Following the mass shooting this year in Buffalo, Gov. Kathy Hochul and Attorney General Letitia James are urging legislators to punish those who make and distribute videos of extreme violence.
Making or sharing videos of mass shootings or other extreme violence online should be illegal under state and federal law, New York's leaders said on Tuesday as they released a new report on the livestreamed racist massacre in Buffalo.
The 49-page report, compiled by the state's attorney general, Letitia James, after a request from Gov. Kathy Hochul, described how internet platforms influenced the suspect, who is accused of killing 10 people, all of them Black, during the mass shooting at a Buffalo supermarket on May 14.
The suspect had written that he planned to livestream the killings to spread the white supremacist ideology that motivated his massacre, and hoped to inspire others to follow with other racist attacks.
The report emphasized that, under the law as it stands, anyone wishing to hold the internet platforms responsible would have little legal recourse.
Instead, Ms. James, a Democrat, recommended that New York lawmakers introduce criminal penalties for creating images or videos of a murder -- a measure that would be the first of its kind in the United States were lawmakers to take it up -- and that those who shared such videos online be held liable for disseminating violent content.
Ms. Hochul, also a Democrat, signed on to that recommendation when the report was released on Tuesday, saying it offered "a road map toward greater accountability."
In a statement, Ms. James noted the danger of insufficiently regulated online platforms, which she called "breeding grounds for white supremacy."
The report said that as many as 28 people had watched at least some portion of the attack as it was shown live on Twitch, the popular video streaming platform.
The report also found that Twitch stopped the livestream two minutes "after the first person was shot," but that a version of the video that spread most widely online was uploaded by a single user in Washington State, who put it on 4chan, an anonymous message board, on the night of the attack. Within days, the link had been posted and reposted thousands of times, the report said.
Few details were provided as to how a criminal statute might work -- other than to note that any legislation should avoid covering videos created passively, "such as those captured by police officers' body-worn cameras."
The suggestion drew skepticism from former prosecutors.
"It makes little if any sense," said Jack Ryan, a veteran of the Queens district attorney's office. "If you've committed a homicide, it's not going to deter you that it's against the law to tape it, and if you're an accomplice to a homicide you're as guilty of the murder as the person who pulled the trigger. I quite frankly don't understand what they're trying to do."
But the effort to stem the flow of such videos was met with approval from gun control advocates like David Pucino, the deputy chief counsel at the Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
Mr. Pucino said such laws could help counteract what is known as the "contagion" effect of shootings, where mass killers draw inspiration from other mass killers, while also broadcasting their own acts to gain fame.
Indeed, the Buffalo suspect, Payton Gendron, said he had been drawn to the violence of other mass shooters, particularly the Australian man who murdered 51 people in an attack on two mosques in the city of Christchurch, New Zealand, in 2019, while livestreaming.
The attorney general's report acknowledged significant obstacles to holding platforms accountable. Companies that host content online are broadly protected from liability, both by the First Amendment and by Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, which Ms. James also recommended be reformed.
The law is also at the heart of a case that the Supreme Court agreed to hear this month, which may change the way the measure has been understood.
Ms. James "is right that the first step is that you would need to change Section 230," said Jeff Kosseff, an associate professor at the United States Naval Academy who studies the legal protections for online speech.
But, he added, even if those changes were made, there would still be First Amendment barriers to imposing civil liability on both platforms and the people who distributed content on them.
Mr. Gendron, now 19, is an avowed white supremacist who had displayed signs of mental instability before the attack, including detailing racist musings and plans for an attack in a diary he kept on the chat application Discord.
While Discord has said it uses "advanced tooling" and "machine learning" to root out violent content, Ms. James's office found that its tools "either did not scan his writing, or else were not calibrated to develop any assessment about the profusion of popular racist memes, inflammatory rhetoric and precise details about a planned mass shooting."
Other platforms were similarly flat-footed when it came to registering Mr. Gendron's intentions. He streamed on Twitch, the platform that he ultimately used to broadcast the attack, three times before the day of the shooting, but did not appear to have violated any of the platform's rules.
The video of the attack itself lasted approximately 24 minutes, including the two minutes that ran after the first person was shot.
The suspect said in his online writings that he had traveled to Buffalo's East Side with the intention of "killing as many Blacks as possible." He chose that neighborhood because it was the most predominantly African American area near his home in the Southern Tier town of Conklin, N.Y., about 200 miles to the southeast.
Wearing camouflage, a ballistic helmet and body armor, the suspect is accused of shooting 13 people using a semiautomatic Bushmaster rifle. Three people survived the shooting. He is currently facing murder and domestic terrorism charges, leveled by state authorities, in addition to more than two dozen charges under federal gun and hate crime laws. He has pleaded not guilty to all charges.
Even with her recommendations for state legislation, Ms. James acknowledged that "the national problem of gun violence demands national solutions."
That sentiment was echoed by Garnell Whitfield Jr., who lost his 86-year-old mother, Ruth, in the attack, and has since been vocal about the need for federal action on guns and social media sites. On Tuesday, Mr. Whitfield repeated those calls for new legislation, but said the report still had value.
"They're shining light on this," said Mr. Whitfield. "Whether anything comes of it or not, that can't be the determining factor whether you call it out, and call it what it is."
Photograph Attorney General Letitia James's report in response to the Buffalo massacre last May noted the danger of loosely regulated platforms. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MUSTAFA HUSSAIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
