1. Eight candidates took the stage in Milwaukee for the first Republican presidential debate. Who spoke the most?
Ron DeSantis
Nikki Haley
Mike Pence
Tim Scott
Vivek Ramaswamy
2. Former President Donald J. Trump was booked in Georgia this week on charges that he tried to overturn his 2020 election loss. What happened this time that did not happen when he was booked in New York?
He had his mug shot taken.
He was detained overnight.
He was fingerprinted.
He was handcuffed.
He was led to a courtroom to enter his plea.
3. In what state did the approach of a storm named Hilary cause its first-ever tropical storm warning?
Alabama
California
Oklahoma
Oregon
Texas
4. Greece is battling its worst wildfire outbreak on record. On Wednesday, a government official said about how many fires had broken out in the previous five days?
100
250
350
450
500
5. India this week became the first country to successfully land a spacecraft on what part of the moon?
The Delta River region
The Far Side
Olympus Mons
The Sea of Tranquillity
The South Pole region
6. The painting above is set to become part of a new exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. What era of art will the new exhibition be dedicated to?
Art Deco
Bauhaus
GIFs
Harlem Renaissance
Pop Art
7. Pakistani military crews rescued eight people this week -- seven of them students -- from what perilous place?
A collapsing bridge
A broken cable car
A burning school
A deep cave
River rapids
8. A private plane said to be carrying Yevgeny V. Prigozhin, the founder of the Wagner private military company, crashed in Russia, two months after Mr. Prigozhin did what?
Defected to Ukraine
Leaked battlefield positions to NATO countries
Led a mutiny against Russia's military leaders
Left his position to start a catering business
Ordered his troops to steal ammunition from Russian soldiers
9. Which American sprinter, who missed the Tokyo Olympics because of a positive marijuana test, won her first world championship title in the 100 meters this week?
Ewa Swoboda
Marie-Josée Ta Lou
Sha'Carri Richardson
Shelly-Ann Fraser Pryce
Tamari Davis
10. The computer chip maker Nvidia announced this week that its revenue doubled over the past year. Which technology did the company cite as driving the surge in sales?
Artificial intelligence
Carbon capture
Self-driving cars
Video conferencing
Virtual reality
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning. Solutions: 1. C; 2. A; 3. B; 4. C; 5. E; 6. D; 7. B; 8. C; 9. C; 10. A.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH VIA CLARK ATLANTA UNIVERSITY ART MUSEUM)
