Boeing 737 Max 9s are not leaving the tarmac anytime soon. Since a portion of a Max 9 fuselage blew off midair during an Alaska Airlines flight from Portland, Ore., to Ontario, Calif., last week, 171 airliners have been grounded as federal investigators try to get to the bottom of what happened and whose fault it may be.
The central question is whether the door panel from the Boeing 737 Max had been properly bolted onto the body of the plane. In search of answers, two government agencies are conducting separate investigations. The Federal Aviation Administration was responsible for immediately grounding the aircraft and is looking into whether Boeing failed to ensure that its Max 9 planes were safe to fly and manufactured to match the design the agency had approved. It also ordered the inspection of all Max 9s in the United States. United Airlines and Alaska Airlines both said on Monday that they had found loose bolts or "loose hardware" on Max 9s in the process of those inspections.
The same day, the National Transportation Safety Board -- the other agency that has opened an inquiry -- said it was possible that the bolts had never been installed on the Max 9 before it took off. The safety board is investigating a wider set of factors that may have contributed to the plane's malfunction, including Boeing's manufacturing process, any maintenance or installation work Boeing or Alaska Airlines carried out on the plane and potential gaps in the F.A.A.'s oversight.
Ultimately, Boeing is in the hot seat again. A different 737 model, the Max 8, was involved in crashes in 2018 and 2019 that killed a total of 346 people. Though travelers may be eager to rebook their flights and take to the air -- hundreds of flights have been canceled since the grounding, affecting tens of thousands of customers -- this latest episode involving Boeing airliners has undoubtedly frightened many. It has also spooked Wall Street: In the first trading session after the accident, Boeing's share prices fell about 8 percent.
"Investors should remain cautious about the myriad risks associated with Bitcoin and products whose value is tied to crypto."
Gary Gensler, the chair of the Securities and Exchange Commission, after the agency on Wednesday approved a new financial product that tracks the price of Bitcoin.
"We've seen how the data can be bumpy."
Gregory Daco, chief economist at EY-Parthenon, who said that "core" inflation data, which strips out volatile food and fuel prices, showed inflation making progress back toward a normal pace, while the overall data was more uneven.
"You should be able to delegate any tedious, day-to-day computer work to an agent."
David Luan, the chief executive of Adept, an A.I. start-up, on how he expects artificial intelligence products to become more powerful and ubiquitous this year.
