A look at the relative merits of Google and Apple mapping services -- with a third entry making a good showing.
It's been a long time since most of us carried a stand-alone GPS device around with us. The smartphone gets us where we need to go, thanks to built-in mapping and navigation.
Google has long dominated the smartphone map race. But Apple Maps, its primary competitor, at least in the United States, has made great strides in the last couple of years, recovering nicely from the disastrous introduction of Maps in 2012. Both now give accurate directions, for the most part, and keep adding features to beat the other.
Even in recent months, both Google Maps and Apple Maps have undergone significant changes. Apple's service, for example, now comes with some new useful information about businesses, like operating hours and contact information. Google Maps now includes lane guidance while driving, among other new features.
With all the effort and changes going into these mapping apps, it seemed like a good time to pit them against each other and see which one comes out on top.
For most people, Apple Maps is the easiest option on an Apple phone. It comes loaded on iPhones and is set by default as the maps app tied to services like Siri and the Spotlight search.
Apple's software received some major updates with the latest iOS released this year, mainly around improving its database of locations and accurate listings.
Its interface is attractive and uncluttered, with nice big turn directions and subtle colors.
But frustrations remain. Apple Maps still lacks public transit directions -- it offers just driving and walking navigation. There is, however, a new option called Apps. If you select that option, Apple Maps can open up a second transportation app that you have installed, like a subway app, Google Maps or MapQuest, that does have transit information. The second app opens when you tap a Route button. But that extra step seems unnecessary.
And Apple Maps isn't quite as car-friendly as Google Maps. For example, when using voice control to ask Google Maps to navigate to Whole Foods, it just picks the closest one and starts navigating. Siri, Apple's voice control service, will ask me which one I mean and ask me to tap the selection.
In addition, you must tap on the maps display to reveal useful menu items like End, the maps overview, the list of steps and audio options. The latter is important because Maps insists on routing directions to the Bluetooth system in my car. If I haven't enabled Bluetooth audio, I can't hear the spoken navigation. And no matter how many times I tap the option to send audio through the phone instead, Apple Maps won't remember my choice.
Apple Maps does a nice job of alerting you to things like the distance before your next turn. But I wish it did a better job of showing traffic conditions.
Google Maps, meanwhile, is still the gold standard for maps. It also has improvements -- some made as recently as the past week -- that keep it well ahead of Apple in terms of features.
Adding lane guidance is probably the best new feature. This tells you what lane you need to be in when you're taking an exit or even making a left turn on a big street. For example, it will say, "use the left two lanes to turn left," or "use the middle lane to turn left and then stay in the right lane." It's extremely helpful.
More recently, Maps got the ability to make a restaurant reservation from the map interface, using the Open Table service. And when you are comparing travel options like car or transit, Google Maps can also show you the price and estimated travel time if you just give up on the subway and take an Uber car (as long as you have the Uber app installed).
It's also the only option of the three to include bike directions.
However, Google Maps is not perfect. While it is available for Android and Apple devices, it works much better on Android.
It's also not perfect, however. I wish I could mix transportation types, for example. If you map with transit, you must map the entire trip with transit. But what if I drive to the subway and then take a train? There is no way to check that travel time, except one leg at a time.
Still, between Google Maps and Apple Maps, Google is the easy winner.
That said, my new favorite navigation alternative is Nokia Here. It's available for Windows Phone 8.1 phones and Nokia X devices, but a test version is also included on some Samsung Galaxy models and you can download it for other Android phones.
The interface is intuitive: You swipe down on the map to get a list of directions and side to side to see alternate routes. You can tap the green location symbol at your starting point and share your location with anyone using Glympse, a location-sharing service.
That's a nice trick, because when you share your location, people can then track your progress to or from a meeting or location and know if you'll be arriving on time. It's a smart thing to integrate into navigation software.
The Here app also offers helpful features like the ability to create collections out of favorite locations and organize them into categories like work or neighborhood. The navigation interface is big and driver-friendly, unlike Apple Maps, which is littered with small buttons to tap. Speaking of driver-friendly, Nokia's maps can also warn you about speed limits on various roads.
But the real benefit to the Here platform, especially for those with limited data plans or who are traveling overseas, is that you can download offline maps from all over the world. The maps are large files, of course, but the ability to carry them with you on travels is terrific.
Still, Nokia Here isn't as easy as using the default mapping application on your device, if that device is an Android or Apple phone. Voice controls can be crucial for navigating while driving, and those commands rely on the built-in app.
It is a fantastic option, though, and one that will hopefully keep heat on Google and Apple to keep the improvements coming.
