A widespread washout for U.S. stocks dragged Wall Street lower on Thursday.
The S&P 500 dropped 0.8 percent to pull further from its record high set on Tuesday. The Dow Jones industrial average tumbled 1.3 percent, from its own record set a day before, while the Nasdaq composite sank 0.7 percent.
As they did the day before, when the Nasdaq tumbled to its worst loss since 2022, several Big Tech stocks led the market lower. Drops of 2 percent for Apple, 2.2 percent for Amazon and 0.7 percent for Microsoft were three of the heaviest weights on the S&P 500.
Unlike much of the last week, Thursday's losses hit many corners of the market. Smaller stocks, which had been cranking higher after badly lagging their larger rivals, fell more than the rest of the market. The Russell 2000 index lost 1.8 percent after jumping more than 1 percent in five of the last six days.
The majority of stocks within the S&P 500 also fell after giving up gains from earlier in the day. The sharpest loss came from Domino's Pizza, which dropped 13.6 percent despite topping analysts' expectations for profit in the spring.
The pizza chain temporarily suspended its forecast for how many stores will open globally over the long term. While that was likely because of reasons beyond the company's control, analysts said it could frustrate investors.
Darden Restaurants, the company behind Olive Garden, LongHorn Steakhouse and other chains, sank 3 percent. It said it would buy the Chuy's Tex-Mex chain in an all-cash deal valuing it at $ 605 million. Chuy's stock jumped 47.8 percent.
Stocks of chip companies stabilized a bit after tumbling a day earlier amid worries about potentially worsening tensions with China. U.S.-traded shares of Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. rose 0.4 percent after the industry giant reported stronger profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected. It bounced back from its loss of 8 percent a day earlier, but only after swerving between gains and losses.
Nvidia rose 2.9 percent after likewise flipping between gains and losses through the day. It stretched its gain for the year to nearly 145 percent.
Earlier this year, a climb for Nvidia and some of the other handful of stocks that came to be known as the "Magnificent Seven" may have been enough to prop up the rest of the market.
Their stock prices rocketed amid a frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology, even as other stocks struggled under the weight of higher interest rates and slowing economic growth.
Because the S&P 500 and other indexes give more weight to stocks of bigger size, and because the Magnificent Seven stocks had swelled into Goliaths, gains for Big Tech could drive up the market almost by themselves.
But a shift had gotten underway on Wall Street over the last week. Instead of piling into Big Tech, which critics have called too pricey, investors moved toward smaller stocks, companies whose profits are closely tied to the economy's strength and other areas that have been unloved for a while.
The momentum kicked into a high gear after an encouraging report on inflation raised expectations for the Federal Reserve to begin easing interest rates in September.
Lower rates and a solid economy could mean bigger benefits for smaller companies than for Big Tech giants, which rose almost regardless of such factors.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.20 percent from 4.16 percent late Wednesday.
D.R. Horton jumped 10.1 percent for the largest gain in the S&P 500 after the home builder reported stronger profit and revenue for the spring than analysts expected.
Other home builders also rallied, including a 2.5 percent rise for PulteGroup and a 2.1 percent climb for Lennar.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
