TECHNOLOGY
Apple Plans to Increase Spending in U.S. by 20%
Apple said on Monday that it would increase its spending in the United States by 20 percent, or $ 80 billion, over the next five years and that it planned to build a new office in North Carolina.
The company said it would invest more than $ 1 billion in North Carolina, with a new office in the Raleigh-Durham area and at least 3,000 new jobs there. Many of those jobs will be in high-tech fields like machine learning and artificial intelligence.
The overall spending includes its operations at its Cupertino, Calif., headquarters and on data centers across the country, as well as the U.S. taxes it pays. But Apple also announced a number of new investments.
Apple said it was expanding in San Diego, Boston, Seattle and Boulder, Colo. The company also announced a $ 100 million investment with a supplier named XPO Logistics to create an advanced distribution center in Clayton, Ind., a small town outside Indianapolis. JACK NICAS
AUTOMOBILES
Lyft Is Latest to Sell Off
Self-Driving Car Business
Lyft will sell its autonomous-vehicle unit to Woven Planet, a Toyota subsidiary, the companies announced on Monday. Woven Planet will pay $ 200 million in cash for Level 5, Lyft's self-driving car initiative, and will follow up with additional payments of $ 350 million over five years.
Lyft is among several tech companies that have stepped back from developing autonomous vehicles over the last year, as the technology has proved difficult to master and the pandemic has placed pressure on the companies' bottom lines. In December, Uber handed off its autonomous vehicle unit to Aurora, the self-driving truck start-up.
Some automotive executives have said they overestimated how soon the technology would be ready for the road. And although Waymo, the autonomous vehicle unit owned by Google's parent company, Alphabet, has recently expanded its operations, the chief executive of Waymo stepped down earlier this month to pursue "new adventures." KATE CONGER
GAMBLING
U.K. Online Casino Firm Sets Sights on U.S. Market
Super Group, a British company that owns a sports betting and an online casino company, is seeking to enter the fast-growing U.S. market.
The company said Sunday it is joining with Sports Entertainment Acquisition Corp., in a deal expected to close in the second half of this year that would take the company public in U.S. stock markets.
Super Group is not currently licensed in the U.S., but aims to remedy that through a deal it has reached to acquire Digital Gaming Corporation. If approved by regulators, that deal would give it access to as many as 10 U.S. states, including Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Colorado, Indiana and Iowa.
The proposed merger with Delaware-based Sports Entertainment Acquisition is the latest example of how alluring the U.S. market has become to gambling companies from other countries. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Jack Nicas, Kate Conger and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBYN BECK/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)
