Shortly before he finished graduate school at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Sadegh Nouri Gooshki landed a job in Brooklyn.
He had never been to New York City.
"I heard that it is hard to find nice new apartments in New York," said Mr. Gooshki, 28, a native of Iran whose graduate research was in artificial intelligence and machine learning.
For starters, he had trouble deciphering online listings. "It looks that you have a lot of options, but you spend two or three hours and don't find anything," he said. "There are a lot of contributing factors to choose: place, price, amenities. I spent a lot of time, and I felt that I'm lost."
He could tell, however, that laundry was a big deal. Apartments in Charlotte often came with a washer-dryer, he said, but New York listings made it clear that in-unit machines were not standard. He wasn't familiar with building laundry rooms. "In Charlotte you either have it in an apartment or you go to a public laundry," he said.
As he busily prepared for graduation, Mr. Gooshki had just one weekend for apartment hunting. On Facebook, he found Mahsa Taghdisi Jani, a licensed saleswoman at Keller Williams TriBeCa, who is active in the city's Iranian community.
For a Brooklyn studio or one-bedroom near his office in northwest Brooklyn and close to a subway -- preferably with its own washer-dryer -- Mr. Gooshki's price range was up to $ 2,500 a month. He preferred a new building with a gym and some kind of communal business center, lounge, library or study room.
"I spend a lot of time with my computer, and I prefer to do things in public places," he said. In Charlotte, he frequented Amelie's, a French bakery and cafe that was always open.
One day last spring, Ms. Taghdisi Jani picked up Mr. Gooshki at Newark Liberty International Airport and took him to the city via PATH train and subway.
"When you are coming to New York, it can sometimes be scary because you don't know anything," she said. "You can get lost in the subway."
Mr. Gooshki learned that, with his budget, he would likely have a choice between a studio with amenities and a one-bedroom without them.
He was fine with a studio. "I really don't need a one-bedroom, and sometimes if you are busy a larger place is a little harder to manage," he said.
Ms. Taghdisi Jani took him to buildings in several neighborhoods. "I wanted to show him all around Brooklyn," she said. "He didn't know anything about Brooklyn. He wanted to see all his options."
Among his choices:
1. 475 Clermont Avenue
Each studio in this brand-new, 12-story, industrial-chic building on the edge of Fort Greene and Clinton Hill had its own washer-dryer and came with a number of amenities: concierge, gym, business center and rooftop lounge. The A and C trains were two blocks away.
The rent was in the high $ 2,000s, but with the concessions on offer the "net effective" rent was in the $ 2,400 range.
2. The Brooklyner
This 51-story high-rise, which opened in 2009 in Downtown Brooklyn, was the borough's tallest building until 2013. It offered stunning views from the rooftop terrace, as well as a gym, a laundry room and a lounge. Multiple subways were within walking distance, as were shops and restaurants.
The rent was in the high $ 2,000s for a studio on a high floor with a view.
3. 410 Eastern Parkway
This six-story elevator building in Crown Heights, dating to the late 1920s, had a laundry room but no other amenities. A nicely renovated studio was available for just over $ 2,000. The 2/3 and 4/5 trains were a couple of blocks away.
"I wanted to show Sadegh what he gets if he pays $ 2,000 and if he pays $ 500 more," Ms. Taghdisi Jani said.
His Choice
Downtown Brooklyn felt busy and crowded, at least when Mr. Gooshki visited. He wanted a quieter neighborhood.
The Crown Heights apartment was less expensive than the others, but it lacked a washer-dryer and the building didn't have a gym. He figured the time and money spent on those things would counteract any benefit of a lower rent. Besides, he had another option that was brand-new.
So Mr. Gooshki rented the first place he saw: a studio overlooking the building's landscaped courtyard, which had seating areas and a firepit. He arrived shortly after he graduated and ordered furniture online.
"It satisfied all the requirements I had: access to subway, good amenities, washer-dryer inside, safety and close to my workplace," he said.
The kitchen, with ample counter space and a dishwasher, was nicer than he had envisioned. The stacked washer-dryer sat in a closet just inside the entry door.
Mr. Gooshki liked the diverse neighborhood, too. "I saw a lot of people with different ages, and a variety of people were passing on the street," he said.
He has been surprised, however, to discover that the city is not as active around the clock as he thought it would be.
"That is strange to me, that you don't have that many options if you need a place to go and open your laptop, especially during the night," he said. "Many places close at 10 or 11 p.m. There are not a lot of people who go to coffee shops late at night."
Email thehunt@nytimes.com
Photograph The Renter: Sadegh Nouri Gooshki, who wasn't familiar with building laundry rooms.; The Options (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT WRIGHT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
