Generate image description The OpenAI logo at the company headquarters in San Francisco on March 10, 2023. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)
SAN FRANCISCO — Talks at OpenAI to bring back Sam Altman, the artificial intelligence startup’s recently ousted CEO, continued Sunday afternoon but there were disagreements over the makeup of the company’s board of directors, according to two people familiar with the discussions.
Altman, 38, spent the weekend waging a pressure campaign on the startup’s four-person board of directors who ousted him Friday afternoon, three people familiar with the matter said. The result was a groundswell of support from investors, employees and OpenAI executives.
Altman was at the OpenAI headquarters Sunday afternoon. He posted a photo of himself on X, formerly known as Twitter, wearing a guest identification badge and said, “first and last time am ever wear one of these.”
The negotiations included a look at how the company’s board of directors might be reshaped if Altman returns as CEO, two of the people said. Members of the board have not yet agreed to what a restructured board of directors might look like — nor is Altman’s reinstatement an inevitability, two of the people said.
There has been a whirlwind of activity since Altman was forced out of OpenAI, a company he helped found eight years ago that has become one of the most closely watched companies in tech thanks to its popular ChatGPT chatbot.
On Sunday afternoon, Will Hurd, a former OpenAI board member and a former Republican member of Congress from Texas, was standing outside the company’s headquarters in San Francisco’s Mission district waiting for a ride to the airport after spending two days digging into the details of Altman’s dismissal.
Hurd said that a representative of the company had called him Friday morning, before Altman’s removal, and asked for his help in navigating the leadership upheaval. Hurd traveled from Texas to San Francisco on Saturday.
“The industry is important, the company is important,” Hurd said. “This is the future. How do we make sure there’s a level of trust and transparency? All things we want from models, we want from governance.”
OpenAI declined to comment.
OpenAI’s board of directors is unique. The organization started as a nonprofit before transforming itself into a for-profit company and bringing on Microsoft as its biggest investor. The for-profit company still answers to the nonprofit board. As a result, the company’s investors have had no official say in what happens to the startup or who leads it.
Before Altman was forced out, OpenAI had six board members, including Altman and Greg Brockman, a company co-founder and board chair who quit Friday in solidarity with Altman.
The other board members are Ilya Sutskever, an OpenAI co-founder; Adam D’Angelo, CEO of Quora, the Q&A site; Helen Toner, a director of strategy at Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology; and Tasha McCauley, an entrepreneur and computer scientist.
Since Friday, people close to the company have been trying to learn why the board dismissed Altman. Brad Lightcap, the company’s chief operating officer, said in a note to staff Saturday that there was no “malfeasance” involved.
The stalemate is the latest twist in a series of power struggles at OpenAI. The fight drew attention to a longtime rift in the AI community between people who believe AI is the biggest business opportunity in a generation and others who worry that moving too fast could be dangerous.
The company was recently in talks to raise a new funding round that would value the company at more than $80 billion. Bloomberg News earlier reported some of the details of the discussions.
Altman’s potential reinstatement would be a dramatic reversal for OpenAI, which said he had not been “consistently candid” in his discussions with the board when it unceremoniously ousted him.
As deliberations continued Sunday, executives at OpenAI called in resources. At 12:45 p.m., a delivery person with a dozen drinks from the Boba Guys chain showed up on a motorbike outside with two bags. Another delivery person followed later with a half-dozen more drinks.
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description The senior executives of OpenAI, from left: Mira Murati, then chief technology officer; Sam Altman, then chief executive; Greg Brockman, president; and Ilya Sutskever, chief scientist, at the company’s headquarters in San Francisco on Monday, March 13, 2023. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)
