ECONOMY
Growth in Second Quarter Is Revised Downward
The U.S. economy expanded at a 2.1 percent annual pace from April through June, showing continued resilience in the face of higher borrowing costs for consumers and businesses, the government said Wednesday in a downgrade from its initial estimate.
The government had previously estimated that the economy expanded at a 2.4 percent annual rate last quarter.
The Commerce Department's second estimate of growth last quarter marked a slight acceleration from a 2 percent annual growth rate from January through March. Though the economy has been slowed by the Fed's interest rate increases, it has managed to keep expanding, with employers still hiring and consumers still spending.
The report on the nation's gross domestic product showed that growth last quarter was driven by upticks in consumer spending, business investment and outlays by state and local governments. ASSOCIATED PRESS
EARNINGS
Salesforce Raises Forecast on Demand for Software
Salesforce raised its annual revenue forecast on Wednesday and projected quarterly sales above estimates as it benefits from a recent price increase and resilient demand for its cloud and business software offerings.
The results fan optimism about a recovery in technology spending in the second half of 2023 after earnings from major cloud players, including Amazon and Google, suggested that the slowdown was nearing an end.
Salesforce has also tried to increase demand by integrating artificial intelligence into its offerings like Slack and launching a generative A.I. product, Einstein GPT, for salespeople, customer support agents and marketers.
The company expects revenue to be between $ 8.70 billion and $ 8.72 billion in the third quarter, compared with estimates of $ 8.66 billion, according to Refinitiv data. Quarterly earnings per share forecast also exceeded estimates.
"We're leading our customers into the new A.I. era," Salesforce's chief executive, Marc Benioff, said in a statement. REUTERS
SEMICONDUCTORS
Bosch Seeking U.S. Aid to Expand in California
The top executive at Bosch said on Wednesday that the German company needed subsidies from the U.S. government to carry out the full expansion it planned for a California chip plant it was acquiring.
In April, Bosch said it planned to buy key assets of TSI Semiconductor's chip production facilities in Roseville, Calif., and invest $ 1.5 billion to retool the site to make silicon carbide chips, which can help boost the range of electric vehicles. Production at the new company, Robert Bosch Semiconductor, will start in 2026.
On Wednesday, Bosch said California had approved a $ 25 million tax credit for the factory.
Bosch's chief executive, Stefan Hartung, said during a trip to San Francisco that expanding the facility to the intended full size "depends on the support of the U.S. government, or the regional government or the California government, and it is already supported by some, but obviously it needs more support." REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)
