Our guide to film series and special screenings . All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies .
NEW YORK JEWISH FILM FESTIVAL at Walter Reade Theater (through Jan. 24). The centerpiece of this year's event is "Peshmerga" (Jan. 18), a documentary directed and narrated by the French philosopher and writer Bernard-Henri Lévy. The movie chronicles his travels across Iraqi Kurdistan as he meets with Kurdish fighters engaged in combat against the Islamic State. He also encounters remnants of Jewish life in the region. The festival contains multitudes: The next day, it will show Mel Brooks's "The Producers," which is approaching its 50th anniversary. The screening will be followed by a Q. and A. with Josh Mostel, son of Zero Mostel, who starred in the film alongside Gene Wilder, and with Walter Bernstein, who wrote the screenplay for "The Front," in which Zero Mostel also starred.212-875-5601, filmlinc.org
PIRANDELLO 150 at Film Forum (Jan. 13-19). As part of a citywide sesquicentennial celebration of the playwright and author Luigi Pirandello's birth, Film Forum is showing screen adaptations of his work. The centerpiece, "Kaos," directed by the brothers Paolo and Vittorio Taviani, threads four Pirandello stories of Sicilian peasant life. (One of the more lively entries concerns a new bride who discovers that her husband unleashes anguished howls every time there's a full moon.) On Jan. 15, the theater will host a free screening of a 1976 television version of "Six Characters in Search of an Author"; the show reimagines Pirandello's metafictional play for a TV soundstage. John Houseman plays the Director, and Andy Griffith plays the Father -- one of a coterie of characters seeking to tell their story.212-727-8110, filmforum.org
SPIELBERG BY HASKELL at the Metrograph (Jan. 14-18). To complement the publication of "Steven Spielberg: A Life in Films," a study of Mr. Spielberg's movies by the critic Molly Haskell, the Metrograph is showing five of that director's features. On Jan. 14, Ms. Haskell will introduce "Empire of the Sun" (1987), adapted from J. G. Ballard's semi-autobiographical novel and starring a young Christian Bale as a British boy separated from his parents during the Japanese invasion of Shanghai in 1941. A project Mr. Spielberg took up from David Lean, the movie is one of the director's most strikingly realized historical re-creations -- a feat of production design and cinematography. "It is, in a strong if minority opinion (mine included), Spielberg's greatest film," Ms. Haskell writes in the book. The screening, at 2:30 p.m., will be followed by a book signing. "A.I.: Artificial Intelligence" (Jan. 15 and 18), "Minority Report" (Jan. 16) and "Catch Me If You Can" (Jan. 17) will follow in the series.212-660-0312, metrograph.com
