Several dentists recently took to TikTok to debunk a conspiracy theory: that toothpaste tubes were printed with secret codes signaling their true ingredients to powerful people in the know.
Their efforts garnered far fewer views than the video that offered up the theory in early January. Not counting all the times the post was referenced in videos by other TikTok users, it has been seen more than seven million times in less than three months.
Tall tales are common on TikTok, where a flimsy patchwork of assumptions and coincidences -- often concerning the schemes of a nefarious echelon of elites -- is illustrated by dramatic images generated by artificial intelligence and spooky musical tracks. (Other such hits include false theories that President Joe Biden rigged the Super Bowl in favor of the Kansas City Chiefs or that Justin Bieber had signaled he was a victim of PizzaGate. False allegations of voter fraud also abound.)
Abbie Richards, a misinformation researcher who studies the TikTok ecosystem, said that such posts thrive because of the platform's potent recommendation algorithms and its low barrier to entry.
TikTok allows users to earn money from their videos through tools such as its creator rewards program and livestream subscriptions. Conspiracy theories, which draw high engagement, are one of the most profitable categories, said Ms. Richards, a senior video producer at the liberal watchdog group Media Matters.
"It's like candy for your brain -- it tells a story that simplifies the world in a way that feels good to you," she said.
The toothpaste theory was promoted by two young men known for conspiratorial content, including popular posts about satanic hit men and Britney Spears. They claimed that the colored dots on toothpaste tubes correspond to all-natural, medicinal or chemical ingredients.
The post was quickly reposted, copied and stitched into reaction videos. Some came from dentists, who explained that the dots were actually used during the toothpaste packaging process to help guide manufacturing equipment to properly cut and seal the tubes.
That conspiracy theory is not new -- they rarely are on TikTok. Colgate, a major toothpaste manufacturer, addressed the color patch rumor last year and said that "as much as we love cracking secret codes, this one actually has nothing to crack because it's entirely untrue."
Even silly rumors, however, can spin out from TikTok into real-world harms. The baseless concerns that store-bought toothpaste tubes might hide toxic ingredients reignited recommendations to opt instead for unproven and potentially damaging homemade options.
The "Jumpers Jump" podcast helped to circulate what it called "the toothpaste theory."
