Another slide for the Wall Street heavyweight Nvidia kept U.S. indexes mixed on Monday, even as the majority of stocks rallied.
The S&P 500 slipped 0.3 percent to pull further from its record set last week. The drops for Nvidia and other winners of Wall Street's artificial-intelligence boom pulled the Nasdaq composite down 1.1 percent, while the Dow Jones industrial average rose 260 points, or 0.7 percent.
Stocks of oil-and-gas companies were among the market's strongest, as seven out of every 10 stocks in the S&P 500 rose. Exxon Mobil climbed 3 percent, and oil field services provider SLB gained 4 percent as oil prices hung near their highest levels since April.
Financial companies were also strong. JPMorgan Chase added 1.3 percent, and Wells Fargo climbed 1.6 percent ahead of results coming later in the week for tests by the Federal Reserve of how big banks would fare in a recession.
But declines for a handful of high-profile stocks offset all of those gains, and the spotlight shone brightest on Nvidia's 6.7 percent tumble. It was a third straight drop for the chip company, which had rocketed 1,000 percent higher since the autumn of 2022.
Nearly insatiable demand for Nvidia's chips to power artificial-intelligence applications have been a big reason for the U.S. stock market's run to records recently, even as the economy's growth slows under the weight of high interest rates. But the A.I. boom has been so frenzied that it has raised worries about a possible bubble in the stock market and too-high expectations among investors.
Nvidia's stock has been receding since it briefly overtook Microsoft as Wall Street's most valuable last week, and it is down nearly 13 percent in just three days. Because Nvidia has become so huge, the movements for its stock carry extra weight on the S&P 500 and other indexes. It was the heaviest weight by far on the S&P 500 on Monday.
Other A.I. beneficiaries also gave up some of their fantastic gains. Super Micro Computer dropped 8.6 percent to shave its gain so far for the year back below 200 percent, to 190.9 percent.
Such a rotation among stocks could actually be a healthy sign for the market, as long as it can stay close to its records. Market watchers have been worried to see just Nvidia and a few other companies responsible for much of the S&P 500's returns recently. They would prefer a market where many stocks are participating in the gains.
RXO jumped 23 percent after it agreed to buy the Coyote Logistics freight brokerage business from UPS for nearly $ 1.03 billion. RXO said the deal will make it North America's third-largest provider of brokered transportation. UPS, which bought Coyote in 2015 for $ 1.8 billion, rose 1.5 percent.
Under Armour swung from an early loss to a gain of 2 percent after saying it agreed to pay $ 434 million to settle charges raised by shareholders related to its accounting and sales practices. The shoe and athletic wear company denied any wrongdoing in the settlement, but it also agreed to separate the roles of chairman and chief executive for at least three years.
All told, the S&P 500 fell 16.75 points to 5,447.87. The Dow rose 260.88 to 39,411.21, and the Nasdaq composite dropped 192.54 to 17,496.82.
In the bond market, Treasury yields eased a bit. The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 4.23 percent from 4.26 percent late Friday.
It's been mostly falling since topping 4.70 percent in late April, which has relaxed the pressure on the stock market. Yields have sunk on hopes that inflation is slowing enough to persuade the Federal Reserve to cut its main interest rate later this year.
The Fed has been keeping the federal funds rate at the highest level in more than 20 years, hoping to grind down on the economy just enough to get inflation under control.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
