U.S. stock indexes drifted amid mixed trading Monday, ahead of this week's meeting by the Federal Reserve that could set Wall Street's direction into next year.
The S&P 500 rose 0.4 percent, coming off its first losing week in the last four. The Nasdaq composite climbed 1.2 percent to a record, while the Dow Jones industrial average was a laggard and fell 110 points, or 0.3 percent.
Broadcom leaped 11.2 percent to help lead the S&P 500 for a second-straight day after delivering a profit report last week that beat analysts' expectations. The technology company is riding a wave of enthusiasm about its artificial-intelligence offerings.
The market's main event, though, will arrive on Wednesday when the Federal Reserve will announce its last move on interest rates for the year. The widespread expectation is that it will cut its main rate for a third-straight time, as it tries to bolster the slowing job market after getting inflation nearly all the way down to its target of 2 percent.
The question is how much more it will cut rates next year, and Fed officials will release projections for where they see the federal funds rate ending 2025, along with other economic indicators, once their meeting concludes. The Fed Chair Jerome H. Powell will also answer questions in a news conference after the meeting.
For now, the general expectation among traders is that the Fed may cut a couple more times in 2025, according to data from CME Group. But such expectations have been shrinking after reports suggesting that inflation may be tough to get all the way down to 2 percent from here. Besides last month's slight acceleration in inflation, another worry is that President-elect Donald J. Trump's preference for tariffs and other policies could lead to higher inflation down the line.
The Goldman Sachs economist David Mericle has dropped his earlier forecast of a cut by the Fed in January, for example. Beyond the possibility of tariffs, he said, Fed officials may also want to slow their cuts because of uncertainty about exactly how low rates need to go so that they no longer press the brakes on the economy.
Expectations for a series of cuts to rates by the Fed have been one of the main reasons the S&P 500 has set a high 57 times so far this year and is heading for one of its best years of the millennium. The economy has held up better than many feared, continuing to grow even after the Fed increased the federal funds rate to a two-decade high in hopes of grinding down on inflation, which topped 9 percent two summers ago.
On Wall Street, MicroStrategy jumped as much as 7 percent during the day as it continues to benefit from the surging price for Bitcoin, which set another high. But its stock ended the day down by less than 0.1 percent after Bitcoin's price pulled back below $ 106,000 after setting a record above $ 107,700, according to CoinDesk.
The software company has been building its hoard of the cryptocurrency, and its stock price has more than sextupled this year. It will also soon join the Nasdaq 100 index.
Bitcoin's price has catapulted from roughly $ 44,000 at the start of the year, riding a recent wave of enthusiasm that Trump will create a system that's more favorable to digital currencies.
Honeywell rose 3.7 percent after saying it's still considering a spinoff or sale of its aerospace business as part of a review of its overall business. It said it plans to give an update with the release of its fourth-quarter results.
They helped offset a drop for Nvidia, whose chips are powering much of the world's move into A.I. Its stock fell 1.7 percent. Because it's grown so huge, with a total value topping $ 3 trillion, it was the single heaviest weight on the S&P 500.
In the bond market, Treasury yields held relatively steady. The yield on the 10-year Treasury edged down to 4.39 percent from 4.40 percent late Friday. The two-year yield eased to 4.24 percent from 4.25 percent.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
