For some technologists, machine intelligence is not seen as a job-killing catastrophe, but something like a windfall that could lead to a free income for all.
Let's say computers come for most of our jobs. This may not seem likely at the moment; computer scientists and economists offer wildly varying ideas for how deeply automation will affect future employment.
But for the sake of argument, imagine that within two or three decades the United States of America will have morphed into the Robotic States of America.
In Robot America, most manual laborers will have been replaced by herculean bots. Truck drivers, cabbies, delivery workers and airline pilots will have been superseded by vehicles that do it all. Doctors, lawyers, business executives and even technology columnists for The New York Times will have seen their ranks thinned by charming, attractive, all-knowing algorithms.
How will society function after humanity has been made redundant? Technologists and economists have been grappling with this fear for decades, but in the last few years, one idea has gained widespread interest -- including from some of the very technologists who are now building the bot-ruled future.
The idea is known as "universal basic income," or U.B.I., and it goes like this: As the jobs dry up because of the spread of artificial intelligence, why not just give everyone a paycheck?
Imagine the government sending each adult about $1,000 a month, about enough to cover housing, food, health care and other basic needs for many Americans. U.B.I. would be aimed at easing the dislocation caused by technological progress, but it would also be bigger than that.
While U.B.I. has been associated with left-leaning academics, feminists and other progressive activists, it has lately been adopted by a wider range of thinkers, including some libertarians and conservatives. It has also gained support among a cadre of venture capitalists in New York and Silicon Valley, the people most familiar with the potential for technology to alter modern work.
Rather than a job-killing catastrophe, tech supporters of U.B.I. consider machine intelligence to be something like a natural bounty: Society has struck oil, and now it can hand out checks to each of its citizens. These supporters argue machine intelligence will produce so much economic surplus that we could collectively afford to liberate much of humanity from both labor and suffering.
Sam Altman, president of the American tech incubator Y Combinator, recently proposed to fund research into U.B.I. The firm has received thousands of applications, Mr. Altman said; it plans to select winning recipients within a few weeks, and ultimately, Y Combinator plans to spend "tens of millions" of dollars on research to answer some of the most basic questions about life under U.B.I.
Mr. Altman said those questions ranged from the most practical -- how much U.B.I. would cost, and whether it could be afforded -- to deeper issues concerning people's motivation and purpose in what you might call a "postwork" age.
When you give everyone free money, what do people do with their time? Do they goof off, or do they engage in more meaningful pursuits? How would U.B.I. affect economic inequality? How would it alter people's psychology and mood? Do we, as a species, need to be employed to feel fulfilled, or is that merely a legacy of postindustrial capitalism?
A cynic might see the interest of venture capitalists in U.B.I. as a way for them to atone for their complicity in the technology that might lead to permanent changes in the global economy. After all, here are rich people who both actively fund and benefit from creating highly profitable companies that employ very few people.
It doesn't help that you have some investors who've been terrifically tin-eared about the perils of globalization and the modern economy (see musings from Paul Graham on inequality, Marc Andreessen on colonialism and Thomas J. Perkins on class resentment.)
But my conversations with techies interested in U.B.I. revealed a sincerity and sophistication about the idea. They aren't ashamed or afraid of automation, and they don't see U.B.I. merely as a defense of the current social order. Instead, they see automation and U.B.I. as the most optimistic path toward wider social progress.
"I think it's a bad use of a human to spend 20 years of their life driving a truck back and forth across the United States," said Albert Wenger, a venture capitalist at the New York-based Union Square Ventures. "That's not what we aspire to do as humans -- it's a bad use of a human brain -- and automation and basic income is a development that will free us to do lots of incredible things that are more aligned with what it means to be human."
Like much of what venture capital firms work on, basic income is a pie-in-the-sky notion. Though it has enjoyed recognition among wonks and some political momentum in Europe, not a single American presidential candidate has expressed interest in the idea. It has also been hampered by some very basic practical questions: How much should be given out in monthly income? What amounts would be affordable?
Supporters say the questions will be answered by research, which in turn will prompt political change. For now, they argue that the proposal is affordable if we alter tax and welfare policies to pay for it, and if we account for the ways technological progress in health care and energy will reduce the amount necessary to provide a basic cost of living.
They also note that increasing economic urgency will push widespread political acceptance of the idea. "There's a sense that growing inequality is intractable, and that we need to do something about it," said Natalie Foster, the co-founder of Peers, an organization that supports sharing-economy workers.
Andrew L. Stern, a former president of the Service Employees International Union in the United States, who is working on a book about U.B.I., compared the feeling of the current anxiety around jobs to a time of war. "I grew up during the Vietnam War, and my parents were antiwar for one reason: I could be drafted," he said.
As people across all income levels become increasingly worried about how they and their children will survive in tech-infatuated America, "we are back to the Vietnam War when it comes to jobs," Mr. Stern said. "We're entering a universal, white-collar, middle-class anxiety, which drives political change faster than poor people tend to drive change."
