Generate image description The OpenAI offices in San Francisco, Nov. 19, 2023. (Jason Henry/The New York Times)
SAN FRANCISCO — It would be easy to dismiss Elon Musk’s lawsuit against OpenAI as a case of sour grapes.
Musk sued OpenAI last week, accusing the company of breaching the terms of its founding agreement and violating its founding principles. In his telling, OpenAI was established as a nonprofit that would build powerful artificial intelligence systems for the good of humanity and give its research away freely to the public. But Musk argues that OpenAI broke that promise by starting a for-profit subsidiary that took on billions of dollars in investments from Microsoft.
An OpenAI spokesperson declined to comment on the suit. In a memo sent to employees Friday, Jason Kwon, the company’s chief strategy officer, denied Musk’s claims and said, “We believe the claims in this suit may stem from Elon’s regrets about not being involved with the company today,” according to a copy of the memo I viewed.
On one level, the lawsuit reeks of personal beef. Musk, who founded OpenAI in 2015 along with a group of other tech heavyweights and provided much of its initial funding but left in 2018 over disputes with leadership, resents being sidelined in the conversations about AI. His own AI projects haven’t gotten nearly as much traction as ChatGPT, OpenAI’s flagship chatbot. And Musk’s falling out with Sam Altman, OpenAI’s CEO, has been well documented.
But amid all of the animus, there’s a point that is worth drawing out, because it illustrates a paradox that is at the heart of much of today’s AI conversation — and a place where OpenAI really has been talking out of both sides of its mouth, insisting both that its AI systems are incredibly powerful and that they are nowhere near matching human intelligence.
The claim centers on a term known as AGI, for “artificial general intelligence.” Defining what constitutes AGI is notoriously tricky, although most people would agree that it means an AI system that can do most or all things that the human brain can do. Altman has defined AGI as “the equivalent of a median human that you could hire as a co-worker,” while OpenAI itself defines AGI as “a highly autonomous system that outperforms humans at most economically valuable work.”
Most leaders of AI companies claim that not only is AGI possible to build, but it is imminent. Demis Hassabis, CEO of Google DeepMind, told me in a recent podcast interview that he thought AGI could arrive as soon as 2030. Altman has said that AGI may be only four or five years away.
Building AGI is OpenAI’s explicit goal, and it has lots of reasons to want to get there before anyone else. A true AGI would be an incredibly valuable resource, capable of automating huge swaths of human labor and making gobs of money for its creators. It’s also the kind of shiny, audacious goal that investors love to fund, and that helps AI labs recruit top engineers and researchers.
But AGI could also be dangerous if it’s able to outsmart humans, or if it becomes deceptive or misaligned with human values. The people who started OpenAI, including Musk, worried that an AGI would be too powerful to be owned by a single entity, and that if they ever got close to building one, they’d need to change the control structure around it, to prevent it from doing harm or concentrating too much wealth and power in a single company’s hands.
Which is why, when OpenAI entered into a partnership with Microsoft, it specifically gave the tech giant a license that applied only to “pre-AGI” technologies. (The New York Times has sued Microsoft and OpenAI over use of copyrighted work.)
According to the terms of the deal, if OpenAI ever built something that met the definition of AGI — as determined by OpenAI’s nonprofit board — Microsoft’s license would no longer apply, and OpenAI’s board could decide to do whatever it wanted to ensure that OpenAI’s AGI benefited all of humanity. That could mean many things, including open-sourcing the technology or shutting it off entirely.
Most AI commentators believe that today’s cutting-edge AI models do not qualify as AGI, because they lack sophisticated reasoning skills and frequently make boneheaded errors.
But in his legal filing, Musk makes an unusual argument. He argues that OpenAI has already achieved AGI with its GPT-4 language model, which was released last year, and that future technology from the company will even more clearly qualify as AGI.
“On information and belief, GPT-4 is an AGI algorithm, and hence expressly outside the scope of Microsoft’s September 2020 exclusive license with OpenAI,” the complaint reads.
What Musk is arguing here is a little complicated. Basically, he’s saying that because it has achieved AGI with GPT-4, OpenAI is no longer allowed to license it to Microsoft, and that its board is required to make the technology and research more freely available.
His complaint cites the now-infamous “Sparks of AGI” paper by a Microsoft research team last year, which argued that GPT-4 demonstrated early hints of general intelligence, among them signs of human-level reasoning.
But the complaint also notes that OpenAI’s board is unlikely to decide that its AI systems actually qualify as AGI, because as soon as it does, it has to make big changes to the way it deploys and profits from the technology.
Moreover, he notes that Microsoft — which now has a nonvoting observer seat on OpenAI’s board, after an upheaval last year that resulted in the temporary firing of Altman — has a strong incentive to deny that OpenAI’s technology qualifies as AGI. That would end its license to use that technology in its products, and jeopardize potentially huge profits.
“Given Microsoft’s enormous financial interest in keeping the gate closed to the public, OpenAI Inc.’s new captured, conflicted and compliant board will have every reason to delay ever making a finding that OpenAI has attained AGI,” the complaint reads. “To the contrary, OpenAI’s attainment of AGI, like ‘Tomorrow’ in ‘Annie,’ will always be a day away.”
Given his track record of questionable litigation, it’s easy to question Musk’s motives here. And as the head of a competing AI startup, it’s not surprising that he’d want to tie up OpenAI in messy litigation. But his lawsuit points to a real conundrum for OpenAI.
Like its competitors, OpenAI badly wants to be seen as a leader in the race to build AGI, and it has a vested interest in convincing investors, business partners and the public that its systems are improving at breakneck pace.
But because of the terms of its deal with Microsoft, OpenAI’s investors and executives may not want to admit that its technology actually qualifies as AGI, if and when it actually does.
That has put Musk in the strange position of asking a jury to rule on what constitutes AGI, and decide whether OpenAI’s technology has met the threshold.
The suit has also placed OpenAI in the odd position of downplaying its own systems’ abilities while continuing to fuel anticipation that a big AGI breakthrough is right around the corner.
“GPT-4 is not an AGI,” Kwon wrote in the memo to employees Friday. “It is capable of solving small tasks in many jobs, but the ratio of work done by a human to the work done by GPT-4 in the economy remains staggeringly high.”
The personal feud fueling Musk’s complaint has led some people to view it as a frivolous suit — one commenter compared it to “suing your ex because she remodeled the house after your divorce” — that will quickly be dismissed.
But even if it gets thrown out, Musk’s lawsuit points toward important questions: Who gets to decide when something qualifies as AGI? Are tech companies exaggerating or sandbagging (or both) when it comes to describing how capable their systems are? And what incentives lie behind various claims about how close to or far from AGI we might be?
A lawsuit from a grudge-holding billionaire probably isn’t the right way to resolve those questions. But they're good ones to ask, especially as AI progress continues to speed ahead.
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description Elon Musk, CEO of X/Tesla, speaks with reporters as he departs the U.S. Capitol in Washington, Sept. 13, 2023. (Haiyun Jiang/The New York Times
Generate image description Sam Altman, chief executive of OpenAI, in San Francisco on March 13, 2023. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)
