American workers are getting more done in less time. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, productivity increased 2.7 percent in 2023. Over the past two quarters, it has been growing at more than double the rate from 2005 to 2019.
Productivity is usually measured as a simple ratio: the total amount of output an economy produces per hour worked by its labor force. And when that ratio picks up, it can create a positive cascading effect. Gains in productivity mean businesses can make more money per hour, reinvest it in their operations and, at least theoretically, pay workers more without sacrificing profitability. A more productive business can also sell its goods and services at lower prices, making customers happier, too.
Some economists say that the rise in worker productivity has helped officials at the Federal Reserve pull off what appears to be a "soft landing," slowing down the economy with high interest rates without tipping it into a recession.
Is all of this too good to be true? Maybe. Even though many economic models suggest that workers' pay should rise roughly in proportion with their productivity -- twice the pay for double the daily or hourly production -- jumps in productivity haven't always resulted in significant gains for workers. In some cases, shareholders and executives have seen the biggest financial benefits. And artificial intelligence and other technology that increase productivity may complicate matters more.
"If your company is still incorporated in Delaware, I recommend moving to another state as soon as possible."
Elon Musk, who moved the incorporation of SpaceX, his privately held rocket giant, to Texas from Delaware in search of a state friendlier to his businesses. He is threatening to do the same with X.
"It cannot be quantity over quality. We don't want to deliver a number of planes. We want to deliver a number of planes that are of high quality and safe."
Guillaume Faury, the chief executive of the European plane maker Airbus, which is ramping up production as Boeing, its U.S. rival, faces scrutiny over the safety of its 737 Max airliners.
"If we have three straight quarters of negative growth, people would feel like 'Is the Japanese economy really OK?"'
Saisuke Sakai, senior economist at Mizuho Research & Technologies, warned that consumer sentiment would suffer if Japan's economy, which slipped into a recession at the end of last year, continued to contract.
