The most personal communication devices we own are compromised to the hilt. It's time to lock them down.
Here's a thought: Maybe it's O.K. to care about your privacy, even if you have nothing to hide.
Millions of us share our most personal sentiments and our most potentially damaging data through our smartphones. They're the most personal communication devices we own, and they are compromised to the hilt. It is time to lock them down.
A deluge of news about National Security Agency phone-sniffing, hacks on supposedly private services like SnapChat, and revelations about leaky mobile phone apps have kept smartphone privacy in the spotlight. Now a handful of companies are offering tools to help close some of the security gaps.
Soon, the average person will have access to what amounts to a secure phone: It's called the Blackphone. Available for pre-orders on Monday, it has been built from scratch with security in mind. It can do texting, video, calling, searching, browsing, file storage and sharing -- all shielded from the prying eyes of governments and hackers.
The phone is being built by the Spanish phone maker Geeksphone and Silent Circle, a communications security company headed by Phil Zimmermann, who created the encryption program known as P.G.P., or "Pretty Good Privacy." Mr. Zimmermann then founded Silent Circle, which provides encrypted texting and mobile phone calling for $10 to $24 a month.
Few details are available about the phone and what it might cost. Its website displays a stylish and ominous introductory video and a basic feature list. It's available unlocked (not tied to one carrier) and can run on any global system for mobile communications, or G.S.M., network: T-Mobile, AT&T and a handful of prepaid carriers in the United States.
While Blackphone is an intriguing concept, some of its features can be obtained already through Silent Circle, which offers subscriptions for iOS and Android. The $10 per month option encrypts voice, video, texting and file communications sent to anyone who is also using Silent Circle Mobile. The more expensive plan encrypts your end of a phone call to a mobile or landline, even if the person on the other end is not a subscriber.
Other, cheaper options exist for more secure iOS and Android communications that can help you create your own Blackphone, or at least come close. All of them require the person on the other end to install the same app.
Let's start with texting and instant messaging.
Android currently has the best options available for secure messaging. My favorite is the free TextSecure from Whisper Systems. It encrypts text messages between users, as long as you both have the app installed, and you use it for texting instead of your regular app. The texts are encrypted as they're sent back and forth and stay encrypted when they are stored on your phone.
TextSecure is based on open-source software and makes its source code available for anyone to see. That, according to security experts, is the key to trust. If you can't see a product's source code, you can't guarantee that it hasn't been compromised by a hacker or government backdoor. It's like publication in a scientific journal: Even if you don't understand the science, you at least know it has been peer reviewed.
The only drawback to TextSecure is that it's not yet available for iOS. But Whisper Systems told me it would be submitted to the Apple App Store by the end of March.
If you want encrypted messaging across iOS and Android, try ChatSecure, created by the Guardian Project, a collection of developers, activists and hackers who create tools for more secure communications. This free app doesn't replace texting; instead, it lets you send encrypted messages over a number of existing chat services like Facebook Chat, Google Talk, Google Hangouts, Jabber and some others.
You must have an account with one of those, and your recipient must also install ChatSecure. But since the app is free and available on virtually any device, it's a good way to encrypt messaging across some common chat services. ChatSecure is also open source.
When it comes to calling, the options are simpler -- because there aren't many. One option is the Silent Circle Mobile subscription mentioned earlier, which works on iOS and Android to encrypt voice and video communications.
Then there's RedPhone, also from Whisper Systems, currently available only on Android. RedPhone is free, simple to use and, once installed, disappears into your phone's dialer. If you're calling someone who also uses the app, you'll see an option to "upgrade" to an encrypted call. When you dial, you hear entertaining sound effects meant to sound like encryption in progress. It's charming and reassuring.
The process works by encrypting the voice data and then routing it through the data network (Wi-Fi, 3G or LTE) instead of over a standard voice channel. So the phone company can't listen to your calls, and your carrier or the wireless network provider can only see encrypted data.
The only possible concern is that the calls now use data instead of voice minutes. If you have a low allotment, you might want to limit your chat time. Also, call quality is not as good as over the mobile network. Whisper Systems seems to know this and offers to let you rate each call once it has ended.
Whisper says the app should be submitted to Apple for approval by the end of February.
Another common security failure on your mobile phone is browsing. Your search data, location and personal information can all be gathered while you surf, either by your carrier, government snoops or hackers. Consider a secure browser or browsing app for your phone.
On Android, The Guardian Project has you covered. Its free Orweb browser and companion Orbot apps offer private browsing that frees you from cookies, stops network providers from viewing your web travels, does not keep a browsing history and disables security threats.
Used in conjunction with Orbot, Orweb can mask your identity when you try to gain access to sites that might be monitored, censored or located outside your home country. Orbot routes your surfing and searching through the Tor network, a distributed system of communicating that prevents monitors from seeing web traffic or where it originated.
Orweb and Orbot aren't available for iOS, but a good alternative is the $1 Onion Browser, which, like Orbot, routes your surfing through the Tor network.
For lighter-weight protection, you can use the private browsing modes in Safari or Chrome (on Android or iOS) to make sure your browser isn't saving your data, browsing history or cookies once you exit.
It's worth noting that none of these options are completely secure, especially not if you've got Angry Birds running alongside the Onion Browser and if your carrier is storing encrypted data until some computer comes along powerful enough to break it. But they're a good start to securing at least some of your communications. Go forth and be more private.
