Nicholas Galanin at Peter Blum; 'NXTHVN: Undercurrents" at Sean Kelly; Ani Liu at Cuchifritos Gallery + Project Space; John Riepenhoff at Broadway Gallery.
Summer hours vary at galleries. Visitors should check in advance.
Nicholas Galanin
Through July 22. Peter Blum, 176 Grand Street, Manhattan; 212-244-6055, peterblumgallery.com.
"I would stand up for that flag," an artist commented on a social media post featuring a photo of Nicholas Galanin's "White Flag" (2022), a sculpture with a polar bear rug mounted on a rough wooden staff. At a time when flags representing nations and political causes feel particularly fraught, "White Flag," in Galanin's exhibition "It Flows Through" at Peter Blum, feels poignant.
Galanin, an Alaska-based artist whose work often refers to his Tlingit and Unangax heritage, frequently draws on the nonhuman world. In addition to "White Flag," which nods to both surrender and spiritual power -- but also the threat against this endangered species -- there is "Infinite Weight" (2022), which features a taxidermied wolf mounted upside down on the ceiling and a video loop of a live wolf. "Anax Yaa Nadéin (it is flowing through it)" (2022) is a wall installation of found baskets with eyes and nose-holes cut into them to resemble the balaclavas of activists, terrorists or freedom fighters -- or perhaps spirits or shamans. Many of the works here use the ready-made tactics of artists like David Hammons or Jimmie Durham, which turn found objects into sharp critiques of colonialism and racism.
Galanin can be overly didactic: In addition to his sculptures, prints and photographs, he has written texts to explain the works. He doesn't need to do this. Viewers are smart enough to draw their own conclusions and his objects, which rest on the X factor of unexpected interventions and juxtapositions, are vastly more powerful and persuasive. MARTHA SCHWENDENER
'NXTHVN: Undercurrents'
Through Aug. 5. Sean Kelly Gallery, 475 10th Avenue, Manhattan; 212-239-1181, skny.com.
"Care, growth, abundance, rebirth, loss, dislocation, the forgotten" are what the sculptor Layo Bright says are the key concerns that undergird her work in the group show "Undercurrents." These interests first strike me as particularly millennial, but then I look at "Double Standard" (2022), two coruscating, yet darkly foreboding rectangles of glass epoxied over nylon tote bags. Then listening to her discuss the 1983 forced deportation of Ghanaians from her native Nigeria I realize this is a profoundly purposeful reflection on the inequities of migration. All her work is also visually delectable, especially the "Visions" (2022) pieces, kiln-formed-glass visages combined with natural elements such as leaves to look like 21st-century building capitals. The curators, Marissa Del Toro and Jamillah Hinson installed the work high on the walls so that it reads just this way.
"Undercurrents" is a show by graduates of the NXTHVN fellowship program, thus, as you might expect, it's a smorgasbord -- though laid out elegantly. There are some cartoonish, propulsive, almost surreal paintings by John Guzman that do surprising things to human faces. Alyssa Klauer's paintings are all fey, ethereally glowing portraits with the repeated motif of one woman's silhouette merging with another. There are almost gimmicky paintings by Patrick Quarm that owe something to Kehinde Wiley and employ vividly colored portraits of Black people pierced by strategically placed holes.
The entire exhibition feels like the assembled artists do consider loss, dislocation and the forgotten, and yet find their way to abundance. SEPH RODNEY
Ani Liu
Through July 30. Cuchifritos Gallery + Project Space, 88 Essex Street, No. 21, Manhattan; 212-420-9202, artistsallianceinc.org.
The work that parents, especially mothers, do to raise their kids is often referred to as "invisible labor" because it happens out of the public eye. In her solo exhibition, "Ecologies of Care," Ani Liu quantifies that amount of labor and makes it visible, turning her experience of new motherhood into a series of thought-provoking artworks.
Liu came to art by way of architecture and then technology: For her master's thesis, she used an EEG device to control the movement of sperm on a custom circuit. The pieces here harness technology to consider what it means to be a parent. The investigation is physical -- for example, custom machines pumping a breast milk look-alike through looping tubes -- and cultural, as with works showcasing gendered toys generated by a machine-learning algorithm (e.g. "Silver Scented Pony Hair Barbie Doll").
The strongest pieces translate Liu's physical experiences into mediated self-portraits, following feminist artists like Teresa Burga, Lynn Hershman Leeson and Adrian Piper. There's a quiet tension between the art's sleek appearance and the visceral realities of parenting, and in the attempt to impose order on a process that's stubbornly unpredictable. "Untitled (Labor of Love)" (2022) charts every feeding and diaper change during the first 30 days of Liu's infant's life through vials containing breast milk, formula and pieces of diapers. To this childless writer, it was an eye-opening lesson -- all the more acute in a post-Roe America -- in just how much labor it takes to keep someone alive. JILLIAN STEINHAUER
John Riepenhoff
Through July 15. Broadway Gallery, 373 Broadway, Manhattan. 212-226-4001; broadwaygallery.nyc.
John Riepenhoff likes to paint the sky in plein-air. He's done it all over the world, but the paintings currently showing at Broadway Gallery were made in his hometown, Milwaukee, where he also runs a space of his own, Green Gallery.
They range in size from 2 by 3 feet to 7 by 8 feet, use oil, acrylic and sometimes flashe, and are all titled "Skies." One is covered with a reticulated pattern; another shows a vertical rain of vigorous long dashes. All of them make a monochrome impression of smoky gray-blue, though Riepenhoff uses various tones to achieve this effect, including smudges of pink and orange in the background and the occasional tiny dot of bright yellow or purple.
They're not literally figurative, but you can't definitively call them nonfigurative, either. By rendering his blots and dashes in a single, variable color that leaves plenty of unprimed gray linen exposed, what Riepenhoff succeeds in depicting isn't the look of the open sky, but its feel -- its emptiness, its paradoxical density, the weird spiritual disquiet you may experience when staring into something infinite and intangible.
He's also succeeded in assembling one of the more stylistically coherent shows I've seen in quite a while, a suite of paintings that feel like the healthy elaboration of a single idea. Two naïve little ceramic owls, one perched on the gallery's desk and one over the door, add a charming accent. WILL HEINRICH
Photograph "White Flag" (2022) in Nicholas Galanin's exhibition "It Flows Through" at Peter Blum Gallery. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA NICHOLAS GALANIN AND PETER BLUM GALLERY, NEW YORK); Layo Bright's "Visions I" (2022), kiln-formed glass, in the group show "NXTHVN: Undercurrents" at Sean Kelly Gallery. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA NXTHVN AND SEAN KELLY, NEW YORK); One of John Riepenhoff's works, all of which are titled "Skies," in the exhibition "Milwaukee Nights and Decoys" at Broadway Gallery. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA JOHN RIEPENHOFF AND BROADWAY GALLERY); Ani Liu's "Untitled (Labor of Love)," 2022, in her solo exhibition "Ecologies of Care," a series of pieces reflecting on motherhood at Cuchifritos Gallery. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA ANI LIU AND CUCHIFRITOS GALLERY, NEW YORK)
