Fears of a massive cyberattack were realized this month, when over 200,000 computers were hacked in a global blackmail attempt. Hospitals were locked out of medical records; individuals were prompted to pay a ransom to access their computers. Yet cybersecurity remains murky territory. Here are a few books that address the threat, recommended by the Newsbook columnist Concepción de León. (One, published decades ago, shows that the current cyberworld may have been foreseen in literature.) DARK TERRITORY: THE SECRET HISTORY OF CYBER WAR (2016)
Fred Kaplan draws from conversations with prominent American government leaders, including former directors of the National Security Agency, to deliver a behind-the-scenes look at policy formulation over the last several decades. The book traces the United States' advances in cybersecurity -- anything we can do, he argues, adversaries could replicate or learn to do better. (The May 12 cyberattack used technology that originated in the United States.)
CYBER WAR: THE NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT (2010)
Richard A. Clarke, a former counterterrorism adviser to President George W. Bush, argues that more resources should be invested into warding off cyberattacks. This book outlines what a cyberattack in the United States might look like -- trains disabled, electrical power grids damaged, medical records wiped out -- and proposes a plan its authors argue will give the country a fighting chance.
NEUROMANCER (1984)
Case, the protagonist of William Gibson's exploration of the implications of artificial intelligence, is a hacker who can plug into his machine to intimately experience electronic transmissions. After he is caught stealing by his former employers, they damage his central nervous system, cutting off his access to cyberspace. When he is offered help repairing his nervous system in exchange for his services in a nefarious mission, Case jumps at the opportunity. And so begins the novel's swift unfolding.
For more news-based book recommendations, find the Newsbook column at nytimes.com/books.
Photos
