Tech companies get off easy after privacy violations
March 30
Google agrees to settle federal charges that it used deceptive practices in the rollout of a social network called Buzz. Later that year, Facebook agrees to settle wider charges that it also deceived users. David C. Vladeck, director of the Bureau of Consumer Protection at the Federal Trade Commission In 2010, in an effort to directly compete with Facebook, Google tried to roll out Buzz. They made some serious mistakes. Google users who had signed in were basically encouraged to go to Buzz, and if they went to Buzz, things like their contacts would be disclosed. So if you were a psychiatrist and had a bunch of patients on your contact list, that well may have been shared.
Google did a good job deflecting it by being contrite. But there were a lot of people whose lives were seriously impacted.
What Google did was really bad. But in some ways, what Facebook did was even worse.
Facebook was all about sharing information and allowing third-party apps to have access to its site, to make it more interesting and promote growth. And they were very successful. The problem was the user was told that the app would only be harvesting data needed for the functionality of the app. But the apps would be taking lots of personal information.
Facebook was acutely aware of what was going on. There were records.
Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook's chief operating officer, came in and tried to basically say: "We care about privacy. We think we're protecting privacy. We think we're doing a good job." That may well have been Facebook's perception. It was just completely at odds with what we thought.
The consent decree was constructed to send a signal to Facebook that it really had to clamp down. Obviously, the company didn't take that very seriously.
I regret not having done things differently. We struggled with the reporting provisions of both consent decrees. This may have been a failure of our imagination. The idea of privacy audits was floating around, but there were no templates. There was no model to use.
We did what we could, with biannual privacy assessments. But they turned out to be wholly insufficient. And in hindsight, that to me is the Achilles' heel. As told to NATASHA SINGER Siri says hello (and much more)
Oct. 4
Apple introduces a new way to control iPhones with speech. Adam Cheyer, co-founder of Siri, a start-up acquired by Apple When it came out, I went with a group of Siri employees to an Apple store to see what the vibe was. They had set up this plasma display on the front wall, just to the right of the door, showing Siri. I got these chills down my spine.
Usage started going viral -- I think it was two orders of magnitude more than marketing had predicted. I mean, every late-night TV host was having a segment about Siri.
The usage spikes were overwhelming because speech recognition is a challenge. You know, there's only so much you can do when you get a million simultaneous requests. We were literally sleeping on army cots in the hallways of Apple trying to keep everything stable and scaled.
Ultimately, I think we showed the world two things that they didn't know before: One is that it was possible. The challenge of being able to understand speech -- I don't think most companies at the time, Google and others, thought you could really do it at that scale. It's like a diver in the Olympics who does the first quadruple flip. The second thing we showed was that users would like it, that this was an appealing interface concept.
Many times Steve Jobs is attributed with having reinvigorated or reinvented fields, like Pixar with movies and computing itself with the graphical interface. Well, you can also say that Steve Jobs reinvigorated the field of artificial intelligence. Steve was the first to go out and put A.I. back in the marketplace. As told to JOHN MARKOFF The Tim Cook Era Begins at Apple
Oct. 5
Steve Jobs, the company's visionary co-founder, dies at age 56 of complications from pancreatic cancer. His longtime No. 2 becomes the public face of the company. Regis McKenna, who was involved in Apple's creation in 1976 Steve's death was the moment the Tim Cook era began. It was a really rough beginning, because Tim had no credibility in the community or the public. There was a lot of noise out there that Tim wasn't a product guy -- he was a process guy -- and that he just didn't have the creativity that Steve had.
Tim's response was: "I'm not Steve Jobs. I'm not going to try to be Steve Jobs. I'm going to be me."
When you sat in a meeting with Steve, he dominated, and he would tell you to shut up and let someone he wanted to hear from talk. Tim was completely the opposite. He listened to everybody no matter what you had to say, and he would come back to challenge them on things. There was a lot more openness and freedom to bring new ideas to the surface. As told to JOHN MARKOFF
(PHOTOGRAPH BY GETTY IMAGES)
