9 P.M. (AMC) HUMANS Gemma Chan, above, stars as Anita, an exquisite specimen of artificial intelligence, or "synth" -- one of the must-own gadgets populating a present-day London in a parallel universe -- who has been purchased by an exasperated husband (Tom Goodman-Hill) after his wife's work schedule proves more than he and their three messy offspring can handle. But with her silky ebony hair, lithe limbs and ability to charm man and child alike, Anita isn't exactly the kind of help a frazzled middle-aged woman (Katherine Parkinson) wants to encounter at the breakfast table before she's had her morning shower. Meanwhile, across town, the government has issued a new elder-care bot (Rebecca Front) to George Millican (William Hurt), an aging scientist involved in the creation of the synths who wants to hold on to his outdated model, Odi (Will Tudor), with his memories of George's dead wife. "There's a lot going on in this show," Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. "Some of it is familiar from previous takes on artificial life, some of it is innovative, but all of it is involving, well written and well played."
10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Representative Michael McCaul, Republican of Texas, talks about global terror attacks. Michael V. Hayden, a former director of the National Security Agency, and Karim Sadjadpour, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment, discuss the latest on the nuclear deal with Iran. Theodore B. Olson, a former solicitor general, weighs in on the Supreme Court's ruling on same-sex marriage.
10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION Chad Griffin, the president of the Human Rights Campaign, and Russell Moore, the president of the Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist Convention, discuss same-sex marriage.
7 P.M. (NBC) AVALANCHE In this "Dateline" special, Richard Engel traces the footsteps of climbers with the Seattle-based Madison Mountaineering, who were stranded on Mount Everest during the Nepal earthquake in April. He also meets with Reto Rüesch, the helicopter pilot who rescued some of those stuck on the mountain.
7:30 P.M. (13) TREASURES OF NEW YORK: COOPER HEWITT This series looks at the $91 million overhaul and expansion of Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum.
8 P.M. (13, 49) LAST TANGO IN HALIFAX In this Season 3 opener, an unexpected visitor forces Alan (Derek Jacobi) to confront his past, causing anxiety in Gillian (Nicola Walker, left) and Caroline (Sarah Lancashire) when he decides to keep it a secret from Celia (Anne Reid).
8 P.M. (BET) THE BET AWARDS 2015 Janet Jackson will receive the inaugural Ultimate Icon: Music Dance Visual award at this ceremony celebrating excellence in entertainment and sports by African-Americans and members of other minority groups. Smokey Robinson will be honored for lifetime achievement and Tom Joyner for his humanitarianism. Tracee Ellis Ross and Anthony Anderson will host this live broadcast from the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles, which features performances by Kendrick Lamar, Chris Brown, Nicki Minaj, Anthony Hamilton, Robin Thicke, K. Michelle and Janelle Monae. Reporting from the red carpet starts at 6; an after-party follows at 11:30.
9 P.M. (CNN) GLEN CAMPBELL: I'LL BE ME (2014) In 2011, at 75, Mr. Campbell, left, the singer and guitarist behind standards like "Gentle on My Mind" and "Wichita Lineman," revealed that he had Alzheimer's and would embark on a farewell tour. James Keach chronicles 151 shows over 15 months as the music clings but the man fades away.
9 P.M. (Showtime) NURSE JACKIE The series and its star, Edie Falco, pull the plug after seven seasons.
What's Streaming Now
SHORTS ON SUNDANCETV Michael Plante, a senior programmer for the Sundance Film Festival, curates this inaugural batch of short films for this new destination within the SundanceTV website. The lineup includes Jill Soloway's "Una Hora Por Favora," Denis Villeneuve's "Next Floor," Jordana Spiro's "Skin," Ben Berman's "I'm a Mitzvah" and Emily Carmichael's "The Hunter and the Swan Discuss Their Meeting." (sundance.tv) KATHRYN SHATTUCK
Photograph (Photograph by Des Willie, Kudos/Amc-C4)
