AIR travel, as an experience, sure leaves a lot to be desired.
Smaller seats, higher baggage fees and ticket prices (despite lower fuel costs) are just a few of the myriad complaints.
On the bright side, however, airlines are making more money, and after years of outdated in-flight entertainment, investments in onboard technology may entertain passengers enough to make the miles go by more quickly.
Most United States carriers have, in recent months, announced updates and improvements to their domestic in-flight tech that, in some cases, even provide free entertainment to the poor souls back in coach.
These new services let you use your own mobile devices, like tablets, laptops and phones, to either stream free content like TV, music or games, or to rent movies and TV without having to pay for a Wi-Fi plan.
At the center of many new offerings is Gogo Air, the in-flight Internet pioneer that provides both Wi-Fi on planes and more full-fledged entertainment options.
Delta Air Lines' new Delta Studio service, for example, relies on Gogo. The service, released in August, is available to all passengers on any flight over 90 minutes, letting them stream satellite TV, music and video games on a personal device without paying for a Wi-Fi plan.
When you open a browser window on your laptop, tablet or phone, you'll see a menu that offers movies and TV to stream or rent.
What you see is based on where you're sitting. (You'll be asked for your name and seat number when you sign in.)
So-called premium movies and TV are free for first, business and upgraded economy class, but Delta said coach passengers get at least something free, and can pay $6 for additional movies and $1 for TV shows.
If you want to surf the web or check email, though, you'll still have to pay for Wi-Fi. And be aware that to get the free streamed content, you must download Gogo's video player app before boarding the flight.
Alaska Airlines this week announced a similar service, also powered by Gogo, that will let fliers rent movies and TV even if a separate Wi-Fi subscription isn't available on the flight.
JetBlue, which has long been popular thanks to its satellite TV in flight -- every plane in its fleet has a seat-back TV -- is also leaning heavily on personal devices and faster Wi-Fi. The airline's Fly-Fi service uses satellite-based Internet access, instead of the more typical ground-to-air system, with speeds that can rival home broadband networks.
The airline is still deploying the faster Wi-Fi throughout its fleet; it said just under half its planes offer the faster Internet options. A JetBlue spokeswoman said the rollout would be complete in spring 2015. If you're on a flight with Fly-Fi, you can get basic web access free, or upgrade to even faster Internet access for $9 an hour. Those prices may change after the entire fleet has the technology.
That's expensive, but I've paid as much or more for Gogo's in-flight Wi-Fi and had it work at a crawling pace. If you really wanted to stream a movie from Netflix, the cost might be worth it.
Its free content includes programs from Fox and National Geographic, e-learning videos, book excerpts and cooking shows.
Personally, I'd rather watch the live TV on the seat back, but maybe a Fox series would suffice if the TV signal became choppy.
Many airlines are finding that offering better in-flight Wi-Fi and a few free content options is easier and cheaper than upgrading expensive seats to include seat-back TVs. And a few free offerings go a long way, especially in coach.
"Other than pouring us endless martinis, that's just about the only thing they can do to keep us happy in flight," said Jack Plunkett, chief executive of Plunkett Research, a market research firm based in Houston.
Mr. Plunkett said airlines were slow to jump into in-flight technology after the industry's first major attempt -- the seat-back telephone -- proved a "dismal failure."
"It added a lot of weight to the airplane, drew a lot of power and required a communications system connecting the airplane to a comm system on the ground," he said. "After that failure, it was hard to talk them into trying Wi-Fi on board."
But as personal devices like phones, tablets and laptops became more and more common, and third-party Wi-Fi providers offered to shoulder the cost of in-flight Internet access, airlines realized that the "bring your own device" model of in-flight entertainment could be cheap and easy.
And instead of replacing entire seats to add entertainment, airlines are adding welcome niceties like power outlets and USB plugs in every row. So, using in-flight Wi-Fi to stream a movie to a plugged-in tablet becomes a better way to fly.
Southwest Airlines, always bare bones in terms of its actual planes, offers Wi-Fi on about 80 percent of its flights.
While the company said its smaller aircraft would not be retrofitted for Wi-Fi, any new jets that come into the fleet will have it.
Southwest also includes live Dish satellite TV and Beats Music playlists without requiring passengers to pay for a Wi-Fi plan, and said it was the only airline that offered wireless Internet access during taxiing, before takeoff and after landing.
In the coming years, expect in-flight Wi-Fi to continue to get faster -- and hopefully cheaper. Virgin America announced this week that it had upgraded its in-flight Wi-Fi, provided by Gogo Inflight, to up to 10 megabits per second, close to a typical home broadband connection. The connections in-flight will probably be slower, because everyone is sharing the Wi-Fi, but that is still an improvement.
And Gogo said that it was testing satellite-based Wi-Fi, instead of the current ground-to-air system, and that could provide a plane with a connection of 70 megabits per second. Even shared among passengers on a plane, that would be speedy Internet.
A few carriers are, of course, slower to upgrade than others. United, for example, offers Wi-Fi access on only about half of its jets, although it just announced plans to bring Wi-Fi and Gogo-powered personal device streaming to some of its smaller United Express planes starting early next year. About 200 of its 700 planes offer seat-back entertainment.
American Airlines offers Wi-Fi on all its big jets, but only on 12 percent of its regional planes, and it has some kind of seat-back entertainment in 58 percent of its wide-body jets, the company said.
And then there's the domestic in-flight dream: Virgin America, often lauded as having the best domestic in-flight system of them all. Yes, every flight has (newly upgraded) Wi-Fi, power outlets and USB ports.
But every plane also has seat-back TVs that stream live television and offer on-demand movies and TV (free to Main Cabin Select and first-class passengers).
The TVs serve as touch-screen ordering systems for food and drinks, which are then delivered directly to your seat. You can use them to play games and chat with other passengers, and Virgin America just introduced a new feature that lets you send a drink to another passenger on the plane.
Such seat-back amenities might not be practical to maintain forever, especially as personal devices and faster in-flight Internet access become cheaper and easier to deploy.
But for now, the best of all worlds is still the best option.
Photograph American Airlines, Top, has Some Kind of Seat-Back Entertainment in 58 Percent of Its Wide-Body Jets. Every Virgin America Flight, Above, has Wi-Fi, Power Outlets and Usb Ports. Jetblue's Fly-Fi Service, Below, Uses Satellite-Based Internet Access, Instead of the More Typical Ground-to-Air System.
