CORRECTION APPENDEDOSTENSIBLY, the new Amazon Fire TV is a streaming media set-top box -- an Internet-connected device that lets you watch video from Amazon Instant Video, Netflix, Hulu, YouTube, Crackle or a few other outlets and play games with or without a controller, which is sold separately.
In reality, the Fire TV is a small, flat, matte black Trojan horse intended to sell you even more Amazon goods than you already buy. I prefer streaming that is content-neutral, or that at least allows me to find the best deal. This is not that box.
That's not to say the Fire TV isn't likable. The packaging and the hardware are tidy, premium and elegant. With its design and $99 price, the device pretty clearly targets the Apple TV as its primary competition. The two streaming devices have similar designs -- and designs on your regular purchasing.
The setup for the Fire TV is remarkably simple, although the package does not include an HDMI cable, which I find annoying, although not uncommon. The Bluetooth remote pairs relatively easily; mine was a little slow to respond until I walked around the backside of the box. It's still a smoother Bluetooth setup than most. There is no clunky entering of a code or anything like that; just hold down the "home" button on the remote or controller for a few seconds, and you're off.
Amazon is promoting its voice integration, which allows searches for content by speaking aloud. I like that the remote uses a microphone button to start voice commands, rather than just passively listening all the time. But that button has to be held down while you're speaking, which is unintuitive and easy to forget.
That's the least of what is wrong with the voice search, or any search for that matter. Yes, you can use your voice to search for content on the Fire TV. But the box will return movie, TV and game results only from the Amazon catalog, even if you have downloaded and signed into other apps, like Netflix's.
You could argue that it makes (some) sense that Amazon would index only its own catalog. But the company noted that the voice search also includes Vevo, a site that features music videos and some musician-related documentary content. So the capability exists.
For movie, TV and game content, however, the Fire TV does not search across platforms at all -- or display other viewing options in its search results or show summaries. If a show is available to stream free via Netflix, you would never know it.
For example, when I searched for "House of Cards," all I saw were options to rent episodes for $2.99. Even though I had downloaded and signed into Netflix on the Fire TV, there was no mention of Netflix availability on the show summary, even under the tantalizingly named "More ways to watch" menu.
The same happened with the documentary movie "The Summit." It is a $4.99 rental on Amazon, but when I searched for it on Netflix, I found that I could stream it free with my subscription.
Oddly, at least one Amazon search result noted that the title was also available on Hulu Plus; it's possible a more universal search is in the works but just not yet in place. In the short term, though, if you already pay for Netflix or Hulu Plus and are tricked into paying again to rent a movie or show from Amazon, you will end up feeling like, well, a sucker.
By contrast, the Roku streaming media box (priced from $49 to $99) can search across multiple platforms, what it calls its "top channels." So can TiVo, which is one of my favorite streaming media boxes because its integrated search includes live TV; on-demand sources like Netflix, Hulu Plus and Amazon; and even, depending on cable or satellite provider, on-demand results.
Other Fire TV features feel less than baked as well. Parental settings are available that require a pass code to buy or download movies, shows or games; but no content rating restrictions are attached. When I searched for Pokemon, the box recognized the name and sent me through to search results, where the first one listed was the Walking Dead game series. That is not a child-friendly outcome.
As for content, the Fire TV has less than Roku or Apple TV; there are no HBO Go or Spotify, which are big misses. The Fire TV has 180 apps in total; Roku has some 1,200.
In addition to the need to hold down a button for voice search, other aspects of the interface are not entirely intuitive either, and they can be jarring. Title images are huge, and it is hard to see many listings on a page. Getting information like summaries or availability takes multiple clicks, and the visual highlights that signal navigation are overly subtle.
I also wish voice controls were better integrated throughout the interface, for data entry, searching other apps or even navigation.
The Fire TV tries to stand apart from the crush of streaming set-top boxes by offering games. Possibly Amazon is positioning it as an alternative to the much more expensive PlayStation 4 or Xbox One, which are able media-streaming devices that also, obviously, do gaming.
So far, though, the game selection is less than impressive: Deus Ex, Minecraft and Despicable Me are the titles I recognized. One exclusive game, Sev Zero, is included and Amazon promises more.
The $40 controller is fine, although compared with those of the new Xbox One and especially the PlayStation 4, it is less comfortable and polished. My son tried to play Minecraft using it, and found it highly frustrating; when I tried it, I agreed.
The Fire TV, over all, is a decent effort that suffers from entering a crowded field. Even if the market for streaming media boxes is currently small -- just 8 percent of consumers in the United States own one, according to Forrester Research -- the competition is more mature, and not limited to boxes.
Internet-connected or "smart" TVs offer similar access to streaming media without taking up an HDMI port or room on a component shelf. Google's $35 Chromecast, the darkest and cheapest horse in the race, lets you stream supported content from a phone, computer or laptop with almost magical ease.
I find that combining my smart TV (a Panasonic Viera) with a Chromecast for easy streaming of Netflix or YouTube is right for me; I have Netflix, Amazon video, Pandora or Spotify, and that is just about all I need. I have not seen anything in the Fire TV that would persuade me to buy it.
Nevertheless, Amazon has a huge reach and is aggressively promoting the Fire TV; if the company continues to improve the content, games and interface, the Fire TV could be an accessible entry-level device. But if I had to buy just one gadget to introduce someone to streaming Internet video, I would get a Chromecast or a Roku until the Fire TV grows up a bit.
Correction: April 8, 2014, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: The Machine Learning column on Monday, about the Amazon Fire TV set-top box, misstated the voice search range of the device. The Fire TV box searches the music video site Vevo as well as the Amazon catalog. It is not limited to the catalog alone. The error was repeated in an accompanying picture caption.
Photograph Voice Search Is a Feature Amazon Is Promoting On the Fire Tv, Though It Will Retrieve Results Only From the Amazon Catalog.
