INTERNATIONAL
Alibaba's Ma Resurfaces In China After Travels
Alibaba founder Jack Ma has resurfaced in China after months of overseas travel, visiting a school Monday in the city where his company is headquartered to discuss topics such as artificial intelligence.
Mr. Ma founded e-commerce firm Alibaba in the 1990s and was once China's richest man. He has kept a low profile with few public appearances since November 2020, when he had publicly criticized China's regulators and financial systems during a speech in Shanghai.
Shortly afterward, authorities put the brakes on the initial public offering of Alibaba's financial affiliate Ant Group, which had been set to raise $ 34.5 billion in what would have been the world's largest share offering at the time. Alibaba was later investigated and fined $ 2.8 billion for breaching antitrust rules as Chinese authorities cracked down on the once-freewheeling technology industry. ASSOCIATED PRESS
LABOR
Chipotle to Pay for Closing Store Seeking to Unionize
Chipotle Mexican Grill has agreed to pay $ 240,000 to former employees as part of a settlement stemming from a complaint that the company violated federal law by closing a restaurant where workers wanted to unionize.
Chipotle announced it was permanently closing its Augusta, Maine, location last year after workers filed a National Labor Relations Board petition for a union election. The N.L.R.B. later said the closure was illegal.
The Maine location was the first in the chain to file a union petition. The settlement says two dozen employees will receive payments from Chipotle and they will be placed on a preferential hiring list.
The company must also post a notice in dozens of stores in New England that it won't close stores or discriminate due to union support, the settlement states.
"It sends a message to corporations that shutting down a store and blackballing workers didn't work for Chipotle and it won't work for them either," said Brandi McNease, a former employee in Augusta. ASSOCIATED PRESS
ENERGY
Wind Industry Predicts Return to Rapid Growth
The wind power industry on Monday projected growth to rapidly accelerate this year, with incentives and policy changes in key nations helping to overcome a slowdown in 2022.
The Global Wind Energy Council in Brussels also cited concern about climate change, as well as secure energy supplies following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, for a fast-growth outlook in its annual Global Wind Report. The international trade association projected 680 gigawatts of new onshore and offshore wind will be installed by 2027 -- enough to power about 657 million homes annually.
"The twin challenges of secure energy supplies and climate targets will propel wind power into a new phase of extraordinary growth," the council said.
The wind power market stalled in 2022 because of government policies that encouraged "race to the bottom" pricing, and because of inflation, higher logistics costs and inefficient permitting and licensing rules, the council said. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL DWYER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
