AIRLINES
JetBlue Decides to End Its Deal With American
JetBlue says it won't appeal a judge's ruling against its partnership with American Airlines, effectively dropping the deal in an effort to salvage its purchase of Spirit Airlines.
JetBlue said Wednesday that it would wind down the deal with American in the coming months and "turn even more focus" on a $ 3.8 billion purchase of Spirit.
The U.S. Justice Department sued to block both the JetBlue-American deal and JetBlue's purchase of Spirit on grounds that they would hurt competition.
JetBlue hopes that dropping the deal with American might persuade the Justice Department to let the Spirit purchase go ahead.
A federal judge decided in May that JetBlue and American must end their partnership, called the Northeast Alliance, because it violates U.S. antitrust law.
Buying Spirit would let JetBlue grow quickly to nearly 10 percent of the nationwide air-travel market. ASSOCIATED PRESS
ACQUISITIONS
Mars Says It Will BuyKevin's Natural Foods
The family-owned food giant Mars agreed on Wednesday to buy Kevin's Natural Foods, which is known for its sous-vide meals, sauces and side dishes, the companies said.
Mars, which generates about $ 48 billion in annual sales, has three major businesses: Mars Petcare, Mars Snacking and Mars Food & Nutrition.
After the deal is completed, Kevin's will operate as a stand-alone brand under the food and nutrition unit.
In pet care, Mars operates brands like Pedigree, Whiskas, and Royal Canin, and it recently acquired the veterinary equipment firm Heska Corp.
Mars, widely known as the maker of candy brands like M&M's and Snickers, has made a series of acquisitions in recent years as part of its efforts to diversify and build out its categories focused on healthy foods.
"What really inspired us about Kevin's was their purpose and their passion for food," said Shaid Shah, global president at Mars Food & Nutrition. REUTERS
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Traffic to ChatGPTDeclines for First Time
ChatGPT, the popular artificial intelligence chatbot launched by Open AI in November, saw monthly traffic to its website and unique visitors decline for the first time ever in June, according to analytics firm Similarweb.
Worldwide desktop and mobile traffic to the ChatGPT website decreased by 9.7 percent in June from May, while unique visitors to ChatGPT's website dropped 5.7 percent. The amount of time visitors spent on the website was also down 8.5 percent, Similarweb data shows.
OpenAI did not immediately respond to request for comment.
ChatGPT set off a frenzied use of generative A.I. in daily tasks from writing to coding and reached 100 million monthly active users in January, two months after its launch.
It is the fastest-growing consumer application ever, and now boasts over 1.5 billion monthly visits, one of the top 20 websites in the world. REUTERS
Credit: By Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)
