CORRECTION APPENDEDSHOPPING for a camera used to be a fairly simple proposition, even just a couple of years ago. Sure, there were a lot of models, but you were either buying a cheap and compact point-and-shoot digital camera or an expensive and big digital camera with interchangeable lenses, known as a digital single-lens reflex.
Now smartphone cameras are so good that point-and-shoot cameras seem almost redundant. (I said almost. There are good reasons to own them that I'll get into below.) A D.S.L.R. can make you look like a tourist, and its array of controls can be overwhelming.
This feeling of confusion about what camera to get -- or whether you even need a camera other than your phone -- is contributing to flagging sales. Camera shipments across all categories (other than phones) were down 40 percent in 2013, according to the Camera and Imaging Products Association, a trade group that regularly tracks camera sales.
Camera makers are more than aware of these changes to their industry. And they realize that a camera phone isn't the best option for many occasions. So in recent years, they have created a new category of camera, one that offers a mix of attributes -- a device that produces higher-quality pictures than a point-and-shoot while being less bulky and less expensive than most D.S.L.R. options.
These cameras -- so-called mirrorless cameras -- do add another type of camera to consider. But the end result might be a camera that's much closer to what you actually need, and therefore one you might frequently use.
While mirrorless cameras are usually about the same size as a point-and-shoot digital camera, they're actually closer in spirit and technology to a D.S.L.R. First, like a D.S.L.R., they have interchangeable lenses. They also have image sensors that are nearly the same size as those found in D.S.L.R.s and many times larger than the ones in a point-and-shoot camera.
Image sensors, much more than megapixels, are the true path to image quality. A larger sensor means a camera is capable of much higher-quality images than compact cameras, and far better quality than camera phones. The bigger the sensor, the better the results in low-light shooting situations, and the more control you will have over depth of field. That last feature is what gives you those photos only the pros seem to pull off, where the people or objects in the front of the frame are in focus while everything behind them is pleasingly soft.
The major difference between a mirrorless camera and a D.S.L.R. is the physical design.
In a digital single-lens reflex camera, the term "reflex" refers to the fact that a mirror inside the camera reflects light from the lens to the viewfinder, so that what you are looking at actually represents how the photo will look when you take it.
Then, when you click the shutter -- that is, take a picture -- the mirror moves up and out of the way, and the light from the lens hits the image sensor. (It's more complicated than that, but that's the gist.)
A mirrorless camera uses an electronic viewfinder or the camera's LCD screen to create a "live preview" of the shot, rather than a true mirror image. The previews are still pretty accurate, especially when it comes to color, but some pros still prefer the so-called optical viewfinder on a D.S.L.R.
The mirroring system is large, so mirrorless cameras can be significantly smaller than D.S.L.R.s. They're not as easy to slip into a pocket as a point-and-shoot because of the lens size, but they're pretty small.
I recently tried out the Fujifilm X-T1, a 16-megapixel mirrorless camera that is meant to be as good as a D.S.L.R. and that costs more than most low-end D.S.L.R.s and even some midrange models. It retails for $1,300 without a lens and $1,800 bundled with a Fujifilm 18-55mm lens. I found it almost too much camera for me but quite pleasant to use nonetheless.
The camera has a retro design that puts most of the manual control dials on the top. There's something very satisfying about "dialing in" the right photo. It has a tiltable three-inch LCD viewfinder on the back with a crisp screen that is noticeably nicer than the one on my D.S.L.R. (a Canon EOS Rebel T2i).
The photos were amazing, as they should be for a camera at this price. But the X-T1's auto mode shooting didn't blow me away. I'm not a photography snob, and I know that a lot of casual photographers want a nice camera that takes great photos without all the fussing.
The autofocus is fast, though, and the camera wasn't stumped by low light or moving objects. The camera has a weather-resistant body and Wi-Fi, with a companion app that lets you browse and upload photos from your phone, which I love.
But then there is the size -- what is supposed to be a top selling point of a mirrorless camera. The X-T1 is barely more compact than my D.S.L.R. and only an ounce or so lighter (15.4 ounces against 16.8 ounces for the Canon).
And even with that heft, I wasn't impressed with the battery life. With those faults, I find the price hard to stomach.
For a more affordable comparison, I tried the Sony Alpha NEX 5T, which was released in September 2013 and can be found online for about $550. It lacks the panache of the X-T1, but the $1,100 price difference makes it worth a look.
The camera's body is almost hilariously small: At about 4.5 inches wide and under 3 inches tall, this thing is all lens. That makes it more pocketable, but also not as rugged, so you will want to be a bit more delicate. Because of its size, you won't need a stand-alone camera bag -- I would feel comfortable putting it in a backpack as long as the lens cap was on.
I found the focus to be fast, the image quality good and the video quality excellent. The camera has built-in Wi-Fi and near-field communication for wireless transfer to Android phones that support that technology. Unfortunately, the camera body is so small that there's no viewfinder, and its flash, like the X-T1's, isn't connected -- it's an attachable add-on that's going to be all too easy to lose.
You'll find just about every variation of mirrorless camera in between the two I tried. Most major camera makers now produce them, including Canon, Samsung, Nikon and Pentax; a Sony spokesman said many people consider mirrorless cameras the future of photography.
In my experience, the Fujifilm X-T1 is a dream camera for anyone who is looking to step into more serious photography or as a companion camera for a pro. For a cheaper alternative, I would actually look at the even older Nex 6; it has a similar price and is ever so slightly more polished than the NEX 5T.
As a category, mirrorless cameras are certainly intriguing. The idea of D.S.L.R.-caliber photos in a compact package is a good sell, because size, weight and the need for a separate bag are the reasons my D.S.L.R. doesn't get out of the house much.
But if you're going to be serious about photography and are willing to spend $1,000 or more on a camera, a D.S.L.R. still offers the best bang for the buck and the best photo quality available.
And keep in mind: There are perfectly good reasons to carry a compact point-and-shoot -- many of them are now drop- and water-resistant. That's great for swimming and snorkeling or for handing off to the children, and you can get them for about $300.
A true all-purpose camera kit still probably contains a smartphone, a rugged point-and-shoot with Wi-Fi (the key to ensuring that photos don't stay on the camera forever) and a low- to midrange D.S.L.R. that costs $1,000 to $1,500. But a higher-quality shooter that subtracts one camera from that equation is mighty tempting.
Mirrorless compact cameras, new as they are, haven't been immune to the decline in camera sales; they made a strong debut in 2011, sold well in 2012 and leveled off in 2013. But to my mind, the category still has promise if you want more than a phone but less than a big, bulky camera bag. Are they the future of photography? Perhaps not, but these cameras are still worth a look.
Correction: June 6, 2014, Friday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: The Machine Learning column on Thursday, about mirrorless digital cameras, misstated the function of the mirror in a single-lens reflex camera. It reflects light from the lens to the viewfinder, but when the shutter is activated the mirror moves out of the way, allowing light from the lens to hit the image sensor. The mirror does not reflect light onto the sensor to produce an image.
Photograph The Mirrorless Fujifilm X-T1 Retails for $1,300 Without a Lens and $1,800 with One. The Photo at the Right Was Shot with It.; the Sony Alpha Nex 5t Is a Conveniently Small Mirroless Camera with Wi-Fi but No Viewfinder. It Sells for $550. The Photo at the Right Was Taken with a Nex 5t. (Photographs by Molly Wood/the New York Times)
