Also: IBM unveils Twitter tools to help developers, and Hampton Creek, the food technology start-up, reduces its staff.
Generation after generation, computers have become smaller, faster and cheaper. If technology companies have their way, they will soon be smaller and astronomically more expensive.
Last week, TAG Heuer, the Swiss watch company, announced that it was building a new smartwatch -- a wrist computer, in essence -- as part of a collaboration with Intel and Google. The companies made a joint announcement at Baselworld, an annual show in Basel, Switzerland, for high-price watches and jewelry.
The watch will be released this year, but the announcement was light on specifics. No exact release date. Nothing about what it will do. No price.
But it seems most likely that the watch will be very expensive, given the number of synonyms for the words "technology" and "luxury" in an accompanying news release. In it, David Singleton, Google's director of engineering for Android Wear, talked about "fusing beauty with technology" for a "unique blend of emotion and innovation."
Google is not the only company lately to try to fuse technology with a high price tag. Apple's soon-to-be-released line of Apple Watches has a gold version, the Apple Watch Edition, that begins at $10,000.
The chip maker Intel already has MICA, My Intelligent Communication Accessory, a watch/bracelet that is a result of a collaboration between it and Opening Ceremony. It sells for about $500 at Barneys.
And Tory Burch makes a $200 bracelet that can hide the Fitbit Flex, a fitness tracker that counts its wearer's steps. CONOR DOUGHERTY
IBM unveils Twitter tools
When IBM announced its partnership with Twitter in October, the move seemed both promising and logical.
IBM is betting a fair share of its future on exploiting large troves of data for its business customers, and Twitter is a big-data fire hose with 6,000 posts a second, more than half a billion each day.
Twitter's data-licensing business, though still a small part of the company, is growing rapidly.
IBM and Twitter brought out the first products last week, developer tools and cloud-based data analysis services that mine Twitter data. The data services run on IBM's Watson artificial intelligence technology and on IBM BigInsights, its version of Hadoop, the open-source software for processing large quantities of data across computer clusters. The developer tools will allow people to write applications that pull in Twitter data.
In recent months, IBM has trained more than 4,000 engineers and consultants on using Twitter data in business projects. Its goal is to have 10,000 IBM employees with Twitter data-handling skills. And IBM has worked with more than 100 corporate clients so far, in a range of industries and projects.
"We thought the early interest would be in consumer products and marketing, but it has turned out to be much broader than that," said Alistair Rennie, general manager of IBM's business analytics group.
The early work, he said, included companies that wanted to tap the Twitter data to help guide product development and plan manufacturing schedules. STEVE LOHR
Food start-up reduces staff
Hampton Creek, a prominent food technology start-up that has attracted investors and talent from the technology industry, laid off nearly one-fifth of its work force last month, just months after announcing that it had raised $90 million in financing.
Changes at the company included the layoffs of about a dozen of Hampton Creek's roughly 65 employees, according to several people briefed on the moves who spoke on condition of anonymity because Hampton Creek had not publicly announced the layoffs. Several more employees left Hampton Creek voluntarily around the same time through a severance offer the company extended, the people said. Counting employees who left voluntarily and those who were laid off, Hampton Creek reduced its staff by nearly a quarter.
In a brief phone conversation, Morgan Oliveira, a Hampton Creek spokeswoman, confirmed the reduction but played down its significance and declined to discuss it in detail. "We're just doing a reorganizing of employees," Ms. Oliveira said. "Now we're hiring more."
According to two of the people briefed on the changes, Hampton Creek told some affected employees that they were being laid off for performance reasons, while others were told they were being let go for being negative.
While layoffs at start-ups are not uncommon, it is unusual for them to occur so soon after coffers have been replenished with cash. In December, Hampton Creek announced that it had secured $90 million in a fund-raising round. NICK WINGFIELD
