No matter how much free time you have this weekend, we have TV recommendations for you. Come back every Friday for new suggestions on what to watch.
This Weekend I Have ... a Half-Hour, and I Like My Humor Bite-Size
'The New Negroes With Baron Vaughn & Open Mike Eagle'
When to watch: Friday at 11 p.m., on Comedy Central and BET.
The comedian and actor Baron Vaughn and the rapper Open Mike Eagle bring their long-running Los Angeles stand-up showcase to Comedy Central, with a simulcast on BET. The eight-episode series takes its name -- and mission -- from the title of a Harlem Renaissance-era book by Alain Locke: As Vaughn jokes in the premiere, "This is the stand-up show you get when you say 'James Baldwin' three times into a bathroom mirror."
"The New Negroes" is a platform for comedians of color,with episodes comprised of short sets from three different comics, culminating in a pre-taped video for an original song featuring a new musical guest each week. Hannibal Buress crashes the first episode, which includes sets from Chris Redd, Shalewa Sharpe and Langston Kerman.
... an Hour, and I Fear the Robots
'Vice Special Report: The Future of Work'
When to watch: Friday at 10 p.m., on HBO.
This Vice special examines how automation and artificial intelligence are poised to transform the workplace -- and the ways it already has. "The Future of Work" makes an emotional case for the dignity of work, even if it sometimes veers into the stunt-ish, as when the host, Krishna Andavolu, stages a confrontation in a diner between truckers and the chief executive of a driverless truck company. Over all, though, it's an illuminating and often alarming look into the future.
... Five Hours, and My Heart Is Wide Open
'Ramy'
When to watch: Season on drops Friday, on Hulu.
There aren't enough TV series centered on the everyday lives of Muslim Americans, which makes this excellent original series stand out. The show stars the actor Ramy Youssef as Ramy, a soul-searching first-generation Egyptian-American who lives with his parents and sister in New Jersey. (The wonderful Hiam Abbass plays his mother.) He's in his late 20s, unmarried, and full of angst: about his career, his romantic life and, most of all, his faith.
Ramy may be American-born, but his story doesn't follow the typical child-of-immigrants arc -- he doesn't really chafe against the constraints of religion, and he actively requests that his family set him up with a nice Muslim girl. His problem, he says, is "I don't know what kind of Muslim I am." Youssef is a warm and extremely appealing presence, and the first season's 10 half-hour episodes seem determined to show that there are many ways to be Muslim.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RAMONA ROSALES/COMEDY CENTRAL; HBO; KEVIN WINTER/GETTY IMAGES FOR COACHELL)
