A write-in campaign appears to be Democrats' only hope in a Georgia congressional district after a lawyer with extreme right-wing views won the party's primary.
In a congressional race in the northern suburbs of Atlanta, Democrats have been spending the precious final days of the campaign making an urgent appeal: Do not vote for the "Democrat."
After a dizzying sequence of events, the party has disavowed the candidate listed as its nominee for Georgia's 11th House District: Katy L. Stamper, a lawyer who argues that the Republican incumbent is not conservative enough and has offered herself as a choice who would be.
The platform presented by Ms. Stamper, who refers to herself as an "independent candidate running on the Democratic ticket," includes a call for the mass deportation of undocumented immigrants, whom she has described as "invading ungrateful hordes." She wants to repeal the right to gay marriage. She supports free therapy for transgender people, but only because, as she says on her campaign website, "We should help them deal with their mental injuries without pretending reality is other than it is."
As a result, Democrats have been scrambling to mobilize a write-in campaign, trying to direct support to another candidate -- one with views that are not diametrically opposed to the party's position on just about every issue.
Tracey Verhoeven, a relative newcomer to Georgia politics, has emerged as that candidate.
Her campaign, which began in August, has claimed TheRealDemocrat.com as the domain for its website. Yard signs -- including one warning of a "Fake Democrat" -- were printed in just the past few weeks. And volunteers have been handing out cards that voters can take with them to the polls explaining how to write in a candidate.
"What she did was not right," Ms. Verhoeven said of Ms. Stamper, sitting at a brewery and barbecue spot in Woodstock, Ga., that has served as her de facto campaign headquarters, "and I want to rectify it."
The race is not widely regarded as competitive. Representative Barry Loudermilk, the Republican incumbent seeking his sixth term, has won past elections with more than 60 percent of the vote, and does not appear to be sweating the challenge.
Still, Ms. Stamper's place in the election has helped create a situation that is, quite simply, bizarre: Democrats in the district are hoping for a surge in turnout to boost Vice President Kamala Harris in a crucial swing state, while also wishing that in this one specific race that support will not trickle down the ballot.
And Mr. Loudermilk, 60, is in the rare position of fending off a challenge from the right in a general election.
Ms. Stamper, 66, disputed claims that she had misrepresented herself in the May primary, arguing that voters responded to her focus on issues like inflation and her desire to push the party in a more conservative direction. She criticized party leaders for failing to respect a victory she believed she earned fair and square.
"They mobilized against me because they dislike democracy, real democracy," Ms. Stamper wrote in response to written questions.
The district encompasses a vast stretch of terrain, including suburbs remolded economically, racially and politically by explosive growth; idyllic lakeside communities; and rural sprawl. In the primary, which had very low turnout compared with past years, Ms. Stamper won with almost 57 percent of the just over 24,000 votes cast, outpacing Antonio Daza, the Democrat who lost to Mr. Loudermilk in the 2022 general election.
Some Democrats believe that Republicans took advantage of the state's open primary system and voted on the Democratic ticket. But an analysis prepared by Mr. Daza's advisers also suggests that Ms. Stamper may simply have benefited from many voters knowing little about who was running. The consultants cited research, including from Northwestern University, that found Democratic voters were more likely to favor female candidates over male ones.
Ms. Stamper had been active for years in local conservative politics, and was known for her fixation on immigration.
In a video she shared recently on social media, she said that when she saw Latino families in public, she pointed at them and counted their children. "It offends me when I hear this jibber-jabber about how we're a nation of immigrants," she said in the video. "We're a nation of conquerors and settlers."
Still, Ms. Stamper had a tempered message on her website before the primary, saying she was a veteran and small business owner who wanted to curb inflation, protect social security and address college debt. She said that she was opposed to transgender women competing in women's sports. References to immigration were limited to a brief mention of border security.
In her written response to questions, Ms. Stamper said she wanted to make her platform easily digestible for voters who did not know her. "I wasn't going to spell it all out," she said, "because that would be the equivalent of a white paper."
But after the primary, Ms. Stamper expounded extensively on her vision for squeezing out immigrants: Twenty-five million people need to be deported, she said. She also called for stripping away the tax-exempt status of any nonprofit that helps undocumented people with anything other than leaving the country.
The friction with Democrats intensified over the summer as her views became more widely known.
Amy Susanne Powers, who is involved in a group of liberal women in Cherokee County, introduced herself to Ms. Stamper at an event, and told her that she had a transgender child.
"I'm so sorry," Ms. Stamper replied, according to Ms. Powers.
After that, Ms. Powers called Ms. Verhoeven with a plea: You need to run.
Ms. Verhoeven, who moved from California three years ago and owns rental properties, had some reluctance. She was recovering from a primary run this year for a State Senate seat that she lost by 171 votes. She was grieving the recent death of her mother. Her 7-year-old son kept her busy.
But she was easily persuaded.
Ms. Powers, who has a business decorating short-term vacation rentals, became her political director. The first thing she did, Ms. Powers said, was open ChatGPT and type in: "How do you win a write-in campaign?"
The strategy has been to do everything possible to catch up: Days of door-knocking, text message blasts, TikTok videos and podcast interviews. The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Georgia's largest newspaper, published a story about the campaign this month.
Ms. Verhoeven, 60, has tried to position herself as a moderate alternative. She supports abortion rights and finding a compromise to add some restrictions on gun access. She believes that border security needs to be strengthened, but also argues that more needs to be done to address the forces -- particularly violence and the consequences of climate change -- that are driving people toward the United States.
"I feel it, I see it -- I want to make a difference," Ms. Verhoeven said. "I have too many good ideas."
She acknowledged the effort was a long shot. Her best hope, perhaps, is advancing to a runoff. Still, she said, at a recent event she ran into Jon Ossoff, one of Georgia's Democratic senators. She told him she would see him in Washington.
Photograph Voters casting their ballots in the 11th House District in Kennesaw, Ga., in 2022. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GABRIELA BHASKAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Democrats scramble to direct support to Tracey Verhoeven, above, as a write-in candidate. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KENDRICK BRINSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
