1. Which countries were struck by an earthquake that has killed more than 23,000 people and left hundreds of thousands homeless as of Friday?
Lebanon and Israel
Syria and Iraq
Syria and Israel
Turkey and Georgia
Turkey and Syria
2. Which two of the following are not lines from President Biden's State of the Union address this week?
"As my football coach used to say, lots of luck in your senior year."
"Covid continues to dominate our lives."
"That's why I'm running for re-election."
"The climate crisis doesn't care if you're in a red or blue state."
"Time and again, Democrats and Republicans came together."
3. The Kansas City Chiefs are playing the Philadelphia Eagles in the Super Bowl on Sunday. Which musician is headlining the halftime show?
Bad Bunny
Doja Cat
Dua Lipa
Morgan Wallen
Rihanna
4. This week, the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam is opening a blockbuster exhibition of which artist, whose works include "Girl With a Pearl Earring"?
Diane Arbus
Francisco Goya
Johannes Vermeer
Judith Leyster
Michelangelo
5. What's happening in the photo above?
Greenpeace volunteers are removing litter from the Great Pacific Garbage Patch.
The U.S. Coast Guard is investigating a structure found attached to a buoy in the Gulf of Mexico.
Scientists are hauling up film equipment used to monitor the underwater volcano in Tonga.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service agents are removing illegal drift nets from waters in the Florida Keys.
U.S. Navy sailors are recovering the Chinese balloon in the waters off South Carolina.
6. Which conductor will be the next music director of the New York Philharmonic?
Gustavo Dudamel
Leonard Bernstein
Lydia Tár
Rodrigo De Souza
Yannick Nézet-Séguin
7. LeBron James this week broke the N.B.A. record for most career _________. Fill in the blank.
Assists
Games played
Points
Rebounds
Three-pointers
8. New York City, where tens of thousands of asylum seekers have arrived in the past year, has done which of the following?
Built a 1,000-apartment building for migrants in Long Island City
Bused migrants to the Canadian border
Deported more than 90 percent of the migrants
Ended its "right to shelter" law
Invited more than 50 migrant families to live at Gracie Mansion
9. Microsoft integrated artificial intelligence software from OpenAI, the maker of the popular chatbot ChatGPT, into which search engine?
Bang
Bard
Bing
Bong
Boop
10. President Volodymyr Zelensky visited European allies in recent days, his second time outside Ukraine since Russia invaded. Where was his first stop this week?
Brussels
London
Paris
Prague
Zurich
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning. Photo credit: Petty Officer 1st Class Tyler Thompson/U.S. NavySolutions: 1. E; 2. B and C; 3. E; 4. C; 5. E; 6. A; 7. C; 8. B; 9. C; 10. B.
Photograph
