TRANSPORTATION
New York's Transit Agency Stops Updating on Twitter
Real-time train delays, bus route changes and other service information that would be vital to millions of New York City commuters will no longer be shared on Twitter because the "reliability of the platform can no longer be guaranteed," a Metropolitan Transportation Authority official said on Thursday.
The M.T.A. is the latest big-name account to make significant adjustments to how it uses the platform, after recent changes under its new owner, Elon Musk.
"The M.T.A. has terminated posting service information to Twitter, effective immediately," Shanifah Rieara, the agency's acting chief customer officer, said in a news release. Ms. Rieara said information can be found through the MYmta and TrainTime apps, the M.T.A.'s website, email alerts and text messages.
The M.T.A. said it was not abandoning Twitter altogether. Its account will remain active for branding and other messaging. DERRICK BRYSON TAYLOR
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
ChatGPT Meets Demands Of Regulators in Italy
ChatGPT's maker said Friday that the chatbot is available again in Italy after the company met the demands of regulators who temporarily blocked it over privacy concerns. OpenAI said it fulfilled a raft of conditions that the Italian data protection authority wanted satisfied by an April 30 deadline to have the ban lifted.
"ChatGPT is available again to our users in Italy," San Francisco-based OpenAI said by email. "We are excited to welcome them back, and we remain dedicated to protecting their privacy."
Last month, the Italian watchdog, known as Garante, ordered OpenAI to temporarily stop processing Italian users' personal information while it investigated a possible data breach. The authority said it didn't want to hamper AI's development but emphasized the importance of following the EU's strict data privacy rules.
OpenAI said it "addressed or clarified the issues" raised by the watchdog.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
TELECOMMUNICATION
After Regrouping, Huawei Reports Modest Profits
Chinese tech giant Huawei reported Friday that its revenue edged up 0.8 percent from a year earlier in 2023's first three months and the company was profitable.
Revenue rose to 132.1 billion yuan ( $ 19.1 billion), a company statement said. It said its net profit margin was 2.3 percent, down from 4.3 percent a year earlier.
Huawei Technologies Ltd., China's first global tech brand, has struggled since then-President Donald Trump cut off access to U.S. processor chips and other technology in a feud with Beijing over technology and security. American officials say the company is a security risk and might facilitate Chinese spying, which Huawei denies.
The company is the biggest global maker of network equipment for phone and internet companies. It switched its emphasis last year to selling technology to automakers, factories, mines and other industrial customers.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Photograph AI systems mimic human work. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DADO RUVIC/REUTERS)
