TECHNOLOGY
HP Enterprise Is Buying Juniper to Bolster A.I.
Hewlett Packard Enterprise is buying Juniper Networks in an all-cash deal valued at about $ 14 billion, which is anticipated to double HPE's networking business.
HPE will pay $ 40 per Juniper share.
Juniper, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., helps companies access the cloud infrastructure that serves as the foundation of digital and A.I. strategies.
"This transaction will strengthen HPE's position at the nexus of accelerating macro-A.I. trends, expand our total addressable market, and drive further innovation for customers as we help bridge the A.I.-native and cloud-native worlds," HPE's C.E.O., Antonio Neri, said in a statement.
Juniper's C.E.O., Rami Rahim, will lead the combined HPE networking business. He will report to Mr. Neri. HPE was spun off from Hewlett-Packard in 2015 and is now based in Houston.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
TSMC's Revenues Flat
But Beat Expectations
The Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company reported largely flat fourth-quarter revenue on Wednesday, but that still beat both the company's and the market's expectations.
TSMC, the world's largest contract chipmaker, whose customers include Apple and Nvidia, has benefited from a boom in artificial intelligence applications that has helped it weather the tapering off of pandemic-led demand.
Revenue in the final three months of last year came in at T $ 625.5 billion ( $ 20.10 billion), according to Reuters calculations, compared with $ 19.93 billion a year earlier. That beat TSMC's previous prediction for fourth-quarter revenue being in a range of $ 18.8 billion to $ 19.6 billion.
For December alone, TSMC reported that revenue fell 8.4 percent from a year earlier. It was also down 14.4 percent compared with the previous month.
REUTERS
INTERNATIONAL
Germany's SAP to Pay
$ 222 Million Over Bribery
The German software company SAP agreed to pay about $ 222 million to resolve two investigations into bribery schemes in seven countries, U.S. authorities said.
The Justice Department said SAP had entered a three-year deferred prosecution agreement to resolve criminal charges that it conspired to bribe government officials in Indonesia and South Africa in order to win business.
SAP also reached a related civil settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to address similar alleged bribery schemes in Azerbaijan, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi and Tanzania, as well as Indonesia and South Africa.
The company "has accepted responsibility for corrupt practices that hurt honest businesses engaging in global commerce," the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, Jessica Aber, said in a statement.
SAP did not immediately respond to requests for comment. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANN WANG/REUTERS)
