Steve Ballmer, the former chief executive of Microsoft and the owner of the Los Angeles Clippers , founded USAFacts, a nonpartisan organization that uses publicly available data sources -- and polling -- to create a portrait of the American population, government finances and government's impact on society. Last week, he talked about some of the issues facing voters as the midterm elections approached, including information on social media. Here are excerpts from his conversation with Andrew Ross Sorkin. They have been edited and condensed.
MR. SORKIN We live in an age where people talk about fake news, and the role of social media. And you have lived in the world of technology for so long. Do you think that people actually do care ultimately about facts? And what do you think that we, or Silicon Valley, or the world of technology, needs to do if that really is the case?
MR. BALLMER Well, I'm not going to swear to it the way I would government numbers. On the other hand, I believe it. I think people do actually care about facts. You could say, "What are facts?" Numbers help to be more factual. So I'm going to believe that people care. The other thing which we found is, people will say social media is their No. 1 news source. And people also tell you social media is the least-trustworthy news source out there. There's a conflict there.
MR. SORKIN What do you think the industry, to the extent that's an issue, needs to do about that?
MR. BALLMER I think -- and I'm not saying it's not happening today -- but it's got to really be Job 1 for the tech industry, the people involved in social media, in search, to say: "Hey look, what do we do about this? How do we use artificial intelligence to try to suss out what is real, what isn't, and not get in the way of free expression?"
MR. SORKIN But if the public is so interested in reading media, or articles, or whatever it is that they say are biased, and they don't believe, what do you do about that? That's sort of a very interesting free-market problem.
MR BALLMER It is a good free-market problem. I think people are telling us they'd prefer to read things that they trust. It's just that social media is so easy to consume these days compared to everything else.
MR. SORKIN What is the Ballmer family view of our economy today? Not the numbers, but the way you think about this?
MR. BALLMER As I think about the economy I see more downside than I do upside. I can't imagine interest rates staying at their current rate very long. Interest rates will drive down asset values. That'll affect the more affluent less than the less affluent. Less-affluent people don't borrow as much money, ironically, as more-affluent people. So I don't, you know, foresee excellent things ahead. In the longer run, sure I do. That's why I own equities and only equities.
MR. SORKIN What about the tech landscape, both as an investor and a thinker about it?
MR. BALLMERI think there are some big things happening technologically that will unleash so much. You know, A.I. was a big word when I started in tech. Then it became a discredited word. Now it's back. I really believe in the concept -- I believed in it for many years. How can machines enhance your ability to do something you want to do? I see so much opportunity for that.
Photograph Steve Ballmer is the founder of USAFacts, a nonpartisan organization. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE COHEN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
