The company has been investing in artificial intelligence technologies, as well as building the immersive world of the metaverse.
For months, Meta and other big technology companies have spent heavily to build artificial intelligence technologies, which show no immediate signs of yielding profits. For months, the companies have also delivered a consistent message about the investments: Trust us.
On Wednesday, Meta, which owns Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, showed it was not changing course. The company said it had spent $ 8.5 billion in the second quarter on computing infrastructure for A.I., building the immersive world of the metaverse and other expenses, up 33.4 percent from a year earlier.
Meta also raised part of its spending forecast, saying its expenditures for the year would total $ 37 billion to $ 40 billion, up from a prior estimate of $ 35 billion to $ 40 billion.
"We're in the business of building the best consumer and advertising experiences," Mark Zuckerberg, Meta's chief executive, said on a call with investors on Wednesday. "To do that, we need access to the leading technology and not be constrained by what competitors allow us to do."
Revenue for the second quarter was $ 39.1 billion, up 22 percent from a year earlier and above Wall Street estimates of $ 38.3 billion, according to data compiled by FactSet. Profit was $ 13.5 billion, up 73 percent from $ 7.8 billion a year earlier.
Meta also signaled that its ad business remained strong. The company said it expected revenue of $ 38.5 billion to $ 41 billion for the current quarter, above Wall Street expectations of $ 39.3 billion.
Shares of Meta rose more than 5 percent in after-hours trading, after closing at $ 474.83.
Meta has continued to grow as its spending has come under increasing scrutiny. After an initial wave of enthusiasm for A.I. when OpenAI's ChatGPT burst onto the scene in 2022, Wall Street has started to question how much money the technology can generate. Those concerns have been compounded by the billions of dollars that Meta has shoveled into building virtual reality and augmented reality headsets and glasses for the metaverse.
Meta has already cut one A.I. initiative that failed to gain traction -- artificially intelligent characters based on Jane Austen, Snoop Dogg, MrBeast, Charli D'Amelio and other famous people that could chat across its messaging apps. The company unveiled the A.I. characters less than a year ago. The Information earlier reported the reversal.
Even so, Mr. Zuckerberg has bet big on A.I. Before raising the annual spending forecast on Wednesday, his company had already upped it in April to $ 35 billion to $ 40 billion, from a previous estimate of $ 30 billion to $ 37 billion. The moves are driven by heavy investments in A.I. infrastructure, including data centers; chip designs; and research and development.
"I'd rather build capacity before it is needed rather than too late," Mr. Zuckerberg said on Wednesday's call.
He said the investments were being used not only to develop future technologies but to improve Meta's core advertising business. With A.I., the company can show people more relevant ads, as well as more relevant videos on Facebook and Instagram. That can lead people to spend more time on the company's services.
"Part of what's important about A.I. is that it can be used to improve all of our products in almost every way," he said.
Other tech giants have also spent billions on A.I. Microsoft said on Tuesday that its capital expenses had totaled almost $ 19 billion last quarter, more than twice as much as two years earlier. Last week, Alphabet said its capital expenditures for the last quarter had surged 91 percent from a year earlier.
Meta said on Wednesday that more than 3.27 billion people now use one or more of its apps every day. Threads, which competes with X, is closing in on almost 200 million monthly active users, Mr. Zuckerberg said. And WhatsApp, the messaging app, surpassed more than 100 million users in the United States this year.
Illustration
