/thĭngk-boi/
A slang term for wannabe experts.
There are two main paths to fame, fortune and followers in business. You can do a lot of work for a long time and hope you are someday rewarded with success. Or you can skip the grueling, boring part and tweet as if you already are a success. The first group -- business influencers who have made it -- are called thought leaders.
The second group -- those who haven't but post as if they have? Those are thinkbois. The road to thought leadership is littered with thinkbois.
Once you understand the difference, it's difficult to unsee.
Thought leaders give TED Talks. Thinkbois have podcasts.
Thought leaders commission ghostwritten books. Thinkbois use ChatGPT to write LinkedIn broetry and hustle-porn tweet storms.
Thought leaders work at Salesforce or Accenture. Thinkbois work at a start-up you've never heard of.
Thought leaders go to Davos. Thinkbois move to Miami.
They are quick to jump on whatever trend is getting the most attention, as the satirical Twitter account VCBrags recently pointed out, tweeting, "Absolutely wild how many tech thinkbois quietly rebranded themselves from Web3/Crypto experts to AI experts."
Thinkbois can graduate to the echelons of thought leadership, but why would they want to? The clout that comes with a large online following can open enough doors on its own. Attention begets more attention, and business lessons are often so generic and obvious that it barely matters whether they were obtained through decades of hard-won experience ... or from web-searching "legal definition fiduciary duty."
Thinkbois democratize who gets to preach the gospel of creating shareholder value. They inspire the world to hustle our way toward maximal optimization and reflect on our key wins at each turn. Who among us hasn't lusted for capitalist success after watching a viral TikTok about productivity? Who among us hasn't striven harder than we've ever striven with flow states, batch working and the Pomodoro technique?
What's that? You haven't? Perhaps you've been thought-led astray.
