The business of the Valley today is less about focusing on a particular industry than a continuous process of innovation with technology, across a widening swath of fields.
Lee Redden, 26, a doctoral student in engineering at Stanford University in California, recently decided to shelve his education and help found a start-up company. His skills lie in a couple of red-hot niches of artificial intelligence, computer vision and machine learning. Yet he is not applying his talents to Internet search, online commerce or intelligence surveillance.
Mr. Redden's ambitions are further afield -- in farm fields, actually. His company, Blue River Technology, is developing a robotic weedkiller for organic farms, which shun chemical pesticides and herbicides. The new venture, he said, is "a great way to bring this technology to agriculture."
The start-up in Sunnyvale, California, points to the latest stage of evolution in Silicon Valley, the world's epicenter of innovation. Over the years, the region has shown unmatched economic dexterity in jumping from one industry of opportunity to another, from military electronics to silicon wafers to personal computers to the Internet.
But the business of Silicon Valley today is less about focusing on a particular industry than a continuous process of innovation with technology, across a widening swath of fields.
The trend reflects the steady march of that most protean of technologies, computing, as it makes further inroads into every scientific discipline and industry. Clean energy, bioengineering, medical diagnostics, preventive health care, transportation, even agriculture are part of the mix these days for Silicon Valley's technologists and entrepreneurs.
The pace of discovery has quickened, not only for technologies but also for the process of finding out which companies will succeed.
"What's different in the Valley is that we've found a quasi-scientific method for reinventing businesses and industries, not just products," said Randy Komisar, a partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, a leading venture capital firm, and a lecturer on entrepreneurship at Stanford. "The approach is much more systematic than it was several years ago."
The newer model for starting businesses relies on hypothesis, experiment and testing in the marketplace, from the day a company is founded. That is a sharp break with the traditional approach of drawing up a business plan, setting financial targets, building a finished product and then rolling out the business and hoping to succeed. It was time-consuming and costly.
The preferred formula today is often called the "lean start-up." The concept's foremost proponents include Eric Ries, an engineer, entrepreneur and author, who coined the term and is now an entrepreneur-in-residence at Harvard Business School, and Steven Blank, a serial entrepreneur, author and lecturer at Stanford.
The approach emphasizes the quick development of "minimum viable products," low-cost versions that are shown to customers for reaction, and then improved. Flexibility is its other hallmark. Known as pivoting, the process involves testing business models and ideas, ruthlessly culling failures and then moving on to Plan B, Plan C, Plan D and so on.
The National Science Foundation is betting on the new model to improve the rate of commercialization of the university research it finances.
In October, the foundation announced the first series of grants for what it calls the N.S.F. Innovation Corps. The 21 three-member teams selected from across the United States will receive $50,000 each for six months to test whether their inventions are marketable. It begins with a swing through Stanford and courses taught by Mr. Blank and others, followed by online classes and mentoring.
Each team is expected to constantly test its ideas and products with customers, to experiment again and again, adhering to the lean start-up formula.
"It's all about how to apply the scientific method to market-opportunity identification," said Errol B. Arkilic, a program manager at the foundation. "And that is exactly why this method is the one the N.S.F. selected."
Mr. Arkilic says the foundation plans to award 15 or 20 Innovation Corps grants every quarter. "We can't replicate Silicon Valley elsewhere," he said. "But we need to figure out a way to take some of the best practices in Silicon Valley and deploy them elsewhere."
Silicon Valley's start-up model is influencing mainstream business education.
At business schools, courses on entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial management have been around for years. But this spring, the 900 first-year students at Harvard Business School will be required to start a business as a required course. They will be in teams of six students each, be given $3,000 a team and told to create a start-up that pulls in revenue by the end of the semester, explained Thomas R. Eisenmann, a professor who will oversee the program.
Dr. Eisenmann is also a leader of a Silicon Valley immersion program that takes dozens of students out there each year for a firsthand look at not only the practices but also the culture of the entrepreneurial hothouse.
Most start-ups fail. More than perhaps any place else, Silicon Valley's investors and technologists tend to view failure with a certain scientific objectivity, as if setbacks are heuristic tools, leading to further research and discovery.
"Over 70 years, this Valley has developed a culture that does not personalize failure," said Mr. Komisar of Kleiner Perkins. "If you're not corrupt, stupid or lazy, we see failure as learning -- learn from it, and reapply it."
That risk-taking and perpetual learning culture is now being applied far beyond computer hardware and software. There are high-profile ventures like Nest Labs, founded by Tony Fadell, a former Apple executive, which has hired more than 100 engineers from Apple, Google, Microsoft and other high-technology companies.
Yet Silicon Valley is filled with other, less prominent start-ups in new fields, including Blue River Technology. Mr. Redden met his fellow founder and the start-up's chief executive, Jorge Heraud, 41, in Mr. Blank's class.
Mr. Heraud, an engineer, had decided to return to Stanford to refresh his career, after working for years as a manager for an agriculture equipment company.
He met up with Mr. Redden, and they jointly recognized the opportunity for applying computer vision and machine learning to agriculture. After talking to potential customers, they settled on killing weeds for organic farming, a fast-growing industry that cannot use pesticides and struggles with labor costs.
In their small office in Sunnyvale, they are assembling the machine and training the computer-vision software to distinguish lettuces from weeds. Initially, they experimented with laser blasts to kill the weeds, but that proved too costly. Now they plan to use superheated oil -- organic, of course.
Their contraption, pulled behind a tractor, has to identify weeds and kill them within 200 milliseconds, a formidable but attainable challenge, Mr. Redden says.
If applying computer vision to agriculture is so promising, why are the big farm equipment companies not well ahead?
"This isn't on their radar screen," Mr. Heraud replied. "They aren't putting their heads into computer vision. That's a Silicon Valley technology."
