International
CHINA CALLS FOR CANDOR
FROM JAPAN ON CRISIS
China urged Japan to report any developments in its nuclear crisis quickly and accurately as concern spread over whether officials in Tokyo had played down the scope of the radiation risk. While China Central Television reported that radiation was at normal levels, worried citizens searched pharmacies for potassium iodide tablets, even though officials said they would not decrease the risk of developing thyroid cancer from nuclear radiation. PAGE A14
CABLE CAUSES FUROR IN INDIA
India's Parliament erupted in outrage over a report of an American diplomatic cable that described insiders in the governing Congress Party showing off chests of money and boasting of paying bribes to wavering lawmakers to secure passage of a critical 2008 vote on a landmark civilian nuclear deal between India and the United States. The cable, obtained by WikiLeaks, portrays an effort by the Congress Party to win a confidence vote in Parliament that could have doomed the nuclear deal. PAGE A4
RADIATION FEARS IN RUSSIA
Fears of radioactive contamination from the crippled nuclear plant in Japan are spreading to Russia's Far East, where residents are ignoring official assurances that there is no danger, and are beginning to stockpile food, medicines and face masks. The events in Japan have rekindled stark memories of the Chernobyl disaster in the Soviet era, and Russians tend to be skeptical of official pronouncements, especially during crises. PAGE A13
ZAWAHRI'S BROTHER FREED
The governing military council in Egypt released the younger brother of Ayman al-Zawahri, Al Qaeda's second in command, from prison after detaining him for a decade on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government, his lawyer said. Security officials said he was the head of the Special Action Committee of Islamic Jihad, which organized terrorist operations. PAGE A6
National
DISASTER MAY DEAL BLOW
TO TOURISM IN HAWAII
The disaster in Japan has the potential to significantly worsen the budget shortfall in Hawaii, a state that is heavily dependent on Japanese tourism. State officials, well aware of the history of Japanese tourism bottoming out after other calamities -- including the Kobe earthquake in 1995 and the swine flu epidemic in 2009 -- are now bracing for a sharp drop in tourism and the revenue it produces. PAGE A18
HOUSE CUTS NPR FINANCING
The House voted to cut off financing for National Public Radio, with Democrats and Republican fiercely divided over both the content of the bill and how it was brought to the floor. The Senate approved a short-term spending measure that would keep the government financed through April 8. Members of both parties and chambers said the move, which once again averted a government shutdown, should be the last of its kind. PAGE A20
New York
U.S. UNIVERSITIES WORRY
ABOUT STUDENTS ABROAD
American colleges have long trumpeted the benefits of studying abroad, but administrators and students have been discovering the downside as the world has erupted politically and physically in recent weeks. College officials have staged evacuations on short notice and are increasingly engaging their own experts to help spot the next calamity. PAGE A25
LAYOFF ESTIMATES HIGH
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has been warning that 4,600 city teachers will have to be let go this spring because budget cuts will eliminate about 6,100 teaching positions, and only 1,500 teachers will be lost to attrition. But over the last two years, the city's teaching force has shrunk by 2,000 to 2,500 each year, according to Department of Education statistics, suggesting that the city would need to lay off 500 to 1,000 fewer teachers than it has said. PAGE A25
Business
A PUSH TO EASE HURDLES
FOR FOREIGN ENTREPRENEURS
A group of lawmakers and prominent technology investors are trying to ease bureaucratic hurdles for thousands of foreign-born entrepreneurs as part of a broader effort to create jobs in the United States and to spur innovation. This issue has become a rallying cause for the technology industry, an area in which foreign entrepreneurs have played a central role for years. PAGE B7
OPPORTUNITIES IN VOLATILITY
Volatility funds like Alphabet look for small discrepancies in the prices of everything from stock market futures and options to equity indexes, jumping in when they think the market has misjudged the price. And in markets like these where buy-and-sell decisions are more often driven by scary headlines or fear, traders at Alphabet say they are finding a lot of appealing bets. PAGE B1
Sports
CHARLES DAVIES'S RECOVERY
CONTINUES IN M.L.S.
In 2009, an automobile accident shattered Charles Davies's chances of playing in the 2010 World Cup and left himwith fractures in the femur, tibia and fibula in his right leg, left elbow, left eye socket and nose; and a torn knee ligament. Yet his body has been reconstructed, and Davies is likely to make his M.L.S. debut Saturday with D.C. United. PAGE B13
Arts
THE 180-YEAR-ITCH,
SPEAKING METAPHORICALLY
A revival of Tom Stoppard's entirely terrific "Arcadia" finds the playwright at his most luxuriantly wordy, and David Leveaux's production shows that the play, a tale of two centuries in pseudopastoral England, is propelled by genuine, panting passion, writes Ben Brantley. PAGE C1
Obituaries
DAVID E. RUMELHART, 68
A psychologist and MacArthur fellow, his computer simulations of perception gave scientists some of the first testable models of neural processing and they proved helpful in the development of machine learning and artificial intelligence. PAGE A27
Op-ed
DAVID BROOKS PAGE A29
PAUL KRUGMAN PAGE A29
