TECHNOLOGY
Google Fires 28 Workers
For Israeli Contract Sit-In
Google fired 28 employees on Wednesday after dozens of employees participated in sit-ins at the company's New York and Sunnyvale, Calif., offices to protest the company's cloud computing contract with the Israeli government.
A day earlier, nine employees were arrested on charges of trespassing at the two offices.
"Physically impeding other employees' work and preventing them from accessing our facilities is a clear violation of our policies, and completely unacceptable behavior," a Google spokeswoman said in a statement.
Years before the dismissals, tensions had been simmering between the company's management and some activist employees over Project Nimbus, a $ 1.2 billion Google and Amazon deal to supply the Israeli government with cloud services, such as artificial intelligence. Some Google employees have expressed concern that the company was aiding Israel's military.
That discord had deepened since the war in Gaza began in October. Google recently fired an employee who disrupted an Israeli technology conference in New York. And the company is even planning to make changes to a corporate forum because employees were bickering about the conflict.
Google said it would continue to investigate the Tuesday protests. In Sunnyvale, employees refused to leave the office of Thomas Kurian, the chief executive of Google Cloud.
Google employees affiliated with the group that organized the sit-ins, called No Tech for Apartheid, said in a statement that the firings were "a flagrant act of retaliation."
"Google workers have the right to peacefully protest about terms and conditions of our labor," the employees said. They added that some of the employees Google fired had not participated in the sit-ins.
NICO GRANT
LABOR
Alabama Auto Workers
To Vote on Unionizing
Thousands of workers at a big Mercedes-Benz factory near Tuscaloosa, Alabama, will vote next month on whether they want to be represented by the United Auto Workers union.
The National Labor Relations Board said Thursday that the vote will take place from May 13 to May 17 at the facilities in Vance and Woodstock, Ala. Votes will be counted by the agency on May 17.
The vote will be the second in the union's drive to organize 150,000 workers at more than a dozen nonunion auto manufacturing plants largely in Southern states. About 4,300 workers at Volkswagen's factory in Chattanooga, Tenn., are voting on union representation this week, with the vote tally to be announced on Friday.
The organizing effort comes after the union won big pay raises after workers struck Detroit's three automakers last fall.
The Mercedes facilities had about 6,100 employees as of the end of 2023. More than 5,000 are calling for the union vote, the union has said.
Earlier this week the governors of six Southern states, including Alabama and Tennessee, put out a statement saying that workers will put their jobs in jeopardy if they vote for a union.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Nico Grant and Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY REBECCA COOK/REUTERS)
