Stocks rose just enough Thursday for Wall Street to barrel into a new bull market as the S&P 500 keeps rallying off its low from last fall.
The index rose 0.6 percent to carry it 20 percent above a bottom hit in October. That means Wall Street's main measure of health has climbed out of a bear market, which saw it drop 25.4 percent over roughly nine months.
The Dow Jones industrial average added 0.5 percent, while the Nasdaq composite led the market with a 1 percent rise. That has been the norm so far this bull run, as the chip maker Nvidia and a handful of other Big Tech stocks have been responsible for the lion's share of Wall Street's gains.
Declaring the end of a bear market may seem arbitrary, but it offers a useful marker for investors. It also provides a reminder that investors able to hold on through downturns have nearly always made back all their losses in S&P 500 index funds eventually.
Even though it was driven by so many superlatives -- the worst inflation in generations and the fastest hikes to interest rates in decades, for example-- this most recent bear market lasted only about nine months. It stretched from Jan. 3, 2022, when the S&P 500 set a record, until Oct. 12, when it hit bottom. That's shorter than the typical bear market, and it also resulted in a shallower loss than average.
"In hindsight, it might not look that bad, but it certainly feels bad in the moment," said Brent Schutte, chief investment officer at Northwestern Mutual.
What made last year even more painful for investors, he said, is that both stocks and bonds lost money, something that hasn't happened in decades.
The market has gained because the economy has refused to fall into a recession, despite repeated predictions for one. It has withstood the highest interest rates since 2007, three high-profile collapses of U.S. banks since March, and another threat by the U.S. government of an economy-shaking default on its debt.
"Bottom line, the economy has been very resilient," said Anthony Saglimbene, chief markets strategist at Ameriprise Financial.
Not only has the economy avoided a recession because of a remarkably solid job market and spending by consumers, hopes are also rising that the Fed may soon stop raising interest rates. High rates undercut inflation by slowing the economy, which drags down prices for stocks and other investments.
The broad expectation among traders is that the Fed will hold rates steady next week, which would mark the first meeting where it hasn't raised rates in more than a year. While it may raise rates one more time in July, the hope on Wall Street is that it won't go beyond that. Inflation has been coming down from its peak last summer.
But many challenges still remain for the stock market. Chief among them is that no one can be sure when the Fed will stop hiking rates. Even if inflation has eased, it has remained stubbornly above the Fed's comfort level.
That has some investors continuing to prepare for a recession, even if they keep pushing out predictions for when it will arrive. Another warning sign for skeptics is how much of the S&P 500's gains have been concentrated this year within just a handful of stocks. Euphoria around artificial intelligence was fanned by last month's tremendous sales forecast by Nvidia, and just seven stocks have been responsible for the majority of the S&P 500's gain this year.
Nvidia, Apple, Microsoft and other Big Tech giants have huge influence on the S&P 500 because they're the biggest, and the index gives more weight to stocks based on their size. Nearly half the stocks in the S&P 500 are down for the year so far.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury, which helps set rates for mortgages and other important loans, fell to 3.71 percent. The two-year yield, which moves more on expectations for the Fed, fell to 4.53 percent.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
