Leaders from India, Brazil, the Middle East and Africa joined discussions in a nod to the changing global balance of power.
The Group of 7 countries threw open the doors of their club on Friday to India, Brazil, Turkey and other non-Western countries, acknowledging a shifting global landscape as they tried to enlist these nations' leaders in causes ranging from climate change to managing the economic competition with China.
While diplomats from the Group of 7 hammered out a communiqué that pledged support for Ukraine in its war against Russia and greater ambition in curbing carbon emissions, the focus was on Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil and other leaders from outside the G7, whose support is increasingly critical to achieving any of these goals.
Among the thorny questions on the second day of the summit: migration, which has helped fuel a recent resurgence of populism and far-right parties in Europe and the United States. The leaders also discussed the war in Gaza and China's state subsidies of industries like electric vehicles, which has prompted the United States and the European Union to impose tariffs on Chinese exports.
Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni of Italy, who is hosting the gathering, said the goal of her expanded guest list was to "strengthen dialogue with the nations of the Global South." She insisted that the Group of 7 was "not a fortress closed in itself" but "an offer of values that we open to the world."
Ms. Meloni recruited Pope Francis to speak to the leaders about the dangers posed by artificial intelligence. Francis urged them to regulate the technology, of which he was himself a victim when A.I.-generated fake images of him clad in a white puffer jacket and a jewel-encrusted crucifix went viral last year.
"The benefits and the damages it causes will depend on the way it is used," the pope declared, warning of the risks of A.I.'s uncontrolled development. He called for lethal autonomous weapons, which are unmanned and uncontrolled by a human hand, to be banned, saying, "No machine should ever decide whether to take the life of a human being away."
The pope's appearance was the emotional highlight of a day of carefully staged summitry that seemed to concede that the West is less dominant demographically and economically than in the past -- and that it is listening to calls for more equity and balance in global decision-making.
As Ms. Meloni guided the pope, in a wheelchair, around a circular table to meet the leaders, he was greeted by a visibly moved President Biden and got an enthusiastic hug from Argentina's flamboyant president, Javier Milei, whose election last November was viewed as another sign of the rising tide of populism across the Americas and Europe.
This is not the first time non-Western leaders have been invited to a Group of 7 meeting, but rarely have they been so conspicuous. In part that reflects the issues that Ms. Meloni has highlighted: Africa and the Mediterranean. The leaders of Algeria, Kenya and Tunisia were on hand at a luxury resort hotel on Italy's southern coast, as was President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.
"Inviting key developing country leaders reflects the reality that confronting China and Russia requires the cooperation of more than the G7," said Daniel M. Price, who was a top trade adviser to President George W. Bush. "And Brazil, India and Turkey are as concerned about Chinese predatory trade practices and overcapacity as are Japan, Europe and the U.S."
The final G7 communiqué voiced concern about what the leaders called China's "persistent industrial targeting and comprehensive nonmarket policies and practices that are leading to global spillovers, market distortions and harmful overcapacity."
The communiqué endorsed Mr. Biden's effort to broker a cease-fire between Israel and Hamas in Gaza. France and Canada had pushed for stronger language on Israel's conduct of the war, according to people familiar with the negotiations, but the United States and Germany resisted.
In a victory for Ms. Meloni, a conservative who opposes abortion, the communiqué did not include an explicit reference to abortion, in a passage that pledged to promote "comprehensive sexual and reproductive health and rights for all." A communiqué released by the Group of 7 leaders after their last summit in Hiroshima, Japan, referred specifically to abortion rights.
The issue injected a briefly discordant note into the gathering after President Emmanuel Macron of France told an Italian journalist that some politicians did not share France's "vision of equality between women and men." Ms. Meloni criticized Mr. Macron, who recently called a snap parliamentary election, as seeking to politicize the issue at a "precious forum like the G7."
For the most part, however, the meeting underscored harmony among the leaders, many of whom are embattled by their own domestic politics. It also served as a platform for Ms. Meloni, 47, who has overcome initial qualms about her political roots in a party built on the ashes of fascism to win respect for her steadfast support of Ukraine. Presiding over the two days of meetings, she was able to put a spotlight on several of her pet issues.
How to control migration has vexed the United States and Europe, compounded by the effects of climate change and warfare in Afghanistan, the Middle East and Ukraine. It is a particularly delicate issue for Ms. Meloni, who has campaigned hard to fight what she has called "uncontrolled immigration" to Italy and other parts of Europe from Africa and the Middle East.
While Europe has welcomed thousands of Ukrainians, especially women and children, fleeing the Russian invasion, Ukrainian officials have urged European countries to help them repatriate men of fighting age.
"Turkey is a critical player on global migration," said Peter Westmacott, who served as Britain's ambassador to Turkey, France and the United States. He noted that there are about three million Syrian refugees in Turkey, as well as hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Kurds and Afghans.
"If Europe wants to control migration from these countries," Mr. Westmacott said, "Turkey is an indispensable partner."
Mr. Erdogan, he said, could also yet play a role in brokering an end to Ukraine's war with Russia. As a Black Sea power, Turkey has kept open its commercial and political links to Russia. But it is also a NATO member and has supplied cheap, highly effective drones to help the Ukrainian resistance.
Some of the invitations reflected diplomatic protocol, according to Italian officials. Brazil, India and South Africa were automatically included as current or future presidents of the Group of 20 industrialized nations.
Argentina was invited, these officials said, because Mr. Milei has recognized the connections and interdependence between East and West. He and Ms. Meloni have also cultivated close personal ties, sharing a right-wing populism that includes opposition to abortion and gay rights.
Emma Bubola contributed reporting from London.
Emma Bubola contributed reporting from London.
Photograph Clockwise from top: President Biden at the G7 in Italy on Friday. On issues of geopolitics, there was little that divided the group; anti-tank defenses known as "dragon's teeth" in Ukraine; Patriot air defense systems at a training area in Germany on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE NEW YORK TIMES; JENS BUTTNER; NICOLE TUNG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES )
