Wall Street set more records Thursday as stocks coasted to the close of their latest winning month and quarter.
The S&P 500 rose 0.1 percent, adding to its record set the day before. It roared 10.2 percent in the first three months of the year as the market continues a nearly unstoppable run that began last October. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 0.1 percent, and the Nasdaq composite slipped 0.1 percent.
Treasury yields inched higher in the bond market following several reports on the economy. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.20 percent. Bond and stock markets in the United States will be closed for Good Friday.
The stock market has been on a tear since late October, with the S&P 500 notching its fifth straight winning month. The market has leaped as the economy has remained remarkably solid despite high interest rates meant to get inflation under control. And with inflation still cooling from its peak, the Federal Reserve has indicated it will likely cut interest rates several times later this year.
Most stocks scrambled higher during the quarter, led by a pocket of companies riding Wall Street's continued frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology. Nvidia, whose chips are powering much of the A.I. rush, surged 82.5 percent.
The only stock in the S&P 500 to do better was Super Micro Computer. The company, which sells server and storage systems used in A.I. and other computing, saw its stock soar a staggering 255.3 percent.
They more than made up for stumbles during the quarter by companies like Tesla and Boeing. Tesla fell 29.3 percent to continue its volatile run, having more than doubled last year. Boeing sank 26 percent as worries mounted about its safety and manufacturing quality.
One economic report released on Thursday said that the economy's growth in the final three months of last year was stronger than earlier estimated. Another one said fewer workers applied for unemployment benefits last week, the latest indication of a solid job market.
Other reports showed that sentiment among consumers was stronger than economists expected, but manufacturing in the Chicago region is contracting by more than forecast.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.20 percent from 4.19 percent late Wednesday. The yield on the two-year Treasury, which more closely tracks expectations for the Fed, rose to 4.62 percent from 4.57 percent.
RH jumped 17.3 percent even though the retailer of home décor reported weaker profit and revenue for the latest quarter than analysts expected. It also indicated demand was trending upward, and it gave a revenue forecast for the upcoming year that was slightly above analysts' expectations.
Chemours fell 9.1 percent despite reporting better results for the latest quarter than analysts expected. It gave a forecast for earnings before taxes and other items in the current quarter that was below analysts' expectations. The company also said its board has completed its internal reviews of accounting issues and found some weaknesses in its internal control over financial reporting.
Also on the losing end was Trump Media & Technology Group. The company behind former President Donald Trump's Truth Social fell 6.4 percent after soaring more than 14 percent in each of the past two days.
Its stock has shot well beyond what critics say is reasonable for the money-losing company, driven by fans of Trump and investors hoping to cash in on the mania.
In stock markets abroad, Tokyo's Nikkei 225 slumped 1.5 percent amid speculation about whether Japanese officials will make moves to support the value of the Japanese yen.
Movements were more modest across much of the rest of Asia and Europe.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
