Times journalists from around the newsroom talk about their beats and our work.
The Morning recently invited its readers to submit questions. Below, we're publishing a selection of them, along with answers from Times staff members. (We also published some answers in today's edition of The Morning.)
We edited some questions for brevity.
The English language
Do you have any data about the evolution of the English language? I know right now that language is evolving rapidly because of TikTok and the younger generations' apprehension toward using millennial lingo. The change seems more exponential from 1900 to 2024 than from 1300 to 1500. -- Divya Thomas
John McWhorter, an Opinion writer (and linguist): It can certainly seem as if English is changing faster than in the past, but mainly because of the blizzard of new terms and new slang. In terms of the actual heart of language -- sounds, structures and basic words -- English changed much faster from 1300 to 1500.
From 1300 to 1600, for example, Middle English became Modern English, which was different enough that Shakespeare and Chaucer would have found it dicey to converse beyond an elementary level. Vowels transformed so vastly that a word once pronounced "MAH-day" became our "made."
For all our neologisms like "diss," "because X," "X-adjacent" and "I'm good," no transformation like that has happened in English for a very long time. Time traveling back to 1900, we would find that people used some words in different ways, and people would often sound a little funny in terms of accent. But they were speaking the language we speak.
Why is it that so many children and adults end a normal sentence with an inflection that makes it sound like a question? Where are the teachers and parents who should be correcting them? -- Joan Kool
John McWhorter: The reason people use "uptalk" -- statements that have the melody of questions -- so much these days stems from a gradual change in how we interpret that melody.
Certainly, the original use of that melody was in questions. But one of the bedrocks of communication is that we want to know that our interlocutor is with us, that they understand. That can lead one to make a statement with that rising melody, such that you are doing two things at a time: making the statement while, in a background way, asking if the person gets what you mean.
The result is that the rising melody no longer signifies a question in itself. The melody of the question remains, just as the smile of the Cheshire cat does. But because this does not impede communication -- and perhaps even improves it -- it does not qualify as a mistake. It is an example of how language, always making new usages of old material, is ever in a state of flux.
(If you're interested in more, John -- who's a professor at Columbia University -- has written a book, "Words on the Move," about how English continually changes.)
How we make The Morning
I've always wondered how the seemingly small team working on The Morning reads all the stories in The Times and decides which ones to publish in the newsletter? Especially since news is now a 24-hour cycle, how is the inevitable selection bias avoided of choosing stories that break later in the day? -- Sagar Varma
How many people are on The Morning newsletter team? How far in advance are the topics decided on, and how often do you have to pivot when something big happens? -- Ashley Raska
Do you work on the newsletter all night long? When do you sleep? -- Alice Fitch
David Leonhardt: We appreciate your concern. We don't work on it all night long, and we do sleep.
Here are the basics of how The Morning comes together: We have a staff of about 10 people, spread across the U.S. and London, with a mix of specialties -- in reporting, editing, graphics and photography. We hold a daily video meeting at 11 a.m. Eastern, during which we review that morning's newsletter to talk about what we liked about it and what we might have done differently. We also look ahead to the next day and talk about what subjects deserve lead items over the next week and beyond. (Vanity Fair recently profiled The Morning, although the article is gated.)
Ideally, the lead item for the following day's newsletter is already written by 11 a.m. We can then fact-check and edit it by midafternoon. Most days, we think it's fine if the lead item isn't about a breaking news story from the previous day. ("The Daily" podcast takes the same approach.) Our goal with the lead item is to help you understand the most important and fascinating stories in the world. We use the lower sections to focus on the latest breaking news. Sometimes, of course, a news story is so big -- a campaign event or a natural disaster, for instance -- that we change our plans and scramble to put together a lead item on the news.
Our U.S.-based staff spends much of the afternoon and evening putting together the newsletter. But our two editors in London -- Desiree Ibekwe and Lauren Jackson -- oversee the final stages. Thanks to the time difference, they start work when it's still nighttime in the U.S. -- typically before 9 a.m. in London, which is before 4 a.m. in New York. They review the work we did in the U.S., update it and make final decisions about what to include in the newsletter. They press send around 6:30 a.m. Eastern most mornings.
Then the whole process starts all over again.
Games and quizzes
I started subscribing to The New York Times when I became hooked on the freebie part of the Spelling Bee game. Now I do Spelling Bee, the Mini, Wordle and Connections to get my brain started in the morning. I even have an Excel spreadsheet now to track my game progress. So, my question is this: Where does the WordleBot get his/her/their word list? -- Susan Sloan
David Leonhardt: Wordle accepts about 15,000 words as guesses. But many of those words are too obscure to be on the Bot's list. Some examples, via Tom Giratikanon, a Times editor: unwit, aflow, faire, tumid, fitch, hight. And some more examples from Josh Katz, a Times graphics editor: bajri, dsobo, mbret, nurtz, ryiji, yeeek. WordleBot suggests only about 4,500 reasonably familiar words as possible guesses .
The Bot does suggest some words that can't be Wordle solutions, like many plural words that end in S or ES. (Sometimes, the most efficient path to solving the puzzle involves guessing a word that can't be the answer.) The bot has about 3,200 words in its dictionary of possible solutions, based partly on how often the words have appeared in The Times. This guide to the bot offers more detail.
Why do the Mini Crossword and Suduko change to the next puzzle 2-3 hours earlier than the other puzzles? -- Jean
Everdeen Mason, editorial director, Games: Many of our puzzles have different publish times for a variety of reasons. The Mini and the daily crossword publish at 10 p.m., whereas the Spelling Bee publishes at 3 a.m. Our newer games, such as Wordle, Connections and Strands, publish at midnight wherever the solver resides.
Is it correct that I now need a separate subscription in order to work the Mini Crossword? That's something I did daily during my lunch break. -- Susan van Beuningen
Everdeen Mason: You do not need a subscription to solve the Mini; it is free to play. However, the Mini is only available for free each day until 10 p.m., and then it will switch to the next puzzle. If you'd like to play an older Mini that you may have missed, you need a Games subscription.
Are the answers to all of the questions in the weekly News Quiz contained in The Morning that week? Or is it also necessary to have followed the links to articles referenced in The Morning? -- William Agnew
Tom Wright-Piersanti, The Morning's news editor, who oversees the quiz: When we're writing the weekly News Quiz, we almost always base our questions on articles that have appeared in The Morning. Most of the answers can be found in The Morning, too, but not all of them.
Often, the answers that don't appear in the newsletter are the ones that test your general knowledge: Sometimes we'll ask about the history of a topic, or a piece of trivia that we think is fairly well known (as we did in a recent quiz, when we asked about the famous Willie Mays play known as the Catch.) Reading The Morning every day will certainly help you get a good score, but if you want to ensure a perfect score, you should read the biggest stories of the week, too.
Ask a politics reporter
I'm interested in polls. There are so many that hit the news and they are not consistent. But they do influence the perception of readers. In years past, everyone had a land line and pollsters could get a random sample easily. How do they get a random sample now? And how are the questions phrased? -- Cheri Powell
Ruth Igielnik, who helps create Times polls: Cheri, you are absolutely right that it has gotten more complicated for pollsters to find a simple random sample than it was in the days when everyone had a landline and we could randomly dial numbers. We've had to get creative.
For the New York Times/Siena College poll, because our focus is on voters, we can use what's called a registered voter list, or a voter file. This is a list that every state is required by law to keep of all the voters in the state, many of whom have phone numbers that they included when they registered to vote. We can randomly select voters off those lists, which helps us recapture the randomness we had with randomly dialed phone numbers.
We spend a tremendous amount of time working on the phrasing of questions to make sure they are accurate and unbiased. We want people who read the question to understand it in the same way, feel like the question is fair and feel like their views are reflected in one of the options. Fair questions help us to ensure we are accurately reflecting the views of all Americans, across the political spectrum.
In reporting political polls, when a poll is within the margin of error of a preceding poll, why is it reported that there has been "movement" in the state of the race when, in fact, the results are the same? -- Bill Thompson
David Leonhardt: We appreciate this question, Bill, because it gives us a chance to address a common misunderstanding about poll results. When the difference between two candidates' poll numbers is within the margin of error, some people think that's the same thing as a tie. (We in the media sometimes feed this perception by using the term "statistical tie.") But that's not exactly right. The candidate with the higher poll number is still likely to be ahead, just not certain to be ahead.
In the case of this year's presidential election, different polls have repeatedly shown that Donald Trump has a small lead over President Biden. Sometime, the difference is within the margin of error. Still, the consistency of the result suggests that Trump really is ahead. Similarly, the fact that multiple polls have shown a shift toward Trump after Biden's bad debate last month suggests that result is also real.
Donald Trump is now a convicted felon. Felons are excluded from having national security clearances. So how can he be president of the U.S. and not have access to security information? -- Don MacGillivray
Julian Barnes, intelligence reporter: The president of the United States automatically gets a clearance, no matter what. A national security clearance is, in essence, a delegation of a small bit of presidential power to an individual. So while there are complex rules and regulations around clearances, they do not apply directly to a president while in office. Presidents can award or rescind a clearance at will, if they so choose, as well as classify or declassify a piece of information. Consequently, a president is not subject to the complex background checks -- which would flag felony convictions -- that any other person would come under.
Can you update us on the status of the civil case (business fraud, falsifying records) brought against Trump and his business by the State of New York in which he lost and was ordered to pay something like $ 500 million? I believe that case is being appealed. What's the status? Can you profile the judges hearing the case and the likelihood that Trump will prevail ? -- Christopher M. Saleh
Ben Protess, who has been covering the trial: After a recent lull, the New York attorney general's civil fraud case against Trump is poised to heat up again in the coming months. Now that the trial judge has decided the case in favor of the attorney general, Letitia James, it is up to an appeals court to uphold the ruling or overturn it, either partly or fully. Over the summer, both sides will submit written arguments to the appeals court, starting with Trump's lawyers on Monday. James's office will submit its papers in August. A panel of appeals court judges could issue a ruling as soon as this fall.
I would like to learn more about Project 2025. -- Janet McCorsley
David Leonhardt: Project 2025 is a $ 22 million presidential transition operation that is preparing policies, personnel lists and transition plans for a potential second Trump administration. The Heritage Foundation is leading the project. Trump has both praised it and suggested it is not a reliable guide to what he would do in a second term.
The Times has devoted significant resources to reporting on the project, and you can learn more from this recent feature, called "If Trump Wins," by my colleagues Charlie Savage, Jonathan Swan and Maggie Haberman, as well as this short video from Jonathan.
Why does the news still focus on politics like a horse race, instead of bringing into focus issues and positions? -- Beth Cherne
David Leonhardt: Beth, I addressed this question in a recent newsletter. (Search for "postscript.") In brief: We do cover issues more frequently than we cover polls, but we think polls deserve some attention. Polls affect the decisions of politicians and their advisers. They're an important part of a campaign's story.
Ask a foreign correspondent
Could you cover more about the Houthi attacks on shipping? This is having a major effect on world transportation of goods. I would think it would be in the news every day with updates on whatever has happened in past 24 hours. But not seeing much. -- Mary Foldstein
Vivian Nereim, who's based in Saudi Arabia: News is an odd business. When a once-shocking phenomenon becomes the norm, it's no longer "new," and often -- even if it's consequential -- it fades from the spotlight. That's the story for the Houthis. Their attacks on ships in the Red Sea have waxed and waned for months. Houthi missiles and drones are now an expected, albeit terrifying and dangerous, cost of doing business for shipping companies that pass Yemen's shores.
A strange twist to this is that the Houthis actually seem to crave media attention, including from the West, which they profess to despise. They announce their attacks with relish, and recently released a music video with English subtitles, part of their longtime strategy of using musical propaganda. When I wrote a front-page article about them last year, they proudly published a screenshot of it on a Houthi-run news outlet.
I don't expect the Houthis to stop their attacks soon. They don't believe that they have any compelling reason to stop. A bombing campaign by a U.S.-led coalition that has attempted to deter the Houthis has also become a new normal.
With all the news focused on Gaza and Ukraine, I'm left wondering: What happened with the crises in, say, Belarus? -- Daniel S.
Valerie Hopkins, Moscow correspondent: There's no good news to report from Belarus, I am afraid. It has been almost four years since Aleksandr Lukashenko brutally repressed protesters opposing his claim of re-election as president for a sixth term. Because Lukashenko had to depend on the support of Vladimir Putin, Belarus, which once tried to balance its economic ties between East and West, has become a vassal state of Russia and has been used as a staging ground for the invasion of Ukraine. Last year, Belarus's government declared its readiness to host Russian nuclear weapons on its territory, and in May it held joint nuclear exercises with Russia.
The security services are still finding ways to prosecute people who supported the pro-democracy protests. The leaders of the protests have not been heard from in months, and their family members have not been able to find them or communicate with them. That list includes the 2020 presidential candidates Viktor Babariko and Sergei Tikhanovsky, husband of Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, who leads the Belarusian opposition in exile. The family of Maria Kolesnikova, another prominent opposition figure, has not heard from her since February 2023.
If Narendra Modi's policies and general stance are (or, at least, seem) antagonistic toward Muslims, why isn't there more of a diplomatic outcry from countries in the Middle East? -- Rory Regan
Ben Hubbard, Istanbul bureau chief, who spent almost 15 years working in the Arab world: Decades ago, it was much more common for leaders of Muslim-majority countries to take public stands on what were considered transnational Islamic causes, meaning issues that were seen as relevant not just to individual countries but to all of the world's Muslims. Take, for example, Arab armies coming together to fight Israel in 1948 and 1967, or international Muslim support for the mujahedeen against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in the 1980s.
These days, while some leaders still deploy Pan-Islamic rhetoric to appeal to parts of their populations, most have a stronger practical interest in national sovereignty, which they see as giving them the ability to run their countries as they wish and allowing other leaders to do the same.
This largely explains the lack of broad outrage among Muslim heads of state at Narendra Modi's treatment of India's Muslims. Add to that the size of India's economy and the desire of many Muslim-majority countries to increase trade with India and the potential risks of publicly bashing Modi become too great. Other Muslim minorities are in similar situations. The suffering of the Uyghurs in China and the mostly Muslim Rohingya in Myanmar has also failed to generate broad outrage among leaders of Muslim countries.
Ask a business reporter
Why haven't more gas stations implemented electric vehicle charging stations as an attempt to attract different consumers? -- Pankaj Sharma
Jack Ewing, a longtime auto reporter: Some of the big fueling chains like Pilot Flying J, Circle K and Sheetz have installed fast chargers and are adding more. It typically takes at least 30 minutes to recharge an electric vehicle, so it makes the most sense to install chargers at sites that also offer food and other services, as those chains do. A neighborhood filling station probably can't offer as many ways for electric vehicle drivers to occupy their time. That said, as fast chargers become more commonplace and less expensive to install, you'll probably start to see more of them at gas stations.
I'd like to hear or read a follow-up to the Amazon workers that voted to unionize. It was big news and I'm curious what became of it. -- Vivian Romero
Noam Scheiber, who covers labor: The Amazon warehouse on Staten Island that voted to unionize in April 2022 remains the only Amazon warehouse to do so in the United States. The union, known as the Amazon Labor Union (A.L.U.), lost elections at two other warehouses that same year, and it began to fracture over internal disagreements soon after the second loss. The company continues to contest the A.L.U.'s election victory and has yet to begin bargaining with the union.
In June, the previously independent A.L.U. voted to affiliate with the 1.3-million-member International Brotherhood of Teamsters, which will give it access to more money and staff to challenge Amazon. But the A.L.U. will retain much of its independence and is voting on new leadership this month.
We hear so much about how A.I. is changing, or going to change, the world. Is there potential for A.I. to solve (or help us solve) some really pressing issues? For example, is anyone working on A.I. and climate change? Or curing cancer? I'd love to hear about this. -- Laura Coordes
Cade Metz, a technology reporter: As you might expect, halting climate change or curing cancer is significantly more difficult than building a chatbot that sounds like a person. But many companies and academic labs are working to solve such issues. Just as ChatGPT can generate term papers and images, similar A.I. technologies can generate blueprints for new proteins -- the tiny biological mechanisms that drive the behavior of the human body and all other living things. A.I. can then analyze millions of potential new proteins to see which seem to be most promising in helping to fight the next pandemic or, in the long run, cancer.
The caveat: Scientists still need to test the effects of these proteins in the real world. Clinical trials, where medicines and vaccines are tested with patients, still take years. Ensuring that a never-before-seen protein is a safe way to fight cancer -- or even just the flu -- requires years of work. Remember: Chatbots make silly mistakes. Those mistakes matter far more in the medical world.
Please explain whether Dr. Anthony Fauci received royalties from drug companies for discoveries made at the National Institutes of Health, and whether those payments motivated him to only approve or recommend drugs that provided money to him. -- Abbe Hohmann
Rebecca Robbins, who covers pharmaceuticals: Over decades as a government scientist, Dr. Anthony Fauci received modest royalty payments from companies that licensed his inventions. None were related to Covid-19, according to the National Institutes of Health.
Fauci contributed to 17 inventions at the N.I.H., according to the agency. There is only one license for which he is still receiving royalties. It covers a biological material, developed in 1982, that is used in carrying out laboratory tests. Fauci has said he has received less than $ 200 per year on average for that invention.
There's no evidence that Fauci has improperly lent backing to any products stemming from inventions for which he has been compensated. In his role at the N.I.H., Fauci did not have the power to approve drugs. That's the purview of the Food and Drug Administration.
Beyond Fauci, the N.I.H. publicly reports how much its scientists, institutes and centers receive in royalty payments. Individual inventors can receive no more than $ 150,000 a year.
Ask the climate desk
What data do you have to support the statement made that " 2023 was the planet's warmest year on record and perhaps in the last 100,000 years"? What record supports this statement? Hieroglyphics on some cave wall? -- Pamela Beckman
Sarah Graham, an editor on the climate desk: The historical records that archive what our planet's atmosphere was like in the distant past include things like tree rings, ice cores, corals and layers of sediment deep beneath the floors of oceans and lake beds. How do we know what those records tell us? Air bubbles trapped in layers of snow compacted over centuries into ice can tell scientists about atmospheric temperatures in the distant past. The rings that document a tree's growth widen or narrow depending on the conditions under which they grew.
The field of study focused on the planet's past is called paleoclimatology, and it puts together a comprehensive picture that points in a single direction: The climate is warming, and humans are causing it. Using a number of these records, the latest climate assessment report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concluded that the global temperature is reaching a level not experienced in more than 100,000 years.
How is the world's temperature calculated? Where and when is the temperature taken? -- Joe
Sarah Graham: The world's temperature, when reported as one number, is a global average that is the result of many measurements taken in many different places using many different instruments. The readings, which include data collected by satellites, sensors and weather balloons, are combined and analyzed by climate monitoring agencies.
Different agencies may produce slightly different estimates of how hot the planet is at any point, but the conclusions usually line up quite closely. And the overall trend over decades is clear: The planet is heating up rapidly.
Ask Wirecutter and Well
What is the best bean and/or roast of coffee for flavor and/or caffeine content? -- Wayne Glass
Ben Keough, a Wirecutter editor: On flavor: Taste is an inherently personal thing. (This subscription service lets you explore -- or focus on what you know you like.)
As for caffeine: That's determined by a dizzying array of factors, including coffee species (like robusta or arabica), growing conditions, roasting method and brewing method. James Hoffmann, a coffee expert, recently tested several of these variables and confirmed the longstanding theory that the longer coffee is in contact with water, the more caffeine you get. But his results cast doubt on the idea that lighter-roast coffee inherently produces more caffeine.
Espresso generally contains less caffeine than filter coffee (including pour over and drip coffee), and coffee made from arabica beans typically contains less caffeine than coffee made from robusta.
Is it safer to consume products with "natural flavors" as opposed to those with "artificial flavors?" I read that the term "natural" is not regulated (no legal definition or something) so "natural flavors" can actually be worse than "artificial flavors." It's hard to find a straight answer with Google, but I am concerned because the term may be misleading. -- M Barker
Annemarie Conte, a Wirecutter editor: It is confusing, but we don't think you should worry.
The Food and Drug Administration regulates the use of the terms "natural flavors" and "artificial flavors." Natural flavors do, in fact, need to be derived from something natural -- say, eggs, vegetables or meat. And the term "artificial flavors" simply means that the flavor is not derived from any of the naturally occurring stuff on the F.D.A.'s list.
The F.D.A. considers both natural and artificial flavors safe in the amounts that are present in food products, Jaclyn London, a registered dietitian, said. Now, the Department of Agriculture does regulate the term "organic" but not "natural." That may be where the confusion lies. Organic certification is a complicated, expensive process to ensure that, among other things, an ingredient is produced without most conventional pesticides and that animals are not given antibiotics.
I wash out glass, plastic and metal food containers to recycle them, and then worry about how much water I'm wasting. (How do you get all of the peanut butter out of a jar?) Of course we can try to minimize the food packaging, but which is better for the environment, recycling the containers or saving the water? -- Steve Farris
Katie Okamoto, a Wirecutter editor: Your question gets to an inescapable tension: Addressing one environmental impact in the best possible way sometimes means a trade-off with another. But a few tips for both recycling and water use can help make your already responsible actions go even further.
By recycling, in theory, you're helping to keep resources in the ground, avoid greenhouse gas emissions and reduce pollution from the manufacturing of new things. Unfortunately, the system -- especially for plastic -- is broken because of a combination of factors including economics, supply and logistics. But taking certain steps, like checking that your local hauler accepts what you put in the bin, helps.
Rinsing your empties is probably worth it, too. There are likely more important ways to limit water and energy use at home. Take shorter (and cooler) showers. Run only full loads of wash. If you use a dishwasher, don't prerinse dishes. You may even want to rinse your empties in the dishwasher, which is more efficient than washing them in the sink.
When following recommendations from Wirecutter, I would like to know which products are most environmentally friendly. That plays a huge part in my purchasing decisions. Is there a way they could include information along those lines? -- Jerri A. Donahue
Katie Okamoto: Assessing the environmental friendliness of a given product is extremely complex.
When there is a choice that is clearly more environmentally friendly, we let you know. We also try to be specific. One dishwasher is more energy- and water-efficient than another, for example, or one type of cookware lasts generations and doesn't use forever chemicals.
We pay special attention to how long a product lasts when you use and maintain it, because the most sustainable choice is the thing you'll keep the longest. Ultimately, we've done our job if you buy something we recommend, don't return it and keep it until it dies -- without replacing or augmenting it with something else that you wish you'd bought first.
What is the safe humidity level for golfing? -- Thomas J. Foley
Molly Mirhashem, a Well editor who oversees fitness coverage: Not everyone responds to heat and humidity in the same way, so the safe level for you will partly depend on your age, fitness level and how often you exercise in humid weather. Humidity makes it harder for your sweat to evaporate off your skin, which is the process that cools you down. When the conditions are muggy, wear moisture-wicking clothing (not cotton, which can hold onto moisture) if you can. High humidity can be dehydrating, so be sure to drink water when you're thirsty. You should also try to resist the urge to wipe off your sweat, which needs to be able to evaporate off your skin to help keep your body cool. And listen to how you feel -- don't push through symptoms like a headache, dizziness or nausea, which can all be signs of heat-related illness.
Inside The Times
In a time when likes and comments dominate social media sites, why doesn't The New York Times allow comments for every story it publishes? This is now one way people connect. -- Megan Hulce
Vindu Goel, director of community engagement: Hi, Megan. Thanks for your question. At The Times, moderators review comment submissions before publication. Our goal is to foster engaging, informative, respectful conversations around our journalism. Many of our readers say they appreciate these curated conversations, which are different from the mostly unmoderated conversations on social media services. However, this human review takes time, which means that our team is unable to open every article for comment. We focus our attention on articles that we think will spark the best discussions. We also regularly close older articles to make room for new ones.
I subscribe digitally from New Orleans and I love the newsletters. Is there any way you can make the newsletters more shareable? I understand you don't want to give away content to nonsubscribers, but the information is so good and so fresh that I want my network of Facebook folks to see it. -- Grant Cooper
David Leonhardt: We appreciate that, Grant. Do you know that almost all Times newsletters are also published on the web? If you bookmark this page, you can find the web version of The Morning every day. You can share the link on social media -- and we appreciate it when people do.
Why do you not use the Oxford comma in the title of The Morning newsletter? -- Mandy Toren
Jessica Schnall, who frequently edits The Morning: The English language offers many reasonable ways to punctuate a sentence, spell a word and make other stylistic decisions. For the sake of consistency, The Times maintains a stylebook honed over decades by our editors. Here's a longer description of it.
Times style is to omit a comma before "and" or "or" in a series, unless one is needed to avoid confusion. This is also the style of The Associated Press, whose stylebook guides numerous newspapers, magazines and public relations offices in the United States. (See what I did there?)
Sorry to be pedantic about this one, but I've emailed before to recommend that your editors and writers learn that "data" is a plural form of the word "datum." So you wouldn't say or write that "the data is correct," you'd say or write that "the data ARE correct." Your reporting and writing are at such a high level that when I read this error of word usage it seems odd and out of place. -- Josh Bernbaum
Jessica Schnall: The Times's stylebook employs, shall we say, potent language when discussing the singular "datum," calling it "a word both stilted and deservedly obscure." For that reason, the stylebook instructs us to treat the deservedly more common "data" as singular in most cases.
Why does The Morning still use B.C. instead of B.C.E. for dates? -- Michele McGovern
Jessica Schnall: We still use B.C. (before Christ) and A.D. (anno Domini, or in the year of the [or our] Lord) for dates because doing so is The New York Times's style. Although some institutions and academic fields have adopted the use of the secular B.C.E. (before Common Era) and C.E. (Common Era), they haven't been universally embraced. The Gregorian calendar, which uses B.C. and A.D., is still the international standard, and the one Times readers are likely to be most familiar with.
More on The Morning
I love this newsletter. I read it before I even get out of bed in the morning. But I've noticed that you no longer publicize the Times podcast "The Daily" and the upcoming topics it's covering. Because I listen to that every day too I was just curious why you stopped. Thanks! -- Stacy Huisman
David Leonhardt: Thank you, Susan. We deeply admire "The Daily." Its plain-spoken, intelligent approach has been a model for us on The Morning since we started the newsletter in 2020. So why did we stop including a link to "The Daily" each day at the bottom of our newsletter? Despite the show's enormous popularity, our daily link to it was one of our least-clicked links. We think that's because relatively few people go straight from reading a newsletter to listening to a podcast. Most instead listen to "The Daily" earlier or later in their days, and they get to it from The Times's main app, the Times Audio app or an app like Spotify. We weren't meaningfully helping "The Daily" by including the link.
And as surprising as this may sound, The Morning has space constraints. If we put in too many links, the newsletter is more likely to "clip" -- that is, to cut off before the end and more likely to go to your spam folder. We need to make choices, as a result. We decided that it made more sense to include a link to an additional Times story each day than a standing podcast link that relatively few people were using. For the same reason, we stopped including the daily link to an image of the print front page. By doing so, we can include more links to Times stories in the newsletter (and we still can't include most Times stories each day).
If you prefer finding "The Daily" through the web rather than an app, you can find the new episode on this web page every morning. You can find the image of the print front page on the right side of this page every day.
I've been a digital subscriber since 2016. The Morning starts my day every day. I have one complaint: Why do you include stories from other publications like The Washington Post or The Wall Street Journal? I can't open them as a nonsubscriber. -- Tom Ahlberg
David Leonhardt: Thank you for being a Morning reader, Tom. When we put together the newsletter each day, we want it to give you the best possible overview of the world. This often means including some stories from other news organizations. We're partial to The Times, of course, but we don't think it has a monopoly on great journalism.
We know many of our readers don't subscribe to these other publications, which is why we always try to make sure our summaries of their stories include the most important information. We think you can learn something from our summaries even without clicking through.
It's funny: When I'm at public events and speak with Morning readers, our inclusion of outside links is one of the most common subjects people raise. But opinions differ. Some people ask a version of your question, and others say the inclusion of outside stories is one of their favorite things about the newsletter.
A tip for people who are in your camp: We always try to label outside links so that you will know in advance whether you can click through.
Why is it that whenever D.C. is referenced, it's as "Washington" instead of "Washington, D.C.," or just "D.C."? I used to live in Washington (the state) and now live in Northern Virginia. I find it confusing, and most people in the area just call it D.C. -- Adanna
David Leonhardt: We heard a version of this comment from multiple readers, especially in the Pacific Northwest. It will change how we approach "Washington" in the future. In some cases, we think it's clear from the context that Washington means either Washington, D.C., or Washington State. (One example: The president returned to Washington to sign the bill. Another example: Seattle is the largest city in Washington.) Going forward, though, we will more often use "Washington, D.C.," or "Washington State."
I find that maps of any kind -- small or large, highly detailed or wide-lens -- with any story are so helpful. If space is at a premium within the newsletter, perhaps you could provide a link to one within each relevant story. For example, a recent story on Darfur provided a small graphic of the Darfur region within Sudan -- great! Then I went to my globe to situate Sudan within northern Africa. -- Diane Chase
David Leonhardt: We agree, Diane. We've regularly included basic maps of Ukraine, Israel and Gaza in our coverage of the wars there. We will aim to do so even more often in the future.
For several more questions and answers, see today's Morning newsletter.
Illustration
