It is often daunting to sort through the newest technology products to find something befitting your gadget-loving family and friends. Fret not: Here are some of the most useful and entertaining tech gifts of the year.
Bose QuietComfort 35 Wireless Headphones, $350
Bose's noise-canceling headphones, which are Bluetooth-compatible, sound as good as some of the best wired earphones and are extremely comfortable to wear.
Dyson V8 Absolute Cordless Vacuum, $600
Dyson's cordless vacuum cleaner is powerful and easy to use. It includes attachments for different floor types, and it can transform into a mini-handheld vacuum.
Roku Streaming Stick, $50
Roku's video-streaming stick makes a perfect travel companion. It includes a physical remote control, and its software can connect to finicky Wi-Fi networks in hotel rooms.
TCL 32S3800 Smart TV, $169
This inexpensive 32-inch television includes the brains of Roku's software to give you easy access to your favorite streaming apps, like Netflix and Hulu.
Sony PlayStation VR, $399
Sony has gotten the best start on virtual reality with its headgear for the PlayStation 4. The headset is comfortable to wear and easy to set up.
Amazon Echo Dot Smart Speaker, $50
This smaller version of Amazon's $180 Echo smart speaker is a fraction of the cost and just as capable.
Google Home Smart Speaker, $129
In response to the Amazon Echo, Google has released Home, its own smart speaker. What makes Home special is its tie to Google's omniscient search engine.
Apple Watch Series 2, From $269
The new Apple Watch is substantially faster, Siri works much better than before and Apple has redesigned the interface to cut clutter and confusion.
Aura Smart Picture Frame, $399
Aura's tabletop digital picture frame features a stunningly sharp display that pulls photos from your phone to show them off in the best light.
Anki Cozmo Robot, $180
Cozmo comes loaded with sensors and a camera that recognizes your child's face and is controlled by the artificial intelligence of a smartphone app.
August Smart Lock, $229
The August Smart Lock will ease anxiety about getting locked out. The device electromechanically locks or unlocks your deadbolt, taking commands from a smartphone app.
Tile Mate Bluetooth Locator, $25
The Tile Mate, a tiny square with a tracking sensor, can easily be attached to a key ring or tied to an Apple TV remote. When you've misplaced that item, just open Tile's smartphone app, hit the "Find" button, and the device will play a sound.
Photograph Photos
