MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. -- As we merged with freeway traffic on Highway 101, one of Silicon Valley's busiest freeways, Christopher Urmson, the man in the driver's seat, gestured, not touching the steering wheel.
Mr. Urmson is a Google engineer, and last Wednesday, I sat belted in the back seat as he talked and as the car, a Toyota Prius equipped by Google with radar, video, motion sensors and a GPS device, drove itself at 60 miles an hour.
My eyes were glued to the 22-inch three-dimensional color display in front of Dmitri Dolgov, an artificial intelligence researcher at Google who was riding shotgun. It showed the world around us in great detail, down to painted lane markers, stop signs, traffic lights and a sliding green column that indicated our path. A blocky yellow object representing a car was coming up behind us in the lane we were entering as the robotic, female voice of the Prius announced, "Preparing to change lane."
"Don't worry, we have plenty of room," Dr. Urmson said.
We followed a 12-mile planned route in a vehicle that looks different from the striking Google Street View cars, which are distinguished by a six-and-a-half-foot-tall camera mast.
Instead, Google's autonomous Prius has a more modest if no less striking sensor mounted in the center of the vehicle's roof. Known as Lidar, or Light Detection and Ranging, it provides a continuously updated three-dimensional map of the world at centimeter accuracy extending for more than 230 feet around the car.
The Lidar is supplemented by four standard automotive radars with less resolution and greater range, three in front and one in the rear. Inside the car, positioned next to the rear-view mirror, is a high-resolution video camera to detect street lights and moving obstacles like pedestrians and bicyclists. The Prius also has a GPS receiver and an inertial motion sensor.
The same, or very similar, sensor array was used on many of the cars that competed in the 2007 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Urban Challenge, a competition for autonomous automobiles held on the grounds of a former Air Force base.
What has changed -- in addition to the use of public roads -- is the computing power available to the designers and the artificial intelligence software. Designers have made advances in detecting pedestrians, street lights and lane markers, as well as in resolving conflicting sensor data and in motion planning to avoid obstacles. A traffic-cop program monitors all the car's processes.
One main technique used by the Google team is known as SLAM, or simultaneous localization and mapping, which builds and updates a map of a vehicle's surroundings while keeping the vehicle located within the map. To make a SLAM map, the car is first driven manually along a route while its sensors capture location, feature and obstacle data. Then a group of software engineers annotates the maps, making certain that road signs, crosswalks, street lights and unusual features are all embedded. The cars then drive autonomously over the mapped routes, recording changes as they occur and updating the map. The researchers said they were surprised to find how frequently the roads their robots drove on had changed.
Unsolved problems remain. Sebastian Thrun, a Google engineer and head of the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, said the design team was stumped by how to train its system to follow the hand signals that a human traffic cop or crossing guard might make.
Despite its limitations -- and they are significant -- the Google car's abilities occasionally gave me goose bumps, particularly compared with previous rides in autonomous vehicles. In 2005, I was in such a vehicle with Dr. Thrun and two others when it swerved off a gravel road at more than 20 miles per hour. Unlike the newer Google cars, the only way to wrest control from that car was to hit a large red button on the driver's console, and Dr. Thrun was simply unable to push the button quickly enough to keep the car from driving into the brush.
For me, the tour de force of the new car came when the vehicle halted at a stop sign to make a right turn. It waited patiently for a vehicle in front of it to turn, then inched forward. A car was approaching from the left, but the Prius pulled into the far right lane, and I realized that it "knew" the other car was not in our lane even though it was passing close to us. There was no need to hit the red button.

Photograph A Car Driven by Computer Hardware Recently Attracted the Attention of a Bicyclist in Mountain View, Calif. (Photograph by Ramin Rahimian for the New York Times)
