Gov. Gavin Newsom must now decide whether to sign into law the fiercely debated legislation.
California lawmakers on Wednesday overwhelmingly approved legislation that would create new restrictions for artificial intelligence, clearing a path to the governor's office for a bill that might set the national standard for regulating the new technology.
The State Assembly approved the measure, known as S.B. 1047, which would require big A.I. companies to test their systems for safety before releasing them to the public. The bill would also give the state's attorney general the power to sue A.I. makers for serious harms caused by their technologies, like death or property damage.
Gov. Gavin Newsom has not indicated his position on the legislation and has faced strong pressure from many in the tech industry to veto it. The proposed regulations have become embroiled in a fierce debate over how to regulate A.I., which, depending on whom you ask, has the potential for great benefits and harms to humanity.
"The Assembly has taken the truly historic step of working proactively to ensure an exciting new technology protects the public interest as it advances," Senator Scott Wiener, a Democrat and co-author of the bill, said in a statement.
If the bill is signed into law, the state will become the standard-bearer for regulating a technology that has exploded in recent years, particularly with the introduction of humanlike chatbots and realistic image and video generators. Although the European Union has created the A.I. Act, no U.S. laws that restrict the use of riskier technology like facial recognition software have been passed.
The State Senate, which has already passed the bill, will vote again with new amendments this week, in what is considered a procedural step. Mr. Newsom will then have until Sept. 30 to consider the bill, amid a flurry of lobbying by technology executives, venture capitalists, academics and federal lawmakers.
Mr. Newsom's office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Elon Musk posted this week on X, his social media site, that it was a "tough call" but that "all things considered," he supported regulation of A.I. and the bill because of the technology's potential risks to the public. Last year, Mr. Musk founded the A.I. company xAI, and he is the chief executive of Tesla, an electric vehicle manufacturer that uses A.I. for self-driving.
Other supporters of the bill say that without guardrails, A.I. has catastrophic potential. It could be used to fuel biowarfare or overturn democratic elections and governments through disinformation campaigns.
"The choices the government makes now about how to develop and deploy these powerful A.I. systems may have profound consequences for current and future generations of Californians, as well as those around the world," Yoshua Bengio, a professor of computer science at the University of Montreal, and Geoffrey Hinton, a prominent A.I. researcher who quit Google over A.I. safety concerns, wrote in a letter to Mr. Newsom.
Critics have accelerated a campaign to pressure Mr. Newsom to veto the bill.
Several members of Congress, including Nancy Pelosi, the former House speaker, have written Mr. Newsom to warn him that the legislation could harm the development of A.I. They say that the technology is still in its infancy and that it's too early to determine how A.I. systems could prove if they are safe.
"The view of many of us in Congress is that S.B. 1047 is well intentioned but ill informed," Ms. Pelosi wrote in an open letter published last week.
This month, Mr. Wiener, of San Francisco, made several changes to it to appease tech industry critics like Anthropic, OpenAI, Meta and Google. He scrapped a proposal for a new agency dedicated to A.I. safety. He also weakened liability for companies so that they would be punished only for actual harms, not for potential harms.
Opponents of the A.I. bill worry it could stifle innovation and choke off the progress of start-ups. They have argued that it would discourage tech giants from sharing software code underlying their artificial intelligence with other businesses and software developers -- a practice known as open source.
Illustration
