U.S. stock indexes held roughly in place on Monday ahead of an inflation report that could show how realistic Wall Street's hopes for easier interest rates are.
The S&P 500 slipped 5.75 points, or 0.1 percent, to 5,117.94, coming off just its third losing week in the last 19. It's still near its high set Thursday, buoyed by expectations that cuts to interest rates are coming this year and by signals that the economy remains remarkably resilient.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 46.97, or 0.1 percent, to 38,769.66, and the Nasdaq composite fell 65.84 or 0.4 percent, to 16,019.27.
Tuesday's report on prices at the consumer level could show inflation remained at 3.1 percent in February, if economists' forecasts are correct.
A month ago, a hotter-than-expected report on inflation at the consumer level sent financial markets spinning after scrambling bets for when the Federal Reserve will start cutting rates. Stocks have already run higher and Treasury yields have already eased in the bond market on expectations that such cuts are coming.
But the trend for inflation has been mostly downward, cooling toward the Fed's 2 percent target from its peak above 9 percent. Fed Chair Jerome Powell said last week that the Fed is "not far" from getting enough confidence about inflation to begin cutting rates. Cuts to the Fed's main interest rate, which is at its highest level since 2001, would relax pressure on the economy and financial system, while goosing investment prices.
The general expectation among traders is that the Fed will begin cutting rates in June.
It's such expectations that have helped drive the U.S. stock market's big run since late October, according to Michael Wilson and other strategists at Morgan Stanley. From here, though, "the burden is now likely on earnings/fundamentals to show more material improvement" for the rally to continue.
This most recent earnings reporting season has mostly wrapped up, but Archer Daniels Midland and Ulta Beauty are among the S&P 500 companies reporting later this week.
Expectations for easier interest rates have helped the price of gold rally to a record. When bonds pay less in interest, investors lose out on less income by owning gold instead. Gold for delivery in April ticked up by $ 3.10 to settle at $ 2,188.60 per ounce. Gold prices are up about 17 percent over the last 12 months.
Bitcoin, which proponents sometimes pitch as "digital gold," also rallied to another record. It rose above $ 72,000 after sitting below $ 17,000 at the start of last year. It has more than bounced back from its prior peak of nearly $ 69,000.
On Wall Street, Oracle rose 1.5 percent before it released its latest earnings report after trading finished for the day. Its profit topped analysts' expectations, and its stock rose more in after-hours trading.
On the losing end was natural-gas producer EQT, which sank 7.8 percent for the biggest drop in the S&P 500. It said it will buy Equitrans Midstream and its gas transmission and storage systems in an all-stock deal that values the combined company at $ 35 billion. Equitrans Midstream rose 1.5 percent.
Nvidia swung through a shaky day after coming off a 5.5 percent drop on Friday, which was its worst day since May. Nvidia is still up more than 70 percent this year after more than tripling last year amid a frenzy on Wall Street around artificial-intelligence technology.
The rally has caused Nvidia to swell in size, and it has become the third-largest stock on Wall Street. That gives its stock movements outsize sway on the S&P 500, and it's been getting criticism that its stock ran too high, too fast. After flipping earlier between losses and gains, Nvidia's stock dropped 2 percent to act as one of the heaviest weights on the S&P 500.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
