On the east side of Bryant Park in Midtown Manhattan, three cameras on the roof of a restaurant film the lunch crowds, tourists and commuters. The feeds are streamed online for anyone to see.
Thousands walk through the park each day. It's the type of public space, like a sidewalk, road or train station, that most people pass through in their daily routine.
Generally, we think that when we walk through a park, and whom we're with when we're there, is private information -- certainly not something a stranger could have access to. But facial recognition, applied to the web of cameras that already exists in most cities, is a threat to that assumption.
To demonstrate how easy it is to track people without their knowledge, The Times collected public images of people who worked near Bryant Park (available on their employers' websites, for the most part) and ran one day of footage from the park cameras through Amazon's commercial facial-recognition service. (We've since deleted the images that we collected and are no longer monitoring the Bryant Park cameras.)
Our system made several possible identifications and matched one frame to a head shot of Richard Madonna, a professor at the SUNY College of Optometry.
"My first reaction was, 'Oh, my God, that is unbelievable,"' Dr. Madonna said after we reached him and explained the experiment. "I was shocked at how readily it seems that it picked me up, because, really -- it's the side of my head."
The cameras in Bryant Park were installed more than a decade ago so that people could see whether the lawn was open for sunbathing, for example, or check how busy the ice skating rink was in the winter, according to the corporation that runs the park.
But our experiment shows that a person equipped with just a few cameras and facial recognition technology can learn people's daily habits. This is entirely legal. In the United States, facial recognition is almost wholly unregulated.
New York City is nothing like China, where the government has installed approximately one surveillance camera for every seven citizens. But according to the American Civil Liberties Union, the police here have access to more than 9,000 camera feeds in Lower Manhattan alone. Advocates warn about the chilling effect on free speech if the government could monitor everyone's whereabouts all the time.
Hundreds of cameras across New York City monitor traffic, and the feeds are streamed publicly online. And the city's LinkNYC kiosks, which provide free wireless internet, each have two security cameras, though using facial recognition is against the policy of the company that owns the kiosks.
Amazon is one of several companies that sell facial-recognition services to the public. It has highlighted positive applications of its technology -- like the ability to help find lost children -- but has been criticized for marketing facial recognition to law-enforcement agencies.
The company recommends using a threshold of at least 99 percent similarity for applications of its service that involve public safety. None of the matches we obtained from the Bryant Park footage met that threshold.
Matt Wood, the general manager of artificial intelligence for Amazon Web Services, noted it is possible that the service, like other types of information available to law-enforcement officials, could be used inappropriately. "The law-enforcement agency will have to be accountable to these individuals and to the law if they violate people's civil liberties," he said.
So how should this technology be regulated? Some privacy advocates propose that authorities must have a reasonable suspicion before conducting a search with this technology and would prohibit, except in life-or-death situations, live facial-recognition searches using driver's license databases.
Others say the technology is so dangerous that no regulation is sufficient. But it might already be too late for a ban.
Dr. Madonna said that as a doctor, he often considers the ratio of risk to benefit. He saw the tremendous benefits that facial recognition could offer. But the technology is open to abuse, he added, when individuals or governments can use it to track any group, or just about any ordinary person -- even someone walking through Bryant Park.
AuthorAffiliation Sahil Chinoy is a graphics editor in The New York Times Opinion section. Photograph Our system detected 2,750 faces from a nine-hour period. It returned several possible identifications, including one frame matched to a head shot of Richard Madonna, a professor at the SUNY College of Optometry.; A surveillance camera on the west side of the New York Public Library looking toward Bryant Park. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) MAP: Surveillance on the Corner (Sources: OpenStreetMap, N.Y.C. Department of Transportation, N.Y.C. Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications); CHART

Location: United States--US
