At movie awards ceremonies, most winners thank their stars, their agents, their significant others. Guillermo del Toro, during his victory lap earlier this year for "The Shape of Water," thanked a teenager who had been dead for more than 150 years. "So many times, when I want to give up, when I think about giving up," he said onstage at the British Academy of Film and Television Awards in February, "I think of her."
"She gave voice to the voiceless, and presence to the invisible," he continued, "and showed me that sometimes to talk about monsters, we need to fabricate monsters of our own."
Del Toro, the leading cinematic monster-maker of our time, was talking about Mary Shelley, the author of "Frankenstein," and not for the first time. Adapting the novel -- begun when Shelley was only 18 -- has long been a dream project for the director, who has called Victor Frankenstein's nameless creation "the most beautiful and moving" of all monsters.
The world will have to wait for del Toro's version, but this is Frankenstein's year. The novel's 200th anniversary has inspired a cavalcade of exhibitions, performances and events around the world, from Ingolstadt, the Bavarian home of Victor Frankenstein's fictional lab, to the hell mouth of Indiana, which in a bid to become the epicenter of American Franken-frenzy, has held more than 600 events since January.
Then again, when is it not the monster's moment? While Frankenstein may have thwarted his creature's desire to procreate, Shelley's novel has birthed a seemingly endless stream of adaptations and riffs, including at least 170 screen homages, from the sublime to the ridiculous and beyond (see "Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet Frankenstein").
There have been camp Frankensteins, feminist Frankensteins, queer Frankensteins, and political Frankensteins of all stripes, which have taken the monster's murderous revolt against its maker as allegory of everything from scientific overreach to capitalism to racism to war.
Of course, the recently fashionable zombie and vampire, who tend to travel in packs, have starred in plenty of pointed allegories of their own. But they can't match the deeper jolt of human recognition that Shelley's solitary, lonely monster stirs.
"The story touches on the most basic part of what it means to be an embodied human creature," said Elizabeth Campbell Denlinger, a co-curator of "It's Alive! Frankenstein at 200," an exhibition at the Morgan Library & Museum in Manhattan that gathers artifacts ranging from original pages of the manuscript to Elsa Lanchester's "Bride of Frankenstein" beehive. "It leaves us asking, Am I a monster too?"
"Frankenstein" was born during a famously gloomy summer of 1816, which has become almost as mythic as the story itself. Mary Shelley and Percy Shelley, her husband, were guests at a lakeside villa in Switzerland with Lord Byron and others, who passed the rainy days dreaming up ghost stories, in a kind of competitive parlor game.
The first glimmerings of the monster came to her one night. "With shut eyes but acute mental vision," she recalled, "I saw the pale student of unhallowed arts kneeling beside the thing he had put together." Later, she would sum up her dual (at least) intentions of her "hideous progeny," as she called the book: "to speak to the mysterious fears of our nature, and awaken thrilling horror."
"Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus" was published anonymously two years later, in 1818, and almost immediately grabbed the popular imagination. Since then, it has become the rare story to pass from literature into common myth.
Even people who have never cracked the novel know the story of the misshapen creature patched together from human corpses who turns on his creator, or at least the archetypal green-skinned, bolt-in-the-neck image embodied by Boris Karloff. (Those key characteristics are under copyright by Universal Pictures until 2026, as it happens.)
But almost from the beginning, it also slipped the bounds of its own novelist-creator, leaving some of its own patched-together parts behind, starting with most of the monster's philosophical preoccupations, and even his basic powers of speech.
In the first stage production, in 1823, the nameless creature (or "-----," as he was identified in a playbill included in the Morgan show) was played by T.P. Cooke, an actor famous for pantomime, . setting the template for an inarticulate, if not entirely wordless, monster.
If it took the medium of film to jolt the Frankenstein pop culture tradition alive, it also took the 20th century to fully activate its warning against science run amok. In a 1987 essay, the biologist Leonard Isaacs credited Shelley with writing what may have been "the first future myth," which "lay waiting for human activity to catch up with it."
A line of Dr. Frankenstein's from James Whale's 1931 movie version -- "Now I know how it feels to be God!" -- was a frequent target of local censors, who saw it as blasphemous. Whale's "Bride of Frankenstein" (1935), the Morgan show notes, took care to condemn any enthusiasm he expressed for his unholy labors.
But since then, the hubris of "playing God" has been freely invoked in debates over the atomic bomb, artificial intelligence, genetic engineering, nanotechnology and just about any other technology that threatens to overrun its human creators.
To some, the Frankenstein metaphor itself (aided by "Frankenfoods," "frankenscience" and other scary "frankenwords") has become something of a rhetorical monster, rampaging across the possibility of reasoned public debate about scientific innovation.
Ed Finn, a literary scholar at Arizona State University and co-editor of a new annotated edition of Shelley's novel aimed at scientists, engineers and "creators of all kinds," said that the Frankenstein story, when invoked simplistically, is itself a "dangerous narrative."
"A better conversation about Frankenstein would focus on the deep connection between scientific creativity and our responsibility to ourselves and one another," he said.
But if some hope to turn the story into a more positive one of ethical science, feminist artists and critics have read it as an allegory of male usurpation of female procreative power.
Margaret Atwood's 1967 poetry collection "Speeches for Dr. Frankenstein" imagined the monster as a woman addressing her creator. In Shelley Jackson's "Patchwork Girl" (1997), an early hypertext novel, Mary Shelley herself creates the female monster, who then falls in love with her. (To navigate, readers clicked on different parts of the monster's body.)
Deidre Lynch, an English professor at Harvard who teaches a course on monsters, said the novel was about both "unnatural" creation, and also, perhaps more conventionally, about family life.
"It asks, on the one hand, 'What if I hate my child?' and on the other 'What if my father deems me a misfit who has failed to resemble him?'," she said.
The Frankenstein story has become a touchstone for gay and transgender artists, who have mined both its story of parental rejection and its homoerotic subtext (perhaps made most literal in Andy Warhol's X-rated "Flesh for Frankenstein.") Some transgender artists have taken the fear of the monster's "unnatural" body and turned it on its head.
In "Amateur: The True Story of What Makes a Man," his recent memoir of becoming the first transgender man to fight in Madison Square Garden, the writer Thomas Page McBee invokes "Frankenstein" both as a metaphor for the trans experience, and for masculinity itself, which he calls a kind of "created monster."
"For me, the novel is a kind of poetic touchstone for asking, 'How do people become evil? How do I work through my own fears of becoming a monster?"' he said.
Other writers have used the story to create double-edged 21st-century political allegories. In "Frankenstein in Baghdad," by the Iraqi novelist Ahmed Saadawi, a peddler stitches together stray parts of bombing victims in hopes of creating a body for proper burial, only to see it become a rampaging killer.
"Destroyer," a recent comic by the novelist Victor LaValle that transports the story to the age of Black Lives Matter, features two "monsters." There's Shelley's original, who is found alive in the Arctic, and also a 12-year-old African-American boy who is shot by the police and then reanimated by his mother, a scientist who happens to be the last living descendant of Victor Frankenstein.
LaValle, expressing skepticism of "touchy-feely monsters," said he wanted to embrace the creature's -- and the mother's -- rage, which he called "the right of the maligned and oppressed."
Perhaps more simply, he also wanted to take readers back to what had drawn him to Frankenstein in the first place.
"As a kid," he said, "I was drawn to the fear of the monster. I wanted a monster who would tear a human being in half, for better or for worse."
Clockwise From Left: Mary Shelley Knew of the "Animal Electricity" Experiments of Luigi Galvani and His Nephew Giovanni Aldini; a Comic Riff, at the Morgan; the First Screen Version, From Edison Studios, in 1910; the Pantomime Actor T. P. Cooke Was First to Play the Monster Onstage, in 1823. (Photographs by the Morgan Library & Museum; First Classics Inc, Via Trajectory Inc.; California Institute of the Arts Library Special Collections; the New York Public Library) (Ar16); Far Left and Top Left, Victor Lavalle's Comic "Destroyer" Adapts the Story for the Era of Black Lives Matter. Above Left, a Poster for James Whale's 1931 Masterpiece. Above, a French Stage Version, Circa 1826. (Photographs by Boom! Studios; Universal Pictures; DÉPartement Des Arts Du Spectacle/the BibliothÈQue Nationale de France); the Monster (Joshua Jeremiah) Attacks His Creator (Brian Cheney) in "Sketches From Frankenstein," a New Piece by Gregg Kallor That Was Performed This Month in the Catacombs at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn. (Photograph by Joe Carrotta for the New York Times) (Ar17)
