'MINING THE WEB FOR THE "VOICE OF THE HERD" TO TRACK STOCK MARKET BUBBLES' by Mark T. Keane, chairman of computer science, University College Dublin, and Aaron Gerow, graduate student at Trinity College Dublin. Proceedings of the 22nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Barcelona, July 2011.
THE EXPERIMENT Stock market bubbles occur when everyone is talking about the market and has a positive view of it, which is why John D. Rockefeller reputedly got out of the market when a bellhop asked him for a stock tip, Mr. Keane and Mr. Gerow write. They wondered if it would be possible to take a different sort of tip from Rockefeller and listen to the "voice of the herd" by tracking the language used by financial commentators. They analyzed 17,713 finance-related articles online from The New York Times, The Financial Times and the BBC from 2006 to 2010. Their hypothesis was that financial commentators would come to repeat the same optimistic words and terms to express a shared positive view of the stock market, evidence that a kind of group think has grabbed hold in the period leading up to and during an economic bubble.
THE RESULTS During a bubble Mr. Keane and Mr. Gerow found an increase in the frequency of language like "stocks rose again," "scaled new heights" or "soared." They called this verb convergence and noun convergence. At the same time there was a decrease in the number or variety of economic events or circumstances mentioned, as happened with dot-com companies in 1999, when there was a fixation on a small number of rapidly rising stocks.
During a collapse these trends reversed themselves, and journalists and commentators used more diverse language. The computer scientists also looked at the frequency of positive and negative terms and discovered that in a normal market, there is a mix of language. Right before a bubble, however, there is a jump in positive language.
When the Dow Jones Industrial Average was rising through 2007, for example, "rise," "fall," "close" and "gain" were the most popular verbs, peaking the week of Oct. 12, after which the crash began. The use of negative terms peaked in January 2009, two months before the Dow dropped significantly.
Economists have developed several measures to predict bubbles and crashes, primarily based on pricing, but a review of language offers another way to assess what people are saying and thinking about the market.
WHAT DO YOU THINK? Would you invest when media experts speak positively about the stock market? Comment at nytimes.com/thinkingcap. PATRICIA COHEN
