I am concerned that my childhood dreams may turn into a nightmare.
Stanley Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey," which I first saw in 1968 at seven years of age, sparked my fascination with computers and artificial intelligence, and I have since focused my academic studies and career pursuits within this area.
Fast-forward to today. I still believe that A.I. and automation can keep bringing good to the world. Its effects on middle-skill workers, in America's industrial Midwest and elsewhere, however, worry me.
It has been suggested that the significant job loss and career destruction illuminated by the 2016 presidential election are a result of bad trade deals and corporate greed. I disagree. It's much more likely a result of computers, including significant advances in A.I., which have allowed us to optimize our economy as never before. Already, they have permitted the global economy to function as if it were in your backyard. In the next decade, they will take over a vast array of routine work, in new industries, affecting even more workers.
The economic dislocations that computers and artificial intelligence have unleashed have been vastly underestimated. And we are just in the early days.
Think about commercial trucking in America. A.I.-based self-driving truck technology for travel on interstate highways is already technically feasible. Today, about five million drivers are employed in this industry. Even a 20 percent reduction in this work force over the next 15 years equates to a million lost jobs.
One of capitalism's bedrock promises -- one that dates back to Adam Smith -- is that competition in the free market benefits society at large. Somewhere along the line, intoxication with efficiency caused us to lose sight of that principle at the expense of workers. Getting back to that promise will require policy changes and a renewal of forgotten values.
The raw, widespread anger we saw during the recent election -- and the unexpected swing of several industrial states from reliably blue to red -- reflects in large part the intense despair that many middle-skill workers feel as they see their families' economic prospects fade and social conditions deteriorate.
Trade and immigration have become boogeymen, while technological advances and the huge efficiency gains they bring truly underpin the "hollowing out" of the middle class behind the scenes. Industrial automation has been displacing workers for decades -- particularly those doing repetitive, lower-skill work.
Exponential gains in computing power, along with innovations in software, analytical techniques and the rise of Big Data, mean that many white-collar occupations are due for disruption by machines too. According to a 2013 study by two Oxford University professors, almost half of all jobs in the United States are susceptible to "computerization" over the coming decade or two.
With so many at risk of being pushed aside by Smith's invisible hand, no one should be surprised if people decide to push back.
Unless we change course now, we can expect many more Everytowns to become Allentowns.
While the phenomenon I describe is understood by academics and technocrats and, more important, keenly felt by millions of Americans, no one seems to know how to fix this. As Harvard's Clayton Christensen and Derek van Bever argue in "The Capitalist's Dilemma," orthodox finance dictates that investment by corporations to create jobs tends to be the third-best option behind substitutive innovation (which tends not to create new jobs) and efficiency innovation (which almost always results in job losses). As we have seen, companies today increasingly prefer not to employ humans, if possible.
What's the answer? Most of the commonly proposed fixes are unlikely to resolve the issue. For example, an increasing focus on education, while necessary (the number of American college graduates falls short of labor demand by about 300,000 annually), is not sufficient; what good is a college degree if there are no opportunities to use it? The same could be asked of worker retraining programs.
Some promote the promise of the so-called gig or sharing economy -- flexibility! convenience! -- but I don't buy it. Working as an Uber driver might help make ends meet in the short term, but the experience actually causes skills to atrophy over time. When I speak of jobs being lost or saved, what I really mean is careers: the kind of work that provides skill development, meaningful wage growth prospects and a reasonable likelihood that one's work won't be automated away. The types of careers, in other words, that have traditionally formed the foundation of healthy communities.
Some argue that history teaches us not to worry: The Industrial Revolution was disruptive, but it created jobs eventually, didn't it? Sure. Will the Information Revolution do the same? Nobody knows. Creative destruction has become a hallowed concept in the American boardroom, but let's be honest: Not all destruction is creative in the Schumpeterian sense. As we are seeing, it might just create a wasteland where middle-class communities once thrived.
Mr. Christensen and Mr. van Bever suggest rebooting the capitalist system through a series of policy incentives aimed at making investment capital more "patient," evolving the curriculums at business schools, realigning corporate strategy and resource allocation and freeing managers to focus on long-term value creation.
These ideas are worthy of support. I would go further and recommend aligning corporate tax policy with the goal of creating and fostering careers by skewing tax rates to favor businesses that create opportunities meeting the criteria described above (skill development, wage growth and resistance to automation).
Given the nature of the problem we face, companies able to create careers through innovation should reap significantly greater policy rewards than companies focused primarily on driving down costs -- and eliminating careers.
And business leaders must wake up to the scope and difficulty of the challenges we face. It's going to require a shift in values. The hollowing out of the middle-skill work force is a classic tragedy of the commons, and few in leadership positions today feel a personal responsibility to help address it. Unfortunately, the true costs associated with the upheaval have thus far been borne not by those in the C-suite, but predominantly by the hard-pressed American worker.
A narrow emphasis on efficiency puts our entire system at risk. Moving forward, creating careers (rather than dead-end jobs) must be an equally valid goal. We cannot and should not try to stop the march of technological progress. But we have to redefine what progress really means.
David Siegel is co-founder and co-chairman of Two Sigma Investments.
