A planned "explosion event" in Los Angeles by the artist Cai Guo-Qiang left several injured and others shaken.
The Getty museum this week found itself having to apologize for the "explosion event" by the artist Cai Guo-Qiang at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum after it left several people injured by falling debris and many others shaken by the sound and smoke.
"We're aware of a few people who were hit by some kind of falling debris, and it was really loud, and we're really sorry there were people who were freaked out by how loud and smoky it was," Katherine E. Fleming, the president of the Getty Trust, said in a telephone interview, adding that appropriate procedures had been followed for stadium events and that city officials had been notified in advance.
The fireworks display on Sept. 15 -- which the Getty had said in an earlier news release would "recall the myth of Prometheus's theft of fire from the gods" -- marked the start of PST Art, a $ 20 million, Getty-funded museum collaboration which this year is focused on art and science.
The Getty did not specify how many people were injured or to what extent. "Unfortunately, pieces of debris fell on some people. We know a few of them required first aid," a spokeswoman told The Art Newspaper in an email. "Of course this is distressing to us, and we have expressed our concern to the people for whom we have contact information."
Calls to the Los Angeles Fire Department and police were not immediately returned.
Some people in the area were also highly disturbed by the loud noise. "It sounded like bombs dropping in the neighborhood," one resident told CNN.
Carol Cheh, a Los Angeles arts writer, added that in the "times that we live in" it was understandable that people were rattled. "Here we are setting off massive explosions with a ton of smoke and no explanation in a major city," she said.
For Cai's show, "WE ARE," more than 4,000 people on the stadium's playing field watched fireworks shells on bamboo sticks explode with drone-launched pyrotechnics overhead, a type of fireworks that began to be approved this year. Cai narrated the event from a podium on the sidelines with an A.I.-assisted translator.
Cai, who designed the pyrotechnics for the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics, had worked on the Los Angeles display with an artificial intelligence program developed by his studio. "I'm thinking about a celebration of the hopes and successes of the human civilization," he told The Times in July, "and I'm having A.I. play a role as my collaborator to help tell the story."
Illustration
