Before there was Watson, there was Deep Blue.
In 1997, Deep Blue, another computer built by I.B.M., defeated the world chess champion, Garry Kasparov, in a six-game match.
At the time, it was considered a stunning achievement and a significant step forward in the field of artificial intelligence. Some people said that a new era would be ushered in, one in which computers would perform many tasks -- like air traffic control -- that it once seemed only humans could do. That era has not quite materialized.
But almost 14 years later, chess programs running on an average desktop computer can play better than Deep Blue, making its victory no longer seem as implausible. And while the research that went into making Deep Blue has not itself transformed society, the lessons from designing and building it have had practical applications, said Murray S. Campbell, one of Deep Blue's developers, who still works at I.B.M.
Playing chess was a "deep computing" problem, Dr. Campbell said, the kind that involves processing and analyzing large amounts of data. Based on what it learned from Deep Blue, I.B.M. created a Deep Computing Institute to analyze and solve complex computing problems, like those posed by credit card transactions, telephone call centers and weather analysis.
What the researchers who created Deep Blue did not even try to do was to develop a system that could really identify, parse and mimic human behavior. "We didn't know what to do with language and speech and vision and so on," Dr. Campbell said. "It was so hard.
Where Deep Blue left off is where Watson picks up. "Watson is finally tackling these real world issues," Dr. Campbell said. "It is tackling it head-on and not trying to avoid it."
Part of what makes that possible is that Watson is much more powerful than Deep Blue. It has 2,800 microprocessors; Deep Blue had 30 general-purpose processors and 480 custom ones. Watson can calculate up to 80 teraflops, or 80 trillion operations, a second, which is about 100 times faster than Deep Blue.
Still, what Watson does is not all that dissimilar from what Deep Blue did, Dr. Campbell said. "We don't claim that Watson is thinking in the way people think. It is working on a computational problem at its core."
Deep Blue never played again. Part of it is now in the Smithsonian.
"We'd accomplished what we set out to do," Dr. Campbell said.
