Even if the equinox, and official start to autumn, is a few days away, a season of new books is upon us.
Here are 67 books to watch for this fall. Whether you like novels or nonfiction, stories or memoir, historical fiction or evolutionary science (really!), there's certainly a book you'll love.
Beyond the Wall: A History of East Germany, by Katja Hoyer
A historian turns her eye to the country of her birth in this political history of the German Democratic Republic, which existed from 1949 to 1990. Contrary to common depictions, Hoyer presents a picture of a vibrant society that weathered intense state suppression but also enacted solidarity.
Basic Books, Sept. 5
Crossings: How Road Ecology Is Shaping the Future of Our Planet, by Ben Goldfarb
Humans have built 40 million miles of road on earth, which have profoundly influenced our world. Goldfarb's account examines roads in context of the environment around them -- touching on the Trans-Canada highway that conservationists called "the meatmaker," and even the mountain lions trapped in California's Santa Monica Mountains -- and profiles the scientists, engineers and organizers seeking to mitigate their ecological harm.
Norton, Sept. 12
Do You Remember Being Born?, by Sean Michaels
When an aging poet realizes that her critical acclaim hasn't translated to financial stability, she agrees to train a poetry A.I. program named Charlotte at a tech company's campus in California. Over the course of a week, she grapples with questions of art, family and connection.
Astra House, Sept. 5
Elon Musk, by Walter Isaacson
The best-selling author of "Steve Jobs" returns with a biography of the richest man on earth. Isaacson spent two years shadowing Musk, the head of X (formerly Twitter), Tesla and SpaceX, and interviewing both his friends and foes. The resulting book delves deep into the billionaire's demons, including childhood bullies and a difficult father, and interrogates their relationship to his success.
Simon & Schuster, Sept. 12
The Fraud, by Zadie Smith
Smith's new novel centers on a trial that divided Victorian England, in which a lower-class Australian butcher claimed the right to a huge estate. This roving work of historical fiction examines who has the right to tell a story, who is taken seriously and who is remembered.
Penguin Press, Sept. 5
Glossy: Ambition, Beauty, and the Inside Story of Emily Weiss's Glossier, by Marisa Meltzer
The cosmetics behemoth Glossier began in 2010, with the lifestyle blog "Into the Gloss." Meltzer emphasizes the entrepreneurial savvy of the brand's founder, Emily Weiss, who blogged in the mornings before her internship at Vogue and eventually secured funding from the same venture capital firm as Apple and Google, turning Glossier into the rare billion-dollar company helmed by a woman.
Atria/One Signal, Sept. 12
Holly, by Stephen King
The private investigator Holly Gibney appeared in "The Outsider," "Mr. Mercedes" and other novels, and King has said she "stole" his heart. Now, she takes center stage as she works to recover a missing girl and uncover the gruesome secret held by two retired professors.
Scribner, Sept. 5
Daughter, by Claudia Dey
Dey's third novel follows Mona, whose father is a novelist. After he makes her complicit in an affair with his publicist, the other women in her family hold her responsible. Leaping between Mona's narration and her family's, Dey examines estrangement from multiple perspectives as decades of betrayal accumulate.
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Sept. 12
A House for Alice, by Diana Evans
In the wake of the 2017 fire at Grenfell Tower, in London, and the death of her estranged husband, a woman named Alice considers returning to Nigeria in hopes of leaving behind the "disagreement of place" she feels with Britain.
Pantheon, Sept. 12
Larry McMurtry: A Life, by Tracy Daugherty
A celebrated literary biographer takes on the life of McMurtry, a fellow Texan known for his Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, "Lonesome Dove," and other best selling Westerns. Daugherty's perceptive analysis brings alive McMurtry's trademark wit -- he often wore a shirt that said "minor regional novelist" -- along with his solitary tendencies and disciplined approach to writing.
St. Martin's, Sept. 12
Normal Rules Don't Apply: Stories, by Kate Atkinson
Atkinson's first story collection in years features 11 related selections with the feel of fairy tales. They are populated by a recurring cast of characters: the rakish, aimless Franklin Fletcher; Princess Aoife; Dame Phoebe Hope-Waters; and a chorus of talking animals.
Doubleday, Sept. 12
Rouge, by Mona Awad
In this Gothic tale set in modern-day Los Angeles, a young woman grieves her beauty-obsessed mother and is saddled with her debts. Eventually, she becomes entangled with the cultlike spa that consumed her mother's life.
Simon & Schuster/Marysue Rucci, Sept. 12
The Vaster Wilds, by Lauren Groff
Groff's new novel is a wilderness epic about a servant girl who must survive a bitter winter after fleeing a colonial settlement in 1600s Virginia.
Riverhead, Sept. 12
The Young Man, by Annie Ernaux. Translated by Alison L. Strayer.
Ernaux received the Nobel Prize in Literature last year, becoming the first Frenchwoman to receive the prize. This book chronicles an affair she had when she was in her 50s with a much younger man, which led her to revisit how her own life unfolded: "With him I traveled through all the ages of life, my life."
Seven Stories, Sept. 12
Bright Young Women, by Jessica Knoll
The year is 1978, and the All-American Sex Killer, as the papers refer to the criminal, is on a murder spree. After a pair of young women go missing in Seattle and a student finds two of her sorority sisters dead in Tallahassee, two women linked by tragedy go on a shared mission to catch the culprit.
Simon & Schuster/Marysue Rucci, Sept. 19
Father and Son: A Memoir, by Jonathan Raban
Raban died in January, but this meditative memoir tells two parallel stories: Raban's own, coming to terms with the limitations of his body after suffering a stroke at 68; and his father's, who was evacuated at the Battle of Dunkirk during World War II and with whom his relationship was distant for many years.
Knopf, Sept. 19
Mr. Texas, by Lawrence Wright
Wright, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and longtime resident of Texas, spins a satirical story about his state's politics. After Sonny's heroic actions during a fire, a lobbyist approaches him about running for his district's seat in the Texas state Legislature. As Sonny, who cares deeply about doing the right thing, ventures deeper into his campaign, he must decide how far he's willing to go to get ahead and save his ranch (and his marriage).
Knopf, Sept. 19
Night Watch, by Jayne Anne Phillips
At the Trans-Allegheny Lunatic Asylum in West Virginia -- which operates under Dr. Thomas Story Kirkbride's surprisingly progressive "moral treatment" principles -- 12-year-old ConaLee and her mother take back their lives in the wake of the Civil War.
Knopf, Sept. 19
The Pole, by J.M. Coetzee
This new book by the Nobel laureate traces the constantly shifting power imbalance in a love affair between a Polish pianist, Wittold Walccyzkiecz, and his beloved, Beatriz, who is a married philanthropist.
Liveright, Sept. 19
Wellness, by Nathan Hill
Hill (known for his earlier book, "The Nix") tells the story of Jack and Elizabeth's marriage, from their courtship in the '90s Chicago art scene to their life as parents decades later. According to Hill, the novel is most concerned with the question: "How much can something change before it's no longer fundamentally itself?"
Knopf, Sept. 19
American Gun: The True Story of the AR-15, by Cameron McWhirter and Zusha Elinson
Two Wall Street Journal reporters dig into the history of this controversial weapon, which was invented in a 1950s California garage, used widely by the U.S. military during the Vietnam War and adopted by mass shooters in the 2000s. The book's measured examination considers how World War II, pop culture and profit contributed to the AR-15's proliferation.
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Sept. 26
Germany 1923: Hyperinflation, Hitler's Putsch, and Democracy in Crisis, by Volker Ullrich. Translated by Jefferson Chase.
This history investigates the forces that led to the Weimar Republic's eventual collapse, many of which came to a head in 1923. Economic pressures, along with occupation by French troops and Hitler's failed coup all made for a "year of lunacy," Ullrich writes, though such forces would not succeed in toppling Germany's first democracy for another decade.
Liveright, Sept. 26
Land of Milk and Honey, by C Pam Zhang
In a version of the future where the world is blanketed in smog and everyday foods (even fresh strawberries) have become scarce, a young chef travels to a mountain colony on the Italian-French border to cook meals of rare ingredients for the ultrawealthy. There, she rediscovers the pleasures of food and forms a curious bond with her boss's daughter.
Riverhead, Sept. 26
People Collide, by Isle McElroy
Eli and Elizabeth are a couple living in Bulgaria, but one day, Eli leaves the apartment to discover he's in his wife's body -- and his wife, presumably in his body, is missing. As Eli searches for his wife across Europe, he re-examines his marriage, his lived experience and even the basic tenets of his identity.
HarperVia, Sept. 26
Thicker Than Water: A Memoir, by Kerry Washington
The star of "Scandal" and "Little Fires Everywhere" offers a view into her private life and identity. Her memoir touches on childhood traumas, the mentors who helped her career, the motivations behind her political advocacy and her tumultuous but satisfying path to finding her authentic self.
Little Brown Spark, Sept. 26
The Unsettled, by Ayana Mathis
Mathis follows three generations of a Black family in 1985. Ava Carson moves into a Philadelphia shelter after leaving an abusive marriage, along with her son, Toussaint. In Alabama, Ava's estranged mother is a once-promising blues singer whose hometown is rapidly changing. But when Toussaint's father, Cass -- a Black Panther -- returns to town with a vision of building a local health clinic and commune, he brings hope and a sense of danger.
Knopf, Sept. 26
Alfie and Me: What Owls Know, What Humans Believe, by Carl Safina
The author, an ecologist, and his wife rescued a screech owl in bad shape, expecting it would be well on its way soon. But the owl's prolonged stay, which coincided with the Covid-19 pandemic, brought a sense of "consistent magic," prompting Safina to reflect on nature, spirituality and human existence.
Norton, Oct. 3
Brooklyn Crime Novel, by Jonathan Lethem
Spanning nearly 100 years, Lethem's latest work views the borough through a lens of the crimes -- both literal and figurative -- underpinning its gentrification.
Ecco, Oct. 3
Collision of Power: Trump, Bezos, and The Washington Post, by Martin Baron
The former executive editor of the Post details the many difficult decisions involved in maintaining journalistic integrity during the years he ran the paper, from 2013-2021. Especially fascinating is Baron's inside analysis of the forces at play when Jeff Bezos bought the Post in 2013, and three years later, when Donald Trump became president and expected Bezos to censor it.
Flatiron, Oct. 3
A Day in the Life of Abed Salama: Anatomy of a Jerusalem Tragedy, by Nathan Thrall
A Palestinian father desperately looks for his 5-year-old son after his school bus crashes outside of Jerusalem. As his search is slowed down by bureaucratic hurdles and a scattered emergency response, Thrall depicts the agony of losing a child and how it's intensified by the discrimination Palestinians face under Israeli rule.
Metropolitan, Oct. 3
Eve: How the Female Body Drove 200 Million Years of Human Evolution, by Cat Bohannon
Bohannon traces the development of mammalian milk from a field mouse that lived 200 million years ago, investigates the biological mystery of menopause and provides evidence that women utilized tools before men in this comprehensive book, which synthesizes a wide breadth of scientific research to reframe the story of evolution around the female body.
Knopf, Oct. 3
Extremely Online: The Untold Story of Fame, Influence, and Power on the Internet, by Taylor Lorenz
The Washington Post reporter presents a history of social media, "the greatest and most disruptive change in modern capitalism." She reports on "mommy bloggers" and the birth of influencers, catalogs the rise and fall of platforms that have shaped online culture and offers a sober assessment of their toll on our collective mental health.
Simon & Schuster, Oct. 3
Going Infinite: The Rise and Fall of a New Tycoon, by Michael Lewis
Lewis, the author of "The Big Short" and other books cataloging financial breakdowns, first met Sam Bankman-Fried after a friend asked him to vet Bankman-Fried's cryptocurrency platform FTX. About a year later, both men were in the Bahamas when Bankman-Fried was arrested and charged with fraud. This new book, based on many months of interviews, chronicles the meteoric rise and fall of both the company and the man.
Norton, Oct. 3
How to Say Babylon: A Memoir, by Safiya Sinclair
"The scorch-marks of his anger were everywhere I looked, my family withered and blistered," the Jamaican poet recalls. As she recounts her upbringing under the surveillance of a restrictive and volatile Rastafari father, she reflects on childhood trauma, colonialism and her growing affinity for poetry.
37 Ink, Oct. 3
Making It So: A Memoir, by Patrick Stewart
Stewart reflects on not only his years in the Royal Shakespeare Company and his famous "Star Trek" role as Picard (about which his feelings have changed), but also his working-class childhood in northern England, his changing relationship to family and even his love for nearly-burned toast. Now 83, the actor insists he has no intention of retiring from his lifelong calling: "Why would I stop?"
Gallery, Oct. 3
A Man of Two Faces: A Memoir, a History, a Memorial, by Viet Thanh Nguyen
The Pulitzer Prize-winning writer pushes the boundary of genre in his new memoir, which investigates his personal history as a Vietnamese refugee forced to flee at age 4, as well as the many narratives that form the idea of America itself. Film criticism, poetry and self-effacing jokes are involved, but ultimately, "this is a war story," he writes.
Grove, Oct. 3
The Maniac, by Benjamín Labatut
Labatut's first novel written in English is a trio of stories about real-life geniuses and scientific breakthroughs that disrupted the fabric of human reality. His subjects include the Austrian physicist Paul Ehrenfest; Johnny von Neumann, who collaborated on the Manhattan Project; and Lee Sodol, a South Korean master of the game Go, who in 2016 retired after a defeat by artificial intelligence.
Penguin Press, Oct. 3
Blackouts, by Justin Torres
The unnamed narrator first met Juan while undergoing treatment at a psychiatric hospital. A decade later, Juan is dying, and the narrator has signed on to finish his research. Interspersed throughout the book are passages of a fictional biography, poems and playful references to queer art and literature.
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Oct. 10
The Hive and the Honey, by Paul Yoon
Yoon's haunting, evocative new collection centers on themes of migration, displacement, collective memory and the Korean diaspora.
Simon & Schuster/Marysue Rucci, Oct. 10
The Leftover Woman, by Jean Kwok
Jasmine arrives in the United States in search of her daughter, whom her abusive husband gave up for adoption. Soon, she learns the child was taken in by a wealthy New York publishing family. Balancing shifts as a cocktail waitress to pay down her debts to the human traffickers who brought her to America, she must field threats that could reveal her secret.
Morrow, Oct. 10
Madonna: A Rebel Life, by Mary Gabriel
At over 800 pages long, Gabriel's detailed biography seems to follow every peak and valley of Madonna's life, tracing her childhood in 1960s Michigan and the loss of her mother at 5 years old; rise to fame in the nascent years of MTV; AIDS advocacy; and much more.
Little, Brown, Oct. 10
Normal Women, by Ainslie Hogarth
When Dani realizes that she and her daughter would be financially adrift without her husband's income, she takes a job at the Temple -- a local yoga center that might also be a brothel -- under the guidance of its leader, Renata. But then Renata disappears, and it's up to Dani to find her.
Vintage, Oct. 10
The Canceling of the American Mind: Cancel Culture Undermines Trust and Threatens Us All -- But There Is a Solution, by Greg Lukianoff and Rikki Schlott
Lukianoff, an author of "The Coddling of the American Mind," explains the phenomenon of cancel culture, shows how it's employed by liberals and conservatives alike and explores its context within a greater struggle for status and power in America. Along with Schlott, a columnist at The New York Post, he provides suggestions for reclaiming free speech.
Simon & Schuster, Oct. 17
The Exchange, by John Grisham
This sequel to Grisham's 1991 novel, "The Firm," revisits the lawyer Mitch McDeere in the years since he and his wife, Abby, exposed a Memphis law firm's ties to the criminal underworld. Now, 15 years later, Mitch is a partner at one of New York's biggest law firms. After a friend is kidnapped in Libya, a hostage negotiation places him at the center of an international emergency.
Doubleday, Oct. 17
Judgment at Tokyo: World War II on Trial and the Making of Modern Asia, by Gary J. Bass
After World War II ended, Japanese military leaders were put on trial for war crimes, an attempt to reckon with atrocities that took more than two years. Bass's history shows that, unlike its more famous counterpart in Nuremberg, the Tokyo trial provided few decisive resolutions, and argues that its legacy still reverberates today.
Knopf, Oct. 17
Tremor, by Teju Cole
Composed of vignettes, Cole's new novel traces a weekend through the eyes of Tunde, a Nigerian photography professor, as he meditates on art, race and history.
Random House, Oct. 17
Vengeance Is Mine, by Marie NDiaye. Translated by Jordan Stump.
Maître Susane is a lawyer living quietly in Bordeaux, until a man approaches her with a request: Could she represent his wife, who has been accused of murdering their children? As the case threatens to upend her life, she puzzles over whether she knows this man from her past.
Knopf, Oct. 17
Worthy, by Jada Pinkett Smith
Pinkett Smith described her upcoming memoir as "an adventure, a search for love and self-worth." In it, she opens up about her early life in Baltimore, her marriage to Will Smith and addresses the "falsehoods" she says have circulated about her life over the past several years.
Dey Street, Oct. 17
America Fantastica, by Tim O'Brien
This is the first novel in 20 years from O'Brien, a National Book Award winner, who is best known for his 1990 collection, "The Things They Carried." The story is a madcap heist/road-trip starring a bank robber (who used to be a journalist) and his spitfire hostage, Angie. In hot pursuit are a bumbling private eye, a drug-fueled billionaire and a wannabe Charles Manson.
Mariner, Oct. 24
I Must Be Dreaming, by Roz Chast
"I am creating them. So why, as they unfold, am I always so surprised?" the renowned cartoonist asks about her dreams in this inspired graphic narrative. She enlists everyone and everything she can -- Aristotle, Freud, neuroscientists -- in her quest to find out, in vivid color.
Bloomsbury, Oct. 24
Let Us Descend, by Jesmyn Ward
Ward, the National Book Award-winning author of "Sing, Unburied, Sing," and "Salvage the Bones," returns with a story that riffs on Dante's "Inferno," following an enslaved teenager named Annis who is separated from her mother and sold by her white father. "It took years and multiple drafts to understand how Annis and enslaved people might have retained their sense of self, their sense of hope, in a time and place that attempted to negate both, day in and out," Ward said of the book.
Scribner, Oct. 24
Romney: A Reckoning, by McKay Coppins
Romney has played many political roles -- Massachusetts governor, presidential candidate, senator from Utah. He granted Coppins, a staff writer at The Atlantic who has covered the Republican Party and religion for years, access to private journal entries, emails and texts and sat for interviews. Coppins said he was "astonished by his level of candor" while working on this biography.
Scribner, Oct. 24
Tupac Shakur: The Authorized Biography, by Staci Robinson
Robinson, who knew Shakur in high school, draws on the rapper's letters and notebooks along with interviews with close family and friends, in the first biography authorized by the Shakur estate. It includes photos, handwritten lyrics, and other artifacts from the estate's archives.
Crown, Oct. 24
Absolution, by Alice McDermott
This new novel, from a National Book Award winner, unfolds in 1963 Saigon. After a miscarriage, Tricia joins Charlene's efforts to help Vietnamese civilians. Decades later, when Charlene's daughter reaches out to reconnect, Tricia reckons with the implications of her friend's altruism, both for their lives and on a wider scale.
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Oct. 31
Being Henry: The Fonz ... and Beyond, by Henry Winkler
Winkler is known for his role on the beloved 1970s sitcom "Happy Days," and he's been a television fixture for decades; his performance on "Barry" won an Emmy in 2018. His new memoir chronicles the vagaries of his career, his struggle with dyslexia, his experience writing children's books and more.
Celadon, Oct. 31
A Shining, by Jon Fosse. Translated by Damion Searls.
Fosse, a Norwegian writer, has become something of a literary sensation after the popularity of his dark-horse Septology series. In his new novel, a man makes a series of wrong turns, gets out of his car, starts walking through the forest and becomes dazzled by the titular "shining" and other near-death hallucinations.
Transit Books, Oct. 31
Class: A Memoir of Motherhood, Hunger, and Higher Education, by Stephanie Land
In this follow-up to "Maid," a best-selling memoir about her grueling life as a domestic worker in Washington State, Land recounts the years in which she juggled her pursuit of a writing career with the reality of life as a single parent "who struggled to make ends meet in endless, sometimes impossible ways."
Atria/One Signal, Nov. 7
To Free the Captives: A Plea for the American Soul, by Tracy K. Smith
Smith, a former U.S. Poet Laureate, draws on her personal and family history to make sense of the "din of human division and strife" in America. Beginning with her grandfather's experience as a World War I veteran in Sunflower, Ala., and touching on her own spiritual life, she offers searching questions about the nation's future.
Knopf, Nov. 7
My Name is Barbra, by Barbra Streisand
This book has been hotly anticipated since its announcement years ago. Streisand offers a highly detailed (nearly 1,000 pages) account of her life. It covers her early struggles to become an actress, the hardships she endured as a Jewish woman directing in Hollywood, her friendships with fellow celebrities and much more.
Viking, Nov. 7
Same Bed Different Dreams, by Ed Park
Park spent nine years working on his new surrealist novel, which imagines an alternate political reality. In this world, the Korean Provisional Government, a resistance organization formed in March 1919, is still working toward a unified Korea.
Random House, Nov. 7
The Vulnerables, by Sigrid Nunez
Set during the spring of 2020, an unnamed female narrator -- similar to the narrator of Nunez's National Book Award-winning novel, "The Friend" -- contemplates the meaning of life, connection and self-mythology in pandemic-era New York.
Riverhead, Nov. 7
World Within a Song: Music That Changed My Life and Life That Changed My Music, by Jeff Tweedy
The frontman and a founding member of Wilco reflects on 50 songs that have shaped his life and art, including tracks by Joni Mitchell, Otis Redding and Billie Eilish, as he meditates on what compels us to listen to and create music.
Dutton, Nov. 7
Broken Code: Inside Facebook and the Fight to Expose Its Harmful Secrets, by Jeff Horwitz
Horwitz, a technology reporter at The Wall Street Journal, has written award-winning investigations of how Facebook shielded its elite users, enabled human and drug trafficking and amplified anger on the platform. He expands on that reporting in this book, providing a view of the company's operations and highlighting the employees who identified concerns, proposed solutions and fought efforts to slow them.
Doubleday, Nov. 14
Chasing Bright Medusas: A Life of Willa Cather, by Benjamin Taylor
Taylor's biography captures Cather's early life in Virginia and Nebraska in the late 19th century, and covers her development as a journalist and writer who eschewed contemporary fashions. It offers a thoughtful analysis of her work and makes a case for its relevance today.
Viking, Nov. 14
Day, by Michael Cunningham
Told over the course of three days -- April 5 in 2019, 2020 and 2021 -- this new novel explores how Dan, Isabel, their children and Isabel's brother change over the course of a tumultuous period, which was profoundly shaped by Covid-19. Cunningham received a Pulitzer Prize for his novel "The Hours."
Random House, Nov. 14
The New Naturals, by Gabriel Bump
In the wake of their child's death, a couple founds a utopian society inside an abandoned restaurant in western Massachusetts, drawing a colorful group of members from all walks of life. But as with all counterculture experiments, the group soon wonders whether utopia is truly possible.
Algonquin, Nov. 14
Milton Friedman: The Last Conservative, by Jennifer Burns
Burns, a historian at Stanford and the author of an intellectual biography of Ayn Rand, gives Friedman, a driving force in the postwar embrace of free-market economics, similar treatment in this rigorous account. She draws on archival material to trace his influences, assess his work and recount the struggles and triumphs that shaped his life.
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Nov. 14
