The project is envisioned as a concerted effort to advance knowledge of the brain's billions of neurons and to gain greater insights into perception, actions and, ultimately, consciousness.
Hoping to do for the brain what the Human Genome Project did for genetics, President Barack Obama's administration is planning an ambitious, decade-long scientific effort to examine the workings of the human brain and build a comprehensive map of its activity.
The project, which the administration has been hoping to unveil as early as March, will include U.S. government agencies, private foundations and teams of neuroscientists and nano-scientists in a concerted effort to advance knowledge of the brain's billions of neurons and to gain greater insights into perception, actions and, ultimately, consciousness.
Scientists with the highest hopes for the project also see it as a way to develop the technology essential to understanding diseases like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, as well as finding new therapies for a variety of mental illnesses.
Moreover, the project holds the potential for paving the way for advances in artificial intelligence -- the implementation of human capabilities in computers and robots, like vision, speech recognition and synthesis, as well as decision-making.
The project, which could ultimately amount to billions of dollars, is expected to be part of Mr. Obama's budget proposal in March.
The details and the financing are not final, but four scientists and representatives from institutions involved with the planning say it has a name: the Brain Activity Map.
It is not clear how much government money will be proposed or approved for the project in a time of fiscal constraint, or how far it could advance without significant U.S. funding.
A top administration official, Francis Collins, the director of the National Institutes of Health, may have inadvertently confirmed the existence of the project when he wrote in a Twitter message last week during the president's State of the Union speech: "Obama mentions the #NIH Brain Activity Map in #SOTU." A spokesman for the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy declined to comment on the project.
The initiative, if successful, could provide a boost for the U.S. economy, much the way the Human Genome Project spawned a multitude of businesses, in areas from Silicon Valley to Route 128, the technology corridor in Massachusetts.
"The Human Genome Project was on the order of about $300 million a year for a decade," said George M. Church, a Harvard University molecular biologist who helped create the project and who said he was helping to plan the Brain Activity Map. "If you look at the total spending in neuroscience and nanoscience that might be relative to this today, we are already spending more than that. We probably won't spend less money, but we will probably get a lot more bang for the buck."
The initiative will be organized by the Office of Science and Technology Policy as an interagency project, according to the four scientists.
The National Institutes of Health, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the National Science Foundation will also take part in the project, the scientists said, as will private foundations like the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Chevy Chase, Maryland, and the Allen Institute for Brain Science in Seattle.
Several scientists involved in the planning said they hoped that financing for the project would be more than $300 million a year, which, if approved by Congress, would amount to at least $3 billion over the 10 years.
In his State of the Union speech, Mr. Obama cited brain research as an example of how the government should "invest in the best ideas."
"Every dollar we invested to map the human genome returned $140 to our economy -- every dollar," he said. "Today our scientists are mapping the human brain to unlock the answers to Alzheimer's. They're developing drugs to regenerate damaged organs, devising new materials to make batteries 10 times more powerful. Now is not the time to gut these job-creating investments in science and innovation."
The Humane Genome Project cost $3.8 billion. It was begun in 1990, and its goal, the mapping of the complete human genome, or all the genes in human DNA, was achieved ahead of schedule, in April 2003. A U.S. government study of the impact of the project indicated that it had returned $800 billion by 2010.
The advent of new technology like the functional M.R.I. and optogenetics that allow scientists to identify firing neurons in the brain has spawned numerous government, foundation and private brain research projects around the world. Yet the brain remains one of the greatest of all scientific mysteries.
Composed of about 100 billion neurons that electrically "spike" in response to outside stimuli one by one, as well as in vast ensembles based on conscious and unconscious activity, the human brain is so complex that scientists have not yet found a way to record the activity of more than a small number of neurons at once, and in most cases that is done invasively, with physical probes.
But a group of nanotechnologists and neuroscientists believes that technologies are at hand to make it possible to observe and gain a more complete understanding of the brain, and to do it less intrusively.
In June in the journal Neuron, six leading scientists proposed pursuing a number of new approaches for mapping the brain, including those based on the new field of synthetic biology.
One possibility -- which was until recently straight from the annals of science fiction -- is to build a complete model map of brain activity by creating fleets of molecule-sized machines to non-invasively act as sensors to measure and store brain activity at the cellular level. The proposal envisions using DNA itself as a storage mechanism for brain activity. A single synthetic DNA molecule might easily hold a week's worth of local measurement of brain activity, they wrote.
"Not least, we might expect novel understanding and therapies for diseases such as schizophrenia and autism," the scientists wrote in Neuron.
The Obama initiative is markedly different from a recently announced European flagship science project that will invest EUR 1 billion, or $1.3 billion, in a Swiss-led effort to build a silicon-based "brain."
That project aims to construct a supercomputer simulation that will synthesize the best research about the inner workings of the brain, ranging from the basic chemical structure of the neurons through theories about human consciousness and decision-making.
Critics, however, say the simulation will be built on knowledge that is still theoretical, incomplete or inaccurate.
The Obama proposal seems to have evolved in a manner similar to the Human Genome Project, scientists said.
"The genome project arguably began in 1984, where there were a dozen of us who were kind of independently moving in that direction but didn't really realize there were other people who were as weird as we were," Dr. Church said.
A number of scientists said that mapping and understanding the human brain presented a dramatically more significant challenge than mapping the genome.
"It's different in that the nature of the question is a much more intricate question," said Ralph J. Greenspan, associate director at the Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind at the University of California, San Diego, who said he was involved in the project. "It was very easy to define what the genome project's goal was. In this case, we have a more difficult and fascinating question of what are brainwide activity patterns and ultimately how do they make things happen."
In addition to Dr. Church and Dr. Greenspan, the authors of the Neuron article included A. Paul Alivisatos, a chemist at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California; Miyoung Chun, a molecular geneticist who is vice president of science programs at the Kavli Foundation, based in Oxnard, California; Michael L. Roukes, a physicist at the California Institute of Technology; and Rafael Yuste, a neuroscientist at Columbia University in New York.
In their proposal, they suggest exploring a variety of imaging technologies ranging from silicon nanoprobes to optical and laser-based techniques. They also suggest the pursuit of even more futuristic ideas from the emerging world of synthetic biology, where researchers are designing biological "robots" on a molecular scale that could act as sensors and collect data without having to open the human skull.
Currently, it is possible to sample from about 1,000 neurons simultaneously, said Dr. Yuste, who has pioneered the use of lasers to measure the activity of neurons in the cortex of mice.
The plan is for the mapping to begin with species that have brains with very small numbers of neurons and then work toward increasingly complex animals and ultimately the human brain. For example, the worm C. elegans contains just 302 neurons with 7,000 connections and is the only animal for which there is a complete static map, or "connectome."
The authors propose moving on to the Drosophila fly brain, which has 135,000 neurons; the zebra fish, with a complete brain of about one million neurons; the mouse; and then the Etruscan shrew, which is the smallest known mammal, whose cortex is composed of about one million neurons.
The scientists acknowledge a range of thorny ethical issues, including privacy concerns, the possibility of mind reading and even what is now science fiction: mind control.
