Hey, the calendar's turning! Summer's almost over, and it's time to stop blocking out current events along with horrendous weather reports.
Really, quite a lot's been going on. Let's see what you noticed.
1. June started out on an unpromising note for Donald Trump, when he was arraigned on a 37-count federal indictment in Miami. However, Trump tried to give the day a brighter spin by visiting a Cuban restaurant, promising to buy "food for everyone." And then ...
A. Recommending the ham roll-ups.
B. Describing ropa vieja as "that thing you catch cows with."
C. Leaving without paying the bill.
2. Senator Tommy Tuberville of Alabama has been holding up hundreds of pending military promotions because he's upset about ...
A. An excess number of generals.
B. Abortion.
C. Conflicting policies on Ukraine.
3. President Biden spoke at a gun-safety event in Connecticut, ending his remarks with ...
A. "No harm, disarm."
B. "You know, Hartford so reminds me of London."
C. "God save the queen, man."
4. Biden's dog Commander made headlines when he ...
A. Ate up all the eggs before the White House Easter egg roll.
B. Bit Secret Service agents 10 times over four months.
C. Signed a contract to write a tell-all memoir called "Barking for the Bidens."
5. Republicans are obsessed with Hunter Biden. House Speaker Kevin McCarthy just announced an inquiry into ...
A. Hunter's worst grades in college.
B. Other stuff Congress might get done instead of pursuing this forever.
C. Impeaching Joe Biden for ... fatherhood.
6. Campaigning at the Iowa State Fair, Robert Kennedy Jr. continued his anti-vaccine message. While the non-inoculated Kennedy did catch Covid himself, he told an interviewer it ...
A. "Was something I offered up in repentance for saying Anthony Fauci was orchestrating 'fascism."'
B. "Didn't stop me from skiing."
C. "Gave me time to do some serious reading -- have you ever heard of 'War and Peace'?"
7. There isn't much talk about challenging Biden's renomination on the Democratic side. But Joe Manchin did announce, "If I get in a race, I'm going to win." And then added ...
A. "I'll be announcing soon."
B. "I haven't made a decision."
C. "I'm going to put first things first and finish work on my new self-help book, "Ways to Make Money by Screwing Up the Environment."'
8. Do you think anybody had a worse summer than Rudy Giuliani? He's reportedly begged Trump for financial assistance, and Trump is said to have responded ...
A. Without enthusiasm.
B. With an open checkbook.
C. By offering Rudy a job supervising the dry-cleaning operation at Mar-a-Lago.
9. Well, Trump himself probably beat Rudy in the Bummer Summer sweepstakes. Our former president's appearance for booking on multiple criminal charges in Georgia was certainly a moment for the history books. The Trump team responded by ...
A. Encouraging the former president to keep comparing himself to Abraham Lincoln.
B. Sponsoring a panel discussion on the meaning of the moment, featuring several distinguished professors of constitutional law.
C. Selling a whole new line of products featuring his mug shot.
10. Among the many, many charges pending against Trump are ...
A. Plotting to assassinate a flock of dolphins frolicking near Mar-a-Lago.
B. Conspiring to disenfranchise millions of Americans.
C. Golf cart speeding.
11. Trump announced his final fund-raising goal for August would be $ 2,313,827 in honor of ...
A. The booking number of his mug shot.
B. The sum the New York attorney general says he inflated his wealth by on one Tuesday.
C. The amount his associates stole from donors who thought they were contributing to build a wall along the Mexico border.
12. Trump stayed away from the first debate of the Republican campaign season, but eight other Republicans did go. It wasn't all that easy to qualify. For instance, you needed to prove you'd gotten a good chunk of modest donations from the public. Doug Burgum, the governor or North Dakota, made the grade by ...
A. Offering a $ 20 gift card to anybody who donated a dollar.
B. Persuading all 3,000 residents of the town of Horace, N.D., to put a quarter in his hat.
C. Spending several days a week outside airport terminals selling "I Dig Doug" stickers.
13. Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida didn't make much of a splash at the debate. Nobody asked him, for instance, about his state's rejection of an Advanced Placement African American studies course. Some of the governor's people complained that it might give students the view that slavery was ...
A. "Based solely on race or ethnicity."
B. "Inefficient."
C. "A big deal."
14. The debate did introduce much of America to young, perpetually grinning Vivek Ramaswamy, who, his opponent Chris Christie said ...
A. "Sounds like ChatGPT."
B. "Reminds me of me, back in the seventh grade."
C. "Is, oh Lord, going to be around for the rest of my life."
Of course, there are a lot of people running for ... other offices. Let's see how much you know about what's been happening with a few of them -- not to mention a certain Supreme Court justice.
15. Senator Jon Tester of Montana sent out a call for donations from supporters. He apparently couldn't go fund-raising in person because ...
A. Actually, he's just always hated doing it.
B. He had to stay home and harvest peas.
C. He had to stay in Washington in case the Republicans try to abolish Social Security.
16. Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson of North Carolina, who's now a candidate for governor, has said he "wouldn't be surprised" if ...
A. The 1969 moon landing was a fake.
B. The election of President Martin Van Buren was a fake.
C. North Carolina Tarheels quarterback Drake Maye was his party's next candidate for secretary of state.
17. In Mississippi, the incumbent Republican governor, Tate Reeves, is being challenged by ...
A. Brandon Presley, a distant cousin of Elvis's.
B. Stephanie Swift, an aunt of Taylor's.
C. Robert Kennedy Jr.
18. Justice Clarence Thomas frequently told friends how hard he struggled to afford buying his nifty ride, a $ 267,230 Prevost Marathon. Records obtained by The New York Times indicate that a lot of that money came via ...
A. A secret second job selling car insurance over the phone.
B. A winning lottery ticket bought by his wife, Ginni.
C. A loan from a rich friend.
Answers are:
1-C; 2-B; 3-C; 4-B; 5-C; 6-B; 7-B; 8-A; 9-C; 10-B; 11-A; 12-A; 13-A; 14-A; 15-B; 16-A; 17-A; 18-C
1-5 Time to get back to basics. Who's the current president again?
6-10 Look, I know it's been a tough year. But current event avoidance is not the answer.
11-13 Hey, you're average! Could be way worse.
14-16 This is terrific. Have you ever thought of managing a campaign?
17-18 You won! Congratulations! Brag to every friend you're confident won't look a little worried.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .
(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
