A listing of discussions, film screenings, cultural activities and walking tours in New York City.
Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes .com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication the following week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes .com /events.
Museums and Sites
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY: 'DARK UNIVERSE' (continuing) With the return of the Hayden Planetarium, which had closed in August for renovations, comes the latest space show, "Dark Universe." Narrated by Neil deGrasse Tyson, the film explores mysterious dark matter and dark energy, and the ways scientists are working to improve their understanding of these phenomena. Every half-hour from 10:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. on weekdays, to 5 p.m. on weekends, Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.
BROOKLYN HISTORICAL SOCIETY: 'TRUMAN CAPOTE'S BROOKLYN: THE LOST PHOTOGRAPHS OF DAVID ATTIE' (continuing) Behind this new exhibition -- 40 photographs of Capote and Brooklyn Heights taken by David Attie in 1958 -- is the story of a son's rediscovery of his father's long-lost work. Mr. Attie died in 1982, when his sons were very young. One of them, the television writer Eli Attie, has spent the last few years exploring his father's archive for the first time; in the process he found photos his father had taken to accompany the Truman Capote essay "A House on the Heights," which appeared in Holiday magazine in February 1959. Few of the photos were published, and the magazine included none of the Capote portraits. Now they are on view in an intimate show that feels like both a celebration of and an elegy for an unrefined Brooklyn that once earned the provocative opening line in Capote's essay: "I live in Brooklyn. By choice." 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.
BROOKLYN MUSEUM: 'WHO SHOT SPORTS: A PHOTOGRAPHIC HISTORY, 1843 TO THE PRESENT' (through Jan. 8) From a sepia-toned, 1843 salt paper image of a tennis player -- believed to be the earliest known sports photograph -- to the sharp digital images of recent Olympic drama, this exhibition looks to showcase the artistic side of sports photography throughout the years. The curator Gail Buckland has selected approximately 230 works from 170 photographers for the exhibition, which gives equal importance to sporting giants like Serena Williams as it does to, say, a stunning image of a free-falling BASE jumper, a soccer game in Guinea-Bissau, or a vintage 1906 chronophotograph (several frames of movement in one negative) of a gymnast exercising on a horizontal bar. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org.
INTREPID SEA, AIR & SPACE MUSEUM: 'ON THE LINE: INTREPID AND THE VIETNAM WAR' (continuing) Visitors familiar with this museum are likely to be well aware of its flight deck, perhaps even some of its wartime history. During the Vietnam War, the Intrepid served three tours overseas, between 1966 and 1969. Now, in an exhibition set in the space where crew members lived and worked, the museum tells their stories with artifacts, film clips and photographs. Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.
NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY: 'ALEXANDER HAMILTON: STRIVER, STATESMAN, SCOUNDREL' (through Dec. 31) It's the New York Public Library's turn to take advantage of "Hamilton"-mania. This exhibition, made from the library's collection, provides some answers to that question posed at the beginning of Lin-Manuel Miranda's hit musical about the "founding father without a father," Alexander Hamilton: "How does a bastard, orphan, son of a whore and a Scotsman, dropped in the middle of a forgotten spot in the Caribbean by providence, impoverished, in squalor, grow up to be a hero and a scholar?" Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman.
RUBIN MUSEUM OF ART: 'SACRED SPACES' (through Oct. 17) This exhibition's premise is a question: What is a sacred space? It could be the museum's Tibetan Buddhist Shrine Room, a traditional space for prayer and meditation. Or it could be a panoramic vista in the Himalayas. It could even be a video installation about Jain devotional rituals. All are on view in this exploration of veneration and its venues. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.
'SEE HOW THEY RAN! FDR AND HIS OPPONENTS: CAMPAIGN TREASURES FROM THE NEW-YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY' (through Nov. 30) This election exhibition highlights the "new media" of Franklin D. Roosevelt's era. We have Twitter and Snapchat selfies; voters in the 1930s and '40s had campaign buttons and radio broadcasts. The show includes those political oldies, along with broadsides, popular music and posters, including one with a vivid original painting by the artist Ben Shahn. Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute at Hunter College, 47-49 East 65th Street, between Madison and Park Avenues, Upper East Side, 212-650-3174, roosevelthouse.hunter.cuny.edu; free.
Events
ARCHTOBER (through Oct. 31) Tours, talks, exhibitions -- it's difficult to keep track of all the events going on during New York's annual monthlong celebration of architecture and design. Each day features a "building of the day," with a tour. Make reservations early; coveted tours sell out quickly. Among the options for the coming week are a peek at the Department of Sanitation's garage and salt shed complex -- it has a much more radical and exciting design than you might suspect -- at Spring and West Streets in Manhattan (Tuesday at 3 and 3:30 p.m.). Other highlights include "Watching Modernism," a presentation by the World Monuments Fund about buildings on its watch list, such as Philip Johnson's New York State Pavilion, designed for the for the 1964-65 World's Fair in Flushing, Queens (Wednesday at 6:30 p.m. at the Empire State Building). More information at archtober.org.
FUTURE OF STORYTELLING FESTIVAL (Friday through Sunday) Experience the sensation of flying like a bird over Manhattan, tie scents and sounds to the final moments before President John F. Kennedy's and Whitney Houston's deaths, and manipulate the plot of a movie using your phone to influence the protagonist's decisions. FoST Fest, billed as "the world's first immersive storytelling festival," looks to celebrate the ways individuals can now become part of a story. Seventy interactive experiences will take place within the 75,000-square-foot FoST Playground, highlighting such technologies as virtual, augmented and mixed reality; haptic and natural user interfaces; sensors and artificial intelligence. A number of satellite activities will also take place across the city. See futureofstorytelling.org for times. Future of StoryTelling Playground, 1280 Fifth Avenue, Manhattan, 212-727-2242.
HONK NYC (Tuesday through Oct. 15) This annual spectacle of street bands returns with five days of free performances at parks, schools and other public spaces around New York. The festival begins Tuesday with a Gypsy-infused funk performance by Slavic Soul Party at Barbès, in Park Slope, Brooklyn (7 p.m., 376 Ninth Street, at Sixth Avenue). Concerts and events continue throughout the week in Staten Island, Harlem and elsewhere. More information is at honknyc.com.
THE NEW YORKER FESTIVAL (Friday through Sunday) Featuring prominent writers, editors and celebrities sharing their views on topics including literature, politics, business, the arts and food, events at The New Yorker's annual celebration sell out quickly. But while discussions involving Malcolm Gladwell, David Letterman and Bruce Springsteen may have been filled, there are still spaces for David Remnick's conversation with Jonah Hill; a screening of the coming film "Christine," starring Rebecca Hill as a 1970s news reporter who committed suicide live on television; and panels on topics ranging from Donald J. Trump to mental health and TV comedy among others. Several writers will be available for book signings. Various times and locations; more information at festival.newyorker.com.
PALEYFEST: MADE IN NY (through Oct. 19) This series of screenings and panel discussions returns with a focus on television shows filmed in New York City. The coming week's lineup includes "Younger," with appearances by the cast members Sutton Foster and Hilary Duff, as well as others including the show's creator, Darren Star, of "Sex and the City" fame (Monday at 6:30 p.m.). On Thursday, Trevor Noah and his team discuss "The Daily Show With Trevor Noah" (at 8:30 p.m.). Other events at various times. More information at paleycenter.org. Paley Center for Media, 25 West 52nd Street, Manhattan, 212-621-6800.
Spoken Word
MULDOON'S PICNIC (Monday) This variety show by Paul Muldoon, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and poetry editor of The New Yorker, continues its fifth season of storytelling and music. Guests include Len Graham, an Irish folk singer; Alice McDermott, the National Book Award-winning author; Michael Robbins, a poet and New Yorker contributor; Sean Wilentz, a professor of American history at Princeton University; and Warren Zanes, the writer and musician known for his band Del Fuegos. As usual, the house band is Rogue Oliphant. At 7:30 p.m., Irish Arts Center, 553 West 51st Street, Clinton, 212-757-3318, irishartscenter.org.
OPERA IN POP CULTURE (Monday) Regardless of whether you know the whole operas, you could probably recall the overture to Rossini's "Guillaume Tell" or the "Flight of the Valkyries" from Wagner's "Die Walküre." These musical moments that transcend opera are the subject of a three-part series of talks hosted by the Metropolitan Opera Guild and led by William Berger, the author and co-host of the Met's radio broadcasts. It begins on Monday with Opera and Literature. Stick around for Parts 2 and 3, which will explore opera in pop music (Oct. 17) and film (Oct. 24). At 5:30 p.m., Opera Learning Center, Samuel B. and David Rose Building at Lincoln Center, 65th Street, between Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue, Upper West Side, 212-769-7028, metguild.org.
HIROSHI SUGIMOTO (Wednesday) Before a signing of his book "Hiroshi Sugimoto: Theaters," Mr. Sugimoto, a photographer, will discuss the alluring project with Darius Himes, the international head of photographs for Christie's. In order to capture the images in the series -- which, in black and white, feature the luminescent white glow of various cinema screens to bring out the details of the theaters around them -- Mr. Sugimoto opened the shutter and exposed a roll of film for the duration of a movie, the screen acting as the camera's only light source. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.
Walking Tours
BROADWAY UP CLOSE: 'ACT I' (daily) Broadway Up Close's flagship tour takes participants through the history of Manhattan's theater district, from its origins in the 1880s to this season's hits. Highlights include 42nd Street itself, ghost stories and theaters where history was made -- including the Nederlander, where the tour begins and where the musical "Rent" introduced changes (like ticket lotteries) that remain popular today. At 11 a.m., beginning at 208 West 41st Street, Manhattan, 917-841-0187, broadwayupclose.com. Reservations are required.
THE GAY GRAVES TOUR (Sunday) This tour introduces visitors to the famous and not-so-famous gay and lesbian residents of Green-Wood Cemetery, a National Historic Landmark. After observing the final resting place of the piano virtuoso and composer Louis Moreau Gottschalk, the tour passes by the graves of the lesbian artists Violet Oakley and Emma Stebbins, and the Oscar- and Grammy-winning songwriter, actor and singer Paul Jabara. The tour is not limited to landmarks tied to gay men and lesbians: It also stops at the graves of the Tiffany family and Elias Howe, for example, and explains the history behind Battle Hill, Brooklyn's highest natural point. At 11 a.m., Fifth Avenue and 25th Street, Greenwood Heights, Brooklyn, 888-968-6878, walkaboutny.com.
Photograph (Photographs by Adrian Buckmaster)
