The Super Bowl airs on NBC. And TCM airs a documentary about a pathbreaking filmmaker.
Between network, cable and streaming, the modern television landscape is a vast one. Here are some of the shows, specials and movies coming to TV this week, Feb. 7-Feb. 13. Details and times are subject to change.
Monday
LOVE & BASKETBALL (2000) 6 p.m. on BET. Football is front of mind this week, but Gina Prince-Bythewood's coming-of-age classic "Love & Basketball" is timeless. Set in Los Angeles, the movie stars Sanaa Lathan and Omar Epps as young people who are passionate for each other and for the game.
Tuesday
AMERICAN MASTERS: MARIAN ANDERSON -- THE WHOLE WORLD IN HER HANDS (2022) 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). The filmmaker Rita Coburn ("Maya Angelou: And Still I Rise") looks at the barrier-breaking contralto Marian Anderson in this new documentary. Anderson is perhaps best known for her 1939 concert on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, which became a civil rights milestone; she also broke the color barrier for soloists at the Metropolitan Opera and toured for the State Department. Anderson's life and legacy -- she died in 1993 at 96 -- are discussed here by interviewees including the tenor George Shirley and the mezzo-sopranos Denyce Graves and J'nai Bridges.
Wednesday
FAIRVIEW 8:30 p.m. on Comedy Central. A small American town deals with big changes in this new, "South Park"-esque half-hour animated series, which counts Stephen Colbert among its executive producers. Marina Cockenberg, a writer and performer whose credits include "The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon," voices the mayor of Fairview, where people's jobs are being replaced by artificial intelligence; Covid is a concern; and, in at least one case, a student gives a school presentation on his father's career running an explicit OnlyFans account. While moderating an interview panel at New York Comic Con last year, the comedy writer-performer Jen Spyra said to the "Fairview" creator R.J. Fried, "I understand that you take the comedy to some abjectly disgusting places." Fried responded calmly and succinctly: "That's for sure." The voice cast also includes the comics Aparna Nancherla, Blair Socci and Atsuko Okatsuka.
Thursday
DON'T LET GO (2019) 5:20 p.m. on FXM. Grief seems to bend time in "Don't Let Go," a sci-fi thriller led by David Oyelowo and directed by Jacob Aaron Estes. Oyelowo plays Jack Radcliff, a Los Angeles detective whose niece (played by Storm Reid) is murdered. But soon after the killing, Radcliff receives what is apparently a phone call from his dead niece, speaking from the past -- or perhaps from another dimension. He sets off to untangle the mystery. The result is "a likable, derivative genre mash-up," Manohla Dargis said in her review for The New York Times. "You get lost in its thickets because Estes hasn't wholly figured out how to make toying with time work," she wrote. "But he has a fine cast and a good sense of place, including a feel for the spookiness of emptied-out spaces."
Friday
EVERYTHING'S GONNA BE ALL WHITE 8 p.m. on Showtime. The producer-director Sacha Jenkins ("Bitchin': The Sound and Fury of Rick James") is behind this new three-part docuseries, which explores race and racism in America's past and present. It does so with the help of interviewees from an array of fields -- academic, political, artistic and more -- including the historian Nell Irvin Painter, the human rights activist Linda Sarsour, the comedian Amanda Seales, the artist Favianna Rodriguez, the rapper Bun B and the sexuality educator Ericka Hart.
Saturday
CRY MACHO (2021) 8 p.m. on HBO. Clint Eastwood plays a patinated Texas rodeo retiree tasked with transporting a boy (played by Eduardo Minett) from Mexico to the United States in this modern Western. (Or almost modern: It's set in 1980.) Their journey is risky but roundabout, filled with 20-miles-an-hour detours that make the movie a slow burn. Its relative quiet is especially pronounced in comparison to the work that Eastwood is best known for -- a trait that A.O. Scott welcomed, mostly, in his review for The Times. "This one," Scott wrote, "is something different -- a deep cut for the die-hards, a hangout movie with nothing much to prove and just enough to say."
Sunday
OSCAR MICHEAUX: THE SUPERHERO OF BLACK FILMMAKING (2021) 9:30 p.m. on TCM. From 1919 to 1948, the filmmaker Oscar Micheaux made some 40 movies filled with nuanced Black characters who broke screen stereotypes and often directly addressed issues of race. This documentary from the filmmaker Francesco Zippel ("Friedkin Uncut") looks at Micheaux's groundbreaking work and remarkable life: Micheaux's parentshad once been enslaved, and he turned to professional storytelling only after a stint as a homesteader in South Dakota. His first film, "The Homesteader" (1919), was based on a fictionalized memoir he wrote. Produced about a century later, this documentary features perspectives from the late contemporary filmmakers John Singleton and Melvin Van Peebles, and a handful of performers and scholars.
SUPER BOWL LVI 6 p.m. on NBC. Will the Los Angeles Rams or the Cincinnati Bengals prevail? What will it be like seeing two quarterbacks who were No. 1 draft picks -- Joe Burrow of the Bengals and Matthew Stafford of the Rams -- face off in a championship game, an extreme Super Bowl rarity? Most important, will Matthew McConaughey grace us with another weird, surrealist commercial, as he did for Doritos last year? Find out on Sunday during this live broadcast of the 56th Super Bowl. Viewers who are in it more for the culture (and, perhaps, the guacamole) will be glad to see a stacked halftime performance lineup: Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg, Eminem, Mary J. Blige and Kendrick Lamar.
Photograph Performers scheduled for the Super Bowl halftime show on Sunday include, from left, Kendrick Lamar, Mary J. Blige, Snoop Dogg, Eminem and Dr. Dre. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ASSOCIATED PRESS); Clint Eastwood and a rooster named Macho in the slow-burn western "Cry Macho." (PHOTOGRAPH BY CLAIRE FOLGER/WARNER BROS)
