CORRECTION APPENDED. This year, three Washington-based museums of the Smithsonian Institution deployed a half-dozen four-feet-tall, humanoid robots, nicknamed Pepper, to answer visitors' questions and tell stories, using voice, gestures and an interactive touch screen. They also dance, play games and pose for selfies.
Rachel Goslins, director of the Smithsonian's Arts and Industries Building and overseer of the robots' deployment, said she has been "blown away" by visitors' reactions to them.
Pepper, she added, "feels totally aligned with the museums' mission. We are asking people to be present, engaged, to have a communal experience. We're not making you look at your phone even more; we're creating a playful, joyful human experience." She said 80 more robots eventually would be rolled out, helping to guide the work of the Smithsonian's educators and docents.
(The museums using Pepper are the National Museum of African American History and Culture, the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, and National Museum of African Art, as well as the Smithsonian Castle, which is using eight robots, four of which can travel elsewhere.) The robot was created by SoftBank Robotics.
The Smithsonian venture into artificial intelligence to engage visitors is just one example in a rapidly moving trend mixing art and technology.
Artificial intelligence is increasingly being used today by museums of all sizes worldwide, which employ it to develop everything from robots, chatbots and websites, to tools that help them analyze visitor data and their collections, and determine admission policies and exhibition content.
The Akron Art Museum is encouraging visitors to use their phones to interact with Dot, its chatbot digital tour guide, which sports dark glasses and a pink pageboy. Introduced in August, Dot is accessible by the Facebook Messenger platform; when visitors enter the museum, they are directed to a kiosk that explains how Dot works.
She takes visitors on a six-stop "choose your own adventure" tour of the museum's permanent collection, discussing 60 works of art and asking visitors questions. In front of a Sol LeWitt mural in the museum's lobby, for example, she explains that LeWitt did not personally paint the mural but that a drafter did. She calls this process delegating, and asks, "What part of your job do you wish you could assign to someone else?"
Mark Masuoka, director of the museum, called Dot "a great way to connect people with art and each other. And she doesn't require prior knowledge of the artwork." He said the museum would analyze usage of the chatbot, which he said could help it make "more informed decisions about how we want to develop projects and exhibitions."
The Museum of Tomorrow in Rio de Janeiro collaborated with IBM to develop an IRIS+ chatbot that uses IBM's Watson artificial intelligence technology and was introduced last year.
On arrival, museum visitors receive a card embedded with a chip to use IRIS+. When they finish touring the core exhibition, IRIS+ asks, via an iPad, "After everything you learned in the main exhibition, what are your concerns in today's world?"
During the conversation that follows, the app exchanges data with IBM's cloud and suggests initiatives suited to the visitors' concerns, basing these, in part, on personal information the visitors are invited to provide, such as their date of birth and where they live.
Visitors also are encouraged to take a selfie for a wall at the end of the core exhibition. This wall displays visitors' photographs, along with their first names and personal interests; the wall also tracks and graphically displays all visitors' top concerns.
The Barnes Foundation used artificial intelligence when it introduced a new collection website last year, as part of the celebration of the fifth anniversary of its move to downtown Philadelphia.
Emulating the criteria the museum's founder, Albert C. Barnes, used to display his art collection in ensembles, the new website lets visitors search the collection by visual properties, such as light, line, color and space, filtering images according to aesthetic similarities. More than 2,000 of the roughly 3,000 works in the Barnes's collection have been published on the site. The number of visitors going to the Barnes's website has tripled since the new collection display was introduced, according to Shelley Bernstein, the museum's consulting creative technologist.
The New Museum in New York, which was founded in 1977 to exhibit new works by living artists, has also worked often with artificial intelligence. Rhizome, an affiliate of the museum since 2003 that is dedicated to what it calls "born-digital art and culture," recently commissioned a project, enron.email, which was developed by Sam Lavigne and Tega Brain and explores the more than 100,000 emails relating to Enron's corporate fraud. Working with Nokia Bell Labs through NEW INC, the museum's incubator, is Fei Liu, an artist who is teaching robots how to play simple games as a way to better understand the human capacity for empathy. NEW INC is also working with Channel Studio, a group of artists that is mining two decades of original music to make new interactive apps to create compositions.
The Museum of Modern Art is using artificial intelligence to analyze visitors' comments, while The Broad in Los Angeles is using it to analyze visitors' behavior, such as ticket and gift shop purchases and website visits. Diana Pan, chief technology officer of MoMA, which is now undergoing expansion, said the data produced by artificial intelligence could help it determine new signage and navigation requirements. Heather Hart, director of information technology for The Broad, said the data it collects could not only help it improve ticket distribution and exhibition planning, but also possibly what it sells in its gift shop and publishes in its newsletter.
Artificial intelligence has allowed the Art Institute of Chicago to track how long visitors stay in its galleries, leading it to offer more small exhibitions focusing on its permanent collection.
And A.I. is aiding the conservation and attribution efforts of Robert Erdmann, senior scientist at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. He is developing tools that allow visitors to his museum's website -- which contains over 300,000 digital photographs of objects in its collection -- to use artificial intelligence when they try to make comparisons among these objects, exploring, for example, all works -- beside the museum's famous Vermeer painting of a milkmaid -- of women preparing food.
Another possible application of artificial intelligence, according to Elizabeth Merritt, director of the American Alliance of Museums' Center for the Future of Museums, could be the ability of visitors to interact with historical figures at history museums, through chatbots developed using the figures' published writings and archives, as well as oral histories.
Robert Stein, executive vice president and chief program officer of the American Alliance of Museums, warned that museums must be aware of privacy issues as they use artificial intelligence, for example, protecting whatever personal information their visitors provide.
"Any time you talk about an emerging technology, museums have an important role to play teaching the public about it. Artificial intelligence is going to be incredibly important in shaping the world we live in, in profound ways. We need to understand the technology and the issues it raises," added Ms. Merritt.
Correction: November 1, 2018, Thursday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of an artist who is teaching robots how to play simple games as a way to better understand the human capacity for empathy. She is Fei Liu, not Lui.
Photograph The Smithsonian Institution's Educational and Interactive Robot, Nicknamed Pepper, at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington. (Photograph by Justin T. Gellerson for the New York Times)
