International
IN A SLIVER OF INDONESIA,
An Embrace of Judaism
Jews are carving out a small but increasingly public space for themselves in the sometimes strangely shifting religious landscape of Indonesia, the country with the world's largest Muslim population. PAGE A4
Pope's Comments Sow Confusion A4
National
PUNCH LINES TO SOME,
Earmarks Have Defenders
House and Senate Republicans are taking aim at a popular target: the much-criticized system for distributing federal money that reflects politicians' clout as much as the merits of projects in their districts. But at a local level, there remain many supporters of earmarks, who argue that they play an important role -- solving basic and urgent infrastructure needs in communities -- that is often lost in their cartoonish portrayals. PAGE A17
DELIBERATING IN DELAY TRIAL
Jurors began deliberating in the money-laundering trial of Tom DeLay, the former House majority leader who was forced to resign five years ago after he was indicted. PAGE A22
VERDICT IN LEVY MURDER CASE
A jury convicted a Salvadoran immigrant of killing Chandra Levy, the government intern whose romantic affair with Gary A. Condit ended his Congressional career and made her murder case into a national media sensation. PAGE A16
New York
ISLAM CENTER SEEKS
9/11 Recovery Grants
The developers of the proposed Islamic community center and mosque near ground zero said they had applied for grants from an organization tasked with helping Lower Manhattan recover from the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. The amount requested was about $5 million, said a person with knowledge of the grant application. PAGE A24
Business
THE FED TRIES TO NAVIGATE POLITICAL WATERS
Faced with unusually sharp ideological attacks after its latest bid to stimulate the economy, the Federal Reserve now faces a challenge far removed from the conduct of monetary policy: how to defend itself in a hyperpartisan environment without becoming overly political. PAGE B1
AFTER A PLANT POWERS DOWN
Commonwealth Edison is turning over the task of decommissioning a nuclear plant in Zion, Ill., to a demolition company that owns a nuclear dump site -- an approach that, if successful, could have implications for other nuclear plants around the country. PAGE B1
RUMORED SALE OF J. CREW
J. Crew, the clothier of choice for the likes of Michelle Obama, is near a deal with the buyout firms TPG Capital and Leonard Green & Partners, according to people with direct knowledge of the matter. PAGE B1

Sports
REVENUE SHARING IS FOCUS
Of N.F.L. Labor Talks
Tuesday is the beginning of the final 100 days of the N.F.L.'s collective bargaining agreement, which expires March 3. The negotiating committees have not met in weeks, and they have no sessions scheduled, but people on both sides say some progress has quietly been made. There remains, however, a large gulf between the owners and the players on the centerpiece of the negotiations: how revenue will be divided. PAGE B10
Arts
JAY-Z, STREET POET,
Explores His Life
Michiko Kakutani writes that Jay-Z's "Decoded" is less a conventional memoir or artistic manifesto than an elliptical, puzzlelike collage: amid the photo-sharp reminiscences, there are impassioned music history lessons that place rap in a social and political context. PAGE C1
Science Times
IN CYBERTHERAPY,
Avatars Assist With Healing
For more than a decade, a handful of therapists have been using virtual environments to help people to work through phobias, like a fear of heights or of public spaces. But now advances in artificial intelligence are allowing them to take on a wider array of complex social challenges by interactions with virtual humans -- or by inhabiting avatars of themselves. PAGE D1
Op-ed
DAVID BROOKS PAGE A27
BOB HERBERT PAGE A27
