EARNINGS
Foot Locker Outlook Sends Shares Plunging
Shares of Foot Locker slumped about 29 percent on Wednesday after the retailer projected 2024 profit below Wall Street expectations, hurt by a planned increase in investments across its business to bolster demand.
Despite a solid holiday quarter, Foot Locker said it would achieve its long-term profit margin target two years later, in 2028, dashing hopes of a steady recovery in margins, which have been crimped because of a surge in promotions.
Shares more than gave up the gains made this year.
The company, in the midst of a revamp announced in March 2023, said its "Lace Up" strategy has improved its digital business and driven more full-price sales, though it had to discount some items to clean up inventories.
The company projected full-year adjusted earnings between $ 1.50 and $ 1.70 per share, while analysts, on average, expected a profit of $ 1.93, according to LSEG data. REUTERS
EARNINGS
Abercrombie & Fitch
Issues Rosy Forecast
Abercrombie & Fitch on Wednesday forecast full-year revenue growth above Wall Street estimates, as it bets on strong full-price demand for its apparel brands on the back of a robust holiday shopping season and a strong start to spring in the United States.
Apparel retailers such as Abercrombie and Lululemon Athletica have benefited from efforts to trim inventories and introduce fresh styles on their racks during the holiday season.
Abercrombie said it ramped up marketing and invested in digital and in-store experiences to appeal to customers. It forecast first-quarter net sales growth in the low double digits, better than market estimates, and said that it had seen "great product reactions" to its spring collection so far.
Abercrombie posted fourth-quarter revenue of $ 1.45 billion, topping analysts' expectations of $ 1.43 billion. REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
IBM Productivity Rises
From Using A.I. Tools
IBM said on Wednesday that its initial testing of generative artificial intelligence tools from Adobe had resulted in productivity improvements.
IBM said it was using Adobe's tools, which can generate images from text-based prompts, to help with marketing campaigns. It is an early test of Adobe's strategy to create A.I. systems trained on its own proprietary data with legal guarantees against lawsuits.
Billy Seabrook, the global chief design officer for IBM's consulting arm, said that the 1,600 designers in his unit used Adobe's tools to help generate ideas quickly and create variants of them to be used in different parts of marketing campaigns.
Overall IBM said it expects a tenfold increase in the productivity of designers. The long-term impact on employment is less clear. Mr. Seabrook said recent IBM survey data showed most business leaders think designers are more important than ever. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN SULLIVAN/GETTY IMAGES)
