SHANGHAI -- Troubled by huge debts run up by big state companies and politically connected local governments, China is taking steps instead to go after the little guys. Chinese officials have ordered provincial governments to establish online platforms naming those who do not pay their obligations, official media reported this week. The lists should be maintained by local news organizations as well as courts and regulators, the report said, with an aim of exposing deadbeats and pressuring them to pay up.
The new effort is unlikely to affect big borrowers, like major state-owned companies and other big firms, whose debts are almost never called in. But it could intensify and centralize officials' broader moves to assign ratings to individuals based on creditworthiness and other criteria; practices like credit scoring are only just now taking off in the country.
Local officials across China have used public pressure to get results in recent years. Billboards that publicly name irresponsible debtors are a common sight in some areas. In others, local officials have worked with telecommunications companies to make sure those who call an irresponsible debtor get a recording urging them to get their acquaintance to pay up. Other steps include adding debtors to travel blacklists that keep them from boarding planes and high-speed trains.
The new, official platforms could help China establish a centralized database of people it considers irresponsible. Details of loan defaults are often known only at the local or provincial level, said Hu Wenyou, a partner at Yingke, a law firm in Beijing. Sharing data on defaults would make it easier for reliable credit ratings for individuals to become available in China.
"This is a step toward a credit society," Mr. Hu said.
Mortgages, credit cards and other consumer loans are a relatively new, but increasingly popular, development in China. Chinese lenders and officials have turned to unfamiliar and sometimes unorthodox ways to determine creditworthiness, including tracking cellphone use and counting toothbrushes in people's bathrooms.
On a broader level, China has ambitions to establish a social credit system to track personal behavior. That goal, while technically challenging, is increasingly possible as China invests in artificial intelligence and as more people turn to online platforms for even the smallest transactions. Officials hope the new platforms will become a one-stop clearinghouse to help the local authorities expose those names and pressure them to make good on their debts.
China's latest effort is unlikely to address the country's current debt problems. Moody's Investor Service and Standard & Poor's both reduced their ratings for China this year, citing the debt binge. Most borrowing has been done by state-owned enterprises and local governments to help sustain China's growth levels.
Large state-owned enterprises, widely viewed as too big to fail because of the employment they provide, have avoided defaults. That is in large part because they continue to get large loans from state-controlled banks, sometimes to help repay previous loans. Defaults by state-controlled companies have been extremely rare and confined to smaller firms.
Details of how Chinese officials would manage the online platforms were scant. The reports said that China's banking regulator, the Supreme Court and the propaganda arm of the Communist Party had told local officials to complete the platforms by the end of the year and to make the public aware of the websites within two years. The China Banking Regulatory Commission declined to comment on Wednesday.
A possible model for the databases is one already maintained online by the Supreme Court, which mainly catalogs individuals, although it does include some companies and even a few small local governments. That database is based on debtors who have been sued and lost their cases in China, particularly in the more important courts in China's judicial system.
The court announced in June that it had published more than seven million names of defaulters. The database has been used to put pressure on deadbeats by making it hard for them to travel. According to the Supreme Court, the database has already been used to block the sale of more than seven million plane tickets and nearly three million high-speed train tickets.
Banks and other lenders regularly check the Supreme Court database, but they do not add their own data on late or disputed payments, and they share very little data with one another.
China's online giants were not mentioned in official news reports about the plans, but experts say they are likely to play a major role in the establishment of nationwide credit-scoring systems. Ant Financial -- an affiliate of the Alibaba Group, the Chinese e-commerce giant that trades in the United States -- said it had set up its own credit rating system, Sesame Credit, which monitors the Supreme Court database without contributing to it.
"Sesame Credit does not share user information with any third party without the consent of users," Ant Financial said on Wednesday. It declined to comment on the details of the move toward local and provincial databases.
Chinese bankers say that the default rate for individual borrowers is very low in China, and that lenders have usually demanded a car or apartment as collateral before making the loan. The bulk of household lending in China consists of home mortgages, according to data from China's central bank. Personal loans are limited but rising, the data showed.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
KEITH BRADSHER and AILIN TANG Follow Keith Bradsher on Twitter: @KeithBradsher
