The $200 million effort will try to make sense out of the rising flood of digital data from many sources, including the Web, biological and industrial sensors, video, e-mail and social network communications.
The U.S. government is beginning a major research initiative in big data computing. The effort, introduced Thursday, involves several government agencies and departments, and commitments for the programs total $200 million.
Administration officials compare the initiative to past government research support for high-speed networking and supercomputing centers, which have had an impact in areas like climate science and Web browsing software.
"This is that level of importance," said Tom Kalil, deputy director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. "The future of computing is not just big iron. It's big data."
Big data refers to the rising flood of digital data from many sources, including the Web, biological and industrial sensors, video, e-mail and social network communications. The emerging opportunity arises from combining these diverse data sources with improving computing tools to pinpoint profit-making opportunities, make scientific discoveries and predict crime waves, for example.
"Data, in my view, is a transformative new currency for science, engineering, education, commerce and government," said Farnam Jahanian, head of the National Science Foundation's computer and information science and engineering directorate. "Foundational research in data management and data analytics promise breakthrough discoveries and innovations across all disciplines."
On Thursday, the National Science Foundation announced a joint program with the National Institutes of Health seeking new techniques and technologies for data management, data analysis and machine learning, which is a branch of artificial intelligence.
Other departments and agencies announcing big data programs at a gathering Thursday at the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Washington included the U.S. Geological Survey, the Defense Department, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the Energy Department. These initiatives will mostly be seeking ideas from university and corporate researchers for collaborative projects.
The private sector is the leader in many applications of big data computing. Internet powers like Google and Facebook are masters at instantaneously mining Web data, click streams, search queries and messages to finely target users for online advertisements. Many major software companies, including International Business Machines, Microsoft, Oracle, SAP and SAS Institute, and a growing band of startups are focused on the opportunity in big data computing.
Still, there is an important complementary role for the government to play where the incentives for private investment are lacking, according to administration officials and computer scientists. Such areas, they say, include discovery in fields like astronomy and physics, research into policy issues like privacy, and funding for research at universities, where the high-technology work force of the future is educated.
But for government departments and agencies promoting and mastering big data computing, there is self-interest as well.
"There is recognition by a broad range of federal agencies that further advances in big data management and analysis are critical to achieving their missions," said Edward D. Lazowska, a computer scientist at the University of Washington. "It doesn't matter whether the mission is national defense, energy efficiency, evidence-based health care, education or scientific discovery."
Astronomy is a pioneering discipline for the approach. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey has used digital sensors to scan distant galaxies from an optical telescope in New Mexico, collecting huge amounts of image data that are processed with powerful computers.
The resulting three-dimensional mapping has yielded a "visual representation of the evolution of the universe," said Alexander Szalay, a professor at Johns Hopkins University. He calls the digital sky program a "cosmic genome project."
At Stanford University, an intriguing big-data experiment in online education is under way. Last year, three computer science courses, including videos and assignments, were put online. Hundreds of thousands of students have registered and participated in the courses.
The courses generate huge amounts of data on how students learn, what teaching strategies work best and what models do not, said Daphne Koller, a professor at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
In most education research, teaching methods are tested in small groups, comparing results in different classrooms, Ms. Koller explained. With small sample groups, research conclusions tend to be uncertain, she said, and results are often not available until tests at the end of school semesters.
But in an online class of 20,000 students, whose every mouse click is tracked in real time, the research can be more definitive and more immediate, Ms. Koller said.
"If 5,000 people had the same wrong answer, it's obvious a concept is not getting through, and you have a clear path that shows where students went wrong," she said.
That kind of data tracking in education, she said, provides "an opportunity no one has exploited yet."
