How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Millie Tran, a global growth editor for The Times, discussed the tech she's using. Q. You're the first-ever global growth editor at The Times . What does a global growth editor do?
A. The easiest way for me to describe it is this: Think about audience engagement, which is about using qualitative and quantitative data to understand your audience and how it's interacting with your site -- and then add at least 10 more variables like language, country, culture, how people use social media, the media environment and so on.
Then think of all the different and potential audience segments. Each will have slightly different formulas, and you have to constantly experiment, learn and calibrate. In practice, that means I'm looking at a lot of data, reading a lot of reports, talking to a lot of people, trying to understand all these different contexts, and working to distill and communicate everything I'm learning to the rest of the newsroom.
What tech tools do you rely on to keep track of audience and expanding our audience?
So many dashboards and data sets! I use a mix of internal tools -- The Times has a great data team -- and third-party tools like Chartbeat, Google Analytics and CrowdTangle.
I'm a big fan of contextualizing any number or piece of data, whether that's for benchmarking (is that higher or lower than we expected?) or explaining why we care about that figure (is it connected to our newsroom, to business goals or to both?).
It's making a piece of information more sophisticated but also simplifying it. It comes down to our audience: How can I help my colleagues around the newsroom empathize more with our readers, viewers and listeners around the world?
What is your personal tech setup like?
It has changed a lot over the years. Almost a decade ago, I wrote my college senior thesis on cyberwar and taught a seminar on the same subject, so I used to be hypervigilant about all of that. Then, when I was working on the launch of the BuzzFeed News app and newsletter, I had my iPhone, an Android and lots of news apps to check out their push notifications, and email apps to test how an email would be experienced and read. (I was most recently the director of global adaptation at BuzzFeed.)
Since starting work on international growth, I've simplified my hardware -- mostly one phone, an iPhone X, and my good old Moto X when I need to see something on Android -- but I have as many apps as ever: 314.
I'm always trying to better understand how people around the world use the internet and get their news, whether that's browsing around Line and Smart News (Japan), WeChat (China), KakaoTalk (South Korea) or just WhatsApp (almost everywhere else). Fortunately or not, a lot of people around the world get their news and media in mostly the same ways, though there has been a decrease in using social media for news and an increase in using messaging apps for news.
In terms of my main hardware, I have an iPhone, an Apple Watch and a MacBook Pro for work, and my MacBook Pro circa 2012 for personal use. What I love are all the accessories: wireless charging pads at my desk at home and work; AirPods for everyday use, Bose noise-canceling wireless headphones for travel and Sennheisers at work; battery backups everywhere; a Tile for my keys; and cord tacos around anything that still has wires.
In terms of apps and software, I am constantly tinkering and trying new apps. For (mostly) work, it's the whole Google suite, Slack, Things for my to-dos, Bear for notes, Instapaper, Nuzzel, Spotify, Pocket Casts and, of course, the New York Times app. I'm looking for a better mail app right now. The apps I use daily for everything else are Citymapper, Citi Bike, Weather Underground (though I have a whole folder of weather apps), Sleep Cycle and Nike Training.
Translating our articles for non-English-speaking audiences is one growth avenue. What do you think of translation software? Or is it better to rely on people? Why?
I am team humans (supplemented by bots), always, when it comes to translations. I am not a professional translator, and beyond English, I speak Vietnamese. Despite taking eight years of French and a year of Arabic, am pretty hopeless in both languages. In my last job, I hired a team of editors who were also professional translators. They were incredible and taught me that translation is not just the translation of words but also the translation of culture and context. Words are just the first step.
That said, I'm eager to see how translation software develops, especially with advancements in machine learning. I recommend our story a couple years ago on how Google used artificial intelligence to transform Google Translate. Other companies, like Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon, are also doing some really interesting things in the translation space.
What tech do you and your family love outside of work?
My best friends and family are all over the place, so there's a lot of video chatting through FaceTime, Google Hangouts or Facebook Messenger. I love randomly FaceTiming my friends.
I travel to Vietnam every year to see my family, and it's incredible how quickly they've all adopted Facebook, Uber and a bunch of other apps. Viber used to be the primary way for us to communicate, but now we're mostly chatting on Messenger.
Finally, lots of travel sites and apps to find good flight deals to get to all of them!
What do you do to take a break from tech?
Honestly, I'm rarely without my phone or some piece of technology and do believe in making tech work for me and my life, not the other way around. That said, I'm a very tactile person, and you obviously lose a lot of that when you work on the internet. So I love activities like grocery and clothes shopping, and I love my plants and the deeply satisfying feeling of watching something you take care of grow. I'm also looking for a pottery or drawing class right now.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Tools Like Chartbeat, Google Analytics and Crowdtangle Help Millie Tran Get a Handle On the New York Times's Audience in Her Job As Global Growth Editor. Far Left, a Modest Sample of the Apps at Her Disposal, and Her Cord Tacos for Everything That Still Requires Wires. (Photographs by Jeenah Moon for the New York Times)
