The Netflix model is winning, and the entertainment industry may be changed forever.
This article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.
If this is the moment when entertainment changes forever, it won't only be because streaming won. It will also be because total control is irresistible.
Warner Bros., the Hollywood powerhouse whose films include the "Wonder Woman" and "Harry Potter" series and "Casablanca," said on Thursday that all of its new films in 2021 would come out at the same time in movie theaters and on its sibling streaming service, HBO Max, my colleagues Brooks Barnes and Nicole Sperling wrote.
Before now, some new movies in the United States have been available for us to watch at home on the day they debuted in theaters. But never at this scale.
Warner Bros. said that its movies-plus-streaming approach was a temporary measure while the pandemic made some people wary of movie theaters. But don't be fooled. It will be almost impossible to go back to the old ways of doing things, as Brooks and Nicole wrote.
You and your binges of "The Great British Baking Show" know why. "This is about turning HBO Max into a Netflix," Brooks told me.
Conventional entertainment companies like AT&T, which owns Warner Bros., Walt Disney and basically anyone who ever made a TV show are trying to become Netflix, and fast. (The media writer Peter Kafka of Recode, who has said another factor of Warner Bros.' online film releases was the weaknesses of movie theater chains, wrote about the urge to catch up to Netflix several weeks ago.)
But it's also important to understand an underappreciated motivation behind the Netflix envy. This isn't only about streaming beating cable television companies and movie theaters. The Netflix model represents a complete reordering of entertainment into self-contained empires that control as much as possible from the first frame of a film shoot to the last pixel of a movie you watch on your phone.
The old model of entertainment involves constant handoffs of control. A company that makes a movie relies on a cineplex to release it and then turns over its product again to video rental stores (remember them?), movie download services, TV channels and other outsiders to make sure it gets seen.
This new approach dispenses with a bunch of that. Instead, Netflix tries to control almost everything from beginning to end. It's not there yet, and AT&T isn't going that far with HBO Max -- yet -- but that's the direction everyone is headed.
It's as if Ford aspired to make every part that went into its cars, assemble the vehicles and sell them instead of buying parts from a bunch of different suppliers and going through car dealerships.
There has been almost nothing like this before, and that's why this reordering of the entertainment industry is different from the history of big changes that has made Hollywood predict its own demise many times before.
To be frank, I don't know if the self-contained empire model that Netflix inspired will last. Even Netflix has to constantly borrow money because it typically spends more cash each year than it takes in from our subscriptions. But as every major company in entertainment tries to control its own destiny, don't underestimate how big a deal this is.
Google is not a normal workplace
A well-respected Google researcher, Timnit Gebru, said she was fired by the company after criticizing its approach to minority hiring and the biases built into artificial intelligence systems, my colleagues Cade Metz and Daisuke Wakabayashi reported.
(You can read here the email that Dr. Gebru wrote to a group including Google employees, and one that Jeff Dean, who oversees Google's A.I. work, wrote to the company.)
We're seeing clashes between technology company workers and their employers spill out into the open more and more, over issues including workplace safety, diversity and the ethics of technology.
This is probably not because Google, Facebook or Amazon have more disagreements between management and workers than a restaurant chain or an accounting firm. It's that Big Tech companies are not ordinary employers. The outside world pays more attention to what they do, and we should.
These gigantic companies set trends for everything from how offices are designed to what workers are paid, and they should be held to a higher standard. The companies often say they want the extra attention and deserve it, but I'm not sure they mean it.
When Dai wrote an article in 2017 about an analysis that found that Google paid male employees more than women at most job levels, the company's head of human resources at the time told him: "I do believe Google, because of its size and perhaps our size or our prominence in people's everyday lives, I think we're in the spotlight. It feels a little unfair."
I have not forgotten this quote. I think this executive was expressing out loud something that most of her peers believe but keep to themselves. She was right that Google is in the spotlight. She was wrong that it's unfair.
Google's parent company has a stock market value nearly equivalent to the gross domestic product of Spain. It is therefore completely fair for it to get the same attention as a large country.
Before we go ...
Speaking of a spotlight on Big Tech workplaces: The federal government sued Facebook, accusing it of being un-American by favoring foreign workers with visas over those from the United States, my colleagues Cecilia Kang and Mike Isaac wrote. This lawsuit, they said, shows that Big Tech companies are not in the good graces of American politicians of either major party.
Can small nudges make the internet nicer? YouTube said it would start popping up reminders to people before they post potentially offensive comments on videos, Axios reported. Many popular internet services have tried methods like this to encourage people to think twice before they post something they might regret or share inaccurate information. There's mixed evidence on whether it's working.
We love stores -- to return stuff we bought online: Recode wrote about why Amazon and other e-commerce sellers are offering more options for people to return merchandise in person, often in physical stores that compete with e-commerce merchants.
Hugs to this
A couple in Australia returned home after an outing and found this koala clinging to their plastic Christmas tree. The koala was VERY GRUMPY about being pulled from its perch by wildlife rescuers, but she was relocated to a real tree outside.
We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you'd like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.
If you don't already get this newsletter in your inbox, please sign up here .
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY Bernice Liu FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
