ENTERTAINMENT
Netflix Names Producer As Top Movie Executive
Netflix said on Wednesday that the producer Dan Lin would succeed Scott Stuber as the streaming company's top film executive.
Mr. Stuber was the head of Netflix Film for seven years before announcing last month that he would be leaving. During his tenure, he brought a bevy of Oscar-winning filmmakers to Netflix and helped the company push the rest of the entertainment industry into the streaming era.
Mr. Lin, 50, once the senior vice president of production at Warner Bros., is the founder of Rideback Productions, which was behind Netflix's recent live-action remake of "Avatar: The Last Airbender." He was also a producer of the Oscar-nominated film "The Two Popes" for the streaming service, and has produced the "It" and "Lego" movie franchises. He will report to Bela Bajaria, Netflix's chief content officer.
"While I've been approached many times during my past 15 years at Rideback, I could truly never imagine leaving until Bela reached out with this incredible opportunity," Mr. Lin said in a statement.
The son of Taiwanese immigrants, Mr. Lin is part of the new guard of producers who have built companies that tap into the times, notably inclusion. He is known in Hollywood as a strong executive with great relationships. And his ability to toggle between all-audience blockbusters like "Aladdin" and prestige pictures like "The Two Popes" suggests he has the skills to oversee Netflix's varied film slate. He's currently producing the live-action version of "Lilo & Stitch" for Walt Disney.
Most recently, Mr. Lin's name had been bandied for the job running DC Studios for Warner Bros. (That role was eventually split between the filmmaker James Gunn and the producer Peter Safran.) NICOLE SPERLING
TECHNOLOGY
Apple Aims to Disclose
A.I. Projects This Year
Apple plans to disclose more about its plans to put generative artificial intelligence to use later this year, the chief executive Tim Cook said during the company's annual shareholder meeting on Wednesday. Mr. Cook said that the iPhone maker sees "incredible breakthrough potential for generative A.I., which is why we're currently investing significantly in this area. We believe that will unlock transformative opportunities for users when it comes to productivity, problem solving and more."
Apple has been slower in rolling out generative A.I., which can generate human-like responses to written prompts, than rivals such as Microsoft and Google, which are weaving them into products.
On Wednesday, Mr. Cook argued that A.I. is already at work behind the scenes in Apple's products but said there would be more news on explicit A.I. features later this year. Bloomberg previously reported that Apple plans to use A.I. to improve the ability to search through data stored on Apple devices.
Apple shareholders on Wednesday rejected a measure asking the company to disclose more information about how it uses A.I.in its business and its ethical guidelines for the technology.
The proposal, which was defeated at the company's annual shareholder meeting, was put forth by the pension trust of the AFL-CIO, the largest American labor union federation, which has also proposed A.I. measures at other tech companies. REUTERS
Credit: By Nicole Sperling and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY FREDERIC J. BROWN/AFP -- GETTY IMAGES)
