Thanks to a renewed focus on privacy and security, new tools are arriving regularly that should make it easier to encrypt email.
It's time to face reality: Pursuing digital security should be as much of a no-brainer as locking your door as you leave the house.
Identity theft, corporate security breaches and an increased interest in personal privacy are forcing some changes. Many of us are choosing stronger passwords and changing them more often, locking down social media accounts and being more conscious of how we communicate. If you haven't taken such steps, you should.
But one of our favorite forms of electronic communication, email, remains one of the hardest to secure. Security experts say email is a lot more like a postcard than a letter inside an envelope, and almost anyone can read it while the note is in transit. The government can read your email, as can hackers and your employer.
What's the solution? Make your email more like a letter inside an envelope. The best way to do this is encrypting a message into something unreadable that needs a code to be unlocked, providing a layer of protection if someone intercepts your email.
The downside to encryption tools is that they are usually difficult to install and use. In addition, they require the person on the other end to be using the same tools. Thanks to a renewed focus on privacy and security, however, new tools are arriving regularly that should make it easier to encrypt email.
One promising new encryption tool is Virtru, a feature that can be added to Chrome and Firefox browsers or installed on the Mail program on Macs and for Outlook on Windows. One of Virtru's big selling points is that it works with web-mail services like Gmail, Yahoo and Hotmail. There are also apps for iOS and Android.
Another benefit of Virtru is that recipients don't have to be using the service to see your email. They receive an email that contains a link to your encrypted message. Once they click a button to verify their email address, they can read the unencrypted message in a separate web page and reply.
Their responses won't be encrypted unless they also use Virtru, but your original email won't be included in the response, so it remains hidden from prying eyes.
Emails and attachments are encrypted on your computer or mobile device and decrypted on the other side. Such end-to-end encryption means they cannot be read in transit and cannot be decrypted without a key if they are intercepted.
I particularly like that you can determine which emails you want to encrypt, case by case; and I like that it encrypts any type of attachment as well as normal email messages. The service also adds control over your emails after you send them: You can disable forwarding, for example, and even set messages to expire after a certain period of time.
The methods aren't foolproof; someone can obviously still take a screenshot of an email once it is decrypted, or copy and paste the contents into a different file.
Another drawback comes on mobile. You must use Virtru's app to compose and send secure messages on your mobile device, since it doesn't work on other mail apps on the phone.
Although Virtru is relatively easy to use, it is not the only option -- especially if you just want to send a single encrypted message, perhaps one that contains financial information.
If you're looking for one-time encryption, try InfoEncrypt, which says it encrypts messages in the browser without storing any information.
With InfoEncrypt, you type a message, create a password and then encrypt it. Then, you copy the encrypted message and paste it into an email and send it to someone. This is a little onerous, though. For the recipient to open the message, the sender must also pass along the password, presumably through something other than email.
Another one-time option is SafeMess, which works much like InfoEncrypt. But SafeMess lets you set an expiration time for your messages, ranging from three minutes to 90 days.
Expect more simplified tools soon. Google, for example, is letting developers test end-to-end encryption tools for Chrome and hopes to release them broadly in the near future. And a hacker, Nadim Kobeissi, is showing off a prototype tool, miniLock, at a hacker conference this weekend. The tool is a free, open-source browser plug-in that will let users easily encrypt just about anything.
