Person of Interest 2011-16
Five seasons, 103 hourlong episodes. Jim Caviezel, Michael Emerson, Taraji P. Henson , Amy Acker and Sarah Shahi. A presumed-dead C.I.A. agent and a mad genius billionaire use a computer system that can accurately predict premeditated violent crime to save lives.
WATCH ... if you're looking for a sci-fi procedural with a decent amount of suspense and action. By way of the Machine, the system that can predict crime, "Person of Interest" explores both artificial intelligence and the idea of a surveillance state. But what makes it more than just a smart crime show are the characters, well portrayed by a diverse cast.
SKIP ... if you're looking for a low-stakes procedural that doesn't require a lot of close attention. Despite its marketing, the show is actually a demanding, sharply political sci-fi drama in the vein of Philip K. Dick. Also, while the series has great female characters, two very important ones have terribly written exits.
HOW TO WATCH IT: Watch select episodes of Season 1 then binge the rest. While "Person of Interest" starts off as a sci-fi tinged procedural it quickly commits itself to its genre trappings and becomes more serialized. Definitely watch these from Season 1: "Pilot" (Episode 1), "Ghosts" (Episode 2), "Super" (Episode 11), "Root Cause" (Episode 13), "Matsya Nyaya" (Episode 20), and the last two episodes of the season, which aside from being compelling also lay down important groundwork.
WHERE TO WATCH IT: Netflix
Angelica Jade Bastién
Fringe 2008-13
Five seasons, 100 hourlong episodes. Anna Torv , Joshua Jackson, John Noble Wilford and Lance Reddick . The close-knit members of the F.B.I.'s Fringe division are tasked with solving gruesome, unexplained incidents that relate back to the mysteries surrounding a parallel universe.
WATCH ... if you love weird and emotionally resonant sci-fi. Few genre shows are as inventive, intellectually curious and experimental as "Fringe." The series uses its central focus of parallel universes to tackle ideas of destiny, family and autonomy in a fresh way. Beyond the writing and clever visual differences between the two universes, it's the performance by Anna Torv as Olivia Dunham, the lead F.B.I. agent, that makes the show so memorable. Torv brings a fully realized emotional landscape and a strong physical presence to the different versions of her character.
SKIP ... if you need your show's overarching mythology to be consistent. Using parallel universes as the central idea results in numerous plot holes and more than a few deus ex machinas.
HOW TO WATCH IT:Check out the pilot, naturally. After that, it takes "Fringe" a few episodes to find its footing, which it does starting with "In Which We Meet Mr. Jones" (Season 1, Episode 7).
Seasons 2 and 3 are undoubtedly the best of the series and deserved to be watched in full. There are a few episodes, however, like the noir-inspired story-within-a-story "Brown Betty" (Season 2, Episode 20) and the animated "Lysergic Acid Diethylamide" (Season 3, Episode 19) that may be a bit too bonkers for some viewers. Yet they represent the best aspects of "Fringe": intense pathos, bold experimentation and weird sci-fi conundrums.
Season 4 is a bit shaky and feels like a soft reboot, but it has a few standouts, including the two-part finale. Season 5 has a pretty ridiculous "what if?" scenario. So give it a few episodes and if it intrigues you continue onward. The series finale, like much of the final season, feels like a retread of what came before. But it does have a great callback to one of the show's best episodes "White Tulip" (Season 2, Episode 18), and enough good character moments to make it worth your viewing time.
WHERE TO WATCH IT: Rent or buy on Amazon Prime, Google Play, iTunes or Vudu.
Angelica Jade Bastién
The X-Files 1993-2018
11 seasons. Seasons 1-9, between 20 and 25 hourlong episodes each. Season 10, which returned in 2016, has six hourlong episodes, and Season 11 has 10. David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson , Mitch Pileggi and William B. Davis. Marginalized F.B.I. agent Fox Mulder investigates the paranormal -- and shadowy government plots -- with the help of skeptical fellow agent Dana Scully.
WATCH ... to see a dark, creepy and fun sci-fi series. Throughout the '80s, genre fans had been ill-served by network television, which tended to treat fantasy stories as inherently silly and juvenile. Then the upstart network Fox found a sizable audience for a series that brought lively writing and a complex mythology to the subjects of alien abduction and mysterious monsters. Thanks to the big-picture vision of creator Chris Carter and the relaxed chemistry of David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson, "The X-Files" became the kind of cultural phenomenon that people would stay home on a weekend night to enjoy and then swap theories about with their friends.
SKIP ... if you roll your eyes at conspiracy theories. Carter and his writers (including future "Breaking Bad" creator Vince Gilligan) rely a lot on "things aren't as they appear" narrative tricks, which after about 100 episodes becomes a lot less surprising and spine-tingling.
HOW TO WATCH IT: The first five seasons of "The X-Files" are as consistently great as sci-fi TV gets, combining a dense, absorbing longform story with memorable one-off episodes. Here are four of the best from those early seasons: "Ice" (Season 1, Episode 8); "Duane Barry" (Season 2, Episode 5); "Clyde Bruckman's Final Repose" (Season 3, Episode 4); and "Bad Blood" (Season 5, Episode 12). The later seasons are more of a mixed bag; and once Duchovny reduces his involvement starting in Season 8, the show really begins to decline.
WHERE TO WATCH IT: Hulu
Noel Murray
Michael Emerson on "Person of Interest." (PHOTOGRAPH BY GIOVANNI RUFINO/CBS); Anna Torv in "Fringe," about a special F.B.I. division. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FOX); Gillian Anderson and David Duchovny in "The X-Files." (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID GRAY/FOX)
