As an undergraduate at the University of Missouri, from which she graduated in 1996, Rebecca Lynn had an unusual campus job: she worked at the local nuclear reactor. She says her time there -- assisting with cancer research -- helped inspire her ultimate career trajectory.
Today, Ms. Lynn is a partner at Canvas Ventures, a venture capital firm in Silicon Valley, where she invests in early-stage companies doing work in artificial intelligence, digital health and financial technology. She was named one of the top-20 venture investors by CB Insights in 2016, and this year ranked 31st on the Forbes Midas List.
Her best known bet was an early investment in Lending Club, the peer-to-peer lender that went public in 2014. That deal was initially a financial success, but has had a messy aftermath. In 2016, the chief executive, Renaud Laplanche, was ousted after an internal investigation found problems with the company's lending process.
Before joining Canvas Ventures, Ms. Lynn worked at Morgenthaler Ventures, NextCard and Procter & Gamble.
This interview, which was condensed and edited for clarity, was conducted in New York City.
What was your childhood like?
I grew up in a small town. My parents farmed in the Midwest: corn, soybeans, that kind of stuff. Neither graduated from college. My grandparents were around and they had cattle. So we got to feed baby cows and do all of that. Now I've bought a ranch. I have a baby cow in the front lawn, and a pony and chickens and a peacock in the back yard. It's really important for my kids to know where food comes from.
What did you study in school?
I went to Mizzou and studied chemical engineering. I don't know if anyone goes in there thinking, "God, I want to be a chemical engineer." I mean, you make drugs, bombs, booze and oil. But I worked at a nuclear research reactor when I was there. Mizzou has the highest-powered nuclear research reactor in the country, and so what comes with that are some really cool geeky things, like the space crystals from NASA and the O-rings from the space shuttle and all kinds of super magnets and semiconductors and all that great stuff. It probably informs my being a V.C. today. I'd just go look at all the amazing research, talking to these world-class scientists, and I learned a ton.
After school you worked at Procter & Gamble. What did you learn from your time there?
"Profit and God." I loved working there. So many things that I learned at P&G I sort of grudgingly learned at the time, like how to write a memo or how to give a presentation. I look at that now, I'm like, "Thank God they taught me how to do that." You think V.C.s are hard? It's nothing compared getting grilled at P&G when you do presentations.
But there's a certain amount of commonality within everyone there. People work very hard, they're very ethically kind of focused, and they're very Type A and data-driven and quantitative.
Is that kind of uniformity a good thing?
There are times when it's a good thing, when it's more a momentum play, perhaps. But I don't think it's good for innovation. P&G really struggled with innovation and how to do brand-new things. If you get group think going, it's really hard to break out of that.
What was your first job in Silicon Valley?
I came out to the Valley in 1998 and started my first job at NextCard. I was employee 30. Mike Moritz was on the board. I ended up leading the marketing effort and the company went public.
How did that go?
It went public. And then it lost 98 percent of its value in one day. The bottom fell out and it was worth nothing. I just told my husband, "I can't talk to you about this right now." And then you kind of process it for a couple days and you're like, "O.K., I'm young."
Was it a failure of the markets or a failure of the company?
It was a failure of the company entirely. The company had the patent for real-time approval of credit online, and when we were doing prime and superprime credit, we were doing great. Then the company got greedy and decided to go into subprime. The loss rates were too high, and basically couldn't sustain it.
Where was the board?
None of them had any credit experience. And V.C.s only have so much control. I've learned that in spades.
______
"Do you bet on the jockey or the horse? You always bet on the jockey, because good jockeys won't ride bad horses."
-- Rebecca Lynn
______
But then you eventually went on to become a venture capitalist.
It was a big transition. You go from kind of being a player on the field to being a coach. It is really hard, and there's certain rules you kind of learn over time. One of them is: only pick one thing to really focus on. Not 50. Pick one and be very thoughtful and deliberate about what that one thing is because it's like Whac-a-Mole otherwise. Also, just keep asking questions; not directing, but asking questions and just trying to be helpful overall.
Do you ever invest in a founder rather than invest in an idea?
There are times when we just see a phenomenal C.E.O. and we think, "Wow, no matter what this person does, they're going to figure it out." It's like, do you bet on the jockey or the horse? You always bet on the jockey, because good jockeys won't ride bad horses.
You invested in Lending Club and then were on the board. Were there any signs of some of the troubles to come?
Oh, dear. They had a phenomenal executive team, especially when they were like a Series C or D company. But they never added to it. They didn't get a C.O.O. in. There were a lot of things like that, where they just maybe were a couple steps too late in adding some more seasoned executive talent.
You've been working in Silicon Valley for 20 years now. What's changed during that time?
I was reading The Economist on my last European plane flight, and they think the next Democratic candidate will run on an anti-tech platform. I think that's highly possible. If you poll other areas of the country, it's not thought about like we like to think about ourselves. I think we need to really embrace the responsibility of how many lives we impact and how those lives are touched. I'm from the Midwest. I understand that the rest of the country doesn't love California at all. We have to be a little more aware of ourselves and what we're doing in tech, and try to do good things and help people.
What's your biggest concern?
I think society is going to have a come-to-Jesus moment about what the true state of privacy is. It isn't existent today, and I think people are just sort of blissfully ignorant of that fact. If you look at these companies and what they have on you, I think most people would be highly alarmed.
Is the tech backlash affecting how you think about investing in companies?
I think being in companies that we believe are at least net positive is the right thing to do. At the board level, a lot of what I push on very early in a company's life is, "What's your culture, what is it you guys are about?" It's helpful for recruiting, it's helpful for your product direction, it's helpful for your company decision-making. As my old C.O.O. said, "There's only one person you have to sleep with every night, and that's yourself."
Have you felt discriminated against as a woman?
I grew up truly hating the fact I was born a woman. Just really pissed off that that was the hand I was dealt. The guys had better toys, people watched men play sports. Guys just got to do all the fun things. At school, the boys could wear shorts when it was 100 degrees in the summer; the girls had to wear pants. And I'm like, "How wrong is that?" I wanted to be in this world that I was sort of, like, banned from. So I grew up with racetracks, remote control cars, chemistry sets and horses. I know how to hunt and I know how to fish and I can play poker, because my dad really wanted a boy but never got one. So that's how I learned math.
But I think being a woman was often actually helpful to me. Like when I was in engineering, being one of the only women was somewhat helpful, to be honest. Did I have inappropriate comments? Absolutely. But I would just fire back, because that's how I was raised. If someone said something, I would tell them to [expletive] off, or I'd be like, "Yeah, you wish." It affected me, but I didn't flinch.
Photograph Rebecca Lynn invests in early-stage companies working in artificial intelligence, digital health and financial technology. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE COHEN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
