Demis Hassabis is a game developer turned neuroscientist turned artificial intelligence entrepreneur. His London-based company, DeepMind, was acquired by Google this year shortly after he and his colleagues demonstrated that they could teach machines to play video games better than humans.
READING I've just finished reading "The Beginning of Infinity," by David Deutsch, one of the inventors of quantum computing. I actually prefer his previous book, "The Fabric of Reality," in which he lucidly argues for the huge significance of life as a kind of fundamental law of physics, even though as far as we know it only exists on this small cosmic speck of dust we call Earth.
For fiction, the most recent novels I've read are "The Road," by Cormac McCarthy, which I found a moving testament to the power of the bond between father and son, and "1Q84," by Haruki Murakami, a complete work of genius about these two people having a relationship over time and space.
LISTENING I listen to all types of music depending on the mood I'm in and what I'm trying to do. When I'm working, it needs to be drum and bass, ambient or electronic music like Aphex Twin's Syro. I think what that kind of music does is get your brain into a beta-wave state, which has been shown in neuroscience to be good for concentration. When I'm just listening for pleasure it might be Goldfrapp or Leonard Cohen. Cohen's lyrics are kind of like poetry. My dad is a musician and Leonard Cohen and Bob Dylan are his heroes.
WATCHING The most recent film I've watched at the cinema is "Interstellar." The visuals and music -- scored by Hans Zimmer, probably my favorite film composer -- are stunning. Its themes are similar to the books I've been reading -- the significance of life in terms of physics and space and time and also the power of love.
And no matter how busy I am I always keep tabs on my beloved Liverpool Football Club, which I have followed since I was a small kid. The 2005 Champions League comeback was one of the most exhilarating moments of my life. This season has been depressing so far, though.
FOLLOWING I like keeping up-to-date on the news in general through the BBC and The Guardian, and the tech industry through Re/code.net and TechCrunch. Re/code.net is slightly more serious; TechCrunch a little bit more gossipy.
PLAYING I play board games, chess and poker when I have time. I find it useful for brain training. I think it's like going to the gym and keeping your mind sharp. I play board games with a close group of friends who are all brilliant board gamers. Poker and chess I play seriously. For poker, I go to the World Series and play against the best. I like to test myself and have done pretty well, given it's just a hobby.
AuthorAffiliation KATE MURPHY Kate Murphy is a journalist in Houston who writes frequently for The New York Times.
Photograph (Photograph by Adrian Lourie/Evening Standard, Via Redux)
