Our guide to dance performances happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
AUSTRALIA FESTIVAL at the Joyce Theater (through May 12). This event continues with performances by Australian Dance Theater (Friday to Monday) and the Australian Ballet (May 9 to 12). For its program, Australian Dance Theater explores the natural world in "The Beginning of Nature," which is set to a score sung in Kaurna, the first language of the Indigenous peoples of the Adelaide Plains of South Australia. The Australian Ballet wraps up the festival with a trio of dances: Alice Topp's "Aurum," Stephen Baynes's "Unspoken Dialoguesfollows" and a yet-to-be-titled premiere by Tim Harbour.
212-242-0800, joyce.org
COLUMBIA BALLET COLLABORATIVE'S SPRING 2019 PERFORMANCES at Miller Theater (May 4, 8 p.m.; May 5, 3 p.m.). Dances by the choreographers Tom Gold, Morgan McEwen, Durante Verzola, Nadia Vostrikov and Andrea Ward will grace the stage of this student-run group, which was formed in 2007 by five professional ballet dancers enrolled at Columbia University. A sixth premiere, by the Columbia Ph.D. student James Shee -- a former dancer with National Ballet of Canada -- is also be part of the mix; it has been created under the guidance of the former American Ballet Theater soloist and Columbia Ballet choreographer Craig Salstein.
212-854-7799, columbiaballetcollaborative.com
CONVERSATIONS WITH MERCE at N.Y.U. Skirball Center for the Performing Arts (May 3-4, 7:30 p.m.). The Merce Cunningham Centennial festivities continue with three new works celebrating the choreographer's legacy. This presentation, curated by Rashaun Mitchell, a former company member and a trustee with the Merce Cunningham Trust, explores the theoretical, practical and experiential approaches to Cunningham's work. Three respected choreographers take part: Moriah Evans, Mina Nishimura and Netta Yerushalmy. In their responses to his lineage, they focus on conceptual, formal and personal connections with the choreographer. In addition to the commissioned works, Cunningham solos will be performed by Shayla-Vie Jenkins and Keith Sabado.
212-998-4941, nyuskirball.org
E-MOVES at Harlem Stage Gatehouse (May 9-11, 7:30 p.m.). This annual dance series continues its 20th anniversary celebration with a final weekend of performances. The lineup spotlights the work of Ousmane Wiles, or Omari Mizrahi, who presents two works: "Sila Djiguba," or "Path of Hope" -- a work for eight mixing West African, AfroBeat, house and vogue styles -- and "Crossroads," which takes inspiration from relationships of all kinds, good and bad. Faustin Linyekula and Moya Michael present "Festival of Dreams," created in collaboration with 22 street dancers from the organization It's Showtime NYC!, and on May 10 and 11 TweetBoogie offers "Trinity," a fast and intense look at the struggle for female empowerment in hip-hop culture.
212-281-9240, ext. 19; harlemstage.org
LA MAMA MOVES! DANCE FESTIVAL at the La MaMa's Ellen Stewart Theater and the Downstairs (through May 26). This East Village event continues this weekend with performances by Mia Habib, a Norwegian choreographer whose "All -- a Physical Poem of Protest" highlights the protesting body with nude dancers of all ages walking and running in circles, and Colleen Thomas's "But the Sun Came Up and We Were Here." In it, she collaborates with Polish, Ukrainian, Belarusian and American dancers to expose a world of political and social unrest. And on May 9, the choreographer Yin Mei presents "Peony Dreams: On the Other Side of Sleep," a new take on "The Peony Pavilion."
212-352-3101, lamama.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
MARK MORRIS DANCE GROUP at BAM Howard Gilman Opera House (May 8-11, 7:30 p.m.). The choreographer created "Pepperland" in response to a 2017 invitation from the city of Liverpool to make a work in homage to the Beatles album "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band." Morris may be one of the most musical of choreographers working today, but he doesn't set his dances to recorded music. No matter. For his dance, Morris has collaborated with the jazz pianist and composer Ethan Iverson to create new arrangements of six songs as well as six more inspired by the album. It promises to be a feast for the ears and eyes.
718-636-4100, bam.org
NEW YORK CITY BALLET at the David H. Koch Theater (through June 2). The season continues with repeats of premieres by Justin Peck and Pam Tanowitz, as well as several George Balanchine gems, including "Slaughter on Tenth Avenue," "Stravinsky Violin Concerto" and "Western Symphony." But, really, isn't it all about "Diamonds"? Suzanne Farrell, the magnificent ballerina and muse to Balanchine, has recently been coaching dancers in the 1967 work, which is set to Tchaikovsky and pays homage to Russian schooling. The tiaras will glitter even more brightly than usual.
212-496-0600, nycballet.com
RHIZOMATIKS RESEARCH X ELEVENPLAY X KYLE MCDONALD at New York Live Arts (May 8-11, 8:30 p.m.). In the New York City premiere of "Discrete Figures," the Japanese companies Rhizomatiks Research and Elevenplay -- a dance group directed by Mikiko -- collaborate with the American media artist Kyle McDonald. Part of the annual interdisciplinary festival Live Ideas -- this year's focus is on artificial intelligence -- the work features five female dancers who interact with machines to look at the meeting point of humanity and innovation.
212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org
THREE SHARED EVENINGS OF WORK: HILARY CLARK/OREN BARNOY/LESLIE CUYJET at Roulette (May 6-8, 8 p.m.). The choreographers and frequent dance collaborators Molly Lieber and Eleanor Smith curate three evenings of movement-based work, in which two artists perform each night. Clark presents "Another Room" (Monday and Tuesday), in which she considers time passing emotional memory, while Barnoy creates a ritualized version of daily prayer through movement in a work that is titled not by words but with a symbol (Monday and Wednesday). Finally, in "Exographic Will" (Tuesday and Wednesday), Leslie Cuyjet, joined by her longtime collaborator, Darrin Wright, delves into the memories held within a body.
917-267-0368, roulette.org
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
