A growing cottage industry is dedicated to the theory that mind-altering drugs can improve business leadership.
Burrowed in the foothills of the Canadian Rockies is a wooden house, a retreat center made of pine and spruce and filled with mushroom carvings, tapestries of periwinkle and indigo paisley, books about "The Indoctrinated Brain" and other paraphernalia nodding to the promised transformation: Enter as a chief executive, emerge as an enlightened one.
When a group of executives wearing hoodies and leggings arrived on a Tuesday evening in October, they vibrated with the nervous energy of summer camp drop-off. They were gathered for a retreat called "The Psychedelic C.E.O.," which they had agreed to let me observe.
Their guide, Murray Rodgers, used to be a hard-charging oil and gas executive. About a decade ago, he underwent a process of self-discovery. It began after a miserable pairing -- a divorce and a failed company initial public offering -- that left him alone on his 60th birthday, watching Hugh Grant's romantic comedy "The Rewrite" and wondering if it was time for a rewrite of his own. He became a yoga instructor and then went to Costa Rica to try ayahuasca, a hallucinogenic brew. This started a sequence of mushroom trips and psychedelic ceremonies that left Mr. Rodgers, now 69, spiritually, psychologically and professionally transfigured.
It was as if he had thrown his ego into a dryer and watched it shrink, and he became intent on helping others with that same kind of cosmic laundering.
He wrote a book, "The Psychedelic C.E.O.," and after hearing from readers, he also began hosting retreats. On that day in October, he welcomed five business leaders -- Adam, Adam, Jill, Chris and Ajay -- most of whom requested to use only their first names so as not to alarm their investors, employees or children with their unconventional approach to professional development. All run small businesses in the Calgary area and had met through an entrepreneurs' network.
After their arrival, they scarfed down bowls of thick lentil soup and then settled on couches in a downstairs den, waiting for Mr. Rodgers to introduce the agenda.
The first order of business was a microdose, 0.25 milligrams, of psilocybin (the main psychedelic substance found in hallucinogenic mushrooms), which was child's play compared with the dosages they would take the next day. After handing out the psilocybin pills, Mr. Rodgers brought out a map of consciousness, which displayed a range of mental states the entrepreneurs might be experiencing, as varied as shame, guilt and enlightenment. He used a marker to jot down each entrepreneur's current state of being, giving the room the temporary feeling of a corporate off-site run by Ms. Frizzle.
"Who feels nervous about tomorrow?" Mr. Rodgers asked.
Three hands shot into the air.
"Guess what's on the other side of fear?" he said. "Love. Always."
Rainbow People Enter the Office
The relationship between leaders in the corporate world and psychedelics is decades old, as recounted by Michael Pollan in his book "How to Change Your Mind." Without buttoned-up leaders hellbent on becoming their best selves, Americans might have never known the thrills of a mushroom trip.
In the 1950s and early 1960s, Al Hubbard, a drug enthusiast nicknamed "Captain Trips," flew around the United States introducing America's Fortune 500 chief executives to LSD, according to Mr. Pollan, along with Hollywood stars and Catholic Church officials, politicians and computer engineers, bankers and journalists.
It wasn't just the avant-garde or the powerful who got curious about the drugs. Millions of readers of that most middlebrow of publications, Life magazine, learned about psilocybin from a 1957 article written by R. Gordon Wasson, a vice president at J.P. Morgan, who narrated his encounter with the sacred when taking "magic mushrooms." The story became a sensation, even more so when Mr. Wasson promoted it on the CBS program "Person to Person." Other magazines followed up with their own first-person reports.
In the early 1960s, psychedelic drugs arrived in Silicon Valley (though it wasn't yet called that). A technology executive named Myron Stolaroff created a psychedelic research center in Menlo Park, Calif., which he and his colleagues gave a deceptively generic name: the International Foundation for Advanced Study. Eager to know whether tripping could help solve creative problems, the center brought in dozens of engineers and executives for guided drug trips.
James Fadiman, a researcher who helped run the trials, told me that this operation, carried out in a nondescript office, was in no way considered illicit. "Sometimes it was the bosses who came in," Mr. Fadiman said. "This wasn't sneaking off into the mountains with the rainbow people."
It's not hard to discern how the love affair between business and psychedelics came screeching to a halt. Psychedelics became associated with beatniks and hippies who quit their jobs, staged be-ins and followed the siren call of the Harvard psychologist and psychedelic researcher Timothy Leary to "turn on, tune in, drop out." Psilocybin, LSD and some other psychedelic drugs were prohibited by the federal government by the early 1970s. (Oregon, Colorado and a handful of municipalities have since decriminalized psychedelic use.)
But business leaders never completely lost interest in the substances. Some continued using them for pleasure; others attested to their life-changing influence. Steve Jobs declared taking LSD a critical life event, one that "shows you that there's another side to the coin." Sam Altman said psychedelic trips could be "totally incredible." Elon Musk has posted on X about having a prescription for ketamine, a drug that can have hallucinogenic effects.
Psychedelic drugs are popular more broadly, too: Researchers at the RAND Corporation estimated that eight million adults in the United States used psilocybin in 2023.
There is now a growing cottage industry of psychedelic retreats for business leaders. Guides sell curated experiences, with names like "The Journeymen Collective," where stifled executives go on mushroom trips that promise a spiritual makeover. Mr. Rodgers charged roughly $ 4,000 to the group I observed (costs vary for each retreat).
Psychiatrists note that using psychedelics in an environment that isn't medically supervised can be risky, especially for people with family histories of psychiatric disorders, who could experience psychosis. "If you have a loaded family history of either bipolar disorder or schizophrenia, I would be cautious about taking psychedelics," said Dr. Charles Nemeroff, chair of the department of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School.
"Widespread availability of psychedelics worries me," he added, noting that some people could experience feelings of panic and anxiety. (Mr. Rodgers said he interviewed prospective retreat participants about their psychiatric and medical histories in order to help ensure they would have safe experiences.)
The health risks of using psychedelics are minimal, but not nonexistent, according to Dr. Bryan Roth, a professor of pharmacology and psychiatry at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine, and they include a link between chronic microdosing and heart valve damage.
But among business leaders, the stigma of using these drugs is fading. A long-term loosening of corporate culture (think ball pits as an office perk) as well as the premium that American businesses now put on imagination and emotional openness (Stanford's most popular business school elective recently was a class called "Touchy Feely") may have primed business leaders for psychedelic experimentation. Some psychedelic guides also say the industry has boomed because of Covid, which upended the workplace and put a spotlight on mental health.
In a world powered by ego, though, some business people suggest that the growing popularity of ego-checking drugs could have worrisome professional fallout. That concern was summed up in a recent viral post on X, from the chief executive of an artificial intelligence company, who wrote: "Of the Silicon Valley founders I know who went on some of the psychedelic self-discovery trips, almost 100% quit their jobs as CEO."
'Ferris Bueller's Day Off'
"I want to experience ego death." "I want to get my company through a public offering." "I want to find God."
Mr. Rodgers has heard every strain of intention that propels business people toward his psychedelic retreats. He cautions them to reset their expectations. "The key word is surrender," he said. "It doesn't matter how much you've read, how much you think you know -- none of it will be true."
At the retreat center, Mr. Rodgers led the entrepreneurs in some gentle yoga and singing. As they got ready for bed, Mr. Rodgers assured them that every person's journey the next day would be different. He said he once had a client who spent his entire trip staring at the wood column in the center of the home.
"It was his grandmother," Mr. Rodgers explained.
The following morning, we drove to a nearby river for a silent nature walk, taking in the golden sunlight dancing on the water's surface and floes of ice gliding downstream. Mr. Rodgers reminded everyone to focus on their breath.
Back at the house, two women who would serve as trip sitters, supervising the group, showed up. One of them, Lisa Stickle, introduced herself as an acquaintance of Mr. Rodgers from his days in the oil and gas industry: "Back when the C.E.O. was the C.E.O.," she said, laughing. (Mr. Rodgers has since rebranded C.E.O. to stand for conscious, empathetic and open.)
"Did you guys do any breath work?" Ms. Stickle asked.
Nodding, Mr. Rodgers replied, "These guys are tuned in." Turning to address the group, he added: "This is about surrendering to what's in you. This is a day off. This is 'Ferris Bueller's Day Off."'
The entrepreneurs began to ready their "sacred spaces," the mattresses where they would spend the next four hours, bringing over thick colorful blankets. Next to each mat, Mr. Rodgers placed a bucket with a water bottle and toilet paper, in case of tears. He then retreated to a bar at the back of the room, where he began to weigh mushrooms on a scale.
As Mr. Rodgers brewed chamomile-and-fennel tea to mix with the mushrooms, he held up a pitcher and joked: "I'm a bartender. This is what we do in the West. Leave your horse outside."
"Tie up the horse real tight," Ms. Stickle said, laughing. "We're going to be a while."
"Can I take notes?" Adam, one of the entrepreneurs, asked.
"I don't recommend it," Mr. Rodgers said. "That puts you in your mind state."
Ms. Stickle jumped in to add, "If something comes up, you'll remember it."
Mr. Rodgers reminded the group members that in the first few minutes of their trip, they might not feel anything. "Your mind will be like: 'What's going on? I don't feel anything. Why did I pay for this?"'
"It's your ego's last-ditch effort," Ms. Stickle added.
"Believe me," Mr. Rodgers said. "The switch will go on."
The Unsettled Science of Ego Depletion
There's little concrete knowledge, yet, of how or whether psychedelics affect leadership and decision making. Since 2022, two associate business professors at the University of Maryland, Bennet Zelner and Rachelle Sampson, have been observing three cohorts of business leaders who gathered for retreats in the Netherlands, where psilocybin truffles are legal. Some business leaders received executive coaching along with two psilocybin trips. Mr. Zelner and Ms. Sampson are now collecting data on how the experience has affected the executives' professional lives.
Luther Kitahata,a coach for participants in the Netherlands retreats, said he watched someone who used to lead a bank and now sits on company boards overcome fears about public speaking. This didn't surprise him.
"The ego is being brought down," he explained. "The ego is usually what's thinking, 'Oh, what if people think badly of me?"'
Robin Carhart-Harris, a neuroscientist studying the effect of psychedelics, said that it was possible the drugs could help leaders in the workplace. Mr. Carhart-Harris, a professor at the University of California, San Francisco, examines people's brains on drugs. His brain scans show that psychedelics increase entropy. Where the brain usually tries to helpfully compress information, these drugs have the opposite effect, which he argues could shake loose new thinking on the knotty challenges of leadership.
The former chief operating officer of MasterClass, Mark Williamson, has done some 20 guided psychedelic trips since 2020, which he says have yielded professional epiphanies. He started prioritizing mentorship, and also changed his position at MasterClass. "I realized my role was getting too big and the company would be better served if I handed off some responsibilities," Mr. Williamson said.
There are now dozens of studies being done on the effect of psychedelics on mental well being. But some scientists worry about research being done by scholars who seem to be wedded to finding positive results. Reporting in The New York Times this year raised questions about the psychedelic research program at Johns Hopkins University. The director of the program, Roland Griffiths, was accused of overstepping from research into evangelism, including steering subjects to report that the drugs had spiritual effects.
Some psychedelic veterans in the business world worry less about the efficacy of the drugs and more about the pressure that business leaders might unwittingly put on colleagues.
Chip Conley, a former Airbnb executive and a founding board member of Burning Man, stressed that there were many ways for leaders to become more emotionally open without using drugs, and noticed some executives talk about their use of psychedelics as a signaling mechanism. "There's no doubt there's a cultural cachet in some communities that suggests that if you're into psychedelics, you're cool and open-minded," he said.
"Anybody who is doing an activity, especially one that is meant to be countercultural, for the purpose of building status is going to have a bad trip," Mr. Conley continued. "You'll realize you're a poser."
'Dad Did a Lot of Drugs'
Mr. Rodgers played "Here Comes the Sun" to let the entrepreneurs know that their trips were most likely coming to an end. They slowly stirred from their mattresses and left the den, curling up on deck chairs outside to discuss what they had seen. They all agreed on one particularly affecting moment of the day, which was tripping while listening to Coldplay's "Fix You."
Mr. Rodgers brought out blank canvases and pastels so they could draw what they had seen. The group drew blue and green blobs, yellow streaks and infinity symbols.
"My kids will find this in the attic one day, and they won't understand," one entrepreneur, Adam Thompson, joked.
"Dad did a lot of drugs that day," another, also named Adam, replied.
The group had committed to this psychedelic retreat at the urging of one of the Adams, the head of a small environmental consulting firm, who proposed it after listening to a Joe Rogan podcast episode about the drugs.
Adam described how during his trip, he found himself on a spaceship where some of his fellow travelers were farmers, not astronauts. He thought to himself, farmers don't belong in outer space. Afterward, Adam tried to relate this vision to his business, and he realized that high-flying, fast-moving start-up environments don't suit every kind of worker. He considered which of his employees should be discouraged from staying on his team for the long term.
"Different strokes for different folks," Adam said. "I need to make sure I'm understanding people have different needs, wants and levels of risk tolerance."
In the moment, the drug-induced experiences didn't translate into tidy takeaways. But in the month following the retreat, each of the group members found nuggets of meaning. Jill, who is a partner in an advertising firm, said that the trip, which included a visual tour of her childhood home, prompted her to consider why she was averse to taking risks. This was helpful as she tried to make up her mind between two roles at her company, one sales-focused and the other operational. (She ended up inventing her own job description, combining elements of each.) "There was this low-level anxious hum going away," she said. "It's like I'm more chilled out."
Ajay, who runs a marketing firm, found the trip frightening -- for a moment he thought he had died -- but in the weeks afterward, he felt that it had helped him better understand his own emotional states. He summed it up as "feel more, care less." And Mr. Thompson, who runs small e-commerce businesses, said that the trip had left him with a new sense of ease about items he couldn't accomplish on his daily to-do lists.
"When you own a business, you start the day with a 15-line checklist," he said. "What's happened to me is the subtle reminder that it's not all a big deal."
In the final hours of their retreat, the entrepreneurs sat around a campfire. They remarked how relaxing it had been to be off their phones for the day.
Mr. Rodgers told them that he once led a psychedelic retreat for a chief executive who refused to let go of her phone. She was texting while tripping, until, finally, Mr. Rodgers persuaded her to hand over the device. She started crying, asking him, "Am I dying?"
"That's the wrong question," Mr. Rodgers recalled telling her, instructing her to instead ask, "Am I living?"
Photograph Murray Rodgers, above, leads C.E.O.s and entrepreneurs in psilocybin mushroom retreats at his home in Diamond Valley, Alberta, top and above right. His book, "The Psychedelic C.E.O.," above left, describes how his experience, beginning with ayahuasca, convinced him that hallucinogens can help people reach their personal and professional potential. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TODD KOROL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (BU6-BU7)
