Writers' rooms in Hollywood are getting noisier again. Screenwriters began returning to work on Wednesday after a tentative contract agreement with the major studios brought an end to a strike that lasted 148 days.
The Writers Guild of America, which represents 11,500 screenwriters, and the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which bargains on behalf of the Hollywood studios, reached the deal on Sunday, breaking a monthslong standstill in negotiations that contributed to a shutdown of television and film production.
While studios were reticent about the agreement, the Writers Guild said the contract included enhancements worth an estimated $ 233 million annually -- lower than the $ 429 million in enhancements it was seeking but higher than the studios' proposal of $ 86 million.
The union secured concessions on most of its demands, including higher royalty payments for streaming content and guarantees that artificial intelligence technology will not encroach on writers' credits and compensation, a sticking point in the final stretch of bargaining.
Though the writers won't finish voting on the contract until Oct. 9, they'll start trickling back into work before then, and late-night shows like those hosted by Stephen Colbert, Jimmy Fallon and Jimmy Kimmel -- the first to go dark when the strike began -- will resume.
But much of Hollywood will stay quiet as tens of thousands of movie and television actors remain on strike. There is, however, a sign of movement, as their union, SAG-AFTRA, and the studios plan to pick up talks on Monday.
"I think prices are starting to melt up."
Robert McNally, president of the research firm Rapidan Energy Group, on climbing crude oil prices, which are expected to reach $ 100 a barrel soon.
"A single company, Amazon, has seized control over much of the online retail economy."
The Federal Trade Commission, led by Lina Khan, in a 172-page antitrust lawsuit accusing Amazon of squeezing out competitors and harming customers.
"It's very concerning to me -- four in 10 Generation Z workers have taken a loan, early withdrawal or hardship withdrawal."
Catherine Collinson, the head of the Transamerica Institute and Transamerica Center for Retirement Studies, on young adults who are struggling to keep up their credit scores.
