Wall Street's blistering rally stretched into a seventh day Wednesday and vaulted the U.S. stock market to more highs.
The S&P 500 jumped 1 percent and topped the 5,600 level for the first time. The Nasdaq composite also rallied to a seventh-straight gain and added 1.2 percent to its high set a day before. The Dow Jones industrial average, meanwhile, swung 429 points higher, or 1.1 percent.
Big technology companies led the way, as has become the norm on Wall Street, and Taiwan Semiconductor's U.S.-listed shares rose 3.5 percent after it said its revenue climbed nearly 33 percent in June from a year earlier.
Taiwan Semiconductor, or TSMC, makes the chips for Nvidia and others that have been driving the business world's rush into artificial-intelligence technology. The promise of big profits in the future from A.I. has sent Nvidia in particular to breathtaking heights over the last year, and Nvidia rose 2.7 percent Wednesday to bring its gain for the year so far to 172.5 percent. It was again the strongest single force pushing the S&P 500 upward.
Advanced Micro Devices was another major force behind the stock market's leap, and it jumped 3.9 percent after announcing a $ 665 million deal to buy Silo AI, a European A.I. lab.
The frenzy around A.I. has been a major reason the U.S. stock market has climbed to records despite a slowdown in the economy's growth and a tightening squeeze on lower-income households. So have hopes that inflation is slowing enough for the Federal Reserve to deliver much-sought cuts to interest rates this year.
Fed Chair Jerome H. Powell returned to Capitol Hill to give testimony about interest rates, where he echoed many of his comments from a day before. He said he was "not sending any signals" about when cuts to rates could arrive, but he pointed out the downsides of being too late on them.
"We're looking at both sides" of the risks involved in moving its main interest rate, which has been sitting at its highest level in more than two decades, Mr. Powell said. Cutting rates too early could allow inflation to accelerate, while waiting too long could allow the economy's slowdown to gather into a recession.
Much of Wall Street is expecting the Fed to begin cutting its main interest rate in September, but traders have a long history of being premature in their calls. Mr. Powell gave a nod to recent reports that have shown improvement in inflation following a discouraging start of the year, but he said again the Fed doesn't have enough confidence that inflation is sustainably heading toward its goal of 2 percent.
"More good data would strengthen our confidence" and clear the way for a cut, Mr. Powell said.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury edged down to 4.28 percent from 4.30 percent late Tuesday and from 4.70 percent since April. The move since the spring is significant for the bond market and offers support for stock prices.
The two-year Treasury yield, which moves more on expectations for Fed action, held steady at 4.62 percent, where it was late Tuesday.
A report coming on Thursday could cause sharper swings in the bond and stock markets. That's when the U.S. government will release the latest monthly update on inflation. Economists expect it to show U.S. consumers paid prices for food, airline tickets and everything else that were 3.1 percent higher in June than a year earlier. That would be a touch slower than May's 3.3 percent inflation rate.
This week will also bring the unofficial start to the latest earnings reporting season. Delta Air Lines, JPMorgan Chase and others will report how much profit they made during the spring from April through June, and the hope on Wall Street is for S&P 500 companies to deliver the strongest growth in more than two years.
The S&P 500 rose 56.93 points to 5,663.91. The Nasdaq composite rallied 218.16 to 18,647.45, and the Dow gained 429.39 to 39,721.36.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
