In early February, a giant white balloon was seen floating over U.S. skies, prompting speculation about its provenance and purpose. An exclusive analysis of millions of square miles of satellite imagery traces the balloon hours after its launch in China, across the Philippine Sea and then to North America. It also reveals that the balloon was remotely maneuvered at points on its journey. The New York Times worked with the artificial intelligence company Synthetaic to detect and analyze the Chinese balloon in satellite images captured by Planet Labs. This process was the first to track the balloon itself, not just its expected path based on weather projections.
The balloon was launched from China in mid-January...
Jan. 15
The balloon was first detected off the coast of Hainan, where, U.S. officials confirmed to The Times, it was launched in mid-January. The officials also said that the launch didn't require an established site and that it could have been launched from any one-acre plot of land. In satellite photos taken from space, the balloon looked like multiple blobs of different colors. This is because the satellite captures images in different wavelengths of light as it moves rapidly overhead. The balloon was flying relatively low here, at around 48,000 feet. Rodger Farley, a retired NASA engineer who designed superpressure balloons similar to the Chinese one, said in an interview that this was most likely one or two hours after the launch, while the balloon was still ascending.
Jan. 16
The next sighting of the balloon was over the South China Sea. It was now higher, at around 62,000 feet.
Jan. 19-21
The balloon appeared to change altitude daily as it moved over the Philippine Sea, descending from around 58,000 feet to 52,000 feet, and then ascending tao 64,000 feet. These changes were not caused by natural wind or air flows, according to Mr. Farley. They were made by operators remotely steering the balloon up and down to ride wind currents that blow in different directions, he said. "It truly was an altitude-control vehicle," he said after reviewing The Times's calculations, referring to the balloon's remote steering. Both Mr. Farley and U.S. officials told The Times that the balloon's altitude was controlled by adding or releasing compressed gas in an internal compartment.
...Once over water, the balloon was harder to follow...
The type of artificial intelligence that Synthetaic uses to quickly detect small objects like a balloon in vast amounts of satellite imagery is a novel development, said Hamed Alemohammad, a professor at Clark University who specializes in geospatial analytics. "We are in the era that we are going to detect things and see things in satellite imagery that we couldn't think about five years ago or 10 years ago," he said.
The balloon is not detected for the next nine days as it passes over the Pacific Ocean, where less satellite imagery is collected. A computer model that simulates how an object moves through the atmosphere shows that during those nine days the balloon could have been blown northward.
The balloon first enters U.S. airspace on Jan. 28 over Alaska, according to Pentagon officials. Senior U.S. officials believe that it was blown "off course" and had originally been sent to spy on military bases in Guam and Hawaii. In a written response to The Times, Liu Pengyu, the spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in the United States, said the balloon was for meteorological research and "unintentionally drifted into the U.S. because of the westerlies and its limited self-steering capability." Mr. Farley says that launching altitude-control balloons is generally a bad idea in winter, when upper atmospheric winds are less predictable and there is not enough variation in wind direction for balloons to correct course.
Jan. 31
The next sighting of the balloon by satellite is in Canada, near the U.S. border. It is at around 60,000 feet, according to The Times's calculations, some 4,000 feet lower than the last sighting over the Philippine Sea. Later that day, the balloon reportedly enters U.S. airspace over northern Idaho.
Feb. 1
Two days later, the balloon is over South Dakota. By now, it's at around 66,000 feet, considerably higher than it was in Canada.
Feb. 2-4
The balloon remains at around the same height for the rest of its journey in the United States. It's hard to know exactly why. U.S. officials told The Times that they believed the weather at this time was restricting the balloon's ability to change course.
It was eventually shot down over the east coast, its debris found in the ocean.
Feb. 4
At 2:39 p.m., an American F-22 fighter jet destroys the balloon off the coast of Myrtle Beach, S.C. Debris is later collected from the ocean.
Methodology: Finding the Chinese
Balloon in Satellite Images
A satellite collects images of the Earth by taking pictures in different wavelengths of light and stitching them together. The satellite photographs the same location on the ground from slightly different vantage points as it moves at high speeds overhead. An object like the Chinese balloon, floating somewhere between the satellite and the ground, looks like it is hovering over different parts of the Earth in each image.
This phenomenon, where an object looks like it is in different places depending on where you view it from, is called the parallax effect.
Based on this effect, Synthetaic's founder, Corey Jaskolski, knew that the balloon would appear as several differently colored blobs in a satellite photo. He drew a sketch of what the balloon might look like and uploaded it to his company's image analysis platform, RAIC, which stands for rapid automatic image categorization.
RAIC takes a novel approach to detecting objects in satellite imagery, Dr. Alemohammad, the satellite imagery expert, said. It uses an algorithm that doesn't have to be pretrained with lots of reference images for what an object looks like. It can find objects based on a single initial sketch, and users can quickly refine the results to "teach" it to be more accurate. Dr. Alemohammad said that this approach, combined with the availability of almost daily satellite images from Planet Labs, made the balloon's discovery possible.
How the balloon is imaged by satellite makes it possible to calculate its height. By layering two photographs so that their ground features align, Mr. Jaskolski measured the distance between the balloon's apparent positions, known as the "parallax distance."
Each satellite captured several images as it passed over the balloon. The Times and Synthataic used these images to calculate the balloon's altitude.
Drawing lines connecting the satellite, the balloon and the ground and overlaying those lines creates "similar triangles" between the lines. For each image, Planet Labs provided the height and speed of the satellite, the time the image was taken and the image resolution. This information, along with the parallax distance, enabled The Times to calculate the balloon's height using the geometric properties of similar triangles. The Times then added the ground elevation at each location to calculate the balloon's height above sea level.
Additional reporting by Judson Jones.
Photograph RAIC takes a novel approach to detecting objects in satellite imagery, Dr. Alemohammad, the satellite imagery expert, said. It uses an algorithm that doesn't have to be pretrained with lots of reference images for what an object looks like. It can find objects based on a single initial sketch, and users can quickly refine the results to "teach" it to be more accurate. Dr. Alemohammad said that this approach, combined with the availability of almost daily satellite images from Planet Labs, made the balloon's discovery possible. (A6); How the balloon is imaged by satellite makes it possible to calculate its height. By layering two photographs so that their ground features align, Mr. Jaskolski measured the distance between the balloon's apparent positions, known as the "parallax distance." (A7)
