Sure, it's the thought that counts. Still, maybe that ugly Christmas sweater is a bit too, well, ugly.
According to the National Retail Federation, Americans are expected to return some $ 148 billion in holiday gifts -- or about 15.4 percent of all the merchandise purchased over the holiday season. That's only a slight uptick in the rate of returns for the whole year, and it is lower than last year, when customers returned 17.9 percent of holiday purchases.
The estimated sum of returns for all of 2023 -- $ 743 billion -- decreased, too, from $ 816 billion in 2022. But retailers continue to struggle to reduce returns, largely because dealing with them is part of a complex and costly process known in the industry as "reverse logistics."
Retailers and manufacturers are always trying to figure out the most efficient and affordable way to transport returned items back to their stores, warehouses or suppliers. Yet despite their efforts, even brand-new returns may never end up back on shelves and instead are sent to landfills, making more waste and cutting into profits.
And during the holiday season, retailers are extra wary of fraudulent returns -- merchandise that is used, is falsely claimed as defective or is stolen -- which they expect will account for about $ 25 billion of total holiday returns.
As retailers try to reduce both fraudulent and nonfraudulent returns, they're providing more detailed descriptions on sizing and fit of clothing for online shoppers, and being more stringent about receipts for all returns.
It can be a hard line to toe, though: Retailers don't want too-strict return policies to hurt the customer's experience.
"There are a lot of things that have to go right to still come out the other side unscathed."
Mike Wilson, chief equity strategist at Morgan Stanley, who revised his bearish bets over the summer but didn't budge from his stance that the economy would worsen.
"The microphone enabled both the Nuremberg rallies and the Beatles."
Mustafa Suleyman, the chief executive of Inflection AI, who cautioned that new technology like artificial intelligence could be used for sinister purposes.
"Moviegoers seem less interested in being overwhelmed with spectacle and saving the universe than being spoken to, entertained and inspired."
David A. Gross, a film consultant who publishes a newsletter on box office numbers, on moviegoers' changing mood in 2023.
