To keep subscriptions straight and to avoid paying for services no longer wanted, it is worthwhile to conduct a regular audit of your digital spending.
Sometimes the modern world feels like death by a thousand little subscription payments.
In a lot of ways, we can live in an on-demand, a la carte dream. We can collect, stream and store movies, TV shows, photos, videos and music nearly wherever and whenever we desire. It's almost irresistible, and definitely addictive.
But boy, the cost of this fun-at-your-fingertips life adds up quickly. It is easy to owe subscription fees or other payments to almost a dozen services. And even if you try to be less indulgent, the bills can pile up without your realizing it.
To keep all the subscriptions straight, and to avoid paying for services no longer wanted or needed (or forgotten about entirely), it is worthwhile to conduct a regular audit of your digital life. When I recently did this math, adding up my cable, Internet and cellphone bills, the total was a real eye-opener: nearly $400 a month.
Shocked? I was. And you might be, too, once you crunch your numbers -- and it may help if you use my experience as a guide for conducting your own digital audit.
For me, the biggest chunk of money goes to TV and movies. Many consumers are paying for at least two separate services to deliver television and movies, and probably more.
For example, my Comcast cable bill -- which includes a cable television package, high-speed Internet and a landline phone -- is about $180 a month. That is high, but not unusually high: The NPD Group, a research company, said cable TV bills alone (minus Internet and phone) averaged $83 a month in 2012, and they have been increasing by about 6 percent a year, outpacing inflation. NPD predicts the average cost will reach $200 by 2020.
Despite that service and the cost, many of the things I want to watch are not available without an additional service. I recently added HBO for a promotional price of $10 a month, and a supplemental on-demand service, Streampix, that costs $5 a month. So, that's $195 for cable services alone.
Then there is $13 a month I pay for TiVo service, which I prefer to the Comcast cable box, which is $3 a month cheaper. I also pay for Netflix ($8 a month) and Amazon Prime ($79 a year).
By this point, you probably think I have enough to watch. But no.
In the last year, on-demand rentals and iTunes purchases of movies added about $10 a month to my media budget. I also stream some videos on my Xbox 360 game console, which means I need the Xbox Live Gold for $50 a year, or about $4 a month.
In total, then, I'm paying $236 a month for Internet, movies and TV. Ouch.
The obvious way to cut the bill is to get rid of cable. A stand-alone Internet service would cost about $40 a month (prices may vary, of course, depending on speed and promotions), removing $155 or so from my monthly total, or about $1,860 a year.
Music is much less expensive than video, I'm happy to say. I pay $10 a month for commercial-free and offline access to Spotify, and about $4 a month for satellite radio because I like using it to discover new music while in the car.
I'm going to keep my music service as it is, but all of my songs and videos -- not to mention photos -- have created storage needs that I must address. Now, I pay for digital storage twice over. There's the $10 a month I pay for 100 gigabytes of storage on Dropbox. I also pay $8 a month for iCloud storage so I can back up and restore my Apple devices more easily.
Fixing this overlap is easy. Google Drive offers 100 gigabytes of storage for just $2 a month and can automatically upload photos from a phone, just like Dropbox. Or, if you just need photo uploading, switch to Flickr. It gives you one terabyte of storage free, and it uploads automatically as well.
I need that little break, because mobile phone costs continue to rise. Most plans are $70 to $100 a month for a cellphone data package. If you are paying more than that, it might be worth a call to your provider, especially if you are a longtime customer. You might be able to get a cheaper texting plan, for example, or lower your bill altogether by using messaging services like WhatsApp. After monitoring my data use for a while, I realized I could live with a plan that saved me $15 a month. Then I saved even more by switching to T-Mobile. Sometimes you get the best deals when you are a brand-new customer.
Think that covers all your digital costs? It is best to make sure by checking your credit card and PayPal receipts for subscriptions you may have forgotten about. I realized that I spend about $2 a month on apps. And, far worse, I keep getting billed for Microsoft Office 365 and forgetting to cancel it -- even though I occasionally get email reminders to actually install it. Head slap.
Wouldn't life be simpler if one service like Amazon, Comcast or Google could just give me all the streaming media, storage and entertainment I need?
Probably. But it would most likely be more expensive and far less flexible.
For now, I'll live with a la carte services, and the regular ritual of looking to shave a service here and a feature there. Convenience has always come at a cost.
