When Bob Mankoff announced last week that he was stepping down as cartoon editor of The New Yorker after 20 years, some people reached for the obvious, if not necessarily New Yorker-worthy, jokes. "Huge news for refrigerators everywhere," one blogger wrote. Other fans hailed a "last laugh."
But while Mr. Mankoff, 72, may be leaving the magazine, he's hardly retiring. He will be teaching a course about humor and communication at Fordham University. He'll continue to consult on the Cartoon Bank, a licensing platform he founded in 1992. He'll also be working on Botnik Studios, a company he's creating with the comedy writer Jamie Brew that explores using artificial intelligence to augment creativity. (Mr. Mankoff, a former graduate student in experimental psychology, has already collaborated with a Microsoft researcher on an algorithm that can sort through the flood of entries to the magazine's weekly cartoon caption contest.)
And of course Mr. Mankoff -- the de facto star of the 2015 documentary "Very Semi-Serious: A Partially Thorough Portrait of New Yorker Cartoonists" -- will be contributing to the magazine, though he's already bracing himself for brutal competition from the many younger cartoonists he has mentored.
"I've gotten some very nice emails from some of them saying, 'Now that you're submitting, you are my mortal enemy,"' Mr. Mankoff said in a telephone interview. "I think I might have to steal all the ideas that have been sent to me over the years."
He's kidding, though with him it can sometimes be hard to tell. "My mantra is to leave no joke unjoked," he said. "I just feel that being funny is being awake."
We talked with Mr. Mankoff, who officially departs at the end of April, about some of his favorites from among the hundreds of his own cartoons that have appeared in The New Yorker, "wonky humor theory" and that time he discovered that one of his punch lines had been repurposed on a thong. The excerpts here have been edited and condensed.
"This is my most famous cartoon, and the punch line has been ripped off on T-shirts, even a thong. That one is a little tricky -- why would you have that on a thong? I now own the trademark to the phrase. Initially, the Trademark Office denied it, but I was able to show that my cartoon is actually where this phrase, which has been cited many times, comes from."
"One of the things you do as a cartoonist is look inside the language. You see a phrase like 'the language of dance' and you ask: 'Is that a real language? Can anyone talk in it?' One of the interesting things about cartoons is that they are a freeze-frame. Each one has the potential for broader elaboration. You can almost see this one as the premise for an improv skit."
"This is an idea that comes from just seeing something. The New Yorker used to be on 42nd Street, and we could look out on the Empire State Building, a huge phallic symbolic if there ever was one. It just taps into all our obsessions, or at least men's obsessions."
"I did this after that Heaven's Gate cult [the group involved in a mass suicide in 1997 in California]. That's what I liked about it -- it would appear that week or after, and people would associate it with that. At the same time, it would work on another level and continue to be funny. This one has been reproduced a lot. From my point of view as an atheist, it's a cartoon about religion. But it can also just be about mindlessly following a leader."
"A lot of my creativity comes out of my speech. It's almost like as I'm talking, another editor is working, trying to finish the line. I often start a phrase and then try to flip it or exaggerate it. I'm a little hard of hearing, and sometimes I'll say to my wife: 'I'm sorry, I didn't hear you,' and she'll say, 'How far back?' This punch line is an exaggeration, but there's also a deeper truth relating to how much you actually listen to the person you're with."
"A lot of cartoons take place in very generic settings: two people at dinner, or sitting on the couch. Sometimes I see cartoons that are too well drawn, and I tell the cartoonists to take it back a notch -- still draw well, but don't illustrate, which deadens it. There's something really nice about the simplicity of cartoons. You don't want the image to mug too much."
"This is a really dumb joke that everybody loves. I loved doing this cartoon, but at the same time I thought it was dumb. But then I realized it was dumb to keep thinking it was dumb. One of the things you have to recognize about humor is that at its heart it's stupid, and we should enjoy that stupidity."
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Bob Mankoff, 72, has Been the Cartoon Editor of the New Yorker for 20 Years. (Photographs by Davina Pardo; Bob Mankoff/the New Yorker Magazine)
