Generate image description Sen. Barack Obama (D-Ill.), then the Democratic nominee for president, speaks at a campaign rally in Charlotte, N.C., on Nov. 3, 2008, one day before the election. (Damon Winter/The New York Times)
The internet was spewing racist and sexist attacks long before Vice President Kamala Harris began her presidential campaign this month, including when Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton sought the job. Since the last major election, however, it has become even more noxious — and more central to American politics.
In 2008, Obama faced an ecosystem in which Facebook had millions of users, not billions, and the iPhone was just a year old. In 2016, Clinton’s campaign monitored a handful of social media platforms, not dozens. In 2020, when Harris was Joe Biden’s running mate, it was far harder to use artificial intelligence to produce the fake pornographic renderings and misleading videos that now claim to portray her.
In the week since Harris — who is Black, of Indian descent and a woman — became the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, false narratives and conspiracy theories about her have ricocheted across the digital landscape.
Much has changed in the lead-up to 2024. Such claims are now turbocharged, fueled by an increasingly aggressive tone of political speech endorsed by top politicians, powered by AI and other new technologies, and let loose across a far more fragmented online landscape crowded with unmoderated platforms.
“The political arena has been sexist and racist for a really long time. What’s changed is the media ecosystem in which that problematic rhetoric grows,” said Meg Heckman, an associate professor of journalism at Northeastern University. “It’s almost like there are all of these parallel media universes, so we are not all operating on a shared set of facts.”
The attacks against Harris reflect the steady coarsening of political debate, a movement of explicit vulgarity and bigotry out from the shadows and into the open. Experts fear the shift could erode society by discouraging potential candidates from running for office and turning constituents off the democratic process.
Usha Vance, the Indian American wife of JD Vance, the Republican vice presidential candidate, has also faced racist attacks online, including from Nick Fuentes, the prominent white supremacist and antisemite whom Elon Musk, the owner of X, recently allowed back on the social platform. Nikki Haley, the former governor of South Carolina, who mounted an unsuccessful challenge against former President Donald Trump this year, has also faced a barrage of attacks related to her gender and Indian heritage.
It is difficult to quantify whether the online vitriol is gaining traction among voters. Some constituents, especially those exposed to aggressive language from Trump and his supporters, might be “desensitized to such attacks because they have been so normalized,” said Nina Jankowicz, the CEO of the American Sunlight Project, a nonprofit that studies disinformation, who was herself a target of online fury from the right.
“It will be hard for GOP leadership to put that genie back in the bottle, try as they might,” she said.
It remains to be seen whether the attacks will affect voters’ views of Harris, or whether people have become increasingly aware of such content and are thus more likely to discount it.
The false claims about Harris are, in many ways, echoes of those faced by her predecessors, but warped and amplified by the internet’s current structure and delivered with a double-barreled dose of toxicity because of Harris’ race and gender. In the past week, the vice president has been targeted online with unfounded questions about her Blackness and her eligibility to be president — two racist attacks that also followed Obama.
Those falsehoods were embraced on fringe, right-wing platforms like Truth Social and Rumble, which, in recent years, have become highly influential pipelines to mainstream forums, with minimal moderation and oversight.
Sexist posts also claimed that Harris was indebted to men for her success. A similar narrative shadowed Clinton during her lengthy career, accusing her of parlaying her marriage into prominent positions. This week, such ideas found enthusiastic support on Telegram and Gab, two platforms that soared in popularity in 2021, when Facebook cracked down on extremist content and sent far-right Trump supporters searching for new homes online.
Harris was also the focus of false claims that she was actually transgender — a conspiracy theory that has been applied to many prominent women in politics. Such claims have circulated freely on X for much of the 21 months that Musk, a frequent critic of transgender rights, has owned the platform.
“A lot of the airtime is sucked up just on this kind of hate speech and sexist speech,” said Dhanaraj Thakur, the research director at the Center for Democracy and Technology. His nonpartisan advocacy group analyzed more than 100,000 posts on X about congressional candidates in 2020 and found that women of color were twice as likely as white candidates to be singled out by misinformation and disinformation online, and four times as likely to experience violent threats online.
The percentage of people who reported experiencing gendered harassment online from 2017 to 2020 increased 13 points, according to a report from Pew Research Center. In June, the Global Disinformation Index, a nonpartisan team of researchers, warned of a rise in gendered abuse and disinformation online targeting female political leaders and candidates around the recent European Union elections. The Anti-Defamation League found that 46% of Black Americans who were harassed online in the past 12 months said it was because of their race.
Several disinformation experts said the recent discourse attacking Harris was almost certainly made worse by social media companies taking an increasingly hands-off approach to content moderation, such as moves by Musk to reverse policies that previously limited abusive posts and by YouTube to stop removing content that advanced false election fraud claims.
Gendered attacks are also exacerbated by an internet that has become highly visual, as more people spend time with platforms like Instagram and TikTok, according to a study published in Nature in February. More than 100,000 computer-generated, nonconsensual images of women circulated online in 2022, according to the United Nations — and that was before last year’s explosion of interest in AI, which made the technology more sophisticated, easy to use and available to the average user. This month, several fake videos and images surfaced claiming to show Harris in compromising situations.
After Trump’s loss to Biden in 2020, political experts noticed a distinctly violent strain of language coming from some far-right extremists, which they described as the mainstreaming of menace as a rallying tool.
Recent attacks against Harris — including calls to execute her and Biden as “enemies of the USA,” according to the Site Intelligence Group, which monitors extremism online — showcased that extreme tone, especially in some of the smaller forums that have gained traction in recent years. (Some Republican leaders have urged their colleagues to tone down their language. House Speaker Mike Johnson said last week that the election would be about “policies, not personalities” and added that Harris’ “ethnicity, her gender have nothing to do with this whatsoever.”)
“These are sadly just the first of many more threats to come against Harris,” said Rita Katz, the group’s director and the author of “Saints and Soldiers,” a book about online extremists.
Foreign influence campaigns have also evolved since Harris’ last turn on the campaign trail, with savvier use of AI and signs of an increased willingness to weaponize political divisions against specific candidates and parties.
Site Intelligence Group said it had already tracked a pro-Russian campaign taking shape against Harris. That included a post on Telegram it said was linked to remnants of the information network of Yevgeny Prigozhin, the former mercenary who was killed in a plane crash near Moscow.
It derided Harris as a woman from poverty who benefited from “various programs for the integration” of racial minorities. That attack line has been echoed on the far right, which has seized on efforts to improve diversity, equity and inclusion as evidence of gendered or racial favoritism. On Monday, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence said Russia was using “a broad stable of influence actors and tactics” to influence the election.
The attacks could add turbulence to Harris’ bid for the presidency as her campaign responds to, and dispels, the falsehoods. The consequences could also extend further, experts warned.
“Why are disengaged voters going to pay attention to policy issues,” said Heckman of Northeastern University, “if they have to wade through piles and piles of racist, sexist memes?”
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, and her Republican opponent, Donald Trump, during a presidential candidates’ debate in St. Louis, Mo., on Oct. 9, 2016. (Doug Mills/The New York Times)
Generate image description Vice President Kamala Harris arrives to speak to reporters assembled in her ceremonial office at the Eisenhower Executive Office Building, next to the White House, in Washington on July 25, 2024. (Kenny Holston/The New York Times)
Generate image description Supporters of then-President Donald Trump storm the U.S. Capitol after Trump addressed them at a rally outside the White House on Jan. 6, 2021. (Jason Andrew/The New York Times)
