Organizers released the event lineup for the annual New York event, set for June. It includes films that trace the lives of Linda Perry and Avicii.
The 2024 Tribeca Festival will offer the world premieres of a Brat Pack documentary, a movie starring Lily Gladstone and films that trace the lives of the music world figures Linda Perry and Avicii, organizers said Wednesday as they announced the event lineup.
Also on the schedule will be a feature starring Jenna Ortega, a buddy comedy with Michael Cera, Maya Erskine and Kristen Stewart and a documentary that looks at the world of queer stand-up comedy.
This year's festival, which will run in Lower Manhattan from June 5-16, will open with the documentary "Diane von Furstenberg: Woman in Charge" and will include 103 features from 114 filmmakers in 48 countries. The festival will offer 86 world premieres and 30 movies directed by first-time filmmakers.
Officials said their final selections were chosen from more than 13,000 submissions -- a record high.
"We feel really lucky that there was such enthusiasm, particularly with all of the challenges that the industry had this year," Cara Cusumano, the Tribeca Festival's director, said in a phone interview. "It made me feel really optimistic about the future of independent film and about the resiliency of the creative community."
The documentary "Brats" will follow Andrew McCarthy as he crisscrosses the country reconnecting with fellow actors Rob Lowe, Demi Moore, Ally Sheedy, Emilio Estevez and others who in the 1980s and '90s became collectively known as the Brat Pack. A panel featuring McCarthy, who directed the documentary, and other members of the cast will follow the premiere.
Fresh off a strong awards season, Gladstone is teaming up once again with the writer and director Morrisa Maltz in "Jazzy," a follow-up to the 2023 drama "The Unknown Country." Gladstone won a Gotham Award for her performance in that feature before she began snatching up prizes for her work in "Killers of the Flower Moon."
The documentary "Avicii -- I'm Tim" will track the prodigious electronic dance music producer through his own words. (He died in 2018 at age of 28.) And festival organizers said that the pop star turned songwriter Linda Perry would perform after the debut of "Linda Perry: Let It Die Here."
Ortega is starring in a teen love story titled "Winter Spring Summer or Fall," while Cera, Erskine and Stewart get tangled up on a spontaneous road trip in "Sacramento."
"Outstanding: A Comedy Revolution" features Lily Tomlin, Wanda Sykes, Rosie O'Donnell, Hannah Gadsby and Joel Kim Booster. Before the movie, stars of the film will give a standup performance, organizers say.
Cusumano also highlighted what she called a "female-forward" lineup of musical performances, including Perry, Renée Elise Goldsberry (of "Hamilton" and "Girls5eva" fame) and the DJ and singer Sister Nancy.
And Cusumano noted that several films would grapple with timely issues like global conflict, the 2024 presidential election and artificial intelligence.
"We were very mindful of our place in the calendar so close to the election," she said, pointing to the inclusion of movies about affirmative action, misinformation and extremism.
"In addition, we also want to make sure the festival has levity and entertainment, so there's also a fair amount of comedy going on," she added. "People having a good time."
Photograph Rob Lowe, left, and Andrew McCarthy in the documentary "Brats," to be shown at the Tribeca Festival. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VIA 'BRATS' DOCUMENTARY)
