Expectations for the chipmaker have been through the roof because of its dominance in a key component for artificial intelligence systems.
This summer, Wall Street and Silicon Valley began to question whether generative artificial intelligence could produce enough benefits to justify its staggering costs.
But the chipmaker Nvidia showed on Wednesday that enthusiasm for A.I. is still running hot. The company, a bellwether for A.I. spending, blew past Wall Street's expectations for another quarter, reporting that its sales and profit had more than doubled during the three months that ended in July. It also projected that sales in the current quarter would increase 80 percent from a year ago, exceeding earlier estimates.
Revenue was $ 30.04 billion in the quarter, surpassing its $ 28 billion estimate in May. Net income rose to $ 16.95 billion from $ 6.19 billion a year ago, eclipsing the most recent quarterly profits of Meta and Amazon.
Shares in the company, which has been one of the market's hottest stocks, fell by as much as 7 percent in after-hours trading, as the company acknowledged that it had some production challenges with a forthcoming A.I. chip. It said that the chip would still be available to customers this year.
The company said it would spend an additional $ 50 billion on repurchasing its own shares. In the quarter ending in July, it spent $ 15.4 billion on share repurchases and dividends.
The results speak to how Nvidia continues to dominate the market for A.I. chips, even as it faces rising competition and staggering expectations. Years before other big chip companies, Nvidia's chief executive, Jensen Huang, bet that semiconductors known as graphics processing units, or GPUs, would make A.I. systems possible. He built the company over the ensuing years to corner the market.
Nvidia now supplies more than 90 percent of the chips essential to building A.I. It is raking in sales as bigger companies such as Microsoft, Meta, Amazon and Alphabet, the parent company of Google, pour more than $ 50 billion into building A.I. data centers to support endeavors as varied as chatbots like ChatGPT and pharmaceutical companies using the technology to develop new drugs.
Nvidia is at the forefront of what is expected to be $ 1 trillion in spending on data centers and energy costs to support A.I., according to analysts.
Wall Street has rewarded Mr. Huang's prescience. Nvidia's value has tripled over the past year to more than $ 3 trillion, from $ 1 trillion, making it one of the three most valuable technology companies in the world along with Microsoft and Apple. But uncertainty about the sustainability of the A.I. expansion has made its stock price more unpredictable than that of its peers.
The company's shares sank 10 percent on a single day in April, its largest decline on record at the time, amid a broader pullback on tech stocks. The stock later rebounded and jumped 4 percent on Aug. 19, after Goldman Sachs raised its outlook for the company ahead of Wednesday's earnings report.
Customers want more of its chips than Nvidia can produce. The dynamic has raised concerns with government authorities about the company's power to determine how its scarce but essential technology is being allocated. The Justice Department, the European Union, Britain and China have each begun looking into the company's sales practices.
Nvidia is also contending with concerns that its chips are critical to national security. Officials in Washington fear that the chips could be used to help China take a lead in A.I. development.
Two years ago, the U.S. Commerce Department banned shipments of advanced chips to China, forcing Nvidia to create a less powerful chip for the Chinese market. Now, Huawei, one of China's biggest tech companies, is beginning to make its own A.I. chips that rival the performance of Nvidia's products, analysts say.
Competition is on the rise, as well. In the United States, AMD, Intel and smaller players like Cerebras, a start-up in Silicon Valley, are releasing more powerful chips. And customers such as Microsoft and Amazon are developing custom chips that could lessen their dependence on Nvidia.
"With every passing quarter, everyone clinches their fist tighter and tighter, and asks, 'How long can this go on for?"' said Timothy Arcuri, a senior semiconductor analyst with UBS. "The debate isn't about their sales numbers being good but the bigger picture of whether next year is the peak and the music stops. I think the music goes on for a while."
The biggest question hanging over Nvidia has been how long its customers will want more of its chips than it can produce. In May, Mr. Huang said the company wouldn't have enough supply to meet customer demand until "well into next year."
This month, Nvidia's shares fell after reports that the company would delay shipments of its newest artificial intelligence chip. The company said in a statement at the time that production for the chip, called Blackwell, was on track for later this year.
But during a call with analysts on Wednesday, Nvidia's chief financial officer, Colette Kress, acknowledged that the company had trouble with Blackwell, saying that it had made a change to the GPU production process to improve manufacturing. She said that Nvidia would begin making larger volumes of the chip later this year, adding that "demand is well above supply."
"There were no functional changes," Mr. Huang said on the call. Customers are continuing to purchase Nvidia's current line of GPUs, he said, because "they need accelerated computing."
As pressure has risen on Nvidia, Mr. Huang has pushed to bolster its business and compete with its customers. Last year, the company developed its own cloud computing product, DGX Cloud, which charges customers $ 37,000 a month to have access to and control one of its supercomputers.
Photograph Nvidia's leader, Jensen Huang, bet that semiconductors known as graphics processing units would make A.I. systems possible years before rivals did. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B3)
