Who says hindsight is 20/20?
Musicians keep getting tempted to revisit recordings they made long ago, and in 2023, flashbacks from the Beatles and Taylor Swift drew worldwide attention. Some temptations are technological; others have business imperatives. Wielding the latest digital tools, some powered by artificial intelligence, musicians and labels have been busily exploring their vaults and hard drives, many of them thoroughly convinced that they now have a better idea of how their older music is supposed to sound. Do they?
Recorded music is many things: an expression, a structure, a physical performance, a series of decisions large and small, an artifact of memory and emotion, a souvenir of a particular time. But all of those aspects end up as a waveform, which can then be treated like any other information. The digital era and its computer-engineering paradigms have made that information infinitely malleable: just a starting point for version 2.0, 3.0 and beyond. A.I. is only going to make things more complicated as it reconfigures all the information available online.
But with music, an update isn't necessarily an improvement. It might be an anachronism or a betrayal instead.
One of the hardest decisions for any artist is knowing when something is finished. That choice might be made after endless deliberation, on a deadline, on a whim, under the influence -- who knows? In the vinyl era, that decision was usually final, give or take alternate mixes for singles, radio and clubs. Listeners reacted to, and bonded with, the music in its fixed form.
Digital loosened things up -- at first out of necessity, as vast analog catalogs were transferred to new formats, and then more innovatively, as musicians reveled in the possibilities of vastly expanded multitracking, sampling, editing and even glitching. Remixes, remasters, mash-ups, ghost duets -- all kinds of second-guessing ensued, including among musicians themselves who were older but not necessarily wiser as artists. In the streaming era, even an official release date doesn't make things final; Kanye West, now Ye, kept revising his 2016 LP "The Life of Pablo" -- making previous iterations vanish online -- well after its initial release.
There are obvious commercial incentives for looking back. For many artists, as well as their marketers, it's easier creative work to revisit sure things than to forge brand-new material. And there's hardly a more time-tested selling point than claiming that a well-loved product is new and improved.
Pop has been busily plumbing its archives since the dawn of the digital era, but 2023 brought some high-profile time-warping. The Beatles empire heralded the release of "Now and Then," which is billed as the last song that all four members worked on, even asynchronously. It's built from a John Lennon demo from the late 1970s that the other three Beatles started rearranging in the 1990s. Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr did recording sessions to complete the track in 2022, using recent software that could cleanly separate out Lennon's vocal.
The surviving Beatles tidied up the song, strengthening the beat and jettisoning some of Lennon's more self-doubting lyrics and lacing it with elements (like vocal harmonies) lifted from other Beatles songs. They were deliberately looking back where the Beatles of the 1960s had determinedly pushed ahead. It's a 21st-century song, as much "now" as "then."
"Now and Then" arrived as part of the latest Beatles reissues: new, expanded, remixed versions of the anthologies known as the Red and Blue albums, "The Beatles/1962-1966" and "The Beatles/1966-1970" (now also designated "The 2023 Edition"). They are the continuation of the Beatles' longtime efforts to wring every possible product out of their catalog: concept compilations ("Love Songs," No. 1 hits on "1"), expanded -- and illuminating -- reissues that include unreleased session tapes, a "naked" mix of "Let It Be," a megamix for Cirque du Soleil ("Love").
The Red and Blue albums, originally released in 1973, were many young listeners' primers on the Beatles: a whirlwind career ruthlessly pared down to what two LPs could hold. The 2023 editions have more songs; they're now three-LP sets, diluting the canon established by the original compilations. And as with the other painstakingly reworked 21st-century Beatles releases, they fidget with countless sonic details: panning instruments to different places or moving them into the center, separating parts that had been blurred or blended, bringing out new details, crisping things up.
The new mixes offer a contemporary mixture of analytical clarity and arbitrary tweaks. But they don't entirely trust that the groundbreaking 1960s Beatles already knew what they were doing in the first place -- and that their artistic achievement was shaped by how the Beatles dealt with the era's studio technology, limitations and all. People encountering the songs on streaming services may not notice which version they're getting: the ones all the Beatles chose to release, or the new ones.
A different kind of reclamation project continued when Taylor Swift released "1989 (Taylor's Version)," her remake and expansion of her breakthrough pop album from 2014: nearly note-for-note reconstructions of the previously released songs, plus five other songs "from the vault" that she has said didn't fit the original album. Swift has impeccable personal reasons for the do-over; she does not own the master recordings she made for the Big Machine label, even though the songs are hers. Meanwhile, her latest fans get a chance to experience a "new" Swift album as though it were being released for the first time.
Yet an unimpeachable business statement is different from an artistic one. On "1989" -- with the Swedish pop master Max Martin as executive producer -- Swift was boldly and indelibly redefining herself. She left behind the country radio format, cranked up the beats and loops and honed her pop concision. The album has a spirit of both discipline and discovery, of kicking old expectations to the curb while flexing new skills.
And that's something the remake can't recapture. Instead of a breakthrough, it's more like an assignment or an exercise, diligently revisiting every instrumental layer and vocal inflection. It's thoroughly, unblinkingly professional, but the stakes are lower. Time-warp paradoxes start with the first track, "Welcome to New York." Swift sings, "Everybody here wanted something more/Searching for a sound they hadn't heard before" -- as she rebuilds a sound the entire world has now heard before.
Of course, there's an outlier and counterexample -- as always in music -- to leaving the past alone. In 2023, the Replacements released "Tim: Let It Bleed Edition," a boxed set including a full-length remix of the band's 1985 album "Tim" by the longtime producer and engineer Ed Stasium.
"Tim" was the Replacements' fourth album but its first on a major label, at a time when "indie credibility" seemed to matter. That identity crisis was central to the songs Paul Westerberg wrote: "God what a mess/On the ladder of success," he sang in "Bastards of Young."
"Tim" was produced by Tom Erdelyi of the Ramones, who made it unfriendly to radio play; it's distant, muted and unnecessarily murky, perhaps to resist any accusations that the Replacements were selling out. Stasium's remix brings out all kinds of things that were recorded but downplayed in the original production: snappy but untamed drumming, guitars that wrangle and cackle, Westerberg's heartfelt and rowdy vocals.
Even with this mix, "Tim" probably wouldn't have been an album-radio hit; the band was still too scrappy for mid-1980s gatekeepers. But the remixed "Tim" is the rare case where second thoughts can change things for the better. On streaming services and in the box, the Replacements don't hide their earlier choices; the past and present versions of the album are both included. At least we can still know which is which.
Digital possibilities are only going to scramble things further, untethering artistic products from their original inspirations and proportions. Oil paintings are being remarketed as environments. Albums are getting a new round of spatialized Dolby Atmos remixes. A.I. will be generating countless variations, pastiches and fakes. But amid the flood of new versions, let's not forget to identify, recognize and celebrate the originals.
Photograph Art from albums by, from top, the Replacements, Taylor Swift and the "new" Beatles single.
