A team has developed a way for a computer to sense inputs, learn rules and successfully play a number of classic video games.
In a big step in the development of computers capable of independent reasoning, a team of Google researchers has created a machine that can figure out how to play and win video games.
The breakthrough is similar to IBM's chess-winning Deep Blue computer, or Watson, a computer that IBM programmed to win at the television quiz show "Jeopardy!" In some ways the latest advance is more profound, however; Deep Blue and Watson were taught strategies that worked inside the rules of their respective games. The new program learned -- without training -- how to succeed at a number of different games.
The rule-learning technology, described on Wednesday in the British journal Nature, could initially be important to Google for things like search, voice recognition and language translation. Further out, the researchers said, the learning system could be useful for robots and driverless cars.
Demis Hassabis, who led the project, described the program as "a single general learning system," combining sensory knowledge and learning. That dual capability, which the authors of the paper call "deep-Q network," or D.Q.N., "is mastering and understanding structure," he said.
The Google program successfully taught itself the rules to about 50 Atari 2600 computer games from the 1980s, eventually figuring out strategies for victory. This included figuring out navigation, actions and positive outcomes, then using these to improve results.
In 43 of the games, which included such classics as Space Invaders and Breakout, the D.Q.N. outperformed previous computational efforts to win, the paper said. In more than half the games, the new system could eventually play at least three-quarters as well as a professional human game tester.
By figuring out for itself the rules of a system, the D.Q.N. occasionally surprised its creators with new winning strategies. Playing Seaquest, for example, the computer determined that the game's submarine could survive by staying near the surface for the entire game.
Mr. Hassabis is a founder of DeepMind, an artificial intelligence company that Google bought last year for a reported $400 million. He is also a champion gamer and a game designer.
The D.Q.N. team is now focused on bringing its machine into a 1990s capability, learning and navigating the far more difficult three-dimensional spaces of driving games like Grand Theft Auto.
"I would say that will happen in the next five years," Mr. Hassabis said. From there, he added, "if it can drive a car in a racing game, it should theoretically drive a car" in the physical world.
