Generate image description Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, during a campaign event at the UAW Local 900 in Wayne, Mich., on Thursday, Aug. 8, 2024. (Erin Schaff/The New York Times)
WASHINGTON — When a draft of a blockbuster Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade leaked in 2022, Vice President Kamala Harris met with Ron Klain, then the White House chief of staff. He had an idea: She should lead a new task force on abortion rights.
She seemed uncertain. “Why?” she asked.
“We need a real leader, and you’re the leader,” Klain responded.
Harris did not want to just give a speech without substance. But as the White House began mapping out executive actions to defend access to abortion, she began to see the possibilities and accepted the role.
It was a moment that captured the essence of the Harris vice presidency. Deliberate and disciplined, cautious and at times risk averse, she saw trapdoors around her and wanted to avoid them. She considered herself a team player, but could not always be sure the team had her best interests at heart. She gravitated to issues on which she thought she could make a difference without upstaging President Joe Biden, but was rarely promoted as a critical player in the administration.
The court’s decision eliminating a constitutional right to abortion proved to be an issue on which Harris could take the lead, one that Biden did not feel as comfortable addressing. She found her voice as the administration’s champion of abortion rights. And she paved the way to the moment when she will accept her party’s nomination for president this week.
Harris’ record as vice president is complex, as described by current and former administration officials and allies. She has done the dutiful things she has been asked to do. She led a labor task force and a gun safety office. She traveled to places the president had no time to visit and broke key tie votes in the Senate.
She rarely took positions at odds with the president’s, but she made her mark quietly at times. She pushed him to pick Ketanji Brown Jackson for the Supreme Court when he was getting advice to the contrary. Her candidate was selected for the head of the World Bank.
She developed arguments to make Biden comfortable with approving expansive student debt relief when he hesitated. She lobbied him to endorse an exception to the Senate filibuster rule to push forward voting rights legislation. And she advocated speaking out early on the impact of the court’s abortion decision on in vitro fertilization despite resistance from some in the West Wing.
But she was also saddled with no-win assignments, most notably tackling the root causes of illegal immigration from Central America, exposing her to Republican criticism. Stung by an early television interview that went awry, she became skittish about mistakes. And her allies believed the president’s staff often clipped her wings, appropriating her initiatives for him to announce without building up her own public profile.
“She would be very careful to make sure she was making a constructive contribution,” Klain said in an interview. “But I don’t think it’s a question of caution. I think it’s a question of loyalty and dedication and focus on the mission.”
At the same time, he acknowledged that she was not always well served by the White House. “We were all united behind the idea she should be successful. We just didn’t find the path to do it,” he said.
“People really liked her,” Klain added. “And I don’t think we did a good enough job of selling her.”
A Learning Curve
After a half-century in Washington, Biden did not need Harris to explain the capital to him, or at least did not think he did. She came with scant experience in international affairs that the former Senate Foreign Relations Committee chair particularly valued. He did not assign her to lead major negotiations with lawmakers as President Barack Obama had him do.
“The main thing was you don’t get in the way of a sitting president,” said Douglas Brinkley, a presidential historian. “Vice presidents need to stay somewhat second tier and in the shadows.”
Harris had limited time in Washington at that point. “She had a learning curve as vice president like Joe Biden had a learning curve as vice president,” said Rep. James Clyburn, D-S.C. “They didn’t give her time to learn or room to grow.”
Sen. Dick Durbin of Illinois, the assistant Democratic leader, said partnerships between presidents and vice presidents are inherently challenging. “This is a tough assignment, being vice president,” he said. “It’s fraught with tension and rivalry and history.” But for all that, he added, “I don’t see any of that in the relationship between Kamala and Joe Biden.”
Taking Grief
As she settled into the West Wing, Harris set her style. Like the former prosecutor she was, she grilled staff members, stoking anxiety. Her team went through multiple shake-ups early in the administration.
Some former White House officials described her as a “tough boss” who would challenge aides she sensed were unprepared.
Wally Adeyemo, the deputy Treasury secretary, said she was disciplined about pushing for help for small businesses and community financial institutions. “She is both someone who calls on a regular basis to ask how things are going and then requests more information by paper,” he said.
Some outside the administration came to feel that she was not as interested in contradictory views. Rep. Henry Cuellar, D-Texas, said he tried to reach out to her team to talk about border security but his requests were never answered.
“I don’t want to say I told you so, but it did happen the way I said it would happen,” Cuellar said of the record levels of illegal border crossings earlier in Biden’s presidency.
Harris’ interview with Lester Holt of NBC News in June 2021 proved an early turning point. When Holt asked why she had not visited the border, she snapped, “And I haven’t been to Europe.”
She was deeply bruised by the ensuing backlash, and largely avoided major interviews for many months. “She felt like that interview had set us back, and she felt bad about that,” Klain said.
Overseas Messenger
Harris spent much of her first two years on Capitol Hill, where her tiebreaking vote gave Democrats control of a Senate then divided 50-50. She has broken 33 ties, more than any vice president in American history.
But there is little testimony that she played a significant role in brokering the deals leading up to such legislation. She was acutely deferential to Biden, who had spent 36 years in the Senate and considered himself a master legislator.
Harris likewise was careful not to contradict Biden on foreign policy, another area of expertise for him, although she publicly emphasized concern for Palestinian suffering in the Gaza Strip more than he did.
Where she privately differed from Biden on foreign policy was more on framing. She did not think much of his democracy versus autocracy theme, reasoning that a number of close U.S. allies are not democracies. Instead, aides said, she sees foreign affairs through the lens of her legal background, stressing America’s role in defending the international rules-based order. Their different approaches, however, generally led to the same conclusion.
Outside the Box
Much of Harris’ work in the Biden administration focused on issues that were important but did not often make headlines.
She was put in charge of or took interest in a variety of subjects, including child care and paid leave, maternal health, artificial intelligence, maritime security, housing, community banks, community health centers and the child tax credit. She helped raise billions of dollars in private and public funds to address poverty and corruption in Central America. When Biden created the White House Office of Gun Violence Prevention last year, he put Harris in charge of it.
She was also deeply involved in Biden’s only Supreme Court appointment. Harris concluded that Jackson, a federal appeals judge, would be the boldest option. “Joe, you may only get one chance to do this as president, and you want to be proud of your legacy here,” she told Biden, according to Klain.
Mitch Landrieu, who oversaw the administration’s implementation of the bipartisan infrastructure program, said Harris has “really got good policy chops.” At first, he said, “people did not give her a benefit of the doubt.” But he added, “everybody grows into the job.”
A Historic Decision
Air Force Two was just taking off when the Supreme Court issued its decision overturning Roe v. Wade, several weeks after Klain first walked into her office.
Harris was heading to Chicago to talk about maternal health, but scrapped the speech. The first woman elected to national office, Harris knew that all eyes would be on her. “She got very focused, very fast,” recalled Durbin, who was accompanying her that day.
When she landed, Harris huddled with her staff to craft a new speech. Three hours later, she finally took the microphone, denouncing what she said was “the first time in the history of our nation that a constitutional right has been taken from the people of America.”
Whether she realized it at the time or not, it was the start of a new chapter in her vice presidency. “She knew this was a historic decision,” Durbin said, “and she wanted to get it right.”
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, during a campaign event at the UAW Local 900 in Wayne, Mich., on Aug. 8, 2024. (Erin Schaff/The New York Times)
Generate image description Border Patrol agents speak to migrants near Campo, Calif. on March 13, 2024. (Ariana Drehsler/The New York Times)
Generate image description President Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, speak in the overflow room during a campaign event at Prince George's Community College in Largo, Md., on Thursday, Aug. 15, 2024. (Eric Lee/The New York Times)
