ENERGY
Walmart Plans Network Of E.V. Charging Stations
Walmart plans to have its own network of electric vehicle charging stations by 2030 to tap into the growing adoption of E.V.s. The new fast-charging stations will be placed at thousands of Walmart and Sam's Club stores, alongside nearly 1,300 it already offers in a deal with the Volkswagen unit Electrify America. Walmart's more than 5,000 stores and Sam's Club warehouses are within 10 miles of about 90 percent of Americans. "We have the ability to address range and charging anxiety in a way that no one else can in this country," Vishal Kapadia, Walmart's recently appointed senior vice president of Energy Transformation, said in an interview. As E.V. charging infrastructure ramps up in the United States, there are widespread concerns over uptime, performance, ease of use and high installation costs of the machines. Mr. Kapadia said he expected there will be four chargers on average installed per store. REUTERS
ACQUISITIONS
Amazon's Bid for iRobot Faces Antitrust Scrutiny
British antitrust regulators have started investigating Amazon's purchase of the robot vacuum maker iRobot, adding further scrutiny to the $ 1.7 billion deal. The Competition and Markets Authority said Thursday that it was considering whether the deal will result in a "substantial lessening of competition" within the United Kingdom. In an initial step, the U.K. watchdog invited comments on the deal from "any interested party." The acquisition is already facing a review in the U.S. by the Federal Trade Commission amid worries about Amazon's growing market power. Consumer groups had voiced concerns after the deal was announced last year that it would further the e-commerce giant's dominance in the smart home market. The Bedford, Mass.-based company, which makes the popular Roomba robotic vacuum cleaners, said it "continues to work cooperatively with both the F.T.C. in the U.S. and other regulatory agencies in their review of the AmazoniRobot merger." ASSOCIATED PRESS
INTERNATIONAL
OpenAI Tries to Resolve Privacy Issue With Italy
The company behind ChatGPT will propose measures to resolve data privacy concerns that sparked a temporary Italian ban on the artificial intelligence chatbot, regulators said Thursday. The Italian data protection authority, known as Garante, last week blocked San Franciscobased OpenAI's popular chatbot, ordering it to temporarily stop processing Italian users' personal information while it investigates a possible breach of European Union data privacy rules. Experts said it was the first such case of a democracy imposing a nationwide ban on a mainstream A.I. platform. In a video call Wednesday between the watchdog's commissioners and OpenAI executives, including Sam Altman, the chief executive, the company promised to address the concerns. The regulators imposed the ban after some users' messages and payment information were exposed. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN SULLIVAN/GETTY IMAGES)
