SOMETIMES the modern world feels like death by a thousand little subscription payments.
In a lot of ways, we can live in an on-demand, à la carte dream. We can collect, stream and store movies, TV shows, photos, videos and music nearly wherever and whenever we desire. It's almost irresistible, and definitely addictive.
But boy, the cost of this fun-at-your-fingertips life adds up quickly. It is easy to owe subscription fees or other payments to almost a dozen services. And even if you try to be less indulgent, the bills can pile up without realizing it.
To keep all the subscriptions straight, and to avoid paying for services no longer wanted or needed (or forgotten about entirely), it is worthwhile to conduct a regular audit of your digital life. When I recently did this math, adding up my cable, Internet and cellphone bills, the total was a real eye-opener: nearly $400 a month.
Shocked? I was. And you might be, too, once you crunch your numbers -- and it may help if you use my experience as a guide for conducting your own digital audit.
For me, and probably for you, the biggest chunk of money goes to TV and movies. Many consumers are paying for at least two separate services to deliver television and movies, and probably more.
For example, my Comcast cable bill -- which includes a cable television package, high-speed Internet and a landline phone -- is about $180 a month. That is high, but not unusually high: The NPD Group, the research company, said cable TV bills alone (minus Internet and phone) averaged $83 a month in 2012, and they have been increasing by about 6 percent a year, outpacing inflation. NPD predicts the average cost will reach $200 by 2020.
Despite that service and the cost, many of the things I want to watch are not available without an additional service or a more expensive TV package. I recently added HBO for a promotional price of $10 a month, and a supplemental on-demand service, Streampix, that costs $5 a month.
So, that's $195 for cable services alone.
Then there is $13 a month I pay for TiVo service, which I prefer to the Comcast cable box, which is $3 a month cheaper. I also pay for Netflix ($8 a month) and Amazon Prime ($79 a year).
By this point, you probably think I have enough to watch. But no.
In the last year, on-demand rentals and iTunes purchases of movies added about $10 a month to my media budget. I also stream some videos on my Xbox 360 game console, which means I need the Xbox Live Gold for $50 a year, or about $4 a month.
In total, then, I'm paying $236 a month for Internet, movies and TV. Ouch.
The obvious way to cut the bill is to get rid of cable. A stand-alone Internet service would cost about $40 a month (prices may vary, of course, depending on speed and promotions), removing $155 or so from my monthly total, or about $1,860 a year. After all, I'm already managing multiple video subscriptions, and my TiVo and my Internet-connected TV both deliver online video to my television set. And almost $2,000 a year is significant savings.
But I'm not quite ready to cut the cord. The primary reason is sports. An HD antenna connected to my TiVo would provide network channels, which would show some sporting events. There are many other events that wouldn't be available, though, like all those World Cup games that were only on ESPN.
Still, consider my cable TV subscription to be on life support.
Luckily, there are other ways to pick away at the movie and TV bill. By making better use of video on demand through my cable service, I probably do not need a Netflix subscription. Many of the old movies available on Netflix can be found on Amazon and iTunes, too, and going that route may be cheaper than paying for Netflix every month. Or I could have either Amazon or Netflix instead of both.
For now, I'm going to spend a month or two trying to live without it and see whether on-demand and Amazon Prime can fill the void.
Music is much less expensive than video, I'm happy to say. I pay $10 a month for commercial-free and offline access to Spotify, and also around $4 a month for satellite radio because I like using it to discover new music while in the car.
If you already have a big digital music collection, though, you might not need offline access to songs and could get by with the free versions of Spotify or Pandora. Or, if you have Amazon Prime, you can get music through its new music service. Amazon's library of streaming music is tiny compared with Spotify or Pandora, but it might be fine if you have a phone full of MP3s.
There are other music deals out there. If you are an AT&T subscriber, you can get a family plan on Beats Music for $15 a month that includes five accounts across 10 devices. Considering that an individual subscription is $10 a month, that's an excellent value.
I'm going to keep my music service as it is, but all of my songs and videos -- not to mention photos -- have created storage needs that I must address. Now, I pay for digital storage twice over. There's the $10 a month I pay for 100 gigabytes of storage on Dropbox. I also pay $8 a month for iCloud storage so I can back up and restore my Apple devices more easily.
Fixing this overlap is easy. Google Drive offers 100 gigabytes of storage for just $2 a month and can automatically upload photos from a phone, just like Dropbox. Or, if you just need photo uploading, switch to Flickr. It gives you one terabyte of storage free, and it uploads automatically as well.
I need that little break, because mobile phone costs continue to go up. Most plans are now $70 to $100 a month for a cellphone data package. If you are paying more than that, it might be worth a call to your provider, especially if you are a longtime customer. You might be able to get a cheaper texting plan, for example, or lower your bill altogether by using messaging services like WhatsApp.
After monitoring my data use for a while, I realized I could live with a plan that saved me $15 a month. Then I saved even more by switching to T-Mobile. Sometimes you get the best deals when you are a brand-new customer.
Think that covers all your digital costs? It is best to make sure by checking your credit card and PayPal receipts for subscriptions you may have forgotten about. I realized that I spend about $2 a month on apps. And, far worse, I keep getting billed for Microsoft Office 365 and forgetting to cancel it -- even though I occasionally get email reminders to actually install it. Head slap.
Wouldn't life be simpler if one service like Amazon, Comcast or Google could just give me all the streaming media, storage and entertainment I need?
Probably. But it would most likely be more expensive and far less flexible.
For now, I'll live with à la carte services, and the regular ritual of looking to shave a service here and a feature there. Convenience has always come at a cost.
AuthorAffiliation MOLLY WOOD molly.wood@nytimes.com Twitter: @mollywood
Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Andy Chen/the New York Times)
