Disheveled, eyes bruised with fatigue, and feeling grungy after two days of showerless toil, 190 video game designers, artists and programmers disembarked on Saturday afternoon from the rain-slicked California Zephyr at the Emeryville, Calif., Amtrak station. The travelers -- some of whom had come from as far away as Zambia and Pakistan -- had taken part in Train Jam, which uses the trip from Chicago to this city just north of Oakland as both an opportunity and a time frame for strangers to come together and, amid laptops, headphones and virtual-reality headsets, create video games.
"You will never know true happiness until you've showered after a 52-hour-long train ride," Adriel Wallick, the event's organizer, wrote on Twitter after arriving in the Bay Area.
Ms. Wallick, 29, an independent game developer from the Netherlands, conceived Train Jam as a way of making a creative venture out of the journey to the Game Developers Conference in San Francisco, the world's largest annual gathering of game makers. Ms. Wallick said the idea came to her during a trip from Boston to Seattle three years ago: "I realized that a cross-country train ride would work perfectly as a game jam," she said, referring to the increasingly prevalent events in which participants develop video games over an allotted time period.
And the views aren't bad, either. Along the 2,438-mile route, the train weaves through the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada, shifting scenery from cities to mountains to deserts. "It's hard to not be inspired by all of the changes and beauty around you," Ms. Wallick added.
Each of the 50 or so video games made during Train Jam will be playable throughout the week at the cavernous Moscone Center, where the conference is being held. More than 26,000 people are expected to attend the 30th Game Developers Conference, which began on Monday and ends on Friday. That these little games are being given a platform on such a sizable stage is indicative of the industry's kaleidoscopic expansion. Today a video game like Minecraft, originally built by a lone programmer in his bedroom, competes with the titans of the industry, such as Call of Duty and FIFA, which are made by a battalion of workers and supported by the screaming winds of multimillion-dollar marketing.
That kind of blockbuster game making is a high-risk venture, with spiraling budgets and development cycles that can last three years. Unproven ideas are perilous, leading most studios to cling to bankable sequels. Game jams, by contrast, are a low-risk way to experiment with new concepts without the need for a commercial aesthetic, an apolitical stance or a bug-free release. Two recent games -- Surgeon Simulator, about a hapless surgeon, and Goat Simulator, about an anarchic goat -- are among the well-known irreverent games to spring from game jams.
Even the games that don't blossom into commercial releases can be useful.
"It is a place to fail, happily," said Susan Gold, founder of Global Game Jam, which invites people to join in, wherever they're based, during a 48-hour period.
Two days is enough time to explore an idea without burning out, and at these jams, programmers, writers, musicians, artists and project managers can all find a use for their talents. The format also encourages networking and stepping outside a rigid development repertoire. For those who usually work with sprawling teams, a game jam can break the monotony and bring fresh focus. For independent game makers who work alone, it can be an opportunity to test an idea, socialize and share skills.
Train Jam accentuates the sense of expedition that comes with all creative work. Like any collaboration, game making is full of diversions and rewrites. A train journey, by contrast, is mostly predictable; the landscape may change, but everybody starts and ends at the same point. Placing game making within the context of a journey provides useful constraints.
The term "game jam" was coined by the wunderkind programmer Chris Hecker, known for his work on the pioneering artificial-intelligence-based game Spore. In 2002, he invited 13 friends to join him in Oakland, Calif., to make games over a four-day period. They called it Indie Game Jam, a reference to musical jam sessions.
Since Mr. Hecker's event, the format has been adopted around the world, with jams unfolding in unusual places, often to a theme. February's Splash Jam, for example, was held during a 745-mile cruise along the coast of Norway. Its 100 participants were tasked with making games related to "Beginnings." Isolation Jam, which takes place in June, is set on a remote, Internet-less farm in northern Iceland. Castle Jam changes its location each year. For Asylum Jam, participants make horror games without the genre clichés related to mental health.
Ms. Gold's inaugural Global Game Jam was in 2009. She started the event with the aim of coordinating a game jam on every continent. "I was thinking that maybe we would get 10 or 20 locations to sign up," she said. But more than 1,500 people took part in 23 countries. By this January, the number had risen to close to 40,000 participants in 93 countries. They created more than 6,800 games, many of which are available free to download and sample.
The rise of game jams also shows a mounting appetite for alternatives to sports and shooter games. Lyst Jam is a Swedish game jam, held in June, in which attendees make video games about romance, love and sex. (Lyst is the Swedish word for lust.) "We feel the medium misrepresents the world we live in, and needs to be less narrow in gender, stories, themes and game mechanics," said Andrea Hasselager, the jam's organizer.
"There's an intense feeling of belonging to a group," she said. "Combine that with a space where you shut out the concerns of everyday life, and the adrenaline rush of working all night and day to see something come to life, and it becomes irresistible."
For Adam Saltsman, an independent game maker from Austin, Tex., whose hit game Canabalt was conceived during a game jam, the appeal is more straightforward. "I think nerds like to party and make stuff," he said. "It's also a nice way to kind of get a bunch of resources into one geographical location, and it's a great excuse to try something new."
Photograph Train Jam Participants Gathered On Saturday at the Emeryville, Calif., Amtrak Station After a Long Ride From Chicago. (Photograph by Jason Henry for the New York Times)
