ECONOMY
Commercial Bankruptcies Are Up 33% Year to Date
U.S. commercial bankruptcy filings are up 33 percent so far this year with new cases in September surging by 78 percent from a year earlier as the recession triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic hits small businesses, data released on Monday showed.
Filings by individuals, however, are lower so far this year thanks to government relief efforts.
Chapter 11 bankruptcy filings totaled 747 last month, up from 420 a year earlier and from 525 in August, legal services firm Epiq said in a monthly report. Year-to-date filings total 5,529, a third higher than in the first three quarters of 2019.
"These commercial filings are primarily small businesses that do not have access to capital or stimulus," Deirdre O'Connor, managing director of corporate restructuring at Epiq, said in a statement. "Unfortunately, those bankruptcies will continue to rise in the current economic environment." Reuters
PHARMACEUTICALS
Bristol Myers to Buy MyoKardia for $ 13 Billion
Bristol Myers Squibb said on Monday it would buy MyoKardia for about $ 13 billion to bolster its portfolio of heart disease treatments, ahead of the potential loss of sales exclusivity of some of its blockbuster drugs.
The deal comes close on the heels of Bristol Myers' $ 74 billion acquisition of Celgene last year, which was aimed at creating an oncology giant and shielding itself from fierce competition for its cancer immunotherapy, Opdivo, from Merck's Keytruda.
Shares of MyoKardia, which have nearly doubled in value this year, surged another 57.8 percent to $ 220.31, just shy of the offer of $ 225 per share.
The deal will also help Bristol Myers reduce its dependence on cancer drugs and give it access to Myokardia's lead heart drug candidate with blockbuster potential, mavacamten, adding to its portfolio of heart drugs that includes blood thinner Eliquis.
Bristol Myers said it expects mavacamten to be a "multibillion dollar asset" and drive significant growth. Reuters
TECHNOLOGY
Nvidia Supercomputer
To Target Health Research
Graphics chip maker Nvidia said Monday it plans to build Britain's fastest supercomputer that health care researchers can use to work on medical problems including Covid-19.
Nvidia, based in Santa Clara, Calif., said it will spend 40 million pounds ( $ 52 million) on the supercomputer, dubbed Cambridge-1, which will consist of 80 Nvidia systems and is expected to be online by the end of the year.
Nvidia's C.E.O., Jensen Huang, said Cambridge-1 will be available to health care researchers using artificial intelligence to work on urgent medical challenges.
"Tackling the world's most pressing challenges in health care requires massively powerful computing resources to harness the capabilities of A.I.," Huang said.
Cambridge-1 would be ranked the 29th most powerful supercomputer in the world and the most powerful in Britain, the company said. Associated Press
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY GETTY IMAGES)
