Much has been written about the fact "Crazy Rich Asians" is the first big studio movie in 25 years to feature Asian actors in leading roles. While making the film, director Jon M. Chu contended with a producer's suggestion that the lead role -- the Chinese-American Rachel Chu -- be rewritten as a white woman, as well as the often-heard complaint that it's difficult to find Asian-American male actors.

The film serves as an obvious rebuke to these assertions: Constance Wu's performance as Rachel is central to the success of the movie, and the cast is stacked with a roster of talent that would make any director blush. Some of the actors are relative newcomers: Awkwafina, who plays Rachel's best friend, just had her first major role in a blockbuster in "Ocean's 8;" Henry Golding, who plays Rachel's boyfriend, was a television host before landing the gig. But many of the other cast members already have impressive resumes. If you don't know them already, you should. Here's where you can find some of their best previous work.
Constance Wu
Fresh Off the Boat
When "Fresh Off the Boat" premiered in 2015 on ABC, it became the first network show to center on an Asian-American family since Margaret Cho's "All American Girl" in 1994. The show is loosely based on the chef Eddie Huang's autobiography of the same title, and Wu's breakout performance as Eddie's mother, Jessica, nearly steals the show. The series is a perfect showcase for her, as the broader comedic strokes of the sitcom format give way to a deeper exploration of the immigrant experience and the American dream. The episode in which Jessica becomes an American citizen is one of the series' best, with Wu allowing Jessica's usual veneer of toughness fall away to reveal her sentimental side.
Also of interest: "The Feels" and "EastSiders."
-
Michelle Yeoh
'Police Story 3: Super Cop'
Jackie Chan's "Police Story" films are part of the action movie canon for good reason: The stunts are stunning, as is the fight choreography. "Police Story 3: Super Cop" features some of the franchise's best sequences -- Quentin Tarantino is a fan of the film -- and stars Yeoh as the Interpol inspector working with Chan's police officer on his latest assignment, infiltrating a drug cartel. "Super Cop" marked Yeoh's return to acting following a brief retirement, though you'd never know it based on her performance. She did all her own stunts, including riding a motorbike alongside and then onto a moving train, and moves through the fight scenes like a human lightning bolt. It's a neat showcase of why she's popularly known as "the queen of martial arts," and a thrilling film to boot.
Also of interest: "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," "Yes, Madam" and "Sunshine."
-
[Interested in getting suggestions on what to watch? Sign up for the Watching newsletter, which we send out every Monday, Wednesday and Friday.]
Gemma Chan
'Humans'

Following its premiere on Channel 4 in 2015, "Humans" became the British broadcaster's biggest original drama in two decades. As with many stories about artificial intelligence, the "synths" in "Humans" offer a way to discuss contemporary issues of intolerance and prejudice, but the series stands out for how attuned it seems to be to the present political moment, as well as its focus on emotional development. Chan plays Mia, a synth whose code hides something more than a growing consciousness, and Chan draws out the battle between her robotic and human sides beautifully. As the show delves into more melodramatic territory, it's the performances -- and Chan's in particular -- that keep it grounded.
Also of interest: "Secret Diary of a Call Girl," "Fresh Meat" and "Death in Paradise."
-
Ken Jeong
'Advantageous'
The bulk of Jeong's previous work skews toward the outrageous -- Mr. Chow in "The Hangover," Señor Chang in "Community" -- which may make his role in Jennifer Phang's "Advantageous" come as something of a surprise. The film takes place in the near future, where the technology has been developed to allow the transfer of consciousness into a new body. As she ages, Gwen (Jacqueline Kim), a company spokeswoman, realizes that she must undergo the procedure herself if she wants to keep her job and provide for her daughter's future. Jeong plays one of the people Gwen reaches out to before going through with the transfer, and seamlessly shifts the intensity he's known for in his comedic work into a striking dramatic turn. The rest of the (predominantly Asian) cast is similarly fantastic, keeping a balance between grounded emotion and abstract thought.
Also of interest: "Dr. Ken," "Pain & Gain" and "Community."
-
Nico Santos
'Superstore'
Given his background in stand-up, it's no wonder Nico Santos is one of the funniest parts of "Crazy Rich Asians." It should also come as no surprise that he holds his own among the comic talents who make up the cast of "Superstore." The series, which follows the employees of the big-box store Cloud 9, features one of the most diverse casts on TV, and addresses each character's real, disparate circumstances without ever exoticizing them or making them caricatures. Santos's character, Mateo Liwanag, a gay Filipino man like Santos himself, is perhaps the best example. His story lines rely just as much on his love of gossip or competitive streak as his heritage or his immigration status. It's also thanks to Santos that the character exists as he does, as the role was originally described as a typical tough guy, and rewritten after Santos knocked his audition out of the park.
Also of interest: "Mulaney"
-
Lisa Lu
'The Last Emperor'
Lu was also one of the stars of "The Joy Luck Club," the last Hollywood film to feature an all-Asian cast, and that fact she appearances in both films is far from a coincidence. Lu has been working in film and television since 1958, starring opposite Jimmy Stewart in "The Mountain Road," appearing in Ang Lee's "Lust, Caution," and playing Empress Dowager Cixi in two films from the Shaw Brothers. She reprised the role in Bernardo Bertolucci's "The Last Emperor," a film based on the life of Puyi, the last Emperor of China. The film -- which won all nine Academy Awards for which it was nominated, including best picture and best director -- is epic in scope, and though Lu's part as the dying Empress Dowager is brief, it's striking. Historians have long debated Cixi's reputation, with some calling her a despot and others pointing out her later reform, and Lu's performance manages to capture shades of both.
Also of interest: "The Mountain Road," "The Arch" and "The Postmodern Life of My Aunt."
-
Read more: 'Crazy Rich Asians': Why Did It Take So Long to See a Cast Like This?
What Being in 'Crazy Rich Asians' Means to the Movie's Stars
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY DES WILLIE/AMC)
