RETAIL
Inflation and Interest Curb April Sales Figures
Americans unexpectedly paused their spending in April from March as inflation continued to sting and interest rates made taking on debt more burdensome.
Retail sales were unchanged, coming in well below economists' expectations, according to Commerce Department data released Wednesday.
Retail sales were also dragged down by a 1.2 percent drop in online business.
"Consumer spending is slowing as elevated interest rates weigh on rate-sensitive spending and as the labor market cools," Michael Pearce, deputy chief U.S. economist at Capital Economics, wrote in a report published Wednesday. But he said he's not concerned.
"The resilience of the economy frees the Fed to focus on the incoming inflation data to guide its rate decisions, which we think will improve over the coming months and prompt the Fed to begin gradually easing rates," he said. ASSOCIATED PRESS
OIL AND GAS
Petrobras C.E.O. Resigns After Dividends Dustup
The head of Brazil's state-controlled oil and gas giant Petrobras has stepped down, the company said on Wednesday, following months of tensions with the federal government.
Petrobras opted not to pay extraordinary dividends to its shareholders earlier this year, souring relations between Petrobras C.E.O. Jean Paul Prates, right, and Brazil's President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.
Lula had defended that decision, calling the market a "voracious dinosaur." The company's shares plunged 7 percent on Prates's departure.
"Markets and investors already know that the change of command at Petrobras represents more of the [Workers' Party] government's clumsy interventionism in the economy," Sergio Moro, former justice minister in far-right Jair Bolsonaro's government, said on social media. ASSOCIATED PRESS
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Anthropic Brings On
New Chief Product Officer
Artificial intelligence startup Anthropic has appointed Instagram co-founder Mike Krieger as its chief product officer, the company said on Wednesday, it looks to spruce up its A.I. offerings and get ahead of rivals.
Krieger will oversee the company's product engineering, management and design efforts and help bring Anthropic's A.I. chatbot Claude to a wider audience, the company said.
The OpenAI competitor has attracted billions of dollars in investment from its backers, as Big Tech firms look to catch up with Microsoft-backed ChatGPT maker.
"Mike's background in developing intuitive products and user experiences will be invaluable as we create new ways for people to interact with Claude, particularly in the workplace," Anthropic C.E.O., Dario Amodei said in a statement.
Krieger resigned as chief technical officer of Meta-owned Instagram in 2018. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK FELIX/AFP -- GETTY IMAGES)
