Wall Street slumped Thursday, despite a blowout profit report from Nvidia, following some mixed reports on the U.S. economy.
The S&P 500 dropped 1.3 percent for its worst loss in three weeks. It nearly wiped out its gain for the week, which had been a bright spot in what's been a rough August.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 1.1 percent, and the Nasdaq composite tumbled 1.9 percent.
Stocks sank as Treasury yields stabilized following their tumble a day earlier. High yields in the bond market have been upping the pressure because they make investors less willing to pay high prices for stocks and other risky investments. They may be set to go even higher, depending on what Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, says in a speech scheduled for Friday.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.24 percent from 4.20 percent late Wednesday. It fell there from 4.33 percent a day before, close to its highest level since 2007.
Yields found some traction following some mixed reports on the U.S. economy. One showed that fewer U.S. workers applied for unemployment benefits last week. It's the latest sign that the job market remains remarkably resilient despite high interest rates.
Another report said orders for long-lasting manufactured goods slumped by more last month than economists expected. That could be a signal that conditions are worsening for the struggling manufacturing industry.
For now, weaker-than-expected reports on the economy may be more welcome in financial markets. The economy has avoided a recession, but the fear is that it's so solid that it will keep upward pressure on inflation.
The Federal Reserve has raised its main interest rate to the highest level since 2001 in hopes of grinding down inflation. High rates slow the entire economy and hurt prices for investments.
Hope had built that the Fed's latest rate hike in July may prove to be the last of this cycle, after inflation cooled considerably since peaking above 9 percent last summer. Traders also have made bets for the Fed to begin cutting rates early next year.
But stronger-than-expected reports on the economy have diminished those hopes. That's why Mr. Powell's speech on Friday morning is so highly anticipated. He'll be speaking at an event in Jackson Hole, Wyo., that has been the site of major policy announcements in the past by the Fed.
The two-year Treasury yield, which moves closely with expectations for the Fed, rose to 5.01 percent. A day before, it had dropped to 4.98 percent from 5.05 percent after a report suggested U.S. business activity is cooling.
That weaker-than-expected report pushed John Vail, chief global strategist at Nikko Asset Management, to think Mr. Powell may not sound as aggressive about keeping rates high.
But he still says Mr. Powell "will likely express concerns about inflation not falling fast enough and that the market should not expect any cuts through at least the first part of 2024."
Thursday's weakness for stocks came despite a much stronger-than-expected profit report from Nvidia, raising hopes that this year's frenzy on Wall Street around artificial-intelligence technology isn't just hype.
Nvidia first stunned the market three months ago when it said the quick adoption of A.I. would send its revenue soaring in the three months through July. Its sales came in even better than forecast, at $ 12.51 billion, and the company gave a forecast for the current quarter that again blew past Wall Street's expectations.
Nvidia shot up more than 6 percent in the morning but its gain diminished through the day, and it finished up by just 0.1 percent. Still, it was one of the strongest forces pushing up the S&P 500, which saw more than 80 percent of the stocks within it fall.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
