REGULATIONS
Amazon's A.I. Deal Cleared by Watchdog
Britain's competition watchdog said Friday that it's clearing Amazon's partnership with artificial intelligence company Anthropic because the $ 4 billion deal didn't qualify for further scrutiny.
The Competition and Markets Authority approval comes after it started looking into the deal, part of wider global scrutiny for investments from Big Tech companies into leading startups working on generative AI technology.
The watchdog found that San Francisco-based Anthropic's revenue and its combined market share with Amazon in Britain were not big enough to require an in-depth investigation under the country's merger rules.
"We welcome the UK's Competition and Markets Authority decision acknowledging its lack of jurisdiction regarding this collaboration," Amazon said in a statement. "By investing in Anthropic, we're helping to spur entry and competition in generative AI."
ASSOCIATED PRESS
ACQUISITIONS
Leading Contender to Buy Citgo Petroleum Emerges
Elliott Investment Management was named on Friday as the leading contender to acquire Citgo Petroleum, the oil refining giant that has been the subject of a long legal battle over billions of dollars the government of Venezuela owes foreign businesses, including U.S. energy companies.
A special master appointed to oversee the sale of Citgo said in a federal court filing that he recommended the company be sold to an affiliate of Elliott, Amber Energy. A federal judge would have to approve the deal, which values Citgo at up to $ 7.3 billion, including debt.
Citgo's main assets are three refineries in Illinois, Louisiana and Texas that together account for roughly 4 percent of the country's fuel-making capacity.
The sale is unlikely to directly affect operations at more than 4,000 independently owned gas stations that use the Citgo brand as franchisees.
REBECCA F. ELLIOTT
AUTOMOTIVE
Volkswagen Downgrades Annual Forecast Again
Volkswagen cut its annual outlook for the second time in less than three months on Friday, citing a weaker-than-expected performance at its passenger car division as pressure on Europe's top automaker continues to rise.
The lowered outlook is the latest from Germany's car giants, with Mercedes-Benz and BMW both downgrading their annual forecasts earlier this month as a result of weakening demand in China, the world's biggest car market.
It also comes two days after Volkswagen kicked off crucial talks with IG Metall, Germany's most powerful union, over pay and job protection, a historic conflict that could lead to the first German factory closures in the carmaker's history.
Volkswagen now expects a profit margin of around 5.6 percent in 2024, down from 6.5-7 percent previously and below the 6.5 percent LSEG estimate. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press, Rebecca F. Elliott and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JONATHAN BACHMAN/REUTERS)
