The Department of Commerce issued guidelines for companies angling to receive federal funding aimed at bolstering the domestic semiconductor industry.
WASHINGTON -- The Department of Commerce on Tuesday unveiled its plan for dispensing $ 50 billion aimed at building up the domestic semiconductor industry and countering China, in what is expected to be the biggest U.S. government effort in decades to shape a strategic industry.
About $ 28 billion of the so-called CHIPS for America Fund is expected to go toward grants and loans to help build facilities for making, assembling and packaging some of the world's more advanced chips.
Another $ 10 billion will be devoted to expanding manufacturing for older generations of technology used in cars and communications technology, as well as specialty technologies and other industry suppliers, while $ 11 billion will go toward research and development initiatives related to the industry.
The department is aiming to begin soliciting applications for the funding from companies no later than February, and it could begin disbursing money by next spring, Gina Raimondo, the secretary of commerce, said in an interview.
The fund, which was approved by Congress in July, was created to encourage U.S. production of strategically important semiconductors and spur research and development into the next generation of chip technologies. The Biden administration says the investments will lessen dependence on a foreign supply chain that has become an urgent threat to the country's national security.
"This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-generation opportunity, to secure our national security and revitalize American manufacturing and revitalize American innovation and research and development," Ms. Raimondo said. "So, although we're working with urgency, we have to get it right, and that's why we are laying out the strategy now."
Trade experts have called the fund the most significant investment in industrial policy that the United States has made in at least 50 years.
It will come at a pivotal moment for the semiconductor industry.
Tensions between the United States and China are rising over Taiwan, the self-governing island that is the source of more than two-thirds of the most advanced semiconductors. Shortages of semiconductors have also helped to fuel inflation globally, by increasing delivery times and prices for electronics, appliances and cars.
Semiconductors are crucial components in mobile phones, pacemakers and coffee makers, and they are also the key to advanced technologies like quantum computing, artificial intelligence and unmanned drones.
With midterm elections fast approaching, the Biden administration is under pressure to demonstrate that it can use this funding wisely and lure manufacturing investments back to the United States. The Commerce Department is responsible for choosing which companies receive the money and monitoring their investments.
In its strategy paper, the Commerce Department said that the United States remained the global leader in chip design, but that it had lost its leading edge in producing the world's most advanced semiconductors. In the last few years, China has accounted for a substantial portion of newly built manufacturing, the paper said.
The high cost of building the kind of complex facilities that manufacture semiconductors, called fabs, has pushed companies to separate their facilities for designing chips from those that manufacture them. Many leading companies, like Qualcomm, Nvidia and Apple, design chips in the United States, but they contract out their fabrication to foundries based in Asia, particularly in Taiwan. The system creates a risky source of dependence for the chips industry, the White House says.
The department said the funding aimed to help offset the higher costs of building and operating facilities in the United States compared with other countries, and to encourage companies to build the larger type of fabs in the United States that are now more common in Asia. Domestic and foreign companies can apply for the funds, as long as they invest in projects in the United States.
To receive the money, companies will need to demonstrate the long-term economic viability of their project, as well as "spillover benefits" for the communities they operate in, like investments in infrastructure and work force development, or their ability to attract suppliers and customers, the department said.
Projects that involve economically disadvantaged individuals and businesses owned by minorities, veterans or women, or that are based in rural areas, will be prioritized, the department said. So will projects that help make the supply chain more secure by, for example, providing another production location for advanced chips that are manufactured in Taiwan. Companies are encouraged to demonstrate that they can obtain other sources of funding, including private capital and state and local investment.
The Commerce Department is setting up two new offices housed under the National Institute of Standards and Technology to set up the programs.
One of the department's biggest challenges will be ensuring that the government funds add to, rather than displace, money that chip making companies were already planning to invest. Companies including GlobalFoundries, Micron, Qualcomm and Intel have announced plans to make major investments in U.S. facilities that may qualify for government funding.
The chips bill specifies that companies that accept funding cannot make new, high-tech investments in China or other "countries of concern" for at least a decade, unless they are producing lower-tech "legacy chips" destined to serve only the local market.
The Commerce Department said it would review and audit companies that receive the funding, and claw back funds from any company that violates the rules. The guidelines also forbid recipients from engaging in stock buybacks, so that taxpayer money doesn't end up being used to reward a company's investors.
"We're going to run a serious, competitive, transparent process," Ms. Raimondo said. "We are negotiating for every nickel of taxpayer money."
In addition to the new prohibitions on investing in chip manufacturing facilities in China, officials in the Biden administration have agreed that the White House should take executive action to scrutinize outbound investment in other industries as well, Ms. Raimondo said.
But she added that the administration was still working through the details of how to put such a policy in place.
Earlier versions of the chips bill also proposed setting up a broader system to review investments that U.S. companies make abroad to prevent certain strategic technologies from being shared with U.S. adversaries. That provision, which would have applied to cutting-edge technologies beyond the chips sector, was stripped out of the bill, but officials in the Biden administration have been considering an executive order that would establish a similar review process.
The United States has a review system for investments that foreign companies make in the United States, but not vice versa.
The Biden administration has also taken steps to restrict the types of advanced semiconductors and equipment that can be exported out of the United States.
In statements last week, Nvidia and Advanced Micro Devices, both based in Silicon Valley, said they had been notified by the U.S. government that exports to China and Russia of certain high-end chips they produce for use in supercomputers and artificial intelligence were now restricted. These chips help power the kind of supercomputers that can be used in weapons development and intelligence gathering, including large-scale surveillance.
Ms. Raimondo declined to discuss the export controls in detail but said the department was "constantly evaluating" its efforts, including how best to work with allies to deny China the equipment, software and tooling the country uses to enhance its semiconductor industry.
Photograph Making chips in Jiangsu, China. The country accounts for much of newly built manufacturing, a U.S. report said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (B3)
