The difficulty of getting drivers to take control of automated cars when necessary has prompted many automakers to take people out of the equation.
Even before Tesla revealed that a fatal accident had occurred while one of its cars was in semiautonomous driving mode, a debate was well underway between researchers and engineers: Is it possible to get a driver to safely take back control of a car once the vehicle has started driving itself?
The question is relevant not only for cars of the future but also for ones already on the road.
While the Tesla Model S has been getting all the attention in the past week, the fact is that many cars, including models from BMW, Mercedes-Benz and Volvo, now have systems that use a combination of adaptive cruise control, lane-keeping and automatic braking to enable drivers to briefly take their hands off the wheel and their eyes off the road.
Some Tesla drivers have reveled in making videos of themselves using the Autopilot feature. But the more conventional automakers have designed their systems to take control of the car for only a few seconds at a time; the driver must be ready to resume command at any time.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in the United States classifies such vehicles and their limited automation as Level 2 cars. So what level should come next?
In the safety agency's taxonomy, the next step would be Level 3, which describes vehicles that can drive on their own in specific circumstances, such as on the highway, but still require a human driver to be "available for occasional control, but with sufficiently comfortable transition time."
But the technology giant Google, as it continues working toward what the company hopes will one day be a commercially available autonomous vehicle, has concluded that meeting such a requirement is not possible and the only safe way to proceed is to take the driver out of the equation. Some conventional automakers are beginning to agree.
Volvo, whose Level 2 cars include the 2017 S90, has decided to skip the Level 3 stage. Like Google, Volvo is pursuing Level 4 cars -- fully autonomous vehicles that don't require any driver input aside from setting a destination.
A car changing lanes at 50 miles per hour should not expect a driver to be able to suddenly take control, said Erik Coelingh, who leads Volvo's autonomous-vehicle research program, Drive Me. "Some people can take control in 10 seconds, but if someone fell asleep it could take two minutes," he said.
Experiments conducted last year by Virginia Tech researchers and supported by the national safety administration found that it took drivers of Level 3 cars an average of 17 seconds to respond to takeover requests. In that period, a vehicle going 65 m.p.h. would have traveled 1,621 feet -- more than five football fields.
Despite such startling findings, some automakers and researchers say it is too soon to abandon human intervention as vehicles become more autonomous.
"I'm hesitant to write off Level 3," said Shane McLaughlin, the director of the Center for Automated Vehicle Systems at Virginia Tech, who thinks additional technology may yet solve the human handoff problem.
Such solutions might involve video and infrared systems in the car that monitor the driver's attentiveness. So-called electronic horizon technologies might also give drivers more time to react by "seeing" farther down the road, with cars able to automatically communicate with one another.
Those in favor of taking a step-by-step transition that includes Level 3 cars point to the challenges still facing developers of fully autonomous Level 4 vehicles.
Gill Pratt, who was recruited to lead Toyota's five-year, $1 billion project in automotive artificial intelligence, gave a presentation in January highlighting the ways a completely autonomous vehicle would need to be able to handle unusual situations.
A viable autonomous car would need to be able, he said, to avoid a mattress falling off a moving truck on a crowded highway, even if it had never encountered such a situation before.
Manuela Papadopol, the director of global marketing at Elektrobit, a technology supplier to the auto industry, advocates a gradual evolution by carmakers like Ford and General Motors that lets consumers become accustomed to the technology while automakers gather more data on the systems.
Audi also supports incremental advances, rather than trying to leap ahead to fully autonomous cars. "We're making sure the conditions are right to begin Level 3," said Brad Stertz, Audi's director of government affairs.
Mr. Stertz said that when Audi was ready to offer Level 3 features, its system would give drivers audible and visual warnings if they appeared not to be paying attention.
Mr. Stertz and Mr. McLaughlin, of Virginia Tech, both stressed the importance of industry standards for partly autonomous Level 3 vehicles.
But industry standards do not yet exist. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration is expected this summer to release new guidelines for testing self-driving vehicles on public roads.
"There have to be some standards on the human-machine interface level," Ms. Papadopol said, "so you don't confuse the driver."
