Elon Musk became one of the richest men in the world in part because of the generous pay package -- to the tune of $ 50 billion in stock options -- he earned as chief executive of Tesla. But a judge's decision last week struck at the heart of Mr. Musk's vast wealth and questioned the way he had secured it.
On Tuesday, Chancellor Kathaleen St. J. McCormick of the Delaware Court of Chancery voided the record-setting pay promised to Mr. Musk, writing that the billionaire had effectively overseen his own compensation plan in a "deeply flawed process." A group of shareholders filed a lawsuit after Mr. Musk reached the pay deal in 2018, accusing Tesla of giving investors "materially misleading" information when the company asked them to approve the package. In the suit, they also argued that Mr. Tesla played a large -- and dubious -- role in shaping the decisions around his pay.
Now, Mr. Musk is threatening to incorporate Tesla in another state, like Texas or Nevada, where his social media company X is based, in the belief that those places could be more hospitable to his business. But he's beholden to his shareholders, who could resist the change if they see it as an effort to diminish their power. In the meantime, Tesla's board of directors has to figure out a new compensation plan that can pass legal muster and satisfy their mercurial leader, who recently demanded that the board substantially increase his stake in Tesla.
Whatever happens to Mr. Musk's compensation, the legal battle has raised a larger question about executive pay: How much is too much? Sarah Anderson, global economy project director at the progressive research group Institute for Policy Studies, said Chancellor McCormick's ruling had established "that there is such a thing as excessive compensation."
"Your product is killing people."
Senator Josh Hawley, Republican from Missouri, to Meta's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, during a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing last week on child safety and social media platforms.
"This feels like I'm making my own genuine content, but it doesn't scream that I'm making an ad."
Melissa Becraft, a creator on TikTok who has used artificial intelligence to create a subtle product placement.
"We want to see more good data."
Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, who said Fed officials would need to see more evidence of moderating inflation before lowering interest rates.
