I HAVE about 2,500 photos stored on my smartphone, and who knows how many more on previous phones and other devices I use. I need an organizing principle, stat.
Luckily, there are many apps that let you organize, categorize and view your photos on a mobile device with varying degrees of difficulty.
I had high hopes for one of the newest entrants, a mobile gallery replacement called Carousel, developed by the cloud storage company Dropbox. Carousel aims to organize, back up and share your mobile photo collection. But while I liked its speed and minimalism, I came away annoyed by its limited features and pushy approach to sharing.
The free app, available for iOS and Android but not yet for Windows Phone, organizes all the photos you've uploaded to Dropbox by date and automatically backs up new photos you take on any connected device. It also lets you share either a full day's collection or individual photos.
But sharing on social networks has serious drawbacks. Rather than simply posting a photo to Facebook or Twitter, the app sends a link that users can click to view the photo on a separate page, and from there they can download the high-resolution version. You can't just email someone a photo.
Also, Carousel's interface for private sharing is a beautiful, elegant chat. But it requires the recipient to use Carousel, even if you try to send a photo as a text. Your friends just get a text with a link to a page that shows them a tiny version of the photo with a big button asking them to download Carousel.
The entire thing feels like spam, and to some extent, it is.
Ramesh Balakrishnan, Dropbox's lead engineer for photos, said the app pushes photo recipients to download Carousel to streamline photo management for everyone, rather than scattering pictures across various texts, emails and other locations. When you share photos with other Carousel users, you can download one another's photos, share them with other people, and save them to your own albums or device.
That is useful.
But like so many services these days, Carousel is also designed to get you to use more services. In this case, more Dropbox storage. Presumably, the more people who install Carousel, the more will require extra storage, since Dropbox offers just 2 gigabytes free. Users can get an additional 3 GB for signing up for Carousel, bringing the total to 5. ICloud gives you 5GB free; Microsoft OneDrive gives 7GB; Google Drive offers 15GB; and Flickr gives its users a whopping 1 terabyte of free storage.
And Dropbox's plans cost far more than some of the competition (other than iCloud): it's $10 a month for 100GB of Dropbox storage, compared with Google's $2 a month for the same amount.
Dropbox already has tools for uploading and backing up photos, and it organizes them by month. And it lets you share pictures or batches of pictures both socially (Twitter and Facebook) and privately via text and email.
Apple's iOS also organizes your photos by date, lets you share either a full day's "Moment" or individual photos socially (Facebook and Flickr) or via text or email. The mobile operating system also backs up photos to iCloud if you let it. Your iCloud photo stream can include photos from other iOS devices, too, but it's not as device-agnostic as something like Dropbox.
On Android, the default gallery app can be hijacked by the phone maker, so each version is different. Sharing, backup and organization is accomplished with the Google Plus app, which is my least favorite option because social sharing is limited to Google Plus. And for pure photo management, using the entire Google Plus app is overkill, despite Google's tempting storage plans.
But even though Carousel duplicates the efforts of other products -- even its parent company -- I appreciate the simple and fast way it handles photos from multiple devices.
Neither the Dropbox mobile app nor Carousel stores photos or backups locally, but that makes for slow navigating of folders in the Dropbox app. Not so with Carousel, which caches the entire gallery without taking up much space on your device -- about 300MB, by my count.
You can quickly scroll through years' worth of backed-up photos. When you tap a photo to view, the app downloads a slightly larger -- but not full-resolution -- version of the photo. Right now, the only way to view a full-resolution image is to download it to your device, or share it and download it from the web.
There are other drawbacks. Dates are a limiting way to organize photos. For one thing, if you download older pictures to your gallery, they end up in odd locations. Also, photos I took with a DSLR and then backed up to Dropbox show up as a huge mass of unorganized photos at the beginning of my Carousel timeline -- a major drawback.
But you can't sort images any other way or rename daily collections or create albums. You can't stop Carousel from importing every single photo you take, either, even mundane things like a screenshot, a photo of a bug, or something you plan to share ephemerally (use your imagination).
On that note, deleting photos is so counterintuitive it might as well be impossible. First, you "hide" a photo by swiping up when you're viewing it. It's not easy to figure out, but at least you can hide photos -- but not entire days or whole albums.
Next, tap your initials in the upper left, which is where settings are hidden. Choose Hidden Photos & Videos, tap the checkmark in the upper right to select images and then you can delete them. Or you can just open the Dropbox app, select a photo and hit the little trash can in the bottom right. I don't know why Carousel doesn't have the same interface.
I'm a Dropbox subscriber, but for managing its photos, I found that the $3 Unbound app for iOS is superior to Carousel. It's not quite as fast, but it lets you create or move photos into albums, share photos socially without demanding downloads and even send pictures to Walgreens for printing.
For better organization of your local gallery, I like Flayvr for Android and iOS, which beautifully categorizes photos by date and location, and can even group them according to calendar entries from your local calendar or Facebook Events.
If you're an Instagram fan, I also discovered Trunx (free for Android or iOS), which organizes gallery photos and includes Instagram and Facebook pictures, lets you search them by tags, creates shared albums with friends, and can share any individual photo to Instagram. That's something nothing else but the Android gallery can do.
And then, of course, there are the apps you already use: both Google Plus, as I mentioned, and Flickr do automatic uploading and organizing of photos, and Flickr's storage space is the most generous of the bunch. I find the app slow and hard to navigate, but it has many fans.
In my search for one app to rule my mobile picture collection, I was left with almost as many photo organizing apps as photos themselves. I will continue to use Dropbox for both photos and file storage, but Carousel's limited features don't give me much reason for a second app.
Photograph The Carousel App has an Elegant Interface for Private Photo Sharing, but Its Requirement That Recipients Also Download the App Feels a Lot Like Spam.; Trunx, a Free App for Android and Ios, Lets Users Search Photos by Tags, Create Shared Albums with Friends and Post Any Single Image to Instagram.; the Flayvr App for Android and Ios Categorizes Photos by Date and Location and Can Group Them According to Entries From a User's Local Calendar or Facebook Events.
