The minions have dwindled. The choreographer Bill T. Jones said: "Mick Jagger tells a story about going to visit James Brown in his dressing room once. James Brown had a valet. He would keep the valet standing next to him, holding Brown's trousers and waiting to dress him, while Brown held a meeting. It was a show of power."
Mr. Jones laughed and added, "I don't know those kind of people."
Nor do many of us. Indeed, in today's world, helpers and aides seem ever more a commodity reserved for the infirm or the lushly wealthy; Businessweek reported last year that "as a result of changing technology and cost-cutting, assistants are disappearing from corporate life, along with their cousins, executive assistants, office managers and clerks."
Today, to tell a new business contact "I'll email your assistant" is potentially to cause your interlocutor to launch into a shame spiral. Or, in other situations, to scoff.
"Some of the younger people out of M.B.A. programs want to do their own administrative work," said Bonnie Low-Kramen, who was the personal assistant to the actress Olympia Dukakis for 25 years and now offers customized training for administrative staff members.
The D.I.Y. ethos is particularly prevalent in Silicon Valley, where chief executives like to boast of "flat" companies and wonkish grit.
Further complicating matters is the fact that some professionals get assistance from people you'd never call assistants. For example, to approach or interview the busy Mr. Jones, who is the executive artistic director of New York Live Arts, a producing, presenting and touring organization, and who choreographed, directed and was a writer of "Fela!" on Broadway, you go through Bjorn Amelan. Mr. Jones's longtime companion, Mr. Amelan is, according to Mr. Jones, "the keeper of schedules, my confidante, my sounding board." He's also the creative director of Mr. Jones's dance company. Mr. Jones said his other helper is Janet Wong, a former dancer turned rehearsal director turned associate artistic director.
The parameters of assistantship have also grown murky as a result of three unusual variants of helpers: fictitious, silent and virtual. In the last few months, a colleague of mine has twice encountered in correspondence the use of fictitious assistants: i.e., she has seen mail that is signed with the name of someone who does not exist, presumably to make the actual letter writer seem more powerful or to provide a buffer from subsequent replies.
"Oh, wow, that's a no-no!" said Joan Burge, the founder and chief executive of Office Dynamics International, a training center for executive assistants. "If you need to do that, you need an actual assistant."
Also potentially discomfiting are what I'll call silent assistants. At some top-tier Hollywood talent agencies, the training for assistants involves placing calls to clients and then unobtrusively listening in on agents' conversations, taking notes.
"Once I asked Creative Artists Agency agent Micah Green if he could call me back on his land line," said Thom Powers, a film curator. "I read out the number to him and heard him ask his assistant, 'Did you get that?' I guess it was too much of a strain for Micah to write those 10 digits himself. I mocked the behavior on Facebook or Twitter and afterward another C.A.A. agent, Dina Kuperstock, made a point to call me herself, and drew attention that she had picked up the phone herself, without the aid of an assistant."
For clients, the silent assistant can be a source of unease: 10 minutes into a phone call, not knowing whether this lurker is still listening in can put an odd hex on a conversation, portions of which may be devoted to, say, your husband's cancer or vivid examples of your wounded narcissism.
Virtual assistants, too, bear their own kind of static. Jo Ann Plante held administrative positions at Blue Cross and Blue Shield and Citizens Bank before coming down with lupus in 2011. When she tried to re-enter the work force in 2013, she was unable to find work, so she started a virtual assistant business, Virtual Colleague, out of her Rhode Island home. Ms. Plante said that if she were now offered a job that required her to work in a company's office eight hours a day, she wouldn't take it.
"If they can't trust me enough to get the job done on my own, then they're the type who micromanages," she said. "Also, it shows that they're not tech savvy. But if you can't trust me, don't give me the job."
The dubious variation on Ms. Plante's offering is a new company called Personal Dating Assistants. For $9.50 an hour, this organization will write a personals ad for a male client and then, posing as the client in emails, solicit dates for him, only handing over the reins to the client once an email from a potential date has been secured.
The company's founder, Matthew Valentines, said: "Our emailing is really a light touch compared with what a lot of guys do on a dating site. Guys tend to spend weeks or months before they meet the girl. We do the opposite: We try to get her number as soon as possible."
Though the company discourages its clients from telling the women that they've been Cyrano de Bergerac-ed, it's willing to disclose the unseemliness to the woman if the client so requests (so far, no one has asked).
When I encouraged Mr. Valentines to mentally put himself in the position of a woman who finds out that she has been duped, he responded: "I would think: 'Here is a guy who's really serious about meeting someone. He's putting his best foot forward even though he doesn't necessarily have the skill set to introduce himself as well as he should.' I would take it as a huge compliment."
Such a mind-set betrays one of the potential perils of the breakdown of traditional employer-assistant relationships, and, indeed, of a future in which machines will be acting on our behalf: a kind of moral expediency. Any time that the niceties of tone and facial expression are replaced with the ominous thrum of efficiency, something is lost. When Joaquin Phoenix's character in the movie "Her" learns that Samantha, the husky-voiced operating system he's fallen in love with, is in love with 641 other users, his grief, and indeed the audience's, is palpable.
"We've become more sloppy," Mr. Jones said. "There's a kind of alertness or emotional in-shapeness that we need to work in a world that's as diverse and fast-moving as ours. Siri and other forms of artificial intelligence operate in the same way that pornography teaches people the wrong things about sex. Having a robot can teach you the wrong thing about being effective in the world."
The engineers at Apple have updated the answers to questions often posed to Siri, the company's hand-held personal assistant and knowledge navigator. Now one of Siri's responses to "Are you 'Her'?" runs "Is that you, Joaquin?"
AuthorAffiliation HENRY ALFORD HENRY ALFORD is the author of "Would It Kill You to Stop Doing That? A Modern Guide to Manners." Circa Now appears monthly.
Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Matt Huynh)
