AUTOMOBILES
Renault Suffers Drop
In Sales and Earnings
France's Renault saw its sales and earnings drop last year and says 2020 will be tough due to the need for investment in new technologies just as the market is shrinking.
The company on Friday said that it sold 3.8 million vehicles last year, down 3.4 percent, with revenue dropping about the same rate to $ 60 billion. That almost wiped out its net earnings, which amounted to just $ 21 million last year compared with $ 3.7 billion a year earlier.
Clotilde Delbos, Renault's interim chief, said "the visibility for 2020 is limited due to an expected volatility in the market."
Those uncertainties include European Union limits on car emissions, which will require car companies to sell more battery-powered vehicles, as well as the impact of the coronavirus outbreak from China, which has disrupted supply chains.
Renault, which is in a global alliance with Japan's Nissan and Mitsubishi, said it expected the European car market to shrink at least 3 percent this year.
Associated Press
INTERNATIONAL
U.K. Bank Changes Name
To Shed Legacy of Bailout
Royal Bank of Scotland, which is majority-owned by the British government, has announced a name change as it tries to leave behind its near-collapse during the 2008 financial crisis.
The bank on Friday said that it will now be known as NatWest Group Plc, shedding the 300-year-old Royal Bank name.
The lender, which is based in Edinburgh, said that 80 percent of its customers bank with NatWest, which Royal Bank bought in 2000, rather than through Royal Bank branches. Royal Bank also owns Northern Ireland's Ulster Bank.
Since the crisis, Royal Bank has dramatically scaled back its global aspirations.
The British government spent 45 billion pounds, or $ 59 billion, bailing out the Royal Bank of Scotland after the 2008 crisis, and it still owns a 62 percent stake in the bank.
Associated Press
TECHNOLOGY
Nvidia Earnings Report Sends Shares Surging
Shares of Nvidia climbed 7 percent on Friday after the chip-maker stunned analysts with strong fourth-quarter results and joined its rivals Intel and Advanced Micro Devices in predicting strong demand for chips used in the latest generation of data centers and artificial intelligence.
At least 11 brokerages hiked price targets on the company's stock. The brokerage Cowen & Company was the most bullish, raising its target by $ 85 to $ 325, higher than Wall Street's median price target of $ 285.15 and Friday's premarket price of around $ 287.
Sales from Nvidia's data center business, which serves clients developing products related to A.I., surged 43 percent to $ 968 million. Jefferies analysts projected a 34 percent increase overall this year.
The chip-maker also forecast first-quarter sales above estimates, even as it expected a $ 100 million hit from the coronavirus outbreak. The strong forecast also helped fuel expectations of a rebound in chip demand. Reuters
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)
