Stocks climbed on Thursday after the market superstar Nvidia and another round of companies said they were doing even better than expected.
The S&P 500 pulled 0.5 percent higher after flipping between modest gains and losses several times. The Dow Jones industrial average jumped 1.1 percent, and the Nasdaq composite was flat.
Nvidia's rise of 0.5 percent was the strongest force pushing the S&P 500 upward after it again beat estimates for profit and revenue. It also gave a forecast for revenue in the current quarter that topped most analysts' expectations, thanks to voracious demand for its chips used in artificial-intelligence technology.
Its stock initially sank in after-hours trading Wednesday after the release of the results. Some investors said the market might have been looking for Nvidia's revenue forecast to surpass expectations by even more. But its stock recovered in premarket trading Thursday, and Wedbush analyst Dan Ives said it was another "flawless" profit report provided by Nvidia and its chief executive, Jensen Huang, whom Mr. Ives calls "the Godfather of A.I."
How Nvidia's stock performs has tremendous impact because it has quickly grown into Wall Street's most valuable company at roughly $ 3.6 trillion. Its meandering up and down through the day dragged the S&P 500 and other indexes back and forth.
The frenzy around A.I. is sweeping up other stocks, and Snowflake jumped 32.7 percent after it reported stronger results for the latest quarter than analysts expected. The company, whose platform helps customers get a better view of all their silos of data and use A.I., also reported stronger revenue growth than expected.
BJ'S Wholesale Club rose 8.3 percent after likewise delivering a bigger profit than expected. That may help calm worries about how resilient U.S. shoppers can remain, given high prices and still-high interest rates.
Google's parent company, Alphabet, helped keep indexes in check. It fell 4.7 percent after U.S. regulators asked a judge to break up the tech giant by forcing it to sell its industry-leading Chrome web browser.
Drops for other big tech stocks also weighed on the market, including a 2.4 percent slide for Amazon.
In the crypto market, bitcoin eclipsed $ 99,000 for the first time before easing back to roughly $ 98,250, according to CoinDesk. It has more than doubled so far this year, and its climb has accelerated since Election Day. President-elect Donald J. Trump has pledged to make the country "the crypto capital of the planet" and create a "strategic reserve" of bitcoin.
Bitcoin also got a boost after Gary Gensler, the chair of the Securities and Exchange Commission, who has pushed for more protection for crypto investors, said he would step down in January.
Bitcoin and related investments, of course, have a notorious history of big price swings in both directions. MicroStrategy, a company that has been raising cash expressly to buy bitcoin, saw an early gain of 14.6 percent for its stock on Thursday quickly disappear. It finished down 16.2 percent.
In the oil market, a barrel of benchmark U.S. crude rose 2 percent to bring its gain for the week to 4.8 percent. Brent crude, the international standard, climbed 1.8 percent. Oil has been rising amid escalations in the Russia-Ukraine war.
In the bond market, Treasury yields edged higher following some mixed reports on the economy. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.42 percent from 4.41 percent late Wednesday.
One report said fewer workers applied for unemployment benefits last week, in the latest signal that the job market remains solid. Another report, though, said manufacturing in the mid-Atlantic region unexpectedly shrank. Sales of previously occupied homes, meanwhile, strengthened last month by more than expected.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
