The presumptive Democratic nominee has won concessions from Big Tech leaders on A.I., but she hasn't successfully pushed Congress to regulate.
Over the past three years, Vice President Kamala Harris has taken a leading role inside the White House on artificial intelligence as the technology is taking off.
As A.I. czar, she brought the chiefs of OpenAI, Microsoft, Google and Anthropic to the White House to agree on voluntary safety standards for the technology. She led a White House executive order mandating how the federal government would use and develop A.I. And she pushed Congress to adopt regulations to protect individuals from A.I. killing jobs and other harms -- although little legislation has emerged and the companies have so far faced few roadblocks.
We "reject the false choice that suggests we can either protect the public or advance innovation," Ms. Harris said in a speech in November, calling for both global regulation and further accountability from companies. "We can and we must do both."
Now, as the Democratic Party's presumptive presidential nominee, a win for Ms. Harris could mean a continued relatively smooth runway for A.I. companies, which have enjoyed little U.S. regulation and the chance to shape White House and Congressional views on the technology.
Ms. Harris has previously taken tougher stances on Big Tech. As the former district attorney of San Francisco, and then attorney general of California, she pushed for laws against cyberbullying and to promote greater privacy for children online. As the state's attorney general, she worked to stem the spread of intimate images, taken without their subject's consent, on big tech platforms.
"She brings a very kind of lawyerly, kind of thoughtful, mind-set about thinking about all sides of the issue," said Alondra Nelson, a former director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.
The Harris campaign referred a request for comment to the White House. Jeff Zients, the White House chief of staff, said in an emailed statement that the administration "has taken unprecedented actions to maximize the potential and manage the risks of A.I. -- and at every turn, both the president and the vice president have pushed us to act quickly and pull every lever."
Under the Biden administration, Big Tech has faced increased scrutiny on antitrust. Regulators have sued Google, Meta, Amazon and Apple, accusing them of monopolistic behavior. Many of those investigations were started under Donald J. Trump, the Republican nominee for president.
Meanwhile, generative A.I. that powers humanlike chatbots and realistic image generators has taken off, fueling concerns that the technology could take jobs and cause other harms, alongside doomsday scenarios that it could destroy humanity. Although Congressional leaders have said they must take action and have held forums to discuss the technology, few concrete efforts to regulate A.I. have materialized.
"She has years of service demonstrating her conviction in corporate accountability," said Dan Geldon, a former aide to Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts. "It seems unlikely that a President Harris would disrupt all the existing litigation and momentum, based on her long history of holding corporations who break the law accountable."
Ms. Harris has connections to tech companies from her time in California, and her brother-in-law, Tony West, is the top lawyer at Uber.
When she was campaigning to become state attorney general in 2010, Ms. Harris appeared for a question-and-answer session at Google's campus in Mountain View. She told employees she saw the tech industry's expertise as central to making sure that the government communicated well and had up-to-date systems.
"I want these relationships and I want to cultivate them, because I want you to be an advisory group," Ms. Harris said at the time, according to a recording of the session. "This is a short drive to come here. This is backyard. We're family."
In 2015, as California's attorney general, she visited Facebook's headquarters in Menlo Park to promote safer internet use. In the event for high school students, Sheryl Sandberg, then chief operating officer of the company now known as Meta, said "we can work together to show the internet can be a tool for good," according to media reports.
Ms. Sandberg is backing Ms. Harris's candidacy, as is the investor Reid Hoffman, a major donor to the Democratic Party.
Ms. Harris could draw on her tech ties to build new advisory teams, tech policy experts said.
"Biden had a close circle of advisers who had been with him for decades, none of whom had deep roots in tech," said Blair Levin, a former chief of staff for the Federal Communications Commission and an adviser for New Street Research. "Her advisers will come from sources, including California, that have tech backgrounds."
The work Ms. Harris has done so far as the White House A.I. czar reflects her moderation and willingness to listen to both sides, experts say.
In October, President Biden signed the A.I. executive order she led requiring companies to talk to the government about the most severe risks associated with their systems, alongside outlining steps for the federal government to adopt the technology.
"We have a moral, ethical and societal duty to make sure that A.I. is adopted and advanced in a way that protects the public from potential harm and ensures that everyone is able to enjoy its benefits," Ms. Harris said at the White House in October while announcing the order. (The Republican Party's platform calls for repealing that executive order because it "hinders A.I. innovation.")
Mr. Zients said in his emailed statement that the commitments by the companies to rigorously test their systems had been Ms. Harris's idea.
"I was meeting with the vice president in one of our weekly check-ins last year," he said. "The vice president said to me, 'Let's bring the C.E.O.s down here and let's get some commitments in place now while we work on our executive actions."'
Those commitments were only part of the solution, Ms. Harris said in a speech in November.
"Let me be clear, these voluntary commitments are an initial step toward a safer A.I. future with more to come, because, as history has shown, in the absence of regulation and strong government oversight, some technology companies choose to prioritize profit over the well-being of their customers, the safety of our communities and the stability of our democracies," she said.
Dr. Nelson, the former White House official, said that Ms. Harris was curious about the technology industry and wanted to see what tech companies could produce. But the vice president also believes, Dr. Nelson said, that companies should be held to account for whether their work provided benefits to Americans.
"I would describe her philosophy of technology as not inherently cautious," Dr. Nelson said. "What does this mean for a regular working class family's life? That's always the litmus test."
Photograph Little legislation has emerged from Vice President Kamala Harris's work on A.I. policy, and the Big Tech companies have faced few roadblocks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID WALTER BANKS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
