Stocks drifted to a mixed finish on Monday as Wall Street waited for the results of a pivotal meeting meant to avoid a potentially disastrous default on the U.S. government's debt.
The S&P 500 was at a virtual standstill after flipping between small gains and losses through the day. It edged up 0.65, or less than 0.1 percent, to 4,192.63. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 140.05 points, or 0.4 percent, to 33,286.58, and the Nasdaq composite rose 62.88, or 0.5 percent, to 12,720.78.
The stock market is near its highest level since August, but it has mostly remained within a tight range for weeks as several big worries have weighed on traders. The biggest near-term risk is the possibility of a U.S. default, which could occur as soon as June 1.
That is when Washington could run out of cash to pay its bills, unless Congress allows it to borrow more. Because Treasurys are seen as the safest investment on Earth, economists and investors say a default would most likely trigger a recession and produce deep pain for financial markets.
President Biden and House Speaker Kevin McCarthy were scheduled to meet after U.S. stock markets closed to discuss the debt limit. Talks so far have been start-and-stop, with stocks rallying in the middle of last week on hopes that a deal might have been progressing, only to falter Friday when negotiations hit a roadblock.
Another worry that has hung over the market is the struggle of the U.S. banking system, which has been weighed down by much higher interest rates. Three high-profile failures since March have shaken confidence in the system, and investors have been looking out for another weak link.
One of the smaller and midsize regional banks that Wall Street has been scrutinizing is PacWest Bancorp. Its stock jumped 19.5 percent after it agreed to sell a portfolio of real-estate construction loans with about $ 2.6 billion in principal still outstanding to Kennedy Wilson. PacWest's stock is still down 70.2 percent for the year so far.
Elsewhere on Wall Street, Micron Technology dropped 2.8 percent as tensions heightened between China and the United States. China's government said on Sunday that Micron's products had unspecified "serious network security risks" that could affect national security. It told users of sensitive computer equipment to stop buying Micron products.
Meta Platforms rose 1.1 percent after shaking off news that European regulators had given the company a privacy fine of $ 1.3 billion, a record. Meta called the decision flawed and unjustified. It said it would appeal.
Meta has been on a tear this year, more than doubling in 2023 already. Other Big Tech companies have also had powerful leaps, much stronger than the rest of the market.
But that split in performance is worrying some market watchers. It has left the index extremely top-heavy, meaning its performance is more dependent on a small group of stocks than it has been in decades.
Much of the excitement has been around artificial intelligence, but that has not been enough to turn around some of Wall Street's more pessimistic voices.
"While we believe A.I. is for real and will likely lead to some great efficiencies that help to fight inflation, it's unlikely to prevent the deep earnings recession we forecast for this year," Michael Wilson and other strategists at Morgan Stanley wrote in a report.
S&P 500 companies are in the midst of reporting a second straight quarter of decreases in profit from a year ago. The question is how much worse they will get because the economy is slowing under the weight of much higher interest rates meant to get inflation under control.
Hopes are high that the Fed will start taking it easier on interest rates by leaving them steady at its next meeting in June.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
