Technology
Slow Rollout of iPhone A.I.
May Be Hurting Demand
Shares of Apple fell nearly 3 percent on Monday after some analysts said delivery times for the new iPhone 16 Pro models indicated weaker-than-expected demand, possibly because of the delayed rollout of key artificial intelligence features.
Apple last week unveiled its long-awaited iPhone 16 series designed around its A.I. software, Apple Intelligence.
Early preorder data from BofA Global Research revealed shorter global shipping times for the iPhone 16 Pro models compared with last year's 15 Pro models.
Ship time on average for the iPhone 16 Pro stood at 14 days, lower than 24 days for the iPhone 15 Pro last year, the data showed, while the 19-day ship time for the iPhone 16 Pro Max compares with 32 days last year.
Apple Intelligence is set to arrive in the U.S. version of the English language in beta next month, and for other versions as late as next year. REUTERS
Companies
Judge Lets Red Lobster Exit From Bankruptcy
Red Lobster has exited Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
A U.S. bankruptcy judge approved the casual seafood chain's reorganization plan earlier this month, which included a lender group led by the asset manager Fortress Investment Group acquiring the business. The green light arrived a little less than four months after Red Lobster filed for bankruptcy protection as it pursued a sale, following years of mounting losses and dwindling customers while it struggled to keep up with competitors.
The chain, which lost $ 76 million in 2023, shuttered dozens of its North American restaurants over recent months, before and during the bankruptcy process. That included more than 50 locations whose equipment was put up for auction just days before the Chapter 11 petition, followed by additional closures throughout the bankruptcy process.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
International
Autoworkers in Brussels Protest Over Layoff Threat
Thousands of disgruntled workers demonstrated in Brussels on Monday to protest the threat of vast layoffs in a state-of-the-art car factory that stands as a symbol for key industries across the European Union that clamor for more government support in the face of global competition.
The trigger for Monday's protest, estimated by the police at 5,500 people, was the announcement that the German automaker Audi would phase out production at its Forest plant in southern Brussels, threatening the jobs of 3,000 staffers, many of whom are experts in electronic vehicle production which the E.U. seeks to promote as a breakthrough sector as it struggles to compete with China and the United States.
"What is happening at Audi can also happen at other factories too. So we have to act to make sure that industries remain," said Salvatore Tabone, who said he had worked for 27 years at Audi.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY TERESA CRAWFORD/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
