Wall Street rallied to one of its best days of the year Thursday after data showed the U.S. economy is holding up better than expected, with particular credit going to the country's shoppers.
The S&P 500 jumped 1.6 percent for its fourth-best day of the year and its sixth straight gain as the U.S. stock market rights itself following a scary few weeks. It's back to within 2.2 percent of its all-time high set last month after briefly falling close to 10 percent below it.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 554 points, or 1.4 percent, while the Nasdaq composite flew 2.3 percent higher as Nvidia and other Big Tech stocks recovered more of their stumbles from the last month.
Treasury yields also leaped in the bond market following the encouraging economic report. One said U.S. shoppers increased their spending at retailers last month by much more than economists expected, while another said fewer U.S. workers applied for unemployment benefits.
A year ago, such reports could have sent the stock market reeling on worries they would push inflation higher. But good news for the economy is once again good news for Wall Street, particularly after a report showed U.S. employers pulled back on their hiring last month by much more than expected.
That dud of a jobs report raised worries the U.S. economy could buckle under the weight of high interest rates brought by the Federal Reserve, and it contributed to turmoil in stock markets worldwide. But Thursday's reports hint a perfect landing may still be possible, one where the Fed slows the economy's growth by just enough through high rates to stifle inflation but not so much that it causes a recession.
"The growth scare isn't over, but it's a little less scary," said Brian Jacobsen, chief economist at Annex Wealth Management.
Inflation has also been improving since it topped 9 percent two summers ago, punctuated by reports earlier this week on prices at both the consumer and wholesale levels. That has cleared the way for the Federal Reserve to soon deliver the cuts to interest rates that Wall Street loves.
Walmart added to the optimism after it delivered a bigger profit for the spring than analysts expected, and its shares climbed 6.6 percent. The retail giant also raised its forecast for sales for the full year, indicating U.S. shoppers can keep spending. Such spending by U.S. consumers makes up the bulk of the economy.
It was just one of several big companies to join the parade of businesses topping analysts' expectations for springtime profit.
Deere & Co. rode 6.3 percent higher after the seller of backhoes, dozers and other equipment reported higher profit and revenue than expected. That was despite what it called challenging conditions across the agricultural and construction sectors globally.
Cisco Systems' profit and revenue for the latest quarter squeaked past analysts' forecasts, and its stock jumped 6.8 percent after the maker of networking equipment also said it would eliminate thousands of jobs as it shifts to faster-growing areas of technology like artificial intelligence.
Ulta Beauty's stock rose 11.2 percent to help lead the market after Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway revealed it has built an ownership stake in the retailer.
All told, the S&P 500 rose 88.01 points to 5,543.22, the Dow gained 554.67 to 40,563.06, and the Nasdaq composite rallied 401.89 to 17,594.50.
In the bond market, the 10-year Treasury yield clambered up to 3.91 percent from 3.84 percent late Wednesday following the strong economic data.
The two-year Treasury yield jumped to 4.09 percent from 3.96 percent late Wednesday.
Traders still widely expect the Fed to cut its main interest rate in September, which would be the first such cut since the 2020 Covid crash. But they're now largely expecting it to lower rates by the traditional quarter of a percentage point.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
