WORKPLACE
Labor Board Widens
Definition of Employee
Labor regulators issued a ruling on Tuesday that makes it more likely for workers to be considered employees rather than contractors under federal law.
The decision effectively increases the number of workers -- like drivers, construction workers or janitors -- who have a federally protected right to unionize or take other collective action.
The ruling ensures that "workers who seek to organize or exercise their rights under the National Labor Relations Act are not improperly excluded from its protections," said a statement by Lauren McFerran, the Democratic chairman of the labor board, which voted 3 to 1 along party lines to broaden the standard.
Determining whether a worker is an employee or a contractor has long depended on several variables, including the potential employer's control over the work and provision of tools and equipment.
In 2019, when the board was controlled by appointees of President Donald J. Trump, it elevated one consideration -- a worker's chance to make more money, often described as "entrepreneurial opportunity" -- above the others. It concluded that such opportunities should be a key tiebreaker when some factors pointed to contractor status and others indicated employment.
In its 2019 decision, the board said an Obama-era ruling had improperly subordinated the question of moneymaking opportunities.
That 2019 ruling appeared to be a victory for gig companies like Uber and Lyft, whose supporters have argued that ride-share drivers should be considered contractors in part because of the opportunities they have for potential profit.
The latest decision returned the board to the standard laid out in the Obama era.
The turnabout was criticized on Tuesday by businesses that rely heavily on contractors.
NOAM SCHEIBER
TECHNOLOGY
Accenture Plans to Spend
$ 3 Billion on A.I. Strategy
The technology services provider Accenture is the latest company to ramp up its artificial intelligence business, announcing Tuesday that it will invest $ 3 billion over the next three years and double its AI-related staff to accommodate scorching hot demand.
Dublin, Ireland-based Accenture said it aims to have 80,000 AI-related staff to help create "industry-specific solutions that will help our clients harness AI's full potential to reshape their strategy, technology, and ways of working, driving innovation and value responsibly and faster than ever before."
Accenture joins a growing list of technology companies racing to take advantage of a broader interest from businesses looking for new AI tools that can analyze data, help make decisions and potentially replace some tasks currently performed by human workers. Much of the interest is on "generative AI" tools such as ChatGPT that can produce works of writing on command, as well as images, code and other media.
Oracle soared to a record high Tuesday after it posted record annual sales and said A.I. companies were flocking to its cloud and infrastructure services.
And Salesforce, which owns the business communications platform Slack, introduced its "AI Cloud" on Monday.
Accenture has 738,000 employees and clients in over 120 countries. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Noam Scheiber and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY NACHO DOCE/REUTERS)
