BARCELONA, Spain -- I've spent the weekend crisscrossing Barcelona for the Mobile World Congress, an annual trade show attracting company bigwigs, senior politicians and tech start-ups. That has meant attending news conferences, meeting executives, eating my weight in tapas and hanging out at landmarks like the Plaça de Catalunya. (Yes, it's a hard life.)
My initial sense from this year's Mobile World Congress, however, is meh.
For sure, there are fancy new phones, internet-connected gadgets (including, for some unknown reason, a toothbrush with artificial intelligence) and enough driverless-car demos to sink a battleship, but much of the technology on show is an incremental step forward from what's already out there.
In short, there's no "iPhone moment" as in 2007, when the product's release set off a dramatic shift in how we all use phones.
That's mostly because the mobile technology world is in a state of flux.
Many of the world's carriers are still trying to figure out how to make money from the increasing use of mobile data, while also investing the billions of dollars required for high-speed networks to stream the likes of Netflix and Hulu on our phones.
So while this year's gathering will have a few surprises, this is a year of transition, not of revolution. Still, there are some things worth keeping an eye on:
Will wearables flame out?
Like many others, I was excited when smartwatches hit the market. But as my Pebble smartwatch sits in my bedroom collecting dust, these devices haven't caught on as many had expected -- despite the sale of millions of Apple Watches each year.
There's a new set of models on show in Barcelona, and the biggest selling point is that their batteries will last up to a month. That longevity, however, requires turning off almost all of the "connected" services. So companies have basically created a normal watch, but with a $400 price tag.
I see wearables taking on different forms, moving away from traditional watches to jewelry, eyewear or something completely different. Basically, a wearable that doesn't feel like a big piece of technology sitting on your wrist. I'd welcome that.
How soon will we get 5G?
First, a refresher: 5G is a new type of mobile technology that could eventually allow us to download high-definition movies to our smartphones and other devices in just a few seconds, among other benefits.
You'll start to hear more about 5G this year when AT&T, Verizon Wireless and other carriers worldwide start trials of the technology. But be careful with these boasts. The tests aren't really 5G because the standards for how the technology will work haven't been agreed to, and much of the geeky mobile infrastructure that's needed to make these superfast networks work hasn't been built yet.
Even industry watchers and executives here admit that 5G networks are still three to five years away, at least when it comes to a widespread rollout. Sure, we'll get test projects here and there -- countries are making big investments to offer "5G style" services around events like the World Cup and Olympics -- but everyday use of 5G won't happen before 2020, at the earliest.
When will we see better batteries (ones that don't catch fire)?
This is the holy grail of mobile technology, and it has come up a lot at the Mobile World Congress. Samsung's recent problems with Galaxy Note 7s that kept catching fire are only one example of how batteries have become a major obstacle to advancement in smartphones.
How long will it take to get longer-lasting batteries? It's hard to say, though my colleague John Markoff wrote recently about "solid state" lithium batteries that could be safer and give engineers more flexibility. People here say that's years away.
It's worth remembering that this problem isn't new. Here's what Thomas Edison had to say in 1883: "The storage battery is one of those peculiar things which appeal to the imagination, and no more perfect thing could be desired by stock swindlers than that very selfsame thing."
What is happening with net neutrality?
Let's step back for a second and remind ourselves what net neutrality is. Rules passed in 2015 by the Federal Communications Commission required internet service providers to treat all online traffic equally.
Ajit Pai, the new F.C.C. chairman, is in Barcelona for Mobile World Congress. There's growing concern that he may rein in net neutrality protections in the United States, allowing internet providers to sign deals with companies to offer digital services like movie streaming at faster speeds than those offered by rivals.
Yet such changes would take years and are unlikely to undo all of the current rules. While Mr. Pai is no fan of the current standards -- he voted against them in 2015 -- he has also said that he believes in an "open and free internet." So expect any changes, and there will be changes, to be more nuanced than both sides currently expect.
The big question: What's the best phone out there?
I guess that depends on how you define "best." Sony and Huawei, a Chinese brand, both came out with high-end phones with fancy high-definition displays and enough processing power to support a small village. But these aren't transformative.
A number of device makers here also are going after the low end of the market, trying to break the $50-to-$75 price barrier that would make smartphones accessible to the growing middle class across Africa, Asia and Latin America. These phones are arguably are more powerful than the iPhone was when it was first released in 2007, but they pale in comparison to the latest Android or iOS device.
Indeed, it shows you what a funk the industry is in when the most talked-about phone in Barcelona is one based on a device released in 2000: Nokia's 3310, a so-called dumb feature phone with no internet connectivity. Why buy one of those when you can get a low-end smartphone for just a little more money? Still, its unveiling here certainly got the nostalgia flowing for when Nokia was the big beast in the phone world.
Scenes From the Trade Show. Clockwise From Top Left: The Nokia 3310, a so-Called Dumb Feature Phone That has No Internet Connectivity; the Unveiling of Huawei's New Smartwatch, the Watch 2; Visitors Trying Out Nokia's Ozo Virtual Reality Sets; Showing the Battery of the New Lg G6 Smartphone. (Photographs by Josep Lago/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images; Paul Hanna/Reuters; David Ramos/Getty Images; Albert Gea/Reuters)
