The twin rise of digital distribution and a robust independent scene has made video games more diverse, more rewarding and more unpredictable than at any time in the medium's history. It's usually hard to see much evidence of that, however, in the fall release schedule, which is dominated by big-budget blockbusters that too often play it safe.
Still, I'm more than capable of getting excited about expensive and well-made mainstream entertainment. Two of the most interesting video games of 2015 -- Konami's Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain for PCs, PlayStations and Xboxes, and Nintendo's Super Mario Maker for Wii U -- went on sale during the first two weeks of September. And there are at least a few smaller games that have a chance to break through despite their not being advertised with noisy, explosion-filled trailers during major televised sporting events.
This fall is also likely to see the first trickle of a rush of virtual-reality headsets that are being marketed to ordinary consumers rather than V. R. enthusiasts. By this time next year, we should be playing virtual-reality games on Facebook's Oculus Rift, Samsung's Gear VR, HTC's Vive and Sony's Project Morpheus.
A caveat about this list: At the start of 2014, I wrote in The Times that my two most anticipated games of the year were The Witness and Quadrilateral Cowboy. It's almost 2016, and they are each still in development. So I am sticking to video games that have been given seemingly firm release dates -- emphasis on "seemingly." (I'm looking at you, Firewatch.)
SOMA
Amnesia: The Dark Descent, a 2010 release from a small Swedish studio, is regarded by some critics as the most terrifying video game ever made. This game, in which an engineer explores a deep-sea research station to uncover what happened to the crew, is not a sequel, but it shares much in common with its predecessor: The mysterious creatures in it cannot be attacked, only evaded. (Frictional Games, Sept. 22; PlayStation 4, PC)
Adr1ft
On April 4, 2013, Adam Orth, a creative director at Microsoft Studios, opened up on Twitter to poke some mild fun at video game players who were concerned about a proposed (and later eliminated) "always-on" Internet connection on the Xbox One. Within a week, after an online blowback from angry gamers, Mr. Orth resigned from his job. The ruined space station that players explore in Adr1ft is a metaphor for how the experience affected him, personally and professionally. This is a video game for the era of Jon Ronson's "So You've Been Publicly Shamed." (Three One Zero, September; PlayStation 4, Xbox One, PC)
Rock Band 4 and Guitar Hero Live
The plastic guitar fad of the first decade of the millennium is back, or so the creators of these games hope. Guitar Hero Live features live-action videos that change according to the skill of the player's performance. Rock Band 4 allows ersatz shredders to improvise their own solos, rather than merely trying to respond to the game's commands. (Rock Band 4: Harmonix, Oct. 6; PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Guitar Hero Live: FreeStyleGame, Oct. 20; PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U, mobile devices)
Halo 5: Guardians
Microsoft's Xbox One console has lagged Sony's PlayStation 4 in the latest iteration of the never-ending platform wars. The newest game in the long-running series about Master Chief shooting aliens is the most notable reward for Xbox loyalists. (343 Industries, Oct. 27; Xbox One)
The Talos Principle: Deluxe Edition
This is a rerelease of one of the very best video games of 2014, a philosophical puzzler about artificial intelligence, the nature of consciousness, the existence of God and other meaty questions. Part of the pleasure involves figuring out how to arrange objects -- laser beams, fans, blocks and more -- to open force fields and progress through the game. But equally engaging is the interactive text, as if Philip K. Dick had written "Paradise Lost" in the form of a "Choose Your Own Adventure" novel. This version includes The Road to Gehenna, an expansion that grapples with questions about the relationship between technology and art -- and includes much more difficult puzzles. (Croteam, Oct. 13; PlayStation 4)
Call of Duty: Black Ops III
Every year since Modern Warfare 2 in 2009, the annual entry in this military shooter has disappointed me. And yet every year, a new wrinkle is added that makes me think this time will be different. This year it's the introduction of four-person cooperative play and the promise of emergent shoot 'em ups that don't play out the same way every time. (Treyarch, Nov. 6; PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, PC)
Fallout 4
This is the one game on this list that I haven't played for even a second. But Fallout 3, a role-playing game about a post-apocalyptic Washington, is regarded as one of the finest games of the last decade. The new game begins with a nuclear attack in 2077, then lets the player emerge into a 23rd-century wasteland in Boston and New England. Newcomers to the series can catch up with the PC-only Fallout Anthology, scheduled for release on Sept. 28. (Bethesda, Nov. 10; PlayStation 4, Xbox One, PC)
Rise of the Tomb Raider
The return of Lara Croft in a first-rate adventure was one of the most welcome surprises of 2013. In this sequel, she is searching for the secret of immortality by hunting for antiquities in Syria and Siberia -- and, like all good archaeologists in training, murdering her enemies. (Crystal Dynamics, Nov. 10; Xbox One, Xbox 360)
Star Wars Battlefront
Up to 40 players, taking the sides of the Imperial storm troopers and the Rebel Alliance, can shoot at one another on the desert planet Tatooine from "Star Wars"; the ice planet Hoth from "The Empire Strikes Back"; the forest moon Endor from "Return of the Jedi"; and the new planet Sullust, to be introduced in J. J. Abrams's forthcoming "The Force Awakens." Add a mode where we can shoot 20 enemy Jar Jar Binkses from "The Phantom Menace" and no one will ever again dispute that video games are art. (EA DICE, Nov 17; PlayStation 4, Xbox One, PC)
Photograph From Top Left, Master Chief in Halo 5: Guardians; in Adr1ft, a Space Station Is a Metaphor for the Trials of the Game's Creator; Lara Croft in Search of the Secret of Immortality in Rise of the Tomb Raider; and a Close Look at Guitar Hero Live. Above, Darth Vader and Other Familiar Characters Make Appearances in Star Wars Battlefront. (Photographs by Microsoft Studios; 505 Games; Crystal Dynamics; Activision Publishing; Dice/Electronic Arts)
