The two-story library has Oriental rugs, shaded lamps dotting its desks and rows of hardbacks lining its walls. It is the architectural centerpiece of the offices of OpenAI, the start-up whose online chatbot, ChatGPT, showed the world that machines can instantly generate their own poetry and prose.
The building, which was once a mayonnaise factory, looks like a typical tech office, with its communal work spaces, well-stocked micro-kitchens and private nap rooms spread across three floors in San Francisco's Mission District.
But then there is that library, with the ambience of a Victorian Era reading room. Its shelves offer everything from Homer's "The Iliad" to David Deutsch's "The Beginning of Infinity," a favorite of Sam Altman, OpenAI's chief executive.
Built at Mr. Altman's request and stocked with titles suggested by his staff, the OpenAI library is an apt metaphor for the world's hottest tech company, whose success was fueled by language -- lots and lots of language. OpenAI's chatbot was not built like the average internet app. ChatGPT learned its skills by analyzing huge amounts of text that was written, edited and curated by humans, including encyclopedia articles, news stories, poetry and, yes, books.
The library also represents the paradox at the heart of OpenAI's technology. Authors and publishers, including The New York Times, are suing OpenAI, claiming the company illegally used their copyrighted content to build its A.I. systems. Many authors worry that the technology will ultimately take away their livelihood.
Many OpenAI employees, on the other hand, believe the company is using human creativity to fuel more human creativity. They believe their use of copyrighted works is "fair use" under the law, because they are transforming these works into something new.
"To say that this is a public debate right now is an understatement," said Shannon Gaffney, co-founder and managing partner of SkB Architects, the architectural firm that renovated OpenAI's headquarters and designed its library. "Though things might look like they are going in different directions, the library serves as a constant reminder of human creativity."
When OpenAI hired Ms. Gaffney's firm to renovate the building in 2019, Mr. Altman said he wanted a library with an academic aura.
He wanted it to be a reminder of the Green Library, a Romanesque library at Stanford University, where he was a student for two years before dropping out to build a social media app; the Rose Reading Room, a Beaux-Arts study hall on the top floor of the New York Public Library in Midtown Manhattan; and the library-like bar inside the now defunct Nomad Hotel, 15 blocks south of the Rose.
"My dining room and living room at home is inside a library -- floor-to-ceiling books all the way around," Mr. Altman said in an interview. "There is something about sitting in the middle of knowledge on the shelves at vast scale that I find interesting."
Many titles, like "English Masterpieces, 700-1900" and "Ideas and Images in World Art," seem like the weighty hardbacks that professional decorators place strategically inside hotel lobbies because they look the part. Still, the library is a reflection of the organization that built it.
On a recent afternoon, two paperbacks sat beside each other at eye-level: "Birds of Lake Merritt" (a field guide to the birds found in a wildlife refuge in Oakland, Calif.) and "Fake Birds of Lake Merritt" (a parody written by GPT-3, an early version of the technology that drives ChatGPT).
Some employees see the library as a quieter place to work. Long Ouyang, an A.I. researcher, keeps a rolling desk against the wall. Others see it as an unusually elegant break room. On weekends, Ryan Greene, another researcher, pumps his digital music through the audio speakers tucked among the hardbacks.
It is, other employees said, a far more inspiring place to work than a cubicle. "This is why so many people choose to work in the library," Ms. Staudacher said.
Recently, Mr. Greene began feeding lists of his favorite books into ChatGPT and asking for new recommendations. At one point, the chatbot recommended "The Book of Disquiet," a posthumously published autobiography from the Portuguese writer Fernando Pessoa. A friend, who knew his tastes well, had recommended that he read the same book.
"Given the trends and patterns in things that have happened in the past, the technology can suggest things for the future," Mr. Greene said.
Ms. Gaffney, from OpenAI's architectural firm, argued that this blend of the human and the machine will continue. Then she paused, before adding: "That, at least, is what I hope and feel."
OpenAI's library was inspired by famous rooms such as the Rose Reading Room at the New York Public Library.; The ornate library is the centerpiece of OpenAI's San Francisco building, which was once a mayonnaise factory.; OpenAI may be changing how the world interacts with language. But inside the company's San Francisco office, there is a very old-fashioned homage to the written word: a library. Many of the books lining the walls were suggested by the company's more than 1,200 employees. On one shelf is "American Prometheus," the Pulitzer Prize-winning biography of Robert Oppenheimer, the father of the atomic bomb. Three books over is "Endurance," about the doomed Antarctic journey of Ernest Shackleton. There are multiple copies of "The Precipice," a book about the existential risks facing humanity, along with science fiction classics like "2001: A Space Odyssey." There are also books about taking mind-altering drugs and empowering women. And what A.I. company's office library would be complete without Philip K. Dick's "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?"; Once the library was built, OpenAI's head of real estate began acquiring titles, many suggested by the company's researchers, engineers and other employees. Natalie Staudacher, who was part of a team that decamped to the library as they were working on an early version of ChatGPT, suggested Carl Sagan's "Cosmos." Others, like "American Art of the 20th Century," seem to acknowledge that OpenAI's chatbot technology now learns from both text and pictures. Some, like David Foster Wallace's encyclopedic postmodern novel "Infinite Jest," seem like a sly comment on the new world OpenAI is helping to create.; Some employees said they find OpenAI's library a far more inspiring place to work than a cubicle.; A display of famous people in science, from left: Nikola Tesla, Albert Einstein, Hedy Lamarr and Alan Turing. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHRISTIE HEMM KLOK)
