Les Moonves, the former chief executive of CBS, did what he could to obstruct the workplace investigation of the egregious sexual assault allegations against him, destroying evidence and misleading the lawyers who interviewed him. Despite his efforts, The Times reported, lawyers investigating Mr. Moonves found enough evidence to justify docking him a $120 million severance payment.
Most workplace investigations proceed with far less drama and without the knowledge of the media and the public. They typically begin after an employee reports to a company hotline, human resources or a company official that she or he has been harassed, assaulted or suffered some other inequity at work. The accuser's company finances these inquiries, either assigning H.R. or hiring lawyers or other professionals to report on whatever they find. Thanks to the #MeToo movement, membership in the Association of Workplace Investigators, whose members conduct many of these inquiries, soared 25 percent over the past year to 998.
I attended the group's annual conference this fall, and I was dismayed to hear the obstacles its members face, even when investigating executives much less famous or powerful than Mr. Moonves. I've been writing about gender discrimination for more than two decades and know that even the most principled investigators can come under intense pressure from companies who sometimes use their work to put the accuser on trial.
Part of the problem is the nature of these investigations. They are not civil or criminal proceedings subject to public scrutiny; and even when the investigator concludes that harassment took place, there's no guarantee the company will do the right thing and protect the victim.
In the 1990s, long before the #MeToo era, Smith Barney -- the Wall Street firm that was the subject of a notorious sex discrimination and harassment case -- ordered an investigation of its Garden City, N.Y., branch office. Investigators confirmed there were problems. But the firm fired the female stockbroker whose complaints led to the inquiry and gently eased the branch manager into retirement. It even had a party to send him off.
Bad investigations still happen. A former product manager at a Silicon Valley artificial intelligence start-up said in a lawsuit in August that she was assured that the investigator hired to look into her sexual harassment allegations would be neutral. But when the manager offered to share messages that corroborated her claims, the investigator wasn't interested. When the report was complete, the manager asked for a copy but was told she couldn't see it.
Yet employees typically have no choice but to participate in workplace investigations. Companies often insist on it, stipulating in employee handbooks or employment contracts that workers must cooperate when called to testify or risk getting fired.
Investigators who strive to be fair sometimes face challenges. Allison West, an investigator in Pacifica, Calif., told me that one client's general counsel demanded that she delete information from her report that reflected badly on the company. (She declined to follow those orders). Another investigator told me that a client told her not to write a report at all if the findings turned out to be bad for the company.
Even companies looking to do the right thing face hurdles. They might punish a harasser with a salary cut or docked bonus but then be forced to keep that information under wraps because of privacy considerations. Men and women in the harasser's department, in the meantime, are left with the impression that either the report was a whitewash or the company chose to do nothing.
Pilar Morin, a lawyer in Los Angeles, described an incident that happened when she was looking into accusations that a college president had sexually harassed a student. During her interview with the president and his lawyer, in the president's office, she excused herself to use the rest room. She returned to a locked door and realized she had left her handwritten notes and computer in the room. "I started pounding on the door," she said, but it was another 15 minutes before they let her back in.
The worst frustration I heard at the conference was from an investigator who learned, in the course of her research, that there had been previous confidential settlements of sexual harassment complaints against the man she was investigating. The advice she got from her peers was that she could not include those previous settlements in her report.
Policymakers need to begin talking about how to make investigations more transparent. They could demand that employees receive disclosures about who is being hired to investigate their companies, what they are paid and whether they have done previous work for the firm. If the disclosures reveal concerns about impartiality or conflicts of interest, employees should be able to decline to testify without penalty.
Policymakers should also work on legal solutions to make sealed settlements accessible to victims of repeat offenders. How do you stop a predator who can bury the evidence against him? As women increasingly speak up in the #MeToo era, there will be more of these inquiries, and not all of them will make headlines. We need to do more to hold every investigation, and every investigator, accountable.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .
