On a frigid February night in 2017, Arca and a cabal of fashion and nightlife icons strolled into the Lower East Side basement dive bar Home Sweet Home. An ensemble of art school kids and unsuspecting patrons milled about, while a D.J. played mediocre 2000s hip-hop. Before long, Arca took over the turntables, and anticipation and curiosity percolated through the air.
She plugged in her USB and grinned as she blasted unreleased treasures, filling the room with glitchy electronic shrapnel that would become her devastating self-titled album a few months later. Only a handful of people in the crowd knew who she was -- at the time, she was mostly an experimental electronic producer with a reputation for harnessing industrial dissonance, the high drama of classical composition and uncomfortable metallic grit. Her relative anonymity allowed her to let loose in front of the small crowd, and those who clicked with the percussive, ululating machinations that filtered out of her USB hollered and jerked along.
Since then, Alejandra Ghersi has become a multidisciplinary performance artist, producer and singer, but her years as a club kid -- abundant with improvisation, spontaneity and openness -- remain a foundational part of her identity.
"Dance floors are where I found freedom," the Venezuelan-born artist said over a video call from her home in Barcelona, Spain, her lips painted a crimson red and a stainless steel choker clinging tightly around her neck. "When I moved to New York at age 17, I was very repressed. There were a lot of colors that I was muting internally."
Today, Arca's volume is turned up loud. Her art -- a grotesque cyberpunk visual vocabulary and disjointed, shape-shifting music -- has commanded the attention of rebels across fashion, music and art. She has produced for FKA twigs, Björk and Kanye West, modeled in campaigns for Bottega Veneta and Calvin Klein, and composed a constantly transforming soundtrack for the Museum of Modern Art's lobby using artificial intelligence. This year, she was up for her first Grammy and Latin Grammy Awards.
Her latest endeavor is "KICK," a five-album masterwork accompanied by an elaborate 3-D visual world, conceptualized in collaboration with the multimedia artist Frederik Heyman. Some of the albums showcase her most irreverent take on pop music yet, while still sharpening her desire to denaturalize and interrogate all kinds of boundaries: of the physical body, of immigrant identity, of biological conceptions of gender, rendered in part by blurring the line between flesh and technology.
"Out of all the stories that we write and we choose to share as world builders, as storytellers, for me, the ones that are most exciting are the ones that point to a recognition of a boundary," she said.
Ghersi often speaks like this, sharing high-level abstractions on the artistic and philosophical motivations of her work. In two long interviews in November, her thoughts unraveled like elongated paragraphs, reminiscent of a Jorge Luis Borges story.
"For me, it's important not to be a snapshot of one of my backgrounds, but to be able to map all of those things," she said. "To let those differences be. And not feel ashamed of them."
GHERSI HAS BEEN dreaming of creating conceptual work like the "KICK" series since she was a teenager. She grew up moving between the United States and Caracas, playing gaita, a type of folk music, as well as performing dreamy synth pop as Nuuro. When she was 17, she came to New York to attend N.Y.U. Her first EPs as Arca, "Stretch 1" and "Stretch 2" from 2012, are bass-heavy, mosaic inversions of club music and hip-hop; the second drew the attention of West, who recruited her to work on a few songs for "Yeezus."
Next came a series of mixtapes and studio albums -- "Xen," "Mutant" and "Arca" -- that revealed Ghersi's gifts as an artist in her own right. Here, she stretched and collaged celestial synth tones and haunting, cavernous echoes of sound, suffused with tortured romantic anguish.
"KiCk i" arrived in the summer of 2020 and contains some of the grandiose, forlorn torch songs that appeared on her self-titled album, as well as features from Björk, Rosalía, Shygirl and Sophie. But it also pointed to the directions Ghersi would explore in the collection's following albums, as she continued to slice up pop templates, concoct manic breakbeats, luxuriate in synth excess and cut and paste the jagged edges of reggaeton.
[Video: Watch on YouTube.]
The "KICK" albums are inspired by expansive works like "Der Ring des Nibelungen," the 19th century collection of German operas by Richard Wagner, and the "Cremaster" cycle, an aesthetic universe created by the contemporary artist Matthew Barney that includes feature-length films, sculptures, photographs and drawings. Ghersi said she sees each record as non-hierarchical; she suggests listening to the albums in one go, even if it isn't in order.
She described "KICK" as a series of "self-contained, mythical, almost world-building exercises that interrelate to one another," in a mid-November video interview, wearing a simple gray hoodie. A mustard Telfar purse hung from a coat hook in the background, and at one point, her striped cat, Lain, jumped into the frame to say hello.
The visual universe of "KICK," which includes the videos for "Prada/Rakata" and the album covers, is a bleak technological dystopia, sculpted in 3-D from close-up images of Ghersi's body. There are robotic arms, electrical cables, fantastical beasts and references to the Venezuelan folk figure María Lionza, as well as cameos of Ghersi's own paintings and calligraphy.
Ghersi's vision for "KICK" unfolded after her 2017 album. Between the projects, she began identifying as a nonbinary trans woman. "I felt like that was something that required certain care to undergo slash survive at times. It just took up all my RAM -- that reckoning that I'd been putting off for so long," she said.
Some of her new tracks venture into the outer edges of mainstream pop, which Ghersi has flirted with more openly over the last few years. (In September, she released her official remix of Lady Gaga's "Rain on Me," and one of the tracks on "KICK ii" features Sia.) "What's magical for me about engaging with pop is to not try to make a song that I think other people will like at the expense of an experiment or a sound that I love," she said. "It's to actually create a bridge for those that have different aesthetic sensibilities or different backgrounds to meet in a shared space that pop can provide."
That sense of communion is at the center of Ghersi's work. She thinks deeply about blurring the barrier between spectator and performer, allowing audience participation to permeate her shows. During her 2019 performance series at the Shed in Manhattan, a three-night engagement called "Mutant;Faith," Arca wore hoofed stilts, munched on her custom acrylic talons and invited audience members to dance with her on a dirt surface that doubled as the stage.
Björk, who co-produced her own albums "Vulnicura" and "Utopia" with Arca, said she was immensely proud of her friend during the performances. "She improvised alone for hours, no two nights the same. Willing to make herself super vulnerable, and therefore also super fierce," she wrote over email. "It is rare to have someone who has both emotional intelligence, high programming technique, performance and singing, humor and drama, gentleness and brutality. It is easy to admire this hyperhuman!"
Part of Ghersi's practice has involved exposing both the softness and ferocity required of femme performers in pop culture. "If you over identify with the diva, it starts to prevent you from feeling things," she said. "There's this weird sweet spot where you can deploy it almost as a way of letting you cross the threshold of pressure exerted on you under that spotlight. You can really feel a lot and communicate a lot to audiences."
ON THE COVER for "KICK ii," Ghersi is squatting in a black bodysuit, her bra enveloping her breasts like a cage. Robotic arms protrude from her back, and black belts are buckled around her thighs. Her right pinkie finger hyperextends into the exposed flesh of another body, which appears upside down, outfitted with a device reminiscent of a milking machine. The album artwork for the other installments in the cycle explore similar motifs of body modification via mechanical aberration: a limb converted into a machine gun, or thick electrical wires attached to her nipples.
"Working with these themes of body and technology is something that I've been drawn to aesthetically since as long as I can remember," Ghersi said, citing her love of anime, video games like Final Fantasy and the science fiction of Ursula K. Le Guin.
The process of designing each scene from the series took over a year. "I exclusively work in digitally altered, photorealistic rendered environments," Heyman said over email. "We wanted Arca to transcend the physical world into an extensive digital séance."
Electronic music has long been a site of affirmation and ideation for queer and trans artists and fans. And for some time, feminist scholars, performance artists and journalists, like Donna Haraway, Stelarc and Sasha Geffen, have been asking questions about the figure of the cyborg and its capacity to free the body from gendered entrapment.
When organic tissue and wiring meet, what kinds of gender-soft, border-permeable futures might we be able to dream of? In her new work, Ghersi appears to answer this question more directly. "There is a particular kind of skepticism or cynicism in the face of the modified body," she said. "As if there was a shame to the transformation of the body."
SHAME IS A feeling Ghersi has spent a lot of time with. Between "Arca" and "KiCK i," she said she felt deeply stagnant, even bitter, a consequence of experiencing gender dysphoria.
"I was stuck in sorrow because I wasn't letting myself feel certain anger in my life," she said. "After you feel both sorrow and the anger, then you can go back to grounding and see the beauty of life."
Across the "KICK" cycle, Ghersi reclaims those emotions as celebration. On "Alien Inside," a demented guitar power ballad, the featured vocalist Shirley Manson of Garbage chants: "Remember the post human celestial sparkle/A mutant faith/A mutant faith/Your dignity." Ghersi said the term "mutant faith" is a belief in the promise of the othered. "A faith for mutants, outcasts, freaks, weirdos, the othered, migrants," she explained. "An intersectional rallying cry for the spirit."
That artistic philosophy extends to language, too. Over the course of the "KICK" cycle, Ghersi moves between English and Spanish. She sang entirely in Spanish on her self-titled album. The decision "was almost a manifesto of which language felt more intimate for me," she said. By returning to Spanish, weaving reggaeton textures and Venezuelan folklore and reveling in the possibilities of post humanism, Ghersi is conjuring her own kind of trans immigrant futurism.
"I do see a lot of possibility for the creation of a self that isn't a photograph, that can change over time," she said. "I think the Latinx community is that. It's going to be shape-shifting ever after and forever, hopefully in the same way that queerness is."
Photograph "For me, it's important not to be a snapshot of one of my backgrounds, but to be able to map all of those things," Arca says. "To let those differences be. And not feel ashamed of them." (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANA CUBA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
