Would there be American troops in Afghanistan at the end of your first term?
The war in Afghanistan could turn 20 years old during the next president's first year in office. We wanted candidates to take a position on whether American troops still belong there. Every Democrat pledged to pull back troops. Only some -- like Elizabeth Warren and Cory Booker -- promised a full exit.
JULIÁN CASTRO
I recognize, like a lot of people, that we do need to withdraw from our engagements there. The question is how we do that. I disagree with this administration's haphazard way of announcing and going about withdrawal. We need to withdraw in a way that is orderly, that respects our allies, that leaves the region as stable as we possibly can, given the circumstances.
ELIZABETH WARREN
NO.
ERIC SWALWELL
As president, I would significantly reduce the troop level in Afghanistan. We want to protect the embassy we have there. There are still Afghan Army forces that we want to train and equip, so they can defend their own country, but I think we should shift largely to supporting them economically so that they can stand themselves up, give their people opportunity, make sure it's an equalopportunity country where men and women are able to compete. That's the best hope for Afghanistan's future.
SETH MOULTON
If there were, they'd be there with a clear mission to prevent terror attacks and that's it. I'm sorry, but we've got to abandon nationbuilding in Afghanistan, it just hasn't worked. And we've got to be cleareyed about what the troops are there to do.
BILL DE BLASIO
It is a war that has gone on too long. We have to make sure there is a peace settlement in Afghanistan; it obviously has to involve the Taliban. Until that point, I don't think it's sensible to take out our troops. But we hope for the day where there's some kind of peace that at least allows us to have much less of a presence in Afghanistan, maybe even one day to remove all of our troops.
AMY KLOBUCHAR
No. I think we need to bring our troops home from Afghanistan. We have been there longer than some of our young people have been on this earth, and it is time to work with the government there and, again, with our allies -- we don't want to do this alone.
PETE BUTTIGIEG
When it comes to Afghanistan, one thing that everybody can agree on is that we're getting out. The hard part is figuring out whether we can get out well, or whether we're going to get out poorly. And one of my top priorities is to make sure our departur
CORY BOOKER
WE CANNOT HAVE FOREVER WARS IN THIS NATION. AND THIS IS ONE AREA WHERE I'M GOING TO BE DETERMINED TO BRING AMERICAN TROOPS HOME.
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND
WE NEED TO BRING OUR TROOPS HOME FROM AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ AND SYRIA. I think if we want to have longterm troop engagements in those countries, we need to have a new A.U.M.F., an authorization for use of military force. The ones that we passed immediately after 9/11, I don't believe -- are no longer appropriate for what we are doing across the Middle East. I think the troops particularly in Syria should be drawn down. I don't think we have true authorization for combat operations there, and I believe that if we are going to engage in anti-terrorism, it should be far more targeted. If we need to engage in stability operations, that should be something that Congress, again, opines on, and authorizes military force.
BERNIE SANDERS
Work as aggressively as we can with our allies in the region to end the endless wars that we have been participating in. I fear very much, and doing everything I can to get the United States now out of the horrific war in Yemen, and to do everything I can to make sure that Trump doesn't get us into a war with Iran
JOHN DELANEY The reason we're in all these countries, fundamentally, was about the fact that we thought there was a terror risk to the United States of America and our citizens. We went there for those reasons, and I wouldn't want to leave until I felt like that risk didn't exist. I think realistically, with respect to Iraq and Afghanistan, we should expect there to be very significant troop withdrawal from those two countries.
TIM RYAN
I do worry about leaving these safe havens for terrorists to plot attacks, and I think we do have to have, at least with an international coalition, be a part of making sure that these attacks can't be planned in some of these safe havens. We just saw in Sri Lanka the other day, there are still people in the world who want to do bad things.
JOHN INSLEE
We have to change our foreign policy to stop this mirage that we can rebuild whole countries and cultures.
MARIANNE WILLIAMSON
I WOULD MAKE NO MOVE IN AFGHANISTAN UNTIL FIRST I SPOKE TO AFGHAN WOMEN.
JOHN HICKENLOOOPER
If there were troops there, there'd be very few. I believe that monopolies are problematic in whatever industry they exist, and I believe there are
BETO O'ROURKE
We have to decide that we will not achieve our foreign policy goals on the backs of 18- and 19- and 20-year-old service members who are deployed in dozens of countries, half a world away right now. We have to begin to bring these wars to a close, and address legitimate foreign policy concerns and goals through our diplomacy, and through working with other countries in the region.
KAMALA HARRIS
I BELIEVE WE SHOULD BRING BACK OUR TROOPS FROM AFGHANISTAN, BUT I ALSO BELIEVE THAT WE NEED TO HAVE A PRESENCE THERE in terms of supporting what the leaders of Afghanistan want to do in terms of having peace in that region, and certainly suppressing any possibility of ISIS or any other terrorist organization from gaining any steam. I think the question is the type of presence, right? And as we have done in the past, I think that it is completely appropriate that we would give support to the Afghan government in terms of helping them train their troops.
TULSI GABBARD
OUR COUNTRY HAS BEEN AT WAR IN AFGHANISTAN FOR FAR TOO LONG, creating a great cost to our troops and to the American people, leaving us and the Afghan people no better off than we were before. First of all, I'm a soldier, I've served over 16 years in the Army National Guard, in Congress over six years on both the Foreign Affairs and Armed Services Committees. I've deployed twice to the Middle East and I know firsthand the cost of war. We've got to take on the threats to our national security, threats like Al Qaeda and ISIS, and defeat those threats. And as president, I will end the wasteful regime-change wars that have taken such a toll on our troops and on the American people, with the trillions of dollars that we've spent on these wars. Dollars that we need to invest in things like health care, infrastructure, education and so much more.
STEVE BULLOCK
You know, we've been 18, 19 years in Afghanistan now. Think about somebody joining the military right now -- Afghanistan and the conflict has been going on for their entire life. Even as governor, I went over to Afghanistan in 2013. And talking to both military leaders and in the diplomatic corps, the discussion was: It's time to get out, it's time to let this country go forward. I think what we ultimately need to do is not only remove the troops, but if we're gutting our diplomatic efforts as this administration has been putting less in the State Department, it's going to be that much harder for stability.
ANDREW YANG
My hope would be that there would be no American troops in Afghanistan at the end of my first term, but it's impossible to know that for sure, given that reality on the ground might lead us to have to have people there if we can accomplish goals in that time frame.
MICHAEL BENNET If we're there for another couple of years in Afghanistan, we'll have been there for 20 years. If you're a kid in college or you're 18 or 19 years old, you've only known us being at war. We've spent $ 5.6 trillion in the Middle East. It's time for us to come home from Afghanistan.
WHERE WOULD YOU GO ON YOUR FIRST INTERNATIONAL TRIP AS PRESIDENT? A president's first foreign trip has great symbolic significance. We thought this question could help reveal the message these candidates would want to send to the world.
MICHAEL BENNET I never thought about that. I probably would go to Europe to reassert that the alliance is strong, that we care about NATO.
CORY BOOKER It's not something I'm going to be telling The New York Times about right now. I know you guys are trying to get a scoop, but I've thought a lot about that, and it is an important trip, both for substance as well as symbol, to talk about what my priorities are going to be.
STEVE BULLOCK I'd probably start by assuring some of our partners that we're still that trusted friend. And that could be as close as Canada, it could be down to Mexico. It could be over to Europe as well.
PETE BUTTIGIEG Probably better become president before finalizing that decision, but I do think that there are so many alliances that the United States needs to shore up, that I would begin by talking to some of our closest friends.
JULIÁN CASTRO My first international trip would be either to Mexico or to Canada, because those are our neighbors. They're the most important allies we have.
BILL DE BLASIO I'd start with a trip to the European Union. To France, to Germany, to Great Britain, obviously -- even though they're in the middle of Brexit, they're a crucial ally that we need to work with. We have to repair all of the rifts that Donald Trump created.
JOHN DELANEY I would do a large tour touching base with some of our most important allies, both in Europe and in the Asia Pacific region.
TULSI GABBARD I'll get back to you on that.
KRISTEN GILLIBRAND I would go to Israel, and I would travel throughout the Middle East and begin to have a worldwide conversation about what it takes to have peace.
KAMALA HARRIS Wherever it is that we have American troops who are in the line of fire. I think it is critically important that a president of the United States have a full understanding of the conditions and the circumstances of any place where we send American lives to defend our values or our country
JOHN HICKENLOOPER I'd want to go to NATO, to Europe, and reassure those allies who now are thinking, perhaps the United States is not the reliable ally that they've always believed.
JAY INSLEE Don't know the answer to that, but wherever it is, it will be a place where we build alliances rather than to break them down as Donald Trump has been.
AMY KLOBUCHAR I would go to Canada, and I would go to visit our NATO allies, and I would as - sure them that America doesn't stand alone in the world.
SETH MOULTON I would go to some of our allies that President Trump has aban - doned around the globe. You know, I'd start with some of our key old European allies that have always been important to us. I'd go to Canada and Mexico.
BETO O'ROURKE I would go to Mexico, our most important neigh - bor, a potential ally as we address other significant challenges in the Western Hemi - sphere.
TIM RYAN Europe. I would go to Europe.
BERNIE SANDERS I have no idea. There are a lot of hot spots around the world. I think clearly we want to reaffirm our relationship with many of our traditional allies in Europe and elsewhere, relationships that Trump has certainly ruptured.
ERIC SWALWELL I would visit our NATO allies. I also would assure the South Koreans and the Japanese that we value the friendship and partnership we have there.
ELIZABETH WARREN I think I'd go to Central America. I think I'd go down to where there are such terrible problems that cause people to flee, and to meet with people in that region and talk about how we can help them there, so that their lives are more secure and more stable.
MARIANNE WILLIAMSON I can tell you what my first international calls would be, and that is to the leaders of Europe to say, "We're back, we're back!"
ANDREW YANG My first impulse is to go someplace that's close to home. So, it would be someplace in South America, I would imagine.
Should tech giants like Facebook, Amazon and Google be broken up?
Both parties have become more concerned about Silicon Valley's influence over government and the economy, and Elizabeth Warren fueled a debate among Democrats by proposing to break up Facebook, Google and Amazon. Some agreed with her, while others -- including Kamala Harris and Seth Moulton -- urged different kinds of regulation.
ERIC SWALWELL
No, but I do think the antitrust division at the Department of Justice could be better used, and that we need to start looking at anticompetitive practices broadly across tech. I also believe that we need a national privacy law so that, in our country, people are aware of how their data is being used, what they are opting into exactly.
JULIÁN CASTRO
We need to scrutinize more, these kinds of big companies and poten - tial mergers, whether they are in the tech industry, the telecom in - dustry, agribusiness, any number of different industries.
ELIZABETH WARREN
It's like in baseball. You can be the umpire -- that is, you can run the plat - form, the market - place -- or you can have a team in the game, that is, you can be one of the competing businesses. But you don't get to do both at the same time. And that's why they should be broken apart.
BERNIE SANDERS
This is an area that we are so far behind. Public policy is so far behind the explosion of technol - ogy that it is really one of the weaknesses of where we are right now as a country. When you talk about the power of tech companies, you're talking about how we look at the workforce in com - ing years. What does artificial intelligence in robotics mean for the jobs that we're going to have? You're talk - ing about the invasion of our privacy, the fact that these tech giants know more about us than anybody would ever dream that they know.
JOHN HICKENLOOPER
We have a process to go through rather than just me saying, me making a unilateral deci - sion . We should be looking at a lot of these mergers and a lot of the size of some of these companies. The system now whereby you have -- some of these large, behemoth compa - nies that pay no taxes, and yet they're creating remarkable share, shareholder value. Are they enhancing our open markets, our capitalistic system in America, or are they in some way begin - ning to compress the overall value to society?
SETH MOULTON
I DON'T THINK WE NEED TO BREAK THEM UP RIGHT NOW, BUT WE'VE GOT TO REGULATE THEM MORE EFFECTIVELY.
JOHN DELANEY
I think we've been woefully defi - cient in actually regulating these companies. You know, I favor digital privacy legis - lation at the federal level very similar to what Cali - fornia has done. I think that's the right framework. I favor updating the Tele - communications Act and our antitrust laws to actu - ally address companies with the kind of scale and capabilities that many of these companies have. I fa - vor putting in place other regulations on, you know, their ability to put political advertising out there without dis - closure.
TULSI GABBARD
Facebook and Google have such monopolies and such power that -- and there have been examples of their abuse of that power, both in invading and violating our personal privacy and civil liberty rights, as well as crushing any who seek to challenge their monopoly.
TIM RYAN
I DON'T THINK THEY'RE MEETING THE STANDARDS THAT WE NEED THEM TO MEET AROUND PRIVACY.
PETE BUTTIGIEG
The F.T.C. needs to be empow - ered to prevent, and in some cases reverse, the merg - ers of some of these companies, not just in tech, but across the American economy. The consolidation can very quickly turn into a kind of monopoly power that diminishes our freedom and squashes competi - tion. I mean, there has to be a due process for something like this. But there is no question that the bar has been drawn far too lightly
BETO O'ROURKE
I DON'T KNOW WHETHER IT IS APPROPRIATE FOR A CANDIDATE FOR THE PRESIDENCY, OR FOR THE PRESIDENT, HIM OR HERSELF, TO BE DESIGNATING WHICH COMPANIES SHOULD BE BROKEN UP.
AMY KLOBUCHAR
This isn't some radical idea. This goes back to our founding fathers. It is Adam Smith if you want to look at the father of modern-day capitalism, who warned us about the standing army of monopolies. That's what's happen - ing and we're going to reduce competition and hurt capitalism if we don't do something about this spreading problem of monopolies.
BILL DE BLASIO
I get very angry when I think about the fact that these huge tech companies, while they were profiting greatly, were part of what broke down our democracy in so many ways in recent years --the spread of misinformation, the interfer - ence by foreign governments in our elections, the ways that privacy was, in so many ways, undermined.
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND
I believe that monopolies are problematic in what - ever industry they exist, and I believe there are grave concerns about monopolistic practices by the largest platforms that exist today
MICHAEL BENNET
Those companies are different from each other and it's worth thinking about that. I think we should abso - lutely examine whether they should be broken up and we should have the antitrust di - vision of the Justice Department take a look at that.
ANDREW YANG
If you have the sense that our government is decades behind the curve in technology, you are right. The temptation, though, is to say break them up, which is frankly a 20th-century solution to a 21st-century set of problems. And there are dynamics in tech - nology, right now, that make it so that competition isn't always the answer. As an example, none of us wants to use the fourth-best navigation app. We just want to know what the best app is going to be that has the most up-todate traffic info. So it's not a situ - ation where you're like, "Oh, if we have more apps competing, like that's somehow going to al - ways be what we want."
KAMALA HARRIS
MY FIRST PRIORITY IS GOING TO BE THAT WE ENSURE THAT PRIVACY IS SOMETHING THAT IS INTACT, AND THAT CONSUMERS HAVE THE POWER TO MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS WITH THEIR PERSONAL INFORMATION.
JAY INSLEE
I BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE TO ENFORCE ANTITRUST L AWS. I BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE TO REGUL ATE PRIVACY We've come very close to pass - ing the best privacy laws in the United States so that those tech giants do not violate our priva - cy and do not violate consumer laws. Whether they are broken up depends on the specifics of the antitrust law as it applies to them individually.
MARIANNE WILLIAMSON
I think giantism is a malfunction. Giantism is a malfunction in the body, and giantism is a malfunc - tion in society. That is why we have antitrust laws. That is why we have antimonopoly clauses. And so, yes, I believe that the tech companies have become giants in ways that make it very, very diffi - cult, even for the free market.
CORY BOOKER
We need to create an economy that works for everyone, not crony capitalism and unchecked corporate consolidation.
STEVE BULLOCK
I think tech giants like Facebook, Amazon and Google first ought to have a lot more obligations to our society. The fact that Ama - zon made $ 10 billion of profits, and didn't pay any taxes last year, shows structural issues altogeth - er. The fact that Google -- half of its employees are independent contractors, don't necessarily get the benefits and the wages that others do, it's problematic. When it comes directly to breaking them up, you know, antitrust used to be about both controlling markets where Amazon now controls 80 percent of Internet sales.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
