Here's a look at what's coming up this week. BANKING
R.B.S.'s shareholder lawsuit heads to court.
A trial is set to begin in London on Monday in a shareholder lawsuit against the Royal Bank of Scotland over a rights issue by the lender before its near collapse in 2008. The litigation is related to the bank's raising of 12 billion pounds, or about $15.5 billion, weeks before the British government rescued it. R.B.S., which remains 73 percent owned by the British government, received a £45 billion bailout that year. After an agreement announced last month, R.B.S. has settled with shareholders representing 87 percent of the claims against it, based on value. Chad Bray
TECHNOLOGY
Humans get another crack at beating a computer.
The venerable Chinese game of Go will give humans another shot to prevail over machines. AlphaGo, the Go-playing contender from the DeepMind artificial intelligence arm of Google's parent, Alphabet, will take on the world champion, Ke Jie, at a humans vs. computers competition in Wuzhen, China, beginning on Tuesday. AlphaGo's defeat of a top Go player in South Korea last year was considered a major victory for artificial intelligence. Carlos Tejada
CENTRAL BANKING
Investors anticipate a benchmark interest rate increase.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday will release the minutes of its most recent meeting, in early May. Surprises are unlikely. Investors expect the Fed to raise its benchmark interest rate at its next meeting in June, partly because the Fed did nothing to diminish those expectations at the May meeting. The Fed's statement after the meeting said officials expected the economy to rebound after a weak first quarter. And a few days later, the federal government announced that the unemployment rate had declined to 4.4 percent in April. Binyamin Appelbaum
HOUSING
Data on sales of previously owned homes in April is coming.
Also on Wednesday, the National Association of Realtors will report sales in April of previously owned homes. Sales of previously owned homes posted solid gains in March, as job growth and easing lending standards made it easier to buy a home. Economists expect the housing market to continue its steady recovery; however, a persistent scarcity of homes for sale will limit the pace of growth, and is likely to lead to a lot of disappointed home shoppers through the spring and summer. Conor Dougherty
ENERGY
OPEC leaders will consider extending production cuts.
OPEC ministers are scheduled to meet in Vienna on Thursday amid skepticism about whether the oil output cuts agreed to late last year are working. OPEC is likely to go along with the recent agreement by Saudi Arabia, the cartel's de facto leader, and Russia to extend the trims nine more months, through March. But analysts say OPEC, which will most likely be joined in Vienna by officials from other producing countries, may also consider other measures to further prop up prices -- now about $49 per barrel for United States crude -- such as curbing exports to soak up the oil glut. Stanley Reed
BANKING
New guidelines for trading in foreign currency markets will be unveiled.
The Bank of England will unveil on Thursday a new global code for best practices for trading in the foreign currency markets. The code was developed after a series of investigations into potential manipulation of the currency markets. The inquiries have led to billions of dollars in penalties, guilty pleas and even criminal charges in the United States by some of the world's biggest banks, including Barclays, Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase and the Royal Bank of Scotland. Several traders have lost their jobs as a result. The code, which is a self-regulatory measure, was jointly developed by the industry and central bankers. Currency trading firms will voluntarily agree to abide by it. Chad Bray
ECONOMY
The Commerce Department will offer a snapshot of early 2017's economy.
On Friday, the Commerce Department will issue two reports outlining how the economy performed in early 2017. After an initial estimate of gross domestic product growth of 0.7 percent in the first quarter, statisticians will offer a revised number based on additional data. Wall Street economists are not expecting a big change, but there could be a slight upward adjustment in the annual rate to near 1 percent, factoring in slightly healthier business investment and government spending.
While the G.D.P. number covers January, February and March, new data on durable goods sales for April will count toward growth in the current second quarter. The headline figure is expected to show a drop in overall durable goods orders, led by a decline in volatile aircraft and defense orders. Demand for core durable goods like appliances is expected to have held up better, showing a slight rise of 0.6 percent. Nelson D. Schwartz
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: THE NEW YORK TIMES
A Russian Oil Field. Opec Production Cuts May Be Extended. (Photograph by Sergei Karpukhin/Reuters)
