MANUFACTURING
Big-Ticket Factory Goods See 11% Jump in Orders
Orders to American factories for big-ticket products jumped 11.2 percent in July, the third consecutive monthly gain and up from 7.7 percent in June, the Commerce Department reported Wednesday.
The strong advance last month, however, was led by the volatile transportation sector, which spiked 35.6 percent. Excluding transportation, orders would have risen by a more modest 2.4 percent.
A closely watched category that serves as a proxy for business investment plans rose a solid 1.9 percent in July after a 4.3 precent rebound in June.
While the gains in orders for durable goods is welcome, economists caution that could falter if coronavirus infections surge in the fall, forcing more factory shutdowns and a return to the near economic stall the U.S. went through in the spring.
The rise in July orders left total durable goods orders at a seasonally adjusted $ 230.7 billion. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
Quantum Hubs to Cost U.S. $ 625 Million
The Department of Energy said on Wednesday that it would provide $ 625 million over the next five years for five newly formed quantum information research hubs as it tries to keep ahead of competing nations like China on the emerging technology.
The funding is part of $ 1.2 billion earmarked in the National Quantum Initiative Act in 2018.
Researchers believe quantum computers could operate millions of times faster than today's advanced supercomputers, making possible potential tasks ranging from mapping complex molecular structures and chemical reactions to boosting the power of artificial intelligence.
The five research hubs are each led by the Energy Department's Argonne, Brookhaven, Fermi, Lawrence Berkeley and Oak Ridge national laboratories. The hubs comprise top research universities, other national labs and big tech companies like IBM, Intel and Microsoft, as well as quantum computer startups Rigetti & Co. and ColdQuanta. REUTERS
CATEGORY
Hedlyne Goes For Maximum of Two Lines
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on Wednesday adopted changes to its decades-old definition of a professional investor in order to allow more everyday Americans to buy shares in private companies, and eased come company disclosure rules.
The agency said it hopes the changes to its "accredited investor" definition will boost retail investors' access to the swelling pool of companies that are staying private for longer. But the change was criticized by investor advocates and agency officials who say even seasoned investors struggle to spot problems with private companies.
Specifically, the agency broadened the definition of an accredited investor by adding a test of the investor's sophistication "based on professional knowledge, experience, or certifications." Previously, the definition was based largely on an investor's income and wealth.
ADVERTISEMENT
The SEC did not say how many additional investors would fall under the new definition, but said it was aimed at individuals - such as hedge fund employees or brokers - who would not have previously qualified but are knowledgeable about private offerings.
The changes also will cover family offices with at least $ 5 million in assets and will also make it easier for foreign nationals and residents of Native American reservations to qualify as accredited investors.
Wednesday's rule faced criticism from the agency's Democratic commissioners, who voted against the rule change because it could leave investors vulnerable.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUL LOEB/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)
