72 of Our Favorite Facts of 2023
January
1. The title character of the film "Guillermo del Toro's Pinocchio" is the first metal 3-D-printed puppet. It was animated using some 3,000 replacement faces.
For 'Guillermo del Toro's Pinocchio,' a Star Built From Tiny Gears and 3-D Printing
2. Neuropsychology has shown that short-term memory lasts 15 to 30 seconds, after which it either has to be encoded as a long-term memory or it decays.
The Man Who Made Spain the Magic Capital of the World
3. The world produces about 400 million metric tons of plastic waste each year, according to a United Nations report. About half is tossed out after a single use.
Trying to Live a Day Without Plastic
4. Research suggests noise from shipping, oil exploration and other underwater human activities may make it harder for dolphins to communicate and work together.
Dolphins Can Shout Underwater, but It's Never Loud Enough
5. First introduced by a brand called My-T-Fine in 1918, instant pudding mix -- whose key ingredients are sugar and cornstarch -- was a product of the post-World War I manufacturing boom.
The Power of Instant Pudding Mix
6. According to the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, more than 23 million American households -- nearly one in five nationwide -- acquired a dog or cat during the pandemic.
How These Dog Walkers Make Over $ 100,000 a Year
February
7. Every year, hundreds of millions of birds die in the United States from flying into glass.
Those Window Stickers to Prevent Bird Strikes? There's a Catch .

8. Wedding rings stem back to the ancient Egyptians, who believed that there was a vena amoris, Latin for "vein of love," in the left hand's fourth finger with a direct route to the heart.
An Enduring Commitment, Wedding Ring or Not
9. As groundskeeper, George Toma, 94, has prepared the Super Bowl field for 57 straight years. Known as the "Sodfather," he is in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
All Hail the 'God of Sod,' Groundskeeper for All 57 Super Bowls
10. New Orleans, a majority Black city, was once the site of the country's largest slave market, where by one estimate more than 135,000 people were bought and sold.
In Majority-Black New Orleans, Chefs Are Rewriting 'Whitewashed' History
11. In a 2022 survey of dentists, conducted by the American Dental Association, half reported that they had treated patients who were under the influence of marijuana or another drug.
What Dentists Wish You Knew
12. Twenty-nine percent of American credit card customers pay only the minimum payment or close to it, even when they can afford to pay more, according to data from the National Bureau of Economic Research.
When It Comes to Money, Your Brain Can Be Your Own Worst Enemy
March
13. A specimen of a giant lacewing, or Polystoechotes punctata, a large insect from the Jurassic Era that disappeared from eastern North America in the 1950s, was found in 2012 outside a Walmart in Fayetteville, Ark.
'What Is This Thing?': How a Jurassic-Era Insect Was Rediscovered in a Walmart
14. According to a study by the sustainability consultancy Edge Impact in 2020, the average American wedding emits 57,152 kilograms of CO2. You would need to plant 2,722 trees to offset that.
How to Have a Sustainable Wedding
15. Russia controls 38 percent of the world's uranium conversion and 46 percent of the uranium enrichment capacity -- essential steps in producing nuclear fuel.
Why Russia Has Such a Strong Grip on Europe's Nuclear Power
16. The average annual income of farmworkers in California is between $ 20,000 and $ 25,000, according to the U.S. Labor Department.
Can the United Farm Workers Rise Again?
17. Using geolocation data near golf courses in the United States, a study from Stanford University found there were 278 percent more people playing golf at 4 p.m. on a Wednesday in August 2022 than in August 2019.
Golf at 3 p.m. Thursday? Sure, It's the Afternoon Fun Economy.
18. Traditional aperitivo, a bittersweet red liqueur, owes its rich tint to a natural dye derived from crushed insects known as cochineals.
America Already Loves Spritzes. Now It Just Needs Its Own Aperol.
April
19. The crew of the 1975 film "Jaws" faced problems when shooting on the open water, including with their malfunctioning mechanical shark, seasickness, uncooperative tides, boats sailing into the frame and even sets that sank.
Bill Butler, Cinematographer Best Known for 'Jaws,' Dies at 101
20. Dashboard touch screens are now integral to most modern cars, which run up to 14 times more code than a Boeing 787.
Cool? Or Just Clunky? The Fight Over Dashboard Touch Screens.
21. There are about 6,000 vessels believed to be shipwrecked in the Great Lakes. A stretch of shoreline in Michigan with about 200 known shipwrecks is even called the "Graveyard of the Great Lakes."
A Century-Old Mystery Surfaces From Lake Superior
22. Kevin Gross of the Philadelphia Phillies was ejected from a game and suspended for 10 days in 1987 because umpires found a piece of sandpaper that was glued to his glove.
Ball Doctoring: A History of Excuses, Denials and Knowing Winks

23. The rate of suicide among farmers is three and a half times higher than among the general population, according to the National Rural Health Association.
A Death in Dairyland Spurs a Fight Against a Silent Killer
24. The Demilitarized Zone, or DMZ, between North and South Korea is strewn with two million land mines.
'Lord Commander' of the DMZ Has Seen It All on the Korean Frontier
May
25. In 1907, John Pierpont Morgan Sr., for whom JPMorgan bank is named, locked his Wall Street peers in his study until they agreed to join him in bailing out the U.S. financial system.
How JPMorgan Became Banking's Regular Rescuer
26. Some people who listen to contemporary Christian music count what's referred to as JPMs: mentions of Jesus Per Minute.
Lauren Daigle, a Christian Music Superstar, Is Ready for a Bigger Tent
27. Because polo ponies gallop up to 30 miles per hour in quick bursts on grass fields the size of nine football fields, players bring about a dozen horses per match to prevent exhaustion and injury.
Polo and Ponies: 'My Money Pit of Choice'
28. About a fifth of Americans today have had their hearing damaged by noise by the time they turn 30, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated.
Hearing Aids Are Changing. Their Users Are, Too.
29. Harald Bluetooth, a Danish Viking king who died near the end of the 10th century, is celebrated as a unifier of feuding Nordic fiefs and the inspiration for the name of a wireless technology designed to unite devices.
A Centuries-Old Mystery: Did This Elusive Viking City Exist?
30. In the United States, there are as many as six parking spaces for every car.
America, Land of the Free Parking
31. Almost all Arctic predators, from wolves to eagles, rely on squirrels as a food source.
Just Between Us Squirrels, There Might Be Trouble in the Arctic Dating Scene
June
32. In the span of 15 miles in Fresno, Calif., from the city's wealthy Northside to its poverty-ridden Southside, life expectancy drops 20 years.
In California's Heartland, a New Resistance Movement Is Taking Root

33. The human body is continually renewing itself. Billions of cells are replaced every day; by some accounts, after 100 days, enough cells will have turned over to generate an entirely new person.
Review: 'Being Mr. Wickham' Tracks a Rake's Progress

34. The comedian Joan Rivers maintained an organized collection of 65,000 typewritten jokes, cross-referenced by categories like "Parents hated me" or "Las Vegas." The largest subject area is "Tramp," which includes 1,756 jokes.
A 'Crown Jewel of Comedy': The Joan Rivers Card Catalog of Jokes Finds a Home

35. Magnaporthe oryzae, a type of fungus, destroys enough rice each year to feed around 60 million people.
The Man Who Turned the World on to the Genius of Fungi

36. Over two million podcasts have been created since the start of 2020, according to the database Listen Notes.
What's a Podcast Doing at a Film Festival?

July
37. Landscape equipment emits nearly 27 million tons of pollutants a year, according to estimates. One gas-powered leaf blower used for an hour generates the same amount of emissions as a car driving 1,100 miles.
Corporate Landscaping Lets Its Hair Down
38. The skew of affluent students enrolled is so extreme at some U.S. colleges that more undergraduates come from the top 1 percent of the income distribution than from the entire bottom 60 percent, one study found.
Social Class Is Not About Only Race
39. Since her debut in 1959, Barbie has been a fashion editor, a nurse, a flight attendant, an "executive career girl," an astronaut and the president, but she has never had a child.
Greta Gerwig's 'Barbie' Dream Job
40. Wikipedia has versions in 334 languages and a total of more than 61 million articles. It consistently ranks among the world's 10 most-visited websites. Its contributors, who make about 345 edits per minute on the site, are not paid.
Wikipedia's Moment of Truth
41. An A.I. chatbot hallucination refers to the tendency of artificial intelligence to fabricate information.
We're Using A.I. Chatbots Wrong. Here's How to Direct Them.
42. Nearly half of the United States' unsheltered population -- those who sleep on the streets, in tents, in cars or in other places not intended for human habitation -- resides in California.
Homeless Camps Are Being Cleared in California. What Happens Next?
August
43. Fearing the consequences of a single country's monopoly on the atomic bomb, the American atomic physicist Theodore Alvin Hall decided to pass classified nuclear details to the Soviet Union. He was never prosecuted and died in 1999.
'A Compassionate Spy' Review: Back to the U.S.S.R.

44. The ocean, which covers about 70 percent of the world's surface, has absorbed more than 90 percent of the heat unleashed by the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation and other human activity.
What This Year's 'Astonishing' Ocean Heat Means for the Planet

45. Aug. 11, 1973, is regarded by many as the birth of hip-hop. That was when DJ Kool Herc -- in an apartment building at 1520 Sedgwick Ave. in the Bronx -- reportedly first mixed two copies of the same album into one seamless breakbeat.
Old-School Fans Celebrate Hip-Hop's 50th

46. The Small Business Administration estimates that more than $ 200 billion, at least 17 percent of the $ 1.2 trillion in pandemic loans the agency doled out, was disbursed to "potentially fraudulent actors."
How to Catch Pandemic Fraud? Prosecutors Try Novel Methods.

47. Roughly three in 10 adults have been addicted to opioids or have a family member who has been, according to a survey conducted by KFF, a health policy research group.
Addiction Treatment Eludes More Than Half of Americans in Need

48. There are more than 20,000 species of wild bees in the world. They don't produce honey, but they are indispensable pollinators of plants, flowers and crops.
The Beekeepers Who Don't Want You to Buy More Bees

49. One-year-olds exposed to more than four hours of screen time a day experienced developmental delays in communication and problem-solving skills at ages 2 and 4, according to one study.
More Screen Time Linked to Delayed Development in Babies, Study Finds

September
50. The United States has the largest population of incarcerated people in the world.
In Jail, Writing in Short Bursts as Therapy and Performance Art
51. The worst shutout loss in N.F.L. regular season history came in 1934, when the Cincinnati Reds lost to the Philadelphia Eagles, 64-0. The Reds were kicked out of the league after that game and never played again.
A Horrible Loss for the Giants, but Not the Worst Ever
52. In recent decades museums have agreed to best-practice guidelines not to acquire an object without clear, documented evidence that it had either left its country of origin before 1970, or had been legally exported after 1970.
Provenance of a Museum's Greek Exhibit Is Questioned, Fueling a Debate
53. A study led by scientists from Monash University in Australia found that each year between 2010 and 2019, every person worldwide had an average of almost 10 days of wildfire smoke exposure.
The Reach of Wildfire Smoke Is Going Global and Undoing Progress on Clean Air
54. In China, people who publicly discuss what happened during the Tiananmen protests can face jail time or see their children prohibited from attending universities.
A Tiananmen Square Musical Worries About China's Glare
October
55. Nearly half of Afghanistan's 39 million people face severe hunger, including about three million on the brink of starvation, according to the United Nations' World Food Program.
Entire Villages Razed as Death Toll Soars From Quakes in Afghanistan

56. The origins of Birkenstock, the sandal brand, date to 1774, when church records from the German village of Langen-Bergheim registered Johannes Birkenstock as a local cobbler.
From LSD to I.P.O.

57. On a clear day, three of the world's 10 tallest mountains are visible from Pokhara, Nepal's second-biggest city.
China Got a Big Contract. Nepal Got Debt and a Pricey Airport.

58. Roughly 40 percent of voters in Mississippi are Black, a greater share than in any other state.
Black Voters Have New Power in Mississippi. Can They Elect a Democrat?

59. In 1931, the cost to visit the Empire State Building's observation deck was one dollar -- the equivalent of about $ 20 now. Today a ticket to the building's 102nd floor observation deck approaches $ 80.
When the Skyscraper You Hate Blocks the Skyscraper You Love

November
60. China accounts for a third of the world's energy-related greenhouse gas emissions -- more than North America, Central America, South America, Europe and Africa combined.
China Is Winning in Solar Power, but Its Coal Use Is Raising Alarms
61. The solar and galactic radiation that washes over Mars, which at its closest is 34 million miles away from Earth, is potentially 700 times as great as what passes through our magnetic defenses.
The Bodily Indignities of the Space Life
62. Those who commute by public transit spend roughly twice as much time traveling to and from work as people who drive.
Most Americans Still Have to Commute Every Day. Here's How That Experience Has Changed.
63. Gram for gram, the white truffle is one of the most expensive foods on the planet. In Italy, fresh white truffles run as high as 4,500 euros per kilogram (or nearly $ 2,200 per pound), according to Italy's biggest agricultural trade group.
'The Climate's No Good': The Hunt for White Truffles Gets Pricier
64. Each year in Japan, thousands of people deliberately disappear without a trace, a phenomenon so common that there's a word for it: jouhatsu, or "evaporated people."
6 Podcasts About Mysterious Disappearances
65. In 1738, excavation teams used blasting powder to reach the buried Roman town of Herculaneum, blowing antiquities to smithereens.
Grave Robbers of the Wild West
66. On "Sesame Street," Cookie Monster's cookies contain no oils, fats or sugars, which would stain the muppet. They're made of pancake mix, puffed rice, instant coffee, Grape-Nuts and water, with colored gobs of glue for chocolate chips.
Nom Nom Nom. What's the Deal With Cookie Monster's Cookies?
December
67. The Federal Election Commission does not have the power to look in bank accounts and must take campaign finance disclosure reports at face value.
George Santos Reveals One Truth: It's Easy to Abuse Campaign Finance Laws

68. The jockey Jimmy Winkfield, who won the Kentucky Derby two years in a row (1901 and 1902), was one of the last Black Americans to ride in a Triple Crown race for almost a century.
Derek Fordjour's Cabinet of Wonders

69. Tollbooths on about two-thirds of the 6,600 miles of American roads overseen by the International Bridge, Tunnel and Turnpike Association -- which represents 130 toll operators in 34 states -- no longer accept cash.
Tips for Avoiding Surprise Bills From Electronic Toll Roads

70. About 4 percent of Americans identify as vegetarian and another 1 percent as vegan, according to an estimate by Gallup.
A Vegan Pernil That Abuela Would Love

71. It is estimated that the more than 92,000 pounds of tea tossed overboard during the Boston Tea Party on Dec. 16, 1773, would be worth $ 1.5 million to $ 1.8 million today.
The Boston Tea Party Turns 250 and Raises 21st-Century Questions

72. Disney's "Pocahontas" (1995) was the company's first animated film to focus on a woman of color. It was also the first (and only) time Disney made an animated movie about a real person.
What 'Pocahontas' Tells Us About Disney, for Better and Worse
