PRINT ONLY WEB VERSION IS A GRAPHIC THIS IS NOT THE LIVE VERSION.
DO NOT PUB THIS ONLINE. FOR PRINT, USE THE PRINT BRANCH
When it comes to machine learning, things can get a little spooky: We know an algorithm can solve a problem, but we often don't know exactly how.
Today's machine-learning algorithms are considered a form of artificial intelligence, but it's more helpful to think of them as prediction algorithms: Based on movies that this customer has rated highly, how much do we think he will like this other movie? Based on people we have hired in the past, how likely are we to hire this job candidate? Based on a list of past Halloween costumes, what might humans dress up as this year?
Hoping to find an answer to that last question, we turned to a special machine-learning algorithm called textgenrnn. Its author, Max Woolf, designed it as a blank slate ready to learn any kind of text; the text we gave it to imitate was a list of 7,182 costumes that people sent to aiweirdness.com over a year.
To train the algorithm, we gave it our list of real Halloween costumes, and the algorithm began to learn to spell words and sentences without human intervention, just by looking at the examples we gave it. It started by making predictions about which letters should be used in which order to make a Halloween costume (like "w-i-t-c-h" for "witch"), and then it checked its own predictions by looking at the data used to train it.
At the beginning of training, the algorithm knew nothing at all about its input data: it didn't know the difference between letters and spaces, or how to spell any words. The more repetition it saw, the more easily it could learn something. Unsurprisingly, one of the first words it learned to spell reliably was "sexy."
As its training progressed, it began to learn more and more words, adding "steampunk," "minion," "cardinalfish" and "Bellatrix" to its repertoire. It learned new and exciting ways to use "sexy," including predicting sexy costumes that don't yet exist, like "Sexy Beet," "Sexy Printer," and "Sexy Minecraft Person."
The algorithm also got better at copying costumes directly from its training data. It did this because we told it to produce costumes like the ones it had already seen and, as far as the algorithm was concerned, exactly copying its input data was a perfect solution.
Everything that the algorithm knew about was something that was in its input data set -- it had no other information to work with. For example, it didn't know about this year's hit movies, so it still produced "Pink Panther" more often than "Black Panther." Even when it was coining new words (as in "Farty Potter" or "Werefish"), it wasn't building these based on any understanding of the meanings of these words, but has simply determined that these were probable letter combinations based on the costumes it had seen.
And this is where neural networks and other machine-learning algorithms get a bit spooky: it's very hard to tell how they determine that these letter combinations -- like "Bloody Horse," "Gothed pines" and "Ballerina trump" -- are possible. Even when we can peer inside the neural network's virtual brain and examine its virtual neurons, the rules it learns for its prediction-making are usually very hard to interpret. For the most part, these algorithms are black boxes, producing predictions without explanation.
Sometimes, the ways algorithms work can have unexpected and disastrous consequences. In 2013, M.I.T. researchers trained an algorithm that was supposed to figure out how to sort a list of numbers. The humans told the algorithm that the goal was to reduce sorting errors, so the program deleted the list entirely, leaving zero sorting errors.
It can be a scary thing to trust a decision that we don't understand -- and it should be scary. Machine-learning algorithms learn from whatever is in their training data, even if their training data is full of the behaviors of biased humans. In other words, when we are using machine-learning algorithms, we get exactly what we ask for -- for better or worse. For example, an algorithm that sees hiring decisions biased by race or gender will predict biased hiring decisions, and an algorithm that sees racial bias in parole decisions will learn to imitate this bias when making its own parole decisions. After all, we didn't ask those algorithms what the best decision would have been. We only asked them to predict which decisions the humans in its training data would have made.
The moral of this story is not to expect artificial intelligence to be fair or impartial or to have the faintest clue about what our goals are. Instead, we should expect AI to merely try its best to give us exactly what we ask for, and we should be very careful what we ask for. Unless what we've always dreamed of is Halloween night dressed as Green Eggs and Princess.
Janelle Shane is an optics research scientist who writes about artificial intelligence and algorithms at AIweirdness.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .
Drawings: In the Early Stages, the Algorithm Knew Nothing at All About Its Input Data: It Didn't Know the Difference Between Letters and Spaces, or How to Spell Any Words.; As Its Training Progressed, It Learned More and More, Adding Words Like "Steampunk," "Minion," "Cardinalfish" and "Bellatrix" to Its Vocabulary.; by the End, the Algorithm Had Created Costumes That Sounded Just Like Real Costumes, but with a Twist. (Drawings by Jessia Ma)
