Education has long figured in deliberations at the World Economic Forum. But with online courses extending the reach of professors around the world, education is getting more attention than ever.
She may not have been the youngest speaker ever at the World Economic Forum in Davos, but Khadija Niazi, 12, was certainly captivating.
Hundreds of the world's well-heeled listened intently as Ms. Niazi, of Lahore, Pakistan, described her experience with massive open online courses, known as MOOCs, which are spreading rapidly to the computers of the curious around the globe.
MOOCs are hugely extending the reach of professors at some of the world's best universities, particularly at Stanford, Harvard, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Yale, Princeton, the University of Pennsylvania and Duke in the United States, where institutions frequently serve as springboards for new kinds of businesses.
Ms. Niazi has been taking courses, without charge so far, from Udacity and Coursera, two of the earliest providers of this new form of instruction. And she confessed to a rivalry with her twin brother, which she claimed to be winning. Both do the homework and take the tests that the courses demand.
Ms. Niazi would like the teachers to be more "enjoyable and funny" and has formed online friendships with fellow students in Iran and England. Her latest enthusiasm is for astrobiology, because she is fascinated by U.F.O.'s and wants to become a physicist.
Education has long played a part in the annual deliberations at this Swiss ski village. But this time, many participants detected what Drew Gilpin Faust, the president of Harvard, described as "a lot of attention at this Davos."
The spectacular spread of MOOCs is one reason. Coursera, at Stanford, for example, has existed just a few months and now has 214 courses attracting 2.4 million students from 196 countries.
Stanford, in Silicon Valley, has been the launching pad of many a storied technology effort, of course, perhaps most notably Google. Still, questions swirl over the economic model that might eventually emerge to finance these new online course efforts, which so far tend to be offered without charge in what amounts to a global test-marketing phase.
There are many other unanswered pedagogical issues, too -- can such courses teach the humanities, or ever grade a creative writing piece? -- in envisioning the potential for the further education of millions who previously had no access to this caliber of teaching.
"We don't know where the next Albert Einstein is," said Daphne Koller, a computer sciences professor at Stanford who, with Andrew Ng, rolled out Coursera last spring. "Maybe she lives in a small village in Africa."
Sebastian Thrun, another Stanford computer science professor who introduced Udacity after seeing more than 160,000 students sign up for an online class on artificial intelligence in the autumn of 2011, predicts that this kind of learning will eventually upend American and perhaps other Western academic institutions.
Lawrence H. Summers, the economist and former president of Harvard, was more cautious in the discussion that followed Ms. Niazi's Davos presentation. He acknowledged the potential "to be hugely transformative."
But "what it means for American students is the smallest part of it," Mr. Summers said. "This is going to take a lot of working out."
Peter Thiel, an early investor in digital technology, said during the same discussion that online learning means that the best university teachers will eventually need to focus even more on their role as mentors to those students they work with in person.
That is one reason Mr. Thiel and others stressed that elite universities -- the incubators of the long-term research essential to most key discoveries -- would continue to exist.
Ms. Faust, during an interview, also stressed the role of research and new ideas. Corporations are valuable sources of innovation, she said, but "they are living under the tyranny of quarterly reports and stock prices."
A university expands thinking and research in ways "that may be unpredictable and may be long," she said. But the cumulative effect of each new postdoctoral, graduate or undergraduate student attending a university like Harvard, whether physically or virtually, is accumulated wisdom and experimentation, she said.
Enterprising academic institutions have taken the lead in online learning. Harvard and M.I.T., for instance, teamed up to introduce EdX, which offers free online courses from the two universities, last year. Roughly 753,000 students have enrolled to date, with India, Brazil, Pakistan and Russia among the top 10 countries from which people are logging in.
Also on hand at Davos were officials from the new Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology in Russia. The institution, also known as Skoltech, recruited a veteran M.I.T. professor, Edward F. Crawley, to aid its efforts to rival research institutions around the world and has welcomed its first 75 graduate students.
China's best universities were also advertising their courses, although Chinese academics themselves noted that outside elite institutions in Beijing and Shanghai, the Chinese emphasis on rote learning so far cannot compete with more interactive education in the West.
Dr. Koller noted that the value of a postgraduate education, no matter where it is gained, is shifting fast. "We have passed the stage in history," she said, "where what you learn in college can last you for a lifetime." After 15 years, she added, that learning is "obsolete."
The elite British universities Oxford and Cambridge are also experimenting with online courses, and they vocally strutted their stuff at Davos.
Because government financing plays a large part in European institutions, both Andrew Hamilton, the vice chancellor of Oxford University, and Leszek Borysiewicz, his counterpart at Cambridge, emphasized the paramount need to keep long-term research going.
In medicine, Mr. Borysiewicz argued, the span from germ of a new idea to bedside is typically about 17 years.
That requires long-term thought, akin to the studiously elite admissions policies and research skills that have kept Britain's top two universities among the world's best for hundreds of years.
But at Stanford, Dr. Koller is thinking in days, not centuries. Asked about the economic viability of Coursera, she outlined three potential sources of income: students paying a low amount (she mentioned $59) on an optional basis for a completed course; smaller colleges licensing the courses devised by the bigger universities; and employers subsidizing courses for their workers to bridge skill gaps.
When pressed on the likelihood of each model, she said simply: "You know what? Get back to me in two weeks. That's when the sign-up for the student model ends."
