I told Siri, my iPhone's voice-activated virtual assistant, to do my taxes for me this year. She responded by asking whether I wanted to call my father.
Voice-activated tax help would seem an easy enough request, given all the hype from the tech industry about artificial intelligence. But so far, none of the three leading tax-preparation programs -- TurboTax, H&R Block and TaxAct -- are providing it. Thus I was left, for this year's review of tax software, to do the return for my spouse and me as I have in years past: I logged on to the programs' websites and typed my way through their lengthy interviews, keying in much of our information myself.
Google wants me to have a driverless car, but I'd settle for a painless tax return.
If my request to Siri seemed foolish, her response did point to something significant about the three tax programs. For all of their many features, the user experiences don't change that much from year to year. If you have liked one of them in the past, you will most likely be happy with this year's version.
Each program's maker has staked out a place in the market where it excels. TurboTax's technology is the smoothest to use -- the program rarely frustrates and offers a few features each year the competitors don't match. Block's tax help is the easiest to understand and get access to. TaxAct's offerings are the cheapest.
One way in which all three have changed this year is security. At the Internal Revenue Service's request, they have provided additional safeguards to prevent identity theft and the filing of bogus returns. When you go to file, you may have to create a stronger password, provide a cellphone number or set up a series of security questions. My favorite possible question came from TaxAct: "What was the first and last name of your first boy/girlfriend?" Who knew taxes could make one nostalgic for teenage love?
My experience with each of the three programs, elaborated below, may provide insight into how the security adjustments and other changes will affect your return filing this year. I opted for the online offerings, which representatives of TurboTax, Block and TaxAct say represent the bulk of the market these days. All three companies still sell downloadable programs you can use on your desktop computer. (TaxAct's downloadable version works on PCs only.)
When I was testing the programs in early February, TurboTax was charging $79.99 for online use of its top-of-the-line Home and Business program and $36.99 for each state return. Block was charging $49.99 for its Premium offering and $36.99 for each state. And TaxAct was charging $29.99 for its Ultimate Bundle, which included a federal and a state return. (All three companies offer free federal filing for people with simple returns such as the 1040EZ and 1040A. The I.R.S. also provides free filing for taxpayers with adjusted gross incomes of $62,000 or less, as do a host of other websites.)
TurboTax My favorite upgrade to TurboTax this year was probably the most trivial. Its iPhone app lets users opt for a touch ID, instead of a password. That is the sort of technology change that typically distinguishes TurboTax -- it's not necessary for preparing an accurate return, but it does save a little bit of time. Block made me type in my password each time I logged on with my phone or iPad -- password auto-save seemed to be disabled -- and TaxAct's phone app wasn't yet ready for the current tax filing season when I tried to use it.
A bigger time saver is the ability to import your previous year's return and some of your financial information. TurboTax has long excelled here. If you used TurboTax last year, the program will pull in, from last year's return, all of your personal information and your previous sources of income. If you have the same sources this year, you just input the new amounts. If you used another tax program last year, TurboTax will import from a PDF copy of that return, though less information carries over.
TurboTax also electronically captures W-2 and investment and interest information from more than a million companies, according to its website. For my wife and me, I could get our W-2s as well as nearly all of our investment information. But much of our interest income, from local banks and credit unions, wasn't available.
Just as a test, I also tried importing my W-2 by taking a cellphone picture of it, a feature Block also offers. I'm no Ansel Adams -- I struggle with selfies -- so I had to shoot twice. The second shot did grab all of the data.
Perhaps the biggest change in all three of the programs over the last several years has been the ability to easily jump back and forth between your computer and your smartphone and tablet while working on your return. TurboTax is seamless in this regard -- you really can pick up your return wherever you left off on whichever device you want. If you are a masochist, you can work on your return while waiting at the dentist or the D.M.V.
The downside to TurboTax is its insistent selling. Choose one of its less expensive programs, and you will probably be urged to upgrade, as I have been in the past. Even if you start with Home and Business, you will see an offer to buy "total peace of mind with MAX benefits." For an additional $59.99, you get representation if you are audited by the I.R.S., assistance if someone steals your identity and files a return in your name, and "priority care" if you need answers to questions about your return ("You'll be our first priority when you call for answers and advice at any point throughout the year").
Note to TurboTax: Could you design the program like a subscription website, where, if I agree to pay a little extra upfront, you will remove the little carnival barker hidden in your code?
H&R Block This firm began with storefront tax-preparation offices, and that fact has long provided its edge in the software business. Its program piggybacks on the expertise and staff of its retail chain, which today numbers about 12,000 locations. If you are audited, for example, one of its staff members will represent you at no additional charge. I.R.S. audits are rare, but the promise does give peace of mind.
I have also long found Block's tax explanations the clearest of the three and its online help the easiest to understand and use. That advantage endured this year. My wife and I didn't face any unusual or particularly complex tax situations last year. But out of curiosity, I searched Block for guidance on how to handle income from the occasional rental of a room in one's house -- something I suspect more people are doing, because of Airbnb.
I searched "room rental" and, on the first page of hits, found a link to the exact guidance needed. The explanation even laid out how to calculate the deductible portion of one's overall home expenses. I couldn't find comparably clear help on TurboTax's or TaxAct's sites, though I tried several search terms.
Block also changed its interview this year, and I found the section for Schedule C, where you report business income, the clearest of the three. It, for example, prompted me at the beginning with a checklist of all the types of self-employment income and expenses I might have, including the contribution to my retirement account. Somehow I had missed where I was supposed to log the retirement contribution in TurboTax.
Technologically, Block seemed a half step behind TurboTax. Its tax-return import worked smoothly, but taking a picture of my W-2 vexed me. Once again, I had to do it twice -- I'm a slow learner -- and, in the end, I couldn't get it to work. The program told me using the picture would introduce a third Social Security number to our return, which wasn't allowed. The return already contained numbers for my wife and me, and the one on the W-2 was correct. I couldn't figure out where the program was seeing a third number and had to trash the picture.
TaxAct If I could hand out a "most improved" award, it would go to TaxAct. In the past, I have found TaxAct's interview and guidance more confusing than those of TurboTax and Block. That was still true sometimes this year, but less so. That is not to say I wasn't occasionally stymied.
I had difficulty starting our return. I decided to try TaxAct's Premium program. When I clicked on the button, the interview didn't begin. My browser, Firefox, appeared to be loading, but nothing appeared. I quit and tried again. Still nothing. I then thought to turn off an anti-tracking browser extension I use, Privacy Badger. Success.
Next came the import of the previous year's return. TaxAct pulled in less of our information than TurboTax or Block had. It didn't, for example, capture any of the information from the Schedule C's that my wife and I file. The program also doesn't allow photos of W-2s, but it does electronically capture them from about 150 large companies. Inputting our wages was relatively easy. A form pops up that looks just like a W-2, so it's obvious where all the numbers go.
My favorite feature of TaxAct, besides its bargain price, is when the program asks for estimated tax payments. It does so near the beginning of the interview, before you have recorded your income. That means the running tally of your bottom line starts as a big refund. If, like us, you tend to owe the I.R.S. a little money every year, you gradually whittle that refund down, as you add your sources of income. With the other programs, you provide your estimated payments toward the end. That means you watch your tax bill swell before you knock it back down with your estimated payments.
Even though I know my response is irrational -- you end up in the same place -- I found myself fretting less about our tax bill with TaxAct's approach. And come tax time, I welcome anything that eases the anxiety.
Photograph Screen Grabs of Turbotax, Above, and H&R Block's Tax-Preparation Software, Below. (Photograph by Turbotax) (Bu12) Drawing (Drawing by Angela Rio)
