Martin J. Schroeter, the company's chief financial officer, called the performance, whose results were reported Monday, a "pretty strong start to the year."
IBM's first-quarter earnings surpassed Wall Street's estimates, helped by solid sales of its new mainframe computers, even as its revenue fell.
Martin J. Schroeter, the company's chief financial officer, called the performance, whose results were reported Monday, a "pretty strong start to the year" -- though IBM executives have said this will be a transition year as it invests to pursue new sources of growth while some of its traditional hardware, software and services business erodes.
IBM is investing aggressively for growth in new fields, including data analytics, cloud computing and mobile applications for corporate customers. It has forged major partnerships with Apple for mobile applications and Twitter for data analysis. It has created new business units around its Watson artificial intelligence technology, and for managing and analyzing the data generated by the surge in low-cost sensors connected to the Internet, known as the Internet of Things.
IBM said its strategic initiatives revenue grew more than 30 percent over all. Cloud computing revenue surged 75 percent, and IBM's large data analytics business grew more than 20 percent, excluding currency fluctuations.
"We're transforming our business and seeing signs that our transformation is succeeding," Mr. Schroeter said in a conference call with analysts.
IBM reported a 5 percent decline in net income to $2.4 billion. But the company reported a 4 percent increase, to $2.9 billion, in operating profits from continuing operations. On an per-share basis, earnings rose 9 percent to $2.91. That was well above the consensus of Wall Street analysts of $2.80 a share.
Revenue for the quarter fell 12 percent to $19.6 billion. But the falloff was almost entirely attributable to a strong dollar and the company's planned exits from less-profitable businesses.
Most of IBM's business is outside the United States, so a stronger dollar translates to lower reported revenue. In fact, eight percentage points of the revenue decline, or $1.7 billion, was because of the currency effect.
