Ernest Cline, whose novel “Ready Player One” is the basis for a new movie, grew up reading: “Like many nerdy kids, I don’t know how I would have survived without being able to escape into books.”
What books are on your nightstand?
I’m currently reading “Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence,” by Max Tegmark.
What’s the last great book you read?
I really loved Andy Weir’s new novel, “Artemis.”
What influences your decisions about which books to read? Word of mouth, reviews, a trusted friend?
All of the above! I constantly seek out new books by authors I already admire as well as new titles with lots of positive buzz. These days, I’m also lucky enough to receive a lot of advance reading copies of books. I always seem to have far more books on my nightstand than I have time to spend reading them — a problem I’ve always had.
What’s the most interesting thing you learned from a book recently?
Apes don’t ask questions, even if they know sign language.
Which classic novel did you recently read for the first time?
“The Handmaid’s Tale,” by Margaret Atwood. A fantastic book!
Which fiction and nonfiction writers — playwrights, critics, journalists, poets — inspired you most early in your career? And which writers working today do you most admire?
Early inspirations include Kurt Vonnegut, Carl Sagan, Stephen King, Robert Heinlein, Jules Verne, Madeleine L’Engle, William Gibson, J. R. R. Tolkien, Dean Koontz, Frank Herbert, Anne McCaffrey, Ursula K. Le Guin, Jack Vance, Judy Blume, Robert McCammon, Gary Gygax, Pauline Kael, Roger Ebert, Mary Oliver, Shel Silverstein and Robert Frost, just to name a few. These days, I really admire the work of Jonathan Tropper, George R. R. Martin, Mary Robinette Kowal, Neal Stephenson, Cherie Priest, Jo Walton, Andy Weir, Hugh Howey, Annalee Newitz and John Scalzi.
What kinds of books bring you the most reading pleasure these days?
Above all else, I love a good adventure story.
Which genres are you drawn to and which do you avoid?
As you’d probably guess, I’ve always been drawn to science-fiction stories, as well as mysteries and thrillers. I tend to avoid horror and romance novels (even though I enjoy both in small doses).
Which self-help book has really helped you out?
My wife gave me a copy of “Big Magic,” by Elizabeth Gilbert, and I found it incredibly inspiring.
What are your favorite movies based on books? And which book would you most like to see turned into a movie?
“Jaws,” “Blade Runner,” “The Shawshank Redemption,” “Jurassic Park” and the “Lord of the Rings” trilogy come to mind. And I would love to see “Replay,” by Ken Grimwood, adapted into a film.
How do you like to read? Paper or electronic? One book at a time or several simultaneously? Morning or night?
I don’t mind reading on my Kindle, but I still prefer paper. And I usually read one book at a time, in the evenings (and occasionally until well after midnight.)
What book might people be surprised to find on your shelves?
“How to Win at E.T.: The Video Game.”
What’s the best book you’ve ever received as a gift?
“The Elements of Style,” by William Strunk Jr. My mother gave me a copy and I’ve never stopped being grateful for it.
Who is your favorite fictional hero or heroine? Your favorite antihero or villain?
As a lifelong “Star Wars” fan, there’s only one way I can answer this. Favorite hero, Luke Skywalker. Favorite villain, Darth Vader.
What kind of reader were you as a child? Which childhood books and authors stick with you most?
I was an avid reader throughout my childhood. Like many nerdy kids, I don’t know how I would have survived without being able to escape into books. Roald Dahl’s Wonka books made a huge impression on me, as did “James and the Giant Peach.” Then I started reading Heinlein’s Y.A. novels and they hooked me on science fiction. “Ender’s Game,” by Orson Scott Card, was the first book I ever read in one sitting. I literally couldn’t put it down.
What book made you a reader?
“James and the Giant Peach.” It sparked my love for stories about unfortunate kids who get caught in fantastic adventures. It also showed me how an author can create an entirely new, bizarre reality with words, and then draw the reader into it.
If you could require the president to read one book, what would it be?
“The Complete Idiot’s Guide to U.S. Government and Politics,” by Franco Scardino.
You’re organizing a literary dinner party. Which three writers, dead or alive, do you invite?
Kurt Vonnegut, Carl Sagan and Carrie Fisher.
Who would you want to write your life story?
Myself. I don’t think I’d trust anyone else to do it.
What do you plan to read next?
I’m going to reread “A Wrinkle in Time” with my daughter.
Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter , sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar . And listen to us on the Book Review podcast .
