REAL ESTATE
Home Sales Zoom Higher As Inventory Grows
Sales of previously occupied homes rose in November to their fastest pace since March, with home shoppers encouraged by a wider selection of properties on the market, even as mortgage rates mostly ticked higher.
Existing home sales rose 4.8 percent last month from October, to an annual rate of 4.15 million, the National Association of Realtors said Thursday.
Sales accelerated 6.1 percent compared with November last year, representing the biggest year-over-year gain since June 2021. Home prices increased on an annual basis for the 17th consecutive month. The national median sales price rose 4.7 percent from a year earlier, to $ 406,100.
Home sales are still running below last year's pace, when they sank to a nearly 30-year low.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
ECONOMY
Spending Propelled G.D.P. To Rise 3.1% Last Quarter
The American economy grew at a healthy 3.1 percent annual clip from July through September, propelled by vigorous consumer spending and an uptick in exports, the government said in an upgrade to its previous estimate.
Third-quarter growth in gross domestic product -- the economy's output of goods and services -- accelerated from the April-July rate of 3 percent and continued to look sturdy despite high interest rates, the Commerce Department said on Thursday. G.D.P. growth has now topped 2 percent in eight of the last nine quarters.
Consumer spending, which accounts for about two-thirds of economic activity, expanded at a 3.7 percent pace, fastest since the first quarter of 2023.
Exports climbed 9.6 percent. Business investment grew a lackluster 0.8 percent, but investment in equipment expanded 10.8 percent. Spending and investment by the federal government jumped 8.9 percent, including a 13.9 percent surge in military spending. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
U.S. to Aid Chip Plant
For a Nvidia Supplier
The Commerce Department on Thursday finalized an award to SK Hynix of up to $ 458 million in government grants to help fund an advanced chip packaging plant and research and development facility for artificial intelligence products in Indiana.
In April, the Nvidia supplier said it would invest $ 3.87 billion to build the West Lafayette facility, which will include an assembly line to mass produce next-generation high bandwidth memory chips. The chips are used in graphic processing units that train A.I. systems.
The department also plans to make available $ 500 million in government loans for the SK Hynix project. The project will create 1,000 jobs and fill a key gap in the U.S. semiconductor supply chain, the department said.
Congress in August 2022 approved a $ 39 billion subsidy program for U.S. semiconductor manufacturing and related components. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN G MABANGLO/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)
