In 1970, the Japanese roboticist Masahiro Mori coined the phrase "uncanny valley." In the field of robotics, and increasingly in computer animation, it refers to the theory that people feel good about robots -- up to a point. When they start to look almost real, but not quite, we experience an eerie and unsettling sense of revulsion.
I have often thought that there must be an uncanny valley of politics, a point at which particular politicians rouse our discomfort because there's something about them that people connect with, but there's something else about them -- intangible, unbelievable and not relatable -- that produces a sense of unease.
It can be found in the "Artificial Intelligence" of Michele Bachmann and her pull-the-string-in-the-middle-of-my-back compulsion to repeat the same red-meat responses no matter the question. It's the Buzz Lightyear-come-to-life bravado of Rick Perry, complete with delusions of grandeur and accomplishment. And it's pretty much everything about the mechanical "I, Republican" Mitt Romney.
But one person I never thought would fall into this valley was Barack Obama, the charismatic candidate who electrified the electorate in 2008 and whom many saw as the fulfillment of the dream of the even-more-electrifying Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Yet here Obama is, down in the valley, struggling to connect with the American people and failing, increasingly coming across as dispassionate to some and outright revolting to others.
Of course, Republicans haven't helped. They're absolutely committed to, and obsessed with, his failure. But that cannot be the excuse. Great leadership isn't shaped in the absence of opposition but in the presence of it. Great leaders draw us together by our universal humanity; they galvanize the wills of the willing; they draw clarity for the spigot of chaos.
But that is not how this president is performing at this critical moment, and people are growing increasingly unhappy with him. A Gallup poll released on Aug. 15 found that Obama's approval rating had fallen to the lowest level of his presidency, and Gallup polls released a few days later found that the number of people not satisfied with the direction of the country and who disapproved of the president's performance on the economy, budget deficit, job creation, education and foreign affairs had reached the highest levels of the administration.
The country needs the president to rise to this crisis in word, spirit and deed. We need him to reach out of his nature and into the nation's need. We are on the precipice. There's growing concern that we may slip into a second, more painful recession. There is little optimism that the housing crisis will loosen its grip on the economy anytime soon. The unspeakable truth is that we may well be on the leading edge of a prolonged period of national stagnation, if not decline.
A robotic Sustainer-in-Chief with an eerie inhumanity will not satisfy. At this moment, we need less valley and more mountaintop.

Chart Percent Hearing Mostly Bad News About...; ...And Some of Their Negative Feelings (Source: Gallup)
