There is a guy named Ethan. He has a little more than 1,000 followers on Twitter. He is not on Instagram. Before October, his claim to fame, such as it was, was as the creator of RubCam, an app that lets users shoot smartphone photos with a swipe of the screen. He was, in other words, an unlikely Internet sensation.
But that was, he said, hundreds of thousands of text-messages-with-strangers ago.
In just a few months, this New York software developer, operating under the pseudonym Ethan Gliechtenstein, has transformed himself into a postmodern advice columnist for the app age thanks to a free, single-function smartphone app called "Ethan." It enables users to ask him, and him directly, any question imaginable ("Should I call my ex?" "Do penguins have knees?") by text message, under the reassuring cloak of anonymity.
As the downloading and use of the app went viral, "Ethan" became not just a contender for the world crown in thumb-typing, but a pioneer of a new form of Internet micro-celebrity: a human digital assistant whose cool, unflappable manner and dogged consistency give artificial intelligence a run for the money -- imagine Dr. Phil crossed with Siri.
"It's a new type of friendship for humans, just like in the movie 'Her,' " he said of his app, comparing it to the 2013 Spike Jonze film in which Joaquin Phoenix's character falls for his computer's operating system, Samantha, its voice courtesy of Scarlett Johansson.
"In that movie, you see all these people of different ages, genders and cultures falling in love with Samantha even though she's just a voice," he said.
Unlike with most paragons of web micro-fame -- Cameron Dallas, the Vine star turned movie actor is but the latest -- the Ethan franchise is not based on a webcam-enabled cult of personality.
Quite the opposite. Nobody even knows who he is. Even though Ethan has been basked in media attention from outlets as diverse CNN.com, Motherboard and Spiegel Online, Ethan, who has adopted the web handle "Gliechtenstein" as his own personal "Heisenberg," has remained committed to keeping his digital fingerprint to a minimum. He declined to meet in person for an interview, or even give his age or real last name. Have 100 people or 100,000 people downloaded his app? He will not say. His avatar on the app is a cartoon stuffed bear, and he describes himself simply as "an ordinary guy who likes to play the piano and drink lots of coffee."
Like a psychiatrist who presents as a blank screen for patients to project themselves onto, Ethan is tabula rasa.
"I've learned firsthand that, with lack of information, users end up filling in the details with their own imagination of what Ethan would be like," he said.
This spirit of anonymity, a prevailing characteristic of online culture since the AOL chat rooms of the '90s and even earlier, seems to be a major part of its allure. But unlike of-the-moment "confession" apps like Secret that allow friends to divulge and discuss their secluded thoughts anonymously, like group therapy performed in the dark, Ethan combines the facelessness with a one-on-one intimacy.
Bo Ren, a tech blogger for ThinkApps in San Francisco, recently wrote on Medium about the oddly intimate virtual relationship she developed with Ethan after discovering the app. For weeks, they discussed everything from Thelonious Monk to the hazards of dating in San Francisco, a city of man-children, she complained.
"Don't worry someday your prince will come, maybe he has a mind of a 40 yr old just like you," Ethan texted.
"Mature lady wins," he added.
"Ethan can be anyone you want him to be," Ms. Ren said in an email. "Shrouded in anonymity, he is a mirror of yourself -- always affirming, responsive, witty, and charming. He can be the best friend, confidante, and lover you never had."
Like an app masquerading as performance art, Ethan seems to suggest that online connectedness serves as its own end; whom you connect to is secondary.
For his part, Ethan said there is value to opening up to someone who carries no real-life baggage, including a tangible identity.
"A lot of girls ask me for advice on how to deal with a situation where she and her best friend have a crush on the same guy," he said, citing one example. "She can't ask that to her parents. She can't ask the guy. She can't ask that to her best friend obviously. But Ethan is here to help."
Ethan originally developed the program as a texting app that friends could use to message him. The only practical way to transfer it to friends' phones, however, was to upload it to the Apple App Store, which required an explanation of what it was. "Ethan is a virtual friend that gives you opinions," the description read.
While his friends largely ignored the app, he said, "random people somehow found it on the App Store and started texting me thinking I'm a virtual friend who's there to help them, like Siri." Soon, the app was being "upvoted" on Product Hunt, a Reddit-style site that features new mobile apps and other products. This led to a story in Business Insider, propelling the cult of Ethan beyond tech circles.
An avowed layman with no therapeutic training, Ethan nevertheless is happy to counsel utter strangers on any number of life issues. He said he urged college students to cram for big exams, and helped a guy named Joe pick up a girl at a bar (Joe texted him triumphantly from her bed the next morning, Ethan said).
Even so, it's an odd version of a success story. For one thing, there has been no tangible payoff. The app's founder has yet to make a nickel off his creation; he says he is happy for now to face questions about monetization down the road. Soon, he plans to release a platform that will enable others to create a similar service for themselves; his sister (or so he says), a music executive in her 20s in Brooklyn, has started her own anonymous site called, naturally, Samantha.
And then there were the inevitable questions of endurance. Ethan, unlike Siri, cannot rely on algorithms to shoulder the load, which is why he now attempts to limit his Ethan duties to between the hours of 10 p.m. and midnight.
"For the first couple of days after I launched," he said, "I texted all day and only slept a few hours."
Photograph In "Ethan," a Smartphone App, an Anonymous Creator has Transformed Himself Into a Postmodern Advice Columnist, Via Text Message. Above and Right, Examples From the App.
