As with a lot of business jargon, the term is simply a cheeky, if overused, metaphorical shorthand for a company's advantage.
mōt
A word used by corporate executives, often as a brag, to describe a competitive edge that boosts profits and market share.
Nvidia has been hailed by Wall Street for the "moat" it built around its chips to power artificial intelligence systems. Starbucks is trying to figure out how to retain its moat in China.
So what's all this talk of moats, and why do executives use the word so much?
As with a lot of business jargon, the term is simply a cheeky, if overused, metaphorical shorthand.
The physical moats of medieval times were deep, water-filled trenches that fortified castles or entire cities against the battering rams of charging soldiers.
In the economic sense, moats are a company's advantages that protect its profits and market share. People often credit Warren Buffett with popularizing the term.
"Moat is just 'pricing power' by a less controversial name," said Samuel Rines, the managing director of Corbu, a financial research firm. And "pricing power" is just a fancy term for a company's ability to charge customers more without losing them.
High-quality products combined with great marketing and branding can create a moat: Consider Apple's addictive, interconnected universe of devices. (I typed this article on a MacBook and conducted interviews, including texts, on my iPhone.) Patent protections and geographic advantages can also give a company a moat.
Moat came up in 316 company transcripts for the second quarter, a record, and in nearly 250 transcripts for the third quarter as of Sept. 20, according to the market intelligence platform AlphaSense. Its spike coincides with high inflation and economic uncertainty, which may be prompting executives to feel more defensive (and use more defensive language) about losing share to competitors.
While companies brag about moats, they could lead to overpriced goods and services that contribute to higher inflation. Some experts worry may also unfairly lock out competitors.
In such cases, moats can run afoul of antitrust laws meant to keep markets functional and fair, with an eye toward "consumer welfare, preserving competition" and preventing unearned, "artificial" barricades to competition, said Hal Singer, an economist at the University of Utah.
In 1984, AT&T, which had a moat in long-distance phone service, was forced to break into smaller companies.
More recently, the Justice Department blocked Penguin Random House from acquiring Simon & Schuster, over worries that the sale would give the publishing house a moat so wide it would distort fair business dealings.
Still, experts acknowledge that some fortifications are fairly earned. Take social media.
If you log on to Instagram every day because your social networks are there, you may have little interest in signing up for competing services. But that's because you like using Instagram, and not because the app is stopping you from joining, say, Snapchat. That sort of moat is both a huge boon for investors in Meta (Instagram's parent company) and usually safe from antitrust scrutiny -- and the ire of economists.
Shop Talk explores the idioms of the business world. Want to nominate a word or term for the column?Email shoptalk@nytimes.com
Illustration
