Robert J. Gordon declares that the kind of rapid economic growth the United States still considers its due was in fact a one-time-only event.
The Rise and Fall of American Growth. The U.S. Standard of Living Since the Civil War. By Robert J. Gordon. Illustrated. 762 pages. Princeton University Press. $39.95.
Back in the 1960s there was a briefly popular wave of "futurism," of books and articles attempting to predict the changes ahead. One of the best-known of these works, and certainly the most detailed, was Herman Kahn and Anthony J. Wiener's "The Year 2000" (1967), which offered, among other things, a systematic list of technological innovations Kahn and Wiener considered "very likely in the last third of the 20th century."
Unfortunately, the two authors were mostly wrong. They didn't miss much, foreseeing developments that recognizably correspond to all the main elements of the information technology revolution, including smartphones and the Internet. But a majority of their predicted innovations ("individual flying platforms") hadn't arrived by 2000 -- and still haven't arrived, a decade and a half later.
The truth is that if you step back from the headlines about the latest gadget, it becomes obvious that we have made much less progress since 1970 -- and experienced much less alteration in the fundamentals of life -- than almost anyone expected. Why?
Robert J. Gordon, a distinguished macroeconomist and economic historian at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, has been arguing for a long time against the techno-optimism that saturates American culture, with its constant assertion that we're in the midst of revolutionary change.
Starting at the height of the dot-com frenzy, he has repeatedly called for perspective: Developments in information and communication technology, he has insisted, just don't measure up to past achievements. Specifically, he has argued that the I.T. revolution is less important than any one of the five Great Inventions that powered economic growth from 1870 to 1970: electricity, urban sanitation, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, the internal combustion engine, and modern communication.
In "The Rise and Fall of American Growth," Mr. Gordon doubles down on that theme, declaring that the kind of rapid economic growth we still consider our due, and expect to continue forever, was in fact a one-time-only event. First came the Great Inventions, almost all dating from the late 19th century. Then came refinement and exploitation of those inventions -- a process that took time, and exerted its peak effect on economic growth between 1920 and 1970. Everything since has at best been a faint echo of that great wave, and Mr. Gordon doesn't expect us ever to see anything similar.
Is he right? My answer is a definite maybe. But whether or not you end up agreeing with Mr. Gordon's thesis, this is a book well worth reading -- a magisterial combination of deep technological history, vivid portraits of daily life over the past six generations and careful economic analysis.
Noneconomists may find some of the charts and tables heavy going, but Mr. Gordon never loses sight of the real people and lives behind those charts. This book will challenge your views about the future; it will definitely transform how you see the past.
Indeed, almost half the book is devoted to changes that took place before World War II. Others have covered this ground -- most notably Daniel Boorstin in "The Americans: The Democratic Experience." Even knowing this literature, however, I was fascinated by Mr. Gordon's account of the changes wrought by his Great Inventions. As he says, "Except in the rural South, daily life for every American changed beyond recognition between 1870 and 1940." Electric lights replaced candles and whale oil, flush toilets replaced outhouses, cars and electric trains replaced horses. (In the 1880s, parts of New York's financial district were seven feet deep in manure.)
Meanwhile, backbreaking toil both in the workplace and in the home was for the most part replaced by far less onerous employment. This is a point all too often missed by economists, who tend to think only about how much purchasing power people have, not about what they have to do to get it, and Mr. Gordon does an important service by reminding us that the conditions under which men and women labor are as important as the amount they get paid.
Aside from its being an interesting story, however, why is it important to study this transformation? Mainly, Mr. Gordon suggests -- although these are my words, not his -- to provide a baseline. What happened between 1870 and 1940, he argues, and I would agree, is what real transformation looks like. Any claims about current progress need to be compared with that baseline to see how they measure up.
And it's hard not to agree with him that nothing that has happened since is remotely comparable. Urban life in America on the eve of World War II was already recognizably modern; you or I could walk into a 1940s apartment, with its indoor plumbing, gas range, electric lights, refrigerator and telephone, and we would find it basically functional. We would be annoyed at the lack of television and Internet -- but not horrified or disgusted.
By contrast, urban Americans from 1940 walking into 1870-style accommodations -- which they could still do in the rural South -- were indeed horrified and disgusted. Life fundamentally improved between 1870 and 1940 in a way it hasn't since.
Now, in 1940 many Americans were already living in what was recognizably the modern world, but many others weren't. What happened over the next 30 years was that the further maturing of the Great Inventions led to rapidly rising incomes and a spread of that modern lifestyle to the nation as a whole. But then everything slowed down. And Mr. Gordon argues that the slowdown is likely to be permanent: The great age of progress is behind us. But is Mr. Gordon just from the wrong generation, unable to fully appreciate the wonders of the latest technology? I suspect that things like social media make a bigger positive difference to people's lives than he acknowledges. But he makes two really good points that throw quite a lot of cold water on the claims of techno-optimists.
First, he points out that genuinely major innovations normally bring about big changes in business practices, in what workplaces look like and how they function. And there were some changes along those lines between the mid-1990s and the mid-2000s -- but not much since, which is evidence for Mr. Gordon's claim that the main impact of the I.T. revolution has already happened.
Second, one of the major arguments of techno-optimists is that official measures of economic growth understate the real extent of progress, because they don't fully account for the benefits of truly new goods. Mr. Gordon concedes this point, but notes that it was always thus -- and that the understatement of progress was probably bigger during the great prewar transformation than it is today.
So what does this say about the future? Mr. Gordon suggests that the future is all too likely to be marked by stagnant living standards for most Americans, because the effects of slowing technological progress will be reinforced by a set of "headwinds": rising inequality, a plateau in education levels, an aging population and more.
It's a shocking prediction for a society whose self-image, arguably its very identity, is bound up with the expectation of constant progress. And you have to wonder about the social and political consequences of another generation of stagnation or decline in working-class incomes.
Of course, Mr. Gordon could be wrong: Maybe we're on the cusp of truly transformative change, say from artificial intelligence or radical progress in biology (which would bring their own risks). But he makes a powerful case. Perhaps the future isn't what it used to be.
