I was buying a jumbo pack of diapers. Presented with the total on the LCD screen, I swiped my credit card and crafted my new signature in the big, loopy letters I thought might attract a little attention. Instead of "Alex Kuczynski," I wrote "Snooki" with a heart over the "i."
The clerk stared at her screen gummy-eyed and handed me my receipt and diapers.
I had done it again. One's signature used to have meaning, acting both as proof of personal identity and, in financial and legal transactions, as a promissory device. However, in recent years the personal signature has become essentially meaningless, especially in consumer transactions. Scrawling my name on credit card terminals at department stores and the like does nothing to prove my identity. So I decided to experiment.
Using the black, inkless wand on the LCD screen at Bloomingdale's, I made an indecipherable squiggle. The clerk asked to see my driver's license. My identity -- if not my signature -- confirmed, she put the charge through. (I wish she hadn't. Those white jeggings were a big mistake.) I went bolder. Buying baby wipes and ointment at the drugstore chain CVS, I signed, very legibly, "Cher." Another day, "Kim Jong-il." I thought signing the name of a North Korean dictator -- whose name clearly didn't jibe with my Caucasian features -- would stir some sign of life in the checkout clerk. Nothing. On other days, on other terminals, all over New York City and Long Island, I was "Benjamin Franklin," "Hillary Clinton," "Steve Wozniak," "Zsa Zsa Gabor," "Angelina Jolie." In an appeal to the young clerks at my local drugstore chain I tried "Kid Cudi" and "Justin Bieber" in swirling, swooping letters. Nothing. And every time my charge was processed without a hitch. I don't look at all like Lady Gaga, but if I sign her name, my credit card is charged. Finally, I even wrote in block letters, this is not my signature. It all worked. What a miraculous little glitch of technology!
The philosophical idea of the personal mark has evaporated. For all the developments in artificial intelligence, issues of individuality and personal aesthetic are beside the point. Think about it: Do you know what your best friend's handwriting looks like? Do you know what her signature looks like? We live in a world of technical elitism, in which a metal-and-polymer brick in our pocket can communicate with people all over the world, yet our very identities remain unquestioned when we buy a box of Kleenex or a six-pack of soda. It's nice that technological innovations allow you to buy a bag of oranges while swiping a credit card through a plastic slot, holding a wriggling infant in one arm and squeezing a 2-year-old between your knees so he won't run out of the store into traffic. But shouldn't the person at the checkout counter at least look at the back of your credit card?
The answer is yes, said T. K. Cheung, vice president of global quality and security for the Hypercom Corporation, which manufactures and distributes card-payment terminals to 130 countries. In other words, you've used one of Hypercom's machines.
"When you sign your signature, the machine is not looking through a database to see if your signature matches," he said. "However, merchants are supposed to be on the ball. I understand these are low-paying jobs, but the person behind the counter should look at the back of your credit card to see if the signature is yours." Cheung told me I could write "Snooki" on every transaction, but it would only become an issue if I wanted to dispute a charge, in which case admitting I used the name "Snooki" wouldn't really bolster my credibility. The signature I supply -- whether it's a squiggle, an X or my name -- is only proof that I obligate myself to pay the bill.
This works because most sales are not contested. And if they are, it's one more piece of evidence that you actually purchased something, but not critical evidence. Wal-Mart can probably prove that you made a purchase even if you sign "Zsa Zsa Gabor" -- because you carry your card, not someone else. If you say it's stolen, then they accept your word and sacrifice the signature issue as a cost of doing business. Business trumps formality.
"When you use your debit card, which more and more people do," Cheung said, "your signature is a numeric one, known only to you." In other words, the personal stamp -- our identities, in some historically distant, outmoded way -- have become unidentifiable and unrecognizable, purposefully so.
While civilian signatures disappear into the electronic ether, collecting those of celebrities has become more and more popular. Steve Cyrkin, the editor and publisher of Autograph magazine, said popular autographs have become increasingly valuable. In the 1980s, for example, a Babe Ruth baseball may have cost around $500. Now it can easily cost $25,000. Conventions where autographs are sold -- like Comic-Con -- are a growing trend. "Over 250,000 people attended Comic-Con this year, and a huge part of the attraction is for autograph buyers," Cyrkin said. But even he admitted that his civilian signature is completely meaningless.
"If I am signing my name for the
letter's editor, it looks like a signature," Cyrkin said. "If I'm in the grocery store, you couldn't tell my signature from Al Pacino's."
Or Snooki's.

Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Brian Rea)
