FOR years, Bluetooth was practically synonymous with irritation.
Connecting a phone to a Bluetooth device or car -- a process called pairing -- was often clunky, annoying and mysterious. ("Pairing failed," the device too often said. But why? That's for you to figure out.)
Even in a car, where Bluetooth can enable hands-free talking, frustration can ensue. Try talking to Siri over Bluetooth and road rage is likely to follow.
Still, Bluetooth is becoming the default system for connecting our devices wirelessly. It is now responsible for connecting phones with wearable devices like fitness trackers, door locks and even toothbrushes and light bulbs. The reason: Bluetooth has quietly evolved into a much smarter technology.
Bluetooth is a short-range wireless radio technology that was released to the public in 1999. The product is controlled by the nonprofit Bluetooth Special Interest Group, which has 24,000 member companies, and any company can use Bluetooth in its product as long as it agrees to certain specifications.
That group, and the small collection of people who determine what goes into the Bluetooth specification, decided a few years ago to create a version of the system that could connect not just wireless headsets and hands-free calling, but also wearable devices, smart home locks, toothbrushes and advertising beacons.
This updated version of Bluetooth goes by a variety of names: Bluetooth Smart, Bluetooth 4.0 and Bluetooth Low Energy. It is a much-lower-power version of Bluetooth that sends far less information than the versions now called Bluetooth Classic. (The Bluetooth name is said to derive from King Harald Bluetooth, Danish royalty in the 10th century.)
"The role of Bluetooth has changed," said Suke Jawanda, a spokesman for the Bluetooth Special Interest Group. "The world is just starting to see now, Bluetooth is everywhere. All these things are being brought into the connected world, and it's all using this Bluetooth Smart."
This new version of Bluetooth is meant to be used for superfast, supershort bursts of information sent over relatively short distances -- like how many steps you're taking or a code that activates an app on your phone. Mr. Jawanda called it the "killer enabler" of connected devices.
Although Bluetooth Smart was introduced in 2010, it's just starting to make its way into more devices. And while the new standard uses less power, saving precious battery life, perhaps the most noticeable change is how it pairs with other devices.
For example, you can now pair devices using an app instead of using the phone's settings. Take the Moto 360 smartwatch. When you turn on the watch, it asks you to download an app to your Android phone.
When you download the app, it does the work of searching for and finding the watch by name (and not displaying other Bluetooth devices like cars or speakers that might be nearby) and generates a code to verify the pairing.
Some developers say that ease of use combined with longer battery life are reasons Bluetooth will actually be able to power the so-called Internet of Things, or the concept of a world of connected devices that can communicate with each other for our benefit.
"To me, it is the Internet of Things," said Joaquin Prendes, a start-up founder from Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Mr. Prendes's company, Jayster, uses Bluetooth Smart to connect a user's phone to a key chain, and he is raising money to connect it eventually to a wallet. The battery in the company's key chain and wallet, he said, should be able to last up to two years or longer, and pairing with a phone is easy.
Mr. Prendes said he was working for Motorola as an engineer when the lower-energy Bluetooth standard emerged and he realized its potential.
"It's the perfect technology to make everything smart that wasn't smart before," he said.
There are clear drawbacks, though.
The biggest downside of any Bluetooth is range. If you have connected your phone to your home thermostat through Bluetooth, you will also have to connect the thermostat to Wi-Fi to control it from outside the house. If you are controlling the thermostat with just Bluetooth and you have a large home, you could even go out of range while inside.
Bluetooth can cover 50 to 150 feet and extend as far as 300 feet if the two devices have a direct line of sight. Of course, that signal is dependent on walls and other obstacles and interference from other devices. (Bluetooth Smart is better than the past version at handling interference.)
Another potential downside is security. Some researchers have reported they were able to bypass the encryption built into Bluetooth Smart, although Mr. Jawanda maintains that Bluetooth offers plenty of security.
But Bluetooth Smart isn't the only connection technology available, and its strongest rival, Wi-Fi Direct, offers faster data speeds and possibly stronger security.
Wi-Fi Direct is based on Wi-Fi, but it lets two devices connect without having to go through a wireless router. For example, some cameras -- like the new GoPro Hero4 -- can connect to mobile phones using Wi-Fi Direct. That lets you control the camera remotely or browse and upload photos from the phone, almost as if the camera had a Wi-Fi Internet connection.
And Wi-Fi Direct received some updates last month that let users send and receive content between connected devices more easily, print from a phone or tablet, stream music and send video to another screen.
"The real value of all this new stuff really comes alive when you have an Internet connection," said Kelly Davis-Felner, vice president for marketing at Wi-Fi Alliance, the trade association that certifies and promotes Wi-Fi. "All of those cool things you want to do, they get a lot cooler when you can do them remotely, monitor them remotely. If you're using Bluetooth, it may be suitable for that 10-foot connection, but ultimately you'll hop through Wi-Fi."
In the end, we'll probably find ourselves in a world filled with both Wi-Fi Direct and Bluetooth Smart. The more difficult question to answer is whether any other connection standards will make a dent in their dominance, like near-field communication and ZigBee, another standard that allows devices (now mostly smart-home gadgets) to talk with one another.
Those other technologies have a steep hill to climb. Bluetooth and Wi-Fi are in almost everything these days, and Bluetooth, in particular, is cheap to include and increasingly reliable.
And as devices get more connected, Bluetooth is dreaming big. Mr. Jawanda said Bluetooth in cars would start to change from one chip that handles audio streaming to multiple low-power chips that can share information about things like tire pressure and temperature.
"Right now, all those things are connected via wires, like a tire pressure monitor," he said. "If you remove cables and put those wireless sensors in your car, you reduce weight, which improves mileage, and the sensors can now speak wirelessly directly to your phone."
That's a long way from driving with a Bluetooth headset.
AuthorAffiliation MOLLY WOOD molly.wood@nytimes.com; Twitter: @mollywood
Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Minh Uong/the New York Times)
