"Girls" wraps for the season with a doubleheader. "The Good Wife" comes full circle as it nears the end of its run. And give "Love" a chance.
What's on TV
GIRLS 10 p.m. on HBO. Ray (Alex Karpovsky, making his directorial debut in this episode) reconnects with Shoshanna after a lengthy absence. ("You're a full-grown woman now," he tells her.) She has some wartime marketing advice for his flailing business: Forget those neo-hippie, gender-neutral monsters across the street and cater to the anti-hipsters. Meanwhile, Hannah delivers some unexpected news to Principal Toby -- something about staying open to signals in the universe. And Elijah asks Dill for exclusivity. In the season finale, at 10:30, Hannah prepares for the Moth Story Slam, while Marnie gets ready to go on tour with Desi. And Jessa and Adam have a blowup of major proportions while caring for his sister's baby. (Image: Mr. Karpovsky and Zosia Mamet)
THE OPEN MIND 3:30 p.m. on World. Wendell Wallach, the author of "A Dangerous Master: How to Keep Technology From Slipping Beyond Our Control," discusses the moral challenges of artificial intelligence.
THE GIRLFRIEND EXPERIENCE 8 p.m. on Starz. Christine/Chelsea, law student/prostitute, confronts her booker, Jacqueline, over her treatment of Avery. Jacqueline, in turn, makes it clear that she plays hardball.
THE GOOD WIFE 9 p.m. on CBS. Alicia and Lucca represent a National Security Agency employee detained by customs officers in Toronto while trying to re-enter the United States. And Peter confronts the possibility of arrest -- and a perp walk.
FEAR THE WALKING DEAD 9 p.m. on AMC. The survivors seek shelter on dry land.
MAGIC MIKE XXL (2015) 10:40 p.m. on HBO Signature. Mike (Channing Tatum) has gone from exotic dancing to furniture building, but one night alone in his workshop he catches a beat -- and starts to move. The guy knows how to handle his tools. Soon he has reunited with some of his colleagues and headed to a big stripper gathering. Rather than trying to expand on Steven Soderbergh's original, Gregory Jacobs's sequel "tosses it all aside like a handyman's tool belt and throws itself headlong into the intoxicating carnality of what is demurely called 'male entertainment,"' A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. "Magic Mike,"which started it all, leads in at 8:45. (Image: Mr. Tatum, second from left)
What's Streaming
LOVE on Netflix. Like the best relationships, this one will grow on you. Mickey (Gillian Jacobs), a self-help radio-show producer with self-destructive tendencies, and Gus (Paul Rust), a dweeby aspiring screenwriter and tutor for a child star, connect cute and then try to decide if they're meant to be together or apart, over and over again -- until finally it dawns on them. She thinks dating a "nice guy" will help her get her life together; he thinks seeing a woman so erratic makes him appear more dangerous. "It's a heavy recognition, but it doesn't have to be the end," James Poniewozik wrote in The Times about this rom-com from Judd Apatow, Lesley Arfin and Mr. Rust. "Sometimes, 'Love' suggests, romance doesn't need candlelight to grow so much as an honest fluorescent glare." (Image: Ms. Jacobs and Mr. Rust)
Photograph (Photographs by Craig Blankenhorn/Hbo; Claudette Barius/Warner Brothers Pictures; Suzanne Hanover/Netflix)
