We need code, and attentive human beings, to solve problems like the runaway stock trades at Knight Capital.
As a former software engineer, I laughed when I read what the Securities and Exchange Commission might be considering in response to the debacle of Knight Capital's runaway computerized stock trades: forcing companies to fully test their computer systems before deploying coding changes.
That policy may sound sensible, but if you know anything about computers, it is funny on several accounts.
First, it is impossible to fully test any computer system. To think otherwise is to misunderstand what constitutes such a system. It is not a single body of code created entirely by one company. Rather, it is a collection of "modules" plugged into one another. Software modules are purchased from multiple vendors; the programs are proprietary; a purchaser (like Knight Capital) cannot see this code. Each piece of hardware also has its own embedded, inaccessible programming. The resulting system is a tangle of black boxes wired together that communicate through dimly explained "interfaces." A programmer on one side of an interface can only hope that the programmer on the other side has gotten it right.
Next, there is no such thing as a body of code without bugs. You can test assiduously: first the programmers test, then the quality-assurance engineers; finally you run the old and new systems in parallel to monitor results. But no matter. There is always one more bug. Society may want to put its trust in computers, but it should know the facts: a bug, fix it. Another bug, fix it. The "fix" itself may introduce a new bug. And so on.
So now consider that tangle of modules. The bug in one meets the bug in another, and that one in another ... and the possibility of system failure multiplies exponentially.
Another absurd thing is trying to define a coding change worth fully testing. A completely new system rollout would certainly qualify. How about installing an updated module from one of those software vendors? It depends on the perceived criticality of the component. How about that new network router and its embedded code? Rarely done. What about a tiny bug fix done by a responsible, hardworking programmer at Knight Capital? Good quality-assurance departments would test that. But individual programmers may see a particular change as insignificant. One time I fixed a function by changing "less than" to "less than or equal to." That "fix" propagated through the system. And down the system came.
And I haven't even mentioned the errors in algorithms devised by all the Ph.D. mathematicians hired to work at Wall Street firms. Written by geniuses they may be, but even Einstein sometimes got things wrong.
The best solution would be to bring back the "market makers" of old, the people who stood between the bid and the asking price and were responsible for making the trade work. Yet I cannot imagine they will return. Technology does not run backward. Once a technical capability is out there, it is out there for good.
The only remaining answer is to go forward. Just as offensive speech is remedied by more speech, the remedy for errant code is more code.
Credit card companies offer us a model, albeit a flawed one. Cardholder liability is limited by law: if a charge is fraudulent, issuers are responsible for most of the cost. They therefore have an incentive to detect events that are out of the ordinary. These companies use artificial intelligence programs that get a "sense" of your normal purchases: where you use the card, the range of the amounts involved, the sort of vendors you deal with. The programs can sometimes be too vigilant (freezing your card on your first trip to Paris), but their reaction is often correct. They put the questionable charge in abeyance, and the company contacts you, asking, Is this valid? Creepy as it is to have the issuer probing into your habits, by protecting themselves, credit card companies also work for you.
Algorithmic stock traders can learn from this example. Each company should create artificial intelligence programs that recognize unusual patterns. The S.E.C. and other regulatory bodies should independently deploy their own systems. The role of these "watcher" programs would be to slow things down and inform a human being that something seems strange: artificial intelligence meets human intelligence, and the human gets to sort things out.
It is indeed laughable to think that programmers, alone, can solve problems like those at Knight Capital. The credit card model informs us: we need code and attentive human beings.
But the indispensable component is the protection induced by the rule of law. Credit card issuers get stuck with the bill. If Knight Capital and other firms were forced to pay back everyone -- everyone -- who got caught in their downdraft, just imagine what brilliant systems the companies would devise.
is the author, most recently, of the novel "By Blood."

Company: Knight Capital
