For now, supply may be constrained, but Hyundai is putting a big bet on building electrics for the American market.
One look at the charming Hyundai Ioniq 5 reliably spawns another. A weeklong drive suggests that Hyundai Motor may be a real dark horse in electric cars -- if it can find enough batteries and factory capacity to put E.V.s in showrooms from coast to coast.
With its origami body, spunky performance and luxury-level tech, and some of the fastest charging in the game, Hyundai's little knockout could further propel a South Korean juggernaut that sold nearly 1.5 million cars in the United States last year. That left Hyundai Motor as America's fifth-largest automaker, with its Hyundai and Kia brands together outselling Honda for the first time. The company now plans to invest $ 7.4 billion, mainly to expand factories and build E.V.s in America.
Throw in high-design models from its Genesis luxury brand and the company has hogged industry awards and headlines like no mainstream automaker in recent years. Headlines include habitual poaching of star designers and engineers, from such highfalutin brands as Bentley, Audi and BMW. They include Sangyup Lee, Hyundai Motor's global design chief, who previously worked at Bentley and Volkswagen.
The South Korean rise echoes that of Japanese automakers beginning a half-century ago, when brands like Toyota and Honda just seemed hungrier and nimbler than the competition from Detroit or Europe. Here in 2022, all three Hyundai brands also remain strongly committed to cars, including sedans that Detroit virtually abandoned in favor of more profitable S.U.V.s and pickups. Even before the pandemic and soaring gasoline prices, Hyundai executives cited fuel-efficient cars and hybrids as a smart long-term play, in part to keep car loyalists and lure new ones from S.U.V.-only brands.
The Ioniq 5 is officially a crossover S.U.V., but it's essentially a taller hatchback with available all-wheel-drive. Its targets are the Tesla Model Y, Ford Mustang Mach-E, Volkswagen ID.4 and Nissan Ariya. For cognoscenti, the Ioniq 5's faceted surfaces are delightful callbacks to cars by Giorgetto Giugiaro of Italy, one of the 20th century's top auto designers; especially his 1970s and '80s oeuvre, such as the Lancia Delta, Lotus Esprit (007's favorite underwater sports car), Saab 9000 and Volkswagen Scirocco.
"He was a maestro in this industry," said Mr. Lee, who fondly recalls chatting with Mr. Giugiaro earlier in his career. Mr. Giugiaro also designed the Hyundai Pony, South Korea's first broadly exported car.
"In the early '70s, there was no car culture here in Korea, so they started a car company out of nothing," Mr. Lee said.
The Ioniq 5 says "Hello, Future" in unmistakable terms, yet avoids the gimmicks and trendiness that mar some E.V.s. They include its Kia EV6 sister car, whose electric-rocketship vibe may not wear as well, and dings both rear headroom and cargo space. The Hyundai is a car that will still look good 10 or 20 years from today.
"The ultimate goal of design is to be timeless," said Mr. Lee, who sees the Ioniq as a common thread in Hyundai's evolution. "Why not take the Pony as inspiration, but then take it to the future?"
An Audi-esque clamshell hood drapes elegantly over front fenders. Signature, pixelated lighting flashes blocks of LEDs from headlamps and taillamps, recalling Tetris and other vintage eight-bit video games. Optional 20-inch alloy wheels in a kaleidoscope pattern are pulled to the corners, muscular visual bookends for a massive 118-inch wheelbase. That wheelbase stretches four inches beyond that of Hyundai's largest S.U.V., the three-row Palisade, aiding an absorbent ride and roomy back seat.
The 39.4 inches of rear legroom is within an inch of the class-leading Tesla's, despite the Hyundai's being four inches shorter overall, and nearly three more inches than a fossil-fueled Mercedes-Benz GLC S.U.V. While we're back there, the Hyundai's most glaring omission is a rear wiper for its steeply canted rear glass.
Compared with the bravura exterior, the interior hews closer to familiar E.V. tropes. But it's still a nice place to be, thanks to Hyundai's usual overachieving in materials, well-considered details and unexpected features. The brand's first head-up display integrates augmented reality directional guides.
A pair of 12-inch screens perch like desktop monitors above a slim dashboard, flashing sharply rendered, configurable driver displays and a fine navigation system with intuitive voice controls. Hyundai's semiautonomous, driver-assistance tech, including adaptive cruise control, can steer the Ioniq 5 down its lane with luxury-level confidence, easing stress in long drives or traffic snarls. That system integrates machine learning that studies a driver's behavior to adjust acceleration and distance from other cars.
The Ioniq is the first of up to 23 global models on Hyundai's new Electric Global Modular Platform through 2025. They include the Kia EV6 S.U.V., which is already on sale, and a sleek Genesis GV60 later this year. That skateboard layout packages its entire 77.4 kilowatt-hour battery between the axles for more-planted performance. And the Ioniq 5's hushed cabin, supple ride and charming road manners offered a hopeful taste of what's to come. I drove a top-shelf Ioniq 5 Limited AWD priced at $ 55,725, or $ 48,225 after a $ 7,500 federal credit.
A rear-drive Ioniq 5 squeezes 303 miles of range and a frugal 114 m.p.g.e. from a 225-horsepower electric motor, for $ 44,875 to start. A $ 3,500 upcharge boosts traction and velocity with dual-motor all-wheel drive. After tax breaks, those A.W.D. versions can be had for around $ 41,000 to $ 43,000, well below the current average new-car price of about $ 47,000.
With 320 horsepower, the Hyundai whispered to 60 miles an hour in about 4.5 seconds, making short work of even muscled-up gasoline S.U.V.s. The trade-off for all-wheel-drive power and traction is a shorter 256-mile range and 98-m.p.g.e. rating; Tesla's stingiest Model Y does better at 330 miles and 122 m.p.g.e. The Hyundai does top the comparable Mach-E's 90 m.p.g.e. In bitter January temperatures, that range fell closer to 225 miles, no matter how I babied the throttle or dialed back on cabin temps. In more-favorable conditions, I'm confident I could squeeze 270 miles from this plug-in cutie, more than enough for owners who recharge daily.
The suspension is more cushy than sporty, true to American tastes. And as with most E.V.s, the steering doesn't transmit much feel for the road. Yet that steering is smoothly weighted and quick, without being darty as in the Model Y. With proper encouragement, the Hyundai is surprisingly frisky.
Sophisticated regenerative braking encapsulates the engineering prowess. A generous five regen levels, selectable via paddle shifters, range from a coast mode to the strongest "iPedal" setting. The latter elicits effortless stops as you ease off the throttle, for the one-pedal driving many E.V. disciples swear by. The physical brake pedal itself can feel spongy, and a sport mode exclusively for brakes dials up firmer response.
Ultrafast public charging may be the biggest technical coup, making these Hyundai models serious road trippers. At its best, the Ioniq 5 can stuff its battery from 10 to 80 percent full in just 18 minutes -- not quite gas-pump-fast, but plenty for interstate quick-draws. A five-minute charge adds up to 68 miles. The secret sauce is a robust 800-volt battery architecture, matching six-figure electric speedsters from Porsche and Audi, and doubling Tesla's 400 volts. That pace does require a 350-kilowatt DC fast charger, the Frankenstein monsters that are steadily going live in America -- including on the Electrify America network that offers two years of free fill-ups for buyers.
For home or office, the Hyundai's 10.9-kilowatt onboard AC charger also allows a faster-than-usual Level 2 refill, reaching 100 percent charge in six hours and 43 minutes. A vehicle-to-load (V2L) function lets owners charge e-bikes, outdoor gear, electronics and even other E.V.s from the Hyundai's battery.
Like Ford's Mach-E, this Hyundai may push the buttons for buyers who are ready to go electric but aren't into Tesla or its polarizing chief executive. Hyundai plans to kick off American E.V. production this year, with an as-yet-unknown model.
Like most global automakers that rely on lithium-ion batteries, Hyundai faces daunting supply issues that may only get worse until companies can bring a multibillion-dollar wave of E.V. and battery factories online. Unusually for Hyundai, the Ioniq 5 went on sale in Europe before its home nation, to focus limited production in that red-hot E.V. market and satisfy more-pressing regulatory rules. Americans, in other words, must take what they can get from plants that build the Ioniq 5, in Ulsan, South Korea, and in Indonesia.
Hyundai executives would not say how many Ioniq 5s will wash up here. This plug-in is also available only in so-called ZEV states that hew to California emissions rules, along with Texas, Florida, Illinois, Pennsylvania, Arizona, Virginia and Washington. That leaves potential buyers in the lurch in 31 of 50 states. Following supply and demand, some dealers are tagging the Ioniq 5 and Kia EV6 with markups ranging from modest sums to $ 15,000 or more.
Add that to a list of frustrating roadblocks for people who would love to own an E.V., or governments and environmentalists who hope to speed an electric revolution and slow the inexorable baking of the planet. Until companies can deliver E.V.s in waves, a whole lot of consumers may also be hot under the collar.
Photograph After tax breaks, all-wheel-drive versions of the Ioniq 5 can cost around $ 41,000 to $ 43,000. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HYUNDAI)
