TECHNOLOGY
Google Chief Apologizes
For A.I. Researcher's Exit
Sundar Pichai, chief executive of Google's parent company Alphabet, apologized for the departure of a prominent artificial intelligence researcher, whose exit has roiled the company's work force and raised questions about its stated commitment to diversity and the responsible development of A.I. technology.
In an email to employees on Wednesday, Mr. Pichai, however, stopped short of saying that the company was wrong in how it hastened the resignation of Timnit Gebru, who was a co-leader of Google's Ethical A.I. team and one of its best-known Black female employees.
Dr. Gebru said last week that the company fired her after she sent an email that criticized the company's lack of progress in hiring women and minorities as well as biases built into its artificial intelligence technology. She said that she had demanded an explanation for why the company had told her to retract a paper that pinpointed flaws in a new breed of language technology, including a system built by Google that underpins the company's search engine.
She said that short of a transparent explanation or further discussion that she would resign after an appropriate amount of time. The company immediately accepted her statement as a resignation.
Colleagues have rallied to Dr. Gebru's defense, saying that Google did not treat her fairly and that this incident was an example of how Black employees are often mistreated at the company.
On Twitter, Dr. Gebru said Mr. Pichai's email was not a true apology. "I see this as 'I'm sorry for how it played out but I'm not sorry for what we did to her yet."'
The parting with Dr. Gebru is especially fraught for Google, because it involves two thorny subjects: a lack of diversity in its work force and concerns about the risks of artificial intelligence technology. DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI
ENTERTAINMENT
Twitch Cracks Down
On Hate and Harassment
Twitch, the livestreaming platform popular among video game players, unveiled new guidelines on Wednesday aimed at cracking down on hateful conduct and sexual harassment on its site.
The site, owned by Amazon, said it had broadened its definition of sexual harassment and created a new category for them. Under the new guidelines, Twitch will ban lewd or repeated comments about anyone's physical appearance and expressly prohibit the sending of unsolicited links to nudity.
The company also said it would prohibit streamers from displaying the Confederate battle flag and take stricter action against those who target someone's immigration status. Violators could receive warnings, temporary suspensions or permanent bans.
Twitch said the changes, which take effect in January, were its most significant policy updates in almost three years. They followed a nearly yearlong review that included consultations with streamers and academics who study cyberbullying, diversity and inclusion, the company said.
"We need to ensure that anyone who shows up on Twitch feels safe and confident that they can broadcast without harassment," Sara Clemens, Twitch's chief operating officer, said in an interview.
For years, Twitch has been dogged by claims that viewers could easily harass streamers with sexually explicit comments and threatening messages. KELLEN BROWNING
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE BLAKE/REUTERS)
