Generate image description FILE — The home of relatives of Shaldan al-Najjar, a senior commander in Palestinian Islamic Jihad, that was destroyed in an Oct. 10, 2023 airstrike by Israeli jets, in Deir al Balah, Gaza. There were no warnings before the strike, which killed al-Najjar, along with his stepmother, four children, a younger brother, a sister-in-law, 13 nephews and nieces, including a 2-month-old baby boy and at least one neighbor. (Bilal Shbair/The New York Times)

JERUSALEM — At exactly 1 p.m. on Oct. 7, 2023, Israel’s military leadership issued an order that unleashed one of the most intense bombing campaigns in contemporary warfare.
Effective immediately, the order granted midranking Israeli officers the authority to strike thousands of militants and military sites that had never been a priority in previous wars in the Gaza Strip. Officers could now pursue not only the senior Hamas commanders, arms depots and rocket launchers that were the focus of earlier campaigns, but also the lowest-ranking fighters.
In each strike, the order said, officers had the authority to risk killing up to 20 civilians.
The order, which has not previously been reported, had no precedent in Israeli military history. Midranking officers had never been given so much leeway to attack so many targets, many of which had lower military significance, at such a high potential civilian cost.
It meant, for example, that the military could target rank-and-file militants as they were at home surrounded by relatives and neighbors, instead of only when they were alone outside.
In previous conflicts with Hamas, many Israeli strikes were approved only after officers concluded no civilians would be hurt. Sometimes, officers could risk killing up to five civilians, and only rarely did the limit rise to 10 or above, though the actual death toll was sometimes much higher.
On Oct. 7, the military leadership changed its rules of engagement because it believed Israel faced an existential threat, according to a senior military officer who answered questions about the order on the condition of anonymity.
Hours earlier, Hamas-led terrorists had stormed into southern Israel, seizing towns and army bases, committing atrocities, firing thousands of rockets at civilian areas, killing up to 1,200 people and taking roughly 250 hostages. As Israelis battled Hamas fighters inside their borders, the officer said, Israel’s leaders also feared an invasion from the group’s allies in Lebanon and believed they had to take drastic military action.
An investigation by The New York Times found Israel severely weakened its system of safeguards meant to protect civilians, adopted flawed methods to find targets and assess the risk of civilian casualties, routinely failed to conduct post-strike reviews of civilian harm or punish officers for wrongdoing, and ignored warnings from within its own ranks and from senior U.S. military officials about these failings.
The Times reviewed dozens of military records and interviewed more than 100 soldiers and officials, including more than 25 people who helped vet, approve or strike targets. Collectively, their accounts provide an unparalleled understanding of how Israel mounted one of the deadliest air wars of this century. Most of the soldiers and officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were barred from speaking publicly on a subject of such sensitivity. The Times verified the military orders with officers familiar with their content.
In its investigation, the Times found that:
— Israel vastly expanded the set of military targets it sought to hit in preemptive airstrikes while simultaneously increasing the number of civilians that officers could endanger in each attack. That led Israel to fire nearly 30,000 munitions into Gaza in the war’s first seven weeks, more than in the next eight months combined. In addition, the military leadership removed a limit on the cumulative number of civilians its strikes could endanger each day.
— On a few occasions, senior commanders approved strikes on Hamas leaders that they knew would each endanger more than 100 noncombatants — crossing an extraordinary threshold for a contemporary Western military.
— The military struck at a pace that made it harder to confirm it was hitting legitimate targets. It burned through much of a prewar database of vetted targets within days and adopted an unproven system for finding new targets that used artificial intelligence at a vast scale.
— The military often relied on a crude statistical model to assess the risk of civilian harm and sometimes launched strikes on targets several hours after last locating them, increasing the risk of error. The model mainly depended on estimates of cellphone usage in a wider neighborhood, rather than extensive surveillance of a specific building, as was common in previous Israeli campaigns.
— From the first day of the war, Israel significantly reduced its use of so-called roof knocks, or warning shots that give civilians time to flee an imminent attack. And when it could have feasibly used smaller or more precise munitions to achieve the same military goal, it sometimes caused greater damage by dropping “dumb bombs” as well as 2,000-pound bombs.
The air campaign was at its most intense during the first two months of the war, when more than 15,000 Palestinians were killed — or roughly a third of the overall toll, according to the Gaza Health Ministry, which does not differentiate between civilians and combatants.
From November 2023 onward, amid a global outcry, Israel began to conserve ammunition and tighten some of its rules of engagement, including by halving the number of civilians who could be endangered when striking low-ranked militants who posed no imminent threat. But the rules remain far more permissive than before the war. Since those early weeks, more than 30,000 Palestinians have been killed, and while Israel disputes the ministry’s figures, the total continues to climb.
Provided a summary of the Times’ findings, the Israeli military acknowledged its rules of engagement had changed after Oct. 7 but said in a 700-word statement that its forces have “consistently been employing means and methods that adhere to the rules of law.”
The changes were made in the context of a conflict that is “unprecedented and hardly comparable to other theaters of hostilities worldwide,” the statement added, citing the scale of Hamas’ attack, efforts by militants to hide among civilians in Gaza, and Hamas’ extensive tunnel network.
“Such key factors,” the statement said, “bear implications on the application of the rules, such as the choice of military objectives and the operational constraints that dictate the conduct of hostilities, including the ability to take feasible precautions in strikes.”
Israel, which has been accused of genocide in a case before the International Court of Justice, says it complies with international law by taking all feasible precautions to minimize civilian casualties, often by ordering evacuations of whole cities before strikes and by dropping leaflets over neighborhoods and posting online maps about imminent operations.
Israel says Hamas’ military strategy makes bloodshed more likely. The group embeds itself in the civilian population, firing rockets from residential areas, hiding fighters and weapons inside homes and medical facilities, and operating from underground military installations and tunnels.
Unlike Hamas, which fires rockets indiscriminately at civilian areas, Israel and all Western armies operate under a multilayered oversight system that assesses the legality of planned strikes. Each attack plan is usually meant to be analyzed by a group of officers, which often includes a military lawyer who can advise on whether strikes might be unnecessary or unlawful.
To comply with international law, officers overseeing airstrikes must conclude the risk of civilian casualties is proportional to the target’s military value and take all feasible precautions to protect civilian life. But officers exercise significant discretion because the laws of armed conflict are vague about what counts as a feasible precaution or an excessive civilian toll.
Why Civilians Were at Higher Risk
Under Israeli military protocols, there are four categories of risk for civilian casualties: Level Zero, which forbids soldiers to put any civilians at risk; Level One, which allows up to five civilian deaths; Level Two, which allows up to 10; and Level Three, which allows up to 20 — and became the standard on Oct. 7.
Suddenly, officers could decide to drop 1-ton bombs on a vast array of military infrastructure — including small ammunition stockpiles and rocket factories — as well as on all Hamas fighters. The definition of a military target included lookouts and money changers suspected of handling Hamas’ funds, as well as the entrances to the group’s underground tunnel network, which were often hidden in homes.
Authorization from senior commanders was required only if the target was too close to a sensitive site, like a school or health facility, though such strikes were regularly approved too.
The effect was swift. Airwars, a London-based conflict monitor, documented 136 strikes that each killed at least 15 people in October 2023 alone. That was almost five times the number the group has documented during any comparable period anywhere in the world since it was founded a decade ago.
Strikes that endangered more than 100 civilians were occasionally permitted to target a handful of Hamas leaders, as long as senior generals or sometimes the political leadership approved, according to four Israeli officers involved in target selection. Three of them said those targeted included Ibrahim Biari, a senior Hamas commander killed in northern Gaza in late October, in an attack Airwars estimated killed at least 125 others.
Another order, issued by the military high command at 10:50 p.m. on Oct. 8, provides a sense of the scale of civilian casualties deemed tolerable. Strikes on military targets in Gaza, it said, were permitted to cumulatively endanger up to 500 civilians each day.
Military officials characterized the order as a precautionary measure intended to cap the number of strikes that could take place each day. A scholar at West Point consulted by the Times, professor Michael N. Schmitt, said it risked being construed by midranking officers as a quota they had to reach.
In any case, the limit was removed two days later — allowing officers to sign off on as many strikes as they believed were legal. Gaza authorities later reported occasional daily tolls of more than 500, but it was unclear how many were civilians or if their deaths had occurred over several days.
The risk to civilians was also heightened by the Israeli military’s widespread use of 1,000- and 2,000-pound bombs, many of them U.S.-made, which constituted 90% of the munitions Israel dropped in the first two weeks of the war. By November, two officers said, the air force had dropped so many 1-ton bombs, it was running low on the guidance kits that transform unguided weapons, or “dumb bombs,” into precision-guided munitions.
While declining to comment on specific incidents, the Israeli military said that its “choice of munitions” was always governed by the rules of war. The senior military official said heavy munitions were required to hit Hamas’ tunnels.
A Depleted Target Bank
Throughout the war, hundreds of Israeli intelligence officers spread across several military bases scrambled to find and strike new targets, relying on an automated surveillance system that enabled them to work exponentially quicker.
In earlier wars in Gaza, officers had typically worked their way through a “target bank” — a database of hundreds of militants and locations that already had been methodically researched and vetted. In this war, the air force raced through much of the list within days, 11 officers and officials said, putting intelligence officers under intense pressure to find new targets.
Many were encouraged to propose a certain number of targets each day, according to five officers.
Israel has long maintained databases, one of which was code-named “Lavender,” that list phone numbers and home addresses of suspected militants, according to 16 soldiers and officials. Israel also controls Gaza’s telecom networks, allowing it to tap and track Palestinian phones. By listening to calls made by phones associated with the militants, intelligence officers tried to work out where they were, officials said.
But the databases sometimes included outdated data, according to six officers, increasing the likelihood officers would misidentify a civilian as a combatant. There were also too many calls for the officers to manually track.
To speed up the process, officers used artificial intelligence.
In recent years, the Israeli military had developed computing systems that could automatically cross-reference information from several different sources, including phone conversations, satellite imagery and mobile phone signals.
In the chaotic opening weeks of the war, different intelligence units harnessed these automated computing systems in varied ways to triangulate data and locate militants.
One common method involved automatically cross-referencing the location of a phone with its owner’s home address. When a phone appeared to be in roughly the same place as an address linked to its owner, the system flagged and recorded the owner’s phone calls.
Arabic-speaking soldiers then listened to these calls to determine whether a wanted militant had been found. Some units used speech-to-text software to translate the conversations automatically.
The military said officers always verified the information provided by the automated systems, and it denied artificial intelligence was ever more than the starting point of a human-led verification process.
But the amount of verification varied from unit to unit, according to at least eight officers. An individual could also be considered a confirmed militant if he was simply listed in Lavender. The Israeli military has denied that was military policy and said any analyst who relied solely on Lavender would have been overruled by superiors.
Once officers were satisfied they had confirmed a legal target, they would begin planning an attack. The first step was to gauge the civilian risk. But the military was pursuing so many targets, officers often lacked the time or resources for sophisticated surveillance.
The military has steadily used fewer munitions over the past 12 months, according to officers and records reviewed by the Times. The average number of munitions used by Israel each month in Gaza fell from a high of nearly 15,000 in October and November 2023 to less than 2,500 from February through May. (The Times was unable to verify the number of munitions fired since June.)
In relative terms, Israel has also tightened its rules of engagement. On Nov. 5, 2023, the military leadership decreed that officers needed special permission to endanger more than 10 civilians in strikes on low-ranking militants who posed no imminent threat to Israeli infantry. By late January, officers needed special permission for nearly all such deadly strikes, except for those targeting the most senior Hamas commanders.
But the rules were still far looser than they were before Oct. 7. Midranking officers could still sign off on most strikes that endangered 10 civilians or less — a threshold far higher than the prewar norm. And many strikes proved far deadlier.
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description **EDS. PLEASE NOTE GRAPHIC CONTENT** FILE — Palestinians in Khan Younis carry the body of a citizen pulled from under the rubble of a house, in the southern Gaza Strip, Dec. 4, 2023. Surprised by the Oct. 7 and fearful of another attack, Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, allowing officers to endanger up to 20 people in each airstrike. (Yousef Masoud/The New York Times)
Generate image description FILE — Palestinians inspecting damage to buildings and houses in Khan Younis following Israeli airstrikes, in the southern Gaza Strip on Oct. 10, 2023. Surprised by Oct. 7 and fearful of another attack, Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, allowing officers to endanger up to 20 people in each airstrike. (Yousef Masoud/The New York Times)
Generate image description FILE — Israeli soldiers during an escorted tour of a tunnel the Israeli military said was built by Hamas underneath a United Nations-run school in central Gaza on Feb. 8, 2024. Surprised by Oct. 7 and fearful of another attack, Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, allowing officers to endanger up to 20 people in each airstrike. (Sergey Ponomarev/The New York Times)
Generate image description FILE — Emergency responders tried to contain fires at one of the first buildings destroyed by an Israeli airstrike in Gaza City in the northern Gaza Strip on Saturday, Oct. 7, 2023. Surprised by Oct. 7 and fearful of another attack, Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, allowing officers to endanger up to 20 people in each airstrike. (Samar Abu Elouf/The New York Times)
Generate image description FILE — Palestinians inspect their property after the bombing of Al-Aklouk Tower, by Israeli warplanes in the middle of Gaza City, Oct. 8, 2023. Surprised by Oct. 7 and fearful of another attack, Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, allowing officers to endanger up to 20 people in each airstrike. (Samar Abu Elouf/The New York Times)
Generate image description FILE — Injured children at Al-Shifa Hospital in Gaza City after Israeli air strikes, on Oct. 12, 2023. After Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, tens of thousands of Palestinians have been injured, according to Gazan health officials. (Samar Abu Elouf/The New York Times)
Generate image description FILE -- A woman mourns the loss of family members killed in Israeli airstrikes in Deir al Balah in the central Gaza Strip, Oct. 23, 2023. Surprised by Oct. 7 and fearful of another attack, Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, allowing officers to endanger up to 20 people in each airstrike. (Samar Abu Elouf/The New York Times)
Generate image description Surprised by Oct. 7 and fearful of another attack, Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, allowing officers to endanger up to 20 people in each airstrike. One of the deadliest bombardments of the 21st century followed. -- 11.9 x 11 -- cat=i
Generate image description Nidal Malaka, left, and his brother Hazem in Deir al Balah, Gaza, in December 2024. At the moment of Israel’s strike on a residential street on the edge of Gaza City on Nov. 16, 2023, 52 people — including Hazem and Nidal Malaka — were crammed into the bottom two floors of a home that was struck. (Bilal Shbair/The New York Times)
Generate image description FILE — Israeli soldiers carry a body in Kfar Azza, Israel, a village just across the border from Gaza that was attacked by Palestinian gunmen, on Oct. 10, 2023. Surprised by Oct. 7 and fearful of another attack, Israel weakened safeguards meant to protect noncombatants, allowing officers to endanger up to 20 people in each airstrike.(Sergey Ponomarev/The New York Times)
