HTC announced the new version of its flagship HTC One on Tuesday, and the phone features some innovative new camera tricks.
For my money, there are really only two features that might make me want to upgrade my smartphone: the camera and the battery life. The new HTC One (M8) is nailing it in the camera department.
The phone, announced on Tuesday, features a second camera sensor on the back that captures dimensional information about images. As a result, the photos you take can be refocused after the fact. HTC calls it Duo camera -- and it is cool.
The manipulation is ultimately a digital trick -- it's not like the Lytro camera with its light-field technology. But the HTC phone's built-in UFocus editing tools apply artsy, shallow depth-of-field effects to any photo, making them look almost as if they were taken with a digital single-lens reflex camera. (Trivia note: The effect is called bokeh, which comes from a Japanese word meaning "blur" or "haze.")
The HTC One (M8) has other built-in editing tools that take advantage of the refocusing, like Foregrounder, which automatically applies effects to everything but the image in the foreground. There are other editing tools that take advantage of the additional dimensional information, too, like seasonal leaf or snowfall effects and a sort of 3-D effect that lets you tilt and pan an image for a mild hallucinogenic feeling.
The efficacy of these tools relies on your framing, of course, but UFocus can almost immediately take your Instagram snaps up a significant notch, and the end result, on the right photo, is startlingly good. It helps that the new HTC One has a very good camera over all: its UltraPixel technology produces images that are just four megapixels (a megapixel is one million pixels), but those pixels are larger than on phone cameras with more megapixels. That produces better lower-light pictures and less image noise.
What I really like, though, is that the editable images are shareable, according to HTC. If you send another HTC One (M8) user one of these raw Duo image files, they'll be able to edit it as they like. And HTC representatives told me they planned to release an app that would let any Android phone edit the photos as well.
HTC also plans to put out programming interfaces that let developers create more filters for dimensional images, although at the time of my briefing there was no time frame for the app or programming interface.
I've only spent a short time with the new HTC One, but I'm definitely enamored of the camera and of the simple and fun editing tools. Oh, and the new One also features a five-megapixel front-facing camera, which you know I'm going to like.
That said, some great features fall by the wayside with daily use, and some are buried or more complicated than they should be.
We'll see if the camera features are enough to propel the phone to success, especially with tough competition on the horizon.
I'll be comparing the new HTC One with the Samsung Galaxy S5 in a future column, so stay tuned for the complete reviews.

Company: HTC
