Wall Street held a bit firmer Monday following a painful three-week losing streak.
The S&P 500 rose 0.7 percent for its first gain in five days. Rallies for Nvidia, Microsoft and other Big Tech stocks lifted the index even though the majority of stocks within it fell.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 0.1 percent, and the Nasdaq composite climbed 1.6 percent.
It was a return to form for Nvidia, Tesla and other market behemoths, which have struggled recently under the weight of rising yields in the bond market. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose again Monday to touch its highest level since 2007 after briefly climbing above 4.34 percent, up from less than 0.60 percent in 2020.
Higher yields are good for people buying bonds, who get paid more in interest for their investments. But it also makes investors less willing to pay high prices for stocks and other investments that are less steady.
A swift rise for yields globally has shaken stock markets worldwide. It has added to concerns that stock prices overshot earlier this year and that signals keep showing China's economic recovery is faltering.
This week's main economic event is likely to be a speech on Friday by Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell. The Jackson Hole, Wyo., setting has been the site of major policy announcements in the past by the Fed.
The worry is that Mr. Powell will dash investors' hopes that the Fed has already raised interest rates for the final time and that its next move will be to cut rates early next year.
The Fed has already pulled its main interest rate to its highest level since 2001 in an effort to grind down high inflation.
For all the anticipation for Mr. Powell's speech, he may not send a strong signal, according to Goldman Sachs.
In the minutes from its last policy meeting in July, the Fed indicated it was unsure about its next move. It said it will make upcoming decisions on rates based on what incoming data say about inflation and the economy.
A big report on each of those topics is due the week after Mr. Powell's speech. One is the latest update on the Fed's preferred measure of inflation, and the other is the monthly jobs report. "The Fed will likely wait to be informed by these new data before changing their current posture," Goldman Sachs' Lexi Kanter and Michael Cahill wrote in a report.
The economy has remained resilient despite much higher interest rates. While the solid job market and spending by households ease long-held worries about a possible recession, they could also add upward pressure on inflation.
Another big event for the market will be Nvidia's profit report scheduled for Wednesday. The chip maker's stock has flown higher this year, more than tripling on excitement about demand for artificial-intelligence technology.
Nvidia's report on Wednesday may offer a hint about whether all the furor around it and other A.I.-related stocks was deserved. Its shares jumped 8.5 percent Monday. Microsoft, another A.I. winner, rose 1.7 percent. They were two of the strongest forces lifting the S&P 500.
Along with them was Tesla, another high-growth stock that has been hurt recently by the threat of higher rates. It rose 7.3 percent to recover some of its 11 percent loss from last week.
Shares of the security software maker Palo Alto Networks jumped 14.8 percent for the biggest gain in the S&P 500 after the company reported better profit for the spring than expected.
On the losing end of Wall Street was Nikola, which has recalled more than 200 electric trucks after a couple of battery fires. It said it could not guarantee when it would resume selling the trucks and that it would raise $ 325 million by selling convertible bonds. Nikola's stock fell 23 percent.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
