Selections from the warm-weather season, including Shakespeare, new plays and musicals in development. We also picked our favorite festivals in dance , classical music and pop .
Shaw and Stratford Festivals
NIAGARA-ON-THE LAKE, ONTARIO, THROUGH OCT. 28; STRATFORD, ONTARIO, THROUGH NOV. 4 Free will is the theme at the Stratford Festival this year, where productions of "The Tempest" (starring Martha Henry as Prospero), "Coriolanus" (directed by Robert Lepage) and Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into Night" (directed by Miles Potter) are among the dozen shows planned. Over at another Canada mainstay, the Shaw Festival, a new adaptation of C.S. Lewis's "The Magician's Nephew," written by Michael O'Brien and directed by festival's artistic director, Tim Carroll, will have its world premiere. Sarah Ruhl's "Stage Kiss," a reimagined "Henry V" and plenty of other productions are also planned for the Shaw's three stages. stratfordfestival.ca; shawfest.com
Clubbed Thumb Summerworks
NEW YORK CITY, MAY 19-JUNE 30 As sure a sign of summer as Shakespeare in the Park, the Off Off Broadway company Clubbed Thumb, known for finding and nurturing unusual new works, will present its 23rd summer season of three world premieres. Prior summers have introduced theatergoers to new plays by Ethan Lipton, Sarah Ruhl, Jordan Harrison, Madeleine George and Erin Courtney -- a list of Clubbed Thumb alums that also includes a lot of really good directors like Leigh Silverman and Lear deBessonet. The new plays in the 2018 lineup -- and the new playwrights we'll want to keep an eye on -- are "Tin Cat Shoes," by Trish Harnetiaux; "Wilder Gone," by Angela Hanks; and "Plano," by Will Arbery. clubbedthumb.org
San Francisco International Arts Festival
SAN FRANCISCO, MAY 24-JUNE 3 A grief-stricken man tries to bring his deceased lover back with the aid of artificial intelligence and social media in "Solo Date," written and performed by Pao-Chang Tsai, a founder of the Tainaner Ensemble of Taiwan. The show, a coproduction of S.F.I.A.F. and the National Queer Arts Festival, is one of the numerous dance, music and theater productions in this annual event, which strives to be always of the moment. (A show exploring loss and longing through data mining is certainly timely.) The festival will also pay tribute to Martin Luther King Jr., who was assassinated 50 years ago, and will feature productions that reflect themes of queer identity, powerful women in leadership and more. sfiaf.org
The Berkshires
WESTERN MASSACHUSETTS, THROUGH OCT. 28 World premiere productions of Douglas Carter Beane's "The Closet," starring Matthew Broderick; Adam Rapp's latest, "The Sound Inside," with Mary-Louise Parker; and a new play by Theresa Rebeck are just a few of the many reasons to visit the Williamstown Theater Festival this summer. And, as always, western Massachusetts will be bursting with great theater in other gorgeous settings: Catch "Hair" and "Tarzan" as part of the Berkshire Theater Group's 90th anniversary season; "Macbeth" and "As You Like It," at Shakespeare & Company in Lenox; "The Royal Family of Broadway," loosely based on the Barrymore family, at Barrington Stage; Annie Baker's "The Aliens" at Chester Theater Company; and lots more. wtfestival.org; berkshiretheatregroup.org; barringtonstageco.org; shakespeare.org; chestertheatre.org
Spoleto Festival and Piccolo Spoleto
CHARLESTON, S.C., MAY 25-JUNE 10 "The Flying Lovers of Vitebsk," an imaginative and romantic play by Daniel Jamieson, inspired by the work of the painter Marc Chagall, comes to Charleston this year after an award-winning premiere at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe in 2017. "Lovers" is one of a few recent Edinburgh hits to be presented at the 2018 Spoleto Festival; David Greig's "The Strange Undoing of Prudencia Hart" and Henry Naylor's "Borders" are also among the festival's theater offerings. Spoleto, which, of course, will feature opera, dance and other performances, runs concurrently with the ambitious and sprawling Piccolo Spoleto Festival, a smorgasbord of theater, dance, comedy and music. Together, the two festivals make a visit to Charleston a must on your to-do list this spring. spoletousa.org; piccolospoleto.com
American Players Theater
SPRING GREEN, WIS., JUNE 9-OCT. 7. Though this is not a festival, per se, the American Players Theater makes our list because its recently rebuilt amphitheater on a hill is the kind of wanderlust-inspiring highlight we love about summer theater. The company's season looks promising, too, with "As You Like It," Athol Fugard's "Blood Knot" and several other shows planned. But it's the pairing of Timberlake Wertenbaker's "Our Country's Good," about prisoners in a penal colony in Australia putting on a production of George Farquhar's comedy "The Recruiting Officer," along with a full production of the Farquhar play employing the same cast, that has me searching Expedia for flights to Spring Green. americanplayers.org
Colorado New Play Festival
STEAMBOAT SPRINGS, COLO., JUNE 10-16 Take a peek at new works still being created by Lucas Hnath, Daisy Foote and other writers, presented in staged reading format at the end of an intensive week of work that includes rehearsals open to the public at this annual festival. With the motto "creating magic in the mountains," the festival, now in its 21st year, will partner with five American theater companies to create five new plays. The 2018 participating companies are the Actors Theater of Louisville, Alley Theater (Houston), Curious Theater Company (Denver), Primary Stages (New York), and Victory Gardens Theater (Chicago). cnpfsteamboat.org
Shakespeare in the Park(s)
NEW YORK CITY, THROUGH SEPT. 8 From Chukwudi Iwuji as Othello and Shaina Taub as Feste in "Twelfth Night" at the Delacorte in Central Park, to Brad Frost as Macbeth in an adaptation set in gang-ridden 1800s New York City, presented in Bryant Park, many actors will take on classical roles in outdoor productions across the five boroughs in the coming months. New York Classical Theater, the Public Theater, Hip to Hip and the Drilling Company Theater are among the many companies large and small that will participate in this annual summer ritual of New York City. publictheater.org; newyorkclassical.org; hiptohip.org; bryantpark.org/programs/shakespeare
International Festival of Arts & Ideas
NEW HAVEN, JUNE 9-23 You can see "The Merchant of Venice," Shakespeare's play about justice and retribution, in site-specific fashion in New Haven next month, when Compagnia de' Colombari presents the show in the Yale Law School Courtyard. The company, an international collective dedicated to creating theater in unexpected places, first staged this "Merchant" production in 2016 in the Venice Ghetto. Directed by Karin Coonrod, the show is one among many offerings at this annual festival of theater, music, dance and thought-provoking lectures and discussions. Theatergoers should also catch "Radicals in Miniature," Ain Gordon's show, with music by Josh Quillen, which honors some lesser-known artists from the New York City of the 1970s and '80s. artidea.org
Powerhouse
POUGHKEEPSIE, N.Y., JUNE 22-JULY 29 Hmm, an aspiring journalist as the central character in a new musical ... interesting. The show, "The Connector," with music and lyrics by Jason Robert Brown, a book by Jonathan Marc Sherman and directed by Daisy Prince, is one of four workshop presentations planned for this annual partnership between Vassar and New York Stage and Film. "Alice By Heart," inspired by "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland," with a book by Steven Sater and Jessie Nelson, music by Duncan Sheik, lyrics by Mr. Sater and directed by Ms. Nelson, will also have a workshop presentation. On the main stage, catch "The Waves," adapted from the novel by Virginia Woolf, featuring a book by Lisa Peterson, music and lyrics by David Bucknam with additional music by Adam Gwon and directed by Ms. Peterson. There are plenty of other productions and readings planned at this festival, where the list of recently developed work includes the new Go-Go's musical "Head Over Heels," which had a recent run at the Curran Theater in San Francisco and is headed for Broadway. powerhouse.vassar.edu
Utah Shakespeare Festival
CEDAR CITY, JUNE 28-OCT. 13 The effects of intolerance on our collective humanity is a stated theme for the coming season in Cedar City, where productions of "Henry IV, Part One," "The Merry Wives of Windsor" and "The Merchant of Venice" will be staged at the open-air Engelstad Shakespeare Theater. Art Manke's "Pearl's in the House," a musical play about Pearl Bailey, who was not only a performer but also a special ambassador to the United Nations, appointed by Gerald R. Ford, is one of several other productions planned for the three stages at Utah Shakespeare. bard.org
Oregon Shakespeare Festival
ASHLAND, THROUGH OCT. 28 The always prescient William Shakespeare wrote about racism and xenophobia hundreds of years ago in his works, including "Othello." As a result, productions of that play seem ultra timely in our fractious present in the United States. Oregon's artistic director, Bill Rauch, chose to open his 2018 season with this tragedy, and the season includes several other Shakespeare productions and a nontraditional revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Oklahoma!" Also on stage: the world premiere of Mary Kathryn Nagle's "Manahatta," about a Native American woman struggling to adjust to New York City after leaving her home with the Delaware Nation in Anadarko, Okla. osfashland.org
Contemporary American Theater Festival
SHEPHERDSTOWN, W.VA., JULY 6-29 In "A Late Morning [in America] With Ronald Reagan," a new play by Michael Weller ("Fifty Words"), Tim Matheson plays Reagan, now retired, who invites us into his office to share his Alzheimer's-affected memories from his time as president. The production is one of a half dozen that comprise this festival, which intends to "feed your head," according to its brochure this year. The season will also feature five world premiere productions, as well as a lecture series, readings of new plays in development and other events during what looks to be a thought-provoking three weeks. catf.org
4 Freedoms Festival
MANCHESTER AND ARLINGTON, VT., JULY 7-22 The new musical "Perfect Picture," inspired by the life of Norman Rockwell and the creation of his "Four Freedoms" paintings, is the centerpiece of this new festival presented by the Mill, a nonprofit arts complex. In 1941, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in a speech to Congress, described four essential human rights -- freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear -- and inspired Rockwell to create his series of oil paintings. The festival, which marks 75 years since Rockwell's paintings were featured in the Saturday Evening Post, includes a lot of other programming, like a pop-up exhibition at the Bennington Museum. "Perfect Picture," with a book and lyrics by Eileen Bluestone Sherman and music by Gail C. Bluestone, will star Lillias White and be directed and choreographed by Randy Skinner. themillvt.com/4freedomsfestival
TheatreWorks Silicon Valley New Works Festival
PALO ALTO, CALIF., AUG. 10-19 The musical "Memphis" and several plays by Rajiv Joseph, including "Archduke" and "Describe the Night," had some of their earliest readings and presentations at this festival devoted to developing new works. With audiences providing feedback that sometimes generates immediate changes, theatergoers can see into the creative process early on and participate directly. Among the new works this summer is "Pride and Prejudice," with book, music and lyrics by Paul Gordon, who wrote the music and lyrics for the 2001 Tony Award-nominated production of "Jane Eyre." theatreworks.org
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph Top, the Stratford Festival's production of "The Music Man." Center from left: Richard Howard, Alejandra Escalante and Chris Butler in "Othello" at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival. Above, Andrea Brugnera in "The Merchant of Venice" at the International Festival of Arts & Ideas. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CYLLA VON TIEDEMANN; JENNY GRAHAM/OREGON SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL; ANDREA MESSANA); Above left, Susan Graham, who will sing at the Opera Theater of St. Louis. Below, Joshua Bell, at center. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY HIROYUKI ITO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; ZACH MALONE) (AR26); Above, Pao-Chang Tsai in "Solo Date" at the San Francisco International Arts Festival. Below, the American Player Theater's amphitheater in Spring Green, Wis. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY YOU-WEI CHEN/TAINANER ENSEMBLE; TOREY BYRNE) (AR27)
