Cancer claimed Kim Suozzi at age 23, but she chose to have her brain preserved with the dream that neuroscience might one day revive her mind.
In the moments just before Kim Suozzi died of cancer at age 23, it fell to her boyfriend, Josh Schisler, to follow through with the plan to freeze her brain.
As her pulse monitor sounded its alarm and her breath grew ragged, he fumbled for his phone. Fighting the emotion that threatened to paralyze him, he alerted the cryonics team waiting nearby and called the hospice nurses to come pronounce her dead. Any delay would jeopardize the chance to maybe, someday, resurrect her mind.
It was impossible to know on that cloudless Arizona morning in January 2013 which fragments of Kim's identity might survive, if any. Would she remember their first, fumbling kiss in his dorm room five years earlier? Their private jokes and dumb arguments? The seizure, the surgery, the fancy neuroscience fellowship she had to turn down?
More than memories, Josh, then 24, wished for the crude procedure to salvage whatever synapses gave rise to her dry, generous humor, compelled her to greet every cat she saw with a high-pitched "helllooo," and inspired her to write him poems.
They knew how strange it sounded, the hope that Kim's brain could be preserved in subzero storage so that decades or centuries from now, if science advanced, her billions of interconnected neurons could be scanned, analyzed and converted into computer code that mimicked how they once worked.
But Kim's terminal prognosis came at the start of a global push to understand the brain. And some of the tools and techniques emerging from neuroscience laboratories were beginning to bear some resemblance to those long envisioned in futurist fantasies.
For one thing, neuroscientists were starting to map the connections between individual neurons believed to encode many aspects of memory and identity.
The research, limited so far to small bits of dead animal brain, had the usual goals of advancing knowledge and improving human health. Still, it was driving interest in what would be a critical first step to create any simulation of an individual mind: preserving that pattern of connections in an entire brain after death.
"I can see within, say, 40 years that we would have a method to generate a digital replica of a person's mind," said Winfried Denk, a director at the Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology in Germany, who has invented one of several mapping techniques. "It's not my primary motivation, but it is a logical outgrowth of our work."
Josh, a political science major, fell in love with Kim, an agnostic science geek, shortly after encountering her during freshman year at Truman State University, in Missouri. There, in the fall of 2007, they bonded over a dislike for the U.S.A. Patriot Act.
At the start of their final semester, Kim applied to a summer neuroscience fellowship as a steppingstone to graduate school. Josh was lining up a job as a legislative assistant to a Missouri state representative, but promised to get a job in politics wherever she landed.
The headaches started that winter. Then came the seizure. She went to the hospital, and she and Josh spent the better part of the following weeks at Barnes-Jewish Hospital in St. Louis.
In mid-March 2011, Kim announced on Facebook that a series of MRI scans revealed a tumor her doctors believed would be benign. "Bad news: a tumor got into my BRAIN."
They learned a few weeks later that the tumor was glioblastoma, a virulent and incurable form of cancer.
In the spring of 2011, as Kim began chemotherapy that caused hives to erupt all over her body, an unusual letter appeared in Cryonics magazine. Titled "The Brain Preservation Technology Prize: A challenge to cryonicists, a challenge to scientists," it argued that if a brain was properly preserved, time would not be an issue.
The magazine is published by the Alcor Life Extension Foundation, the larger of two United States cryonics organizations. Founded in the 1970s, Alcor is best known for storing the frozen head of the baseball great Ted Williams, along with some 140 others who hoped to one day be revived. The foundation, a nonprofit, has about 1,000 members who have made financial arrangements to undergo its preservation procedure upon death.
The brain researcher Kenneth Hayworth had formed the Brain Preservation Foundation shortly before Kim's diagnosis and had written the letter to introduce the prize. Perhaps the only mainstream neuroscientist to openly acknowledge that he would like to upload his brain to a computer someday -- and to argue that there would be broader social merits to the practice -- he counted himself a "skeptical member" of Alcor at the time.
In an indication of the prevailing skepticism, Dr. Hayworth had been unable to garner a substantial purse for his prize.
But an anonymous donor offered $100,000 after hearing Dr. Hayworth's pitch in a 2010 speech at a conference in Cambridge, Mass. Now Dr. Hayworth had enough to award a $25,000 prize for a small mammal brain -- a rabbit or mouse -- and reserve $100,000 for a larger one, likely a pig. And he already had one competitor, Shawn Mikula, then a postdoctoral researcher at the Max Planck Institute.
The entries were to be judged by other neuroscientists who would examine portions of the preserved brains with an electron microscope. To win, a description of the technique would also need to be accepted for publication in a peer-reviewed scientific journal.
The challenge for the competitors was how to preserve a brain for scanning -- by chemicals or cold.
The decades-old practice of cryonics, in which human brains and bodies are stored at somewhere below minus 300 degrees Fahrenheit, has since the 1990s employed a viscous antifreeze to replace the blood and water in the brain in an effort to preserve it before storing it.
Kim had had an interest in cryonics since college, when she read "The Age of Spiritual Machines," by the artificial intelligence researcher Ray Kurzweil. She knew that it was expensive and that the most common way to pay for it, taking out a life insurance policy for the amount of the fee, was not an option for a previously uninsured 22-year-old with terminal brain cancer.
She had hesitated to raise the prospect of paying for it with her father, Rick Suozzi, a medical device sales representative.
And when she finally did talk to her father, in an airport lounge in June 2012, his refusal came as a rude awakening.
"I can't help you with this," he said. "We don't live forever, Kim."
If the $80,000 fee for neuropreservation seemed steep, they learned that about a third of it pays for medical personnel to be on call for death, while another third is placed in a trust for future revival. The investment income from the trust also pays for storage in liquid nitrogen, which is so cold that it can prevent decay in biological tissue for millenniums.
When an August MRI showed that a long-shot experimental drug had failed to halt the growth of Kim's tumor, she and Josh shot a short video for her blog and used the online forum Reddit to request donations for cryonics.
A group of longtime cryonics supporters, the Society for Venturism, pitched in, as did Kim's mother, Jane Suozzi, who signed over a $10,000 life insurance policy she held in Kim's name.
As donations continued to come in and their contacts at Alcor indicated that Kim would almost certainly be fully funded, Josh sat her down to shoot a thank-you video.
In early November, Kim assigned her power of attorney to Josh. She understood, Josh later realized, better than he had, how little time she had left.
Kim decided to refuse food and water to hasten her death before the tumor consumed more of her brain.
Alcor's emergency medicine technician was prohibited from touching Kim before her death was officially pronounced by a medical professional.
When Josh called to say she was dying, the procedure went mostly as planned. With the help of two nurses employed by Alcor, the company's emergency medical technician, Aaron Drake, performed a series of steps designed to keep the blood vessels in Kim's brain from collapsing. He connected her to a CPR device to restore the circulation of her blood. A tube was inserted into her lungs to deliver air. She was given medications to prevent the brain from swelling and to break up blood clots. Then she was lowered into an ice bath and carried to the van for the short drive to Alcor's facility.
By late morning, her head had been separated from her torso. Josh watched from an observation window as the cryoprotectant was pumped through her main cerebral arteries.
When all that remained was to continue the cooling with liquid nitrogen gas, Josh looked into her face for the last time. They had done, he thought, the best they could.
