TECHNOLOGY
Though Layoffs Loom,
IBM Banks on Services
IBM forecast full-year revenue growth above market estimates on Wednesday, banking on stable demand for its IT software and consultancy services from businesses looking to adopt artificial intelligence.
Shares of the company were up more than 8 percent in extended trading.
The company will also lay off some employees in 2024 but will hire for more AI-centered roles, an IBM spokesperson said, and will likely end the year with a largely unchanged head count.
IBM may see a rebalancing charge similar to the about $ 400 million recorded in 2023, the spokesperson added.
Under the chief executive officer, Arvind Krishna, the more than 111-years-old company has repositioned itself to focus on software and consulting with a renewed focus on AI, capitalizing on a broader push for its integration across industries. REUTERS
TRANSPORTATION
Union Pacific Profits Up On Growth in Shipments
OMAHA, Neb. -- Union Pacific's fourth-quarter profit crept up 1 percent as the railroad delivered more fertilizer, imported goods and vehicles.
The Omaha, Nebraska-based railroad said it earned $ 1.65 billion, or $ 2.71 per share, in the quarter. That's up slightly from $ 1.64 billion, or $ 2.67 per share, a year earlier.
The results topped the estimates of the analysts surveyed by FactSet Research that called for earnings of $ 2.60 per share as Union Pacific hauled 3 percent more shipments.
Jim Vena, the chief executive officer, said the railroad's key operating metrics improved in the fourth quarter with average freight car velocity jumping 14 percent to 217 daily miles per car, and the average maximum length of Union Pacific's trains increased 2 percent to 9,413 feet. The average speed of the railroad's trains also increased 5 percent to 24.9 mph. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
Meta Plans $ 800 Million
Data Center In Indiana
JEFFERSONVILLE, Ind. -- Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. announced plans Thursday to build an $ 800 million data center in southern Indiana that's expected to create 100 long-term, high-paying jobs when it's operational and several hundred other jobs during construction.
Work will begin this month on the nearly 700,000-square-foot data center at the River Ridge Commerce Center in Jeffersonville, Meta said. Jeffersonville is an Ohio River city located just north of Louisville, Kentucky.
The Indiana Economic Development Corp. has committed to granting Meta a 35-year sales tax exemption for the data center, among other performance-based project incentives.
The project is expected to be operational in 2026, the company said. During peak construction, it's expected to support 1,250 construction jobs.
Gov. Eric Holcomb said it was "a great day for Indiana and for our southeast region."
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATI HARNIK/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
