TECHNOLOGY
Hedlyne Goes For Maximum of Two Lines
OpenAI is testing an A.I.-powered search engine that can access information from across the internet in real time.
The prominent A.I. start-up revealed the new prototype, SearchGPT, in a blog post on Thursday. The company said it was testing the technology with a small group of users as well as online publishers that teamed up with OpenAI to help build the search engine.
"Getting answers on the web can take a lot of effort, often requiring multiple attempts to get relevant results," the company said in its blog post. "We believe that by enhancing the conversational capabilities of our models with real-time information from the web, finding what you're looking for can be faster and easier."
OpenAI did not immediately respond to a request for additional comment.
Other companies, including tech giants like Google and Microsoft, as well as start-ups like the San Francisco-based Perplexity, have built similar technologies. These services augment traditional internet search engines with chatbot technology that generates text as a way of answering questions and summarizing online information.
OpenAI plans to integrate its new search engine technology with its existing online chatbot, ChatGPT, which launched the A.I. boom when it was released in November 2022. The company said its new technology would respond to questions with up-to-date information from the web while also providing links to relevant sources.
For instance, if someone asks when the Paris Olympics begin and SearchGPT provides a date for the opening ceremony, it might link to a news article.
OpenAI said online publishers such as Reuters are working with the company on the product. "We are committed to a thriving ecosystem of publishers and creators," the company said, adding that the technology would highlight "high-quality content in a conversational interface with multiple opportunities for users to engage."
The company also said it was developing ways for publishers to manage how they appeared in answers generated by the new search engine.
The New York Times has sued OpenAI and its partner, Microsoft, claiming copyright infringement of news content related to A.I. systems. The two companies have denied the suit's claims. CADE METZ
ENTERTAINMENT
HAmazon MGM Makes Deal With Former Netflix Exec edlyne Goes For Maximum of Two Lines
Amazon MGM Studios has entered a multiyear film partnership with Scott Stuber, the former longtime head of films at Netflix, to finance and release movies from his new production company, it said on Friday.
Stuber, who left Netflix in March to start his media company, will produce several films annually under United Artists, a relaunched label that once operated under MGM. The films will be released both theatrically and on Prime Video.
The agreement with Stuber, who will be involved in all projects released by UA, includes a first-look deal and gives his company a base at Amazon MGM Studios' Culver City lot.
UA was first launched by Charlie Chaplin, among others, in 1919 as a production and distribution company and was acquired by MGM in 1981.
Amazon bought MGM, or Metro Goldwyn Mayer, the fabled U.S. movie studio home to the James Bond franchise, for $ 8.45 billion in 2021, giving it a huge library of films and TV shows and ramping up competition with streaming rivals Netflix and Disney+. REUTERS
Credit: By Cade Metz and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY FRAZER HARRISON/GETTY IMAGES)
