AVIATION
Pay Package Approved For Boeing's C.E.O.
Boeing shareholders on Friday approved chief executive David Calhoun's $ 32.8 million compensation and heard leaders explain what the troubled aircraft maker is doing to improve the quality and safety of its planes after a door plug blew off a Boeing 737 Max jetliner in January.
Mr. Calhoun said the company is finishing a 90-day plan for fixing its manufacturing problems -- a report the Federal Aviation Administration demanded after the door-plug blowout.
The chief executive added that the company is still working to complete an acquisition of key supplier Spirit AeroSystems, but he gave no deadline.
The company has lost more than $ 23 billion -- including $ 2.2 billion last year -- since Mr. Calhoun took over as CEO in January 2020, mostly related to a pair of deadly 737 Max crashes that occurred in Indonesia and Ethiopia before he became chief executive. ASSOCIATED PRESS
AUTOMOTIVE
Supporter of Muscle Cars Retiring From Stellantis
Tim Kuniskis, chief executive of the Ram and Dodge brands and the unofficial voice of American muscle cars, is retiring after nearly 32 years with Stellantis.
The announcement Friday comes as Stellantis struggles with U.S. sales as it begins the transition from internal combustion to electric vehicles. Through April, its sales were down 14.1 percent while the industry as a whole saw a 3.1 percent increase, according to Motorintelligence.com.
For years Mr. Kuniskis, right, was the spokesman for high-performance American cars, introducing powerful models including last year's 1,025 horsepower Challenger SRT Demon 170.
But in March, Mr. Kuniskis led the unveiling of two battery-powered versions of the Charger muscle car, while keeping one gas-powered version of the Charger without a big Hemi V8. ASSOCIATED PRESS
INTERNATIONAL
Regulators Won't Open Inquiry On Microsoft Deal
British regulators said Friday they don't need to open a competition investigation into Microsoft's partnership with French artificial intelligence company Mistral, a month after asking for industry feedback on the deal.
Microsoft announced earlier this year that it was partnering with the buzzy French startup in a move that could lessen the software giant's reliance on ChatGPT-maker OpenAI for supplying the next wave of chatbots and other generative AI products.
The Competition and Markets Authority said that the tie-up "does not qualify for investigation" under U.K. merger rules.
The watchdog said last month that it was seeking comments from "interested third parties," before deciding whether to carry out an in-depth antitrust investigation.
The watchdog is still looking into Microsoft's hiring of key staff from another startup, Inflection AI. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY CARLOS OSORIO/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
