For the past three weeks I have been baby-sitting a robot. It is not your traditional looking robot -- if there is such a thing yet -- but looks like an extra-large lollipop on wheels.
Using this contraption is a little like owning a puppy. Sometimes it wanders off on its own, and sometimes it stubbornly stops doing what you ask it to do. People ask, "Can it do any neat tricks?"
The robot I adopted, the Texai, is made by Willow Garage, a technology company based in California, and is designed for telepresence. In humanspeak, that means it allows me to take control of the robot remotely and wander around an office, interacting with co-workers and gauging their reactions through the built-in camera and microphone as if I were in the same room.
And react they did. While I sat comfortably on my couch at home manipulating the controls in a Web browser, the robot at the office encountered an editor in the hallway who had stepped out for ice cream. She stopped midstride, plastic spoon attached to her mouth as if someone had stuck it there with Super Glue, and she just stared. From the perspective of my computer it looked as if she were frozen in space and time by the sight of a digital version of me.
In defense of my colleagues, the Texai is a little startling to encounter coming around a corner in the office. A 15-inch flat-panel screen with a Webcam sits atop a five-foot metal pole. A large motor with wheels sits at its base and looks like extra large clown feet.
I wheeled past, said hello over the robot's speakers and watched through the camera as her head moved slowly with my passing, the spoon still suspended in midair.
Moving around is like driving an exceptionally large, and unusually slow, remote-controlled car. The robot is controlled though a Skype voice-over-Internet connection. Its only requirements are a good Wi-Fi connection and a place to recharge its batteries.
From my computer I could see through two cameras, one pointing directly in front of the robot and one -- called the nav-cam -- pointing toward the ground and designed to help me avoid obstacles like trash cans or small children.
Moments later I came across two other people in another hallway who were clearly engaged in a private conversation. They were unaware that a digital robot with supersonic hearing had sneaked up on them. (The robot's motor whirs but is not very loud.) I knew they did not know I could hear them, so I spoke up as I slowly rolled by, sharply interrupting them -- the opposite action real people would use as they passed by.
My attempts at robot-human camaraderie did not work with these two. From the robot's perspective, at least, they looked frustrated and annoyed. I decided to move along. I was worried that if they became too perturbed, they could easily press the robot's visible power button, leaving me powerless, literally and figuratively.
These kinds of encounters happened whenever I took the Texai out and about. Some people looked perplexed; it was as if the robot had a special power to pause reality, leaving people temporarily paralyzed, mouth usually agape.
Elevators' confines are often awkward, and when we all piled inside to go to the cafeteria, it was even more uncomfortable as people silently peered out of the corners of their eyes at a man's face displayed on a monitor atop a metal stick. (The robot has no arms, so I was dependent on their good will to push the elevator button.)
Even sitting still, it gave some people the heebie-jeebies. One employee, unsure when its camera was turned on, felt as if it was constantly staring at him. We draped a scarf over its head -- I mean, screen.
But gradually, people started to interact. During one robot outing a copy editor spoke up and asked if the robot was there to replace her. I assured her that it would be some time before that happened.
Other people fell in love with the robot. One co-worker had a remote-controlled car at his desk and insisted that it should follow the robot around, like the robot's cute little pet. But the car soon ran out of batteries, and it was returned to its shelf in a cubicle.
As for the most common question people asked: "No, it can't get you a cup of coffee," I would respond. "It clearly doesn't have any arms."
Smarter Than You Think: Articles in this series are examining the recent advances in artificial intelligence and robotics and their potential impact on society.
Photograph Nick Bilton Took a Texai Robot for a Spin at the Offices of the New York Times, Operating It Remotely. Many People Found It Disconcerting at First. (Photograph by Patrick Farrell/the New York Times)
