Hello!
We're in the thick of summer, and we hope we've been helping you have a great one so far.
We've heard from many of you over the past few weeks that you want more free activities and events from us. All right then! These two ideas were pretty easy to research and write, as they are two of our favorite places in New York City. We trust you'll like them as much as we do.
Thanks for reading as always,
Margot and Tejal
Beach Day, Fort Tilden, Queens
What's the Plan?
It's almost as if, with its hip bazaar and splashy programming, Jacob Riis Beach is a decoy to keep the masses out of Fort Tilden. But make it past the end of the Riis promenade, 10 minutes from the bazaar, and you'll find a serene, scrubby beach minding its business.
Grasses, poking through the white sand, bend in the breeze. Terns and piping plovers roost in cordoned-off preservation areas. Craggy and gently winding, the coastline runs on, sparsely dotted by sunbathers, birders and leisure fishermen pulling in floppy skates and rays.
Yes, you are still in New York City.
But this nature area wasn't always this peaceful. The fort, established in 1917 to protect New York Harbor from naval attacks, was armed, locked and loaded through both world wars and most of the Cold War.
If you enter the thicket behind the beach and whack your way through the overgrown trails (and poison ivy, watch out!), you'll come across abandoned bunkers, derelict batteries, missile sites and munitions dumps, left to nature and graffiti artists since the military base was decommissioned in the '70s. The National Park Service has since taken over the base, which is now a stretch of the Gateway National Recreation Area.
Winding through the brush to find these forgotten sites feels a little illicit and very adventurous -- like playing Robinson Crusoe as a kid, or maybe like being in high school, on the hunt for a decent place to party. But you're of age now and you're just after a good sunset. So climb to the top of your favorite battery and open yourself to the sweeping, painted skies, set against a tiny profile of the distant Manhattan skyline.
Adulthood is where you left it, but you don't have to think about that now: You're at the beach.
To get here, you can take the 2 to a bus, but we encourage you to come on wheels. Luxe bike lanes line the route all the way from Prospect Park. Also, seclusion comes with a lack of infrastructure, but Riis has bathrooms.
(Google Map)
Beach Day: Food to Pack and Go
If you can pack a snack in advance and tuck it into a cooler, try this herby yogurt dip and take a whole bunch of tasty things to swipe through it: raw radishes, soft flatbread, washed lettuce leaves, blanched romano beans, whole Persian cucumbers, salty chips, you name it.
A sweet, spicy side of chilled watermelon chaat will be absolutely perfect after you've taken in some sun and get hungry all over again.
Want to go all out? Make these fried chicken biscuits with hot honey butter, which you can wrap up individually in parchment paper. Bake or fry the components the day of, if you like, but give yourself an extra hour so the chicken and biscuits can cool all the way down before you sandwich them -- steam will make things soggy.
Beach Day: I'm Not That Organized
Starting at 11 a.m., most of the vendors in the Riis Park Beach Bazaar open with ready-made snacks and drinks. Keep an eye out for:
The messy Coney dogs piled high with meat and chopped onion from Ed & Bev's, and the simple chicken tenders if you're feeling a real wave of nostalgia.
Excellent cheeseburgers in puffy sesame buns with crisp, perfectly salted French fries at Two Dudes (the restaurant plans to add a veggie burger to its menu this week).
Rockaway Clam Bar's obscenely buttery split-top rolls filled with fried clams, and the lobster boils, which you can set up on the picnic tables on Fridays.
The big plastic cups of frosé and frozen margaritas, churning away at various bars all along the bazaar.
(Google Map)
And Nearby
Fort Tilden's old administrative area at Breezy Point looks like a vintage postcard to us, but some buildings are still in use. Poke around the patchy soccer fields and working theater, and wonder what year it is after all.
MoMA has installed Yayoi Kusama's "Narcissus Garden" in the base's old train garage. Exhibited many times in New York since the work's creation in the 1960s, the 1,500 mirrored metal spheres now reflect the shattered windows and high ceilings of the abandoned building in the Rockaways, in disrepair since Hurricane Sandy.
If you want to get the most out of that sunset, you can camp nearby at Floyd Bennett Field. Just reserve a spot in advance.
(Google Map)
Required Reading
Read "Wild New York," a guide to our city's wildlife. Or fall in love with piping plovers as quickly as we did by learning about them in this three-minute episode of Birdnotes.
Realizing how many of our neighborhoods have "Fort" in their names? Listen to the Bowery Boys investigate New York's old defenses, from Fort Tilden to Fort Greene, in the "City of Forts" episode.
Reconcile the seascape with its military history in this article from The Times's archive about a Korean War veteran turned Fort Tilden Park Ranger.
Second Sundays at Pioneer Works, Red Hook
What's the Plan?
Travel far enough into Red Hook, to a sleepy block with views of the water at almost every turn, and you'll encounter a cavernous brick building. The expansive, three-story structure is supported by broad wood beams high above and looks out of enormous cathedral-like windows to a large garden, where pebbled trails meander through plants and weeping willows toward comfy seating areas.
For young and old, Pioneer Works is a little oasis in New York City.
The nonprofit art space that makes up the building, the garden and the wonders throughout hosts artists, events and exhibits that explore art and science and the connection between. Open to the public Wednesday through Sunday each week, the organization does it up each month for its free Second Sunday series.
This weekend, walk through the old warehouse's garage-size double doors and join the party. Where you go from there is up to you.
You could start with the talk at 3 p.m. by artist Demian DinéYazhi'. When the doors officially open an hour later, take in as much art as you like. The main exhibition space will be outfitted with interactive art installations, mostly virtual reality and artificial intelligence projects from a recent Software for Artists conference. (Prepare to wait for those V.R. experiences, as they accommodate only a few viewers at a time.)
After you take off the V.R. headset, don't miss the two laptops holding a conversation through Google's auto-reply function, an exhibit installed by Damjanski, who calls himself an "artist in a browser." More exhibits are upstairs, tucked up on two floors overlooking the main gallery, as are the open studios of the resident artists.
The attendees each Second Sunday are all ages, and the kids there will have as much fun (or more) than the grown-ups who brought them. In the courtyard, watch them traipse through the garden and poke into an airstream that turns into a star-viewing station after dark, telescope and all.
Until then, post up with a drink from the garden bar or some gelato sold on-site by the neighborhood outpost Dolce. If you're real-food hungry, there's also Thai food from the Grasshopper Brooklyn.
Inside, the Crown Heights D.J. Tygapaw takes the floor at 7 p.m., and her futuristic club vibes will most likely have you trading moves with new friends young and old. Until bedtime, that is -- it's Sunday!
It's not just summer! Pioneer Works' Second Sunday series runs every month throughout the year. Hours: 4 to 10 p.m. Suggested donation: $10.
(Google Map)
Before and After: Restaurants
If you're here for the day and looking for brunch, the Good Fork nails the standard order of two eggs with home fries and bacon or sausage. And don't miss the homemade pork-and-chive dumplings. Grindhaus, a little farther down on Van Brunt Street, is the place to go for buttermilk waffles with duck confit and hot honey.
Pizza Moto turns out charred, puffy brick-oven pies that are well worth a walk to the edge of the B.Q.E. The simple margherita, made with a tangy tomato sauce and rich buffalo mozzarella, is a must. But keep an eye out for the vegetarian mushroom pie, too, and the one topped with crumbled sausage and pickled peppers.
(Google Map)
Before and After: Bars
For fresh, juicy summery cocktails of all sorts head to Fort Defiance, where you can also get a great burger or a dozen raw oysters. If a beer and a shot are more your speed, the Ice House is a perfect neighborhood bar: cheap, relaxed, unfussy and open until 4 a.m. every day, with a sprawling patio out back full of picnic tables in the sun.
If you come to the neighborhood and don't have a drink at Sunny's, the wonderful, crusty and beloved bar on the bay, were you really here at all? Bring your own instrument on Saturdays if you want to join the folk and bluegrass jams that start at 9 p.m. Carry on.
(Google Map)
And Nearby
For a change of scenery, cross the street to another Second Sunday on the Mary A. Whalen, an oil tanker that is now used as an educational vessel. There will be plenty of children, hammocks and tables for picnicking. If you're in adult mode, a Mediterranean music jam starts on deck at 10 p.m.
Stop by the Waterfront Museum, a century-old wooden barge that displays maritime art and artifacts, offers children's (plus adult) plays and also houses its gregarious owner and his family. It's not open this Sunday, but most Thursdays and Saturdays it is, as well as assorted other Sundays for performances.
Record Shop on Van Brundt Street is full of records, cassettes and people who know all about them. Last time we walked by, a friendly D.J. was on the turntables in the window.
Extra points if you get here on the ferry or take Citi Bike (a docking station is just down the block, across the street from Pioneer Books, but it will most likely be full from other partygoers).
(Google Map)
Required Reading
"Restless and looking for who knows what, he sees a light in the darkness. A strange, off-the-beaten-path bar." For more about that bar, read Tim Sultan's "Sunny's Nights: Lost and Found at a Bar on the Edge of the World."
Listen to the Broken Boxes podcast, in which Demian DinéYazhi' discusses being a "transdisciplinary artist" and the fellowship he launched for artists who are indigenous; activists; queer, trans or nonbinary; of color; woman-identifying; and of mixed, lost or stolen heritage.
Watch "Hearts Beat Loud," Nick Offerman's new movie about a father-daughter musical duo, just because it was shot at Sunny's, Pioneer Works, Baked and more. Red Hook love.
Tip Line
Extra Extra
On Saturday, the first of the Concrete Safaris series turns 116th Street between Lexington and Second Avenues in East Harlem into a playground, racetrack and obstacle course for local children from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. Bring your kids, or sign up to volunteer.
Or go south on Saturday and sign up for a community cleanup and paddle in Jamaica Bay. Do some pickup and take out a free kayak.
The Brooklyn Hip-Hop Festival running from July 9 to 14 offers talks and performances around the borough. Catch the Juice Hip Hop Exhibition at Littlefield on Friday, July 13, for M.C. and dance showcases.
Still searching? Check out The Times's Arts & Entertainment Guide.
From You
"What about something in Manhattan included in each release?" -- Erin F.
"Would also love to see weekday ideas! Summer happens every day with all this daylight." -- Sarah F.
From Us
Erin, we are heading to Chinatown next week, and Sarah, we are trying. Are we doing enough? Thanks to everyone though for reading our newsletter.
Thanks also to Phoebe Lett of the New York Times podcast club for the smart podcast recommendations.
This edition of Summer was written by Margot Boyer-Dry and Tejal Rao . In real life, Margot writes the New York-based newsletter Lorem Ipsum on what's cool and why, while Tejal is a Food reporter at The New York Times and an Eat columnist for The New York Times Magazine. Both take having a good time very seriously.
Margot: Twitter | Instagram
Tejal: Twitter | Instagram
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph Top, Fort Tilden beach and, above, a buttery roll filled with fried clams at Rockaway Clam Bar. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARIAN CARRASQUERO/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
