Stocks rose to another record on Thursday, but a slide in oil prices kept the gains in check. Global financial markets also rallied.
The S&P 500 added 0.4 percent to set a record high for the third time this week and the 42nd time this year. The Dow Jones industrial average gained 0.6 percent, to finish just shy of its record, while the Nasdaq composite also rose 0.6 percent.
Micron Technology led the way with a jump of 14.7 percent after the maker of computer memory and storage delivered stronger profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected. It pointed to sales related to artificial-intelligence technology, where a boom has helped drive some stocks to astounding heights.
Jabil climbed 11.8 percent after the electronics manufacturer likewise reported stronger profit and revenue than expected. It also announced a plan to buy back up to $ 1 billion of its stock to plow cash to its shareholders.
But drops for Exxon Mobil and other oil-and-gas companies were a drag on indexes. Oil prices tumbled after The Financial Times reported through sources that Saudi Arabia is preparing to abandon its unofficial price target of $ 100 a barrel for crude as it prepares to increase output.
The price of benchmark U.S. crude fell 3.1 percent, while the international standard of Brent crude fell 2.7 percent. That sank Exxon Mobil's stock 1.4 percent, and it was one of the heaviest weights on the S&P 500. ConocoPhillips sank 2.7 percent.
A big winner of the A.I. frenzy, Super Micro Computer, gave back some of its huge gains after more than tripling last year. Its stock tumbled 11.5 percent following a report from The Wall Street Journal saying the Department of Justice was investigating the seller of servers and storage systems. The company declined to comment.
A prominent investor, Hindenburg Research, published a report in August that accused the company of accounting red flags and other issues The Super Micro C.E.O., Charles Liang, later said the report contained false or inaccurate statements.
In stock markets overseas, indexes were more jubilant on hopes for more moves by China to prop up the world's second-largest economy. The country's powerful Politburo on Thursday called for intensified efforts as China tries to meet its goals for economic growth, according to the official Xinhua News Agency.
That follows a raft of announcements earlier in the week by the country's central bank that had also sent global markets jumping. China's economic growth has been flagging, with particular troubles in its real-estate industry, and Chinese officials appear to be making a more coordinated effort to bolster it following earlier piecemeal attempts.
In the United States, a round of reports on Thursday suggested the world's largest economy may be doing better than expected.
Fewer workers applied for unemployment benefits last week in the latest signal that layoffs remain relatively low across the economy. A separate report said the overall economy grew at a solid 3 percent annual rate during the spring, as previously estimated.
The hope on Wall Street is for a form of financial nirvana where the economy's growth can hold steady and keep profits for companies humming while the Federal Reserve continues to lower interest rates.
When they cut their main interest rate by an unusually large half of a percentage point last week, Fed officials also suggested they may cut the federal funds rate by another half of a percentage point this year.
Many traders are betting on that big of a cut at the Fed's next meeting alone in November, with another possible cut in December. If economic reports continue to come in stronger than expected, the Fed may not end up cutting as much as investors expect.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury edged up slightly to 3.79.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
