Tesla's Autopilot software has gotten a red light from U.S. regulators. On Tuesday, the electric vehicle maker recalled two million vehicles after federal officials said the company had not done enough to make sure that drivers remained attentive when using the system. The recall includes nearly all the cars that Tesla has manufactured in the United States since 2012.
Autopilot is Tesla's driver-assistance system, which includes features to steer, brake and accelerate vehicles automatically on highways -- and is key to Elon Musk's futuristic vision of self-driving cars. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration began investigating Autopilot two years ago, when the technology was involved in several accidents, some fatal. Since then, the administration has ramped up the pressure on Tesla to make changes to the system.
It's not the first time that Tesla has had to issue mass recalls. The automaker recalled 1.1 million cars in China and another 362,000 cars in the United States earlier this year. Last year, it recalled 54,000 cars equipped with its Full Self-Driving software to disable a feature that sometimes let the vehicles roll through intersections without making required stops.
Tesla said it planned to automatically update its cars via cellular networks to add more prominent features that would prompt drivers to keep their hands on the wheel and pay attention to the road -- reminders that the cars do not drive themselves, as some Tesla owners erroneously assume.
"The Fed right now looks pretty dang good, in terms of how things are turning out."
Michael Gapen, head of U.S. economics at Bank of America, on the prospect that Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, may have slowed inflation without sending the economy into a recession.
"We need to find some sort of balance between 'A.I. is going to rule the world' and 'A.I. is going to end the world."'
Isabella Iturrate, a senior at River Dell High School in Oradell, N.J., who is trying to promote artificial-intelligence literacy with a group of her classmates.
"The discourse is being shaped by this thing even if you yourself don't use it."
Teddy Goff, a digital strategist who worked on presidential campaigns for Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, on how politicians are wrestling with whether to be on TikTok.
