Pat Gelsinger stepped down after nearly four years at the helm of the onetime highflying company, Intel said Monday.
Over the weekend, Patrick Gelsinger, Intel's chief executive, was given a choice by the company's board of directors: Resign or be fired.
Intel's board had concluded that Mr. Gelsinger had to depart after his plans to turn around the iconic semiconductor maker were not showing results quickly enough, said a person with knowledge of the matter, who was not authorized to speak publicly. Other challenges had piled up, with the company's stock plunging more than 50 percent this year.
On Monday, Intel announced that Mr. Gelsinger had retired as of Dec. 1. The 63-year-old Intel veteran, who took the helm in 2021 after an 11-year absence from the company, also resigned from the board. He will be replaced for now by two executives, David Zinsner and Michelle Johnston Holthaus, the company said, adding that it would continue its search for a permanent chief executive.
The abrupt change was the latest sign of the 56-year-old company's fall from grace. Intel was one of the pioneers that gave Silicon Valley its name and for years was one of the world's best-known tech names. But the company has been mired in recent years in innovation struggles and has ceded ground to rivals including Nvidia, the reigning maker of artificial intelligence chips.
"We have much more work to do at the company and are committed to restoring investor confidence," Frank Yeary, who will serve as interim executive chair on Intel's board, said in a statement.
Mr. Gelsinger said in the statement that the move was bittersweet. "It has been a challenging year for all of us as we have made tough but necessary decisions to position Intel for the current market dynamics," he added.
Bloomberg earlier reported some details of Mr. Gelsinger's exit.
Intel's struggles reached the point this year that Wall Street analysts began considering it a potential takeover candidate or a target for a breakup. The change also came amid signs that the company's latest production process, a technology at the center of Mr. Gelsinger's turnaround plan, might not restore Intel to a leadership position next year as he promised.
Intel, which makes chips that handle calculations in a majority of the world's computers, lost its lead in developing manufacturing technology to Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company toward the end of the last decade. It also missed out on supplying processors for mobile phones and, more recently, the booming market for A.I. applications.
Mr. Gelsinger embarked on an ambitious plan to introduce five new production processes in four years while remaking Intel as a manufacturer for other chip designers, as well as producing its own products. He also spent much of his time pushing the Biden administration and Congress to pass the CHIPS Act, which was designed to encourage more U.S. production of the foundational silicon components.
As part of that lobbying effort, Mr. Gelsinger committed to building new U.S. factories and promised that Intel would catch up to TSMC's technology by 2025.
But Mr. Gelsinger also hired aggressively as Intel's latest microprocessors ran into slower demand and stiff competition. Revenue plunged more than 30 percent from 2021 through 2023. In October, the company posted a $ 16.6 billion quarterly loss, the biggest in its history.
Along the way, Intel's market valuation withered as Nvidia turned into one of the world's most valuable companies.
Mr. Gelsinger, acknowledging that Intel's costs and revenue were out of balance, announced 15,000 job cuts. After a board meeting in September, he announced further belt tightening, including delaying plans for a new factory in Germany.
Mr. Gelsinger said that month that he still had the board's support. But Mr. Yeary's statement suggested that the board was not satisfied with Intel's focus on making its chips more competitive with offerings from Nvidia and rival Advanced Micro Devices.
"As a board, we know first and foremost that we must put our product group at the center of all we do," Mr. Yeary wrote. "Our customers demand this from us, and we will deliver for them."
Part of that effort will be elevating Ms. Holthaus, who rose through Intel's sales and marketing ranks to be an executive vice president of its client computing group. She was named chief executive of Intel products on Monday.
Mr. Zinsner, who will help run Intel during a transition period, was hired in January 2022 as chief financial officer after a stint at Micron Technology.
Intel's shares rose about 5 percent in premarket trading after the company announced Mr. Gelsinger's exit, but ended the day down less than 1 percent.
Mr. Gelsinger first joined Intel in 1979, eventually ascending to become the company's chief technology officer during his initial 30-year stint at the chipmaker. That tenure coincided with the era when Intel grew into the dominant supplier of chips for personal computers and, later, the server systems that power the internet.
Mr. Gelsinger later left Intel, eventually leading the software maker VMware before rejoining Intel in early 2021. He vowed to restore the company's engineering-led corporate culture that was instilled by Andy Grove, the onetime Intel chief who died in 2016.
But that culture had always bound Intel too closely to its lucrative franchise in chips for computers, making it difficult to move into new markets. Mr. Gelsinger's style and some of his tactics also did not sit well with some Intel engineering leaders, who complained privately that he had lost touch with industry changes and put too much emphasis on building new factories rather than Intel's products.
His crusade to create new manufacturing processes, which determine the computing power of chips, also ran into problems.
Some customers were recently informed by Intel that its most advanced manufacturing processes, which it calls 18a and 16a, were far behind TSMC, a chip industry official briefed on Intel's progress said. TSMC is producing 30 percent of its leading-edge chips, known as 2 nanometer chips, without any flaws, while Intel's new process produces less than 10 percent of its 18a chips without flaws, the person said.
The difference in the production quality between TSMC and Intel means that customers would have to spend more money with Intel to produce the same number of chips, so it makes more sense to choose TSMC.
An Intel spokeswoman said the new manufacturing processes were meeting the company's expectations and progressing on schedule.
Mr. Gelsinger's turnaround plan partly hinged on the U.S. government's providing financial support for its manufacturing expansion. As the Biden administration pushed the CHIPS Act, Mr. Gelsinger pledged to spend $ 100 billion in the next five years on U.S. manufacturing, including building two plants in Ohio.
In March, the Biden administration made an initial commitment of $ 8.5 billion to support Intel's plan in Ohio, as well as manufacturing expansions in Arizona, New Mexico and Oregon. But when the government announced its ultimate grant last week, it reduced that total to $ 7.8 billion and said Intel would be spending $ 90 billion by the end of the decade, with only one plant slated to be completed in Ohio.
The deal with the Commerce Department includes restrictions that could affect Intel's ability to sell stakes in its chip-manufacturing unit if the company ceases to own at least 50.1 percent of that business. In some circumstances, the Commerce Department might have to approve external investment transactions involving the business, according to a securities filing. Such restrictions could hinder any spinoff of Intel's chip-making foundry business.
Some analysts and industry experts had also questioned Mr. Gelsinger's strategy of becoming a chip-making foundry for other companies while keeping that business a unit of Intel, rather than spinning it off entirely.
Former Intel board members, including Reed Hundt and David Yoffie, urged the company to split into two parts -- one for manufacturing chips, the other for designing them. They argued that potential chip designers that compete with Intel would shy away from using its manufacturing processes as part of a combined company.
Mr. Gelsinger had already announced plans to make Intel's chip-making business an independent subsidiary, arguing that the time was not right for a complete spinoff. His departure suggested that the structure of Intel's business could be reconsidered.
Intel said on Monday that the leadership structure of its foundry business would remain unchanged.
"Ultimately, returning to process leadership is central to product leadership, and we will remain focused on that mission while driving greater efficiency and improved profitability," Mr. Yeary said.
Analysts said they were more surprised by the timing of the announcement than by Mr. Gelsinger's departure. The main question, they said, is what comes next.
"There don't seem to be any easy answers here, so whoever winds up filling the slot looks in for a tough ride," Stacy Rasgon, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein, wrote in a note on Monday.
Danielle Kaye contributed reporting from New York.
Danielle Kaye contributed reporting from New York.
Photograph Pat Gelsinger has stepped down from his role as chief executive of Intel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY I-HWA CHENG/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (B4)
