TECHNOLOGY
Google's 'Net Zero' Goal
Derailed by A.I. Needs
Three years ago, Google set an ambitious plan to address climate change by going "net zero," meaning it would release no more climate-changing gases into the air than it removes, by 2030.
But a report from the company Tuesday shows it is nowhere near meeting that goal.
Rather than declining, its emissions grew 13 percent in 2023 over the year before. Compared to its base line year of 2019, emissions have soared 48 percent.
Google cited artificial intelligence and the demand it puts on data centers, which require massive amounts of electricity, for last year's growth.
Making that electricity by burning coal or natural gas emits greenhouse gas emissions, including carbon dioxide and methane, which warm the planet, bringing more extreme weather.
The company has one of the most significant climate commitments in the industry. Associated Press
ECONOMY
2.6% Growth Predicted
For the Global Economy
The World Bank upgraded its outlook for the global economy Tuesday, estimating that it will expand 2.6 percent this year on the strength of sustained growth in the United States.
The bank's latest outlook marks an increase from the 2.4 percent growth for 2024 it had predicted in January. And it would match the global economy's 2.6 percent expansion in 2023.
But the agency cautioned that global growth remains sluggish by past standards, that the poorest countries are struggling under the weight of heavy debts and high interest rates and that increased trade barriers endanger prosperity worldwide. The brutal wars in Ukraine and Gaza are inflicting further pressures on regional economies.
Stronger-than-expected growth in the United States, the world's biggest economy, accounted for 80 percent of the World Bank's upgraded outlook. Associated Press
MERGERS
F.T.C. Intends to Block Deal by Mattress Titans
The Federal Trade Commission said on Tuesday that it will sue to block the $ 4 billion merger between the mattress manufacturer Tempur Sealy International Inc and the retailer Mattress Firm.
Tempur Sealy had announced the cash-and-stock deal in May 2023, seeking to add Mattress Firm's more than 2,300 brick-and-mortar store locations. The combined company would have about 3,000 stores globally.
The FTC voted 5-0 to block the deal, voicing concern about the effects on competition with rivals including Serta Simmons Bedding and Purple Innovation that could lead to higher prices for consumers and potential job losses for manufacturing workers.
"This deal isn't about creating efficiencies; it's about crippling the competition," said Henry Liu, head of the F.T.C.'s Bureau of Competition.
Tempur Sealy said in a statement that it was disappointed with the decision. Reuters
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEVE MARCUS/REUTERS)
