The Bowl Championship Series will release its first standings of the year on Sunday. One-third of the formula that will eventually determine the matchup for college football's national championship game comes from a compendium of six computerized ranking systems that deal in mathematical minutiae. The nerds did not just crash the jocks' party. They were invited.
Since the inception of the B.C.S. in 1998, it has used the computers as a shield against cries of partisanship in the polls that make up the other two-thirds of the formula. One of the computer rankers for the B.C.S. is Richard Billingsley, a stress-management expert from Hugo, Okla.
His knowledge of college football history is encyclopedic. His knowledge of mathematics, the foundation of any accurate computer-ranking system, is not.
"I'm not a mathematician," Billingsley said. "I'm not even a highly educated man, to tell you the truth. I don't even have a degree. I have a high school education. I never had calculus. I don't even remember much about algebra. I think everyone questions everything I do. Why is he doing that? Does he know what he's doing, a crazy kook in Oklahoma?"
The short answer is no. Billingsley's ranking system is vilified by professional mathematicians and a subculture of amateur computer rankers. His is not the only one. The stringent rules placed by the B.C.S. on the computers -- they must, for example, exclude margin of victory from their formulas, making 10-7 equivalent to 70-7 -- turned them into the laughingstock of the numbers community. Two of the computer analysts, Jeff Sagarin and Kenneth Massey, acknowledge that their rankings for the B.C.S. are not the most accurate they can produce.
"You're asked to rank teams that don't play each other, that don't play long seasons, and you can't include margin of victory?" said Massey, who provides a "better version" on his Web site, masseyratings.com. "It's a very challenging problem from a data-analysis standpoint. It does require sacrificing a bit of accuracy. It's not the best way to do it."
It is bad enough that one analytical mathematician, the U.C. Irvine professor Hal S. Stern, has called for the statistical community to boycott participation in the B.C.S. standings.
When the godfather of modern sports statistics, Bill James, wrote a rousing affirmation, Stern's suggestion spread rapidly. It encapsulated the overwhelming anti-B.C.S. sentiment that populates the college-football-viewing country. The computers are an easy scapegoat for a public skeptical of artificial intelligence playing such a large part in crowning a national champion.
Any potential impartiality they bring, however, is quickly scythed by the inability of the B.C.S. to trust its own numbers.
The B.C.S. has tinkered with the computers time and again. When the systems blatantly disagreed with the two human elements used -- the equally questionable coaches poll and the Harris Interactive Poll, a group of voters with laughable qualifications -- they were overhauled. The computer systems that refused to compromise their math by removing margin of victory were removed themselves.
"Stern's analysis was clearly right," James said. "This isn't a sincere effort to use math to find the answer at all. It's clearly an effort to use math as a cover for whatever you want to do. I don't even know if the people who set up the system are aware of that.
"It's just nonsense math."
The "nonsense math" is certain to inflame debate. Experts last week predicted that Boise State, the underdog from the upstart Western Athletic Conference, would be ranked first. Ohio State, the top-ranked team in the polls, could be as low as fifth because of its across-the-board low computer rankings.
Accordingly, the computers end up being the patsy more than any part of the B.C.S. system. Fans want to understand the math behind them. They cannot, not because of quantitative inability but because of lack of transparency; only Wes Colley, who runs the Colley Matrix system, makes his formula public.
Billingsley chooses not to. It is a simple formula, he said, because he is a simple man. He does, against all reason, use the previous season's end rankings as the starting point for the current year's. It matters not whether the team lost its coach or its quarterback. Billingsley thinks that to understand the present, one must understand the past, even if that past resembles the present in no demonstrable fashion.
So good news, Florida Gators fans: Tim Tebow is still your quarterback in at least one place.
"I don't know that the powers that be even know what he's doing," Stern said.
They do not know. Three of the computer rankers said the B.C.S. did not verify the numbers they turned in. It supports the notion that the B.C.S., like a teenage-movie cliche, befriended the pocket-protector set only to cast it as the perfect red herring.
Which leaves college football with a problem it cannot solve: real mathematicians exposing the computers -- and the B.C.S. -- for the nonsense they are.

AuthorAffiliation JEFF PASSAN and DAN WETZEL Jeff Passan and Dan Wetzel are columnists for Yahoo Sports and co-authors with Josh Peter of "Death to the BCS: The Definitive Case Against the Bowl Championship Series."
Photograph Some Statisticians Have Doubts About How the B.C.S. Picks Teams for Its Title Game. (Photograph by Mark Humphrey/Associated Press)
