"Barbenheimer" is more than a cheeky internet meme -- it's a box-office unicorn expected to bring in $ 150 million in the United States and Canada through Sunday.
Ordinarily, two films opening on the same day would be competitors. But "Barbie" and "Oppenheimer," widely released on Friday, are geared toward different audiences. And the stark contrast between the movies -- one portraying the Mattel doll's pink-bathed universe and the other the architect of the atomic bomb -- has borne a surfeit of jokes online and a conjoined hype cycle that promises eye-popping ticket sales for both.
AMC Entertainment, the world's largest cinema chain, said on Monday that more than 40,000 people had purchased tickets to see "Barbie" and "Oppenheimer" as a double feature, up from 20,000 a week earlier. That's a combined five hours of movie viewing.
Still, one of the films is expected to outperform the other. Analysts who track audience interest and forecast box office performance say that "Barbie" has the potential to earn $ 100 million through Sunday. "Oppenheimer," they predict, will bring in about half of that in domestic sales. (Warner Bros., the studio behind "Barbie," appeared to play down expectations, saying it expected closer to $ 75 million.)
Hollywood desperately needs the lift that many say "Barbenheimer" will deliver. Movie theater chains have struggled to recover from the pandemic, which closed cinemas across the country for months, and have spent millions trying to lure back moviegoers.
"The chances of a soft landing are higher -- there's no question about that."
Diane Swonk, chief economist at KPMG US, about the possibility that the Federal Reserve might avoid tipping the country into a recession as it brings down inflation.
"I always had a question in the back of my mind. Am I training my replacement?"
Ylonda Sherrod, who works at an AT&T call center where artificial intelligence tools have already replaced aspects of her customer service job.
"At the end of the day I can't wait to go home and turn off my phone and have a drink and get away from it all."
Caroline Ellison, a top executive at the crypto hedge fund Alameda Research who pleaded guilty in the collapse of FTX, wrote last February, before the crypto market imploded.
