The program, Dr. Fill, typically thrives on conventional crosswords, even ones with arcane clues and answers, but it tends to struggle on puzzles with humor.
Score one for humans and their subtle, quirky, pattern-matching brains.
Over the weekend, an impressive crossword-solving computer program called Dr. Fill matched its digital wits against 600 of the best U.S. solvers at the American Crossword Puzzle Tournament in New York.
Before the tournament, Matthew Ginsberg, the creator of Dr. Fill and an expert in artificial intelligence, predicted a range of likely outcomes for his clever code. In simulations of 15 past tournaments, Dr. Fill finished on top three times. But at other times it stumbled.
Mr. Ginsberg said the program would probably finish in the top 50. With only seven puzzles, the range of possible outcomes was wide. "If I'm lucky, I'll win," he said, "If I'm unlucky, I'll end up 150th" -- still in the top fourth.
As it turned out, Dr. Fill finished 141st. "It was within the range, but I wish it had done better," Mr. Ginsberg said Sunday. "I'll be back next year."
Dr. Fill typically thrives on conventional crosswords, even ones with arcane clues and answers. Indeed, the seventh puzzle, a difficult one, it got perfectly.
But the computer program is literal minded, and tends to struggle on puzzles with humor, or those with unusual themes or letter arrangements.
"Two of the puzzles were bizarre in ways that were bad for it," Mr. Ginsberg explained.
One included several words that had to be spelled backwards. And another puzzle required correct answers, not just across and down, but some arrayed diagonally as well. Those were the second and fifth puzzles in the tournament.
"Dr. Fill got killed on puzzles two and five," said Will Shortz, director of the tournament, who is also the crossword puzzle editor of The New York Times.
Mr. Shortz commissions and edits the puzzles in the contest. Dan Feyer, last year's winner, said before the tournament that he figured Mr. Shortz would include a puzzle or two with innovative twists or patterns to trip up Dr. Fill.
Did Mr. Shortz choose puzzles with foiling the computer program in mind? Mr. Shortz shook his head no, and smiled, when asked that question after the tournament ended Sunday afternoon.
Mr. Ginsberg said, "I have no reason to believe that's the case," adding, "but people did say the puzzles were particularly innovative this year."
Mr. Ginsberg himself constructs crossword puzzles as a hobby, with more than two dozen published in The New York Times.
In a further sign of crossword continuity, this year's winner was Mr. Feyer, for the third straight time.
