Wall Street drifted to a mixed finish Thursday after Tesla surged to one of the best days in its history, while IBM slumped to its worst in six months.
The S&P 500 rose 0.2 percent to break its first three-day losing streak since early September. It bounced between losses and gains through the day, and it was roughly evenly split between stocks rising and falling.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 0.3 percent, while the Nasdaq composite rose 0.8 percent.
Tesla led the market with a jump of 21.9 percent after the electric-vehicle maker reported better profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected. Elon Musk, the C.E.O., was optimistic in predicting 20 percent to 30 percent sales growth next year, though Tesla's revenue for the latest quarter fell short of analysts' forecasts. It was the best day for Tesla's stock since 2013.
UPS climbed 5.3 percent after likewise topping analysts' forecasts for profit. The package-delivery company's finances can offer a window into the strength of the economy because of how many different types of customers it serves, and its revenue edged past expectations.
ServiceNow, whose platform helps companies automate and connect processes, was another one of the strongest forces lifting the S&P 500. It rose 5.4 percent after delivering stronger profit and revenue than expected, driven by customer interest in artificial-intelligence technology.
Such gains helped to offset a drop of 6.2 percent for IBM, which reported revenue for the latest quarter that fell just short of analysts' expectations. It was the single biggest reason the Dow dragged behind other indexes.
Boeing was another weight and sank 1.2 percent after its machinists voted to continue their strike, which has crippled aircraft production. More than 60 percent of union members who voted on the proposed contract rejected it, keeping them on the picket lines six weeks into their strike.
Union Pacific dropped 4.4 percent after the railroad reported slightly weaker profit and revenue than expected.
Stocks have broadly regressed this week after the S&P 500 and Dow both set records at the end of last week. Critics had already been saying that stocks looked too expensive, given how much faster their prices have risen than corporate profits.
Yields have climbed as report after report has shown the economy remains stronger than expected. That's good news for Wall Street, because it bolsters hopes the economy can escape from the worst inflation in generations without a painful recession.
But it's also forcing traders to ratchet back forecasts for how deeply the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates.
A report on unemployment claims Thursday offered a mixed picture on the job market. It said fewer workers applied for unemployment benefits last week, which can be a signal of relatively low layoffs. But it also said the total number of those collecting benefits rose to its highest level in almost three years.
Altogether, the numbers show a slowing economy, "but there is no sign of a crash in employment or a surge of layoffs in these data," according to Carl Weinberg and Rubeela Farooqi at High Frequency Economics.
Treasury yields, which had eased overnight, pared their losses after the release of the unemployment claims report before yo-yoing. The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 4.20 percent from 4.25 percent late Wednesday.
A separate preliminary report said growth in business activity may have accelerated slightly last month, as strength for companies in services industries continue to make up for weakness in manufacturing. The report from S&P Global also showed a recovery in confidence as companies anticipate greater stability and certainty after the upcoming presidential election.
A third report said sales of new homes were stronger last month than economists expected.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
