ENFORCEMENT
McDonald's Groups FinedFor Child Labor Violations
Two 10-year-olds are among 300 children who worked at McDonald's restaurants illegally, a Labor Department investigation of franchisees in Kentucky found.
Agency investigators found the 10-year-olds received little or no pay at a McDonald's in Louisville, the Labor Department said. The three franchisees were fined $ 212,000 in total.
One of them, Louisville's Bauer Food L.L.C., which operates 10 McDonald's locations, employed 24 minors under the age of 16 to work more hours than legally permitted, the agency said. Among those were two 10-year-old children. The agency said the children sometimes worked as late as 2 a.m., but were not paid.
The franchise owner-operator, Sean Bauer, said the two 10-year-olds were visiting their parent, a night manager, and weren't employees.
The Walton, Ky.-based Archways Richwood L.L.C. and Louisville-based Bell Restaurant Group I L.L.C. were also fined. ASSOCIATED PRESS
INTERNATIONAL
French Authority RejectsRestoring Retirement Age
France's top constitutional body rejected on Wednesday an effort by opposition lawmakers to undo a law to raise the retirement age to 64, deeming that a proposal did not meet the needed criteria. The law was pushed by President Emmanuel Macron, right.
It was the second time that the Constitutional Council has rejected the plan to restore the retirement age to 62, notably via a possible referendum or new bill. Had it passed muster, the process called for would be long and wouldn't stop Mr. Macron's unpopular law from taking effect.
Opposition lawmakers, mainly from the left, sought a complex process to reject the law, which was enacted last month.
The Constitutional Council's role was to assess whether the opposition's request meets the legal conditions for a potential referendum. Had it been accepted, supporters would have had nine months to collect signatures from at least 4.8 million, or 10 percent, of French voters. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
Google Plans to Add2 Data Centers in Ohio
Google plans to build two more data centers in Ohio to help power its artificial intelligence technology and other tools, the company and state officials announced Wednesday.
With one data center already up and running near Columbus, the two new locations will bring Google's total investment in Ohio to more than $ 2 billion, officials said.
Ohio is seeing a wave of big investments by the technology industry.
Intel is building a $ 20 billion chip factory just east of Columbus, and Honda and LG Energy Solution of South Korea are building a $ 3.5 billion battery plant between Columbus and Cincinnati that the automaker envisions as its North American electric vehicle hub.
The area around Columbus also is home to data centers operated by Facebook and Amazon.
The two new Google data centers will be built in Columbus and Lancaster. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (POOL PHOTO BY GONZALO FUENTES)
