BANKING
Former Bank Chairman Sent to Prison in China
A former chairman of the state-owned bank China Everbright Group was sentenced to 12 years for embezzlement and bribery, the broadcaster CCTV said Tuesday.
Tang Shuangning, who had also held senior posts at the People's Bank of China and the China Banking Regulatory Commission, was arrested in January, part of a wave of prosecutions of senior officials accused of financial crimes.
A court in the city of Tangshan, about 100 miles east of Beijing, found him guilty of taking advantage of his position at the state-owned bank in "seeking convenience for others" in jobs and loans, in exchange for illegal payments. The court said he had accepted illegal property with a total value of more than 11 million yuan, or about $ 1.5 million.
Mr. Tang, who retired in 2017, was expelled from the Communist Party in January. His successor, Li Xiaopeng, was also suspected of graft, expelled and removed from office. Associated Press
CRIME
$ 15 Million S.E.C. Penalty In Morgan Stanley Thefts
Morgan Stanley Smith Barney will pay a $ 15 million penalty as part of a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission related to four financial advisers who stole millions of dollars of advisory clients' and brokerage customers' funds.
The settlement announced late Monday is also related to the firm's failure to adopt policies and procedures designed to prevent and detect such theft.
The S.E.C. order said that M.S.S.B. failed to prevent its financial advisers from using two forms of unauthorized third-party disbursements, Automated Clearing House payments and certain patterns of cash wire transfers, to misappropriate funds from customer accounts. The order said the financial advisers, in Texas and California, made hundreds of unauthorized transfers from customers' or clients' accounts to themselves or for their own benefit. Associated Press
ENERGY
Energy Analysts Predict Record Usage for the Year
U.S. power consumption will rise to record highs in 2024 and 2025, the U.S. Energy Information Administration said in its Short Term Energy Outlook on Tuesday.
E.I.A. projected that power demand will rise to 4,086 billion kilowatt-hours in 2024 and 4,165 billion kW-h in 2025. That compares with 4,012 billion kW-h in 2023 and a record 4,067 billion kW-h in 2022.
With growing demand from artificial intelligence and data centers and as homes and businesses use more electricity for heat and transportation, E.I.A. forecast 2024 power sales will rise to 1,494 billion kW-h for residential consumers, 1,420 billion kW-h for commercial customers and 1,026 billion kW-h for industrial customers.
Those forecasts compare to highs of 1,509 billion kW-h for residential consumers in 2022, 1,408 billion kW-h in 2023 for commercial customers and 1,064 billion kW-h in 2000 for industrial customers. Reuters
Credit: By Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
