The arrival of organized criminal syndicates to the software piracy scene has escalated worries at companies like Microsoft, Symantec and Adobe.
As the sun rose over the mountains circling Los Reyes, a town in the Mexican state of Michoacan, one morning in March 2009, a caravan of more than 300 law enforcement agents set out on a raid.
All but the lead vehicle turned off their headlights to evade lookouts for La Familia Michoacana, the Mexican cartel that controls the drug trade. This time, the police were not hunting for a secret stash of drugs, guns or money. Instead, they looked to crack down on La Familia's growing counterfeit software ring.
The police reached the house, barreled in and found rooms crammed with about 50 machines used to copy CDs and make counterfeit versions of software like Microsoft Office and Xbox video games.
The raid added to a body of evidence confirming La Familia's expansion into counterfeit software as a low-risk, high-profit complement to drugs, bribery and kidnapping. The group even stamps the disks it produces with "FMM," for Familia Morelia Michoacana, alongside the original brand of software makers.
The arrival of organized criminal syndicates on the software piracy scene has intensified worries at companies like Microsoft, Symantec and Adobe. Groups in China, South America and Eastern Europe appear to have supply chains and sales networks rivaling those of legitimate businesses, said David Finn, Microsoft's anti-piracy chief. Sometimes they sell exact copies of products, but often they peddle tainted software that opens the door to other electronic crime.
"As long as intellectual property is the lifeblood of this company, we have to go protect it," Mr. Finn said.
Microsoft has adopted a hard line against counterfeiting. The company has set up an anti-piracy operation that dwarfs those of other software makers; it is staffed with dozens of former government intelligence agents from the United States, Europe and Asia who use a host of forensic technology tools.
But the hunt for pirates carries with it a cost to Microsoft's reputation.
The company's profit from Windows and Office remains the envy of the technology industry, and critics contend that Microsoft simply charges too much. In countries like India, where Microsoft encourages local police officers to conduct raids, the company can come off as a bully willing to go after its own business partners if they occasionally peddle counterfeit software to people who struggle to afford the real thing.
"It is better for the Indian government to focus on educating its children, rather than making sure royalties go back to Microsoft," said Eben Moglen, a leading advocate of free software.
Mr. Finn argues that Microsoft has no choice but to be aggressive in its fight, saying the company's immense network of resellers and partners cannot make a living in areas flush with counterfeit software. He says consumers and businesses are being coaxed into buying counterfeit products that either do not work or do serious harm by clearing the way for various types of electronic fraud.
And, crucially, the counterfeit software cuts into Microsoft's potential profit. A software industry trade group estimated the value of unlicensed software for all companies at $51.4 billion last year.
The most vociferous critics of Microsoft and the overall proprietary software industry describe the anti-piracy crusade as a sophisticated dog-and-pony show. They say the software makers tolerate a certain level of piracy because they would rather have people use their products -- even counterfeit products -- than pick up lower-cost alternatives. At the same time, according to the critics, the software companies conduct periodic raids to remind customers and partners that playing by the rules makes sense.
"It has always been in Microsoft's interests for software to be available at two different prices -- expensive for the people that can afford it and inexpensive for those that can't," Mr. Moglen says. "At the end of the day, if you're a monopolist, you have to tolerate a large number of copies you don't get paid for, just to keep everyone hooked."
Microsoft's pursuit of software counterfeiters begins in Dublin, at one of the company's 10 crime laboratories.
Donal Keating, a physicist who leads Microsoft's forensics work, has turned the lab into an anti-piracy playpen full of microscopes and other equipment used to analyze software disks. Monitors show data about counterfeit sales, and evidence bags almost overflow with nearly flawless fakes.
The undercover operative of this group is Peter Anaman, who is exploring a shift in piracy from groups that make CDs to those that offer downloads online.
Through three online personas -- two female and one male -- Mr. Anaman chats with hackers in Russia and Eastern Europe who use stolen credit card numbers to set up hundreds of Web sites and offer products from Microsoft, Adobe and Symantec.
"It is part of gathering human intelligence and tracking relationships," Mr. Anaman said.
Through an artificial intelligence system, Microsoft scans the Web for suspicious, popular links and then sends takedown requests to Web service providers, providing evidence of questionable activity. The counterfeiters, however, have automated systems that replace links that Microsoft takes down. So the company has turned up the dial on its link-removal machine.
"We used to remove 10,000 links a month," Mr. Anaman said. "Now, we're removing 800,000 links a month."
He described the groups behind these sites as "part of the dark Web," saying they have links to huge spam, virus and fraud networks. Microsoft's tests of software on some popular sites have shown that 35 percent of the counterfeit software contained harmful code.
About 75 people -- including former agents of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, the F.B.I., the U.S. Secret Service and Interpol -- work under Mr. Finn.
Mr. Finn, a former federal prosecutor in New York, directs the squad from a Paris office. He says Microsoft spends "north of $10 million" a year on its intelligence-gathering operations and an estimated $200 million on developing anti-piracy technology.
Mr. Finn talks at length about Microsoft's need to refine the industry's equivalent of fingerprinting, DNA testing and ballistics through CD and download forensics that can prove a software fake came from a particular factory or person. And his eyes widen as he thinks about advancing this technology to the point that Microsoft can emphasize the piracy issue directly to customers.
"Imagine the day when a consumer finds a link that says, 'Click here if you would like a forensic examination of your disk,"' Mr. Finn said. "You put the disk in, the computer reads it and suddenly you see a map of everywhere that counterfeit has been seen all over the world. If people see it in a graphic and visual way, I think they are more likely to help."
Microsoft's investigators spend much of their time examining how large-scale counterfeiters produce copies at factories and then distribute their wares.
Microsoft has found that operations on this scale tend to include all the trappings of legitimate businesses. Workers spend years building up contacts at software resellers around the globe, offering them discounted versions of software. Then they take the orders and send them off via shipping services, Mr. Keating says.
Many Microsoft products make users enter an activation code to register the software and have it work properly. The syndicates trade in stolen versions of these codes as well, and sometimes set up their own online authentication systems to give people the feeling they have a legitimate product. Groups in Russia and Eastern Europe, with various cybercrime operations in play, now use money gained from credit card fraud schemes to buy activation codes.
About a decade ago, only a few companies had the expertise or the $10 million needed to buy machines that could press CDs and DVDs. Today, someone can spend about $100,000 to buy second-hand pressing gear, said Patrick Corbett, the managing director at a CD plant owned by Arvato Digital Services, which produces Microsoft's retail software in Europe.
"Just five years ago, there were five sites in China that supplied the whole country," Mr. Corbett says. "Now these machines are commonplace."
A prized object is the stamper, the master copy of a software product that takes great precision to produce. From a single stamper, Arvato can make tens of thousands of copies on large presses.
Crucially for Mr. Keating, each press leaves distinct identifying markers on the disks. He spends much of his time running CDs and needs about six minutes to scan a disk and find patterns. Then he compares those markings with a database he has built of pressing machines worldwide.
This system allows Microsoft to follow the spread of CDs from factories. The company conducts test purchases of software online and in stores and receives copies from some of the 300,000 people who have complained about running into counterfeits over the last four years.
Microsoft keeps tight controls over its partners that produce CDs. But counterfeiters get around these measures by stealing stampers and presses, presenting factories with fake paperwork from Microsoft or printing in a factory when it is not doing official business -- a practice known as producing "cabbage."
The grand question surrounding Microsoft's anti-piracy razzle-dazzle is whether it is worth the cost.
The piracy problems tend to be most severe in regions where there is less money to pay for Microsoft's products. Backers of free software like the Linux operating system take aim at these areas, and Microsoft also faces growing competition from Google, which gives away its Office rival to consumers and sells a business version at prices far below what Microsoft typically receives.
"We love Microsoft's heavy-handedness," said Jim Zemlin, the executive director of the Linux Foundation, a nonprofit organization. "We want 100 percent of the people using Windows to pay for it, because in those places where you have a lot of pirated use of Windows, we don't have any cost advantage."
