Two scientists in San Diego are pursuing goals that prompt hopes and doubts on their practicalities.
Ann Lam places a glass slide holding a slice of brain from a living human onto a small platform in a room the size of a walk-in refrigerator. She closes a heavy door and turns to control her experiment from a row of computer monitors.
She is standing next to one of the world's most sophisticated and powerful microscopes, the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource. Dr. Lam is trying to learn about the distribution of metals in the brains of epilepsy patients. The microscope's ability to produce intense bursts of X-rays will help. But she has another reason for being here as well.
Traditional techniques for staining brain tissue produce byproducts and waste that are hazardous to the environment. And often, this sort of research is performed on animals, something Dr. Lam insists on avoiding.
The radiation that illuminates the Stanford microscope was once a waste product produced by the particle accelerators used to conduct physics experiments. Now that it has been harnessed -- recycled, in a sense -- for use in the laboratory, she is able to use it to examine tissue removed from living human patients, not animals.
For Dr. Lam, those are important considerations. Indeed, scientists like her worry that neuroscience has become a dirty business. Too often, they say, labs are stocked with toxic chemicals, dangerous instruments and hapless animal subjects. Funding often comes from the military, and some neuroscientists fear their findings may soon be applied in ways that they never intended, raising moral questions that are seldom addressed.
In 2012, Dr. Lam and Elan Ohayon, her husband, founded the Green Neuroscience Laboratory in a former industrial building in the Convoy District of San Diego. There are solar panels on the roof and a garden, lovingly tended, on the second floor. "Our dream is to create an educational training program in green neuroscience where people can really study ethics, philosophy and experimentation all at the same time," she said. The laboratory is a sharp contrast to the sterile and corporate environment at the Salk Institute, nearby in La Jolla, where the two once worked as visiting scholars. But that's the point.
Dr. Lam and Dr. Ohayon refuse to experiment on animals, a mainstay of neuroscience research, and will not conduct research with military applications. At scientific conferences around the United States, they have been urging scientists to stop clinging to dated notions of normalcy and deviance.
At a time when research often seems to suggest that humans are neural puppets, Dr. Lam and Dr. Ohayon are chasing projects intended to show how brain functioning is connected to free will and personal freedom. And they are believers in transparent, open-source science: They are committed to using widely available technologies and publishing findings and data without restrictions -- sometimes even as it happens during experiments.
Their ideas have raised eyebrows in scientific circles -- and hopes.
"The lab is one of the laboratories that has a chance to become a place where new ideas in artificial intelligence and neuroscience come from," said Hava T. Siegelmann, a professor of computer science, who studies neural systems at the University of Massachusetts.
But their rigid opposition to animal research in particular may come at a steep price.
"They don't want to play the game," said W. McIntyre Burnham, a neuropharmacologist at the University of Toronto, with whom Dr. Ohayon studied. "They may be the wave of the future, but I think they may also have trouble getting support."
The two came to the idea of an alternative approach to neuroscience on a backpacking trip on Vancouver Island in 2011. Dr. Lam was ending a postdoctoral fellowship at the Salk Institute, and the two scientists were worried about the direction of neuroscience. As it turned out, they were not the only ones.
Eventually they found a kindred spirit in the neuroscientist Jay S. Coggan, who also came from Salk. The Green Neuroscience Laboratory is affiliated with -- and shares offices with -- the NeuroLinx Research Institute, which he founded.
A former staff researcher at the Salk Institute, Dr. Coggan had grown disappointed with the "establishment" science in which, he says, academic research and the priorities of corporate profits are increasingly indistinguishable. He started the laboratory with his own money and now keeps it going with a variety of private individual contributions and research grants.
NeuroLinx supports a range of projects, including an exploration of how dolphins sleep, an effort to create a computer simulation of the ubiquitous lab worm C. elegans (known as the "Open Worm" project) and an exploration of nerve damage in diseases like multiple sclerosis.
Dr. Ohayon had done early research in the field of autonomous agents based on neural networks, computing models inspired by biological nervous systems, but stepped away from the field for almost a decade because of worries about military applications of the technology.
Now he has returned to the research: In the Green Neuroscience Laboratory, a sandbox-like table is home to a small robot used to model neural network behavior. The research group recently published work exploring the basis of neural activity needed to support movement in an environment.
But Dr. Ohayon is treading gingerly, hoping to find ways to ensure that his scientific and technological insights are not misused. "We have to treat neuroscience and robotics like we treat biological and chemical weapons," he said.
To build ethical perspective into their work, Dr. Lam and Dr. Ohayon have decided that all of their research projects must have two components. One is the "familiar and experimental" outline of the scope and requirements of the project, Dr. Lam said. The other is a bit more usual: "A parallel green paper that guides the study and helps explore the application guidelines." In short: How can the study be done ethically, and how can the finding be used ethically?
Dr. Lam and Dr. Ohayon have begun to travel around the country, speaking about the moral quandary they believe faces neuroscientists. They start by reviewing dystopian futures as described in science fiction. "You know all of that stuff?" they ask. "It's much worse."
Brain technologies emerging today may put anything that George Orwell might have imagined to shame, they say. The government's ambitious effort to map the human brain, they note, also includes research into whether information can be "written" into the brain. "The problem is that we haven't learned from history," Dr. Ohayon said. "Now we know what science can create."
