U.S. stocks rallied to records, again, on Tuesday. What made this time more jubilant was how many companies joined the party.
The S&P 500 climbed 0.6 percent to set a high for the 38th time this year. Unlike other record-setting days, Tuesday's came after a widespread rally where nearly nine out of every 10 stocks in the S&P 500 rose, instead of just the few influential Big Tech stocks that have been behind most of this year's returns.
The Dow Jones industrial average leaped 742 points, or 1.8 percent, to lead the market a day after setting its own record. The Nasdaq composite lagged with a gain of 0.2 percent, as the stars dimmed for some of the year's biggest winners.
UnitedHealth Group drove the market after reporting better profit for the spring than analysts expected, despite losses it took because of a massive cyberattack. Its stock rose 6.5 percent, and the health care company reported growth in the number of people served at both its Optum and UnitedHealth businesses.
Bank of America rallied 5.3 percent after it likewise reported stronger profit for the latest quarter than forecast. It benefited from growth at its investment banking business.
They helped offset drops for a handful of Big Tech stocks, whose sizes give their movements an outsize effect on indexes. Nvidia, for example, was the heaviest single weight on the S&P 500 after falling 1.6 percent.
But that decline was just a minor pullback compared with how much the chip company's stock rocketed earlier amid Wall Street's frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology. Nvidia shares are still up 155.2 percent for the year.
Plus, some market watchers have been hoping for just such a broadening of the stock market's performance, because a market with many stocks rising is seen as healthier than one driven by just a few elite stocks.
Only 24 percent of companies in the S&P 500 had been beating the index so far this year, according to Solita Marcelli, chief investment officer, Americas, at UBS Global Wealth Management. That's down from last year's already low tally of 26 percent.
In another signal of more companies participating in the market's rally, stocks of smaller companies also outpaced their larger rivals after having lagged for a while.
The Russell 2000 index of smaller stocks jumped 3.5 percent, nearly six times the S&P 500's gain. It's coming off its best week since November, as stocks from other beaten-down corners of the market also rally following signals that the U.S. economy remains solid and that easier interest rates may soon be on the way.
Several big winners from the day before, which benefited from heightened expectations for former President Donald J. Trump to retake the White House, gave back some of their immediate jumps after Mr. Trump dodged an assassination attempt over the weekend.
Trump Media & Technology Group fell 9.1 percent, a day after leaping 31.4 percent. Shares of the company behind the Truth Social platform regularly swing by big percentages each day, up or down.
All told, the S&P 500 rose 35.98 points to 5,667.20. The Dow jumped 742.76 to 40,954.48, and the Nasdaq composite added 36.77 to 18,509.34.
In the bond market, some of the prior day's moves also reversed. Longer-term yields sank more than shorter-term yields after a report showed sales at U.S. retailers held firm last month despite economists' expectations for a decline.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury dropped to 4.16 percent from 4.23 percent late Monday. It's fallen from 4.70 percent in April, which is a major move for the bond market and has given a solid boost to stock prices.
Yields have eased on rising expectations that inflation is slowing enough to persuade the Federal Reserve to begin cutting interest rates soon.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
