TECHNOLOGY
Facebook's Latest Buy: Brain-to-Computer Firm
Facebook said on Monday it had bought CTRL-labs, a start-up in New York that is exploring ways for people to communicate with computers using brain signals.
Andrew Bosworth, Facebook's vice president for augmented and virtual reality, announced the deal in a Facebook post.
CTRL-labs will join the Facebook Reality Labs team, Mr. Bosworth said, without giving any financial details.
Facebook said it intended to use the neural interface technology of CTRL-labs in developing a wristband that connects to other devices intuitively.
"The vision for this work is a wristband that lets people control their devices as a natural extension of movement," Mr. Bosworth said. "We hope to build this kind of technology, at scale, and get it into consumer products faster."
Media reports said CTRL-labs was working with brain science and machine learning to create interfaces for people to manipulate computers by thinking. REUTERS
MEDIA
Court Rejects F.C.C. Effort
On Media Ownership Rules
The Federal Communications Commission suffered a setback on Monday in a long-running legal battle when a federal appeals court struck down its latest effort to loosen media ownership rules.
The F.C.C. in 2017 voted to eliminate the 42-year-old ban on cross-ownership of a newspaper and TV station in a major market.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in a 2-1 decision, told the F.C.C. to take up the issue again, saying the regulator "did not adequately consider the effect its sweeping rule changes will have on ownership of broadcast media by women and racial minorities."
Ajit Pai, the F.C.C. chairman, said that despite instructions from Congress to review media ownership regulations, federal appeals court judges for 15 years have "taken that authority for themselves, blocking any attempt to modernize these regulations to match the obvious realities of the modern media marketplace."
The F.C.C. plans to challenge the decision, he added. REUTERS
AUTOMOBILES
Honda to End Sales
Of Diesels in Europe
Honda Motor said on Monday it would phase out all diesel cars by 2021 in favor of models with electric propulsion systems, as the Japanese automaker moves to electrify all of its European cars by 2025.
For Honda, declining demand for diesel vehicles and tougher emissions regulations have clouded its manufacturing prospects in Europe.
Honda said in February it would close its only British car plant in 2021, with the loss of up to 3,500 jobs.
By next year, according to European Union emission targets, carbon dioxide must be cut to 95 gram per kilometer for 95 percent of cars from the current 120.5 gram average, a figure that has increased of late as consumers spurn fuel-efficient diesels and embrace SUVs. All new cars in the E.U. must be compliant in 2021.
Honda, Japan's No. 3 automaker, has said it would cut the number of car model variations to a third of current offerings by 2025. REUTERS
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: By REUTERS
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY TOBY MELVILLE/REUTERS)
