Does the idea of a machine that's as smart as you are inspire fascination? Or fear? From "2001" to "The Terminator," science fiction has conditioned us to dread the metal tap on the shoulder. But "Smartest Machine on Earth," a gee-whiz episode of the PBS series "Nova" on Wednesday night, puts a friendly face on artificial intelligence.
In fact, we're supposed to feel sorry for the machine in question, an I.B.M. computer called Watson, a name that pays tribute to Thomas J. Watson, the company's founder, while also evoking Sherlock Holmes's stolid sidekick.
Watson, as followers of computing or television game shows already know, was developed over the course of four years (and at the cost of tens of millions of dollars) specifically to play "Jeopardy!" against human competition. "Smartest Machine on Earth," in addition to being a quick, jokey history of the development of A.I. and a profile of the team that built Watson, is an hourlong teaser for the three episodes of "Jeopardy!," Monday through next Wednesday, that will pit the computer against the flesh-and-blood champions Ken Jennings and Brad Rutter.
David Ferrucci, the Watson team leader, spends much of the hour looking hangdog as the computer goes down in its first matches against humans and as "Jeopardy!" producers initially decline to put the machine on the program. When a comedian hired to host practice matches ridicules Watson's more obtuse answers (Rembrandt rather than Pollock for a "late '40s artist"), Mr. Ferrucci lashes out: "He's making fun of a defenseless computer."
Those who would like to see the machines kept in their place will be heartened by these scenes, but they shouldn't make assumptions about next week's matches (which were actually filmed, under a media blackout, in January). In a short public exhibition, Watson has defeated Mr. Jennings and Mr. Rutter, the best humanity has to offer.
And a moment late in the program that sends the I.B.M. engineers into ecstasy may send a chill up those same viewers' spines: after a programming tweak, Watson demonstrates that it can learn the trick of a "Jeopardy!" category -- in this case, that the answers must be the names of months -- and adjust its responses accordingly, within the space of the category's five clues.
"Smartest Machine on Earth" is part of an all-"Nova" night on PBS dedicated to the theme of intelligence. It begins with "How Smart Are Animals?," an episode of "Nova ScienceNow." Here, in the fast-moving, populist (or pandering) "Mr. Wizard"-meets-"Monty Python" style of "ScienceNow," we see dogs, dolphins, octopuses and a parrot whose impressive feats of communication all involve doing elaborate tricks in return for food or affection.
The evening also includes an installment of the "Nova" mini-series "Making Stuff," hosted by David Pogue, technology columnist for The New York Times.
That Watson has the affection of its I.B.M. creators, not to mention the "Nova" producers, can be seen in the fact that it's routinely referred to as "he" and "him," just like the cute border collies and performing dolphins. The mind-set we're exposed to throughout the program is reflected in one engineer's poetic framing of this man-and-machine high noon: "It's a human standing there with their carbon and water versus the computer with all of its silicon and its main memory and its disc."
The program gives an interesting summary of how Watson has been armed for its single function: loaded with a numbing amount of data (10 million documents, including encyclopedias, the Bible, the Internet Movie Database and the archive of The New York Times) and thousands of old "Jeopardy" clues, then programmed to compute the likelihoods of possible answers in microseconds.
This may seem, to the average viewer, like nothing more than a specialized, high-powered keyword search, but when the machine is rattling off correct answers in its anodyne voice and racking up tens of thousands of dollars in practice matches, it's impressive. And, yes, unsettling.
"Jeopardy!" fans will have at least one significant question that "Nova" doesn't answer: Does the lack of thumbs give Watson an advantage? Because everyone knows that you can have a head full of encyclopedias, but it's still all about the buzzer.
NOVA SCIENCENOW
How Smart Are Animals?
On PBS stations on Wednesday night at 8 (check local listings).
Produced for PBS by the WGBH Science Unit at WGBH Boston. "Dog Genius": Written, produced and directed by Julia Cort; edited by Steve Audette. "Dolphin Behavior": Produced by Doug Hamilton; edited by Rob Tinworth. "Octopus/Cuttlefish": Written by Rushmore DeNooyer; directed and produced by Mr. DeNooyer and Dana Rae Warren; edited by Ryan Shepheard. "Irene Pepperberg": Written and directed by Joshua Seftel; produced by Mr. Seftel and Jesse Sweet; edited by Jessica Reynolds. Paula Apsell, senior executive producer; Samuel Fine, executive producer; Neil deGrasse Tyson, host and executive editor.
NOVA
Making Stuff: Smarter
On PBS stations on Wednesday night at 9 (check local listings).
Produced by Powderhouse Productions for Nova/WGBH. Written, produced and directed by Daniel McCabe; David Pogue, host; Paula Apsell, senior executive producer; Chris Schmidt, executive producer; Joel Olicker and Tug Yourgrau, executive producers for Powderhouse Productions.
NOVA
Smartest Machine on Earth
On PBS stations on Wednesday night at 10 (check local listings).
Produced by Little Bay Pictures for Nova/WGBH. Written by Julia Cort and Michael Bicks; directed and produced by Mr. Bicks; edited by William A. Anderson and Daniel Gaucher; Paula Apsell, senior executive producer; Ms. Cort, senior producer.
