At a rally in a state he lost in 2020, the former president considered the possibility of another defeat.
The ex-president, exhausted at last?
"I've been doing this for 42 days straight without a rest," Donald J. Trump said Tuesday night as the clock ticked past 10:00 and his third campaign for president entered its final phase. "Can you believe it?"
The 78-year-old Republican candidate was standing onstage at an opera house in Atlanta, looking out at red hats amid red plush seats. Mr. Trump, who likes to play Luciano Pavarotti at his rallies, is ordinarily something of a one-man opera himself. And yet, over the course of one hour on Tuesday evening, he sounded strangely muted.
"If we don't win," he said quietly at one point, "it's like, it was all for not very much."
It seemed an uncharacteristically vulnerable display from Mr. Trump, 21 days before the end of the campaign. Maybe it was because he was back in Georgia, a state he narrowly lost in 2020 (and where he still faces charges for election interference); early voting there had just begun that day. Or maybe he was just feeling wiped out after a very long day. The previous 24 hours had not gone exactly as planned.
The night before, at a town-hall event in Oaks, Pa., Mr. Trump cut short the questions after two of his supporters fainted. He spent more than 30 minutes swaying in place while playing his favorite music, which prompted an entire news cycle in which people speculated about whether he was having some kind of mental breakdown. Then, Tuesday morning, he sat for a testy exchange with John Micklethwait, the editor in chief of Bloomberg News, who questioned him about his age and his fitness for office. (In Atlanta, Mr. Trump vented about that interview, saying: "He was a Trump hater. My staff didn't tell me that.") Then he taped an all-women town hall in Forsyth County, Ga., at which he declared himself "the father of I.V.F."
Nonetheless, in Atlanta, his supporters were giddy about the state of the race. They were organized, discussing their plans to vote early, and many in the crowd were talking as though victory were already at hand.
Marjorie Taylor Greene, the far-right congresswoman, vibrated with excited energy as she told the audience (some of whom were her constituents) how she had cast her vote for Mr. Trump (and herself) that very morning. "I am doing everything I can with every cell in my body," she said, "but I am counting on all of you. I hope you are as pissed off and fed up as I am."
The Trump campaign made sure they were.
As the audience waited for the former president to arrive, a slide show played for hours on a massive screen hanging above the stage. Advertisements for hats and T-shirts ("MAGA Never Surrender -- Brand New!") were interspersed with cartoonish images that appeared to be generated by artificial intelligence.
In one, a young girl who looked more like a Pixar character than an actual human child sat on a swing in a park with Day-Glo green grass. White text that was overlaid read: "A little girl was raped and murdered by 2 illegals THAT KAMALA SET FREE." (The message was a reference to the case of Jocelyn Nungaray, a 12-year-old who was killed in Texas in June; two undocumented immigrants from Venezuela were charged in her murder.)
Another image showed a shadowy man holding a knife as long as his forearm, stalking a woman down a darkened alleyway. It looked like a promotional poster for a new "Scream" sequel. "No one is safe with Kamala's open border," it read. There were more uncanny images: dark-haired children piled on top of one another in an overflowing classroom. Brown-skinned men with face tattoos and white tank tops. A tangle of human flesh converging on an overwhelmed hospital.
Ashlee Engel, a 22-year-old college student from Cumming, Ga., who was sitting in a seat not far from the stage, considered the images flashing before her eyes. "They're very provocative," she said. Did she see them as naked scaremongering tactics? "Yeah, I would say so," she said. Still, she said of Mr. Trump: "I still believe in him. I still believe he's a good guy."
And so here was how the former president rallied his audience and his fatigued self, with his most animating theme, only darker and more fantastical than ever. It always comes back to this.
Talking about immigration was how he forged that adamantine bond with his base in the first place. In terms of importance, it is an issue that "beats the economy," he said Tuesday. "It's not even close."
In some ways, the country and the political elite have come around to where Mr. Trump started on this issue. The Democratic Party at large, and Vice President Kamala Harris in particular, have changed the way they talk about the border and the need to secure it.
But as Mr. Trump resorts to ever more dehumanizing messaging -- even using images of fake human beings -- the question becomes: Can he scare enough Americans into giving him another shot?
"Check out the front page of The New York Post today, they've taken over Midtown Manhattan," he said in Georgia. He growled and put on an accent while invoking Tren de Aragua, the transnational gang he warned was coming to a small town near you. "They are vicious as hell," he said. "Take a look." Another video began to play.
All around the opera house, Mr. Trump's supporters began to rise from their seats to jeer at the screen. Old women in boxes on the mezzanine level cried out. Young women with blond hair extensions and bedazzled MAGA hats shook their fists from down on the floor. The theater began to chant the name of Laken Riley, the 22-year-old nursing student who was killed on the University of Georgia campus. An undocumented immigrant was charged in her death. "You know Laken very well," said Mr. Trump, his voice low. "She was killed viciously while out on a jog. She was assaulted, beaten and horrifically murdered by an illegal alien," he said.
"You saw the picture."
Photograph Donald J. Trump repeated his anti-immigrant theme at the event, including using A.I.-generated images to reinforce his message. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NICOLE CRAINE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
