AGRICULTURE
Citing Declining Demand, Deere & Co. Lays Off 600
Deere & Co. is laying off nearly 600 workers as the farm equipment manufacturer deals with declining demand.
Deere confirmed on Monday that the positions being cut are concentrated at two factories in Iowa and one at its home base in Moline, Ill., where 280 employees will be laid off effective Aug. 30. A combined 310 workers will be let go at the Iowa locations.
In its second-quarter earnings release in May, Deere reported a more than 15 percent decline in revenue, the third-straight quarter of sales declines.
Company executives said at the time that they expected further sales declines in the second half of the fiscal year and said it would continue to "take proactive steps to reduce production and inventory."
Deere & Co. turned in a quarterly profit of $ 2.37 billion, down from $ 2.86 billion in the same period the previous year. ASSOCIATED PRESS
INVESTING
Robinhood Markets Buys A.I.-Powered Pluto Capital
Robinhood Markets said on Monday that it had bought artificial intelligence-powered investment platform Pluto Capital, adding the trading app to a growing list of companies looking to offer A.I. tools to customers.
Top technology companies are racing to build A.I. into their products and services. Generative A.I., which aims to create humanlike interactions by processing vast amounts of data, has taken the world by storm, with analysts expecting it to lead transformation across industries.
The Menlo Park, Calif.,-based company said the deal will give investors access to enhanced data analysis, personalized investment strategies as well as real-time insights and portfolio optimization.
Robinhood's platform has seen a resurgence in trading activity after a prolonged slump as higher interest rates and heavy market volatility turned investors averse to risk. Reuters
LABOR
WestJet Reaches Accord To End Mechanics' Strike
Canada's second largest airline, WestJet, has reached a deal with its mechanics to end a strike that had disrupted the travel plans of tens of thousands of passengers over the Canada Day long weekend.
WestJet said late Sunday that there will still be flight disruptions in the week ahead as its planes are brought back into service.
In its own news release, the Airplane Mechanics Fraternal Association urged its members to return to work immediately pending a vote on the temporary agreement.
Some 680 workers, whose daily inspections and repairs are essential to airline operations, had walked off the job on Friday evening despite a directive for binding arbitration from the labor minister.
Since Thursday, WestJet has canceled 829 flights scheduled between then and Monday in the busiest travel weekend of the season in Canada. Associated Press
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
