The rapid spread of cellphones has fueled an appreciation among Africans for the practical uses of science and technology.
He might have been content simply to teach thousands of university students in Uganda how to use computers, assemble them into networks, manage them and write basic software programs. In a poor African country with one of the world's fastest-growing populations and rising Internet use, that alone would have been an enormous achievement.
But Venansius Baryamureeba had bigger ideas. In 2005, when he returned home with a doctorate from the University of Bergen in Norway, he was just one of a handful of computer scientists in Uganda. His timing was right. The largely agricultural economy had been growing about 7 percent annually, propelling an enormous expansion of the upper-middle class and the urban elite's aspirations for advanced training in science and engineering.
And it is not just Uganda. The rapid spread of cellphones has fueled an appreciation among Africans for the practical uses of science and technology. The children of the African elite are also seeing career possibilities in computing science and engineering beyond the traditional disciplines of medicine, law and finance or the more typical scientific callings of crop and soil science.
"Computer science appeals to a generation of urban students raised on a diet of digital devices," said Chanda Chisala of Zambia Online, a software development company and Internet provider in the capital, Lusaka.
In Uganda, emboldened by the country's relative peace and prosperity in recent years, Dr. Baryamureeba founded a new college that includes departments of computer science and computer engineering at the creaky Makerere University, in the Ugandan capital, Kampala.
At the top of a hill near the university's entrance, overlooking the derelict law school to one side and an also derelict school mosque to the other, two gleaming glass buildings went up seemingly without a hitch. So many undergraduates swarmed them that the faculty even held classes at midnight to accommodate them.
Dr. Baryamureeba wanted more than a vocational school; he also created a graduate program that he hoped would someday turn out dozens of scientists who would themselves become college professors and help push the boundaries of global research.
Improbably, his vision is gaining traction at Makerere. Young, homegrown scientists there are now nearing completion of their doctorates. And faculty members are carrying out cutting-edge experiments. They are seeking to endow cellphones with the "intelligence" embedded in tiny software programs animated by mathematical algorithms, to identify crop diseases or detect malaria in a person's bloodstream.
Ernest Mwebaze, a doctoral student and lecturer, said there were still serious obstacles to pursuing such research in Uganda, including unreliable Internet service and power failures. But he also said the potential upside was huge.
"Uganda offers several unique research challenges and problems whose solutions can actually have a greater marginal benefit than, say, solutions to problems in Europe," he said.
Each Monday, in a laboratory of thrumming computers, Mr. Mwebaze teaches a class on artificial intelligence to 10 graduate students, highlighting this esoteric field -- the subject of his doctorate research.
The potential for Africans trained in Africa to do science attuned to the realities of Africa is not limited to computing.
"There's a growing interest in research, and science generally, in the region," said Calestous Juma, a professor at Harvard University who specializes in the study of technology and development.
Computer science appeals to chronically underfinanced African universities because its study is relatively inexpensive. No big atom smashers are needed as in physics; no giant telescopes as in astronomy.
Computer science in Africa is still held back by the perception that it is preferable to study and work in Europe or the United States, even if that means leaving Africa permanently. Georgia Institute of Technology researchers recommended in a study that African educators reinforce efforts to shape computer science curriculum to "local needs."
A shortage of skilled teachers also remains a problem. The continent's leading computer science departments -- based on research publications -- are all based in South Africa. Yet even there, the number of university-level teachers is limited. "Our C.S. departments are much smaller than counterparts in the U.S.," said Bill Tucker, an American who is a senior lecturer at the University of the Western Cape. Computer science research is also held back by differing ethical practices in African and U.S. academic institutions.
When V.S. Subrahmanian, a computer scientist at the University of Maryland, decided to forge a research partnership last year with Nigerian professors, he was enthusiastically received. But when he provided a Nigerian computer center with data compiled by Maryland, the center started selling it.
Dr. Subrahmanian, who thought the data should have been openly available for scholars, found what happened "very troubling."
Dr. Baryamureeba's commitment has helped Makerere overcome such obstacles. He now leads the entire university, ensuring that computer science and engineering have high-level support. Partnerships with universities in Norway and the Netherlands have also proved crucial. Graduate students from Uganda have been able to study both at home and abroad. And the European universities require that the students return to Uganda to get their doctorates and promise not to poach them.
There is also a palpable sense among young scholars that Africa is cool -- and that universities are improving just enough to advance the scientific ambitions of Western scientists.
Consider John Quinn, a Scot. He attended the University of Cambridge and received a doctorate in computer science from the University of Edinburgh. Searching for an unconventional research experience, he contacted Makerere just as Dr. Baryamureeba was casting about for international talent to bolster his faculty.
Dr. Quinn accepted and has never looked back.
An artificial intelligence research group he formed has received financing from both Microsoft and Google. One project involves designing code that turns a cellphone into a sophisticated microscope. He presented his research on diagnosing malaria over the phone at an artificial intelligence conference in San Francisco in August.
"There's a growing awareness of the need to focus, to specialize and to become internationally competitive," Dr. Quinn said of himself and his colleagues.
One potentially practical and profitable benefit partly explains the interest of computer companies in Dr. Quinn's research: Turning cellphones into cheap microscopes and pattern-recognition devices could help people in the developed world lower costs of instant diagnosis of minor medical problems.
So far, Dr. Quinn's reputation has only been enhanced by his work in Uganda, and he is earning roughly $3,000 a month, not that far from what recent post-docs earn teaching in Europe.
That has him thinking he will stay a while in Kampala. He had initially planned to stick it out for two years, but he is now four years into his African university tenure and sees a lot of running room in computer science -- for himself, and for Africa.
