Home security is blossoming for toy makers that can match the technical power and flexibility of the computer industry with the mass-market prices that come from large production runs.
When Robert Oschler leaves his home, he knows it is secure. And if he ever has cause for concern, he can open his laptop and survey the house through the eyes of his watchdogs.
"I don't have any pets. I just have pet robots, and they're pretty well behaved," said Mr. Oschler, a programmer who lives in Florida. "Fortunately, I've never logged in and seen a human face."
His robot, a modified version of the Rovio from WowWee, has a camera, microphone and speakers atop a three-wheeled platform. From anywhere with an Internet connection, Mr. Oschler can send his robot zipping around the house, returning a video signal along the way.
"As creepy as it sounds, you could even talk to the guy and say, 'Get out of there. There's nothing valuable. I'm calling the police,"' he said.
For all its capabilities, the Rovio is usually found in a store's toy department, at a price of about $170. Other robots from toy makers, like Meccano, are there as well. Outfitting a house with a fleet of robot guards is no longer just for those with the wealth of James Bond villains.
Home security is blossoming for toy makers that can match the technical power and flexibility of the computer industry with the mass-market prices that come from large production runs. Low prices are a trade-off, however; many people find that the reliability of the lower-priced robots is adequate for home experimentation but far from ready for a task like guarding a collection of fine art.
"You should buy two," Mr. Oschler said.
The off-the-shelf Rovio robot is ready to explore after a simple installation process, but Mr. Oschler added a few enhancements to the software, which he distributes at robodance.com. His version improves the audio and video quality the Rovio transmits and offers more sophisticated programming options that create routines and paths for the robots to follow.
Mr. Oschler has even wired his robot to a headset that picks up the subtle electrical activity produced by his brain.
"When I tilt my head, the robot goes left," he said. "When you do that, it's a Matrix-like moment."
Other programmers have modified their guard-bots, too. Peter Redmer of Illinois, an online community manager at robocommunity.com, said his site gathered the collective wisdom of toy robots' owners. One hobbyist in China, Qiaosong Wang, posted pictures of his Rovio after he added a small fire extinguisher and software that can detect the shape of fire.
"One of the goals is to create something that the consumer can enjoy without pricing it at $5,000 or $10,000 with military-grade technology," Mr. Redmer said.
Others have experimented with adding software for aiming the camera or enhancements like better lights for patrolling at night.
Mr. Redmer said he was most interested lately in the Parrot AR.Drone, a flying robot priced at $300. "It flies," he said. "How much cooler does it get?"
Not all of the innovation is attached to something that moves. Several companies are matching sophisticated artificial intelligence algorithms with video cameras. These systems monitor a video feed and sound alarms when objects of a certain shape appear.
I tried some software called Vitamin D that lets me watch my office. It raises flags -- by beeping -- whenever anyone walks in. It requires a computer and detects video signals from attached cameras. (A single-camera version of the software is free, and the cost can rise to $199, at vitamindinc.com.)
Archerfish makes surveillance cameras with sophisticated filters for detecting and distinguishing people, vehicles and random movement. The models, at myarcherfish.com, include either one or four cameras for $400 to $1,400.
I also spent some time with a Spykee, a robot made by the French company Meccano, which sells toys in the United States under the brand name Erector. Several models of Spykee robots are at spykeeworld.com, for $110 to $300.
Meccano designed the Spykee as a kit requiring some basic assembly. The essential gears and electronics come in a pre-assembled base, and attaching the arms takes an hour or so.
"It's a toy, but many people use it as a surveillance robot," said Jennifer Briand, the product manager for Spykee. By focusing on children, Ms. Briand said, "We wanted a product that they could drive on their own like a spy, play jokes on their brothers and sisters, and protect their bedroom, because at that age they don't like their sister coming in."
Still, she said, the use of the Sypkee as a surveillance robot was a bit of a surprise.
"At the beginning we thought that very young adults would be very interested in the product, but today we know that we have a lot of adults from 25 to 55 that like to play with Spykee," Ms. Briand said. "When you ask them what the favorite function is, they say they really like to drive it when they're out of the home."
She is right. It was fun to drive the robot throughout the first floor of my home, chasing the cats and seeing if anything was somehow different. And when I was done checking on the living room, it made sense to check on the kitchen. No one ever broke in, but the cats seemed to move around more.
While everything worked correctly, there were definite physical limits. The Spykee cannot go up or down stairs. Small bumps like the edge of a carpet do not cause trouble, but taller obstacles present an insurmountable barrier. The engineering is quite good, but it's not easy to trust the Spykee with serious responsibility. It can be difficult, for instance, to dock the device with its recharger.
Steering something only a foot tall takes some adjustment. As I was remotely directing the robot around my house, I bumped its head on a low overhang and the Spykee tipped over. I tried yelling for help -- remotely -- but no one heard me. There was no choice but to wait until I got there to pick it up.
