SoftLayer Technologies is a player in the fast-growing market for computing sold to businesses as a service delivered over the Internet.
I.B.M. announced on Tuesday that it had agreed to buy SoftLayer Technologies, a cloud computing company, in an effort to strengthen its position in the fast-growing market for computing sold to businesses as a service delivered over the Internet.
The purchase price was not disclosed publicly. But it was about $2 billion, according to a person told of the negotiations who asked not to be identified by name because he had not been authorized to speak about the terms.
SoftLayer, a private company based in Dallas, has a network of 13 data centers in the United States, Singapore and Amsterdam, and revenue of about $400 million a year. GI Partners, a private equity fund based in Menlo Park, California, is the majority owner of SoftLayer.
The acquisition is the largest made so far under the leadership of Virginia M. Rometty, who became chief executive in January 2012. The move, analysts say, also gives I.B.M. a broader presence in the business of cloud computing services.
I.B.M.'s first moves in the cloud market date from 2007. But its early emphasis, analysts say, was mainly on private clouds, in which the computing is delivered to users as service over the Internet but from data centers owned by I.B.M.'s corporate customers.
By contrast, Amazon is the leader in the public cloud arena, delivering services from its own data centers, and its roster of customers includes not only start-ups and research projects but also some large companies like Netflix.
Amazon does not break out the revenue for its cloud business, Amazon Web Services, but it is growing fast. The unit had estimated revenue of $2 billion last year, according a recent research report from Barclays Capital, which forecast that Amazon's cloud business would reach $5 billion or more by 2014.
The SoftLayer acquisition will sharply expand I.B.M.'s capability to deliver public cloud services. The SoftLayer data centers will be added to the 10 cloud services data centers I.B.M. now has worldwide.
I.B.M. executives say its strategy is to compete in the public cloud market not with basic computing capabilities like processing and storage, but with software for marketing, procurement and customer service delivered as cloud offerings. Since 2007, I.B.M. has spent $4.5 billion on more than a dozen acquisitions to build up its cloud software and services offerings.
"We're focusing on business services that leverage the cloud model," said Ric Telford, vice president of I.B.M. for cloud services.
Beyond the acquisitions, I.B.M. hopes to offer the company's homegrown technologies as cloud services, like its Watson artificial-intelligence software, which I.B.M. announced last month was being tailored as a smart customer-service assistant.
"Watson has a lot more potential because of the cloud delivery model," Mr. Telford said.
Dannon, the U.S. subsidiary of the French company Danone, is a cloud services customer that reflects the I.B.M. strategy. It uses I.B.M. public-cloud software for optimizing pricing, promotions and product planning for its yogurt. The cloud software has helped Dannon's sales planning teams improve the percentage of products sold to consumers from 75 percent to 98 percent, crucial for a foodstuff with a limited shelf life. The software was developed by DemandTec, which I.B.M. acquired last year.
In new projects, Dannon is now pursuing a "cloud first strategy," said Timothy Weaver, the chief information officer.
I.B.M. has earmarked its cloud business as an area for investment and growth. That business grew 70 percent in the first quarter of 2013 compared to a year earlier. By 2015, I.B.M. has forecast its cloud business should reach $7 billion, including private and public cloud services.
All the major technology companies -- including Microsoft, EMC, Hewlett-Packard and Oracle -- are pursuing cloud strategies. But analysts say I.B.M., perhaps more than any other company, can make corporate customers feel comfortable putting their business information in remote data centers and buying public cloud services.
More than a decade ago, I.B.M. demonstrated that endorsement effect when made a big commitment to Linux, the open-source operating system, helping it become a mainstream technology in corporate data centers.
"I.B.M. is very much a trusted brand here," said Steven Milunovich, an analyst at UBS Securities. "Once they show up, they tend to have a big impact."
