Samsung Folding Screen Phone to Go on Sale After Big Delay/AP
https://scoop.nyt.net/ui/article/100000006699286/web/editing
Bayer Says Monsanto's List of Influential People Was Not Illegal/Reuters
https://scoop.nyt.net/ui/article/100000006699313/web/editing
Prudential to Buy Assurance IQ for $ 2.35 Billion to Widen Customer Base/Reuters
https://scoop.nyt.net/ui/article/100000006699315/web/editing
TECHNOLOGY
Samsung Ready to Sell Delayed Folding Phone
Samsung's highly anticipated folding phone will go on sale Friday, after the original debut date was delayed by months because of embarrassing problems with the screen. The South Korean tech giant had put the Galaxy Fold's introduction on hold after reviewers encountered problems with the device's innovative folding screen, which the company said have been resolved. The nearly $ 2,000 phone will debut on Sept. 6 in South Korea, and Sept. 18 in France, Germany and Britain, with versions for next generation 5G networks available in the latter two countries. Other markets including the United States and Singapore will follow, but the company did not specify dates. The Galaxy Fold's original April debut was pushed back after some journalists reported that the screens started flickering and turning black before fizzling out. ASSOCIATED PRESS
INTERNATIONAL
Prudential Buys Start-Up, Paying $ 2.35 Billion
Bayer said a law firm it commissioned to investigate lists compiled by Monsanto of European journalists, politicians and researchers had found no evidence of illegal behavior. French prosecutors in May opened an inquiry after the newspaper Le Monde filed a complaint alleging Monsanto, which was bought by Bayer for $ 63 billion, had kept files of influential people in a bid to sway public opinion on its pesticides. "There was also no evidence that the lists were based on illegal 'surveillance' of individuals, as claimed by the media," Bayer quoted the report by law firm Sidley Austin as saying. Bayer faces potentially heavy litigation costs from lawsuits in the United States in which plaintiffs claim its Roundup weedkiller, which contains glyphosate, causes cancer. The 1,475 people on the lists came from a range of mostly European countries including France (466), Germany (202), Poland (152), Spain (144), Britain (93), Bayer said. REUTERS
INSURANCE
Monsanto Influencers List Was Legal, Bayer Says
Prudential Financial is set to buy the online insurance start-up Assurance IQ Inc for $ 2.35 billion, the latest in a series of moves by traditional insurers to increase investment in technology and data crunching by buying Silicon Valley start-ups that they view as being disruptive to their business. Assurance and peers like the California-based Health IQ and Clover Health use data crunching and artificial intelligence to boost revenue and cut costs. Andrew Sullivan, who heads Prudential's retirement and group insurance businesses, said in a call with analysts that Assurance brought with it 17 million customers. "We know that there are large middle market and mass affluent customer segments that have been traditionally underserved," he said. Assurance will add a new earning stream to Prudential that is not sensitive to equity markets, interest rates and credit, he said. REUTERS
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS and REUTERS
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE BLAKE/REUTERS)
