Richard Marquis's exquisite handblown vessels; Verner Panton's signature chairs; and supernatural vehicles and fantastical weapons at an Arthur Simms retrospective.
Richard Marquis and Verner Panton
Through Jan. 8. R & Company, 64 White Street, Manhattan. 212-343-7979; r-and-company.com.
A 20-year stalwart of Franklin Street, the design gallery R & Company (formerly R 20th Century) expanded in 2018, taking a space on White Street for exhibitions and its considerable design archive. Its latest offering there is a pair of shows connected by saturated color. One is a magnetic group of eight exquisite handblown vessels dating from 1991 to 2011 by the American glass artist Richard Marquis. The other surveys the prolific Danish furniture and interior designer Verner Panton (1926-1998). Marquis was the first outsider to be taught the millefiori or murrine technique -- carefully guarded for generations by the glassmaking families of Murano. Each piece is a breathtaking world of contrasting hues, translucencies and patterns, including scatterings of snowmen as well as stripes, checks, wood grains and even paint splatters.
Panton's resonant colors and clean geometric shapes personify '60s Pop. This large selection includes his well-known Cone Chair (in wire) and Split-Cone chair, bowllike Easy chair, bull's-eye shag rugs and sundry textiles and light fixtures, most notably the bright orange "Flower Pot" chandelier. Today, Panton's designs seem more institutional than radical, an effect perhaps of seeing them undiluted rather than as unforgettable high notes in mixed interiors. Exceptions include the 1965 S-chair, which is a curvaceous bentwood version of Gerrit Rietveld's angular Zig-Zag chair (1934); a 1971 coat rack that is a mannequin-like cylinder of red wire painted with a pinched waist and a 1963 sofa in aluminum tubing that toggles between Paul McCobb and Wiener Werkstätte.
ROBERTA SMITH
Cécile B. Evans
Through Jan. 5. The High Line, at 14th Street, Manhattan. thehighline.org/art.
The American-born, London-based artist Cécile B. Evans is an incisive analyst of contemporary disturbances: artificial intelligence, networked knowledge, transformed ecosystems. Yet the roots of her new work stretch back almost two centuries to "Giselle," Adolphe Adam's ballet of love, betrayal and redemption. At that ballet's center is the "Dance of the Wilis," a showstopper of ghostly maidens who died before their wedding night. In Evans's short film "A Screen Test for an Adaptation of Giselle" -- showing daily on the High Line -- the Wilis are very much alive, and dancing around more stubborn troubles.
This Giselle has fled to the countryside, following, her mother tells us in voice-over, "the great migration of people who moved from the ruins of this planet." Friends follow, then friends of friends, all dancing with a passionate aggression shot in tight close-ups, intercut with footage of riots and arson. In the forest, the red-draped Wilis form a spastic collective; their faces fluctuate through A.I.-generated variations, not pinned down to one identity or name. These climate-refugee maenads have reimagined society as -- here's Giselle's mother again -- "a constant stream of transfers."
Evans is an artist to take seriously, though it's a shame the projection conditions here are so hostile. The High Line only tells visitors that screenings take place "at dusk"; I Googled the sundown time, then stood in the cold for 45 minutes waiting for an 8-minute film, still poorly visible thanks to ambient light. I've waited two years to rediscover the ecosystem of the city; this was one time I'd have preferred my screen.
JASON FARAGO
'The Unseen Professors'
Through Jan. 29. Tina Kim Gallery, 525 West 21st Street, Manhattan. 212-716-1100; tinakimgallery.com.
As the writer and curator John Yau points out, grouping the sculptors Minoru Niizuma (1930-1998), Leo Amino (1911-1989) and John Pai (born 1937) as "Asian Americans" is a little reductive -- but it may also be the neatest way of encapsulating why they haven't gotten more attention. Born in Japanese-occupied Taiwan, Amino briefly attended college in California before moving to New York, while Niizuma, raised and educated in Tokyo, didn't get here till 1959. Pai, who lives in Connecticut, left Korea with his parents as an 11-year-old.
Juxtaposed by Yau in "The Unseen Professors," though, their works complement powerfully. Pai's welded steel skirts the border between math and craft, while Niizuma's chunky marble sculptures reveal the beauty of the stone without eliding the ambivalent violence of carving it.
But it's Amino, if you missed last year's show at David Zwirner, who's likely to be the revelation. Experimenting with polyester resin after it was declassified following World War II, Amino made transparent boxes enlivened with streaks of primary color, transforming the ordinary experience of viewing sculpture by making his objects seem, from certain vantage points, less than solid. The angled facets of "Refractional #21," a geometric composition of triangles and rhomboids, flicker like an old movie as you move around it, while "Refractional 27A," whose colors float like clouds in a frozen fish tank, seems to exist not in three full dimensions but only in two and a half.
WILL HEINRICH
Arthur Simms
Through Jan. 15. Martos Gallery, 41 Elizabeth Street, Manhattan. 212-560-0670; martosgallery.com.
A vast world of energies and ideas are packed into Arthur Simms's show "And I Say, Brother Had a Very Good Day, One Halo," which surveys more than 30 years of his work. References to his native Jamaica, the African diaspora and Aboriginal art are integrated here into sculptures that include glass bottles, human hair, toys, tools and knives. His technique of wrapping with rope is also uncannily similar to so-called folk and outsider artists like the Philadelphia Wireman or Judith Scott, but it is self-consciously meticulous and masterly: Simms even embedded syllabuses from his university art courses in several works.
Some of the sculptures here look like fantastical weapons; others, supernatural vehicles of transport. Knives poke from the edges of "To Explain, Expound and Exhort, To See, Foresee and Prophesy, To the Few Who Could or Would Listen" (1995), while "Left Foot, Right Foot" (2007) is a pair of black roller skates with a halo of feathers. Skateboards, bicycles and tricycles also appear in several works.
If defense or flight seem highlighted in this show, so is the healing potential of sculpture, corresponding with current exhibitions of Milford Graves at Artists Space in Manhattan and Guadalupe Maravilla at the Museum of Modern Art. In Simms's work, carefully placed swatches of hair and nails driven into surfaces, as in the Central African nkisi (power figures), remind us that objects are not just aesthetic, but bearers of energy, and discarded objects collected and repurposed by artists just might serve ameliorative ends.
MARTHA SCHWENDENER
Photograph Richard Marquis's "Group of Marquiscarpas" (1991-2011). Marquis was the first outsider to be taught the millefiori, or murrine, glassmaking technique. (PHOTOGRAPH BY R & COMPANY; JOE KRAMM); The angled facets of Leo Amino's "Refractional #21" flicker like an old movie as you move around it. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LEO AMINO AND TINA KIM GALLERY; HYUNJUNG RHEE); A still from Cécile B. Evans's short film "A Screen Test for an Adaptation of Giselle" (2019). It is showing daily on the High Line in Manhattan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CÉCILE B. EVANS); An installation view of Arthur Simms's "And I Say, Brother Had a Very Good Day, One Halo Friday," which surveys more than 30 years of his work. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARTHUR SIMMS AND MARTOS GALLERY)
