The magazine’s Ethicist columnist on the limits of personal responsibility.
I think that overfishing is going to result in wild fish’s becoming exceedingly rare — something that our grandchildren won’t get to eat often, if at all. Given this outlook, what do you think about continuing to enjoy fish now while we can? I don’t think that excuses like “everyone is doing it” or “my actions won’t make a difference” apply if an act is inherently immoral. But how about actions that are not inherently wrong but that collectively and cumulatively will lead to harm? — Josh
For around a decade now, about half the world’s seafood has come from aquaculture. There are good and bad ways of doing aquaculture, of course; recently there has been a growth in land-based aquaculture (which may reduce potential harm to other marine creatures) and experiments with plant- or algae-based fishmeal substitutes for feeding carnivorous fish, like salmon, that are especially popular with consumers. While we certainly need to worry about wild marine animals and the condition of the rivers, lakes and oceans that sustain them — and while some people deplore all fisheries and all fishing as cruel — we’re not likely to run out of fish to eat.
But what about our overexploited wild fisheries: Is it wrong to consume creatures you wish were never caught? Setting aside broader debates about the ethics of eating animals, let’s focus on the specific ecological issue you raise about overfishing. Today about a third of global marine stocks are estimated to be overfished, and less than 10 percent could sustain fishing at greater than current levels. Yet governments continue to subsidize fishing. A 2018 study suggested that more than half of high-seas fishing, including much deep-sea bottom trawling, wouldn’t be economical without those subsidies.
If you thought the destruction of a species was morally wrong, I’d say that you would have a moral reason not to participate in it, even though your nonparticipation wouldn’t prevent it from happening. It’s bad to join in a murder whether or not the victim would still have died without your involvement. In a much-discussed thought experiment, the philosopher Derek Parfit imagined that a thousand people were each administering a tiny shock to each of a thousand victims. Though each shock is imperceptible, a thousand shocks is agony, so that, at the end of the exercise, a thousand people have been tortured. An individual’s abstention wouldn’t make a difference to the victims, and yet Parfit, a cunning critic of consequentialism, thought it was no defense for someone to say, “All I did was give a tiny painless shock to a thousand people, and it wouldn’t have mattered if I hadn’t.”
Parfit devised a suggestive scenario. Still, we have to think hard about how to apply its lessons. It’s morally relevant that these harmless torturers are conscious that they’re part of a torturing collective. (That’s why it’s OK to toss a coin to someone who needs it, even though that person would be harmed if thousands of people did so at once.) But once we identify the problem in aggregate terms, we need to think of solutions in aggregate terms too. That’s why, in the real world, the more urgent goal is to take positive collective actions to mitigate negative ones.
Forswearing wild fish is a practice that, if widely adopted, would have a highly desirable effect — saving wild-fish stocks — but that, if taken up by only a few people, would have no effect. In these circumstances, you should want to see measures to protect fish stocks given the force of national and international law. So by all means, avoid overfished seafood. But more important than changing your food-eating habits is changing your policy-promoting habits.
Back in 2020, like many other organizations in the United States looking to respond to and reckon with a society that made George Floyd’s murder possible, the predominantly white, wealthy, suburban school district where I taught began to ramp up its antiracism work. In time, a small but vocal group of community members showed up at board meetings, on Nextdoor and outside some of the local schools to protest our work. I was frustrated by the glacial pace of change; the district and site administrators who initially embraced the work tried too hard to placate the naysayers. At the time, I was teaching a class that concentrated on the historical context of race in America, and I advertised a weekly safe space for queer students in my classroom, so I worked every day with kids whose lives were personally and profoundly affected by racism and prejudice on our campuses.
After 20 years of teaching, I quit at the end of the 2022 school year. I was burned out and disenchanted. I felt as if the antiracist work had devolved into white bickering. Soon after that, my wife and I moved to a nearby city where the schools are more racially diverse, and where the district has a long history of actively fighting racism. I am happier. My kids are settled in with new friends and great teachers. My wife has been wildly supportive of my shift away from education.
And yet I am stuck with this nagging feeling that I failed my students because I gave up. I am a white, transmasculine person, but most people see me as a white woman, so this was never an issue of personal risk. Instead, I feel as if I walked away from my commitment to listen to and care for students. Should I have stuck it out and kept fighting, even though it felt futile? — Name Withheld
While you’re working in an institution — especially in educational institutions — there’s every reason to try your best to reduce the ways in which bigotry can undermine its work. But you can’t hold yourself responsible if your efforts are thwarted and you decide, in the light of this and other considerations, to move on.
At least some students, I grant, might have been better off if you stayed — those you worked with and looked after. Yet you can’t be obliged to remain in an environment that leaves you feeling burned out, and your work with the students who most profited from your presence would very likely have suffered in the end. Nor did you have reason to think that your sticking it out would have made a decisive difference at the policy level. Within the context of local democratic participation, people who disagree with you about objectives or simply about methods are going to have a voice, too.
It’s our obligation to do our fair share to make a just world. That doesn’t mean you have a duty to take on an immense burden because others are not doing what they should. As the Roman maxim has it, Ultra posse nemo obligatur — you can’t be obliged to do more than you’re able to. Your life matters, for the same reason that the lives of those children matter, but you’re ethically entitled to give priority to your life and the lives of your family members. And you can bring your concerns about justice to bear in your new pursuits as well.
Readers Respond
Last week’s question was from a junior-high-school English teacher, who wrote: “Should I embrace new technology and use A.I.-assisted grading to save time and my sanity even though I forbid my students from using it? Is it unethical for teachers to ask students not to use A.I. to assist their writing but then allow an A.I. platform to grade their work?”
In his response, the Ethicist noted: “It’s not hypocritical to use A.I. yourself in a way that serves your students well, even as you insist that they don’t use it in a way that serves them badly.” ( Reread the full question and answer here .)
⬥
An important thing to keep in mind when speaking about junior high school is that teachers serve a purpose beyond academic instruction for the students. Being some of the most influential adults in a young person’s life, part of their responsibility should be to model sustainable behavior with emerging technology such as ChatGPT. While I agree that the principle of using A.I. assistance in the tedium of grading junior high papers is ethically sound, this could easily be taken out of context by young people and become a way to normalize academically dishonest or lazy habits. — Graham
⬥
Usually I think the ethicist’s advice is well researched and wise. Not this time, however. English teachers must read and personally comment on each student’s paper. It would be unethical and dismissive to the students to force them to work hard on a paper that will never be read by a human other than possibly their parents. The Ethicist is correct that a well trained AI grader could have advantages over a fallible human. But this AI tool must be used in conjunction with, not instead of the human. Ideal practice would have the teacher reading the papers without seeing the AI output, providing feedback on the substantive ideas in the paper, then looking at the AI comments and grades on the structural aspects of the assignment to assure that they be appropriate and on point. (Even well trained AI tools “hallucinate” and go off the rails in various ways.)Teachers might even take this process one step further by using it as a lesson on appropriate versus inappropriate uses of AI. — Thomas
⬥
It’s not just about the quality of the comments. If you do creative work as a student – painting, composing, writing – you deserve at least one person who sees and appreciates that work. Having your teacher feed it to a machine is the opposite of that, even if your teacher assures you they have skimmed the machine’s feedback. I hope the letter writer persists in rewarding students’ efforts with genuine engagement, and that the school settles on an ethical AI policy in which individual attention to students’ work is rewarded (with time) and incentivized. A personal compliment to this teacher; auto-generated performance reviews to their colleagues. — Jeroen
⬥
I agree with the distinction made about the purpose of the exercise. The students need the experience of writing in order to learn how to do it better, as well as to learn to recognize when AI has done a poor job. The teacher, on the other hand, needs to provide feedback so the students can, in fact, improve with practice. If the teacher is confident that AI can provide meaningful feedback—a big “if” to be sure, although the teacher might actually become a better critic by learning from the AI—then it can be a legitimate tool for completing the task. We do need to remember that AI is not really “intelligence”. Rather, it is powerful data crunching and pattern recognition. The human touch of the teacher is not likely to be readily replaced in the near future. — Jesse
⬥
Great answer to a pressing question! I fully agree. We want students to learn how to use calculators and PCs but also exclude the use of these tools in certain tests of the student’s own skills and knowledge. AI is no different. As a university teacher in computer science, I have used plagiarism detectors and marking software, which I often programmed myself, for many years before ChatGPT arrived. Of course, the result of the software marking is not the final mark, never mind the final grade. The software takes some dog work out. I now have to make sense of those automated essential marks in addition to the student’s work. However, automation allows me to spend more time on assessing the student’s knowledge than on the monotony of finding many minor errors. Caveat: The last point is valid only if developing or setting up essential marking software takes fewer hours than my marking essentials for the work of many students without the software. For ChatGPT or another AI to be useful to a teacher in this way, it will have a lot of essential and useful explaining to do! Surely that time may come. — Heinz
By Kwame Anthony Appiah
