Generate image description The tech investor Garry Tan in San Francisco on Feb. 23, 2024. (Mike Kai Chen/The New York Times)
SAN FRANCISCO — Under cathedral ceilings and soaring stained glass windows, Garry Tan clutched a microphone as he greeted a crowd of political centrists, including San Francisco’s mayor, local prosecutors and police brass.
“Welcome to the church of turning San Francisco around!” said Tan at a fundraiser he was hosting for local Asian American female political candidates just days before the Super Tuesday elections.
For a man evangelizing for change in San Francisco, owning a condo that used to be part of a church comes in handy. Last year, he scooped up the $3.95 million space near the city’s palm-tree-studded Dolores Park to hold events like this one — events he hopes will shift San Francisco from its idealistic progressivism toward nuts-and-bolts centrism.
Tan’s day job is chief executive of Y Combinator, the accelerator for tech startups that has helped create household names including Airbnb, DoorDash, Dropbox, Instacart and Reddit.
But Tan’s passion, as it is for a growing number of tech industry leaders, is San Francisco politics. He is one of a cadre of love-them-or-hate-them tech executives and investors with lots of opinions about the city and endless piles of cash to, as they say in the tech industry, move fast and break things. (Their critics would say it’s more like they’re trying to buy City Hall.)
To some of San Francisco’s political establishment, Tan, 43, has become the most annoying in a parade of wealthy tech executives. He has created a bombastic online persona while spending about $400,000 on local politics in the past few years — with potentially a lot more to come. And on the social media site X, where he has 425,000 followers, Tan doesn’t just rub some people the wrong way, he enrages them.
Just after midnight on Jan. 27, he posted on X, formerly Twitter, that seven left-leaning members of the city’s Board of Supervisors, listed by name, should “die slow,” punctuated by an expletive. It was a subtle reference to the rap legend Tupac Shakur’s famous track “Hit ’Em Up,” released 28 years ago as an insult to his music rivals. But to some people, it sounded like a threat.
Tan was, he admitted when an X follower asked him, drunk.
A few hours after his post went up, Tan deleted it and apologized. But plenty of people had already seen it.
A couple of days later, some supervisors received anonymous letters at their homes bearing Tan’s face and the words: “Garry Tan is right! I wish a slow and painful death for you and your loved ones.” Aaron Peskin, a supervisor who is considering challenging London Breed, the San Francisco mayor, in the November election, was one of a few supervisors to file police reports based on Tan’s post.
Despite his online bravado, Tan, who says he is a moderate Democrat, wants three not-exactly-radical changes to San Francisco: a beefed-up police force with more power to combat the city’s property crime epidemic and anti-Asian violence; a thriving public school district that pushes students academically; and more housing for people of all income levels in a city struggling with tent encampments and a disappearing middle class.
In many parts of the country, that platform would hardly be controversial. But few issues are so simple in San Francisco, where Tan and his allies are often labeled right-wing know-it-alls. After all, a sizable chunk of politicians and their constituents in the liberal city wants to defund police, end merit-based admissions to the city’s top public high school and build housing only for the very poor.
Connie Chan, a city supervisor whom Tan is trying to oust in November, said in an interview that the tech investor was “a danger to democracy” who thrived on divisiveness. She said she didn’t think the majority of people working in the tech industry behaved like him, “but if Garry Tan is their spokesperson, then we’ve got a real problem on our hands.”
To Lily Ho, a first-time political candidate whom Tan helped get elected to the local Democratic Party governing board in March, he’s just a nice guy trying to make his city better and being attacked because his efforts are working.
“The stereotype of an Asian man is quiet, obedient, keeps their head down, does good work,” she said. “When they find someone who is vocal and opinionated and happens to have a platform, they’re scared.”
Just a ‘Centimillionaire’
The knock against the Bay Area’s tech leaders about a decade ago was that they weren’t civically engaged. Now many of them are living in San Francisco and raising children there, rather than fleeing for exclusive suburbs. Many say they simply want a more functional city for their families and employees.
Tan is raising two boys, ages 4 and 8, with his wife, Stephanie Lim, who co-founded the publishing house Third State Books, in the city’s pricey Noe Valley neighborhood and looks like any other San Francisco tech dad. He’s a short, chatty, enthusiastic guy usually wearing thick glasses, jeans, a hoodie and colorful sneakers. He said in an interview that he’s not a billionaire, just a “centimillionaire,” though he declined to say how many hundreds of millions of dollars he’s worth.
Tan said his father, a mechanical engineer, was an alcoholic who he said prized 24-packs of Budweiser over food for the family. (Tan said his father entered recovery when his older son was born eight years ago, and they now have a good relationship.) His mother worked two jobs, as an in-home health care aide and at a nursing home, and would bring home expired bread the nursing home couldn’t use to feed her family.
The couple, both of Chinese descent, he from southern China, she from Myanmar, met at an A&W fast-food restaurant while university students in Manitoba, and had Tan there. They moved from Canada to Fremont, California, 40 miles southeast of San Francisco, when Tan was in fifth grade, and he later became an American citizen.
Tan said Fremont’s excellent public schools had changed his life, pushing him to take accelerated math classes and learn to code by seventh grade. By age 14, he was writing code for a company that made city websites. He graduated from Stanford in 2003.
He worked at Microsoft before becoming the 10th employee at Palantir, a software company started by investor Peter Thiel. In 2011, he joined Y Combinator as a partner and co-founded Initialized Capital, a venture capital fund that invests in tech companies. He left Y Combinator in 2015 to focus on Initialized full time before returning to the tech incubator as its president and chief executive in 2022. (These days, Y Combinator, which is raising $2 billion in venture capital, is probably best known as the former employer of Sam Altman, the chief executive of OpenAI. Tan and Altman remain in touch.)
While Tan’s tech career boomed, so did his frustrations with San Francisco city government. Records show he started donating to local politicians in 2015, but Tan said he didn’t get particularly invested in city politics until the pandemic.
He grew outraged that the city’s school board was spending its time debating whether to rename 44 schools, including Abraham Lincoln High, rather than pushing to get students back inside them. The school district kept children home on Zoom longer than the vast majority of districts in the country while private school students, like his own, were back in their classrooms months earlier.
He also was incensed by the killing of two women in a downtown crosswalk on New Year’s Eve 2020, struck by a man driving a stolen car. The driver had a long criminal history and had been repeatedly arrested and then released in fall 2020 by the office of Chesa Boudin, the district attorney at the time.
A couple of weeks later, Tan tuned into a meeting on Clubhouse, the audio platform that hosts live conversations, titled the “Future of SF.” It drew thousands of listeners — and surprise appearances from both Boudin and Nancy Tung, a moderate Democrat who lost the district attorney’s race to him in 2019.
In the meeting, Tung said she would take a walk with anybody who wanted to better understand city politics, and Tan took her up on the offer. He said their stroll around Noe Valley had convinced him that Boudin had to be recalled, and he contributed more than $50,000 to the effort that forced Boudin out of office in 2022. He also helped fund the successful recall of three school board members.
In March, he backed a successful measure to advise the school district to reinstate algebra for eighth graders after the advanced course was eliminated over concerns that white and Asian children were accelerating in math faster than their Latino and Black counterparts. He also supported the election of numerous moderate candidates, including Tung, to the powerful Democratic County Central Committee.
His opponents say his politics are too conservative and caustic for San Francisco, but his allies say Tan’s beliefs reflect those of the vast majority of everyday city residents.
“There was a lot of craziness going on during the pandemic,” said Jeremy Stoppelman, the chief executive of Yelp and a city resident. “I was impressed at his willingness to dive in and become a lightning rod for a good cause.”
And his methods, his allies say, are working.
“Things are shifting, but they’re not shifting conservative,” said Lee Edwards, a venture capitalist who lives in the city and is a friend of Tan’s. “It’s shifting from Mao socialist to Biden Democrat.”
The Fallout
After the controversial post on X, Peskin said he didn’t think Tan would physically harm him, but he filed the police report because nobody, let alone corporate leaders, he said, should get away with broadcasting violent speech.
“Has Donald Trump beaten an Asian person on our streets? No,” Peskin said. “But when he speaks violent words about the ‘China virus’ and crazy Americans beat up Asian people, he’s inciting violence.”
Peskin said Tan and a few other tech leaders, including Elon Musk and the venture capitalist Ron Conway (an active donor in local politics), were toxic and harmful to San Francisco.
“They think that because they have an algorithm and an app, they can be the rulers of the world,” Peskin said. “Good luck with that.”
Myrna Melgar, a city supervisor, was also named in Tan’s post and received a threatening letter at home. She said she had never even met him — until a private school in her district attended by Tan’s older son invited her to its Lunar New Year celebration in early February.
“As soon as he saw me, his face fell and he got really red. He said, ‘I’m sorry,’ like five times,” she said.
At Melgar’s suggestion, the two talked over breakfast the next week at Squat & Gobble, a corner cafe in the city’s leafy West Portal neighborhood. She said that she found him “nerdy, small and perfectly lovely” and that he promised to pick up the phone the next time he had an issue with her rather than blast her on X.
Tan said the two bonded over their support of YIMBY, the Yes in My Backyard movement, which supports building more housing for people of all income levels. He said the meeting had helped him realize his demeanor on X — where he has blocked tens of thousands of accounts from interacting with him — wasn’t always productive.
“That’s part of the reason why I feel like we need to turn a new leaf over from just the personalities and really focus on the policies,” he said.
‘Politics Can Be Rough’
Tan has tried to learn from his online mess — or says he has. In person, he speaks kindly and calmly and smiles often, frequently bowing to people while making a prayer gesture with his hands. At his political fundraiser in the former church, he said he was sipping a mocktail, a “Green Goddess” with apple, celery and cucumber juice.
“Alcohol doesn’t have a lot to teach me these days,” he said. Asked whether that was because of the drunken post that got him in hot water, he said, “There’s some correlation.”
Several supervisors named in Tan’s controversial post called for candidates who received his donations to return the money. None did. Tan said the police had never contacted him about the post. The San Francisco Police Department did not respond to requests for comment on whether an investigation was being conducted.
Though he plays the angry guy on X, Tan said he was optimistic about the future of the city. He said he thought the fast-growing artificial intelligence industry, centered in San Francisco, would hasten the city’s revival.
He recently moved Y Combinator from Mountain View to within the city limits and just a couple of miles from its struggling downtown. He presses the founders of startups accepted into the Y Combinator program to live in San Francisco because he thinks proximity to one another is so essential — and because it’s a boon to the city he loves.
“This is our oil. This is our industry,” he said. “Hollywood has movies. New York has finance. San Francisco has building the technology that billions of people use.”
He thinks moderate Democrats with common-sense ideas are taking back their city, and he’s supporting centrists on the November ballot in hopes they will seize a majority of the board of supervisors.
Tan encouraged his fellow middle-of-the-road Democrats at the church turned condo to keep the faith. “Politics can be rough. As centrists, we find ourselves facing criticism for questioning policies that haven’t delivered,” he told his quasi-congregation, his voice rising. “My dedication to making San Francisco a city that works for everyone is a commitment I will not abandon.”
The crowd of about 100 roared.
Breed then spoke about the “dogfight” of San Francisco politics and thanked Tan, one of her donors, for braving it.
“And no, I’m not giving my money back!” she said to laughter.
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description The tech investor Garry Tan in San Francisco on Feb. 23, 2024. (Mike Kai Chen/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech investor Garry Tan clasps his hands together while chatting with Mayor London Breed, left, and other guests at his fundraiser for Asian female political candidates in San Francisco on Feb. 29, 2024. (Mike Kai Chen/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech investor Garry Tan in San Francisco on Feb. 23, 2024. (Mike Kai Chen/The New York Times)
Generate image description To his critics, Garry Tan, chief executive of the tech incubator Y Combinator, has become the most annoying of tech executives using their wealth to influence politics. (Mike Kai Chen/The New York Times)

ERIC Subject: Nursing Homes; Advanced Courses; Public Schools; Boards of Education; Supervisors; College Students; Police; Residential Institutions; Private Schools; Politics; School Districts; Intermediate Grades; Grade 7; Grade 8; Grade 5
