In a shift away from robots made to perform in factories, designers are putting the "human" into humanoids so that they can safely interact in public.
On a recent morning Natanel Dukan walked into the Paris offices of the French robot maker Aldebaran and noticed one of the company's humanoid NAO robots sitting on a chair. Mr. Dukan, an electrical engineer, could not resist. Bending over, he reached down to kiss the robot on the cheek. In response the NAO tilted its head, touched his cheek and let out an audible smack.
It is certainly a very French application for a robot, but the intimate gesture by the $16,000 two-foot robot, now being used in academic research labs and in robotic soccer leagues, also reflects a significant shift.
Until recently most robots have been carefully separated from humans. They have largely been used in factories to perform repetitive tasks that required speed, precision and force. That generation of robots is dangerous, and they have been caged and fenced for the protection of workers.
But the industrial era of robotics is over. And robots are beginning to move around in the world. More and more, they are also beginning to imitate -- and look like -- humans. And they are beginning to perform tasks like humans, too. Many of this new generation are tele-operated from a distance, but increasingly they are also doing tasks on their own.
For instance, Romeo, a five-foot humanoid robot, will soon be introduced by Aldebaran as a "big brother" to the pipsqueak, kissing NAO robot. Created with the assistance of $13.8 million in financing from the government, this costly robot is intended for research applications in elder care. To provide useful assistance, it will have to do more than the repetitive work already being performed by commercial robots in factories, hospitals and other settings. Moreover, the new robots are designed not just to replace, but to collaborate with humans.
The idea that robots will be human partners, rather than stand-ins or servants, is now driving research at universities and industrial laboratories. And just this month, new U.S. industry standards for robotic manufacturing systems were published, underscoring the emergence of the field. The standards specify performance requirements that will permit human workers to collaborate with robots directly, and they reverse manufacturing guidelines from 1999 that prohibited "continuous attended operations" requiring humans to be in close contact with robots that were deemed unsafe by the industry. Today's robot designers believe that their creations will become therapists, care givers, guides and security guards, and will ultimately perform virtually any form of human labor.
Key to this advance is the new robots' form. Their human-like appearance does more than satisfy science fiction fantasies. Roboticists said they are choosing the human form for both social and technical reasons. Robots that operate indoors, in particular, need to be able to navigate a world full of handles, switches, levers and doors that have been designed for humans.
Roboticists also point out that humans have an affinity for their own shape, easing transitions and making collaboration more natural. Creating robots in humanoid form also simplifies training and partnerships in the workplace, and increases their potential in new applications like caregiving.
It is still unclear how well these new faux-people will be accepted by society, for they raise fundamental questions about what it means to be human. But rapid improvements in computer vision, processing power and storage, low cost sensors and new algorithms that allow robots to plan and move in cluttered environments are making these new uses possible, and in the process changing the nature of robotics.
"This is the wave that's happening in robotics right now," said Charlie Kemp, an associate professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta. "Things are not the same when you're interacting with people. That's where we want robots to be, it's where we see there are huge opportunities for robots, and there are very distinct requirements from what led to the classic industrial robot."
And so on factory floors around the world a new breed of robots is being manufactured by companies like Rethink Robotics of Boston, which makes a humanoid robot for simple factory automation tasks, and Universal Robots of Odense, Denmark, which makes a dual robot arm system designed for doing more traditional factory applications, but without cages. Rethink released a video of its robot, Baxter, making a cup of coffee with a Keurig machine. The company said the humanoid robot, with tong-like hands and a computer screen face, was trained in just several hours.
In Mr. Kemp's Healthcare Robotics lab at Georgia Tech, a robot named Cubby that is able to sense forces on its arms, and has a base that allows it to move gracefully, is being used as a dance partner for both experienced human dancers and patients in physical therapy. "This is a way that robots can be used for fun, interactive exercise in rehabilitation," Mr. Kemp said."We can also use it as a tool to understand whole body physical interaction between people and robots."
At Carnegie Mellon University, Manuela M. Veloso, a professor of computer science, has developed a series of mobile robots she calls CoBots to perform tasks like delivering the mail, guiding visitors to appointments and fetching coffee. She calls it "symbiotic autonomy," since the robots also rely on humans.
For example, because they don't have arms, they can't operate the elevators, so they have been programmed to wait and ask for human assistance. If they get lost, they will stop, call up a map of the building on their computer screen, interrupt a passing human and say, "I am lost, can you tell me where I am?"
"The robotics community calls the idea cheating," she said, "but it's not, it's the secret to real autonomy."
To function in the world and to be human-safe, robots must have a radically different design from factory robots, which are based on "stiff" actuators that are capable of moving with great speed to a precise position. The new robots have "compliant actuators," which respond to external forces by yielding in a natural fashion. The original research into this area of what is now known as "soft robotics" began in the mid-1990s at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, with work by Gill Pratt, who was exploring walking robots, and Matthew Williamson, then a graduate student and now director of technology development at Rethink Robotics.
The research was not initially focused on solving the problem of human interaction, but the scientists soon realized the implications, said Mr. Pratt, who is now the project manager for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's Darpa Robot Challenge, a contest that is intended to advance robotics to be used in natural disasters.
"It actually started with numerically controlled machine tools," he said, using computer-controlled robots to perform milling tasks.
For those manufacturing applications, what mattered was the precise positioning of the robot limb. But Mr. Pratt was focused on developing walking robots that could move in the natural world: "There the position of the limb didn't matter so much, but what mattered was how hard was the robot pressing on the world, and how hard the world was pressing back on the robot."
The solution to the problem was to put something elastic, like a spring, between the motor and the joint. These are now described as Series Elastic Actuators, and the technique is now widely used as a low-cost solution for robots that are both non-threatening to humans and which are able to move more agilely in the natural world.
"In the Darpa Robotics Challenge, almost all of the robots that are being used there have Series Elastic Actuation or other types of compliant control," he said. "The reason is both because it makes the locomotion task easier and the manipulation task easier, and it also makes it possible for the robot to be gentle when it does things and not make things worse."
Mr. Pratt recalled an incident when the researchers first realized that Series Elastic Actuation was the key to freeing robots from their cages. While working on an early humanoid robot named COG, in a project led by Rodney Brooks, the founder of Rethink Robotics who was then director of the M.I.T. artificial intelligence lab, they were demonstrating how the robot could do tasks like writing with pencil and paper. But there was a bug in the software, causing the robot's arm to repeatedly bang the table.
Mr. Brooks decided it was an opportunity to demonstrate the safety of the technology. He placed himself between the table and the arm, which began spanking him.
Roboticists describe this original approach as "passive compliance." Today there are other approaches -- "active compliance" -- that use software and sensors to blend speed and precision of more rigid robots with operations that are safe around humans.
