INVESTING
Short Seller's Report Takes Aim at Dorsey
Hindenburg Research, the small investment firm whose critical investigative reports pummeled shares in an Indian industrial conglomerate and an electric-vehicle start-up, has found its newest target: Jack Dorsey's financial technology company, Block. Hindenburg published a 17,600- word report on Thursday accusing Block of overstating its user base and failing to stamp out fraud and illegal activity on its platforms -- particularly Cash App, its mobile payment service. Block responded to the accusations by saying it intended to "explore legal action." "Hindenburg is known for these types of attacks, which are designed solely to allow short sellers to profit from a declined stock price," Block said in a statement. Block has become the latest big target of Hindenburg, whose business revolves around publishing research reports that harshly evaluate companies -- and then, often, betting that their shares will fall. MICHAEL de la MERCED
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
A Chatbot Start-Up Is Valued at $ 1 Billion
Character.AI, a 16-month-old start-up that builds online chatbots, said on Thursday that it had raised $ 150 million in a recent funding round that valued the company at $ 1 billion. Character.AI is among a group of small companies -- along with the tech industry's giants -- that are building technology that could one day rival the systems under development at OpenAI, the San Francisco start-up that incited the artificial intelligence boom with the release of the online chatbot ChatGPT. These companies have an unusual blend of experienced researchers and outsize ambition, and they require huge amounts of capital. Many experts believe that a handful of companies could dominate work on the new artificial intelligence. Venture capitalists are jockeying to invest in the young A.I. companies even as the rest of the tech industry struggles through layoffs, plummeting valuations and an unexpected banking crisis prompted by the failure of Silicon Valley Bank. CADE METZ
COMPANIES
Accenture Trims Forecasts and Will Cut 19,000 Jobs
Accenture lowered its annual revenue and profit forecasts and decided to cut about 2.5 percent of its work force, or 19,000 jobs, the latest sign that the worsening global economic outlook was sapping corporate spending on information technology services. More than half the jobs to be cut will be in nonbillable corporate functions, Accenture said on Thursday. Accenture, which is based in Dublin, now expects annual revenue growth to be between 8 and 10 percent, compared with its previous projection of 8 to 11 percent. Earnings per share is expected in the range of $ 10.84 to $ 11.06 compared with $ 11.20 to $ 11.52 previously. "Companies remain focused on executing compressed transformations," Accenture's chief executive, Julie Sweet, said in a postearnings call, referring to how businesses were trying to become leaner in the turbulent economy. REUTERS
Credit: By Michael J. de la Merced, Cade Metz and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY IAN C. BATES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
