One of the most intriguing features in the New York International Children's Film Festival is all about Oz. But this place has no Dorothy, no wizard, no Emerald City. And it's even farther from Kansas.
Here Oz is a virtual universe controlling everything from traffic signals to nuclear missile codes. Its sudden, fateful hacking by the Love Machine, a rogue artificial intelligence, forms the plot of "Summer Wars," by the up-and-coming Japanese anime director Mamoru Hosoda.
It is "a story about how an ordinary family in a rural area helps stave off a world crisis," Mr. Hosoda said in an e-mail message. But the movie, which opens the festival Friday night, is also a coming-of-age tale and a budding romance involving Kenji, a shy high school math nerd of humble origins, and Natsuki, a feisty girl whose lineage goes back to the samurai. The film represents what young audiences can see at the festival that they won't usually find at commercial cinemas: movies with subtitles, with strong female characters (it includes a great-grandmother turning 90), with sometimes piercing social commentary and without a single flatulence joke.
"Ticket sales are up 60 percent over last year," said Eric Beckman, who founded the festival in 1997 with his wife, Emily Shapiro. "I don't know why. It's a good film selection, but I hadn't expected quite that big a leap."
The festival, which continues through March 21 at six Manhattan locations, is growing in other ways too. Offering more than 100 films, it will run this year for four weekends instead of three, with its final days devoted to encore screenings. Features as well as short works will compete for a grand prize. The festival is also expanding the programs it offers outside its annual February-March competition: in April it will begin showing movies every weekend, rather than monthly, at the IFC Center in Greenwich Village. It will continue to tour a "Best of NYICFF" program and is planning a San Francisco event in September. But this year the festival has something unprecedented: its own Oscar nominee.
That is "The Secret of Kells," a feature from the Irish director Tomm Moore. A hand-drawn animated film with an unusual hero -- a medieval monk in training, seeking to save the ancient Book of Kells -- it had its American premiere in July as part of the festival's year-round programming. When the movie's American distribution deal fell through, GKids, the festival's film-distribution arm, acquired it and mounted an Academy Awards campaign, resulting in a nomination for best animated feature. Although the festival has shown Oscar contenders (and winners) before, this is the first time it has owned the rights to one.
"I can't tell you how huge this is," Mr. Beckman said in an interview. He praised the nominators for "embracing an independent film" over one "with 20 times the production budget."
Independent projects are the heart of the festival, which follows the pattern of film industry events, from an opening-night gala to an awards ceremony and reception. The festival's grand prizes are determined solely by audiences' votes. Its adult jury -- including the filmmakers Gus Van Sant and Michel Ocelot; the actors John Turturro, Susan Sarandon, Matthew Modine and Frances McDormand; and the producers James Schamus and Christine Vachon -- gives its own award for the best short.
Works from adult festivals often appear. This year offers "Next Floor," a Canadian prizewinning short at Cannes in 2008, and "The Six Dollar Fifty Man," a New Zealand movie that took the International Jury Prize in Short Filmmaking last month at Sundance. These disturbing live-action pieces -- one about a dinner party straight out of nightmares, the other about bullying and a troubled 8-year-old boy -- are in the popular "Heebie Jeebies" shorts program.
"There's nothing approaching 'Saw III,' " Mr. Beckman noted, "but if you're coming to see something freaky and bizarre, you're not expecting 'The Teddy Bears' Picnic.' "
In a weekend in which more than one children's film festival opens (see Spare Times, Page 35), Mr. Beckman's offers numerous options for those over 10. In addition to "Heebie Jeebies" it presents the adolescent shorts programs "Flicker Lounge" and "Girls' POV."
Several features, including "Summer Wars," are for filmgoers at least 8 or 9. "In the Attic," a story about a society of toys by the renowned Czech animator Jiri Barta, comments on Soviet-style totalitarianism; "Little White Lies," from the German director Marcus Rosenmuller, explores a schoolboy's deception in 1931 -- with all that era implies.
Small children also have plentiful fare. "Shorts for Tots" includes "Electric Car," an American animation with music by They Might Be Giants, and "Short Films One," for 5-to-10-year-olds, offers the Iranian live-action film "The Bird That Could Tell Fortunes," about a boy and his amazingly clever pet. The French director Dominique Monfery's animated feature "Eleanor's Secret" (it's in English) explores a library whose fairy-tale characters come to life.
Another fantastical realm is the subject of "Oblivion Island" (ages 7 and older), Shinsuke Sato's anime film about a girl's quest to find a keepsake mirror in a land for abandoned, once cherished objects -- a sort of afterlife for lost toys and trinkets. And other films seem to defy specific age recommendations, like "Turtle: The Incredible Journey," the British director Nick Stringer's documentary following a loggerhead for 6,000 miles.
The festival also comprises film workshops, a 50-year French animation retrospective and discussions with directors. And while the only festival film with an announced theatrical run is "The Secret of Kells" (opening in New York next Friday), Mr. Beckman said GKids might release others.
"Typically, a film plays our audience and then is sucked into a hole because no distributor will handle it," he said. The American business model, he added, favors $100 million children's films "that are considered failures if they do under $200 million at the box office."
GKids, which recently distributed the acclaimed animated film "Sita Sings the Blues," is dedicated to giving other creative choices because, Mr. Beckman said, "there is an appetite and demand for provocative cinema." Even for 8-year-olds.

Photograph A Scene From "the Secret of Kells," a Hand-Drawn Film From the Irish Director Tomm Moore. An Oscar Nominee for Best Animated Feature, It has an Unusual Hero -- A Medieval Monk Trainee. (Photograph by Gkids); Oscar Vancy-Connor in "the Six Dollar Fifty Man," a New Zealand Entry Directed by Mark Albiston and Louis Sutherland. (Photograph by Sticky Pictures, Courtesy of New York International Children's Film Festival)
