For someone who catalogs strange and unexplored corners of the globe, Dylan Thuras, a founder of Atlas Obscura and an author of "Atlas Obscura: An Explorer's Guide to the World's Hidden Wonders," keeps it pretty local. Mr. Thuras, 34, lives in the Greenpoint neighborhood of Brooklyn with his wife, Michelle J. Enemark, 34, an animator, and their 22-month-old son, Phineas. The Atlas Obscura office is in the Pencil Factory, and Mr. Thuras's apartment is just three blocks away, in a building that used to house employees of Astral Oil Works. One of their slogans, he said, was "Will not explode!"
ONE FOR YOU My day begins at 6 when my son wakes up and we try to get him in bed with us. Phin has a banana and an egg. Right now he's into "bite for me, bite for him." I make coffee. Lots of coffee. I'll put on NPR while that's happening, or we'll have a little dance-off. I grew up on Talking Heads. My parents are both relatively young because I was a surprise, so it's music I danced to when I was a baby.
A RUN THROUGH HISTORY When I'm on my game, I'll go on a run. I'll go past the site of the Greenpoint sewer explosion. In 1950, the fumes filled the sewer and it exploded. For some reason it's not that well known. The explosion ripped the street apart, and people thought they were being bombed by the Russians.
LAYERS Greenpoint is interesting because it's so old. It's easy to get local's blindness, but if you kick your own butt and make yourself get out there, you'll find stuff. That's the idea behind Atlas Obscura, too -- that within a couple of miles of you there's probably something pretty awesome.
GRITTY BEAUTY I'll run to the Newtown Creek Nature Walk. Across the river you can see the Sims Metal Management scrap yard. A big claw picks up crushed cars and puts them on a barge. I'll take a break and watch. It's very industrial, but it's idyllic.
PINBALL THERAPY We'll do chores. We will sometimes take our laundry to this place called Sunshine Laundromat. It's a functioning laundromat that's also a pinball bar. For a long time it was just a laundromat and a pinball place. Pretty recently, the owner opened a bar, a pinball bar in the back room. I'm still really bad, but I love it.
WATERFRONT We'll go to the WNYC Transmitter Park. We'll let Phin play there and maybe sneak off to Brooklyn Barge and get a beer if we don't think it will make us sleepy, which it probably will.
SIESTA It's time for a nap for Phin. Sometimes he'll do an hour and a half. If we're smart, we'll take a nap, too; if not, we'll look at our emails. If it's a more advanced Sunday, we'll go upstate. We've been thinking about moving upstate. We're looking at a place in Rosendale.
FIT FOR KINGS Not far from Rosendale, there's an abandoned quarry where wanderers have piled pieces of thin slate rock into a throne, and there's a fire pit. You can look out over this great view of the Catskills, this huge expanse of trees. There's a throne, an arch and a set of stairs. It seems to be this sort of collective effort of hikers over the years. It's very cool.
WINE AND SOLIPSISM We do Blue Apron. After Phin is in bed, we'll have people over. We have a wine store very conveniently located, Dandelion Wine. Or we might watch "Westworld" or "High Maintenance." It's a show about New Yorkers. It's so solipsistic, but there's this joy to watching it. The "I live in the center of the world" thing is weirdly affirmed when you turn on the TV and it's literally your own corner.
SHE TIME Michelle and I are both huge sci-fi readers. We both just read this series called "Ancillary Justice," a trilogy. It only uses the pronoun "she" because it's written from an Artificial Intelligence perspective that can't quite understand the difference. Right now I'm also reading a trashy, fun fantasy series called "The Dresden Files." It's like a hard-boiled detective series but he's a wizard. Then, hopefully, to bed.
AuthorAffiliation ANNIE CORREAL #SundayRoutine readers can follow Dylan Thuras on Twitter @dylanthuras and @atlasobscura.
Photograph (Photographs by John Taggart for the New York Times)
