A wipeout on Wednesday sent stock indexes to their worst losses since 2022 after profit reports from Tesla and Alphabet helped suck momentum from Wall Street's frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology.
The S&P 500 tumbled 2.3 percent for its fifth drop in the last six days. The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 1.2 percent, and the Nasdaq composite skidded 3.6 percent.
The profit reports from Tesla and Alphabet weren't disasters, but they raised questions among investors about which other market heavyweights' springtime results could fall short of expectations, said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA.
"How many disappointments are we likely to see? Maybe let's sell first and ask questions later."
Tesla was one of the heaviest weights on the market and tumbled 12.3 percent after reporting a 45 percent drop in profit for the spring, and its earnings fell short of analysts' forecasts.
Tesla has become one of Wall Street's most valuable companies not just because of its electric vehicles but also because of its A.I. initiatives, such as a robotaxi. That's a tough business to assign a value to, according to UBS analysts, and the "challenge is that the time frame, and probability of success is not clear."
At Alphabet, investors' patience with the company's big A.I. investments may also be running out.
Alphabet dropped 5 percent even though it delivered better profit and revenue for the latest quarter than expected. Analysts pointed to some pockets of weakness underneath the surface, including weaker growth in advertising revenue for YouTube than expected. They also said increased A.I. investments and other spending could crimp how much cash it generated.
The larger challenge for Alphabet may have simply been how much its stock has already rallied, nearly 50 percent in the 12 months through Tuesday, on expectations for continual growth.
Profit expectations are high for companies broadly, but particularly so for the small group of stocks known as the " Magnificent Seven." Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta Platforms, Microsoft, Nvidia and Tesla need to keep delivering powerful growth after being responsible for the majority of the S&P 500's run to records this year, when many other stocks struggled under the weight of high interest rates. Critics are also calling these stocks too expensive.
The hope on Wall Street is that if momentum does flag for the Magnificent Seven, other stocks can rise to support the market. Conditions may be improving at the right time. Hopes for imminent cuts to interest rates have helped smaller stocks in particular to flip the market's leaderboard.
The Russell 2000 index of smaller stocks had risen at least 1 percent in seven of the last 10 days, though it dropped 2.1 percent Wednesday.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.29 percent from 4.25 percent late Tuesday.
Mattel was a bright spot for the market, jumping 9.8 percent after topping expectations for profit, aided by growth for its Fisher-Price and Hot Wheels lines.
The problem for Wall Street is that even if more stocks were to rise, they'll need to do so by more than Big Tech stocks are falling because of how much influence that small group carries.
Nvidia, for example, fell 6.8 percent. That wasn't as steep as Tesla's drop, but it was still the single heaviest weight on the S&P 500 because its total market value tops Tesla's. A 1 percent move for Nvidia packs more punch than a 1 percent move for any company other than Microsoft or Apple.
Outside of Big Tech, Lamb Weston lost 28.2 percent for the worst loss in the S&P 500 after the supplier of French fries and other frozen potato products reported weaker profit for the latest quarter than expected. The company said fewer diners visited restaurants than expected. It also warned of softer demand because of "menu price inflation."
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
