When Robert Turetsky was growing up, there was always a degree of artistic ferment in his life: one of his grandmothers, Dora Wasserman, had founded a prominent Yiddish theater in Montreal, and Mr. Turetsky said he "essentially grew up sleeping in the aisles."
The theater was later led by his mother, Bryna Wasserman, a sprite of a woman whose smile, dizzy energy and taste for the dramatic seem to be genetic. Her son is also quick to grin and emote and obsess in ways that have often amazed and sometimes frustrated his friends, even as he pursued (and pursued and pursued) a very different kind of career as a professor and a scientist.
"He's the quintessential recluse genius," said Naum Shaparin, who has known Mr. Turetsky since their undergraduate days at Rutgers. "He's too smart for his own good."
To wit: Mr. Turetsky, 35, graduated from Rutgers in 2000, but spent the better part of the next decade at Columbia working on a Ph.D. in artificial intelligence and computational neuroscience. "He's an academic but he can't get a project finished," said Dr. Shaparin, who often teased him about his progress.
And so it was that when Rachel Marcus entered his life, his friends were thrilled. In her, it seemed, Mr. Turetsky had found a solution to both his bachelorhood and a question posited over the eons by drama and science alike: how can control and chaos coexist?
The answer, it seems, is "quite happily."
"He's got a thousand ideas," said Jason Shapiro, another friend of Mr. Turetsky's from Rutgers. "And she helps him focus."
Ms. Marcus, 31, is herself no intellectual lightweight, having received a bachelor's degree from the University of North Carolina in her home state, and a master's degree in public administration from New York University.
Now a supervising analyst for the New York City Office of Management and Budget, she had done stints at a nonprofit for international development in Washington and had traveled to Indonesia to help evaluate housing stock after the 2004 earthquake and tsunami.
But though a veteran of politically charged, wine-enhanced bull sessions on everything from environmental policy to labor laws, Ms. Marcus wasn't looking for a D.C. power broker, said Jennifer Zuccarelli, who lived with Ms. Marcus in Washington. "She was waiting for the right guy."
After moving to New York in 2005, she decided, after some prodding from her sister, Kara, to look for a partner on JDate, the Jewish singles Web site. It was there that she found Mr. Turetsky's profile, and she was intrigued -- despite his ponytail.
"It was very good that he cut it before I met him," she said. She also made it clear early on that she didn't put a great deal of stock in computerized matchmaking.
"She said profiles are overrated," he recalled. "She was very sarcastic. And in my head, literally, I thought, 'This is a girl I can love.' "
If not totally locate: for their first date in 2008, he chose the rooftop bar at the Bentley Hotel on East 62nd Street. He thought it was around the corner from Ms. Marcus's office.
He was off by only 18 blocks.
Their first date went well, and was sealed with a passionate embrace -- sort of. To be exact, Mr. Turetsky, a fireplug of a man, gave her a bear hug that had the startling effect of setting her heart aflutter.
"It was a great hug," she said. "And that's when I knew." His snuggling skills notwithstanding, he wooed her with old-fashioned romance, which included walks across the Brooklyn Bridge, Woody Allen movies and a commitment to regularly (and literally) sweeping the slim Ms. Marcus off her feet.
"It's his signature move," Ms. Zuccarelli said.
Ms. Marcus said she was also attracted to Mr. Turetsky's mind and passion for science and teaching, and impressed by his marathon work sessions. "He'll drink 10 Red Bulls," she said. "It's just sheer determination."
Mr. Turetsky responded to this assertion jokingly: "Great art is born from great suffering," he said. "Rob goes into the office, Rob goes sits in front of a computer, and three days later, science comes out."
Not that his work is a mystery to her. "Rob actually has an amazing ability to explain things," Ms. Marcus said. "Really complicated things, in terms anyone can understand."
Except, of course, when it comes to what makes his world go round. "Rachel is the unexplainable," he said, before citing her humor, brains and kindness. "She is literally, from my perspective, the best thing to ever happen to me."
Ms. Marcus is a daughter of Robert and Shirley Marcus of Seattle; her father is a retired engineer, and her mother, also retired, is a curriculum specialist. She said Ms. Turetsky expanded her horizons, taking her skiing and snorkeling, while she taught him a thing or so about, you know, life. "Until he met me, Rob was never on time," she said. "He has now been early on some rare occasions."
And Ms. Zuccarelli says that while Ms. Marcus seems quiet, she's not docile. "Man, watch out," she said. "She won't hesitate to give you her opinion when she feels passionately about something."
They also seem to support each other in small ways that add up, friends said. When Ms. Marcus, an avid runner, was preparing for a marathon, he decided he would run a half-marathon in solidarity. And while he didn't train anywhere nearly enough, he did finish the whole race.
"He just won't give up," Ms. Marcus said. But that nonstop work ethic and the strain of academia were intense. In 2011, Mr. Turetsky developed Bell's palsy, a weakening of the facial muscles, which lasted for a month or so. Ms. Marcus said she thinks it was caused by stress related to his pursuit of a Ph.D. "It was too much work for too little reward," she said.
So he soon took a different professional tack, and became a quantitative analyst, or "a quant," with a small trading firm in Manhattan.
"I do the geek part of it," he said.
His mother, who is now the executive director of the National Yiddish Theater in Manhattan, said her son had always "danced to the beat of a different drummer." Ms. Marcus, his mother added, has given "discipline" to her son's life.
"He's a perfectionist," Ms. Wasserman said. "He wants to get everything done, but tomorrow."
Mr. Turetsky and Ms. Marcus began planning for many tomorrows last May. His proposal on a balcony overlooking the Caribbean involved a video he had made about their time together so far.
"Rob doesn't do anything small," she said. "He likes to make a production, just like his mom and grandmother."
They were married before 125 guests on Feb. 17 at the Diamond Mills Hotel in Saugerties, N.Y., a red-brick hotel overlooking icy Esopus Creek. The ceremony was led by Rabbi Yossi Pollak, and moments after they were officially wed, the groom punctuated his joy with his signature move: lifting his smiling bride into the air.
The reception included a speech by his father, Samuel Turetsky, a retired lawyer. Partly paralyzed by a stroke, he was in a wheelchair, his hands folded in against his body. He spoke clearly about his expectations and hopes for the couple.
"They have respect, respect for religion, celebration of holidays, and welcome and love for their family and friends," he said. "May this continue with their future."
There were plenty of goofiness, if not nerdiness, as the celebration unfolded. The bridesmaids and groomsmen ran a gauntlet of glow sticks as they were introduced. When guests hit the dance floor, many donned gigantic sunglasses, floppy New York Giants caps and hula hoops.
The groom beamed and the bride smiled shyly during their first dance, to "Dream a Little Dream of Me."
At the reception, the groom watched his friends and relatives swirl by on the dance floor. He was quiet for a minute as he watched the controlled chaos. He then turned to a guest.
"Later," he said, "there's going to be lasers."
ON THIS DAY
Background They met online and quickly connected, overcoming a long-distance relationship by New York standards: he lived on the Upper West Side, she the Lower East Side.
When Feb. 17, 2013
Where Diamond Mills Hotel, Saugerties, N.Y.
Details Their first date ended with a bear hug; despite his wearing a T-shirt with a quote from "Lost," she said yes to a second date. "He can be a nerd," Ms. Marcus said, "but he likes to go out, too ."
Photograph The Wedding Took Place Before 125 Exuberant Guests at the Diamond Mills Hotel in Saugerties, N.Y. (Photographs by Jennifer May for the New York Times)
