Estimation of R´enyi Entropy and Mutual Information
Based on Generalized Nearest-Neighbor Graphs
D´avid P´al
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, Canada

Barnab´as P´oczos
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Csaba Szepesv´ari
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, Canada

Abstract
We present simple and computationally efﬁcient nonparametric estimators of
R´enyi entropy and mutual information based on an i.i.d. sample drawn from an
unknown, absolutely continuous distribution over Rd. The estimators are cal-
culated as the sum of p-th powers of the Euclidean lengths of the edges of the
‘generalized nearest-neighbor’ graph of the sample and the empirical copula of
the sample respectively. For the ﬁrst time, we prove the almost sure consistency
of these estimators and upper bounds on their rates of convergence, the latter of
which under the assumption that the density underlying the sample is Lipschitz
continuous. Experiments demonstrate their usefulness in independent subspace
analysis.
1
Introduction
We consider the nonparametric problem of estimating R´enyi α-entropy and mutual information (MI)
based on a ﬁnite sample drawn from an unknown, absolutely continuous distribution over Rd. There
are many applications that make use of such estimators, of which we list a few to give the reader
a taste: Entropy estimators can be used for goodness-of-ﬁt testing (Vasicek, 1976; Goria et al.,
2005), parameter estimation in semi-parametric models (Wolsztynski et al., 2005), studying fractal
random walks (Alemany and Zanette, 1994), and texture classiﬁcation (Hero et al., 2002b,a). Mu-
tual information estimators have been used in feature selection (Peng and Ding, 2005), clustering
(Aghagolzadeh et al., 2007), causality detection (Hlav´ackova-Schindler et al., 2007), optimal exper-
imental design (Lewi et al., 2007; P´oczos and L˝orincz, 2009), fMRI data processing (Chai et al.,
2009), prediction of protein structures (Adami, 2004), or boosting and facial expression recogni-
tion (Shan et al., 2005). Both entropy estimators and mutual information estimators have been used
for independent component and subspace analysis (Learned-Miller and Fisher, 2003; P´oczos and
L˝orincz, 2005; Hulle, 2008; Szab´o et al., 2007), and image registration (Kybic, 2006; Hero et al.,
2002b,a). For further applications, see Leonenko et al. (2008); Wang et al. (2009a).
In a na¨ıve approach to R´enyi entropy and mutual information estimation, one could use the so called
“plug-in” estimates. These are based on the obvious idea that since entropy and mutual information
are determined solely by the density f (and its marginals), it sufﬁces to ﬁrst estimate the density
using one’s favorite density estimate which is then “plugged-in” into the formulas deﬁning entropy
1
arXiv:1003.1954v2  [stat.ML]  25 Oct 2010

and mutual information. The density is, however, a nuisance parameter which we do not want to
estimate. Density estimators have tunable parameters and we may need cross validation to achieve
good performance.
The entropy estimation algorithm considered here is direct—it does not build on density estimators.
It is based on k-nearest-neighbor (NN) graphs with a ﬁxed k. A variant of these estimators, where
each sample point is connected to its k-th nearest neighbor only, were recently studied by Goria
et al. (2005) for Shannon entropy estimation (i.e. the special case α = 1) and Leonenko et al.
(2008) for R´enyi α-entropy estimation. They proved the weak consistency of their estimators under
certain conditions. However, their proofs contain some errors, and it is not obvious how to ﬁx them.
Namely, Leonenko et al. (2008) apply the generalized Helly-Bray theorem, while Goria et al. (2005)
apply the inverse Fatou lemma under conditions when these theorems do not hold. This latter error
originates from the article of Kozachenko and Leonenko (1987), and this mistake can also be found
in Wang et al. (2009b).
The ﬁrst main contribution of this paper is to give a correct proof of consistency of these estimators.
Employing a very different proof techniques than the papers mentioned above, we show that these
estimators are, in fact, strongly consistent provided that the unknown density f has bounded support
and α ∈(0, 1). At the same time, we allow for more general nearest-neighbor graphs, wherein
as opposed to connecting each point only to its k-th nearest neighbor, we allow each point to be
connected to an arbitrary subset of its k nearest neighbors. Besides adding generality, our numer-
ical experiments seem to suggest that connecting each sample point to all its k nearest neighbors
improves the rate of convergence of the estimator.
The second major contribution of our paper is that we prove a ﬁnite-sample high-probability bound
on the error (i.e. the rate of convergence) of our estimator provided that f is Lipschitz. According
to the best of our knowledge, this is the very ﬁrst result that gives a rate for the estimation of R´enyi
entropy. The closest to our result in this respect is the work by Tsybakov and van der Meulen
(1996) who proved the root-n consistency of an estimator of the Shannon entropy and only in one
dimension.
The third contribution is a strongly consistent estimator of R´enyi mutual information that is based on
NN graphs and the empirical copula transformation (Dedecker et al., 2007). This result is proved for
d ≥3 1 and α ∈(1/2, 1). This builds upon and extends the previous work of P´oczos et al. (2010)
where instead of NN graphs, the minimum spanning tree (MST) and the shortest tour through the
sample (i.e. the traveling salesman problem, TSP) were used, but it was only conjectured that NN
graphs can be applied as well.
There are several advantages of using k-NN graph over MST and TSP (besides the obvious concep-
tual simplicity of k-NN): On a serial computer the k-NN graph can be computed somewhat faster
than MST and much faster than the TSP tour. Furthermore, in contrast to MST and TSP, computa-
tion of k-NN can be easily parallelized. Secondly, for different values of α, MST and TSP need to
be recomputed since the distance between two points is the p-th power of their Euclidean distance
where p = d(1 −α). However, the k-NN graph does not change for different values of p, since
p-th power is a monotone transformation, and hence the estimates for multiple values of α can be
calculated without the extra penalty incurred by the recomputation of the graph. This can be advan-
tageous e.g. in intrinsic dimension estimators of manifolds (Costa and Hero, 2003), where p is a free
parameter, and thus one can calculate the estimates efﬁciently for a few different parameter values.
The fourth major contribution is a proof of a ﬁnite-sample high-probability error bound (i.e. the rate
of convergence) for our mutual information estimator which holds under the assumption that the
copula of f is Lipschitz. According to the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst result that gives a
rate for the estimation of R´enyi mutual information.
The toolkit for proving our results derives from the deep literature of Euclidean functionals, see,
(Steele, 1997; Yukich, 1998). In particular, our strong consistency result uses a theorem due to Red-
mond and Yukich (1996) that essentially states that any quasi-additive power-weighted Euclidean
functional can be used as a strongly consistent estimator of R´enyi entropy (see also Hero and Michel
1999). We also make use of a result due to Koo and Lee (2007), who proved a rate of convergence
result that holds under more stringent conditions. Thus, the main thrust of the present work is show-
1Our result for R´enyi entropy estimation holds for d = 1 and d = 2, too.
2

ing that these conditions hold for p-power weighted nearest-neighbor graphs. Curiously enough, up
to now, no one has shown this, except for the case when p = 1, which is studied in Section 8.3 of
(Yukich, 1998). However, the condition p = 1 gives results only for α = 1 −1/d.
All proofs and supporting lemmas can be found in the appendix. In the main body of the paper,
we focus on clear explanation of R´enyi entropy and mutual information estimation problems, the
estimation algorithms and the statements of our converge results.
Additionally, we report on two numerical experiments. In the ﬁrst experiment, we compare the
empirical rates of convergence of our estimators with our theoretical results and plug-in estimates.
Empirically, the NN methods are the clear winner. The second experiment is an illustrative applica-
tion of mutual information estimation to an Independent Subspace Analysis (ISA) task.
The paper is organized as follows: In the next section, we formally deﬁne R´enyi entropy and R´enyi
mutual information and the problem of their estimation. Section 3 explains the ‘generalized nearest
neighbor’ graphs. This graph is then used in Section 4 to deﬁne our R´enyi entropy estimator. In
the same section, we state a theorem containing our convergence results for this estimator (strong
consistency and rates). In Section 5, we explain the copula transformation, which connects R´enyi
entropy with R´enyi mutual information. The copula transformation together with the R´enyi entropy
estimator from Section 4 is used to build an estimator of R´enyi mutual information. We conclude
this section with a theorem stating the convergence properties of the estimator (strong consistency
and rates). Section 6 contains the numerical experiments. We conclude the paper by a detailed
discussion of further related work in Section 7, and a list of open problems and directions for future
research in Section 8.
2
The Formal Deﬁnition of the Problem
R´enyi entropy and R´enyi mutual information of d real-valued random variables2 X
=
(X1, X2, . . . , Xd) with joint density f : Rd →R and marginal densities fi : R →R, 1 ≤i ≤d,
are deﬁned for any real parameter α assuming the underlying integrals exist. For α ̸= 1, R´enyi
entropy and R´enyi mutual information are deﬁned respectively as3
Hα(X) = Hα(f) =
1
1 −α log
Z
Rd f α(x1, x2, . . . , xd) d(x1, x2, . . . , xd) ,
(1)
Iα(X) = Iα(f) =
1
α −1 log
Z
Rd f α(x1, x2, . . . , xd)
 d
Y
i=1
fi(xi)
!1−α
d(x1, x2, . . . , xd).
(2)
For α = 1 they are deﬁned by the limits H1 = limα→1 Hα and I1 = limα→1 Iα. In fact, Shannon
(differential) entropy and the Shannon mutual information are just special cases of R´enyi entropy
and R´enyi mutual information with α = 1.
The goal of this paper is to present estimators of R´enyi entropy (1) and R´enyi information (2) and
study their convergence properties. To be more explicit, we consider the problem where we are
given i.i.d. random variables X1:n = (X1, X2, . . . , Xn) where each Xj = (X1
j , X2
j , . . . , Xd
j ) has
density f : Rd →R and marginal densities fi : R →R and our task is to construct an estimate
bHα(X1:n) of Hα(f) and an estimate bIα(X1:n) of Iα(f) using the sample X1:n.
3
Generalized Nearest-Neighbor Graphs
The basic tool to deﬁne our estimators is the generalized nearest-neighbor graph and more speciﬁ-
cally the sum of the p-th powers of Euclidean lengths of its edges.
Formally, let V be a ﬁnite set of points in an Euclidean space Rd and let S be a ﬁnite non-empty
set of positive integers; we denote by k the maximum element of S. We deﬁne the generalized
2We use superscript for indexing dimension coordinates.
3The base of the logarithms in the deﬁnition is not important; any base strictly bigger than 1 is allowed.
Similarly as with Shannon entropy and mutual information, one traditionally uses either base 2 or e. In this
paper, for deﬁnitiveness, we stick to base e.
3

nearest-neighbor graph NNS(V ) as a directed graph on V . The edge set of NNS(V ) contains
for each i ∈S an edge from each vertex x ∈V to its i-th nearest neighbor. That is, if we sort
V \{x} = {y1, y2, . . . , y|V |−1} according to the Euclidean distance to x (breaking ties arbitrarily):
∥x −y1∥≤∥x −y2∥≤· · · ≤∥x −y|V |−1∥then yi is the i-th nearest-neighbor of x and for each
i ∈S there is an edge from x to yi in the graph.
For p ≥0 let us denote by Lp(V ) the sum of the p-th powers of Euclidean lengths of its edges.
Formally,
Lp(V ) =
X
(x,y)∈E(NNS(V ))
∥x −y∥p ,
(3)
where E(NNS(V )) denotes the edge set of NNS(V ). We intentionally hide the dependence on S
in the notation Lp(V ). For the rest of the paper, the reader should think of S as a ﬁxed but otherwise
arbitrary ﬁnite non-empty set of integers, say, S = {1, 3, 4}.
The following is a basic result about Lp. The proof can be found in the appendix.
Theorem 1 (Constant γ). Let X1:n = (X1, X2, . . . , Xn) be an i.i.d. sample from the uniform
distribution over the d-dimensional unit cube [0, 1]d. For any p ≥0 and any ﬁnite non-empty set S
of positive integers there exists a constant γ > 0 such that
lim
n→∞
Lp(X1:n)
n1−p/d
= γ
a.s.
(4)
The value of γ depends on d, p, S and, except for special cases, an analytical formula for its value is
not known. This causes a minor problem since the constant γ appears in our estimators. A simple
and effective way to deal with this problem is to generate a large i.i.d. sample X1:n from the uniform
distribution over [0, 1]d and estimate γ by the empirical value of Lp(X1:n)/n1−p/d.
4
An Estimator of R´enyi Entropy
We are now ready to present an estimator of R´enyi entropy based on the generalized nearest-neighbor
graph. Suppose we are given an i.i.d. sample X1:n = (X1, X2, . . . , Xn) from a distribution µ over
Rd with density f. We estimate entropy Hα(f) for α ∈(0, 1) by
bHα(X1:n) =
1
1 −α log Lp(X1:n)
γn1−p/d
where
p = d(1 −α),
(5)
and Lp(·) is the sum of p-th powers of Euclidean lengths of edges of the nearest-neighbor graph
NNS(·) for some ﬁnite non-empty S ⊂N+ as deﬁned by equation (3). The constant γ is the same
as in Theorem 1.
The following theorem is our main result about the estimator bHα. It states that bHα is strongly con-
sistent and gives upper bounds on the rate of convergence. The proof of theorem is in the appendix.
Theorem 2 (Consistency and Rate for bHα). Let α ∈(0, 1). Let µ be an absolutely continuous
distribution over Rd with bounded support and let f be its density. If X1:n = (X1, X2, . . . , Xn) is
an i.i.d. sample from µ then
lim
n→∞
bHα(X1:n) = Hα(f)
a.s.
(6)
Moreover, if f is Lipschitz then for any δ > 0 with probability at least 1 −δ,
 bHα(X1:n) −Hα(f)
 ≤



O

n−
d−p
d(2d−p) (log(1/δ))1/2−p/(2d)
,
if 0 < p < d −1 ;
O

n−
d−p
d(d+1) (log(1/δ))1/2−p/(2d)
,
if d −1 ≤p < d .
(7)
5
Copulas and Estimator of Mutual Information
Estimating mutual information is slightly more complicated than estimating entropy. We start with a
basic property of mutual information which we call rescaling. It states that if h1, h2, . . . , hd : R →
R are arbitrary strictly increasing functions, then
Iα(h1(X1), h2(X2), . . . , hd(Xd)) = Iα(X1, X2, . . . , Xd) .
(8)
4

A particularly clever choice is hj = Fj for all 1 ≤j ≤d, where Fj is the cumulative distribution
function (c.d.f.) of Xj. With this choice, the marginal distribution of hj(Xj) is the uniform distri-
bution over [0, 1] assuming that Fj, the c.d.f. of Xj, is continuous. Looking at the deﬁnition of Hα
and Iα we see that
Iα(X1, X2, . . . , Xd) = Iα(F1(X1), F2(X2), . . . , Fd(Xd)) = −Hα(F1(X1), F2(X2), . . . , Fd(Xd)) .
In other words, calculation of mutual information can be reduced to the calculation of entropy pro-
vided that marginal c.d.f.’s F1, F2, . . . , Fd are known. The problem is, of course, that these are not
known and need to be estimated from the sample. We will use empirical c.d.f.’s ( bF1, bF2, . . . , bFd)
as their estimates. Given an i.i.d. sample X1:n = (X1, X2, . . . , Xn) from distribution µ and with
density f, the empirical c.d.f’s are deﬁned as
bFj(x) = 1
n|{i : 1 ≤i ≤n, x ≤Xj
i }|
for x ∈R, 1 ≤j ≤d .
Introduce the compact notation F : Rd →[0, 1]d, bF : Rd →[0, 1]d,
F(x1, x2, . . . , xd)
=
(F1(x1), F2(x2), . . . , Fd(xd))
for (x1, x2, . . . , xd) ∈Rd ;
(9)
bF(x1, x2, . . . , xd)
=
( bF1(x1), bF2(x2), . . . , bFd(xd))
for (x1, x2, . . . , xd) ∈Rd . (10)
Let us call the maps F, bF the copula transformation, and the empirical copula transformation,
respectively. The joint distribution of F(X) = (F1(X1), F2(X2), . . . , Fd(Xd)) is called the copula
of µ, and the sample (bZ1, bZ2, . . . , bZn) = (bF(X1), bF(X2), . . . , bF(Xn)) is called the empirical
copula (Dedecker et al., 2007). Note that j-th coordinate of bZi equals
bZj
i = 1
n rank(Xj
i , {Xj
1, Xj
2, . . . , Xj
n}) ,
where rank(x, A) is the number of element of A less than or equal to x.
Also, observe
that the random variables bZ1, bZ2, . . . , bZn are not even independent!
Nonetheless, the empiri-
cal copula (bZ1, bZ2, . . . , bZn) is a good approximation of an i.i.d.
sample (Z1, Z2, . . . , Zn) =
(F(X1), F(X2), . . . , F(Xn)) from the copula of µ. Hence, we estimate the R´enyi mutual infor-
mation Iα by
bIα(X1:n) = −bHα(bZ1, bZ2, . . . , bZn),
(11)
where bHα is deﬁned by (5). The following theorem is our main result about the estimator bIα. It
states that bIα is strongly consistent and gives upper bounds on the rate of convergence. The proof of
this theorem can be found in the appendix.
Theorem 3 (Consistency and Rate for bIα). Let d ≥3 and α = 1 −p/d ∈(1/2, 1). Let µ be an
absolutely continuous distribution over Rd with density f. If X1:n = (X1, X2, . . . , Xn) is an i.i.d.
sample from µ then
lim
n→∞
bIα(X1:n) = Iα(f)
a.s.
Moreover, if the density of the copula of µ is Lipschitz, then for any δ > 0 with probability at least
1 −δ,
bIα(X1:n) −Iα(f)

≤









O

max{n−
d−p
d(2d−p) , n−p/2+p/d}(log(1/δ))1/2
,
if 0 < p ≤1 ;
O

max{n−
d−p
d(2d−p) , n−1/2+p/d}(log(1/δ))1/2
,
if 1 ≤p ≤d −1 ;
O

max{n−
d−p
d(d+1) , n−1/2+p/d}(log(1/δ))1/2
,
if d −1 ≤p < d .
6
Experiments
In this section we show two numerical experiments to support our theoretical results about the con-
vergence rates, and to demonstrate the applicability of the proposed R´enyi mutual information esti-
mator, bIα.
5

6.1
The Rate of Convergence
In our ﬁrst experiment (Fig. 1), we demonstrate that the derived rate is indeed an upper bound on
the convergence rate. Figure 1a-1c show the estimation error of bIα as a function of the sample
size. Here, the underlying distribution was a 3D uniform, a 3D Gaussian, and a 20D Gaussian with
randomly chosen nontrivial covariance matrices, respectively. In these experiments α was set to 0.7.
For the estimation we used S = {3} (kth) and S = {1, 2, 3} (knn) sets. Our results also indicate that
these estimators achieve better performances than the histogram based plug-in estimators (hist). The
number and the sizes of the bins were determined with the rule of Scott (1979). The histogram based
estimator is not shown in the 20D case, as in this large dimension it is not applicable in practice. The
ﬁgures are based on averaging 25 independent runs, and they also show the theoretical upper bound
(Theoretical) on the rate derived in Theorem 3. It can be seen that the theoretical rates are rather
conservative. We think that this is because the theory allows for quite irregular densities, while the
densities considered in this experiment are very nice.
10
2
10
3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
 
 
kth
knn
hist
Theoretical
(a) 3D uniform
10
2
10
3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
 
 
kth
knn
hist
Theoretical
(b) 3D Gaussian
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
0
10
1
 
 
kth
knn
Theoretical
(c) 20D Gaussian
Figure 1: Error of the estimated R´enyi informations in the number of samples.
6.2
Application to Independent Subspace Analysis
An important application of dependence estimators is the Independent Subspace Analysis problem
(Cardoso, 1998). This problem is a generalization of the Independent Component Analysis (ICA),
where we assume the independent sources are multidimensional vector valued random variables.
The formal description of the problem is as follows. We have S = (S1; . . . ; Sm) ∈Rdm, m inde-
pendent d-dimensional sources, i.e. Si ∈Rd, and I(S1, . . . , Sm) = 0.4 In the ISA statistical model
we assume that S is hidden, and only n i.i.d. samples from X = AS are available for observation,
where A ∈Rq×dm is an unknown invertible matrix with full rank and q ≥dm. Based on n i.i.d.
observation of X, our task is to estimate the hidden sources Si and the mixing matrix A. Let the
estimation of S be denoted by Y = (Y1; . . . ; Ym) ∈Rdm, where Y = WX. The goal of ISA is
to calculate argminWI(Y1, . . . , Ym), where W ∈Rdm×q is a matrix with full rank. Following the
ideas of Cardoso (1998), this ISA problem can be solved by ﬁrst preprocessing the observed quan-
tities X by a traditional ICA algorithm which provides us WICA estimated separation matrix5, and
then simply grouping the estimated ICA components into ISA subspaces by maximizing the sum of
the MI in the estimated subspaces, that is we have to ﬁnd a permutation matrix P ∈{0, 1}dm×dm
which solves
max
P
m
X
j=1
I(Y j
1 , Y j
2 , . . . , Y j
d ) .
(12)
where Y = PWICAX. We used the proposed copula based information estimation, bIα with
α = 0.99 to approximate the Shannon mutual information, and we chose S = {1, 2, 3}. Our
experiment shows that this ISA algorithm using the proposed MI estimator can indeed provide good
4Here we need the generalization of MI to multidimensional quantities, but that is obvious by simply re-
placing the 1D marginals by d-dimensional ones.
5for simplicity we used the FastICA algorithm in our experiments (Hyv¨arinen et al., 2001)
6

estimation of the ISA subspaces. We used a standard ISA benchmark dataset from Szab´o et al.
(2007); we generated 2,000 i.i.d. sample points on 3D geometric wireframe distributions from 6
different sources independently from each other. These sampled points can be seen in Fig. 2a, and
they represent the sources, S. Then we mixed these sources by a randomly chosen invertible matrix
A ∈R18×18. The six 3-dimensional projections of X = AS observed quantities are shown in
Fig. 2b. Our task was to estimate the original sources S using the sample of the observed quantity
X only. By estimating the MI in (12), we could recover the original subspaces as it can be seen
in Fig. 2c. The successful subspace separation is shown in the form of Hinton diagrams as well,
which is the product of the estimated ISA separation matrix W = PWICA and A. It is a block
permutation matrix if and only if the subspace separation is perfect (Fig. 2d).
(a) Original
(b) Mixed
(c) Estimated
(d) Hinton
Figure 2: ISA experiment for six 3-dimensional sources.
7
Further Related Works
As it was pointed out earlier, in this paper we heavily built on the results known from the theory of
Euclidean functionals (Steele, 1997; Redmond and Yukich, 1996; Koo and Lee, 2007). However,
now we can be more precise about earlier work concerning nearest-neighbor based Euclidean func-
tionals: The closest to our work is Section 8.3 of Yukich (1998), where the case of NNS graph
based p-power weighted Euclidean functionals with S = {1, 2, . . . , k} and p = 1 was investigated.
Nearest-neighbor graphs have ﬁrst been proposed for Shannon entropy estimation by Kozachenko
and Leonenko (1987). In particular, in the mentioned work only the case of NNS graphs with
S = {1} was considered. More recently, Goria et al. (2005) generalized this approach to S = {k}
and proved the resulting estimator’s weak consistency under some conditions on the density. The
estimator in this paper has a form quite similar to that of ours:
˜H1 = log(n −1) −ψ(k) + log
 2πd/2
dΓ(d/2)

+ d
n
n
X
i=1
log ∥ei∥.
Here ψ stands for the digamma function, and ei is the directed edge pointing from Xi to its kth
nearest-neighbor. Comparing this with (5), unsurprisingly, we ﬁnd that the main difference is the
use of the logarithm function instead of | · |p and the different normalization. As mentioned before,
Leonenko et al. (2008) proposed an estimator that uses the NNS graph with S = {k} for the purpose
of estimating the R´enyi entropy. Their estimator takes the form
˜Hα =
1
1 −α log
 
n −1
n
V 1−α
d
C1−α
k
n
X
i=1
∥ei∥d(1−α)
(n −1)α
!
,
where Γ stands for the Gamma function, Ck =
h
Γ(k)
Γ(k+1−α)
i1/(1−α)
and Vd = πd/2Γ(d/2 + 1)
is the volume of the d-dimensional unit ball, and again ei is the directed edge in the NNS graph
starting from node Xi and pointing to the k-th nearest node. Comparing this estimator with (5),
it is apparent that it is (essentially) a special case of our NNS based estimator. From the results
of Leonenko et al. (2008) it is obvious that the constant γ in (5) can be found in analytical form
when S = {k}. However, we kindly warn the reader again that the proofs of these last three cited
articles (Kozachenko and Leonenko, 1987; Goria et al., 2005; Leonenko et al., 2008) contain a few
errors, just like the Wang et al. (2009b) paper for KL divergence estimation from two samples.
Kraskov et al. (2004) also proposed a k-nearest-neighbors based estimator for the Shannon mutual
information estimation, but the theoretical properties of their estimator are unknown.
7

8
Conclusions and Open Problems
We have studied R´enyi entropy and mutual information estimators based on NNS graphs. The
estimators were shown to be strongly consistent. In addition, we derived upper bounds on their
convergence rate under some technical conditions. Several open problems remain unanswered:
An important open problem is to understand how the choice of the set S ⊂N+ affects our estimators.
Perhaps, there exists a way to choose S as a function of the sample size n (and d, p) which strikes
the optimal balance between the bias and the variance of our estimators.
Our method can be used for estimation of Shannon entropy and mutual information by simply using
α close to 1. The open problem is to come up with a way of choosing α, approaching 1, as a
function of the sample size n (and d, p) such that the resulting estimator is consistent and converges
as rapidly as possible. An alternative is to use the logarithm function in place of the power function.
However, the theory would need to be changed signiﬁcantly to show that the resulting estimator
remains strongly consistent.
In the proof of consistency of our mutual information estimator bIα we used Kiefer-Dvoretzky-
Wolfowitz theorem to handle the effect of the inaccuracy of the empirical copula transformation.
Our particular use of the theorem seems to restrict α to the interval (1/2, 1) and the dimension
to values larger than 2. Is there a better way to estimate the error caused by the empirical copula
transformation and prove consistency of the estimator for a larger range of α’s and d = 1, 2?
Finally, it is an important open problem to prove bounds on converge rates for densities that have
higher order smoothness (i.e. β-H¨older smooth densities). A related open problem, in the context of
of theory of Euclidean functionals, is stated in Koo and Lee (2007).
