Improving non-deterministic uncertainty modelling
in Industry 4.0 scheduling
Ashwin Misra
The Robotics Insitute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA

Ankit Mittal
Maruti Sizuki India
Gurugram, India

Vihaan Misra
Netaji Subhas University of Technology
New Delhi, India

Deepanshu Pandey
ZS Associates
Gurgaon, India

Abstract
The latest Industrial revolution has helped industries in achieving very high rates of
productivity and efﬁciency. It has introduced data aggregation and cyber-physical
systems to optimize planning and scheduling. Although, uncertainty in the environ-
ment and the imprecise nature of human operators are not accurately considered
for into the decision making process. This leads to delays in consignments and
imprecise budget estimations. This widespread practice in the industrial models is
ﬂawed and requires rectiﬁcation. Various other articles have approached to solve
this problem through stochastic or fuzzy set model methods. This paper presents a
comprehensive method to logically and realistically quantify the non-deterministic
uncertainty through probabilistic uncertainty modelling. This method is applica-
ble on virtually all Industrial data sets, as the model is self adjusting and uses
epsilon-contamination to cater to limited or incomplete data sets. The results are
numerically validated through an Industrial data set in Flanders, Belgium. The
data driven results achieved through this robust scheduling method illustrate the
improvement in performance.
1
Introduction
Despite the onset of Industry 4.0 across various Manufacturing plants, many areas of this relatively
newer framework needs improvement to enhance it’s reliability and accuracy. Production planning
combines and coordinates all the manufacturing activities; it broadly consists of three components-
planning, controlling and dispatching. The planning process refers to the pre-manufacturing task of
the objectives and targets with respect to the available resources and constraints. Control refers to the
continuous evaluation of the performance, according to the standards set by planning. Hence, the aim
of production control is to make sure that the consignment is produced at the optimum quality, time
and quantity with cost-effective methods. In Production Planning, Scheduling refers to the part of
planning which is concerned with the schedule of an activity; the start time and the ﬁnish time. This
paper aims to develop a robust scheduling strategy to improve the scheduling aspect of production
planning.
The main reason, the scheduling of a consignment is inconsistent or deviates from the standard
behaviour is due to various non-deterministic reasons such as human operator error, machine faults,
delays in supply etc. The current planning algorithms do not capture these intrinsic non-deterministic
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2101.05677v1  [stat.OT]  8 Jan 2021

uncertainties which result in poor performance during execution. This leads to losses in capital, time
and resources. The method discussed in this paper is inﬂuenced by this problem. These uncertainties
are more accurately quantiﬁed to develop an improved robust scheduling strategy.
This paper provides a general outline to more realistically quantify operational non-deterministic
uncertainty which is conventionally different from the general practices currently employed in the
industry.The general practices assume it to be a deterministic system, which leads to such faulty
predictions[1]. It introduces the uncertainty models used- P-box and epsilon-contamination models,
brieﬂy describe the Industrial data set and explain how to model on such data. A numerical example
is introduced for a speciﬁc case which would enhance the understandability of the project.
1.1
Current Literature
During the last years, a lot of academic research has focused on the topic of production planning
and scheduling. The authors [2] attribute the operational uncertainty to software that are ﬁxated on
ideal schedules. They suggest human operator intervention from the production planner to the task
scheduler- depending on the frequency and severity of scheduling errors. These respondents are
responsible for rescheduling and identifying the optimal path of action. This method relies on human
intervention to counter the planning faults due to non-deterministic uncertainty. However, this is only
applicable to small production plants and does not factor in the human operator errors.
The authors[3] have focused on reviewing methods to scheduling under uncertainty including robust,
stochastic and fuzzy scheduling. They propose a baseline schedule which is planned before the
manufacturing operation. Reactive scheduling re-optimizes this schedule dynamically according to
the uncertainties. Hence it depends on a stochastic assessment of the uncertainty, from which a set of
decisions are developed.
2
Uncertainty Modelling
Generally, in such systems, the uncertainty is either quantiﬁed as probabilistic[4] or fuzzy set
models[5]. Typically, stochastic methods are used with a combination of different probability
distribution models to represent various phenomenons. These models are however unrealistic due
to the fact that interval-based uncertainties are not possible to quantify/model with ﬁxed parameter
probability distributions. They fail to take into account the variations in uncertainty such as the
variation in any initial probability distributions such as median value shifts. Such models are
also very complex to build and require ﬁeld experts to deﬁne and generate. As shown by [5],
classic probabilistic models fail to capture the whole non-deterministic nature of uncertainties in
manufacturing processes. After analysis of a large Industrial data set, it was concluded that probability
box models are much more accurate for manufacturing plants. Epsilon contamination is a method
to capture uncertainty through e-contamination classes. It is a bayesian method, which is used in
data sets which has corrupted, incomplete or insufﬁcient data. It is used in Robust statistics and the
methodology discusses uses this as one of its components.
2.1
Probability box
A P-box or a probability box is the area circumscribed within an upper and lower cumulative
distribution function to characterize an imprecise distribution. The most signiﬁcant beneﬁt of a p-box
is that it captures this non-deterministic uncertainty within a conﬁned group very well in juxtaposition
to Probability distribution functions themselves. For a more extensive data set, set are divided into a
subset, and PDFs are computed, then PDFs are integrated to construct a bounded set of CDF. The
non-deterministic likelihood of the technique or parameters affected by this new unpredictable change
is represented by this set of CDFs.
F(x) = P(X <= x)
(1)
A Cumulative Frequency distribution represents the cumulative probability of a random variable from
negative inﬁnity up to a random variable X. By deﬁnition, F is a non-decreasing function with a range
of [0, 1] over the domain of [−∞, ∞]
f(x) = Pr[X = x]
(2)
2

Figure 1: Sample p-box
The PDF is the derivative of the CDF if it exists. A generalised probability box, or generalised p-box,
is a pair (F, F) of distribution functions from Ωto [0, 1] following F <= F. If Ωis a closed interval
on R, then we call (F, F) a p-box. When both F, F assume general number of different values only,
It can be said that the generalised p-box is discrete. F X(x) and F X(x) are respectively the lower and
upper cumulative probability bounds, and Fx(x) is non-decreasing with x, F X(x) = P(X <= x),
F X(x) = P(X <= x)
As a function of unexplained unpredictable disturbances to speciﬁc techniques or parameters, p-boxes
are a valuable method for catching non-deterministic uncertainties. Let’s consider a particular task
performed by 2 workers, and the time taken to complete the job is recorded for a year. Using the
data, respective PDFs and CDFs are plotted. Then from the resulting CDFs, it is computed that
which worker works better than others for the particular task. But the result did not account for
the non-deterministic uncertainty parameters such as mood or the worker’s distractions. It may be
possible that these uncertainties affect the worker timing and due to which one CDF has a higher
variation than others. To capture these non-deterministic uncertainties, the p-box is the most suitable
tool. To plot the p-box data set is divided into subsets; upper and lower bounded CDFs are plotted.
P-box captures the uncertainty in the probability of duration task completion. This enables the system
for more robust task assignments for any future event accommodating non-deterministic delays.
2.2
Epsilon Contamination
The epsilon contamination model
P(f) = (1 −ϵ)P(f) + ϵQ(f)
(3)
In this model[7], the probability epsilon (ϵ) donates the probability that the data set is contaminated
by a distribution Q. Let P be the distribution of the sequence i.e. a function of the measures of central
tendency. This model provided by Huber proposes a robust statistical framework by establishing
priors. It is a convex combination of two distinct uncertainty models- 1. Vacuous Model and 2.
Probabilistic model. Epsilon, is a parameter assigned to the trust on the model.
Both of these models rely on the principle of imprecise belief by [6], the intervals of the p-box and
epsilon contamination models quantify uncertainty accurately and should be incorporated in the
scheduling algorithms. This belief can be attributed to an operators experience and his expertise in a
particular task, i.e. assigning a particular factor to replicate the belief of the process. In this paper, the
speciﬁc distributions used are cumulative distribution functions.
3
Modelling on Industrial Data set
This section will explain how to model a particular industrial process through the uncertainty models
and how to interpret the model to achieve a more accurate scheduling and robust planning autonomous
3

framework. The modelling technique is divided into two parts- For data with limited information
and for complete data. In this numerical case, a critical point of n=25 samples is taken. For the
incomplete data set, the epsilon-contamination model is applied with a belief measure. P-boxes are
applied on the complete data sets as they have restricted bounds due to the complete information.
The database obtained from the industry needs to be pre-processed before entering into this tool if it
is unstructured. As the main objective of this research is to optimize the scheduling. In our example,
The attributes of the database which exist for operation time, operator ID, task Sequence and Operator
skill are taken. Any similar attributes pointing to similar sets of attributes should be identiﬁed and
taken according to different Industries.
For each task undertook in the industry, various operational parameters are considered. Every
sequence, operator and season corresponding to a particular task. For every season, cumulative
distribution functions of every operator executing a task is plotted.
The error times are calculated for every operator in the different operations and season timings.
ε = PredictedTime −ObservedTime
(4)
This error is equal to the Actual time recorded minus the predicted time by the IoT-prediction
software. Cumulative distribution functions and probability density functions are plotted for each.
After analyzing the graphs of the cumulative distribution functions for very operator per operation
sequence. Now the curves are of two types-
First, In which the data points are sufﬁcient to plot probability box for the operator, Second, Less
than sufﬁcient data points to form a probability box. In the second case, the epsilon contamination
model proves to be a useful analytical tool.
In the ﬁrst case, with sufﬁcient data points, the uncertainty is quantiﬁed with p-box models as shown
in the ﬁgure. The numerical example of SeqID786 shows the CDF of various operators executing
the same operation, The maximum and minimum bounds of this ﬁgure gives the upper and lower
bounds/previsions of the p-box. This ﬁgure denotes the uncertainty of a speciﬁc operator using upper
and lower previsions. The area bound between the upper and lower previsions denotes the uncertainty
or error in the task execution. Similar graphs are plotted for all operators to study their error patterns
across various seasons, tasks and operation parameters. The upper bound of this curve denotes the
upper prevision and the lower bound denotes the lower prevision.
Figure 2: p-box of sample sequenceID 786
For the second case, for lesser data points or the operators who are on a temporary basis or have
limited responsibilities. Epsilon contamination is a very new research topic which focuses on a small
region and generalizes for the whole range. The trust factor is taken as 0.8. In the given example,
seqID 787 is taken which had only three operators working on this sequence and only 9 observations.
To capture the non-determinism in this data, epsilon contamination samples the distribution to form
upper and lower previsions according to a trust factor ϵ.
The upper and lower previsions are calculated using this formula and their difference denotes the
degree of uncertainty in the data. In this formula, the trust factor is denoted by epsilon, which is
4

assigned by an Industry expert/supervisor on the probability of the task being completed in time.
The contaminated model means the lower and upper previsions are calculated from the average
distribution of the operators in a sequence with an individual distribution contaminant.
Figure 3: Epsilon Contamination model, P=Upper Prevision, C=Lower Prevision, L=Mean prevision
curve
The Second step in the process after quantifying the uncertainty is to improve the prediction model of
the Industry 4.0 framework. The current task completion time prediction used is not accurate and
differs greatly from the real time recorded. This model can be improved using dynamic Machine
Learning;
ε = f(estimatedproductiontime, trainingdata)
(5)
And the predicted estimated time according to the new model is
Newestimatedtime = f + ε
(6)
To give an insight, in the paper [3], a Rational Quadratic Gaussian method Regression Model was
chosen when a lot of models were analyzed on this knowledge, the model was trained stochastically
on the past estimated and real production times to estimate the assembly time with decreased error.
The training data is used for an year of operation with the exception of operators who have very less
data points. The model is explained as follows-
ε = N(f(x, b), a2)
(7)
The model has to be suited to different data sets. The numerical example have employed this with
parameters b = 7.734x103 with a = 4.43x103. The result section compares the recomputed p-box
which shows that this learning model improved the prediction times are reduced the error times by an
appreciable margin.
The ﬁnal step is consolidating all these features into an easy-to-use GUI. This will increase the
usability of the research results and will lead to wider adaptability to different industries. An
application can be developed via MATLAB or python to incorporate all such modelling techniques
suggested in this paper and link it with a regression learner to automate the whole process. The best
operator suggestion is made by calculating the degree of uncertainty i.e. the difference of the upper
and lower previsions. The predicted time of completion of operation is also shown using the new
developed model.
5

4
Results
Figure 4: P-box comparison, before and after training
The results achieved through the adoption of this process by the facility are very substantial. The
industry has reported more accurate prediction times and have helped in estimating the delivery time
for different operations. After, the machine learning process the P-boxes are again computed which
highlight that the error times are reduced. A reduction is e.g., observed from Original = 0.15 units to
TrainedModel = 0.7 for the same operation as per normalised area. As the area under the pox-describe
the variance in the error values, this shows that the predicted times are now closer to the actual times
observed. This research has also helped to rank the employees on their performance and create a new
assignment schedule for different operations and operators according to different seasons.
5
Conclusion
To conclude, this article provides a new perspective to data optimization of Industry 4.0. This article
bridges the gap between pure mathematics and application and proposes a novel applied mathematics
approach to quantify non-deterministic uncertainty. General practices assume determinism which is
an inherent ﬂaw in the procedure and this paper proposes a dynamic approach to solve this problem.
