1
AI based Service Management for 6G Green
Communications
Bomin Mao, Member, IEEE, Fengxiao Tang, Member, IEEE,
Yuichi Kawamoto, Member, IEEE, and Nei Kato, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Green communications have always been a target
for the information industry to alleviate energy overhead and
reduce fossil fuel usage. In current 5G and future 6G era,
there is no doubt that the volume of network infrastructure
and the number of connected terminals will keep exponentially
increasing, which results in the surging energy cost. It becomes
growing important and urgent to drive the development of green
communications. However, 6G will inevitably have increasingly
stringent and diversiﬁed requirements for Quality of Service
(QoS), security, ﬂexibility, and even intelligence, all of which
challenge the improvement of energy efﬁciency. Moreover, the
dynamic energy harvesting process, which will be adopted widely
in 6G, further complicates the power control and network
management. To address these challenges and reduce human
intervene, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has been widely recognized
and acknowledged as the only solution. Academia and industry
have conducted extensive research to alleviate energy demand,
improve energy efﬁciency, and manage energy harvesting in
various communication scenarios. In this paper, we present the
main considerations for green communications and survey the
related research on AI-based green communications. We focus
on how AI techniques are adopted to manage the network and
improve energy harvesting toward the green era. We analyze
how state-of-the-art Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning
(DL) techniques can cooperate with conventional AI methods
and mathematical models to reduce the algorithm complexity
and optimize the accuracy rate to accelerate the applications in
6G. Finally, we discuss the existing problems and envision the
challenges for these emerging techniques in 6G.
Index Terms—6G, green communications, Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (AI), energy harvesting.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
ECENTLY, 5G has been launched to provide users with
high-throughput services in some countries, while the
worldwide researchers have started to conceive 6G [1]–[3].
It has been reported that 5G Base Stations (BSs) and mobile
devices consume much more energy than 4G [4]. For example,
a typical 5G BS with multiple bands has a power consumption
of more than 11,000W, while a 4G BS costs less than 7,000W.
The dramatically increased power consumption mainly comes
from two parts: the growing Power Ampliﬁcation (PA) in
the massive Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) antenna
and the processing of booming data. Even though the energy
consumption per unit of data has dropped drastically, the
exponentially increasing energy required to provide seamless
5G services cannot be neglected since the number of required
5G BSs is at least 4 times that of 4G to cover the same
Bomin Mao, Fengxiao Tang, Yuichi Kawamoto, and Nei Kato are with the
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

sized area. Data show that Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) accounts for more than total electricity
consumption as shown in Fig. 1a, and it will keep an estimated
annual growth rate between 6% and 9% [5], [6].
Then, what will be the situation for 6G in terms of energy
consumption? As we know, 6G is expected to extend the
utilized frequency bands to Terahertz (THz) for 1,000 times
of throughput improvement on the basis of 5G [1]. Since the
upper bound of transmission range is shortened from 100 m
of millimeter Wave (mmWave) to 10 m of THz spectrum,
future THz-enabled BS is envisioned to be deployed in the
house to provide indoor communications [7], which means
signiﬁcant growth of required BSs. Moreover, besides the com-
munication purpose for mobile terminals and various sensing
devices, the computation and content provision services will
be gradually transferred from local devices to clouds and edge
servers through real-time communications [8], [9], which is
one of the main constituent of ICT energy consumption as
in Fig. 1b. Another critical paradigm is the utilization of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques to provide context-aware
information transmissions and personal-customized services,
as well as realize the automatic network management [1],
[10], [11]. The growing ICT infrastructure, exploding data, and
the increasingly complex network management will result in
surging energy consumption, which poses a great challenge for
the network operators [12], [13]. Data analysis shows that the
ICT sector may cost more than 20% of the total electricity [5]
as in Fig. 1a.
To alleviate the growing energy burden toward 6G, the
academia and industry have conducted extensive research.
And the available solutions to address the huge energy
consumption mainly come from two parts: energy-efﬁcient
network design [14], [15] and energy harvesting [16], [17].
Speciﬁcally, energy harvesting units, such as the solar panels,
wind turbines, and vibration harvester, are widely adopted
to convert the various kinds of energy to electricity for
the communication devices as shown in Fig. 1c. Among
these energy harvesting techniques, Radio Frequency (RF)
harvesting is an important technique which enables not only
the simultaneous information and energy transmission, but
also the utilization of the interference signal. Similar to RF
harvesting, the Intelligent Reﬂecting Surface (IRS) is expected
to be widely deployed to reﬂect the wasted signal to the
receivers to increase the Signal to Interference plus Noise
Ratio (SINR) [18]–[20]. Some other deployment including the
satellites and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), are deployed
to provide seamless coverage. For more efﬁcient energy/power
arXiv:2101.01588v2  [cs.NI]  11 Jan 2021

2
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
1800
2800
3800
4800
5800
6800
7800
8800
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
2030
Energy consumption
Share
(TWh)
(%)
(a) Energy consumption of ICT and its share.
Data centers
Network 
infrastructure
Consumer 
devices
(b) Energy consumption of dif-
ferent parts for ICT.
Solar 
Wind  
Tide  
RF signals
Vibration 
Geothermal
(c) Various energy harvesting sources for
ICT.
Fig. 1: Tendency of energy consumption for ICT and the promising energy harvesting techniques.
management, AI techniques including conventional heuristic
algorithms, the popular Machine Learning (ML), and state-
of-the-art Deep Learning (DL) methods, has been adopted
to simplify the traditional mathematical iteration process and
predict the future network changes as shown in Fig. 2. Since
the future network services have diverse requirements instead
of only the high throughput, traditional mathematical models
aiming at improving the bit-per-Joule may not be applied to
future complex scenarios. To realize the automatic network
management toward the green era, AI is the most promising
solution. And what we need to do is analyze the various
network resources and consider more joint optimizations as
shown in Fig. 2. Accordingly, AI techniques are more widely
adopted to optimize the power control and resource alloca-
tion in many works [21]–[24]. In this research, we conduct
a survey on AI-related service management for 6G green
communications. In the following paragraphs, we introduce
the motivations, scope, and contributions of this paper.
A. Motivation
1) Energy-related Issues for Different Network Services:
Similar to the 5G which has deﬁned three kinds of ser-
vices including the eMBB (enhanced Mobile Broadband),
uRLLC (ultra-Reliable and Low-Latency Communications),
and mMTC (massive Machine Type Communications), some
researchers have also considered service deﬁnitions in 6G [1].
Among these different service deﬁnitions, we expand our
introductions from three typical communication scenarios:
Cellular Network Communications (CNC), Machine Type
Communications (MTC), and Computation Oriented Commu-
nications (COC).
• CNC: Since the majority of energy consumption for cel-
lular networks comes from the BSs, the related research
on green CNC mainly focuses on the deployment and
conﬁgurations of BSs. To optimize energy efﬁciency of
CNCs, the deployment and work states of the BSs should
be carefully analyzed and scheduled. Moreover, for the
working BSs, the power control and resource allocation
are critical to improving the system throughput with
minimum energy consumption. Furthermore, the energy
harvesting technology can be also considered to alleviate
the grid electricity demand of BSs.
• MTC: For the MTC devices most of which are battery-
constrained and difﬁcult to be charged, to alleviate en-
ergy demand can be conducted from the access layer
and network layer. The research mainly concentrates on
the optimization of network access, routing, and relay.
As energy harvesting has been widely regarded as an
important technique for future Internet of Things (IoT)
networks, how to manage the networks considering en-
ergy dynamics is challenging and meaningful.
• COC: Computation and storage services will be an
important part of 6G, which is also energy-aggressive
as shown in Fig. 1b. For the computation parts, the
research to reduce energy consumption mainly analyzes
the ofﬂoading decision computation resource allocation
since each server has a limited capacity. Moreover, the
uneven distribution of computation demand requires the
optimization of server deployment for the balance of
latency and energy consumption. For the Content Deliv-
ery Networks (CDNs), the content caching and delivery
policies directly affect energy consumption.
2) Limitations of Conventional Methods: To alleviate en-
ergy demand and improve energy efﬁciency is usually very
complex since it is not only concerned with the power control,
but also related to many other factors, such as transmission
scheduling, resource allocation, network design, user associ-
ation, and so on. Thus, the formulated problem considering
multiple related factors is non-convex or NP-hard [22], [48],
[49]. And the conventional mathematical approach is to iter-
ative search the global optimum result or divide into two or
multiple sub-problems and search the sub-optimal point [50],
[51]. However, due to the increasing factors necessary to
be considered, the solution space is signiﬁcantly huge, re-
sulting in low convergence or extreme difﬁculty in ﬁnding
the global optimum. Moreover, since 6G network services
have more diversiﬁed requirements for throughput, latency,
and reliability than 5G, common mathematical optimization
methods focusing on the maximization or minimization of a
single metric is not enough. Furthermore, the nonlinear and
unclear relationship among multiple parameters necessary to
be considered makes the mathematical models difﬁcult to be
constructed. Additionally, node mobility and service changes
lead to increasing network dynamics, which may result in

3
TABLE I. Existing Surveys on Energy Harvesting and Green Communications
Publication
Topics in this survey
Difference and enhancements of our survey
Zhang, 2010 [25]
Energy efﬁciency, optical networks
Focus on energy-efﬁcient wireless
communications and network management
Sudevalayam, 2011 [26]
Energy harvesting, wireless
sensor networks
Enhanced coverage including various wireless
scenarios and AI-based green communications
Feng, 2013 [27]
Energy efﬁciency, resource management,
cooperative communication, MIMO, OFDMA
Focus on AI-based energy-efﬁcient
network management
Aziz, 2013 [28]
Energy efﬁciency, wireless sensor
networks, topology control
Enhanced coverage including various wireless
scenarios and AI-based green communications
Budzisz, 2014 [29]
Energy efﬁciency, cellular
networks, WLAN, sleep modes
Enhanced coverage of energy-efﬁcient wireless
communication scenarios
Lu, 2015 [30]
RF Energy harvesting, SWIPT,
CRN, communication protocols
Enhanced coverage of various wireless scenarios
and focus on AI-based green communications
Ismail, 2015 [31]
Energy efﬁciency, cellular networks,
power consumption modeling
Enhanced coverage of various wireless scenarios
and focus on AI-based green communications
Fang, 2015 [32]
Energy efﬁciency, information-centric
networking, content delivery networks
Focus on wireless communication scenarios
Erol-Kantarci, 2015 [33]
Smart grid, data centers,
energy-efﬁcient communications
Focus on energy-efﬁcient wireless
communications and network management
Huang, 2015 [34]
Energy efﬁciency, energy harvesting,
cognitive radio networks
Enhanced coverage including various wireless
scenarios and AI-based green communications
Peng, 2015 [35]
Interference control, energy harvesting,
resource allocation, heterogeneous networks
Focus on AI-based energy-efﬁcient
communications and network management
Mahapatra, 2016 [36]
Energy efﬁciency, tradeoff,
spectrum, routing, scheduling
Focus on state-of-the-art power management
for network performance optimization
Heddeghem, 2016 [37]
Power saving techniques in IP-over-WDM
backbone networks
Focus on the different wireless access networks
Ku, 2016 [38]
Energy harvesting, usage protocol,
energy scheduling, network design
Enhanced coverage of green
communication techniques
Buzzi, 2016 [39]
Energy efﬁciency, 5G, cellular
network, energy harvesting
Enhanced coverage of green
communication techniques
Omairi, 2017 [40]
Energy harvesting, wireless
sensor networks
Enhanced coverage including various wireless
networks and AI-based green communications
Zhang, 2017 [41]
Green communications, tradeoffs,
5G networks
Focus on AI-based power management
for network performance optimization
Alsaba, 2018 [42]
Energy harvesting, beamforming,
SWIPT, physical layer security
Enhanced coverage of energy-efﬁcient wireless
communications and network management
Perera, 2018 [43]
SWIPT, 5G
Focus on energy-efﬁcient communications
and network management
Chen, 2019 [44]
Energy-saving, physical-layer and
cross-layer communication coding
Enhanced coverage including various AI-based
energy-efﬁcient communication techniques
Tedeschi, 2020 [45]
Energy harvesting, security,
green communications, IoT
Focus on AI-based energy-efﬁcient
communications and network management
Ma, 2020, [46]
IoT, energy harvesting, sensing,
computing, and communications
Enhanced coverage including
heterogeneous wireless networks
Hu, 2020 [47]
Energy harvesting management,
5G/B5G communication networks
Enhanced coverage of energy-efﬁcient
communications and focus on AI-based solutions
frequent failures of conventional methods.
3) Advantages of AI Methods: Compared with conventional
methods, AI techniques including the traditional heuristic
algorithms, ML, and the currently popular DL approaches
have signiﬁcant advantages. AI techniques aim to solve the
problems in a naturally intelligent manner [52]. Thus, it can try
to explore the complex relationship among different network
parameters through trial and error [53]. In current years, the
ML/DL methods have been widely used to learn the power
control and resource allocation policy [21], [49], [54], [55],
which greatly alleviate the difﬁculty in manually studying
the complex relationships and constructing the mathematical

4
DESIGN 
DESIGN 
Power
Related metrics
Deep AI model
AI model
Automatic network management
AI-assisted iterations
Future 
AI-based green 
communications
Existing 
DL-based green 
communications
Previous 
smart green 
communications
Fig. 2: The development of AI-based green communications
models. Moreover, many AI models can estimate the changes
of network parameters, which enables the necessary network
adjustment in advance and avoids the potential performance
deterioration [56], [57]. More importantly, the future increas-
ing Internet users and growing trafﬁc provide massive data
resource to adopt and develop AI methods in order to realize
automatic network management.
B. Scope
In this paper, we focus on AI-based research to alleviate
energy cost and improve energy efﬁciency. Different from pre-
vious works which concentrate on some deﬁnite networks [25],
[34], [39], [45], our research is expanded from three 6G com-
munication services: CNC, MTC, and COC. And we mainly
focus on AI techniques utilizing for green communications
including the traditional heuristic algorithms, ML, and the
state-of-the-art DL. Detail introductions will be given in the
following paragraphs.
1) Existing Surveys:
The green communications-related
topics have attracted scholars’ attention in more than 10 years
and Table I lists the concerned survey papers. We can ﬁnd
that these survey papers focus on deﬁnite networks, includ-
ing backbone networks [37], optical networks [58], cellular
networks [27], [29], [31], [41]–[43], [47], Cognitive Radio
Networks (CRNs) [30], [34], and Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSNs) [26], [28], [40]. And different topics, such as improv-
ing energy efﬁciency [25], [27], [28], [31]–[33], [36], energy
harvesting [26], [30], [34], [35], [38], [40], [42], [45]–[47],
balancing energy cost and network performance tradeoff [36],
[41] have been discussed. However, no research focus on AI-
based energy-efﬁcient communication techniques, even though
AI has been regarded as the next paradigm to improve
communication and network performance [1], [59]. Another
problem is that these surveys mainly focus on the relationship
between energy and communication performance. However,
computation and storage services will be an important part for
6G [60], [61]. Thus, to construct the 6G green ICT systems,
we need to make analysis from not only the communication
perspective, but also the computation perspective.
2) Structure of This Survey: The remaining part consists
of ﬁve sections. Before introducing the related research, we
introduce the widely-adopted AI techniques in Sec. II. Then,
we introduce the related research according to the studied
communication scenarios including CNC, MTC, and COC
in Sec. III, IV, and V, respectively. Then, we summarize
the limitations of existing research and envision the future
directions in Sec. VI and conclude this article in Sec. VII.
The structure of this paper is given in Fig. 3.
3) Contribution: After discussing the existing surveys and
introducing our research, the contributions can be summarized
as below:
• We summarize the commonly concerned communication
parts and techniques to alleviate energy demand and
improve energy efﬁciency.
• We introduce the widely-adopted AI models as well as
the state-of-the-art ML/DL methods to improve energy
management and network performance, which can give
some ideas for future related research.
• We analyze the green ICT systems from not only the
communication perspective, but also the viewpoint of
computation. And this survey covers the most promising
6G network scenarios, including THz-enabled cellular
networks, Satellite-Air-Ground Integrated Networks (SA-
GINs), DCNs, Vehicular ad hoc Networks (VANETs), and
IoTs.
• We not only focus on how AI is adopted in these research
works, but also analyze how to design AI models to
improve the performance. Especially, we explain the com-
mon techniques and mathematical methods to improve the
AI accuracy rate.
• We envision the challenges of AI-based 6G green commu-
nications including the overwhelming computation over-
head, security issues, and practical deployment.
II. OVERVIEW OF AI METHODS TOWARDS 6G
ENERGY-EFFICIENT COMMUNICATIONS
Besides the applications in image classiﬁcation [62], natu-
ral language processing [63], and game [64], AI techniques
have been widely studied to optimize the network perfor-
mance [65]–[68], while green communication is an important
application. To improve the performance of AI strategies,
various AI models have been developed and some new ten-
dency has appeared toward more intelligent communication
management. In this section, we give some introductions about
traditional and current AI methods.
AI has been conﬁrmed as an important paradigm for 6G to
realize the network automatic management [1], [59]. However,
the growing network complexity and increasingly stringent
service requirements cause great challenges for existing AI
techniques. Future intelligent network management depends
on the cooperation of various parts: network design, deploy-
ment, resource allocation, and so on. To realize the intelligence
in every part, various kinds of AI techniques will be adopted.

5
Sec. II Commonly 
utilized AI methods for 
green communications
Future perspective 
learning methods
Development of 
DL models
Traditional AI 
methods
Sec. III Cellular network 
communications
Power control and 
resource allocation
BS deployment and 
configuration
Power consumption and 
energy efficiency model
Sec. IV Machine type 
communications
Energy-efficient 
network access 
Basic concepts and existing AI-based literature of green communications
Power consumption 
model
Energy harvesting-
enabled BS
Energy efficient 
transmissions 
Energy harvesting 
and sharing
Energy Efficient
Cloud and edge 
computing
Power consumption 
model
Green content 
caching and 
delivery
Sec. V Computation 
oriented computations
Introductions of AI
Open research issues
Green BS 
management 
for 6G HetNet
Energy efficient
SAGIN
AI-based 
energy efficient 
transmissions
AI-enhanced
energy transfer 
and sharing
Security for 
AI-enabled 
networks
Lightweight AI 
model and 
hardware design
Fig. 3: Main contents and structure of this article
A. Traditional AI Algorithms
The development of AI technology can be separated into
several stages and Fig. 4 gives an example. As shown in this
ﬁgure, the traditional AI techniques utilized in communication
networks mainly consist of two types: the heuristic algorithms
and ML methods [69]. Even though some ML methods also
belong to the heuristic algorithms, such as the Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks (ANNs) and Support Vector Machines (SVMs), we
only consider the non-data-based heuristic models for clear
explanations. Thus, the former one mainly utilizes the online
search of optimum solution through iterations, while the latter
group constructs and train deﬁnite models with extensive data
to accumulate experience. The following paragraphs will give
some more detailed discussions.
1) Heuristic Algorithms: The heuristic algorithms focus on
the NP-hard problem and aim to ﬁnd a good enough solution
given a limited time frame. Generally, the heuristic algorithms
use some shortcuts and run faster compared with traditional
greedy search methods. However, the sacriﬁce is the worse
accuracy rate or near-global optimum. The shortcut methods
vary from different heuristic methods, including the Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO),
and Genetic Algorithm (GA) as shown in Fig. 4.
Particle Swarm Optimization: This optimization method
assumes the dubbed particles move around the search-space
according to the mathematical formulations of their positions
and velocities [70]. The movement of each particle is affected
by its own best position and the best-known positions in the
search-space, which leads to the discovery of improved po-
sitions. Through repeating the process, a satisfactory solution
may be found. This method has been adopted to optimize edge
server deployment [71] and virtual machine placement [72],
[73] in order to improve energy efﬁciency. Moreover, the
method previously mainly adopted for continuous problems
has also been illustrated its availability for a discrete pro-
cess [72], [73]. However, this method is easy to fall into local
optimum in high-dimensional space and has low a convergence
rate.
Ant Colony Optimization: Inspired by the ants’ behavior to
search food, ACO has been proposed to ﬁnd the optimal route
through simulating the revolution [74]. Similar to PSO, ACO
is also based on swarm intelligence, where a grout of artiﬁcial
"ants" which are multiple simulation ants move through the
search space to ﬁnd the optimal route. And for each artiﬁcial
ant, record its position and quality, which can guide other ants
to locate better positions in later simulation iterations. This
method has been widely studied in many network applications
in order to improve energy efﬁciency, such as routing [75],
resource allocation [76], and server deployment [66].
Genetic Algorithm: The GA, which is also termed genetic
programming, borrows the concepts of mutation, crossover,
and selection in evolutionary biology to improve the solu-
tion [77]. In GA, a group of candidate solutions is abstracted
as chromosomes or phenotypes and a pair of chromosomes or
phenotypes can crossover to generate a new generation with
a certain probability. Moreover, the mutation may happen for
each new generation to result in a totally new chromosome or
phenotype. To guide the process toward the expected direction,
ﬁtness is deﬁned to evaluate the individuals in every generation
and the individual with low ﬁtness value is eliminated. GA is
easy to converge and expandable, while it cannot guarantee
the global optimum and depends heavily on the parameter
selection. Researchers have adopted this method to design
the cellular networks [78], [79] and optimize the edge server
deployment [80], [81].
2) Machine Learning Algorithms: As a data-based tech-
nique, various ML algorithms have been developed and
adopted in many network performance optimization strate-
gies [60], [82], [83]. In this part, we focus on three machine
learning algorithms: regression analysis [84], SVM [85], and
K-means clustering [86], which are commonly utilized in
green communications. Another important technique: Rein-

6
Heuristic 
Algorithms
Machine
Learning
Deep
Learning
• Particle Swarm Optimization
• Genetic Algorithm 
• Ant Colony Optimization
• Simulated Annealing
• Supervised learning
• Unsupervised learning
• Reinforcement learning
• Semi-supervised learning
• Supervised/semi-supervised
• Unsupervised learning
• Deep reinforcement learning
• Federated learning
• Transfer learning
• Imitation learning
Increasing accuracy with growing complexity
Fig. 4: Development of AI Techniques
forcement Learning (RL) will be introduced in the next
subsection.
Regression Analysis: This method is mainly utilized to
analyze the relationship between two or among multiple
parameters. The most common application is to map from the
input parameters to the output results with the labeled dataset
and a cost function is usually deﬁned to evaluate the accuracy
rate. According to whether the output is linear or binary, the
regression analysis can be divided into linear regression and
logistic regression. Regression analysis plays an important role
in green communications. For instance, the linear regression
can be utilized to predict future trafﬁc changes, which is
further adopted to determine the energy-efﬁcient transmission
schemes, resource allocation, and computation ofﬂoading [15].
Support Vector Machine: SVM is adopted to analyze data
for classiﬁcation and regression analysis in a supervised learn-
ing manner [85]. An SVM utilizes a set of orthogonal vectors
to deﬁne a hyperplane or a set of hyperplanes to separate
the training data point. And the best hyperplane is the one
that has the largest distance to the nearest training data in any
class. The SVM can be adopted for high-dimensional problems
and suitable for the small dataset. In green communication
management, SVM has been applied to solve the problems
like user association [67] and computation ofﬂoading [87].
K-means Clustering: This method aims to partition multiple
observations into several clusters in which each observation
belongs to the cluster with the nearest center [86]. As an
unsupervised learning method, this technique repeats the pro-
cess to assign the nodes into different clusters and update the
cluster center. To evaluate the assignments, a cost function
based on the distance between the nodes and the cluster center
is deﬁned. K-means clustering is efﬁcient to cluster the users
and associate them to suitable BSs for saving energy [88]–
[90]. It can also be applied to the optimization of cloudlet
placement [91].
B. Development of Deep Learning Models
Since the common ML/DL models and three training man-
ners shown in Fig. 4 have been introduced in many works [82],
[92], we just give some discussion about the development of
ML/DL models which have been utilized to improve energy
efﬁciency.
Most of the current ML/DL models are developed from
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) which can be also termed
Neural Networks (NNs). ANN is constructed by layers of
interconnected units named "artiﬁcial neurons", which is to
model the neurons in a biological brain [93]. Each artiﬁcial
neuron can process the received signals with some non-
linear functions and then transmit the result to neurons in
the next layer through the weighted edges. Thus, the ﬁnal
output of each ANN depends on not only the input signals,
but also the utilized non-linear functions and edge weights.
In recent decades, the ML/DL models have developed fast
on the basis of ANNs, which can be summarized into three
aspects. First, the most obvious development is the increased
number of layers, which result in the deep architectures from
traditional shallow ones. Thanks to the breakthrough in the
training algorithm [94] as well as the hardware developments,
current DL models can have very complex architectures while
keeping a extremely high accuracy rate, which enables them
to be adopted in very complicated scenarios and overwhelm
humans in some applications, such as the board game [64].
Second, connection manners become more complex. Besides
the full connections among neurons in adjacent layers for most
ANNs, the partial connections have also been utilized in some
modern ANNs, such as the Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [95], which enables the ﬂexible processing of the input
where features are not distributed everywhere. And part of the
output can be also further input the learning models, such as
the Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [96], to generate the
time-consecutive variables. Third, researchers have developed
the models to concurrently utilize multiple ANNs to cooper-
atively complete one task, such as the Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) [97] and Actor-Critic (AC) method [98]. The
two ANNs can have the same or different structures while
act different roles. Forth, the techniques such as the different
activation functions, data processing methods, and attention
mechanism signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy rate of current
ML/DL structures.
C. Future Perspective AI Learning Methods
Besides the development in the ML/DL structures, the
learning methods also critically affect the accuracy rate and
computation performance. Future networks will consist of
more complex scenarios and dynamics, which drives us to
consider more advanced AI learning methods. In this part,
besides the traditional supervised learning and unsupervised
learning, we focus on three AI learning methods which will
deﬁnitely attract more attention as shown in Fig. 4.
1) Deep Reinforcement Learning: RL is the dynamically
learning through trial and error to maximize the outcome.
In an RL model, the essential components are the environ-
ment, a deﬁned agent, the state space, the action space, and
reward [99]. In the studied environment, the agent chooses an
action according to the current state, and then gets rewarded
for the correct action or penalized for an incorrect one. In the
training process, the agent follows the existing experience or
explores a new action with a certain probability in order to
maximize the reward. In the traditional RL model, a table is
usually utilized to store the Q value which is the expected
accumulated reward for different actions at each state. The
training process is to ﬁll in the table, which can guide
future action selection. However, with the studied problem

7
becoming complex, the number of states and potential actions
will be huge and even unavailable, which makes the Q-value
table impossible. To solve this problem, the DL models are
adopted to map from the state to the corresponding action,
which is the main concept of Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) [99]. Another advantage is that this method enables
an agent to generalize the value of states it has never seen
before or just has partial information. Due to these advantages,
it has been witnessed that DRL has attracted more attention
to improving energy efﬁciency through optimizing the BS
management [100], resource allocation [101], [102], power
control [21], [103], and computation ofﬂoading [23], [24],
[104].
2) Transfer Learning: Transfer learning is a machine learn-
ing method which aims to utilize the constructed knowledge
system while solving a problem to the different but related
problem [105]. Different from traditional ML models which
learn the knowledge from zero, what is necessary to do for the
new application in related problems is ﬁne-tune the new model
based on existing knowledge system or train part of it. Thus,
transfer learning can signiﬁcantly reduce the computation con-
sumption and required training data, resulting in extended and
accelerated applications. As the network changes frequently
due to the mobility and transmission environment changes,
transfer learning is widely considered to address the similar
scenarios [106]–[109]. On the other hand, the application
range of the existing knowledge system as well as the balance
between training and performance in target scenario are hot
topics and require more attention in existing research [108].
3) Federated Learning: Federated learning is a decentral-
ization method by utilizing the distributed servers or devices
to train and test AI models with the local data [110], [111].
Thus, the edge servers or devices can keep the training data
locally and just need to upload the obtained parameters to the
central controller. What the central controller needs to do is
collect and integrate the parameters of AI models. And then
the edge devices can download AI models to make predictions
or conduct periodical update. Since personal privacy arouses
increasing concern recently, the federated learning technique
will attract growing attention in 6G. Moreover, the cooper-
ative training and running manner of federated learning can
efﬁciently utilize the idle computation resource and reduce
the consumption in the central controller. Furthermore, the
uploading of parameters instead of training data results in
reduced communication overhead [24], [87], [112].
D. Summary
From the above introduction, we can ﬁnd AI techniques
have various application scenarios and should be chosen
according to deﬁnite problems. And with the development of
computation hardware, DL techniques have attracted growing
attention to solving more complex problems. However, this
does not mean that the traditional AI techniques such as
heuristic algorithms and shallow ML models are not suitable
anymore. Since many traditional AI methods have much lower
computation complexity compared with DL, they are suitable
for some resource-limited scenarios. In the following paper,
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Output:
Future 
traffic
Input:
Traffic trace, 
user mobility,
CSI,
⋯
Final result:
BS switching 
policy
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Output:
BS switching 
policy
…
…
Mathematical 
model
(a) Two-step strategy
(b) One-step strategy
Input:
Traffic trace, 
user mobility,
CSI,
⋯
Fig. 5: One-step and two-step AI-based BS switching strategy
we give more detailed explanations about how these meth-
ods to realize green communications in different scenarios.
It should be noted that some important AI techniques are
not introduced in this section, but they still have promising
perspectives, such as imitation learning [113] and quantum
machine learning [114].
III. CELLULAR NETWORK COMMUNICATIONS
Energy consumption of cellular networks comes from the
radio access part and the core part [31]. Some practical
measurements of energy consumption of cellular networks
have been reported in [31], [115]. And the data illustrate
that the BSs account for more than half of the total energy
consumption, in which more than 50% to 80% is utilized for
the power ampliﬁer and feeder. With the utilized frequency
band extended to sub-THz and THz in the 6G era, the coverage
of single BS further shrinks [1], [116]. Then, the required
increasing number of BSs to realize seamless coverage is
expected to consume more energy. Therefore, green com-
munication research for cellular networks mainly focuses on
BSs. In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the power consumption
and energy efﬁciency modeling of cellular networks and then
explain the related AI-based approaches to realize the green
communications from different perspectives.
A. Power Consumption and Energy Efﬁciency of Cellular
Networks
According to our above introductions, we mainly focus on
the Radio Access Network (RAN) part consisting of BSs
and access terminals. We introduce the power consumption
modeling of BSs and the metric "bit-per-Joul" to measure
energy efﬁciency for both the BSs and access terminals.
1) Power Consumption Modeling of BSs: The power con-
sumption of a BS consists of four part: power supply, signal
processing, air conditioning, and the power ampliﬁer [31].
Since part of the power consumption is constant for BSs
at sleep and idle states while the other part is relevant to

8
the workload, energy consumption of a BS can be usually
summarized as [117]:
𝑃𝑏𝑠= 𝑃𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑝+ 𝐼𝑏𝑠{𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑+ 𝜂𝑃𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠}
(1)
where 𝑃𝑏𝑠and 𝑃𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠denote the total power consumption and
maximum transmission power consumption of the BS, while
𝜂∈[0, 1] denotes the usage rate. 𝑃𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑝is the constant power
consumption to sustain the basic functions in sleep mode.
𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑denotes the additional constant power for computation,
backhaul communication, and power supply in active mode.
𝐼𝑏𝑠is a binary parameter representing whether the BS is active
or sleep. According to Equation 1, to reduce energy consump-
tion, we should try our best to turn the idle BS to sleep
mode and minimize the usage in active mode. If we further
consider that future deployed multi-tier heterogeneous BSs are
enabled with various frequency bands up to THz [78], [118],
to reduce the consumed energy of all the BSs should be mainly
dependent on the BS deployment as well as management, user
association, and resource allocation.
2) Energy Efﬁciency Measurement: Energy efﬁciency is to
measure to achieved performance with energy per unit mass.
Thus, in the cellular networks, it is usually deﬁned as the
ratio between the obtained transmission rate and power con-
sumption with the unit of "bit-per-Joule". Different from the
direct energy-saving strategies, to improve energy efﬁciency
is also an important direction towards green communication.
Here we deduce the equations of energy efﬁciency for a UE in
cellular networks and then analyze the potential optimization
strategies. It should be noted that the derivation method also
applies to the BSs.
We assume a multi-cell interference network with multiple
single-antenna UEs and several multi-antenna BSs. The same
spectrum resource is multiplex among the cells [49]. If one
UE’s transmission power and the channel gain to the corre-
sponding BS are 𝑃𝑢
𝑡and 𝐺𝑢, respectively, then the maximum
uplink transmission rate can be calculated as:
𝑅𝑢= 𝐵log (1 + 𝐺𝑃𝑢
𝑁+ 𝐼)
(2)
where 𝑅𝑢is the maximum transmission rate for the uplink of
the considered UE. And 𝐵is the assigned bandwidth, while 𝑁
and 𝐼denote the noise and interference on the utilized channel,
respectively. If we further assume the inefﬁciency of the con-
sidered UE’s power ampliﬁer and static power consumption
are 𝜇and 𝑃𝑢0, respectively, then energy efﬁciency can be
calculated as below:
𝐸𝐸𝑢=
𝑅𝑢
𝜇𝑃𝑢+ 𝑃𝑢0
(3)
According to Equations 2 and 3, we can ﬁnd that the
parameters affecting energy efﬁciency include the assigned
bandwidth, channel gain, transmission power, and interference,
while the noise and static power consumption are usually
constant. Therefore, we need to optimize the allocation of
resource including channels and bandwidth, power control, and
transmission scheduling policy to improve energy efﬁciency.
UE
eNB
UE
eNB
Macro 
BS
eNB
Genetic Algorithm
Data processing
Candidate 
solution
Machine learning 
model
Prediction 
result
Network information
Deployment configurations
Fig. 6: Intelligent BS deployment.
3) Summary: According to our above analysis, the strate-
gies toward the green cellular networks in the 6G era mainly
consists of the deployment and management of BSs [119]–
[121], the power control [21], [122], and resource alloca-
tion [118], [123]–[125]. Another important direction which
has been mentioned in Sec. I is the utilization of renewable
energy to drive the BSs [126]–[129], [129], [130], [130].
B. Base Station Deployment and Conﬁguration
As we mentioned in Sec. I, the signiﬁcant penetration
loss of THz radio signals will cause 6G BSs to cover very
limited areas with increased available frequency bands [1],
both of which contribute to the drastic increase of energy
consumption [4]. However, the uneven distribution and user
mobility result in unbalanced trafﬁc load for different BSs.
According to Equation 1, to reduce energy consumption and
improve efﬁciency, we need to minimize the number and
transmit power of working BSs in the cellular networks. Thus,
the BS deployment policy, workload management, and user
association are three attractive strategies.
1) Base Station Deployment: In the network construction
period, the BS deployment is an important factor to affect the
communication performance and energy consumption. Even
though some deployment positions can be manually selected
according to the population density [131], the increasing dy-
namics, variable propagation characteristics, complex physical
surroundings, and even the climates drive the researchers and
operators to consider more efﬁcient and automatic strategies.
To decrease the number of deployed BSs, Dai and
Zhang [78] consider multi-objective GA. In their research,
the proposed approach ﬁrstly extracts the main features which
determine the strength of the Received Signal Strength (RSS).
Then, multiple ML models including 𝑘-Nearest Neighbor
(KNN) [83], random forest [132], SVM [85], and Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP) [133] are adopted to map the relationship
between the extracted features and RSS values. In the second
stage, the multi-objective GA [77] is adopted to optimize
the locations and operating parameters. Speciﬁcally, the GA
programming process is conducted with a different number
of BSs, and then the minimum number reaching the coverage
requirement is selected. Then, the feasible solutions are evalu-
ated by the proposed ML models. Simulation results illustrate
that the MLP outperforms other ML models in terms of Mean
Absolute Error (MAE). And the coverage rate is improved by
18.5% compared with real-world deployment.

9
Besides the BS deployment planning, the coverage design is
an important factor to affect the required number of BSs and
network performance. Assuming the deployment is done with-
out detailed cell planning, Ho. et al [134] utilize the GA [77]
method to adjust the femtocell coverage in order to optimize
the three network metrics: coverage holes, coverage leakage,
and load balance. In this paper, the authors consider three
metrics including coverage holes, coverage leakage, and load
to deﬁne the ﬁtness function for the evaluation of considered
solutions during the evolution process. To overcome unknown
network dynamics and user mobility, the online learning
method based on periodical updates with real-time network
measurements is adopted. In their proposal, the hierarchical
Markov Models (hMMs) [135] are used to capture the behavior
and generate the load trace of each femtocell with a high
accuracy rate. Then, the results can be used to calculate the
ﬁtness. And the evolution process is illustrated to provide the
continuous performance improvement.
Similar to [78], [134], Moysen et al. [79] also combine
the GA and ML in the design of cellular networks. In their
research, the SVM [85] is trained ofﬂine as a QoS regressor
with the collected data including the Reference Signal Re-
ceived Power (RSRP) and Reference Signal Received Quality
(RSRQ) coming from the serving and neighboring eNBs.
Then, in the online phase, the GA algorithm is utilized to
generate the feasible solutions consisting of the conﬁguration
parameters of eNBs. And then the UE measurements for each
feasible solution is utilized as the input of SVM, of which
the predicted QoS result is adopted to calculate the ﬁtness
function. With the goal of minimizing the PRB per transmitted
Mb, the improved BS conﬁguration set can be found through
the iterations of GA. The case study illustrates the proposed
model can enable the operator to ﬁnd the appropriate deploy-
ment layout and minimize the required resources.
From the above research, it can be found that the deploy-
ment policy is usually found by iterative algorithms, such
as the GA, while the supervised learning-based training is
adopted to predict the multiple network parameters as the input
of GA or evaluate the ﬁtness function as shown in Fig. 6.
The combinations of the heterogeneous algorithms and ML as
shown in Fig. 6 can cooperatively improve the performance
of the proposed model. Since the DL has shown improved
accuracy rate and more advanced policy searching ability, it
is highly expected to witness the application of the prevalent
DL techniques in the BS deployment design.
2) Work State Management:
As the network trafﬁc is
dynamically changing due to user mobility, the multi-tier BSs
can be scheduled to switch on and off to reduce energy
consumption [136]. If the work state of the BS is changed, the
user association information should be adjusted accordingly to
ensure a qualiﬁed connection. Therefore, the work state of BSs
should be scheduled carefully to minimize energy consumption
as well as meet the QoS requirement.
Since the users’ daily movements contribute to the similar
changing tendency of the trafﬁc patterns, the correlation be-
tween the current trafﬁc data and historical experience can be
utilized to design the BS switch on/off policy [106], [107]. To
predict the future trafﬁc with a historical proﬁle and switch off
the BSs with low usage may be the easiest solution. The main
concern to switch off some BSs is the potential deterioration
of QoS. To alleviate the concern, the accuracy rate of trafﬁc
prediction affects network performance in terms of energy
saving and QoS. Gao et al. [137] compare multiple ML
models including Auto-regressive Integrated Moving Average
(ARIMA) [138], prophet, random forest, LSTM, and ensemble
learning in terms of accuracy rate, speed, and complexity.
Then, these models are utilized in trafﬁc prediction. The
prediction results are further utilized to calculate energy ef-
ﬁciency. Thus, some BSs can be switched off if the Key
Performance Index (KPI) is below the predeﬁned threshold.
Similarly, Donevski et al. [139] utilize two kinds of NNs,
including the dense NN and RNN to predict the future trafﬁc
of Small Base Stations (SBSs) according to the previous trace.
Then, a threshold is deﬁned to decide whether the SBS could
be switched off or kept on. Another uniﬁed strategy is given by
directly utilizing the trafﬁc trace to predict the BS switching
scheme as shown in Fig. 5. It should be noted that the threshold
in this proposal is adjustable to achieve a balance between the
coverage loss and efﬁciency loss. Simulation results illustrate
that energy consumption can be reduced by 63%, while more
than 99.9% of requests can be satisﬁed.
Different from the above scenarios which only consider two
work states, Pervaiz et al. [140] analyze the switching policy
for the multi-sleep-level-enabled BSs in a two-tier cellular
network. The machine learning technique is utilized to decide
the best sleep level of SBSs, while the users keep connections
with the Macro Base Stations (MBSs). Speciﬁcally, the SVM
regression model is considered to predict the vacation period
and operation time of the SBSs according to historical network
trafﬁc proﬁle. Then, the prediction results are analyzed along
with energy consumption and latency to decide which sleep
level the SBS should be switched to. It should be noted that the
SVM utilized in this paper can be replaced by other regression
models.
The above research works utilize the historical trafﬁc proﬁle
to efﬁciently train the ML models in a supervised manner.
Researchers have also proposed the approaches to combine
the RL and transfer learning to increase the ﬂexibility and
accelerate the convergence. Authors of [106], [107] consider
the RL agent to select the BS work modes for system power
minimization according to the trafﬁc patterns. Moreover,
transfer learning [105] is exploited to use the past learning
experience in current scenarios, which can accelerate the
learning process. However, these two research works [106],
[107] neglect the QoS even though the authors consider the
user association policy after switching off some BSs. To solve
this problem, in [141], the cost function of the RL model is
deﬁned as an adjustable combination of energy consumption
and service delay instead of only energy consumption [106],
[107]. Consequently, their proposal can not only reduce energy
consumption, but also guarantee the diversiﬁed QoS require-
ments. Additionally, the transfer learning technique is utilized
to accelerate the convergence of the considered AC model [98].
Another similar research [142] also combines the RL and
transfer learning to design the BS switching policy. In this
proposal, the learned knowledge for spectrum assignment is

10
transferred to the process of user association.
Deep Q-learning (DQL) technique has also been applied
to design the BS switching policy based on the network
trafﬁc in [143]. Different from the research [106], [107] which
directly utilizes the trafﬁc pattern, authors in [143] consider a
trafﬁc modeling module to iteratively ﬁt an Interrupted Possion
Process [144] and predict the next trafﬁc belief state. Since
the trafﬁc model is learned in an online fashion, it can capture
the complex dynamics of real-world trafﬁc, which allows the
adopted DQL model to output more accurate action. The
adopted Deep Q-network (DQN) decides the sleeping policy
according to the output brief state of the trafﬁc modeling
module. And the reward function is deﬁned as the sum of
the operation cost and the service reward. To enhance the
original DQN model, a reply memory storing a certain amount
of past experiences are utilized in the training step as a
bootstrapped estimation of true distributions. And the stable
parameters are stored by a separate network to avoid the
training oscillations and divergence. The authors also apply
adaptive reward scaling to match the network outputs. Even
though the research neglects the mutual effects among BSs,
the proposed model is suitable for BSs with different trafﬁc
patterns. And the experiment with a network simulator and
dataset illustrates the advantages of the proposed model over
other ML algorithms.
In the above research, to switch off some BSs in low usage
on the one hand reduces energy consumption, on the other
hand sacriﬁces some network performance due to the resulted
coverage hole. Therefore, the proposed AI approaches usually
deﬁne a weighted sum of energy consumption and QoS as
the reward or cost function to reach a balance [140], [141].
To address the QoS sacriﬁce physically, Panahi et al. [145]
consider the heterogeneous scenario where the Device-to-
Device (D2D) technique is utilized to relay the messages
toward working BSs. To decide the work state for each MBS
and Femtocell Base Station (FBS), the authors propose the
Fuzzy Q-learning (FQL) algorithm which combines the Q-
learning (QL) and Fuzzy Interference System (FIS) [146],
[147]. In the model, the FIS is utilized to map the relationship
between the input energy efﬁciency as well as the service
success probability and the switching policy. In the QL model,
the reward is deﬁned as the weighted probability of a D2D link
success probability, while a threshold of cellular link success
probability is adopted to decide whether the reward is positive
or negative. With the reward function, the 𝜖-greedy algorithm
allows to explore and exploit the potential switch on/off poli-
cies until convergence. Even though every MBS/FBS decides
the switching scheme, the control functionality including the
initialization and termination of the optimization process is
deployed in a central entity. And after each state transition
process, MBSs and FBSs receive the overall shared reward
determined by the central entity, and uses it to update the Q
value to avoid the local selﬁsh optimization.
Lee et al. consider the joint cell activation and user associa-
tion for load balancing and energy saving in their work [148].
The authors adopt the QL method. Speciﬁcally, each BS is
treated as an agent, while the state and action are current
activation variable and mode, respectively. Once each BS
chooses an action, a user association scheme can be found
by relaxing the load balancing problem to a convex problem.
Then, the Q-value based on the heterogeneous network (Het-
Net) power consumption can be calculated to evaluate the pair
of BS activation and user association scheme. By iterating the
process until the threshold is reached, the best scheme which
jointly optimizes the load balancing and energy efﬁciency can
be obtained. Results illustrate the signiﬁcant improvement of
the network performance and energy efﬁciency.
3) User Association and Load Balancing: To switch the
idle BSs to sleep or off mode may result in the overloaded
usage of nearby working BSs, which further leads to the QoS
deterioration. To strike the balance between energy efﬁciency
and QoS, AI-based user association schemes have been stud-
ied.
Zhang et al. adopt the QL technique to decide the user
ofﬂoading policy to reduce energy consumption as well as
improve network throughput [149]. In this paper, the authors
consider that part of the connected users for each SBS can
be ofﬂoaded to neighbor SBS or MBS in the multi-tier
Ultra Dense Networks (UDNs). In this way, the idle SBS
can be turned to sleep or off mode, while the overloaded
SBS can be alleviated to ensure the provided services. The
proposed QL model aims to solve the problem of how much
workload of each SBS can be ofﬂoaded to other BSs. The
state space includes the load of studied cell and neighbor cells
as well as the proportion of users who could be ofﬂoaded.
And to guarantee energy saving performance and network
throughput concurrently, the reward function considers the
EE, throughput, and the load difference among the cells.
The authors also utilize the mean normalization method to
eliminate the sample difference of the considered factors to
deﬁne the reward function.
The authors of [117] combine the game theory and RL
technique to solve the user association and Orthogonal Fre-
quency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) tile assignment.
Speciﬁcally, each player is treated as a player to choose
the heterogeneous NodeB (hgNB) considering the potential
proﬁt and the effects on other players. Since the combinatorial
problem can result in the huge size of potential solutions, the
authors propose two RL approaches to intelligently guide the
search: the regret learning-based algorithm and the ﬁctitious
play-based algorithm. In the former one, the Q value is deﬁned
according to the regret which is interpreted as the difference
between the actual payoff the agent realizes and the potential
payoff if another HeNB is chosen. In the latter one, the agent
reinforces a strategy considered the payoff calculated on the
empirical frequency distribution of the opponents.
Wang et al. [54] utilize the ML techniques to predict the
potential trafﬁc burst and then conduct the trafﬁc-aware vehicle
association. In their proposal, the supervised learning model is
adopted to analyze the statistical correlation between past and
present trafﬁc. And online learning is adopted with the goal of
minimizing regret instead of loss. In the proposed architecture,
every AP performs independent trafﬁc prediction, while the
central coordinator conducts the global trafﬁc balance. Since
the vehicles are traveling across the APs, the trafﬁc changes
in adjacent cells are correlated. Thus, the trafﬁc prediction of

11
each AP is based on the historical data rates and association
information of neighboring APs. Once the central coordinator
obtains the trafﬁc forecast results, it can proactively update the
BS conﬁgurations to change the user association information.
Thus, some BSs can make preparations for the coming trafﬁc
burst, while other BSs can be switched to off mode.
C. Power Control and Resource Allocation
According to Equation 3, to improve the system energy
efﬁciency, the transmit power control and resource alloca-
tion which affects the interference is critical. Since the ul-
tra massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO), Non-
Orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA), and beamforming tech-
nologies will be important techniques in 6G [1], we will
introduce the power control for these parts as well as the
general power control issue.
1) General Power Control: The transmit power of BSs
affects the received SINR at the targeted receivers as well
as interference for users in neighboring cells. Thus, the op-
timization of energy consumption is also jointly considered
with interference mitigation through the transmit power con-
trol. In [21], [55], Zhang et al. utilize the RL technique to
optimize the transmit power for alleviating the interference
in neighboring cells according to the received SINR and user
density. In their proposal, for each transmit power level, every
target BS is assumed to obtain a deﬁned utility according to
the received SINR at the target users, energy consumption,
and interference to non-served users. Then, the Q-value can
be deﬁned according to the utility to measure the overall
performance of the transmit power level. With the Q-function,
the target BSs apply the 𝜖-greedy policy to determine the
optimal transmit power level. The performance illustrates the
reduced energy consumption and interference as well as im-
provement of network throughput. In [21], the authors further
proposed a CNN based DRL model to map from the network
states including the received SINR, user density in the target
cell, and estimated channel conditions in neighboring cells, to
the transmit power level. The performance illustration shows
that the DRL based method can further improve the network
performance in terms of energy consumption, throughput, and
interference. Another important advantage is that the DRL
method converges much faster than the RL based strategy.
Dong et al. [108] utilize the Fully-connected NN (FNN) and
cascaded NN to optimize the transmit power and channel allo-
cation aiming at minimizing the network energy consumption
considering the various service requirements. In this paper, the
arrival rates of services and packets are considered as input.
For the FNN, the transmit power and channel allocation are
adopted as the output. Since the transmit power is a continuous
parameter while channel allocation has discrete values, the
quantization error in the output layer cannot guarantee the
optimal solution even though the DL structure is supervised
trained with the labeled data generated by global optimization
method. To solve this problem, the authors consider the
cascaded FNN structure where the ﬁrst FNN is to predict
the channel allocation and the second for power control of
each user. The authors also analyze the non-stationary channel
conditions and different service types, and then adopt the
transfer learning technique to only ﬁne-tune the last a few
layers of the structures through backpropagation process as
shown in Fig. 7. For the non-stationary wireless channels, the
ﬁrst FNN in cascaded structure only needs to ﬁne-tune the last
a few layers with a small number of data samples as shown
in Fig. 7a. On the other hand, for the reason that the channel
distribution which is the input changes, all layers of the second
FNN need to be ﬁne-tuned. Moreover, the authors mention that
to ﬁne-tune the last a few layers can be also applied when the
service type changes. For instance, the parameters of last a few
layers of the cascaded FNN using for delay-tolerant service
can be ﬁne-tuned to ﬁt the delay-sensitive or URLLC services
as shown in Fig. 7a. Furthermore, if we consider multiple types
of services exist, the authors propose a structure as shown
in Fig. 7b, where a few layers are just cascaded at the end
of FNN for each service. In this way, we can only ﬁne-tune
the parameters of the newly-added layers with a few training
samples.
Mattiesen et al. [49] utilize the ANN to determine the
transmit power according to the channel states. The research
goal of their proposal is to optimize the weighted sum energy
efﬁciency, which is a non-convex problem. To solve this
problem, they ﬁrst propose an improved Branch-and-Bound
(BB) based algorithm to obtain the global optimum solution.
Then, the results obtained with this method can be further
utilized to train the ANNs in a supervised manner. Since
the training is conducted ofﬂine, the ANN can be trained
with a large dataset generated by the proposed BB-based
algorithm to achieve global optimal performance. And the
online calculation of the transmit power based on the ANN
is illustrated to be robust against mismatches between the
training set and real dataset conditions.
Liu et al. [150] study the power allocation in a distributed
antenna system and utilize the KNN model to optimize the
spectrum efﬁciency and energy efﬁciency. In this paper, the
single-cell distributed antenna system with multiple Remote
Access Units (RAUs) is considered and the transmit power of
the RAUs should be optimized. However, the research purpose
is not for further improvement over traditional methods. On
the other hand, they target on solving the high computation
overhead of existing methods and hope to utilize the KNN
to map the relationship between the user location and power
allocation with the assumption of available Channel State
Information (CSI) and orthogonal channel resource. Thus, they
utilize the traditional method to obtain some data samples for
training the KNN models. In the running phase, Euclidean
distance between users in the testing and training groups are
calculated. And the same power of the nearest neighbor in
the training samples is copied to the user in the test group.
The ﬁnal performance analysis shows the KNN can achieve
near-optimal performance.
The power control for multi-layer HetNet is more com-
plex and difﬁcult to reach the global optimum. Zhang and
Liang [103] propose a multi-agent-shared-critic DRL method
conducted in the core network. Speciﬁcally, in the core net-
work, an actor and target actor DNN are trained for every
BS, while a shared DNN pair acts as the critic and target

12
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Source task
Target task
Fine-tuned layers
Input 
Output 
Input 
Output 
Source scenario
Target scenario
Learned knowledge 
transfer
(a) The transfer learning model for non-stationary wireless channels.
Service n
Service 2
…
Service 1
Target task
Input 
Input 
Input 
Output 
Fine-tuned layers
(b) The transfer learning model for multiple types
of services.
Fig. 7: The transfer learning techniques for dynamic channel conditions and multiple service types.
critic. The actor DNNs are trained with redundant experience,
then share the weight parameters with the corresponding local
DNNs. The local DNNs can calculate the transmit power with
the real-time local data. To avoid the problem of involving the
local optimum, the core network utilizes the global experience
to train the critic DNNs. Li et al. [151] combine the graph
theory and RL technique. In this research, the conﬂict graph
constructed according to the received SINR by the users is
utilized to dynamically cluster the cells in order to optimize
the channel allocation. To optimize the power control in cell
clustering, the RL technique is utilized where the SBS acts as
the agent. The state space consists of the interference set and
RSS, while the reward is deﬁned according to the throughput
and interference.
With the extension of utilized frequency bands to THz, the
propagation loss and penetration loss will become increasingly
serious. To solve this problem as well as keep satisﬁed cover-
age, the radius of future THz-enabled BSs will be limited to
10 meters. Thus, the power control to mitigate the interference
in an indoor network will attract increasing attention. Authors
in [152] propose the QL-based distributed and hybrid power
control strategies to optimize the network performance in
terms of throughput, energy efﬁciency, and user experience
satisfaction. For the BSs without mutual communications, each
BS acts as the agent to determine the power for each Resource
Block (RB) in a selﬁsh manner. On the other hand, if a central
controller is provided, it conducts the QL model to decide the
transmit power for each BS. In these two methods, the state
is the received SINR level and current transmit power level,
while the action is the power level that can be assigned to
each RB. The reward functions are deﬁned according to the
throughput.
2) Beamforming: Adaptive beamforming is an important
technology to adjust the directionality of the antenna array
to enable highly directional transmissions in densely pop-
ulated areas. Through the adaptive beamforming technique,
the network performance of the hotspot can be signiﬁcantly
improved, which further results inincreased energy efﬁciency.
However, the hotspot areas are not ﬁxed due to the dra-
matically changing user distribution caused by the lifestyle
and habits. In [125], Liu et al. utilize the LSTM to extract
the spatial and temporal features of UE distributions from
the history dataset and detect future hotspots. Based on the
location information of predicted hotspots, hybrid beamform-
ing which combines the digital and analog beamforming
techniques at the MBS can be adjusted to minimize the total
power consumption. Speciﬁcally, in the analog beamforming
design of massive MIMO systems, the phase shifter can
be adjusted to maximize the large array gain. For hybrid
beamforming, the optimal power allocation and beamforming
directions can be found by converting the original problem
into a convex one. The ﬁnal results also illustrate the reduced
energy consumption.
Du et al. jointly optimize the cell sleeping control and
beamforming operation by DNN models in [153]. The au-
thors ﬁrstly model the power minimization problem through
joint cell sleeping and coordinated beamforming. And the
formulated power minimization problem is constrained by the
required SINR and maximum power threshold. To alleviate
the computation overhead of the numerical method for large-
scale scenarios, the authors consider the DNN models to map
the relationship between the channel coefﬁcients and beam-
forming vectors. And the numerical method can be adopted
to generate the training data which are further utilized to train
the constructed DNN models. To illustrate the performance,

13
the no sleep control and equivalent association strategies are
compared. The ﬁnal results show the DNN-based method can
achieve obvious advantages in terms of power saving and
satisfactions of QoS demands.
The authors of [154] consider the manifold learning [155]
and K-means method [88] to cluster the multi-cell users into
several regions and reduce the complexity of the considered
massive MIMO operation. In the two-tier massive MIMO
system, the interference mitigation and MIMO hybrid precod-
ing process are challenging due to the large channel dimen-
sionality and high complexity caused by the large antenna
count. To alleviate the computation overhead, the authors
ﬁrst utilize the maximum-minimum distance-based K-means
method to cluster users into different groups. Thus, with the
manifold learning, the nonlinear high dimensional channel
coefﬁcients can be transformed into the linear combinations
of neighborhood channel coefﬁcients, resulting in signiﬁcant
dimension reduction of the channel matrix while keeping
the original geometric properties of the underlying channel
manifold. Furthermore, the two-tier beamformers are mainly
characterized by the distribution of low-dimensional manifolds
and split into outer beamformer and inner beamformer, which
are utilized to minimize the inter-cell interference and multi-
user intra-cell interference. The ﬁnal results illustrate the
improved SINR and reduced computation complexity.
Beamforming is also jointly optimized with some other
network factors to improve energy efﬁciency, such as the relay
operations. Zou et al. [156], [157] adopt the DRL technique
to improve the multi-antenna Hybrid AP (HAP) beamforming
strategies and RF-powered relay operations. In their consid-
ered scenario, the individual relay can forward or backscatter
the signal to improve the received SINR. Moreover, the relay
needs to harvest part of the received power to keep continuous
working states. Then, a hierarchical Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradient (H-DDPG) model is proposed to select the relay
mode and optimize the parameters including the beamforming
vector, power splitting ratio, and reﬂection coefﬁcient in order
to maximize the SINR. Speciﬁcally, the considered model sep-
arates the studied problems into two sub-problems. The DQN
model is utilized in the outer loop to select the relay mode.
Once the relay mode is selected, the channel conditions, which
can be used by the AC networks [98] of the inner loop Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) to generate the actions,
representing the values of beamforming and relay operation
parameters. To accelerate the convergence of the conventional
DDPG model caused by the random initialization of double Q-
networks, an optimization model is developed to approximate
the original problem, which can estimate a lower bound of
the target value. The simulations show the improvement of
the ﬁnal reward value and convergence speed compared with
the model-free DDPG method. Moreover, the H-DDPG-based
framework can signiﬁcantly improve throughput.
Since the UAVs are usually adopted as the ﬂying BSs, AI
technique has also been applied for the UAV-enabled cellular
networks. Li et al. [158] combine the ML and Meaning Field
Game (MFG) techniques to jointly optimize the beamforming
and beam-steering to maximize the system sum rate. In the
considered scenario, to optimize hybrid beamforming lies in
the optimization of the hybrid analog beamformer. The Cross-
Entropy (CE) function is adopted to evaluate the obtained
system sum-rate corresponding to each randomly generated
hybrid analog beamformer. In the beam-steering optimization
process, the MFG framework is adopted, where the beams act
as the agents and information interactions are converted into
the interactions with the mass. Considering the conventional
numerical methods require a large dimension of action and
state spaces, the RL technique is adopted to solve the MFG.
Speciﬁcally, the state is deﬁned as the combination of index
offset of antenna elevation and azimuth angles, while the
actions represent the beam selectable path, elevation Angle
of Departure (AoD), and aimuth AoD. The reward function
is deﬁned according to the obtained system rate. Through the
QL process, the optimal action can be chosen.
3) MIMO: In the distributed massive MIMO systems, the
pilot sequences transmitted by users are usually adopted to
estimate the CSI. However, the pilot contamination caused by
the adopted same orthogonal pilot sequences affects the chan-
nel estimation accuracy. To alleviate the pilot contamination,
the power allocated to each pilot sequence is important. Xu
et al. design an unsupervised learning method to predict the
power allocation scheme according to the large-scale channel
fading coefﬁcients [159]. In their research, the authors consider
the Minimum Mean-Square Error (MMSE) channel estimator
and formulate the problem as the sum MSE minimization.
Then, a DNN is exploited with the channel fading coefﬁcients
and power allocation as the input and output, respectively.
With the loss function deﬁned by the sum MSE of channel
estimation, the training process enables the DNN to map
nonlinear relationship from channel fading coefﬁcients to the
optimal pilot power allocation. Similarly, the authors of [14]
consider the same input and output for the designed Deep
Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN). The authors focus
on the maximum sum rate problem in limited-fronthaul cell-
free massive MIMO. And a heuristic sub-optimal approach
is proposed to obtain some data samples, which are to train
the DCNN model. Another similar research [160] is to utilize
the ANN to map from the users’ positions or shadowing
coefﬁcients to the power allocation vector. All of these re-
search works have veriﬁed the advantages of DL techniques
over traditional mathematical models in terms of the power
allocation in massive MIMO systems.
Intelligent power control has also been considered to sup-
press the attack motivation for more secure communications
of MIMO transmitter in [161]. In the considered scenario,
the malicious attacker can choose different attack modes
including jamming, eavesdropping, and spooﬁng according to
the potential reward. The authors combine the game theory
and RL to control the power of MIMO transmitter for the
suppression of the attack motivation considering the required
EE. Speciﬁcally, a game model is formulated between the
MIMO transmitter and the malicious attacker. And the RL
technique is adopted to derive the optimal power control and
transmission probability to reach the Nash Equilibrium (NE) in
favor of the MIMO transmitter. The ﬁnal results illustrate the
improvement of transmission secrecy performance and energy
efﬁciency.

14
The authors of [162] and [48] utilize the CE-based algo-
rithm to solve the hybrid procoding problem in mmWave
massive MIMO systems. Speciﬁcally, the CE-based algorithm
is adopted to update the probability distribution of the analog
beamformer in the iteration process and then the "elite" analog
beamformer which can result in minimum total transmit power
can be found. Moreover, the authors of [48] adaptively weight
different elites according to their objective values, which can
further improve the performance of CE-based algorithms. The
simulations in the two paper verify the CE-based hybrid
precoding scheme can improve energy efﬁciency of mmWave
massive MIMO systems with low complexity.
Different from the above research focusing the intelligent
power control in the massive MIMO system, the authors
of [163] propose a DL-based user-aware antenna allocation
strategy. In their research, the LSTM model trained with the
real dataset is adopted to predict the variations of future
associated users for the massive MIMO-enabled BSs, which is
similar to the applications of DL in trafﬁc forecast [15], [137],
[139]. Based on the prediction results, the optimum number
of BS antennas are allocated to maximize the EE.
4) NOMA:
The NOMA technique introduces an extra
power domain to enable multiple users to be multiplexed
on the same channel resource [101], which can improve the
network capacity and resource efﬁciency. Thus, the resources
including the power and channels are usually considered as the
key metrics to be optimized for network performance improve-
ment. In [101], the authors ﬁrst utilize the DRL technique to
conduct the channel assignment for alleviating the computation
overhead of conventional methods due to the huge solution
space. In the proposal, each BS acts as the agent, while the
NOMA system is regarded as the environment. The attention-
based NN is adopted to model the channel assignment policy,
with the encoder computing the embedding of state space
and decoder outputting the probability distribution over all
states. Once a channel assignment solution is obtained, the
corresponding power allocation can be calculated. Then, the
derived system performance is further utilized to deﬁne the
reward function. And the training process enables the proposed
NN to ﬁnd the optimal channel assignment according to the
system states with low complexity. The authors of [164] also
utilize the DL technique to alleviate the computation overhead
of conventional methods. However, their proposal train the
DNN in a supervised manner, where the downlink channel
gains and corresponding power allocation scheme are as the
input and output, respectively.
Zhang et al. [22] also consider the DL-based radio resource
management to improve EE in NOMA networks. Besides
the subchannel and power allocation considered in [101], the
authors of [22] also analyze the user association since they
consider the two-tier networks including MBSs and SBSs.
The authors optimize these three factors separately with three
methods. Speciﬁcally, the semi-supervised learning-based NNs
and supervised learning-based DNN are adopted to optimize
subchannel assignment and power allocation, respectively,
while the Lagrange dual decomposition method is used to
solve the user association problem. In the optimization of
subchannel assignment, the numerical iterative method, the
two-side matching algorithm, is utilized to generate some
labeled data samples, which cooperate with the unlabeled
data to train the NN in a semi-supervised learning manner.
The authors consider the co-training semi-supervised learning
model [165], where two NNs are trained with the data from
different views to produce the optimal learner. The input
and output of the NNs are the channel gains and allocation
strategies, respectively. Since the classiﬁcation with unlabeled
data still depends on the labeled data, the authors select the
highly conﬁdent labeled data with the most consistency. To
optimize the power allocation, the DNN is trained with the
labels generated by an iterative gradient algorithm.
User clustering is an important factor to improve energy
efﬁciency for NOMA-enabled multi-tier cellular networks.
Zhang et al. [89], [90] adopt the K-means clustering to cluster
the users in Thz MIMO-NOMA systems. In their research, the
users are separated into different clusters of SBSs and MBS
in the coverage. Since the THz transmission is challenged
by the severe path spreading loss and molecular absorption
loss, a suitable clustering scheme can improve the channel
quality and suppress the interference, resulting in higher SINR
and transmission throughput. Then, the authors propose an
enhanced K-means strategy to cluster the users. To overcome
the ﬂuctuation with different initial clustering centers for
the conventional K-means method, the authors calculate the
channel correlation parameters of different cluster heads and
choose the one that maximizes the metric. And the MSE
analysis clearly veriﬁes the improved convergence compared
with the conventional K-means method.
D. Energy Harvesting-enabled Base Station
Motivated by the concern for climate change and inspired
by the development of energy harvesting, the renewable energy
resources have been considered to alleviate the requirement for
the power grid. On the other hand, the dynamics of renewable
energy resources complicate the management and operation
of cellular networks. AI techniques have been widely studied
to track the dynamic harvesting source and optimize network
operations.
To optimize cellular network performance with renewable
energy-enabled BSs, the most direct method is to predict the
harvesting power. For the scenario where BS is powered by a
photovoltaic (PV) panel, battery, and power grid, the authors
of [15] adopt the Block Linear Regression (BLR) [166],
ANN [167], and LSTM [168] to forecast the trafﬁc, while
the linear regression model is utilized to predict the dynamic
harvesting power. To measure the performance of these ML
models, the metrics including the Average Mean Absolute
Relative Error (AMARE) and Average Mean Error (AME) are
analyzed. Then, the prediction results can be utilized to switch
off some micro BS in low usage to save energy.
Miozzo et al. [169] propose a distributed RL-based SBS
switching strategy to balance the network drop rate and energy
consumption for two-tier cellular networks where the SBS
and MBS are powered by the electricity grid and renewable
solar energy. The state space includes the instantaneous energy
harvested, battery level, and trafﬁc load, while the reward is

15
deﬁned according to the system drop rate and battery level.
However, this method has the limitation to reach the system
optimization since each SBS acts as the agent and decides
the working state according to its local state. To alleviate
this problem, the authors further propose a layered learning
optimization framework in [126]. In the lower layer, each
SBS still follows the original manner to decide the switching
scheme in a distributed intelligent manner. The only difference
is that a heuristic function is deﬁned and united with the
regular Q-value to select the optimal policy. Moreover, the
heuristic value is decided in the upper layer in a centralized
manner. Speciﬁcally, the MBS utilizes a multi-layer NN to
forecast its trafﬁc load and judge whether the system is
under-dimensioned or over-dimensioned. Based on the load
estimation, the heuristic value is derived.
Li et al. [170] utilize the DRL method to manage the work
states of the harvesting-enabled SBS in a centralized manner.
In their proposal, the central controller acts as the agent to
decide the action which is a vector consisting of binary units
representing the switching decision for each SBS. And the
state space includes the harvested energy, battery levels, trafﬁc
loads, throughput, and delay of all SBSs. Since the research
aims to balance the EE and QoS, the reward function is deﬁned
as the weighted sum of the two metrics. Using the DNNs to
approximate the Q-value, the ﬁnal simulation results clearly
illustrate the advantages of DQL against the traditional QL
in terms of energy efﬁciency and delay. On the other hand,
this method has a shortcoming that the size of action space
exponentially increases with the number of SBSs, which leads
to abundant explorations during the training process. To solve
this problem, Li et al. [171] consider the DDPG model. In this
model, the AC algorithm [172] is adopted where an actor NN
and a critic NN are adopted to select an action and evaluate
the selected action, respectively. The ﬁnal results verify the
improved energy efﬁciency over DQN and QL methods.
Since
the
renewable
energy-enabled
BSs
are
usually
equipped with batteries to store the harvested energy, to
optimize battery management can also contribute to the EE.
The authors of [173] propose the FQL-based power manage-
ment which combines the QL and FIS [174] to minimize the
electricity expenditures and enhance the battery life span. The
authors also construct the power consumption model related
to the real-time trafﬁc as well as the battery aging model,
which is meaningful to design a more detailed energy-efﬁcient
BS management policy in the future. Piovesan et al. [175]
analyze the constrained capacity of SBS battery and consider
energy sharing in the design of the SBS switching scheme. The
authors utilize and compare imitation learning [176], QL, and
DQL methods. The considered state includes the battery level
and harvested energy, while the reward functions in two RL
models are deﬁned according to the grid energy consumption.
In the imitation learning model, the ANN is supervised trained
with the labeled data generated by a mathematical model [177]
to map the relationship between the system state and switch
action. For the two RL models, the difference is that the Q-
value is stored in a table for QL, while DQL utilizes an ANN
approximator to estimate the Q-value. The ﬁnal comparison
illustrates the DQL model achieves the best performance in
terms of energy saving and system outage, which is more
suitable for the highly-dense scenarios.
Wei et al. [123] utilize the policy gradient-based AC
networks [178] to solve the user scheduling and resource
allocation problem for the optimization of EE in a two-tier
HetNet where the SBSs are powered by solar and wind energy.
Since the wireless fading channels and stochastically harvested
renewable energy have the Markovian property [102], the
optimization of user scheduling and resource allocation can be
formulated as an MDP, which lays the foundation for using
DRL method. In their proposal, the state space consists of
the SINR of each user and battery energy level of each SBS,
which are both continuous variables. The action space includes
the number of allocated users and subchannels as well as the
transmission power. The reward function is deﬁned as the
EE with only the grid energy consumption considered. And
through online training, the ﬁnal numerical analysis illustrates
the improved EE.
From the above introductions, it can be found that AI
techniques are efﬁcient to address the dynamics of energy
harvesting process. And similar to the BSs which are only
powered by electricity grid, AI models can be utilized to op-
timize the switching scheme, user association, power control,
and resource allocation.
E. summary
In the above research, AI techniques can be utilized to
optimize different network parameters in order to reduce en-
ergy consumption or improve the EE. The supervised learning
technique can be utilized to regress the complex unknown
relationships among the network parameters. For example, AI
models can be trained with the data generated by conventional
methods to map the relationship between channel conditions
and power allocation [14], [153]. Thus, AI-based algorithms
can avoid the massive iterations and alleviate the computation
overhead of conventional methods. Moreover, the RL and DRL
techniques can efﬁciently address the problem of the huge size
of solution space [171], [179]. Furthermore, the combinations
of ML/DL models with heuristic algorithms or game theory
can further enhance efﬁciency [79], [117], [134], [161], [180]
IV. MACHINE TYPE COMMUNICATIONS
Besides the cellular networks, MTC techniques provide
users with more choices and ﬂexibility. And the development
of IoT will result in a great surging number of MTC de-
vices [181]. In this section, we ﬁrst give the power consump-
tion model of MTC and introduce the related AI strategies to
reduce energy consumption and improve efﬁciency.
A. Power Consumption Modeling
The actual energy consumption of MTC depends on the
deﬁnite scenario including the transmission policy, devices,
information size, and so on. In this part, we give a general
power consumption model for the single-hop MTC scenario,
by which the multi-hop power consumption model can be
derived.

16
The total power consumption of a machine node is mainly
utilized for two purposes: transmission and receiving packets,
which can be simpliﬁed in the following equation. The details
can be referred to [182].
𝑃𝑚(𝑑) = 𝑃𝑡0 + 𝑃𝑟0 + 𝑃𝑎(𝑑)
(4)
where 𝑃𝑚denotes the total power consumption of an MTC
node. 𝑃𝑡0 and 𝑃𝑟0 are the power consumed by the circuit for
transmitting and receiving and usually regarded as constants.
𝑃𝑎(𝑑) denotes the power consumption of Power Ampliﬁer
(PA), where 𝑑is the transmission distance. From the equation,
it can be found that the total power consumption depends on
the PA. However, the value of 𝑃𝑎(𝑑) is affected by many
factors including the speciﬁc hardware implementation, DC
bias condition, load characteristics, operating frequency, and
the required PA output power 𝑃𝑚𝑡. In a speciﬁc scenario
with given MTC devices, we usually only study the required
minimum PA output power while the other factors are constant.
And the relationship between the two metrics can be denoted
as below:
𝑃𝑚𝑡(𝑑) = 𝜂𝑃𝑎(𝑑)
(5)
where 𝜂denotes the drain efﬁciency of PA. Speciﬁcally, the
value of required minimum PA output power 𝑃𝑚𝑡can be calcu-
lated according to the given SINR threshold at the receiver side
and the path loss model between the transmitter and receiver.
Then, the power consumption for a single-hop MTC model
can be calculated. By adding the power consumption for each
hop, the multi-hop power consumption can be obtained. Since
the deﬁnition of energy efﬁciency in MTC is similar to that
in cellular networks, we can use Equation 3 accordingly.
It can be found the power consumed by the MTC node
is mainly to support the circuit and PA. Since most of the
MTC nodes do not need to keep the working state, the idle
nodes can be turned into the sleep state to reduce the circuit
energy consumption. For the working nodes, how to reduce
the required transmit power 𝑃𝑚𝑡as well as minimize the
transmission time are the main factors considered in green
communications. For the former part, the transmit power
depends on the path loss and required SINR at the receiver.
The practical solutions to reduce the transmit power include
the optimization of network deployment, access technologies,
and resource allocation. To reduce the transmission time, we
need to optimize the transmission protocols, such as routing
and relay. Similar to the renewable energy-enabled BSs, energy
harvesting and sharing are also important techniques toward
green MTC. The following paragraphs introduce the related
research one by one.
B. Energy-Efﬁcient Network Access
Various access technologies have been developed for dif-
ferent MTC scenarios, such as cellular communications, IEEE
802.15.4, WiFi, Narrow-Band IoT (NB-IoT), backscatter com-
munications, and so on. The satellites and Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) have been emerging platforms to provide
Internet access for devices. In this part, we discuss how
AI is utilized to improve energy efﬁciency of these access
technologies.
1) Terrestrial Access Conﬁgurations: Even though cellular
communications can provide stable and high-throughput con-
nections, the high power consumption to keep connections as
well as the expense of the cellular infrastructure challenge
the wide applications in MTC. Moreover, since different
MTC services have heterogeneous QoS requirements and are
distributed in various areas including the sparsely populated
areas and hazardous environments, to develop corresponding
access techniques is important to reduce energy consumption
or extend the lifetime. Some AI researcher works related to
improve energy efﬁciency of these access technologies are
introduced in the following paragraphs. We also give Table II
to give more examples to adopt AI to optimize the access layer
for green communications.
Li et al. adopt the RL technique to optimize the duty cycle
control for each router node in IEEE 802.15.4-based M2M
communications [183], [184]. The authors consider the QL
method to design the superframe order for minimizing the sum
of weighted energy consumption and delay. In the considered
RL model, the agent interacts with the environment and
chooses the suitable superframe order according to the queue
length. And the ﬁnal simulation results verify the improved
energy efﬁciency. Xu et al. also utilize the model-free RL
method to improve the throughput and EE of IEEE 802.15.4-
enabled Industrial IoT (IIoT) networks [185]. In their research,
the QL is adopted to adjust the sampling rate of the control
subsystem and backoff exponential, which is difﬁcult to be
addressed by traditional stochastic modeling approaches. For
the IEEE 802.15.4-based MTC scenarios, Zarwar et al. [186]
give a comprehensive survey on RL-enabled adaptive duty
cycling strategies, which can be referred for more knowledge.
Alenezi et al. focuses on LoRa communication technology
and utilize the K-clustering method to cluster the nodes in
order to reduce the collision rate [187]. To address the high
probability of packet collision caused by random access and si-
multaneous transmissions, the authors ﬁrst utilize the K-means
clustering to separate the IoT nodes into several groups and
then schedule their transmissions according to dynamic prior-
ity. The ﬁnal simulations illustrate the signiﬁcant reduction of
collision rate, which further results in the decreased transmis-
sion delay and energy consumption. Azari and Cavdar [188]
also utilize AI to optimize the performance of LoRa. The
authors consider the Multi-Agent Multi-Arm Bandit (MAB)
to choose the best transmit power level, spreading factor,
and subchannel to maximize the reward which is deﬁned as
a weighted sum of communication reliability and EE. The
analysis illustrates the lightweight complexity of the proposed
algorithms and veriﬁes the performance improvement in terms
of energy efﬁciency and transmission success probability.
Guo and Xiang [202] utilize the distribute multi-agent RL
technique to pick the power ramping factor and preamble for
each UE in the NB-IoT networks. In their research, an adaptive
learning rate based QL algorithm is proposed for the non-
stationary environment, with the reward deﬁned according to
the UE’s energy consumption. Moreover, the learning rate is
adjusted after comparing current expected reward and expec-
tations. The authors of [203] also utilize the QL techniques
to optimize the conﬁgurations in the random access process.

17
TABLE II. Some Related Research Works Using AI to Optimize Network Access for Green MTCs
Research work
Access
technology
Learning
method
AI
model
Input/
state
Output/
action
Target/
metric
Zhou et al.
[189]
UAV
reinforcement
DNN
UAV location,
task information,
energy cost
ofﬂoading
decision
delay
Nguyen et al.
[190]
UAV, D2D
reinforcement
DDPG
D2D SINR
information
harvesting
time
energy
efﬁciency
Chen et al.
[191]
satellite
reinforcement
QL
trafﬁc demand,
channel condition
power
allocation
service
fairness
Özbek et al.
[192]
cellular
network, D2D
supervised
ANN
channel gain
power
allocation
energy
efﬁciency
Zhang et al.
[193]
cellular
network, D2D
reinforcement
DDPG
QoS satisfaction
degree
mode selection,
power control
energy
efﬁciency
Ji et al.
[194]
cellular
network, D2D
reinforcement
DQN
SINR
transmission power
transmission
power change
energy
efﬁciency
Chowdhury et al.
[195]
unknown
reinforcement
DNN
current resource
allocation, service
deman
resource
allocation
strategy
energy cost
and delay
Yang et al.
[196]
WiFi, VLC
reinforcement
DQN
channel status,
channel quality
service types,
service satisﬁcation
network selection,
channel assignment,
power management
energy
efﬁciency
Yang et al.
[197]
CRN
actor-critic
reinforcement
AC
channel states,
device priority,
channel SNR,
trafﬁc load
power control,
spectrum management,
modulation selection
transmission
rate, power
throughput,
and delay
Rahman et al.
[198]
RAN
reinforcement
DQN
content states,
channel states,
and power
caching policy,
and power
allocation
delay
Sharma et al.
[199], [200]
unknown
reinforcement
DNN
battery states, and
channel gains
transmit power
throughput
Bao et al.
[201]
cellular
reinforcement
QL
battery states
transmit power
SNR
Their proposal focuses on the optimization of three parameters
including the number of random access channel periods, the
repetition value, and the number of preambles in each access
period. In the single-cell scenario, the tabular QL, linear
approximation-based QL, and DQN methods are adopted by
the eNB to predict the number of preambles in order to
maximize the served IoT devices. In the multi-cell scenario,
the huge size of the action space composed of three parameters
is a great challenge. The authors consider an action aggregated
approach by converting the selection of deﬁnite value to the
choice of increase or decrease. Then, the three QL methods
are compared with a cooperative multi-agent DQL proposed.
Lien et al. study the intelligent radio access in vehicular
network to strike the balance among energy efﬁciency, latency,
and reliability [204]. The authors concentrate on the fronthaul
radio resource starvation and propose an RL-based MAB
algorithm to avoid the backhaul transmission in the core
networks. In the considered scenario, each vehicle can simul-
taneously access multiple BSs to request the contents using
the feedbackless transmission schemes, which further means
different communication reliability, energy consumption, and
latency. To strike the tradeoff among energy efﬁciency, latency,
and reliability, the authors ﬁrst formulate the Lyapunov func-
tion [205] to derive the optimum number of BSs to meet the
content request of each vehicle. Then, to decide whether to
use the feedback-based or feedbackless transmission scheme,
the authors construct the MAB model and utilize the 𝜖-greedy
RL algorithm to solve this problem. Speciﬁcally, the research
goal of this step is to minimize the long-term expected cost
which is deﬁned as the weighted sum of request drop event,
transmission latency, and energy consumption.
2) Access through Satellites: Satellites can provide seam-
less coverage for IoT devices, especially for rural and remote
areas. However, the large path loss challenges the system
EE and lifetime. Authors of [206] study DRL-based channel
allocation to improve the system EE as well as guarantee the
QoS for LEO satellite IoTs. The authors formulate the channel
resource allocation as an MDP and further utilize the DRL
technique to solve it. In their proposal, the agent is assumed
to choose an action to assign the channels according to the
state which is deﬁned as the user task size and location. The
authors also construct the users’ requests into an image as the

18
Policy
Environment 
Value 
function 
action
State Critic 
Actor 
Reward  
TD error
Agent
channel
UE
Fig. 8: The Actor-Critic model for UAV-assisted IoT network.
input of the considered NN, which can reduce the input size
and accelerate the learning process. The proposed intelligent
approach is illustrated to save more than 60% of energy.
Sun et al. utilize the DL technique to optimize the Suc-
cessive Interference Cancellation (SIC) decoding order for
NOMA downlink system in satellite IoT networks [207]. In
this research, the long-term joint power allocation and rate
control scheme is formulated to improve the NOMA downlink
rate. Then, the Lyapunou optimization framework [205] is
adopted to convert the original problem to a series of on-
line optimization sub-problems, where the power allocation
depends on the SIC decoding order, which is further affected
by the queue state and channel states. Due to the continuous
changes, the DNN model is adopted to map from the states of
queues and channels to the SIC decoding order. Moreover, the
DNN is trained in a supervised manner with the data obtained
by traversing all possible choices.
Han et al. combine the game theory and DRL to optimize
the anti-jamming performance of satellite-enabled army IoT
networks [208]. In their considered scenario, the sensing
devices are separated into different groups and the messages
are relayed by the sink nodes to reduce energy consumption.
Assuming the smart jammers may launch jamming attacks to
the IoT devices, the authors ﬁrst utilize the DRL technique
to select the optimal location of jammers for the maximum
jamming effect. In the DRL model, the reward is deﬁned with
the estimated transmission energy consumption and minimal
value without jamming attacks into account. With the deﬁned
jamming policy, the anti-jamming part is constructed as a
hierarchical anti-jamming stackelberg game, which is not the
focus of this paper.
3) Access through UAVs: Since UAVs can be easily con-
trolled to ﬂy over the communication terminals, they have
been widely recognized as air BSs or gateway to provide
periodical Internet connections [66], [189], [209], [210]. Liu et
al. [66] consider the UAVs to collect the sensing information
aggregated by the collection point from terrestrial IoT end
terminals. In the considered scenario, the ﬂying trajectory of
UAVs affects the received SINR, which further impacts the
number of uploaded packets for each collection point in a
round. Then, the authors utilize the DRL technique to optimize
the trajectory with the deﬁned reward considering EE and
packet delay priority. The dueling DQN is utilized to decide
the moving direction according to current states which consist
of both the delay priority and energy consumption priority.
The simulation illustrates the improved average reward with
different network scale and data density.
Cao et al. [210] utilize the DRL technique to optimize
the channel allocation and transmit power control for the
IoT nodes. Speciﬁcally, with the ﬁxed trajectory assumed,
the UAV acts as the agent to select a suitable channel and
transmit power for every IoT uplink at each time slot in
order to maximize the reward which is deﬁned as the EE
of all IoT nodes. The AC network [178] is adopted in the
DRL algorithm, where the actor and critic NN have different
structures as shown in Fig. 8. Moreover, the authors also
try the different number of trajectory steps to update the
channel and power allocations through the simulations. Similar
research in [211] also considers the UAV-enabled BS with the
predeﬁned trajectory. However, the research aims to optimize
user scheduling and hovering time assignment for improving
the EE of battery-constrained UAVs. Since the problem is a
discrete constrained combinatorial problem that is beyond the
conventional AC model, the authors consider the stochastic
policy to address the issue of huge discrete spaces. A ﬂexible
reward function is deﬁned with an adjustable parameter. The
ﬁnal performance illustrates that the proposed model can save
nearly 30% of energy compared with the conventional AC
model.
The above paragraphs give some typical research works on
AI-based network access toward green MTCs. We further list
some research works and the utilized AI techniques as shown
in Table II.
C. Energy-Efﬁcient Transmissions
In many MTC scenarios, the messages are transmitted in a
cooperative manner from the senders to receivers or APs due
to the resource constraints. Then, the routing path design or
the relay selection affects both the network performance and
power consumption [212], [213]. Different from the message
transmission in wired networks, the path and relay selection of
MTC scenarios needs to consider more issues, such as energy
dynamics [213], [214], node mobility [204], [215], spectrum
efﬁciency [212], [216], QoS [217], [218], and even the infor-
mation security [219], [220]. The following paragraphs and
Table III show the related research.
1) Routing: Liu et al. study the routing problem in the
wide area mesh IoT networks and consider the RL technique
to address the limitations of conventional methods in terms
of energy sensitivity [212]. In their proposal, the model-free
RL method called temporal difference learning is adopted to
populate and update the routing table. Speciﬁcally, the routing
metric which indicates the probability of selecting a particular
adjacent node is calculated by using a Boltzmann exploration
process. And once the routing metric values of the visited
nodes in all paths are calculated, the path quality value is
computed using the RL method. To improve energy sensitivity
of the routing method, the cost function is deﬁned according
to the transmission power as well as the remaining energy
of transmit and receive nodes. The ﬁnal simulation results
illustrate the performance improvement in terms of energy
efﬁciency as well as the success rate and spectrum efﬁciency.
The routing design in underwater sensor networks (UWSN)
is a hot application of AI techniques. Zhou et al. utilize the

19
QL method to select the next node and deﬁne the reward
function according to the residual energy and depth infor-
mation for a balance of End-to-End (E2E) delay and energy
consumption [221]. The utilization of QL enables the long-
term reward taken into account, which ﬁnally reaches the
global optimization. By sorting the neighbors according to
the calculated Q-value, the node with higher priority can be
selected to forward packets, while the other neighbors with
smaller Q-values are suppressed for energy saving. Hu and
Fei also adopt the QL to solve the routing in UWSNs [222],
while the research goal is to make the residual energy of sensor
nodes more evenly distributed for the maximum network
lifetime. In the RL proposal, the authors consider not only
the residual energy but also energy distribution in a group
of sensor nodes to deﬁne the cost function, which is further
utilized to calculate the reward and Q-value for different
actions indicating various next nodes. The authors in this
paper also illustrate that the proposed method can converge
for dynamic scenarios. And ﬁnal performance results indicate
the lifetime can be extended up to 20%.
In [223], authors adopt supervised learning-based MLP
algorithm to improve the routing performance and energy
efﬁciency for the IoT low power networks. Different from
the other works [212], [221], [222] which utilize AI models
to predict the next node directly, [223] aims at optimizing
the value of transmission range of each node to improve the
routing performance and minimizing energy consumption. In
this paper, the authors ﬁrst construct an IoT network to collect
the labeled data including node positions and corresponding
transmission range. Then, the MLP is trained with the labeled
data to map the relationship from the node position to the
optimal transmission range. One of the advantages of this
proposal is to address the high dynamics of IoT networks. And
the ﬁnal simulations illustrate the extension of the network
lifetime.
Mostafaei studies the multi-constrained routing problem in
WSNs and proposes a distributed learning approach [217],
where each node is regarded as a learning automaton. After
the initial phase each learning automaton senses the neighbor
nodes to construct the action space, it transmits a packet by
a randomly selected action. Once the packet reaches the sink
node, the environment will feedback a reinforcement signal
which can be a penalty or a reward to evaluate the selected
action. Then, the transmission probability of each action for
every node can be updated.
2) Relay and D2D: Compared with routing, relay and D2D
techniques provide more ﬂexibility. AI can be adopted to
decide whether to relay or not and help to select the optimal
relay node according to the energy condition. Mastronarde et
al. utilize the MDP to formulate the relay decision for each
UE in the cellular networks [228]. To maximize the long-
term utility, the authors proposed a supervised learning-based
model to help each UE to learn the optimal cooperation policy
online. Speciﬁcally, the UE estimates three parameters, namely
the outbound relay demand rate, inbound relay demand rate,
and relay recruitment efﬁciency in an online manner. Then,
the estimated values can be utilized to calculate the transition
probability and utility functions. To address the problem of
frequent recomputing, the authors ﬁrst compute a collection
of cooperation policies ofﬂine. Then, in the online phase, the
estimated parameter values can be adopted to calculate energy
cost, which ﬁnally helps to choose the optimal policy.
He et al. study the relay selection problem in the air-to-
ground VANETs (A2G VANETs) and adopt the QL to choose
the relay node in order to balance the network performance
and energy consumption [229]. In this paper, the ﬂying UAVs
and the ground vehicles transmit messages to each other
by multi-hop relaying. Then, the relay selection affects the
packet delivery ratio, latency, signal overhead, and energy
consumption, which is further formulated to a multi-objective
optimization problem. The authors construct the Q value table
including the state and action indicating the network states and
relay selection, respectively. Through attempting different re-
lay selections, the Q values for different choices can be ﬁnally
calculated. The extensive performance analysis illustrates the
improvement in terms of packet delivery ratio, latency, hop
counts, and signal overhead, which means increased energy
efﬁciency.
Wang et al. also utilize QL to optimize the power allo-
cation and D2D relay selection for maximizing the energy
efﬁciency [218]. As the relay selection policy affects energy
efﬁciency of all D2D pairs, the authors construct a ﬁnite MDP
and adopt QL to choose which neighbor node is selected.
In the QL model, the state space is deﬁned with the four
cases that whether energy efﬁciency of ﬁrst-hop and second-
hop D2D links is below or above the deﬁnite lower band.
Each D2D pair acts as the agent to select a neighbor node in
their region with the target of maximizing the reward deﬁned
according to their energy efﬁciency. Through the iteration
process in the QL algorithm, the Q-value table of each D2D
pair can be updated and the optimal relay with the maximum
Q-value is chosen. The ﬁnal simulation clearly illustrates the
improvement of energy efﬁciency.
Hashima et al. [230] utilize the stochastic MAB [231]
to model the neighbor discovery and selection problem in
mmWave D2D networks. And the considered MAB model
aims to maximize the long-term reward which is deﬁned as
the average throughput of the devices subject to the resid-
ual energy-constraint of nearby devices. To solve this MAB
problem, a family of upper conﬁdence bound algorithm plus
Thomson sampling is utilized by incorporating residual energy
constraints. The ﬁnal results illustrate the improved average
energy efﬁciency and extended network lifetime. Authors
of [232] also focus on the relay selection in D2D mmWave
networks to increase the connection reliability. However, they
utilize the DL model to predict the best relay device according
to the distance between the device and BS or other devices,
node mobility, signal strength, and residual energy. Speciﬁ-
cally, the proposed relay selection algorithm consists of two
phases. In the online phase, the random training values are
generated with the best relay labels to train the considered
DNN model. Then, the second phase is to utilize the trained
DNN to predict the best relay.

20
TABLE III. Some Related Research Works Using AI to Optimize Transmissions for Green MTCs
Research
work
Network
scenario
Learning
method
AI
model
Input
/state
Output/
action
Target/
reward
Fu et al.
[224]
vehicular
energy
network
supervised
LSTM
trafﬁc ﬂow
future
trafﬁc
optimizing routing
and storage
allocation
Jin et al.
[225]
UWSN
reinforcement
QL
information of
neighbors and
links
packet
forwarding
constant cost,
congestion cost,
delay, and energy
consumption
Huang et al.
[226]
wireless
sensor
network
supervised
CNN
adjacency
matrix
link
reliability
optimizing
routing
Zhang et al.
[179]
relay
network
reinforcement
QL
states of
link, buffer,
and battery
link selection
maximizing
receiving data
He et al.
[227]
Cognitive
Radio
Network
reinforcement
QL
harvested energy,
battery,
destination nodes
next hop
optimizing energy efﬁciency
D. Energy Harvesting and Sharing
Similar to the cellular networks, MTC terminals can also
be charged by the ambient energy in a wireless manner [206],
[233]. To drive the MTC toward the green 6G era, two com-
mon energy harvesting techniques are expected to be widely
applied: renewable energy harvesting and RF harvesting. The
formal one considers renewable green energy sources such
as solar, winding, tide, and so on to reduce the utilization of
fossil fuel. The latter one is to efﬁciently harvest the dissipated
energy which counts the majority in RF signals but cannot be
used [234]. On the other hand, the dynamics of the harvesting
power further complicate the network performance improve-
ment or energy efﬁciency optimization, which is the reason for
the application of AI techniques. In the following paragraphs,
we introduce the related AI-based research considering the two
EH techniques.
1) Renewable Energy Harvesting: Chu et al. utilize the RL
technique to design the multiaccess control policy and predict
the future battery state [17]. In their research, the authors
consider the uplink communication scenario where multiple
energy harvesting-enabled UEs access the BS with the limited
channel resource. The authors ﬁrstly assume the user battery
and channel states are available for the BS, then utilize the
DQN based LSTM to design the UE uplink access scheme. In
this model, the system state includes the channel conditions
and UE battery levels. The reward is deﬁned as the discounted
system sum rate of the long term. The consideration of
multiple time slots drives the authors to adopt the LSTM
model, which can make sequential decisions. The constructed
LSTM model assists the BS to select the UEs at each time
slot in order to maximize the system sum rate. In the second
proposal, the authors utilize the RL based LSTM to predict
the battery level. In this RL model, the considered state space
includes the access scheduling history, the previous UE battery
predictions, and the practical UE battery information. Since the
purpose is to maximize the prediction accuracy, the reward is
deﬁned according to the long-term prediction loss. Finally, the
authors combine the predictions of access control and battery
information and design a two-layer LSTM DQN network. The
ﬁrst layer is to predict the battery level, which is adopted
as part of the state space in the access control prediction.
Extensive simulations illustrate the improvement of the system
sum rate, further resulting in improved energy efﬁciency.
Similar to the considered scenario in [17], the same authors
apply the DRL techniques to optimize the joint control of
power and access [235]. Generally, the proposal consists of
two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, the LSTM model is utilized to
predict the battery states, which is similar to that in [17]. In the
control stage, the authors utilize the AC algorithm and DQN to
decide the access and power scheme. The state space consists
of the channel power gain, predicted UE battery level, history
information of power control policy, and selected UE’s true
battery, while the action represents the transmit power which
has a continuous value. The reward is deﬁned according to the
achieved transmission rate, thus the algorithm aims to improve
the system throughput. The proposed LSTM model is veriﬁed
a high accuracy rate to predict the battery state and the new
approach enables the improved average sum rate compared
with conventional algorithms as well as DQN-based models.
From the above introduction, we can ﬁnd that using the
AI method to predict the harvesting-enabled battery state is
an efﬁcient method to adjust the network conﬁgurations for
performance optimization. Authors of [16], [233] utilize the
non-linear regression method to ﬁnd the relationship between
future harvesting power and the historical records. Then, with
the estimated harvesting power, the IoT node can adjust the
security conﬁgurations to provide qualiﬁed service as well
as reduce the outage probability. In [233], the authors also
study the THz-enabled 6G IoT scenario and show the achieved
network throughput improvement and extended working time.
2) Radio Frequency Harvesting: Abuzainab et al. focus
on the problem of adversarial learning in a communication

21
network where the devices are served and powered by the
Hybrid Access Point (HAP) [236]. In the considered scenario,
the HAP needs to estimate the transmission power of the
devices and determine the suitable energy signal to reduce
the packet drop rate of the devices. As the adversary may alter
the HAP’s estimate, the authors propose a robust unsupervised
Bayesian learning method. In the proposed model, the HAP
is assumed to have full CSI, which is utilized to calculate the
transmission power according to the received signal power.
In the nonparametric Bayesian learning model, the Dirichlet
distribution is used to calculate the posterior distribution of
the probability vector of the device transmission power. Then,
the HAP can ﬁnd the optimal transmission power to maximize
the utility while not depleting the device’s battery. Compared
with the conventional Bayesian learning method, the proposed
approach can achieve performance in terms of packet drop
rate without jeopardizing energy consumption. The proposed
learning scheme also exhibits improved energy efﬁciency
compared with a ﬁxed power transmission policy.
Kwan et al. study the RF harvesting from intended and
unintended sources and propose machine learning-based wake-
up scheduling policy for on-body sensors [237]. To address
the unpredictable nature and low amount of energy harvesting
from the RF signals of unindented sources make it difﬁcult to
decide the wake-up time, the authors consider two machine
learning techniques including linear regression and ANN to
predict the wake-up time. In the linear regression-based fore-
caster, the authors consider the current capacitor charge level
and average energy harvesting rate to address the dynamics
caused by user mobility and changing channel conditions. The
proposed ANN is to predict the next wake-up time considering
the last successful wake-up time and energy level. The ﬁnal
simulation results illustrate the two models both achieve high
accuracy rate.
Similar to [237], the authors of [238] also focus on the opti-
mization of active time of IoT nodes which are powered by RF
harvesting energy. In this paper, besides information collection
and energy provision, the HAP is also responsible for setting
the sampling time of the IoT devices. The challenge of this
problem is that the HAP cannot have exact knowledge of the
harvested energy for each IoT device due to the imprecise
knowledge of CSI. To address this issue, the authors combine
stochastic programming and RL techniques. Firstly, stochastic
programming is used to maximize the minimum sampling time
among all devices. To tackle the limitation of an unknown
and dynamic probability distribution, the RL technique is
adopted where the assumed agent decides the sampling and
charging time according to the states corresponding to the
device battery levels. The reward function is measured by
the maximum-minimum active time of devices. Moreover,
the authors model the large-state or continuous space using
linear function approximation. The ﬁnal results illustrate the
RL approach can achieve as high as 93% of the minimum
sampling time computed by stochastic programming.
E. Summary
In this section, we analyze the AI-based research toward
green MTCs. Compared with conventional methods, the ad-
vantage of AI is that it can address the uncertainty and
alleviate the failure ratio during the access and transmission
process [185], [203], [212], [214], [222]. For energy harvesting
process, AI enables more knowledge about future available
power and battery status, which enables necessary conﬁgura-
tions towards improved energy efﬁciency [17], [235].
V. COMPUTING ORIENTED COMMUNICATIONS
In the 6G era, the computation services are expected to play
a more important role in people’s work and life. With the
great leap in transmission rate and communication capacity,
an increasing number of applications will be ofﬂoaded to the
cloud or edge server for the nearly real-time results instead
of execution locally. Moreover, to store the contents on the
cloud and edge servers can provide users with more efﬁcient
and ﬂexible service. Additionally, the widespread application
of AI techniques also drives the development of computing
oriented communications to accelerate network management.
In this section, we discuss the power consumption model and
introduce the existing AI-based research aiming to improve
energy efﬁciency and save energy consumption of the COC
scenarios.
A. Power Consumption Modeling
The consuming power of the servers depends on the Central
Processing Unit (CPU) or Graphic Processing Unit (GPU)
utilization which usually keeps changing. Generally, energy
consumption of a server is approximately linearly dependent
on the CPU and GPU usage. If we assume 𝑃𝑖𝑑𝑙𝑒and 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥to
denote the consuming power of a server working at idle state
and full state, respectively, the following equations can model
energy consumption when the utilization rate is denoted as
𝑢[71], [72]:
𝑃(𝑡) = 𝑃𝑖𝑑𝑙𝑒+ (𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑃𝑖𝑑𝑙𝑒) × 𝑢(𝑡)
(6)
𝐸=
∫
𝑡
𝑃(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
(7)
Thus, for a cluster of servers, the total energy consumption
can be calculated by summing energy cost of all servers.
From Equations 6, it can be found that to save energy
consumption, we can reduce the utilization rate of each server.
However, it has been investigated that the server in the idle
state consumes approximately more than 60% of the peak
load electricity [239], [240], which makes the problem more
complicated. For a given workload, to utilize only one or sever
servers at the full state and turn off the other servers may result
in low energy consumption, but on the other hand contribute
to the high delay. Therefore, how to allocate the computation
resources to balance energy consumption and service quality
is an important direction in the research [149], [241], [242].
B. Energy-Efﬁcient Cloud and Edge Computing
According to Equation 6, to reduce the CPU/GPU usage
can alleviate energy cost. In this part, we discuss the three
common issues to alleviate the computation resource usage
including ofﬂoading decision, resource allocation, and server
placement.

22
…
…
Global 
model
Local model n
hgNB 1: 
UAV
hgNB 2: 
HAB
hgNB n: 
BS
End 
devices
Local model 2
Local model 1
Aggregate and update
Fig. 9: The federated learning structure for heterogeneous
network architecture.
1) Ofﬂoading Decision: The existing networks usually con-
sist of multiple types of computation platforms including the
cloud, fog, and edge computation servers. Moreover, the com-
putation tasks can be also executed locally if necessary. The
heterogeneous computation platforms have variable latency as
well as different energy consumption. Moreover, computation
ofﬂoading choice also means different communication over-
head. In this part, we introduce how AI is utilized to decide
the computation ofﬂoading policy for green communications.
Wang et al. [243] combine the heuristic algorithm and DL to
optimize the computation ofﬂoading policy to the fog or cloud
servers. In this paper, the authors analyze energy consumption
and latency to ﬁnish the computation task by fog servers
and cloud server, and then formulate a Mixed Integer Non-
Linear Programming (MINLP) problem aiming at minimizing
the total energy cost under the latency constraint. To solve
the NP-hard problem, the authors ﬁrst utilize the simulated
annealing algorithm [244] to ﬁnd some optimal solutions,
which is further utilized to train the constructed CNN model.
Moreover, the training process is periodically conducted to
update the parameters of the considered CNN models, while
the greedy algorithm is utilized as compensation if the result
of CNN models is not reasonable.
To alleviate the computing overhead for meeting the latency
requirement, Gong et al. [23] consider the high-rate RF
communication and low-power backscatter communications to
realize active ofﬂoading and passive ofﬂoading, respectively.
Since the local computing, active ofﬂoading, and passive of-
ﬂoading have different computation latency as well as various
energy consumption, DRL is adopted to optimize the suit-
able computation and transmission policy. The assumed agent
chooses from three actions: local computing, active ofﬂoading,
and passive ofﬂoading, given the channel conditions, energy
status, and workload in each time slot. The ﬁnal results
illustrate that the DRL-based method can reduce the outage
probability by intelligently scheduling the ofﬂoading policy.
Moreover, this paper illustrates many perspective directions of
DRL-based backscatter-aided data ofﬂoading in Mobile Edge
Computing (MEC) scenarios.
Yan [245] consider the single user with multiple indepen-
dent tasks meaning that the results of some computing tasks
may be utilized as the input of some others. The authors ﬁrst
adopt the task call graph [104] to model the inter-dependency
among different computation components. To reduce energy
consumption of mobile devices and the computation latency,
the authors deﬁne the reward function with weighted energy
consumption and latency, then consider two problems: how
to ofﬂoad the computation tasks and how to allocate the
CPU cycles for different tasks. Since the ﬁrst problem is a
combinatorial binary problem while the second one is convex,
the authors adopt the DRL technique to decide the ofﬂoading
policy. The AC learning structure [172] is utilized where a
DNN in the actor network is adopted to learn the relationship
between the input states (wireless channels and edge CPU
frequency) and the ofﬂoading policy, while the critic network
is to evaluate the energy and latency performance of different
ofﬂoading strategies. Different from the conventional critic
network which utilizes the DNN to evaluate the ofﬂoading
decisions, the authors deﬁne the one-climb policy where the
tasks in one path of the task graph can only migrate once
from the mobile device to edge servers, which can reduce
the number of performance evaluations, resulting in reduced
complexity and accelerated computations of the DRL method.
Ren et al. [24] unite the federated learning and DRL to op-
timize the partial ofﬂoading policy for the energy harvesting-
enabled IoT nodes. Different from the centralized learning
technique, the adopted federated learning enables every IoT
node to avoid the sensing data uploading to the edge node,
which can protect data privacy and alleviate the transmission
overhead. Speciﬁcally, the edge node only acquires the pa-
rameters of the trained DRL agent, while a random set of
IoT devices are selected to download the parameters from
the edge node, train the DRL agent with newly collected
data, and ﬁnally upload the updated parameters to the edge
node. In this paper, the authors also compare with central-
ized DRL in terms of training performance and network
performance. Results show that the training of FL-based DRL
can ﬁnally approach that of centralized DRL, even though it
ﬂuctuates more seriously. And under varying computation task
generation probability, the federated learning-enabled DRL
can improve the overall network performance, especially in
terms of queuing delay and task drop rate. Similar research
is also conducted in [112]. The authors demonstrate that
the federated learning-based DRL models can be applied to
various environments with reduced transmission consumption
and enhanced privacy protection.
Different from the above works focusing on static scenarios,
the authors of [113] adopt multiple ML techniques to optimize
the cooperative Vehicular Edge Computing (VEC) and cloud
computing in dynamic vehicular networks. As the uncertain
vehicle mobility results in the dynamic network structure and
unstable connections, which leads to low efﬁciency for con-
ventional heuristic searching strategies, ML is adopted [246] to
cluster the vehicles into groups according to their connection
time, where each group consists of a Road Side Unit (RSU),
multiple service demanding vehicles, and service providing
vehicles. And the RSU decide whether ofﬂoading the tasks
to the cloud servers or conduct them locally. To schedule the
computation tasks for a balance of energy consumption and

23
latency, an imitation learning-based algorithm is proposed,
which can alleviate the extreme complexity of conventional
branch-and-bound algorithm. Speciﬁcally, an expert is trained
with a few samples to obtain the optimal scheduling policy
in an ofﬂine manner. Then, the agent is trained to follow the
expert’s demonstration online. Results illustrate that imitation
learning can signiﬁcantly accelerate the execution of the
branch-and-bound process.
2) Computation Resource Allocation:
The computation
platform usually needs to execute multiple tasks. How to
allocate the computation resource, especially the CPU/GPU
cycles is an attractive topic [87], [109], [113], [247]. On the
other hand, energy consumption is also an important metric
that needs to be considered. How to balance energy consump-
tion and computation performance can be addressed by AI
techniques [113], [248], [249]. The following paragraphs will
focus on several research works.
Similar to [113], the authors of [250] also consider AI
techniques to balance energy consumption and latency for the
scenarios utilizing the capacity-limited edge servers and cloud
server. However, edge servers are driven by hybrid power
including solar, wind, and diesel generator, while computation-
efﬁcient cloud servers are grid-tied. The authors model the
joint workload ofﬂoading and edge server provision as an
MDP and utilize the RL technique to solve it. The authors
deﬁne the total system cost with the delay, diesel generator
cost, and battery consumption, while the policy denotes the
computing power demand in each time slot. To ﬁnd the opti-
mal policy, a novel post-decision state-based online learning
algorithm is proposed to exploit the state transitions of the
considered energy harvested-enabled MEC system. Compared
with the standard QL method, the proposed approach con-
verges much faster. And extensive simulations conﬁrm that
the MEC system performance can be signiﬁcantly improved.
Pradhan et al. [109] study the computation ofﬂoading of
IoT devices in the massive MIMO Cloud-RAN (C-RAN)
deployed in an indoor environment. In this paper, the pur-
pose of optimizing the computation ofﬂoading is to minimize
the total transmit power of IoT devices. In the considered
scenario, the transmission latency of the uplink signals is
concerned with the transmit power and the CPU cycle alloca-
tion. Therefore, to minimize the total transmit power of IoT
devices under the latency threshold, we need to consider not
only the signal processing factor, but also the computation
resource allocation, which is a non-convex problem due to
the coupling relationship among these factors and their value
constraints. To solve this problem, the authors consider the
supervised learning method and adopt the DNN model to
decide the transmit power, CPU cycle assignment vector, and
the number of quantized bit. The authors also propose an
Alternating Optimization (AO) based mathematical model to
obtain some near-optimal solutions to train the DNN model
ofﬂine. Simulation results illustrate the fast convergence of
the DNN training process. More importantly, to tackle the
same problem in dynamic IoT networks, the authors utilize
the transfer learning [105] technique, which means that part of
the trained DNN’s parameters are utilized in the newly-formed
DNN for the changed scenario. Then, the DNN can be updated
through training with limited samples, avoiding the complex
training from scratch, which reduces the execution time by
the order of two magnitudes. The ﬁnal performance analysis
show that the transfer learning-based DNN can provide a close
approximation of the optimal resource allocation.
Wang et al. [87] study the cellular networks where MEC-
enabled High-Altitude Balloons (HABs) conduct the users’
computation tasks with limited capacity and energy. Since the
data sizes of the computation tasks vary, the user association
policy should be optimized to meet the requirement as well
as minimize energy consumption. To alleviate the limitations
of traditional Lagrangian dual decomposition [251] and game
theory [67] in dynamic scenarios, the authors utilize the SVM-
based federated learning algorithm to map the relationship
from users’ association and historical requested task size to
the future association. Speciﬁcally, similar to the process
in Fig. 9, the HAB ﬁrst train an SVM model with the
locally obtained data to construct the relationship between user
association and computation task size. Then, the HABs share
their trained SVM model, which enables further integration
and local improvement. Thus, each HAB can build an SVM
model to quantify the relationship between all user association
and historical computation task information. The simulation
results illustrate energy consumption can be reduced with a
better prediction of optimal user association.
Ma et al. [247] utilize the PSO algorithm to jointly optimize
the selection of access networks and edge cloud to minimize
the latency and total energy consumption. In the considered
scenario, each user can be served by multiple edge cloud-
enabled access networks. Since the latency and energy con-
sumption are both caused by task ofﬂoading and execution, the
formulated problem to minimize the two metrics is NP-hard.
In the adopted PSO model, the ﬁtness function is deﬁned as
the sum of weighted latency and energy consumption. Note
that the values of latency and consumed energy are processed
to between 0 and 1 to avoid the dimensional inﬂuence.
And the ﬁnal performance analysis illustrates the signiﬁcant
improvement in terms of latency and energy consumption.
3) Edge Server and Virtual Machine Placement: The place-
ment optimization including the edge servers and Virtual
Machines (VMs) affect the resource utilization of the whole
network. Since power consumption at the idle state constitutes
the major part of total energy waste [66], to minimize the
active servers as well as meet the service requirements can
improve energy efﬁciency. And AI techniques including the
heuristic algorithms and machine learning methods have been
studied to optimize the deployment of edge servers and VMs.
Li and Wang [71] study the edge server placement and
devise a PSO-based approach to minimize energy consump-
tion. In this paper, the authors consider that multiple edge
servers are located at different base stations. And the delay
for the base stations to access the edge servers should be not
above a threshold. In this paper, the minimization of energy
consumption depends on the locations and assignments of the
edge servers. To solve this discrete problem, the authors also
redeﬁne the parameters and operators of the PSO method.
To evaluate the performance, a real dataset from Shanghai
Telecom is utilized in the experiment, with which the PSO-

24
based approach shows an improvement of more than 10%
energy saving.
Liu et al. [66] study the VM placement in cloud servers
and adopt the ACO algorithm to minimize the number of
active servers and balance the resource utilization, resulting
in improved energy efﬁciency. In their approach, the bipartite
graph is constructed to describe the VM placement prob-
lem. And the pheromone is distributed not only between
the VMs and servers, but also among the VMs assigned to
the same server. And the assumed artiﬁcial ants conduct the
VM assignment based on global search information. To speed
the convergence and improve the solution, a local search
including the ordering exchange and migration operations is
conducted. The improved ACO algorithm is efﬁcient for large-
scale problems. And the experimental results show that the
number of active servers can be minimized with balanced
usage of resources including the CPU and memory, which
results in improved energy efﬁciency.
Shen et al. [91] focus on the cloudlet placement to improve
energy efﬁciency in the mobile scenario and K-means cluster-
ing [88] method is adopted to search the location center. In this
paper, energy consumption is assumed to be directly related
to the number of deployed cloudlets. Thus, to minimize the
number of deployed cloudlets can optimize energy efﬁciency.
To tackle this problem, the authors ﬁrstly utilize the K-means
clustering method to ﬁnd the central locations of the mobile
devices. The following steps are to delete some locations that
do not meet the density requirements and generate the moving
trajectory of the cloudlets. Performance analysis illustrates the
increased number of covered devices of each cloudlet, which
results in reduced energy consumption.
Zhang et al. [80] study the container placement to optimize
energy consumption of virtual machines and propose an im-
proved GA. In this paper, the container is utilized to compute
some applications and energy consumption is assumed to be
nonlinearly related to resource utilization. Since the container
placement is regarded as a combinatorial optimization prob-
lem, the heuristic algorithms, such as GA [81], are well suited.
However, the conventional GA sometimes incorrectly elimi-
nates new individuals in the mutation operation when resource
utilization is high, which causes performance degradation. To
solve this problem, the authors propose two kinds of exchange
mutation operations and deﬁne a control parameter with the
number of search iterations. And the method can help the
search iteration to jump out of the local optimum. The ﬁnal
simulations illustrate the signiﬁcantly improved power saving
performance in small, medium, and large scales of scenarios
with uniform and non-uniform VM distributions.
Wang et al. [72] study virtual machine placement in
heterogeneous virtualized data centers and utilize the PSO
method [252] to minimize energy consumption. In this paper,
the authors ﬁrst establish energy consumption model of a
heterogeneous virtualized data center. Since traditional PSO
method can be only utilized for continuous optimization prob-
lems, the authors redeﬁne the particle position and velocity
with two 𝑛-bit vectors, and then redeﬁne the subtraction,
addition, and multiplication operators to ﬁt the energy-aware
virtual machine placement optimization, which is a discrete
problem. Then, the authors consider the energy-aware local
ﬁtness and devise a two-dimensional encoding scheme to
accelerate the convergence and reduce the search time. Results
illustrate that the proposed method outperforms the other
approaches and can lessen 13%-23% energy consumption. A
similar research work based on PSO is given in [73]. The
authors utilize the decimal coding method to apply PSO in
a discrete problem. And energy consumption is minimized
considering the service requirement constraints. The authors
also analyze the complexity of the proposal which is related
to the numbers of migrated virtual machines, particles, and
iterations.
C. Green Content Caching and Delivery
Besides ofﬂoading the contents to the edge/cloud servers,
to store the contents is also an important service for future
CDN. Energy consumption of this part mainly comes from the
caching and delivery process. In the following paragraphs, we
discuss the related research on how AI is adopted to improve
energy efﬁciency of content caching and delivery.
1) Caching Policy Design: For future multi-tier or hierar-
chical networks, the contents are usually cached in different
parts to improve storage efﬁciency. The content caching policy
needs to be optimized due to the variable storage size of
heterogeneous devices and different energy consumption for
content retrievers. Li et al. [253] utilize the DRL to optimize
the content caching policy for multi-tier cache-enabled UDNs.
The authors analyze the different energy consumption of
content retriever from the Small Access Points (SAPs), MBS,
and core networks, then construct the energy-efﬁcient model.
To optimize energy efﬁciency, the standard DRL method using
the regular multi-tier DNN is adopted, where energy efﬁciency
and different content combinations as the reward and state,
respectively. To accelerate the convergence of the proposed
intelligent content caching method, the authors utilized the
latest ﬁnds including the prioritized experience replay [254],
dueling architecture, and deep RNN. Extensive simulations
illustrate that the proposed intelligent content caching algo-
rithms can signiﬁcantly improve energy efﬁciency for both the
stationary and dynamic popularity distributions. [255] analyzes
impacts of the channel conditions on content caching. And
the RL-based content caching is proposed to alleviate energy
consumption.
Shi et al. [256] adopt the DQN model to optimize the
content caching in three layered vehicular networks, where
an airship distributes the contents to UAVs for satisfying the
terrestrial services. In the considered scenario, the airship
needs to schedule the UAV caching the required contents to
provide the service if the requested content is not in local UAV,
which means more energy consumption. To minimize energy
consumption, the DQN model is proposed and the deﬁned
reward considers the probabilities of local UAV requests and
other UAV scheduling. To improve training performance, the
experience replay mechanism is considered. And the proposed
DQN model is veriﬁed to overcome the large number of states
and in the training process.
Tang et al. [257] consider the scenario where the users can
retrieve the contents locally, or from the neighbor devices,

25
SBS, and MBS, with increasing energy consumption. On the
other hand, the user’s device, SBS, and MBS have increasing
caching capacity. Speciﬁcally, the QL algorithm is applied
to every user to select the cached contents with the goal of
minimizing the cost which is inversely proportional to the
popularity of cached ﬁles. For the caching policy of each SBS,
the DQN is adopted to select the contents in order to minimize
the total energy consumption. In the proposal, the cost function
is similar to the reward in DRL, while the optimization goal
becomes to minimize the value of cost. For this proposal, the
complexity of QL is relatively low since every user’s device
has very limited capacity, which means the state space is small.
On the other hand, the DQN has a relatively high complexity
since the number of cache combinations is large, leading to a
huge state space.
The content caching policy design deeply depends on the
users’ preferences, thus, the centralized control-based opti-
mization methods may cause concern for privacy. For the data-
driven AI algorithms including ML and DL techniques, the
training and running process which requires the users’ data
poses great challenges. To address this problem, federated
learning has been widely studied to keep the data IN the
local area to protect privacy [116], [258], [259]. In [116],
the UE conducts the calculations of the shallow layers to
generate some general features of the content requests. Similar
to the process in Fig. 9, the heterogeneous BSs including the
ﬂying UAVs aggregate the parameters of the shallow layers to
conduct the further training and running process to decide the
content caching policy. Different from the cooperative training
of the deep learning models, Yu et al. [258] consider that each
user downloads the Stacked Autoencoder from the server and
trains it with the local dataset generated from the personal
usage. Then, the updated parameters and extracted features are
uploaded to the server, where the hybrid ﬁltering technique
is adopted to decide the content caching policy. To further
ensure data security, blockchain techniques can be adopted in
the data transmission process [259]. However, these research
works aim to improve the caching performance, instead of the
minimization of energy consumption.
2) Delivery: Besides content caching, how to deliver the
contents is also an important factor to affect energy consump-
tion. In this part, we discuss the related AI-based research on
content delivery optimization.
Lei et al. [260] study the content caching and delivery
in cellular networks, and a supervised DNN based approach
is adopted to optimize the user clustering to minimize the
transmit power of the BSs. In each cell, the content delivery
should satisfy the stringent delay requirement, thus the user
scheduling algorithm should have low computation time to
enable real-time operations. To realize this goal, the DNN
is trained to map from the users’ channel coefﬁcients and
requested data amount to the clustering scheduling policy.
The authors utilize a variable size of dataset generated with
conventional iterative algorithms to train the proposed DNN.
And the performance shows that the large sized dataset can
result in 90% approximation to the optimum with limited time
consumption.
Al-Hilo et al. [261] utilize the DRL technique to optimize
the trajectory of UAV in order to improve content delivery
for the UAV-assisted intelligent transportation system. In this
paper, the moving vehicles are assumed to cache part of the
contents due to the limited capacity and need to retrieve the
other contents from the BS which is time-consuming and
unstable. To improve the content delivery performance, the
cache-enabled UAVs are assumed to hover over the vehicles
to meet some content requests. As the trajectory control affects
the performance of content delivery as well as the power
consumption of UAVs, the Proximal Policy Optimization
algorithm is adopted to decide the ﬂying velocity according
to the network states including the current position, vehicle
information, and cached contents. The ﬁnal results also show
the improvement of energy efﬁciency.
The above works focus on content delivery in the access
networks, while the data forwarding in the core networks
is also an important factor to affect energy consumption.
Li [75] utilize the ACO algorithm [262] to optimize the data
forwarding scheme to reduce content retrieve hops, which
results in less energy consumed by the routers and links. In this
paper, the CDNs are ﬁrst divided into multiple domains. And
the data packets and the hello message packets are assumed to
be two types of ants. For each path, the pheromone is deﬁned
and calculated as the normalized sum of path load, delay, and
bandwidth. Then, through the generated interest ants in the
initial state, the node can construct the paths and update the
corresponding pheromone values. Then, during the data packet
transmission stage, the pheromone is further updated according
to the real-time performance.
3) Joint Optimization: Since the caching and delivery poli-
cies both affect energy consumption, joint optimization is
another direction toward green communications. Li et al. [263]
adopt the DRL method to minimize the latency and energy
cost of content caching and delivery in RAN. In this paper,
the authors deﬁne the reward function considering the latency
and energy cost of the content caching and delivery between
the users and SBS, MBS, and cloud servers. Then, the AC
model and DDPG algorithm [264] are adopted, where two
identical DNNs are utilized to generate the deterministic action
and evaluate the chosen strategy. Here, the action is deﬁned
with the content ﬁle placement, SBS-user association, and
subchannel assignment. The simulation results illustrate the
improved rewards, which means the performance improvement
in terms of transmission delay and energy consumption.
Similarly, Li et al. [242] also utilize the DL technique
to jointly optimize the content delivery latency and system
energy consumption. However, as the cache-enabled D2D
networks are adopted to alleviate the overhead of requesting
the contents from the cellular BS In this paper, the device
mobility, content popularity, and link establishment decisions
need to be considered. To address the complexity caused
by the dynamics including changing channel conditions and
variable content popularity, the authors consider a three-step
proposal, all of which utilize the DL models. First, the RNN
models including the conceptor-based Echo State Networks
(ESN) [265] or LSTM is utilized to predict user mobility
according to the limited previous records. Then, the predicted
D2D user location information, together with other attributes

26
including gender, age, occupation, time, and so on, are utilized
as the input of ESN or LSTM to predict the probability of
each user to request every content at the next time slot. Then,
the content request distribution can be utilized to assist the
content placement. For example, the content will be assigned
to the user if the request probability is above 70%. In the
third step, the joint value and policy-based AC algorithm [172]
is utilized for each user to choose a neighbor to establish
the communication link for content delivery according to
the observed environment which is deﬁned as the transmit
power, channel gain, and distance. In this algorithm, the
reward function is denoted by the sum of weighted content
delivery delay and power consumption. The simulation results
illustrate that with different weight combinations of delay and
power consumption, variable power saving performance can be
obtained, which means that the proposed strategy is reasonable
and ﬂexible. Similar research is given in [266], which also
utilizes the ESN model [265] to predict the user mobility
and content request distribution. Since the requested content
is dependent on the users, the authors consider the context of
users including the gender, occupation, age, and device type to
predict the probability of content requests. To make the results
practical, the authors collect historical content transmission
and user mobility records to train the considered models.
D. Summary
According to the introduced research, we can ﬁnd AI
techniques can signiﬁcantly improve energy efﬁciency of the
content caching process. In the content placement step, AI
techniques are important and efﬁcient to predict the content
popularity and users’ information including the preference and
location, which can result in improved local Cache Hit Ratio
(CHR) and reduce the content retriever from cloud servers.
For the content delivery part, the optimization is to improve
the resource allocation, transmission scheduling, routing, and
other communication functions to save energy. Different from
the energy-efﬁcient proposals in cellular networks as we
mentioned above, the strategies in content delivery networks
should consider the content placement, latency requirements,
and even the caching capacity.
VI. OPEN RESEARCH ISSUES
Even though there are a huge number of research works
on AI-based green communication services, we still need to
pay more attention to transform our endeavors into practical
applications in the 6G era. Moreover, the utilization of AI
techniques in current networks is still confronted with many
challenges in terms of computation complexity, hardware com-
patibility, data security, and so on. The following paragraphs
give some promising directions, which we believe will give
some ideas to the researchers.
A. Green BS Management for 6G HetNet
As we mentioned in Sec. III, the BSs take the majority of
total energy consumption. In the 6G era, the number of BSs
is meant to be multiple times that of 5G. And these BSs are
constructed in a hierarchical manner and have various sizes of
coverage. Moreover, as the UAVs and HABs will also act as
the BSs [87], [116], [249], [261], the heterogeneous hardware
architectures and the mobility further complicate the green
management. The following paragraphs introduce the potential
AI-based research considering the potential three functions of
6G BSs.
As the end terminals can be served by different BSs
including the MBSs, SBSs, and Tiny Base Stations (TBSs) in
the multi-tier 6G HetNet, the user association policy should
be optimized in order to turn off the redundant BSs for
energy saving. Moreover, the BSs are usually deployed with
multiple frequency bands, the resource allocation including
the channels and power are critically for the network en-
ergy efﬁciency. However, the mobility of end devices, and
UAV or satellite-enabled BSs results in the changing trafﬁc
demand and dynamic channel conditions, while the resource
heterogeneity further complicates these problems. To address
these issues, AI techniques can provide efﬁcient assistance.
For example, AI models can be adopted to predict the trafﬁc
demands, mobility patterns, and channel conditions, which
enables the network reconﬁgurations in advance.
Besides offering communication services, future BSs will
act multiple roles, such as the computation/storage providers
and energy source. As some BSs have a certain amount of
computation and storage resources, the computation ofﬂoading
and content caching policies can be optimized by AI models.
For example, the computation ofﬂoading or content caching
are usually models as a non-convex problem, which is further
solved by the RL or DRL techniques. As we mentioned in
Sec. I, compared with the traditional method which divides the
non-convex problem into two sub-problems and solves them
one by one, the RL or DRL can ﬁnd the global optimal solution
and avoid the complex iteration process during the algorithm
execution period.
B. Energy-Efﬁcient Space-Air-Ground Integrated Networks
SAGIN has been regarded as one of the key technologies
for 6G [1], [267]. SAGIN can provide seamless coverage
and ﬂexible information transmissions, especially for massive
MTCs. Since the satellites, HABs, and many UAVs are driven
by renewable energy, energy-efﬁcient network orchestration
is critically important for SAGIN. However, the diversiﬁed
transmission environments, heterogeneous hardware platforms,
and dynamic energy resources pose great challenges. To ad-
dress the complexity and uncertainty, AI can provide many
efﬁcient models. For example, using the RL technique to
optimize the resource allocation policy including the trans-
mitting power [268] and channels [206] has been evaluated
to improve the network energy efﬁciency. Moreover, the CSI
dynamics and network mobility make energy-efﬁcient packet
transmissions more difﬁcult. As AI has been demonstrated
that it can efﬁciently map the complex relationship between
existing network traces and future transmission policy for
terrestrial networks [206], [216], we believe the research can
be extended to the SAGIN scenario.
Even though AI has been studied to optimize the SAGIN
performance [189], [269], current research mainly focuses

27
on the single layer, such as the LEOs and UAVs. From
the systematic perspective, the network management toward
green communications should consider every part of SAGIN.
For example, the UAV deployment and trajectory should be
optimized considering the beam control of satellites to realize
energy-efﬁcient coverage [66], [210], [211]. As AI has been
illustrated to be competent to handle the complex multiple-
variable-related problems [196], [197], using AI techniques to
analyze performance from the perspective of whole SAGIN
system will be a promising direction. However, the difﬁculty
is how to characterize the concerned factors into the AI
model [57], [92]. And, the execution of the AI model is another
challenge due to the extreme computation overhead. Moreover,
AI is also important to optimize RF energy harvesting in
cellular networks, which will be discussed in Sec. VI-D.
C. AI-based Energy-Efﬁcient Transmissions
Packet transmission is energy-consuming as it costs energy
of transmitters, forwarders, and receivers. Besides power con-
trol and resource allocation methods to reduce energy con-
sumption, many other choices have been provided including
the routing policy design, relay, backscatter communication,
and IRS-aided transmissions. There is no doubt that multiple
communication manners will be provided for the end devices
to transmit the packets successfully. For instance, the mobile

which can be also ﬁnished by the IEEE 802.11-based WiFi
or through D2D in a multi-hop manner. How to cooperatively
utilize and schedule the different communication methods
and resource in a multi-agent multi-task environment will
heavily affect the system energy consumption and network
performance. Most AI-based research focuses on the single
communication scenario, while very limited works study the
hybrid scenario [193], [196]. In the future, we can pay more
attention on AI to improve energy-efﬁcient transmission in the
scenario where multiple communication manners are available.
D. AI-Enhanced Energy Harvesting and Sharing
Energy harvesting has been widely recognized as an im-
portant part for green communications. To drive the devel-
opment of green communications, various energy harvesting
techniques will be utilized, which can be grouped into dif-
ferent groups according to whether it is controllable and pre-
dictable [270]. AI techniques can be adopted in the scenarios
using the uncontrollable but predictable energy group and
partially controllable energy group, where the formal consists
of the solar, winding, tide, and other renewable sources,
while the latter includes RF energy. For the uncontrollable
but predictable energy harvesting techniques, some AI models
can be utilized to map the relationship between the future
harvesting power and related factors [271], [272]. And the
predicted results can be adopted to reconﬁgure the network
in advance. Another method is to directly utilize AI models
to map from the harvesting-related factors to network man-
agement policy. These methods enable network operators to
gain more knowledge of energy harvesting and improve the
utilization efﬁciency. For the partially controllable RF energy
harvesting technique, AI can be used to optimize the BS power
control and transmission scheduling [150], [152]. For the UAV-
enabled BSs, AI can be adopted to optimize the trajectory
to reduce energy consumption and improve the harvesting
efﬁciency [161], [273]. Current research mainly focuses on
the maximization of minimum harvesting energy due to the
disordered transmission and unplanned power control [237],
[238], AI can enable the RF harvesting process to be energy-
aware, which can greatly reduce the wasted energy, especially
for the signals from omnidirectional antennas.
The RF harvesting technique also enables energy sharing
among devices, which can be considered to avoid the outage
of some network parts as well as reduce energy waste when
batteries of some devices are nearly full and cannot save
incoming energy anymore [129]. The Simultaneous Wireless
Information and Power Transmission (SWIPT) technique has
been widely studied, especially in MTC scenarios [274]. Even
though it may cause some performance loss to harvest energy
from part of the received signals, AI can be utilized to decide
the ratio between RF harvesting and information transmission
to reach a balance [275]. Currently, ambient backscattering is
a promising technique especially for the low power machines,
AI can be considered to optimize energy harvesting and
information forwarding process [23], [156], [157].
E. Security for AI-enabled Networks
The adversaries and unauthenticated users threaten the in-
formation privacy as well as cause the transmission failures,
leading to the deteriorated energy efﬁciency. To protect the
normal information transmission from the attacks, AI can
be considered as it has been veriﬁed to detect the network
threats [276]. Moreover, using AI to control the transmit
power and allocate the resource is also efﬁcient to address the
network jammers [208]. For the future AI-driven 6G, a new
type of network threatens may be the malicious data generated
by the adversaries, which misleads AI models to reach a
wrong decision. Besides the decreased throughput or increased
latency, the potential results may be the widespread outage of
end terminals or extremely low harvesting efﬁciency. How to
develop robust AI models to ensure green communications
will be important topics.
Most AI techniques including the DL and ML rely on
data in the training and running phases. Since the data may
be concerned with personal privacy or business information,
to develop and execute AI algorithms should consider the
data security issues. More importantly, the standards and
regulations should be built to guide the collection and usage
of data [59].
F. Lightweight AI Model and Hardware Design
To develop AI-based green communications, energy con-
sumption of AI algorithms should be analyzed. However,
most of the current research just focuses on the network
performance improvement compared with conventional algo-
rithms and neglects the consumed energy for the training
and running of AI models [277], [278]. This may cause the
high complexity of the proposed AI models, which may be

28
more energy-aggressive than traditional methods. Thus, how
to minimize the required training data and how to decrease
the algorithm complexity is important for the development of
AI-based green communications. As the reduced complexity
may sacriﬁce the accuracy rate in some cases, the balance
energy efﬁciency and network performance is still critical for
AI algorithms. Furthermore, the amount of consumed energy
for AI algorithms also depends on the hardware. To design
the hardware for computation acceleration of AI algorithms
with low cost should also be paid more attention [279].
Currently, very limited research has analyzed how to conduct
AI algorithms with low energy consumption [280], [281]. And
the results inspire us to pay more attention to how to execute
the proposed AI algorithms in an energy-efﬁcient manner.
VII. CONCLUSION
AI has aroused widespread attention from nearly every ﬁeld
to improve the quality, accelerate production, customize the
provided services, and so on. To utilize AI technologies in 6G
has been widely acknowledged as a paradigm. And the AI-
based green communications will be an important direction
due to the exponentially increasing energy consumption from
the growing infrastructure and end devices. To reduce energy
cost and improve energy efﬁciency, too many variables and a
high dimension of solution space need to be considered and
analyzed. Conventional heuristic algorithms and convex opti-
mizations require the simpliﬁcation of considered problems,
which may need a great number of iterations or not reach
a satisfying energy efﬁciency level. On the other hand, AI
techniques have been veriﬁed their overwhelming advantages
and power in handling complex problems. In this research, we
survey the AI-related research on network management and
conﬁgurations toward energy efﬁciency optimization. Another
direction for green communications is to utilize energy har-
vesting techniques which adopt renewable energy or ambient
energy to reduce the usage of fossil resource. AI techniques
can be adopted to address the uncertainty and dynamics in
energy harvesting process. Moreover, this paper considers
three common scenarios in 6G: CNC, MTC, and COC, and
analyze how AI can improve the conﬁgurations of 6G elements
including massive MIMO, NOMA, SAGIN, and THz. We
believe this paper can provide some guidance and encourage
future works focusing on AI-based 6G green communications.
Furthermore, we analyze the strengths and weakness of dif-
ferent AI models, including the traditional heuristic algorithms
and the state-of-the-art ML/DL methods. We illustrate how
they can cooperatively work to reduce energy consumption
and improve energy efﬁciency from a systematic perspective.
Additionally, we discuss the necessity to consider energy
consumption of AI models and indicate some open issues
including data privacy, computation complexity, hardware de-
sign, and network deployment, which the future researchers
need to embrace.
