Domain-Aware Dialogue State Tracker for
Multi-Domain Dialogue Systems
Vevake Balaraman,1,2 Bernardo Magnini1
1Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
2ICT Doctoral School, University of Trento, Italy

Abstract
In task-oriented dialogue systems the dialogue state tracker
(DST) component is responsible for predicting the state of
the dialogue based on the dialogue history. Current DST ap-
proaches rely on a predeﬁned domain ontology, a fact that
limits their effective usage for large scale conversational
agents, where the DST constantly needs to be interfaced with
ever-increasing services and APIs. Focused towards over-
coming this drawback, we propose a domain-aware dialogue
state tracker, that is completely data-driven and it is mod-
eled to predict for dynamic service schemas. The proposed
model utilizes domain and slot information to extract both
domain and slot speciﬁc representations for a given dialogue,
and then uses such representations to predict the values of the
corresponding slot. Integrating this mechanism with a pre-
trained language model (i.e. BERT), our approach can effec-
tively learn semantic relations.
1
Introduction
Task-oriented dialogue systems are developed to help users
to achieve tasks such as, for instance, restaurant reserva-
tion and ﬂight bookings. In such systems the dialogue state
tracker (DST) is a core component, aimed to maintain a dis-
tribution over the dialogue states based on the dialogue his-
tory. A dialogue state at any turn t in the dialogue is typically
represented as a set of slot-value pairs, such as (price, mod-
erate) or (food, italian) in the context of restaurant reserva-
tion. The goal of the DST is to determine the user’s intent
and the user’s goal during the dialogue and represent them
as such slot-value pairs. The downstream components of a
dialogue system (e.g the dialogue manager) that are respon-
sible to choose the next system action, rely on an accurate
DST for an effective dialogue strategy.
Because of the importance of DST in dialogue systems,
their development attracted lots of research both in academia
and industry. Typical dialogue systems are modeled for a
ﬁxed ontology consisting of a single domain (Mrkˇsi´c et al.
2017; Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2018; Ren et al. 2018), and
the domain ontology schema deﬁnes intents, slots and values
for each slot of the domain. Though this approach simpliﬁes
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
the DST task, making it domain speciﬁc, nevertheless it has
additional signiﬁcant real-world limitations. Firstly, this ap-
proach imposes that the values for each slot are predeﬁned,
while in real situations the number of possible values for a
given slot could be large (e.g. departure city) and it is not
feasible to enumerate all possible values for a slot of any ex-
ternal service via an API (Xu and Hu 2018). Secondly, the
ﬁxed domain approach has the consequence that any mod-
iﬁcation in the domain schema, such as the inclusion of a
new slot, would require retraining the model before deploy-
ing it. Thirdly, the domain knowledge learned by the system
on a certain domain can not be transferred to a new domain.
This last point is particularly interesting for large-scale con-
versational agents, such as Alexa, Siri, Google Assistant or
Cortana, as they have to interact with various external ser-
vices and APIs, and they would beneﬁt from the possibil-
ity to use knowledge from one domain for another similar
domain. Recent research have proposed new approaches to
tackle some of the above challenges. (Rastogi, Hakkani-Tur,
and Heck 2017) proposed to use the concept of candidate
set to tackle the unbounded set of values for a given slot.
(Ramadan, Budzianowski, and Gaˇsi´c 2018) proposed neural
belief tracker (NBT) for multi domain belief tracking. NBT
uses semantic similarity between dialogue utterance and on-
tology terms to make prediction. NBT cannot be used to pre-
dict for non-categorical slot value. (Wu et al. 2019) proposed
Transferable Multi-Domain State Generator (TRADE) that
generates dialogue state directly from the dialogue utterance
using a copy mechanism. Since TRADE model is a genera-
tion based approach, predicting for categorical values is not
straight forward and requires change in architecture.
In this paper we propose a domain-aware dialogue state
tracker, able to serve any new domain, intent, slot or value
without the need for re-training. We propose this model for
the Schema-Guided State Tracking1 challenge (Rastogi et al.
2019) at the Eighth Dialog System Technology Challenge
(DSTC8) (Kim et al. 2019). The proposed model is inspired
from the works of (Rastogi et al. 2019) and (Balaraman and
Magnini 2019).
The proposed domain-aware DST is modeled to read the
1https://github.com/google-research-datasets/dstc8-schema-
guided-dialogue
arXiv:2001.07526v1  [cs.CL]  21 Jan 2020

schema of a domain for a dialogue and then make predic-
tions for the domain based on this schema. Since the schema
of the domain is not predeﬁned in the model, it allows for
easy integration with new schemas and domain transfer in-
cluding zero-shot dialogue state predictions. We achieve this
by leveraging a pretrained language model, BERT (Devlin et
al. 2019), which provides semantic representations for both
the domain schema and the dialogue history. The domain-
aware DST model then learns the relationship between the
schema and the dialogue history based on the training data,
and applies it to new schemas in the test data. In particu-
lar, we use a multi-head attention mechanism to extract both
domain and slot speciﬁc representations from the dialogue
history based on the schema, and to learn the relationship
between these representations and the schema representa-
tion to make dialogue state predictions. The evaluation on
the task shows that the proposed approach outperforms the
baseline for both single-domain and multi-domain dialogues
both in the schema-guided dataset (SGD) and in the WoZ2.0
dataset.
2
Schema-Guided Approach to DST
Typically, a task-oriented dialogue dataset consists of a sin-
gle domain with a predeﬁned ontology, which is used both
for training and for testing (Hemphill, Godfrey, and Dod-
dington 1990; Wen et al. 2017). Recent work has shown
promise in modeling multi-domain dialogues and has facil-
itated the release of multi-domain dialogue datasets, such
as MultiWOZ (Budzianowski et al. 2018) and FRAMES
(El Asri et al. 2017). However, these datasets still do not suf-
ﬁciently capture the challenges that arise in scaling virtual
assistants for real production, such as the ability to easily
integrate new external services and handling new domains
(Rastogi et al. 2019). Thus, DST models built using existing
datasets can not be evaluated for their ability to integrate new
services or to predict dialogue states for a different domain,
possibly without training data (zero-shot learning). This is
mainly due to the fact that different datasets consist of a
different schema and that they are incompatible with each
other.
To address the above challenges, (Rastogi et al. 2019) pro-
pose a schema-guided approach that allows easy integration
of new services and APIs. In this approach, each service con-
sists of a list of intents and slots supported by the service,
along with their natural language descriptions. The sup-
ported slots could either be categorical or non-categorical;
and if categorical, all the corresponding values are also de-
ﬁned. The details in the schema, such as service name, slot
names, intent names, value names and their natural language
description are used to obtain a semantic representation for
the domain/service, which can be used in prediction. A sam-
ple schema for a given service in the schema-guided dataset
is shown in Figure 1. Each service provides a schema, simi-
lar to the one reported in Figure 1, listing all the slots and the
intents supported by the service. The model is then trained to
make predictions based on the schema of the service. Adopt-
ing this schema-guided approach helps to build models that
contain no domain or service speciﬁc parameters.
Figure 1: A sample schema for a banking service from the
schema-guided dataset.
3
Domain-Aware Dialogue State Tracker
In this section we describe the proposed domain-aware DST
framework. First, we brieﬂy introduce the pre-trained model,
based on BERT, used for this work, and then we describe the
different components of the Domain-Aware Dialogue State
Tracker that relies on the BERT representations. While a
single domain might have multiple services, for easier in-
terpretability of the model, we refer to each service in the
schema as a separate domain.
3.1
BERT Encoder
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Trans-
formers) is a multi-layer bidirectional Transformer encoder
that is designed to learn representations from unlabelled text
by conditioning on both the right and left context in a given
text (Devlin et al. 2019; Vaswani et al. 2017). The input to
BERT can either be a single sentence or a pair of sentences,
both referred to as “sequence”. A special token [CLS] is
always prepended to the input sequence, while to differen-
tiate the sentence in the sequence, another special token,
[SEP], is used to separate them. Finally the input sequence

Sentence 1
Sentence 2
Domain
Domain Name
Domain description
Intent
Intent Name
Intent description
Slot
Slot Name
Slot description
Value
Value Name
-
Table 1: Input sequences for obtaining schema embedding.
is formed as below:
InputSeq = [CLS] + S1 + [SEP] + S2 + [SEP]
where S1 and S2 are the sentence pairs. The representation
for the input sequence consists of the i) token embedding
constructed using WordPiece embedding; ii) segment em-
bedding indicating whether a token belongs to S1 or to S2
and iii) Position embedding to indicate the position of each
token in the corresponding sentence.
The model is then trained on two unsupervised tasks,
namely a) Masked language model (MLM) and b) Next sen-
tence prediction (NSP). The BooksCorpus (800M words)
and English Wikipedia (2,500M words) are used as the
dataset for pre-training. Once pre-trained on this dataset, the
representations learnt by BERT is then ﬁne-tuned for down-
stream tasks using corresponding task-speciﬁc labelled data
by adding a task-speciﬁc output-layer. During ﬁne-tuning,
the output of the [CLS] token representation is used for sen-
tence level classiﬁcation tasks, such as sentiment analysis,
and the output of corresponding token representation is used
for the classiﬁcation of token-level tasks, such as sequence
tagging.
3.2
Schema Embedder
Given a schema consisting of the possible intents, slots (both
categorical and non-categorical) and categorical values for
a domain, the schema embedder component is used to ob-
tain the representations for the corresponding domain, in-
tents, slots, and the categorical values. We construct input
sequences for each of the above information in the given
schema as shown in Table 1, based on their corresponding
name and description.
These sequences are then passed to the pre-trained BERT
model and the corresponding output of the [CLS] token is
used as their corresponding embedding. For a given schema,
the schema embedder component outputs the following em-
beddings: Domain embedding (D), Intent embedding (I),
Slot embedding (S) and Categorical Value embedding (V ).
For better explainability, we represent the slot embeddings
of categorical and non-categorical slots separately, as C and
N respectively, while S denotes all the slots.
3.3
Utterance Encoder
The utterance encoder of the model is similar to the one pre-
sented in (Chao and Lane 2019; Rastogi et al. 2019), which
uses BERT for encoding the previous system response R and
the current user utterance U. We follow their approach of
treating R and U as sentence pairs to form an input sequence
for BERT model. The output from BERT corresponding to
Figure 2: Architecture of the proposed model to extract rep-
resentations that are both domain and slot speciﬁc.
the tokens in the sentence pair is used as the token level rep-
resentation T = t1, t2...tM, while the representation of the
[CLS] token is used as the sequence representation u.
3.4
Decoder
The decoder relies on the schema embedding obtained from
the schema embedder and makes predictions based on the
obtained schema. As the input schema to the model is dy-
namic, the decoder is modeled to accommodate any new do-
main, and relies on the pre-trained knowledge of BERT to
predict the new domain.
Intents.
For a given domain d, let the intent embeddings
Id = {i1, i2, ...ij} represent the possible intents. By default
the intent of the user is NONE until a speciﬁc intent is initi-
ated by the user. So the set of possible intents is then repre-
sented as follows:
i′ = [inone; i1, i2, ...ij]
where inone is a trainable parameter that represents the
NONE intent. The representations of the intents i′ are then
combined with the utterance representation u to predict a
probability for each intent. Formally,
h1 = GELU(W1u + b1)
(1)
h2 = GELU(W2(i′ ⊕h1) + b2)
(2)
score = W3h2 + b3
(3)
pd
i′ = softmax(score)
(4)
where Wi and bi are trainable parameters; GELU is
the non-linear activation function (Hendrycks and Gimpel
2016); and pd
i′ is the probability distribution over all intents
i′ in a domain d.
Domain and Slot Speciﬁc Representation.
Given a do-
main representation d and the corresponding slot represen-
tation sd, we employ multi-head attention (MHA) (Vaswani
et al. 2017) to extract domain-speciﬁc d′ and slot-speciﬁc s′

representations from the token-level representation T. The
d′ and s′ are then combined to obtain a context represen-
tation ctx. The architecture of the model that extracts the
context representation from the input sequence is shown in
Figure 2. Formally:
d′ = MHA(d, T, T)
(5)
s′ = MHA(sd, T, T)
(6)
ctx = W4(d′ ⊕s′) + b4
(7)
The context representation ctx is then used to predict if a
slot is expressed in the input sequence by the user. Based on
the slot-type, the decoding strategy varies.
Requested Slots.
The prediction of the requested slots fol-
lows a similar approach as the intent prediction. Unlike in
intent prediction, where only a single intent is active at a
time, the user may request for multiple slots in the same turn.
So we use a binary classiﬁcation approach for each possible
slot. Formally:
h3 = GELU(W5ctx + b5)
(8)
h4 = GELU(W6(Sd ⊕h3) + b6)
(9)
score = W7h4 + b7
(10)
pd
r = sigmoid(score)
(11)
where Wi and bi are trainable parameters; and pd
r is the prob-
ability distribution over all slots Sd for a given domain d.
Slot-Value Decoding.
Given the slot representations S in
a domain d, we adopt a two-step strategy, similar to (Chao
and Lane 2019; Rastogi et al. 2019), to decode the values for
the slot. First, we predict if a value (other than dontcare) was
expressed by the user, and then decide to decode the value
for the slot.
h5 = GELU(W8(ctx) + b8)
(12)
h6 = GELU(W9(h5 ⊕S) + b9)
(13)
[pnone, pdontcare, pvalue] = softmax(W10(h6) + b10)
(14)
where pdontcare denotes that the user does not care about
the value for the slot, while pvalue denotes that the user has
expressed a value in the input and needs to be decoded.
To decode the corresponding value for the slot, based on
the slot type (i.e categorical or non-categorical) the respec-
tive classiﬁer is used.
Categorical Slots.
The context representation ctx of the
input sequence and the representation of possible values for
each slot V sd are then combined to get the logit score for
each of the value.
h7 = GELU(W11V sd + b11)
(15)
ctx′ = GELU(W12ctx + b12)
(16)
score = ctx′ · h7
(17)
psd
c = sigmoid(score)
(18)
Train
Dev
Test
No. of dialogs
16142
2482
4201
Single domain
5403
836
1331
Multi domain
10739
1646
2870
Domains
16
16
18
Services
26
17
21
Unseen services
-
8
15
No. of Slots
214
136
Table 2: Statistics of the Schema-Guided Dataset. Statistics
for the lower half of the table are calculated over all dia-
logues.
where Wi and bi are trainable parameters, and psd
c
is the
probability for each possible categorical values (V sd) of a
given slot s in domain d. We adopt a binary classiﬁcation for
each value rather than a multi-class classiﬁcation approach.
This helps the model to predict for values iff there is strong
evidence for the value being expressed in the input sequence.
Non-Categorical Slots.
For non-categorical slots, the
context representation ctx of the input sequence and the rep-
resentation of non-categorical slots N are combined to ob-
tain the probability of each token being either the start or end
of a span.
hi
8 = GELU(W13(ti ⊕N) + b13)
(19)
αi, βi = W14hi
8 + b14
(20)
[Pα, Pβ] = [softmax(α), softmax(β)]
(21)
where Pα denotes the probability of a token being at the be-
ginning of a span, and Pβ denotes the probability of a token
being at the end of a span.
4
Experiments
In this section we describe the dataset and the experimental
setting used for the state tracking task.
4.1
Dataset
Schema-Guided Dataset (SGD)
is the ofﬁcial dataset for
the schema-guided state tracking challenge at DSTC8 (Ras-
togi et al. 2019). The schema-guided dataset consists of 20
domains with a total of 45 services among those domains.
The dataset consists of both single and multi-domain dia-
logues. The same domain could have multiple services, due
to the fact that different external service providers could use
different schema. Each dialogue in the dataset consists of
a service it corresponds to and a schema ﬁle that captures
all possible service schemas. This dataset consists of large
number of unseen services in both the development-set and
the test-set. The statistics of the data among different splits
are shown in Table 2.
WoZ2.0.
We also used the WoZ2.0 dataset (Mrkˇsi´c et
al. 2017), consisting of written text conversations for the
restaurant booking domain, to evaluate the proposed model.
Unlike the schema-guided dataset, WoZ2.0 is a single do-
main dataset collected using the Wizard of Oz framework.

WoZ2.0 consists of a total of 1200 dialogues, out of which
600 are for training, 200 for development and 400 for test-
ing. It consists of a predeﬁned ontology listing all possible
slots and values. We use this ontology to generate a schema
consisting only of the slot names and to extract a schema
representation based on these slot names. We experiment
by treating the slots as both categorical and non-categorical
slot-types.
4.2
Evaluation Metrics
We evaluated our models using the ofﬁcial evaluation script
of (Rastogi et al. 2019) and compared the models on the
following metrics.
1. Intent Accuracy: The fraction of user turns for which the
active intent is correctly predicted by the model.
2. Requested Slots F1: This indicates the model perfor-
mance in correctly predicting if a slot is requested by the
user. This is the macro-averaged F1 score over for all re-
quested slots.
3. Average Goal Accuracy: This is the average accuracy of
predicting the correct value for a slot.
4. Joint Goal Accuracy: This indicates the model perfor-
mance in predicting all slots in a given turn correctly.
Joint Goal accuracy is the primary metric for state track-
ing task.
4.3
Experimented models
The proposed approach is modeled to be applicable for both
single-domain and multi-domain dialogues. This means that
the same model trained on single-domain dialogues can be
used to predict multi-domain dialogues as well. This is be-
cause the model makes prediction based on the schema
rather than a predeﬁned ontology. As mentioned in Section
3, we build on top of the model proposed in (Rastogi et
al. 2019), which also uses BERT to extract representations
that are considered as baselines. We evaluate the proposed
approach by applying both domain and slot representations
extracted from the schema embedder. The default model de-
ﬁned in Section 3 is referred by D + S, meaning that both
domain and slot representations are used to extract context
representation from dialogue history. We also investigate an
approach that makes use only of the domain representation
to extract context representation from the dialogue history;
this model is referred as D.
4.4
Implementation
We use the pytorch (Paszke et al. 2017) library to imple-
ment the domain-aware state tracker. The encoder is the
BERTBASE model (Devlin et al. 2019) implemented by Hug-
gingFace2 (Wolf et al. 2019) consisting of 12 layers with 768
hidden dimensions and 12 self-attention heads. The schema
representation is extracted from the BERT model based on
the schema for the dialogue, following the input sequence
template shown in Table 1. This schema representation is
not ﬁne-tuned during training. We use a learning rate of 5e-
5 with batch size of 32 for training.
2https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/.
Int. Acc
Req. F1
Avg. GA
Jnt. GA
Baseline
0.966
0.965
0.776
0.486
D*
0.973
0.967
0.814
0.541
D + S*
0.971
0.964
0.844
0.597
D+
0.962
0.971
0.841
0.576
D + S+
0.963
0.971
0.861
0.627
Table 3: Performance on the dev set on the single-domain di-
alogues. * indicates models trained with only single domain
dialogues, while + denotes models trained with both single
and multi domain dialogues.
Int. Acc
Req. F1
Avg. GA
Jnt. GA
Baseline
0.908
0.973
0.740
0.411
D*
0.932
0.966
0.698
0.397
D + S*
0.933
0.963
0.728
0.432
D+
0.953
0.977
0.771
0.480
D + S+
0.958
0.976
0.783
0.502
Table 4: Performance on the complete dev set of the dataset
(both single and multi-domain dialogues). * indicates mod-
els trained with only single domain dialogues, while + de-
notes models trained with both single and multi domain di-
alogues.
5
Results and discussion
5.1
Performance on SGD
The evaluation of the proposed model on the SGD dev set
for the single domain is shown in Table 3. We can see that
all models presented in Table 3 perform very well on the
intent accuracy and the requested slot F1 metrics. Using
only the single domain data of the SGD dataset for training,
the model (D*) with domain-speciﬁc representation obtains
a joint goal accuracy of 0.541, while the model (D+S*) with
both domain and slot speciﬁc representations obtains 0.597.
Training the same models on all the dialogues in the train-
ing set (models D+ and D+S+), we can see that the corre-
sponding models outperform the previous ones, which were
trained on fewer dialogues (single domain dialogues). Eval-
uating the above four models on the complete dev-set, in-
cluding both single and multi domain dialogues, we notice
the same trend as shown in Table 4. This indicates that using
both domain and slot speciﬁc representations help the model
to learn to represent the input sequence better as compared
to the baseline approaches.
The results on the test-set of the SGD dataset are shown in
Table 5. Again, we notice the same pattern, proving that our
approach of integrating domain and slot representation to
learn better representation for the input sequence is helpful
in improving the models performance.
5.2
Performance on WoZ2.0
The evaluation of the proposed model on WoZ2.0 testset is
shown in Table 6. Similarly to the SGD results, the model
with both the domain and slot speciﬁc representation out-
performs other approaches in terms of the joint goal accu-
racy metric, as shown in Table 6. In addition, the proposed

Int. Acc
Req. F1
Avg. GA
Jnt. GA
Baseline
0.906
0.965
0.560
0.254
D*
0.893
0.953
0.574
0.244
D + S*
0.890
0.954
0.610
0.254
D+
0.913
0.972
0.623
0.295
D + S+
0.900
0.968
0.638
0.303
Table 5: Performance on the complete test set of the dataset
(both single and multi-domain dialogues). * indicates mod-
els trained with only single domain dialogues, while + de-
notes models trained with both single and multi domain di-
alogues.
Model
Slot Type
Req. F1
Avg. GA
Jnt. GA
Baseline
-
0.970
0.920
0.810
D
Non-Cat.
0.944
0.942
0.848
D + S
Non-Cat.
0.978
0.948
0.869
D
Cat.
0.952
0.939
0.841
D + S
Cat.
0.968
0.962
0.899
Table 6: Performance on the WoZ2.0 dataset. Non-Cat. de-
notes non-categorical slot-type and Cat. denotes categorical
slot-type.
models outperform the baseline model when the slot-type
is treated either as a non-categorical slot or as a categorical
slot. This shows the models ability to extract relevant infor-
mation from the dialogue history for making prediction.
5.3
Zero-Shot Dialogue State Tracking
The architecture of the proposed model is robust to varia-
tions in the service schema, thus enabling to adequately pre-
dict for any new schema that was not seen in training (un-
seen). Such zero-shot prediction capability of the domain-
aware DST is crucial, as it enables knowledge transfer from
high resource domains to similar domains with no or fewer
training data. The overall performance of the (D+S+) model,
both for seen and unseen services, on the test-set is shown in
Figure 3: Models performance on the test set for all services,
both seen and unseen in the training data.
Domain
Avg. GA
Joint GA
Alarm*
0.328
0.445
Buses*
0.658
0.204
Events*
0.646
0.295
Flights*
0.592
0.113
Homes*
0.691
0.215
Hotels**
0.668
0.360
Media*
0.609
0.270
Messaging*
0.198
0.095
Movies**
0.807
0.501
Music*
0.337
0.191
Payment*
0.290
0.112
RentalCars*
0.567
0.104
Restaurants*
0.739
0.326
RideSharing
0.612
0.282
Services**
0.609
0.083
Trains*
0.736
0.394
Travel
0.650
0.504
Weather
0.884
0.791
Table 7: Performance on each domain in Test set. * indicates
the domains that contain services not seen in training, while
** indicates domains containing one seen and one unseen
service.
Figure 3. We can notice that the performance on the unseen
services is comparatively low with respect to the seen ser-
vices, due to the fact that unseen services contain a higher
number of out-of-vocabulary (OOV) slots and values. The
performance of the model on each domain in the test set is
shown in Table 7. Of all the domains in test set, the domains
Alarm, Messaging, Payment and Trains do not have any ser-
vice in the training data. This results in the lowest average
goal accuracy for Alarm, Messaging, Payment among all do-
mains. However, for the Trains domain, we can notice that
the average goal accuracy is even higher than the accuracy
on some of the seen domains. This is due to the fact that
the Trains domain is similar to other domains in the training
set, such as Buses and Flights. This shows that the model is
able to use the learned knowledge from existing domains in
training data, and effectively apply this knowledge to new
similar domains without any additional training data.
6
Conclusion
We presented a proposal for a schema-guided dialogue state
tracking, which is robust to changes that may occur in the
schema. The proposed model does not imply any domain
or slot speciﬁc parameter, rather it utilizes domain and slot
representations to learn corresponding representations from
the input sequence. We showed that such approach outper-
forms the baseline approach and it is able to effectively per-
form knowledge transfer between domains. This is partic-
ularly promising for low-resource domains, where training
data are scarce or even absent. In these settings the proposed
approach could leverage data from high-resource domains,
achieving signiﬁcant data efﬁciency.
