1 
NEURAL SOURCE/SINK PHASE CONNECTIVITY IN 
DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA BY MEANS OF INTERCHANNEL CAUSALITY 
I. RODRÍGUEZ-RODRÍGUEZ, A. ORTIZ, N.J. GALLEGO-MOLINA, M.A. FORMOSO 
Departamento de Ingeniería de Comunicaciones, Universidad de Málaga, 29004 Málaga, Spain 

W. L. WOO 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST, UK 

While the brain connectivity network can inform the understanding and diagnosis of developmental dyslexia, its 
cause-effect relationships have not yet enough been examined. Employing electroencephalography signals and band-
limited white noise stimulus at 4.8 Hz (prosodic-syllabic frequency), we measure the phase Granger causalities among 
channels to identify differences between dyslexic learners and controls, thereby proposing a method to calculate 
directional connectivity. As causal relationships run in both directions, we explore three scenarios, namely channels’ 
activity as sources, as sinks, and in total. Our proposed method can be used for both classification and exploratory 
analysis. In all scenarios, we find confirmation of the established right-lateralized Theta sampling network anomaly, 
in line with the temporal sampling framework’s assumption of oscillatory differences in the Theta and Gamma bands. 
Further, we show that this anomaly primarily occurs in the causal relationships of channels acting as sinks, where it 
is significantly more pronounced than when only total activity is observed. In the sink scenario, our classifier obtains 
0.84 and 0.88 accuracy and 0.87 and 0.93 AUC for the Theta and Gamma bands, respectively. 
Keywords: Developmental Dyslexia, EEG, Granger causality, functional connectivity, anomaly detection; 
1. Introduction 
Developmental dyslexia (DD) is a learning difficulty that 
typically causes various reading difficulties, including 
letter migration and frequent spelling errors. In any given 
population, between 5% and 12% of learners are likely to 
have DD, depending on the test battery used 1. DD is 
traditionally diagnosed using behavioral tests of reading 
and writing skills, but these are vulnerable to exogenous 
factors, such as attitude or disposition, leading to 
diagnoses that may be fundamentally unsound 2. It is, 
therefore, imperative to develop more objective metrics 
that can offer a more accurate diagnosis among young 
learners. A stimulus system that remains uninfluenced by 
the learner’s behavior, actions and context (e.g., native 
language or learning level) would be extremely valuable. 
If the stimulus further involves the simulation of prosody, 
i.e. the white noise at the usual frequency of the language 
envelope, it may also inform our understanding of the 
brain areas active in auditory processing, indicating the 
differences between learners with and without dyslexia. 
While various neuroscience methods for gathering 
functional brain data exist, including functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) 3, magnetoencephalography 
(MEG) and functional near-infrared spectroscopy 
(fNIRS), electroencephalography (EEG) continues to be 
the most widely used and least costly method to assess 
cortical brain activity with enhanced temporal resolution.  
An EEG measures several frequency bands, namely the 
Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta, and Gamma bands, which do 
not experience stimulation equally, and it is thus 
generally held that the stimulation of one band can 
transfer to the others. Using EEG to separately 
investigate the patterns emerging in these bands may 
offer valuable insights for the research on DD. 
EEG is well-established in DD studies exploring the 
functional network connectivity and organization of the 
brain. Functional connectivity means the level of 
coordination between the activities in different areas of 
the brain while the learner is engaging in a task. Prior 
research has produced various techniques that employ 
EEG to assess functional connectivity to, for example, 
determine what patterns are characteristic of neurological 
conditions, including Parkinson’s disease 4. Studies in 
cognitive neuroscience have also used brain connectivity 
to identify brain areas crucial to language and learning 5. 

Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 
 
2
Connectivity analysis has allowed neuroscience to 
provide even deeper insights 
6 by analyzing the 
parameters linking two signals gathered through two 
distinct channels, such as their correlation, causality and 
covariance 7. Employing connectivity analysis to brain 
signals measured in different regions allows us to explore 
the neural network, in line with the notion that the brain 
is hyper-connected 8. 
Notably, brain connectivity is not solely limited to the 
interactions between areas, with regions potentially 
influencing each other through, e.g., phase-phase or 
phase-amplitude modulations among bands 9. We here 
consider areas that primarily exert an influence as 
sources, while those more likely to be subject to this 
influence are sinks. This novel consideration of 
connectivity in terms of sources and sinks can not only 
serve classification but also facilitate exploratory 
analysis. 
We propose extracting the frequency components of each 
band from the EEG signals acquired under prosodic 
auditory stimuli, subsequently using them to generate a 
connectivity model based on inter-channel Granger 
causality 10. By modelling connectivity as sources and 
sinks, we seek to clarify the existence of abnormalities 
between learners with and without DD, aiming to offer 
an 
enhanced understanding 
of 
the 
mechanisms 
underlying DD, ultimately allowing early diagnosis. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 describes the most relevant extant work in this 
field, and Section 3 outlines the data and methodology, 
including the preprocessing, Granger causality matrices 
and connectivity matrices construction, and classification 
algorithms. Section 4 presents our main results, leading 
to the discussion in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 presents 
the main conclusions and contributions of this work. 
2. Related works 
Previous studies have indicated that the phonological 
deficit that causes DD may be due to an impairment in 
the neural encoding of low-frequency speech envelopes, 
relating to speech prosody 11. There is evidence of 
significant difficulties among that learners with DD in 
tasks relying on prosodic awareness, e.g. identifying 
syllable stress, compared to controls at an earlier reading 
level 12. This indicates the presence of atypical oscillatory 
functioning in low-frequency brain rhythms in DD 13. 
There has been substantial research on the important role 
played by the ability to perceive prosodic frequency. 
After directly measuring the neural encoding of 
children’s speech using EEG, Power et al. 
11 
reconstructed the participants’ speech stimulus envelopes 
using the emergent patterns. The EEG recordings were 
done while the participants were performing a word 
report task using noise-vocoded speech, i.e. still with a 
low-frequency envelope yet with a degraded temporal 
fine structure (TFS) of speech. Due to this degradation, 
the participants necessarily derived the spoken words and 
sentences from the information given by the envelope. If 
the learners could accurately perceive the words and 
sentences, it was possible to evaluate the functioning of 
their neural encoding of the low-frequency envelopes in 
speech, which is likely impaired in learners with DD 
according to temporal sampling theory. 
Brain activity, and thus the connectivity network, occurs 
across various frequency bands, as demonstrated via the 
temporal sampling framework (TSF). Temporal coding 
is thought to be partially attributed to synchronous 
auditory cortex activity, wherein the network neurons 
synchronize 
endogenous 
oscillations 
at 
different 
preferred rates while matching the temporal information 
of the acoustic speech signal 14 15 16. The auditory and 
visual parts of speech unfold across different timescales, 
and thus, when the neurons in auditory and visual cortices 
oscillate, they are believed to phase-align their activity to 
match the input’s modulation rates 17. 
TSF proposes that atypical oscillatory sampling at 
various temporal rates may be the cause of the 
phonological impairment in DD. Furthermore, a potential 
biological mechanism for DD has recently been 
suggested, highlighting the presence of atypical 
dominant neural entrainment 18 for the slow rhythmic 
prosodic (0.5–1 Hz), syllabic (4–8 Hz) and phoneme (12–
40Hz) rhythm categories 19. Following this line of 
thought, we might consider learners with DD to have 
atypical oscillatory sampling for at least one temporal 
rate, leading to difficulties in phonologically capturing 
linguistic units such as syllables or phonemes.  
However, this phenomenon is not likely to be 
experienced equally across all frequency bands (i.e. 
Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta, and Gamma). Thus, it seems 
pertinent to examine these bands’ connectivity patterns 
separately using EEG. Prior research has indeed used 
EEG or MEG to investigate the fundamental mechanisms 
underlying DD, implementing speech-based stimuli 
under the premise that DD is essentially derived from a 
lesser awareness of individual speech units 20. Using 
visual and auditory stimulus, Power et al. 21, for example, 
identified differences between learners with DD and a 
control group in the preferred entrainment phase of the 
Delta and Theta bands. Based on changes in the 
frequency, phase, and power spectrum, it thus becomes 
feasible to derive measures of spectral connectivity. In 
line with this, there are techniques showing the statistical 

 
Neural source/sink phase connectivity in Developmental Dyslexia 
 
3 
relationship between electrodes on the same frequency 
band 22. 
The prior research has also explored the inference from 
connectivity patterns during reading tasks. For example, 
Žarić et al. 23 used visual word and false font processing 
tasks to investigate disruptions in the connectivity 
between the visual and language processing networks. 
They hereby calculated the connectivity patterns based 
on how statistically significant the differences in the 
power spectral density (PSD) were for each EEG band. 
Language-based reading or writing-related tasks have 
also been used in previous studies identifying 
discriminant patterns in EEG signals. For instance, using 
graph theory, González et al. 24 compared the EEG 
measurements of participants performing audiovisual 
tasks or at rest to determine differences in the 
connectivity patterns. Meanwhile, Stam et al. 25 used a 
phase lag index to compute multiple weighted 
connectivity matrices for multiple frequency bands.  
Assessing the connectivity of two channels requires a 
separate analysis of their respective phases. A signal’s 
phase, φ(t), changes over time when being captured with 
an electrode, and thus it must be measured for each 
channel i, referring to the instantaneous phase, captured 
using a Hilbert transform and computed via band-pass 
filtered signals. Consequently, the phase value can be 
pinpointed at each time point, allowing inter-channel 
correlation and causality to be determined. Using this 
method to track changes in the phase synchronization of 
epileptic patients, Mormann et al. 26 showed that epileptic 
episodes are often preceded by characteristic changes in 
synchronization.  
Following this, we can estimate the inter-channel 
connectivity based on the cause-effect relationships. The 
Granger causality test can hereby show whether one of 
the factors is a time series, allowing the characteristics of 
additional time series to be predicted. First employed in 
the 1980s in the economics field, Granger causality is a 
statistical hypothesis test that has been used to produce 
good results in a wide range of other fields 10. 
Neuroscience 
research 
has 
applied 
it 
to 
EEG 
measurements, producing findings on brain activity in 
emotion recognition 27, Vagus nerve stimulation 28, and 
pain perception 29. 
Connectivity based on causality implies cause-effect 
relationships between various areas of the brain, but these 
are not necessarily bidirectional. Thus, some brain areas 
will be very active because they are influencing others, 
and other areas may be very active because they are being 
influenced by remote areas. Likewise, it could be the case 
that high activity may be due to both situations.  While 
this concept of sources/sinks is not new, it has been 
subject to a variety of different approaches. For example, 
Rimehaug et al. 30 integrated it into their model of the 
visual cortex’s local field potential, while Sotero et al. 31 
used it to explain the laminar distribution of phase-
amplitude coupling of spontaneous current sources and 
sinks in rat brains. However, neither of those studies 
based their modeling of sources and sinks on causality 
relationships, instead using the electrical activity in the 
cerebral cortex. 
The concepts of Granger causality and source/sink 
relationships have been used to address the clinical issue 
of surgical resection planning by capturing high-
frequency ictal and preictal oscillations on an intracranial 
EEG 32, although no connectivity maps were constructed; 
furthermore, the study did not use machine learning to 
examine whether this approach could be applied in the 
differential diagnosis of impairments. 
Building on the work outlined above, we apply machine 
learning classification algorithms to assess the potential 
of diagnosing DD via a learner’s sources, sinks and total 
activity under stimulus, identified using Granger 
causality matrices. Due to the impenetrable nature of 
EEG signal classification and the complexity of the 
problem being addressed, machine learning is highly 
suitable 33. Briefly, we seek to demonstrate that different 
connectivity patterns are induced in certain brain 
networks by low-level auditory processing. To this end, 
we delineate this connectivity by establishing the source 
and sink relationships through the application of Granger 
causality to the phase synchronization among EEG 
channels. 
3. Materials and methods 
3.1. Data acquisition 
The dataset comprised EEG data from the University of 
Málaga’s Leeduca Study Group 34, gathered from 48 age-
matched child participants (32 skilled readers and 16 
dyslexic readers) (t(1) = -1.4, p > 0.05, age range: 88-100 
months). All participants were righthanded native 
Spanish speakers with normal or corrected-to-normal 
vision; none had a hearing impairment. All participants 
in the dyslexic group had been formally diagnosed with 
dyslexia at school. All participants in the skilled reader 
group were free from reading and writing difficulties and 
had not been formally diagnosed with dyslexia. The 
participants’ 
legal 
guardians 
expressed 
their 
understanding of the study, gave their written consent, 
and were present throughout the experiment. 
All participants experienced an auditory stimulus in 15-
minute sessions. The stimulus, which was modulated at 

Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 
 
4
4.8 Hz (prosodic-syllabic frequency) in 2.5-minute 
segments, was band-limited white noise. This type of 
stimulus was chosen to identify what synchronicity 
patterns the low-level auditory processing would induce 
and on the basis of the expert knowledge of linguistic 
psychologists 
concerning 
the 
main 
frequency 
components representing words in the human voice. The 
participants’ EEG signals were recorded with a 
BrainVision actiCHamp Plus with 32 active electrodes 
(actiCAP, Brain Products GmbH, Germany) at a 500 Hz 
sampling rate. The 10–20 standardized system was used 
to place the 32 electrodes. 
3.2. Preprocessing 
The preprocessing involved removing all eye-blinking 
and movement/impedance variation artifacts from the 
EEG signals. The former were eliminated via 
independent component analysis (ICA) 35 based on the 
eye movements observed in the EOG channel, while for 
the latter the relevant EEG segments were excluded. The 
channels were then referenced to the Cz channel. 
Then, a band-pass filter was applied to the EEG channels 
to collect information for the five EEG frequency bands 
(Delta, 1.5–4 Hz; Theta, 4–8 Hz, Alpha, 8–13 Hz; Beta, 
13–30 Hz; and Gamma, 30–80 Hz). We used finite 
impulse response (FIR) filters because these ensure a 
constant phase lag that can later be corrected. To be 
specific, each signal was sent forward and backward 
through the two-way zero-phase lag band-pass FIR least-
squares filter, producing a zero-lag phase in the overall 
filtering process that addressed the issue of phase lag 36. 
As low-pass filtering with an 80 Hz threshold was 
employed, we added a 50 Hz notch filter during 
preprocessing to eliminate this frequency component. 
3.3. Hilbert Transform 
A Hilbert transform (HT) transforms real signals into 
analytic signals, i.e. complex-valued time series without 
negative frequency components, allowing the time-
varying amplitude, phase and frequency, i.e., the 
instantaneous amplitude, phase and frequency, to be 
calculated from the analytic signal. 
 
We define HT for a signal x(t) as: 
 
ℋ[𝑥(𝑡)] = 1
𝜋∫
𝑥(𝑡)
𝑡−𝜏𝑑𝜏
+∞
−∞
 
(1) 
 
and we obtain the analytic signal zi(t) for signal x(t) as: 
 
𝑧𝑖(𝑡) = 𝑥𝑖(𝑡) + 𝑗ℋ{𝑥𝑖(𝑡)} = 𝑎(𝑡)𝑒𝑗𝜙(𝑡) 
(2) 
 
From zi(t), computing the instantaneous amplitude is 
straightforward: 
 
𝑎(𝑡) = √𝑟𝑒(𝑧𝑖(𝑡))2 + 𝑖𝑚(𝑧𝑖(𝑡))2 
(3) 
 
with the instantaneous, unwrapped phase as: 
 
𝜙(𝑡) = 𝑡𝑎𝑛−1 𝑖𝑚(𝑧𝑖(𝑡))
𝑟𝑒(𝑧𝑖(𝑡)) 
(4) 
 
The above technique gives the phase value for each time 
point, allowing the inter-channel synchronization to be 
estimated based on the phase variation. 
3.4. Granger Causality test 
Developed for the field of econometrics by Clive 
Granger, 
Granger 
causality 
37 
describes 
causal 
interactions occurring between continuous-valued time 
series. As a statistical hypothesis test, it essentially states 
that “the past and present may cause the future, but the 
future cannot cause the past”; hence, knowing a cause 
will be more helpful in predicting future effects than an 
auto-regression will. Specifically, variable x will 
Granger-cause y if the auto-regression for y that uses past 
values of x and y is significantly more accurate than one 
using only past values of y. We may exemplify this by 
taking two stationary time-series sequences, xt and yt, 
whereby xt−k and yt−k are, respectively, the past k values 
of xt and yt. We then use two regressions to perform 
Granger causality:  
 
𝑦𝑡̂ 1 = ∑𝑎𝑘
𝑙
𝑘=1
𝑦𝑡−𝑘+ 𝜀𝑡 
(5) 
 
𝑦𝑡̂ 2 = ∑𝑎𝑘
𝑙
𝑘=1
𝑦𝑡−𝑘+ ∑𝑏𝑘
𝑤
𝑘=1
𝑥𝑡−𝑘+ 𝜂𝑡 
(6) 
 
where 𝑦𝑡̂ 1 and 𝑦𝑡̂ 2 are, respectively, the fitting values of 
the first and second regressions; l and w are the maximum 
numbers of the lagged observations of xt and yt; ak; bk ∈ 
R are the regression coefficient vectors estimated using 
least squares; and εt and ηt are white noise (prediction 
errors). Note that even though w can be infinite, due to 
the finite nature of our data, we consider w finite and give 
it a length well below the time series length, estimated 
using model selection, such as the Akaike information 
criterion (AIC) 38. Next, an F-test is applied to give a p-
value indicating whether the regression model produced 

 
Neural source/sink phase connectivity in Developmental Dyslexia 
 
5 
by Eq. (5) is statistically better than that of Eq. (6). If it 
is, then x Granger-causes y.  
We perform Granger causality testing for each 
participant and evaluate the channels’ interactions, 
producing an n x n square matrix of p-values (n = number 
of channels). 
Using Granger causality to analyze the neural network’s 
directed functional connectivity intuitively demonstrates 
the directionality with which information is transmitted 
between neurons or brain regions. Previous studies have 
already applied this technique to EEG analysis with great 
success 39 40. 
3.5. Connectivity vectors 
The field of neuroscience tends to consider the brain as a 
network using functional information  
41 
42 
43, 
culminating in the so-called connectome. This refers to 
the complete mapping of all connections between brain 
regions as an adjacency matrix, and often includes the 
covariance, as well as other metrics, between fMRI 
signals measured for different regions. Several studies 
have also examined the temporal covariance between 
EEG electrodes. 
Once we had assembled the Granger causality matrices 
for each participant subject, we established a threshold 
value that evidenced a causal relationship between the 
channels. Then, we formulated the three scenarios used 
to produce each participant’s feature set:  
• Sources: Array of n x 1 elements; each element 
relates each channel with the number of channels that 
it influences. 
• Sinks: Array of n x 1 elements; each element relates 
each channel with the number of channels that it is 
influenced by. 
• Total activity: Array of n x 1 elements; the sum of 
the two previous scenarios, acting as a reference for 
each channel’s global activity. 
By organizing the information thus, we receive the same 
number of features as there are channels for each 
participant, each with a number that indicates its activity 
as a source, as a sink, or the total. A summary of this 
process is presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Assembling the source and sink connectivity arrays for 
a participant, given the relevant Granger matrix. [P(k)] is an 
Iverson bracket function. 
3.6. Ensemble feature selection 
If the model includes many features, it will be more 
complex, potentially leading to data overfitting. 
Moreover, some of the features may be noise and could 
adversely affect the model. Thus, we removed such 
features to ensure the better generalization of the model. 
We hereby selected the variables based on majority 
voting through the application of several techniques. If a 
variable was chosen by an algorithm, it received one 
vote.  The votes were then summed for each variable, and 
those with the most votes were selected. (Fig. 2). This 
method has been found to be suitable for datasets that are 
high-dimensional yet have few instances 44. The voting 
strategy used a variety of feature selection methods 45, as 
outlined in the following:  
Information value (IV) using weight of evidence 
(WOE): This indicates the predictive power of an 
independent variable concerning the dependent variable 
46. It allows a continuous independent variable to be 
transformed into a set of groups or bins based on the 
similarity of the dependent variable distribution (i.e. 
numbers of events and non-events). Using WOE allows 
outliers and missing values to be addressed and 
eliminates the need for dummy variables 47: 
 
𝑊𝑂𝐸= ln (
𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡%
𝑁𝑜𝑛 𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡%) 
(7) 
 
𝐼𝑉= Σ[(𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡% −𝑁𝑜𝑛 𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡%) ∗𝑊𝑂𝐸] 
(8) 
 
An IV statistic above 0.3 is held to indicate a strong 
relationship between the predictor and the event/non-
event odds ratio 48. 

Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 
 
6
Variable importance using random forest/extra trees 
classifier: Calculated using a tree-based estimator, this 
can be used to eliminate irrelevant features. Variable 
importance is conventionally computed using the mean 
decrease in impurity (i.e., gini importance 
49) 
mechanism, wherein the improvement in the split 
criterion for each split of each tree is the importance 
measure assigned to the splitting variable. For each 
variable, this is separately accumulated over all the trees 
in the forest. This measure is similar to the R2 in the 
training set regression. 
Recursive Feature Elimination: This can be used to 
select features by recursively considering feature sets 
with diminishing size based on an external estimator (a 
linear regression model) that assigns weights to the 
features 50. The estimator is trained on the first feature 
set, noting each feature’s importance based on a given 
attribute. The least important features are subsequently 
removed from the current set. The process is performed 
recursively on the pruned set until the desired number of 
features is achieved. 
Chi-square best variables: This uses a chi-square (χ2) 
test to assess the correlations among a dataset’s features 
and identify multicollinearity. The aim is revealing any 
relationships between the dependent variable and any of 
the independent variables 51. In the chi-square test, H₀ 
(null hypothesis) assumes that two features are 
independent, while H₁ (alternative hypothesis) predicts 
that they are related.  We set a α=0.05 and a p-value of 
0.05 or greater is considered critical, anything less means 
the deviations are significant hence the hypothesis must 
be rejected. 
L1-based feature selection: Some features can be 
eliminated using a linear model with an L1 penalty. This 
method involves regularization, wherein a penalty is 
added to various parameters of a machine learning model 
to reduce the model’s freedom and prevent overfitting. 
When regularizing linear models, the penalty is applied 
in addition to the coefficients multiplying the predictors 
52. Unlike other forms of regularization, L1 can reduce 
some coefficients to zero, meaning the feature is 
removed. 
Once the best variables had been chosen by voting, we 
performed a multicollinearity check on them. 
 
 
Fig. 2. The feature selection procedure for the ‘Sources’ 
scenario using a vote-based approach. 
3.7. Classification process 
In an ensemble method, multiple models are first 
generated and then integrated to produce higher-quality 
results. The respective predictions are hereby combined 
using weighted majority voting to make the final 
prediction. At each boosting iteration, the data are 
modified by applying w1, w2 , …, wn to each training 
sample. As the weights are initially wi=1/N, a weak 
learner is trained in the first step using the raw data. At 
each successive iteration, the sample weights are 
modified individually, and the algorithm is then applied 
to the reweighted data. Training examples that are 
incorrectly predicted relative to the previous step’s 
boosted model are given increased weights; correctly 
predicted examples are given decreased weights. As a 
result, the examples that were difficult to predict become 
increasingly influential as the number of iterations 
increases, and the weak learners that follow are forced to 
focus on the examples previously missed. 
Ensemble methods deliver more accurate results than 
single models, and are particularly suitable for improving 
binary prediction on small data sets. We use the Gradient 
Boosting classifier, as well as an Ada Boost for results 
verification. This latter classifier 53 is a meta-estimator 
that initially fits to the data, with further copies then being 
fit to the same data, while incorrectly classified 
instances’ weights are modified to force subsequent 
classifiers to focus on them. The Gradient Boosting 
classifier 54 creates an additive model based on a forward 
stage-wise construction, allowing the optimization of the 
arbitrary differentiable loss function. At each stage, n 
regression trees are fit to the multinomial or deviance 
binomial loss function’s negative gradient, with a single 
regression tree being used for the special case of binary 
classification. To identify the best parameter set, we 
cross-validate with 20 folds and a parameter grid, as 
shown in Table 1. 

 
Neural source/sink phase connectivity in Developmental Dyslexia 
 
7 
Table 1. Parameter grid of machine learning classifiers. 
Algorithm 
Parameter 
Range 
Gradient  
n_estimators 
1 to 12 
Boosting 
Loss 
deviance, exponential 
 
Learning rate 
0.05 to 1.5 
 
Criterion 
friedm_mse, sq_error, mse, mae 
 
Min_samples_split 
0.01 to 3 
 
Min_samples_leaf 
0.01 to 3 
 
 
Max_depth 
1 to 4 
Ada Boost 
n_estimators 
1 to 25 
 
Learning rate 
1 to 3.5 
 
Boosting algorithm 
SAMME, SAMME.R 
4. Results 
Plotting each learner’s array of sources and sinks permits 
the visual extraction of the respective patterns of the 
dyslexic and control groups. To this end, we examined 
the channel distributions for both groups by calculating 
the means and dispersions and producing a box-and-
whisker plot. We also constructed a topoplot as this can 
illustrate the results with greater clarity. For example, 
Fig. 3 shows the Theta band connectivity of the control 
and dyslexic groups specifically for total activity. Please 
note that Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 do not directly represent the 
electrical activity of the cerebral cortex, but rather show 
the levels of the cause-effect relationships between the 
channels, i.e. in one direction or in the other direction or 
in total. It immediately becomes clear that despite the 
similarity of the patterns, the dyslexic group has a 
significantly higher activity level in the Theta band. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Boxplot of the total activity in the Alpha band. 
Fig 4. The equivalent graphical representation of Fig. 3 in a 
topoplot. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Source/sink activity in the Theta, Beta and Gamma bands in the control and dyslexic groups. Numbers represent how many 
channels are affected by each channel as a source, or how many channels are affecting each channel as a sink. 

Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 
 
8
Fig. 5 compares the channel activity in the Theta, Beta 
and Gamma bands, and can be viewed separately as 
sources, sinks, or total activity for both the control and 
dyslexic groups. Please note that the range of 
visualization is the same in all sinks/sources topoplots, 
while different in the total activity ones, for better 
representation. Once more, it is immediately clear that 
while the patterns are broadly similar, the activity level is 
higher in the dyslexic group, primarily observed in the 
sink activity (less in the source activity). Thus, although 
the sources, broadly speaking, behave similarly between 
the groups, the dyslexic group has significantly more 
concentrated sinks and more activity. Consequently, the 
overall activity level is also affected. 
 
 
Fig. 6. Feature importance in Theta, Beta and Gamma bands considering sources, sinks and total activity. 
With as many arrays as subjects, and with each array 
having as many components as channels, we performed 
feature selection to identify channels that can help 
differentiate between the control and dyslexic groups. 
The feature selection procedure outlined above was thus 
applied for the cases of sources, sinks and total activity, 
according to the band. Fig. 6 presents the results for the 
Theta, Beta and Gamma bands, whereby the importance 
values are normalized to permit fair and simple 
comparison. Channels showing a higher significance are 
those with more dissimilarity between the control and 

 
Neural source/sink phase connectivity in Developmental Dyslexia 
 
9 
dyslexic groups, directing us to where we can find 
different patterns of functioning. 
After performing the feature selection for each band, for 
each case (sources, sinks and total activity), we optimize 
the Gradient Boosting classifier to obtain the best 
performance. The results are summarized in Table 2, with 
performances achieving at least 80% marked bold. 
According to the results, the greatest differences between 
the control and dyslexic groups (i.e., the best classifier 
results) emerge in the Theta and Gamma bands when 
accounting for the activity sink role of the different 
channels, achieving accuracies of 84% and 88%, 
respectively. We also wish to highlight the results for the 
Beta band for the activity sources regarding the Area 
Under the Curve (AUC), in addition to accuracy. 
Table 2. Results of the Gradient Boosting machine 
learning classifier. 
Band 
Features set 
Accuracy 
AUC 
Delta 
Sources 
0.77 ± 0.14 
0.65 ± 0.31 
 
Sinks 
0.79 ± 0.20 
0.70 ± 0.29 
 
Total activity 
0.74 ± 0.19 
0.76 ± 0.25 
Theta 
Sources 
0.77 ± 0.17 
0.77 ± 0.30 
 
Sinks 
0.84 ± 0.15 
0.87 ± 0.18 
 
Total activity 
0.74 ± 0.17 
0.72 ± 0.28 
Alpha 
Sources 
0.79 ± 0.19 
0.74 ± 0.25 
 
Sinks 
0.76 ± 0.21 
0.71 ± 0.29 
 
Total activity 
0.79 ± 0.17 
0.77 ± 0.21 
Beta 
Sources 
0.80 ± 0.17 
0.86 ± 0.18 
 
Sinks 
0.79 ± 0.24 
0.81 ± 0.27 
 
Total activity 
0.76 ± 0.23 
0.75 ± 0.32 
Gamma 
Sources 
0.81 ± 0.18 
0.83 ± 0.22 
 
Sinks 
0.88 ± 0.14 
0.93 ± 0.16 
 
Total activity 
0.82 ± 0.12 
0.87 ± 0.18 
 
The Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) space is a valuable 
data interpretation tool that can be used to assess the 
performance of a binary classifier, wherein it indicates 
the cutoff point at which sensitivity is traded for 
specificity. Hence, it can be used to evaluate the 
classifier’s performance in distinguishing positive and 
negative samples. Related to this, AUC is the probability 
that the classifier will assign a random positive instance 
a more extreme value than a random negative instance. 
Fig. 7 presents the ROC curves for the Theta, Beta and 
Gamma bands, to identify those with the best 
performance. Notably, the Gamma band with the 
channels’ sinks activity as the features presents a 93% 
under the curve. 
The obtained results were verified by repeating the 
classification process using the Ada Boost algorithm. 
Table 3 presents the results for the Gamma band while 
Fig. 8 shows the ROC curve. While the performance is 
slightly diminished, it remains consistent across all bands 
and cases (sources, sinks and total activity) with the 
results from the Gradient Boosting. 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. ROC curves for the Theta, Beta and Gamma bands with 
the Gradient Boosting classifier. 
 

Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 
 
10
Table 3. Results for the Ada Boost classifier for 
the Gamma band. 
Band 
Feature set 
Accuracy 
AUC 
Gamma 
Sources 
0.83 ± 0.17 
0.82 ± 0.27 
 
Sinks 
0.88 ± 0.11 
0.86 ± 0.21 
 
Total activity 
0.77 ± 0.19 
0.76 ± 0.31 
 
 
Fig. 8. ROC curves for the Gamma band with the Ada Boost 
classifier. 
As is often the case in biomedical studies, statistical tests 
are required to check that the number of samples has not 
introduced bias in the classification stage (e.g., through 
overfitting). Moreover, there is a need to check the 
probability of these results having been obtained by 
chance. For large datasets, such tests need not be as 
stringent, but real-world studies demand special attention 
due to the small sample sizes and unbalanced classes. 
Specifically, in experimental studies the prevalence of 
the disorder among the population being treated must be 
taken into account. For DD, this is around 5-12%, as 
mentioned above. 
To this end, a null distribution is generated by estimating 
the classifier’s accuracy for 1000 permutations of the 
labels. This indicates the distribution for the null 
hypothesis that the features are not dependent on the 
labels, and enables the estimation of the probability that 
the classification results will be reproduced with shuffled 
labels. The result is an empirical p-value determined by: 
 
𝑝−𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒= #𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑎𝑐𝑐. ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑛 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒
#𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑢𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
 
(9) 
 
Fig. 9 gives the permutation test results for the Theta, 
Beta, and Gamma bands for sources, sinks and total 
activity. 
The 
null 
distribution 
from 
the 
label 
permutations, as outlined above, is in blue, while the 
vertical red line represents the accuracy obtained for the 
non-permuted case. At each permutation iteration, a 20-
fold stratified cross-validation is performed, and based on 
the average of the results obtained at these 20 folds, the 
corresponding permutation iteration is determined. 
Hence, Fig. 9 presents the classification’s probability 
density. According to the permutation tests, the results 
have low p-values and are significant. 
5. Discussion 
The participants were subjected to white noise at 4.8 Hz, 
i.e. between the syllabic and prosodic frequencies, as the 
sole stimulus. DD has been shown to link to impairments 
in syllabic and prosodic perception 55, suggesting general 
difficulties in identifying the different modulation 
frequencies. This influences the slower temporal rates of 
speech processing in particular, as well as the tracking of 
the amplitude envelope of speech, diminishing learners’ 
syllabic segmentation efficiency. 
Multi-time resolution models of speech processing 16 
have evidenced that phonetic segment identification 
associates with faster temporal modulations (Gamma 
rate, 30–80 Hz), syllable identification is linked to slower 
modulations (Theta rate, 4–10 Hz), and syllable stress 
and prosodic patterning information correlates with very 
slow modulations (Delta rate, 1.5–4 Hz). Nonetheless, 
anomalies can emerge in various frequency ranges due to 
inter-band entrainment. 
As it offers adequate time resolution, examining the 
patterns occurring in EEG channels at different bands can 
unveil the speech encoding linked to problems with 
speech prosody and sensorimotor synchronization. 
Exemplifying this, previous research 18 used speech-
based stimuli and time-frequency descriptors to reveal 
the link between speech features and neural dynamics. 
We find that the classifier performs better in the Theta 
and Gamma bands. The results for the Theta band are 
expected as the TSF suggests that the phonological 
deficit of DD – regardless of language – may be partially 
attributed to functionally atypical or impaired phonology 
entrainment mechanisms in the auditory cortex, 
especially as oscillations at slower temporal rates, i.e. 
Theta and Delta, relate to syllabic and prosodic 
processing 56. 
 
 

 
Neural source/sink phase connectivity in Developmental Dyslexia 
 
11
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Permutation tests for Gradient Boosting classifier in Theta, Beta and Gamma bands. 
As per the TSF, group differences are expected in 
neuronal oscillatory entrainment at slower rates (approx. 
4 Hz, in line with the stimulus used) 57. Higher causality 
relationships emerged in the frontal area in all scenarios 
for the Theta band. In addition, the number of channels 
that g-causes causality is higher in the dyslexic domain, 
which was the case for the sources, sinks and total 
activity. This higher activity in terms of overall causality 
relations was evident across all bands. However, in the 
participants with DD there was significantly less 
entrainment in the auditory networks of the right 
hemisphere in the Theta band. As Fig. 6 (feature 
selection) shows, the C4 channel in the upper part, i.e. the 
Theta band, is predominantly influential for the causality 
regarding the sources, as well as the sinks and total 
activity. It has already been established that the right-
lateralized Theta sampling network tends to involve 
slower temporal rates and codes the speech signal’s lower 
modulation frequencies 57, facilitating syllable-scale 
temporal integration. In other words, spoken sentences 
are tracked and distinguished by the Theta band phase 
pattern, allowing the incoming speech signal to be broken 
into syllable-sized packets and speech dynamics to be 
tracked through resetting and sliding, such as with 
varying rates of speech 58. Fig. 5 (topoplots) clearly 
demonstrates that the C4 channel is the most interesting 
as it has the most Granger causality (causing and being 
caused) for all scenarios for the dyslexic group. For the 
sources, the frontal area contains other noteworthy 
channels (FP2, F7, F3 and Fz) that show differences 
between the control and dyslexic groups in terms of 
activity. The most influential channels in the sinks are F3 
and F4 (frontal area) and P3.  
Hence, it seems pertinent to suggest that the main 
differences in the causality relationships of the Theta 
band lie in the so-called dorsal and ventral pathways. In 
particular, the right area seems critical, as evidenced in 

Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 
 
12
the prior research and especially demonstrated here with 
the sinks scenario. 
Another interesting result worth discussing is that for the 
Beta band. Here, more activity was observed for all three 
scenarios in the dyslexic group; this agrees with the 
results for the Theta band as well as those from previous 
studies 59. For the sources, differences in the causal 
relationships were mainly identified in the C3 and C4 
channels, pointing to areas responsible for motor 
processing 11. It is becoming increasingly clear that 
speech perception is at least partially located in the motor 
areas, especially under less-than-optimal listening 
conditions. This cruciality of the C4 channel was 
similarly seen in the Theta band and is in line with prior 
research evidencing the important role played by the 
lower frequency bands in general and Beta band coupling 
in particular 60. Hence, inefficient phase locking in the 
auditory cortex may affect visual and motor processing 
development, which may in turn cause some of the 
visual, motor and attentional difficulties seen in DD 61. 
It should be noted, however, that the C3-C4 interaction is 
mostly relevant for the sources and is not important for 
either the C3 for the sinks or, as a result, for the total 
activity. Meanwhile, the causal activity in the Beta band 
is different in the occipital area in the sinks scenario, and 
it is remarkably different in the frontal area, especially in 
FP1 for all three scenarios and in the F3 channel for the 
sinks scenario. 
In the Gamma band the activity is higher than in the Theta 
band for maximum values, although the occipital area 
shows more concentrated activity among the causality 
relations, as Fig. 5 shows. Nevertheless, the effect is 
different between the control and dyslexic groups, 
whereby the participants with DD show higher activity 
for the sinks, which increases their total activity.  
For the sources, the channels with the most explicit 
differences are FC1 and, more generally, TP9 in the left 
temporal area. In the case of sinks, this is also an 
important channel, although O1 and, as highlighted 
above, C3 also play a role.  
Meanwhile, 
in 
the 
Gamma 
band, 
despite 
the 
discrepancies between the dorsal and ventral pathways, 
the latter offers the main difference for the classification 
of TP9 for both sources and sinks. FC1 is linked to 
sources and C3 to sinks, suggesting a significant cause-
effect relationship, albeit with potentially less activity in 
the dyslexic group, facilitating classification. 
We can confirm that the classifier performs better in the 
Theta and Gamma bands, which can evidence atypical 
oscillatory differences based on both speech and non-
speech stimuli 56. According to Leong’s models 62, the 
slower rates (Delta and Theta) temporally constrain 
entrainment at the faster rates, such as Gamma.  
Lehongre et al. 65 contended that the oscillatory nesting 
seen between the Theta/Delta phase and the Gamma 
power 63 64 offers a way to integrate information at the 
phonemic (Gamma) rate into the syllabic rate. 
Meanwhile, the integration of the various acoustic 
features that contribute to the same phoneme being 
perceived may be hindered by impairments in the phase 
locking by Theta generators. Otherwise, flaws in certain 
Theta mechanisms could influence the development of 
the phonological system, which thus tends to code 
information bilaterally with the Gamma oscillations 
independently and then link them perceptually with the 
Theta oscillator output. In this case, the impaired phase 
locking of the right hemisphere Theta oscillatory 
networks causes difficulties with lower frequency 
modulations 17 66. 
In addition, the spontaneous oscillatory neural activity 
identified in the auditory cortex in both the Theta and 
Gamma bands is known to associate with spontaneous 
activity in the visual and premotor areas 66. 
A bilateral Gamma sampling network codes the signal’s 
higher frequency modulations, thereby facilitating 
temporal integration at the phonetic (i.e., phoneme) scale.  
If we apply this model to DD, it is indicated that impaired 
processing at the syllable level (i.e., less efficient Theta 
phase locking) occurs alongside unimpaired Gamma 
sampling, meaning more weight is assigned to phonetic 
feature information during phonological development. 
Hence, as is the case in typical infant development, 
children with DD may have sensitivity to all phonetic 
contrasts of human languages 67. 
Leong and Goswami 62 found that learners with DD show 
a preference for different phase alignment between 
amplitude modulations (AMs) when these respectively 
convey syllable and phoneme information (Theta and 
Gamma-AMs). A different phase locking angle suggests 
a discrepancy in the integration of speech information 
that arrives at a temporal rate different to that of the final 
perception of the speech 14. Our results concerning the 
interaction between the Theta and Gamma bands support 
this. 
Finally, our results also seem to confirm that the dyslexic 
brain is less efficient at encoding the amplitude 
modulation hierarchy’s highest levels, i.e. those bearing 
information on the prosodic-syllabic structure, leading to 
cascade effects that impact the encoding of the 
phonological structure’s levels nested within the Delta 
band, such as the syllable-level (Theta band) and 
phoneme-level (Gamma band) AM information. 
Importantly, our results have been validated using a 
demanding permutation test, with the aim of ensuring 
that the results are not coincidental, despite the medium 
sample size. 

 
Neural source/sink phase connectivity in Developmental Dyslexia 
 
13
6. Conclusion and future works 
Our results support the main assumption of the TSF that 
DD involves a specific deficit in the low-frequency phase 
locking mechanisms in the auditory cortex, thereby 
potentially affecting phonological development 56.  
In confirmation of this, we find an anomaly that emerges 
primarily in the causal relationships of channels that 
function as sinks, which is significantly more pronounced 
than when only the total activity is considered. Hence, it 
is reasonable to consider a division into Granger-causing 
or Granger-caused relationships. This, in turn, suggests 
that the main differences contributing to DD emerge 
when certain brain areas must function as receptors in the 
interactions between channels.  
Furthermore, our results are in line with previous 
research, which has already detected an anomaly in the 
right-lateralized Theta band. We have clearly identified 
this here across all three scenarios (sources, sinks, total 
activity). 
We also find confirmation for the higher brain activity in 
learners with DD, although differences are more 
significant for the sinks in the Theta and Gamma bands, 
in turn leading to more total activity. The highest 
classifier performance (accuracy and AUC) is hereby 
found in the sink scenario. For the Beta band, the 
difference in activity is more consistent across all three 
scenarios. The classifier also performs well for the Beta 
band in all three scenarios, with few differences 
observed, thereby confirming the important role played 
by this band in the sensorimotor coding of speech. 
The results reflect the causal activity generated in the 
brain subjected to prosodic-syllabic stimulus at 4.8 Hz. 
Consequently, future work could consider the Granger 
causality relationships in the phases across channels and 
bands using higher frequency stimuli to stimulate 
syllabic-phonetic and phonetic activity.
