Point-Based Methods for Model Checking
in Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
Maxime Bouton

Stanford University
Stanford, CA
Jana Tumova

KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
Mykel J. Kochenderfer

Stanford University
Stanford, CA
Abstract
Autonomous systems are often required to operate in partially
observable environments. They must reliably execute a spec-
iﬁed objective even with incomplete information about the
state of the environment. We propose a methodology to syn-
thesize policies that satisfy a linear temporal logic formula in
a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP). By
formulating a planning problem, we show how to use point-
based value iteration methods to efﬁciently approximate the
maximum probability of satisfying a desired logical formula
and compute the associated belief state policy. We demonstrate
that our method scales to large POMDP domains and provides
strong bounds on the performance of the resulting policy.
Introduction
Designing decision making strategies for robotic systems in
uncertain environments can be challenging. In many applica-
tions, the agent is equipped with sensors that are not capable
of detecting all the relevant features of the environments.
Sensors may not be able to detect objects through walls or
directly measure the intentions of humans. Algorithms must
generate strategies that are both efﬁcient and reliable even in
situations where all the information about the environment is
not accessible. In addition, the resulting policies must exhibit
strong guarantees on their performance.
A principled way to take into account both stochastic dy-
namics and state uncertainty is to model the environment as a
partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP). The
objective is often speciﬁed using an instantaneous reward
function. The agent seeks to ﬁnd a strategy that maximizes
the expected accumulated reward over time. Deﬁning re-
ward functions can be very challenging and can lead to a
value alignment problem, where the agent does not behave
as expected (Hadﬁeld-Menell et al., 2017). Although exist-
ing planning algorithms can generate approximately optimal
policies, it may not be straightforward how to interpret the
performance of the policy through expected accumulated
rewards.
In this work, we focus on the problem of synthesizing
policies that achieve a desired objective expressed by a logi-
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
cal formula in a POMDP. We consider linear temporal logic
(LTL) (Pnueli, 1977) as the framework for specifying the ob-
jective. LTL formulas can mathematically express objectives
formulated in structured English (Finucane et al., 2010). In
addition, we are interested in computing the probability of
satisfying the desired formula when following the resulting
policy. This problem is known as quantitative model check-
ing (Baier and Katoen, 2008). In general, the problem of
computing a policy that has the best probability of satisfying
a logical formula in a POMDP is undecidable (Chatterjee
et al., 2013). However, it is possible to derive approximate
solutions to the problem with conﬁdence bounds (Hauskrecht,
2000).
We propose a methodology to approximately solve quan-
titative model checking problems in POMDPs. We show
that the problem of ﬁnding a policy maximizing the satis-
faction of the objective can be formulated as a reward max-
imization problem. This consideration allows us to beneﬁt
from efﬁcient approximate POMDP solvers, such as SAR-
SOP (Kurniawati et al., 2008), to solve the original model
checking problem. In addition, the bounds provided by the
solver constitute strong guarantees on the performance of
the resulting policy. We apply our methodology to classical
POMDP domains and demonstrate that it can scale to larger
environments than previous methods. We empirically verify
that the probability of success of the policy is consistent with
the upper and lower bounds provided by the solver. Finally,
we compare the performance of point-based methods against
previous work (Norman et al., 2017).
Related Work
Model checking in ﬁnite state Markov decision processes
(MDPs) has been studied extensively and relies on two main
solving strategies: value iteration and linear programs (Baier
and Katoen, 2008; Lahijanian et al., 2011). These algorithms
scale polynomially in the size of the MDP and efﬁcient
tools for probabilistic model checking can synthesize policies
satisfying an LTL formula in MDPs with several millions
states (Kwiatkowska et al., 2011; Dehnert et al., 2017). How-
ever, these tools have little support for environments where
the state is not observable, and current methods cannot scale
to large POMDPs useful for robotics applications.
arXiv:2001.03809v1  [cs.AI]  11 Jan 2020

The general problem of ﬁnding a policy satisfying an LTL
formula in an inﬁnite horizon POMDP is undecidable (Chat-
terjee et al., 2013; Chatterjee et al., 2015). However, one
can often compute approximate solutions by relaxing some
aspects of the problem. A possible approach consists of re-
stricting the space of policies to ﬁnite state controllers. This
assumption can signiﬁcantly reduce the search space. Chatter-
jee et al. (2015) propose an exact algorithm relying on some
heuristics to ﬁnd policies satisfying a formula with probabil-
ity 1. This algorithm has been used to synthesize policies in
a drone surveillance problem (Svorenov´a et al., 2015). Other
algorithms solve the quantitative model checking problem
using parameter synthesis (Junges et al., 2018) or a variant of
value iteration (Sharan and Burdick, 2014). The restriction
to classes of policies with a limited number of internal states
allows those approaches to scale to domains with thousands
of states. However, in many applications, ﬁnite state policies
might not be expressive enough to solve the problem. Instead,
the policy must be represented as a mapping from a belief
state (a distribution over states) to an action.
Norman et al. addresses the problem of belief state plan-
ning with LTL speciﬁcations by discretizing the belief space
and formulating an MDP over this space (Norman et al.,
2017). In problems where the state space has more than a
few dimensions, discretizing the belief space becomes in-
tractable. We demonstrate that our method scales to problems
with an order of magnitude more hidden states. Similarly,
abstraction reﬁnement methods were proposed to discretize
the belief space in linear Gaussian POMDPs (Haesaert et al.,
2018). Another approach for control in the belief space with
LTL speciﬁcations linear Gaussian systems uses sampling
based methods (Vasile et al., 2016). Wang et al. proposed
an online search method to only explore belief points reach-
able from the current belief but their approach is limited to
safe reachability objectives where the agent maximizes the
probability of reaching a goal state while avoiding dangerous
states (Wang et al., 2018). Alternative methods can check
that a given belief state policy satisﬁes a safety or optimality
criterion using barrier certiﬁcates but do not allow for policy
synthesis (Ahmadi et al., 2018).
In this work, we propose a method to synthesize policies
mapping belief states to actions with an LTL speciﬁcation in
a POMDP. We show that we can beneﬁt from the advances in
POMDP planning algorithms to solve model checking prob-
lems efﬁciently and avoid a naive discretization of the belief
space. In contrast with previous work, we do not assume that
the labels constituting the LTL formula are observable. In
addition, our method handles stochastic observation models.
Background
This section reviews partially observable Markov decision
processes and linear temporal logic.
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
Sequential decision making problems with state uncertainty
can be modeled as partially observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs). They are formally deﬁned by the tuple
(S ,A ,O,T,O,R,γ) where S is a ﬁnite state space, A a
ﬁnite action space, O a ﬁnite observation space, T a transition
model, O an observation model, R a reward function, and γ a
discount factor. The transition model describes the probability
of transitioning to a state s′ when taking an action a ∈A in
a state s: T(s′ | s,a) = Pr(s′ | s,a). When executing an action
a in a state s, the agent receives a scalar reward given by
the function R(s,a). The observation model represents the
probability of observing o ∈O while having executed action
a and being in state s′: O(o | s′,a) = Pr(o | s′,a).
During the decision process, the agent cannot sense the
true state of the environment. Instead it maintains a belief that
reﬂects its internal knowledge of the state. The belief state is a
probability distribution over all possible states, b : S →[0,1],
and b(s) represents the probability of being in state s. In
POMDPs with ﬁnite states, actions, and observations, the
belief b is updated after taking action a and observing o
using the following equation:
b′(s′) ∝O(o | s′,a)∑
s
T(s′ | a,s)b(s)
(1)
A policy is a mapping from beliefs to actions. Given a
policy π, an induced trajectory is a trajectory generated by
an agent following π from a given belief point. The solution
to a POMDP is a policy π∗that, if followed, maximizes the
expected discounted sum of immediate rewards. The optimal
policy can be extracted from the optimal belief action utility
function U∗(b,a) as follows:
π∗(b) = argmax
a
U∗(b,a)
(2)
where U∗(b,a) represent the accumulated discounted reward
obtained when following the optimal policy after taking ac-
tion a in belief b. We note U∗(b) = maxaU∗(b,a) the belief
state utility function (also called value function).
When performing model checking, a convenient approach
is to label the states of the POMDP and express the property
we wish to verify in terms of these labels. The labels are
atomic propositions that evaluate to true or false at a given
state. We augment the deﬁnition of a POMDP with a ﬁnite
set of atomic propositions Π, and L a mapping, L : S →2Π,
giving the set of atomic propositions satisﬁed at a given state.
We do not assume that the labels are observable. The agent
should infer the labels from the observations.
In this work, we focus on POMDPs with ﬁnite states, ac-
tions, and observations. We discuss possible extensions to
continuous spaces in the conclusion.
Linear Temporal Logic
Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) is an extension to propositional
logic with temporal operators. An LTL formula is built of
atomic propositions according to the following grammar:
φ ::= p | φ1 ∧φ2 | φ1 ∨φ2 | ¬φ | Gφ | Fφ | φ1Uφ2 | Xφ
(3)
where p is an atomic proposition, φ, φ1, and φ2 are LTL
formulas, ¬ (negation), ∧(conjunction), and ∨(disjunction)
are logical operators, and G (globally), F (eventually), U
(until), and X (next) are temporal operators (Baier and Katoen,
2008). In this work we use LTL as a language to specify
the objective of the problem. For example, safe-reachability

objectives: “avoid state A and reach state B” are speciﬁed
by the formula ¬AUB, persistent tasks: “keep visiting A” are
represented by the formula GFA.
The satisfaction of an LTL formula is evaluated on an in-
ﬁnitely long trajectory in the environment. A labelling func-
tion maps each state of the environment to the set of atomic
propositions holding in that state. The satisfaction of the for-
mula can be veriﬁed by analyzing the sequence of atomic
propositions generated by a trajectory. Even if the trajectory
is continuous in time, the sequence of atomic propositions
needs to be discrete.
Proposed Approach
This section presents our approach to solve the quantitative
model checking problem using a POMDP formulation. We
ﬁrst demonstrate how to formulate a planning problem from
a given model checking problem. Then, we explain how to
approximately compute a policy that maximizes the proba-
bility of satisfying a given LTL formula. Finally we discuss
how the convergence error of the solver can be used as a
conﬁdence interval on the resulting performance.
Problem Formulation
The problem of interest consists of computing the maximum
probability of satisfying a given linear temporal logic formula
φ when starting in an initial belief point b in a POMDP.
Given a policy π, Prπ(b |= φ) represents the probability
that a trajectory induced by π starting from belief b will
satisfy the LTL formula φ. The quantity we wish to compute
is expressed as follows:
Prmax(b |= φ) = max
π Prπ(b |= φ)
(4)
Such problem is referred to as quantitative model check-
ing as opposed to qualitative model checking, which con-
sists of ﬁnding a policy satisfying the formula with proba-
bility 1 (Chatterjee et al., 2015). In this work, the atomic
propositions forming the LTL formula are deﬁned over the
states of the POMDP. Hence, the value of the atomic proposi-
tions is not observed by the agent. Instead, we will show that
our formulation captures this information in the belief state.
Reachability Problems
Point-based value iteration methods can scale to POMDPs
with many thousands states (Kurniawati et al., 2008; Shani
et al., 2013). Those solvers have been designed to solve
reward maximization problems. We explain how to formulate
reachability problems as reward maximization problems so
we can use these solvers.
A reachability problem consists of computing the maxi-
mum probability of reaching a given set of states. If B is a
propositional formula then the reachability problem corre-
sponds to computing Prmax(b |= FB). For simplicity of the
notation, we will also denote B, the set of states where the
propositional formula expressed by B holds true. A reachabil-
ity problem can be interpreted as a planning problem where
the goal is to reach the set B. This problem is addressed by
deﬁning the following reward function:
RReachability(s,a) =
1
if s ∈B
0
otherwise
(5)
In addition, the states in the set B are made terminal states
and the initial value of Prmax(b | FB) is initialized to 0 for
any belief states. We can interpret the reachability problem
as a reward maximization problem as follows:
Prmax(b |= FB) = max
π E[
∞
∑
t
RReachability(st,π(bt)) | s0 ∼b]
(6)
The right side of this equation corresponds to solv-
ing a POMDP planning problem with a value-based
method (Kochenderfer, 2015). The maximization is over the
policy space. Note that in a POMDP, policies map belief
states to actions rather than states to actions. The search
problem becomes much harder than in MDPs and the value
iteration algorithm can no longer scale. It has been proven
that computing the maximum expected reward in a POMDP
is undecidable (Madani et al., 1999). Instead, we will rely on
approximate methods that scales to POMDP domains with
tens of thousands of states. This step is discussed in depth
in the section on approximate solution techniques. The next
section discusses the generalization to any LTL formula.
From LTL Satisfaction to Reachability
Product POMDPs
In this step, we deﬁne a new POMDP
such that solving the original quantitative model checking
problem reduces to a reachability problem in this model.
It is known that any LTL formula can be represented by
a deterministic Rabin automaton (Baier and Katoen, 2008),
which can be deﬁned as follows:
Deterministic Rabin Automata (DRA): A deterministic
Rabin automaton is a tuple R = (Q,Π,δ,q0,F) where Q is a
set of states, Π a set of atomic propositions, δ : Q×2Π →Q
is a transition function, q0 is an initial state, and F is an
acceptance condition: F = {(L1,K1),...,(Lk,Kk)} where Li
and Ki are sets of states for all i.
A trajectory of a Rabin automaton is an inﬁnite sequence
of states τ = q0q1 ..., where qi+1 = δ(qi,σ) for an input
σ ∈2Π. We say that a trajectory is accepting if there exists i
such that: inf(τ)∩Ki ̸= /0 and inf(τ)∩Li = /0 where inf(τ) is
the set of states visited inﬁnitely often in the trajectory. By
converting the LTL formula into a DRA, we have a direct
equivalence between accepting trajectories and trajectories
satisfying the formula.
In general, converting an LTL formula into a DRA results
in a ﬁnite state machine with a number of states double expo-
nential in the number of atomic propositions in the formula.
In practice, a lot of heuristics can be used to reduce the num-
ber of states in the automaton to a reasonable number. We
give an example of the automaton resulting from converting
G¬A∧FB in Fig. 1.
Product POMDP:
For a POMDP P, and DRA R,
we deﬁne a product P ⊗R as a POMDP: P′ = (S ×
Q,A ,O,T ′,O,L) where the state space is the Cartesian prod-
uct of the state space of P and R and the transition function

1
start
2
¬A∧¬B
¬A∧B
¬A
Figure 1: Illustration of an automaton generated by convert-
ing the LTL formula G¬A ∧FB. State 2 must be visited in-
ﬁnitely often to satisfy the formula. Each propositional for-
mula on the edges represents possibly multiple transitions
labeled with the subsets of atomic propositions that satisfy
the formula on the edge.
satisiﬁes:
T ′((s,q),a,(s′,q′)) =
T(s,a,s′)
if q′ = δ(q,L(s))
0
otherwise
(7)
all the other elements of the product are the same as in
the original POMDP. In the product, some transitions are
prevented by the automaton. We can notice that the transi-
tion function deﬁned is no longer a probability distribution.
In practice, we can add an additional sink state such that if
δ(q,L(s)) = /0, the system transitions in the sink state with
probability 1. The new transition function ensures that tra-
jectories that end up in the sink state are not accepted by the
automaton (they are violating the speciﬁcation).
Let aside the model checking problem, the construction of
the product POMDP can be interpreted as a principled way
to augment the state space in order to account for temporal
objective. In addition, one can note that this state space ex-
tension is not always necessary. For formulas involving only
a single until (U) or eventually (F) temporal operators, the
problem can be directly expressed as a reachability problem
and does not require a state space augmentation.
Maximal End Components
The next step consists of iden-
tifying a set of states B in the product POMDP, such that
reaching a state in this set guarantees the satisfaction of the
formula. We call those states success states.
From the deﬁnition of the DRA, we ﬁnd that an inﬁnitely
long trajectory satisfying the formula must visit certain states
inﬁnitely often and others only ﬁnitely often. We ﬁrst start
to compute the sets of states that are visited inﬁnitely of-
ten in the product POMDP, that is the maximal end com-
ponent of a POMDP. More precisely, we need to ﬁnd the
maximal end components of the underlying MDP deﬁned by
(S ×Q,A ,T ′). Starting from any state, with any policy, the
agent will end up in a maximal end component if we consider
inﬁnitely long trajectories. Maximal end components can be
computed by a graph algorithm that scales polynomially with
the size of the state space (Baier and Katoen, 2008). Once
the end components have been found, we must identify the
success states.
Success States: (Baier and Katoen, 2008) Given a product
POMDP P′, its underlying MDP is noted M ′. A state con-
tained in a maximal end component EC of M ′ is a success
state if there exists an i such that Ki ∈EC and Li /∈EC, where
Ki and Li results from the accepting conditions of the DRA
used to form the product POMDP.
From the previous deﬁnition, we can conclude that from
a success state, there is a probability of 1 of satisfying the
LTL formula associated with the Rabin automaton. We can
deﬁne a reachability reward function associated to the set of
success states and compute the probability of success at a
given belief point using Eq. (6).
The ﬁrst steps of the model checking approach (prod-
uct POMDP and reduction to reachability) are identical for
POMDPs and MDPs. They are independent of the structure
of the observation space and are agnostic to partial observabil-
ity. State uncertainty will play a role in the last step, which
consists of solving the reachability problem.
Theorem: Given a POMDP and an LTL formula φ, the
optimal value function of the product POMDP with the reach-
ability reward function associated with the set of success
states satisﬁes: U∗(b) = Prmax(b |= φ), where b is a belief
state in the product POMDP. In addition, there is a one to one
mapping between the policy maximizing the value function in
the product POMDP and the policy maximizing Pr(b |= φ).
Proof Sketch: The construction of the product POMDP,
and the deﬁnition of success states give the following:
Prmax
P (b |= φ) = Prmax
P′ (b |= FB)
(8)
where on both sides, b is a belief of the product states, that
is a belief over both the state of P and the state of the DRA
associated with φ, and B is the set of success states in P′.
When updating the belief using Eq. (1), the transition model
from the product POMDP is used. Finally, Eq. (6) holds from
the construction of the reachability reward function and the
deﬁnition of the belief state value function of a POMDP.
More precisely, Eq. (6) can be proven by formulating a belief
state MDP (Kochenderfer, 2015) and use the equivalent result
for MDPs (Baier and Katoen, 2008).
The agent cannot observe whether it has reached an end
component or not, but the belief state characterizes the conﬁ-
dence on whether or not it is in an end component. Previous
works often assume that the end components are observed,
our algorithm allows to relax this assumption by maintaining
a belief on both the state of the environment and the state of
the automaton.
Approximate Solution Techniques
The previous sections illustrated how to convert the quanti-
tative model checking problem into a reward maximization
problem. This section describes how to solve this problem
using existing POMDP planning algorithms and how to inter-
pret the convergence bounds with respect to the problem of
interest. As we have shown, Prmax(b |= φ) can be interpreted
as a belief value function for a speciﬁc POMDP. This section
discusses how to compute such value function.
Solving POMDPs exactly is generally intractable (Kochen-
derfer, 2015; Madani et al., 1999), however approximation
techniques have been developed. Approximation methods
rely on restricting the policy space, either by considering
ﬁnite-state controllers or alpha vector representations. Previ-
ous work addressed the problem of ﬁnding ﬁnite state con-
trollers (Junges et al., 2018; Chatterjee et al., 2015). This
paper focuses on alpha vector representations of the policy
and the value function. An advantage of alpha vectors is that

they can be used to represent both the policy and the value
function. Hence, we can approximate the quantitative model
checking problem and not only the policy synthesis problem.
Alpha vectors are |S |-dimensional vectors deﬁning a lin-
ear function over the belief space. Given a set of alpha vectors
Γ = {α1,...,αn}, the value function is deﬁned as follows:
U(b) = maxα∈Γ α⊤b
Point based Value Iteration (PBVI) algorithms are a family
of POMDP solvers that involves applying a Bellman backup
to a set of alpha vectors in order to approximate the opti-
mal value function. Shani et al. (2013) survey various PBVI
methods. In this work, we used SARSOP (Kurniawati et al.,
2008), which has shown state-of-the-art performance in terms
of scalability. PBVI algorithms sample the belief space and
compute an alpha vector associated to each belief point to
approximate the value function at that point. SARSOP differs
from other PBVI algorithms by relying on a tree search to
explore the belief space. It maintains an upper and lower
bound on the value function, which are used to guide the
search close to optimal trajectories. The algorithm is given
an initial belief point and only explores relevant regions of
the belief space. That is, regions that can be reached from the
initial belief point under optimality conditions.
PBVI algorithms, often offer convergence guarantees spec-
iﬁed in upper and lower bound on the value function. A
precision parameter ε is provided and control the tightness
of the convergence (by controlling the depth of the tree in
SARSOP for example) which yields to:
|U∗(b0)−U∗(b0)| < ε
(9)
Given a formula φ, we have show how to build a product
POMDP in which we have the equivalence between the value
function U∗(b) and Prmax(b |= φ). As a consequence, for
a given precision parameter, we can directly translate the
bounds on the value function in the product POMDP in terms
of probability of success for our problem of quantitative
model checking:
|Prmax(b0 |= φ)−Prmax(b0 |= φ)| < ε
(10)
where Prmax(b0 |= φ) is an upper bound over the actual prob-
ability of satisfaction, Prmax(b0 |= φ) is a lower bound, and
b0 is the initial belief. With an inﬁnite computation time,
an arbitrary ε can be reached. However in practice only a
minimum ε can be achieved within the computation budget.
The original implementation of SARSOP relies on a discount
factor. In this work, the discount factor is set to one such
that the obtained value function matches exactly with the
probability of satisfaction of the LTL formula.
The proposed methodology to solve quantitative model
checking problems in POMDPs is agnostic to the planning
algorithm. Although we focused the discussion on PBVI
solvers, any belief state planner could be used. The strength
of the guarantees are directly dependent on the choice of the
underlying planning algorithm. For example, one could use
the QMDP or FIB approximations to only compute an upper
bound on the probability of success (Hauskrecht, 2000). Our
implementation allows the user to easily choose the underly-
ing algorithm among the one available in POMDPs.jl (Egorov
et al., 2017) a POMDP planning library.
Experiments
We evaluate our methodology on three discrete POMDP do-
mains from the literature. The ﬁrst one is a partially observ-
able slippery grid world, the second one is the rock sample
problem (Smith and Simmons, 2004), and the third is a drone
surveillance problem (Svorenov´a et al., 2015). Those do-
mains have a grid world like structure and can easily be
scaled to different size of state and observation spaces to
evaluate the scalability of our approach. More details on the
domains can be found in the available source code and in the
supplementary material.
Partially Observable Grid World
This domain is an n×
n grid with three labels: A, B, and C associated to some
cells in the grid. The agent can choose to move left, right,
up, and down. It reaches the desired cell with a probability
of 0.7 and moves to another neighboring cell with equal
probability otherwise. The agent receives a noisy observation
of its position generated from a uniform distribution over the
neighboring cells (vanish for distances greater than 1). The
agent is initialized to a cell in the grid world with uniform
probability. We investigated the following speciﬁcations:
• φ1 = ¬CUA ∧¬CUB: The agent must visit states A and
B in any order while avoiding state C. This formula is a
constrained reachability objective and does not require to
form a product POMDP.
• φ2 = G¬C: The agent must never visit state C.
The precision of the solver is set to 1×10−2.
Drone Surveillance
The drone surveillance problem is in-
spired by Svorenov´a et al. (Svorenov´a et al., 2015). An aerial
vehicle must survey regions in the corners of a grid like en-
vironment while avoiding a ground agent. The drone can
observe the location of the ground agent only if it is in its
ﬁeld of view delimited by a 3×3 area centered at the drone
location. We labeled the states as A when the drone is in the
bottom left corner, B when it is in the top right corner, and
det when it can be detected by the ground agent (when it
is on top of it). We analyzed one formula: ¬detUB. The
drone should eventually reach region B without being de-
tected. Note that this is already a reachability objective and
does not require the construction of a product POMDP. The
precision is set to 1×10−2.
Rock Sample
The rock sample problem models a rover
exploring a planet and tasked to collect interesting rocks. The
environment consists of a grid world with rocks at a known
location as well as an exit area. The rocks can be either good
or bad and their status is not observable. The robot can move
deterministically in each direction or choose to sample a rock
(when on top of it), or use its long range sensor to check
the quality of a rock. The long range sensor returns the true
status of a rock with a probability decaying exponentially
with the distance to the rock. The problem ends when the
robot reaches the exit area, this state is labeled as exit. In
addition we deﬁned two labels for situations when the robot
pick a good rock or a bad rock respectively labeled good
and bad. This paper considers three different formulas:

• φ1 = G¬bad : This formula expresses that the robot should
never pick up a bad rock. There exist a trivial policy that
satisﬁes this formula which is to never pick up any rocks.
• φ2 = Fgood ∧Fexit: This formula expresses that the
robot should eventually pick a good rock and eventually
reach the exit. Since the exit is a terminal state, the robot
must pick up a good rock before reaching the exit. This
policy cannot be satisﬁed with a probability 1 since there
is a possibility that all the rocks present are bad.
• φ3 = Fgood∧Fexit∧G¬bad: This formula is a com-
bination of the two previous speciﬁcations. In addition of
bringing a good rock and reaching the exit the robot must
not pick a bad rock. A video demonstrating the resulting
strategy is provided in the supplementary material.
For this domain, the precision of the solver is set to 1×10−3.
Results
We applied the proposed methodology on different sizes
of the proposed domains with different formulas. We use
SARSOP as the underlying POMDP planning algorithm to
solve the quantitative model checking problems. Note that our
approach is agnostic to the choice of the planning algorithm
and other methods could have been used. However, SARSOP
is a good candidate for the task since it is one of the most
scalable ofﬂine POMDP planners (Kurniawati et al., 2008). In
addition, it provides strong bounds on the results, which can
be translated into guarantees on the probability of success.
We compared the performance of SARSOP with the algo-
rithm used by Norman et al. (2017). It consists of computing
an upper bound by discretizing the belief space and perform-
ing Bellman backups on each of the belief points (Lovejoy,
1991). The main drawback of this algorithm is that the belief
space is high dimensional (12545 dimensions for the largest
rock sample), and the size of the grid grows exponentially.
Fig. 2 illustrates the beneﬁts of using SARSOP instead of
the Lovejoy algorithm. The discretization scheme is con-
trolled by a granularity parameter m, the bigger m is, the
more belief points are used. The Lovejoy line is obtained by
varying m from 1 to 8, while the SARSOP line is obtained by
specifying different precision targets. In the log scale ﬁgure,
we can see that it takes much longer time to reach a given
precision using the Lovejoy algorithm than SARSOP. In ad-
dition, we can see the exponential growth of the number of
belief points. As a reference we added the precision given
by QMDP (Littman et al., 1995) and FIB (Hauskrecht, 2000)
which are two algorithms to compute upper bound on the
value of a POMDP. Point-based methods provide both an
upper and desired bound and allow the user to specify the
precision. Hence there is no need to use an abstraction reﬁne-
ment mechanism to choose the right granularity of the belief
space as done in previous work (Norman et al., 2017).
Table 1 summarizes the performance of our approach in
solving different tasks. In each case, we report the lower
bound on Prmax(b0 |= φ) as well as the precision ε described
in previous sections. The upper bound is the sum of the two.
In addition, we report the solving time, it takes into account
both the time to compute the maximal end components in
the product POMDP as well as the time taken by SARSOP
to solve the problem. The MEC column reports the time
needed to identify the success states and construct the product
POMDP (if needed). To control the number of iterations used
by SARSOP, we used a threshold on the precision, ε i.e. after
each iteration we check if the precision is lower than the
threshold and return the policy and the probability of success
if it is. The |Γ| columns reports the number of belief points
used by the point-based method.
1
10
100
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
Time (s)
Precision
SARSOP
Lovejoy
QMDP
FIB
100
101
102
103
104
105
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
Number of belief points
Precision
SARSOP
Lovejoy
QMDP
FIB
Figure 2: Illustration of the time precision trade-off for differ-
ent algorithms providing upper bounds on the value function
in a POMDP. Lovejoy is the algorithm used by Norman et al.
To compute the precision, we used the lower bound computed
using SARSOP as a reference. The experiments are carried
on a 3×3 partially observable grid world domain.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
·104
0.8
0.85
0.9
Number of simulations
Probability of success
MC estimate
SARSOP lower bound
SARSOP upper bound
Figure 3: Estimate of the probability of success of a policy
generated by SARSOP. We simulated 10000 episodes esti-
mated the probability of success. We compare this result with
the upper and lower bound provided by SARSOP.

Table 1: Performance of POMDP model checker.
Domain
|S | / |A | / |O|
LB
ε
|Γ|
MEC (s)
Time (s)
PO Grid World
[10,10] φ1
101 / 4 / 101
0.904
9.9×10−3
3452
0.64
207.2
[10,10] φ2
0.0099
0
1
0.13
0.4
Drone Surveillance
[5,5]
626 / 5 / 10
0.96
9×10−3
4812
0.73
95.5
[5,5] (U)
0.94
8×10−3
4277
0.73
78.3
[7,7] (U)
2402 / 5 / 10
0.94
1.9×10−2
41799
4.8
12587.5
Rock Sample
[4,4] φ1
65 / 7 / 3
1.0
0.0
1
0.03
0.02
[4,4] φ2
0.749
9.2×10−5
13
0.09
0.3
[4,4] φ3
0.744
2×10−4
23
0.10
0.4
[5,5] φ1
201 / 8 / 3
1.0
0.0
1
0.19
0.11
[5,5] φ2
0.879
2.8×10−4
24
0.70
0.5
[5,5] φ3
0.865
9×10−4
56
0.70
0.8
[7,7] φ1
12545 / 13 / 3
1.0
0.0
1
11.3
13.4
[7,7] φ2
0.990
9×10−4
378
50.6
77.5
[7,7] φ3
0.979
9×10−4
301
53.5
87.2
We empirically verify the correctness of the bound
provided by SARSOP by simulating the resulting policy
in the partially observable grid world with the formula
¬CUA∧¬CUB. Fig. 3 illustrates the convergence of the esti-
mated probability of success with the number of simulation
of the policy. The probability of success is estimated using a
Monte Carlo estimator. We can see that the estimated value
converges towards the lower bound provided by SARSOP
(dotted line). In this particular example, the value of the prob-
ability of success is around 0.90. The gap between the upper
and lower bound provided by the solver can be controlled
with the precision, in expense of a longer time to solve. Fig. 3
shows that the resulting policy has an empirical performance
consistent with the lower bound given by SARSOP.
Discussion
We have illustrated in the previous section that our approach
scales to POMDP domains with many thousands states and
supports different LTL speciﬁcations. We can see from Ta-
ble 1, that the model checker is able to provide an approxi-
mate solution in a reasonable time. In contrast with previous
work (Svorenov´a et al., 2015; Chatterjee et al., 2015), solving
a quantitative model checking problem instead of a qualita-
tive problem allows us to ﬁnd a policy even in cases where
satisﬁability cannot be guaranteed with probability 1. More-
over, our technique scales to larger state spaces.
In a few cases, the solver returned a policy with perfect
precision in a very short time. This is the case for G¬C in grid
world, and G¬bad in rock sample. In those two cases, the
probability of success can be directly extracted from the max-
imum end components. In the grid world example, the whole
grid world is a maximal end component. The state space is
fully connected under any policy because of the probabilistic
transitions. As a consequence, there exists no trajectory that
would not eventually visit the state C in an inﬁnite time. This
problem does not have any success states. In the rock sam-
ple problem, the transition is deterministic, there exist many
trivial policies to not pick a bad rock. The robot can just stay
idle, or reach the exit. In those two examples, computing the
maximum end component and performing one iteration of
SARSOP is enough to solve the model checking problem.
For the large version of the drone surveillance problem, the
computation reached a maximum memory limit on the size
of the policy and was not able to reach the desired precision.
Although this problem is smaller than rock sample, the belief
space has a much denser support. The drone maintains a
belief over the location of the agent outside its ﬁeld of view.
This characteristic of the belief space makes this problem
harder to approximate (Hsu et al., 2007).
The solution provided by our approach is approximate. Al-
though it provides mathematical bounds on the performance,
it is not possible to compute the solution exactly. Reaching
an arbitrary precision would require exploring the full belief
space and take an inﬁnite time. As a consequence, for smaller
domains, approaches like the one proposed by Chatterjee et
al. might be more suitable (Chatterjee et al., 2015). However,
our approach does allow us to ﬁnd approximate solutions
in domains that were intractable for previous belief state ap-
proaches to model checking in POMDPs. The formulation
of the reward function in the product POMDP makes it a
goal-oriented POMDP Kolobov et al., 2012. Our method-
ology would allow one to replace the POMDP planner by
a goal-oriented POMDP solver. It would require extending
the algorithm from Kolobov et al. (2012) to POMDPs. A
comparison with traditional POMDP planners would be an
interesting future direction. The dead end framework could
be a useful theoretical framework to analyze the convergence
of the solvers in the product POMDPs.
Contrary to previous work (Norman et al., 2017), we do
not assume that the labels are observable. The computed
policy maps a belief in the product space (POMDP state
and automaton state) to an action. In problems where the
automaton state is observable, our approach could still be
applied and leverage this mixed observability assumption.
This property would certainly help improve the results on
the large drone surveillance problem. It has been shown that
PBVI algorithms can scale to even larger domains when part
of the state is fully observable (Ong et al., 2009).
Conclusion
This paper proposed a methodology to solve quantitative
model checking problems in POMDPs. Given an LTL for-
mula and a POMDP model, our approach approximates the
maximum probability of satisfying the formula as well as the
corresponding belief state policy. We ﬁrst convert the LTL
formula into an automaton and construct a product POMDP
between the automaton and the original POMDP model. By
formulating a reward maximization problem, we have shown
how to beneﬁt from approximate POMDP planning algo-
rithms to compute a solution to the model checking problem.
Our method provides strong convergence bounds on the re-
sult. We have shown empirically that our approach applies to
a variety of discrete POMDP domains, for different LTL for-
mulas, and scales to larger problem than previous belief state
techniques (Norman et al., 2017; Svorenov´a et al., 2015). We
provide a Julia package for POMDP model checking avail-
able at https://github.com/sisl/POMDPModelChecking.jl.
The main limitation of the methodology is that it only
applies to POMDPs with discrete state spaces. The two bot-
tlenecks are the computation of the maximal end components

and the choice of the planning algorithms. For some LTL for-
mula, like constrained reachability (Baier and Katoen, 2008),
or if one is interested in policy synthesis only, the reward
maximization problem can be formulated without having to
compute maximal end components (Sadigh et al., 2014). Our
approach provides a ﬂexible way to integrate LTL objectives
in POMDP planning and allows to use any planning algo-
rithm to allow a trade-off between convergence guarantees
and scalability. Online POMDP planning algorithms could be
used instead of PBVI methods to generate policies from an
LTL objective at the price of lacking convergence guarantees.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the Honda Research Institute.
The authors thank Sebastian Junges, Nils Jansen, and Emma
Brunskill for their advice on the early stages of this work.
