International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST) Vol.5, No.6, November 2015 
 
DOI:10.5121/ijfcst.2015.5602                                                                                                                        15 
 
THE NEW HYBRID COAW METHOD FOR SOLVING 
MULTI-OBJECTIVE PROBLEMS 
 
Zeinab Borhanifar and Elham Shadkam* 
  
Department of Industrial Engineering, Faculty of Eng.; Khayyam University, Mashhad, 
Iran 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In this article using Cuckoo Optimization Algorithm and simple additive weighting method the hybrid 
COAW algorithm is presented to solve multi-objective problems. Cuckoo algorithm is an efficient and 
structured method for solving nonlinear continuous problems. The created Pareto frontiers of the COAW 
proposed algorithm are exact and have good dispersion. This method has a high speed in finding the 
Pareto frontiers and identifies the beginning and end points of Pareto frontiers properly. In order to 
validation the proposed algorithm, several experimental problems were analyzed. The results of which 
indicate the proper effectiveness of COAW algorithm for solving multi-objective problems. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Cuckoo Optimization Algorithm (COA), simple additive weighting (SAW), Pareto frontier, Multi-objective 
optimization problem (MOP). 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
There are many methods for solving nonlinear constrained programming problems such as 
Newton, Genetic algorithm, the algorithm of birds and so on. In this paper using the emerging 
Cuckoo Optimization Algorithm and simple additive weighting a method to solve multi-objective 
problems is presented.  
 
In single-objective optimization, it is assumed that the decision makers communicate only with 
one goal like: profit maximization, cost minimization, waste minimization, share minimization 
and so on. But in the real world it is not possible to consider single goals and usually more than 
one goal are examined. For example, in the control of the projects if only the time factor is 
considered, other objectives such as cost and quality are ignored and the results are not reliable. 
So it is necessary to use multi-objective optimization problems.  
 
Ehrgott and Gandibleux presented a detailed approximation method regarding the problems 
related to combinatorial multi-objective optimization [1]. Klein and Hannan for multiple 
objective integer linear programming problems (MOILP) presented and algorithm in which some 
additional restrictions is used to remove the known dominant solutions [2]. Sylva and Crema 
offered a method to find the set of dominant vectors in multiple objective integer linear 
programming problems [3]. Arakawa et al. used combined general data envelopment analysis and 
Genetic Algorithm to produce efficient frontier in multi-objective optimization problems [4].  
 
Deb analyzed the solution of multi-objective problems by evolutionary algorithms [5]. Reyes-
seerra and Coello Coello analyzed the solution of multi-objective problems by particle swarm [6]. 
Cooper et al. have worked on the solution of multi-objective problems by the DEA and presenting 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST) Vol.5, No.6, November 2015 
 
 
16 
an application [7]. Pham and Ghanbarzadeh solved multi-objective problems by bee algorithm 
[8]. Nebro et al. analyzed a new method based on particle swarm algorithm for solving multi-
objective optimization problems [9]. Gorjestani et al. proposed a COA multi objective algorithm 
using DEA method [10]. 
 
For multi-objective optimization problems usually it is not possible to obtain the optimal solution 
that simultaneously optimizes all the targets in question. Therefore we should try to find good 
solutions rather than the optimal ones known as Pareto frontier. Given that so far the Simple 
Additive Weighting method is not used in meta-heuristic, especially cuckoo algorithms, this 
paper presents a combined method.  
 
The first section introduces Cuckoo optimization algorithm, then in the second section Simple 
Additive Weighting (SAW) method is discussed as a combined method for solving multi-
objective described. Finally, the fourth section provides the proposed implemented approach, 
numerical results and a comparison which is made with other methods. 
 
2. CUCKOO OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM 
 
Cuckoo optimization algorithm was developed by Xin-She Yang and Suash Deb in 2009. Thence 
Cuckoo optimization algorithm was presented by Ramin Rajabioun in 2011 [11]. Cuckoo 
algorithm flowchart is as figure 1. This algorithm applied in several researches such as production 
planning problem [12], portfolio selection problem [13], evaluation of organization efficiency 
[14], evaluation of COA [15] and so on. For more information about the algorithm refer to [11]. 
 
3. SIMPLE ADDITIVE WEIGHTING METHOD  
 
SAW is one of the most practical methods designed for decision-making with multiple criteria 
presented by Hong and Eun in 1981. In this method which is also known as weighted linear 
combination after scaling the decision matrix by weighted coefficients of criteria, the free scale 
weighted decision matrix id obtained and according to this scale the score of each option is 
selected. The most important feature of this method is the simple application because of its 
mathematical logic.  
 
Assuming the multiple target model (1) and defining the parameters w1 and w2 which are the 
weight of the objective functions and defined based on the importance of the functions by the 
decision maker, the model can be converted to single-objective models (2):  
 
Max F(x)=(, , … . , 
 
(1)
 
s.t.  ≤ 
 ≥0
Max F(x)=    +  + ⋯+  
(2)
 +  + ⋯+  = 1
 
In these models x… x are objective functions.  is the weight defined by the importance 
of the decision maker.  
 

International Journal in Foundations o
Figure 1: T
 
4. PRESENTATION OF HYB
 
In this section we present the m
algorithm are as follows. Also th
 
Step1 Different random w1 and 
equals to one. 
Step 2 The present locations of C
Step 3 A number of eggs are allo
Step 4 The laying radius of each 
Step 5 The Cuckoos hatch in the 
Step 6 Eggs that are detected by 
Step 7 The eggs of the identified
Step 8 The habitats of the new cu
Step 9 the maximum number of
wrong areas are destroyed 
Step 10 The cuckoos are cluster
the residence 
Step 11 The new population of c
Step 12 Stop condition is estab
determined for the best solutions
of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST) Vol.5, No.6, N
 
 
The Cuckoo optimization algorithm flowchart 
BRID COAW ALGORITHM  
method COAW which is proposed in this paper. The
he flowchart of COAW algorithm is as figure 2. 
w2 are generated subject to the summation of thes
Cuckoos are determined randomly 
ocated to each Cuckoo 
Cuckoo is determined 
nests of the hosts that are within their laying radius
the host birds are destroyed 
 cuckoos are nurtured  
uckoos are evaluated by SAW method and determine
f cuckoos living at each location are determined and
red by K-means and the best cluster of cuckoos is d
uckoos moves toward the target location 
blished otherwise go to step 2Step 13 the value 
s and the Pareto frontier is gained based on  ,  
November 2015 
 
17 
e steps of this 
se two values 
ed weights 
d the ones in 
determined as 
of ,  are 

International Journal in Foundations o
Figur
5. IMPLEMENTATION OF C
 
In this section in order to validat
problems are presented in Table 
 
 
 
Number of problem


1 


2 

3 
SAW module
Determination of 
weights problem 
Evaluation of cost 
function based on 
determined weights 
of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST) Vol.5, No.6, N
 
 
 
 
re 2. The flowchart of COAW algorithm 
 
COAW ALGORITHM ON SOME TEST PROB
tion the COAW algorithm some test problems are a
1. 
Table 1. Test problems 
Constraints 
Objectives 
  2 +   2  4
 ,  ≥0
  =  
  = 
  1
 +  ≤0 
,  ≥0
  = 2  
  = 

  3   ≤0 
 ≥1,  ≤2 
  =   
  =              
November 2015 
 
18 
BLEMS  
analyzed. Test 
4 ≤0

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST) Vol.5, No.6, November 2015 
 
 
19 
Given that determining input parameters is one of the effective problems in meta-heuristic 
algorithms, so the parameters of the algorithm are presented as follows: the number of initial 
population=5, minimum number of eggs for each cuckoo= 2, maximum number of eggs for each 
cuckoo =4, maximum iterations of the Cuckoo Algorithm=50, number of clusters that we want to 
make=1, Lambda variable in COA paper=5, accuracy in answer is needed=-3.75, maximum 
number of cuckoos that can live at the same time=10, Control parameter of egg laying=5, 
cuckooPopVariance = 1e-13. 
 
6. THE SOLUTION OF TEST PROBLEMS  
 
In this section the experimental problems of the previous section are solved by the proposed 
algorithm and the results are compared and examined with the same algorithm. 
 
6.1. The First Problem 
 
Figure 3. Pareto frontiers created by COAW algorithm for first problem 
 
(C)
(b)
(a)
 
 
Figure 4. Pareto frontiers created by: (a) Ranking method (b) DEA method (c) GDEA Method for first 
problem 
 
 
 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
f1
f2

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST) Vol.5, No.6, November 2015 
 
 
20 
6.2. The Second Problem 
 
Figure 5. Pareto frontiers created by COAW for the first problem 
 
(c)  
(b) 
(a) 
 
Figure 6. Pareto frontiers created by: (a) Ranking method (b) DEA method (c) GDEA Method for second 
problem 
 
6.3. The Third Problem 
 
Figure 7. Pareto frontiers established by COAW for third problem 
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
f1
f2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
f1
f2

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST) Vol.5, No.6, November 2015 
 
 
21 
 
 
 
(C)
(b)
(a) 
 
Figure 8. Pareto frontiers created by: (a) Ranking method (b) DEA method (c) GDEA Method for third 
problem 
 
After the implementation of the proposed approach on test problems the Pareto frontiers are 
obtained according to figures 3, 5 and 7 in order to compare the COAW method with other 
methods, ranking method, DEA method and GDEA method are implemented on problems. The 
results are show as figures 4, 5 and 8. 
 
As figures indicate the created Pareto frontiers of the COAW proposed algorithm are exact and 
have good dispersion. This method has a high speed in finding the Pareto frontiers and identifies 
the beginning and end points of Pareto frontiers properly. The COAW algorithm not only solves 
the problems with lower initial population 5 but also it presents better and more exact answers in 
fewer repetitions than similar methods.  
 
7. CONCLUSION  
 
 In this paper the hybrid COAW algorithm was presented to solve multi-objective problems. The 
hybrid approach includes Cuckoo Algorithm and Simple Additive Weighting method. The 
algorithm was analyzed for a number of experimental problems and compared with several 
similar methods. The results indicate the accuracy in finding Pareto frontiers. Also the Pareto 
frontier is better than similar methods and as a result COAW proposed method is reliable, fast and 
simple to solve multi-objective optimization problems.
