Beyond Turing: Intelligent Agents Centered on the User
Maxine Eskenazi, Shikib Mehri, Evgeniia Razumovskaia and Tiancheng Zhao
Dialog Research Center, Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University, USA

Abstract
Most research on intelligent agents centers on
the agent and not on the user.
We look at
the origins of agent-centric research for slot-
ﬁlling, gaming and chatbot agents. We then
argue that it is important to concentrate more
on the user. After reviewing relevant litera-
ture, some approaches for creating and assess-
ing user-centric systems are proposed.
1
Introduction
Intelligent agents have entered the realm of pop-
ular use.
Over 50,000,000 Alexa agents are in
use today (Sterling, 2019). As agents of all kinds
become part of the household, the AI community
must respect the individuals who use them. With
close public scrutiny, the possibility of failure is
high. If we are not attentive, our agents may cause
us to lose public conﬁdence. This can have seri-
ous consequences for research, such as drastically
reduced funding, as we have seen in the case of
automatic speech recognition (ASR) in the 1990s.
Intelligent agents must live up to the users’ ex-
pectations. Consequently, the research community
should not set those expectations above what we
can reasonably deliver. We should be especially
concerned about the tendency of the community to
concentrate on the agent and disregard the effect of
the dialog on the end user. The two interlocutors
are equals in this endeavor. The agent should be
serving the myriad needs of the user in the same
way that a car serves its user for travel, a pen for
writing.
Agents presently serve users in three broad a-
reas: accomplishing some task (slot-ﬁlling), pro-
viding enjoyment via gaming, and providing com-
panionship (chat). Most research approaches these
areas separately although some recent hybrid work
such as DialPort (Lee et al., 2017) has combined
slot-ﬁlling and chat. This paper attempts to ad-
dress agents in all three areas.
We also con-
sider systems independently of whether they are
embodied (since there are successful agents that
are both embodied (Stratou and Morency, 2017;
Muessig et al., 2018; Lycan and Artstein, 2019)
and not (Siri (Apple), Alexa (Amazon), etc)).
In the early days of dialog research, the user was
treated on an equal par with the agent. The PAR-
ADISE (Walker et al., 1997) approach was often
used to assess system success. Researchers mea-
sured the length of a dialog and its success rate.
Thus getting the user the information that had been
requested was a sign of success. User feedback
was also taken into account.
Since the advent of PARADISE, the agent has
been endowed with new qualities, for example,
emotion (Gratch and Marsella, 2001). The sys-
tem chooses the “correct” emotion to express. It
is assumed that if the system chooses the cor-
rect emotion, the user will beneﬁt in some ill-
deﬁned way. Rapport and similar affective qual-
ities (Gratch et al., 2007) have also been added to
some agents. Here again the goal is for the agent to
correctly express a given emotion. If that happens,
it is assumed that the result will be useful to the
user. In both cases, there is little empirical proof
that the new qualities have beneﬁted the user. A
few exceptions do exist. The reader is referred, for
example, to the systems produced at USC-ICT 1.
One of the overarching goals of the dia-
log/intelligent agent community has been to create
an agent that is confused with a human, as deﬁned
by the Turing test. This idea originally appeared in
Alan Turing’s 1950 paper (Turing, 1950), although
that was not the main concern of Turing’s original
premise. Computers had just begun to appear. Tur-
ing, like many at the time, was looking to answer
the burning question of whether a computer would
1http://nld.ict.usc.edu/group/projects
arXiv:1901.06613v2  [cs.CL]  18 Mar 2019

some day be able to “think”.
For this, he pro-
posed that human thought had two characteristics:
generalization and inference. Rather than testing
each of the two separately, he sought an assess-
ment scheme that accounted for both at the same
time. While we could imagine several possible test
scenarios, the one that Turing chose had two in-
terlocutors hidden from a human judge; one being
human and the other a computer. The human judge
had to determine which one was the computer. To
do this, the judge could ask each interlocutor a se-
ries of questions. The Turing test caught on thanks
to the very seductive idea of a machine deceiving a
human. Much research has gone into agents capa-
ble of making the user believe that they are human.
Some of this research has produced agents that re-
side in the Uncanny Valley (Moore, 2012), having
human qualities that cause discomfort to the user.
Deception has created a sense of fear in the gen-
eral public. Consequently much “explaining” has
taken place (“robots are not out to take over the
world, they will not replace humans” (Lee, 2019)).
The present paper will examine how we can get
our research goals back on track: focusing on the
user rather than on the appearance and functions of
the agent. We believe that this change in focus will
shape the design of new and powerful algorithms
and agents in the future.
This paper will discuss existing work and then
propose novel ways to approach the agent and
its assessment. We address assessment since the
manner in which we assess our agents has a strong
inﬂuence on their development. The paper has six
sections. Section 2 proposes a deﬁnition of the
relation of the agent to the user in a user-centric
approach. Section 3 gives background. Section
4 discusses the elephant in the room, the issue
of getting users for training and testing. Section
5 proposes several novel approaches to assessing
agents in a user-centric context and Section 6 con-
cludes.
2
Deﬁning the role of the agent in a
user-centric approach
In order to focus on the user, we must ﬁrst deﬁne
the role of the agent. In 1950 Turing asked “Can
the computer think?” In the early 21st century,
a more pertinent question is “Can the computer
serve?” This question casts the agent as a partner
rather than an opponent. The agent works seam-
lessly, hand in hand with the user, to arrive at some
goal. All three types of agents (slot-ﬁlling, chat
and hybrid) can be partners. The iPhone has be-
come a partner. Apple stores often ask customers
to come back after an hour to pick up a phone left
for a simple repair. Employees observe that most
customers come back in 15 minutes (Apple, 2018)
and are surprised to ﬁnd that they have not been
gone for a full hour. They appear to have lost the
ability to estimate time without their iPhone. To
get a more concrete deﬁnition of the agent as a
partner, consider the well-known agent utterance,
“How may I help you?” If the agent can begin a
dialog asking for this guidance, then it is logical
that the agent should end that dialog by asking,
“Have I helped you?”. The answer to this question
is a ﬁrst user-oriented assessment. This question is
ﬂexible enough to cover systems in all three areas.
• Have I helped you accomplish some task?
(slot-ﬁlling)
• Has your interaction with me given you some
enjoyment? (via gaming)
• Has your interaction with me given you some
companionship? (via conversation - chat)
We can measure how well an agent fulﬁlls this
role from our personal observation, from third
party observation (crowdsourcing, for example)
and, especially, from the user’s point of view
(feedback via questionnaires, for example).
Following are two examples of how a slot-
ﬁlling agent can serve the user, going beyond pro-
viding a “correct” answer as output.
2.1
Seniors
Human capabilities change as we age. An agent
partnering with a senior must be sensitive to
slower information processing and less multitask-
ing (Black et al., 2002). Thus, for example, the
agent must adapt its speaking rate to that of the se-
nior user. It should also not provide seniors with
more information than they can process at a given
time.
An agent communicating with seniors should
be assessed according to its capability to demon-
strate these qualities. It should also be assessed
according to what the user gets out of the interac-
tion. Was the senior able to use the information
in some way. Did they enjoy their chat with the
agent? Would they use it again?

2.2
Workers in industry
Industry workers use agents for a variety of
narrowly–deﬁned applications. For example peo-
ple inspecting equipment in factories use agents
to record their observations. Such an agent must
adapt to the user’s background and preferences.
Some users have had the same job for decades and
need little help. The agent in this case mainly pro-
vides hands-free data entry. The advantage over
a screen is that it enables the inspector to keep
their eyes on the piece of equipment as they enter
parameters into the system. In this case the per-
son needs only one dialog turn to get something
done: “what is the measure on the upper right hand
pressure gauge?” A newer employee, on the other
hand, needs more help, implicit training, until they
are familiar with the task: “now you need to mea-
sure the pressure in the upper right hand pressure
gauge. That’s the one in the green frame.” “Ok, I
see it.” “You should hold down the button located
under that gauge for 5 seconds.” “Ok, done.” “It
will give you the correct reading as soon as you
lift your ﬁnger.” Some workers who have been
on the job for a while may still need some help.
The agent should be able to detect that. It should
also know when the user needs extra time between
turns. To assess an agent in this setting we deter-
mine whether the user was able to correctly ﬁnish
their task, if they did it with less error, if they feel
free to ask for extra information when needed and
if they would use the agent again.
3
Background
In this Section, we discuss some of the literature
on intelligent agents that do focus on the user. Sig-
niﬁcant effort has gone into the assessment of indi-
vidual dialog system modules such as natural lan-
guage generation (NLG). Liu et al (2016) review
dialog system assessment approaches. They de-
scribe word overlap and embedding-based strate-
gies.
They also provide evidence that existing
measures are insufﬁcient. The paper states that al-
though embedding-based measures hold the most
promise, no one has, to date, found a way to carry
out unsupervised evaluation. In addition, while it
is important to insure that modules function prop-
erly, authors cannot claim that they have designed
a better agent until they interactively test a module
with users. Section 4 discusses user issues.
Curry et al (2017) review assessment techniques
for social dialog systems. As mentioned above,
PARADISE (Walker et al., 1997) uses task com-
pletion while optimizing for the number of utter-
ances. This measure has withstood the test of time.
It is more relevant for slot-ﬁlling systems than for
chat and gaming. The measure of response delay
does, however, cover all three types of agents.
One strategy for agent assessment is to employ
third party human judgment (Lowe et al., 2017).
In this paper, human judges are recruited from
Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) to determine the
validity of the agent’s response based on criteria
such as ”topicality, informativeness and whether
the context required background information to be
understandable”. These three elements measure
the amount of relevant material that was provided.
This may be helpful to the user. Yet there would
be more information about its usefulness if the
user had been one of the judges. They also used
human-generated responses to determine whether
the agent’s response was useful. The use of real
versus paid users, as mentioned in Ai et al (2007)
could also have made the results more informative.
Paid workers are not rewarded for producing a cor-
rect outcome no matter how long it takes (Figure
1). They are rewarded for simply completing the
task. There is also no reward for giving the sys-
tem additional information. A real user often pro-
vides some more context in order to help steer the
system to a successful outcome. A paid user will
abandon their original goal if it means that they
must have a longer dialog with the agent.
Shah et al (2016) demonstrated the possibility
of interactively adapting to the user’s response.
They used reinforcement learning to enable the
system developer to indicate the desired end states.
The goal was to endow the system with speech
that is more varied than the speech in the train-
ing database. By actively modifying the agent us-
ing the simulated user turn that follows a given
system turn, the new system response became in-
creasingly more appropriate and useful to the user
over time. We examine other implementations of
this approach in Section 5.
Tan et al (2018) devised a way (using LSTMs)
to predict the empathetic response of the user over
time, concentrating on the emotions of the user
rather than those of the agent.
They used the
OMG-Empathy dataset, drawing inspiration from
the EmotiW Challenge, both of which are oriented
toward the user’s emotions.
Hancock et al (2019) used a conﬁguration that

U: <SILENCE>
S: Hello, welcome  to  the  Cambridge  restaurant  system.   You can 
ask for restaurants by area, price range or food type.   How  may  I  
help  you?   
U:  looking  for  a restaurant in the south part of town 
S: There are restaurants in the south of town. What type of food do 
you want? 
U: eritrean food 
S: You are looking for a restaurant serving any kind of food, right? 
U: yes
From DSTC2 with paid user
From DSTC2 with real user
U: <SILENCE> 
S: Hello , welcome to the Cambridge restaurant system . You can ask 
for restaurants by area , price range or food type . How may I help 
you ?
U: looking for a restaurant in the south part of town
S: There are restaurants in the south of town . What type of food do 
you want?
U: eritrean food
S: You are looking for a restaurant serving any kind of food right?
U: No, that’s not what I said. I asked for eritrean food. That’s 
like Ethopian or Somalian. Can you find that?
Figure 1: Two example dailogs from DSTC 2 with paid
and real users.
enabled the user of a deployed agent to give it
immediate feedback when it made an error. The
agent ﬁrst had the ability to detect that the user
was not satisﬁed. Then it generated an appropri-
ate question that got the user to explain what it
should have said instead. Finally it modelled the
user answer to generate future utterances. The pa-
per shows an improvement in performance on an
ofﬂine test. The user’s answers to the agent’s re-
quest can vary signiﬁcantly. It is probable that the
system may not be able to deal with all of the dif-
ferent types of responses. Yet this is one step to-
ward taking the user into account. We suggest a
more direct form of user feedback in Section 5.
Muralidharan et al (2018) speeds up data an-
notation of user engagement by capturing speciﬁc
signals that reﬂect user engagement. They then
use multitask learning and validation to increase
labelling accuracy. They choose to create coarse
grain labels, which are easier to obtain and are
deemed to be more reliable. These labels are then
used to generate ﬁner grain labels. This technique
was applied to requests for songs.
3.1
User-oriented guidelines from industry
The Alexa and Google Assistant ecosystems host
many third-party applications that users can con-
verse with, typically as a means of completing a
particular task (e.g., ordering food from speciﬁc
vendors, controlling smart home devices, etc.). In
order to ensure a consistent and high-quality user
experience, Amazon and Google have each devel-
oped a list of development guidelines.
Table 1 lists these guidelines; the ﬁrst column
shows instructions2 that Google provides develop-
ers building Google Assistant actions and the sec-
ond shows instructions3 that Amazon provides for
Alexa skill developers.
Third-party developers can easily understand
these instructions. Although they appear to be for-
mulated in order to maximize user satisfaction,
upon closer examination the focus is actually on
producing “good” system output, thus turned to-
ward the qualities of the agent, rather than toward
user satisfaction.
Multiple guidelines that are common to both
sets of instructions, lead to a more “natural” and
less ”robotic” appearance.
The underlying as-
sumption is that users would prefer assistance in
a human-like manner. It is unclear whether these
instructions result from real user studies or large
scale data analysis. In order to cover every user
and each action or skill, a user-centric system
should have a ﬂexible set of guidelines that adapts
to the nature of each action or skill and to what
really satisﬁes the user. The agent should be able
to modify its behavior according to the context.
For example, it is not necessarily correct to consis-
tently use a simple vocabulary, particularly if the
user is speaking in “jargon and legalese”. Like-
wise, if a user appears to be annoyed when the
agent repeatedly attempts to be engaging, or “lead-
ing with beneﬁts”, the system should recognize the
dissatisfaction and appropriately alter its behavior.
4
The user issue
In this Section, we address the elephant in the
room: user data. Getting users for training and
testing our agents, especially real users, is costly
in time, in payment and in recruitment effort (Lee
et al., 2017; Lowe et al., 2017). Some of the costs
include ﬁnding the appropriate users, advertising,
website management (making the offering attrac-
tive), app creation and creating and maintaining
hardware and software other than the agent soft-
ware itself (for example, servers so that the agent
2https://designguidelines.withgoogle.
com/conversation/style-guide/language.
html
3https://developer.amazon.com/docs/
alexa-design/design-voice.html

Google Assistant
Amazon Alexa
Brevity
Don’t launch into monologues. The system should not domi-
nate the conversation; it should maintain concise responses and
allow users to take their turn.
Be brief. The system should minimize the number of steps it
takes to complete a task, and avoid redundancy in messages.
Simplicity of Word Choice
Use short, simple words. Responses should be simple, with
plain and basic words, to ensure accessibility to people of all
backgrounds.
Be informal. Responses should use a relaxed word choice al-
beit with a respectful tone.
Avoid jargon and legalese. Responses should be simple, and
the system should avoid specialized expressions that can elicit
mistrust or confusion.
Natural Dialog
Randomize prompts when appropriate. Responses should
be kept diverse and varied, to ensure the conversation remains
natural.
Vary responses. Responses should be randomly selected in or-
der to sound natural and avoid sounding robotic.
Avoid niceties. Formalities should be avoided, and the conver-
sation should remain friendly and informal.
Use natural prosody. Alexa skills should mimic the prosody
of natural speech to reduce ambiguity, and avoid sounding un-
natural or robotic.
Use contractions.
The expansion of contractions should be
avoided, as they sound punishing and harsh.
Use contractions.
Contractions should be used, in order to
sound natural and mimic natural conversation.
Engage the user. The system should prompt the user with sim-
ple, open-ended questions. Rather than telling the user exactly
what to say, questions should be kept natural.
User-Centric Dialog
Focus on the user. Everything should be phrased in the context
of the user, rather than making the system persona the focus.
Developers should avoid referring to the system (e.g., I placed
that order) and instead focus on the user (e.g., your order will
be arriving shortly).
Be engaging. The system should contain a welcome message
which broadly informs the user about its capabilities. It should
also use brief question prompts, re-prompt the user in the event
of a mistake, offer help in the event of user confusion, have
engaging follow-up prompts and a natural exit message.
Lead with beneﬁts. When asking the user to perform an action,
the response should begin by providing a clear motivation.
Be contextually relevant. Options should be listed in order of
relevance to the ongoing conversation.
Miscellaneous
Don’t provide UI-speciﬁc directions.
The system should
avoid providing UI-speciﬁc instructions, to better remain rel-
evant in the face of product and interface evolution.
Table 1: A description of user guidelines provided by Amazon and Google for third-party developers for Alexa
skills and Google Assistant actions, respectively. They are grouped these into broad categories and provided a clear
description for each instruction. The bold guideline titles are taken verbatim from the aforementioned websites.
We made an effort to use similar terminology for the instructions to better reﬂect the motivations.
is up and running 24/7 and that many users can ac-
cess the system at the same time). There are also
IRB (Institutional Review Board) and privacy con-
cerns. However, real users challenge our research
in ways that all others cannot. Real users (Ai et al.,
2007) do not accept wrong system answers. They
do not accept correct answers that do not respond
to their needs. Real users will not use a gaming
system that has made an error in calculating their
score. Real users will not use a chatbot that re-
peats the same thing several times, even if it was a
good answer the ﬁrst time it was said.
Many researchers have devised alternative data
gathering and assessment schemes in an effort to
reduce costs. In the end, to truly assess whether
an agent is the user’s partner, we have to bite the
bullet and ﬁnd a stream of real users to interact
with our agents.
Based on our experience with Let’s Go (Raux
et al., 2006), we deﬁne real users as people who
have some personal need for what the agent of-
fers. They ﬁnd some extrinsic value: getting a
task done, enjoyment or companionship.
They
have some self-deﬁned goal: the reason why they
sought to interact with the agent. The real user can
be someone who had been a paid crowdsourcing
worker but then found that the agent was useful
and came back on their own to talk to it again. A
real user can also be someone who has come to de-
pend on a given agent to get some task done, like
the iPhone for telling time. That is the only agent
they use each time they need to do that speciﬁc
task.
Given the high cost of real users, some less
onerous solutions in the literature are: self-dialog,
simulated users, crowdsourcing.

• In self-dialog a person imagines a conver-
sation and plays the roles of both interlocu-
tors (Fainberg et al., 2018). This obtains data
at half the cost and in less time. Much of
the nature of human interaction is lost in this
approach, for example, the natural entrain-
ment that happens in a dialog between two
humans and the exchange of differing ideas.
A single-user dialog can never reﬂect varied
word choice or other linguistic characteristics
that result from two individuals with differ-
ent backgrounds interacting with one another.
And it cannot measure user satisfaction.
• Others, including some of the present au-
thors (Zhao and Esk´enazi, 2018) have cre-
ated simulated users trained on some dataset.
This produces a large amount of data at low
cost (M¨oller et al., 2006). However, the re-
sulting dialog is limited to exactly what the
dataset contained. Generalization to unseen
dialog context and novel user expressions is
limited or absent. And there cannot be ex-
plicit user feedback.
• Many have used crowdsourcing (Eskenazi
et al., 2013) to generate human/computer
dialog.
The Wizard-of-Oz (WoZ) sce-
nario where a human plays the part of the
agent (Bonial et al., 2017) can be used here
and requires less system development. While
this approach is less onerous (the crowd-
sourcing platform ﬁnds and pays the workers,
and the cost is somewhat lower) than attract-
ing real users, it still poses the paid vs real
user issue. As mentioned above, the worker
is paid to ﬁnish a task. Their goal is not al-
truistic. They want to get many tasks done as
quickly as possible in order to earn a decent
wage. Thus, they will accomplish the task
they are assigned, but they will not insist on a
speciﬁc outcome even if it is part of their sce-
nario nor will they pursue other options if the
system cannot satisfy their request. Figure 1
shows a dialog in the DSTC 2/bAbI database
test set (Henderson et al., 2014; Bordes et al.,
2016). It illustrates how real users respond in
ways that are very different from paid users.
We see that the paid user, faced with an incor-
rect agent response (not what was requested)
accepts it. We constructed the second exam-
ple to illustrate what a real user might have
said.
Crowd workers can become real users if they
discover that the agent that they were paid to
test is useful. They may then want to return
to interact with it again without being paid.
We have observed this for DialPort users (see
below). The paid task was the opportunity for
workers to kick the tires of the Portal, trying
various services (remote agents) and ﬁnding
one that is useful to them. The return visit
was counted as a real user dialog.
Industry has real users. Amazon, Google, Mi-
crosoft, Apple, etc create very large streams of
data from users talking to their agents.
How-
ever, they cannot share the data (even the Alexa
Challenge only shares the data with the individ-
ual participating team rather than the public), thus
there is no way to replicate results to verify their
ﬁndings. Furthermore, the data collected (some-
times just the ﬁrst user utterance after the wake
word (Salvador et al., 2016) or the request to play
a song (Muralidharan et al., 2018) may be very
speciﬁc.
One of the ﬁrst datasets of real user/agent
dialogs is the Let’s Go bus information sys-
tem (Raux et al., 2006). The Let’s Go dataset con-
tains over 170,000 dialogs collected over 11 years
of live daily service to real users via the Port Au-
thority of Allegheny County’s phone line. Sub-
sets of Let’s Go have been used in several chal-
lenges, for example, DSTC1 (DSTC1). The com-
plete dataset is available on Github 4.
DialPort (see the screenshot in Figure 2) col-
lects real user data. Agents from any site anywhere
in the world can easily connect to the DialPort Por-
tal using an API call (Lee et al., 2017). Several
sites (Cambridge University, USC, UCSC) are al-
ready connected and more are preparing to con-
nect. Unlike any other service, connected systems
collect real user data in both text and speech signal
format. The DialPort team advertises the Portal to
potential users, maintains it and tallies its through-
put. A daily report displays data from testers and
real users, not developers, (second, third, etc us-
age, determined from the IP address). DialPort
is a hybrid system including both slot-ﬁlling sys-
tems (Cambridge) and chatbots (UCSC’s Slugbot
and CMUs Qubot). In DialPort, Qubot deals with
all out of domain (OOD) user utterances. Qubot
4https://github.com/DialRC/
LetsGoDataset

keeps the dialog moving along for turns where
none of the Portal’s agents is capable of respond-
ing. This keeps the system from being unrespon-
sive to the user. Another way that DialPort keeps
the dialog moving along is its use of backup sys-
tems. In the rare case when Cambridge, for ex-
ample, is not available, the CMU in-house Let’s
Eat restaurant agent answers the user. Thus, the
dialog has continuity. The user never hears ”The
Cambridge system is not responding at present,
can I help you with something else?”. The CMU
Let’s Guess movie game is the backup for USCs
Mr. Clue game. UCSCs Slugbot has Qubot as its
backup. A non-CMU system is always chosen by
the Portal over the CMU backup system when that
system is available.
Figure 2: The web interface of DialPort Portal. Users
can give both turn-level and dialog-level feedback via
thumbs up/down (at lower right).
If researchers want to start a ﬁrst phase of
their assessment with crowdsourced workers, the
CMU Dialog Research Center (DialRC) offers
DialCrowd, a layer between the developer and
the crowdsourcing platform of choice (Lee et al.,
2017). This layer helps developers create effec-
tive instructions, set up commonly used testing
strategies (like ABX tests (Munson and Gardner,
1950)), determine correct payment, control in-
coming data quality and get a ﬁrst set of statistics.
With logﬁle analysis, we can determine if the
user returns to use the agent again, how frequently
this happens and the length of their engagement.
In the case of CMU’s Qubot, we assess its con-
tribution by determining whether Qubot’s turn al-
lowed the conversation to continue seamlessly as
opposed to the user quitting or getting frustrated.
5
Toward user-based assessment
This section proposes ideas for user-centric assess-
ment. This ﬁrst step is intended to inspire the com-
munity, who can extend and elaborate what we
propose according to their speciﬁc goals.
5.1
Thumbs up
One of the easiest ways to determine whether an
agent’s output is of value is to display thumbs
up/thumbs down icons on a webpage and ask for
the user’s opinion at the level of both the indi-
vidual turns and the overall dialog (Young, 2017).
Figure 2 shows the these icons in the lower right
corner on DialPort’s website. The user’s opinion
is gathered immediately as the interaction takes
place, rather than relying on the user’s memory
once the dialog is ﬁnished.
5.2
Flow
Many user-centric metrics focus on whether the
user found a conversation to be engaging (Yu et al.,
2016) or whether they would want to use the sys-
tem again (e.g., the Amazon Alexa Prize Chal-
lenge, (Ram et al., 2018)).
These metrics are
turned toward the user. However, some are ap-
plicable to non-task-oriented systems only. Task
oriented systems are typically assessed automati-
cally using entity accuracy and through evaluation
of the output language with metrics such as per-
plexity and BLEU. These metrics mostly demon-
strate the prowess of the developer in creating the
agent and do not take the user into account.
A more user-centric metric is dialog ﬂow. We
posit that this metric reveals the coherent nature
of communication with a given agent. It is appli-
cable to both task-oriented and non-task-oriented
systems. After deﬁning dialog ﬂow, we will dis-
cuss how the term has been used before, the rela-
tion of dialog ﬂow to other previously-used user-
centric metrics and its value as shown in the exam-
ple of senior users.
We deﬁne dialog ﬂow to be a measure of
whether a conversation is “going smoothly.” At
each step of the conversation, this metric measures
whether the system response is a logical continua-
tion of the dialog history.
This term has been used previously in the liter-
ature, however there is a lack of agreement about
its meaning.
For some authors, dialog ﬂow re-
ﬂects whether the system has stayed on topic and
how topics have changed over the course of the
dialog (Bowden et al., 2018). However, this def-
inition only takes into account the continuity of
the topics discussed and not whether the dialog
was smooth, for example, if the system repeated

the same utterance three times, it is considered
to be one topic but each successive repetition of
that turn is uninformative. Other authors exam-
ined whether the agent could follow a set of pre-
deﬁned scripts, which were referred to as the di-
alog ﬂow (Schaefer et al., 2006; Klemmer et al.,
2000). While this approach describes the dialog,
it does not give us a way to assess it. The assump-
tion that there is a predeﬁned script, may be valid
rigidly hand-crafted task-oriented systems but not
for non-task-oriented systems.
Our deﬁnition of dialog ﬂow complements other
user-centric metrics. The Alexa Prize Challenge
(Ram et al., 2018) acknowledges the user in its as-
sessment metrics. All of the contestants were eval-
uated based on real user feedback. After convers-
ing with a particular system, the user was asked
to rate whether they would want to talk to the sys-
tem again on a scale of 1 to 5 (Ram et al., 2018). A
subset of the users was asked to rate how engaging
the system was. Other characteristics of the sys-
tems such as coherence and conversational depth
were measured automatically (Ram et al., 2018).
Coherence and depth do contribute to an impres-
sion of dialog ﬂow. This can complement data on
whether the user would return for another conver-
sation. To further measure ﬂow, the user could be
asked (similarly to thumbs up) how content they
were at each turn of the conversation, rather than
simply after the entire dialog.
In the context of task-oriented dialogs, ﬂow can
reﬂect whether the user is closer to completing the
task after each turn. In the context of non-task-
oriented dialogs, ﬂow can capture whether the dia-
log is coherent and smooth from the user’s point of
view. Both completing a task and dialog smooth-
ness may be captured in the following user turn.
Dialog ﬂow advances the role of the user as both
an active and passive partner and provides a global
assessment of the partnership. This more versatile
approach to partnership would be beneﬁcial, for
example, for seniors since it intrinsically considers
the features described in section 2.1. If a dialog
ﬂows well, the dialog will proceed in a step-by-
step fashion which gives the user a feeling of more
control over the course of the dialog.
5.3
Next-turn User Feedback (NUF)
In this section we examine the effect of looking
at the user utterance that follows the system re-
sponse. We propose a method to effectively lever-
age this additional information. One of the stan-
dard assessment methods used in the literature
is turn-level system response evaluation where,
for each dialog context, we determine whether
the model’s system response output matches the
ground truth system response. Metrics have been
proposed to test various aspects of performance,
like lexical similarity (BLEU), embedding-based
semantic matching etc.
Prior research has shown that for open-domain
chatting these metrics correlate poorly with hu-
man evaluation (Liu et al., 2016).
Moreover,
prior research has demonstrated that the context-
to-response problem is one-to-many in an open
domain environment. Thus, considering each re-
sponse in a dataset to be ground truth gives us
noisy supervision signals, which is one of the
causes of the dull-response problem (Zhao et al.,
2017), i.e. the model can only learn to generate
dull, generic responses.
The NeurIPs2018 ConvAI challenge (ConvAI,
2018) further highlighted the discrepancy between
automated metrics and human evaluation. Hug-
ging Face topped the leaderboard in every auto-

nal measure in the competition used human evalu-
ation (Dinan, 2018). The winner was Lost in Con-
versation, a team that did not do particularly well
on the automated metrics and just barely made it
into the ﬁnals. The results of this challenge stress
the importance of constructing well-deﬁned auto-
mated metrics, that better correlate with a human
evaluation of conversation quality.
Context
usr: What’s the Mountaineering Club doing
this weekend?
sys: We are going to climb a cliff on the Col-
orado River.
usr: How hard is the climb?
System Response Ssys = 5
It is a very difﬁcult climb because there are not
many places to put your hands and feet.
Next-turn User Response Susr = 3
What did you do last week ?
Table 2: Example where the the system response is ap-
propriate given the context, but the user response sug-
gests that the other speaker is not satisﬁed. This exam-
ple comes from Daily Dialog corpus.
We would like to develop a measure of whether
the agent utterance was correct as deﬁned by

Context
sys: Welcome to the CMU Let’s Go bus infor-
mation system. To get help at any time, just say
Help or press zero. What can I do for you?
usr: next bus from 6c u 12a
sys: I think you want the next bus. Am I right?
usr: yes
sys: Alright Where do you wanna leave from?
usr: eight
System Response Ssys = 2
For example. You can say, when the next bus
from CMU to the airport?
Next-turn User Response Susr = 5
bigelow boulevard
Table 3: Example where the the system response seems
off, but the user is in fact satisﬁed. This example comes
from DSTC-1.
whether the user would approve of it. We con-
centrate on the validity of the agent’s utterance
conditioned on the following user utterance, rather
than the agent’s utterance given the preceding ut-
terances alone.
Although ideally it is true that
the entire dialog that follows a system response
should be used to judge the response, this be-
comes prohibitively expensive when used to as-
sess each system utterance. Therefore, we assume
that the next-turn user reply/feedback (which we
call NUF) provides sufﬁcient supervision signals
for our goal. Given this assumption, prior work
has used coherence-based measures to determine
whether a system response is on topic (Li et al.,
2016).
We cannot simply predict the user’s re-
sponse since we would be predicting both good
and bad (“thats right” and “No, you didn’t under-
stand!”) with no reward for predicting the user
response that reﬂects success. Here is an example:
• Sys: “ok, leaving from Forbes and Shady,
where are you going?”
• Usr: “Not Forbes and Shady! Forbes and
Murray”
In this example, the two utterances have sig-
niﬁcant word overlap. Thus, automatic analysis
would ﬁnd that the agent utterance is on topic and
correct. But it is evident that the agent utterance is
incorrect. It does not respond to the user’s request
and will not result in useful information. There-
fore, we propose NUF, a new extension of stan-
dard system response evaluation that takes the fol-
lowing user response into account during assess-
ment. Speciﬁcally, standard system response eval-
uation asks “is response x an appropriate response
given the context c?”.
Instead, our metric asks
“has response x satisﬁed the user based on context
c and the following user reply u?”. We deﬁne be-
ing satisﬁed in a task-oriented slot-ﬁlling domain
as simply whether the system provides useful in-
formation to the user. In more complex chat-based
systems, the deﬁnition of ﬂow in Section 5.2 can
be applied.
5.3.1
Human Study of NUF
In order to test our hypothesis, a human study
compares the ability of human annotators to as-
sess the quality of a system utterance in two dif-
ferent situations: ﬁrst given just the context and
the system utterance alone and second given the
context, the system utterance plus the following
user response. We used four datasets in order to
cover both slot-ﬁlling and non-slot-ﬁlling systems:
DSTC-1 (Williams et al., 2013), DSTC-2 (Hen-
derson et al., 2014), Daily Dialog (Li et al., 2017)
and Switchboard (Godfrey et al., 1992). 30 c-x-
u tuples from each dataset were sampled and la-
belled by four expert raters (the coauthors of this
paper) who gave a score of 1 to 5, ranging from no
user satisfaction to complete user satisfaction. Ap-
pendix A contains the annotation instructions. Ta-
Kappa
Ssys
Susr
DSTC-1
0.359
0.616
DSTC-2
0.487
0.593
Daily Dialog
0.196
0.287
Switchboard
0.172
0.348
Table 4: Fleiss Kappa among the four raters.
ble 4 shows that the rater agreement on Susr (tak-
ing the following user utterance into account) is
much higher than that for Ssys for all four datasets.
This conﬁrms the hypothesis that, even for hu-
mans, it is difﬁcult to judge whether a response
is truly appropriate if only the previous dialog his-
tory (dialog context) is used. But, given the fol-
lowing user turn, it becomes signiﬁcantly easier.
This result also implies that the following user
turn contains salient information that helps dis-
tinguish between “good” system responses versus
“mediocre” or “bad” responses, which are rarely
used in standard supervised-learning-based train-
ing for end-to-end neural dialog systems.

Table 2 and Table 3 show examples of dialogs
where Ssys > Susr and vice versa. They show that
the appropriateness of a system response is much
clearer when we see the following user utterance.
For example, the dialog in Table 2 shows that al-
though the system gives an on-point explanation
for the previous question, the user is apparently
not interested in continuing down that path of the
conversation.
Ssys = Susr
Ssys < Susr
Ssys > Susr
46.3%
18.6%
35.0%
Table 5: Percentage of the data where the annotators
underestimated and overestimated the quality of system
response relative to what was indicated by the follow-
ing user utterance.
Table 5 compares the annotations of conversa-
tion quality both in the presence and in the ab-
sence of the following user utterance. We show
the percentage of the data where the raters gave
the system higher scores than the user did and
inversely where the raters’ score was lower than
that of the users. This is equivalent to compar-
ing the annotators’ perception of the system utter-
ance to the user’s perception of the system utter-
ance. We ﬁnd that the difference (practically dou-
ble) between Ssys < Susr and Ssys > Susr un-
derlines our claim that judging system correctness
should be based on the following user utterance.
Using the system utterance plus previous context
alone leads to an artiﬁcially high assessment of the
quality of the system utterance and consequently
of system performance.
5.3.2
Automatic NUF Prediction of Susr
We wanted to see how we can automatically pre-
dict Susr given c-x-u.
Data Annotation The four experts annotated a
subset of the DSTC-1 dataset, resulting in a to-
tal of 1250 c-x-u data points with 150 overlapped
(seen by all annotators) to ensure inter-rater agree-
ment.
The Fleiss kappa was computed, giving
0.207 for Ssys and 0.515 for Susr.
Then both
classiﬁcation and regression models were created.
70% of the data was used for training and the re-
maining 30% was used to test.
Model Details The last turn in the dialog con-
text history, the system response and the user re-
sponse are turned into vector representations via
bag-of-ngram features for n ∈[1, 2] with TF-
IDF (term frequency-inverse document frequency)
weighting. We combined these sources of infor-
mation by simply concatenating the feature vec-
tors.
Also, for classiﬁcation, a support-vector-
machine (SVM) with a linear kernel is used, as
well as Ridge regression (linear regression with L2
regularization). Given the above setup, we are in-
terested in how well can we predict Susr and what
the input features are.
Results Table 6 shows the results. The best per-
Input
Acc
MAE
c
47.5%
1.31
x
55.7%
1.14
u
60.3%
0.81
c, x
54.6%
1.08
c, u
62.9%
0.78
x, u
65.8%
0.67
c, x, u
65.8%
0.68
Table 6: Results for Susr prediction. MAE stands for
absolute mean error.
forming model is able to achieve 65.8% accuracy
and MAE 0.67, which represents less than 1 error
to the ground truth expectation. Further, the results
yield the following insights:
• The most useful features to predict Susr
stress the importance of understanding user
feedback.
Table 6 shows that the model
struggles when only presented with the con-
text and the system response whereas it
achieves strong performance even when it
only uses u as its input. This opens up the
possibility of having a universal user satisfac-
tion model that solely takes the user response
as its input. This is easier to obtain for train-
ing than manually labelling every context-
response-user response tuple.
• Regression is more suitable than classiﬁca-
tion for this task. Figure 3 shows that the
classiﬁcation models mostly confuse close-
by classes, e.g. class-1 and class-2, which
come from the raters’ ambiguity concerning
similar classes. Therefore, regression natu-
rally takes care of the ordinal nature of Susr.
6
Conclusions and future directions
This paper is a ﬁrst step toward making the agent
into a real partner for human users. It suggests sev-
eral guidelines for system developers: avoid paid

Figure 3: Confusion matrix for classiﬁcation model
with c-x-u as inputs.
users in favor of real ones, use an interface like
DialPort to collect data, do active rather than off-
line assessment, ask for immediate feedback (e.g.
thumbs up), care about the ﬂow of the dialog, use
NUF or create measures similar to it. It shows how
we can quantify the effect of the agent on the user
and serves as a point of departure for the devel-
opment of more assessment strategies that turn to-
ward the user.
