1
Simultaneous Signal-and-Interference
Alignment for Two-Cell Over-the-Air
Computation
Qiao Lan, Hyo Seung Kang, and Kaibin Huang
Abstract
The next-generation wireless networks are envisioned to support large-scale sensing and distributed
machine learning, thereby enabling new intelligent mobile applications. One common network operation
will be the aggregation of distributed data (such as sensor observations or AI-model updates) for
functional computation (e.g., averaging) so as to support large-scale sensing and distributed machine
learning. An efﬁcient solution for data aggregation, called over-the-air computation (AirComp), embeds
functional computation into simultaneous access by many edge devices. Such schemes exploit the
waveform superposition of a multi-access channel to allow an access point to receive a desired function
of simultaneous signals. In this work, we aim at realizing AirComp in a two-cell multi-antenna system.
To this end, a novel scheme of simultaneous signal-and-interference alignment (SIA) is proposed that
builds on classic IA to manage interference for multi-cell AirComp. The principle of SIA is to divide
the spatial channel space into two subspaces with equal dimensions: one for signal alignment required
by AirComp and the other for inter-cell IA. As a result, the number of interference-free spatially
multiplexed functional streams received by each AP is maximized (equal to half of the available spatial
degrees-of-freedom). Furthermore, the number is independent of the population of devices in each cell.
In addition, the extension to SIA for more than two cells is discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
Internet-of-Things (IoT) is expected to connect billions of edge devices (smartphones and
sensors), which will generate enormous data distributed at the network edge. The data can be
leveraged for sensing and edge machine learning to support a wide range of edge-intelligence
Q. Lan, H. S. Kang, and K. Huang are with The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Contact: K. Huang

January 13, 2020
DRAFT
arXiv:2001.03309v1  [cs.IT]  10 Jan 2020

2
applications ranging from smart cities to autonomous driving. Functional computation is typical
in data processing, i.e., the averaging of distributed sensing data [1], or the averaging of stochastic
gradients computed at devices for updating a global AI model [2], [3]. One challenge faced by the
edge-intelligence applications is the long multiple-access latency when there are many devices.
A class of techniques that integrate multiple-access and functional computation, called over-
the-air computation (AirComp), provide a promising solution. AirComp is a simultaneous-access
scheme that enables an access point (AP) to receive a functional value of analog modulated
symbols simultaneously transmitted by devices [3]–[5]. This is realized by exploiting the wave-
form superposition property of a multi-access channel. From the signal processing perspective,
a key feature of AirComp schemes is signal alignment (SA), referring to aligning the received
magnitudes of multiuser signals to facilitate functional computation. The idea of AirComp for
sensing was ﬁrst proposed in [1] and proved therein to be optimal from the information theoretic
perspective for the case of independent Gaussian sources. Motivated by the next-generation edge
intelligence applications, more sophisticated AirComp techniques have been developed recently
[3]–[5]. For multi-antenna sensor networks, beamforming algorithms have been proposed to
support spatially multiplexed multi-functional computation targeting multi-modal sensing at high
mobility [3], [5]. On the other hand, it is proposed in [4], [6], [7] that AirComp can be applied
to reduce the latency of local-model aggregation in federated learning, a popular paradigm of
distributed edge learning. The prior work focuses on single-cell systems that are free of inter-cell
interference. Managing such interference is important for multi-cell AirComp, which is an open
area and motivates the current work.
For interference management, there exist a class of classic schemes, called interference align-
ment (IA), for achieving the capacity of an interference channel at high signal-to-noise ratios
(SNRs) [8]. The schemes have been widely adopted in different types of practical systems [9].
The basic principle of IA is to align the interference from multiple sources into the same subspace
so as to minimize their total dimensions and thereby maximize the interference-free dimensions
for desired signals. The most relevant to this work are IA schemes for cellular networks as
designed in [10]–[12]. The IA schemes (available for both uplink and downlink) share a common
principle that can be described in the context of uplink as follows. The multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) channel space is divided into two subspaces, interference and signal subspaces,
for the following operations:
1) IA: IA precoding is applied at each user so that the inter-cell interference is constrained
January 13, 2020
DRAFT

3
within the interference subspace;
2) Multiuser detection (MUD): The AP cancels the aligned interference and decouples the
multiuser data streams lying within the signal subspace by zero forcing.
The optimal uplink IA schemes are known only for two-cell systems [10], [11] while some sub-
optimal designs for multi-cell systems are available [12], [13]. These optimal schemes achieve
that the array size at each node (AP or user), M, for supporting Npu signal streams per user and
K users per cell is required to have the size M given as
M = Npu(K + 1).
(1)
For many users (K →∞), the required array size M approaches that for a single-cell system
free of inter-cell interference, namely M = NpuK.
In this letter, building on the existing work, we propose a novel scheme called simultaneous
signal-and-interference alignment (SIA) for two-cell AirComp systems. Compared with the IA
principle, SIA has a different one as follows. Unlike asymmetric space partitioning for IA, the
MIMO channel space is divided into two subspaces with symmetry in dimensionality with proven
optimality. Their purposes are as follows.
1) IA: The IA operation in the interference subspace is identical to that in the conventional
schemes;
2) Signal Alignment (SA): Following IA precoding, each device inverses the reduced-dimension
effective MIMO channel by zero-forcing precoding to achieve SA within the allocated signal
subspace.
The proposed SIA scheme achieves that the array size at each node (AP or device), M, for
supporting Nac spatial AirComputed functional streams per cell, is required to have the size
given as
M = 2 × Nac.
(2)
Comparing (1) and (2), one can observe that unlike the conventional IA, the required array
size for SIA is independent of the number of devices. The difference should not be interpreted
in terms of performance comparison since they are two different applications. The former is
multi-access for rate maximization, and the latter is multi-access for functional computation. It
is via the novel SIA design for a new application that the current work advances the area of
interference management. The details design is presented and its performance is evaluated in the
remainder of this letter.
January 13, 2020
DRAFT

4
inter-cell interference
signal
Access
 Point
temperature
multi-modal 
sensor
humidity
stochastic gradient
luminosity
edge  
device{federated learning 
worker
Access
 Point
Fig. 1. A two-cell AirComp system for data aggregation.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Consider the two-cell system for data aggregation as depicted in Fig. 1, where there are K
edge devices in each cell. Each node (device or AP) is equipped with an M-antenna array for
supporting MIMO AirComp described as follows [3]. Consider an arbitrary symbol duration.
Each device transmits an Nac × 1 vector symbol over the array after SIA precoding. The
simultaneous transmission of all devices allows the AP to receive an M ×1 vector symbol, from
which an Nac ×1 vector of functional values is retrieved after inter-cell interference suppression.
Let i, j ∈{1, 2}, i ̸= j, be the indexes of cells, the k-th edge device of the i-th cell be labeled
as the (k, i)-th device with k ∈{1, 2, ..., K}. Let Wk,i ∈CM×Nac be the transmit precoder of
the (k, i)-th device. The channel matrices from the (k, i)-th device to the i-th AP (the connected
AP) and the j-th AP (the neighboring AP) are denoted as Hk,i and Gk,i, respectively. It’s
assumed that channels are generic. Consider channel reciprocity, local channel-state information
at transmitters (CSIT) is assumed to be available [i.e., the (k, i)-th device perfectly knows Hk,i
and Gk,i] [11]. Moreover, the M × 1 vector received by the i-th AP is given by
eyi =
K
X
k=1
Hk,iWk,ixk,i +
K
X
k=1
Gk,jWk,jxk,j + ni,
(3)
where xk,i is the vector symbol of the (k, i)-th device and ni is the Gaussian noise. Each AP
has an Nac-by-M aggregation beamformer Ai to recover Nac AirComp streams as byi = Aieyi.
January 13, 2020
DRAFT

5
modulation precoding
beam- 
forming
MIMO channel
A1
AirComputed 
results
n1
AirComputed 
results 
n2
A2
LAM
LAM
LAM
LAM
post-
processing
x1,1
xK,1
x1,2
xK,2
W1,1
WK,1
W1,2
WK,2
H1,1
G1,1
HK,1
GK,1
G1,2
H1,2
GK,2
HK,2
post-
processing
pre-processed 
data
pre-processed 
data
pre-processed 
data
pre-processed 
data
Fig. 2. SIA operations in a two-cell AirComp system, where LAM is the abbreviation of linear analog modulation.
The objective of SIA design is to receive Nac interference-free aggregated streams as follows:
yi =
K
X
k=1
xk,i,
(4)
such that the antenna array size M does not scale with K. This supports AirComp in a dense
network. Given the above objective, Nac is suitably referred to as the number of AirComp DoF.
Given the AirComp operation in (4), applying suitable pre-processing of the transmit vector
symbol {xk,i} makes it possible to compute different functions for different AirComp streams.
The feasible functions form a class called nomographic functions (e.g., averaging and geometric
means). The said operations are well-known in the literature (see e.g., [3], [14]) and omitted
here for brevity.
Remark 1 (Insufﬁciency of Only IA). The conventional “transmit-then-compute” approach can
apply an existing IA scheme to support two-cell data uploading, followed by function computation
at APs. Deﬁne the communication efﬁciency as the number of functional values obtained per
cell per symbol duration over the array size. According to (1), the efﬁciency of the conventional
approach is Npu
M =
1
K+1 that diminishes as K grows. Therefore, the approach is impractical for
data aggregation over numerous devices. In contrast, SIA is a promising solution as discussed
in Remark 4.
III. SIA DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE
A. SIA Scheme
The system operations in the SIA scheme are shown in Fig. 2 and designed as follows.
Each precoder, say Wk,i at the (k, i)-th device, comprises three cascaded components: Wk,i =
January 13, 2020
DRAFT

6
W(a)
k,i W(b)
k,iW(c)
k,i. The ﬁrst two are designed to align inter-cell interference at the neighboring AP
while the last one aligns signals at the target AP. Moreover, the aggregation beamformers at APs
are designed to null out aligned interference and retrieve AirComp streams.
1) IA: The IA precoder, namely {W(a)
k,i }, for the SIA scheme is designed similarly as that in
[11]. The key difference lies in the partitioning of the spatial channel space for IA and signal
transmission (see Remark 2). Let the M-dimensional channel space at each AP be equally
partitioned into an Nac-dimensional subspace for SA and an N ′-dimensional subspace for IA. If
M is an even number, Nac = N ′ = M
2 ; if M is odd, Nac = M−1
2
and N ′ = M+1
2 . Consider the
precoding at the (k, i)-th device. The ﬁrst precoder component inverses the interference channel
to the neighboring AP, namely W(a)
k,i = (Gk,i)−1. The second component is an M-by-N ′ full-
rank reference matrix W(b)
k,i = Bi, ﬁxed for all devices in the i-th cell. By the above two-step
precoding, all the interference from one cell, say the i-th cell, to the AP at the other cell, say
the j-th cell, is aligned to the N ′-dimensional column subspace of the M-dimensional channel
space observed by the AP:
dim
(
span
(
G1,i (G1,i)−1 Bi
G2,i (G2,i)−1 Bi ... GK,i (GK,i)−1 Bi
))
= N ′.
Consider the design of aggregation beamformers at APs. To null out aligned inter-cell inter-
ference, the beamformer matrix Aj is chosen as Aj ⊥Bi, or equivalently
Aj ∈null (Bi) ,
(5)
where null(·) represents the null space. Note that such an aggregation beamformer always exists
since M −Nac = N ′.
Remark 2. Consider conventional IA schemes designed for sum rate maximization. The par-
titioning of the M-dimensional channel space at each AP for IA and data transmission is
highly asymmetric. To be speciﬁc, the signal subspace has KM
K+1 dimensions and the interference
subspace has
M
K+1 dimensions. The subspace partitioning for AirComp is symmetric (or almost
so) with subspaces having
M
2
dimensions if M is even or otherwise differing only by one
dimension (see Fig. 3). Such partitioning is shown to be optimal in the sequel.
2) SA: SA or IA concerns the high-SNR regime where DoF maximization is the criterion
[11]. In this regime, the Nac ×M aggregation beamformer {Aj} can be chosen arbitrarily under
the constraint Aj ⊥Bi, and that Aj is of full column rank. The precoder components, {W(c)
k,i}
January 13, 2020
DRAFT

7
intended for SA, are designed as follows. Given Ai and IA reference matrix Bi, the SA precoder
component inverts the effective MIMO channel after SIA:
W(c)
k,i =
 AiHk,i (Gk,i)−1 Bi
−1 .
(6)
Combining the above precoding and receive beamforming design yields the SIA scheme that
can achieve the desired Nac AirComp DoF as shown in the next subsection. By cascading the
IA and SA components, the precoder at the (k, i)-th device is given as
Wk,i = (Gk,i)−1 Bi
 AiHk,i (Gk,i)−1 Bi
−1 .
(7)
Remark 3 (SIA for Noisy Channels). The above SIA scheme targets the regime of high SNRs
where its performance is measured by AirComp DoF. The choices of precoding/beamforming
matrices A1, B1, A2, and B2 are arbitrary so long as they are of full rank and satisfy the
orthogonality constraint in (5). On the other hand, in the regime of noisy channels (moderate to
low SNRs), besides AirComp DoF, the reliability (or cost) of each AirComp stream is measured
by an additional metric such as expected error due to noise (or transmission power). Then
optimizing the said matrices provides a mean of improving the reliability or reducing the cost
of individual AirComp streams (see single-cell examples in [3], [15]).
B. Performance Analysis
The proposed SIA scheme can achieve Nac AirComp DoF as shown below. The vector of
retrieved Nac AirComp streams in the i-th cell is obtained as
byi
=
Aieyi
(a)=
Aini + Ai
K
X
k=1
Hk,iWk,ixk,i + Ai
K
X
k=1
Gk,j (Gk,j)−1 BjW(c)
k,jxk,j
(b)=
Aini + Ai
K
X
k=1
"
Hk,i (Gk,i)−1 Bi
 AiHk,i (Gk,i)−1 Bi
−1 xk,i
#
(c)=
K
X
k=1
xk,i + Aini,
(8)
where (a), (b), (c) substitute (5), (6) and (7), respectively. In the high-SNR regime [equivalent
to Var(ni) →0], byi →yi in (4) in probability, achieving Nac = ⌊M
2 ⌋AirComp DoF, and giving
the following main result.
January 13, 2020
DRAFT

8
SIA
interference subspace
-dimensional
signal subspace
-dimensional
interference subspace
-dimensional
M
K + 1
KM
K + 1
M
2
signal subspace
-dimensional
M
2
Conventional
 IA
Fig. 3. Comparison in partitioning of the M-dimensional channel space between IA and SIA for even M.
Theorem 1 (AirComp DoF for SIA). Given M antennas at each node, the SIA scheme achieves
Nac = ⌊M
2 ⌋AirComp DoF (interference-free AirComp streams) in each cell, which is independent
of the number of edge devices in each cell.
Based on the above result, a remark on the efﬁciency of SIA for supporting data aggregation
is provided below.
Remark 4 (Communication Efﬁciency of SIA). The proposed SIA scheme achieves the commu-
nication efﬁciency (deﬁned in Remark 1) Nac
M = 1
2 if M is even or otherwise Nac
M =
  1
2 −
1
2M

,
superior to the conventional approach. Because the number of spatial DoF required for SIA is
independent of the number of edge devices. In other words, as the number of devices grows
and the spatial DoF is ﬁxed, the number of AirComp DoF that quantiﬁes the system throughput
remains unchanged. Thereby, SIA overcomes the limitation of the conventional IA schemes on
supporting data aggregation in a dense network.
Next, a key feature of SIA is the symmetry of SA and IA whose optimality is given in the
following theorem.
Theorem 2 (Optimality of Symmetric Space Partitioning). Consider the SIA scheme. Equal-
dimension partitioning (see Remark 2) for signal and interference subspaces maximizes the
minimum AirComp DoF of each cell.
Proof. Theorem 2 can be proved by contradiction. In the case of even M, consider the conjecture
that unequal partitioning of channel space can achieve N ′
ac AirComp DoF with N ′
ac > Nac = M
2 .
Let M1 be the dimensions of signal subspace and M2 be the dimensions of interference subspace,
where M1 ̸= M2 and M1 +M2 = M. The spatial multiplexing of AirComp streams is supported
by cascaded SA and IA precoders, that are of rank M1 and M2, respectively. This limits the
maximum AirComp DoF as N ′
ac = min(M1, M2) <
M
2 . This leads to a contradiction to the
January 13, 2020
DRAFT

9
conjecture. Hence, the conjecture is proven false, and Theorem 2 holds for even M. The proof
for odd M is similar and omitted for brevity.
IV. EXTENSION TO AIRCOMP IN MORE THAN TWO CELLS
For two-cell uplink IA, the joint design of precoders and receive beamformers ensures in-
terference from devices in one cell is aligned at a single AP in the other cell [10], [11]. The
generalization of such schemes to the scenario of more than two cells is non-trivial as the joint
design need to ensure simultaneous IA at multiple APs in multiple neighbouring cells [12], [13].
Fortunately, for SIA for multi-cell AirComp, SA is required only for a single (intended) AP
while the extension of two-cell IA to multiple cells faces a similar challenge as in the literature
and can be thus solved using existing techniques. In other words, the extension of the proposed
two-cell SIA to the scenario of more than two cells is straightforward. For this reason and also
due to the limited space, we do not pursue such generalization in this letter.
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this letter, we have proposed a novel SIA scheme for managing interference in a two-
cell AirComp systems, which ﬁnds applications to sensor networks and distributed learning in
wireless networks. The principle of SIA is to symmetrically partition the spatial channel space
for simultaneous signal and interference alignment. As a result, regardless of the number of
devices, the required array size is only twice of the spatially multiplexed AirComp streams.
This work opens a new direction of interference management for multi-cell AirComp. A series
of issues that warrant further research include practical schemes for interference management,
limited feedback, power control, and radio resource management.
