Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 45 (2012) 125-163
Submitted 05/12; published 09/12
Towards Unsupervised Learning of Temporal
Relations between Events
Seyed Abolghasem Mirroshandel

Gholamreza Ghassem-Sani

Computer Engineering Department
Sharif University of Technology
Azadi Avenue, Tehran 11155-9517, Iran
Abstract
Automatic extraction of temporal relations between event pairs is an important task for
several natural language processing applications such as Question Answering, Information
Extraction, and Summarization. Since most existing methods are supervised and require
large corpora, which for many languages do not exist, we have concentrated our eﬀorts to
reduce the need for annotated data as much as possible. This paper presents two diﬀerent
algorithms towards this goal. The ﬁrst algorithm is a weakly supervised machine learning
approach for classiﬁcation of temporal relations between events. In the ﬁrst stage, the
algorithm learns a general classiﬁer from an annotated corpus.
Then, inspired by the
hypothesis of “one type of temporal relation per discourse”, it extracts useful information
from a cluster of topically related documents.
We show that by combining the global
information of such a cluster with local decisions of a general classiﬁer, a bootstrapping
cross-document classiﬁer can be built to extract temporal relations between events. Our
experiments show that without any additional annotated data, the accuracy of the proposed
algorithm is higher than that of several previous successful systems. The second proposed
method for temporal relation extraction is based on the expectation maximization (EM)
algorithm.
Within EM, we used diﬀerent techniques such as a greedy best-ﬁrst search
and integer linear programming for temporal inconsistency removal. We think that the
experimental results of our EM based algorithm, as a ﬁrst step toward a fully unsupervised
temporal relation extraction method, is encouraging.
1. Introduction
Much progress has been made in natural language processing (NLP) in recent years. Com-
bining statistical and symbolic methods has played a signiﬁcant role in these advances. As a
result, tasks such as part-of-speech tagging (Søgaard, 2011), parsing (Petrov & Klein, 2007),
and named entity recognition (Mikheev, Grover, & Moens, 1998) have been addressed with
satisfactory results. However, in some other tasks such as temporal information process-
ing, which need a deeper analysis of meaning, the achieved results have not yet been as
satisfactory.
Temporal information is encoded in the textual description of events. Lately, the in-
creasing attention to practical NLP applications such as question answering, summariza-
tion, and information extraction have resulted in a growing demand of temporal information
processing (Tatu & Srikanth, 2008). In question answering, one may expect the system to
answer questions such as “when an event occurred”, or “what is the chronological order be-
c⃝2012 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
tween some desired events”. In text summarization, especially in the multi-document type,
knowing the order of events is a useful source for correctly merging related information.
Construction of the TimeBank corpus in 2003 (Pustejovsky et al., 2003), provided the
opportunity of applying diﬀerent machine learning methods to the task of temporal relation
extraction. However, it has been realized that even a six-class classiﬁcation of temporal
relations is a very complicated task, even for human annotators (Mani, Verhagen, Wellner,
Lee, & Pustejovsky, 2006).
This paper presents two diﬀerent approaches in which the need for annotated data in
temporal relation learning is reduced. The ﬁrst approach is a weakly supervised machine
learning algorithm for classiﬁcation of temporal relations between events. In the ﬁrst stage,
the algorithm learns a general classiﬁer from an annotated corpus. Then, inspired by the
hypothesis of “one type of temporal relation per discourse”, it extracts useful information
from a cluster of topically related documents for retraining of the model. By combining the
global information of such a cluster with local decisions of a general classiﬁer, we propose a
novel bootstrapping cross-document classiﬁer to extract temporal relations between events.
Our experiments show that without any additional annotated data, the accuracy of the
proposed algorithm is at least 7% higher than that of the state-of-the-art of statistical
methods (Chambers, Wang, & Jurafsky, 2007).
The second introduced approach is a novel usage of expectation maximization (EM) al-
gorithm for temporal relation learning. This algorithm also employs Allen’s interval algebra
(Allen, 1984) for correction of predicted relations. For applying interval algebra, we utilize
two diﬀerent approaches: 1) a heuristic search method and 2) integer linear programming
(ILP). We think that the experimental results of this EM based algorithm, as a ﬁrst step
toward a fully unsupervised temporal relation extraction method, is encouraging.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: section 2 is about previous ap-
proaches to the temporal relation learning. Section 3 explains our ﬁrst proposed method,
which is evaluated in section 4. The second algorithm is explained in section 5, and eval-
uated in section 6. Finally, section 7 includes our conclusions and some possible future
work.
2. Temporal Relation Learning
Assuming that we have access to the texts in which events and time expressions have been
appropriately tagged, two diﬀerent tasks pertaining to temporal relation learning can be dis-
tinguished: 1) detecting whether there exist any relation between a given pair of events/time
expressions; 2) identifying the relation type for positive cases of the ﬁrst task. The ﬁrst
task is very hard to evaluate, because the annotators may ignore many plausible existing
relations while tagging the corpora (Mani et al., 2006). Accordingly, in this paper like other
existing research, we have only addressed the second task, which can be more speciﬁcally
deﬁned as follows: “For a given ordered pair of components (x1, x2), where x1 and x2 are
annotated events and/or time expressions, a temporal relation classiﬁer identiﬁes the type
of relation ri that temporally links x1 to x2”. As it is shown in Figure 1, each temporal re-
lation can be one of the fourteen types proposed in TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2003). For
example, in “Powerful political pressures (event1) may convince (event2) the Conservative
government to keep (event3) its so-called golden share, which limits any individual holding to
126

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
  
Figure 1: Diﬀerent temporal relations in TimeML.
15%, until the restriction (event4) expires (event5) on Dec. 31, 1990 (time1)”. (taken from
document wsj 0745 of TimeBank, see Pustejovsky et al., 2003). The task is to automat-
ically tag the relations between pairs (event1, event2), (event3, event5), (event5, event4),
and (event5, time1) with BEFORE, ENDED BY, ENDS, and IS INCLUDED, respectively
(see Figure 2). Since automatic extraction of just “event-event” relations is itself a diﬃcult
task, in this paper, we have focused on this particular task, and left the detection of other
type of temporal relations such as “event-time” or “time-time” to future work.
There are many ongoing research focusing on temporal relation learning. Additionally,
there have been two important shared tasks on temporal information extraction: TempEval
2007 (Verhagen et al., 2007) and TempEval 2010 (Verhagen, Sauri, Caselli, & Pustejovsky,
2010). In TempEval 2007, there were three diﬀerent tasks regarding temporal relations
classiﬁcation between A) events and times within the same sentence; B) creation time of a
document and its events; and C) main (verb) events in adjacent sentences.
In TempEval 2010, there were six diﬀerent tasks including A, B) Determining the time
expressions and events of input texts and speciﬁed features; and temporal relation classiﬁca-
tion between C) events and times within the same sentence; D) creation time of a document
and its events; E) main events in consecutive sentences; and F) two events where one event
syntactically dominates the other event.
Due to focusing on temporal relations between event pairs, task C of TempEval 2007
plus tasks E and F of TempEval 2010 are similar to the task that we tackle in this paper;
however, these tasks can be considered as special cases of ours. For instance, in task E of
TempEval 2010, only the event pairs from consecutive sentences are considered; whereas,
in our task the event pairs can be either from the same sentence or from any other two
sentences of the input text.
The research on temporal relation learning can be divided into diﬀerent categories. In
this paper, we divide these eﬀorts into three groups: 1) Statistical; 2) Rule-based, and 3)
127

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
Hybrid, which are explained in the following sections.
  
Figure 2: Temporal relations of the sentence “Powerful political pressures (event1) may
convince (event2) the Conservative government to keep (event3) its so-called
golden share, which limits any individual holding to 15%, until the restriction
(event4) expires (event5) on Dec. 31, 1990 (time1)”. Bold arrows show relations
between event pairs.
2.1 Statistical Methods
In all statistical methods, a classiﬁcation (or clustering) algorithm is employed over a num-
ber of tagged and/or extracted features of an input corpus.
Maximum Entropy (Mani,
Wellner, Verhagen, & Pustejovsky, 2007; Derczynski & Gaizauskas, 2010), Support Vector
Machines (Chambers et al., 2007; Bethard & Martin, 2007; Hepple, Setzer, & Gaizauskas,
2007; Cheng, Asahara, & Matsumoto, 2007; Mirroshandel, Ghassem-Sani, & Khayyamian,
2009a, 2009b, 2011), Conditional Random Fields (Llorens, Saquete, & Navarro, 2010; Kolya,
Ekbal, & Bandyopadhyay, 2010), and Markov Logic Networks (UzZaman & Allen, 2010;
Ha, Baikadi, Licata, & Lester, 2010) are some of the statistical techniques that have been
applied to this problem.
MaxEnt is one of the ﬁrst approaches to the temporal relation learning, which uses
maximum entropy classiﬁcation algorithm (Mani et al., 2007). In this method, the classiﬁer
assigns one of six diﬀerent temporal relation types to each event-event or event-time pair.
The classiﬁer relies on a number of features including modality, polarity, tense, aspect, and
the event class, which have been hand-tagged in the corpus. In addition to these features,
it also relies on pairwise agreement of two additional features: tense and aspect. We later
propose a new technique to improve MaxEnt. The results of comparing the proposed method
and MaxEnt are given in section 4.
128

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
USFD2 (Derczynski & Gaizauskas, 2010) is another method that employs maximum
entropy in solving tasks C and F of TempEval 2010. This method uses the same features
as MaxEnt plus some features related to the so-called signals of the text. USFD2 achieved
the second highest score in task C of TempEval 2010. However, its results on task F were
not satisfactory enough.
The state-of-the-art of the statistical methods is analogous to MaxEnt (Chambers et al.,
2007). It works in two consecutive stages and employs some event-event features in addition
to those used by MaxEnt.
In this work, Support Vector Machines (SVM) are used for
classiﬁcation. Similar results were reported for using a Naive Bayes classier instead of SVM.
Section 4 also includes the results of comparing this work with our proposed algorithm.
SVMs have been also used as a classiﬁcation algorithm in several other research. CU-
TMP (Bethard & Martin, 2007) applied SVM for solving all three tasks of TempEval 2007.
It also used gold-standard TimeBank features for event and time expressions plus parts
of derived parse trees from the input text. CU-TMP ﬁrst solves task B and then uses its
results to tackle tasks A and C.
USFD (Hepple et al., 2007) and NAIST-Japan (Cheng et al., 2007) were two other
participants of TempEval 2007 that used SVM for classiﬁcation.
In NAIST-Japan, the
task was deﬁned as a sequence labeling model. The task is approached by using HMM-
SVM, relying on features from dependency-parsed trees and standard attributes of target
events/time expressions. The result of this system was slightly more than average in tasks A
and B, but less than average in task C. It was shown that extracted features from dependency
parsed trees were not so eﬀective for task C, in contrast with tasks A and B. In USFD,
temporal relation learning is treated as a simple classiﬁcation task (Hepple et al., 2007).
They used diﬀerent classiﬁcation algorithm from WEKA machine learning workbench (Hall
et al., 2009). In task C, SVMs have gained the best result among the participants of the
shared task.
In another work, a corpus of parallel temporal and causal relations was employed, and
SVMs were used to extract both types of relations (Bethard & Martin, 2008). Since existing
corpora provide no parallel temporal or causal annotations, 1000 conjoined event pairs were
annotated (Bethard & Martin, 2008; Bethard, 2007). It was shown that causal relation
information could be helpful in temporal relation extraction, too. It was also shown that
temporal relation information has mutually positive eﬀects in causal relation extraction
(Bethard & Martin, 2008).
Bethard and his colleagues (2007a, 2007b) have applied SVM to classify event pairs in
which the ﬁrst event is a verb and the second one is the head of a clausal argument of that
verb. They have used a combination of a number of event based features (e.g., tense and
aspect) and some syntactic features (e.g., a speciﬁc path through the parse tree). Their
reported results have shown a high accuracy for these speciﬁc event pairs.
There are also other algorithms which utilize grammatical information in SVM using
convolution tree kernels (Mirroshandel et al., 2009a, 2009b, 2011).
It was shown that
grammatical aspects of the input text are rich sources of information for temporal relation
classiﬁcation. Argument Ancestor Path Distance (AAPD) convolution tree kernel is the
most successful tree kernel that has been used in SVM classiﬁcation. This kernel is similar
to the CollinsDuﬀy tree kernel (Collins & Duﬀy, 2001). The CollinsDuﬀy kernel eﬀectively
counts the number of common subtrees between two comparing parse trees. In this kernel,
129

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
all subtrees have the same importance, whereas in AAPD, diﬀerent weighting functions are
used to compute the kernel value. Furthermore, in AAPD, the signiﬁcance of subtrees are
measured using the distance from a so-called argument ancestor path (AAP). An AAP is
the ancestor nodes of an argument (event). An example of a node (NN) and the distance
between the node and an AAP is shown in Figure 3. In AAPD, the closer a node is to the
path, the less it is decayed by the weighting function. In other words, the nodes which are
located nearer to the path are more important than those farther away.
To improve the accuracy of AAPD, it was combined with some other kernels, which
were either linear or polynomial (Zhang, Zhang, Su, & Zhou, 2006). However, polynomial
composite kernels have shown superior results (Mirroshandel et al., 2009b).
Section 4
includes the results of comparing AAPD and AAPD Polynomial kernels.
  
Figure 3: A syntactic parse tree with two argument ancestor paths for events “move” and
“resigned” plus the distance of node NN from AAP of “resigned”.
Markov Logic Networks (MLN) is another classiﬁcation algorithm, which have been
used by two participants of TempEval 2010: TRIPS & TRIOS (UzZaman & Allen, 2010)
and NCSU (Ha et al., 2010). TRIPS and TRIOS use a number of features produced by
a deep semantic parser, plus a few features extracted from target pairs (i.e., event/time
expression). In contrast with other participants, TRIPS and TRIOS operate on raw texts.
In other words, these systems do not use any tagged events/time expressions. They both
outperformed all other teams on two tasks (C and E). TRIOS also gained the second best re-
sults on the four remaining tasks. NCSU is another participant of TempEval 2010 that uses
MLN for classiﬁcation. It relies on basic annotated features, syntactic features extracted
from generated parse trees, and lexical semantic features from two external resources (Ver-
130

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
bOcean and WordNet) (Ha et al., 2010). NCSU was applied to tasks C, D, E, and F in
two diﬀerent settings: NCSU-indi and NCSU-joint. In NCSU-indi, an independent MLN
was trained for each task. On the other hand, a set of global formulae was also added to
NCSU-joint to ensure the consistency among classiﬁcation decisions from four local MLNs
(one for each task). NCSU-indi achieved the best result in task F and the second best result
on task C.
One of the most successful participants of TempEval 2010 was TIPSem that is based on
Conditional Random Field (CRF) models for classiﬁcation purpose (Llorens et al., 2010).
TIPSem employs diﬀerent morphological, syntactic, and semantic features for building CRF
models. In Spanish, it achieved the best results in all tasks. In English, TIPSem achieved
the best results in Tasks B and D; and was one of the best systems in all other tasks.
JU CSE TEMP was another participant of TempEval 2010 that utilized CRF models for
temporal relation learning tasks (Kolya et al., 2010).
The system needs only the gold-
standard features of TimeBank for time expressions and/or events. In comparison with
TIPSem, JU CSE TEMP achieved weaker results, which shows the importance of feature
engineering in temporal relation learning.
There is another approach that applies diﬀerent machine learning techniques to detect
intra-sentential events, and builds a corpus of sentences with two or more events in which
at least one event is triggered by a key time word (e.g., after, before, etc.). The classiﬁer is
based on a number of syntactic and clausal ordering features (Lapata & Lascarides, 2006;
Bramsen, Deshpande, Lee, & Barzilay, 2006).
There exist a comprehensive study about statistical methods, which compares three
diﬀerent interval based algebras in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy, performance, and ex-
pressiveness power (Denis & Muller, 2010). There are also a few algorithms that exclusively
work on temporal relation classiﬁcation between events and time expressions. One of such
algorithms employs cascaded ﬁnite-state grammars (for temporal expression analysis, shal-
low syntactic parsing, and feature generation) together with a machine learning component
capable of eﬀectively using large amounts of unannotated data (Boguraev & Ando, 2005).
There is a group of statistical methods that rely on information of argument ﬁllers (called
anchors) of every event expression as a valuable clue for recognizing temporal relations. In
these methods, by looking at a set of event expressions whose argument ﬁllers have a similar
distribution, analogous event expressions are recognized. Algorithms such as DIRT (Lin &
Pantel, 2001), TE/ASE (Szpektor, Tanev, Dagan, & Coppola, 2004), and that of the Pekar’s
system (2006) are examples of this type of statistical method.
DIRT is an unsupervised method based on an extended version of the so-called distri-
butional hypothesis (Lin & Pantel, 2001). According to this hypothesis, words that occur
in the same contexts are usually similar. Here, instead of words, the algorithm applies the
distributional hypothesis to certain paths of the dependency trees of a parsed corpus.
TE/ASE, too, is an unsupervised algorithm, which has two major phases. In the ﬁrst
phase (called Anchor Set Extraction), the algorithm extracts similar anchors. Then, in the
second phase (called Template Extraction), the system extracts templates from the resulting
anchor sets. In the ﬁnal part of the algorithm, some post-processing transformations are
applied to the extracted templates to remove inappropriate templates (Szpektor et al.,
2004).
131

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
In Pekar’s approach (2006), co-occurrence of two verbs inside a locally coherent text is
used to extract some useful information. This method has three major steps. First, based
on the local discourse, it identiﬁes several pairs of clauses as being related. Next, based
on those related clauses, it tries to create a number of templates of verb pairs by using
information such as syntactic behavior. In the last step, the algorithm scores and employs
those templates for relation extraction.
2.2 Rule-Based Methods
The common idea behind rule-based methods is to ﬁnd some general patterns for classifying
temporal relations. In most of these works, rules (patterns) are manually deﬁned.
Perhaps the simplest rule-based method is the one that was developed using a knowledge
resource called VerbOcean (Chklovski & Pantel, 2005). VerbOcean has a small number of
manually designed generic rules. The style of rules is in the form of “* <Verb-X> * <Verb-
Y> *”. For example, there are rules such as “to Verb-X and then Verb-Y”, “to Verb-X
and eventually Verb-Y”, or “to Verb-X and later Verb-Y” for the “happens-before” relation
type; and also there are rules such as “Verb-X even Verb-Y” or “Verb-Y or at least Verb-X”
for the so-called “strength” relation type. After manually creating these rules, a number of
semantic relations (e.g., strength, antonymy, happens-before, etc.) between events can be
detected. Several heuristics were also employed to ﬁlter inappropriate relations (Chklovski
& Pantel, 2005).
There is another rule-based method for temporal relation learning focused on biomedical
texts (Mulkar-Mehta, Hobbs, Liu, & Zhou, 2009). It was shown that existing methods for
temporal relation learning were not eﬀective for such texts. In this work, some speciﬁc
axioms (rules) were used to predict the temporal and causal relations. A pattern extraction
algorithm was employed to create the system rules in a semi-automatic manner.
XRCE-T, a participant of TempEval 2007, is a rule-based system that relies on syntactic
and semantic features (e.g., deep syntactic analysis and determination of thematic roles)
(Hag`ege & Tannier, 2007). XRCE-T was in fact used as a post-processing module of a
general purpose linguistic analyzer.
In another study, rules of temporal transitivity were used to increase the training set.
The test accuracy on this enlarged corpus showed some improvements (Mani et al., 2007).
Reasoning with pre-determined rules is another approach to the rules’ usage. In the work
of Tatu and Srikanth (2008), a rich set of axioms (rules) was created and used by a ﬁrst
order logic based theorem prover to ﬁnd a proof for each temporal relation by refutation.
A set of discourse rules was used in the algorithm of Muller and Tannier (2004) to
establish the possible relations between every two consecutive events of the input text.
These rules were based on tenses of the event verbs.
Then a classical path-consistency
algorithm (Allen, 1984) was applied to the extracted relations of the ﬁrst step.
2.3 Hybrid Methods
It has been shown that one can increase the accuracy of temporal relation classiﬁers by
merging some of discussed methods. For example in the work of Chambers and Jurafsky
(2008), local decisions generated by a statistical method were combined with two types of
implicit global rule-based properties. These properties included the transitivity rule (e.g., A
132

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
before B and B before C implies A before C), and time expressions normalization (e.g., last
month is before yesterday). The constraints were used to create a more densely-connected
network of events, and then a global state of consistency was enforced by incorporating the
constraints into an integer linear programming framework (Chambers & Jurafsky, 2008).
Integer linear programming with local classiﬁers was shown to be appropriate only for
cases in which the number of possible relations between events is restricted (Denis & Muller,
2011). It was suggested that a translation of constraints from temporal intervals to their end-
points can be used to handle a signiﬁcantly smaller set of constraints. During translation,
temporal relations are preserved. This method was shown to have a rather high accuracy.
They also proposed a graph decomposition technique that can further improve the accuracy.
In another algorithm, which was spiritually similar to that of (Chambers & Jurafsky,
2008), instead of applying global constraints using integer linear programming, the so-called
Markov logic (ML) was used (Yoshikawa, Riedel, Asahara, & Matsumoto, 2009). Global
constraints can be easily captured through adding some weighted ﬁrst order logic formulas.
It was shown that the problem can be solved by ML more easily and accurately than by
ILP.
WVALI is another hybrid system, which has an enhanced classiﬁcation process by us-
ing some rules from a particular knowledge base (Puscasu, 2007). In this system, diﬀerent
heuristics and temporal reasoning mechanism have been combined with statistical data ex-
tracted from the training corpus. WVALI achieved the best results in all tasks of TempEval
2007.
LCC-TE was another hybrid system of TempEval 2007. It combined diﬀerent machine
learning models with human rules for temporal relation learning (Min, Srikanth, & Fowler,
2007). LCC-TE uses gold-standard features available in TimeBank, as well as a number of
derived and extended features such as grammatical and semantic features. The evaluations
on LCC-TE have shown acceptable results in all three tasks.
3. Bootstrapped Cross-Document Classiﬁcation (BCDC)
In this section, a new method of extracting temporal relations between events is introduced.
We call this method Bootstrapped Cross-Document Classiﬁcation (BCDC). The results of
experiments with BCDC show a signiﬁcant improvement over previous work in terms of
accuracy (see Tables 6 and 7).
We have used SVM with three diﬀerent kernels in the
learning process. There are two novelties in our bootstrapping (self-training) method: 1) it
is an information retrieval based approach that extracts useful information exclusively from
related documents. 2) It builds a speciﬁc model for each test document. Before describing
BCDC, our motivation is brieﬂy explained in the next section.
3.1 Motivation
In a regular corpus with heterogeneous documents, verbs, which often act as event triggers,
may have diﬀerent senses in diﬀerent documents. For example, event “ﬁring” may have a
sense of “shooting” a gun in a document about army, whereas it may also have a sense of
“ending” someone’s job in a diﬀerent document about a company. However, for a cluster of
topically-related documents, the distribution should be much less divergent. This motivated
us to apply the so-called “one sense per discourse” hypothesis (Yarowsky, 1995) to the
133

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
problem of temporal relation classiﬁcation, and extend the scope of discourse from a single
document to a cluster of topically related documents. Also inspired by another work that
proposed assumptions of one event trigger sense and one event argument role per discourse
(Ji & Grishman, 2008), we based our work on an analogous assumption, which we called
“one type of temporal relation per discourse”. In other words, we assume that similar event
pairs in diﬀerent places of topically related documents are very likely to have the same
temporal relations. Although, as it is later explained, we have not explicitly employed this
assumption in our proposed algorithm, we have tried to verify the assumption by considering
temporal relations of the Opinion corpus (Mani et al., 2006). In this corpus, documents are
located in four diﬀerent directories each having a speciﬁc topic. In our veriﬁcation, we have
considered all documents within the same directory as being related. In other words, two
documents are considered as “related documents” if they are in the same directory (i.e.,
they have the same topic). To verify the assumption, we selected those event pairs that have
appeared more than once. In Opinion corpus, there are a total number of 2666 temporally
related event pairs (i.e., TLinks), out of which, only 994 pairs appeared more than once1.
Table 1 shows the results of our veriﬁcation. Supporting samples are those event pairs that
have appeared in two or more related documents with exact the same temporal relation.
Even if event pairs having diﬀerent relations are from unrelated documents, they are also
regarded as the supporting samples. On the contrary, if event pairs having diﬀerent relations
are from related documents, they are considered as contradictory samples. As it is shown in
Table 1, more than 95% of the samples have supported our assumption (i.e., “one temporal
relation per discourse”).
Count
Supporting Samples
942(95%)
Contradictory Samples
52(5%)
Total
994
Table 1: The distribution for assumption of “one type of temporal relation per discourse”
over the Opinion corpus.
As an example, in the following sentences, which have been taken from diﬀerent doc-
uments of the same topic (i.e., Kenya Tanzania Embassy bombings), the event pair (blast
and kill) has IBEFORE temporal relation in all sentences:
“Reports reaching here said a massive blast damaged the U.S. embassy in Nairobi ,
killing 40 people while wounding at least 1,000 people.”
“More than 100 people have been killed and more than 1,000 others wounded in the
blasts next to the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania on Friday.”
“In Dar es Salaam , she laid a wreath next to the crater left by the embassy blast that
killed 10 people.”
1. Before counting the number of event pairs, we applied a lemmatizer to event words.
134

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
3.2 Feature Engineering
In BCDC, two types of features are used: basic and extra event-event features.
Basic
features are simple features related to individual events and extra event-event features
are those extracted from two related events. In the next two sections, these features are
explained in more detail.
3.2.1 Basic Features
These are simple features extracted from events. For each event, there are ﬁve temporal
attributes, which are tagged in standard corpora: 1) tense; 2) grammatical aspect; 3)
modality; 4) polarity, and 5) event class. Tense and aspect deﬁne temporal location and
event structure; thus, they are necessary in any method of temporal relation extraction.
Modality and polarity specify non-occurring or hypothetical situations. The event class
shows the type of event. The range of values for these attributes is based on the work of
Pustejovsky et al. (2003), and is shown in Table 2. These attributes are either annotated
in the input corpus or can be automatically extracted by existing tools.
Attribute
Range of values
Tense
none, present, past, future
Aspect
none, prog, perfect, prog perfect
Modality
none, to, should, would, could, can, might
Polarity
positive, negative
Event Class
report, aspectual, state, I state, I action, perception, occurrence
Table 2: The range of values for ﬁve temporal attributes.
In addition to the ﬁve mentioned attributes, BCDC also employs the string of words
that constitute each event, their part of speech tags as well as a number of contextual fea-
tures including pairwise agreement of tenses and aspects. Part of speech tags of events are
again either annotated in the corpora or can be determined by existing POS taggers. For
example, in sentence “He succeeds James A. Taylor, who ...”, “succeeds” is an event with
the following features:
[tense: present], [aspect: none], [modality: none], [polarity: positive], [event class: as-
pectual], [word: succeeds], [pos: verb]
3.2.2 Extra Event-Event Features
Extra event-event features are based on two related events and are automatically extracted
from the input text. In our case, there are three types of these features, deﬁned as follows:
Event-Event parse tree: if both events are in the same sentence, the algorithm can
use the parse tree of the sentence to learn some useful syntactic properties such as domina-
tion. In a parse tree, event A dominates event B, if A is an ancestor of B. These properties
are not explicit features, but rather implicit properties which can be extracted and learned
by the SVM using appropriate tree kernels such as those proposed in the work of Mirroshan-
135

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
del et al. (2009b). Parse trees can be extracted by a statistical parser and there is no need
for any Treebank.
Prepositional phrase: a preposition head is often an indicator of a temporal class.
Thus, we can use a new feature that indicates if an event is a part of a prepositional phrase.
This information can also be extracted from the parse trees. For example, in sentence “I
saw him before the earthquake”, the relation between events “saw” and “earthquake” can be
easily determined by the word “before” in the prepositional phrase “before the earthquake”.
Event-Event distance: it is based on the idea that the strength of the relationship
between two events is inversely related to the textual distance of those events. It means
that the relationship becomes weaker as the distance increases (and vice versa). Accord-
ingly, intra- and inter-sentential events should be treated diﬀerently. We train two separate
models: one for the intra-sentential events and one for the inter-sentential ones.
3.3 Proposed Algorithm
BCDC applies a novel usage of bootstrapping to the classiﬁcation of temporal relations
between events. It works in two main stages. In the ﬁrst stage, using a standard corpus,
a general model is learned. Then in stage two, the general model is retrained for each test
document based on some related information. Figure 4 shows the ﬂowchart of the proposed
algorithm, which is described in more detail in the following sections.
3.3.1 Stage One
In stage one, BCDC employs the discussed features extracted from a standard corpus to
train a general model for classiﬁcation using SVM. At the end of this stage, we will have
a model for temporal relation classiﬁcation. However, such models, which have also been
proposed before by other researchers, all have the problem of being too general. In other
words, such a model does not have any speciﬁc information about the particular domain
under consideration. To better deal with this problem, BCDC has an extra bootstrapping
phase of training.
3.3.2 Stage Two
In stage two, we retrain the general model produced in stage one, for each test document
with some related information. In order to achieve this goal, the bootstrapping phase of
BCDC proceeds according to the following steps:
Step 1: ﬁrst of all, an unprocessed test document is randomly selected.
Step 2: then BCDC ﬁnds the top N documents that are topically related to the se-
lected test document from a large unannotated corpus. The choice of related documents can
be made by the INDRI retrieval system (Strohman, Metzler, Turtle, & Croft, 2005). Note
that the mentioned large unannotated corpus is diﬀerent from the training and test corpora.
136

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
  
Figure 4: The ﬂowchart of BCDC.
137

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
Step 3: in this step, we extract events and required features from the related documents
found by INDRI. The events and speciﬁed features of section 3.2 can be automatically an-
notated by EVITA (Saur´ı, Knippen, Verhagen, & Pustejovsky, 2005). Although some of
the events and/or features extracted by EVITA may be incorrect, our experimental results
show that they can still be very helpful. The extra event-event features and other required
features can be extracted by a POS tagger and a statistical parser.
Step 4: then by using the existing model, the temporal relations between only intra-
sentential event pairs of the related documents are predicted. Besides, a normalized measure
of conﬁdence is computed for each relation.
We have used SVM for our classiﬁcation
purpose. Therefore, we have designed a conﬁdence measure using SVM, as it is explained
below.
In SVM binary classiﬁcation, positive and negative instances are linearly partitioned by
a hyper-plane (with maximum marginal distance to instances) in the original or a higher
dimensional feature space. In order to classify a new instance X, its distance to the hyper-
plane is computed and X is assigned to the class that corresponds to the sign of the com-
puted distance. The distance between instance X and hyper-plane H, which can be either
a positive or a negative value, is supported by the support vectors X1 . . . Xl and computed
by equation 1 (Han & Kambert, 2006):
d(X, H) =
l
X
i=1
yi αi Xi XT + b0
(1)
where yi is the class label of support vector Xk; αk and b0 are numeric parameters that
are automatically determined.
We have used one-versus-one case of multi-class classiﬁcation with m classes, in which
a set of m ∗(m −1) / 2 hyper-planes (i.e., one hyper-plane for every class pair) denoted by
H is deﬁned. The hyper-plane that separates class i and j is referred to as Hi,j. Hi is used
to denote a subset of m −1 hyper-planes of H that separates class i from the others. In
order to classify a new instance X, its distance to each hyper-plane Hi,j is computed. Then
X is assigned to class i or j. At the end of this process, for every instance X, each class i
has accumulated a certain number of votes, represented as Vi(X), which is the number of
times that the classiﬁer has assigned instance X to class i. The ﬁnal class of X, denoted
by C(X), will be the one with the highest number of votes.
In the process described above, it is easy to compute the conﬁdence values based on the
distance measures of equation 1 (i.e., the closer a case is to the support vectors, the less it
is conﬁdent). More precisely, in the multi-class classiﬁcation, we deﬁne the conﬁdence of
instance X as the sum of its distances to all its class-separating hyper-planes:
ϕ(X) =

X
H∈HC(x)
d(X, H)

(2)
Based on equation 2, the larger value of ϕ(X) shows that X is more conﬁdent, and vice
versa.
138

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
Step 5: in this step, BCDC chooses the K most conﬁdent temporal relations of those
detected in step 4.
Step 6: we then retrain the SVM by injecting the temporal relations selected in step
5. It should be noted that for each test document, the original model is retrained by the
most conﬁdent relations from the documents related to only that test document and not
any other test documents.
the model is trained on only the original training data plus the most conﬁdent predicted
relations from the “relevant” documents for the current test document and not any of pre-
dicted relations for other test documents.
Steps 4-6 are repeated until one of the following two termination conditions will be sat-
isﬁed: 1) there will be no more unselected temporal relation, or 2) a predeﬁned number of
iterations will be reached.
Step 7: when the retraining phase of the general model for a selected test document
is ﬁnished, the temporal relations of the test document are classiﬁed based on the new
speciﬁcally retrained model.
Then, if there are still some unprocessed test documents, BCDC will start from step 1
again; otherwise the algorithm will terminate.
The fundamental idea of the second stage of BCDC is to obtain some document- and
cluster-wide statistics about the temporal relations between diﬀerent types of events, and
then using this information to improve temporal relation identiﬁcation.
As it was explained above, a speciﬁc model is learned for each test document, using a
number of unannotated text documents which are topically related to that test document
(i.e., bootstrapping phase). However, if some test documents are themselves topically re-
lated, their corresponding retrained models will be very similar. For the sake of eﬃciency,
we can run the bootstrapping phase for just one of such test documents, and then use the
same retrained model for the rest. In other words, we run steps 2 to 6 of BCDC just for one
member of a set of similar test documents, and for other members, we solely apply step 7.
As it was explained in the section 3.1, we do not explicitly use the assumption of “one
type of temporal relation per discourse” in any part of BCDC. However, in bootstrapping,
we somehow implicitly beneﬁt from this assumption by seeking only topically related docu-
ments, which are more likely to include similar event pairs with identical temporal relations.
4. Experimental Results of BCDC
In this section, the speciﬁcation of the employed corpora is brieﬂy explained. Then, the
accuracy of BCDC is analyzed.
4.1 Characteristic of Corpora
We have used two standard corpora (i.e., TimeBank (v 1.2) and Opinion, see Mani et al.,
2006) in our experiments. TimeBank has 183 newswire documents with 64, 077 tokens, and
139

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
Opinion has 73 documents with 38, 709 tokens. These two datasets have been annotated
based on the TimeML standard (Pustejovsky et al., 2003). As mentioned before, there
are fourteen temporal relation types (SIMULTANEOUS, IDENTITY, BEFORE, AFTER,
IBEFORE, IAFTER, INCLUDES, IS INCLUDED, DURING, DURING INV, BEGINS,
BEGUN BY, ENDS, ENDED BY) in the TLink class of TimeML. For the sake of reducing
the data sparseness problem, as many others (Mani et al., 2006; Tatu & Srikanth, 2008;
Mani et al., 2007; Chambers et al., 2007), we have used a normalized version of these
relation types including only six following relations:
SIMULTANEOUS
ENDS
BEGINS
BEFORE
IBEFORE
INCLUDES
Original Relation
Converted Relation
X AFTER Y
Y BEFORE X
X IAFTER Y
Y IBEFORE X
X ENDED BY Y
Y ENDS X
X BEGUN BY Y
Y BEGINS X
X IS INCLUDED Y
Y INCLUDES X
X DURING Y
Y INCLUDES X
X IDENTITY Y
X SIMULTANEOUS Y
X DURING INV Y
X INCLUDES Y
Table 3: The normalization process for temporal relation types.
For normalizing, the inverse relations are merged. These conversions are shown in the
Table 3. In the ﬁrst six conversions, relations can be easily converted by swapping their
arguments. Relations IDENTITY and SIMULTAENOUS are collapsed, since IDENTITY
is a subtype of SIMULTANEOUS (i.e., two events are IDENTITY if they are SIMULTA-
NEOUS and coreferential).
Similarly, relations DURING INV and INCLUDES are also
collapsed because DURING INV is a subtype of INCLUDES (i.e., identical to the Allen’s
CONTAINS) based on the Allen’s interval algebra (Allen, 1984). It should be clear that by
using these conversions, no information is lost.
Relation Type
TimeBank
OTC
IBEFORE
63
131
BEGINS
77
160
ENDS
114
208
SIMULTANEOUS
1304
1528
INCLUDES
588
950
BEFORE
1335 (38.35%)
3170 (51.57%)
TOTAL
3481
6147
Table 4: The normalized TLink class distribution in TimeBank and OTC.
140

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
In our experiments, like some previous work (Mani et al., 2006; Chambers et al., 2007;
Chambers & Jurafsky, 2008), TimeBank and Opinion corpora have been merged into a single
corpus called Opinion TimeBank Corpus (OTC). Table 4 shows the normalized TLink class
distribution (only for Event-Event relations) over TimeBank and OTC. As it is shown,
relation “BEFORE” is the most frequent relation; thus it forms the majority class, and can
be used as a baseline of the experiments.
For comparison with some other methods, we also used the English part of the TempEval-
2 corpus. This part is based on TimeBank (Verhagen et al., 2010; Pustejovsky et al., 2003;
Boguraev, Pustejovsky, Ando, & Verhagen, 2007). However, all the TimeBank annotations
have been reviewed based on the guidelines of TempEval 2010 and the temporal relations
have been modiﬁed according to the speciﬁc types of the shared task.
Relation Type
Task E
Task F
Training
Test
Training
Test
BEFORE
403
58
600 (35.46%)
92
AFTER
279
38
299
45
OVERLAP
652 (41.19%)
124 (48.63%)
518
100 (33%)
BEFORE-OR-OVERLAP
61
9
111
55
OVERLAP-OR-AFTER
51
6
89
11
VAGUE
137
20
75
0
TOTAL
1583
255
1692
303
Table 5: The distribution of temporal relation types in TempEval-2 Corpus for Task E and
F.
There are two parts in this corpus: 1) the training part including 163 documents and
53, 450 tokens; and 2) the test part with 21 documents and 4, 848 tokens. There are six dif-
ferent temporal relation types: BEFORE, AFTER, OVERLAP, BEFORE-OR-OVERLAP,
OVERLAP-OR-AFTER, and VAGUE. Among six diﬀerent tasks of TempEval 2010, we
just focused on tasks E and F, which are similar to the problem that we have tackled in this
paper. Tasks E and F are the only tasks which consider exclusively the relations between
two events. The distribution of temporal relation types for these tasks over the training
and test parts of the corpus is shown in Table 5. The majority classes have been underlined
in the table.
As it was discussed in section 3.3.2, for each text, we retrieve a number of topically
related texts using a public domain software called INDRI. In our experiments, these related
texts have been retrieved from the English part of TDT5 multilingual news text corpus2. In
total, TDT5 consists of 407, 505 text documents in English (278, 109 documents), Mandarin
Chinese (56, 486 documents), and modern standard Arabic (72, 910 documents). It also has
250 diﬀerent topics. Unlike previous TDT corpora, TDT5 does not contain any broadcast
news data; all sources are newswires.
2. TDT 2004: Annotation Manual, Available at http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/TDT2004.
141

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
4.2 Experiments
We have used the LIBSVM java source for the SVM classiﬁcation (Chang & Lin, 2011).
The EVITA system (Saur´ı et al., 2005) has been used for event extraction. EVITA works
based on both linguistic and statistical information. In addition to event extraction, event
attributes (which were described in Table 2) can also be extracted by EVITA. We have also
used the Stanford NLP package3 for tokenization, sentence segmentation, part of speech
tagging, and parsing. The INDRI retrieval system (Strohman et al., 2005) has been em-
ployed to obtain related documents. INDRI is a language model based search engine that
provides a state-of-the-art text search engine. The English part of TDT5 has been indexed
by INDRI, and by using this search engine, the texts that are highly related to some speciﬁed
documents can be retrieved.
As it was mentioned earlier, we applied our algorithm to TimeBank, OTC, and Tem-
pEval 2010 Corpora.
We randomly selected 20 documents (almost 10 percent of total
documents) of TimeBank as our development set. Based on several experiments on this de-
velopment set and with diﬀerent number of extracted related documents in step 2 of BCDC
(i.e., N), and number of most conﬁdent relations chosen in step 5 (i.e., K), we have set N
to 25 and K to 40.
On TimeBank and OTC, the results were evaluated by ﬁrst excluding the 20 documents
of the development set and then measuring accuracy using the ﬁve-fold cross validation
method. However, for the corpus of TempEval-2, there was no need for cross validation,
because the training and test sets are predetermined, and we just reported the accuracy of
BCDC on the test set.
Table 6 shows the results of three diﬀerent settings of the proposed algorithm against
several others over TimeBank and OTC. In this table, the baseline is the majority class for
event-event relations (i.e., the BEFORE relation) of the evaluated corpora. Mani’s method
is regarded as a successful statistical approach to temporal relation identiﬁcation, which
exclusively uses gold standard features of events (Mani et al., 2007). Methods proposed
by Chambers and Mani are similar except that Chambers has also used a number of extra
features in a two step algorithm. His method is currently regarded as the state-of-the-art of
statistical approaches over TimeBank and OTC. To achieve a higher accuracy, he has also
used some extra resources such as WordNet (Chambers et al., 2007).
Argument ancestor path distance (AAPD) is an accurate convolution tree kernel which
only uses parse trees of event-event sentences for temporal relation classiﬁcation (Mirroshan-
del et al., 2009b). AAPD polynomial is a composite kernel that combines a simple event
kernel and AAPD (Mirroshandel et al., 2009b). The mentioned simple event kernel is a lin-
ear kernel that exclusively uses the same features as that of Mani’s method (Mirroshandel
et al., 2009b). AAPD and AAPD polynomial kernels were designed to be applied only to
the event pairs that are within the same sentence. Accordingly, the relations of TimeBank
and OTC were split into two parts: 1) relations between intra-sentential event pairs, and
2) relations between inter-sentential event pairs. Then these kernels were applied only to
the ﬁrst part and for the second part, we just used simple event kernel (i.e., Mani’s kernel).
In Table 6, the results reported for AAPD and AAPD polynomial kernel are in fact the
outcome of merging the partial results from these two parts.
3. Available at http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/index.shtml
142

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
Method
TimeBank
Corpus
OTC
Corpus
Baseline
38.35
51.57
Chambers
59.43
65.48
Mani (Event Kernel + Basic Features)
50.97
62.5
Classic Bootstrapping + Event Kernel + Basic Features
53.21
63.12
BCDC + Event Kernel + Basic Features
59.71
65.19
AAPD Kernel + Extra Event-Event Features
54
63.44
Classic Bootstrapping + AAPD Kernel + Extra Event-Event
Features
57.98
64.53
BCDC + AAPD Kernel + Extra Event-Event Features
62.56
66.29
AAPD Polynomial Kernel + Basic Features + Extra Event-
Event Features
57.02
65.95
Classic Bootstrapping + AAPD Polynomial Kernel + Basic
Features + Extra Event-Event Features
59.83
66.55
BCDC + AAPD Polynomial Kernel + Basic Features +
Extra Event-Event Features
66.18
68.07
Table 6: The accuracy of proposed methods on event-event temporal relation classiﬁcation
over TimeBank and OTC.
“BCDC + Event Kernel + Basic Features” is our bootstrapped algorithm, which only
uses basic features, mentioned in section 3.2.1, by applying a simple event kernel (Mir-
roshandel et al., 2011). In “BCDC + AAPD Kernel + Extra Event-Event Features”, we
utilized extra event-event features in AAPD kernel. Third setting (“BCDC + AAPD Poly-
nomial Kernel + Basic Features +Extra Event-Event Features”) uses AAPD Polynomial
kernel to combine all basic and extra event-event features.
For better comparison, we also applied a classic bootstrapping method with the same
SVM kernels and features as that of BCDC. For reporting these results, the initial model was
trained on a standard corpus (i.e., like stage one of BCDC). Then, in an iterative manner,
most conﬁdent samples of all documents (rather than just related documents) were used to
retrain the model. Note that in this case, there is no need to the process of retrieving related
documents, and only one model is learned for all test documents. In order to ﬁnd the best
value for K (i.e., number of most conﬁdent samples) in the classic bootstrapping method,
we performed several diﬀerent experiments on the mentioned development set. Incidentally,
our experiments showed that here, too, K should be set to 40.
As Table 6 indicates, “BCDC + AAPD Kernel + Extra Event-Event Features” and
“BCDC + AAPD Polynomial Kernel + Basic Features + Extra Event-Event Features” both
show a signiﬁcant improvement over the state-of-the-art method (i.e., Chambers’ method).
Comparison between BCDC and classical bootstrapping shows the eﬀectiveness of the pro-
posed idea of extracting the retraining samples only from related documents.
The improvement over TimeBank is more considerable than that of OTC. It seems that
diﬀerent distributions of temporal relations in the two corpora has caused the diﬀerence
143

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
between these improvements. As it is shown in Table 4, in OTC, the majority class (i.e.,
BEFORE relation) has a larger part of the whole corpus. This causes the learning algorithm
to become biased towards the BEFORE relation, and thus the correct prediction of other
relations becomes harder. On the contrary, in TimeBank, the distribution is less biased and
thus BCDC has shown more improvement on this corpus.
Method 1
Method 2
P-Value
on
Time-
Bank
P-Value
on OTC
BCDC + Event Kernel + Ba-
sic Features
Mani (Event Kernel + Basic
Features)
0.0134∗
0.0476∗
BCDC + AAPD Kernel + Ex-
tra Event-Event Features
AAPD Kernel + Extra Event-
Event Features
0.0296∗
0.0383∗
BCDC + AAPD Polynomial
Kernel + Basic Features +
Extra Event-Event Features
AAPD
Polynomial
Kernel
+ Basic Features + Extra
Event-Event Features
0.0212∗
0.0422∗
BCDC + Event Kernel + Ba-
sic Features
Classic
Bootstrapping
+
Event Kernel + Basic Fea-
tures
0.0311∗
0.0514
BCDC + AAPD Kernel + Ex-
tra Event-Event Features
Classic
Bootstrapping
+
AAPD
Kernel
+
Extra
Event-Event Features
0.0299∗
0.0441∗
BCDC + AAPD Polynomial
Kernel + Basic Features +
Extra Event-Event Features
Classic
Bootstrapping
+
AAPD
Polynomial
Kernel
+ Basic Features + Extra
Event-Event Features
0.0402∗
0.0491∗
BCDC + Event Kernel + Ba-
sic Features
Chambers
0.0765
0.0878
BCDC + AAPD Kernel + Ex-
tra Event-Event Features
Chambers
0.0503
0.0487∗
BCDC + AAPD Polynomial
Kernel + Basic Features +
Extra Event-Event Features
Chambers
0.0431∗
0.0397∗
Table 7: The statistical signiﬁcance test results on our proposed methods.
For testing statistical signiﬁcance, we applied a type of “stratiﬁed shuﬄing”, which is a
kind of “compute-intensive randomized test”. The null hypothesis (i.e., the two models that
produced the observed results are the same) was tested by randomly shuﬄing the generated
output for each event pair between the two models and then re-computing the evaluation
metrics (i.e., accuracy in this case). If the diﬀerence in a particular metric after a shuﬄing is
equal to or greater than the original observed diﬀerence in that metric, then a counter (nc)
for that metric is incremented. Ideally, we should perform all 2n possible shuﬄes, where
n shows the number of test cases (i.e., event pairs). But, in our case, this is impractical
because n is a rather large number. Therefore, as many others, we have tried only 10, 000
144

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
iterations (nt). After ﬁnishing all iterations, the p-value (likelihood of incorrectly rejecting
the null hypothesis) is simply calculated by (nc+1)/(nt+1) (Yeh, 2000). Table 7 shows the
result of the signiﬁcance test on our proposed methods. In this test, each proposed method
was compared with its relevant method.
As it is shown in Table 7, majority of the methods passed the test (the p-value is less
than 0.05). There are only four exceptions in which the p-value is slightly greater than 0.05.
Table 8 shows the accuracy of BCDC on the English part of the corpus used in TempEval
2010 for tasks E and F. JU-CSE, NCSU-indi, NCSU-joint, TIPSem, TIPSem-B, TRIOS,
and TRIPS are participants of the TempEval 2010 shared task (Verhagen et al., 2010). The
other methods are the same as in Table 6. AAPD kernel can only be applied to event pairs
within the same sentence. Therefore, we are unable to apply it to task E. For inter-sentential
event pairs, AAPD Polynomial kernel is almost similar to simple event kernel, because it
cannot use the syntactic parse trees, which are appropriate sources of information.
Method
Task E
Task F
Baseline
49
33
JU-CSE
56
56
NCSU-indi
48
66
NCSU-joint
51
25
TIPSem
55
59
TIPSem-B
55
60
TRIOS
56
60
TRIPS
58
59
Event Kernel + Basic Features
38.02
33.23
BCDC + Event Kernel + Basic Features
44.35
38.44
AAPD Kernel + Extra Event-Event Features
−
40.71
BCDC + AAPD Kernel + Extra Event-Event Features
−
47.20
AAPD Polynomial Kernel + Basic Features + Extra
Event-Event Features
38.54
43.51
BCDC + AAPD Polynomial Kernel + Basic Features
+ Extra Event-Event Features
45.62
50.41
Table 8: The accuracy of proposed methods on tasks E and F of TempEval 2010 shared
task.
As it can be seen in Table 8, although BCDC has shown some improvement in the
accuracy of temporal relation identiﬁcation (i.e., in comparison with our base methods),
it is generally weaker than almost all the participants of TempEval 2010. We think this
weakness is due to the restricted feature set that have been used in BCDC. In other words,
majority of participants of TempEval 2010 have used richer feature sets of diﬀerent levels
(e.g., lexical, syntactic, and semantic), while we have just used simple event features (plus
a few syntactic features only for task F). We think but have not veriﬁed yet that with a
richer set of features, BCDC will produce more successful results on TempEval’s tasks, too.
Besides, we think replacing our base method for a more successful method such as TipSem
145

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
or TRIPS, can make BCDC competitive with participants of TempEval 2010. However, to
show this, we ﬁrst need to ﬁnd an appropriate conﬁdence measure for step 4 of BCDC4,
which requires further investigation and is one of our directions in future research.
  
Figure 5: The eﬀects of utilizing related documents vs. randomly selected documents on
accuracy of BCDC over TimeBank and OTC.
4.3 Analysis
As it can be seen in Tables 6 and 8, BCDC has shown a substantial improvement over
several diﬀerent methods in terms of accuracy and without using any extra annotated data.
Bootstrapping by using a number of related documents have the following positive eﬀects:
1) By knowing the relation between events, we can better predict the relation types
between analogous events, which may appear in related documents.
2) In related documents, the number of sentences with similar patterns will increase,
and the tree kernels can extract more conﬁdent information from the parse trees. Thus in
4. It should be noted that our proposed conﬁdence measure is just useful for SVM classiﬁcation technique.
146

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
this way, SVM can be more informative.
3) The used corpora are rather small with few examples for each relation. This data
sparseness problem can aﬀect the performance of any temporal relation identiﬁcation method.
In BCDC, retrieving related documents and extraction of new temporal relations of these
documents can increase the number of relations and improve its performance by alleviating
the data sparseness problem.
One remaining question is “what is the impact of choosing related documents?”. In other
words, what if we randomly choose a number of unrelated documents in the bootstrapping
phase of BCDC. To show the eﬀectiveness of the idea of using related documents, we have
repeated our experiments with N = 25 (i.e., the same as original BCDC) randomly selected
documents.
The results of these experiments are shown in Figure 5.
As it is shown,
although randomly selected documents have slightly improved the base methods, however,
the improvement is not comparable with that of using related documents.
5. Using EM for Temporal Relation Learning (EMTRL)
Since supervised and even semi-supervised methods need annotated corpora, which for many
languages and/or domains do not exist, here, we propose an unsupervised algorithm for the
temporal relation learning problem.
Due to the encouraging results of the expectation
maximization (EM) algorithm in other unsupervised tasks of natural language processing
such as unsupervised grammar induction (Klein, 2005), unsupervised anaphora resolution
(Cherry & Bergsma, 2005; Charniak & Elsner, 2009), and unsupervised coreference resolu-
tion (Ng, 2008), we decided to evaluate EM in unsupervised temporal relation extraction.
Currently, there is no reported work in temporal relation extraction based on EM. In fact,
there has not yet been any attempt towards an unsupervised approach to temporal relation
extraction. Here, we explain how EM can be successfully applied to the task of temporal
relation extraction and show that the performance of EM is encouraging in this task. Before
that, we ﬁrst introduce the deﬁnitions and notations that will be later used in subsequent
sections.
5.1 The EM Algorithm
EM is a general algorithm for maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) (Dempster, Laird, &
Rubin, 1977). This algorithm can be used when we deal with incomplete information. As
it was mentioned before, in temporal relation learning, the task is to determine the type of
temporal relation r that is between two events e1 and e2. In this algorithm, context means
the sentence (or sentences) containing a pair of events.
5.2 The Proposed Model
Let us call the new proposed algorithm EMTRL, which stands for EM based temporal
relation learning. EMTRL operates at the corpus level, inducing valid temporal clustering
for all event pairs of a given corpus.
More speciﬁcally, EMTRL induces a probability
distribution to maximize P(corpus) (the probability of the corpus). To easily incorporate
147

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
linguistic constraints, corpus is represented by its event pairs (ei ej). We assume event pairs
are independent:
P(corpus) =
Y
ei ej ∈corpus
P(ei ej)
(3)
We can rewrite P(ei ej) so that it uses a hidden variable TCi j (temporal class for event
pair ei ej) that inﬂuences the observed variables (ei ej):
P(ei ej) =
X
TCi j ∈possible temporal classes
P(ei ej, TCi j)
(4)
The probability P(ei ej, TCi j) can be rewritten as:
P(ei ej, TCi j) = P(ei ej | TCi j)P(TCi j)
(5)
For inducing temporal relations, EMTRL runs EM on this model. We use a uniform
distribution over P(TCi j). It is clear that if we could choose a more informative prior
distribution P(TCi j), it would have some beneﬁts like having a better handle on the skew-
ness of the distribution. In some other applications of EM, there are settings for this prior
distribution. However, in the problem of temporal relation learning, there cannot be any
other prior distribution except uniform distribution; because here, all temporal relation
types would seem equal to the learner.
If we expand equation 5, each pair ei ej can be represented by its features, which can
be potentially used for determining the temporal relation type between events ei and ej.
Therefore, P(ei ej | TCi j) can be rewritten using equation 6:
P(ei ej | TCi j) = P(ei e1
j, ei e2
j, ... ei ek
j | TCi j)
(6)
where ei el
j is the value of the lth feature of ei ej. These features, which are similar to
those mentioned in the work of Chambers and Jurafsky (2008), are listed in Table 9.
To reduce the data sparseness problem and improve the probability estimation, the con-
ditional independence is assumed for these features’ value generation. We only assume that
tense and aspect are dependent (i.e., tensei and aspecti), because tense and aspect deﬁne
temporal location and event structure, and thus considering these features together can be
a rich source of information in any temporal relation extraction system. By conditional
independence assumption, the value of P(ei ej | TCi j) can be rewritten as:
P(ei ej | TCi j) =
Y
all features l
P(ei el
j | TCi j)
(7)
These probabilities (i.e. P(ei el
j | TCi j) ) are regarded as the parameters of our proposed
model. Because using them, the likelihood of diﬀerent temporal classes can be determined.
Based on the features in Table 9 and diﬀerent temporal classes, P(ei el
j | TCi j) can be
deﬁned. Four examples of such probabilities are shown below:
• P(class(ei) = “OCCURRENCE” AND class(ej) = “PERCEPTION” | TCi j =
“BEFORE”)
148

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
Feature
Description
Word1 & Word2
The text of ﬁrst and second events
Lemma1 & Lemma2
The lemmatized ﬁrst and second events heads
Synset1 & Synset2
The WordNet synset for ﬁrst and second events heads
POS1 & POS2
The POS of the ﬁrst and second events
Event Government V erb1 &
V erb2
The verbs that govern the ﬁrst and second events
Event Government V erb1 &
V erb2 POS
The verbs’ POS that govern the ﬁrst and second events
Auxiliary
Any auxiliary adverbs and verbs that modiﬁes the gov-
erning verbs
Class1 & Class2
The Class of the ﬁrst and second events
Tense1 & Tense2
The tense of the ﬁrst and second events
Aspect1 & Aspect2
The aspect of the ﬁrst and second events
Modality1 & Modality2
The modality of the ﬁrst and second events
Polarity1 & Polarity2
The polarity of the ﬁrst and second events
Tense Match
If two events have the same tense or not
Aspect Match
If two events have the same aspect or not
Class Match
If two events have the same class or not
Tense Pair
Pair of two events’ tense
Aspect Pair
Pair of two events’ aspect
Class Pair
Pair of two events’ class
POS pair
Pair of two events’ POS
Preposition1
If ﬁrst event is in a prepositional phrase or not
Preposition2
If second event is in a prepositional phrase or not
Text order
If the ﬁrst event occurs ﬁrst in the document or not
Dominates
If the ﬁrst event syntactically dominates second event
or not
Entity Match
If an entity as an argument is shared between two
events
Table 9: The features of events which are used in EMTRL for temporal relation learning.
149

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
• P(ei dominates ej | TCi j = “AFTER” )
• P(Tense(ei)
=
“PAST” AND Tense(ej)
=
“PAST” AND Aspect(ei)
=
“NONE” AND Aspect(ej) = “PROGRESSIV E” | TCi j = “OV ERLAP”)
• P(POS of ei = “V ” AND POS of ej = “N” | TCi j = “AFTER” )
5.3 The Induction Algorithm
To induce a temporal clustering on a corpus, EM was applied to our proposed model. In
EMTRL, the corpus (i.e., event pairs) and the temporal clustering TC are respectively the
observed and unobserved (the hidden) random variables. The EM algorithm includes two
main steps of expectation (E) and maximization (M), which in our task can be deﬁned in
the following way to iteratively estimate the parameters of the model (i.e., P(ei el
j | TCi j)):
E-step: Fix current parameters of the model, and assign a probability, P(TCi j | ei ej),
to each possible temporal class for event pairs (ei ej) of the corpus. This probability can
be computed by following equation:
P(TCi j | ei ej) = P(ei ej, TCi j)
P(ei ej)
(8)
We can rewrite equation 8 by using equations 4, 5, 7:
P(TCi j | ei ej) =
P(TCi j) Q
all features l P(ei el
j | TCi j)
P
TC′
i j ∈possible temporal classes P(TC′
i j) Q
all features l P(ei el
j | TC′
i j)
(9)
Using equation 9, for each event pair (eiej), the temporal relation type (temporal class)
with the highest probability is selected. These relations will be later used in the M-step to
update the parameters of the model.
M-step: By ﬁxing determined temporal relations in E-step, the parameters of the
model, P(ei el
j | TCi j), are updated in this step. For achieving this goal, diﬀerent opti-
mization algorithms such as conjugate gradient can be used. However, these algorithms are
slow and costly. In addition, it is diﬃcult to smooth these methods in a desired manner.
Therefore, we have used the relative frequency method for re-estimation of the parameters,
using equation 10:
P(ei el
j | TCi j) = N(ei el
j, TCi j)
N(TCi j)
(10)
where N(∗) counts the number of times that given items or joint items have appeared
in the corpus. For example, updating probability P(ei dominates ej | TCi j = “AFTER”)
can be done by dividing N(ei dominates ej, TCi j = “AFTER”) (i.e., number of times
that ei dominates ej and the temporal relation between ei and ej is AFTER) by N(TCi j =
“AFTER”) (i.e., number of times that relation between event pairs in the corpus is AF-
TER).
150

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
Steps E and M are repeated until one of the following termination conditions will be
satisﬁed: 1) a predeﬁned number of iterations will be reached, or 2) there will be no more
changes in P(ei el
j | TCi j). In practice, EMTRL is usually stopped after 30 predeﬁned
iterations, while ﬁnal behavior had been apparent after 15 −22 iterations.
After ﬁnishing the training phase, the temporal relation (
ˆ
TCi j) for requested event
pairs ei ej can be determined using the following equation:
ˆ
TCi j = arg maxTC′ ∈possible temporal classesP(TC′ | ei ej)
(11)
Now, the EM algorithm can begin at either the E-Step or the M-step. We start the
induction algorithm at the M-step. It is clear that parameters of the model are not available
in the ﬁrst iteration of EM. Instead, an initial distribution over temporal clustering can be
used. There is an important question: how one should initialize this distribution?
Initialization is an important task in EM, because EM only guarantees to ﬁnd a local
maximum of likelihood. The quality of such a local maxima is highly dependent on the
initial starting point. We tested three diﬀerent ways of initialization:
1) Random Initialization: a uniform distribution over all temporal clustering was
used; therefore, all temporal clustering in the ﬁrst step had equal probability.
2) 10% Supervised Initialization: we used a small part of a labeled corpus (10% of
each relation type) for this task. Relations were selected randomly.
3) Rule-based Initialization: we used speciﬁc rules for initial estimation of tempo-
ral relation types and used this initial estimation for computing parameters of the model.
These rules were the combination of the so-called GTag rules (Mani et al., 2006), VerbO-
cean (Chklovski & Pantel, 2005), and rules derived from certain signal words (e.g., “on”,
“during”, “when”, and “if”) of the text. GTag contains 187 syntactic and lexical rules for
inferring and labeling temporal relations between event, document time, and time expres-
sions. Out of these rules, 169 are between event pairs, which were utilized in EMTRL.
These 169 rules are either between event pairs of the same sentence or between two main
events of two consecutive sentences. An example of a GTag rule is shown below; other rules
are accessible from the Blinker part of the TARSQI toolkit5.
if conjBetweenEvents = Y ES &&
isTheSameSentence = TRUE &&
event1.class = (OCCURRENCE|PERCEPTION|ASPECTUAL|I ACTION) &&
event2.class = STATE &&
event1.tense = PAST &&
event2.tense = PAST &&
event1.aspect = NONE &&
event2.aspect = PERFECT &&
event1.pos = V ERB &&
event2.pos = V ERB
5. Available at http://www.timeml.org/site/tarsqi/index.html
151

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
Then
relation(event1, event2) = AFTER
VerbOcean contains lexical rules between two verbs, which can be mined using some
lexical and syntactic patterns. The relation between verb pairs can be one of diﬀerent se-
mantic relations such as strength, enablement, antonymy, similarity, and happens-before.
We extracted 4, 205 happens-before rules from VerbOcean. Two examples of these rules are
shown below:
announce [happens-before] postpone :: 12.844086
review [happens-before] recommend :: 9.049530
Each rule contains two verbs, their relation, and the strength value of the relationship.
For example, the second rule shows relation happens-before between “review” and “recom-
mend” with strength of 9.049530. We also designed 23 other rules based on some signal
words such as “before”, “on”, “when”. These rules are in the GTag format. An example of
this group of rules is given below:
if isTheSameSentence = True &&
signal = before &&
signalBetweenTwoEvents = True
Then
relation(event1, event2) = before
Like many other statistical NLP tasks, smoothing is vital here to alleviate the problem of
data sparseness. In particular, in the ﬁrst few iterations, much more smoothing is required
than in later iterations. In our experiments, we used simply the add-1 smoothing technique
in computing equation 10.
6. Experimental Results of EMTRL
Like our experiments with BCDC, TimeBank and OTC were also used in the experiments
with EMTRL. However, in order to simplify the task, we used a diﬀerent normalized version
of these corpora, which contained only the three following temporal relations:
BEFORE
AFTER
OVERLAP
The main reason for this simpliﬁcation in EMTRL was that reducing the level of super-
vision in the task of temporal relation learning makes it an even more diﬃcult task, which
is itself already considered to be a hard one (Mani et al., 2006). To normalize these corpora
and reduce the number of relation types to three, we adopted the same normalization ap-
proach like some previous work (Bethard et al., 2007b), BEFORE and IBEFORE relations
were merged into only BEFORE relations. Similarly, the AFTER and IAFTER relations
should also be merged into AFTER relations. All the remaining ten relation types were
collapsed in OVERLAP relations. Table 10 shows the converted TLink class distribution
over TimeBank and OTC.
152

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
Relation Type
TimeBank Corpus
OTC Corpus
BEFORE
706
2369
AFTER
692
1073
OVERLAP
2083 (59.83 %)
2792 (44.79 %)
Total
3481
6234
Table 10: The converted TLink class distribution in TimeBank and OTC.
Beside TimeBank and OTC, the performance of EMTRL has been also evaluated on
tasks E and F of TempEval-2 corpus. The tasks and relations distribution are the same as
those shown in Table 5.
6.1 Results and Discussions
In our experiments, the baselines were the majority class of event pair relations in the
employed corpora (i.e., OV ERLAP in both corpora).
Note that the Mani’s method is
in fact supervised, which exclusively uses gold-standard features (Mani et al., 2007). The
Chambers’ method is similar to Mani’s, except that it also uses some external resources such
as WordNet (Chambers et al., 2007). Here, the result of our implementation of Mani and
Chambers methods are diﬀerent from their reported results, because, as it was explained
before, we only considered three temporal relation types while in their reported experiments,
there were six relation types.
In Table 11, in addition to the results of employing EMTRL with three diﬀerent initial-
izations, we have also reported the results of these initializations as stand-alone classiﬁers.
For Random Initialization and EMTRL + Random Initialization, a question that may arise
is how these methods can determine the label of diﬀerent classes. In fact, these methods
can only distinguish three diﬀerent classes (Class1, Class2, and Class3). Among diﬀer-
ent possible ways that these unlabeled classes can be mapped to BEFORE, AFTER, or
OV ERLAP, we choose the mapping in which the similarity between predicted and anno-
tated temporal relations is maximized.
Method Type
TimeBank Corpus
OTC Corpus
Baseline
59.83
44.79
Mani
61.55
60.58
Chambers
66.79
62.94
Random Initialization
35.99
37.29
EMTRL + Random Initialization
40.92
43.02
10% Supervised Initialization
39.33
41.14
EMTRL + 10% Supervised Initialization
48.31
49.34
Rule-based Initialization
38.92
41.03
EMTRL + Rule-based Initialization
47.86
48.78
Table 11: The accuracy results of diﬀerent methods on TimeBank and OTC.
153

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
Considering the unsupervised nature of EMTRL, the results of Table 11 can be encour-
aging. As it is shown in the table, TimeBank’s baseline is well above that of OTC. That
is because TimeBank is highly biased towards OVERLAP. Accordingly, it is more diﬃcult
for learning methods to pass the baseline of TimeBank. The performance of the Mani’s
method, which is a fully supervised approach, is only slightly over this baseline. In this
case, EMTRL’s accuracy is considerably below the baseline. However, in the case of OTC,
its performance has passed the baseline.
As it is shown in Table 11, EMTRL’s accuracy in all three diﬀerent initializations,
have been respectively superior to that of the stand-alone counterparts. The statistical
signiﬁcance of all those results in this table that shows the superiority of EMTRL over the
baseline (i.e., in the case of OTC) or the stand-alone initializations (i.e., both corpora) have
been veriﬁed by the stratiﬁed shuﬄing test with signiﬁcance level α = 0.05.
Table 11 shows that the best accuracy belongs to the Chambers’ method. However, it
should be noted that this method currently has the best-reported results over TimeBank
and OTC among all supervised temporal relation extraction methods.
Table 11 also shows that EMTRL + Randomized Initialization has not been eﬃcient in
either corpora. It may be due to the fact that randomized initialization in this very hard
problem causes some divergence in the probability distribution. On the other hand, two
other initializations have shown satisfactory results in tackling the problem. This implies
that initialization is a critical factor in EMTRL, and even little source of supervision can
be crucial for achieving satisfactory results.
Method Type
Task E
Task F
Baseline
49
33
NCSU-indi
48
66
TRIPS
58
59
Random Initialization
24.75
19.11
EMTRL + Random Initialization
27.92
22.33
10% Supervised Initialization
26.35
23.77
EMTRL + 10% Supervised Initialization
32.20
26.29
Rule-based Initialization
27.17
23.64
EMTRL+ Rule-based Initialization
32.76
27.03
Table 12: The accuracy results of diﬀerent methods on tasks E and F over TempEval-2
Corpus.
Table 12 shows the results of applying EMTRL to the corpus of TempEval 2010. In
comparison with the accuracy of kernels in Table 8, EMTRL could achieve encouraging
results. In this case, EMTRL’s accuracy in all three diﬀerent initializations, have also been
respectively superior to that of the stand-alone counterparts. TRIPS and NCSU-indi are
the most successful supervised systems in tasks E and F of TempEval 2010, respectively
(Verhagen et al., 2010).
154

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
6.2 Inconsistency Removal
Since in a pair-wise relation learning system, the relation between each pair of events is
predicted without considering its impact on the relations of other event pairs, system may
encounter some inconsistencies among predicted relations. This may happen after selecting
temporal relations by equation 9 in E-step. It can also happen in ﬁnding ﬁnal class labels
by equation 11. Figure 6 shows an example of an inconsistent relation between events A,
B, and C:
  
Event	
  A 
Event	
  
Event	
  C 
	
  A	
  	
  After	
  	
  B 
	
  A	
  	
  Before	
  C 
	
  B	
  After	
  C 
Figure 6: A contradiction in temporal relations between three events A, B, and C.
There are several ways of eliminating such inconsistencies (Mani et al., 2007; Tatu &
Srikanth, 2008; Chambers & Jurafsky, 2008).
In this work, we have used two diﬀerent
approaches: a greedy best-ﬁrst search strategy and an Integer Linear Programming (ILP)
based method. More details about both approaches are given next.
6.2.1 Greedy Best-First Search Strategy
In order to detect possible inconsistencies between predicted relations, we ﬁrst build a graph
for each text, where each node corresponds to an event, and an edge represents a temporal
relation between corresponding events. Then, any existing contradiction among connected
nodes of each graph can be discovered by applying a set of rules (i.e., 640 rules) based on
the Allen’s interval algebra (Allen, 1984). As an example, consider the following three rules:
• before(x, y) && before(y, z) −→before(x, z)
• after(x, y) && before(z, y) −→after(x, z)
• after(x, y) && includes(y, z) −→after(x, z)
The inconsistent relations of each graph is stored in a sorted list named SL, based on a
computed conﬁdence score (i.e., P(TCi j | ei ej) of equation 9). Thus, in SL, the ﬁrst and
the last elements are the most and the least conﬁdent relations, respectively.
The algorithm starts from the ﬁrst relation of SL, and pops oﬀthis relation and adds
it to another list named FL. After adding a new relation to FL, the algorithm veriﬁes the
consistency among relations of FL. If the new relation introduces an inconsistency, it will be
155

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
replaced by the next conﬁdent relation between its corresponding events. This replacement
may be repeated until that the new relation will be consistent with other relations existing
in FL. When there are no more contradictions in FL, the algorithm will move the next
element of SL to FL. These operations are iterated until there will remain no more relations
in SL. The resultant consistent relations in FL can then be used in subsequent M-step or
in the ﬁnal result of EM.
6.2.2 The Integer Linear Programming (ILP)
In our second approach, we cast the task of ﬁnding most probable temporal relations as an
optimization problem. In contrast with the previous method, this approach, which is based
on an integer linear programming (ILP) framework, ﬁnds an optimal solution based on the
parameters of the model, P(ei el
j | TCi j). This method is similar to that of Chambers and
Jurafsky (2008).
In this ILP framework, for each event pair (ei , ej), there is a relation type M from ei
to ej denoted by TRi j−M. The objective function of the framework is deﬁned as follows:
max
X
i
X
j > i
 X
M
(Pi j−M TRi j−M + Pj i−M TRj i−M)
!
(12)
where (Pi j−M (i.e., P(M | ei ej) of equation 8) is the probability of the temporal relation
of type M from ei to ej. This objective function maximizes the sum of probabilities of all
temporal relations between event pairs of the input text. There are also three following
constraints (i.e., 13, 14, 15) on this objective function:
∀i ∀j ∀M, i > j : TRi j−M, TRj i−M ∈{0, 1}
(13)
Constraint 13 implies that each TRi j−M variable is either zero or one.
∀i ∀j, i > j :
X
M
(TRi j−M + TRj i−M) = 1
(14)
Constraint 14 ensures that between each pair of events (ei and ej), only one TRi j−M
variable is set to one, and the rest are set to zero. In other words, it is impossible for a pair
of events to have two (or more) relations.
TRi j−M1 + TRj k−M2 −TRi k−M3 ≤1
(15)
Constraint 15 guarantees the transitivity conditions among event pairs, wherever rela-
tions TRi j−M1 and TRj k−M2 entail relation TRi k−M3. It is obvious that the transitivity
constraint is eﬀective only when the event pairs are connected to one another. In a discon-
nected graph, this constraint has little eﬀect. For example, in Figure 6, by considering this
constraint and relations TRA B−After and TRB C−After, TRA C−After is the only possible
relation between events A and C.
After generating the set of all constraints for each document, we can use an ILP solver
(SCIP6) to solve the problem. One important issue about ILP is that this technique is more
6. This ILP solver which is the fastest existing noncommercial mixed integer programming solver. Available
at http://scip.zib.de/
156

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
eﬀective on dense temporal graphs than in sparse ones.
After removing contradictions in the temporal relations, generated (consistent) relations
can be easily used in updating the probabilities of the model in the M-step. The results of
Tables 11 and 12 are without applying the greedy best-ﬁrst search or ILP. The accuracy
results with the greedy and ILP algorithms over TimeBank and OTC are shown in Table
13. Table 14 shows the accuracy results for tasks E and F over the corpus of TempEval
2010. One question that may arise is how we can enforce the transitivity constraints in EM,
when we have only labels Class1, Class2, and Class3, rather than BEFORE, AFTER, and
OVERLAP. This problem only happens for the case of EMTRL + Random Initialization,
for which we have used a prior assignment of Class1 = AFTER, Class2 = BEFORE,
and Class3 = OV ERLAP.
For the other two initializations (i.e., 10% Supervised and
Rule-base), this problem does not occur, because our algorithm starts with the actual class
labels BEFORE, AFTER, and OVERLAP.
Method Type
TimeBank
OTC
Base
Method
Greedy
ILP
Base
Method
Greedy
ILP
EMTRL + Random Ini-
tialization
40.92
41.09
41.03
43.02
42.94
43.00
EMTRL + 10% Supervised
Initialization
48.31
49.54
50.34
49.34
50.52
51.44
EMTRL + Rule-based Ini-
tialization
47.86
50.88
52.12
48.78
49.98
51.17
Table 13: The accuracy results of applying the greedy best-ﬁrst search strategy and ILP to
TimeBank and OTC.
Method Type
Task E
Task F
Base
Method
Greedy
ILP
Base
Method
Greedy
ILP
EMTRL + Random Ini-
tialization
27.92
28.03
28.04
22.33
22.32
22.30
EMTRL + 10% Supervised
Initialization
32.20
33.54
33.92
26.29
27.94
27.92
EMTRL + Rule-based Ini-
tialization
32.76
33.49
34.12
27.03
28.36
28.55
Table 14: The accuracy results of applying the greedy best-ﬁrst strategy and ILP to tasks
E and F of TempEval 2010.
157

Mirroshandel & Ghassem-Sani
Tables 13 and 14 show the impact of utilizing the greedy best ﬁrst search and ILP
approaches in EMTRL against the base method. By using these strategies, some of the
inconsistencies that may exist among predicted temporal relations, are removed (in step
E of EMTRL) to make the predicted relations more reliable. As a result, in step M, the
parameters of the model will be updated more accurately and thus the accuracy of the
whole algorithm will iteratively increase.
The signiﬁcance of the results depicted in Tables 13 and 14 have been veriﬁed by the
stratiﬁed shuﬄing with signiﬁcance level α = 0.05. As we had expected, the results of these
approaches on EMTRL + Random Initialization was not statistically signiﬁcant. On the
other hand, in majority of tests on EMTRL + 10% Supervised Initialization and EMTRL +
Rule-based Initialization, where we compared the output of the greedy and ILP algorithms
with that of base method, the statistical signiﬁcance of the results was veriﬁed.
7. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have addressed the problem of temporal relation learning between events,
which has been a topic of interest since early days of statistical natural language processing.
We have concentrated our eﬀorts to reduce the need to annotated corpora as much as
possible.
Accordingly, in this paper, two new algorithms, a weakly supervised and an
unsupervised, were presented.
The ﬁrst algorithm was a two-stage weakly supervised approach for classiﬁcation of
temporal relations. In the ﬁrst stage of the algorithm, a SVM based classiﬁer was trained
to learn temporal relations of the corpus. Then, in the second stage of the algorithm, a
cross-document bootstrapping technique was employed to iteratively improve the model
produced in the ﬁrst stage. By the idea of bootstrapping, which has been inspired by the
hypothesis that we have called “one type of temporal relation between events per discourse”,
for each test document, some global evidences from a cluster of topically related documents
reﬁned local decisions made by the initial model. The results of experiment with this new
technique showed a signiﬁcant improvement in terms of accuracy over related work including
the state-of-the-art of the statistical methods.
The second proposed algorithm was a novel model that used the EM algorithm with
interval algebra reasoning for temporal relation learning. We compared this work with some
of the successful fully supervised methods. Our experiments showed encouraging results,
considering the low level of supervision that was provided for the algorithm.
Currently, we are working on ﬁnding ways of further improvement of our algorithms, and
at the same time trying to reduce the supervision level. In BCDC, by extracting semantic
features from related documents, we may be able to improve its performance. Inconsistency
removal (i.e. ILP and greedy best ﬁrst search) algorithms can be also employed in BCDC.
Besides, employing the hypothesis of “one type of temporal relation between events per
discourse” as an explicit constraint can be other possible direction for further research.
In EMTRL, one can use other sources of information like narrative information, relations
between events and document times, and relations between events and time expressions
to build a denser temporal graph. This increases the eﬀectiveness of the greedy best ﬁrst
search and integer linear programming algorithms. We also think, but have not veriﬁed yet,
that using a richer feature set may further improve the accuracy of EMTRL.
158

Unsupervised Temporal Relation Learning between Events
