Improve Fidelity and Utility of Synthetic
Credit Card Transaction Time Series from
Data-centric Perspective
Din-Yin Hsieh∗, Chi-Hua Wang †, Guang Cheng‡
January 3, 2024
Abstract
Exploring generative model training for synthetic tabular data, specifically in se-
quential contexts such as credit card transaction data, presents significant challenges.
This paper addresses these challenges, focusing on attaining both high fidelity to actual
data and optimal utility for machine learning tasks. We introduce five pre-processing
schemas to enhance the training of the Conditional Probabilistic Auto-Regressive
Model (CPAR), demonstrating incremental improvements in the synthetic data’s fi-
delity and utility. Upon achieving satisfactory fidelity levels, our attention shifts to
training fraud detection models tailored for time-series data, evaluating the utility of
the synthetic data. Our findings offer valuable insights and practical guidelines for
synthetic data practitioners in the finance sector, transitioning from real to synthetic
datasets for training purposes, and illuminating broader methodologies for synthesizing
credit card transaction time series.
Key Words: Credit Card Transaction Data, Time Series Generative Model, Synthetic
Training Datasets, Fraud Detection, Data-centric Machine Learning..
1
Introduction
Synthetic Tabular Data is garnering increasing interest from the academic and industrial
sectors alike [13]. This surge in attention can be attributed to the capability of synthetic
data to foster innovation and aid in decision-making processes, all while adhering to contem-
porary privacy regulations such as GDPR [10] and CCPA [27]. The promising prospects of
accelerating and supporting the entire machine learning lifecycle make this area particularly

†Postdoctoral Scholar, Department of Statistics and Data Science, UCLA, CA, 90095.

1
arXiv:2401.00965v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2024

appealing. As a result, there is a growing impetus among machine learning researchers and
practitioners to delve into the advantages and limitations associated with utilizing synthetic
datasets [29, 9].
While synthetic tabular data offers substantial potential, its application is fraught with
challenges, particularly in handling sequential tabular data [33]. Despite its apparent simi-
larity to standard tabular data in terms of representation, sequential tabular data is unique
due to the existence of relationships between rows. These inter-row relationships arise from
the specific nature of the application used during data collection. Consider, for example,
health monitoring data: here, data points (or rows) are recorded at consistent time intervals,
resulting in a regular and predictable pattern conducive to statistical modeling [18, 32]. In
contrast, credit card transaction data presents a different scenario; the time intervals between
data points (transactions) are irregular, mirroring the sporadic nature of consumer spending.
Consequently, the regularity of data point recording emerges as a crucial consideration in
the development of models for synthetic sequential data.
In this study, we aim to offer insights on training generative models tailored for the credit
card transaction data synthesis, ensuring both high fidelity to real data and optimal utility
for machine learning applications. It’s important to note that credit card transaction data is
inherently multi-sequence, marked by its irregular measurement intervals [30]. Presently, the
CPAR (Conditional Probabilistic Auto-Regressive Model) [33] stands out in literature as a
quintessential multi-sequence generative model. CPAR model is available to researchers and
practitioners through the open-source Synthetic Data Vault (SDV) library [21] (for a detailed
understanding of the CPAR model, please refer to Section 3.2). Although the CPAR model
can handle both regular and irregular multi-sequence data, its synthetic output for credit
card transaction data still leaves room for enhancement in terms of real data fidelity and
machine learning utility. Our experiments shed light on the criticality of ”pre-processing” in
tabular data fields, which markedly influences the fidelity and utility of the synthesized credit
card transactions. Such discoveries emphasize the importance of thorough data preparation
to elevate the efficacy of generative models, especially when handling intricate datasets like
credit card transaction records.
We adopt a data-centric strategy to bolster the fidelity and utility of synthetic credit
card transaction data. Instead of tweaking the generative model to enhance the quality of
synthetic data, we place our primary emphasis on the preprocessing of raw tabular data.
This shift in focus aims to amplify both the fidelity and utility of the derived synthetic time
series. We propose five unique preprocessing schemas, each designed to iteratively enhance
the fidelity of the generated synthetic credit card data. After attaining a satisfactory fidelity
benchmark, we pivot our efforts toward training fraud detection models [5, 25, 19] specifically
tailored for time-series data. Three models — XGBoost [4], LGBM [14], and Catboost [8] —
were chosen and trained on data stemming from the most promising preprocessing schema.
Our exploration centers around the efficacy of these models, with a special focus on their
False Positive Rate (FPR) and False Negative Rate (FNR) in the fraud detection context
(for a detailed analysis, please see Section 4.3). Through this comprehensive approach, we
accentuate not just the pivotal role of preprocessing in the realm of synthetic time series
data generation, but also its broader ramifications for ensuing machine learning tasks, laying
a solid groundwork for ensuing investigations in this area.
Paper Organization. This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a review on
2

related keywords about synthetic credit card transaction data. Section 3 give comprehensive
details on how to preprocess the credit card dataset to train CPAR model for high-fidelity and
high-utility. Section 4 gives results on the fidelity evaluation of categorical variables (Section
4.1) and continuous variable (Section 4.2) and also utility evaluation of fraud detection model
performance (Section 4.3). Section 5 talks about our conclusion, new concerns and future
direction.
2
Relate Work
2.1
Synthetic Transactions Dataset
In recent years, the generation of synthetic data has emerged as a popular research direction
[2, 22, 28], primarily due to the increasing accessibility and ease of use of various tabular
synthesis models. These models encompass methodologies based on Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [31, 36, 35, 17, 34], Diffusion Models [16, 15], as well as Transformers
[12, 3, 26], all of which have achieved success across diverse domains of tabular data. Never-
theless, the synthesis of transactional data poses unique research challenges. Transactional
data inherently constitutes a time series, and the successful applications of synthetic data
models have predominantly been on tabular data lacking temporal stamps. This discrepancy
highlights the complexity and specificity required in handling time-series transactional data,
necessitating further investigation and innovation in this domain.
2.2
CPAR model
The Conditional Probabilistic Auto-Regressive, or the CPAR model [33] is the main model
that aims to capture sequential dependencies currently provided by the Synthetic Data Vault
(SDV) [21]. The model, which is based on neural network, achieves this by capturing inter-
row dependencies conditioned on the previous sequence history, and then outputting the
necessary parameters to synthesize the future entries. For training, this model also has 3
different loss functions, with each applied to 3 different types of data: continuous numerical,
discrete numerical, and categorical.
2.3
Credit Card Transaction Dataset
We use credit card transaction dataset provided in [2]. According to the offical documenta-
tion of Synthetic Data Vault (SDV), the CPAR model is suitable for multi-sequence data,
which fits our credit card transaction dataset where there exists multiple users, each with
their own transaction history. In addition, we were curious about CPAR’s ability to gen-
erate high fidelity synthetic data given columns that have continuous numerical data, as
well as columns that have high cardinality. Furthermore, the existence of the Is Fraud?
column gave us the ability to generate synthetic data to train machine learning models for
downstream tasks such as fraud detection. Overall, we believe that this dataset is great for
both assessing the quality of the CPAR model, as well as the machine learning efficacy of
synthetic dataset for downstream tasks.
3

Figure 1: Metadata Data Type of Original Credit Card Transaction Dataset. S(i)
j
denotes
the ith user’s jth row.
3
Approach and Evaluation Framework
This section gives comprehensive details on the credit card transaction dataset (Sec. 3.1),
training CPAR model (Sec. 3.2), how to preprocess the credit card transaction dataset (Sec.
3.3) and how to train the fraud detection model with synthetic data (Sec. 3.4).
3.1
Basic of Credit Card Transaction Dataset
Figure 1 gives the full table of the Credit Card Transaction Dataset. The figure, containing
3 parts, shows an overview of the original dataset and its columns, as well as what types
of data they are considered under the CPAR framework. In part 1, the figure shows that
for columns User, Card, Use Chip, MCC, and Errors?, the CPAR framework considers them
as categorical data columns. The Amount column, on the other hand, is considered as a
continuous numerical data column.
In part 2, the figure shows that the columns Year, Month, Day, and Time are not consid-
ered as any of the 3 data types (continuous numerical, discrete numerical, or categorical).
Rather, they are considered as ’datetime’, which are used to set the sequence index under
the metadata of the CPAR model.
In part 3, the figure shows that the columns Merchant Name, Merchant City, Merchant
State, and Zip are considered as categorical data columns. Note this is still the case when
data in Merchant Name are of type ’integer’, as the original dataset follows the same form
for this column. This also applies for the Zip column, where all zip codes are displayed as
4

’float’. In the synthesis of the original data (except for schema 1), we transform the data
in these 4 columns into ’string’ and consider them as categorical columns when training the
CPAR model.
3.2
CPAR Basic
To train the CPAR model on a dataset of credit card transactions, we categorize the loss
functions according to the data type of the variables involved: continuous numerical and
categorical.
Continuous Numerical Data: Consider the parameters µ = π(i)
(t,µ), σ = π(i)
(t,σ), and
m = π(i)
(t,m), where i represents the sequence number (or user), and t denotes the transac-
tion index for a given user. The loss function L(x; µ, σ, m) is defined as: L(x; µ, σ, m) =
−(log (fµ,σ2(x)) + log(1 −m)) : x is not missing; L(x; µ, σ, m) = −log(m) : x is missing.
Here, µ and σ2 represent the mean and variance of a Gaussian distribution, and m indicates
the probability of the value being missing. In our case, the credit card transaction dataset
contains a continuous numerical column, Amount, parameterized by: π(i)
(t,µ), π(i)
(t,σ), π(i)
(t,m) where
i ∈{0, 1, 2}, t ∈{2540, 2676, 2630}, and m ∈{0, 0, 0} corresponding to users 214, 882, and
1798 respectively.
Categorical Data:For categorical data, the loss function is defined as:
L(x; π0, π1, . . . , πN−1) = −
X
j∈N
xj log(πj)
where N is the number of categories, πj represents the proportion of category j in the dataset,
and xj is a binary indicator, equal to 1 if the instance belongs to category j and 0 otherwise.
In our dataset, the following columns are treated as categorical: Card, Use Chip, Merchant
Name, Merchant City, Merchant State, Zip, MCC, Errors?, and Is Fraud?. Their parame-
ters are denoted as π(i)
(t,j), with the index sets being: i ∈{0, 1, 2}, t ∈{2540, 2676, 2630}, j = 0
and the category counts, N, detailed as follows:
1. Card: N = 1,
2. Use Chip: N ∈{2, 3, 3},
3. Merchant Name: N ∈{185, 151, 231},
4. Merchant City: N ∈{68, 78, 115},
5. Merchant State: N ∈{20, 23, 29} (excluding NaN),
6. Zip: N ∈{87, 86, 134} (excluding NaN),
7. MCC: N ∈{63, 62, 73},
8. Errors?: N ∈{5, 4, 2} (excluding NaN),
9. Is Fraud?: N = 2.
5

Algorithm 1 One training epoch
Loss : L, Neural Network : NN
for each sequence S(i) do
C(i) ←Context(S(i))
for each step S(i)
t
in S(i) do
π(i)
t
←NN(C(i), S(i)
0 , . . . , S(i)
t−1)
L += L(S(i)
t ; π(i)
t )
end for
end for
NN ←min(L, NN)
Overall Loss Function. With the individual loss functions specified, the overall loss
for the model is calculated as:
L =
X
i
X
t
k−1
X
j=0
L

S(i)
t , π(i)
t,j

(1)
where k represents the total number of variables.
Training Epoch. A training epoch for our model, outlined in Algorithm 1, involves
iterating over the sequences and time steps, updating the model parameters, and calculating
the loss at each step.
For Algorithm 1, the loss function L is defined as (1), and the neural network is built with
4 layers: a GRU layer in between 2 dense layers, alongside with a final layer with different
activation functions depending on the column data type. For more details, see section 3.1.2
of [33].
Next, for each sequence S(i), the constant input Context is assigned to the variable C(i).
Then, for each row S(i)
t , C(i) and all S(i)
0 , . . . , S(i)
t−1 are inputted into the neural network to
output parameters π(i)
(t,0), π(i)
(t,1), . . . . The training loss are then calculated from the parameters
and added to the total loss. Finally, the loss function for the neural network is then minimized
and outputted. For more details, see section 3.1 of [33].
3.3
Preprocessing Credit Card Transaction Dataset
We present a variety of preprocessing schemas to generate synthetic credit card transaction
datasets via the CPAR model, each introducing unique modifications for comprehensive
analysis. The initial dataset and metadata configurations serve as the foundation for each
schema.
Schema 1: Minimal CPAR Requirements. To meet the minimum requirements
for running the CPAR model, we focus on three users and transform the dataset as follows:
combine Year, Month, Day, and Time into a single Pandas datetime column; convert Amount
to a numerical format, removing the $ sign; replace NaNs in Zip with ’not applicable’ for
non-U.S. zip codes, converting valid zips to ’string’; change NaNs in Errors? to ’none’, indi-
cating error-free transactions; adjust Merchant Name to string, and Is Fraud? to boolean.
6

Figure 2: Differences of Columns between Schemas
With metadata from the preprocessed data, we apply CPAR (parameters: epochs = 1024,
context columns = []) to generate the initial synthetic dataset.
Schema 2: Handling Location and Avoiding Non-Existent Entries. Building on
the previous schema, we integrate Merchant Name, Merchant City, Merchant State, and
Zip into a single ’string’ data type Location column to prevent the creation of non-existent
locations, a common issue in Schema 1 due to possible shifts in these four columns. With
updated metadata marking Location as ’categorical’, we proceed to generate the second
synthetic dataset using the same CPAR parameters.
Schema 3: Enhancing Machine Learning Efficacy through Categorical Encod-
ing. Building upon prior schemas, we apply Scikit-Learn’s Label Encoder to categorical
columns (Use Chip, MCC, Errors?, Location, and Is Fraud?), maintaining their ’string’
data types and unchanged metadata. This strategy ensures CPAR’s accurate recognition of
these as categorical, avoiding the potential generation of out-of-category values in the case
of ’integer’ data types. Post-encoding, we generate the third synthetic dataset and revert
the columns to their original states using the trained encoders.
Schema 4: Addressing Non-Gaussianity with Quantile Transformation. Ex-
tending previous steps, Schema 4 employs quantile encoding for the Amount column, trans-
forming its values logarithmically into 10 bins, following [20].
Post-transformation, this
column is converted to ’string’ to generate the fourth synthetic dataset, before undergoing
an inverse transformation to revert changes.
Schema 5:
Mitigating Non-Gaussianity with Cubic Root Transformation.
7

Building on Schema 3, this final schema standardizes the Amount column to zero mean
and unit variance, followed by a cubic root transformation. This prepares the data for the
fifth synthetic dataset generation, after which all transformations and scalings are reversed
to preserve data integrity.
Each schema enhances the dataset’s structure and content, facilitating a thorough anal-
ysis through the CPAR model.
3.4
Training Fraud Detection Model
This subsection outlines the process of training a fraud detection model, detailing each step
from data preparation to performance evaluation.
• Step 1: Synthetic Data Generation. Utilizing schema 5, we generate synthetic
datasets for 3 users with lengths determined by the CPAR model, choosing the first
dataset for our machine learning efficacy experiment.
• Step 2: Data Categorization. We partition the datasets into fraud and non-fraud
samples, subsequently using CPAR to create a synthetic dataset comprising 15,000
fraud transactions.
• Step 3: Dataset Preparation. Five datasets, each with 10,000 samples and varying
fraud-to-non-fraud ratios (1%, 5%, 10%, 20%, and 50%), are prepared.
The Time
column is dropped, and a time diff column is added to indicate the time since the
last event in minutes, initialized to 0 for the first transaction of each user.
• Step 4: Model Training. We train models using the prepared datasets, employing
metadata from 3.1, context = [], and setting epochs to 1024.
• Step 5: Performance Evaluation. Model performance is assessed by comparing
accuracy (False Positive Rate and False Negative Rate) across the five datasets using
original data as ground truth.
Through these steps, we conduct a thorough evaluation of our fraud detection models,
ensuring that they are well-suited to handle the complexities and challenges of identifying
fraudulent activities in transactional data. The use of synthetic data, coupled with careful
data preparation and categorization, ensures that our models are trained on relevant and
representative data, providing a solid foundation for accurate and reliable fraud detection.
Training on original and encoded data. For measuring machine learning efficacy,
not only did we trained with untransformed data, but also did we consider encoded data.
We label encoded every categorical column in the synthetic datasets and added identical
time diff column to the datasets.
Then, we proceeded to train new machine learning
models with these synethetic datasets, and compared the performance of machine learning
models trained on encoded and un-encoded data.
Fraud Detection Model Class. To conduct a comprehensive efficacy analysis, we have
implemented three distinct fraud detection models, each designed to handle varying fraud-
to-non-fraud ratios. These models are selected for their unique strengths and capabilities in
tackling different aspects of fraud detection, ensuring a robust and versatile evaluation.
8

(I) Categorical Boosting (Catboost) [8] CatBoost is a powerful algorithm renowned
for its proficiency in managing categorical features directly without necessitating preprocess-
ing, which can be a game changer in fraud detection where data is often diverse and complex.
In our setup, we specify the ’categorical feature indices’ parameter to ensure that the model
accurately recognizes and utilizes the categorical data within the dataset. We follow a stan-
dard 80%-20% train-test split to assess the model’s performance and prevent overfitting. In
terms of hyperparameters, we have settled on 500 iterations, a learning rate of 0.01, and a
tree depth of 5, ensuring a balanced trade-off between model complexity and training effi-
ciency. The ’Logloss’ loss function is employed to optimize the model’s performance, and we
set a random seed of 200 to guarantee reproducibility in our results. The model’s effective-
ness is meticulously validated using the original dataset to ensure authenticity and reliability
in its fraud detection capabilities.
(II) Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) [4] XGBoost stands out for its scala-
bility and computational efficiency, which is paramount in fraud detection due to the high
volume of transactions that need to be analyzed promptly. We harness the power of the ’hist’
tree method in XGBoost, which is known for its faster computation times and efficient mem-
ory usage, coupled with its ability to handle categorical inputs seamlessly. After splitting
our data following the 80%-20% rule for training and testing, we configure the model with
hyperparameters akin to those used in CatBoost, albeit with ’binary logistic’ specified as
the objective function to tailor the model for binary classification tasks, which is a common
scenario in fraud detection. A different random seed is set to ensure diversity and robustness
in our results. As with the previous model, we use the original data to validate the model’s
performance, ensuring a thorough and accurate evaluation.
(III)Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM) [14] LGBM is renowned for its
efficiency and speed, making it an ideal candidate for fraud detection tasks that demand
quick and accurate results. It utilizes Gradient-Based Decision Trees (GBDT), Gradient-
based One-Side Sampling (GOSS), and Exclusive Feature Bundling (EFB) to enhance its
performance and efficiency. Following the standard practice, we split our dataset into 80%
training and 20% testing portions.
The model is then configured with 500 iterations, a
learning rate of 0.01, and a ’binary’ objective to align with the nature of fraud detection
tasks. The ’binary logloss’ metric is used to assess the model’s performance, ensuring a
precise evaluation. A random state of 100 is set for reproducibility. Similar to the other
models, we validate LGBM’s performance using the original dataset, ensuring a reliable and
accurate assessment of its fraud detection capabilities.
By leveraging the strengths of CatBoost, XGBoost, and LGBM, we aim to provide a
comprehensive analysis that addresses various challenges in fraud detection, ultimately con-
tributing to more secure and trustworthy financial transactions. Each model’s unique fea-
tures are meticulously harnessed to optimize their performance in fraud detection, providing
us with valuable insights and a robust evaluation of their effectiveness.
4
Evaluation Results
In this section, we give empirical evaluation on the fidelity and utility of resulting synthetic
credit car transaction time series. At section 4.1, we present fidelity evaluation on categor-
9

Figure 3: Marginal Distributions of columns
Is Fraud?, User, Use Chip, Errors?,
from original data set and Schema 1 to 5
Figure 4:
Marginal Distribution of Loca-
tion (first 50 entries) for Synthetic dataset,
Schema 5
ical variable (MCC Errors?, Users, Use Chip, Location, Is Fraud?). At section 4.2, we
present fidelity evaluation on continuous variable (Amount). At section 4.3, we present util-
ity evaluation on the fraud detection model trained on the synthetic credit card transaction
dataset.
4.1
Fidelity of Synthetic Categorical Variable
Figure 3, first plot: This plot shows 4 marginal distributions of low-cardinal categorical
columns (Is Fraud?, User, Use Chip, Errors?). Specifically, the plots display the counts
of each category across the original dataset and all synthetic dataset generated from each
schema.
We also note that the column Card is not included, as it remains a constant
for all datasets.
The first plot in figure 3 indicates that for columns Is Fraud?, User,
and Errors?, the differences in marginal distributions between the ground truth and all 5
datasets generated from each schema are minimal. For column Use Chip, however, the plot
indicates that datasets generated from schema 1, 2, 3, and 4 (colors orange, green, red, and
purple, respectively) are visibly farther from the original dataset (blue) than the dataset
generated from schema 5 (brown). Thus, most synthetic datasets closely match the
original, except for ”Use Chip”.
Figure 4, first plot: For the marginal distribution of Location, we first sort the count
of unique locations in the original dataset in descending order, then plot out the first 50
comparisons with the mean count across all 20 Schema 5.
The second plot in figure 2
indicates that for locations that have higher counts in the original dataset, there exists
some discrepancies between the original dataset and the dataset generated from schema 5.
Moving to the right of the plot where locations have lower counts, the discrepancies starts
to decrease, and the distribution is more similar. Thus, we found discrepancies between
10

Figure 5: Amount Distribution for Original Dataset vs Synthetic Datasets Generated From
Schema 3, 4, and 5
original and schema 5 datasets decrease for lower-count locations.
Figure 4, second plot: For the marginal distribution of MCC, we also sort the count
of unique MCC in the original dataset in descending order. Then, we plot out the first
25 comparisons with the mean count across all 20 Schema 5.
The third plot in figure
2 indicates that the marginal distribution of MCC between the original dataset and the
dataset generated from schema 5 are really close to each other. Thus, we found The MCC
distribution in Schema 5 closely matches the original.
4.2
Fidelity of Synthetic Continuous Variable
Figure 5 gives the fidelity evaluation result for the continuous variable in the credit card
transaction dataset. The figure indicates that dataset generated from schema 3 (before data
transformation, in orange), shows a shifted Gaussian distribution, which is accurate from
the description of the CPAR model. The dataset generated from schema 4 (green) shows
multiple long and thin bars as a result of transaction amount quantization. The dataset
generated from schema 5 (red) shows a distribution that is really close with the marginal
distribution of the transaction amounts in the original dataset.
The plot indicates that
between the 3 datasets generated from schema 3, 4, and 5, schema 5 is the closest to the
original data by a large margin. Thus, we found Schema 5 closely matches the original
transaction amount distribution.
11

Figure 6: False Negative Rate (Left) and False Positive Rate (Right) for Fraud Detection
Result of Catboost, XGBoost and LGBM.
4.3
Utility of Synthetic Data trained Fraud Detection model
Figure 6 gives a utility evaluation of synthetic data trained fraud detection model. Note that
since the original dataset is highly imbalanced (0.4206% fraud transactions and 99.5794%
non-fraud transactions), monitoring the false positive and false negative rate is highly im-
portant, as high accuracy does not imply low false positive or false negative rates.
The left figure indicates that for the false negative rate across all 3 machine learning
models, Catboost and LGBM have the best resutls, with Catboost reaching and LGBM
reaching 3.0303% in mean false negative rate across training on 20 different seeds (essentially
only missing 1 out of 33 fraud transactions) at 20% and 50% fraud to non-fraud ratio. While
LGBM suffers from higher uncertainty, we note that training speed of LGBM is way faster
than the training speed of Catboost. On the other hand, XGBoost fails to deliver great result,
with a mean of almost 100% across all fraud to non-fraud ratios. This might be caused by
the lack of support of categorical features in the library (the support for categorical features
is currently still in experimentation). Thus, we found Catboost and LGBM outperform
XGBoost in false negative rate.
The right figure indicates that for the log base 10 of the false positive rate across all 3
machine learning models, the false positive rate of Catboost continues to decrease (at last
to ¡0.0001%) as fraud to non-fraud ratio increases, while LGBM encounters a great leap in
false positive ratio when moving from 20% fraud to non-fraud ratio to 50% fraud to non-
fraud ratio. XGBoost, on the other hand, maintains a high false positive rate throughout all
the different fraud to non-fraud ratios. Thus, we found Catboost outperform LGBM and
XGBoost in false positive rate.
Lastly, note that the previous models are trained from decoded data, meaning that they
are similar to that of the original data. We also trained our models using encoded Dataset:
Schema 5 and validated on encoded original data, which is the same encoded schemas as
Dataset: Schema 3 and 5. The results we discovered is that for mean false negative rate
across all fraud to non-fraud ratios, all models remain robust (cite appendix). For mean false
positive rate, on the other hand, both XGBoost and Catboost remain robust, while Light-
12

GBM appears to be sensitive to label encoding.Thus, we found Light-GBM is sensitive to
label encoding, while XGBoost and Catboost remain robust.
5
Conclusion
We evaluate the fidelity and utility of synthetic data generated from the application of the
CPAR model to a real-world Credit Card Transaction dataset. By employing Schema 5 for
preprocessing the original dataset, we ensure that the distribution of both categorical and
continuous variables is well-preserved in the synthesized time-series data. Based on Schema 5,
we generate synthetic data to train three representative fraud detection models (Catboost,
XGBoost, LGBM), further investigating the utility of the synthetic data as training material
for machine learning. Utilizing the synthetic data allows us to increase the proportion of
fraud cases in our training dataset, leading to near-zero False Positive and False Negative
Rates for Catboost and LGBM. From the insights gained in this study, we posit that, given
the appropriate preprocessing schema, synthetic data can indeed serve as a high-
fidelity copy of the original data, enhancing the performance of fraud detection
by generating additional fraud case data.
13
