arXiv:1104.2541v1  [cs.AI]  13 Apr 2011
Kernels for Global Constraints∗
Serge Gaspers
Stefan Szeider
Vienna University of Technology
Vienna, Austria

Abstract
Bessière et al. (AAAI’08) showed that several intractable global constraints can be eﬃciently
propagated when certain natural problem parameters are small. In particular, the complete
propagation of a global constraint is ﬁxed-parameter tractable in k – the number of holes in
domains – whenever bound consistency can be enforced in polynomial time; this applies to the
global constraints AtMost-NValue and Extended Global Cardinality (EGC).
In this paper we extend this line of research and introduce the concept of reduction to a
problem kernel, a key concept of parameterized complexity, to the ﬁeld of global constraints.
In particular, we show that the consistency problem for AtMost-NValue constraints admits
a linear time reduction to an equivalent instance on O(k2) variables and domain values. This
small kernel can be used to speed up the complete propagation of NValue constraints. We
contrast this result by showing that the consistency problem for EGC constraints does not
admit a reduction to a polynomial problem kernel unless the polynomial hierarchy collapses.
1
Introduction
Constraint programming (CP) oﬀers a powerful framework for eﬃcient modeling and solving of a
wide range of hard problems [Rossi et al., 2006]. At the heart of eﬃcient CP solvers are so-called
global constraints that specify patterns that frequently occur in real-world problems.
Eﬃcient
propagation algorithms for global constraints help speed up the solver signiﬁcantly [van Hoeve and
Katriel, 2006]. For instance, a frequently occurring pattern is that we require that certain variables
must all take diﬀerent values (e.g., activities requiring the same resource must all be assigned dif-
ferent times). Therefore most constraint solvers provide a global AllDifferent constraint and
algorithms for its propagation. Unfortunately, for several important global constraints a complete
propagation is NP-hard, and one switches therefore to incomplete propagation such as bound consis-
tency [Bessière et al., 2004]. In their AAAI’08 paper, Bessière et al. [2008] showed that a complete
propagation of several intractable constraints can eﬃciently be done as long as certain natural
problem parameters are small, i.e., the propagation is ﬁxed-parameter tractable [Downey and Fel-
lows, 1999]. Among others, they showed ﬁxed-parameter tractability of the AtLeast-NValue and
Extended Global Cardinality (EGC) constraints parameterized by the number of “holes” in
the domains of the variables. If there are no holes, then all domains are intervals and complete
propagation is polynomial by classical results; thus the number of holes provides a way of scaling
up the nice properties of constraints with interval domains.
∗Research funded by the ERC (COMPLEX REASON, 239962).
1

In this paper we bring this approach a signiﬁcant step forward, picking up a long-term research
objective suggested by Bessière et al. [2008] in their concluding remarks: whether intractable global
constraints admit a reduction to a problem kernel or kernelization.
Kernelization is an important algorithmic technique that has become the subject of a very
active ﬁeld in state-of-the-art combinatorial optimization (see, e.g., the references in [Fellows, 2006;
Guo and Niedermeier, 2007; Rosamond, 2010]). Kernelization can be seen as a preprocessing with
performance guarantee that reduces a problem instance in polynomial time to an equivalent instance,
the kernel, whose size is a function of the parameter [Fellows, 2006; Guo and Niedermeier, 2007;
Fomin, 2010].
Once a kernel is obtained, the time required to solve the instance is a function of the parameter
only and therefore independent of the input size. Consequently one aims at kernels that are as
small as possible; the kernel size provides a performance guarantee for the preprocessing. Some
NP-hard combinatorial problems such as k-Vertex Cover admit polynomially sized kernels, for
others such as k-Path an exponential kernel is the best one can hope for [Bodlaender et al., 2009a].
Kernelization ﬁts perfectly into the context of CP where preprocessing and data reduction
(e.g., in terms of local consistency algorithms, propagation, and domain ﬁltering) are key methods
[Bessière, 2006; van Hoeve and Katriel, 2006].
Results
Do the global constraints AtMost-NValue and EGC admit polynomial kernels? We
show that the answer is “yes” for the former and “no” for the latter.
More speciﬁcally, we present a linear time preprocessing algorithm that reduces an AtMost-
NValue constraint C with k holes to a consistency-equivalent AtMost-NValue constraint C′
of size polynomial in k. In fact, C′ has at most O(k2) variables and O(k2) domain values. We
also give an improved branching algorithm checking the consistency of C′ in time O(1.6181k).
The combination of kernelization and branching yields eﬃcient algorithms for the consistency and
propagation of (AtMost-)NValue constraints.
On the other hand, we show that a similar result is unlikely for the EGC constraint: One
cannot reduce an EGC constraint C with k holes in polynomial time to a consistency-equivalent
EGC constraint C′ of size polynomial in k.
This result is subject to the complexity theoretic
assumption that NP ̸⊆coNP/poly whose failure implies the collapse of the Polynomial Hierarchy
to its third level, which is considered highly unlikely by complexity theorists.
2
Formal Background
Parameterized Complexity
A parameterized problem P is a subset of Σ∗× N for some ﬁnite
alphabet Σ. For a problem instance (x, k) ∈Σ∗×N we call x the main part and k the parameter. A
parameterized problem P is ﬁxed-parameter tractable (FPT) if a given instance (x, k) can be solved
in time O(f(k) · p(|x|)) where f is an arbitrary computable function of k and p is a polynomial in
the input size |x|.
Kernels
A kernelization for a parameterized problem P ⊆Σ∗× N is an algorithm that, given
(x, k) ∈Σ∗×N, outputs in time polynomial in |x|+k a pair (x′, k′) ∈Σ∗×N such that (i) (x, k) ∈P
if and only if (x′, k′) ∈P and (ii) |x′|+k′ ≤g(k), where g is an arbitrary computable function. The
function g is referred to as the size of the kernel. If g is a polynomial then we say that P admits a
polynomial kernel.
Global Constraints
An instance of the constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) consists of a set
of variables, each with a ﬁnite domain of values, and a set of constraints specifying allowed combi-
nations of values for some subset of variables. We denote by dom(x) the domain of a variable x and
2

by scope(C) the subset of variables involved in a constraint C. An instantiation is an assignment α
of values to variables such that α(x) ∈dom(x) for each variable x ∈scope(C). A constraint can be
speciﬁed extensionally by listing all legal instantiations of its variables or intensionally, by giving
an expression involving the variables in the constraint scope [Smith, 2006]. Global constraints are
certain extensionally described constraints involving an arbitrary number of variables [van Hoeve
and Katriel, 2006]. For example, an instantiation is legal for an AllDifferent global constraint
C if it assigns pairwise diﬀerent values to the variables in scope(C).
Consistency
A global constraint C is consistent if there is a legal instantiation of its variables.
The constraint C is hyper arc consistent
(HAC) if for each variable x ∈scope(C) and each
value v ∈dom(x), there is a legal instantiation α such that α(x) = v (in that case we say that
C supports v for x). In the literature, HAC is also called domain consistent or generalized arc
consistent. The constraint C is bound consistent if when a variable x ∈scope(C) is assigned the
minimum or maximum value of its domain, there are compatible values between the minimum and
maximum domain value for all other variables in scope(C). The main algorithmic problems for a
global constraint C are the following: Consistency, to decide whether C is consistent, and Enforcing
HAC, to remove from all domains the values that are not supported by the respective variable.
It is clear that if HAC can be enforced in polynomial time for a constraint C, then the consistency
of C can also be decided in polynomial time (we just need to see if any domain became empty). The
reverse is true for constraints that satisfy a certain closure property (see [van Hoeve and Katriel,
2006]), which is the case for most constraints of practical use, and in particular for all constraints
considered below.
The same correspondence holds with respect to ﬁxed-parameter tractability.
Hence, we will focus mainly on Consistency.
3
NValue Constraints
The NValue constraint was introduced by Pachet and Roy [1999]. For a set of variables X and a
variable N, NValue(X, N) is consistent if there is an assignment α such that exactly α(N) diﬀerent
values are used for the variables in X. AllDifferent is the special case where dom(N) = {|X|}.
Beldiceanu [2001] and Bessière et al. [2006] decompose NValue constraints into two other global
constraints: AtMost-NValue and AtLeast-NValue, which require that at most N or at least
N values are used for the variables in X, respectively. The Consistency problem is NP-complete for
NValue and AtMost-NValue constraints, and polynomial time solvable for AtLeast-NValue
constraints.
For checking the consistency of an AtMost-NValue constraint C, we are given an instance
I consisting of a set of variables X = {x1, . . . , xn}, a totally ordered set of values D, a map
dom : X →2D assigning a non-empty domain dom(x) ⊆D to each variable x ∈X, and an integer
N.1 A hole in a subset D′ ⊆D is a couple (u, w) ∈D′ × D′, such that there is a v ∈D \ D′ with
u < v < w and there is no v′ ∈D′ with u < v′ < w. We denote the number of holes in the domain
of a variable x ∈X by #holes(x). The parameter of the consistency problem for AtMost-NValue
constraints is k = P
x∈X #holes(x). An interval I = [v1, v2] of a variable x is an inclusion-wise
maximal hole-free subset of its domain. Its left endpoint l(I) and right endpoint r(I) are the values
v1 and v2, respectively. Fig. 1 gives an example of an instance and its interval representation. We
assume that instances are given by a succinct description, in which the domain of a variable is given
by the left and right endpoint of each of its intervals. As the number of intervals of the instance
1If D is not part of the input (or is very large), we may construct D by sorting the set of all endpoints of intervals
in time O((n + k) log(n + k)). Since, w.l.o.g., a solution contains only endpoints of intervals, this step does not
compromise the correctness.
3

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
N = 6
x1
x3
x6
x9
x′
3
x13
x′
13
x2
x4
x7
x′
2
x12
x15
x8
x10
x11
x′
11
x5
x′
5
x14
Figure 1:
Interval representation of an AtMost-NValue instance I = (X, D, dom, N), with
X = {x1, . . . , x15}, N = 6, D = {1, . . . , 14}, and dom(x1) = {1, 2}, dom(x2) = {2, 3, 10}, etc.
I = (X, D, dom, N) is n + k, its size is |I| = O(n + |D| + k). In case dom is given by an extensive
list of the values in the domain of each variable, a succinct representation can be computed in linear
time.
A greedy algorithm by Beldiceanu [2001] checks the consistency of an AtMost-NValue con-
straint in linear time when all domains are intervals (i.e., k = 0). Further, Bessière et al. [2008] have
shown that Consistency (and Enforcing HAC) is FPT, parameterized by the number of holes, for
all constraints for which bound consistency can be enforced in polynomial time. A simple algorithm
for checking the consistency of AtMost-NValue goes over all instances obtained from restricting
the domain of each variable to one of its intervals, and executes the algorithm of [Beldiceanu, 2001]
for each of these 2k instances. The running time of this FPT algorithm is clearly bounded by
O(2k · |I|).
In the realm of parameterized complexity it is then natural to ask whether AtMost-NValue
has a polynomial kernel. In the next subsection, we give a linear time kernelization algorithm. We
then prove its correctness and that the size of the produced instance can be bounded by O(k2).
In Subsection 3.3, we give an FPT algorithm, which uses the kernelization algorithm, for checking
the consistency of an AtMost-NValue constraint in time O(1.6181kk2 + |I|). HAC can then be
enforced by applying this algorithm O(|D|) times.
3.1
Kernelization Algorithm
Let I = (X, D, dom, N) be an instance for the consistency problem for AtMost-NValue con-
straints. The algorithm is more intuitively described using the interval representation of the in-
stance.The friends of an interval I are the other intervals of I’s variable. An interval is optional
if it has at least one friend, and required otherwise. For a value v ∈D, let ivl(v) denote the set of
intervals containing v.
A solution for I is a subset S ⊆D of at most N values such that there exists an instantiation
assigning the values in S to the variables in X. The algorithm may detect for some value v ∈D, that,
if the problem has a solution, then it has a solution containing v. In this case, the algorithm selects
v, i.e., it removes all variables whose domain contains v, it removes v from D, and it decrements N
by one. The algorithm may detect for some value v ∈D, that, if the problem has a solution, then it
has a solution not containing v. In this case, the algorithm discards v, i.e., it removes v from every
domain and from D. (Note that no new holes are created with respect to D \ {v}.) The algorithm
may detect for some variable x, that every solution for (X \ {x}, D, dom|X\{x}, N) contains a value
from dom(x). In that case, it removes x.
The algorithm sorts the intervals by increasing right endpoint (ties are broken arbitrarily). Then,
it exhaustively applies the following three reduction rules.
4

4
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
N = 5
x3
x6
x9
x′
3
x13
x′
13
x4
x7
x12
x15
x10
x11
x′
11
x14
Figure 2:
Instance obtained from the instance of Fig. 1 by exhaustively applying rules Red-⊆,
Red-Dom, and Red-Unit.
Red-⊆: If there are two intervals I, I′ such that I′ ⊆I and I′ is required, then remove the variable
of I.
Red-Dom: If there are two values v, v′ ∈D such that ivl(v′) ⊆ivl(v), then discard v′.
Red-Unit: If |dom(x)| = 1 for some variable x, then select the value in dom(x).
In the example from Fig. 1, Red-⊆removes the variables x5 and x8 because x10 ⊆x′
5 and x7 ⊆x8,
Red-Dom removes the values 1 and 5, Red-Unit selects 2, which deletes variables x1 and x2, and
Red-Dom removes 3 from D. The resulting instance is depicted in Fig. 2.
After none of the previous rules apply, the algorithm scans the remaining intervals from left
to right (i.e., by increasing right endpoint). An interval that has already been scanned is either a
leader or a follower of a subset of leaders. Informally, for a leader L, if a solution contains r(L),
then there is a solution containing r(L) and the right endpoint of each of its followers.
The algorithm scans the ﬁrst intervals up to, and including, the ﬁrst required interval. All these
intervals become leaders.
The algorithm then continues scanning intervals one by one.
Let I be the interval that is
currently scanned and Ip be the last interval that was scanned. The active intervals are those that
have already been scanned and intersect Ip. A popular leader is a leader that is either active or has
at least one active follower.
• If I is optional, then I becomes a leader, the algorithm continues scanning intervals until
scanning a required interval; all these intervals become leaders.
• If I is required, then it becomes a follower of all popular leaders that do not intersect I and
that have no follower intersecting I. If all popular leaders have at least two followers, then set
N := N −1 and merge the second-last follower of each popular leader with the last follower
of the corresponding leader; i.e., for every popular leader, the right endpoint of its second-last
follower is set to the right endpoint of its last follower, and then the last follower of every
popular leader is removed.
After having scanned all the intervals, the algorithm exhaustively applies the reduction rules Red-
⊆, Red-Dom, and Red-Unit again.
In the example from Fig. 2, variable x6 is merged with x9, and x7 with x10. Red-Dom then
removes the values 7 and 8, resulting in the instance depicted in Fig. 3.
3.2
Correctness and Kernel Size
Let I′ = (X′, D′, dom′, N ′) be the instance resulting from applying one operation of the kerneliza-
tion algorithm to an instance I = (X, D, dom, N). An operation is an instruction which modiﬁes
5

4
6
9
10
11
12
13
14
N = 4
x3
x6
x′
3
x13
x′
13
x4
x7
x12
x15
x11
x′
11
x14
Figure 3: Kernelized instance.
the instance: Red-⊆, Red-Dom, Red-Unit, and merge. We show that there exists a solution S
for I if and only if there exists a solution S′ for I′. A solution is nice if each of its elements is the
right endpoint of some interval. Clearly, for every solution, a nice solution of the same size can be
obtained by shifting each value to the next right endpoint of an interval. Thus, when we construct
S′ from S (or vice-versa), we may assume that S is nice.
Reduction Rule Red-⊆is sound because a solution for I is a solution for I′ and vice-versa,
because any solution I′ contains a value v of I ⊆I′, as I is required. Reduction Rule Red-Dom
is correct because if v′ ∈S, then S′ := (S \ {v′}) ∪{v} is a solution for I′ and for I. Reduction
Rule Red-Unit is obviously correct (S = S′ ∪dom(x)).
After having applied these 3 reduction rules, observe that the ﬁrst interval is optional and
contains only one value. Suppose the algorithm has started scanning intervals. By construction,
the following properties apply to I′.
Property 1. A follower does not intersect any of its leaders.
Property 2. If I, I′ are two (distinct) followers of the same leader, then I and I′ do not intersect.
Before proving the correctness of the merge operation, let us ﬁrst show that the subset of leaders
of a follower is not empty.
Claim 1. Every interval that has been scanned is either a leader or a follower of at least one leader.
Proof. First, note that Red-Dom ensures that each domain value in D is the left endpoint of some
interval and the right endpoint of some interval. Let I be the interval that is currently scanned and
Ip be the previously scanned interval. If Ip or I is optional, then I becomes a leader. Suppose I and
Ip are required. We have that l(I) > l(Ip), otherwise I would have been removed by Red-⊆. By
Rule Red-Dom, there is some interval Iℓwith r(Iℓ) = l(Ip). If Iℓis a leader, I becomes a follower
of Iℓ; otherwise I becomes a follower of Iℓ’s leader.
The following two lemmas prove the correctness of the merge operation. Recall that I′ is an
instance obtained from I by one application of the merge operation.
Lemma 1. If S is a nice solution for I, then there exists a solution S′ for I′ with S′ ⊆S.
Proof. Consider the step where the kernelization algorithm applies the merge operation. At that
step, each popular leader has at least two followers and the algorithm merges the last two followers
of each popular leader and decrements N by one. The currently scanned interval is I. Let F2
denote the set of all intervals that are the second-last follower of a popular leader, and F1 the set
of all intervals that are the last follower of a popular leader before merging. Let M denote the set
of merged intervals. Clearly, every interval of F1 ∪F2 ∪M is required as all followers are required.
6

Claim 2. Every interval in F1 intersects l(I).
Proof. Let I1 ∈F1. By construction, r(I1) ∈I, as I becomes a follower of every popular leader
that has no follower intersecting I, and no follower has a right endpoint larger than r(I). Moreover,
l(I1) ≤l(I) as no follower is a strict subset of I by Red-⊆and the fact that all followers are
required.
Let I−be the interval of F2 with the largest right endpoint. Let L be a leader of I−. By construction
and Red-⊆, L is a leader of I as well and is thus popular. Let t1 ∈S ∩I be the smallest value of
S that intersects I and let t2 ∈S ∩I−be the largest value of S that intersects I−. By Property 2,
t2 < t1.
Claim 3. S contains no value t0 such that t2 < t0 < t1.
Proof. Suppose S contained such a value t0. As S is nice, t0 is the right endpoint of some interval
I0. As t2 is the rightmost value intersecting S and any interval in F2, I0 is not in F2. As I0 has
already been scanned, and was scanned after every interval in F2, I0 is in F1. However, by Claim
2, I0 intersects l(I). As no scanned interval has a larger right endpoint than I, t0 ∈S ∩I, which
contradicts the fact that t1 is the smallest value in S ∩I and that t0 < t1.
Claim 4. Suppose I1 ∈F1 and I2 ∈F2 are the last and second-last follower of a popular leader L′,
respectively. Let M12 ∈M denote the interval obtained from merging I2 with I1. If t2 ∈I2, then
t1 ∈M12.
Proof. For the sake of contradiction, assume t2 ∈I2, but t1 /∈M12. As t2 < t1, we have that
t1 > r(M12) = r(I1). But then S is not a solution as S ∩I1 = ∅by Claim 3 and the fact that
t2 < l(I1).
Claim 5. If I′ is an interval with t2 ∈I′, then I′ ∈F2 ∪F1.
Proof. First, suppose I′ is a leader. As every leader has at least two followers when I is scanned,
I′ has two followers whose left endpoint is larger than r(I′) ≥t2 (by Property 1) and smaller than
l(I) ≤t1 (by Red-⊆). Thus, at least one of them is included in the interval (t2, t1) by Property 2,
which contradicts S being a solution by Claim 3.
Similarly, if I′ is a follower of a popular leader, but not among the last two followers of any
popular leader, Claim 3 leads to a contradiction as well.
Finally, if I′ is a follower, but has no popular leader, then it is to the left of some popular leader,
and thus to the left of t2.
Consider the set T2 of intervals that intersect t2. By Claim 5, T2 ⊆F2 ∪F1. For every interval
I′ ∈T2 ∩F2, the corresponding merged interval of I′ intersects t1 by Claim 4. For every interval
I′ ∈T2 ∩F1, and every interval I′′ ∈F2 with which I′ is merged, S contains some value x ∈I′′
with x < t2. Thus, S′ := S \ {t2} is a solution for I′.
Lemma 2. If S′ is a nice solution for I′, then there exists a solution S for I with S′ ⊆S.
Proof. As in the previous proof, consider the step where the kernelization algorithm applies the
merge operation. The currently scanned interval is I. Let F2 and F1 denote the set of all intervals
that are the second-last and last follower of a popular leader before merging, respectively. Let M
denote the set of merged intervals.
By Claim 2 from the previous proof, every interval of M intersects l(I). On the other hand,
every interval of I′ whose right endpoint intersects I is in M, by construction. Thus, S′ contains
the right endpoint of some interval of M. Let t1 denote the smallest such value, and let I1 denote
7

the interval of I with r(I1) = t1 (due to Red-⊆, there is a unique such interval). Let I2 denote
the interval of I with the smallest right endpoint such that there is a leader L whose second-last
follower is I2 and whose last follower is I1, and let t2 := r(I2).
Claim 6. Let I′
1 ∈F1 and I′
2 ∈F2 be two intervals from I that are merged into one interval M ′
12
of I′. If t1 ∈M ′
12, then t2 ∈I′
2.
Proof. Suppose t1 ∈M ′
12 but t2 /∈I′
2. We consider two cases. In the ﬁst case, I′
2 ⊆(t2, l(I′
1)). But
then, I′
2 would have become a follower of L, which contradicts that I1 is the last follower of L. In
the second case, r(I′
2) < t2. But then, I1 is a follower of the same leader as I′
1, as l(I1) ≤l(I′
1), and
thus I1 = I′
1. By deﬁnition of I2, however, t2 = r(I2) ≤r(I′
2), a contradiction.
By the previous claim, a solution S for I is obtained from a solution S′ for I′ by setting S :=
S′ ∪{t2}.
After having scanned all the intervals, Reduction Rules Red-⊆, Red-Dom, and Red-Unit are
applied again, and we have already proved their correctness.
Thus, the kernelization algorithm returns an equivalent instance.
To bound the kernel size
by a polynomial in k, let I∗= (V ∗, D∗, dom∗, N ∗) be the instance resulting from applying the
kernelization algorithm to an instance I = (V, D, dom, N).
Property 3. I and I∗have at most 2k optional intervals.
Property 3 holds for I as every optional interval is adjacent to at least one hole and each hole
is adjacent to two optional intervals. It holds for I∗as the kernelization algorithm introduces no
holes.
Lemma 3. I∗has at most 4k leaders.
Proof. Consider the unique step of the algorithm that creates leaders.
An optional interval is
scanned, the algorithm continues scanning intervals until scanning a required interval, and all these
scanned intervals become leaders. As every interval is scanned only once, for every optional interval,
there are at most 2 leaders. By Property 3, the number of leaders is thus at most 4k.
Lemma 4. Every leader has at most 4k followers.
Proof. Consider all steps where a newly scanned interval becomes a follower, but is not merged with
another interval. In each of these steps, the popular leader Lr with the rightmost right endpoint
either
(a) has no follower and intersects I, or
(b) has no follower and does not intersect I, or
(c) has one follower and intersects I.
Now, let L be some leader and let us consider a period where no optional interval is scanned. Let us
bound the number of intervals that become followers of L during this period without being merged
with another interval. If the number of followers of L increases in Situation (a), it does not increase
in Situation (a) again during this period, as no other follower of L may intersect I. After Situation
(b) occurs, Situation (b) does not occur again during this period, as I becomes a follower of Lr.
Moreover, the number of followers of L does not increase during this period in Situation (c) after
Situation (b) has occurred, as no other follower of L may intersect I. After Situation (c) occurs,
the number of followers of L does not increase in Situation (c) again during this period, as no other
8

follower of L may intersect I. Thus, at most 2 followers are added to L in each period. As the ﬁrst
scanned interval is optional, Property 3 bounds the number of periods by 2k. Thus, L has at most
4k followers.
As, by Claim 1, every interval of I∗is either a leader or a follower of at least one leader, Lemmas
3 and 4 imply that I∗has O(k2) intervals, and thus |X∗| = O(k2). Because of Reduction Rule
Red-Dom, every value in D∗is the right endpoint and the left endpoint of some interval, and thus,
|D∗| = O(k2).
Using a counting sort algorithm with satellite data (see, e.g., [Cormen et al., 2009]), the initial
sorting of the n + k intervals can be done in time O(n + |D| + k). To facilitate the application
of Red-⊆, counting sort is actually used twice to also sort by increasing left endpoint the sets of
intervals with coinciding right endpoint. An optimized implementation applies Red-⊆, Red-Dom
and Red-Unit simultaneously in one pass through the intervals, as one rule might trigger the
other. To guarantee a linear running time for the scan-and-merge phase of the algorithm, only the
ﬁrst follower of a leader stores a pointer to the leader; all other followers store a pointer to the
previous follower. Due to space limitations, we omit the formal details about the implementation
and running time analysis of the kernelization algorithm. We arrive at our main theorem.
Theorem 1. The Consistency problem for AtMost-NValue constraints, parameterized by the
number k of holes, admits a linear time reduction to a problem kernel with O(k2) variables and
O(k2) domain values.
Using the succinct description of the domains, the size of the kernel can be bounded by O(k2).
Remark: Denoting var(v) = {x ∈X : v ∈dom(x)}, Rule Red-Dom can be generalized to discard
any v′ ∈D for which there exists a v ∈D such that var(v′) ⊆var(v) at the expense of a higher
running time.
3.3
Improved FPT Algorithm and HAC
Using the kernel from Theorem 1 and the simple algorithm described in the beginning of this section,
one arrives at a O(2kk2 + |I|) time algorithm for checking the consistency of an AtMost-NValue
constraint. Borrowing ideas from the kernelization algorithm, we now reduce the exponential depen-
dency on k in the running time. The speed-ups due to this branching algorithm and the kernelization
algorithm lead to a speed-up for enforcing HAC for AtMost-NValue constraints (by Corollary 1)
and for enforcing HAC for NValue constraints (by the decomposition of [Bessière et al., 2006]).
Theorem 2. The Consistency problem for AtMost-NValue constraints admits a O(ρkk2 + |I|)
time algorithm, where k is the number of holes in the domains of the input instance I, and ρ =
1+
√
5
2
< 1.6181.
Proof. The ﬁrst step of the algorithm invokes the kernelization algorithm and obtains an equivalent
instance I′ with O(k2) intervals in time O(|I|).
Now, we describe a branching algorithm checking the consistency of I′. Let I1 denote the ﬁrst
interval of I′ (in the ordering by increasing right endpoint). I1 is optional. Let I1 denote the
instance obtained from I′ by selecting r(I1) and exhaustively applying Reduction Rules Red-Dom
and Red-Unit. Let I2 denote the instance obtained from I′ by removing I1 (if I1 had exactly one
friend, this friend becomes required) and exhaustively applying Reduction Rules Red-Dom and
Red-Unit. Clearly, I′ is consistent if and only if I1 or I2 is consistent.
Note that both I1 and I2 have at most k −1 holes. If either I1 or I2 has at most k −2 holes,
the algorithm recursively checks whether at least one of I1 and I2 is consistent. If both I1 and I2
have exactly k −1 holes, we note that in I′,
9

(1) I1 has one friend,
(2) no other optional interval intersects I1, and
(3) the ﬁrst interval of both I1 and I2 is If, which is the third optional interval in I′ if the second
optional interval is the friend of I1, and the second optional interval otherwise.
Thus, the instance obtained from I1 by removing I1’s friend and applying Red-Dom and Red-
Unit may diﬀer from I2 only in N.
Let s1 and s2 denote the number of values smaller than
r(If) that have been selected to obtain I1 and I2 from I′, respectively. If s1 ≤s2, then the non-
consistency of I1 implies the non-consistency of I2. Thus, the algorithm need only recursively check
whether I1 is consistent. On the other hand, if s1 > s2, then the non-consistency of I2 implies the
non-consistency of I1. Thus, the algorithm need only recursively check whether I2 is consistent.
The recursive calls of the algorithm may be represented by a search tree labeled with the number
of holes of the instance. As the algorithm either branches into only one subproblem with at most
k−1 holes, or two subproblems with at most k−1 and at most k−2 holes, respectively, the number
of leaves of this search tree is T (k) ≤T (k −1) + T (k −2), with T (0) = T (1) = 1. Using standard
techniques in the analysis of exponential time algorithms (see, e.g., [Fomin and Kratsch, 2010]),
and by noticing that the number of operations executed at each node of the search tree is O(k2),
the running time of the branching algorithm can be upper bounded by O(ρkk2).
For the example of Fig. 3, the instances I1 and I2 are computed by selecting the value 4, and
removing the interval x3, respectively. The reduction rules select the value 9 for I1 and the values
6 and 10 for I2. Both instances start with the interval x11, and the algorithm recursively solves I1
only, where the values 12 and 13 are selected, leading to the solution {4, 9, 12, 13} for the kernelized
instance, which corresponds to the solution {2, 4, 7, 9, 12, 13} for the instance of Fig. 1.
Corollary 1. HAC for an AtMost-NValue constraint can be enforced in time O(ρk · k2 · |D| +
|I| · |D|), where k is the number of holes in the domains of the input instance I = (X, D, dom, N),
and ρ = 1+
√
5
2
< 1.6181.
Proof. We ﬁrst remark that if a value v can be ﬁltered from the domain of a variable x (i.e., v has no
support for x), then v can be ﬁltered from the domain of all variables, as for any legal instantiation
α with α(x′) = v, x′ ∈X \ {x}, the assignment obtained from α by setting α(x) := v is a legal
instantiation as well. Also, ﬁltering the value v creates no new holes as the set of values can be set
to D \ {v}.
Now we enforce HAC by applying O(|D|) times the algorithm from Theorem 2. Assume the
instance I = (X, D, dom, N) is consistent. If (X, D, dom, N −1) is consistent, then no value can
be ﬁltered. Otherwise, check, for each v ∈D, whether the instance obtained from selecting v is
consistent and ﬁlter v if this is not the case.
4
Extended Global Cardinality Constraints
An EGC constraint C is speciﬁed by a set of variables scope(C) = {x1, . . . , xn} and for each value
v ∈Sn
i=1 dom(xi) a set D(v) of non-negative integers. The constraint is consistent if each variable
can take a value from its domain such that the number of variables taking a value v belongs to the
set D(v).
The Consistency problem for EGC constraints is NP-hard [Quimper et al., 2004]. However,
if all sets D(·) are intervals, then consistency can be checked in polynomial time using network
ﬂows [Régin, 1996].
By the result of Bessière et al. [2008], the Consistency problem for EGC
constraints is ﬁxed-parameter tractable, parameterized by the number of holes in the sets D(·).
10

Thus Régin’s result generalizes to instances that are close to the interval case.
However, it is
unlikely that EGC constraints admit a polynomial kernel.
Theorem 3. The Consistency problem for EGC constraints, parameterized by the number of holes
in the sets D(·), does not admit a polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆coNP/poly.
Proof. We establish the theorem by a combination of results from Bodlaender et al. [2009b], Fort-
now and Santhanam [2008], and Quimper et al. [2004]. We need the following deﬁnitions. The
unparameterized version of a parameterized problem P ⊆Σ∗× N is UP(P) = { x#1k : (x, k) ∈
P } ⊆(Σ ∪{#})∗where 1 is an arbitrary symbol from Σ and # is a new symbol not in Σ.
Let
P, Q ⊆Σ∗× N be parameterized problems. We say that P is polynomial parameter reducible to Q
if there is a polynomial time computable function f : Σ∗× N →Σ∗× N and a polynomial p, such
that for all (x, k) ∈Σ∗× N, we have (x, k) ∈P if and only if (x′, k′) = f(x, k) ∈Q, and k′ ≤p(k).
We prove the theorem by combining three known results.
(1) [Bodlaender et al., 2009b] Let P and Q be parameterized problems such that UP(P) is NP-
complete, UP(Q) is in NP, and P is polynomial parameter reducible to Q.
If Q has a
polynomial kernel, then P has a polynomial kernel.
(2) [Fortnow and Santhanam, 2008] The problem of deciding the satisﬁability of a CNF formula
(SAT), parameterized by the number of variables, does not admit a polynomial kernel, unless
NP ⊆coNP/poly.
(3) [Quimper et al., 2004] Given a CNF formula F on k variables, one can construct in polynomial
time an EGC constraint CF such that
(i) for each value v of CF , D(v) = {0, iv} for an integer iv > 0,
(ii) iv > 1 for at most 2k values v, and
(iii) F is satisﬁable if and only if CF is consistent.
Thus, the number of holes in CF is at most twice the number of variables of F.
We observe that (3) is a polynomial parameter reduction from SAT, parameterized by the number
of variables, to the Consistency problem for EGC constraints, parameterized by the number of
holes. Hence the theorem follows from (1) and (2).
5
Conclusion
We have introduced the concept of kernelization to the ﬁeld of constraint processing, providing both
positive and negative results for the important global constraints NValue and EGC, respectively.
On the positive side, we have developed an eﬃcient linear-time kernelization algorithm for the
consistency problem for AtMost-NValue constraints, and have shown how it can be used to
speed up the complete propagation of NValue and related constraints. On the negative side, we
have established a theoretical result which indicates that EGC constraints do not admit polynomial
kernels.
Our algorithms are eﬃcient and the theoretical worst-case time bounds do not include large
hidden constants. We therefore believe that the algorithms are practical, but we must leave an
empirical evaluation for future research. We hope that our results stimulate further research on
kernelization algorithms for constraint processing.
11
