Automated Reasoning and Presentation Support
for Formalizing Mathematics in Mizar⋆
Josef Urban1⋆⋆and GeoﬀSutcliﬀe2
1 Radboud University, Nijmegen
2 University of Miami
Abstract. This paper presents a combination of several automated rea-
soning and proof presentation tools with the Mizar system for formal-
ization of mathematics. The combination forms an online service called
MizAR, similar to the SystemOnTPTP service for ﬁrst-order automated
reasoning. The main diﬀerences to SystemOnTPTP are the use of the
Mizar language that is oriented towards human mathematicians (rather
than the pure ﬁrst-order logic used in SystemOnTPTP), and setting the
service in the context of the large Mizar Mathematical Library of pre-
vious theorems, deﬁnitions, and proofs (rather than the isolated prob-
lems that are solved in SystemOnTPTP). These diﬀerences poses new
challenges and new opportunities for automated reasoning and for proof
presentation tools. This paper describes the overall structure of MizAR,
and presents the automated reasoning systems and proof presentation
tools that are combined to make MizAR a useful mathematical service.
1
Introduction and Motivation
Formal mathematics, in its interactive and veriﬁcation aspects, and in the auto-
mated reasoning aspect, is becoming increasingly well-known, used, and experi-
mented with [10]. Projects like FlySpeck [9], formal proof of the Four Color The-
orem [8], veriﬁcation of tiny (but real) operating systems [12], and the increased
use of veriﬁcation for software and hardware [7], are stimulating the development
of interactive veriﬁcation tools and interactive theorem provers (ITPs). Linked
to this is the development of strong automated theorem proving (ATP) systems,
used either independently to solve hard problems in suitable domains [14, 17, 3],
or integrated with interactive tools [15, 11, 4]. ATP development has also stimu-
lated interesting research in the context of automated reasoning in large theories
[16, 34, 21].
The goal of the work presented here is to make formal mathematics and auto-
mated reasoning easily accessible to practitioners in these areas, by putting most
of the work into their browsers, and providing a very fast (real-time) server-based
experience with a number of ATP, ITP, presentation, and AI tools that work
⋆The ﬁnal publication of this paper is available at www.springerlink.com
⋆⋆Supported by the NWO project “MathWiki a Web-based Collaborative Authoring
Environment for Formal Proofs”.
arXiv:1005.4592v1  [cs.AI]  25 May 2010

well together. This is important for supporting existing users and attracting new
users of Mizar, by providing them with an attractive environment for exploring
the world of formal reasoning in mathematics. Fast server-based solutions make
systems easy to use, to the extent of just “pushing a button” (clicking on a
HTML link), rather than having to go through the pains of building an ade-
quate local hardware and software installation, for beneﬁts that might initially
not be clear. Server-based solutions are becoming an important part of general
computer use, and formal mathematics is no exception. It is not possible to name
all the server-based services that already exist for informal mathematics, starting
e.g., from the arXiv, Wikipedia, MathOverﬂow, PolyMath, Wolfram MathWorld,
PlanetMath, ProofWiki, the SAGE system for working with CASes, etc.
This paper describes the Automated Reasoning for Mizar (MizAR) web ser-
vice, which combines several automated reasoning and proof presentation tools
with the Mizar system for formalization of mathematics, to form a useful math-
ematical service. MizAR runs in the context of the Mizar Mathematical Library
(MML), and uses the Mizar language that is oriented towards human mathemati-
cians. The main inspiration for MizAR is the SystemOnTPTP ATP service [22].
SystemOnTPTP allows users to easily experiment with many ﬁrst-order ATP
systems in a common framework, and provides additional services such as proof
presentation with the IDV system [28], discovery of interesting lemmas with the
AGInT system [18], and independent proof veriﬁcation with the GDV veriﬁer
[23]. Pieces of the SystemOnTPTP infrastructure also served in the initial imple-
mentation of the MizAR web service. SystemOnTPTP’s infrastructure is brieﬂy
described in Section 2. Section 3 describes the implemented MizAR service, and
demonstrates its use. Section 4 considers a number of possible future extensions,
and concludes.
2
SystemOnTPTP
The core of SystemOnTPTP is a utility that allows an ATP problem or solution
to be easily and quickly submitted in various ways to a range of ATP systems
and tools. SystemOnTPTP uses a suite of currently available systems and tools,
whose properties (input format, reporting of result status, etc) are stored in a
simple text database. The input can be selected from the TPTP (Thousands
of Problems for Theorem Provers) problem library or the TSTP (Thousands
of Solutions from Theorem Provers) solution library [24], or provided in TPTP
format [25] by the user. The implementation relies on several subsidiary tools
to preprocess the input, control the execution of the chosen ATP system(s),
and postprocess the output. On the input side TPTP2X or TPTP4X is used
to prepare the input for processing. A strict resource limiting program called
TreeLimitedRun is used to limit the CPU time and memory used by an ATP
system or tool. TreeLimitedRun monitors processes’ resource usage more tightly
than is possible with standard operating system calls. Finally a program called
X2tptp converts an ATP system’s output to TPTP format, if requested by the
user.

The web interfaces SystemB4TPTP, SystemOnTPTP, and SystemOnTSTP
provide interactive online access to the SystemOnTPTP utility.3 The online ser-
vice can also be accessed directly with http POST requests. The SystemB4TPTP
interface provides access to tools for preparing problems for submission to an
ATP system, including conversion from other (non-TPTP) formats to TPTP for-
mat, parsing and syntax checking, type checking, and pretty printing. In addition
to providing access to ATP systems, the SystemOnTPTP interface additionally
provides system reports, recommendations for systems to use on a given prob-
lem, and direct access to the SSCPA system [26] that runs multiple systems in
competition parallel. The SystemOnTSTP interface provides access to solution
processing tools, including parsing and syntax checking, pretty printing, deriva-
tion veriﬁcation using GDV [23], interactive graphical proof presentation using
IDV [28], answer extraction [27], and proof conversion and summarization tools.
The three interfaces have options to pass the output from a system/tool on to
the next interface – from problem preparation, to problem solving, to solution
processing. The output is returned to browsers in appropriate HTML wrapping,
and can also be obtained in its raw form for processing on the client side (typi-
cally when the interfaces are called programmatically using http POST requests).
The online service is hosted at the University of Miami on a server with four
2.33GHz CPUs, 4GB RAM, and running the Linux 2.6 operating system.
3
MizAR
MizAR is running experimentally on our server4, where it can be best learned
by exploration. A good way to explore is to start with an existing simple Mizar
article, e.g., the card 1 article5 about cardinal numbers [1]6, from the MML.7
Within MizAR, select the “URL to fetch article from” ﬁeld, insert the article’s
URL into the text box, and press the “Send” button. For experienced Mizar
users, there is also a simple way to send the current Mizar buﬀer to the remote
service, by running the mizar-post-to-ar4mizar interactive function in the
Mizar mode for Emacs [30]. Both actions call the main MizAR cgi-bin script
with appropriate arguments, which launches the functions described below.
MizAR links together a number of Mizar and ATP-related components, which
are useful for general work with formal mathematics in Mizar. The main com-
ponents are as follows (details are provided in the rest of Section 3):
– Web access to the whole cross-linked HTMLized MML.
– Fast server-based veriﬁcation of a Mizar article.
– Disambiguation of the article by HTMLization, producing an HTML pre-
sentation of the veriﬁed article with links to an HTMLized version of the
3 Available starting at http://www.tptp.org/cgi-bin/SystemOnTPTP
4 http://mws.cs.ru.nl/~mptp/MizAR.html
5 http://mws.cs.ru.nl/~mptp/mml/mml/card_1.miz
6 Available at http://mizar.uwb.edu.pl/JFM/Vol1/ordinal1.html
7 All articles are available from http://mws.cs.ru.nl/~mptp/mml/mml

MML. Additional useful information is also extracted during HTMLization,
and included in the HTML presentation of the article.
– Fast translation of the article to MPTP (Mizar Problems for Theorem Provers)
format.
– Fast generation of ATP problems in TPTP format, for all the theorems in
the article, and for all the atomic inferences done by Mizar.
– Easy access to default ATP systems for solving the ATP problems, and access
to SystemOnTPTP for solving more diﬃcult problems.
– Easy access to IDV for visualization and postprocessing of proofs found by
the ATP systems.
– Suggesting useful hints for proving (either by ATP or interactively in Mizar)
particular Mizar lemmas and theorems.
Figure 1 shows the overall structure of the MizAR system. The leftmost col-
umn shows the various forms of the article that are produced, and the two bold
boxes in the next column are the HTML presentations for user interaction. The
third column shows the software tools that generate the various dataforms, using
the article and the background information shown in the rightmost column. A
Mizar article is submitted through the web interface or from Emacs. The article
is then veriﬁed and converted to XML format, which is subsequently rendered in
HTML format with links to the MML. The HTML presentation includes links
that allow the user to proceed with further processing, and is the main inter-
face for user interaction with MizAR. While the HTML is presented to the user,
the article is asynchronously converted to the MPTP format, which is used for
generating TPTP format ATP problems. The ATP problems can then be sub-
mitted to ATP systems, either locally via SystemOnTPTP. The ATP systems’
solutions are used to enrich the HTML presentation, and can be passed on to
various post-processing tools. The subcomponents that perform these tasks are
described in more detail below.
3.1
Server-based Veriﬁcation of a Mizar Article
Unlike many other (especially LCF-inspired) proof assistants, Mizar is a compiler-
like batch processor, verifying a whole article in one pass. While a lot of work
on Mizar goes into balancing the strength, speed, and obviousness of the proof
checking, the process of checking a whole article can get quite time-consuming
for longer and more complex articles, especially on older hardware.
There are several advantages to remote server-based veriﬁcation of Mizar
articles. The ﬁrst obvious advantage is that having everything web-based removes
the need for a local installation of Mizar. The second advantage is that even if
Mizar is installed locally, it is often more convenient to quickly (try to) verify an
article in a browser, instead of launching the veriﬁcation environment on one’s
local computer. In cases when the article is available online, it is possible to
provide that URL as an argument to the MizAR URL, to directly launch MizAR
on the article.8 This makes such veriﬁcation snippets available in all kinds of
8 For example, http://mws.cs.ru.nl/~mptp/cgi-bin/MizAR.cgi?ProblemSource=
URL&FormulaURL=http://mws.cs.ru.nl/~mptp/mml/mml/card_1.miz&Name=Test1

MPTP translator
HTMLization tool
Mizar article
HTMLized MML
Original MML
HTML links
MPTP format MML
Mizar installation!
(veriﬁer, etc.)
XMLized article
MPTP format article
ATP Problems
ATP Solutions
HTMLized article
AI hint tool
EP and SPASS
HTMLized article with!
references or hints
SystemOnTSTP!
postprocessing
SystemOnTPTP!
ATP systems
Visualization and!
Veriﬁcation
MPTP tools
Fig. 1. Structure of the MizAR system

rendering of the results. In short, the third advantage is that a web service
provides mechanism for online communication of veriﬁcation results.
The fourth (and probably greatest) advantage of server-based veriﬁcation is
the raw veriﬁcation speed. A dedicated server usually runs on reasonably new
hardware with enough memory, etc. For example, even for the relatively short
card 1 Mizar article mentioned above, full veriﬁcation on a recent notebook

(1.66GHz Intel Atom) takes 2s, while on a recent lower-range server (2 quad-
core hyperthreading 2.27GHz Intel Xeons) the same task takes 0.5s. For a more
involved article this diﬀerence becomes more visible, and can be the deciding
factor for the usability and real-time experience with the system. For example,
for the more involved Mizar article fdiff 19 about real function diﬀerentiability
[19], the diﬀerence is 23s vs. 6s.
The latest advances in CPU power have been achieved mainly by packing
multiple CPUs together, instead of raising the speed of individual CPUs. To
take advantage of this, Mizar processing has recently been parallelized10, and
the parallel version of the Mizar veriﬁer is running on our server. This (depend-
ing on the success of the parallelization) can further signiﬁcantly improve the
real-time veriﬁcation experience. For example, on the even longer Mizar arti-
cle fdiff 211 about real function diﬀerentiability [13], the diﬀerence between
running the parallel version (using eight cores) and the non-parallel version is a
factor of four (31s vs. 7.8s). Veriﬁcation of this article using the above mentioned
notebook takes 125s, resulting in a speed-up factor of sixteen (and substantially
improving the real-time interaction with the system).
The last important advantage is that a server-based installation supports use
of modiﬁed, enhanced, and experimental versions of the veriﬁer. This can provide
useful additional functionalities. For instance, the Mizar parallelizer requires
additional software to run, and a recently modiﬁed version of the Mizar veriﬁer
that has not yet been distributed to Mizar users. Translation of Mizar articles
to ATP formats also requires a version of the veriﬁer that has been compiled
with a special ﬂag, again not included in the standard Mizar distribution. An
online service can also easily include multiple versions of the Mizar library and
binaries, as is done for the MML Query service [2].
3.2
HTMLization of Mizar Articles
There has been quite a lot of recent work on XMLization and HTMLization of
Mizar articles [29, 35], including the addition of useful additional information
into the XML form of the Mizar article and its HTML presentation. There are
two major reasons for having a static HTMLized MML available:12 (i) to provide
fast browsing of the theorems and deﬁnitions used in a particular formalization,
with a number of user-friendly features (like (sub)proof hiding/showing, etc.),
and (ii) providing explanations for a number of phenomena in the formalization
that are made explicit and clear only during veriﬁcation, and are hard to decipher
from the formalization text alone. The latter includes, for example:
– Explicit HTML presentation of the current goal (thesis), computed by the
veriﬁer at each point of the formalization.
9 http://mws.cs.ru.nl/~mptp/mml/mml/fdiff_1.miz
10 The description of the Mizar parallelization and related experiments is unpublished
as of January 2010. The parallelizer is available at http://github.com/JUrban/
MPTP2/raw/master/MizAR/cgi-bin/bin/mizp.pl.
11 http://mws.cs.ru.nl/~mptp/mml/mml/fdiff_2.miz
12 It is available at http://mws.cs.ru.nl/~mptp/mml/html/

– Proper disambiguation of overloaded mathematical symbols. Overloading is
necessary in a large body of mathematics including all kinds of subﬁelds, but
at the same time makes it diﬃcult for readers of the textual versions of the
articles to understand the precise meaning of the overloaded symbols.
– Explicit access to formulae for deﬁnition correctness, and formulae express-
ing properties (projectivity, antisymmetry, etc.) that are computed by the
veriﬁer. Making these explicit in the HTML presentation can help users.
– Explicit representation of other features that are implicit in Mizar veriﬁca-
tion, e.g., deﬁnitional expansions, original versions of constructors that have
been redeﬁned, etc. Making these explicit in the HTML presentation can
also help users.
The static HTMLized MML is an important resource used by MizAR. The
articles submitted to MizAR are dynamically linked to the static HTMLized
MML. This is a notable diﬀerence to SystemOnTPTP, which treats each problem
as an independent entity. The ﬁrst implementation of MizAR has focused on
developing the services for a ﬁxed version of the MML. However, management
of library versions is a nontrivial and interesting problem. Allowing users to
verify new articles and also refactor existing ones will ultimately lead into the
area of formal mathematical wikis [6, 5].
The main functions of the HTMLization service are to (i) provide quick
linking to the static HTMLized MML (thus providing the disambiguation and
explanation functions described above), and (ii) allow a number of additional
(mainly automated reasoning and AI) services to be launched by suitable CGI
and AJAX calls from links in the HTML. These additional services are described
in the following subsections. The main features of server-side HTMLization are
increased speed, and the availability of additional programs and features. While
the Mizar HTML processing was designed to be locally available, using just
a browser-based XSL processor (i.e., loading the XML produced by Mizar di-
rectly into a browser, which applies the appropriate style sheet), even the basic
XSL processing in the browser can take a long time (minutes). Again, having
a specialized fast XSL processor installed on the server helps quite a lot, and
the HTMLization can be parallelized using techniques similar to the paralleliza-
tion of the basic veriﬁcation process. This provides a much better HTMLization
response, and also makes additional XSL-based preprocessing possible. This is
needed for better HTML quality, and for the translation to ATP formats.
3.3
Generation of ATP Problems in TPTP Format
One of the main objectives of MizAR (as suggested by its name) is to allow easy
experimentation with ATP systems over the large body of formal mathemat-
ics available in the MML, and to apply ATP functionalities on Mizar articles.
The MPTP system [32, 31] for translating Mizar articles to the TPTP format
has been modiﬁed to work in a fast real-time mode, generating ATP problems
corresponding to Mizar proof obligations. The MPTP system translates Mizar
articles to the MPTP format, which is an extension of the TPTP format with

information needed for further processing into ATP problems. Like the static
HTMLized MML, a static copy of the MML in MPTP format is available to
MizAR. It is used for building translated MML items (theorems, deﬁnitions, for-
mulae encoding Mizar type automations, etc.) that are necessary for creating
complete ATP problems.
Using MPTP and generating ATP problems requires a quite complex instal-
lation and setup (SWI Prolog, Unix, special XSL style sheets, the translated
MML in the MPTP format, etc.), so this is a good example of an additional
functionality that would be quite hard to provide locally. The MPTP was ini-
tially designed for oﬄine production of interesting ATP problems and data, and
was not optimized for speed. Several techniques have been used to provide a
reasonable real-time experience:
– More advanced (graph-like) data structures have been used to speed up the
selection of parts of the MML necessary for generating the ATP problems.
– Larger use has been made of Prolog indexing and the asserted database, for
various critical parts of the code.
– The MPTP version of the MML has been factored so that it is possible to
work with only the parts of the MML needed for a given article.
These techniques have led to reasonable real-time performance of the MPTP
problem generation, comparable to the performance of Mizar veriﬁcation and
HTMLization. For example, the MPTP processing followed by the generation of
all 586 ATP problems for the card 1 article takes 7s on the server.
After the conversion to MPTP format, the ATP problems for an article are
generated asynchronously while the user is presented with the HTMLized article.
There is a small danger of the user wanting to solve an ATP problem that has
not yet been generated. However, it is easy to check if the translation process
is ﬁnished, and which ATP problems are already available, by examining the
system log.
The MPTP processing has not been parallelized (like the Mizar veriﬁcation
and HTMLization). However, there are no serious obstacles to that. Another
speed-up option would be to ask MPTP to generate only a subset of the ATP
problems (this is actually how the parallelization is going to work), selected in
some reasonable way by the formalizer in the user interface. It is also possible
to keep the MPTP system loaded and listening once it has generated a subset
of problems, and to have it generate new ATP problems from the current article
on demand.
The HTMLization of an article and the generation of ATP problems are
independent processes that could be separated into two separate services. Users
might, for instance, be interested only in HTML-like disambiguation of their
articles, or only in getting explanations and advice from ATP systems, without
looking at the HTML form of the article. With suﬃcient CPU-cores in the server,
none of these two possible use-cases suﬀers in terms of the response time.

3.4
Calling ATP Systems
The calling of ATP systems to solve the ATP problems is built into the HTML
presentation of the user’s article, by linking the available ATP services to key-
words in the HTML presentation. This follows the general idea that the HTML
serves as the main interface for calling other services. The links to the ATP ser-
vices in the HTML are the Mizar keywords by and from, indicating semantic
justiﬁcation in Mizar. For example, the Mizar justiﬁcation
thus ( f is one-to-one & dom f = X & rng f = A )
by A1, A4, WELLORD2:25, WELLORD2:def 1;
in the last line of the proof of theorem Th4 in the card 1 article says that the
Mizar checker should be able to verify that the formula on the left hand side of
the by keyword follows from the previously stated local propositions, theorems
and deﬁnitions A1, A4, WELLORD2:25, WELLORD2:def 1, and some knowledge
that the Mizar veriﬁer uses implicitly. There are now the following use-cases
calling ATP systems:
1. Mizar has veriﬁed the inference, possibly using some implicit information.
The user is interested in knowing exactly what implicit information was used
by Mizar, and exactly how the proof was conducted.
2. Mizar has not veriﬁed the inference. The user is interested in knowing if the
inference is logically valid, if it can be proved by a (stronger) ATP system,
and what such an ATP proof looks like.
The ﬁrst use-case typically happens for one of two reasons. The ﬁrst reason
is that the theory in which the author is working has become very rich, and in-
volves many implicit (typically typing) Mizar mechanisms that make the formal
text hard to understand. The TPTP translation has to make all this implicit in-
formation explicit in the TPTP problems, and the resulting corresponding ATP
proofs show explicitly how this information is used. For the Mizar justiﬁcation
above, clicking on the by keyword calls the EP system [20] on the ATP problem,
with a several second time limit. If a proof is found, the interface is refreshed
with an explanation box that includes (among other things described below) a
list of the references used in the proof, as shown in Figure 2. In this case the
exact references shown to the user are following:
e8_9__mtest1, dt_k1_wellord2, dt_c2_9__mtest1, e2_9__mtest1,
e7_9__mtest1, t25_wellord2, d1_wellord2
These references use the MPTP syntax, but are linked (dynamically using AJAX
calls) to the corresponding places in the theorem’s HTML or the static HTM-
Lized MML), and are given appropriate explanation titles. Note that the EP
proof uses seven more references than the four that are in the original Mizar by
inference. One reference is added because it explicitly denotes the formula being
proved (the left-hand side of by), and the two remaining references encode im-
plicit type declarations that are used by Mizar (the type of the local constant R,

Fig. 2. ATP explanation box
and the type of the functor RelIncl that is used in proposition A4 (renamed to
e7 9 mtest1 by MPTP)). The ATP proof can be visualized in the IDV system
by clicking on the palm tree icon in the explanation box.
The second reason for the ﬁrst use-case is cross-veriﬁcation. In cases when
a bug in the Mizar implementation is suspected, or incompleteness in the ATP
translation is suspected, the user may be interested in knowing if the Mizar proof
can be done by another system (and how). In this sense the environment is used
for gathering additional information and debugging. The cross-veriﬁcation rates
for Mizar justiﬁcations are reasonably high [33], which makes this usage realistic.
The second use-case (ﬁnding proofs that are too hard for Mizar) is the real
“ATP proof assistance” dream, i.e., using ATP systems to automatically ﬁnd
proofs for ITPs. Users can do this within MizAR by providing a large set of “po-
tentially relevant” Mizar propositions on the right-hand side of the by keyword,
and letting the EP system try to ﬁnd a proof. Note that if EP does not ﬁnd the
problem to be countersatisﬁable, the user also has the option to try the SPASS

ATP system [36] directly from the interface, as shown in Figure 3. This is justi-
ﬁed by the general experience that SPASS is reasonably complementary to EP
when solving MPTP problems. If SPASS is not successful the user can use the
links and icons in the explanation box to inspect the ATP problem, and launch
the SystemOnTPTP interface to try the ATP systems available there. The proofs
found by the ATP systems can be processed in the SystemOnTSTP interface, in-
cluding visualization using the IDV system, analysis using the AGInT system for
ﬁnding the interesting steps in proofs, and ATP-based cross-veriﬁcation using
the GDV veriﬁer.
3.5
Getting Hints for Necessary Mizar References
If none of the ATP systems can ﬁnd a proof for an ATP problem (corresponding
to a Mizar inference), either because the ATP system timed out or found that
the ATP problem is countersatisﬁable (as in Figure 3, then typically some more
assumptions (Mizar references) have to be added to the TPTP problem. The
explanation box can provide hints for proving the Mizar proposition. This is
done using the “Suggest hints” link that is put into the box when EP fails to
ﬁnd a proof (see Figure 3). The “Suggest hints” button is linked to a Bayesian
advisor that has been trained on the whole MML (i.e., on all of the proofs in it).
(See [34] for the details of how the machine learning is organized in the context
of a large deductive repository like MML. Other axiom selection systems could
be used in a similar way.) The trained advisor runs as a daemon on the web
server, and receives queries initiated by clicking on the “Suggest hints” button.
This service is very fast, and the hints are usually provided in milliseconds. They
Fig. 3. ATP explanation box for “Proof not found”

are HTMLized and inserted (by AJAX calls) into the explanation box, as shown
in Figure 4.
4
Future Work and Conclusions
This paper has introduced the MizAR web service that allows Mizar users to
use automated reasoning tools on their Mizar articles. MizAR is to some degree
based on and similar to the SystemOnTPTP service for solving ﬁrst-order ATP
problems. The main diﬀerences to SystemOnTPTP are the use of the Mizar
language that is oriented towards human mathematicians (rather than the pure
ﬁrst-order logic used in SystemOnTPTP), and setting the service in the context
of the large Mizar Mathematical Library of previous theorems, deﬁnitions, and
proofs.
There are obvious diﬀerences to those systems, given by the large-theory
setting in which Mizar formalization is typically done. There are several use-cases
described above, ranging from using HTMLization to disambiguate complicated
Mizar syntax, usage of ATP systems to explain Mizar inferences, provide new
proofs, and ﬁnd counterexamples, to using additional AI-based services for proof
advice, like the proof advisor trained on the whole MML.
There are many directions for future work in this setting, some of them men-
tioned above. The service already is available by an interactive call from the
Fig. 4. ATP explanation box oﬀering hints

Emacs interface. However, Emacs simply generates the request from the current
Mizar buﬀer, and lets the user see the response (and all the associated function-
alities) in a browser. Obviously, the ATP and proof advising functionalities could
be made completely separate from the HTML presentation, and sent directly to
the Emacs session.
As mentioned above, the static MML is now present on the server in both
HTML and MPTP format (and obviously in raw text and in the Mizar internal
format), but not directly editable by the users. Giving the user the ability to edit
the supporting MML forms leads in the direction of formal mathematical wikis,
with all the interesting persistence, versioning, linking, user-authentication, and
dependency problems to solve. There is an experimental ikiwiki-based prototype
available for Mizar and the MML, which solves some of the persistence and
user-authentication problems, and that is likely to be merged with the services
presented here. Hopefully this will form a rich wiki for formal mathematics,
with a large number of services providing interesting additional functionalities
to people interested in formal mathematics.
There is also a large amount of work that can be done on making the system
nicer and more responsive, e.g., the parallelization of the MPTP processing is
yet to be done, better machine learning and hint suggestion methods can be
used and linked to the ATP services, and presentations in formats other than
HTML (e.g., TeX and PDF are also used for Mizar) would be nice to include.
