139 
Learning the Structure of Dynamic Probabilistic Networks 
Nir Friedman 
Kevin Murphy 
Stuart Russell 
Computer Science Division, U. of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 

Abstract 
Dynamic probabilistic networks are a compact repre­
sentation of complex stochastic processes. In this pa­
per we examine how to learn the structure of a DPN 
from data. We extend structure scoring rules for stan­
dard probabilistic networks to the dynamic case, and 
show how to search for structure when some of the vari­
ables are hidden. Finally, we examine two applications 
where such a technology might be useful: predicting 
and classifying dynamic behaviors, and learning causal 
orderings in biological processes. We provide empir­
ical results that demonstrate the applicability of our 
methods in both domains. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Probabilistic networks (PNs), also known as Bayesian net­
works or belief networks, are already well-established as 
representations of domains involving uncertain relations 
among several random variables. 
Somewhat less well­
established, but perhaps of equal importance, are dynamic 
probabilistic networks (DPNs), which model the stochastic 
evolution of a set of random variables over time [5]. DPNs 
have significant advantages over competing representations 
such as Kalman filters, which handle only unimodal pos­
terior distributions and linear models, and hidden Markov 
models (HMMs), whose parameterization grows exponen­
tially with the number of state variables. For example, [31] 
show that DPNs can outperform HMMs on standard speech 
recognition tasks. 
PNs and DPNs are defined by a graphical structure and 
a set of parameters, which together specify a joint distribu­
tion over the random variables. Algorithms for learning the 
parameters of PNs [1, 21] and DPNs [1, 14] are becoming 
widely used. These algorithms typically use either gradi­
ent methods or EM, and can handle hidden variables and 
missing values. 
Algorithms for learning the graphical structure, on the 
other hand, have until recently been restricted to networks 
with complete data, i.e., where the valueú of all variables are 
specified in each training case [ 4, 15]. Friedman [ 10, 11] has 
developed the Structural EM (SEM) algorithm for learning 
PN structure from data with hidden variables and missing 
values. SEM combines structural and parametric modifi­
cation within a single EM process, and appears to be sub­
stantially more effective than previous approaches based 
on parametric EM operating within an outer-loop structural 
search. SEM can be shown to find local optima defined by 
a scoring function that combines the likelihood of the data 
with a structural penalty that discourages overly complex 
networks. This property holds for both the Bayesian Infor­
mation Criterion (BIC) score [28], a variant of Minimum 
Description Length (MDL) scoring, and the BDe score [ 15], 
a Bayesian metric that uses an explicit prior over networks. 
In this paper, we extend the BIC and BDe scores to han­
dle the problem of learning DPN structure from complete 
data. More importantly, we extend the SEM algorithm to 
learn DPNs from incomplete data with both scores. Given 
partial observations of a set of random variables over time, 
the algorithm constructs a DPN (possibly including addi­
tional hidden variables) that fits the observations as well 
as possible. 
The addition of hidden variables in DPNs 
is particularly important as many processes-human de­
cision making, speech generation, disease processes, for 
example-are only partially observable. 
We begin with formal definitions of PNs and DPNs. Sec­
tion 3 discusses the complete-data case, developing scores 
for DPNs so that existing algorithms for learning PN struc­
tures can be applied directly. In Section 4, we handle the 
case of incomplete data and show how to extend SEM to 
DPNs. Computation of the necessary sufficient statistics is 
highlighted as a principal bottleneck. Section 5 describes 
two applications: learning simple models of human driving 
behavior from videotapes, and learning models of biologi­
cal processes from very sparse observations. 
2 
PRELIMINARIES 
We start with a short review of probabilistic networks and 
dynamic probabilistic networks. 
We will be concerned with distributions over sets of dis­
crete random variables, where each variable Xi may take 
on values from a finite set, denoted by Val( Xi)· We denote 
the size of Val( Xi) by IIXill· We use capital letters, such as 
X, Y, Z, for variable names and lowercase letters x, y, z to 
denote specific values taken by those variables. Sets of vari­
ables are denoted by boldface capital letters X, Y, Z, with 
sets of values denoted by boldface lowercase letters x, y, z. 
For a given network, we will use X = { X1, •
.
•
 , Xn} to de­
note the variables of the network in topological order, and P 
to denote a joint probability distribution over the variables 

140 
Friedman, Murphy, and Russell 

(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1: (a) A prior network and transition network defin­
ing a DPN for the attributes Xt. X2, X3. (b) The corre­
sponding "unrolled" network. 
in X. 
A probabilistic network (PN) is an annotated directed 
acyclic graph that encodes a joint probability distribution 
over X. Formally, a PN for X is a pair B 
= (G,E>). 
The first component, G, is a directed acyclic graph whose 
vertices correspond to the random variables Xt, ... ,Xn 
that encodes the following set of conditional independence 
assumptions: each variable Xi is independent of its non­
descendants given its parents Pa(Xi) in G. The second 
component, e, represents the set of parameters that quan­
tifies the network. In the simplest case, it contains a pa­
rameter Oi,J;,k; = Pr(Xi = kiiPa(Xi) = ji) for each pos­
sible value ki of Xi and each possible set of values ji of 
Pa(Xi). Each conditional probability distribution can be 
represented as a table, called a CPT (conditional probabil­
ity table). Representations which require fewer parameters, 
such as noisy-ORs [27] or trees [12], are also possible­
indeed, we use them in the experimental results section -
but, for simplicity of notation, we shall stick to the CPT 
case. 
Given G and 0, a PN B defines a unique joint probability 
distribution over X given by: 
PB(Xt, ... 'Xn) = nZ=l PB(xilpa(Xi)) 
A PN describes a probability distribution over a fixed 
set of variables. DPNs extend this representation to model 
temporal processes. For simplicity, we assume that changes 
occur between discrete time points that are indexed by the 
non-negative integers. We assume that X = { Xt, ... , Xn} 
is a set of attributes that the process changes. Xi[t] is the 
random variable that denotes the value of the attribute xi 
at timet, and X[t] is the set of random variables Xi [t]. 
To represent beliefs about the possible trajectories of 
the process, we need a probability distribution over the 
random variables X[O] U X[l] U X[2] U.. .. 
Of course, 
such a distribution can be extremely complex. 
In this 
paper, we assume the process is Markovian in X, i.e., 
P(X[t + 1] I X[O], ... ,X[t]) = P(X[t + 1] I X[t]). We 
also assume that the process is stationary, i.e., that the tran­
sition probability P(X[t + 1]1 X[t]) is independent oft. 
Given these assumptions, a DPN that represents the joint 
distribution over all possible trajectories of a process con­
sists of two parts: 
• a prior network B0 that specifies a distribution over 
initial states X[O]; and 
• a transition network B--+ over the variables X[O] U 
X[1] that is taken to specify the transition probability 
P(X[t + 1] 1 X[t]) for all t. 
Figure 1(a) shows a simple example.1 
In the transition 
network (but not the prior network), the variables in X[O] 
have no parents. The transition probability implied by such 
a network is: 
PB .... (x(1JI x(O]) = TIt=tPB .... (xi(1)lpa(Xi(1])). 
A DPN defined by a pair (Eo, B--+) corresponds to a 
semi-infinite network over the variables X[O], ... , X[oo]. 
In practice, we reason only about a finite interval 0, . .. , T. 
To do this, we can notionally "unroll" the DPN structure 
into a PN over X[O], ... ,X(T]. In slice 0, the parents of 
Xi[O] are those specified in the prior network Bo; in slice 
t + 1, the parents of Xi[t + 1] are those nodes in slices t 
and t + 1 corresponding to the parents of Xi[l] in B+ We 
copy the conditional distributions for these variables in a 
similar manner. Figure 1 (b) shows the result of unrolling 
the network in Figure 1(a) for 3 time slices. Given a DPN 
model, the joint distribution over X[O), ... , X[T) is 
PB(x(O], ... , x[T]) = PB0(x[O])TI[::(/ PB .... (x(t + 1] 1 x[t]) 
(1) 
where PB .... (x[t + 1] 1 x[t]) is obtained in the obvious way 
from the transition model. 
3 
LEARNING from Complete Data 
In this section we develop the theory for learning DPNs from 
complete data. We begin with a brief review of how one 
learns standard PNs. Then we derive the details of the BIC 
and BDe score for DPNs and finally we discuss how these 
are optimized in the search for good structures. The upshot 
of this section is that learning DPNs from complete data 
uses the same techniques as learning PNs from complete 
data. Learning DPNs is not quite the same as applying 
PN methods to the unrolled network, however, due to the 
constraint of repeated structure and repeated parameters. 
3.1 
LEARNING PNS 
The problem of learning a probabilistic network is stated 
as follows. Given a training set D of instances of X, find 
a network B = ( G, 0) that best matches D. The notion 
of "best match" is defined using a scoring function. Sev­
eral different scoring functions have been proposed in the 
literature. The most frequently used are the Bayesian Infor­
mation Criterion [28] and the BDe score [ 15]. Both of these 
1 Some authors define DPNs using just the transition network, 
assuming that all "slices," including slice 0, have the same struc­
ture. In general, however, the prior distribution on X[O] can have 
a quite different independence structure from other slices, since 
it may represent either the way in which the process is initialized 
or the dependencies induced among the variables in X[O] by the 
unobserved portion of the process before t = 0. For example, if 
t = 0 represents an arbitrary starting point taken from an infinite 
process, thdn it is reasonable to use a dependency structure for 
X[ OJ that reflects the stationary distribution of the Markov chain 
defined by the transition network. One can combine the prior 
and transition networks into a single two-slice network, but, be­
cause the learning processes for the prior and transition models 
are distinct, we have chosen to represent them separately. 

Learning the Structure of Dynamic Probabilistic Networks 
141 
scores combine the likelihood of the data according to the 
network, L(B : D) = logPr(D I B), with some penalty 
relating to the complexity of the network. When learning 
the structure of PN s, a complexity penalty is essential since 
the maximum-likelihood network is usually the completely 
connected network. 
The BIC and BDe scores are derived from the posterior 
probability of the network structure. Let the random vari­
able G range over the possible network structures that might 
in fact obtain in the real world. Then, using Bayes' rule, 
the posterior distribution over G is 
Pr( G l D) ex: Pr(D I G) Pr( G) 
where the likelihood of the data given a network structure 
can be computed by conditioning on the associated network 
parameters: 
Pr(D 1 G) = f Pr(D 1 G, e) Pr(e 1 G) de. 
(2) 
Obviously, specifying the parameter priors and evaluating 
this integral can be difficult. 
One approach to avoiding full computation of the inte­
gral in (2) is to examine the asymptotic behavior of this 
term. Given a large number of data points, the posterior 
probability is insensitive to the choice of prior (assuming 
that the prior does not give probability zero to any event). 
Schwarz [28] derives the following asymptotic estimate for 
well-behaved priors: 
logPr(D I G) = logPr(D I G, Ba)- losN #G + 0(1), 
(3) 
where E>a are the parameter settings for G that maximize 
the likelihood of the data, N is the number of training 
instances, #G is the dimension of G (which in the case 
of complete data is just the number of parameters), and 
0 ( 1) is a constant term which is independent of N and G. 
The BIC score uses E quation (3) to rank candidate network 
structures. Notice that it obviates the need for parameter 
priors, and the prior on structures is reduced to counting 
parameters.2 
An alternative approach is to evaluate (2) in closed form 
given a restricted family of priors [3, 4, 15]. 
Roughly 
speaking, the prior on the parameters for a given structure 
G is assumed to factor into independent priors over the pa­
rameters for each conditional distribution P(Xi I pa(Xi) ). 
When the data is complete, this implies that the posterior 
factors in the same way. Thus, each conditional distribu­
tion can be updated and scored separately. The score can 
be computed in closed form if we assume in addition that 
the prior for each conditional distribution is from a conju­
gate family, such as the Dirichlet distribution. The details 
appear below. 
Since we might examine a large number of possible net­
work structures, we would like to avoid having to assign a 
prior distribution over parameters for each possible struc­
ture. [15] provide a set of assumptions that allow the pa­
rameter prior for all structures to be specified using a single 
network with Dirichlet priors, together with a single "vir­
tual data count" that describes the confidence in that prior. 
2 A similar formula arises from the Minimum Description 
Length (MDL) principle [20]. 
This approach has the desirable property that the scores of 
two networks that are equivalent (i.e., describe the same 
set of independence assumptions) are the same. Finally, 
to compute the full BDe score, a simple description-length 
penalty corresponding to Pr( G) is added in. 
3.2 
BIC SCORE FOR DPNS 
We now describe the BIC score for DPNs. Unsurprisingly, 
the results here mirror the results for PNs. 
Throughout this section, we assume that we are given a 
training set D consisting of Nseq complete observation se­
quences. The £th such sequence has length Nt and specifies 
values for the variables xi [OJ, . . . , xl [Ne]. Such a dataset 
give us Nseq instances of initial slices, from which we can 
train Bo, and N = l:e Nt instances of transitions, from 
which we can train B-t. 
We start by introducing some notation. Let us define 
BfJ:,k: 
= Pr(Xi[O] = kgIPa(Xi[O]) = ji) 
and similarly 
B;j;,k; = Pr(Xt[t] = kiiPa(Xi[t]) = Ji) 
for t = 1 , ... , T. We will also need some notation for the 
sufficient statistics for each family, 
NLJ:,k: 
= l:ei(Xi[O] = kg,Pa(Xi[O]) =ji;xl) 
and 
NiJ;,k; = l:el:ti(Xi[t] = ki,Pa(Xi[t]) =ji;xt) 
where I(·; xl) is an indicator function which takes on value 
1 if the event · occurs in sequence xi, and 0 otherwise. 
Using (1), and rearranging terms, we find that the likeli­
hood function decomposes according to the structure of the 
DPN, just as with PNs: 
N(O) 
Pr(DIG,ea) = n n n (e(O) ) i,j:,k: 
X 
i jh 
ki 
i,jh ,ki 
( 
)
N-:-*. k 
n. n. n e-:+. 
t,J;, i 
(4) 
t 
Ji 
k; 
>,J; ,k; 
and hence the log-likelihood is given by 
L(B: D) 
= I:i l:i: l:k: NLJ:,k: logBfJ:,k: + 
l:i l:i; l:k; NiJ,,k, logB;j,,k; 
(5) 
This decomposition facilitates the computation of the BIC 
and BDe scores in several ways. First, note that the like­
lihood is expressed as a sum of terms, where each term 
depends only on the conditional probability of a variable 
given a particular assignment to its parents. Thus, if we 
want to find the maximum likelihood parameters, we can 
maximize within each family independently. Second, the 
decomposition implies that we can learn Bo independently 
of B-+. Finally, we can learn B-+ in exactly the same 
manner as learning a PN for a set of samples of transitions. 
We now make these arguments more precise. Using the 
standard maximum likelihood estimate for multinomial dis­
tributions, we immediately get the following expression for 
E>a. 

142 
Friedman, Murphy, and Russell 
and similarly for the transition case. 
In the case of CPTs, the number of parameters in the 
network is given by 
#G =#Go+ #G ..... 
where 
#Go= Li LpEPa(X;[o]) IIXpll x (IIXi[O]II)- 1) 
and similarly for the transition case. 
Finally, substituting into (3), we find that the BIC score 
is given by 
BIC(G: D)= BICo + BIC-} 
(6) 
where 
BICo = Li Lj: Lk: NPJ: ,k: logBW; ,k: - logaseq#Go 
and 
BIC-} = Li Lj; Lk; NiJ;,k; logBij;,k;- logt #G-t 
Note that the penalty for families in the original time 
slice is a function of the number of sequences Nseq• since 
we only observe that many examples for this part of the 
model; whereas the penalty for the transition model is a 
function of N, the total number of transitions observed. 
3.3 
BDe SCORE FOR DPNS 
Recall that to compute the BDe score, we need to evaluate 
the following integral. 
Pr(D I G) = IPr(D I G,ea)Pr(ea I G)dea 
The first term inside the integral decomposes as in Equa­
tion 4. If we assume that the prior over each conditional 
probability is independent of the rest, then the prior term 
also decomposes as 
Pr(ea I G)= rt Tij: Pr(OXY];,k:) X [li [lj; Pr(Oi,j;,kJ 
Inserting this into the preceding equation, we see that the 
entire expression consists of an integral over the product of 
independent terms. Hence Pr(D I G) can be written as a 
product of two integrals, 
N(O) 
TI TI I TI (n(O) ) i,f ,k'. 
p (n{O) ) dn{O) 
. ., 
k' 
u . . , k' 
' 
' x r v .
.
 , k' 
x 
u . .  
, k' 
t 
Ji 
i 
t,Ji, i 
'''i' i 
'I.,Ji' i 
and similarly for the transition case. 
In order to obtain a closed-form solution, we assume 
Dirichlet priors [6]. A Dirichlet prior for a multinomial 
distribution of a variable X is specified by a set of hyper­
parameters { N' x : x E Val( X)} as follows: 
Pr(8x) = Dirichlet({N'x: X E Val(X)}) <X II o£1'.,-l, 
X 
Intuitively, the hyperparameters can be thought of as 
"pseudo counts", since they play a similar role to the actual 
counts we derive from the data. Under a Dirichlet prior, 
the probability of observing a sequence of values of X with 
counts N(x) is 
I Tix o:<x) Pr(ex I G)dex = 
r<L: N'.,) 
x·n rcN'.,+N(x)) 
r(L:.,<N' .,+N(x))) 
X 
rcN' .,) 
' 
where r(x) = Ioo  tx-le-tdt is the Gamma function that 
satisfies the properties r(1) = 1 and r(x + 1) = xr(x). 
Returning to the BDe score, let us assume that for each 
structure G, we have chosen the hyperparameters N'Y:Jb ,k' 
-} 
.. 
and N' i,j; ,k;. Then we can rewrite Pr( D I G) as a product 
of two terms, 
and similarly for the transition case. 
This still requires us to supply the Dirichlet hyperparame­
ters for each candidate DPN structure. Since the number of 
possible DPN structures is large, these prior estimates might 
be hard to asses in practice. Following [15], we can assign 
all of these given a prior DPN B' = ( B(o), Bc) and two 
equivalent sample sizes if(O) and N-}. Given these compo­
nents, we assign the Dirichlet weights for G = (Go, G->) 
as follows: 
N'd];,k; = if(O) x PBu(Xi[O] = k( I Pa( Xi[O]) = jD 
N'id;,k; 
N-} x PBv (Xi[1) = ki I Pa(Xi[l]) = ji) 
(Note that the choice of parents here is based on G, and 
might differ from the structure of B'.) Intuitively, we can 
consider the belief in B' as equivalent to having previously 
experienced if(O) sequences with N-} transitions. 
It is easy to verify that choosing priors in this manner 
preserves the main property we require: two DPN structures 
that imply identical independence assumptions will receive 
the same score. Thus, we claim that our definition is the 
natural extension of the BDe score to the case of dynamic 
probabilistic networks. 
3.4 
LEARNING IN PRACTICE 
Both scores we considered so far have two important prop­
erties. First, the score of a DPN can be written as a sum 
of terms, (for the BDe case we look at the logarithm of 
Pr( G I D)), where each term determines the score of a 
particular choice of parents for a particular variable. Thus, 
a local change to one family (e.g., arc addition or removal) 
affects only one of these terms. Second, the term that eval­
uates Xi[t] given its parents is a function of the appropriate 
counts (either N(0)(·) or N->(·)) for that family. Thus, 
by caching these counts we can efficiently evaluate many 
families. 
These two properties can be exploited by hill-climbing 
search procedures [3, 15] that gradually improve a candidate 
structure by applying the best arc addition, deletion, or 
reversal. In the case of DPNs, as opposed to static PNs, 
we have the additional constraint that the network structure 
must repeat over time. This reduces the number of options 
at each point in the search. Moreover, we can search for 
the best structure for Bo independently of the search for the 
best structure for B-}. 

Learning the Structure of Dynamic Probabilistic Networks 
143 
4 
LEARNING FROM INCOMPLETE 
DATA 
We now examine how to learn DPNs from incomplete data. 
Incomplete data is crucial since in most real life applications 
since we do not have complete observability of the process 
we want to model. This means that even if the process is 
a stationary Markov process, the partial observations we 
have are not Markovian. As an example, suppose we are 
tracking a car moving down the highway and we are ob­
serving the car's speed, lane, relative distance to other cars, 
and so on. This example is clearly not Markovian, given 
the observations. On the other hand, a Markovian model 
might be reasonable provided we include as part of the state 
information the driver's goals, e.g., get to the left lane, exit 
at the next off ramp, etc. By learning hidden variables, we 
can capture state information about the process. This allows 
the model to "remember" additional information about the 
past and to make better predictions of the future. 
The main difficulty with learning from partial observa­
tions is that we no longer have the score decomposition 
properties of (4). This means that the optimal parameter 
choice in one part of the network depends on the parameter 
choices in other parts of the network. This problem can 
be understood better if we notice that once we have partial 
observability we can no longer talk about counts from the 
training data. For most events of interest, the counts are 
not defined, since we do not know the exact value of the 
variables in questions. 
The most commonly used method to alleviate this 
problem is the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm 
[7, 21]. The E -step of EM uses the currently estimated 
parameters to complete the data by computing the ex­
pected counts. TheM-step then re-estimates the maximum­
likelihood parameter values as if the expected counts were 
true observed counts. The central theorem underlying EM's 
behavior is that each EM cycle is guaranteed to improve the 
likelihood of the data given the model until it reaches a local 
maximum. 
EM has been traditionally viewed as a method for ad­
justing the parameters of a fixed model structure. How­
ever, the underlying theorem can be generalized to apply to 
structural as well as parametric modifications. Friedman's 
Structural EM (SEM) algorithm [10] has the same E -step 
as EM, completing the data by computing expected counts 
based on the current structure and parameters. In addition 
to re-estimating parameters, theM-step of SEM can use the 
expected counts according to the current structure to evalu­
ate any other candidate structure-essentially performing a 
complete-data structural search in the inner loop. Friedman 
shows that for a large family of scorings rules, including 
the BIC score and BDe score [11], the resulting network 
must have a higher score than the original. This is true 
even though the expected counts used in evaluating the new 
structure are computed using the old structure. 
We can extend Friedman's results to the DPN case 
in the following way. 
Let E[BIC((Bb, Bj) : n+) : 
D, (B0,R.7)] be the expected BIC score of a DPN 
( Bh, Bk) based on all possible completions n+ of the data, 
i.e., an assignment of values to the hidden variables. The ex­
pectation is taken with respect to Pr(D+ I D, (B(o), B-+ )), 
i.e., the probability assigned to this completion based on 
the old DPN. Using Theorem 3.1 of [10], we can prove the 
following: 
Theorem 4.1: 
BIC((Bb,Bl): D) -BIC((Bo,B-+): D)> 
E[BIC((Bb,Bm): n+): D,(Bo,B-+)]­
E[BIC((Bo,B-+): n+): D,(Bo,B-t)] 
That is, if we choose a new DPN that has a higher expected 
score than the expected score of the old DPN, then the true 
score of new DPN will also be higher than the true score 
of the old DPN. Moreover, the difference in the expected 
scores is a lower bound on the improvement in terms of the 
actual score we are trying to optimize. 
The crucial property of the expected BIC score is that it, 
too, decomposes into a sum of local terms, as follows. By 
the linearity of expectation, we can "push" the E opera­
tor through the summation signs implicit in (6) to get an 
equation which involves terms of the following form: 
E[NiJ,,k.] 
L":tl:tE[I(Xi[t] = ki,Pa(Xi[t]) =ji;r)] 
= L":t L":t Pr(Xi[t] = ki, Pa(Xi[t]) = iilxi) 
and similarly for E[Ni(,Lk:J· These are called the expected 
sufficient statistics. Hence the key requirement to apply the 
SEM algorithm in the incomplete data case is the ability 
to compute the probabilities of all the families Pr(Xi[t] = 
ki,Pa(Xi[t]) = jilr) of all the networks which we wish 
to evaluate, i.e., the current network and the "neighboring" 
networks in the search space. 
To efficiently compute the probabilities of the families, 
we can convert the DPN to a join tree and use a two-pass dy­
namic programming algorithm [19], similar to the forwards­
backwards algorithm used in HMMs [29]. To efficiently 
compute the probability of a set of nodes that is not con­
tained in any of the join tree nodes, we need to use more 
sophisticated techniques [30]. A simpler approach, which 
is the one we currently use, is to connect together all the 
variables in a single timeslice into a single node (i.e., to 
convert the DPN to a Markov chain), compute the expected 
number of transitions between every pair of consecutive 
states in this chain, and then marginalize these counts to get 
the counts for each family. We also maintain a cache of 
the expected counts computed so far based on the current 
completion model, and use this cache to avoid recomputing 
expected counts. Whatever technique we use, computing 
exact expected sufficient statistics for all models of interest 
is likely to remain computationally challenging. In the dis­
cussion section we mention some approximation techniques 
that may allow us to learn larger models. 
In summary, the SEM procedure is as follows. 
procedure DPN-SEM: 
Choose (B8, BÈ) (possibly randomly). 
Loop for n = 0, 1, . . . until convergence 
Improve the parameters of ( B(j, BÉ) using EM 
Search over DPN structures 
(using expected counts computed with (Eli, BÉ)) 
Let the best scoring DPN seen be (B;+t, BÉ+1) 
if (B;+t, BÉ+1) = (B[j, BÉ) 
return (B;+t, BÉ+1) 

144 
Friedman, Murphy, and Russell 
Data Size 
Ns 
N-+ 
0 
250 
11387 
-1.4323 
500 
28043 
-1.0737 
1000 
61864 
-0.9979 
1500 
102906 
-0.9820 
BIC 
1 
-1.4196 
-1.0248 
-0.9961 
-0.9773 
BDe 
2 
0 
1 
2 
-1.0812 
-1.5286 
-1.5027 
-1.3347 
-1.0168 
-1.2503 
-1.0160 
-1.0339 
-0.9783 
-0.9638 
-0.9647 
-0.9676 
-0.9787 
-0.9625 
-0.9511 
-0.9888 
Figure 2: Logloss (bits) per slice on test data for the networks learned in the driving domain using the BIC and BDe scores. 
Columns are labeled by the number of additional binary variables introduced. 
(a) 
Ç 
ED----8 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 3: Transition models learned from the driving domain. Shaded nodes correspond to hidden variables. 
The above discussion was for the application of SEM for 
the BIC score. In [11], Friedman shows how to extend the 
SEM procedure to learn with the BDe score. The details are 
more involved, since the BDe score is not linear. Nonethe­
less, Friedman shows that it is a reasonable approximation 
to use the BDe score on the expected counts inside the SEM 
loop. 
5 
APPLICATIONS 
In this section we describe two preliminary investigations 
that attempt to evaluate the usefulness of the DPN technol­
ogy we develop here for real-life applications. 
5.1 
INFERRING DRIVER BEHAVIOR 
In many tracking domains, we would like to learn a predic­
tive model of the behavior of the object being tracked. The 
more accurate the model, the more robust the tracking sys­
tem and the more useful its predictions will be in decision 
making. For objects with hidden state, it is our hope that 
DPNs can be learned that correctly reflect the unobserved 
process governing the behavior. The learned model may 
also provide insight into how the behavior is generated. 
In this section, we describe some experiments we car­
ried out using a simulated driving domain [9]. The data 
is an idealization of what cameras mounted on the side of 
the road can collect. In particular, at each time step of 
the simulation, we get a report on cars that are within the 
camera's range. The report for each car has the following 
attributes: position and velocity (relative to the camera's 
reference frame), relative speed and distance to the car in 
front, and whether there is a car immediately to the left or 
right. From this data, we want to learn models of typical 
classes of driving behavior. Such models can be useful for 
several tasks. A prime example arises in the BATmobile 
autonomous car project [8]. The BATmobile's autonomous 
controller attempts to predict the behavior of neighboring 
car. For example, it would be useful to know that someone 
who has just driven across two lanes might be attempting 
to leave the freeway, and consequently is likely to cut in 
front of you. Since tracking information from real cam­
eras is readily available [24], it is reasonable to hope that 
realistic models of human drivers can be obtained. In ad­
dition to their use in autonomous vehicles, such models are 
of paramount importance in so-called "microscopic" traffic 
models used in freeway design and construction planning 
and also in safety studies. 
In our experiments, we generate a variety of simulated 
traffic patterns consisting of populations of vehicles with a 
mixture of different driving tendencies (e.g., trucks, sports 
cars, Sunday drivers, etc.). We generated 3500 cars and 
tracked their behavior over sequences of roughly 40-70 time 
steps. The observed data were discretized using fixed-sized 
bins. We then trained networks using a dataset consisting 
of the first 250, 500, 1000, and 1500 sequences, and tested 
these networks on the last 2000 sequences. 

Learning the Structure of Dynamic Probabilistic Networks 
145 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4: (a) A simple pathway model with five vertices. 
Each vertex represents a site in the genome, and each arc 
is a possible triggering pathway. (b) A DPN model that is 
equivalent to the pathway model shown in (a). 
We learned networks with 0, 1, and 2 hidden variables 
using decision tree CPTs [12] with the BIC and BDe score. 
The initial network structure in each case had each hidden 
variable (if any) dependent on its value in the previous time 
slice, and each observable variable dependent only on the 
hidden variables in the same time slice. (Thus, we did not 
put in any persistence arcs in the initial model.) This struc­
ture connects each hidden variable to all the other variables, 
allowing that variable to carry forward information about 
previous time slices. 
Table 2 summarizes the logloss, per time slice, on the 
test data for the different networks we learned. We can 
roughly interpret the negative of the logloss as the number 
of bits needed to encode a time slice using each network. 3 
These numbers indicate that the addition of hidden vari­
ables improves the predictive ability of the models. They 
also indicate that we might benefit from using many more 
training sequences; this is because many of the important 
events such as lane changes are quite rare in typical freeway 
traffic patterns. Some of the learned networks are shown 
in Figures 3. The networks seem to include at least some 
of the essential relationships that we expect to see. For 
example, in Figure 3(b ), the single hidden node has parent 
"relative distance" and children "lane-position" and "longi­
tudinal velocity" (but not "lateral velocity"). This suggests 
that it encodes "need to take avoiding action." 
5.2 
LEARNING CAUSAL PATHWAYS IN 
BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES 
DPNs are a powerful representation language for describ­
ing causal models of stochastic processes. Such models are 
useful in many areas of science, including molecular biol­
ogy, where one is often interested in inferring the structure 
of regulatory pathways. McAdams and Shapiro [26] model 
part of the genetic circuit of the lambda bacteriophage in 
terms of a sequential logic circuit; and attempts have even 
be made to automatically infer the form of such Boolean 
circuits from data [22]. However, it is well known that the 
abstraction of binary-valued signals together with deter­
ministic switches often breaks down, and one must model 
3For comparison, the g zip utility compresses the observations 
to approximately 5.6 bits per time slice. 
the continuous nature and inherent noise in the underlying 
system to get accurate predictions [25]. Also, one must be 
able to deal with noisy and incomplete observations of the 
system. 
We believe that DPNs provide a good tool for model­
ing such noisy, causal systems, and furthermore that SEM 
provides a good way to learn these models automatically 
from noisy, incomplete data. Here we describe some initial 
experiments using DPNs to learn small artificial examples 
typical of the causal processes involved in genetic regula­
tion. We generate data from models of known structure, 
learn DPN models from the data in a variety of settings, and 
compare these with the original models. The main purpose 
of these experiments is to understand how well DPNs can 
represent such processes, how many observations are re­
quired, and what sorts of observations are most useful. We 
refrain from describing any particular biological process, 
since we do not yet have sufficient real data on the processes 
we are studying to learn a scientifically useful model. 
Simple genetic systems are commonly described by a 
pathway model-a graph in which vertices represent genes 
(or larger chromosomal regions) and arcs represent causal 
pathways (Figure 4(a)). A vertex can either be "off/normal" 
(state 0) or "on/abnormal" (state 1). The system starts in a 
state which is all Os, and vertices can "spontaneously" turn 
on (due to unmodelled external causes) with some probabil­
ity per unit time. Once a vertex is turned on, it stays on, but 
may trigger other neighboring vertices to turn on as well­
again, with a certain probability per unit time. The arcs on 
the graph are usually annotated with the "half-life" param­
eter of the triggering process. Note that pathway models, 
unlike PNs, can contain directed cycles. For many impor­
tant biological processes, the structure and parameters of 
this graph are completely unknown; their discovery would 
constitute a major advance in scientific understanding. 
Pathway models have a very natural representation as 
DPNs: each vertex becomes a state variable, and the trig­
gering arcs are represented as links in the transition network 
of the DPN. The tendency of a vertex to stay "on" once 
triggered is represented by persistence links in the DPN. 
Figure 4(b) shows a DPN representation of the five-vertex 
pathway model in Figure 4(a). The nature of the problem 
suggests that noisy-ORs (or noisy-ANDs) should provide 
a parsimonious representation of the conditional density 
function at each node. To specify a noisy-OR for a node 
with k parents, we use parameters q1, ... , qk, where qi is 
the probability the child node will be in state 0 if the ith par­
ent is in state 1. (Thus we need only k parameters instead 
of 2k for a full CPT.) In the five-vertex DPN model that we 
used in the experiments reported below, all the q parame­
ters (except for the persistence arcs) have value 0.2. For a 
strict persistence model (vertices stay on once triggered), q 
parameters for persistence arcs are fixed at 0. To learn such 
noisy-OR distributions, we follow the technique suggested 
in [27]; this entails introducing a new hidden node for each 
arc in the network, which is a noisy version of its parent, and 
replacing each noisy-OR gate with a deterministic-OR gate. 
We also tried using gradient descent, following [1], but en­
countered difficulties with convergence in cases where the 
optimal parameter values were close to the boundaries (0 

146 
Friedman, Murphy, and Russell 
² 
\ 
o,-GI_ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
·, 
I 
e--a. 
/ 
' 
µ/ 
',, ' ' 
o----e 40% 
60% 
q b- K-·9-·-o
, 
'e-------
e-- -0 
->0--------------o-._ 
L--.-:,.,.--'_ -o 
----------------
e 
· o  
-1¸----¹----º-» 
o 
m 
± 
M 
® 
³ 
´ 
ro 
U 
U 
° 
6 
² 
\ 
5 
o-r&. 
Ill 
CD 
\ 
'· 
I \ 
g 4 
\ 
¶I 
\ 
Æ 3 
". b- .l-_ 
!!>, 
Number of training sequences 
L 2 
b- 6) 'G- -- - - - - ·- -
V.e1 
. 
' 
---
 

 H: H:··\, 
e 
G-f) 0% 
0- ----0 
20% 
0----0 4()0.4 
e---0 
60% 
---
---
-- El 
-1 ¼-½------9--: 
a 
to 
± 
¯ 
® 
³ 
oo 
ro 
U 
U 100 
Number of training sequences 
G-f) 0% 
Ill 1.5 
0-·····0 20% 
0----£) 40% 
o-- -0 60% 
! 
.9 1 
i 
a: 0.5 
'e _____ _ 
o

--··-::=
·---
·-···- ·=
-·--<
-···-· ··
- - o 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Number of training sequences 
= 1.5 
M 
= 1 
N 
-;; 
a: 0.5 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Number of training sequences 
G-f) 0% 
0-·-·E> 40% 
G-- -0 60% 
60 
--= 
U 
100 
Figure 5: Hamming distance (left) of the learned models compared to the generating model for the five-vertex process, 
and relative log-loss (right) compared with the generating model on independent sample of 100 sequences. Tests are for 
regimes in which 0%, 20%, 40%, and 60% of the slices are hidden at random. Top: tabulated CPTs; bottom: noisy-OR 
network. 
or 1). 
In all our experiments, we enforced the presence of the 
persistence arcs in the network structure. We used two 
alternative initial topologies: one that has only persistence 
arcs (so the system must learn to add arcs) and one that 
is fully interconnected (so the system must learn to delete 
arcs). Performance in the two cases was very similar. 
We experimented with three observation regimes that cor­
respond to realistic settings: 
• The complete state of the system is observed at every 
time step. 
• Entire time slices are hidden uniformly at random with 
probability h, corresponding to intermittent observa­
tion. 
• Only two observations are made, one before the pro­
cess begins and another at some unknown time tobs 
after the process is initiated by some external or spon­
taneous event. This might be the case with some dis­
ease processes, where the DNA of a diseased cell can 
be observed but the elapsed time since the disease pro­
cess began is not known. (The "initial" observation is 
of the DNA of some other, healthy cell from the same 
individual.) 
This last case, which obtains in many realistic situations, 
raises a new challenge for machine learning. We resolve 
it as follows: we supply the network with the "diseased" 
observation at time slice T, where T is with high prob­
ability larger than the actual elapsed time tobs since the 
process began.4 We also augment the DPN model with 
a hidden "switch'' variable S that is initially off, but can 
come on spontaneously. 
When the switch is off, the 
system evolves according to its normal transition model 
4With the q parameters set to 0.2 in the true network, the actual 
system state is all-ls with high probability after about T = 20, so 
this is the length used in training and testing. 
P(X[t + 1]1 X[t], S =0), which is to be determined from 
the data. 
Once the switch turns on, however, the state 
of the system is frozen-that is, the conditional probabil­
ity distribution P(X[t + 1] I X[t], S = 1) is fixed so that 
X[t + 1] = X[t] with probability 1. The persistence param­
eter for S determines a probability distribution over tobs; 
by fixing this parameter such that (a priori) tobs < T with 
high probability, we effectively fix a scale for time, which 
would otherwise be arbitrary. The learned network will, 
nonetheless, imply a more constrained distribution for tobs 
given a pair of observations. 
We consider two measures of performance. One is the 
number of different edges in the learned network compared 
to the generating network, i.e., the Hamming distance be­
tween their adjacency matrices. The second is the difference 
in the logloss of the learned model compared to the gen­
erating model, measured on an independent test set. Our 
results for the five-vertex model of Figure 4(a) are shown 
in Figure 5. We see that noisy-ORs perform much better 
than tabular CPTs when the amount of missing data is high. 
Even with 40% missing slices, the exact structure is learned 
from only 30 examples by the noisy-OR network. However, 
when all-but-two slices are hidden, the system cannot learn 
effectively with a reasonable amount of data (results not 
shown). The case in which we do not even know the time at 
which the second observation is made (which we modeled 
with the switching variable) is even harder to learn (results 
not shown). Obviously, the application of prior knowledge 
will be very important in reducing the data requirements. 
6 
DISCUSSION 
In this paper we addressed the question of learning the 
structure and parameters of DPNs from complete and in­
complete data. To the best of our knowledge, we are the 
first to examine this problem. As our experiments show, 

Learning the Structure of Dynamic Probabilistic Networks 
147 
we can learn non-trivial structures from synthetic data and 
"realistic" data from a nontrivial simulator. 
The main bottleneck in the application of our procedures 
is inference, which is necessary to compute the expected 
sufficient statistics. Unlike the case of PNs, a sparse DPN 
structure does not necessarily ensure fast inference-the 
minimum size of the posterior distribution for a slice is 
generally exponential in the number of variables that have 
parents in the previous slice. There are various approxi­
mations that we could use to speed up inference: (1) The 
method proposed by Boyen and Koller [2], which approxi­
mates posterior probabilities in the DPN in a factored form; 
this should be particularly appropriate for the biological 
models we are investigating. (2) Stochastic simulation-for 
example, the ER/SOF algorithm ofKanazawa et al. [ 18]. (3) 
Variational approximations, e.g., Jaakkola and Jorden [17] 
and Ghahramani and Jordan [14]. (4) Methods based on 
multilevel abstraction hierarchy to detect which variables 
are related to each other. 
We are currently extending SEM to learn the structure 
of linear Gaussian DPNs; we hope this will prove com­
petitive with traditional techniques of system identification 
[23]. One advantage of the Gaussian case over the discrete 
case is that marginalizing the posterior over two slices is 
an efficient operation. Ultimately we wish to tackle the 
case of hybrid DPNs, with both discrete and continuous 
variables. The advantage of hybrid DPNs over switching 
state space models [16] is that the state variables can be 
represented in factored form. For example, in the driving 
domain, we can have separate variables for the continuous 
observations (such as speed and position) and for the dis­
crete hidden states (such as "want to change lane" or "want 
to overtake"). The question of how to know when to add 
hidden variables is a very interesting one which we are also 
currently investigating.
