arXiv:1003.2586v1  [cs.LO]  12 Mar 2010
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Inductive Logic Programming in Databases:
from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
FRANCESCA A. LISI
Dipartimento di Informatica
Universit`a degli Studi di Bari
Via Orabona 4
70125 Bari, Italy

submitted 24 April 2009; revised 15 November 2009; accepted 1 January 2010
Abstract
In this paper we address an issue that has been brought to the attention of the database
community with the advent of the Semantic Web, i.e. the issue of how ontologies (and
semantics conveyed by them) can help solving typical database problems, through a better
understanding of KR aspects related to databases. In particular, we investigate this issue
from the ILP perspective by considering two database problems, (i) the deﬁnition of views
and (ii) the deﬁnition of constraints, for a database whose schema is represented also by
means of an ontology. Both can be reformulated as ILP problems and can beneﬁt from
the expressive and deductive power of the KR framework DL+log¬∨. We illustrate the
application scenarios by means of examples.
KEYWORDS: Inductive Logic Programming, Relational Databases, Ontologies, Descrip-
tion Logics, Hybrid Knowledge Representation and Reasoning Systems
1 Motivation
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) has been historically concerned with the induc-
tion of rules from examples for classiﬁcation purposes (Nienhuys-Cheng and de Wolf 1997).
Due to the close relation between Logic Programming and Relational Databases
(Ceri et al. 1990), ILP has established itself as a major approach to Relational
Data Mining (Dˇzeroski and Lavraˇc 2001). Indeed, Datalog (Ceri et al. 1989) is
the most widely used Knowledge Representation (KR) framework in ILP. Con-
versely, interesting extensions of Datalog such as Datalog¬∨(Eiter et al. 1997)
have attracted very little attention in ILP. Some eﬀort has been made also at making
ILP more able to face the challenges posed by Relational Data Mining applications,
e.g. scalability (Blockeel et al. 1999). However the actual added value of ILP with
respect to far more eﬃcient approaches still remains the use of prior conceptual
knowledge (also known as background knowledge, or shortly BK) during the learn-
ing process which enables the induction of conceptually meaningful rules. Yet, the
BK in ILP is often not organized around a well-formed conceptual model. This

2
F.A. Lisi
practice seems to ignore the latest achievements in conceptual modeling such as
ontologies.
In Artiﬁcial Intelligence, an ontology refers to an engineering artifact (more pre-
cisely, produced according to the principles of Ontological Engineering (G´omez-P´erez et al. 2004)),
constituted by a speciﬁc vocabulary used to describe a certain reality, plus a set of
explicit assumptions regarding the intended meaning of the vocabulary words. This
set of assumptions has usually the form of a ﬁrst-order logical (FOL) theory, where
vocabulary words appear as unary or binary predicate names, respectively called
concepts and relations. More formally, an ontology is a formal explicit speciﬁca-
tion of a shared conceptualization for a domain of interest (Gruber 1993). Among
the other things, this deﬁnition emphasizes the fact that an ontology has to be
speciﬁed in a language that comes with a formal semantics. Only by using such a
formal approach ontologies provide the machine interpretable meaning of concepts
and relations that is expected when using an ontology-based approach. Among
the formalisms proposed by Ontological Engineering, the most currently used are
Description Logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2007). In particular, the advent of the Se-
mantic Web (Berners-Lee et al. 2001) has given a tremendous impulse to research
on DL-based ontology languages. Indeed the DL SHIQ (Horrocks et al. 2000)
has been the starting point for the deﬁnition of the W3C standard mark-up lan-
guage OWL (Horrocks et al. 2003). Note that DLs are decidable fragments of FOL
that are incomparable with Clausal Logics (CLs) as regards the expressive power
(Borgida 1996) and the semantics (Rosati 2005b). Yet, DLs and CLs can be com-
bined according to some limited forms of hybridization. E.g., DL+log¬∨is a gen-
eral KR framework that allows for the tight integration of DLs and Datalog¬∨
by imposing the condition of weak DL-safeness on hybrid rules (Rosati 2006)1. We
argue that the adoption of such hybrid KR systems can help overcoming the current
diﬃculties in accommodating ontologies in ILP.
In this paper we address an issue that has been brought to the attention of the
database community with the advent of the Semantic Web, i.e. the issue of how
ontologies (and semantics conveyed by them) can help solving typical database
problems, through a better understanding of KR aspects related to databases. In
particular, we investigate this issue from the ILP perspective by considering two
database problems:
• the deﬁnition of views
• the deﬁnition of constraints
for a database whose schema is represented also by means of an ontology. Both
can be reformulated as ILP problems and can beneﬁt from the expressive and
deductive power of the KR framework DL+log¬∨, mainly from its nonmonotonic
(NM) features. We illustrate the application scenarios by means of examples.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides basic notions on DLs, a short
1 We prefer to use the name DL+log¬∨instead of the original one DL+log in order to emphasize
the Datalog¬∨component of the framework.

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
3
Table 1. Syntax and semantics of some typical DL constructs.
bottom (resp. top) concept
⊥(resp. ⊤)
∅(resp. ∆I)
atomic concept
A
AI ⊆∆I
(abstract) simple role
S
S I ⊆∆I × ∆I
(abstract) individual
a
aI ∈∆I
concept
C
role
R
concept negation
¬C
∆I \ C I
concept intersection
C1 ⊓C2
C I
1 ∩C I
2
concept union
C1 ⊔C2
C I
1 ∪C I
2
value restriction
∀R · C
{x ∈∆I | ∀y (x, y) ∈RI →y ∈C I}
existential restriction
∃R · C
{x ∈∆I | ∃y (x, y) ∈RI ∧y ∈C I}
at least number restriction
≥nR
{x ∈∆I | |{y|(x, y) ∈RI}| ≥n}
at most number restriction
≤nR
{x ∈∆I | |{y|(x, y) ∈RI}| ≤n}
at least qualif. number restriction
≥nR · C
{x ∈∆I | |{y ∈C I|(x, y) ∈RI}| ≥n}
at most qualif. number restriction
≤nR · C
{x ∈∆I | |{y ∈C I|(x, y) ∈RI}| ≤n}
role inversion
R−
{(x, y) ∈∆I × ∆I | (y, x) ∈RI}
role intersection
R1 ⊓R2
RI
1 ∩RI
2
summary of KR research on the integration of DLs and CLs, and a brief introduc-
tion to ILP. Section 3 introduces syntax, semantics and reasoning of DL+log¬∨.
Section 4 and Section 5 deﬁne the ILP proposals for inducing database views and
database constraints, respectively, within the DL+log¬∨framework. Section 6
surveys related work. Section 7 concludes the paper with ﬁnal remarks.
2 Background
2.1 Representing ontologies
DLs are a family of decidable FOL fragments that allow for the speciﬁcation of
knowledge in terms of classes (concepts), instances (individuals), and binary rela-
tions between instances (roles) (Borgida 1996). Complex concepts can be deﬁned
from atomic concepts and roles by means of constructors. Syntax and semantics of
some typical DL constructs are reported in Table 1. E.g., concept descriptions in
the basic DL AL are formed according to only the constructors of atomic negation,
concept conjunction, value restriction, and limited existential restriction. The DLs
ALC and ALN are members of the AL family. The former extends AL with (ar-
bitrary) concept negation (also called complement and equivalent to having both
concept union and full existential restriction), whereas the latter with number re-
striction. The DL ALCNR adds to the constructors inherited from ALC and ALN
a further one: role intersection. Conversely, in the DL SHIQ (Horrocks et al. 2000)
it is allowed to invert roles and to express qualiﬁed number restrictions of the form
≥nR · C and ≤nR · C where R is a simple role. Also transitivity holds for roles.

4
F.A. Lisi
Table 2. Syntax and semantics of DL KBs.
concept equivalence axiom
C1 ≡C2
C I
1 = C I
2
concept subsumption axiom
C1 ⊑C2
C I
1 ⊆C I
2
role equivalence axiom
R1 ≡R2
RI
1 = RI
2
role inclusion axiom
R1 ⊑R2
RI
1 ⊆RI
2
concept assertion
C(a)
aI ∈C I
role assertion
R(a, b)
(aI, bI) ∈RI
individual equality assertion
a ≈b
aI = bI
individual inequality assertion
a ̸≈b
aI ̸= bI
A role (expression) is called complex if it contains any role operations other than
inversion, e.g. role intersection.
A DL knowledge base (KB) Σ can state both is-a relations between concepts (ax-
ioms) and instance-of relations between individuals (resp. couples of individuals)
and concepts (resp. roles) (assertions or facts). Axioms form the so-called termino-
logical box (TBox) T whereas facts are contained in the so-called assertional box
(ABox) A. A SHIQ KB encompasses also a role box (RBox) R which consists of a
ﬁnite set of role equivalence and role inclusion axioms. Therefore hierarchies can be
deﬁned over not only concepts but also roles. Transitivity of roles is also speciﬁed
by means of axioms. Thus, when a DL-based ontology language is adopted, an on-
tology is nothing else than a TBox, possibly together with a RBox. If the ontology
is populated, it corresponds to a whole DL KB, i.e. encompassing also an ABox.
The semantics of DLs can be deﬁned directly with set-theoretic formalizations as
shown in Table 2 or through a mapping to FOL as shown in (Borgida 1996). An
interpretation I = (∆I, ·I) for a DL KB consists of a domain ∆I and a mapping
function ·I. Under the Unique Names Assumption (UNA)(Reiter 1980), individuals
are mapped to elements of ∆I such that aI ̸= bI if a ̸= b. Yet UNA does not hold
by default in DLs. Thus individual equality (inequality) assertions may appear in
a DL KB (see Table 2). An interpretation I is a model of a KB Σ = (T , A) iﬀ
it satisﬁes all axioms and assertions in T and A . Also the KB represents many
diﬀerent interpretations, i.e. all its models. This is coherent with the Open World
Assumption (OWA) that holds in FOL semantics. A DL KB is satisﬁable if it has at
least one model. An ABox assertion α is a logical consequence of a KB Σ, written
Σ |= α, if all models of Σ are also models of α.
The main reasoning task for a DL KB Σ is the consistency check which tries to
prove the satisﬁability of Σ. The consistency check is performed by applying deci-
sion procedures mostly based on tableau calculus. Another well known reasoning
service in DLs is instance check, i.e., the check of whether an ABox assertion is
a logical implication of a DL KB. A more sophisticated version of instance check,
called instance retrieval, retrieves, for a DL KB Σ, all (ABox) individuals that

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
5
are instances of the given (possibly complex) concept expression C, i.e., all those
individuals a such that Σ entails that a is an instance of C. In data-intensive ap-
plications, querying KBs plays a central role. Instance retrieval is, in some aspects,
a rather weak form of querying: although possibly complex concept expressions
are used as queries, we can only query for tree-like relational structures, i.e., a DL
concept cannot express arbitrary cyclic structures. The possibility of expressing
conjunctive queries (CQ) and unions of conjunctive queries (UCQ) is widely stud-
ied in DLs. Let PC and PR be the alphabets of concept names and role names,
respectively. A Boolean UCQ over the alphabet PC ∪PR is a FOL sentence of
the form q1 ∨. . . ∨qn, where each qi is a conjunction ∃⃗X conji(⃗X ) of atoms whose
predicates are in PC ∪PR and whose arguments are either constants or variables
from the tuple ⃗X . A Boolean CQ corresponds to a Boolean UCQ in the case when
n = 1. The Boolean UCQ entailment problem in DLs is deﬁned as follows: A KB
Σ entails a UCQ Q = q1 ∨. . . ∨qn, written as Σ |= q1 ∨. . . ∨qn, if, for every
model I of Σ, there is some i such that qi is satisﬁed in I and 1 ≤i ≤n. Note
that instance check can be expressed as the problem of query entailment problem
of a Boolean CQs constituted by just one ground atom. The Boolean CQ/UCQ
containment problem2 in DLs is deﬁned as follows: Given a DL-TBox T , a Boolean
CQ Q1 and a Boolean UCQ Q2 over the alphabet PC ∪PR, Q1 is contained in Q2
with respect to T , denoted by T |= Q1 ⊆Q2, iﬀ, for every model I of T , if Q1 is
satisﬁed in I then Q2 is satisﬁed in I. This problem has been proved decidable for
many DLs, notably for the very expressive SHIQ (Glimm et al. 2008) and SHOQ
(Glimm et al. 2008). Finally, when the UNA does not hold, it can be immediately
reduced to the Boolean UCQ entailment problem (Calvanese et al. 2008). In the
rest of the paper we shall consider DLs without UNA.
2.2 Integrating ontologies and relational databases
The integration of ontologies and relational databases follows the tradition of KR
research on hybrid systems, i.e. those systems which are constituted by two or
more subsystems dealing with distinct portions of a single KB by performing spe-
ciﬁc reasoning procedures (Frisch and Cohn 1991). The motivation for investigating
and developing such systems is to improve on two basic features of KR formalisms,
namely representational adequacy and deductive power, by preserving the other
crucial feature, i.e. decidability. Those KR systems that integrate ontologies and
relational databases will be referred to as DL-CL hybrid KR systems in the rest of
the paper. They implement diﬀerent solutions to the problem of combining DLs and
CLs. Indeed DLs and CLs are FOL fragments incomparable as for the expressive-
ness (Borgida 1996) and the semantics (Rosati 2005a) but combinable at diﬀerent
degrees of integration. The integration is said to be tight when a model of the hy-
brid KB is deﬁned as the union of two models, one for the DL part and one for the
CL part, which share the same domain. In particular, combining DLs with CLs in
a tight manner can easily yield to undecidability if the interaction scheme between
2 This problem was called existential entailment in (Levy and Rousset 1998).

6
F.A. Lisi
the DL and the CL part of a hybrid KB does not fulﬁll some condition of safe-
ness(Rosati 2005b). Indeed safeness allows to solve the semantic mismatch between
DLs and CLs, namely the OWA for DLs and the CWA for CLs3. In the following
we shall brieﬂy describe two exemplary cases of tightly-integrated DL-CL hybrid
KR systems: AL-log (Donini et al. 1998) and Carin (Levy and Rousset 1998). The
former is safe whereas the latter is not.
AL-log (Donini et al. 1998) is a hybrid KR system that integrates ALC (Schmidt-Schauss and Smolka 1991)
and Datalog (Ceri et al. 1989). In particular, variables occurring in the body of
rules may be constrained with ALC concept assertions to be used as ’typing con-
straints’. This makes rules applicable only to explicitly named objects. A further
restriction is that only Datalog atoms are allowed in rule heads. Reasoning for
AL-log knowledge bases is based on constrained SLD-resolution, i.e. an extension
of SLD-resolution with a tableau calculus for ALC to deal with constraints. Con-
strained SLD-resolution is decidable and runs in single non-deterministic exponen-
tial time. Constrained SLD-refutation is a complete and sound method for answer-
ing ground queries, i.e. conjunctions of ground Datalog atoms and ALC concept
assertions.
A comprehensive study of the eﬀects of combining DLs and CLs can be found in
(Levy and Rousset 1998). Here the family Carin of hybrid languages is presented.
Special attention is devoted to the DL ALCNR. The results of the study can
be summarized as follows: (i) answering CQs over ALCNR TBoxes is decidable,
(ii) query answering in a logic obtained by extending ALCNR with non-recursive
Datalog rules, where both concepts and roles can occur in rule bodies, is also de-
cidable, as it can be reduced to answering a UCQ, (iii) if rules are recursive, query
answering becomes undecidable, (iv) decidability can be regained by disallowing
certain combinations of constructors in the logic, and (v) decidability can be re-
gained by requiring rules to be role-safe, where at least one variable from each role
literal must occur in some non-DL-atom. As in AL-log, query answering is decided
using constrained resolution and a modiﬁed version of tableau calculus.
2.3 Learning rules with ILP
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) was born at the intersection between Logic
Programming and Concept Learning (Muggleton 1990). From Logic Programming
it has borrowed the KR framework, i.e. Horn Clausal Logic (HCL). From Concept
Learning it has inherited the inferential mechanisms for induction, the most promi-
nent of which is generalization. Concept Learning is concerned with the problem of
automatically inducing the general deﬁnition of some concept (called target), given
examples labeled as instances or noninstances of the concept. In ILP the target is
the predicate whose deﬁnition is returned by the inductive learning process as a hy-
pothesis. The deﬁnition may consist of one or more clauses. A distinguishing feature
of ILP with respect to other forms of Concept Learning is the use of prior knowledge
of the domain of interest, called background knowledge (BK). Therefore, induction
3 Note that the OWA and CWA have a strong inﬂuence on the results of reasoning.

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
7
with ILP generalizes from individual instances/observations in the presence of BK,
ﬁnding valid hypotheses. Validity depends on the underlying setting.
2.3.1 Settings
At present, there exist several formalizations of induction in ILP that can be clas-
siﬁed according to the following two orthogonal dimensions: the scope of induction
(discrimination vs characterization) and the representation of observations (ground
deﬁnite clauses vs ground unit clauses) (De Raedt and Dehaspe 1997). Discrimi-
nant induction aims at inducing hypotheses with discriminant power as required in
tasks such as classiﬁcation where observations encompass both positive and nega-
tive examples. Characteristic induction is more suitable for ﬁnding regularities in
a data set. This corresponds to learning from positive examples only. For a thor-
ough discussion of diﬀerences between discriminant and characteristic induction see
(Michalski 1983). The second dimension aﬀects the notion of coverage, i.e. the con-
dition under which a hypothesis explains/conﬁrms an observation. In learning from
entailment (also called normal or explanatory ILP setting), hypotheses are clausal
theories, observations are ground deﬁnite clauses, and a hypothesis covers an ob-
servation if the hypothesis logically entails the observation (Frazier and Pitt 1993).
In learning from interpretations (also called nonmonotonic or conﬁrmatory ILP
setting), hypotheses are clausal theories, observations are Herbrand interpretations
(ground unit clauses) and a hypothesis covers an observation if the observation
is a model for the hypothesis (De Raedt and Dˇzeroski 1994). Summing up, when
learning from entailment with the aim of discrimination, a hypothesis is valid (or
correct) if it logically entails all positive examples and none of the negative exam-
ples. The former condition of validity is called completeness, whereas the latter is
referred to as consistency. If the scope of induction is characterization, the condi-
tion of consistency is dropped out from the notion of validity due to the absence
of negative examples. The two settings for the case of learning from interpretations
can be deﬁned similarly.
2.3.2 Techniques
In Concept Learning, thus in ILP, generalization is traditionally viewed as search
through a partially ordered space of inductive hypotheses (Mitchell 1982). Accord-
ing to this vision, an inductive hypothesis is a clausal theory and the induction of
a single clause requires (i) structuring, (ii) searching and (iii) bounding the space
of clauses (Nienhuys-Cheng and de Wolf 1997).
First we focus on (i) by clarifying how the algebraic notion of ordering can be
applied to clauses. A generality relation allows for determining which one, between
two clauses, is more general than the other. It deﬁnes a pre-order (or quasi order)
on the set of clauses, i.e. a partially-ordered set of equivalence classes. One such
ordering is θ-subsumption (Plotkin 1970): Given two clauses C and D, we say that

8
F.A. Lisi
C θ-subsumes D if there exists a substitution θ, such that Cθ ⊆D4. Given the
usefulness of BK, orders have been proposed that reckon with it. Among them is
relative subsumption (Plotkin 1971): Given two clauses C and D and a clausal
theory K, we say that C subsumes D relative to K if there exists a substitution
θ such that K |= ∀(Cθ ⇒D). Also, generalized subsumption (Buntine 1988) is
of interest to this paper: Given two deﬁnite clauses C and D standardized apart5
and a deﬁnite program K, we say that C subsumes D w.r.t. K iﬀthere exists
a ground substitution θ for C such that (i) head(C)θ = head(D)σ and (ii) K ∪
body(D)σ |= body(C)θ where σ is a Skolem substitution6 for D with respect to
{C} ∪K. In the general case, generalized subsumption is undecidable and does not
introduce a lattice7 on a set of clauses. Because of these problems, θ-subsumption
is more frequently used in ILP systems. Yet for Datalog generalized subsumption
is decidable and admits a least general generalization.
Once structured according to a generality order, the space of hypotheses can
be searched (ii) by means of reﬁnement operators. A reﬁnement operator is a
function which computes a set of specializations or generalizations of a clause
according to whether a top-down or a bottom-up search is performed. The two
kinds of reﬁnement operator have been therefore called downward and upward, re-
spectively. A good reﬁnement operator should satisfy certain desirable properties
(van der Laag 1995). We shall illustrate these properties for the case of downward
reﬁnement operators but analogous conditions are actually required to hold for the
upward ones as well. Ideally, a downward reﬁnement operator should compute only
a ﬁnite set of specializations of each clause - otherwise it will be of limited practical
use. When it accomplishes this condition, it is called locally ﬁnite. Furthermore, it
should be complete: every specialization should be reachable by a ﬁnite number of
applications of the operator. Finally, it is better only to compute proper special-
izations of a clause, for otherwise repeated application of the operator might get
stuck in a sequence of equivalent clauses, without ever achieving any real special-
ization. Operators that satisfy all these conditions simultaneously are called ideal.
It has been shown that ideal reﬁnement operators do not exist for both full and
Horn clausal languages ordered by either subsumption or the stronger orders (e.g.
implication).
In order to deﬁne a reﬁnement operator for full clausal languages, it is necessary to
drop one of the three properties of idealness. Since local ﬁniteness and completeness
are usually considered the most important among these properties, this means that
locally ﬁnite and complete, but improper reﬁnement operators can be deﬁned for
full clausal languages. On the other hand, in order to retain all the three properties
of idealness, it seems that the only possibility is to restrict the search space. Hence,
4 This deﬁnition relies on the set notation for clauses.
5 Two clauses C and D are said to be standardized apart if they have no variables in common.
6 Let B be a clausal theory and C be a clause. Let X1, . . . , Xn be all the variables appearing
in C , and a1, . . . , an be distinct constants (individuals) not appearing in B or C . Then the
substitution {X1/a1, . . . , Xn/an} is called a Skolem substitution for C w.r.t. B.
7 A lattice is a partially ordered set (also called a poset) in which any two elements have a unique
supremum (the elements’ least upper bound) and an inﬁmum (greatest lower bound).

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
9
the deﬁnition of reﬁnement operators is usually coupled with the speciﬁcation of a
declarative bias for bounding the space of clauses (iii). Bias concerns anything which
constrains the search for theories, e.g. a language bias speciﬁes syntactic constraints
on the clauses in the search space. One such constraint is connectedness: A clause
C is connected if each variable occurring in head(C) also occurs in body(C). The
constraint of linkedness is also widely used: A deﬁnite clause C is linked if each
literal li ∈C is linked. A literal li ∈C is linked if at least one of its terms is linked.
A term t in some literal li ∈C is linked with linking-chain of length 0, if t occurs
in head(C), and with linking-chain of length d +1, if some other term in li is linked
with linking-chain of length d. The link-depth of a term t in li is the length of the
shortest linking-chain of t.
3 Integrating Ontologies and Databases with DL+log¬∨
The KR framework of DL+log¬∨(Rosati 2006) allows for the tight integration
of DLs (Baader et al. 2007) and Datalog¬∨(Eiter et al. 1997). More precisely, it
allows a DL KB to be extended with Datalog¬∨rules according to the so-called
weak safeness condition as shown in the following.
3.1 Syntax
Formulas in DL+log¬∨are built upon three mutually disjoint predicate alphabets:
an alphabet PC of concept names, an alphabet PR of role names, and an alphabet
PD of Datalog predicates. We call a predicate p a DL-predicate if either p ∈PC
or p ∈PR. Then, we denote by N a countably inﬁnite alphabet of constant names.
An atom is an expression of the form p(⃗X ), where p is a predicate of arity n and ⃗X
is a n-tuple of variables and constants. If no variable symbol occurs in ⃗X, then p(⃗X )
is called a ground atom (or fact). If p ∈PC ∪PR, the atom is called a DL-atom,
while if p ∈PD, it is called a Datalog atom.
Deﬁnition 1
Given a description logic DL, a DL+log¬∨KB B is a pair (Σ, Π), where Σ is a
DL KB and Π is a set of Datalog¬∨rules, where each rule R has the form
p1( ⃗X1) ∨. . . ∨pn( ⃗
Xn) ←
r1( ⃗Y1), . . . , rm( ⃗
Ym), s1( ⃗Z1), . . . , sk( ⃗Zk), not u1( ⃗
W1), . . . , not uh( ⃗
Wh) (1)
with n, m, k, h ≥0, each pi( ⃗Xi), rj ( ⃗Yj ), sl(⃗Zl), uk( ⃗
Wk) is an atom and:
• each pi is either a DL-predicate or a Datalog predicate;
• each rj , uk is a Datalog predicate;
• each sl is a DL-predicate;
• (Datalog-safeness) every variable occurring in R must appear in at least one
of the atoms r1( ⃗Y1), . . . , rm( ⃗
Ym), s1( ⃗Z1), . . . , sk( ⃗Zk);
• (weak DL-safeness) every head variable of R must appear in at least one of
the atoms r1( ⃗Y1), . . . , rm( ⃗
Ym).

10
F.A. Lisi
We remark that the condition of weak DL-safeness allows for the presence of
variables that only occur in DL-atoms in the body of R. This condition allows to
overcome the main representational limits of the safe approaches by keeping the
integration scheme still decidable. Indeed, the notion of DL-safeness proposed in
(Motik et al. 2005) can be expressed as follows: every variable of R must appear in
at least one of the atoms r1( ⃗Y1), . . . , rm( ⃗
Ym). Therefore, DL-safeness forces every
variable of R to occur also in the Datalog atoms in the body of R. This disables the
possibility of expressing CQs and UCQs. By weakening the DL-safeness condition,
this possibility can be enabled. For these reasons, DL+log¬∨is located between
AL-log and Carin along the expressivity line.
Without loss of generality, we can assume that in a DL+log¬∨KB (Σ, Π) all
constants occurring in Σ also occur in Π.
Example 1
Let us consider a DL+log¬∨KB B (adapted from (Rosati 2006)) integrating the
following DL-KB Σ (ontology about persons)
[A1] PERSON ⊑∃FATHER−.MALE
[A2] MALE ⊑PERSON
[A3] FEMALE ⊑PERSON
[A4] FEMALE ⊑¬MALE
MALE(Bob)
PERSON(Mary)
PERSON(Paul)
FATHER(John,Paul)
and the following Datalog¬∨program Π (database about students):
[R1] boy(X) ←enrolled(X,c1,ft), PERSON(X), not girl(X)
[R2] girl(X) ←enrolled(X,c2,ft), PERSON(X)
[R3] boy(X)∨girl(X) ←enrolled(X,c3,ft), PERSON(X)
[R4] FEMALE(X) ←girl(X)
[R5] MALE(X) ←boy(X)
[R6] man(X) ←enrolled(X,c3,pt), FATHER(X,Y)
enrolled(Paul,c1,ft)
enrolled(Mary,c1,ft)
enrolled(Mary,c2,ft)
enrolled(Bob,c3,ft)
enrolled(John,c3,pt)
encompassing rules that mix DL-literals and Datalog-literals. The rule [R3], e.g.,
says that: If X is a PERSON enrolled in the course c3 as a full-time student (ft), then
X is either a boy or a girl. The rule [R6] says that: If X is a FATHER (of some Y)
enrolled in the course c3 as a part-time student (pt), then X is a man. Notice that
the variable Y in R6 is weakly-safe but not DL-safe, since Y does not occur in any
Datalog literal of R6.

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
11
3.2 Semantics
For DL+log¬∨two semantics have been deﬁned: a FOL semantics and a NM se-
mantics. The FOL semantics does not distinguish between head atoms and negated
body atoms. Thus, the rule (1) is equivalent to:
p1( ⃗X1) ∨. . . ∨pn( ⃗
Xn) ∨u1( ⃗
W1) ∨. . . ∨uh( ⃗
Wh) ←
r1( ⃗Y1), . . . , rm( ⃗
Ym), s1( ⃗Z1), . . . , sk( ⃗Zk) (2)
The NM semantics is based on the stable model semantics of Datalog¬∨. Accord-
ing to it, DL-predicates are still interpreted under OWA, while Datalog predicates
are interpreted under CWA. Notice that, under both semantics, entailment can be
reduced to satisﬁability, since it is possible to express constraints in the Datalog
program. In particular, it is immediate to verify the following theorem on ground
query answering (Rosati 2006).
Theorem 1
Given a DL+log¬∨KB (Σ, Π) and a ground atom α, (Σ, Π) |= α iﬀ(Σ, Π∪{←α})
is unsatisﬁable.
Analogously, CQ answering can be reduced to satisﬁability in Datalog¬∨, more
precisely it can be performed by means of multiple satisﬁability tests. Consequently,
Rosati (2006) concentrates on the satisﬁability problem in DL+log¬∨KBs. It
has been shown that, when the rules are made out of Datalog∨(i.e., without
negated atoms), the above two semantics are equivalent with respect to the satis-
ﬁability problem. In particular, FOL-satisﬁability can always be reduced (in linear
time) to NM-satisﬁability by rewriting rules from the form (1) to the form (2).
Hence, only the satisﬁability problem under the NM semantics is deeply treated in
(Rosati 2006).
Example 2
With reference to Example 1, it can be easily veriﬁed that all NM-models for B
satisfy the following ground atoms:
1. boy(Paul) (since rule [R1] is always applicable for {X/Paul} and [R1] acts
like a default rule, which can be read as follows: if X is a person enrolled in
course c1, then X is a boy, unless we know for sure that X is a girl);
2. girl(Mary) (since rule [R2] is always applicable for {X/Mary});
3. boy(Bob) (since rule [R3] is always applicable for {X/Bob}, and, by rule [R4],
the conclusion girl(Bob) is inconsistent with Σ);
4. MALE(Paul) (due to rule [R5] and conclusion 1);
5. FEMALE(Mary) (due to rule [R4] and conclusion 2).
Notice that B |=NM FEMALE(Mary), while Σ ̸|=FOL FEMALE(Mary). In other words,
adding rules has indeed an eﬀect on the conclusions one can draw about DL-
predicates. Moreover, such an eﬀect also holds under the FOL semantics of DL+log-
KBs, since it can be veriﬁed that B |=FOLFEMALE(Mary) in this case.

12
F.A. Lisi
NMSAT-DL+log(B)
1. satisﬁable=false
2. if there exists a partition (GP, GN ) of grp(Π) such that
3.
(a) Π(GP, GN ) has a stable model and
4.
(b) T |= CQ(A ∪GP) ⊂UCQ(GN)
5.
then satisﬁable=true
6. endif
return satisﬁable
Figure 1. The algorithm NMSAT-DL+log
3.3 Reasoning
The problem statement of NM-satisﬁability for ﬁnite DL+log¬∨KBs relies on the
aforementioned Boolean CQ/UCQ containment problem for the DL part and on the
so-called DL-grounding of the Datalog¬∨component. In particular, DL-grounding
is an adaptation of the grounding operation used in stable model semantics to the
DL+log¬∨case.
Given a DL+log¬∨KB B = (Σ, Π), we denote by CΠ the set of constants
occurring in Π. The DL-grounding of Π, denoted as grp(Π), is a set of Boolean
CQs obtained by grounding all and only the DL-parts of rule bodies and the DL-
atoms appearing in rule heads in Π with respect to the constants in CΠ. Note that
grounding in grp(Π) is partial, since the variables that only occur in DL-atoms in
the body of rules are not replaced by constants in grp(Π). Similarly to grp(Π), we
deﬁne the partial grounding of Π on CΠ, denoted as pgr(Π, CΠ), as the program
obtained from Π by grounding with the constants in CΠ all variables except for the
existential variables of rules that only occur in DL-atoms. Finally, given a partition
(GP, GN ) of grp(Π), we denote by Π(GP, GN ) the ground Datalog¬∨program
obtained from pgr(Π, CΠ) by taking into account the two sets GP and GN so that
no DL-predicate occurs in such a program.
Let G be a set of Boolean CQs. Then, we denote by CQ(G) (resp. UCQ(G))
the Boolean CQ (resp. UCQ) corresponding to the conjunction (resp. disjunction)
of all the Boolean CQs in G. The algorithm NMSAT-DL+log for deciding NM-
satisﬁability of DL+log¬∨KBs has a very simple structure (see Figure 1). It
guesses a partition (GP, GN ) of grp(Π) that is consistent with the DL-KB Σ =
(T , A) (Boolean CQ/UCQ containment problem) and such that Π(GP, GN ) has a
stable model. More details can be found in (Rosati 2006).
The decidability of reasoning, thus of ground query answering, in DL+log¬∨
depends on the decidability of the Boolean CQ/UCQ containment problem in DL.
Theorem 2
For any DL, satisﬁability of DL+log¬∨KBs (under both FOL and NM semantics)
is decidable iﬀBoolean CQ/UCQ containment is decidable in DL (Rosati 2006).
From Theorem 2 and from previous results on query answering and query con-
tainment in DLs, it follows the decidability of reasoning in several instantiations

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
13
of DL+log¬∨. In all these decidable cases, ground queries can be answered by
applying NMSAT-DL+log.
The complexity of reasoning in DL+log¬∨depends on the speciﬁc DL chosen
for instantiating the framework. We remind the reader to (Rosati 2006) for the
analysis of some cases.
4 Inducing Database Views in DL+log¬ with ILP
In this section we consider the problem of deﬁning a new view in a database whose
schema is partly represented by an ontology. We suppose that there are tuples
known to belong to the view as well as tuples known not to belong to the view. Cast
in the DL+log¬ framework, this problem boils down to the problem of building
DL+log¬ rules deﬁning a Datalog predicate p which stands for the view name.
Tuples are ground Datalog facts that are true for p if they belong to the view, false
otherwise. The database problem of interest can be reformulated as the following
problem of discriminant induction.
Deﬁnition 2
Given:
• a Datalog database Π and a DL ontology Σ integrated into a DL+log¬
KB B (background theory);
• a Datalog predicate p (target predicate);
• a set O of ground Datalog facts that are either true or false for p (examples);
and
• a set L of constraints on the form of DL+log¬ deﬁnitions for p (language
of hypotheses)
the problem of deﬁning the view of name p is to induce a set H ⊂L (hypothesis) of
DL+log¬ rules from O and B such that H explains O by taking B into account.
We assume that the background theory B in Deﬁnition 2 is a DL+log¬ KB
which consists of an intensional part K (i.e., the TBox T plus the set ΠR of rules)
and an extensional part F (i.e., the ABox A plus the set ΠF of facts). Also we denote
by PC(B), PR(B), and PD(B) the sets of concept, role and Datalog predicate
names occurring in B, respectively. Note that p ̸∈PD(B).
Example 3
Throughout this section we shall consider a database Π in the form of the following
Datalog¬ program:
famous(Mary)
famous(Paul)
famous(Joe)
scientist(Joe)
containing also the rule
[R1] RICH(X) ←famous(X), not scientist(X)

14
F.A. Lisi
linking the database to the ontology Σ expressed as the following DL KB:
[A1] RICH⊓UNMARRIED ⊑∃WANTS-TO-MARRY−.⊤
[A2] WANTS-TO-MARRY⊑LOVES
UNMARRIED(Mary)
UNMARRIED(Joe)
Note that Π and Σ can be integrated into a DL+log¬ KB B (adapted from
(Rosati 2006)) that concerns the individuals Mary, Joe, and Paul and builds upon
the alphabets PC(B) = {RICH/1, UNMARRIED/1}, PR(B) = {WANTS-TO-MARRY/2, LOVES/2},
and PD(B) = {famous/1, scientist/1}.
The language L of hypotheses in Deﬁnition 2 must allow for the generation of
DL+log¬ rules starting from three disjoint alphabets PC(L) ⊆PC(B), PR(L) ⊆
PR(B), and PD(L) ⊆PD(B). Also we distinguish between P+
D(L) and P−
D(L)
in order to specify which Datalog predicates can occur in positive and negative
literals, respectively. More precisely, we consider DL+log¬ rules of the form
p(⃗X ) ←r1( ⃗Y1), . . . , rm( ⃗
Ym), s1( ⃗Z1), . . . , sk( ⃗Zk), not u1( ⃗
W1), . . . , not uh( ⃗
Wh)
where the unique literal p(⃗X ) in the head is formed out of a Datalog-predicate
p which represents the target predicate. Note that the conditions of linkedness
and connectedness usually assumed in ILP are guaranteed by the conditions of
Datalog safeness and weak DL safeness valid in DL+log¬∨.
Example 4
Suppose that the Datalog-predicate happy is the target and the set P+
D(Lhappy)∪
PC(Lhappy) ∪PR(Lhappy) = {famous/1, RICH/1, LOVES/2, WANTS-TO-MARRY/2}
provides the building blocks for the language Lhappy. The following DL+log¬
rules
Rhappy
1
happy(X) ←famous(X)
Rhappy
2
happy(X) ←famous(X), RICH(X)
Rhappy
3
happy(X) ←famous(X), LOVES(Y,X)
Rhappy
4
happy(X) ←famous(X), WANTS-TO-MARRY(Y,X)
belonging to Lhappy can be considered deﬁnitions for the target predicate happy.
The set O of observations in Deﬁnition 2 contains facts of the kind p(⃗ai) where
p is the target predicate and ⃗ai is a tuple of individuals occurring in the ABox A.
We assume B ∩O = ∅. Furthermore, the description of each observation oi ∈O
is in the background theory and may be incomplete due to the inherent nature
of DL+log¬. Therefore, the normal ILP setting is the most appropriate to the
learning problem in hand and can be extended to DL+log¬ as follows.
Deﬁnition 3
Let R ∈L be a DL+log¬ rule, B a DL+log¬ KB, p the target predicate, and
oi = p(⃗ai) ∈O a ground Datalog fact. We say that R covers oi under entailment
w.r.t. B iﬀB ∪R |= p(⃗ai).
Note that the coverage test can be reduced to query answering in DL+log¬ KBs
which in turn can be reformulated as a satisﬁability problem of the KB.

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
15
Example 5
The rule Rhappy
4
mentioned in Example 4 covers the observation oMary = happy(Mary)
because B ∪Rhappy
4
|= happy(Mary). Indeed, all NM-models for B′ = B ∪Rhappy
4
satisfy:
• famous(Mary) is in B;
• ∃WANTS-TO-MARRY−.⊤(Mary), due to the axiom [A1] and to the fact that both
RICH(Mary) and UNMARRIED(Mary) hold in every model of B′. In particular,
RICH(Mary) holds because of [R1];
• happy(Mary), due to the above conclusions and to the rule Rhappy
4
. Indeed,
since ∃WANTS-TO-MARRY−.⊤(Mary) holds in every model of B′, it follows that
in every model there exists a constant x such that WANTS-TO-MARRY(x,Mary)
holds in the model, consequently from Rhappy
4
it follows that happy(Mary)
also holds in the model.
Note that Rhappy
4
does not cover the observations oJoe = happy(Joe) and oPaul =
happy(Paul). More precisely, B′ ̸|= happy(Joe) because scientist(Joe) holds in
every model of B′, thus making the rule [R1] not applicable for {X/Joe}, therefore
RICH(Joe) not derivable. Finally, B′ ̸|= happy(Paul) because UNMARRIED(Paul) is
not forced to hold in every model of B′, therefore ∃WANTS-TO-MARRY−.⊤(Paul) is
not forced by [A1] to hold in every such model.
It can be proved that also Rhappy
3
covers only oMary, while Rhappy
1
covers all
the three observations and Rhappy
2
covers oMary and oPaul only.
In order to support the induction of DL+log¬ rules with ILP techniques, the
language L of hypotheses needs to be equipped with a generality order ⪰so that
(L, ⪰) is a search space. Therefore, the next two subsections, Section 4.1 and Section
4.2, are devoted to suggested techniques for structuring and searching the hypothe-
sis space, respectively. Conversely, Section 4.3 sketches an ILP algorithm employing
these techniques to solve the original problem of inducing database views.
4.1 The hypothesis space
The deﬁnition of a generality order for hypotheses in L must consider the pecu-
liarities of DL+log¬. One issue arises from the presence of NAF literals (i.e.,
negated Datalog literals) both in the background theory and in the language of
hypotheses. As pointed out in (Sakama 2001), rules in normal logic programs are
syntactically regarded as Horn clauses by viewing the NAF-literal ¬p(X ) as an
atom not p(X ) with the new predicate not p. Then any result obtained in ILP on
Horn logic programs is directly carried over to normal logic programs. Assuming
one such treatment of NAF literals, we propose to adapt generalized subsumption
(Buntine 1988) to the case of DL+log¬ rules and provide a characterization of
the resulting generality order, denoted by ⪰¬
K, that relies on the reasoning tasks
known for DL+log¬∨and from which a test procedure can be derived.

16
F.A. Lisi
Deﬁnition 4
Let R1, R2 ∈L be two DL+log¬ rules standardized apart, K a DL+log¬ KB,
and σ a Skolem substitution for R2 with respect to {R1} ∪K. We say that R1
is more general than R2 w.r.t. K, denoted by R1 ⪰¬
K R2, iﬀthere exists a ground
substitution θ for R1 such that (i) head(R1)θ = head(R2)σ and (ii) K∪body(R2)σ |=
body(R1)θ. We say that R1 is strictly more general than R2 w.r.t. K, denoted by
R1 ≻¬
K R2, iﬀR1 ⪰¬
K R2 and R2 ̸⪰¬
K R1. We say that R1 is equivalent to R2 w.r.t.
K, denoted by R1 ≡¬
K R2, iﬀR1 ⪰¬
K R2 and R2 ⪰¬
K R1.
Note that condition (ii) is a variant of the Boolean CQ/UCQ containment prob-
lem because body(R2)σ and body(R1)θ are both Boolean CQs. The diﬀerence be-
tween (ii) and the original formulation of the problem is that K encompasses not
only a TBox but also a set of rules. Nonetheless this variant can be reduced to
the satisﬁability problem for ﬁnite DL+log¬ KBs. Indeed the skolemization of
body(R2) allows to reduce the Boolean CQ/UCQ containment problem to a CQ
answering problem. Due to the aforementioned link between CQ answering and
satisﬁability, checking (ii) can be reformulated as proving that the KB (T , ΠR ∪
body(R2)σ ∪{←body(R1)θ}) is unsatisﬁable. Once reformulated this way, (ii) can
be solved by applying the algorithm NMSAT-DL+log.
Example 6
Let us consider the hypotheses
Rhappy
1
happy(A) ←famous(A)
Rhappy
2
happy(X) ←famous(X), RICH(X)
reported in Example 4 up to variable renaming. We want to check whether
Rhappy
1
⪰¬
K Rhappy
2
holds. Let σ = {X/a} be a Skolem substitution for Rhappy
2
with respect to K ∪
Rhappy
1
and θ = {A/a} a ground substitution for Rhappy
1
. Both conditions of
Deﬁnition 4 are immediately veriﬁed. Thus, Rhappy
1
⪰¬
K Rhappy
2
. Since the vicev-
ersa does not hold, we can say that Rhappy
1
≻¬
K Rhappy
2
. Analogously, it can
be proved that Rhappy
1
≻¬
K Rhappy
3
and Rhappy
1
≻¬
K Rhappy
4
. Also, it turns
out that Rhappy
2
is incomparable under ⪰¬
K with Rhappy
3
and Rhappy
4
. Finally,
it can be proved that Rhappy
3
≻¬
K Rhappy
4
. In particular, the condition (ii) K ∪
{famous(a), LOVES(b,a)} |= {famous(a), WANTS-TO-MARRY(b,a)} is nothing else
that a ground query answering problem in DL+log¬. The entailment is guaranteed
by the axiom [A2].
It can be proved that ≻¬
K is a decidable quasi-order (i.e. it is a reﬂexive and
transitive relation) for DL+log¬ rules. In particular, the decidability of ≻¬
K follows
from the decidability of DL+log¬.

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
17
4.2 A reﬁnement operator
As pointed out in Section 4.1, the space (L, ≻¬
K) is a quasi-ordered set, therefore it
can be searched by reﬁnement operators. In the following, we deﬁne a downward
reﬁnement operator for a DL+log¬ language.
Deﬁnition 5
Let L be a DL+log¬ language of hypotheses built out of the three ﬁnite and
disjoint alphabets PC(L), PR(L), and P+
D(L) ∪P−
D(L), and
p(⃗X ) ←r1( ⃗Y1), . . . , rm( ⃗
Ym), s1( ⃗Z1), . . . , sk( ⃗Zk), not u1( ⃗
W1), . . . , not uh( ⃗
Wh)
be a rule R belonging to L. We deﬁne a downward reﬁnement operator ρ¬ for
(L, ⪰K) such that the set ρ¬(R) contains all R′ ∈L that can be obtained from R
by applying one of the following reﬁnement rules:
⟨AddDataLit B+⟩body(R′) = body(R) ∪{rm+1(
⃗
Ym+1)} if
1. rm+1 ∈P+
D(L)
2. rm+1(
⃗
Ym+1) ̸∈body(R)
⟨AddDataLit B−⟩body(R′) = body(R) ∪{not um+1(
⃗
Wh+1)} if
1. uh+1 ∈P−
D(L)
2. uh+1(
⃗
Wh+1) ̸∈body(R)
⟨AddOntoLit B⟩body(R′) = body(R) ∪{sk+1( ⃗
Zk+1)} if
1. sk+1 ∈PC(L) ∪PR(L)
2. it does not exist any sl ∈body(H ) such that sk+1 ⊑sl
⟨SpecOntoLit B⟩body(R′) = (body(R) \ {sl(⃗Zl)}) ∪s′
l(⃗Zl) if
1. s′
l ∈PC(L) ∪PR(L)
2. s′
l ⊑sl
All the rules of ρ¬ are correct, i.e. the R′’s obtained by applying any of the
rules of ρ¬ to R ∈L are such that R ≻¬
K R′. This can be proved intuitively
by observing that they act only on body(R). Thus condition (i) of Deﬁnition 4 is
satisﬁed. Furthermore, it is straightforward to notice that the application of any
of the rules of ρ¬ to R reduces the number of models of R. In particular, as for
⟨SpecOntoLit⟩, this intuition follows from the semantics of DLs. So condition (ii)
also is fulﬁlled.
Example 7
With reference to Example 4, applying the reﬁnement rule ⟨AddDataLit B+⟩to
Rhappy
0
happy(X) ←
produces Rhappy
1
which can be further specialized into Rhappy
2
, Rhappy
3
, and
Rhappy
4
by means of ⟨AddOntoLit B⟩. Note that no other reﬁnement rule can
be applied to Rhappy
1
and that Rhappy
4
can be also obtained as reﬁnement via
⟨SpecOntoLit B⟩from Rhappy
3
.

18
F.A. Lisi
NMLEARN-DL+log¬(L, B, O, p)
1. H ←∅
2. E + ←{oi ∈O|oi is true for p};
3. E −←{oi ∈O|oi is false for p};
4. while E + ̸= ∅do
5.
R ←{p(⃗X ) ←};
6.
E −
R ←E −
7.
while E −
R ̸= ∅do
8.
Q ←{R′ ∈L|R′ ∈ρ¬(R)};
9.
R ←best of (Q);
10.
E −
R ←E −
R \ {e ∈E −
R |B ∪R |= e};
11.
endwhile
12.
H ←H ∪{R};
13.
E + ←E + \ {e ∈E +|B ∪R |= e};
14. endwhile
return H
Figure 2. Main procedure of NMLEARN-DL+log¬
Ideal reﬁnement operators have been proven not to exist for clausal languages
ordered by θ-subsumption or stronger orders but can be approximated by dropping
the requirement of properness or by bounding the language (Nienhuys-Cheng and de Wolf 1997).
We choose the latter option because it guarantees that, if (L, ⪰) is a quasi-ordered
set, L is ﬁnite and ⪰is decidable, then there always exists an ideal reﬁnement op-
erator for (L, ⪰). In our case, since ≻¬
K is a decidable quasi-order for any DL with
decidable Boolean CQ/UCQ containment problem, we only need to bound L in a
suitable manner. From Deﬁnition 5 we know that the alphabets PC(L), PR(L), and
P+
D(L)∪P−
D(L) are ﬁnite. Having Datalog as basis for the CL part of DL+log¬
avoids the generation of inﬁnite terms. Yet, the expressive power of DL+log¬ re-
quires several other bounds to be imposed on L in order to guarantee its ﬁniteness.
It is necessary to introduce a complexity measure for DL+log¬ rules, as a pair
of two diﬀerent coordinates. Considering that the complexity of a DL+log¬ rule
resides in its body, the former coordinate is the size (i.e. the diﬀerence between the
number of symbol occurrences and the number of distinct variables) of the biggest
literal in body(R), while the latter is the number of literals in body(R). To keep L
ﬁnite, we need ﬁrst to set a maximum value for these two coordinates. Second, it is
necessary to set the maximum number of specialization/generalization steps of the
DL literals so that the search in the ontology is also depth-bounded.
4.3 An algorithm
The algorithm in Figure 2 deﬁnes the main procedure of NMLEARN-DL+log¬.
Notice that the outer loop (4-14) corresponds to a variant of the sequential covering
algorithm, i.e., it learns new rules one at a time, removing the positive examples
covered by the latest rule before attempting to learn the next rule (13). The hy-
pothesis space search performed by NMLEARN-DL+log¬ is best understood by
viewing it hierarchically. Each iteration through the outer loop (4-14) adds a new

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
19
rule to its disjunctive hypothesis H. The eﬀect of each new rule is to generate the
current disjunctive hypothesis (i.e., to increase the number of instances it classiﬁes
as positive), by adding a new disjunct. Viewed at this level, the search is a bottom-
up search through the space of hypotheses, beginning with the most speciﬁc empty
disjunction (1) and terminating when the hypothesis is suﬃciently general to cover
all positive training examples (14). The inner loop (7-11) performs a ﬁner-grained
search to determine the exact deﬁnition of each new rule. This loop searches a sec-
ond hypothesis space, consisting of conjunctions of literals, to ﬁnd a conjunction
that will form the preconditions for the new rule. Within this space, it conducts
a top-down, hill-climbing search, beginning with the most general preconditions
possible (5), then adding literals one at a time to specialize the rule (7) until it
avoids all negative examples. To select the most promising specialization from the
candidates generated at each step (9), NMLEARN-DL+log¬ considers the per-
formance of the rule over the training examples, i.e. it maximizes the number of
positive examples covered while keeping the number of negative examples covered
as low as possible.
Example 8
With reference to Example 7 and Example 5, we suppose that
E + = {oMary, oJoe}
E −= {oPaul}
The outer loop of the algorithm NMLEARN-DL+log¬ starts from:
Rhappy
0
happy(X) ←
which is further reﬁned through the iterations of the inner loop, more precisely it
is ﬁrst specialized into:
Rhappy
1
happy(X) ←famous(X)
which in turn, since it covers negative examples, is then specialized into:
Rhappy
2
happy(X) ←famous(X), RICH(X)
Rhappy
3
happy(X) ←famous(X), LOVES(Y,X)
Rhappy
4
happy(X) ←famous(X), WANTS-TO-MARRY(Y,X)
out of which the rule Rhappy
3
is selected as the best and added to the hypothesis
because it does not cover negative examples. Note that Rhappy
3
is preferred to
Rhappy
4
because it is more general.
5 Inducing Database Constraints in DL+log¬∨with ILP
In this section we face the problem of inducing an integrity theory H for a database
Π whose instance ΠF is given and whose schema K encompasses an ontology Σ and
a set ΠR of rules linking the database to the ontology. We assume that Π and Σ
shares a common set of constants so that they can constitute a DL+log¬∨KB B.

20
F.A. Lisi
Deﬁnition 6
Given:
• an intensional Datalog database ΠR and a DL ontology Σ integrated into
a DL+log¬∨KB K (background theory);
• a set O = ΠF of ground Datalog facts (observation); and
• a set L of constraints on the form of DL+log¬∨rules to be induced (language
of hypotheses)
the problem of deﬁning an integrity theory for ΠF is to induce a set H ⊂L (hy-
pothesis) of DL+log¬∨rules from O and K such that H conﬁrms O by taking K
into account.
Note that, as opposite to the learning problem formally stated in Deﬁnition 2, the
background theory in Deﬁnition 6 is a DL+log¬∨KB K which does not include
the extensional part ΠF of the database. Indeed ΠF plays the role of the unique
observation from which the learning process should induce a theory H. Conversely,
similarly to Section 4, we denote by PC(B), PR(B), and PD(B) the sets of concept,
role and Datalog predicate names occurring in B, respectively, assuming that
B = Σ ∪Π.
Example 9
Throughout this section we shall refer to a database about students in the form
of a Datalog¬∨program Π which consists of an extensional part ΠF with the
following facts:
boy(Paul)
girl(Mary)
enrolled(Paul,c1)
enrolled(Mary,c1)
enrolled(Mary,c2)
enrolled(Bob,c3)
and an intensional part ΠR with the following rules:
[R1] FEMALE(X) ←girl(X)
[R2] MALE(X) ←boy(X)
linking the database to an ontology about persons expressed as the following DL
KB Σ:
[A1] PERSON ⊑∃FATHER−.MALE
[A2] MALE ⊑PERSON
[A3] FEMALE ⊑PERSON
[A4] FEMALE ⊑¬MALE
MALE(Bob)
PERSON(Mary)
PERSON(Paul)

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
21
Note that Π and Σ can be integrated into a DL+log¬∨KB B (adapted from
(Rosati 2006)) that concerns the individuals Bob, Mary, and Paul and builds upon
the alphabets PC(B) = {FEMALE/1, MALE/1, PERSON/1}, PR(B) = {FATHER/2}, and
PD(B) = {boy/1, girl/1, enrolled/2}.
The language L of hypotheses in Deﬁnition 6 must allow for the generation of
DL+log¬∨rules starting from three disjoint alphabets PC(L) ⊆PC(B), PR(L) ⊆
PR(B), and PD(L) ⊆PD(B). Analogously to Section 4, we distinguish between
P+
D(L) and P−
D(L) in order to specify which Datalog predicates can occur in
positive and negative literals, respectively.
Example 10
The following DL+log¬∨rules:
PERSON(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
boy(X) ∨girl(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
←enrolled(X,c2), MALE(X)
←enrolled(X,c2), not girl(X)
MALE(X) ←enrolled(X,c3)
belong to the language L built upon the alphabets PC(L) = PC(B), PR(L) = ∅,
P+
D(L) = {boy/1, girl/1, enrolled( ,c1), enrolled( ,c2), enrolled( ,c3)},
and P−
D(L) = {boy/1, girl/1}.
The scope of induction in the learning problem of interest is characterization
because we are looking for a theory which conﬁrms the observation. Also, since a
DL+log¬∨KB may be incomplete due to the inherent nature of this KR frame-
work, the most appropriate setting for induction is the one for learning from entail-
ment. The coverage test proposed in the following generalizes the case illustrated
in Deﬁnition 3 to observations which are not singletons of facts.
Deﬁnition 7
Let R ∈L be a DL+log¬∨rule, K a DL+log¬∨KB, and O = {pi(⃗ai)} a set
of ground Datalog facts. We say that R covers O under entailment w.r.t. K iﬀ
K ∪R |= V pi(⃗ai).
It is immediate to notice that the coverage test of Deﬁnition 7 can be reduced to
Boolean CQ answering in DL+log¬∨KBs and therefore to a NM-satisﬁability
problem.
In the following we sketch the ingredients for an ILP system able to discover such
integrity theories on the basis of NMSAT-DL+log.
5.1 The hypothesis space
The order of relative subsumption (Plotkin 1971) is suitable for extension to DL+log¬∨
rules because it can cope with arbitrary clauses and admit an arbitrary ﬁnite set
of clauses as the background theory.

22
F.A. Lisi
Deﬁnition 8
Let R1, R2 ∈L be two DL+log¬∨rules, and K a DL+log¬∨KB. We say that
R1 is more general than R2 w.r.t. K, denoted by R1 ⪰¬∨
K
R2, if there exists a
substitution θ such that K |= ∀(R1θ ⇒R2). We say that R1 is strictly more general
than R2 w.r.t. K, denoted by R1 ≻¬∨
K
R2, iﬀR1 ⪰¬∨
K
R2 and R2 ̸⪰¬∨
K
R1. We say
that R1 is equivalent to R2 w.r.t. K, denoted by R1 ≡¬∨
K
R2, iﬀR1 ⪰¬∨
K
R2 and
R2 ⪰¬∨
K R1.
Example 11
Let us consider the following DL+log¬∨rules belonging to the language L speciﬁed
in Example 10:
R1
boy(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
R2
boy(A) ∨girl(A) ←enrolled(A,c1)
It can be easily proved that R1 ⪰¬∨
K
R2. Let θ = {X/A} be the substitution to be
applied to R1 and let us suppose that, for every A, if A is enrolled in the course c1,
then A is a boy (i.e. the rule R1θ is true), thus we can also say that A is either a
boy or a girl (i.e. the rule R2 is true). Note that R2 ̸⪰¬∨
K R1.
Let us now consider the following DL+log¬∨rules also belonging to L:
R3
MALE(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
R4
PERSON(A) ←enrolled(A,c1)
In order to prove that R3 ⪰¬∨
K
R4, we apply θ = {X/A} to R3 and suppose that,
for every A, if A is enrolled in the course c1, then A is a MALE (i.e. the rule R1θ is
true). Due to axiom [A2] occurring in the ontology Σ reported in Example 9, A is
a PERSON (i.e. the rule R4 is true). It is immediate to verify that R3 ≻¬∨
K R4.
The generality relation deﬁned by ⪰¬∨
K
is a quasi-order on DL+log¬∨rules,
therefore the resulting space (L, ⪰¬∨
K ) can be searched by means of reﬁnement
operators.
5.2 The reﬁnement operator
A reﬁnement operator for (L, ⪰¬∨
K ) should generate DL+log¬∨rules good at ex-
pressing integrity constraints. Since we assume the database Π and the ontology Σ
to be correct, a rule R must be modiﬁed to make it satisﬁable by Π ∪Σ by either
(i) strenghtening body(R) or (ii) weakening head(R).
Deﬁnition 9
Let L be a DL+log¬∨language of hypotheses built out of the three ﬁnite and
disjoint alphabets PC(L), PR(L), and P+
D(L) ∪P−
D(L), and
p1( ⃗X1) ∨. . . ∨pn( ⃗
Xn) ←
r1( ⃗Y1), . . . , rm( ⃗
Ym), s1( ⃗Z1), . . . , sk( ⃗Zk), not u1( ⃗
W1), . . . , not uh( ⃗
Wh)
be a rule R belonging to L. We deﬁne a downward reﬁnement operator ρ¬∨for
(L, ⪰K) such that the set ρ¬∨(R) contains all R′ ∈L that can be obtained from R
by applying one of the following reﬁnement rules:

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
23
⟨AddDataLit B+⟩body(R′) = body(R) ∪{rm+1(
⃗
Ym+1)} if
1. rm+1 ∈P+
D(L)
2. rm+1(
⃗
Ym+1) ̸∈body(R)
⟨AddDataLit B−⟩body(R′) = body(R) ∪{not um+1(
⃗
Wh+1)} if
1. uh+1 ∈P−
D(L)
2. uh+1(
⃗
Wh+1) ̸∈body(R)
⟨AddOntoLit B⟩body(R′) = body(R) ∪{sk+1( ⃗
Zk+1)} if
1. sk+1 ∈PC(L) ∪PR(L)
2. it does not exist any sl ∈body(H ) such that sk+1 ⊑sl
⟨SpecOntoLit B⟩body(R′) = (body(R) \ {sl(⃗Zl)}) ∪s′
l(⃗Zl) if
1. s′
l ∈PC(L) ∪PR(L)
2. s′
l ⊑sl
⟨AddDataLit H ⟩head(R′) = head(R) ∪{pn+1(
⃗
Xn+1)} if
1. pn+1 ∈P+
D(L)
2. pn+1(
⃗
Xn+1) ̸∈head(R)
⟨AddOntoLit H ⟩head(R′) = head(R) ∪{pn+1(
⃗
Xn+1)} if
1. pn+1 ∈PC(L) ∪PR(L)
2. it does not exist any pi ∈head(R) such that pn+1 ⊑pi
⟨GenOntoLit H ⟩head(R′) = (head(R) \ {pi( ⃗Xi)}) ∪p′
i( ⃗Xi) if
1. p′
i ∈PC(L) ∪PR(L)
2. pi ⊑p′
i
Note that, since we are working under NM-semantics, two distinct rules, namely
⟨AddDataLit B−⟩and ⟨AddDataLit H ⟩, are devised for adding negated Datalog
atoms to the body and for adding Datalog atoms to the head, respectively. It can
be proved that all the rules of ρ¬∨are correct, i.e. the R′’s obtained by applying
any of the rules of ρ¬∨to R ∈L are such that R ≻¬∨
K R′. Intuitively, it is suﬃcient
to observe that the application of any of the rules of ρ¬∨conceived to strenghten
body(R) reduces the number of models of R whereas the rules aiming at weakening
head(R), when applied, do not augment the number of models of R.
Example 12
From the rule belonging to the language L speciﬁed in Example 10:
←enrolled(X,c1)
we obtain the following rules by applying ⟨AddDataLit B+⟩:
←enrolled(X,c1), boy(X)
←enrolled(X,c1), girl(X)
←enrolled(X,c1), enrolled(X,c2)
←enrolled(X,c1), enrolled(X,c3)

24
F.A. Lisi
NMDISC-DL+log¬∨(L, K, ΠF)
1. H ←∅
2. Q ←{ □}
3. while Q ̸= ∅do
4.
Q ←Q \ {R};
5.
if NMSAT-DL+log(K ∪ΠF ∪H ∪{R})
6.
then H ←H ∪{R}
7.
else Q ←Q ∪{R′ ∈L|R′ ∈ρ¬∨(R)}
8.
endif
9. endwhile
return H
Figure 3. Main procedure of NMDISC-DL+log¬∨
the following ones by applying ⟨AddDataLit B−⟩:
←enrolled(X,c1), not boy(X)
←enrolled(X,c1), not girl(X)
the following ones by applying ⟨AddOntoLit B⟩:
←enrolled(X,c1), PERSON(X)
←enrolled(X,c1), FEMALE(X)
←enrolled(X,c1), MALE(X)
the following ones by applying ⟨AddDataLit H ⟩:
boy(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
girl(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
enrolled(X,c2) ←enrolled(X,c1)
enrolled(X,c3) ←enrolled(X,c1)
and the following ones:
PERSON(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
FEMALE(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
MALE(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
by applying ⟨AddOntoLit H ⟩.
5.3 The algorithm
The integrity theory H we would like to discover is a set of DL+log¬∨rules. It
must be induced by taking the background theory K = Σ ∪ΠR into account so
that B = (Σ, Π∪H) is a NM-satisﬁable DL+log¬∨KB. The algorithm in Figure 3
deﬁnes the main procedure of NMDISC-DL+log¬∨: it starts from an empty theory
H (1), and a queue Q containing only the empty clause (2). It then applies a search
process (3) where each element R is deleted from the queue Q (4), and tested for
satisfaction w.r.t. the data ΠF by taking into account the background theory K and
the current integrity theory H (5). Note that the NM-satisﬁability test includes also
the current induced theory in order to deal with the nonmonotonicity of induction

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
25
in the normal ILP setting. If the rule R is satisﬁed by the database (6), it is added to
the theory (7). If the rule is violated by the database, its reﬁnements according to L
are considered (8). The search process terminates when Q becomes empty (9). Note
that the algorithm does not specify the search strategy. In order to get a minimal
theory (i.e., without redundant clauses), a pruning step and a post-processing phase
can be added to NMDISC-DL+log¬∨by further calling NMSAT-DL+log8.
Example 13
With reference to Example 12, the following DL+log¬∨rule:
PERSON(X) ←enrolled(X,c1)
is the only one passing the NM-satisﬁability test at step (5) of the algorithm
NMDISC-DL+log¬∨. It is added to the integrity theory. All the other rules are
further reﬁned. When the learning process ends at step (9) because the queue of
rules has become empty, the integrity theory will encompass the rules reported in
Example 10 because they are satisﬁed by the database.
6 Related Work
Very few ILP frameworks have been proposed so far that adopt a hybrid DL-CL rep-
resentation for both hypotheses and background knowledge (Rouveirol and Ventos 2000;
Kietz 2003; Lisi 2008; Lisi and Esposito 2008). They are less or diﬀerently expres-
sive than the one presented in this paper.
The framework proposed in (Rouveirol and Ventos 2000) focuses on discriminant
induction and adopts the ILP setting of learning from interpretations. Hypotheses
are represented as Carin-ALN non-recursive rules with a Horn literal in the head
that plays the role of target concept. The coverage relation of hypotheses against
examples adapts the usual one in learning from interpretations to the case of hybrid
Carin-ALN BK. The generality relation for hypotheses is deﬁned as an extension
of generalized subsumption. Procedures for testing both the coverage relation and
the generality relation are based on the existential entailment algorithm of Carin.
Following (Rouveirol and Ventos 2000), Kietz studies the learnability of Carin-
ALN , thus providing a pre-processing method which enables ILP systems to learn
Carin-ALN rules (2003).
In (Lisi 2008), the representation and reasoning means come from AL-log. Hy-
potheses are represented as constrained Datalog clauses. Note that this frame-
work is general, meaning that it is valid whatever the scope of induction is. The
generality relation for one such hypothesis language is an adaptation of generalized
subsumption to the AL-log KR framework. It gives raise to a quasi-order and can be
checked with a decidable procedure based on constrained SLD-resolution. Coverage
relations for both ILP settings of learning from interpretations and learning from
entailment have been deﬁned on the basis of query answering in AL-log. As opposite
8 Based on the following consequence of the Deduction Theorem in FOL: Given a KB B and a
rule R in DL+log¬∨, we have that B |= R iﬀB ∧¬R is unsatisﬁable.

26
F.A. Lisi
to (Rouveirol and Ventos 2000), the framework has been partially implemented in
an ILP system (Lisi and Malerba 2004) that supports a variant of frequent pattern
discovery where rich prior conceptual knowledge is taken into account in order to
ﬁnd patterns at multiple levels of description granularity.
The framework presented in (Lisi and Esposito 2008) is the closest to the present
work. Indeed it faces the problem of learning in DL+log, i.e. by disregarding
the NM features of DL+log¬∨. Yet the framework is more general than the one
illustrated here because two cases of rule learning are considered, one aimed at
inducing rules with one Datalog literal in the head and the other rules with one
DL literal in the head. The former kind of rule will enrich the Datalog part of
the KB, whereas the latter will extend the DL part.
The main procedure of NMLEARN-DL+log¬ follows the principles of FOIL
(Quinlan 1990) but shows some peculiarities due to the nature of the underlying KR
framework, e.g. the setting of learning from entailment (which is more powerful than
the use of extensional background theory and coverage testing), and the ordering
of generalized subsumption (instead of θ-subsumption).
The main procedure of NMDISC-DL+log¬∨is inspired by CLAUDIEN (De Raedt and Bruynooghe 1993)
as for the scope of induction and the algorithm scheme but diﬀers from it in several
points, notably the adoption of (i) relative subsumption instead of θ-subsumption,
(ii) stable model semantics instead of completion semantics, and (iii) learning from
entailment instead of learning from interpretations, to deal properly with the cho-
sen representation formalism for both the background theory and the language of
hypotheses.
ILP has been also applied to data engineering tasks such as the interactive re-
structuring of databases giving rise to the so-called Inductive Data Engineering
(IDE) (Flach 1993; Flach 1998; Savnik and Flach 2000). The main idea is to use
induction to determine integrity constraints, such as functional and multivalued
dependencies, that are valid (or almost valid) in a database and then use the con-
straints to decompose (restructure) the database.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we have investigated two ILP solutions for learning in the KR frame-
work of DL+log¬∨, both valid for any DL for which the instantiation of the
framework is decidable, but one restricted to Datalog¬ and the other for the full
framework. Indeed, well-known ILP techniques for induction such as the orderings
of generalized subsumption and relative subsumption have been reformulated in
terms of the deductive reasoning mechanims of DL+log¬∨, namely by relying on
the algorithm NMSAT-DL+log devised to prove NM-satisﬁability of DL+log¬∨
KBs. Notably, we have deﬁned generality orders, reﬁnement operators and coverage
tests on the basis of NMSAT-DL+log. Though the work presented in this paper
is not yet supported by empirical evidence, it shows that it is feasible for ILP to
go beyond Datalog towards DL+log¬∨. The potential of this extended ILP has
been illustrated in two traditional database problems, i.e. the deﬁnition of views
and the deﬁnition of integrity theories, for which we have sketched ad-hoc ILP al-

ILP in Databases: from Datalog to DL+log¬∨
27
gorithms, NMLEARN-DL+log¬ and NMDISC-DL+log¬∨, respectively. The NM
features as well as the DL component of DL+log¬∨enable these algorithms to
build hypotheses with expressiveness far greater than the one reachable with the
predecessors FOIL and CLAUDIEN. Notably, ontologies accommodate elegantly in
the solution to the database problems being considered. From the ILP viewpoint the
expressive power of DL+log¬∨has, of course, raised some technical diﬃculties.
In particular, the critical point has been the DL component that has required an
appropriate treatment when deﬁning both the generality orders and the reﬁnement
operators. Also the setting of learning from entailment turned out to be the most
appropriate for the induction within the DL+log¬∨KR framework.
As next step towards any practice, we plan to ﬁrst analyze the complexity and
then produce an eﬃcient and scalable implementation of these ILP algorithms.
Adopting less expressive but tractable instantiations of DL+log¬∨may turn out
crucial from this point of view. E.g., DL-Lite (Calvanese et al. 2007) has been
proved to be good at making DL+log¬∨practically useful (Rosati 2006). An-
other point is the deﬁnition of so-called optimal reﬁnement operators to be actually
employed in NMLEARN-DL+log¬ and NMDISC-DL+log¬∨. Indeed, ideal re-
ﬁnement operators are mainly of theoretical interest, because in practice they are
often very ineﬃcient. More constructive - though possibly improper - reﬁnement
operators are usually to be preferred over ideal ones. Optimal reﬁnement operators
can be easily derived from those proposed in this paper.
Learning in DL+log¬∨is also promising for Semantic Web applications for the
following reasons. First, it can deal with ontologies almost as expressive as the ones
that OWL allow. Indeed, as already mentioned, SHIQ has been the starting point
for the deﬁnition of OWL and gives rise to one of the currently most expressive
decidable instantiations of DL+log¬∨. Second, it can deal with incomplete knowl-
edge thanks to the NM features of DL+log¬∨. Third, it can deal with ontologies
and rules tightly integrated as devised by the W3C Rule Interchange Format (RIF)
working group.9 Indeed the activity of the RIF group concerns (i) the deﬁnition of
a core language with extensions some of which (the nonmonotonic ones) will most
likely be inspired by hybrid DL-CL languages like DL+log¬∨and (ii) the identi-
ﬁcation of use cases many of which are suitable to our algorithms for application.
As a ﬁnal remark, we would like to point out that the shift from Datalog to
DL+log¬∨in ILP paves the way to an extension of Relational Learning (and
Data Mining), named Onto-Relational Learning, which accounts for ontologies in a
clear, well-founded and systematic way. Following the work reported in this paper,
we can build new-generation ILP systems able to learn from relational databases
integrated with ontologies according to the principles of Onto-Relational Learning.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to Riccardo Rosati for his precious advice on
DL+log¬∨and Diego Calvanese for his valid support on the Boolean CQ/UCQ
containment problem. Also we thank the anonymous reviewers whose commments
very much helped us improving this paper.
9 http://www.w3.org/2005/rules/wiki/RIF Working Group

28
F.A. Lisi
