Muse: Text-To-Image Generation via Masked Generative Transformers
Huiwen Chang * Han Zhang * Jarred Barber † AJ Maschinot † Jos´e Lezama Lu Jiang Ming-Hsuan Yang
Kevin Murphy William T. Freeman Michael Rubinstein † Yuanzhen Li † Dilip Krishnan †
Google Research
Abstract
We present Muse, a text-to-image Transformer model that achieves state-of-the-art image generation performance
while being signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than diffusion or autoregressive models. Muse is trained on a masked
modeling task in discrete token space: given the text embedding extracted from a pre-trained large language
model (LLM), Muse is trained to predict randomly masked image tokens. Compared to pixel-space diffusion
models, such as Imagen and DALL-E 2, Muse is signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient due to the use of discrete tokens and
requiring fewer sampling iterations; compared to autoregressive models, such as Parti, Muse is more efﬁcient
due to the use of parallel decoding. The use of a pre-trained LLM enables ﬁne-grained language understanding,
translating to high-ﬁdelity image generation and the understanding of visual concepts such as objects, their spatial
relationships, pose, cardinality etc. Our 900M parameter model achieves a new SOTA on CC3M, with an FID
score of 6.06. The Muse 3B parameter model achieves an FID of 7.88 on zero-shot COCO evaluation, along
with a CLIP score of 0.32. Muse also directly enables a number of image editing applications without the need
to ﬁne-tune or invert the model: inpainting, outpainting, and mask-free editing. More results are available at
http://muse-model.github.io.
1. Introduction
Generative image models conditioned on text prompts have taken an enormous leap in quality and ﬂexibility in the last few
years (Ramesh et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Midjourney,
2022). This was enabled by a combination of deep learning architecture innovations (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Vaswani
et al., 2017); novel training paradigms such as masked modeling for both language (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020)
and vision tasks (He et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2022); new families of generative models such as diffusion (Ho et al., 2020;
Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) and masking-based generation (Chang et al., 2022); and ﬁnally, the availability
of large scale image-text paired datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2021).
In this work, we present a new model for text-to-image synthesis using a masked image modeling approach (Chang et al.,
2022). Our image decoder architecture is conditioned on embeddings from a pre-trained and frozen T5-XXL (Raffel et al.,
2020) large language model (LLM) encoder. In agreement with Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), we ﬁnd that conditioning on a
pre-trained LLM is crucial for photorealistic, high quality image generation. Our models (except for the VQGAN quantizer)
are built on the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture.
We have trained a sequence of Muse models, ranging in size from 632M parameters to 3B parameters (for the image decoder;
the T5-XXL model has an additional 4.6B parameters). Each model consists of several sub-models (Figure 3): First, we
have a pair of VQGAN “tokenizer” models (Esser et al., 2021b), which can encode an input image to a sequence of discrete
tokens as well as decode a token sequence back to an image. We use two VQGANs, one for 256x256 resolution (“low-res”)
and another for 512x512 resolution (“high-res”). Second, we have a base masked image model, which contains the bulk
of our parameters. This model takes a sequence of partially masked low-res tokens and predicts the marginal distribution

1
arXiv:2301.00704v1  [cs.CV]  2 Jan 2023

Two cats doing research.
Astronauts kicking a 
football in front of 
Eiffel tower.
A fluffy baby sloth with 
a knitted hat trying to 
figure out a laptop, 
close up.
Manhattan skyline made 
of bread.
A large array of color-
ful cupcakes, arranged 
on a maple table to 
spell MUSE.
3D mesh of Titanic 
floating on a water 
lily pond in the style 
of Monet.
A storefront with 'Muse' 
written on it, in front 
of Matterhorn Zermatt. 
Three dogs celebrating 
Christmas with some 
champagne.
A cake made of macarons 
in a unicorn shape. 
A futuristic city with 
flying cars.
A sheep in a wine glass. 
A surreal painting of a 
robot making coffee.
Figure 1. Muse text-to-image generation (512 × 512 resolution). Under each generated image, the corresponding caption is shown,
exhibiting a variety of styles, captions and understanding. Each image was generated in 1.3s on a TPUv4 chip.
for each masked token, conditioned on the unmasked tokens and a T5XXL text embedding. Third, we have a “superres”
transformer model which translates (unmasked) low-res tokens into high-res tokens, again conditioned on T5-XXL text
embeddings. We explain our pipeline in detail in Section 2.
Compared to Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) or Dall-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) which are built on cascaded pixel-space diffusion
models, Muse is signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient due to the use of discrete tokens; it can be thought of as a discrete diffusion
process with the absorbing state ([MASK]) (Austin et al., 2021). Compared to Parti (Yu et al., 2022), a state-of-the-art
autoregressive model, Muse is more efﬁcient due to the use of parallel decoding. Based on comparisons on similar hardware
(TPU-v4 chips), we estimate that Muse is more than 10x faster at inference time than either Imagen-3B or Parti-3B models
and 3x faster than Stable Diffusion v1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) (see Section 3.2.2). All these comparisons are when images
of the same size: either 256 × 256 or 512 × 512. Muse is also faster than Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), in spite
of both models working in the latent space of a VQGAN. We believe that this is due to the use of a diffusion model in Stable
2

 Inpainting
 Outpainting
Mask-free Editing 
A funny big inflatable 
yellow duck
On the ring of Saturn
Hot air balloons
A futuristic Streamline 
Moderne building
Input
Output
London skyline
A wildflower bloom at 
Mountain Rainier
A woman wearing a dress 
A man wearing a blue 
t-shirt with “hello 
world” written on it 
NegPrompt: A man wearing
a t-shirt
A man wearing a christ-
mas sweater.
Figure 2. Examples of zero-shot text-guided image editing using Muse. We show examples of a number of editing applications using the
Muse text-to-image generative model, on real input images, without ﬁne-tuning. All edited images are generated at 512 × 512 resolution.
Diffusion v1.4 which requires a signiﬁcantly higher number of iterations at inference time.
The efﬁciency improvement of Muse, however, does not come at a loss of generated image quality or semantic understanding
of the input text prompt. We evaluate our output on multiple criteria, including CLIP score (Radford et al., 2021) and FID
(Heusel et al., 2017). The former is a measure of image-text correspondence; and the latter a measure of image quality and
diversity. Our 3B parameter model achieves a CLIP score of 0.32 and an FID score of 7.88 on the COCO (Lin et al., 2014)
zero-shot validation benchmark, which compares favorably with that of other large-scale text-to-image models (see Table 2).
Our 632M(base)+268M(super-res) parameter model achieves a state of the art FID score of 6.06 when trained and evaluated
on the CC3M (Sharma et al., 2018) dataset, which is signiﬁcantly lower than all other reported results in the literature (see
Table 1). We also evaluate our generations on the PartiPrompts (Yu et al., 2022) evaluation suite with human raters, who ﬁnd
that Muse generates images better aligned with its text prompt 2.7x more often than Stable Diffusion v1.4 (Rombach et al.,
2022).
Muse generates images that reﬂect different parts of speech in input captions, including nouns, verbs and adjectives.
Furthermore, we present evidence of multi-object properties understanding, such as compositionality and cardinality, as
3

well image style understanding. See Figure 1 for a number of these examples and our website http://muse-model.
github.io for more examples. The mask-based training of Muse lends itself to a number of zero-shot image editing
capabilities. A number of these are shown in Figure 2, including zero-shot, text-guided inpainting, outpainting and mask-free
editing. More details are in Section 3. Our contributions are:
1. We present a state-of-the-art model for text-to-image generation which achieves excellent FID and CLIP scores
(quantitative measures of image generation quality, diversity and alignment with text prompts).
2. Our model is signiﬁcantly faster than comparable models due to the use of quantized image tokens and parallel
decoding.
3. Our architecture enables out-of-the-box, zero-shot editing capabilities including inpainting, outpainting, and mask-free
editing.
Masked 
High-Res Tokens
VQ Tokenizer
Mask
SuperRes
Transformer
Input  
Image
Masked 
Tokens
Reconstructed
Tokens
VQ Tokenizer
Text Encoder
Base
Transformer
Text Embedding
Text Prompt:  “A cat 
looking at a dog”
Mask
Reconstructed 
HighRes Tokens
Input Image
Cross Entropy 
Loss
Cross Entropy 
Loss
256x256
512x512
Figure 3. Muse Framework: We show the training pipeline for our model, with the T5-XXL pre-trained text encoder, base model and
super-resolution model depicted on the three rows. The text encoder generates a text embedding that is used for cross-attention with
image tokens for both base and super-res Transformer layers. The base model uses a VQ Tokenizer that is pre-trained on lower resolution
(256 × 256) images and generates a 16 × 16 latent space of tokens. This sequence is masked at a variable rate per sample and then the
cross-entropy loss learns to predict the masked image tokens. Once the base model is trained, the reconstructed lower-resolution tokens
and text tokens are passed into the super-res model that then learns to predict masked tokens at a higher resolution.
2. Model
Our model is built on a number of components. Here, we provide an overview of each of those components in the order
of their training, while relegating many details of the architecture and parameters to the Appendix. Figure 3 provides an
overview of the model architecture.
2.1. Pre-trained Text Encoders
Similar to the ﬁndings in (Saharia et al., 2022), we ﬁnd that leveraging a pre-trained large language model (LLM) is beneﬁcial
to high-quality image generation. The embeddings extracted from an LLM such as T5-XXL (Raffel et al., 2020) carry
rich information about objects (nouns), actions (verbs), visual properties (adjectives), spatial relationships (prepositions),
and other properties such as cardinality and composition. Our hypothesis is that the Muse model learns to map these rich
visual and semantic concepts in the LLM embeddings to the generated images; it has been shown in recent work (Merullo
et al., 2022) that the conceptual representations learned by LLM’s are roughly linearly mappable to those learned by models
trained on vision tasks. Given an input text caption, we pass it through the frozen T5-XXL encoder, resulting in a sequence
of 4096 dimensional language embedding vectors. These embedding vectors are linearly projected to the hidden size of our
Transformer models (base and super-res).
4

2.2. Semantic Tokenization using VQGAN
A core component of our model is the use of semantic tokens obtained from a VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021b) model. This
model consists of an encoder and an decoder, with a quantization layer that maps an input image into a sequence of tokens
from a learned codebook. We build our encoder and decoder entirely with convolutional layers to support encoding images
from different resolutions. The encoder has several downsampling blocks to reduce the spatial dimension of the input, while
the decoder has the corresponding number of upsampling blocks to map the latents back into original image size. Given an
image of size H × W, the encoded token is of size H/f × W/f, with downsampling ratio f. We train two VQGAN models:
one with downsampling ratio f = 16 and the other with downsampling ratio f = 8. We obtain tokens for our base model
using the f = 16 VQGAN model on 256×256 pixel images, thus resulting in tokens with spatial size 16 × 16. We obtain
the tokens for our super-resolution model using the f = 8 VQGAN model on 512 × 512 images, and the corresponding
token has spatial size 64 × 64. As mentioned in previous work (Esser et al., 2021b), the resulting discrete tokens after
encoding capture higher-level semantics of the image, while ignoring low level noise. Furthermore, the discrete nature of
these tokens allows us to use a cross-entropy loss at the output to predict masked tokens in the next stage.
2.3. Base Model
Our base model is a masked transformer(Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018), where the inputs are the projected
T5 embeddings and image tokens. We leave all the text embeddings unmasked and randomly mask a varying fraction of
image tokens (see Section 2.6) and replace them with a special [MASK]token (Chang et al., 2022). We then linearly map
image tokens into image input embeddings of the required Transformer input/hidden size along with learned 2D positional
embeddings. Following previous transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), we use several transformer layers including
self-attention block, cross-attention block and MLP block to extract features. At the output layer, an MLP is used to convert
each masked image embedding to a set of logits (corresponding to the VQGAN codebook size) and a cross-entropy loss is
applied with the ground truth token label as the target. At training, the base model is trained to predict all masked tokens at
each step. However, for inference, mask prediction is performed in an iterative manner which signiﬁcantly increases quality.
See Section 2.8 for details.
2.4. Super-Resolution Model
Text Embedding
K V
Low-Res 
Tokens 
Concat
Embed
Self
Attention
MLP
Embed
Multi-axis
Attention
MLP
Q
Project
16x16
64x64
Predicted 
High-Res Tokens
32x
 8x
64x64
Masked 
High-Res Tokens
Cross
Attention
+
+
LowRes 256x256
HighRes 512x512
A high contrast portrait photo
of a fluffy hamster wearing an
orange beanie and sunglasses 
holding a sign that says 
"Let's PAINT!"
Text
A bear riding a bicycle, 
with a bird perched on 
the handlebars.
Figure 4. Super-resolution Model. On the left is shown the architecture of the super-resolution model. Low-resolution tokens are
passed into a series of self-attention Transformer layers; and the resulting output embeddings are concatenated with text embeddings
extracted from the conditioning text prompt. Following this, cross-attention is applied from these concatenated embeddings to the masked
high-resolution tokens; the loss learns to predict these masked tokens conditioned on the low-resolution and text tokens. On the right are
shown two examples of the improvement brought about by the super-resolution model.
We found that directly predicting 512 × 512 resolution leads the model to focus on low-level details over large-scale
semantics. As a result we found it beneﬁcial to use a cascade of models: ﬁrst a base model that generates a 16 × 16 latent
map (corresponding to a 256 × 256 image), followed by a super-resolution model that upsamples the base latent map to a
64 × 64 latent map (corresponding to a 512 × 512 image). The super-res model is trained after the base model has been
5

trained.
As mentioned in Section 2.2, we trained two VQGAN models, one at 16 × 16 latent resolution and 256 × 256 spatial
resolution, and the second at 64 × 64 latent resolution and 512 × 512 spatial resolution. Since our base model outputs
tokens corresponding to a 16 × 16 latent map, our super-resolution procedure learns to “translate” the lower-resolution
latent map to the higher-resolution latent map, followed by decoding through the higher-resolution VQGAN to give the ﬁnal
high-resolution image. This latent map translation model is also trained with text conditioning and cross-attention in an
analogous manner to the base model, as shown in Figure 4.
2.5. Decoder Finetuning
To further improve our model’s ability to generate ﬁne details, we increase the capacity of the VQGAN decoder by the
addition of more residual layers and channels while keeping the encoder capacity ﬁxed. We then ﬁnetune the new decoder
layers while keeping the VQGAN encoder weights, codebook and transformers (i.e., base model and super resolution model)
frozen. This allows us to improve our visual quality without re-training any of the other model components (because the
visual token “language” stays ﬁxed). This is shown in Figure 13 in the Appendix, where we see that the ﬁnetuned decoder
can reconstruct more sharper details in the store front. We also give details of the ﬁnetuned decoder architecture in the
Appendix.
2.6. Variable Masking Rate
As was done in (Chang et al., 2022), we train our model with a variable masking rate based on a Cosine scheduling: for
each training example, we sample a masking rate r ∈[0, 1] from a truncated arccos distribution with density function
p(r) = 2
π(1 −r2)−1
2 . This has an expected masking rate of 0.64, with a strong bias towards higher masking rates. The bias
towards higher masking rates makes the prediction problem harder. In contrast with autoregressive approaches, which learn
conditional distributions P(xi|x<i) for some ﬁxed ordering of tokens, random masking with a variable masking ratio allows
our models to learn P(xi|xΛ) for arbitrary subsets of tokens Λ. This is not only critical for our parallel sampling scheme,
but it also enables a number of zero-shot, out-of-the-box editing capabilities, such as shown in Figure 2 and Section 3.3.
2.7. Classiﬁer Free Guidance
We employ classiﬁer-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2022) to improve our generation quality and our text-image
alignment. At training time, we remove text conditioning on 10% of samples chosen randomly (thus attention reduces to
image token self-attention). At inference time, we compute a conditional logit ℓc and an unconditional logit ℓu for each
masked token. We then form the ﬁnal logits ℓg by moving away from the unconditional logits by an amount t, the guidance
scale:
ℓg = (1 + t)ℓc −tℓu
(1)
Intuitively, CFG trades off diversity for ﬁdelity. Different from previous approaches, we reduce the hit to diversity by
linearly increasing the guidance scale t through the sampling procedure. This allows the early tokens to be sampled more
freely, with low or no guidance, but increases the inﬂuence of the conditioning prompt for the later tokens.
We also exploit this mechanism to enable negative prompting (NegPrompt, 2022) by replacing the unconditional logit ℓu
with a logit conditioned on a “negative prompt”. This encourages the resulting image to have features associated with the
positive prompt ℓc and remove features associated with the negative prompt ℓu.
2.8. Iterative Parallel Decoding at Inference
The critical component for our model’s inference time efﬁciency is the use of parallel decoding to predict multiple output
tokens in a single forward pass. The key assumption underlying the effectiveness of the parallel decoding is a Markovian
property that many tokens are conditionally independent given other tokens. Decoding is performed based on a cosine
schedule (Chang et al., 2022) that chooses a certain ﬁxed fraction of the highest conﬁdence masked tokens that are to be
predicted at that step. These tokens are then set to unmasked for the remainder of the steps and the set of masked tokens is
appropriately reduced. Using this procedure, we are able to perform inference of 256 tokens using only 24 decoding steps in
our base model and 4096 tokens using 8 decoding steps in our super-resolution model, as compared to the 256 or 4096 steps
required for autoregressive models (e.g. (Yu et al., 2022)) and hundreds of steps for diffusion models (e.g., (Rombach et al.,
2022; Saharia et al., 2022)). We note that recent methods including progressive distillation (Salimans & Ho, 2022) and
6

LowRes Generated Images
HighRes Generated Images
Step = 4
Step = 2
Step = 8
Step = 4
Step = 2
Step = 6
Step = 12
Step = 14
Step = 16
Step = 8
Step = 18
Figure 5. Inference samples. We visualize the evolution of masked tokens over the sequence of steps for the base model (left) and the
super-res model (right). The super-res model, being conditioned on the low-res tokens, requires signiﬁcantly fewer sampling steps for
convergence.
better ODE solvers (Lu et al., 2022) have greatly reduced the sampling steps of diffusion models, but they have not been
widely validated in large scale text-to-image generation. We leave the comparison to these faster methods in the future work,
while noting that similar distillation approaches are also a possibility for our model.
3. Results
We train a number of base Transformer models at different parameter sizes, ranging from 600M to 3B parameters. Each
of these models is fed in the output embeddings from a T5-XXL model, which is pre-trained and frozen and consists of
4.6B parameters. Our largest base model of 3B parameters consists of 48 Transformer layers with cross-attention from text
to image and self-attention among image tokens. All base models share the same image tokenizer. We use a CNN model
with 19 ResNet blocks and a quantized codebook of size 8192 for the tokenization. Larger codebook sizes did not result in
performance improvements. The super-resolution model consists of 32 multi-axis Transformer layers (Zhao et al., 2021)
with cross-attention from concatenated text and image embedding to high resolution image and self-attention among high
resolution image tokens. This model converts a sequence of tokens from one latent space to another: the ﬁrst latent space
being that of the base model tokenizer, a latent space of 16 × 16 tokens, to that of a higher resolution tokenizer with 64 × 64
tokens. After token conversion, the decoder for the higher resolution tokenizer is used to convert to the higher resolution
image space. Further details of conﬁgurations are provided in the appendix.
We train on the Imagen dataset consisting of 460M text-image pairs (Saharia et al., 2022). Training is performed for 1M
steps, with a batch size of 512 on 512-core TPU-v4 chips (Jouppi et al., 2020). This takes about 1 week of training time.
We use the Adafactor optimizer (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) to save on memory consumption which allowed us to ﬁt a 3B
parameter model without model parallelization. We also avoid performing exponential moving averaging (EMA) of model
weights during training, again to save on TPU memory. In order to reap the beneﬁts of EMA, we checkpoint every 5000
steps, then perform EMA ofﬂine on the checkpointed weights with a decay factor of 0.7. These averaged weights form the
ﬁnal base model weights.
3.1. Qualitative Performance
Figure 6 qualitatively demonstrates the capabilities of Muse for text prompts with different properties. The top left of
Figure 6 shows examples that demonstrate a basic understanding of cardinality. For objects with non-unity cardinality,
instead of generating the same object pixels multiple times, Muse instead adds contextual variations to make the overall
image more realistic, e.g., elephant size and orientation, wine bottle wrapper color, and tennis ball rotation. The top right
of Fig, 6 demonstrates understanding of multi-object composition and relativeness. Instead of placing objects at random
locations, Muse generates images that preserve prepositional object relations in the text, e.g., on vs under, left vs right, etc.
The middle left of Figure 6 demonstrates its ability to generate images spanning many styles, both speciﬁc to a renowned
artist (e.g., Rembrandt) as well as general to a style as a whole (e.g., pop art and Chinese ink and wash). The middle right of
Figure 6 demonstrates the ability of Muse to render words and phrases. Text generation is fundamentally different than
generating most other objects. Instead of the model learning a mapping between an object name and its characteristics (e.g.,
that “elephant” maps to “large”, “gray”, and “peanut eating”), the virtual continuum of possible words and phrases demands
that the model learn differently. It must instead learn a hierarchical understanding between phrases, words, and letters.
The bottom left of Figure 6 demonstrates that Muse uses the entirety of a text prompt when rendering instead of focusing
7

Cardinality
Composition
Three elephants standing on
top of each other.
Four wine bottles.
A tiny football in front of
three yellow tennis balls.
Three small yellow boxes on
a large blue box.
A large present with a red rib-
bon to the left of a Christmas
tree.
Two baseballs to the left of
three tennis balls.
Style
Text Rendering
Portrait of a well-dressed rac-
coon, oil painting in the style
of Rembrandt.
A portrait of a man wearing
sunglasses and a business suit,
painting in pop art style.
Portrait of a tiger wearing
a train conductor’s hat and
holding a skateboard that has
a yin-yang symbol on it. Chi-
nese ink and wash painting.
A t-shirt with Carpe Diem
written on it.
High-contrast image of the
word
“WOMBAT”
written
with thick colored grafﬁti let-
ters on a white wall with dra-
matic splashes of paint.
The
saying
“BE
EXCEL-
LENT TO EACH OTHER”
written in a stained glass win-
dow.
Usage of Entire Prompt
Failure Text Classes
An
art
gallery
displaying
Monet paintings.
The art
gallery is ﬂooded. Robots are
going around the art gallery
using paddle boards.
A photograph of the inside
of a subway train.
There
are raccoons sitting on the
seats.
One of them is read-
ing a newspaper. The window
shows the city in the back-
ground.
Two cups of coffee, one with
latte art of yin yang symbol.
The other has latter art of a
heart.
A cartoon of a dog saying “I
see what you did there”.
Ten wine bottles.
A basketball game between a
team of four cats and a team
of three dogs.
Figure 6. Examples demonstrating text-to-image capabilities of Muse for various text properties. Top left: cardinality; top right:
composition; middle left: style; middle right: text rendering; and bottom left: usage of the entire prompt. For all examples, 16 instances
per prompt were generated, and the one with the highest CLIP score (Radford et al., 2021) was chosen. Bottom right: examples of
generated image failure in Muse for various text properties such as direct rendering of long phrases, high cardinalities, and multiple
cardinalities.
8

Figure 7. Comparing the same prompts across DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) (left), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) (middle) and
Muse (right).
9

Approach
Model Type
Params
FID
CLIP
VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021b)
Autoregressive
600M
28.86
0.20
ImageBART (Esser et al., 2021a)
Diffusion+Autogressive
2.8B
22.61
0.23
LDM-4 (Rombach et al., 2022)
Diffusion
645M
17.01
0.24
RQ-Transformer (Lee et al., 2022a)
Autoregressive
654M
12.33
0.26
Draft-and-revise (Lee et al., 2022b)
Non-autoregressive
654M
9.65
0.26
Muse(base model)
Non-autoregressive
632M
6.8
0.25
Muse(base + super-res)
Non-autoregressive
632M + 268M
6.06
0.26
Table 1. Quantitative evaluation on CC3M (Sharma et al., 2018); all models are trained and evaluated on CC3M.
Approach
Model Type
Params
FID-30K
Zero-shot
FID-30K
AttnGAN (Xu et al., 2017)
GAN
35.49
-
DM-GAN (Zhu et al., 2019)
GAN
32.64
-
DF-GAN (Tao et al., 2020)
GAN
21.42
-
DM-GAN + CL (Ye et al., 2021)
GAN
20.79
-
XMC-GAN (Zhang et al., 2021)
GAN
9.33
-
LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2021)
GAN
8.12
-
Make-A-Scene (Gafni et al., 2022)
Autoregressive
7.55
-
DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021)
Autoregressive
-
17.89
LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2021)
GAN
-
26.94
LDM (Rombach et al., 2022)
Diffusion
-
12.63
GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021)
Diffusion
-
12.24
DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022)
Diffusion
-
10.39
Imagen-3.4B (Saharia et al., 2022)
Diffusion
-
7.27
Parti-3B (Yu et al., 2022)
Autoregressive
-
8.10
Parti-20B (Yu et al., 2022)
Autoregressive
3.22
7.23
Muse-3B
Non-Autoregressive
-
7.88
Table 2. Quantitative evaluation of FID and CLIP score (where available) on MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) for 256 × 256 image resolution.
Muse achieves a CLIP score of 0.32, higher than the score of 0.27 reported in Imagen. Other papers in the table above did not report a
CLIP score.
exclusively on only a few salient words. Finally, Figure 7 shows comparisons between Muse, Dall-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022),
and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) for some select prompts, showing that Muse is at par with Imagen and qualitatively better
than Dall-E2 for many prompts.
However, as demonstrated in the bottom right of Figure 6, Muse is limited in its ability to generate images well aligned with
certain types of prompts. For prompts which indicate that long, multi-word phrases should be directly rendered, Muse has
a tendency to render those phrases incorrectly, often resulting in (unwanted) duplicated rendered words or rendering of
only a portion of the phrase. Additionally, prompts indicating high object cardinality tend to result in generated images
which do not correctly reﬂect that desired cardinality (e.g., rendering only 7 wine bottles when the prompt speciﬁed 10). In
general, the ability of Muse to render the correct cardinalities of objects decreases as the cardinality increases. Another
difﬁcult prompt type for Muse is ones with multiple cardinalities (e.g., “four cats and a team of three dogs”). For such cases,
Muse has a tendency to get at least one cardinality incorrect in its rendering.
3.2. Quantitative Performance
In Table 1 and Table 2, we show our performance against other methods on the CC3M (Sharma et al., 2018) and COCO (Lin
et al., 2014) datasets as measured by Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), which measures quality and
diversity of samples, as well as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) score, which measures image/text alignment. For the CC3M
10

0.320
0.322
0.324
0.326
0.328
0.330
0.332
CLIP
7.9
8.0
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
FID
Figure 8. CLIP vs. FID tradeoff curve. We perform
sweeps of sampling parameters for a ﬁxed model, then
plot the Pareto front.
Figure 9. Percentage of prompts for which a human
rater consensus chose a model alignment preference.
Contributions from speciﬁc numbers of rater consen-
suses are shown in different colors, while marginals
over consensuses (= 5, ≥4, and ≥3) are shown nu-
merically.
results, both Muse models were trained on CC3M. The COCO results are zero-shot, using a model trained on the same
dataset as Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022).
Our 632M model achieves SOTA results on CC3M, signiﬁcantly improving upon the state of the art in FID score, and also
achieving state of the art CLIP score. Our 3B model achieves an FID score of 7.88 which is slightly better than the score of
8.1 achieved by the Parti-3B model which has a similar number of parameters. Our CLIP score of 0.32 is higher than the
CLIP score of 0.29 achieved by Imagen (which is achieved when the FID is signiﬁcantly higher 20). For the FID of 7.27,
Imagen achieves a CLIP score of around 0.27 (see Figure 4 in (Saharia et al., 2022)).
Our sampling algorithm (Section 2.8) has a number of hyperparameters, such as guidance scale, sampling temperature,
whether or not to linearly increase guidance during sampling, etc. We perform evaluation sweeps over these parameters. We
ﬁnd subsets of sampling parameters that are Pareto efﬁcient, in the sense that we cannot improve FID without hurting CLIP.
This allows us to study the tradeoff between diversity and image/text alignment, which we show in Figure 8.
3.2.1. HUMAN EVALUATION
Similar to previous works (Yu et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022), we perform side-by-side evaluations in which human raters
are presented with a text prompt and two images, each generated by a different text-to-image model using that prompt. The
raters are asked to assess prompt-image alignment via the question, “Which image matches with the caption better?” Each
image pair is anonymized and randomly ordered (left vs right). Raters have the option of choosing either image or that they
are indifferent1. Each (prompt, image pair) triplet is assessed by ﬁve independent raters; the raters were provided through
the Google internal crowd computing team and were completely anonymous to the Muse team. For the set of prompts
presented to raters, we used PartiPrompts (Yu et al., 2022), a collection of 1650 text prompts curated to measure model
capabilities across a variety of categories. For the two text-to-image models, we compared Muse (3B parameters) to that
of Stable Diffusion v1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022), the text-to-image model most comparable to Muse in terms of inference
speed. For each prompt, 16 image instances were generated, and the one with the highest CLIP score (Radford et al.,
2021) was used. The stable diffusion images were generated via the CompVis Stable Diffusion v1.4 notebook (CompVis,
2022). We required at least a 3 rater consensus for results to be counted in favor of a particular model. From this analysis,
we found that Muse was chosen as better aligned than Stable Diffusion for 70.6% of the prompts, Stable Diffusion was
chosen as better aligned than Muse for 25.4%, and no rater consensus was chosen for 4%. These results are consistent with
Muse having signiﬁcantly better caption matching capability (∼2.7x). Figure 9 shows a breakdown of the rater results for
rater consensuses of 3, 4, and all 5 possible votes. Prompts for which all 5 raters said Muse had better alignment than Stable
1Choosing indifference makes sense when neither image is aligned with the text prompt and helps reduce statistical noise in the results.
11

Diffusion are the larger contributor.
In addition to measuring alignment, other works (Yu et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) have also measured image realism,
often via a rater question similar to, “Which image is more realistic?”. However, we note that care must be taken with
examination of such results. Though it is not the intent of the question, a model that is completely mode collapsed so that it
generates the same sufﬁciently realistic image regardless of prompt will virtually always do better on this question than a
model that does take the prompt into account during image generation. We propose this type of question is only applicable
between models of similar alignment. Since Muse is signiﬁcantly better aligned than Stable Diffusion, we did not assess
realism via human raters. We consider this topic an area of open research.
3.2.2. INFERENCE SPEED
Model
Resolution
Time
Imagen
256 × 256
9.1s
Imagen
1024 × 1024
13.3s
LDM (50 steps)
512 × 512
3.7s
LDM (250 steps)
512 × 512
18.5s
Parti-3B
256 × 256
6.4s
Muse-3B
256 × 256
0.5s
Muse-3B
512 × 512
1.3s
Table 3. Per-batch inference time for several models. Muse, Imagen,
and Parti were benchmarked internally on TPUv4 hardware. Stable
Diffusion/LDM benchmark from (Lambda Labs, 2022), on A100
GPUs. The “LDM (250 steps)” time comes from scaling the 50-step
time by 5; 250 steps were used to achieve the FID in Table 2.
In Table 3, we compare the inference time of Muse to
several other popular models. We benchmarked Parti-3B,
Imagen, and Muse-3B internally on TPUv4 accelerators.
For Stable Diffusion/LDM, we used the fastest reported
benchmark (Lambda Labs, 2022), which was done on
A100 GPUs. For Stable Diffusion, the TPU implemen-
tations we tested were not faster than the A100 imple-
mentation. We also report an inference time for LDM
with 250 iterations, which is the conﬁguration used to
achieve the FID in Table 2. Muse is signiﬁcantly faster
than competing diffusion or autoregressive models, de-
spite having comparable parameter counts (and around 3x
more parameters than Stable Diffusion/LDM). The speed
advantage of Muse over Imagen is due to the use of discrete tokens and requiring fewer sampling iterations. The speed
advantage of Muse over Parti is due to the use of parallel decoding. The speed advantage of Muse over Stable Diffusion is
primarily attributable to requiring fewer sampling iterations.
3.3. Image Editing
By exploiting the fact that our model can condition on arbitrary subsets of image tokens, we can use the model out-of-the-box
for a variety of image editing applications with no additional training or model ﬁne-tuning.
3.3.1. TEXT-GUIDED INPAINTING / OUTPAINTING
Our sampling procedure (Section 2.8) gives us text-guided inpainting and outpainting for free: we convert an input image
into a set of tokens, mask out the tokens corresponding to a local region, and then sample the masked tokens conditioned
on unmasked tokens and a text prompt. We integrate superresolution through a multi-scale approach: Given an image of
size 512x512, we ﬁrst decimate it to 256x256 and convert both images to high- and low-res tokens. Then, we mask out
the appropriate regions for each set of tokens. Next, we inpaint the low-res tokens using the parallel sampling algorithm.
Finally, we condition on these low-res tokens to inpaint the high-res tokens using the same sampling algorithm. We show
examples of this in Figure 2 and Figure 10.
3.3.2. ZERO-SHOT MASK-FREE EDITING
We use Muse in a zero-shot sense for mask-free image editing of real input images. This method works directly on the
(tokenized) image and does not require “inverting” the full generative process, in contrast with recent zero-shot image
editing techniques leveraging generative models (Gal et al., 2022b; Patashnik et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Mokady et al.,
2022).
We ﬁrst convert an input image into visual tokens. Next, we iteratively mask and resample a random subset of tokens,
conditioned on text prompts. We can think of this as being analogous to a Gibbs sampling procedure, where we ﬁx some
tokens and resample others conditioned on them. This has the effect of moving the tokenized image into the typical set of
the conditional distribution of images given a text prompt.
We perform the editing using the low-resolution base model, then perform superres on the ﬁnal output (conditioned on the
12

Original
Masked
San Francisco in
the background
New York City in
the background
Paris in the back-
ground
Original
Masked
A
cabin
in
the
woods
An old, beat up
pickup truck.
A horse tied to a
post.
Figure 10. Examples of text-guided inpainting. The mask is shown in the second column of each row. This behavior arises directly from
the model with no ﬁne-tuning.
editing prompt). In the examples (Figure 2, Figure 11), we resample 8% of the tokens per iteration for 100 iterations, with a
guidance scale of 4. We also perform top-k (k = 3) sampling on the token logits to prevent the process from diverging too
much from the input. The iterative nature allows for control over the ﬁnal output. Figure 12 shows a few intermediate edits
(without superres); in this example, the user may prefer iteration 50 or 75 over the ﬁnal output.
4. Related Work
4.1. Image Generation Models
Variational autoencoders (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) and Generative Adversarial Models (GANs) have shown excellent
image generation performance with many variants proposed for both convolutional and Transformer architectures e.g.
(Goodfellow et al., 2020; Esser et al., 2021b; Karras et al., 2019; Brock et al., 2018; Donahue & Simonyan, 2019). Until
recently, GANs were considered state of the art. Diffusion models, based on progressive denoising principles, are now able
to synthesize images and video at equal or higher ﬁdelity (Ho et al., 2020; Kingma et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2022). Hybrid
approaches that combine principles from multiple approaches have also shown excellent performance (Chang et al., 2022;
Lezama et al., 2022), suggesting that there are more complementarities between approaches that can be exploited.
4.2. Image Tokenizers
Image tokenizers are proving to be useful for multiple generative models due to the ability to move the bulk of the
computation from input (pixel) space to latents (Rombach et al., 2022), or to enabling more effective loss functions such
as classiﬁcation instead of regression (Chang et al., 2022; Lezama et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022). A number of tokenization
approaches such as Discrete VAE’s (Rolfe, 2016), VQVAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) and VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021b)
have been developed, with the latter being the highest-performing as it combines perceptual and adversarial losses to achieve
excellent reconstruction. ViT-VQGAN (Yu et al., 2021) extends VQGAN to the Transformer architecture. We use VQGAN
rather than ViT-VQGAN as we found it to perform better for our model, noting that a better performing tokenization model
does not always translate to a better performing text-to-image model.
4.3. Large Language Models
Our work leverages T5, a pre-trained large language model (LLM) that has been trained on multiple text-to-text tasks (Raffel
et al., 2020). LLMs (including T5, BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), and GPT (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019)) have
13

Input image
Editing output
A bottle of Pinot
Grigio next to a
glass of white wine
and a cork.
A croissant next to
a latte with a ﬂower
latte art.
A dog.
A brown rabbit.
Bond Street.
Input image
Editing output
A Shiba Inu
A
dog
holding
a football in its
mouth
A basket of oranges
A photo of a cat
yawning
A photo of a vase
of red roses
Figure 11. Examples of zero-shot mask-free image editing, post superres. We see that the pose and overall structure of the image is
maintained while changing some speciﬁc aspects of the object based on the text prompt.
Input
Iteration 25
Iteration 50
Iteration 75
Iteration 100
Figure 12. Intermediate iterations producing one of the edits in Figure 11 (pre-superres)
14

been shown to learn powerful embeddings which enable few-shot transfer learning. We leverage this capacity in our model.
All of the modern LLMs are trained on token prediction tasks (either autoregressive or not). The insights regarding the
power of token prediction is leveraged in this work, where we apply a transformer to predict visual tokens.
4.4. Text-Image Models
Leveraging paired text-image data is proving to be a powerful learning paradigm for representation learning and generative
models. CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021) train models to align pairs of text and image embeddings,
showing excellent transfer and few-shot capabilities. Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) and Parti (Yu et al., 2022) use similar
large scale text-image datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2021; 2022) to learn how to predict images from text inputs, achieving
excellent results on FID and human evaluations. A key trick is the use of classiﬁer-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022;
Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) that trades off diversity and quality.
4.5. Image Editing with Generative Models
GANs have been extensively studied for image editing and manipulation capabilities (see (Xia et al., 2022) for a survey). A
number of techniques have been developed on diffusion models to enable editing, personalization and inversion to token
space (Gal et al., 2022a; Meng et al., 2021; Ruiz et al., 2022; Kawar et al., 2022; Brooks et al., 2022; Hertz et al., 2022;
Mokady et al., 2022). Dreambooth (Ruiz et al., 2022) and Imagic (Kawar et al., 2022) involve ﬁne-tuning of the generative
models. ImagenEditor (Wang et al., 2022) frames the editing task as text-guided image inpainting, and involves user
speciﬁed masks.
5. Discussion and Social Impact
The Muse model conﬁrms the ﬁndings of (Saharia et al., 2022) that frozen large pretrained language models serve as
powerful text encoders for text-to-image generation. We also tried in our initial experiments to learn a language model from
scratch on the training data, but found that performance was signiﬁcantly worse than using a pre-trained LLM, especially
on long prompts and rare words. We also show that non-diffusion, non-autoregressive models based on the Transformer
architecture can perform at par with diffusion models while being signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient at inference time. We achieve
SOTA CLIP scores, showing an excellent alignment beteween image and text. We also show the ﬂexibility of our approach
with a number of image editing applications.
We recognize that generative models have a number of applications with varied potential for impact on human society.
Generative models (Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Midjourney, 2022) hold signiﬁcant potential to
augment human creativity (Hughes et al., 2021). However, it is well known that they can also be leveraged for misinformation,
harassment and various types of social and cultural biases (Franks & Waldman, 2018; Whittaker et al., 2020; Srinivasan &
Uchino, 2021; Steed & Caliskan, 2021). Due to these important considerations, we opt to not release code or a public demo
at this point in time.
Dataset biases are another important ethical consideration due to the requirement of large datasets that are mostly automati-
cally curated. Such datasets have various potentially problematic issues such as consent and subject awareness (Paullada
et al., 2021; Dulhanty, 2020; Scheuerman et al., 2021). Many of the commonly used datasets tend to reﬂect negative
social stereotypes and viewpoints (Prabhu & Birhane, 2020). Thus, it is quite feasible that training on such datasets simply
ampliﬁes these biases and signiﬁcant additional research is required on how to mitigate such biases, and generate datasets
that are free of them: this is a very important topic (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Hendricks et al., 2018) that is out of the
scope of this paper.
Given the above considerations, we do not recommend the use of text-to-image generation models without attention to
the various use cases and an understanding of the potential for harm. We especially caution against using such models for
generation of people, humans and faces.
