On Clustering Time Series Using Euclidean
Distance and Pearson Correlation
Michael R. Berthold and Frank H¨oppner
1 Dept. of Computer and Information Science, University of Konstanz, Germany

2 Dept. of Economics, Univ. of Applied Sciences Wolfsburg, Germany

Abstract. For time series comparisons, it has often been observed that
z-score normalized Euclidean distances far outperform the unnormal-
ized variant. In this paper we show that a z-score normalized, squared
Euclidean Distance is, in fact, equal to a distance based on Pearson Cor-
relation. This has profound impact on many distance-based classiﬁcation
or clustering methods. In addition to this theoretically sound result we
also show that the often used k-Means algorithm formally needs a mod-
iﬁcation to keep the interpretation as Pearson correlation strictly valid.
Experimental results demonstrate that in many cases the standard k-
Means algorithm generally produces the same results.
1
Introduction
In the KD-Nuggets poll of July 2007 for the most frequently analyzed type of
data, time series data was voted on the second place. It is therefore not surpris-
ing, that a large number of papers with algorithms to cluster, classify, segment
or index time series have been published in recent years. For all these tasks, mea-
sures to compare time series are needed, and quite a number of measures have
been proposed (cf. [1]). Among these measures, the Euclidean distance is by far
the most frequently used distance measure (although many more sophisticated
measures exist) [1] with applications in ﬁnance [2], medicine [3] or electric power
load-forecast [4], to mention only a few. However, many authors then realize that
normalizing the Euclidean distance before applying standard machine learning
algorithms hugely improves their results.
In this paper, we closer investigate the popular combination of clustering
time series data together with a normalized Euclidean distance. The most com-
monly used learning method for clustering tasks is the k-Means algorithm [5].
We show that a z-score normalized squared Euclidean distance is actually equal
(up to a constant factor) to a distance based on the Pearson correlation co-
eﬃcient. This oberservation allows for standard learning methods based on a
Euclidean distance to use a Pearson correlation coeﬃcient by simply perform-
ing an appropriate normalization of the input data. This ﬁnding applies to all
learning methods which are based solely on a distance metric and do not per-
form subsequent operations, such as a weighted average. Therefore reasonably
arXiv:1601.02213v1  [cs.LG]  10 Jan 2016

simple methods such as k Nearest Neighbor and hierarchical clustering but also
more complex learning algorithms based on e.g. kernels can be converted into
using a Pearson correlation coeﬃcient without actually touching the underlying
algorithm itself.
In order to show how this aﬀects algorithms that do perform additional e.g.
averaging operations, we chose the often used k-Means algorithm which requires
a modiﬁcation of the underlying clustering procedure to work correctly. Exper-
iments indicate, however, that the diﬀerence between the standard Euclidean-
based k-Means and the Pearson-based k-Means do not have a high impact on the
results, therefore indicating that even in such cases a simple data preprocessing
can turn an algorithm using a Euclidean distance into its equivalent based on a
Pearson correlation coeﬃcient.
Our paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we brieﬂy recap distances for
time series. Afterwards we show that a properly normalized Euclidean distance
is equivalent to a distance based on the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient. After this
theoretically sound result we quickly review k-means and the required modiﬁ-
cations to operate on a Pearson correlation coeﬃcient. In section 6 we perform
experiments that demonstrate the (small) diﬀerence in behaviour for standard
k-Means with preprocessed inputs and the modiﬁed version.
2
Measuring Time Series Similarity
In this section, we brieﬂy review the Euclidean distance which is frequently used
by data miners and a distance based on Pearson Correlation which is more often
used to measure the strength and direction of a linear dependency between time
series. Suppose we have two time series r and s, consisting of T samples each
r = (r1, r2, ..., rT ) ∈RT .
Euclidean Distance. The squared Euclidean distance between two time series r
and s is given by:
dE(r, s) =
T
X
t=1
(rt −st)2
(1)
The Euclidean distance is a metric, that is, if r and s have zero distance, then
r = s holds. For time series analysis, it is often recommended to normalize the
time series either globally or locally to tolerate vastly diﬀerent ranges [1].
Pearson Correlation Coeﬃcient. The Pearson correlation coeﬃcient measures
the correlation ϱ between two random variables X and Y :
ϱX,Y = E[(X −µX)(Y −µY )]
σXσY
(2)
where µX denotes the mean and σX the standard deviation of X. We obtain a
value of +/ −1 if X and Y are perfectly (anti-) correlated and a value of ≈0 if
they are uncorrelated.

In order to use the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient as a distance measure for
time series it is desirable to generate low distance values for positively correlated
(and thus similar) series. The Pearson distance is therefore deﬁned as
dP (r, s) = 1 −ϱr,s = 1 −
1
T
PT
t=1(rt −µr)(st −µs)
σrσs
(3)
such that 0 ≤dP (r, s) ≤2. We obtain a perfect match (zero distance) for time
series r and s if there is an α, β ∈R with β > 0 such that ri = α + βsi for all
1 ≤i ≤T. Thus, a clustering algorithm using this distance measure is invariant
with respect to shift and scaling of the time series.
3
Normalized Euclidean Distance vs. Pearson Coeﬃcient
In this section we show that a squared Euclidean Distance can be expressed by a
Pearson Coeﬃcient as long as the Euclidean Distance is normalized appropriately
(to zero mean and unit variance). Note that this transformation is applied and
recommended by many authors as noted in [1].
We consider the squared Euclidean distance as given in equation 1:
dE(r, s) =
T
X
t=1
(rt −st)2
=
T
X
t=1
r2
t −2
T
X
t=1
rtst +
T
X
t=1
s2
t
=
T
X
t=1
(rt −0)2
|
{z
}
(a)
−2
T
X
t=1
rtst +
T
X
t=1
(st −0)2
|
{z
}
(b)
the ﬁrst resp. third part (a/b) of this equation reﬂect T times the standard
deviation of series r resp. s assuming that the series are normalized to have a
mean µr/s = 0. Assuming that the normalization also ensures both standard
deviations be σr/s = 1 (resulting in terms (a) and (b) to be equal to T), we can
simplify the above equation to:
dE(rnorm, snorm) = 2 · T −2
T
X
t=1
rnorm,t · snorm,t
= 2 · T
 
1 −
1
T
PT
t=1(rnorm,t −0)(snorm,t −0)
1 · 1
!
= 2 · T · dP (rnorm, snorm)
Therefore the Euclidean distance of two normalized series is exactly equal to the
Pearson Coeﬃcient, bare a constant factor of 2T.

The equivalence of normalized Euclidean distance and Pearson Coeﬃcient is
particularly interesting, since many published results on using Euclidean distance
functions for time series similarities come to the ﬁnding that a normalization of
the original time series is crucial. As the above shows, these authors may in fact
end up simulating a Pearson correlation coeﬃcient or a multiple of it.
This result can be applied to any learning algorithm which relies solely on
the distance measures but does not perform additional computations based on
the distance measure, such as averaging or other aggregation operations. This is
the case for many simple algorithms such as k Nearest Neighbor and hierarchical
clustering but also applies to more sophisticated learning methods such as kernel
methods.
However, some algorithms, such as the prominent k-Means algorithm do per-
form a subsequent (sometimes weighted) averaging of the training instances to
compute new cluster centers. Here we can not simply apply the above and – by
normalizing the input data – introduce a diﬀerent underlying distance measure.
However, since quite often only a ranking of patterns with respect to the under-
lying distance function is actually used it would be interesting to see if and how
this observation can be used to apply also to such learning algorithms without
actually adjusting the entire algorithm. In the following section we will show how
this works for the well known and often used k-Means Clustering algorithm.
4
Brief Review of k-Means
The k-Means algorithm [5] is one of the most popular clustering algorithms. It
encodes a partition into k clusters by means of k prototypical data points pi,
1 ≤i ≤k, and assigns every record xj, 1 ≤j ≤n, to its closest prototype. It
minimizes the objective function
J =
n
X
j=1
c
X
i=1
ui,j · di,j
(4)
where ui,j ∈{0, 1} encodes the partition (ui,j = 1 iﬀrecord j is assigned to
cluster/prototype i) and di,j is the distance between record j and prototype i.
The classical k-Means uses the squared Euclidean distance as di,j = dE(xj, pi).
In the batch version of k-Means the prototypes and cluster memberships are
updated alternatingly to minimize the objective function (4). In each step, one
part of the parameters (cluster memberships resp. cluster centers) is kept ﬁxed
while the other is optimized. Hence the two phases of the algorithm ﬁrst assume
that the prototypes are optimal and determine how we can then minimize J
wrt the membership degrees. Since we allow values of 0 and 1 only for ui,j, we
minimize J by assigning a record to the closest prototype (with the smallest
distance):
ui,j =
1 if di,j = mink dk,j
0 otherwise
(5)

Afterwards, assuming that the memberships are optimal, we then ﬁnd the op-
timal position of the prototypes. The answer for this question can be obtained
by solving the (partial) derivatives of ∂J/∂pi = 0 for pi (necessary condition for
J having a minimum). In case of an Euclidean distance, the optimal position is
then the mean of all data objects assigned to cluster pi:
pi =
Pn
j=1
Pc
i=1 ui,jxj
Pc
i=1 ui,j
(6)
where the denominator represents the number of data objects assigned to pro-
totype pi. The resulting k-Means algorithm is shown below:
initialize prototypes (i.e. randomly draw from input data)
repeat
update memberships using eq. (5)
update prototypes using eq. (6)
until convergence
5
k-Means Clustering using Pearson Correlation
The k-Means algorithm has its name from the prototype update (6), which re-
adjusts each prototype to the mean of its assigned data objects. The reason why
the mean delivers the optimal prototypes is due to the use of the Euclidean
distance measure – if we change the distance measure in (4), we have to check
carefully if the update equations need to be changed, too. We have seen in
section 3 that the Euclidean distances becomes the Pearson Coeﬃcient (up to a
constant factor) if the vectors are normalized. But if the distances are actually
identical, should not the prototype update also be the same?
The equivalence 2dE(r, s) = dP (r, s) holds only for normalized time series r
and s. To avoid constantly normalizing time series in the Pearson Coeﬃcient (2),
we transform all series during preprocessing, that is, we replace ri = (ri,t)1≤t≤T
by ˆri = (ˆri,t)1≤t≤T with ˆri,t = ri,t−µr
σr
, 1 ≤t ≤T, 1 ≤i ≤n. But in the k-Means
objective function (4) the arguments of the distance function are always pairs of
data object and prototype. While our time series data has been normalized at
the beginning, this does not necessarily hold for the prototypes.
If the prototypes are calculated as the mean of normalized time series (stan-
dard k-Means), the prototypes will also have zero mean, but a unit variance
can not be guaranteed. Once the prototypes have been calculated, their vari-
ance is no longer 1 and the equivalence no longer holds. Therefore, in order to
stick to the Pearson Coeﬃcient, we must include an additional constraint on the
prototypes while minimizing (4).
We use Lagrange multipliers λi, one for each cluster, to incorporate this
constraint in the objective function. So we arrive at:
JP =
n
X
i=1
c
X
j=1
ui,j(1 −x⊤
j pi) +
n
X
i=1
λi(∥pi∥2 −1)
(7)

As with classical k-Means we arrive at the new prototype update equations by
solving ∂J/∂pi = 0 for the prototype pi (see appendix for the derivation):
pi,t =
1
r
PT
t=1
Pn
j=1 ui,jxj,t
2
n
X
j=1
ui,jxj,t
(8)
This corresponds to a normalization of the usually obtained prototypes to guar-
antee the constraint of unit variance. Note that formally, due to a division by
zero, it is not possible to include constant time series when using Pearson dis-
tance (because normalization leads to xj,t = 0 for all t and we would have a
division by zero).
We now have a version of k-Means which uses the Pearson correlation co-
eﬃcient as underlying distance measure. But does the diﬀerence between the
diﬀerent update equations 8 and 6 really matter? In the following we will show
via a number of experiments that the inﬂuence of this optimization is small.
6
Experimental Evaluation
The goal of the experimental evaluation is twofold. The k-Means algorithm has
been used frequently with z-score normalized time series in the literature. We
have seen that in this case a semantically sound solution would require the
modiﬁcations of section 5. Do we obtain “wrong” results when using standard
k-Means? Will the corrected version with normalization yield diﬀerent results at
all? And if so, how much will the resulting cluster diﬀer from each other on the
kind of data used typically in the literature.
6.1
Artiﬁcial Data: Playing Devils Advocate
We expect that the inﬂuence of the additional normalization step on the results
is rather small. An unnormalized prototype pi in k-Means is now normalized
by an additonal factor of αi = 1/∥pi∥in the modiﬁed k-Means. The distances
of all data objects to this prototype miss this factor. However, if the factors αi
are approximately the same for all prototoypes pi, we make the same relative
error with all clusters and the rank of a cluster with respect to the distance does
not change. Since k-Means assigns each data object to the top-ranked cluster,
the diﬀerences in the distances then do not inﬂuence the prototype assignment.
Note also that this (presumably small) error does not propagate further, since
we re-compute the average again from the normalized input data during each
iteration of the algorithm.
Before presenting some experimental results, let us ﬁrst discuss under what
circumstances a diﬀerence between both versions of k-Means may occur. Let us
assume for the sake of simplicity that a cluster consists of two time series r and
s only. Then the prototype of standard k-Means is p = r+s
2 . Since the mean of

p will then also be zero, the variance of the new prototype p is identical to its
squared Euclidean norm ∥p −¯p∥2 = ∥p −0∥2 = ∥p∥2, so we have:
∥p∥2 =

r + s
2

2
= 1
4
 ∥r∥2 + ∥s∥2 + 2r⊤s

From the Cauchy Schwarz inequality and the z-score normalization of r and
s (in particular ∥r∥= ∥s∥= 1) we conclude r⊤s ∈[−1, 1] since (r⊤s)2 ≤
∥r∥2 · ∥s∥2 = 1 · 1. Apparently ∥p∥becomes maximal, if r⊤s or equivalently
the Pearson Coeﬃcient becomes maximal. The new prototype p will have unit
variance if and only if r and s correlate perfectly (Pearson Coeﬃcient of 1). If
the new prototype p is build from data that is not perfectly correlated, its norm
∥p∥will be smaller than one – the worse the correlation, the smaller the norm of
p. As a consequence, for any subsequent distance calculation dP (r, p) = 2−2r⊤p
we obtain larger distance values compared to what would be obtained from a
correctly normalized prototype dP (r, p) = 2 −2r⊤
p
∥p∥(since ∥p∥< 1).
As already mentioned, in order to have inﬂuence on the ranking of the clusters
(based on the prototype-distance), the prototype’s norm must diﬀer within the
clusters. This may easily happen if, for instance, the amount of noise is not
the same in all clusters: A set of linearly increasing time series without any
noise correlates perfectly, but by adding random noise to the series the Pearson
coeﬃcient approaches 0 when the amplitude of the noise is continuosly increased.
To demonstrate the relevance of these theoretical considerations we construct
an artiﬁcial test data set. It will consist of two clusters (100 time series each)
and a few additional time series serving as probes that demonstrate the diﬀerent
behavior of the two algorithms.
The test set contains a cluster of linearly increasing time series rI
=
(0, 1, 2, .., 29, 30, 31) as well as a cluster of linearly decreasing time series rD =
(31, 30, 29, ..., 2, 1, 0), 100 series per each cluster. We add Gaussian noise with
σ = 30 and σ = 10 to the samples, that is, the data with increasing trend is
more noisy than the data with decreasing trend. Finally, we add another 10 time
series that equally belong to both clusters as they consist of a linearly increasing
and a linearly decreasing portion: rM = (16, 15, 14, 13, ..2, 1, 0, 1, 2, .., 13, 14, 15).
The Pearson correlation between rM and rI as well as rD is identical, therefore
our expectation is that – after adding some Gaussian noise with σ = 10 to this
group of time series – on average half of them is assigned to each cluster. For
the experiment we want to concentrate on how the small group of these “probe
series” is distributed among both clusters. The data from each group of time
series is shown in ﬁgure 1.
To reduce the inﬂuence of random eﬀects, we initialize the clusters with
linearly increasing and decreasing series (but the prototypes do not stick to this
initialization due to the noise in the data). Clustering the z-score normalized
data with standard k-Means ﬁnally arrives at prototypes with a norm of 0.07
(increasing cluster) and 0.31 (decreasing cluster) approximately. Instead of the
expected tie situation, all the probing series but one are assigned to the cluster
representing the increasing series (9:1). If we include the normalization step for

Fig. 1. Groups of time series in the test data set.
the Pearson-based k-Means, we obtain an equal distribution among both clusters
(5:5).
Given that the semantics of clustering z-score normalized time series is so
close to clustering via Pearson correlation, this example clearly indicates that we
may obtain counterintuitive partitions when using standard k-Means. Clusters of
poorly correlating data greedily absorb more data than it would be justiﬁed by
the Pearson correlation. This undesired bias is removed by the properly modiﬁed
version of k-Means. Still, the chosen example is artiﬁcial and rather drastic - the
question remains how big the inﬂuence of this issue really is in practice.
6.2
Real World Datasets
In order to demonstrate this on real world data sets, we use the time series data
sets for clustering tasks, available online [6]. For each data set we use the number
of classes as the number of clusters3 and run each experiment ﬁve times with
diﬀerent random selections of initial prototypes for each run of k-Means. During
each run we use the same vectors as initial prototypes for the diﬀerent types of
algorithms to avoid problems with the unfamously instable k-Means algorithm.
In order to compare the result to the natural instability of k-Means, we run a
third experiment with a diﬀerent random initialization. That is, for each data
set we do:
1. set the number of clusters to the number of classes,
2. normalize each time series (row) to have µ = 0 and σ = 1,
3. create a clustering C1 using the classical k-Means algorithm with the Eu-
clidean distance (no normalization),
4. create a clustering C2 using a k-Means algorithm using the Euclidean distance
but prototype update equation (8) with normalization after each iteration,
5. create a clustering C3 using a k-Means algorithm using the Euclidean distance
and no normalization of the prototypes using a diﬀerent (randomly chosen)
initialization of the prototypes.
3 Obviously the number of classes does not necessarily correspond to the number of
clusters. But for the sake of the experiments reported here, the exact match of the
true underlying clustering is not crucial, which is also the reason why we do not
make use of the available class (not cluster!) information to judge the quality of the
clustering methods considered here.

Table 1. Experimental results using diﬀerent version of k-Means. See text for details.
Name
#clusters #length #size
Epear
Erandom
min max min max
Synthetic Control
6
60
300
0,32 0,36 0,41 0,62
Gun Point
2
150
50
0,0
0,0
0,0 0,59
CBF
3
128
30
0,0
0,0
0,30 0,85
Face (All)
14
131
560
0,03 0,16 1,12 1,53
OSU Leaf
6
427
200
0,06 0,26 0,93 1,25
Swedish Leaf
15
128
500
0,0 0,03 0,83 1,09
50Words
50
270
450
0,0 0,05 1,17 1,27
Trace
4
275
100
0,0
0,0
0,50 0,67
Two Patterns
4
128
1000 0,03 0,11 0,86 1,41
Wafer
2
152
1000
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
Face (Four)
4
350
24
0,0
0,0
0,62 1,19
Lightning-2
2
637
60
0,0
0,0
0,0 0,71
Lightning-7
7
319
70
0,0 0,07 0,35 0,99
ECG
2
96
100
0,0
0,0
0,0 0,55
Adiac
37
176
390
0,0
0,0
0,89 1,23
Yoga
2
426
399
0,0
0,0
0,0 0,76
We then compute the average entropy over ﬁve runs of the clustering C1 with
respect to C2 (called Epear) and C1 with respect to C3 (denoted by Erandom).
The entropy measures are composed of the weighted average over the entropy of
all clusters in one clustering using the cluster indices of the other clustering as
class labels. Epear therefore measures the diﬀerence between a clustering achieved
with the correctly modiﬁed k-Means algorithm and its lazy version where we only
normalize the input data but refrain from normalizing the prototypes. Erandom
shows the diﬀerence between two runs of k-Means with the same setting but
diﬀerent initalizations to illustrate the natural, internal instability of k-Means.
The hypothesis would be that Epear should be zero or at least substantially
below Erandom, that is, using the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient should not have
a worse inﬂuence on k-Means than diﬀerent initializations. Table 1 shows the
results. We show the name of the dataset and the number of clusters in the ﬁrst
two columns. Length and number of time series in the training data are listed
in columns 3 and 4. The following four columns show minimum resp. maximum
value over our ﬁve experiments for the two entropies.
As one can see clearly in this table, the diﬀerence between running classical
k-Means on z-score normalized input and the “correct” version with prototype-
normalization is small. The clusterings are the same (Epear = 0) when k-Means
is reasonably stable (Erandom ≈0), that is an underlying reasonably well de-
ﬁned clustering of the data exists (Gun Point and Wafer are good examples for
this eﬀect). In case of an unstable k-Means, also the normalization of the pro-
totypes (or the lack of it) may change the outcome slightly but will never have
the same impact as a diﬀerent initialization of the same algorithm on the same
data. Strong evidence for this eﬀect can be seen by max{Epear} ≤min{Erandom}

in all case. Note how in many case even an unstable classic k-Means does not
indicate any diﬀerence between the prototype normalized and unnormalized ver-
sions, however. Gun Point, CBF, Trace, and Face-Four among others are good
examples for this eﬀect.
From these experiments it seems safe to conclude that one can simulate k-
Means based on Pearson correlation coeﬃcients as similarity metric by simply
normalizing the input data without changing the normal (e.g. Euclidean dis-
tance based) algorithm at all. It is, of course, even easier to apply the discussed
properties to classiﬁcation or clustering algorithms which do not need subse-
quent averaging steps, such as k-Nearest Neighbor, hierarchical clustering, Ker-
nel Methods etc. In these cases a distance function using Pearson correlations
can be perfectly emulated by simply normalizing the input data appropriately
and then using the existing implementation based on the Euclidean distance.
7
Conclusion
We have shown that the squared Euclidean distance on z-score normalized vec-
tors is equivalent to the inverse of the Pearson Correlation coeﬃcient up to a
constant factor. This result is especially of interest for a number of time se-
ries clustering experiments where Euclidean distances are applied to normalized
data as it shows that the authors in fact were often using something close to or
equivalent to the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient.
We have also experimentally demonstrated that the standard k-Means clus-
tering algorithm without proper normalization of the prototypes still performs
similar to the correct version, enabling the use of standard k-Means implemen-
tations without modiﬁcation to compute clusterings using Pearson coeﬃcients.
Algorithms without “internal” computations, such as k-Nearest Neighbor or hi-
erarchical clustering can make use of the theoretical proof provided in this paper
and be applied without any further modiﬁcations, of course.
