Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Multi-agent MOBA Game
Zhijian Zhang , Haozheng Li , Luo Zhang , Tianyin Zheng , Ting Zhang ,
Xiong Hao , Xiaoxin Chen , Min Chen , Fangxu Xiao , Wei Zhou
vivo AI Lab

Abstract
Real Time Strategy (RTS) games require macro
strategies as well as micro strategies to obtain satis-
factory performance, since it has large state space,
action space, and hidden information. This paper
presents a novel hierarchical reinforcement learn-
ing model for mastering Multiplayer Online Battle
Arena (MOBA) games, a sub-genre of RTS games.
The contributions are: (1) proposing a hierarchical
framework, where agents execute macro strategies
by imitation learning and carry out micromanipu-
lations through reinforcement learning, (2) devel-
oping a simple self-learning method to get better
sample efﬁciency for training, and (3) designing
a dense reward function for multi-agent coopera-
tion in the absence of game engine or Application
Programming Interface (API). Finally, various ex-
periments have been performed to validate the su-
perior performance of the proposed method over
other state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algo-
rithms. Agents successfully learn to combat and
defeat bronze-level built-in AI with 100% win rate,
and experiments show that our method can cre-
ate a competitive multi-agent for a kind of mobile
MOBA game King of Glory in 5v5 mode.
1
Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has become a promis-
ing tool for game AI since its success in playing game Atari
[Mnih et al., 2015], AlphaGo [Silver et al., 2017], Dota 2
[OpenAI, 2018], and so on. Researchers verify algorithms by
conducting experiments in games quickly, and transfer this
ability to real world applications such as robotics control, rec-
ommend services. Unfortunately, there are still many chal-
lenges in practice. More and more researchers have started
to conquer more complex Real Time Strategy (RTS) games
such as StarCraft and Defense of the Ancients (Dota) recently.
Dota is a kind of Multiplayer Online Battle Arena (MOBA)
game which includes 5v5 and 1v1 modes. To achieve vic-
tory in a MOBA game, players need to control their only one
agent to destroy enemies’ crystal.
MOBA games take up more than 30% of the online game-
plays all over the world, including League of Legends, Dota,
(a) 5v5 map
(b) 1v1 map
Figure 1: (a) Screenshot from 5v5 map of KOG. Players can get the
position of allies, towers, enemies in view and know whether jungles
alive or not from mini-map. From the screen, players can observe
surrounding information including what kind of skills are released
and releasing. (b) Screenshot from 1v1 map of KOG, known as solo
mode.
King of Glory (KOG), and others [Murphy, 2015]. Fig. 1a
shows a 5v5 map of KOG, where players control the motion
of heros by controlling the left bottom steer button, while
using skills by controling right bottom set of buttons. The
upper-left corner shows mini-map, with the blue markers in-
cidating own towers and the red markers incidating the ene-
mies’ towers. Each player can obtain gold and experience by
killing enemies, jungling and destroying towers. The ultimate
goal of this game is to destroy enemies’ crystal. As shown in
Fig. 1b, there are two players in 1v1 map.
Compared with Atari, the main challenges of MOBA
games for us are: (1) Game engine or Application Pro-
gramming Interface (API) is not available for us. We need
to extract features by multi-target detection, and run the game
on mobile phones, which is restricated by low computational
power. However, the computational complexity can be up
to 1020,000, while AlphaGo is about 10250 [OpenAI, 2018].
(2) Rewards are severely delayed and sparse. The ultimate
goal of the game is to destroy the enemies’ crystal, which
means that rewards are seriously delayed. Meanwhile, the
rewards are really sparse if we set the rewards of −1/1 ac-
cording to the ﬁnal result loss/win. (3) Multi-agents’ com-
munication and cooperation are challenging. Communica-
tion and cooperation are crucially important for RTS games
especially in 5v5 mode.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst attempt
to propose reinforcement learning in MOBA game, which
does not obtain information from API, but captures informa-
tion from game video directly. We cope with the curse of
computational complexity through imitation learning of the
arXiv:1901.08004v6  [cs.LG]  21 Jun 2019

macro strategies, and it is hard to train for agents because the
rewards in this part are severely delayed and sparse. Mean-
while, we develop a distributed platform for sampling to ac-
celerate the training process and combine the A-Star path
planning algorithm to do navigation. To test the performance
of our method, we take the game KOG, a popular mobile
MOBA game, as our experiment environment, and system-
atic experiments have been performed.
The main contributions of this work include: (1) propos-
ing a novel hierarchical reinforcement learning framework
for a kind of mobile MOBA game KOG, which combines im-
itation learning and reinforcement learning. Imitation learn-
ing according to humans’ experience is responsible for macro
strategies such as where to go to, when to offend and defend,
while reinforcement learning is in charge of micromanipula-
tions such as which skill to release and how to move in battle;
(2) developing a simple self-learning method which learns to
compete with agent’s past good decisions and come up with
an optimal policy to accelerate the training process; (3) devel-
oping a multi-target detection method to extract global fea-
tures composing the state of reinforcement learning; (4) de-
signing a dense reward function and using real-time data to
communicate with each other. Experiments show that our
agents learn better policy than other reinforcement learning
methods.
2
Related Work
2.1
RTS Games
There has been a history of studies on RTS games such as
StarCraft [Ontan´on et al., 2013] and Dota [OpenAI, 2018].
One practical way using rule-based method by bot SAIDA
achieved championship on SSCAIT recently. Based on the
experience of the game, rule-based bots can only choose pre-
deﬁned action and policy at the beginning of a game, which
is insufﬁcient to deal with large and real time state space
throughout the game, and it is difﬁcult to keep learning and
evolving. Dota2 AI created by OpenAI, named OpenAI Five,
has made great success by using Proximal Policy Optimiza-
tion (PPO) algorithm together with well-designed rewards.
However, OpenAI Five has used huge computing resources
due to lacking of macro strategy.
Related work has also been done in macro strategies by
Tencent AI Lab in game KOG [Wu et al., 2018], and their 5-
AI team achieved 48% win rate against human player teams
which are ranked top 1% in the player ranking system. How-
ever, 5-AI team used supervised learning and the training data
can be obtained from game replays processed by game engine
and API, which run on server. This method is not possible for
us because we don’t have access to the game engine or API,
and we need to run on mobile phones.
2.2
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
Traditional reinforcement learning methods such as Q-
learning or Deep Q Network (DQN) is difﬁcult to manage
due to large state space in environment, Hierarchical rein-
forcement learning [Barto and Mahadevan, 2003] tackles this
kind of problem by decomposing a high dimensional target
into several sub-target which is easier to cope with.
Hierarchical reinforcement learning has been explored in
different scenarios. As for games, somewhat related to our hi-
erarchical architecture exists [Sun et al., 2018], which takes
advantage of prior knowledge of a game to design macro
strategies, and there is neither imitation learning nor exper-
inenced experts’ guidance. There have been many novel hier-
archical reinforcement learning algorithms proposed recently.
One approach of combining meta-learning with a hierarchi-
cal learning is Meta Learning Shared Hierarchies (MLSH)
[Frans et al., 2017], which is mainly used in multi-task learn-
ing and transfer learning. Hierarchically Guided Imitation
Learning/Reinforcement Learning haved been showed effec-
tive in speeding up learning [?], but it needs high-level expert
guidence in micro strategies which is hard to design for RTS
games.
2.3
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning in Games
Multi-agent reinforcement learning(MARL) has certain ad-
vantages over single agent learning.
Different agents can
complete tasks faster and better through knowledge sharing,
and there are some challenges as well. For example, the com-
putational complexity increases due to larger state space and
action space compared with single agent learning. Because
of the above challenges, MARL mainly focuses on stability
and adaption.
Simple applications of reinforcement learning to MARL is
limited, such as no communication and cooperation among
agents [Sukhbaatar et al., 2016], lacking of global rewards
[Rashid et al., 2018], and failure to consider enemies’ strate-
gies when learning policy. Some recent studies relevant to
this challenge have been investigated. [Foerster et al., 2017]
introduced a concentrated criticism of the cooperative set-
tings with shared rewards.
The approach interprets expe-
riences in the replay memory as off-environment data and
marginalize the action of a single agent while keeping others
unchanged. These methods enable successful combination of
experience replay with multi-agent. Similarly, [Jiang and Lu,
2018] proposed an attentional communication model based
on actor-critic algorithm for MARL, which learns to commu-
nicate and share information when making decision. There-
fore, this approach can be a complement for the proposed re-
search. Parameter sharing multi-agent gradient descent Sarsa
(PS-MASGDS) algorithm [Shao et al., 2018] used a neural
network to estimate the value function and proposed a reward
function to balance the units move and attack in the game of
StarCraft, which can be learned from. However, these meth-
ods require a lot of computing resources.
3
Methods
This section introduces hierarchical architecture, state repre-
sentation and action deﬁnition. Then the network architecture
and training algorithm are presented. The reward function de-
sign and self-learning method are discussed at last.
3.1
Hierarchical Architecture
The hierarchical architecture is shown in Fig. 2. There are
four types of macro actions including attack, move, purchase
and adding skill points, which are selected by imitation learn-
ing. Then reinforcement learning algorithm chooses speciﬁc

Attack
Move
Purchase
Adding Skills 
Point
Attack,Skills
Movement,
Skills
Equipment 
Purchase
Skill 1,2,3
Macro Actions
Scheduler + IL
RL
Agents (Heros)
KOG 
Environment
observation, reward
KOG action
macro action selection
refined action
interaction
Decision Component
Execution Component
Micro Strategies
Macro Strategies
Figure 2: Hierarchical architecture
States
Dimensionality
Type
Extracted features
116
R
Mini-map information
64×64×3
R
Current view information
84×42×3
R
Action A
7
one-hot
Action M
9
one-hot
Table 1: The dimension and data type of our states and action
action a according to policy π for making micro strategies in
state s. The encoded action is performed and the agent can
get reward r and next observation s
′ from KOG environment.
Rπ = PT
t=0 γtrt is deﬁned as the discounted return, where
γ ∈[0,1] is a discount factor. The aim of agents is to learn
a policy that maximizes the expected discounted returns, de-
ﬁned as:
J = Eπ[Rπ]
(1)
The Scheduler module designed by observation from game
video information is responsible for switching between rein-
forcement and imitation learning. It is also possible to replace
the imitation learning part with high-level expert system for
the fact that the data in imitation learning model is produced
by high-level expert guidance.
3.2
State Representation and Action Deﬁnition
State Representation
It is an open problem on how to represent the state of RTS
games optimally. This paper construct a state representation
as inputs to neural network from features extracted by multi-
target detection, mini-map information of the game, and cur-
rent view of the agent, which have different dimensions and
data types, as illustrated in Table 1. Current view informa-
tion is RGB image in the view of the agent, and mini-map
information is from RGB image in the upper-left corner of
the screenshot.
Extracted features include the position of all heroes, tow-
ers, and soldiers, blood volume, gold that the player have
and skills released by heroes in the current view, as shown
in Fig. 3. All the extracted features are embedded to a 116-
dimensional tensor. The inputs at current step are composed
of current state information, the last step information, and the
last action which has been shown to be useful for the learning
process in reinforcement learning. States with real value are
normalized to [0, 1].
Action Deﬁnition
In this game, we deﬁne the action into two parts including
Action M and Action A. The motion movement Action M
includes Up, Down, Left, Right, Lower-right, Lower-left,
Upper-right, Upper-left, and Stay still. When the selected
action is attack Action A, it can be Stay still, Skill-1, Skill-2,
Skill-3, Attack, and summoned skills including Flash and Re-
store. Meanwhile, it is our ﬁrst choice to attack the weakest
enemy when action attack is available for each agent.
3.3
Network Architecture and Training Algorithm
Network Architecture
Table reinforcement learning such as Q-learning has limita-
tions in large state space situations. To tackle this problem,
the micro level algorithm design is similar to proximal pol-
icy optimization (PPO) algorithm [Schulman et al., 2017].
Inputs of convolutional network are current view and mini-
map information with a shape of 84×42×3 and 64×64×3 re-
spectively. Meanwhile, the extracted features consist of 116-
dimensional tensors. We use the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU)
activation function in the hidden layer. The output layer’s ac-
tivation function is softmax function, which outputs the prob-
ability of each action. Our model in game KOG, including
inputs and architecture of the network, and output of actions,
is depicted in Fig. 3.
Training Algorithm
This paper proposes a Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
(HRL) algorithm for multi-agent learning, and the training
process is presented in Algorithm 1. Firstly, we initialize our
controller policy and global state. Then each agent takes a
move and attack action pair [am
t , aa
t ] and receive reward rt+1
and next state st+1. The agent can obtain both macro action
through imitation learning and micro action from reinforce-
ment learning from state st+1. The action probability likeli-
hood is normalized to choose action [am
t+1, aa
t+1] from macro
action At+1. At the end of each iteration, we use the ex-

FC
Step t-1
Extracted features
Mini-map information
Current view information
Action
Extracted features
Mini-map information
Current view information
Action
Step t
Extracted Features
…
…
Enemy Buildings
Own Buildings
Enemy
Own Player
Other Features
 Feature vector
Feature image 
State
CONV3   
CONV   
Agent 1
Imitation Learning
FC
Macro-actions
action_m
Softmax
action_a
FC
Agent 3
Imitation Learning
FC
Macro-actions
action_m
Softmax
action_a
FC
Agent 5
Imitation Learning
FC
Macro-actions
action_m
Softmax
action_a
FC
.
.
FC
FC
FC
FC
Figure 3: Network architecture of hierarchical reinforcement learning model
perience replay samples to update parameters of the policy
network.
We take the loss of entropy and self-learning into account
to encourage exploration in order to balance the trade-off be-
tween exploration and exploitation. Loss formula is deﬁned
as:
LM
t (θ) = Et[w1Lv
t (θ) + w2N M
t (π, at) + LMp
t
(θ) + w3SM
t (π, at)] (2)
LA
t (θ) = Et[w1Lv
t (θ) + w2N A
t (π, at) + LAp
t (θ) + w3SA
t (π, at)] (3)
Lt(θ) = LM
t (θ) + LA
t (θ)
(4)
where LM
t (θ) is the loss of action move, LA
t (θ) is the loss
of action attack. w1, w2, w3 are the weights of value loss,
entropy loss and self-learning loss that we need to tune, N M
t
denotes the entropy loss of action move, N A
t denotes the en-
tropy loss of action attack , SM
t
means the self-learning loss
of action move, and SA
t means the self-learning loss of action
attack. Total loss Lt(θ) is composed of the loss of move and
attack for simply computation.
Value loss Lv
t (θ), policy loss LMp
t
(θ), and policy loss
LAp
t (θ) are deﬁned as follows:
Lv
t (θ) = Et[(r(st, at) + Vt(st) −Vt(st+1))2]
(5)
LMp
t
(θ) = Et[min(rt(θ)DM
t , clip(rt(θ), 1 −ε, 1 + ε)DM
t )] (6)
LAp
t (θ) = Et[min(rt(θ)DA
t , clip(rt(θ), 1 −ε, 1 + ε)DA
t )] (7)
where rt(θ) = πθ(at|st)/πθold(at|st), DM
t
and DA
t are ad-
vantage of action move and action attack computed by the
difference between return and value estimation.
3.4
Reward Design and Self-learning
Reward Design
Reward function plays a signiﬁcant role in reinforcement
learning, and good learning results of an agent are mainly
depending on diverse rewards. The ultimate goal of the game
is to destroy the enemies’ crystal. If our reward is only based
on the ﬁnal result, it will be extremely sparse, and the seri-
ously delayed reward leads to slow learning speed. Dense
reward gives quick positive or negative feedback to the agent,
and can help the agents to learn faster and better. Damage
amount of an agent is not available for us since we don’t have
game engine or API. In our experiment, all agents can receive
two parts of rewards including self-reward and global-reward.
Self-reward consists of gold and Health Points (HP) loss/gain
of the agent, while global-reward includes tower loss and
death of allies and enemies.
rt =ρ1 × rself + ρ2 × rglobal
=ρ1((goldt −goldt−1)fm + (HPt −HPt−1)fH)
+ ρ2(towerlosst × ft + playerdeatht × fd)
(8)
where towerlosst is positive when enemies’ tower is de-
stroyed, and is negative when own tower is destroyed, the

Algorithm 1 Hierarchical RL Training Algorithm
Input: Reward function Rn, max episodes M, function IL(s)
indicates imitation learning model.
Output:
Hierarchical reinforcement learning neural net-
work.
1: Initialize controller policy π, global state sg shared
among our agents;
2: for episode = 1, 2, · · · , M do
3:
Initialize st, am
t , aa
t ;
4:
repeat
5:
Take action [am
t , aa
t ], receive reward rt+1, next state
st+1, where am
t indicates a motion movement, and
aa
t indicates a motion attack;
6:
Choose macro action At+1from st+1 according to
IL(s = st+1);
7:
Choose micro action [am
t+1, aa
t+1] from At+1 ac-
cording to the output of RL in state st+1;
8:
if ai
t+1 /∈At+1, where i = 0, · · · , 16 then
9:
P(ai
t+1|st+1) = 0;
10:
else
11:
P(ai
t+1|st+1) = P(ai
t+1|st+1)/
X
j
P(aj
t+1|st+1);
12:
end if
13:
Collect samples (st, am
t , aa
t , rt+1);
14:
Update policy parameter θ to maximize the expected
returns;
15:
until st is terminal
16: end for
same as playerdeatht, fm is a coefﬁcient of gold loss, the
same as fH, ft and fd, ρ1 is the weight of self-reward and ρ2
means the weight of global-reward. The reward function is
effective for training, and the results are shown in the experi-
ment section.
Self-learning
There are many kinds of self-learning methods for rein-
forcement learning such as Self-Imitation Learning (SIL)
[Oh et al., 2018] and Episodic Memory Deep Q-Networks
(EMDQN) [Lin et al., 2018]. SIL is applicable to actor-critic
architecture, while EMDQN combines episodic memory with
DQN. However, considering better sample efﬁciency and
easier-to-tune of the system, the proposed method migrates
EMDQN to reinforcement learning algorithm PPO [Schul-
man et al., 2017]. Loss of self-learning part can be deﬁned as
follows:
St(π, at) =Et[(Vt+1 −VH)2]
+ Et[min(rt(θ)AHt, clip(rt(θ), 1 −ε, 1 + ε)AHt)]
(9)
where the memory target VH is the best value from memory
buffer, and AHt means the best advantage from it.
VH =

max((max(Ri(st, at))), R(st, at)),
if(st, at) ∈memory
R(st, at),
otherwise
(10)
AHt = VH −Vt+1(st+1)
(11)
Category
Training Set
Testing Set
Precision
Own Soldier
2677
382
0.6158
Enemy Solider
2433
380
0.6540
Own Tower
485
79
0.9062
Enemy Tower
442
76
0.9091
Own Crystal
95
17
0.9902
Enemy Crystal
152
32
0.8425
Table 2: The accuracy of multi-target detection
Scenarios
AI. 1
AI. 2
AI. 3
AI. 4
1v1 mode
80%
/
52%
58%
5v5 mode
82%
68%
66%
60%
Table 3: Win rates playing against AI. 1: AI without macro strategy,
AI. 2: without multi-agent, AI. 3: without global reward and AI. 4:
without self-learning method
where i ∈[1,2,· · · ,E], E represents the number of episodes
in memory buffer that the agent has experienced.
4
Experiments
The experiment setup will be introduced ﬁrst. Then we eval-
uate the performance of our algorithms on two environments:
(i) 1v1 map including entry-level, easy-level and medium-
level built-in AI, and (ii) a challenging 5v5 map. We analyze
the average rewards and win rates during training.
4.1
Setup
The experiment setup includes experiment platform and GPU
cluster training platform. In order to increase the diversity
and quantity of samples, we use 10 mobile phones for an
agent to collect the distributed data. Meanwhile, we need to
maintain the consistency of all the distributed mobile phones
when training. We transmit the collected sample of all agents
to the server and do a centralized training, and share the pa-
rameters of network among all agents. Each agent executes
its policy based on its own states. As for the features obtained
by multi-target detection, its accuracy and category are de-
picted in Table 2, which is adequate for our learning process.
Moreover, the speed of taking an action is about 150 Actions
Per Minute (APM), comparable to 180 APM of high level
player. A-star path planning algorithm is applied when going
to someplace. Parameters of w1, w2, and w3 are set to 0.5,
-0.01, and 0.1 respectively based on preliminary results. The
training time is about seven days for agents on one Tesla P40
GPU.
4.2
1v1 mode of game KOG
As shown in Fig. 1b, there are one agent and one enemy
player in 1v1 map. We need to destroy the enemies’ tower
ﬁrst and then destroy the crystal to get the ﬁnal victory. We
draw the win rates and average rewards when agent ﬁghts
with different level of built-in AI.
Win Rates
The results when our AI plays against AI without macro-
strategy, without multi-agent, without global reward and

-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Entry-level
Easy-level
Medium-level
Episodes
Average Rewards
Figure 4: The average rewards of our agent in 1v1 mode during
training.
without self-learning method are listed in Table 3. 50 games
are played against AI. 1, AI. 3 and AI. 4, and the win rates are
80%, 52% and 58% respectively. We have tested about 200
games for each level of built-in AI, and listed the win rates for
algorithm PPO and HRL in 1v1 mode against different level
of built-in AI, as shown in Table 4.
Average Rewards
Generally speaking, the target of our agent is to defeat the
enemies as soon as possible. Fig. 4 illustrates the average
rewards of our agent Angela in 1v1 mode when combatting
with different enemies. In the beginning, the rewards are low
because the agent is still a beginner and doesn’t have enough
learning experience. However, our agent is learning gradu-
ally and being more and more experienced. When the train-
ing episodes of our agent reach about 100, the rewards in each
step become positive overall and our agent starts to have some
advantages in battle. There are also some decreases in re-
wards when facing high level built-in AI because of the fact
that the agent is unable to defeat the Warrior at ﬁrst. To sum
up, the average rewards are increasing obviously, and stay
smooth after about 600 episodes.
4.3
5v5 mode of game KOG
As shown in Fig. 1a, there are ﬁve agents and ﬁve enemy
players in 5v5 map. What we need to do actually is to destroy
the enemies’ crystal. In this scenario, we train our agents
with built-in AI, and each agent holds one model. In order to
analyze the results during training, we illustrate the win rates
in Fig. 5.
Win Rates
We have plotted the win rates in Fig. 5. there are three differ-
ent levels of built-in AI that our agents combat with. When
ﬁghting with bronze-level built-in AI, agents learn fast and
the win rates reach 100%.
When training with gold-level
built-in AI, the learning process is slow and agents can’t win
until 100 episodes. In this mode, the win rates are about
40% in the end. This is likely due to the fact that our agents
can hardly obtain dense global rewards when playing against
high level AI, which leads to hard cooperation in team bat-
tle. One way using supervised learning method from Tencent
AI Lab obtains 100% win rate [Wu et al., 2018]. However,
the method used about 300 thousand game replays with the
Algorithm
Entry-level
Easy-level
Medium-level
PPO
62%
60%
55%
HRL
89%
83%
80%
Table 4: Win rates for HRL and PPO in 1v1 mode against different
level of built-in AI.
HRL with bronze-level AI
HRL with silver-level AI
HRL with gold-level AI
PPO with gold-level AI
Supervised learning with gold-level AI
Win Rates
Episodes
Figure 5: Win rates of our agents in 5v5 mode against different level
of built-in AI.
advantage of API. Another way is using PPO algorithm with-
out macro strategy, which achieves about 22% win rate when
combatting with gold-level built-in AI. Meanwhile, the re-
sults of our AI playing against AI without macro strategy,
without multi-agent, without global reward and without self-
learning method are listed in Table 3.
These indicate the
importance of each method in our hierarchical reinforcement
learning algorithm.
5
Conclusion
This paper proposed a novel hierarchical reinforcement learn-
ing framework for multi-agent MOBA game KOG, which
learns macro strategies through imitation learning and mi-
cro actions by reinforcement learning.
In order to obtain
better sample efﬁciency, we presented a simple self-learning
method, and extracted global features as a part of state input
by multi-target detection. We performed systematic experi-
ments both in 1v1 mode and 5v5 mode, and compared our
method with PPO algorithm. Our results showed that this hi-
erarchical reinforcement learning framework is encouraging
for the MOBA game.
In the future, we will explore how to combine graph net-
work with our method for multi-agent collaboration
