arXiv:1102.5549v4  [stat.AP]  11 Oct 2011
Instant Replay: Investigating statistical analysis in sports.
Gagan Sidhu,
Department of Computing Science,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
November 5, 2018
Technology has had an unquestionable impact on the way people watch sports. Along with this technological
evolution has come a higher standard to ensure a good viewing experience for the casual sports fan. It can
be argued that the pervasion of statistical analysis in sports serves to satiate the fan’s desire for detailed sports
statistics. The goal of statistical analysis in sports is a simple one: to eliminate subjective analysis. In this
paper, we review previous work that attempts to analyze various aspects in sports by using ideas from Markov
Chains, Bayesian Inference and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. The unifying goal of these
works is to achieve an accurate representation of the player’s ability, the sport, or the environmental effects on the
player’s performance. With the prevalence of cheap computation, it is possible that using techniques in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence could improve the result of statistical analysis in sport. This is best illustrated when evaluating
football using Neuro Dynamic Programming, a Control Theory paradigm heavily based on theory in Stochastic
processes. The results from this method suggest that statistical analysis in sports may beneﬁt from using ideas
from the area of Control Theory or Machine Learning.
KEYWORDS: dynamic programming, markov, baseball, basketball, football
1

1
Introduction
Over time, statistics and sports have become syn-
onymous with each other. This synonymity between
sport and statistics can be best exempliﬁed when ob-
serving the winner and loser of a game. A team only
wins by outscoring its opponent.
However, in order
to outscore an opponent, additional contributions from
non-scoring players on the team are required. As a re-
sult, to reﬂect each player’s contribution to the team sta-
tistical categories have been added. Over time, these
player contributions have been further reﬁned to best
reﬂect overall performance.
An example of this is in basketball when a player
retrieves the ball after a missed shot. Such a retrieval
is called a rebound. This statistic has been further re-
ﬁned in to two categories: defensive rebound and offen-
sive rebound. A defensive rebound is when the oppos-
ing team’s player shoots and misses and the defending
team’s player successfully retrieves the ball. An offen-
sive rebound is when a player on the team misses the
shot, but a player on the same team manages to retrieve
the ball. This reﬁnement allows observers to assess a
player’s rebounding abilities when playing defense or
offense.
This reﬁnement provided by statistical analysis seeks
to accurately and impartially evaluate player and/or team
talent. What can make this analysis difﬁcult is the team-
oriented nature of sports, because player performance
can be heavily impacted by the team’s performance.
Various authors have attempted to use different tech-
niques to assess a player’s ability, independent from
their team, with mixed results.
It is also difﬁcult to assess the performance of a
team in a hypothesized situation. Such an example would
be investigating the impact of a certain team’s batting
lineup affecting the outcome (win or loss) of the game.
Could there have been a different lineup ordering such
that the team could have won the game? As we will see,
there has been some work done in attempt to answer this
question.
The human element, in conjunction with the statis-
tical nature of sports, provides a challenge for any re-
searcher who seeks to investigate consequences of cer-
tain phenomena. The statistical analysis done in sports
indirectly tries to assess players’ Decision Making when
facing uncertainty. Many areas of science are interested
in decision making when facing uncertainty, and good
results will likely beneﬁt more than just one discipline
of science.
The goal of this review is to provide researchers un-
familiar with statistical analysis in sports with an under-
standing of what important research has been conducted
in the area over the last four decades. It is assumed the
reader is familiar with the methods described in the ap-
pendices.
2
Previous Work
There has been a wide array of statistical analysis
performed on sports, primarily baseball. In this sec-
tion, we discuss the important results in the past four
decades. These results provide an idea of how statisti-
cal analysis can be used to evaluate desired properties
of either players, teams or the game itself.
2.1
Offensive Earned Run Average for Base-
ball
In the introduction, it was mentioned that a player’s
performance can be signiﬁcantly impacted by their team.
In baseball, this is especially true with statistics such as
Runs Batted In (RBI), which is credited to a batter when
the outcome of their at-bat scores a run. This means that
if the outcome was a ﬂy out and a run is scored, the bat-
ter is credited with a RBI even if the base runner had the
speed to out-run the throw to home plate. This shows
that there exist player statistics in baseball that depend
on the team’s overall abilities.
2

Offensive Earned Run Average (OERA) was cre-
ated by Cover and Keilers (1977) to accurately assess a
player’s offensive output to avoid situations such as the
above. That is, they wanted to create a metric that was
independent from the team’s performance. The central
idea behind OERA is personal innings, which are de-
ﬁned as innings where the player bats at every position
in the lineup. The provided example was one where
a batter who starts his career with the at-bat sequence
“single, out, double, out , walk, walk, homerun, out”
generating ﬁve runs in this personal inning. The claim
was that OERA is a measure of “batter effectiveness”,
with units of measurement being the expected number
of runs scored per game.
The idea of personal innings is effective when the
goal is to measure a player’s individual offensive contri-
bution to the team. A player who possesses a high bat-
ting average, on base percentage and slugging percent-
age will generate more runs than a player with the same
on base percentage, slugging percentage but a lower
batting average. By measuring batting effectiveness in
such a manner, a player’s OERA depends on their abil-
ity to reach base and advance/score baserunners.
The batter’s cumulative statistics are used to com-
pute the probability of achieving any of the six hitting
outcomes. The six outcomes are: strike out, walk, sin-
gle, double,triple and home run, and their probabilities
are denoted as p0, pB, p1, p2, p3, p4, respectively. The
expected number of runs is generated by using these
probabilities, averaged over all the possible sequences
of hitting performances.
The model to represent the game state consists of
8 × 3 = 24 states. This is because when there are zero,
one, or two, there are exactly 23 different positions that
the base-runners can take. Using a three digit binary
sequence, where the digit position denotes a base runner
at that base, the eight states for each out become clear
(000,001,010,100,101,011,110,111). The third out state
is ignored since it signiﬁes the end of the inning.
Let E(s) represent the expected number of runs scored
in an inning when starting in state s. Since there is a
Markovian Recurrence for E(s), it can be written as:
E(s) =
X
H
pH(E(f(H, s)) + R(H, s)) =
X
s′
p(s′|s)E(s′) + R(s)
(1)
where H ∈{0, B, 1, 2, 3, 4} represent the hitting out-
comes, and s ∈{0, . . . , 24} are the possible states. The
resulting state s′ from a hit is determined by function
s′ = f(H, s). The number of runs scored by the hit is
denoted by R(H, s). A state-transition function is de-
ﬁned as p(s′|s) = P
H:f(H,s)=s′ pH.
This expectation also has an equivalent representa-
tion using the theory of Absorbing Markov Chains:
E = (I −Q)−1R
(2)
Where Q is the 24 × 24 representing the 24 non absorb-
ing states previously mentioned, R and E are 24 × 1
vectors representing the expected number of runs and
runs in those 24 states. As an example, the ﬁrst en-
try in E, E(1), represents the expected number of runs
earned with no outs and no men on base. Using the
probabilities (p0, pB, p1, p2, p3, p4), the negative bino-
mial distribution can be used to calculate the probabil-
ities required to ﬁnd the expected number of batters in
an inning. Speciﬁcally:
P(N = i) =
i −1
2

p3
0qi−3
0
(3)
where q0 is deﬁned as the on base percentage (OBP),
expressed as q0 = 1−p0. 1 Therefore, taking the expec-
tation of the above expression gives E(N) = 3/p0, the
expected number of batters in an inning. Note that the
OBP, q0, for a given type of hitter will differ. To illus-
trate the meaning of “type of hitter”, assume we clas-
sify batters as either singles, doubles, triples or home
1Note that this is the case because every other hitting outcome
consists of the batter getting on base, and so subtracting p0 from 1
gives us the probability the player will get on base.
3

run hitters. Then the OBP for a home run hitter would
be q0 = 1 −p0, where p1 = p2 = p3 = 0 since this
hitter only hits home runs.
The number of runs generated by a home run hitter
would be R4 = (3/p0) −3 = 3q0/p0, which is the ex-
pected number of batters in an inning minus the number
of outs (three). The idea is similar for the other types
of hitters. Note that Ri denotes the expected number of
runs earned for a hit of type i, where i ∈B, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Using the above information, the general case of
“pure-hitters” can be deﬁned. Assume that N is the ran-
dom variable for the number of batters in an inning. For
each type of hitter, there exists a minimum number of
runners required prior to scoring a run; as a result Cov-
ers and Keilers (1977) deﬁne, for any real number t,
(N −t)+ = N −t if N −t ≥0 and (N −t)+ = 0
otherwise. Since will be at least three players in each
inning, t ≥3 because at least three batters are required
to end an inning, assuming each of their at-bat outcomes
resulted in an out.
This means a home run hitter’s expected number of
runs is R4 = E(N −3)+ because they have three outs,
but do not require any men on base to score. Similarly
for a singles hitter R1 = E(N −5)+ because there must
be two men on base (one on ﬁrst base and one on second
base due to the assumptions) in addition to the three
outs before he can score. The doubles and triples hitter
have the same number of players on base required, one,
which gives us R2 = R3 = E(N −4)+. For the all
walks hitter, they need three men on base in addition to
three outs and therefore RB = E(N −6)+. Using this
information, Covers and Keilers (1977) give the ﬁnal
expressions:
RB = 3/p0 −6 + 3p3
0(1 + 2q0 + 2q2
0)
R1 = 3/p0 −5 + 3p3
0q0 + 2p3
0
R2 = R3 = 3/p0 −4 + p3
0
R4 = 3/p0 −3
(4)
Where the player’s OERA is the sum of these ex-
pressions.
The OERA calculation is airtight in the sense that
it uses the most independent player statistic to calcu-
late this production, which is the batting average. The
drawback is how OERA uses this statistic. It does not
factor in the league-wide average in order to get a true
measure of a player’s batting effectiveness. We give the
following scenario to illustrate this problem.
Consider a batter who’s career batting average was
0.270 with an OBP of .330, where the league-wide bat-
ting average was 0.285 with an OBP of 0.350 during his
career. Now consider a player from the “deadball era”
with a career batting average of .230 and OBP of 0.3,
where the league wide batting average was 0.21 with an
OBP of 0.25. The second player was clearly better with
respect to the league performance, but his OERA will
be much lower than the ﬁrst player. However, is it fair
to say that the second player wasn’t an effective batter?
It can be argued that the second player’s batting effec-
tiveness was superior to the ﬁrst player’s given that the
second player was above league average and the ﬁrst
player was not.
The above scenario outlines a rather large caveat
in the OERA calculations. Historically, baseball has
shown shown ﬂuctuations with respect to average num-
ber of runs scored in a game, and this affects OERA
since it doesn’t give us a relative measure of players
with respect to their peers.
2.2
Composite Batter Index (CBI)
Like OERA and the Scoring Index, CBI attempts to
quantify a player’s offensive abilities. A distinguish-
ing and interesting property of CBI when compared to
OERA is that CBI is a relative measure, meaning it at-
tempts to gauge a player’s production with respect to
the entire league. It was developed by Anderson et al
(1997) using Data Envelopment Analysis. Since CBI
is a relative measure, it allows the metric to be insen-
sitive to league-wide changes such as poorer pitching,
rule changes, park changes, or increases/decreases in
league averages.
4

The CBI model has one input with ﬁve outputs. This
single input is plate appearances, which contains the of-
ﬁcial number of at-bats plus the number of walks. Sac-
riﬁce ﬂies/bunts and being hit by a pitch are ignored in
the calculations. The output, Y, consists of the number
of walks, singles, doubles, triples and home runs.
Because CBI relies on a technique called Data En-
velopment Analysis, a standard linear programming for-
mulation is used:
minimize
Θ,
subject to Y λ ≥Y0,
ΘX0 ≥X′λ
Θfree,
λ ≥0
(5)
where Θ is a score that measures the productivity
of the player relative to the rest of the league, and is in
the range of 0 and 1.0. This means if a player has a
Θ = 0.8, then some hitter (or combination of hitters)
could have produced at least the same amount of each
type of hit in 20% fewer plate appearances. A value
of Θ = 1.0 implies that the player is a league leader
because they can’t be surpassed by any combination of
players in equal or less plate appearances. λ is a vector
of virtual multipliers that describe the combination of
league leaders that are equal or greater than the player
studied.
Anderson et al’s (1997) initial results showed that
players were able to achieve league-leader status only
on the basis of being able to obtain singles or walks. Af-
ter further examination they concluded that these eval-
uations were unreasonable because there were certain
players who hit enough longer hits to compensate for
the deﬁcit in shorter hits, and consequently should sur-
pass these short hitting league leaders.
They argue that a player who has a larger number of
longer hits can elect to stop on ﬁrst base during these
hits, instead of continuing to second or third base. By
this argument, Anderson et al (1997) conclude that there
is a dominance relationship among the types of hit. This
dominance would allow single base hits to be the sum
of singles, doubles, triples, and home runs, double base
hits to be the sum of doubles, triples, and home runs,
triple base hits to be the sum of triples and home runs,
and walks to be the sum of walks, singles, doubles,
triples and home runs. This “dominance transforma-
tion” was performed as a pre-processing step. All anal-
yses for the remaining part of their paper involved using
this transformation.
The outcome of this analysis indicated there were
some (statistically unproven) trends in the historical data
that was used. Anderson et al (1997) state that there is
a trend towards a higher league-wide CBI which im-
plies that batting skill is becoming more uniformly dis-
tributed. With the recent divulging of the “steroid era”
in baseball, this seems to be a reasonable assumption
as players are continually trying to improve their per-
formance. Also mentioned was the increase of league
leaders in each year when looking at the raw numbers:
there were six occurrences when CBI league leaders in-
cluded ten players or more, but only one of these was
before 1975. This lead Anderson et al (1997) to con-
clude that it is more difﬁcult to dominate a league than
it was in the past. Lastly, they mention that the pro-
portion of players with high CBI scores has increased
and the number of players with low CBI scores has de-
creased.
Treating a player’s offensive performance as a linear
program is an intriguing concept, however the method-
ology itself must be questioned. While the idea of a
relative measure is most deﬁnitely an enticing one, is
an optimization technique the best way to derive such
a measure? Constraint programming’s versatility can-
not be argued, but the application to a sport in order to
measure a player’s offensive performance relative to the
league is difﬁcult.
As we have seen already, with the use of statistics, it
is possible create effective player metrics that measure a
certain aspect of baseball. CBI and OERA seek to mea-
sure offensive performance in different ways, conse-
quently leading to very different models. Each of these
models sought to evaluate individual performance, but
5

what about team performance?
OERA’s model con-
sisted of 24 states, where the expected number of runs
from each state could be calculated with a Markovian
Recurrence. It seems logical that with a few modiﬁca-
tions that OERA’s model can be used for each player on
a team, allowing team performance to be measured.
2.3
Markov Chain Approach to Baseball
2.3.1
Method
The Markov chain method proposed by Bukiet et al.
(1997) sought to evaluate the the baseball team perfor-
mance and the effect of a player on team performance.
They noticed that “run-production” models like OERA
did not lend insight to team performance.
Of speciﬁc interest to them was the the inﬂuence
of batting order on a team’s performance. They also
use this method to approximate the expected number
of wins in a season, the number of runs of scored in
an inning, and the inﬂuence of trading a player on the
team wins. If a team wins a game, they must outscore
their opponent. The best batting order is the one that
produces the most runs. It is easy to see then that this
model relies heavily on run production to evaluate these
different aspects. This can be a potential issue, since
there exist teams (such as the 2010 San Francisco Gi-
ants) which rely on defense and pitching, instead of hit-
ting, to win games.
It was mentioned that with slight modiﬁcations, the
OERA model could be used to measure team perfor-
mance. Since team performance is being measured, the
three-out state serves as an absorbing state denoting the
end of a team’s inning. Consequently, each player pos-
seses a 25 × 25 transition matrix. Each entry in this
matrix contains the probability for this player, in a sin-
gle at bat, to change the game state to any other state.
Because of low data availability, simple statistical mod-
els were used with the available data for each type of hit
to ﬁll this matrix.
Generating data for probabilities of each hitting out-
come for a player can be hazardous. In contrast, OERA
did not have this issue since only six hitting outcomes
were required, and the baserunners’ position did not af-
fect a player’s hitting probabilities. In this case, the six
hitting probabilities for each player must be generated
for different baserunner positions. Generating data in
such a manner may cause a player’s 25 × 25 transition
matrix to be unrepresentative of their real-world perfor-
mance.
An advantage of this model is that the situational
data can be implemented into the transition matrix with
ease. Consider a batter who is twice as likely to hit a
home run with the bases loaded. By multiplying all en-
tries in the transition matrix that correspond to a transi-
tion to a state with no runners on base and the same
number of outs, the probability of a player hitting a
home run in bases loaded has now been doubled.
The 25×25 (block) transition matrix for every player
has the following form:
P =




A0
B0
C0
D0
0
A1
B1
E1
0
0
A2
F2
0
0
0
1




(6)
Where all A, B, and C matrices are 8 × 8 block ma-
trices, and D0, E1, F2 are 8×1column vectors. The 8×
8 block matrices represent the eight possible states of
base runners; more speciﬁcally A represents the events
which do not increase the number of outs in the inning,
B represents the events for which the outs increase by
one but do not end in three outs, and the C matrix rep-
resents the events that result in a double play (from no
outs to two outs). The rows of each of these matrices
represent the transition probabilities from these states.
Therefore the ith row and jth row of the matrices is the
transition from the ith state to the jth state.
From this information, we know that there are cer-
tain transitions where one can infer that a run is scored.
Consider the transition from the state with zero outs and
base runners on ﬁrst and second base to a state with zero
6

outs and a base runner on second base; this can only oc-
cur when two runners score. The runs scored from these
transitions are used to calculate the run distribution for
each team.
To calculate the distribution of runs in the game, the
probability of scoring any number of runs until the cur-
rent at bat is calculated. For a single inning, this calcu-
lation involves a 1 × 25 vector u0 whose ﬁrst entry is
one, and the remaining 24 entries are zero. This vec-
tor represents with state with no outs, and no one on
base. Similarly, un represents the situation where n bat-
ters have already had their turn batting. Since n batters
have already gone, then it is the turn of the n + 1 bat-
ter. Therefore Un × Pn+1, where Pn+1 is the transition
matrix of the batter whose turn it is, a probability dis-
tribution of the states in the inning after n + 1 batters.
In order to keep track of the number of runs scored un-
til this point in the inning, a 21 × 25 matrix U0 which
has 21 rows to represent zero to 20 runs (the ﬁrst row is
zero runs, the last row is 20 runs), and 25 columns rep-
resenting the current state of the inning, is maintained.
When there is a transition that causes a run to score,
the probability of this outcome is propagated to Un+1.
This relatively simple representation allows the distri-
bution of runs to be calculated after any number of bat-
ters as follows:
U0P1P2P3 . . . P9P1P2 . . .
(7)
where each subscript of P represents one of nine play-
ers. Because this is for a single inning, Un is given nine
times as many rows, where each row set of 21 rows rep-
resents the number of runs in an inning. When an inning
ends, the results are propagated to the next 21 rows and
24 columns (the twenty ﬁfth column is absorbing, and
no scoring is done there). This computation is contin-
ued until the probability that 27 outs have occurred is
greater than 0.999.
It is apparent that this model relies heavily on gen-
erated data and an iterative stopping condition. When
these two ideas are combined, the result may be com-
pletely unrepresentative of the players and teams be-
ing evaluated. Using sample data to generate proba-
bilities of hitting outcomes in speciﬁc situations alone
can cause results to be unrepresentative; using this data
in an iterative computation that determines the stopping
criteria will yield results that are unrepresentative of the
team and player.
2.3.2
Scoring Index
One of the primary goals in developing the Markov
Chain approach was to compute the near-optimal bat-
ting order for a baseball team. With the Markov frame-
work established as above, they also needed a way to
rank a player’s offensive ability. Instead of using OERA,
they used a similar metric proposed by D’Esopo and
Lefkowitz called the Scoring Index because of the simi-
larity in run production calculation between the Markov
Approach and Scoring Index.
The Scoring Index is similar to OERA in sense that
it uses nine copies of the batter in the lineup to calcu-
late the offensive production, however there is ranking
among these nine copies using a deterministic model of
runner advancement. Also similar to OERA, the Scor-
ing Index contains similar assumptions to ensure the
computation is consistent, deterministic and represen-
tative of the player’s offensive capabilities. The distin-
guishing factor is that it uses one inning of the Markov
approach outlined above. And the transition matrix P
for the scoring index is also 25 × 25, deﬁned as:
P =




A
B
0
0
0
A
B
0
0
0
A
F
0
0
0
1




(8)
Inspecting this P, it is apparent that it is different from
the P given in the Markov Chain section. This is due to
block matrices C0, D0 and E0 becoming zero because
the Scoring Index ignores double and triple plays. The
off-diagonal entries of block matrix B are zero because
7

runners cannot advance on an out. Just as OERA has
some assumptions that may affect the calculation, the
Scoring Index does as well. The claim was that these
inaccuracies should “somewhat offset each other”.
A and B are block matrices with the following struc-
ture:
A =











PH
PS + PW
PD
PT
0
0
0
0
PH
0
0
PT
PS + PW
0
PD
0
PH
PS
PD
PT
PW
0
0
0
PH
PS
PD
PT
0
PW
0
0
PH
0
0
PT
PS
0
PD
PW
PH
0
0
PT
PS
0
PD
PW
PH
PS
PD
PT
0
0
0
PW
PH
0
0
PT
PS
0
PD
PW











(9)
B = PoutI
(10)
where the probabilities of getting a walk, single, double,
triple, home run or out are denoted as PW, PS, PD, PT, PH,
and Pout, respectively. I is an 8 × 8 identity matrix. F is
a 8 × 1 vector with the entries: F = (Pout, . . . , Pout)T.
We can use the theory of Absorbing Markov Chains
to calculate the time to the three out state, which is the
absorption state. The (i, j)th entry of matrix (I −Q)−1
gives the expected number of visits from state i to state
j prior to being absorbed into the three out state. This
is referred to as the “expected absorption time”. The
expected absorption time from state i can be calculated
by :
Ei(T) =
24
X
j=1
(I −Q)−1
ij
(11)
and for the Scoring Index model:
Q =


A
B
0
0
A
B
0
0
A


(12)
which results in (I −Q)−1 having the following struc-
ture:
(I −Q)−1 =


R
RBR
RBRBR
0
R
RBR
0
0
R


(13)
where R = (I −A)−1.
2.3.3
Near-Optimal Batting Order
Using the Scoring Index as a way to rank each player’s
offensive ability, the optimal batting order was calcu-
lated with three different algorithms. These three algo-
rithms focused on computational efﬁciency, since CPU
time was not cheap at the time the article was written.
As a result, the differences in these algorithms is omit-
ted since most modern day computers can calculate the
9! (362,880) permutations relatively quickly. It was ob-
served that the lineup that produces the most runs was
also the one with the most wins, which should follow
naturally if the batting order is indeed optimal.
By comparing the worst lineup to the team’s near-
optimal one, the results suggested the following criteria
when constructing a team’s batting lineup:
(i) The batter with the highest scoring index should
bat second, third or fourth.
(ii) The batter with the second highest scoring index
should bat between the ﬁrst and ﬁfth positions.
(iii) The batters with the third and fourth best scoring
indices should bat between the ﬁrst and sixth po-
sitions.
(iv) The batter with the ﬁfth highest scoring index should
bat ﬁrst, second or between the ﬁfth and seventh
positions.
(v) The sixth best batter can bat in any position ex-
cept eighth or ninth.
(vi) The batter with the seventh highest scoring index
can bat either ﬁrst, between sixth through ninth
positions.
(vii) The batters with the lowest and second-lowest scor-
ing indices should bat in the last three positions.
(viii) Either the batter with the second or third highest
scoring index should bat right after the best batter.
(ix) The batter with the lowest scoring index should
be four to six positions after the best batter.
(x) The batter with the second lowest scoring index
8

should be four to seven batters after the best bat-
ter.
These ten possible criteria seem very reasonable,
however there are no conclusive results showing that
lineups following this criteria are optimal in compar-
ison to the team’s regular lineup, or whether this near-
optimal lineup yields more runs (and consequently more
wins) than the regular lineup. Further evaluation of this
method is required; speciﬁcally there should be a com-
parison between the near optimal lineup of the team ver-
sus the regular lineup to determine whether this lineup
will yield more wins. There should also be testing on
more recent data, since the analysis was done on a sin-
gle year of data (from 1989).
2.3.4
Conclusion
This article was the ﬁrst to use an offensive metric (Scor-
ing Index, similar to OERA) for nine players on the
same team to evaluate the team performance. As men-
tioned earlier, the methodology in this article may have
affected the signiﬁcance of the results. With the recent
abundance of data provided by MLB’s GameDay sys-
tem, it should be possible to calculate each player’s hit-
ting probabilities in speciﬁc situations. Using such data
may yield a much more promising result if this experi-
ment is repeated.
It is apparent that evaluating team performance is
difﬁcult if there isn’t an accurate representation of each
player. So far we have only considered the offensive
output of a player while assuming their performance
is not affected by the environment. However, statis-
tics show that players performance is affected by spe-
ciﬁc environments. When considering a player’s per-
formance, whether it is offensive or defensive, their per-
formance in different conditions must be considered if
the team wants to maximize the probability of winning
each game.
2.4
Breakdown Statistics
Albert (1994) broke down players’ annual statistics in
order to test whether batter performance can be affected
by certain situations. As an example: if a batter bats
poorer when he’s not playing on home ﬁeld, is it be-
cause of the playing surface or the fact that he isn’t
comfortable playing away from home ﬁeld? In order
to do this, eight common situations in which players’
averages could be affected were evaluated:
(i) Opposite side versus the same side. This means
that when a pitcher is right-handed and throwing
to a right-handed batter, this is the “same side”.
When a pitcher is left-handed throwing to a right-
handed batter, it is the “opposite side”.
(ii) Whether a pitcher is a “groundball pitcher” or
“ﬂyball pitcher”. This means that this pitcher re-
lies on batters hitting ground balls (or ﬂy balls) to
the pitcher’s defense in order to achieve an out.
(iii) Home versus away.
(iv) The playing surface (grass versus turf)
(v) When a batter is “head in the count” versus two
strikes in the count. Being ahead in the count
means there are more balls than strikes (exception
of three balls and two strikes, which is referred to
as a “full count”).
(vi) Runners in scoring position versus no runners in
scoring position and no runners out.
(vii) Performance in the ﬁrst “half” of the season ver-
sus the second “half”. The halfway point is deter-
mined by the All Star game.
It has been shown that there is a high correlation
between player performance and whether they are play-
ing at home or away from home. In order to evaluate
the performance in each of these situations, the number
of hits and the at bat for home and away games were
recorded for 154 players. For the ith player, this can be
represented as a 2 × 2 contingency table:
hi1
oi1
hi2
oi2
(14)
9

where hi1, oi1, and abi1 denote the number of hits, outs,
and at bats during home games; pi1 and pi2 denote the
probabilities that the ith player gets a hit at home or
away, respectively. It is assumed that the batting at-
tempts are independent Bernoulli trials with the associ-
ated probabilities of success, and that the number of hits
hi1 and hi2 are independently distributed according to
the binomial distributions with the parameters (abi1, pi1)
and (abi2, pi2) respectively.
This information is transformed to approximate nor-
mality by use of the logistic transformation:
yij = log
hij
oij

(15)
which allows yi1 and yi2 to be independent normal with
each yij having mean µij = log(pij/(1 −pij)) and vari-
ance σ2
ij = (abijpij(1−pij))−1. If the contingency table
is now expressed as 2×N we can represent every player.
With this representation, we know that yij is the logit of
player i’s observed batting average in situation j. This
allows the mean of yij to be represented as :
µij = E(yij) = µi + αij
(16)
where µi represents player i’s hitting ability and αij rep-
resents the situational effect that attempts to measure
the change in this player’s hitting ability due to situa-
tion j.
The ability parameters µ1, . . . , µN are assigned in-
dependently assigned ﬂat noninformative priors as they
are nuisance parameters. The reason the ability param-
eters are considered as nuisance is because the goal is
to measure the eﬀect of the environment on the player’s
hitting ability, which is given by the situational effects .
Since the situational effects α1, . . . , αN are of interest,
it is assumed a priori that α1, . . . , αN are independently
distributed from some common population π(α).
The prior distribution used was a t distribution with
mean µα, scale parameter σα and a ν = 4 degrees of
freedom. In order to reﬂect the lack of knowledge about
the size of the situational effect, µα is assigned a non-
informative prior. For σ2
α, an informative prior is con-
structed using the home/away variable as the the repre-
sentative for the situational variables. The prior of σ2
α is
based upon a posterior analysis of the home/away situa-
tional variable in previous seasons. This prior distribu-
tion is used in the posterior analysis for every situational
variable.
The results used a Gibbs sampler to simulate the
posterior distributions. For a sample size of 1000, a pos-
terior distribution was obtained with parameters ({µi}, {αi}, µα
These parameters were used to estimate the functions
of the parameters of interest, primarily the α1, . . . , αN.
The ﬁnal data showed that the spread of each popula-
tion for a given situation was roughly the same, allow-
ing the differences between situations to be explained in
terms of a shift. This is exempliﬁed by the “groundball-
ﬂyball” effects, which are approximately ten batting av-
erage points higher than the “day-night” effects.
While nearly all of the situational effects being mea-
sured did not reveal a signiﬁcant difference in batting
average, the effect of pitch count did. Speciﬁcally, when
a batter was “behind” in the pitch count, they hit 123
average points lower than when they were “ahead” in
the count. A less signiﬁcant result was that batters also
hit 20 average points higher when facing a pitcher that
was on the opposite side, 11 points higher when they
were facing a groundball pitcher and eight points higher
when at home. However, a caveat to these results is that
these situational patterns are only apparent for a group
of players, and not individuals. This was evidenced by
nine players who showed extreme estimated effects for
one season, but many exhibited the opposite sign for the
previous four years. This inconsistency led to the sug-
gestion that season performance might be an imperfect
form of measurement of situational abilities, and that
play by play data might be more helpful.
There is yet to exist any published work which sta-
tistically analyzes baseball at the pitch by pitch level.
It was mentioned earlier that the depth,availability and
accessibility of baseball data recently suggests that this
topic should be re-visited.
10

What is most enticing about this article is the level
at which it attempts to make inference. It is likely that
if data was obtained at the pitch by pitch level, the situ-
ational effects could be measured at the individual level.
The importance of evaluating situational effects in sports
cannot be understated, since performance can be sig-
niﬁcantly impacted depending upon the situation and
player. A question that arises from these results is whether
it is possible to simply take account of these situational
effects, and then attempt to evaluate a player’s perfor-
mance, rather than trying to measure the magnitude of
this effect.
The OERA/Markov Chain approach both rely on
exploiting the Markov Property, whereas Albert (1994)
’s evaluation of breakdown statistics relies on Bayesian
Inference.
Is it possible that a combination of these
two techniques can result in a better evaluation of a de-
sired phenomena? The next two articles rely heavily on
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to gen-
erate the sample points that are used in their analysis.
Particularly interesting is how each article analyzes a
different sport, but both use similar techniques to ob-
tain their results.
2.5
Spatial Analysis of Shot Chart Data in
Basketball
Statistical analysis in basketball is difﬁcult, largely
due to the limited amount of information that is given
in the data. If we compare the analysis of basketball to
baseball, what makes baseball “easier” to analyze sta-
tistically than basketball is the low dependence on spa-
tial information of player movement. In basketball, the
way a player moves up and down the court impacts his
shot selection and his decision making, because they are
allowed to take shots from anywhere. Contrast this to
baseball, where, upon successfully hitting the ball for a
base-hit, the player must run on a ﬁxed (base) path to
reach base.
Reich et al. (2006) used basketball shot chart data
in attempt to infer a player abilities and tendencies so
that this player can be played optimally when defend-
ing. Namely, they attempted to model the player’s shot
frequency and location. The player used for analysis
was Sam Cassell of the Minnesota Timberwolves dur-
ing his 2003-2004 season in the NBA. The data was
about 90 % complete, since six games were missing and
a few shots were not recorded on the shot chart.
The analysis used the shot location, angle from the
center of the basket, time between last shot attempt (game
clock time), shot outcome (make or miss) to compute
ten covariates that affected the player’s shot selection.
The purpose of these covariates were to account for
different situations when the player was on the ﬂoor.
That is, certain covariates accounted for the change in a
player’s performance. It should become apparent to the
reader that the function of these covariates is equivalent
to the situational effects in Albert’s (1994) article.
Lastly, shot selection was deﬁned as the location,
success and frequency of shots taken, each of which
were calculated separately. The shot location was con-
verted from euclidean coordinates to polar coordinates
so the relationship between the angle and distance at
which the player took a shot could be explored.
2.5.1
Shot Frequency
To model the player’s shot frequency, Reich et al
(2006) calculated the median time between each shot
attempt when the player was in the game and explored
how this value was affected by the ten selected covari-
ates denoted Xk, k ∈{1, . . . , 10}. One limiting factor
that should be mentioned is that some of the covariates
could only be calculated at the time of a shot attempt.
The authors attempted to use an error-in-covariates model
to correct for this, but the results were not any better.
By using multiple linear regression,
Y = Xθ + b
where Y = log(Ti) was logarithm between the time
11

of shot attempts i −1 and i, and X was a matrix con-
taining columns for each effect used in calculating the
covariates , interaction between select covariates, and
the homogenous error variance. By using the inverse
gamma distribution IG(α1, α2), with densities propor-
tional to (σ2
e−α1 + 1)exp(−α2/σ2
e), IG(0.01,0.01) was
deﬁned as the prior for error variance, and diffuse nor-
mal priors of mean 0 and variance 1,000 were selected.
Their results were analyzed using the posterior means
with 95% conﬁdence intervals for the exponentials of
the regression parameters (exp bk) (the ﬁtted multiples
of the median times between shots relative to the zero
condition).
2.5.2
Shot Location
As mentioned earlier, polar coordinates were used
for shot location in order to develop a relationship be-
tween the distance and angle of a shot location. To an-
alyze shot locations, the court was divided into 11 re-
gions to capture the 11 distinct angles from which the
player attempted a shot. This resulted in discretizing
the court into an 11 × 11 grid to make the computa-
tion feasible. An additional cell was added underneath
the basket since shot attempts from this location are of-
ten after rebounding, or when the player is “driving to
the net” (running directly to the basket in hopes to get
a close shot). Because the location of shot was taken
as a response to as many as four covariates, and 48 of
the 122 cells contained as few as four shot attempts, the
neighbouring cells shared information to stabilize the
covariate effects. The goal was to ﬁnd the effect of a
certain subset of covariates on each cell where shot at-
tempts were taken.
Multinomial regression was used, where yi ∈{1, . . . , p}
was the region of the ith shot2, and it was assumed that
yi|θ(ηi) followed a multinomial distribution
 θ1(ηi), . . . ,
θp(ηi)

where θ(ηi) = (θ1(ηi), . . . , θp(ηi)) and θj(ηi)
was the probability that the ith shot was taken from re-
2p, in this case, was 122 for the number of cells in the grid
gion j. The probability of each cell depends on shot i’s
p-vector of linear predictors ηi = log A + xib. log A
is a p-vector of offset terms and log Aj is equal to the
area of region j in euclidean distance. This was essen-
tial since each of the 11 regions had differing areas. xi
was a q-vector of covariates and because each of the p
regions had their own set regression coefﬁcients to mea-
sure the q covariates: b·j = (b1j, . . . , bqj)T for the jth
region. Because b·j and xi’s are related through θj(ηi),
a multinomial logit model was used to calculate θj(ηi):
θj(ηi) =
exp(log Aj + xT
i b·j)
Pp
l=1 exp(log Al + xT
i b·l)
If bk· is the spatially varying coefﬁcient of covari-
ant k, is assigned a CAR (conditionally autoregressive)
prior CAR(τk), then bjk|bkj,l̸=j is normally distributed
with mean ¯bkj and precision (which is inverse variance)
τkmj, where ¯bjk is the mean of bk· at region j’s mj
neighbors, τk > 0 is the degree of smoothing of each
bkj towards its respective neighbors.
In order to share information among cells that was
realistic, the idea of distance and angle neighbors were
established. An angle neighbour were adjacent cells
that were the same distance from the basket , and a
distance neighbour were adjacent cells that were the
same angle from the basket. The 2NRCAR (two neigh-
bour conditionally autoregressive) model was used to
allow different amount of smoothing between the angle
and distance by adding parameter βk ∈(0, 1) which
quantiﬁes the amount of “inﬂuence” each type of neigh-
bour has on the respective cells.
Using 2NRCAR(τk, βk) as a prior, the distribution
of bkj|bkl,l̸=j is normally distributed with mean:
E(bkj|bkl,l̸=j) = ¯bajk
majβk
majβk + mdj(1 −βk)+
¯bdjk
mdjβk
majβk + mdj(1 −βk)
(17)
with precision τk(majβk + mdj(1 −βk)), and similar to
the CAR model, ¯bakj and ¯bdkj are the mean of bk· for
12

region j’s mdj and maj distance and angle neighbors,
respectively. With the above formulation,bkj|bkj,l̸=j to
have a weighted average of ¯bakj and ¯bdkj, and βk deter-
mines the weight of each neighbor type with τk control-
ling the smoothness of bk·. It should be intuitive that
βk > 0.5 smoothes angle neighbors more than distance
neighbors, and βk < 0.5 smooths distances neighbors
more than angle neighbors.
Sharing information by use of smoothing ensures
that the computation remains numerically stable. The
elegance of the above formulation lies in the fact that
Reich et al. (2006) distinguished neighbouring cells in
two different manners. By doing so, smoothing could
be performed with on either distance or angle neigh-
bours if the respective neighbours were suffering from
data sparsity. Such a technique is beneﬁcial in alleviat-
ing the issue of data sparsity given a limited amount of
data.
2.5.3
Shot Success
Assuming that the shot location is ﬁxed the prob-
ability of a successful shot attempt from each each of
the p cells is analyzed. To represent realistic in-game
behavior, covariates are allowed to vary over different
cells is allowed because the opposition’s defensive pri-
orities may change over time, or the player’s team may
change their offensive strategy. This can be easily seen
when the player’s team is up by a signiﬁcant amount of
points, since the intent is to then protect the lead late
into a game, which implies less offensive production.
The opposition’s defensive strategy can change when
they are losing the game due to their defense being ex-
posed by a certain player. As a consequence, the de-
fense would then put priority guarding this player, caus-
ing this player’s covariates to change.
To model shooting percentage, separate logistic re-
gressions were each of the p = 122 locations. The re-
sulting regression parameters for each of these p cells
were also smoothed spatially. The probability of mak-
ing ith shot was drawn from a Bernoulli(πi) distribu-
tion, where zi ∈{1, 0} if the shot was made or missed,
and log(πi) = log
 πi/(1 −πi)

= xib·yi where yi is the
region of the ith shot, and b·yi is the q-vector of regres-
sion parameters associated with the region yi.
2.5.4
Conclusion
In the article, Reich et. al (2006) propose a very in-
teresting methodology using simple spatial data to eval-
uate a player’s shot selection by using covariates that
are inferred through the game’s data. Both Reich et al.
(2006) and Albert (1994) attempt to account for situa-
tional effects on the player, but Reich et al (2006) also
sought to evaluate their effects on a player’s shot selec-
tion using sampled data (with the appropriate parame-
ters).
A small drawback is that results given in the article
are almost entirely observational, thereby making eval-
uation of this method difﬁcult. However, this article
attempts to address the environmental affects on an ath-
lete, using smoothing techniques which had not been
attempted prior. By discretizing the state space into a
ﬁne grid, a cell that may have an insufﬁcient amount of
data points can be stabilized by use of smoothing on all
cells that share some spatial property, such as distance
or angle from the basketball net. It is possible that use
of smoothing may improve evaluation of player perfor-
mance.
2.6
Bayesball: Evaluating Fielding in Ma-
jor League Baseball
Earlier, we mentioned that statistically analyzing base-
ball is “easier” due to the low dependence on spatial
information. However there is one case where spatial
information is important: Defense. How can we accu-
rately analyze the defensive aspect of baseball? What
separates a good defensive player from a poor one?
13

Recently, Jensen et al (2009) developed a defensive
metric that sought to evaluate a player’s ﬁelding ability
with higher accuracy than current metrics such as UZR
(Ultimate Zone Rating). UZR discretizes the state space
(baseball ﬁeld) into 54 zones and evaluates the number
of successful plays made by a defensive player in each
zone. One shortcoming with UZR is the granularity of
the state space. It is difﬁcult to accurately measure a
player’s ﬁelding ability if the area of each zone is large,
because the number of plays a ﬁelder makes in a large
zone doesn’t necessarily lend insight to his mobility and
skills. This can be illustrated by comparing two play-
ers who play the same defensive position (and therefore
start at roughly the same position prior to the catch). If
one player catches a ball in play (BIP) little movement
(i.e. the BIP is a pop ﬂy), and the other player catches
a ball that could be 20-30 feet in front (or behind) him,
UZR will evaluate each player’s play for that zone as
the same.
To alleviate this shortcoming in existing defensive
metrics, Jensen et al. (2009) sought to model the suc-
cess of a ﬁelder on a given BIP as a function of that
BIP’s location. To do this, a hierarchical bayesian model
was ﬁtted to evaluate the individual success of each ﬁelder
while sharing information between players at the same
position [6]. The idea of sharing information between
players at the same position was motivated by Reich et
al (2006)’s work, where the relationship is now based
on position of the player. This is a valid relationship
because playing the same position suggests a spatial re-
lationship both in distance and angle from the home
plate. The values that were obtained by this method
were named SAFE, or Spatial Aggregate Fielding Eval-
uation.
2.6.1
Models used
The models were ﬁtted according to the type of BIP
(Flyball, Liner, Grounder) and player position. There
are only two models for the BIPs:
(i) Flyball/liner model: The (x, y) location of the
BIP is set to the location where the ball landed,
or where it was caught (if it was caught). The
probability of making a catch was modelled as
a function of the distance travelled to catch this
ball, the direction he was travelling, and the ve-
locity of this BIP. The distance travelled incorpo-
rates two dimensions because the playing ﬁeld is
a two dimensional plane.
(ii) Grounder model: The (x, y) location of the BIP
is the location where the ball was ﬁelded by ei-
ther the inﬁelder or outﬁelder, depending on if the
ball made it through the inﬁeld. The probability
of a ﬁelder making a catch is a function of dis-
tance, direction, and the velocity. However, this
model’s direction is measured by an angle where
the BIP was caught and the inﬁelder’s starting lo-
cation. The distance is one dimensional since the
inﬁelder now travels the arc length between the
location of the catch and the starting position.
The reason for this formulation is intuitive: the po-
sitions being evaluated have the ability to ﬁeld ﬂyballs
and liners, but inﬁelders almost always ﬁeld grounders.
As a result the outﬁelders are exempt from the grounder
model.3The inﬁeld positions: 1B (First base), 2B (sec-
ond base), 3B (third base) and SS (shortstop) had the
grounder model ﬁt to their respective position. The re-
maining three positions: RF (Right Field), CF (Center
Field), LF (Left Field), along with the four aforemen-
tioned inﬁeld positions had the liner/ﬂyball model ﬁt to
their positions separately. This resulted in 7×2+4 = 18
models.
Because the authors ﬁtted each of the four
year’s data separately, this resulted in a total of 72 sep-
arate models.
One large similarity between the models in this arti-
cle and the previous is their use of ball location. Instead
of the location where a shot was taken, it is now where
the ball landed (or caught). If a player is responsible for
3Pitchers and catchers were ignored due to the lack of data.
14

catching a ball and fails to do so, this is treated similarly
to a missed shot in the previous article.
Since each of the models are similar, so too are their
mathematical formulations:
(i) Flyball/liner model: For a given ﬁelder i, de-
note the number of BIPs hit when that ﬁelder was
playing defense as ni. Since each play’s outcome
is either a success or failure, then:
Sij =

1
if the jth ﬂyball/liner is caught by player i
0
if the jth ﬂyball/liner is not caught by player i
the observed outcome of a success or failure is
modelled as an outcome from a Bernoulli random
variable, which has a parameter obtained from an
underlying event-speciﬁc probability:
Sij ∼Bernoulli(pij).
Each of the Bernoulli probabilities pij are mod-
elled as a function of distance travelled (Dij) to
the BIP, an indicator function that represents the
direction in which the player was moving (Fij =
1 if they’re moving forward, Fij = 0 if they’re
moving backwards) and Vij which is the velocity
of the BIP:
pij = Φ(βi0 + βi1Dij + βi2DijFij+
βi3DijVij + βi4DijVijFij)
= Φ(Xij · βi)
(18)
where Φ(·) is the Gaussian cumulative distribu-
tion function, and Xij is a vector of covariates in
the above equation. βi0 is the parameter that con-
trols the probability of a ﬁelder catching a liner/ﬂyball
hit directly at them (Dij = 0), βi1, βi2 are the pa-
rameters that control the forward (βi1) and back-
ward (βi2) direction of the ﬁelder, and βi3, βi4 are
parameters that adjust the probability of a suc-
cessful catch as a function of velocity. Fij, Dij
are both covariates that are functions of the (x, y)
coordinates of the BIP. This model is recognized
as the probit regression model with covariate in-
teraction, which permits different probabilities for
the same distance travelled leftwards and right-
wards.
(ii) Grounder model: There are slight changes for
this model with respect to the ﬂyball/liner model.
Namely, the distance is one dimensional and the
direction is now an angle in degrees. The ob-
served outcomes are still Bernoulli realizations as
above, however the parameters for the cumulative
distribution function change:
pij = Φ(βi0 + βi1θij + βi2θijLij+
βi3θijVij + βi4θijVijLij)
= Φ(Xij · βi)
(19)
where θij represents the angle between the start-
ing position and the location of the BIP, Vij is the
velocity of the BIP, and Lij is an indicator func-
tion for the direction the ﬁelder has to move to-
wards the BIP (Lij = 1 when moving left, Lij = 0
moving right). Φ(·) is still a Gaussian cumulative
distribution function.
2.6.2
Sharing Information
With these models being quantiﬁed, we now discuss
the previously-mentioned idea of sharing information
between players. When the sample size is small, players
of the same position have the issue of large variability
between their parameter estimates βi. If a hierarchical
model is used with the assumption that each set of pa-
rameter estimates βi are drawn from a common prior
distribution, this issue is eliminated. This is done by
drawing each set of player-speciﬁc parameters βi from a
common distribution shared among players of the same
position:
βi ∼Normal(µ, Σ)
where µ is the 5×1 vector containing the means and Σ
15

is a 5 × 5 prior covariance matrix shared by all players.
The components of the ith player’s parameter estimates
βi are assumed to be independent, even though there is
a posterior dependence between the components of this
parameter estimate induced by the data.
Lastly, a prior distribution must be speciﬁed for each
position’s “shared player” parameters (µk, σk : k =
0, . . . , 4). 4. After extensive investigation, the nonin-
formative distribution was chosen to as:
p(µk, σk) ∝1,
k = 0, . . . , 4
If we wish ﬁnd the unknown parameters β for N
players at a given position, then for each BIP type we
will have a N × 5 matrix containing the parameters for
each player at the given position, a 5 × 1 vector, µ,
which is the vector of parameter means, and σ2, a 5 ×1
vector representing the variance among each player’s
parameters. Thus for each position and BIP-type, the
posterior distribution for parameters β, µ, σ are sepa-
rately estimated,
p(β, µ, σ2|S, X) ∝p(S|β, X)· (β|µ, σ2)· (µ, σ2),
where S contains all of the outcomes Sij and X con-
tains all location and velocity covariates Xij. The pos-
terior distribution of the unknown parameters for each
position and each type of BIP is estimated using Gibbs
sampling.
Instead of sharing information across cells, as was
the case in the previous article, the information is being
shared across players. This is because the previous ar-
ticle focused on how the covariates affected shot selec-
tion, where shot selection must fall in a certain cell. Just
as sharing information with certain neighbouring cells
was important in stabilizing the computation in Reich
et al’s (2006) article, sharing information among play-
ers is important since each player has a limited amount
of ﬁelding data over a season. By pooling all of this in-
4remembering that only players of the same position share in-
formation!
formation together for players with the same position,
sampling from the appropriate representative distribu-
tion, this becomes less of an issue. Both articles rely on
using MCMC techniques in conjunction with sharing
information to achieve their result.
2.6.3
Comparing results
After extensive discussion and evaluation of SAFE,
the results 5 for each position are compared to UZR. The
difference between SAFE and UZR is that SAFE seeks
to evaluates the number of runs that were saved (or cost)
by a player’s defensive play, while UZR records ac-
tual observations. To compare SAFE and UZR, correla-
tion for each player’s respective values was attempted,
but yielded an inconclusive result. This shouldn’t be
surprising, because there is no standardized metric that
measures a player’s defensive play.
To allow further comparison, the assumption that
player ability is constant over time was added. This
assumption would be supported if the player’s value
maintained a high consistency across seasons, since the
noise in the data would be overcome by the “true sig-
nal”. When comparing SAFE’s correlation across sea-
sons to UZR’s, it did well for the outﬁeld positions but
struggled for inﬁeld positions such as shortstop and sec-
ond base. SAFE and UZR’s correlation over these sea-
sons was then averaged over all seven positions, where
SAFE had a slightly higher average correlation than that
of UZR. This should also not be surprising, since SAFE
sought to evaluate defensive play better than UZR by
using an elegant, intuitive and sophisticated representa-
tion for evaluation.
Another interesting question that can be posed is:
Can SAFE’s inﬁelder model be adjusted such that it
shows a higher level of correlation across seasons? SAFE’s
results show correlations of (0.525,0.594,0.444,0.503,0.287)
for positions (CF,LF,RF,3B,1B) across seasons, but a
5Any reader that is curious about the results for which players
were evaluated are encouraged to check the article.
16

meagre (0.051,-0.03) for (2B, and SS) respectively. The
intrigue behind this lies within the fact that the SS and
2B positions are closer than any other two defensive po-
sitions on the ﬁeld. The distance and angle for which a
2B might need to move to catch a BIP to his right might
depend on the calibre of the team’s shortstop. Is there a
minor adjustment to the inﬁeld model that can account
for the 2B/SS proximity, and eliminate the possibility
that both the SS and 2B’s ability to make plays are af-
fected by the BIPs they can catch? In any case, the
results and methods used in this article demonstrate the
power of statistical analysis in sport when a statistician
is equipped with computational power.
The articles covered so far accurately embody the
different ways statistical analysis has been performed
in sport. In the last paragraph the term computational
power was mentioned. If SAFE was proposed 15 years
ago, it would have been computationally infeasible. As
computational power has gotten cheaper, statistically
analysis has beneﬁtted. Another beneﬁcial use of this
computational power is to perform statistical analysis
using techniques in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
The area
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence contains numerous algorithms,
many of which are built on statistical theory, that have
the potential to improve statistical analysis in sport. We
conclude this review by exploring a case study which
applies an Artiﬁcial Intelligence technique to football.
2.7
Modelling using Neuro-Dynamic Pro-
gramming
As we have seen, modelling sports using various statis-
tical models is challenging. A case study performed by
Patek and Bertsekas (1996) used Neuro-Dynamic pro-
gramming (NDP) to simulate the offensive play call-
ing in football [7]. The reason to use football as the
“testbed” was due to it’s state space: it lies on the bound-
ary between medium-scale (tractable) and large-scale
(computationally infeasible) problems. The reason this
problem isn’t computationally infeasible is due to discretization
of the yardage, which in the real-world is real −valued.
This discretization is equivalent to the two articles
previous because it seeks to represent a real-valued state
space accurately, but also efﬁciently. Similar to the pre-
vious articles, sample data that was representative of
typical play was generated to ensure that biased approx-
imations wouldn’t result. This was performed by using
a Gibbs sampler.
A few rules were enforced to create a simpliﬁed ver-
sion of football. Consider a single offensive drive in
the middle of a game that’s inﬁnitely long. The ob-
jective for “our” team is to maximize the score during
“our” team’s offensive drive oﬀset by the rival team’s
expected score from where they receive the ball. The
state of “our” team is represented by integers x, y, d
where x is the number of yards until the goal is reached,
y is the number of yards remaining to reach a ﬁrst down,
and d is the down number. The offensive drive for either
team will terminate when:
(i) A team fails to get a new set of downs. That is,
they fail to achieve a ﬁrst down after four plays.
For those unfamiliar with American Football: A
team always begins its offensive drive with a ﬁrst
down and must achieve y yards in four plays to
receive a new ﬁrst down, and a new y value. If
a team doesn’t achieve y yards in one play, the
down number d is incremented, and y is decre-
mented by the number of yards obtained from this
play.
(ii) Touchdown is scored. (This means the offense
must achieve x ≤0.).
(iii) A turnover either through a fumble on a run at-
tempt, or interception during a pass attempt, or
whenever a team elects to punt or attempt a ﬁeld
goal.
The outcome of a given offensive drive is random, de-
pending on the quarterback’s strategy and the associated
transition probabilities for the diverse play options and
points in the state space. The decision-maker has four
play options from which he can choose: 0- Run, 1-Pass
(attempt), 2-Punt, 3-Field Goal (attempt). Further in-
17

formation on each type of play option can be obtained
by consulting the literature.
With these rules and ideas established, the prob-
lem of maximizing total expected reward can be rep-
resented as the stochastic shortest path problem be-
cause “maximizing net reward” is equivalent to “min-
imizing net costs”; therefore NDP methods mentioned
in Appendix C are applicable. As mentioned above,
there are a ﬁnite number of states for which quarter-
back should have a control action in mind. Such states
where the quarterback will have a control action in mind
will be denoted by i ∈S, where S is ﬁnite. The triple
(xi, yi, di) denotes the number of yards to the goal, yards
to the ﬁrst down, and the down number corresponding
to state i ∈S. By abuse of notation, (xi, yi, di) is writ-
ten as (x, y, d) because there is only one triple for each
state i ∈S and vice-versa.
The quarterback’s policy is represented as a func-
tion µ : S →U, where U = {0, 1, 2, 3}, the control
options available to the quarterback. Whenever posses-
sion is lost by “our” team, we transition to an absorbing
state T with zero-reward, similar to transitioning to the
three-out state in the Markov Chain model for baseball.
The quantity of the reward g is the score received at the
end of “our” team’s drive minus the expected score ob-
tained by the opposing team starting at the given ﬁeld
position.
With this representation, the optimal policy found it
best to run between x = 1 and x = 65, attempt to pass
from x = 66 to x = 94, and run again from x = 95 to
the goal (x = 100). The reward function that used this
optimal policy showed yielded an expected reward of
-0.9449 points when starting from x = 20. This meant
that if the “our” team received the ball at x = 20 every
time, they would lose the game. This result is a function
of arbitrarily-set parameters in the model. If they are
adjusted sufﬁciently, positive reward could be obtained.
What was also interesting was when y was varied
for each x, because y can be as large as x (although the
likelihood of y > 20 is very small). On second downs, it
was found that the optimal policy dictates pass attempts
be made for a wide array of x, y values, with the remain-
ing x, y values as run attempts. For third down, the op-
timal policy recommended a pass attempts, but if x and
y were large enough, the policy suggested punting. For
fourth down, the policy had a diverse recommendation;
if “our” team was close enough to the goal or a ﬁrst
down, a running or passing play was recommended. If
either a ﬁrst down or the goal is far away, either a ﬁeld
goal attempt or punt was recommended. By producing
a policy that is in agreement with commonly-employed
football strategy, Neuro Dynamic Programming shows
promise for devising the “optimal” plan when playing a
general opponent.
Particularly advantageous to using NDP techniques
was the ability to hypothesize a class of policies that
represented legitimate football strategy. These policies
can then be simulated. Using a heuristic policy that
is reﬂective of most good “play-callers” in football, it
was found that this policy had an expected reward was -
1.26 which is .32 game points worse than optimal when
starting from state i∗↔(xi∗= 80, yi∗= 10, di∗=
1). This is interesting because even though the result
is worse than the optimal policy, the fact that an ar-
bitrary heuristic policy could be evaluated suggests the
optimal policy could be surpassed with a combination
of (unbiased) parameter adjustments and reﬁnement of
the policy itself.
We see from these results that, even though this is a
simpliﬁed version of football, that a Markov represen-
tation of sports combined with techniques in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (such as NDP) hold promise for analysis
in sports. This is shown by ﬁnding an optimal policy
that is realistic and reﬂective of play calling in football.
In baseball, it is possible that a similar model could be
constructed.
3
Conclusion
Throughout this survey, we have been exposed to dif-
ferent methodologies and techniques that all had simi-
lar goals: an accurate representation of either players,
18

teams, the performance of players and teams, and per-
formance of players in select situations.
An alternative methodology for evaluating players
is to construct predictive models that are trained on real-
world data. NDP produces a promising result, espe-
cially considering how it was trained on sampled data
that was representative of the real-world. It could be
the case that training on real world data produces a bet-
ter result than the one obtained above. Further experi-
mentation is required in order to determine the validity
of applying NDP to sports.
Aside from the previous article using NDP, the lit-
erature for statistical analysis in sports using Statistical
Learning techniques is sparse. The computer is not just
a computational tool, it possesses the ability to greatly
improve statistical analysis in sport when Statistical Learn-
ing algorithms, which possess elegant mathematical prop-
erties, are used. These elegant mathematical properties
are exploited to not only reduce the amount of compu-
tation, but provide intricate analyses that further sub-
stantiate a statistician’s results.
Application of these
techniques to sports will allow statisticians to investi-
gate complex situations such as the effect of runners
on-base on a player’s pitching strategy. Investigation
of such complex situations in areas of sport may lead
to development of precise player metrics that quantify
players’ decision making abilities.
Appendix A: Absorbing State Markov Chains
Assume we are given a simple n-state Markov chain
(Xt)∞
t=1 and states {s1, . . . , sn} with an associated n×n
transition matrix P. The ith row and jth column of tran-
sition matrix P correspond to the probability P(i, j) =
P(Xt = j|Xt−1 = i).
An Absorbing Markov Chain is Markov Chain where
there exists at least one absorbing state. An absorbing
state is deﬁned as a state which, upon transitioning to,
cannot be exited. Mathematically, this is state sk, where
1 ≤k ≤n, such that P(k, k) = P(Xt = sk|Xt=1 =
sk) = 1.
If we assume we have more than one absorbing state,
then denote the set of these states by E. If we denote the
set of non-absorbing states as S = {s1, . . . , sn}/{E},
then we can construct matrices Q and S such that matrix
Q is of dimension |S| × |S| and matrix S is of dimen-
sion |S| × |E|. The matrix S is the transition matrix of
the states in S to states in E. Matrix Q is the transition
matrix from states in S to states also in S.
Using these matrices Q, S, we can ﬁnd the proba-
bility of reaching a state in E from states in S by the
following expression:
(I −Q)−1S
(20)
which also yields a |S| × |E| matrix. The entries of
this matrix give the probability of entering an absorbing
state in E from a state in S. The matrix (I −Q)−1
is referred to as the fundamental matrix. The (i, j)th
entry of this matrix is the expected number of periods
that the Markov Chain spends in non-absorbing state j
given that the chain began in state i.
As we will see in section 2, Absorbing Markov Chains
are important for certain representations in the game of
baseball.
Appendix B: Gibbs Sampling
Some papers in this review will use the idea of Gibbs
sampling, which is an algorithm that generates a se-
quence data samples from a multivariate probability dis-
tribution. The point of this generating is to approximate
the joint posterior distribution in order to marginalize
with respect to some subset of the variables. If we have
random variables X, Y , then to compute f(x):
f(x) =
Z
f(x, y)dy
however, in practice this can be a difﬁcult integration.
Often in statistical models, either f(y|x)orf(x|y) are
available, and the Gibbs sampler generates samples of
f(x) from these distributions. The generated sequence
19

of random variables is called a “Gibbs sequence”, and
the act of generating this sequence is called “Gibbs Sam-
pling”:
Y ′
0, X′
0, Y ′
1, X′
1, Y ′
2, X′
2, . . . , Y ′
k, X′
k
where Y ′
0 = y′
0 is speciﬁed and the remaining samples
are iteratively generated from:
X′
k f(x|Y ′
j = y′
j)
Y ′
j+1 f(y|X′
j = x′
j)
(21)
With the condition that k is large enough, the distribu-
tion of X′
k is said to converge to f(x), the “true” marginal
probability distribution function for random variable X,
when k →∞. Therefore, if we have a large enough se-
quence of samples, then X′
k = x′
k is said to be a “true”
sample from the distribution of random variable X [4].
Appendix C: Neuro Dynamic Programming
When dealing with the general class of Markov Deci-
sion processes, we are usually interested in ﬁnding a
policy (probability distribution) such that our long-term
total reward is maximized. By applying a control at
a given state, the probability distribution that governs
the immediate reward and transitions to the next state
is determined. Given a starting state i, the long term
discounted reward is:
J∗(s0) =
max
π={µ0,µ1,...}∈Π E
 ∞
X
k=0
αkg(sk, µk(sk), sk+1)|s0, π

(22)
where:
• The states {sk} is a trajectory representing the se-
quence of states in a ﬁnite state space S.
• π = {µ0, µ1, . . .} ∈Π is the policy, which is a
sequence of functions µk ∈M mapping the state
space S to a ﬁnite set of “allowable” controls U.
• The reward from transitioning from i to j under
the control u is g(i, u, j)
• α ∈(0, 1] is the discounting rate for rewards in
the future
• The expectation over all trajectories of states {sk}
that are possible under π.
When looking at the stochastic shortest path prob-
lem and the discounted reward problem, the optimal
reward function from each state is:
J∗(i) = max
u∈U
 X
j∈S
pij(u)(g(i, u, j)+αJ∗(j))

, ∀i ∈S
(23)
This expression is often referred to Bellman’s equation.
It is the value of the control u which achieves the max-
imum in Bellman’s equation for each state i ∈S and
determines the stationary optimal policy µ∗.
Because solving explicitly for this system of equa-
tions is difﬁcult, value iteration is used. The goal of
value iteration is to start with a guess for J∗, called J0,
deﬁned for all states i ∈S. With successive iterations,
the function for the kth iteration is:
Jk(i) = max
u∈U
 X
j∈S
pij(u)(g(i, u, j)+αJk−1(j))

, ∀i ∈S
(24)
where, in the limit J∗= limk→∞Jk(i) ∀i ∈S. Intu-
itively speaking, this means the approximation of each
state’s reward function should approach the value of the
optimal reward function J∗as the number of iterations
increase.
An alternative way to compute the optimal reward
function, J∗uses the policy iteration algorithm. This
algorithm starts with a policy µ0 and evaluates Jµ0 for
all states i ∈S. The kth iteration for this policy is
computed by:
µk(i) = arg max
u∈U
 X
j∈S
pij(u)(g(i, u, j)+αJµk−1(j))

∀i ∈S
(25)
Which will converge to J∗as long as the evaluations of
Jµk are exact and S and U are ﬁnite. It is assumed that
when these algorithms are used in this article that the
20

discount factor α = 1.
Appendix D: Baseball Terminology
We provide a quick description of many terms that are
frequently used in baseball.
• An at-bat is a plate appearance for a batter. This
at-bat has a count starting at 0-0. The ﬁrst num-
ber represents the number of “balls” (explained
below), of which there can be a maximum of four.
If four “balls” are achieved, the batter is advanced
to ﬁrst base (called a “base on ball”). The second
number represents the number of strikes, if three
strikes are obtained then the batter is out and the
plate appearance ends.
• A “ball” is when the pitcher fails to throw a pitch
in the batter’s strike zone.
• Base on balls will be referred to as “walks” for
this paper.
• A “ﬂyout” is when the batter successfully hits the
pitch but it was caught by an outﬁelder on the op-
posing team.
• A “groundball” is when the batter hits the pitch
but it rolls on the ground.
• A “sacriﬁce” is when the batter hits a pitch that
results in either a ﬂyout or groundout to advance
a runner on base (which includes scoring a runner
on third base).
• An inning in baseball consists of each team taking
their turn to bat. Each inning for a team consists
of three outs, and therefore at least three batters
will get a plate appearance prior to the other team
taking their turn to bat.
21
