A Simulation Platform for Multi-tenant Machine Learning
Services on Thousands of GPUs
Ruofan Liang
University of Toronto

Bingsheng He
National University of Singapore

Shengen Yan
SenseTime

Peng Sun
SenseTime

ABSTRACT
Multi-tenant machine learning services have become emerging
data-intensive workloads in data centers with heavy usage of GPU
resources. Due to the large scale, many tuning parameters and
heavy resource usage, it is usually impractical to evaluate and
benchmark those machine learning services on real clusters. In this
demonstration, we present AnalySIM, a cluster simulator that al-
lows efficient design explorations for multi-tenant machine learning
services. Specifically, by trace-driven cluster workload simulation,
AnalySIM can easily test and analyze various scheduling policies in
a number of performance metrics such as GPU resource utilization.
AnalySIM simulates the cluster computational resource based on
both physical topology and logical partition. The tool has been
used in SenseTime to understand the impact of different schedul-
ing policies with the trace from a real production cluster of over
1000 GPUs. We find that preemption and migration are able to
significantly reduce average job completion time and mitigate the
resource fragmentation problem.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent years have seen the fast development of AI and machine
learning (ML) in many fields including computer vision, natural
language processing, recommendation system and self-learning
systems. As such, it is very common to see that ML models are used
to provide personalized and intelligent services for customers. Thus,
machine learning services have become emerging data-intensive
workloads in data centers. Unlike developing traditional services,ML
services usually have an additional model training step which re-
lies on training data and parameter tuning. To make it easier to
develop ML services, many systems (such as Ease.ml [3] and Rafiki
[8]) are proposed for various use cases like model selecting, hyper-
parameter tuning and inference serving.
Many machine learning services involve deep learning train-
ing, and GPUs are heavily used in training the deep models. It is
common to see that service providers are equipped with hundreds
or even thousands of GPUs for offering efficient model trainings.
However, GPUs are still expensive resources in data centers. Ac-
cording to AWS EC2 pricinga GPU instance in the cloud costs much
higher (5-10x) than that of a regular instance. Efficiently utilizing
and allocating GPU resources in the cluster nowadays is another
important topic in both industry and academia.
The commonly used cluster management tools like Slurm [10]
and YARN [7] are mainly designed for traditional big data jobs,
neglecting the rigid usage of GPU resources in machine learning
services and GPU sharing from multiple tenants. Besides, the exist-
ing scheduling policies adapted by these cluster management tools
can also cause heavy head-of-line (HOL) blocking due to the large
variation on the running time of multiple submitted ML training
jobs. In this way, new shared resource management methods and
related job scheduling policies should be considered. Therefore,
recently we have seen many studies focusing on improving the
GPU utilization of multi-tenant machine learning services in data
centers [2, 6, 9].
However, such research requires system-level modification and
evaluation on large-scale GPU clusters, which is inefficient, costly
and sometimes even risky to production systems. Besides, the
emerging learning-based resource management methods like [4]
requires thousands of iterations of parameter updates to learn a
usable scheduling policy, which makes it almost impossible to be
learned from a real running cluster. Clearly, there needs a platform
or tool to study and evaluate shared resource management for ML
development in data centers. Given these situations, the comprehen-
sive simulation of data centers and resource management policies
is of great need fortesting and evaluating different ideas for shared
resource management.
To address the aforementioned needs for ML service develop-
ments, we develop AnalySIM, a flexible trace-driven GPU cluster
resource management simulator, to support the evaluation and de-
velopment of cluster scheduling policies. With detailed job trace
simulation, we can efficiently evaluate existing scheduling policies
and explore potential directions for future improvement. Specifi-
cally, we develop visual analyzing tools to show the simulation re-
sults of various resource management methods (e.g. migration and
reallocation) and job scheduling policies (e.g. preemptive and non-
preemptive scheduling). In the demonstration, we use AnalySIM
to simulate a production Slurm cluster with over 1000 GPUs from
SenseTime, and demonstrate the simulation accuracy and our find-
ings in comparing different scheduling policies.
2
RELATED WORK
Systems for ML services. In recent years, many systems for ML
is proposed to accelerate and simplify the ML service development.
Ease.ml [3] is an AutoML system which automatically select proper
models for different ML tasks in a multi-tenant environment. Rafiki
[8] is a ML analytics service system which provides on-line data
analytics capability to support database system. KubeFlow is combi-
nation of Kubernetes and TensorFlow which provides an end-to-end
ML development pipeline.
arXiv:2201.03175v1  [cs.DC]  10 Jan 2022

Resource management for ML workload. ML development
relies heavily on the high-performance computational resources,
and how to efficiently manage GPUs in a multi-tenant environment
is another important research topic. Optimus [6] uses an online
profiling model to find relative resource configuration to reduce
training time. Gandiva [9] analyzes the training characteristics
of the application and uses migration, packing and preemption
to speed up the overall performance. Tiresias [2] proposes a job-
agnostic discretized two-dimensional least-attained service (DLAS)
scheduling by combining the time job has run and the number of
GPU the job uses. In comparison, this demo complements those
existing studies in the following two aspects. First, existing studies
limit the cluster scale in dozens or hundreds of GPUs, and AnalySIM
does not have this limitation. Our traces are collected from a clus-
ter of thousands of GPUs. Second, AnalySIM has evaluated many
core optimizations in each of existing algorithms such as resource
allocation policies and scheduling, which are helpful to understand
the design options in a cluster with thousands of GPUs.
3
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
This section describes the design of our cluster simulator AnalySIM.
We will first talk about our design principles: 1) Fidelity. The sim-
ulator should simulate the real cluster with small errors. 2) Porta-
bility. It should be flexible enough for various cluster management
policies. 3) Analyzability. It is desirable to provide visualized sim-
ulation results in an intuitive way for better analysis.
Fig. 1 shows the general architecture of AnalySIM. Taking the
job trace and cluster topology as input, AnalySIM performs the
simulation and offers visualization tools for cluster performance
and GPU utilization analysis. This simulator is written by Python
with Object-Oriented Programming.
3.1
Cluster Module
The simulated cluster manages the computational resource of each
node in the real cluster. (AnalySIM.Cluster class in Python). To
better characterize the real GPU cluster, we take both physical and
logical hierarchies into consideration:
Physical topology. By reading the configurations of cluster
manager (e.g., topology.conf in Slurm), we can get the intercon-
nection topology among computational nodes in the cluster. We
develop programs on sending/receiving data packets of different
sizes to calibrate the performance (including latency and band-
width). Such calibrations are able to apply to different networks
such as RDMA and Infiniband. In order to include the network
• scheduling policies:
• non-preemptive
• preemptive
• ML/RL
• topo & partition:
• nodes: CPUs, GPUs
• res-allocation policies:
• first-fit, best-fit, free-GPU
Cluster Module
• job trace viewer
• running statistics
• animatedsimulation
jobs
submit
res request
res allocate
Scheduler Module
Analysis Module
results
demo
map
⓿
❶
❹
❷❸
❺
node connection
stats
GPU vis
Figure 1: The design of AnalySIM.
communication cost, AnalySIM adds the estimated communication
overhead for the distributed ML jobs with nodes from different
switches. Such overhead is roughly estimated by a penalty ratio
obtained from the comparison of data transfer rates among different
nodes.
Logical partition. Modern cluster management tools usually
logically separate the whole computational nodes into different
partitions. Such partitioning avoids the resource contention among
jobs from different task groups. With the information provided
by cluster manager. AnalySIM can construct such partitioning on
the simulated computational nodes. Each partition has its own
resource pool and job queue, which also enables the hybrid partition-
level resource allocation and job scheduling policy (e.g., different
partitions use different management policies).
In our implementation, Cluster class maintains a list of nodes
(AnalySIM.Node class), and each node maintains its GPU usage.
Besides that, Cluster class also has two maps switches and partitions
for representing physical and logical structure of the real cluster.
As for computational resource allocation, AnalySIM allows users
to select or add different resource allocation policies. Currently,
AnalySIM provides three resource allocation policies to serve re-
source requests in the form of the tuple (#Nodes, #GPUsPerNode).
1) First-fit. The first available node combination searched will be
allocated to the pending job. 2) Best-fit. All available node resource
combinations will be searched, the smallest sufficient one will be
allocated to the pending job. 3) Free-GPU. Cluster manager can
use idle GPUs from any nodes to meet the job requirement of the
total #GPUs needed. From all idle GPU combinations, the resource
combination with the smallest number of nodes will be allocated
to the pending job. In constrast to first-fit and best-fit, free-GPU
allocation can be a better policy which requires the co-design of ML
front-end framework (e.g., TensorFlow and PyTorch) and back-end
resource management tools.
In addition to the resource allocation policies, AnalySIM sup-
ports the simulation of dynamic resource migration for the running
jobs. That is, once a running job completes and releases its compu-
tational resources, cluster manager will examine those running jobs
with least required sources and perform migration if the migration
can improve the overall node utilization. We estimate the PCI-e
overhead of job migrations as the data transferred divided by the
PCI-e peak bandwidth. This mechanism can also help to mitigate
the computational resource (GPU) fragmentation problem.
3.2
Scheduler Module
The scheduler module is used to schedule submitted jobs from
collected job traces. The trace used for simulation is collected with
the cluster manager from the production cluster. We use provided
APIs, e.g., sacct in SLURM, to get related job information including
job id, job name, the cluster partition the job belongs to, the number
of requested nodes and GPU, job’s final state and the times when
the job is submitted, started and ended.
The main purpose of AnalySIM is to analyze the cluster sched-
uling algorithms and to speed up the development of new sched-
uling algorithms for GPU cluster. To fully support such purpose,
AnalySIM provides flexible interfaces for the implementation of
various types of scheduling algorithms. By providing predefined

template function interfaces for cluster module and scheduler mod-
ule, we make different types of scheduling and mechanisms able to
run on our simulator. We categorize cluster scheduling algorithms
into the following three types:
Non-preemptive scheduling. Once a submitted job gets re-
quired computational resources, this job will not be preempted
until completion or failure. The FCFS (First Come First Serve) is
one of classic non-preemptive scheduling algorithms. Based on the
FCFS algorithm, many other non-preemptive scheduling algorithms
like SJF (Shortest Job First) and LAS (Least Attained Service) [5]
can be implemented with some minor modifications.
Preemptive scheduling. This type of scheduling allows the
running jobs to be preempted and to be resumed running later. One
typical preemptive scheduling algorithm is Round-Robin schedul-
ing. Based on preemptive interface provided by AnalySIM, other
more sophisticated preemptive scheduling algorithms like MLFQ
(Multi-Level Feedback Queue) [1] can also be easily implemented.
For example, we have implemented LAS-MLFQ scheduling as a hy-
brid of LAS [5] and MLFQ,which gives each job different quantum
units according to the number of GPUs that the job uses. If a job
uses 4 GPUs, then its quantum unit is 1/4 of a job using 1 GPUs.
Learning based scheduling. Machine learning or reinforce-
ment learning (RL) nowadays can also be applied to the cluster
scheduling algorithms. For example, Decima [4] uses RL model to
schedule big-data jobs. Usually, learning-based algorithms need
long history job traces as training data for iterative training, which
is impracticable on a real cluster. In this case, AnalySIM can be used
as a flexible virtual environment, which efficiently gives schedul-
ing feedback (e.g., number of running jobs within a time period
[4]) to the training agents and further speed up development of
learning-based scheduling algorithms.
FCFS, 
Best-fit
SJF, 
Best-fit
MLFQ, 
Best-fit
Timeline
Waiting
Running
Figure 2: The snapshot of Chrome Trace Viewer for three
different cluster scheduling policies.
3.3
Analysis Module
After getting the scheduling results from scheduler module, the
analysis module offers the following functionalities: 1) checking
job status and analyzing cluster scheduling efficiency; 2) checking
GPU status and analyzing GPU resource utilization.
Job status analysis. AnalySIM will generate a simulated job
trace containing all job running information. By visualizing the
trace file, we can directly see how each submitted job is scheduled.
Fig. 2 shows snapshots of Tracing Viewer of different scheduling
policies, which gives an intuitive illustration of how different sched-
uling policies work. Developers can analyze the job scheduling
behaviour based on this visualization.
GPU resource utilization and status analysis. Cluster mod-
ule in AnalySIM also keeps tracing the resource usage of each node.
By utilizing such information, AnalySIM can give a detailed GPU-
level visualization together with other cluster status metrics. We
implemented these functionalities via Python’s Matplotlib package.
Fig. 3 shows the snapshot of this visualization tool. By moving the
time slider (at the bottom), users can study how node utilization
changes over time. Through this visualization tool, the bottleneck
of a scheduling algorithm can be found in a more straightforward
way. For example, adding more nodes to Partition 4 in Fig. 3 would
be helpful to reduce the number of coming pending jobs.
Figure 3: The snapshot of the visualized cluster nodes. Each
small square represents a GPU card, different colors on
GPUs represent different running jobs, white color repre-
sents the idle state. A larger square represents a computa-
tional node (with node ID on its top). Nodes are grouped in
partitions.
4
DEMONSTRATION
AnalySIM has been used in SenseTime Group Ltd, and demonstrated
as a viable solution to understand and evaluate different scheduling
policies with the trace from a real production cluster. In our demon-
stration, we will use AnalySIM to simulate a real production GPU
cluster with 154 nodes and 1160 GPU cards. To run the trace-driven
simulation, we use a subset of 20 days’ production cluster trace
containing 9356 submitted jobs. Almost 40% of the submitted jobs
in this trace require more than 4 GPU cards.
For the resource allocation policy, AnalySIM includes all the
scheduling policies described in Section 3. For the MLFQ based
scheduling, we choose 3 level queues and quantum units for each
job queue are 3250, 7200, 18000 seconds, which is adopted from [2].
As mentioned in [9], the time overhead of deep learning training job
stopping and resuming is approximately 8 seconds, we also add 8
seconds as extra overhead for preemption and migration operations
in our simulator (nevertheless, this parameter can be configured
according to the measurement in the actual cluster).
In the demo, audiences are able to specify different inputs to
AnalySIM, such as specifying cluster topology and the number of
GPUs, and creating new job traces. Then, they can observe the
following demo scenarios in the GUI of the analysis module.

0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Time/sec
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
#Job
FCFS
LSF
SJF
MLFQ
LAS+MLFQ
(a) #pending jobs
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
FCFS
LSF
SJF
MLFQ
LAS+MLFQ
best-fit
free-GPU
(b) Average JCT(sec)
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
400000
450000
500000
Time/sec
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
#UsedGPU/#UsedNode
FCFS
SJF
LAS+MLFQ
FCFS+Mig
SJF+Mig
(c) GPU usage. +Mig is for with dynamic migration.
Figure 4: Running statistics of AnalySIM. Policies in 4(a) and
4(c) are under best-fit placement.
To validate the accuracy of our simulation, we study the mea-
sured and simulated performance. We find that our simulation has
a very high accuracy. The current cluster uses a FIFO-based back-
fill scheduling policies. The average job completion time (JCT) is
6604.11 seconds in our simulation and 6606.35 seconds in real clus-
ter. This small differences show the high fidelity of our simulation.
4.1
Scenario 1: Simulation & Analysis
We will start by running the AnalySIM simulation with aforemen-
tioned scheduling policies to showcase the overall workflow of the
AnalySIM, which will let users know how to feed the trace file and
cluster configurations into our simulator. By running AnalySIM,
users can see the how each node and each GPU is allocated to
different jobs along the simulation timeline (i.e. an animated Fig.
3). Besides, AnalySIM also plots running statistics (Fig. 4) like re-
source usage rate (#usedGPU/#usedNodes), #pendingJobs and #run-
ningJobs. By view simulation results like running statistics (Fig. 4)
and job running timeline (Fig. 2), users can easily find the potential
Red GPUs
Released
(a) Migrations after job completion.
(b) free-GPU placement
Figure 5: Migration and free-GPU placement. The same fig-
ure elements as shown in Fig. 3.
problems of a job scheduling policies. As we can see, there is heavy
head-of-line (HOL) blocking for FCFS scheduling, which results in
the longer average pending time, while MLFQ solves this problem
by doing context switches over running jobs, which mitigate the
HOL blocking and ensures the fairness.
4.2
Scenario 2: Preemption & Migration
Fig. 5(a) also gives a visual demonstration of how migration works
in this simulator. By doing so, a cluster in Fig. 5(a) can vacate 4
completely idle nodes for the coming or pending jobs. We can see
the improvement brought by preemption mechanism from Fig. 4.
We use the ratio between the number of GPUs used and the number
of nodes used as the measurement of GPU resource fragmentation.
Since each node has 8 GPU cards, the ideal GPU utilization ratio
is 8. The higher the ratio is, the less resource fragmentation exits.
From Fig. 4(c), users can clearly see that preemption and migration
mechanisms make the GPU usage at a high rate for a long time,
which does mitigate the resource fragmentation problem.
4.3
Scenario 3: Free-GPU Allocation
In our simulation, job scheduling with free-GPU placement can
always achieve lower average JCT compared with other placements
under the same job scheduling policies (Fig. 4(b)). Besides, Fig. 5(b)
shows the GPU status under the free-GPU placement. We can see
a job using 48 red GPUs across seven nodes (node 26, 35, 44, 47,
50, 53, 112), though the initial resource requirement of this job is
6 nodes and 8 GPUs per node. If we do not allow such free-GPU
allocation, then this large job have to wait pretty long time for 6
wholly unused nodes to be available. In this way, free-GPU can
be treated as another complementary way to efficiently deal with
fragmented computational resources.
5
CONCLUSION
As machine learning services become emerging, resource manage-
ment of large-scale GPU clusters becomes a must, which is ineffi-
cient, costly and sometimes even risky to production systems. We
have demonstrated AnalySIM as an effective platform to research
different resource management policies.
