From Learning to Relearning: A Framework for Diminishing Bias in
Social Robot Navigation
Juana Valeria Hurtado∗, Laura Londo˜no∗, Abhinav Valada
Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
The exponentially increasing advances in robotics and machine learning are facilitating the transition of robots from being conﬁned
to controlled industrial spaces to performing novel everyday tasks in domestic and urban environments. In order to make the presence
of robots safe as well as comfortable for humans, and to facilitate their acceptance in public environments, they are often equipped
with social abilities for navigation and interaction. Socially compliant robot navigation is increasingly being learned from human
observations or demonstrations. We argue that these techniques that typically aim to mimic human behavior do not guarantee fair
behavior. As a consequence, social navigation models can replicate, promote, and amplify societal unfairness such as discrimination
and segregation. In this work, we investigate a framework for diminishing bias in social robot navigation models so that robots
are equipped with the capability to plan as well as adapt their paths based on both physical and social demands. Our proposed
framework consists of two components: learning which incorporates social context into the learning process to account for safety
and comfort, and relearning to detect and correct potentially harmful outcomes before the onset. We provide both technological and
societal analysis using three diverse case studies in different social scenarios of interaction. Moreover, we present ethical implications
of deploying robots in social environments and propose potential solutions. Through this study, we highlight the importance and
advocate for fairness in human-robot interactions in order to promote more equitable social relationships, roles, and dynamics and
consequently positively inﬂuence our society.
Keywords: Social Robot Navigation, Robot Learning, Fairness-Aware Learning, Algorithmic Fairness, Ethics
1. Introduction
The last decade has brought numerous breakthroughs in the
development of autonomous robots which is evident from the
manufacturing and service industries. More interesting are the
advances that are essential enablers of several innovative ap-
plications such as robot-assisted surgery [1], transportation [2],
environmental monitoring [3], planetary exploration [4] and
disaster relief [5]. Novel machine learning algorithms accom-
panied by the boost in computational capacity and availability
of large annotated datasets have primarily fostered the progress
in this ﬁeld. Machine learning and reinforcement learning tech-
niques enable robots to learn complex tasks directly from raw
sensory input. One such task of navigation has seen tremendous
progress over the years. Robots today have the capability to
autonomously plan paths to reach a certain location and even
make decisions based on the scene dynamics, avoiding collisions
with people and objects [6, 7, 8, 9]. Advancing robot navigation
abilities is crucial for robots to effectively operate in real-world
environments.
Robot navigation is a complex task that requires a high de-
gree of autonomy. For a robot to successfully navigate the
real-world, it is essential to fulﬁll high accuracy, efﬁcacy, and
efﬁciency requirements. Additionally, it is critical to consider
∗Equal contribution.
safety standards while developing robots that navigate around
humans. To carry out this task, robots are equipped with sensors
that allow them to perceive the environment and a path plan-
ning system that enables them to compute a feasible route to
achieve the navigation goal. So far, mobile robots have been
successfully employed in various applications such as material
transportation, patrolling, rescue operation, cleaning, guidance,
warehouse automation, among others [10, 11, 12, 13]. This also
elucidates that mobile robot applications are moving closer from
the industry to everyday tasks in households, ofﬁces, and public
spaces. Robot navigation models tailored to solely reach a goal
location efﬁciently are insufﬁcient in these spaces where robots
cohabitate with humans. Other complex considerations such as
social context, norms, and conventions are essential to ensure
that the presence and movements of robots are safe and com-
fortable. These additional considerations of sociability play an
indispensable role in the acceptance of robots in human spaces.
Nevertheless, modeling the social policies that represent hu-
mans is a challenging task. To better capture the social behavior
of navigation, several learning approaches have been proposed
with the goal of directly imitating human navigation or learning
from demonstrations [14, 15, 16, 17]. With the aim of incor-
porating social context in learning algorithms, socially-aware
robot navigation extends the traditional objective of reaching
a certain location to also reﬂect social behavior in the deci-
sion making process [18]. This can be achieved with learning
1
arXiv:2101.02647v2  [cs.RO]  3 Mar 2021

methodologies based on social and cultural norms. These so-
cial characteristics can be incorporated into the learning process
as social constraints [14, 15, 16] or via imitation and demon-
strations [17]. As the role of robots within society is that of a
social agent, they should follow social conventions for better
acceptability in human environments. Following such conven-
tions will enable them to generate actions that are inﬂuenced by
respecting personal spaces, perceiving emotions, gestures, and
expressions [19, 18, 20, 21].
However, despite signiﬁcant advances that enable incorpo-
rating social conventions into navigation models, there is still
no guarantee that a socially-aware robot will always make fair
decisions. We can extensively observe in other applications of
machine learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), how learn-
ing algorithms replicate, promote, amplify injustice, unequal
roles in society, and many other societal as well as historical
biases. Numerous cases have been identiﬁed in face recog-
nition, gender classiﬁcation, and natural language processing
methods [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. Similar to these cases,
learning social behavior from real-world observations will not
prevent discrimination. This is of special concern in service and
caregiving applications where robots physically interact with
humans.
There are multiple social and technical factors that can lead
to bias while learning social robot navigation models. First,
learning techniques require guidance to optimize the navigation
model. Supervised approaches utilize datasets gathered from
simulations, controlled experiments, or the real-world. Other ap-
proaches, such as imitation learning and reinforcement learning,
obtain guidance directly from real experiences. It is important
to consider that real-world data can always include bias reﬂect-
ing unwanted humans behaviors. Additionally, simulations and
controlled experiments cannot contain sufﬁcient diverse infor-
mation about diverse groups of people and their interactions for
the robot to learn the large number of potential unfair situations
that it can encounter. Therefore, current learning algorithms
can signiﬁcantly replicate, promote, and amplify unfair situa-
tions. Besides data-related issues, learning algorithms tend to
ﬁnd certain features that make it easier to optimize for a task and
rely on these attributes to learn the function or policy. This can
lead to mechanisms that depend on these potential bias inducing
features related to a particular characteristic such as race, age,
or gender. Another issue encompasses fairness measurements.
Thus far, there are no standard fairness deﬁnitions or metrics for
the optimization of learning-based navigation algorithms or even
to detect biased or unfair situations. Furthermore, robots are
typically deployed with models that have been pre-trained and
do not have the ability to automatically update their parameters
or their policy online if they encounter a discrimination scenario.
Recently, several strategies to mitigate unfair outcomes in
learning algorithms for tasks such as classiﬁcation or recogni-
tion have been proposed [29, 30, 31, 32]. Nevertheless, learning
fair social navigation models for robotics is substantially lesser
studied. Particularly, investigating fairness in mobile robot navi-
gation presents more complex challenges that are not manifested
in other data-driven tasks in computer vision and machine learn-
ing. In learning-based mobile robot navigation, fairness behavior
not only depends on data but also on the future actions of the
humans around the robot and other factors of the environment.
In this case, it is impractical to anticipate all the possible actions
in advance during the development of these models. With these
considerations in mind, socially-aware robot navigation, besides
learning social skills, should also account for non-discriminatory
and fair behavior that makes the interaction safer for diverse
groups of people.
In the case of humans, the learning process is not ﬁxed but
rather continuous. This allows humans to have both physical
and social adaptability. We refer to this adaptive learning from
experiences as relearning in this work. We, as humans, not only
relearn about the physical world to react to unexpected obstacles
in our path, but we also develop adaptability in terms of inter-
action. This generally prevents us from causing harm to others
with our actions and enables us to correct our behavior when
we encounter unfair situations. Within this social adaptation,
we learn to behave socially and fairly with those with whom
we relate to [33, 34, 35]. The relearning process allows us to
reason about what we are experiencing and develop a personal-
ity deﬁned by certain moral values, ethical values, beliefs, and
ideologies, which in turn inﬂuences the way we interact with oth-
ers [36]. Humans decide how to navigate in public spaces while
taking both social conventions and ethical aspects into account,
such as empathy, solidarity, recognition, respect for people, and
recognizing behaviors that lead to discrimination. Accordingly,
learning and relearning are important processes for humans to
acquire the capabilities that are required for navigating in the
environment and cohabitate in society.
Inspired by the learning and relearning processes in humans,
we propose a framework for diminishing bias in social robot
navigation. Our framework consists of two components. During
robot development, we introduce social context based on social
norms and skills while learning navigation models so that the
robot acquires social conventions. We then incorporate a relearn-
ing mechanism that detects systematic bias in control decisions
made by the robot during navigation. This enables the robot to
update its navigation model when unfair situations are detected
during the operation. Our proposed framework facilitates di-
minishing bias in the behavior of the robot and generates early
warnings of discrimination after the deployment. More impor-
tantly, it enables the adaptation of the robot’s navigation model
to new cultural and social conditions that are not considered
during training.
In this work, we describe the motivation and the technical
approach for implementing our proposed Learning-Relearning
framework for social robot navigation. We then highlight the
risks and propose potential solutions that include speciﬁc fair-
ness considerations for mobile robots that navigate in social
environments. Furthermore, we analyze the ethical and societal
implications of deploying mobile robots in social environments.
To this end, we investigate the behavior of mobile robots in
terms of fairness in three speciﬁc service and caregiving scenar-
ios with different levels of human-robot interaction. There are
other social scenarios where the mobility of the robot directly
depends on the human’s control action such as autonomous
wheelchairs [37] or robotic guide canes [38]. Nevertheless, in
2

this work, we only consider scenarios where the robot navigates
as an independent machine that interacts with multiple humans
in the surrounding environment at different levels of priority. We
provide examples that show cases where models that are only
based on learning social navigation are insufﬁcient to obtain fair
behavior, and we discuss how the relearning mechanism can
extend those models to yield fair behavior. Finally, we analyze
scenarios in which learning social behavior and accounting for
fair behavior play an important role in the real-world.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to investi-
gate the societal implications of bias in learned socially-aware
robot navigation models, and the framework that we present
is the ﬁrst to demonstrate a feasible solution for learning fair
socially compliant robot navigation models. Even though our
work targets socially-aware robot navigation, the framework that
we propose can also be extended to other aspects of human-robot
interaction, which would beneﬁt from the presented insights. As
a result of the social perspective, we provide a comprehensive
understanding of fairness in human-robot interactions. This is an
important step towards diminishing bias and amplifying healthy
social conventions to positively inﬂuence the society. With this
work, we aim to create awareness that robots should positively
impact society and should never cause harm, especially against
individuals or groups who have been historically marginalized
and who disproportionately suffer the unwanted consequences
of algorithmic bias.
In summary, the primary contributions of this paper are:
•
We introduce a framework for diminishing bias in social
robot navigation, consisting of two stages: Learning and
Relearning. We present the technical concept and introduce
methods that can be used to implement our framework.
•
We present a societal and technical analysis of the
social abilities and bias considerations in learning robot
navigation models.
•
We present the social implications of socially-aware
robot navigation models and provide a set of fairness
considerations.
•
We provide detailed case studies that analyze the impact of
bias in different service and caregiving robot applications
and discuss mitigation strategies.
2. Ethical Aspects and Fairness Implications
The growing impact that AI and robotics have in the daily
lives of people has led to the increase in ethical discussions
about current machine learning algorithms and how to handle
new research towards an equal and positive impact of technol-
ogy for diverse groups of people. Consequently, recent works in
both social sciences and machine learning have highlighted the
challenges in socio-cultural structures that are reﬂected and am-
pliﬁed by learning algorithms. As a result, many guidelines from
the technical [39, 40, 41, 42] and social perspectives [43, 44, 45]
have been presented. These guidelines [46, 40, 47] are aimed
towards mitigating the adverse effects and advocating for ethical
principles such as fairness, trust, privacy, liability, data manage-
ment, transparency, equality, justice, truth, and welfare. Similar
efforts have been made by the European Robotics Research
Network (Euronet) in the Euronet Roboethics Atelier project
in 2005, and the British Standards Institute which published
the World’s First Standard on Ethical Guidelines in 2016 [48].
Moreover, some works in robotics [49, 50, 51, 52] have also
investigated the importance of addressing ethical issues for safe
and responsible development.
These ethical guidelines [53, 54, 55, 56] share the value
of robots effectively and safely assisting people, and under
no circumstance cause harm or endanger their physical in-
tegrity [57, 58, 59]. The impact of human-robot interactions
has also been studied to a lesser extent in mobile robotics, e.g.,
providing recommendations on road safety, privacy, fairness, ex-
plainability, and responsibility [60], or studying fairness in path
planning algorithms of robots during emergency situations [61].
Similarly, such ethical discussions should be contrived while
developing socially-aware robot navigation models. As shown
in Figure 1, although the number of publications that consider
fairness in robot navigation is slowly increasing, it is still over
ﬁve-times lesser than the overall number of publications that
address robot navigation. In this section, we present a series of
ethical aspects and social implications that can arise from bias
in socially aware-robot navigation algorithms. Additionally, we
analyze the impact that these social navigation algorithms can
have on human environments.
2.1. Fairness Implications
The cultural and social knowledge in humans is transferred
from generations as a cumulative inheritance that allows each
member of the society to incorporate moral, political, economic,
and social structures that not only have a positive but also a
negative value [62]. These inheritance conditions have perpet-
uated historical discrimination against individuals and groups
of people. The data collected in machine learning and AI come
from these historical inheritance structures; consequently, social-
historical discrimination can also be reﬂected or even ampliﬁed
by learning algorithms. In recent years, several unexpected
outcomes have been observed in learning algorithms that have
caused discrimination and prejudice in society. Numerous exam-
ples demonstrate how social prejudices are reﬂected in machine
learning algorithms [23, 24]. One clear example that was ob-
served in natural language processing was the racial and gender
biases while learning language from text [25, 26]. Another re-
cent example is the automated risk assessments used by U.S.
judges to determine bail and sentencing limits. It was shown that
it can generate incorrect conclusions, resulting in large cumula-
tive effects on certain groups, such as longer prison sentences or
higher bails imposed on darker-skinned users [27]. Moreover,
another study shows how biased algorithms affect the perfor-
mance of vision-based object detectors employed in autonomous
vehicles. Their work demonstrates that pedestrians with dark-
skinned tones presented higher recognition errors [28]. There
have also been numerous cases of algorithmic bias that have
been observed in algorithms used in healthcare. For example,
algorithms trained with gender-imbalanced data have shown
higher error at reading chest x-rays for an underrepresented
gender [63].
3

2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
Year
Papers
Robot Navigation
Social Robot Navigation
Fair Robot Navigation
Figure 1: Comparison of the number of publications on Robot Navigation (blue), Social Robot Navigation (red), and Fair Robot Navigation (green) from 2011 to
2020. Although the rate at which fairness is being considered in robot navigation methods is increasing, there is a growing gap with the number of works that address
robot navigation each year.
The numerous cases of discrimination observed in learning
algorithms employed in various applications are a source of
concern for robotics. In the case of robots that employ learning
algorithms to effectively interact, navigate and assist people, it
is essential to foresee possible unfair situations. Speciﬁcally, as
a result of learning socially-aware robot navigation strategies,
these trained models can enhance the social impact in terms of
human acceptance of mobile robots, daily use, comfort, security,
protection, and cooperation [64]. Providing robots with a more
natural navigation ability also increases their usability. Although
incorporating social navigation models in robots improves their
usability, comfort, and safety in human spaces, social abilities
by themselves do not ensure fair robot decisions, especially
while using learning algorithms to imitate or follow human con-
ventions and behaviors. In human social interactions, a series
of direct and indirect discrimination behaviors and decisions
are often present [65, 66, 67]. Using learning algorithms can
negatively affect society, individuals, or groups if unwanted so-
cial behavior is replicated and reﬂected in the actions of the
robot. Therefore, this highlights the need to implement fair-
ness considerations and measures. The ability of an agent to
dynamically make fair decisions among different people is a
fundamental basis for trust in human-robot interaction [68, 69].
If robots, after their deployment, present an unfair behavior, it
will continue to perpetuate discriminatory structures that will be
reﬂected in the way that people are assisted. Moreover, this will
cause serious consequences such as a large population not being
beneﬁted by the robots and being reticent to use them. These
factors suggest that the robot would only be beneﬁcial for cer-
tain groups of people, which would continue to reinforce large
social inequalities. Robots should inﬂuence society in a positive
way by promoting healthier relationships, roles, and dynamics
after their deployment in different places with diverse people.
This requires the creation of a more reﬂective, equitable, and
inclusive learning methods accompanied by extensive studies
from the social perspective.
2.2. Fairness Measures
Fairness is a complex ethical principle that relates to avoiding
any form of systematic discrimination against certain individuals
or groups of individuals based on the use of particular attributes
such as race, sexual orientation, gender, disability, socioeco-
nomic and sociodemographic position [41]. However, the deﬁ-
nition of fairness tends to be dynamic, mobile, and contingent;
therefore, it should be analyzed from a reﬂective and ethical
perspective. Moreover, fairness highly depends on the con-
text, location, and culture, among other factors. Consequently,
deﬁning an accurate fairness measure could be a complex task.
With efforts in this direction, bias has been used to represent
fairness either in human environments or in technological devel-
opments [70, 71, 72, 73].
For its part, solutions to algorithmic bias that perpetuate social
and historical discrimination against vulnerable and disadvan-
taged individuals or groups of people tend to be technical rather
than moral and ethical [44]. Technological solutions to biased
decisions making are essential but not solely sufﬁcient. Instead,
technical solutions should be accompanied by factors such as di-
versity, inclusion, and participation of underrepresented groups
during the development of navigation models. Although there
is no standard deﬁnition of fairness in machine learning and AI,
some works state that a prediction is fair when it is not discrim-
inating or when there is no bias [44, 74, 75]. However, there
4

are two types of biases, positive and negative. Positive bias
frequently promotes social good and avoids prejudice through
awareness and respect for human differences. Therefore, not all
biased outputs are necessarily undesirable, and eliminating them
can cause unintended outcomes for certain people. For example,
consider an algorithm that is used in a bank to perform a credit
study of the people who apply for a loan. If the algorithm is
trained to guarantee that all the people will have credit, this
may be a disadvantage in the long run for those who cannot pay
back later. While the algorithm is being equal in this case, it is
unfair in the long term as it negatively affects the low-income
people [41].
In socially-aware robot navigation fairness measurements are
yet to be studied. As robots interact and assist different groups
of people in different settings, creating a uniﬁed deﬁnition or
metric is impractical due to the complex and diverse cases that
robots can encounter after deployment. Accordingly, in order to
tackle unfairness, we present a series of fairness considerations
for socially-aware robot navigation:
(i)
Value Alignment refers to the alignment of human values
in decision making during navigation. These values include
respect, inclusion, empathy, solidarity, recognition, and
non-discrimination. In socially-aware robot navigation,
it is reﬂected in cases when the decision-making of the
robot reproduces and increases the welfare of vulnerable
populations. For example, prioritizing to assist and serve
people with physical disabilities in crowded environments.
(ii)
Bias Evaluation is related to the evaluation of bias in de-
cisions making during navigation. Bias can be considered
acceptable if there is adequate reasoning or unacceptable
if the bias replicates, promotes, or ampliﬁes discrimina-
tion. For example, when robots navigate with a different
speed around young people who are faster than around
older adults, it is usually accepted because they have impor-
tant physical differences. Nevertheless, if such decisions
are made based on racial differences, it can be considered
unacceptable, given that there are no fair reasons for this
difference. With this fairness consideration, when biases
are presented in navigation models, it can only be accepted
if there are fair reasons for doing so.
(iii)
Deterrence is expressed in preventing and mitigating un-
wanted bias as well as discrimination during navigation.
Since the notion of deterrence is dynamic and can vary
depending on the social context, robots should be sensi-
tive to cultures by adapting to people, customs, and their
surroundings.
(iv)
Non-Maleﬁcence signiﬁes that the decisions of a robot can
never produce damage to people. The damage is primarily
interpreted as bodily harm, collisions, interruptions, delay,
and obtrusion. However, damage can also refer to the nega-
tive effects caused by discrimination, segregation, and bias.
For example, if a caregiving robot in a hospital becomes an
obstacle to the medical personnel responding to an emer-
gency due to biased decisions, then it would be violating
this property.
(v)
Shared Beneﬁt refers to providing equal beneﬁts to diverse
people in all scenarios. If a robot is speciﬁcally designed for
and only tested in a particular geographical area, tailored to
the characteristics and behaviors of the people in that region,
it can lead to unwanted bias when it is deployed in a new
region which may have completely different characteristics.
Therefore, the beneﬁts that the robot provides should not
be targeted towards people with speciﬁc characteristics
in a determined geographical area, but should rather be
equally beneﬁcial to all users. In this case, adaptability is
an important attribute for robots to achieve shared beneﬁt
so that the autonomy of the robot is ﬂexible to adapt to
characteristics of speciﬁc users in the social environment
where it is deployed.
2.3. Responsible Innovation
Research in technology studies suggests that the conceptions
of responsibility should build upon the understanding that sci-
ence and technology are not only technically but also socially
and politically constituted [76, 77]. Responsible Innovation (RI)
was introduced as a concept to address the impact of research
and innovation in technology from an ethical and fair perspective.
RI states that the technology should be anticipatory, so it should
have a foresight guide that provides alternative options for re-
sponsible development [61, 78], and it should account for social,
ethical, and environmental issues. Based on RI principles, the
framework that we present in this paper aims to identify biased
behavior during navigation and promotes fair decision making
through the learning and relearning process to enable ﬂexible
and adaptive service. RI articulates and integrates four factors:
(i) anticipation of damages, (ii) reﬂection from an ethical per-
spective, (iii) protection of sensitive human characteristics, such
as age, gender, and race, and (iv) responsiveness [78].
With the aforementioned RI factors, responsible robotics aims
to ensure that responsible practices are carefully accounted for
within each stage of design, development, and deployment. Cor-
respondingly, robot navigation models should address the ethical
and legal considerations at the time of development. Given that
these considerations are constantly changing depending on the
social or cultural factors, these models should be updated ac-
cordingly.
3. Learning - Relearning Framework for Socially-Aware
Robot Navigation
The goal of our proposed framework is to develop learning
models for robot navigation that yield social and fair behavior.
To this end, we deﬁne two different stages: learning and re-
learning. In the ﬁrst stage, we incorporate social context into
learning navigation strategies so that robots can navigate in a
socially compliant manner. While, in the second stage, we aim
to diminish any bias in the planned paths with the learned navi-
gation model. In this section, we ﬁrst introduce socially-aware
robot navigation. We then describe our proposed framework and
present the technical approach that can be used for the imple-
mentation. Figure 2 shows the different stages of our framework.
In the learning phase, we learn a navigation policy based on imi-
tation learning with additional social constraints. Whereas, in
5

B: Relearning
Social Environment
Social 
Path
Fairness
State
A: Learning
Expert 
Demonstrations
Social constrains
Learning
Model
Figure 2: Illustration of our proposed Learning-Relearning framework for diminishing bias in social robot navigation. Our proposed framework consists of two
components: learning (A) and relearning (B). By including the social context in the learning process, we aim to account for safety and comfort. The social context is
presented as the social skills demonstrated by experts and social norms as constraints. Moreover, we aim to detect potentially harmful outcomes before the onset using
the relearning mechanism. After detecting unfair effects, the navigation model should be automatically updated to account for fairness.
the relearning phase, we analyze the outputs of the network on-
line and provide the model with updates to reach the navigation
target while accounting for and deterring bias to ensure fairness.
Science and technology, from the RI perspective, have the ability
to provide signiﬁcant beneﬁt through well-established method-
ologies that reﬂect responsibility and ethical principles. This
framework tailored exploits the learning and relearning process
as a methodology to achieve responsible robot navigation.
3.1. Socially-Aware Robot Navigation
One of the widely studied requirements for mobile robots to
operate in human spaces is the ability to navigate according to
social norms and socially compliant behavior. The social naviga-
tion models that are employed in robots play an important role
in the effect that these automated machines have on society and
the perception as well as conﬁdence that humans will have of
them. In the case of humans, we develop the ability to navigate
while considering numerous variables representing the environ-
ment, such as the objects, people, and dynamics of the agents
in it. This ability, known as sociability, from an anthropological
point of view, is the human capacity to cooperate and engage in
joint behavior with others [79]. Further, sociability allows us to
navigate while avoiding situations that make us uncomfortable
or put us or others in danger.
Different social norms have been developed to provide in-
formation about the appropriate behavior, especially in public
spaces. Social norms are standards of conduct based on widely
shared beliefs of how people should behave in a given situ-
ation [80]. Some of the social norms for navigation are not
invading the personal space of people, passing on the right, main-
taining a safe velocity, not blocking people’s path, approach-
ing people from the front, among others [81]. Besides social
norms, different studies such as proxemics [82], kinesics [83]
and gaze [84] also provide cues to determine the appropriate
manner to approach a person, navigate around, and coordinate
in public spaces. Speciﬁcally, proxemics is the study of the
perception and organization of the personal and interpersonal
space. It is associated with the manner of how humans manage
their surrounding space when they walk in public environments
and how their comfort can be affected by the movement of other
pedestrians [85]. Kinesics is related to the actions of the body
and positions [86], and gaze refers to the eye movements and
directions during visual interaction [87]. These studies highlight
social skills such as reading emotions and the prediction of the
intentions of people. The combination of both social norms and
social skills can be considered a determinant of sociability. The
aforementioned studies and norms are some of the increasingly
used factors in learning social robot navigation models. It is
long believed that equipping robots with these social skills and
social norms will enable them to react socially as humans do.
For instance, we can anticipate that cleaning robots [88] that
are primarily used in houses will be widely used in public spaces
in the coming years. Currently, these robots do not conform
to any social norms during navigation. Conﬁned to private lo-
cations and users who know the device, manufacturers have
not made it a priority to include social skills such as predicting
the intention of people and avoiding crashing into them. Nev-
ertheless, sociability is an important skill to deploy cleaning
robots in crowded public spaces. In this case, robots must take
into account aspects such as the space that they occupy and the
personal space of the people around to determine how close to
navigate around them or predict where humans will move so
that they do not interfere with their paths. These skills will allow
robots to plan a safe route so that their presence is not disturb-
ing, surprising, or scaring the people that share the same space.
While planning routes, robots should use social norms such as
6

not invading the personal space and maintaining a safe speed.
Both the use of social skills and social norms change depending
on the type of robot and the context in which it is used. We
present further discussions of this example in Section 4.1.
Socially-aware robot navigation methods can primarily be
categorized into two groups. The ﬁrst category is model-based
and consists of handcrafted models that use mathematical for-
mulations to combine a set of effects to determine the dynamics
of pedestrians, such as reaching the destination, the inﬂuence of
other pedestrians, keeping a certain distance to another person,
or the maximal acceptable speed. [89] introduced the notion
that social forces determine human motion and propose the So-
cial Force Model (SFM) to represent pedestrian dynamics. To
navigate in a manner similar to humans, this formulation was
later used to provide robots with pedestrian-like behavior for
human-robot social interaction [90]. However, SFM requires
us to cautiously deﬁne and tune the parameters for each spe-
ciﬁc scenario, which makes it impractical to scale to complex
tasks and environments [91]. The second category consists of
learning-based methodologies that use some form of guidance
or demonstrations containing the policies that link observations
to the corresponding actions. We further discuss learning-based
methods in the following section.
3.2. Learning
The rapid progress in machine learning in the past years and
the growth of computing power have enhanced the learning capa-
bilities of autonomous mobile robots. Currently, these learning-
based methodologies play an essential role in the development of
complex navigation models. These models are primarily trained
to achieve the best navigation performance under some given
metrics during the learning process. For this purpose, differ-
ent guidance techniques have gained interest in robot navigation
works. The ﬁrst of which is supervision from labeled data, which
uses either data gathered from the real-world or simulations and
the corresponding annotations. The data and annotations are
then employed to optimize the model so that the output predic-
tions are as close as possible to the labels. Supervised navigation
methods can be used directly by learning the mapping from the
states in recorded trajectories that contain social policies to their
corresponding labels or by learning reactive policies that imitate
a planning algorithm [92].
Another extensively explored learning technique is Reinforce-
ment Learning (RL), in which an agent explores the state and
actions by itself while a reward function is used to punish or
encourage the decisions to obtain an optimal model. RL tech-
niques can be used to provide a robot with navigation paths that
maximize rewards in terms of human safety or comfort [93].
Moreover, Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is a technique
that has been widely used to capture the navigation behavior
of pedestrians. Contrary to supervised learning, IRL is able to
recover a cost function that explains an observed behavior [94].
The IRL technique proposed by [95] trains the social navigation
model by learning the navigation policy directly from human
navigated paths in order to generate actions that conform to
human-like trajectories. To include the social context in the
learning process, these models aim to clone the navigation be-
havior of humans. Subsequently, robots are then equipped with
these models for socially-compliant navigation.
Speciﬁcally, to clone an expert behavior in the RL framework,
consider that an agent in an environment reaches a state st+1
after executing an action at ∼π that follows a policy π. At each
transition state, the agent obtains a reward rt presented as a scalar.
The goal is for the agent to adjust the policy π to maximize the
expected long-term rewards that it can receive. Q-learning [96]
is an approach that enables us to ﬁnd an optimal policy based on
the state transition set. The Q-function represents the value of
an action at and following a policy π as
Qπ(st,at) = E[R(st)|st,at],
(1)
where R is the expected long term reward deﬁned as R =
∑∞
t=0 γtrt, being γ ∈[0,1] the discount-rate. Given the state st
and action at the Q-function indicates the expected discounted
accumulative reward. Using the Q-function, we can estimate
an optimal policy π, which maximizes the expected return. Par-
ticularly, no reward function is given in the IRL framework.
Therefore, it is inferred from observed trajectories collected by
the expert policy πE to mimic the observed behavior.
There are numerous works using RL and IRL that generate
human-like navigation behavior in controlled conditions. How-
ever, we can more elaborately deﬁne how we as humans navigate
the environment, using a combination of both social skills and
social norms as described in Section 3.1. Social norms can vary
with respect to the context, location, and culture. Extending the
social skills of the robot by including social norms is important
for social domain adaptation. The social norms that a domestic
robot should consider while navigating are substantially differ-
ent from those that a mobile robot in a hospital should conform
to. For example, in order for the robot to navigate in a socially
compliant manner in a hospital, it is essential for it to identify
emergency situations, understand the priority for interaction, and
have fast reaction times, so that the robot can never interfere
with the paths of hospital staff and cause accidents or delay the
treatment of patients. Given that the context and priorities differ,
the reaction also accordingly changes. We explore these cases
in the case study that we describe in Section 4.
Recently, a deep inverse Q-learning with constraints tech-
nique [97] was introduced. This work presents one such model
that allows for the combination of imitating human behavior
and additional constraints. This is a novel model-free IRL ap-
proach that extends learning by imitation with constraints such
as safety or keeping to the right. Using the previous deﬁnition of
Constrained Q-learning [98], it includes a group of constraints
C that shapes the possible actions in each state. Besides the
Q-function in Inverse Q-learning, it also estimates a constrained
Q-function QC for which the policy is extracted after Q-learning,
considering only the action-values of the actions that satisfy the
required constraint. This approach shows promising potential
for considering relevant social factors while learning socially-
aware robot navigation policies, especially by adding diverse
constraints that represent current norms in order to yield socially
intelligent and unbiased robot behavior.
7

3.3. Fairness Considerations
As with most learning approaches, the method described in
Section 3.2 requires a large number of training examples so
that the model learns to yield the desired output. Therefore,
it is essential to use either data gathered from the real-world,
simulations, or control experiments. With the collected data,
developers aim to present representative examples of real-world
scenarios or guidance of the desired social behavior during navi-
gation. However, these data collection processes can themselves
reproduce biases, and as a consequence, it raises a series of
critical concerns. In the speciﬁc case of learning socially-aware
robot navigation from real-world data, robots can reproduce
biased behaviors implicit in human-human interaction. On the
other hand, the amount of training data that can be obtained from
simulations and control experiments is very limited since only a
handful of situations are taken into account. Most data collection
processes that do not encompass a balanced set of every possible
real-world scenario present a risk for robots trained on them
as this could lead to navigation with biased behavior. These
circumstances are considered as bias in the data. Accurate
generalization of scenarios that highly deviate from the training
data is an extremely difﬁcult task. To address this factor, recent
methods have been proposed to ﬁlter data that is used to train
the models. For instance, [39] presents a selection process for
training data that improves the data quality in terms of ethical
assessments of behavior and inﬂuences the training of the model.
Nevertheless, methods to reduce bias in the data that is used for
learning robot navigation models still remain unstudied.
Apart from the problems in dataset collection, there is still a
lack of a deeper understanding of the underlying principles and
limitations of modern learning algorithms. Especially, a phe-
nomenon known as shortcut learning shows how neural networks
learn more straightforward predictors that are not necessarily
related to the main task or objective [99]. A typical example
of this phenomenon can be seen in the hiring tool developed
by Amazon, which predicts strong candidates based on their
curriculum. This tool was later found to be biased towards pro-
viding advantages for male applicants. Their model, which was
trained on historical human decisions that were made during the
hiring process, identiﬁed that gender was an important feature
for prediction [100]. [99] analyses the dependency of outputs to
strong predictive attributes found by the model during training.
Data-driven models can contain abstract representations of
the data and situations that lead to the prediction. Therefore,
it is typically challenging to explain the decisions made by a
learned model. To facilitate the fairness analysis, we present an
approach that is not solely data-driven, and instead, it implicitly
incorporates human interpretations of social dynamics using a
model that includes high-level and explainable human notions
about social conventions, relationships, and interactions to guide
a mobile robot. The purpose of analyzing this approach is to
demonstrate that biased behaviors can also be learned from
biased demonstrations or observations. We analyze the approach
proposed by [101] to predict personalized proxemics areas that
correspond to the characteristics of individual people. This
approach generates personalized comfort zones of a speciﬁc
size and shape by associating the personal area with the activity
that a person performs or characteristics of the person. Using
these social descriptions, it estimates the proxemic zone that
better matches each pedestrian in the scene. Consequently, the
approach relies on personalized boundary delineation of two
different areas: one area where the human-robot interaction
can occur, and another area that is private, which the robot
should avoid navigating through. The approach consists of three
parts: human-social mode, learning the fuzzy social model, and
a path planner. The human social model utilizes proxemics
theory and aims to reﬂect the pedestrians’ social factors in the
scene. The social factors that are considered include gender,
relative distance, and relationship degree. Using these factors,
the approach yields the parameters that determine the private
zone of comfort for each person in the scene based on the fuzzy
logic system. For each social factor that is considered, the
approach deﬁnes a membership function as follows:
A binary function depending on the gender of the pedestrian,
which is given by
MFgender =
(
0,
if gender is Male
1,
if gender is Female,
(2)
a sigmoid function with relative distance input rr, distribution
steepness ar, and inﬂection point cr describing near or far dis-
tance deﬁned as
MFdistance =
1
1+exp(−ar ×(rr −cr)),
(3)
and three Gaussian functions representing the degree of re-
lationship (DR) as familiar (Fam), acquaintance (Acq), and
stranger(Str), which is given by
MFrelationship =





N (µFam,s2Fam),
if DR is Fam
N (µAcq,s2Acq),
if DR is Acq
N (µStr,s2Str),
if DR is Str.
(4)
Subsequently, the fuzzy social model is learned from human
feedback using an RL approach. The deﬁned membership func-
tions of the social factors can be learned to yield an improved
personal area for each pedestrian. This is performed by adjusting
the relationship degree in the MF Equation 4 to update the social
map. The reward of the RL model is then obtained from human-
robot interaction by means of the emotion or feeling of each
corresponding person. Therefore, the approach sets the focus on
the degree of the relationship to be learned. Finally, the approach
selects a path planner that chooses an optimal navigation path
in the social cost map. The consequently designed social inter-
action area using fuzzy rules presents the output of the model
as two separated personal areas: far personal area (FPA) and
near personal area (NPA). As part of the rules presented, it is
clear that for the input gender female, the near personal area
is never an option. Taking into account that the reinforcement
learning algorithm updates the model based on the MFrelationship,
the resulting navigation policy would never allow for human-
robot interaction close to women. This presents a critical bias
of the model due to the inclusion of social dynamics. This is
an example where bias appears due to an explicit constrain in
8

the learning algorithm. Not only gender but other factors that
may potentially lead to bias as well as other implicit or explicit
biases can appear by learning from real-world data. We dis-
cuss this technical bias of the aforementioned navigation model
with implications and analysis from the social perspective in
Section 4.
Learning robot navigation policies and models that are unbi-
ased requires analyzing how the input is given, how the data is
measured, how the data is labeled, what it means for models to
be trained on them, what parameters are used, and how social
navigation models are evaluated. If models aim to reﬂect the fea-
tures of society, we need to question what behaviors should be
replicated and promoted. For example, [102] explicitly exclude
women in the real-world experiments of their social navigation
framework for assistive robots around humans. Their model
that aims to yield human-friendly routes was only tested in a
corridor where women were excluded based on previous analy-
sis [103], which afﬁrms gender differences in spatial problem
solving. This represents bias in the evaluation where the social
model of navigation is validated only for a privileged group
and can lead to underperformance to the unconsidered after the
deployment. This has also been seen before in medical datasets
or experiments where women were excluded citing differences
in hormonal cycles, which leads to the medicines or medical
procedures causing higher side effects for women compared to
men. The consequences of these biased experiments or trials
have been extensively discussed, which had lead to the inclusion
of women in all medical trials [104].
The technical bias analysis presented in this section shows
cases where the high-level representation of social interaction
replicates unequal roles and dynamics that already exist in hu-
man interaction. It is a signiﬁcantly larger risk in the case
of learning models for social navigation from demonstrations
where the assumption is that the best way to teach a robot to
navigate is to enable it to learn directly by observing humans.
3.4. Relearning
While learning socially-aware robot navigation models, social
biases can be introduced that replicate and even augment the
unfair societal dynamics. Most existing socially-aware robot
navigation techniques aim to learn social navigation behavior
by imitating human navigation. Consequently, it essential to
deter biases during the deployment of robots equipped with such
models. In this section, we present a mechanism to ﬁrst detect
when the navigation model makes biased decisions, especially
against certain groups of people. Subsequently, we use this
mechanism to update the model towards yielding more equitable
social navigation policies.
There are many situations in the real-world where unequal
decisions are desired, such as adapting the speed of the robot
near older adults. In this work, we only analyze situations where
there is no justiﬁable reason to yield different actions while inter-
acting with different groups of people. In this case, an unfair or
discriminatory system will offer an advantage to a certain group
of users or unfavorable interaction to some other groups. Unfair
behavior in robot navigation directly affects how users interact
with the system. For a mobile robot to amend a discrimination
behavior, it is necessary ﬁrst to detect or measure the biased
behavior. An advantage in the case of robots is that the decisions
and actions after deployment can be used to measure the degree
of biased decisions, for instance, concerning protected charac-
teristics, such as age, gender, and race. Whereas, in the case
of bias in deep learning models this task would be signiﬁcantly
harder. For instance, the Microsoft AI Twitter chatbot Tay which
learned by interacting with users and presented gender-biased
as well as racially offensive tweets [105]. In this case, it would
be necessary to additionally measure the features behind the
posted tweets. Given that most robots are designed to move
in the world, this characteristic comes for free in terms of the
navigation actions that were made based on distance, speed,
among other control variables as well as perception, accuracy,
and uncertainty.
The robot can gather a dataset or a log by storing its own
experiences and their corresponding actions even after deploy-
ment. Subsequently, the ﬁrst step is to detect bias in the social
navigation decisions of the robot. Bias identiﬁcation is related
to detecting disproportionate prejudice or favoritism towards
some individuals or groups over others. For example, the paths
planned by the robot produce a negative effect more frequently
for speciﬁc groups of people than they do for another, such as
discomfort, lack of interaction, or avoidance. Other situations
are related to a disproportionate rate of a favorable or higher
quality of attributes prediction for certain groups. This situation
can present itself due to a lack of representation and diversity
in the data or scenarios that were used in the learning stage.
As a result, it can lead to unpredictable or no interaction with
individuals of these groups.
One such method to detect if the navigation model exhibits
outcomes that differ across subgroups is using clustering. Clus-
tering is the technique for grouping data such that the elements
of the same group are assigned closed together, forming assem-
blies called clusters. Clustering is a well-studied technique that
is highly used in unsupervised or exploratory data analytics.
Consider that the dataset collected while the robot was navigat-
ing contains all the decisions that were taken, as well as the
sensor data and the actions of other agents that these decisions
were based on. Additionally, other navigation and perception
attributes can be considered, such as the relative distance of the
pedestrians to the robot, collisions, person identiﬁcation conﬁ-
dence, and intention prediction, as well as additional information
such as rules that were violated and accidents that were caused.
The accumulation of actions the robot outputs corresponds to
the navigation feature set to be clustered. The resulting clusters
can later be correlated to potential protected characteristics.
Having a learned policy π for socially-aware robot naviga-
tion, we deﬁne V = {v1,v2,...,vi} as the set of navigation data
that correspond to the experiences that the robot continuously
accumulates through certain time steps. Different clustering al-
gorithms can be used depending on the attributes of the selected
navigation features (for instance if their nature is categorical or
numerical). One promising clustering algorithm is the method
proposed in [106] which consists of a fully convolutional au-
toencoder trained with two losses, one for reconstruction and the
other for cluster hardening. The result of the clustering process
9

is a collection of assemblies A = A1,A2,...,AK consisting of nav-
igation feature combinations. Each Ak represents the navigation
experience that is similar enough to be considered as a cluster
of the entire set V. The number of clusters K and the size of
each cluster Ak are hyperparameters that can be explored. Ad-
ditionally, we deﬁne F = {f1, f2,..., fN} as the set of protected
features that we aim to analyze and each fn has a set of naviga-
tion features V. To uncover social-group related bias, the next
step is to determine the relationship degree Dk,n between each
protected feature fn and each generated cluster Ak.
After identifying that the robot actions in the navigation expe-
rience set are clustered and correlated to sensitive attributes, the
next step is to trigger alarms or corrective actions when protected
feature fn strongly related to each generated cluster Ak, deﬁned
as Dk,n > un where un threshold that can be selected for each
protected feature. A system of reward or punishment can be
implemented in an off-policy reinforcement learning algorithm
that optimizes an augmented reward that encodes the detection
of unfair behavior as shown in Figure 3. The augmented reward
rRt is penalized when a biased behavior is detected, so it does
not only comprise the behavior for socially-aware navigation but
it is also discounted when we detect bias as Dk,n > un. There-
fore, the robot learns the policy πR so that the long term rewards
reﬂect the decreasing unjustiﬁed bias related to social-groups.
As a result, it is possible to relearn the navigation model in
our framework depending on the information gathered from the
social environment.
From a more realistic perspective, demographic information is
rarely known. Clustering also allows the reduction of this depen-
dency between predictions and demographic information, when
an unsupervised approach is employed. Therefore, when the
dataset containing memory experiences of the robot navigating
conforms to clusters beyond a given threshold, it can trigger an
alarm for further analysis. Other methodologies that can be used
to undercover bias in deep learning models are based on visual-
ization of embeddings. Using visualization techniques, we can
show how the model groups the data, which is useful to expose
the reasons behind the prediction of the model. To do so, differ-
ent tools can be used, such as T-distributed stochastic neighbor
embedding (t-SNE) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection (UMAP), to project the embeddings to reduce the
dimensionality of the data. In this work, we focus on the relearn-
ing component based on clustering to present a feasible solution
to account for fairness while learning socially compliant robot
navigation that can be extended to an unsupervised algorithm.
4. Case Studies and Discussion
In this section, we present extensive discussions that relate
the technical analysis of our proposed framework to complex
real-world scenarios that we present as three case studies. Each
of these case studies contains different levels of human-robot
interaction under four speciﬁc protected characteristics: gender,
disabilities, age, and race. With these scenarios, we analyze the
feasibility of model adaptation and the utility of this mechanism
to check for fairness as well as to correct the bias. The ﬁgures
illustrated in this section were generated using [107].
4.1. Autonomous Floor Cleaning Robots
One of the most societally accepted robots has been the au-
tonomous ﬂoor-cleaning machines [108, 109, 110] and during
the last decade, they have been the most sold robots in the
world [111]. These robots have the task of cleaning ﬂoors using
vacuum systems without any human supervision, and recently,
they can also mop ﬂoors using steam systems. These robots are
currently used in households, and their navigation models vary
in complexity depending on a wide range of prices. However,
these robots are so far not equipped with socially aware navi-
gation models. They do not avoid people or dynamic objects,
rather they only change their cleaning route after they collide
with an object. This can be attributed to the fact that in house-
hold environments, people are typically more tolerant given that
they are aware of the task, features, and capacity of the robot.
It can be expected that the use of cleaning robots in the fu-
ture will spread to different public areas. In this case study, we
analyze from both technological and social points of view the
functioning, requirements, and implications of the navigation
of a cleaning robot that operates in a shopping mall. We illus-
trate this scenario in Figure 4. Consider that the shopping mall
consists of multiple and extensive ﬂoors, and it is open to the
public continually every day of the week. The groups of people
visiting the place range from families and groups of friends to
individual persons. Additionally, the reasons for the visit can
differ, including people making quick shops, taking a walk, eat-
ing, etc. Therefore, we also expect varying types of behavior
of the visitors, such as walking at different speeds, talking in
groups, and sitting down in different spaces.
The task of the robot in this case is to clean the entire environ-
ment effectively. In the following, we examine the effect that a
cleaning robot equipped with social context can have. This robot
has the ability to plan paths taking into account social conven-
tions in public spaces such as avoiding interfering with the paths
of people, avoiding interrupting the interaction between people,
prioritizing safety, avoiding surprising people with movements
outside the visual range (or any other movement that might make
people uncomfortable), navigating with a safe distance and with
a prudent speed, avoiding collisions and predicting the intentions
of people. With socially-aware navigation models, robots can
fulﬁll the main task and act socially with predictable actions.
The goal of including social context into the navigation model
is to ensure that robots are not perceived as dangerous, bother-
some, irritating, inconvenient, or obtrusive. The sociability of
the cleaning robots can be deﬁned as low or indirect, i.e., humans
do not communicate with the robot. However, the interaction
is generated by the navigation model in a socially acceptable
manner. Social navigation models allow the robot to achieve
the main goal without disturbing people sharing the same space.
Consequently, the robot can operate in public spaces during the
entire opening hours.
Speciﬁcally, if we employ the model [101] presented in Sec-
tion 3.3 as the learning component in our framework, the person-
alized size, and shape of the personal zone can in fact improve
the social intelligence of the robot. By avoiding crossing the
comfort zone of people, these robots can learn to plan paths
10

Social Environment
Expert 
Demonstrations
Social constrains
state
action
^
Agent
action
state
augmented
reward
collected 
experiences
IRL framework to learn socially-aware robot 
navigation from demonstration and constraints 
A: Learning
B: Relearning
Off-policy approach. Having the collected experiences 
with the learned policy    , a new policy    is learned 
with a reward that encodes the fairness analysis
^
Figure 3: Illustration of the Learning-Relearning framework for diminishing bias in social robot navigation. During the learning phase, a policy π is learned for
socially-aware robot navigation. During the relearning phase, the robot uses the policy π to navigate in the social environment and collects the navigation experiences.
An augmented reward that encodes detected biased behavior is used to relearn a new policy ˆπ so that the long term rewards reﬂect the decreasing unjustiﬁed bias
related to social-groups.
without disturbing the visitors of the shopping mall while per-
forming the cleaning task. However, the model [101] that takes
the gender of a person into account can induce bias in the deci-
sions. Even though women might prefer a larger comfort area
during interaction among humans, it does not necessarily imply
that they would prefer the same during human-robot interaction.
In principle, a robot should never harm or be unfair to people
based on their gender. In this work, we consider that the robot is
depicted as a gender-neutral machine. Conforming a robot to a
speciﬁc gender depending on the application could again lead
to historical bias, this is an area that requires further research,
which is out of the scope of this paper. Moreover, according
to the bias evaluation consideration for fairness described in
Section 2.2, maintaining different relative distances to people
based on their gender is an unacceptable bias. Furthermore, dis-
tinguishing the comfort area by gender is not of high relevance to
improve the acceptance or beneﬁcial to improve the operation of
robots around humans. Instead, there are other essential factors
that can be used to improve comfort and conﬁdence, such as
safe navigation policies. Given that the bias presented in this
case is explicit, it is easier to identify the bias inducing factor
inﬂuencing the model in the relearning component of our frame-
work, for example, by correlating the obtained behavior to the
input constraints. After detecting the bias inducing factor, it can
be excluded to re-train the model without the gender constraint.
On the other hand, while learning from demonstrations, data-
driven models can also reﬂect negative bias. For instance, if
robots learn from data that is not diverse where people with
movement impairments are not present, then the robot might
not react in a socially acceptable manner when they encounter
such people. This can further lead to an incorrect prediction
of paths of people who walk slower and can make the robot be
perceived as obtrusive. Data induced bias represents an implicit
bias in the model that is more challenging to detect and correct
for. Since the model disproportionately affects a speciﬁc group
of people, by using our relearning component, the recurrent
errors in the path prediction can be detected as a cluster that
can also be related to the set of protected characteristics (e.g.,
people with mobility impairment). Consequently, by using a
punishment system, the reward value is inﬂuenced after the
detection of unwanted behavior to adjust the learning policy,
allowing model adaptation towards a more fair behavior. This
will support the Value Alignment consideration presented in
Section 2.2 in which accepted socially-aware robot navigation
also considers inclusion.
4.2. Guidance Robots in a Shopping Mall
Mobile service robots have extensive use in innovative ap-
plications such as for guidance in public spaces where they
navigate alongside people and assist them to reach their desired
destination. Based on the environment described in Section 4.1,
in this case study we analyze the effects of a guidance robot that
operates in a shopping mall. Unlike the last scenario, the robot
not only navigates under social conventions but also guides a
person in a social manner. The task of the robot is to provide
the requested information about locations in the shopping mall
and accompany people to reach their desired location. This sce-
nario is illustrated in Figure 5. Apart from guiding to reach a
certain destination, the robot should also navigate considering
social conventions that are required to provide comfort to all the
surrounding people during navigation. Furthermore, the robot
11

Figure 4: Illustration of the autonomous ﬂoor cleaning robot scenario. The robot navigates taking the social conventions into account while performing the main task
of cleaning the entire area.
should coordinate with the user while navigating by maintain-
ing a desired relative position with respect to the user. This
scenario has similar characteristics to the mall in the previous
case study where diverse people with different genders, ethnicity,
disabilities, age, skin tones, and cultural origins, will be present.
In this example, fairness considerations such as shared bene-
ﬁt, deterrence and value alignment described in the Section 2.2
should be considered. Additionally, in the shopping mall sce-
nario, the guidance robot will interact naturally with the user in
a socially compliant manner while providing information and
route guidance.
The human-robot interaction in this case is direct given that
people approach the robot with a speciﬁc intention, and they
expect a response from the robot that corresponds to the request.
The resulting navigation strategy that these robots have next to
people and their capacity to react according to the situation is
crucial for their acceptance. Some of the important constraints
in the navigation behavior of guidance robots are adapting the
speed of the robot to the user, and maintaining a relative position
and distance. If the robot navigates with a velocity that does not
correspond to the user, then the robot risks being too slow or too
fast which can cause uncoordinated behavior with the user and
can further lead to accidents. On the other hand, relative distance
and position are related to how people follow the robot and how
the robot guides the user. Ideally, the robot should estimate the
position and intention of the user during the execution of the
guidance and also be able to interrupt the task if the person does
not require any more help. Therefore, robots should adapt their
navigation based on speed, intentions, motivations, orientation
as well as handle unexpected situations such as people crossing
their path, changes in the speed of the person being guided,
unexpected appearance of objects, among others.
Consumers value the unbiased, fast, and error-free behavior
that a robot can provide. Therefore, the robot should adapt its
behavior according to the current social context. In contrast to
the interaction between people and cleaning robots, guidance
robots provide personalized interaction, so the degree of socia-
bility of this robot is greater. For example, if a disabled person
goes to a shopping mall, the robot should recognize that this
person will have different navigation behaviors than others so
it should adapt its strategy accordingly. This adaptation will,
in turn, make the person more comfortable using the assistance
provided by the robot. In this example, aspects such as the
capability to recognize mobility impairments in a person and
navigate accordingly are essential to ensure safe and comfort-
able guidance. Consider that a person with limited mobility
requires guidance from the robot. If the robot is not equipped
to react accordingly to mobility difﬁculties, the interaction can
cause distress, physical overexertion, and even accidents. This
will eventually make the person discontinue using the robot in
the future. In order to avoid such events, the navigation model
in the robot should incorporate social adaptability skills that
enable it to detect particular situations that cause discomfort or
unintended outcomes for speciﬁc individuals.
Assume that a guidance robot is equipped with the navigation
model described in Section 3.3 and as a consequence, it will
assist women keeping larger distances with them. This may
cause the robot to lose the interaction with them in certain sit-
uations and adversely affect the way that women perceive the
robot. Similarly, it can reduce the efﬁciency with this population
group representing the systematic disadvantage we aim to avoid
towards diminishing bias. The model described in Section 3.3
is used to present an example of learning socially-aware robot
navigation in which unfair outcomes are associated with a pro-
12

Interaction
Destination
Figure 5: Illustration of the guidance robot in a shopping mall scenario. The robot guides the user (green circle) to reach the destination (purple circle). Additionally,
the robot is aware of the people in the surroundings during navigation while maintaining a desired relative position with respect to the user.
tected characteristic. Other socially-aware navigation models
that learn solely from human imitation can cause different types
of model-induced biases. In these cases, the navigation model
is optimized to yield sociable actions considering different fac-
tors such as the velocity, orientation, priority of interaction, and
route selection. The guidance robot will encounter situations
where multiple people request for help simultaneously or even
situations where people will try to interact with the robot when
it is already guiding another person. Deciding which person has
the priority is part of the social intelligence. Assume that in the
learning component of our framework, the navigation model
of the robot is trained from demonstrations, and as a result, the
robot learns the preferred interaction behavior based on those
demonstrated interactions. This can lead to unfair outcomes
due to human bias that may be existing in the demonstrations,
policies reﬂecting personal bias, unequal society roles, or under-
representation of minorities. Speciﬁcally, if the learning from
demonstration is performed in a shopping mall only from one
city, there will be insufﬁcient diversity. Similarly, if the robot
is deployed in a different place, or when people belonging to
minorities try to use the robot, the robot will maintain its social
behavior, but it will likely make biased decisions, especially
against people who historically have been discriminated against,
as we observed in other cases [112, 22, 28, 113]. As part of
the relearning component, our framework allows us to generate
clusters related to preferred interaction actions and determine
if the generated clusters are strongly related to protected char-
acteristics. Speciﬁcally, in case the preferred interaction of the
robot is biased favoring or disadvantaging speciﬁc visitors of the
shopping mall the learning policy is adjusted by a reward value
that is penalized when biased behavior is detected. As a conse-
quence, the robot’s actions, such as deciding which person has
the priority to interact with will follow the fairness requirements.
Since diverse people typically visit shopping malls, the robot
should be able to accurately recognize them regardless of fac-
tors such as skin tones. Previous studies [28] have shown that
recognition systems based on RGB perception present higher
error rates for dark skin tones. If similar systems with faulty
sensors or algorithms are used to learn social navigation models,
the robot will be unable to recognize certain people and adhere
to the fairness considerations described in Section 2.2. As a con-
sequence, the robot can perpetuate discrimination against groups
of people that have historically been segregated, as observed in
other learning applications such as the automated risk assess-
ment used by U.S judges and the biased vision-based object
detectors employed in autonomous cars [27, 28]. Furthermore,
discrimination laws prohibit the unfair treatment of people based
on race. In this case, fairness priority is also important for the
legal framework.
4.3. Caregiving Robots in Hospitals
There is signiﬁcant interest in developing service robots for
hospitals due to their ability to provide care for people. The use
of robots in hospitals can be especially advantageous in cases
where there are patients with contagious diseases, such as in a
pandemic situation. In this case study, we analyze the naviga-
tion strategy of caregiving robots that operate in hospitals. The
main task of robots in this case study is to distribute medicines
to patients who are admitted in a hospital. Figure 6 illustrates
this scenario. The human-robot interaction in hospitals requires
special caution as the robot will operate around patients who
require special assistance. One such example is people with
motion impairments who use wheelchairs, crutches, or walking
frames. Furthermore, the robot will encounter rapidly changing
situations, for example, during an emergency where doctors and
care staff rush through the hallways. To provide appropriate re-
sponse, robots should be equipped with algorithms to understand
situations and context that enable them to accordingly adapt their
behavior. Apart from patients, robots will also interact with other
people in the hospital, such as health professionals, secretaries,
13

Visit
Visit
later
Do not
visit
Figure 6: Illustration of the caregiving robot in a hospital scenario. The main task of the robot is to distribute medicines to patients who are admitted in the hospital.
The robot takes emergency situations that could happen into account and people requiring special assistance, while navigating.
family members, and visitors. Similar to the shopping mall
case study, caregiving robots will be interacting directly with
the people. However, the navigation and interaction present
additional complexity, given that they do not assist people indi-
vidually. Here, the robots aim to assist multiple people who have
different medical treatments and deliver medicine to them while
maintaining a socially accepted behavior. In this case, not only
social conventions and sociability described in the previous case
studies are required, but also priority decision making, optimal
recognition, faster reaction, and adaptability. As a consequence,
the navigation models in caregiving robots should have higher
requirements of accuracy and adaptability. These robots can
particularly encounter unexpected events such as emergency
situations where people will be walking in different directions,
speeds, and unpredictable movements. In such situations, there
is a higher risk of accidents due to the vulnerability of people
and the context in the hospital. Furthermore, the consequences
of eventual accidents can be critical for the health of individuals.
Caregiving robots should be able to perceive, recognize, and
react according to the special requirements of the hospital.
Assume that the robots are going to be used in emergency
rooms. Their task there is to deliver a series of necessary supplies
to the people who are attending to the emergencies. Therefore,
the robots have to interact with several people simultaneously.
Based on the proxemics model described in Section 3.3, the
robot will be perceived as atypical in approaching people in dif-
ferent ways, assisting some people differently than others during
urgent situations. Furthermore, taking into account that there
are people playing speciﬁc roles, namely to care for sick people
urgently, their comfort area of interaction is different from that
of normal situations. People typically tend to walk fast, to have
little personal space, and to quickly perceive what is happen-
ing around them. In this scenario, robots that navigate while
maintaining different distances to people based on gender have
lesser foreseeable utility. Alternatively, other characteristics can
be considered that are related to the distribution of medicines
depending on the needs of the patients and priorities, such as
minimizing delivery time.
The priority of the path planning algorithms in such robots is
to deliver medicines to all patients. Assume that in the learning
component the caregiving robot learns from historical data about
the characteristics of the patients. This model may learn that the
pain threshold differs between men and women. Consequently,
the navigation plan will be biased with negative effects towards
men, based on information related to their higher tolerance to
pain. Similarly, the robot could learn that women have more
tolerance to wait longer for medical treatments and spend more
overall time than men in the emergency rooms [114]. In both
situations, the behavior of the robot will be biased given that
it systematically beneﬁts a speciﬁc group of people. In this
example, fairness considerations such as value alignment and
non-maleﬁcence described in the Section 2.2 can improve the
decisions made by the robot. One approach to dealing with
difﬁcult cases of priority is to reﬂect political and commercial
neutrality in robot navigation. This signiﬁes that the navigation
model in caregiving robots should not favor any particular group
of people. Although advocating for the neutrality of assistive
robots is a potential solution to bias problems, in this case, the
concept is substantially complex and requires further research.
Particularly, adapting the model with our relearning compo-
nent to correct for the presented bias will lead the robot to base
decisions on other factors. Using the relearning component
of our framework, we can identify clusters that demonstrate
a systematic disadvantage if the time to deliver medicines is
higher for men and if women wait for a longer period of time in
emergency rooms. Subsequently, to penalize the unfair behavior,
14

we lower the reward value that adjusts the learning policy. As a
result, the navigation model is adapted towards more fair behav-
ior. If the model does not rely on the potentially negative bias
inducing factors, it can learn better representations that reﬂect
relevant characteristics such as urgency and needs. While using
our relearning technique, this type of bias in navigation will be
detected when certain people receive attention more effectively
than others. Consequently, if there is no valid reasoning behind
such bias, the navigation model should be updated accordingly.
5. Conclusions
As more and more robots navigate in human spaces, they also
require more complex navigation models to accomplish their
goals while complying with the high safety and comfort require-
ments. Towards this direction, different methods incorporate
social context into learning models to enable robots to navigate
following social conventions. Typically, these methodologies
utilize data or experiences from the real world, simulations,
or control experiments and social constraints. In this work,
we discussed the societal and ethical implications of learned
socially-aware robot navigation techniques. We demonstrated
that the advances accomplished in social robot navigation are
essential for the development of robots that provide well for
society. More importantly, we showed how these models that
account for socially-aware robot navigation do not guarantee
fairness in different real-world scenarios. Research in the direc-
tion of fairness in robot learning is of special importance, given
that these machines interact with people closely.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that studies
the societal implications of bias in learned socially-aware robot
navigation models. Our proposed framework that consists of
the learning and relearning stages has the ability to effectively
diminish bias in social robot navigation models. Additionally,
we presented fairness considerations and speciﬁc techniques that
can be used to implement our framework. We detailed several
scenarios that show that the adaptability of the model in terms of
fairness enables it to correct for bias. The scenarios demonstrate
the potential unwanted outcomes of social navigation models
that are described with variables and social conventions which
make them easily interpretable. Our framework is especially use-
ful for more complex learning models or models that are trained
with imitation or reinforcement learning, given that these models
contain more abstract representations of the data and situations.
We hope this work contributes towards raising awareness of the
importance of fairness in robot learning.
Acknowledgement
This work was partly funded by the BrainLinks-BrainTools
center of the University of Freiburg, a scholarship from the Grad-
uate School of Robotics of the University Freiburg (according to
the Graduate Funding Law of the Ministry of Science, Research
and Arts of the State of Baden-W¨urttemberg), and a grant from
the Eva Mayr-Stihl Stiftung.
