arXiv:1901.09125v1  [cs.AI]  26 Jan 2019
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming:
A Tarskian perspective
Marc Denecker
Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium

Yuliya Lierler
Department of Computer Science, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE 68182, USA

Miroslaw Truszczynski
Department of Computer Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0633, USA

Joost Vennekens
Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, Campus De Nayer, 2860 Sint-Katelijne-Waver, Belgium

submitted 1 January 2003; revised 1 January 2003; accepted 1 January 2003
Abstract
In Knowledge Representation, it is crucial that knowledge engineers have a good understanding of the
formal expressions that they write. What formal expressions state intuitively about the domain of discourse
is studied in the theory of the informal semantics of a logic. In this paper we study the informal semantics
of Answer Set Programming. The roots of answer set programming lie in the language of Extended Logic
Programming, which was introduced initially as an epistemic logic for default and autoepistemic reasoning.
In 1999, the seminal papers on answer set programming proposed to use this logic for a different purpose,
namely, to model and solve search problems. Currently, the language is used primarily in this new role.
However, the original epistemic intuitions lose their explanatory relevance in this new context. How answer
set programs are connected to the speciﬁcations of problems they model is more easily explained in a
classical Tarskian semantics, in which models correspond to possible worlds, rather than to belief states
of an epistemic agent. In this paper, we develop a new theory of the informal semantics of answer set
programming, which is formulated in the Tarskian setting and based on Frege’s compositionality principle.
It differs substantially from the earlier epistemic theory of informal semantics, providing a different view on
the meaning of the connectives in answer set programming and on its relation to other logics, in particular
classical logic.
KEYWORDS: informal semantics, knowledge representation, answer-set programming
1 Introduction
I am not here in the happy position of a mineralogist who shows his audience a rock-crystal: I cannot put
a thought in the hands of my readers with the request that they should examine it from all sides. Something
in itself not perceptible by sense, the thought is presented to the reader—and I must be content with that—
wrapped up in a perceptible linguistic form.
Gottlob Frege, Der Gedanke

2
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
In knowledge representation, a human expert expresses informal propositions about the do-
main of discourse by a formal expression in some logic L. The latter is formulated in a vocabulary
for which the expert has an intended interpretation I specifying the meaning of the vocabulary
symbols in the domain. It is essential that the human expert understands which informal proposi-
tions about the problem domain are expressed by formal expressions of L. The fundamental task
of the informal semantics of a logic L, sometimes called the declarative reading or the intuitive
interpretation of L, is to provide this understanding by explaining formal expressions of L (or of
a fragment of L) as precise informal propositions about the domain of discourse.
In Frege’s terms, an informal proposition is a thought in the mind of the expert. It is not a
tangible object and is not perceptible by others. To be observed, studied and used, it must be
presented in linguistic form. In this paper, we will therefore assume that the domain expert’s
intended interpretation I maps each vocabulary symbol to some natural language statement that
represents the imperceptible “thought” that this symbol is supposed to represent. Likewise, the
informal semantics of a logic L is a mapping that, given such an intended interpretation I, assigns
to a formal expression ϕ of L a natural language reading II(ϕ) that captures the meaning of ϕ
in I.
We already hint here that natural language is to play a key role in any study of informal
semantics. Such use of natural language may be controversial. For instance, Barwise and Cooper
(1981) say: “To most logicians (like the ﬁrst author) trained in model-theoretic semantics, natural
language was an anathema, impossibly vague and incoherent.” Upon closer inspection, however,
the situation is not quite so dire. Indeed, Barwise and Cooper (1981) go on to say that: “To us,
the revolutionary idea [...] is the claim that natural language is not impossibly incoherent [...],
but that large portions of its semantics can be treated by combining known tools from logic, tools
like functions of ﬁnite type, the λ-calculus, generalized quantiﬁers, tense and modal logic, and all
the rest.” In this article, we subscribe to this more optimistic view on natural language. While it
is certainly possible to create vague, ambiguous or meaningless natural language statements, we
believe that a careful use of suitable parts of natural language can avoid such problems. Indeed,
much of science and mathematics throughout the centuries has been developed by means of a
clear and precise use of natural language. It is this same clarity and precision that we want to
achieve in our study of informal semantics.
The main goal of this paper is to study the informal semantics of answer set programming
(ASP) — a broadly used logic-based knowledge representation formalism (Marek and Truszczynski,
1999; Niemel¨a, 1999; Brewka et al., 2011; Gebser et al., 2012). ASP has its roots in extended
logic programming (ELP) proposed by Gelfond and Lifschitz (1988; 1991). As part of the devel-
opment of ELP, Gelfond and Lifschitz presented an informal semantics GLI for extended logic
programs based on epistemic notions of default and autoepistemic reasoning. According to their
proposal, an extended logic program expresses the knowledge of a rational introspective agent,
where a stable model (or an answer set) represents a possible state of belief of the agent by enu-
merating all literals that are believed in that state. The Gelfond-Lifschitz informal semantics is
attuned to applications in epistemic domains. However, it is not well aligned with others.
A decade after ELP was conceived, researchers realized that, in addition to modeling applica-
tions requiring autoepistemic reasoning, the language can be used for modeling and solving com-
binatorial search and optimization problems (Marek and Truszczynski, 1999; Niemel¨a, 1999).
The term answer set programming was proposed shortly thereafter by Lifschitz (1999; 2002) to
be synonymous with the practice of using extended logic programs for this type of applications.
Since then, ASP has gained much attention and evolved into a computational knowledge repre-

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
3
sentation paradigm capable of solving search problems of practical signiﬁcance (Brewka et al.,
2011). Particularly inﬂuential was the emergence of a methodology to streamline the task of
programming in this paradigm. It consists of arranging program rules in three groups: one to
generate the search space, one to deﬁne auxiliary concepts, and one to test (impose) constraints.
Lifschitz (2002) coined the term generate-deﬁne-test (GDT) to describe it. Programs obtained by
following the GDT methodology, or GDT programs, for short, form the overwhelming majority
of programs arising in search and optimization applications.
However, for GDT programs, the epistemic informal semantics is inappropriate and ineffective
in its role. To illustrate this point, consider the graph coloring problem. One of the conditions of
the problem is the following informal proposition:
“each node has a color”.
(1)
In the language of ELP of 1999, this condition can be expressed by the rule
Aux ←not Aux, Node(x), not Colored(x).
(2)
The reading that the GLI informal semantics provides for rule (2) is: “for every x, Aux holds if
the agent does not know Aux and x is a node and the agent does not know that x has a color.”
There is an obvious mismatch between this sentence and the simple (objective, non-epistemic)
proposition (1) that rule (2) intends to express. In other words, in this example, the explanatory
power of the epistemic informal semantics diminishes. It fails to provide a direct, explicit link
between the formal expression on the one side, and the property of objects in the domain of
discourse it is intended to represent, on the other.
Modern ASP dialects typically provide a more elegant notation for writing down constraints,
such as:
←Node(x), not Colored(x).
(3)
However, in itself this does not address or ﬁx the mismatch. Moreover, as we discuss further on
in this paper, it is often surprisingly difﬁcult to extend the Gelfond-Lifschitz epistemic informal
semantics to cover the new language constructs of modern ASP dialects.
At the root of the mismatch lies the reﬂective epistemic agent. A key aspect of the original
applications for ELP was the presence of such an agent in the domain of discourse; typically
it was a knowledge base that reﬂects on its own content. Such an agent is absent in the graph
coloring problem and in typical problems that are currently solved using ASP. For example, there
are no benchmarks in the series of ASP competitions (Gebser et al., 2007b; Denecker et al., 2009;
Calimeri et al., 2011; Alviano et al., 2013a) that mention or require an epistemic introspective
agent.
In this paper, we present a new theory OBI of the informal semantics for ASP. We call it
Tarskian because it interprets an answer set of an ASP program in the same way as a model
of a ﬁrst-order logic (FO) theory is interpreted—namely, as an abstraction of a possible state of
affairs of the application domain, and not epistemically as a state of beliefs of an agent. We deﬁne
this theory for the pragmatically important class of GDT programs and their subexpressions. Our
informal semantics explains the formal semantics of ASP under the Tarskian view of answer
sets. It offers an explanation of the meaning of connectives, including “non-classical” ones, and
it satisﬁes Frege’s compositionality principle. Under the new semantics, the mismatch between
the information the user encapsulated in the program and the intended reading of the program
disappears. For example, it maps the constraint (3) to the informal proposition (1). It is worth

4
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
noting that the epistemic semantics GLI reﬂects the fact that ASP’s roots are in the domain of
commonsense reasoning. By contrast, the informal semantics that we introduce here uses the
kind of natural language constructs common in mathematical texts.
A major issue in building an informal semantics for ASP concerns the structure of programs.
Formally, programs are “ﬂat” collections of rules. However, to a human expert, GDT programs
have a rich internal structure. To build our informal semantics OBI, we develop an “interme-
diate” logic ASP-FO that is directly inspired by the GDT methodology, in which the (hidden)
internal structure of GDT programs is made explicit. This structure supports the use of the com-
positionality principle when deﬁning the informal semantics for the logic ASP-FO. We show that
by exploiting splitting results for ASP (Ferraris et al., 2011), programs constructed following the
GDT methodology can be embedded in the logic ASP-FO. Thanks to the embedding, our dis-
cussion applies to the fragment of ASP consisting of GDT programs and establishes an informal
semantics for this class of programs.
The paper is organized as follows. We start by reviewing theories of informal semantics for
two logics: the one of ﬁrst-order logic (Section 2), which provides guidance for our effort, and
the Gelfond-Lifschitz theory of informal semantics for ELP (Section 3), with which we contrast
our proposal. We then discuss the class of GDT programs, the focus of our work (Section 4), and
present the logic ASP-FO as a way of making the internal structure of GDT programs explicit
(Section 5). Section 6 then presents the main contribution of this paper: the informal semantics
OBI. Section 7 presents a number of formal results in support of this information semantics. We
ﬁnish with a discussion of related work (Section 8) and some conclusions (Section 9).
2 The formal and informal semantics of ﬁrst-order logic
In this section, we introduce classical ﬁrst order logic (FO), with special attention to its informal
semantics. This serves two purposes. First, it is meant as an introduction of the interplay between
formal and informal semantics. Much of that will be reused for the logic ASP-FO that we deﬁne
later in this paper. Second, ASP-FO is a proper superset of FO. Hence, its formal and informal
semantics will extend that of FO.
Formal syntax of FO We assume an inﬁnite supply of non-logical symbols: predicate and func-
tion symbols, each with a non-negative integer arity. Predicate and function symbols of arity 0
are called propositional and object symbols, respectively. A vocabulary Σ is a set of non-logical
symbols.
A term t is an object symbol or a compound expression f(t1, . . . , tn), where f is an n-ary
function symbol and the ti’s are terms. An atom is an expression P(t1, . . . , tn), where P is an
n-ary predicate symbol and the ti’s are terms (in particular, propositional symbols are atoms). A
formula is then inductively deﬁned as follows:
• Each atom is a formula;
• If t1, t2 are terms, then t1 = t2 is a formula;
• If ϕ1 and ϕ2 are formulas, then so are ϕ1 ∧ϕ2, ϕ1 ∨ϕ2, ϕ1 ⇒ϕ2 and ϕ1 ⇔ϕ2;
• If ϕ is a formula, then so are ¬ϕ, ∃x ϕ and ∀x ϕ, where x is an object symbol, here called
a variable.
An occurrence of a symbol τ in a formula ϕ is bound if it is within a subformula of the form

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
5
∃τ ψ or ∀τ ψ. Otherwise, the occurrence is free. In FO, the only symbols that occur bound are
object symbols.
Given a vocabulary Σ, we call a formula ϕ a sentence over Σ if all symbols with free occur-
rences in ϕ belong to Σ. The set of sentences over Σ is denoted LΣ. A theory is a ﬁnite set of
formulas. A theory over Σ is a ﬁnite set of sentences over Σ.
Example 1
The running application in this section is graph coloring. We choose the vocabulary Σcol that
consists of unary predicates Node and Colour; a binary predicate Edge; and a unary function
ColourOf intended to be the mapping from nodes to colors. We deﬁne Tcol to be the following
sentence over Σcol:
∀x∀y (Edge(x, y) ⇒¬ColourOf (x) = ColourOf (y)).
Formal semantics of FO The basic semantic objects of FO are structures for a given vocabulary.
Deﬁnition 1
Let Σ be a vocabulary. A Σ-structure A consists of (i) a non-empty set dom(A), called the
domain of A, and (ii) an interpretation function (·)A that assigns an appropriate value τ A to each
symbol τ of Σ:
• The value τA of an n-ary function symbol τ is an n-ary total function over dom(A).
• The value τA of an n-ary predicate symbol τ is an n-ary relation over dom(A).1
We call τ A the interpretation or value of τ in A. Given a Σ-structure A, we denote its vocabulary
Σ by ΣA. We say that A interprets a vocabulary Σ′ if it interprets each symbol in Σ′ (that is, if
Σ′ ⊆ΣA).
For a given vocabulary Σ, we denote by SΣ the class of all Σ-structures. For a Σ-structure A, we
deﬁne the projection of A on Σ′ ⊆Σ, written A|Σ′, to be the Σ′-structure with the same domain
as A and the interpretation function (·)A of A restricted to Σ′. We call A an expansion of A′ if
A′ = A|ΣA′ .
Example 2
For the vocabulary Σcol, consider, for instance, the structure Acol deﬁned as follows:
• dom(Acol) = {n1, n2, n3, c1, c2}
• NodeAcol = {n1, n2, n3},
• Colour Acol = {c1, c2},
• EdgeAcol = {(n1, n2), (n2, n3)} and
• ColourOf Acol = {n1 7→c1, n2 7→c2, n3 7→c1, c1 7→c1, c2 7→c2}.
Note that, in FO, a structure must interpret each function symbol by a total function on its do-
main. Therefore, while we intend ColourOf to be a function that maps nodes to colors, it must
1 This deﬁnition correctly handles the case of 0-ary function and predicate symbols. Functions from dom(A)0, i.e., the
empty tuple (), into dom(A) can be viewed as elements from dom(A), yielding a standard interpretation of 0-ary
function symbols (which are often called constants); and each 0-ary predicate symbol is represented by one of exactly
two 0-ary relations over dom(A): () or {()}, i.e., false or true.

6
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
also map each of the colors to some value. This could be avoided by, for instance, allowing par-
tial functions, or by using a typed variant of FO. For simplicity, however, we stay with classical
deﬁnitions of FO.
For a structure A, a 0-ary function symbol τ and a corresponding value v ∈dom(A), we
denote by A[τ : v] the structure identical to A except that τ A[τ:v] = v.
Deﬁnition 2
We extend the interpretation function (·)A of structure A to all compound terms over ΣA by the
inductive rule
– f(t1, . . . , tn)A = f A(tA
1 , . . . , tA
n).
We further extend this function to tuples ¯t of terms over ΣA by deﬁning
– ¯t A = (tA
1 , . . . , tA
k ), where ¯t = (t1, . . . , tk).
The value/interpretation tA is a well-deﬁned object in the domain of A provided t is a term and
A interprets all function and object symbols in t.
Next, we deﬁne the truth relation, or the satisfaction relation, between structures and formulas.
Deﬁnition 3 (Satisfaction relation A |= ϕ)
Let ϕ be an FO formula and A a structure interpreting all free symbols of ϕ. We deﬁne A |= ϕ
by induction on the structure of ϕ:
– A |= P(¯t), where P is a predicate symbol, if ¯t A ∈P A;
– A |= ψ ∧ϕ if A |= ψ and A |= ϕ;
– A |= ψ ∨ϕ if A |= ψ or A |= ϕ (or both);
– A |= ¬ψ if A ̸|= ψ; i.e., if it is not the case that A |= ψ;
– A |= ψ ⇒ϕ if A ̸|= ψ or A |= ϕ (or both);
– A |= ∃x ψ if for some d ∈dom(A), A[x : d] |= ψ.
– A |= ∀x ψ if for each d ∈dom(A), A[x : d] |= ψ.
– A |= t1 = t2 if t1A = t2A; i.e., t1, t2 have identical interpretations in A.
When A |= ϕ, we say that ϕ is true in A, or that A satisﬁes ϕ, or that A is a model of ϕ.
The satisfaction relation is easily extended from formulas to theories.
Deﬁnition 4
Let T be an FO theory over Σ. A Σ-structure A is a model of T (or satisﬁes T ), denoted A |= T ,
if A |= ϕ for each ϕ ∈T .
The satisfaction relation induces deﬁnitions of several other fundamental semantic concepts.
Deﬁnition 5 (Derived semantic relations)
A theory (or formula) T entails a formula ϕ, denoted T |= ϕ, if ϕ is satisﬁed in every structure A
that interprets all symbols with free occurrences in T and ϕ, and satisﬁes T . A formula ϕ is valid
(denoted |= ϕ) if it is satisﬁed in every structure that interprets its free symbols. A formula or
theory is satisﬁable if it is satisﬁed in at least one structure. A formula ϕ1 is logically equivalent
to ϕ2 (denoted ϕ1 ≡ϕ2) if for every structure A that interprets the free symbols of both formulas,
A |= ϕ1 if and only if A |= ϕ2.

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
7
The informal semantics of FO The theory of informal semantics of FO is a coherent system of
interpretations of its formal syntax and semantics that explains formulas as objective propositions
about the application domain, structures as “states of affairs” of the application domain, and the
satisfaction relation as a truth relation between states of affairs and propositions. It also induces
informal semantics for the derived semantical relations. We will denote this informal semantics
by FO, and the three components of which it consists (i.e., the interpretation of formulas, the
interpretation of structures, and the interpretation of semantic relations such as satisfaction) by
FOL, FOS and FO|=, respectively.
The informal semantics of a formula ϕ is the information that is represented by ϕ about the
problem domain. It is essentially a thought. Following the quote by Frege at the beginning of this
article, we make these thoughts tangible by giving them a linguistic form. In other words, the
ﬁrst component of the theory of informal semantics of FO consists of a mapping of FO formulas
to natural language statements.
The informal semantics of a formula ϕ depends on a parameter — the meaning that we give
to the symbols of vocabulary Σ of ϕ in the application domain. This is captured by the intended
interpretation I of the vocabulary Σ. To state the informal semantics of a formula over Σ in lin-
guistic form, we specify I as an assignment of natural language expressions to the symbols of Σ.
For an n-ary function f/n, I(f/n) (or I(f), if the arity is clear or immaterial) is a parameterized
noun phrase that speciﬁes the value of the function in the application domain in terms of its n
arguments. Similarly, for an n-ary predicate p/n, I(p/n) is a parametrized sentence describing
the relation between n arguments of p. In either case, the ith argument is denoted as #i.
Example 3
In the running example, the intended interpretation Icol of the vocabulary Σcol can be expressed
in linguistic form as parameterized declarative sentence and parameterized noun phrases:
• Icol(Node/1) =“#1 is a node”;
• Icol(Edge/2) =“there is an edge from #1 to #2”;
• Icol(ColourOf /1) =“the color of #1”;
Given an intended interpretation I for a vocabulary Σ, the informal semantics FOL
I of FO
terms and formulas over Σ is now the inductively deﬁned mapping from formal expressions to
natural language expressions speciﬁed in Table 1.
A special case in Table 1 is its ﬁnal row. It gives the meaning of the implicit composition
operator of FO, i.e., the operator that forms a single theory out of a number of sentences. The
informal semantics of this operator is simply that of the standard (monotone) conjunction.
Example 4
For the theory Tcol deﬁned in Example 1, FOL
Icol(Tcol) results in the following statement:
For all x in the universe of discourse, for all y in the universe of discourse, if there is an edge from x to
y, then it is not the case that the color of x and the color of y are the same.
In other words, Tcol states that adjacent nodes are of different color.

8
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
Table 1. The informal semantics of FO formulas.
Φ
FOL
I(Φ)
x
x (where x is a variable)
f(t1, . . . , tn)
I(f)⟨FOL
I(t1), . . . , FOL
I(tn)⟩
(i.e., the noun phrase I(f) with its parameters instantiated to
FOL
I(t1), . . . , FOL
I(tn))
P(t1, . . . , tn)
I(P)⟨FOL
I(t1), . . . , FOL
I(tn)⟩
(i.e., the declarative sentence I(P) with its parameters instan-
tiated to FOL
I(t1), . . . , FOL
I(tn))
ϕ ∨ψ
FOL
I(ϕ) or FOL
I(ψ) (or both)
ϕ ∧ψ
FOL
I(ϕ) and FOL
I(ψ)
¬ϕ
it is not the case that FOL
I(ϕ)
(i.e., FOL
I(ϕ) is false)
ϕ ⇒ψ
if FOL
I(ϕ) then FOL
I(ψ)
(in the sense of material implication)
∃x ϕ
there exists an x in the universe of discourse such that FOL
I(ϕ)
∀x ϕ
for all x in the universe of discourse, FOL
I(ϕ)
t1 = t2
FOL
I(t1) and FOL
I(t2) are the same
(i.e., they represent the same elements of the universe of dis-
course)
T = {ϕ1, . . . , ϕn}
FOL
I(ϕ1) and . . . and FOL
I(ϕn)
Example 5
Let us consider an alternative application domain for the FO language considered above, in which
we have humans, each of some age, and each possiby with some siblings. We now may have the
following intended interpretation Isib of the vocabulary Σcol:
• Isib(Node/1) =“#1 is a human”;
• Isib(Edge/2) =“#1 and #2 are siblings”;
• Isib(ColorOf /1) =“the age of #1”.
For theory Tcol, FOL
Isib(Tcol) yields this statement:
For all x in the universe of discourse, for all y in the universe of discourse, if x and y are siblings, then
it is not the case that the age of x and the age of y are the same.

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
9
In other words, in the “sibling” application domain, the theory Tcol states that siblings have
different age.
Informal semantics for FO’s semantical concepts In addition to explaining the informal meaning
of syntactical expressions, the informal semantics of FO also offers explanations of FO’s formal
semantical objects: structures, the satisfaction relation, and the derived concepts of entailment,
satisﬁability, and validity.
The basic informal notion behind these concepts is that of a state of affairs. States of affairs
differ in the objects that exists in the universe of discourse, or in the relationships and functions
amongst these objects. The application domain is in one of many potential states of affairs. In a
state of affairs, a proposition of the application domain is either true or false.
The intended interpretation I in general does not ﬁx the state of affairs. Rather, it determines
an abstraction function from states of affairs to Σ-structures.2
Example 6
Under the intended interpretation Icol for the vocabulary Σcol, the Σcol-structure Acol of Exam-
ple 2 represents any state of affairs with ﬁve elements in the universe of discourse: three nodes
abstracted as n1, n2, n3 with edges corresponding to (n1, n2) and (n2, n3) and two colors rep-
resented by c1, c2; ﬁnally, a coloring mapping that associates colors to all elements (nodes and
colors).
In the sequel, we denote the class of states of affairs that abstract under I to structure A as
FOS
I(A). We call this the informal semantics of the structure A under I. Table 2 expresses the
meaning of structures as explained above.
Different intended interpretations I give rise to different abstractions.
Example 7
Under the alternative intended interpretation Isib of Example 5, Acol represents any state of
affairs with three persons and two ages, where the sibling relation consists of pairs corresponding
to (n1, n2) and (n2, n3) and where persons n1, n3 have the same age different from that of n2.
However, no possible state of affairs under this intended interpretation abstracts into Acol, since
the sibling relation amongst a group of persons is always an equivalence relation while EdgeAcol
is not. Stated differently, FOS
Isib(Acol) contains only impossible states of affairs.
The informal semantics of the satisfaction relation |= between structures and sentences is the
relation between states of affairs and true propositions in it. That is, A |= ϕ is interpreted as
“(the proposition represented by) ϕ is true in the state of affairs (corresponding to) A.” Table 3
summarizes this observation.
We thus speciﬁed for each vocabulary Σ and for every intended interpretation I for Σ a triple
FOI = (FOLΣ
I , FOSΣ
I , FO|=
I ) that explains the informal semantics of formulas, structures and
the satisfaction relation. We call this the (standard) theory of informal semantics of FO.
2 More accurately, it determines an abstraction function from states of affairs to classes of isomorphic Σ-structures.

10
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
Table 2. The informal semantics of FO structures.
A
a state of affairs S ∈FOS
I(A) that has abstraction A
dom(A)
the set of elements in the universe of discourse of S
P A
the property of S described by the declarative sentence I(P)
f A
the function in S described by the noun phrase I(f)
Table 3. The informal semantics of the satisfaction relation of FO.
|=
FO|=
I
A |= T
The property FOL
I(T ) holds in the states of affairs FOS
I(A)
Informal semantics of derived semantical relations The standard theory of informal semantics
of FO also induces the informal meaning for the derived semantical concepts of entailment,
equivalence, validity, satisﬁability, and equivalence in a way that reﬂects our understanding of
these concepts in mathematics and formal science.
For instance, under the standard informal semantics of FO, a formal expression ψ |= ϕ (en-
tailment), becomes the statement that the informal semantics of ϕ (a statement that expresses a
property of the application domain) is true in every state of affairs for that application domain, in
which the informal semantics of ψ (another statement that expresses a property of the application
domain) is true (which, in case the informal semantics of ψ and ϕ are mathematical propositions,
means that the ﬁrst proposition, the one corresponding to ψ, mathematically entails the second
proposition, the one corresponding to ϕ). Similarly, validity of ϕ means that the informal seman-
tics of ϕ is true in every state of affairs, and satisﬁability of ϕ means that the informal semantics
of ϕ is true in at least one state of affairs.
Precision of the informal semantics The informal semantics FOL
I(ϕ) of a sentence of theory T
under intended interpretation I is a syntactically correct statement in natural language, but is this
statement a sensible and precise statement about the application domain? This is a concern given
the vagueness, ambiguity and the lack of coherence that is so often ascribed to natural language
(Barwise and Cooper, 1981). We now discuss this.
First, when the intended interpretation I of Σ is vague or ambiguous, then indeed, the informal
semantics of FO sentences over Σ will be vague or ambiguous. E.g., if we interpret EdgeI as ”#1
is rather similarly looking as #2”, then surely the informal semantics of sentences containing
this predicate will be vague. FO is not designed to express information given in terms of vague

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
11
concepts. In FO, as in many other languages, it is the user’s responsibility to design a vocabulary
with a clear and precise intended interpretation.
A second potential source of ambiguity lies in the use of natural language connectives such as
“and”, “or”, “if...then...”, etc. in Table 1. Several of these connectives are overloaded, in the
sense that they may mean different things in different contexts. However, this does not necessarily
lead to ambiguity or vagueness, since human readers are skilled in using context to disambiguate
overloaded concepts. Let us consider several potential ambiguities.
In natural language, the connective “and” corresponds not only to logical conjunction, but also
to temporal consecutive conjunction exempliﬁed in I woke up and brushed my teeth. However,
the temporal interpretation arises only in a temporal context. Table 1 is not stated within a tem-
poral context, so it is logical conjunction that is intended and this intended meaning is inherited
in every occurrence of ∧in every FO sentence. Similarly, the word “or” is used to denote both
inclusive and exclusive disjunction. In mathematical texts its accepted meaning is that of inclu-
sive disjunction. The rule for “or” in Table 1 explicitly adds “or both”, to remove any possibility
for ambiguity.
The conditional “if ...then ...” is famously ambiguous. It can mean many different things
in varying contexts (Dancygier and Sweetser, 2005). Therefore, any choice for the formal and
informal semantics of the implication symbol can only cover part of the use of the conditional in
natural language3. In FO, the informal semantics of ⇒was chosen to be the material implication,
which interprets “if A then B” as “not A or B”. It has the beneﬁt of being simple and clear, and
it is likely the conditional that we need and use most frequently in mathematical text.
To summarize, the natural language connectives and quantiﬁers in Table 1 are precise and clear.
This precision is inherited by the informal semantics FOL
I of FO sentences. Consequently, under
the assumption that the intended interpretation I is also clear, the natural language statements
produced by FOL
I are as clear and unambiguous as mathematical text.
Informal semantics as the “empirical” component of logic Formal sentences of a knowledge
representation logic are used to specify information about an application domain. The role of the
informal semantics theory of a knowledge representation logic is to provide a principled account
of which information about an application domain is expressed by formal sentences of the logic.
In other formal empirical sciences, we ﬁnd theories with a similar role. A physics theory (e.g.,
quantum mechanics) not only consists of mathematical equations but, equally important, also
of a theory that describes, often with extreme precision, how the mathematical symbols used in
these equations are linked to observable phenomena and measurable quantities in reality. This
second part of the theory therefore plays a role similar to that of the informal semantics theory
of a knowledge representation logic.
A physics theory is a precise, falsiﬁable hypothesis about the reality it models. Such a theory
can never be proven. But it potentially can be experimentally falsiﬁed by computing a mathe-
matical prediction from the formal theory, and verifying if the measured phenomena match the
predictions. If not, the experiment refutes the theory. Otherwise, it corroborates (supports) the
theory. Availability of a large and diverse body of corroborating experiments, in the absence of
experimental refutation, increases our conﬁdence in the theory.
Likewise, a formal logic with a theory of informal semantics is a precise, falsiﬁable hypothesis
3 This suggests adding symbols to the logic to express other conditionals, which is something we we will do later in this
paper).

12
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
about the forms of information (the “thoughts”) expressible in the logic and their truth in different
states of affairs. A possible experiment here could consist of a choice of a vocabulary Σ with
intended interpretation I, a Σ-theory T and a Σ-structure A. The experiment would falsify the
theory of informal semantics if A |= T and yet FOL
I(T ) would not be considered to be true in
the states of affairs of FOS
I(A) by human reasoners. Or, conversely, if it holds that A ̸|= T while
FOL
I(T ) would be considered by human reasoners to be true in FOS
I(A). That such mismatches
do not occur corroborates the theory of informal semantics of FO. Here, we present one such
corroborating experiment.
Example 8
Let us return to our running example. Since Acol |= Tcol, we check that FO|=
I (Acol, Tcol) also
holds. Indeed, it is evident that human reasoners would determine that in all states-of-affairs
described by FOS
I(Acol) it is the case that FOL
I(Tcol) (all neighbouring nodes have different
colors). Therefore, this experiment corroborates the standard theory of FO’s informal semantics.
Alternative theories of informal semantics of FO That the informal and formal semantics corre-
spond so well to each other is not an accident. The key to this is the tight correspondence between
the natural language expressions occurring in Table 1 and the statements used in the bodies of
rules of Deﬁnition 3, for instance, between the informal and formal semantics of ∨, where we
have “FOL
I(ϕ) or FOL
I(ψ) (or both),” on the one side, and the condition for A |= ψ∨ϕ, “A |= ψ
or A |= ϕ (or both),” on the other. Breaking this correspondencewould lead to many mismatches
between informal and formal semantics. E.g., suppose we modify the formal semantics:
A |= ψ ∨ϕ if A |= ψ or (exclusively) A |= ϕ
but we keep the entry for ∨in Table 1. That would obviously create a range of experiments in
which formal and informal semantics are in mismatch. E.g., for the propositional vocabulary
Σ = {P, Q}, it now holds that {P, Q} ̸|= P ∨Q while under any intended interpretation of P, Q,
the statement ”II(P) or II(Q) (or both)” is true in the state of affairs FOS
I({P, Q}).
However, while the formal semantics constrains the informal semantics, it does not uniquely
determine it. The informal semantics of formulas arises from a coherent set of interpretations
of language constructs and of the semantic primitives: structures and |=. By carefully changing
this system, we may obtain an informal semantics that still matches with the formal semantics
although it assigns a very different meaning to formulas. Let us illustrate this.
In the proposed new informal semantics, we reinterpret all connectives such that the informal
semantics of any sentence is exactly the negation of its standard informal semantics, and we rein-
terpret A |= ϕ to mean that the informal semantics of ϕ is false in states of affairs represented by
A. These two negations then compensate for each other, leading to a theory of informal semantics
that still matches with the formal semantics, even though it assigns the negation of the standard
informal semantics to each FO sentence! To be precise, the alternative informal semantics theory
is given by ( ˆ
FO
L
I, ˆ
FO
S
I, ˆ
FO
|=), where ˆ
FO
S
I = FOS
I that is, the informal semantics of structures
as states of affairs is as in the standard informal semantics of FO, and the interpretations of the
two non-standard components ˆ
FO
L
I and ˆ
FO
|= are deﬁned in Table 4. To illustrate, let us consider
the formula ˆϕcol:
∃x∃y (Edge(x, y) ∧ColorOf (x) = ColorOf (y)).
The non-standard informal semantics ˆ
FO
L
I interprets the formula ˆϕcol as:

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
13
For all x in the universe of discourse, for all y in the universe of discourse it is not the case that there is
an edge from x to y, or the color of x and the color of y are not the same.
Stated differently, ˆ
FO
L
I says that adjacent nodes are of different color. Note that this statement is
the negation of the standard informal semantics of this formula and that it has the same meaning
as the one produced by the standard informal semantics FOL
Icol for the (different) formula Tcol.
Since in the new informal semantics, structures are still interpreted in the same way as before,
it follows that ˆ
FO
L
Icol( ˆϕcol) is satisﬁed in the state-of-affairs ˆ
FO
S
Icol(Acol). On the formal side,
nothing has changed and it is the case that Acol ̸|= ˆϕcol, i.e., the formula is not formally satisﬁed
in the structure. But under the new informal semantics, the relation |= is now interpreted as
non-satisfaction and hence, Acol ̸|= ˆϕcol is to be interpreted as the fact that ˆ
FO
L
Icol( ˆϕcol) is
(not non-)satisﬁed in ˆ
FO
S
Icol(Acol). Which is true!
Thus, even though the formal semantics of a logic strongly constrains its informal semantics,
there may nevertheless remain different informal semantics that correspond to the logic’s formal
semantics. In the case of FO, an informal semantics such as ˆ
FO
L
I is counterintuitive and of no
practical use.
As many logics reuse the connectives of FO, we will use the following terminology. We will
say that a connective is classical in a logic under some informal semantics II if IL
I interprets it
in the same way as FOL
I does (i.e., by the same natural language phrase). For instance, in the
non-standard informal semantics ˆ
FO
L
I for FO, the negation connective ¬ is classical, whereas
the conjunction connective ∧is not.
In the rest of this paper, we often omit the superscript from the notation IL
I, IS
I, I|=
I when it is
clear which of the three components of a theory of informal semantics II is intended.
3 The original formal and informal semantics of extended logic programs
In this section, we recall the standard formal and informal semantics of extended logic programs
as it appeared in Gelfond and Lifschitz (1988, 1991). An alternative review of the informal se-
mantics for this logic can be found in (Gelfond and Kahl, 2014, Section 2.2.1). For simplicity,
here we only consider the propositional case. Logic programs with variables are interpreted by
the means of their so-called grounding that transforms them into propositional programs.
A literal is either an atom A or an expression ¬A, where A is an atom. An extended logic
programming rule is an expression of the form
A ←B1, . . . , Bn, not C1, . . . , not Cm,
(4)
where A, Bi, and Cj are propositional literals. If all the literals A, Bi and Ci are atoms (i.e.,
symbol ¬ does not appear in the rule), then such a rule is called normal. The literal A is the head
of the rule and expression B1, . . . , Bn, not C1, . . . , not Cm is its body. We may abbreviate this
rule as Head ←Body. An extended logic program is a ﬁnite set of such rules. We denote the
set of all programs in a given vocabulary Σ by PΣ.
A consistent set of propositional literals is a set that does not contain both A and its comple-
ment ¬A for any atom A. A believed literal set X is a consistent set of propositional literals.
We denote the set of all believed literal sets for a vocabulary Σ by BΣ. A believed literal set X
satisﬁes a rule r of the form (4) if A belongs to X or there exists an i ∈{1, . . . , n} such that
Bi ̸∈X or a j ∈{1, . . ., m} such that Cj ∈X. A believed literal set is a model of a program P
if it satisﬁes all rules r ∈P.

14
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
Table 4. A non-standard informal semantics of FO. The informal semantics of terms is as in
Table 1 and the informal semantics of structures as in Table 2.
Φ
ˆ
FO
L
I(Φ)
P(⃗t)
it is not the case that I(P)⟨ˆ
FO
L
I(t1), . . . , ˆ
FO
L
I(tn)⟩
ϕ ∨ψ
ˆ
FO
L
I(ϕ) and ˆ
FO
L
I(ψ)
ϕ ∧ψ
ˆ
FO
L
I(ϕ) or ˆ
FO
L
I(ψ)
¬ϕ
it is not the case that ˆ
FO
L
I(ϕ)
∃x ϕ
for all x in the universe of discourse, ˆ
FO
L
I(ϕ)
∀x ϕ
there exists an x in the universe of discourse such that ˆ
FO
L
I(ϕ)
t1 = t2
ˆ
FO
L
I(t1) and ˆ
FO
L
I(t2) are not the same
T = {ϕ1, . . . , ϕn}
ˆ
FO
L
I(ϕ1) or . . . or ˆ
FO
L
I(ϕn)
|=
ˆ
FO
|=
A |= T
The property
ˆ
FO
L
I(T ) does not hold in the state-of-affairs
FOS
I(A)
For a rule r of the form (4) and a believed literal set X, the reduct rX is deﬁned whenever
there is no literal Cj for j ∈{1, . . ., m} such that Cj ∈X. If the reduct rX is deﬁned, then it is
the rule
A ←B1, . . . , Bn.
The reduct P X of the program P consists of the rules rX for all r ∈P, for which the reduct is
deﬁned. A believed literal set X is a stable model or answer set of P, denoted X |=st P, if it is
a ⊆-least model of P X.
The formal logic of extended logic programs consists of the triple (PΣ, BΣ, |=st). Gelfond and
Lifschitz (1988; 1991) described an informal semantics for such programs based on epistemic
notions of default and autoepistemic reasoning. Just as with FOI, the informal semantics GLI
arises from a system of interpretations of the formal syntactical and semantical concepts. We
now recall this informal semantics, which we name GLI. We denote its three components by
GLL
I, GLS
I and GL|=
I .
One of the key aspects of GLI is that it views a believed literal set X as an abstraction of

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
15
a belief state of some agent. An agent in some belief state considers certain states of affairs as
possible and the others as impossible. The corresponding believed literal set X is the set of all
literals L that the agent believes in, that is, those that are true in all states of affairs that agent
regards as possible. Importantly, it is not the case that a literal L that does not belong to X is
believed to be false by the agent. Rather, it is not believed by the agent: the literal is false in some
states of affairs the agent holds possible, and it may be true in others. In fact, L is true in at least
one of the agents possible state of affairs unless the complement of L belongs to X (unless the
agent believes the complement of L). Thus, the informal semantics GLI explains the meaning of
programs in terms of what literals an agent with incomplete knowledge of the application domain
might believe in.
Example 9
Consider the believed literal set
X = {student(mary), male(john)}
under the obvious intended interpretation I for the propositional atoms. This X is the abstraction
of any belief state in which the agent both believes that Mary is a student and that John is male,
and does not believe that John is a student or that Mary is male. One such belief state is the state
B0 in which the agent considers the following states of affairs as possible:
1. John is the only male in the domain of discourse; Mary is the only student.
2. John and Mary are both male students.
3. John and Mary are both male; Mary is the only student.
4. John is the only male; John and Mary are both students
Another belief state corresponding to X is the state B1 in which the agent considers the states of
affairs 2-4 of B0 as possible. In both, Mary is a student and John a male in all possible states of
affairs. John is student in worlds 2,4; Mary is male in worlds 2,3. Hence, literals ¬student(john)
and ¬male(mary) are not believed.
Although both belief states abstract to the same believed literal set, they are different. When
compared to B0, the belief state B1 contains the additional belief that either John is a student
or Mary is male. Since this additional belief is not atomic, a formal believed literal set cannot
distinguish belief states in which it holds (e.g., B1) from belief states in which it does not (e.g.,
B0). In this way, different informal belief states are still abstracted to the same formal believed
literal set. This shows that believed literal sets are a rather coarse way of abstracting belief states,
compared to, e.g., believed formula sets or Kripke structures.
We denote the class of informal belief states that are abstracted to a given formal believed
literal set X under an intended interpretation I as GLS
I(X). Table 5 summarizes this abstraction
function.
Table 6 shows the Gelfond-Lifschitz informal semantics GLL
I of programs. As in the informal
semantics for FO, each atom A has an intended interpretation I(A) which is represented lin-
guistically as a noun phrase about the application domain. The intended interpretation I(¬A) is
“it is not the case that I(A)”. As is clear from this table, under GLL
I, extended logic programs
have both classical and non-classical connectives. On the one hand, the comma operator is clas-
sical conjunction and the rule operator ←is classical implication. On the other hand, the implicit
composition operator (constructing a program out of individual rules) is non-classical, because

16
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
Table 5. The Gelfond-Lifschitz informal semantics of belief sets.
A belief set X
A belief state B ∈GLS
I(X) that has abstraction X
A ∈X for atom A
B has the belief that I(A) is true;
i.e., I(A) is true in all states of affairs possible in B
¬A ∈X for atom A
B has the belief that I(A) is false;
i.e., I(A) is false in all states of affairs possible in B
A ̸∈X for atom A
B does not have the belief that I(A) is true;
i.e., I(A) is false in some state of affairs possible in B
¬A ̸∈X for atom A
B does not have the belief that I(A) is false;
i.e., I(A) is true in some state of affairs possible in B
Table 6. The Gelfond-Lifschitz (1988; 1991) informal semantics for ASP formulas.
Φ
GLL
I(Φ)
propositional atom A
I(A)
propositional literal ¬A
it is not the case that I(A)
expression of the form not C
the agent does not know that GLL
I(C)
expression of the form Φ1, Φ2
GLL
I(Φ1) and GLL
I(Φ2)
rule Head ←Body
if GLL
I(Body) then GLL
I(Head)
(in the sense of material implication)
program P = {r1, . . . , rn}
All the agent knows is:
• GLL
I(r1) and
• . . .
• GLL
I(rn)
it performs a closure operation: the agent knows only what is explicitly stated. Of the two nega-
tion operators, symbol ¬ is classical negation, whereas not is a non-classical negation, which is
called default negation.
The ﬁnal component of the GL theory of informal semantics is GL|=st
I
, which explains what it
means for a set of literals X to be a stable model of a program P. As can be seen in Table 7, this
means that, given that GLL
I(P) represents precisely the knowledge of the agent, X could be the
set of literals the agent believes.

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
17
Table 7. The Gelfond-Lifschitz (1988; 1991) informal semantics for the ASP satisfaction rela-
tion.
|=st
GL|=st
I
X |=st P
Given that all the agent knows is GLL
I(P), X could be the set of literals
the agent believes
To illustrate this informal semantics, let us consider Gelfond and Lifschitz’ well-known inter-
view example.
Example 10
Whether students of a certain school are eligible for a scholarship depends on their GPA and on
their minority status. The school has an incomplete database about candidate students. Students
for which the school has insufﬁcient information to decide eligibility should be invited for an
interview. The following ELP program expresses the school’s knowledge.
Eligible(x) ←HighGPA(x).
Eligible(x) ←FairGPA(x), Minority(x).
¬Eligible(x) ←¬FairGPA(x), ¬HighGPA(x).
Interview(x) ←not Eligible(x), not ¬Eligible(x)
Minority(brit).
HighGPA(mary).
¬Minority(david).
FairGPA(david).
The three rules for Eligible specify a partial policy for eligibility: they determine the eligibil-
ity for all students except for non-minority students with fair GPA. In this sense, under GLI,
this program does not actually deﬁne when a student is eligible. The next rule is epistemic. It
expresses that the school interviews a person whose eligibility is unknown. The remaining rules
specify partial data on students Mary, Brit and David. In particular, FairGPA(brit) and even
FairGPA(mary) are unknown.
For Mary, the ﬁrst rule applies and the school knows that she is eligible. The epistemic fourth
rule will therefore not conclude that she should be interviewed. Incidentally, nor is it implied
that she will not be interviewed; the school (formally, the program) simply does not know. This
follows from the informal semantics of the implicit composition operator: “all the agent knows
is...”. For Brit and David, their eligibility is unknown. However, the reasons are different: for
Brit because of lack of data, for David because the policy does not specify it. Therefore, both
will be interviewed. The unique answer set extends the student data with the following literals:
Eligible(mary), Interview(brit), Interview(david).
The crucial property of this example is that whether a student should be interviewed does
not only depend on properties of the student alone, but also on the agent’s knowledge about
this student. In other words, it is perfectly possible that the same student should be interviewed

18
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
when applying to school A but not when applying to school B, even when the eligibility criteria
used by the two schools are precisely the same. Indeed, this can happen if school B has more
information on record about the student in question. Because of this property, a logic with a
subjective informal semantics is required here.
It is illustrative to compare this example to, for instance, graph coloring. Whether a graph is
colorable given a certain number of colors is purely a property of this graph itself. It does not
depend on anyone’s knowledge about this graph, and it does not depend on which agent is doing
the coloring. In other words, graph coloring lacks the subjective, epistemic component of the
interview example. Consequently, as we illustrated in Section 1, applying GLI to the rules of a
typical GDT graph coloring program produces a misleading result. It refers to the knowledge of
an agent, when in fact there exists no agent whose knowledge is relevant to the problem.
The interview example, with its inherent epistemic component, is a clear case where the in-
formal semantics GLI applies. Similar informal semantics have also been developed for other
formalisms for modeling reasoning with incomplete information, including default logic (Reiter,
1980) and autoepistemic logic (Moore, 1985), and much of our discussion above extends to such
formalisms, too. They all have a role to play but it is important to be aware of the scope of their
applicability.
To the best of our knowledge, GLI is the only informal semantics developed in the litera-
ture for the language of extended logic programs. Answer set programming adopted it, when
it adopted the language of extended logic programming. However, the informal semantics GLI
is not suitable for typical answer set programing applications. Moreover, over time, answer set
programming has developed a richer language with features not found in the original papers
by Gelfond and Lifschitz, including choice rules, aggregates and weight constraints. If is often
non-trivial to extend GLI to these richer languages, as illustrated in the next paragraph.
Extending GLI to modern ASP is difﬁcult As a simple example of a modern ASP language
feature, we consider the constraint (3) used to model the property that nodes should be colored.
As stated in the introduction, GLI provides the following informal semantics for this rule: “for
every x, Aux holds if the agent does not know Aux and x is a node and the agent does not know
that x has a color.”
Can a simpler informal semantics (that avoids the predicate Aux) be given for constraint (3)
directly? This question is not easily answered. Starting from the way in which Table 6 interprets
atoms and the operator not, one plausible candidate for such an informal semantics is the sen-
tence: “for every x, it is not the case that x is a node and the agent does not know that x has a
color’.
However, upon closer analysis, this sentence turns out not to match with the formal semantics.
This can be seen as follows. Let us suppose for simplicity that the Herbrand universe consists of
only one constant a. The proposed informal semantics boils down then to:
(*) “It is not the case that a is a node and the agent does not know that a has a color.”
Consider now the ASP program P that consists only of the constraint (3). This program has
a unique answer set ∅, the empty believed literal set. Let B be any (informal) belief state that
satisﬁes (*). In order for our proposed sentence (*) to be a correct informal semantics for (3), this
belief state B must abstract to the unique answer set ∅of P. If so, then in B it is not known that
a is colored (because Colored(a) ̸∈∅). It follows that B must satisfy the property “it is not the
case that a is a node.” In other words, B cannot consider as possible any state of affairs in which

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
19
a is a node. Or, to put it in even simpler terms, the belief state B must contain the belief that a is
not a node. However, since B abstracts to ∅, it must then be the case that ¬Node(a) ∈∅, which
is clearly false. Therefore, our proposed informal semantics of (3) is incorrect.
It is not the purpose of this article to present an epistemic informal semantics for modern ASP
languages. We bring up this issue to point out that doing so is often more problematic than one
might expect. This is not only the case for constraints, but also for choice rules, whose informal
epistemic semantics has been the topic of lively debates in the ASP community4. For the sake
of completeness, we conclude this discussion by mentioning that a correct informal epistemic
reading of (3) is:
(**) “for every x, it is not the case that the agent knows that x is a node and the agent does not know
that x has a color.”
Writing constraints such as (3) is common practice among ASP programmers. At the same time,
the fact that (*) is not a correct informal semantics for them while (**) is, appears to be far from
common knowledge. This illustrates the pitfalls of using the Gelfond and Lifschitz’ epistemic
informal semantics with the GDT programming methodology.
Our goal in this paper is to develop an alternative informal semantics OBI for answer set
programming, which, unlike GLI, is objective, that is, not epistemic, and extends to new features
of the language that ASP now takes for granted. The rationale behind this effort is our conviction
that such an objective informal semantics will be better aligned with typical GDT programs.
Before we introduce it, we ﬁrst review the GDT paradigm.
4 Generate-Deﬁne-Test methodology
The generate-deﬁne-test (GDT) methodology (Lifschitz, 2002) was proposed as a principled way
to encode search problems in ASP. Over the years, it became the de facto standard in the ﬁeld.
The GDT methodology yields programs that consist of three parts: generate, deﬁne and test.
The role of generate is to generate the search space. In modern ASP languages this task is
often accomplished by a set of choice rules:
{A} ←B1, . . . , Bn, not C1, . . . , not Cm,
(5)
where A, Bi, and Cj are atoms (possibly, non propositional). Intuitively, rule (5) states that the
atom in the head can take any of the values true and false, if the condition expressed by the body
of the rule holds. We call the predicate symbol of A generated.
The deﬁne part is a set of deﬁnitions of input and auxiliary predicates. Each deﬁnition is
encoded by a group of normal rules (i.e., rules of the form (4) in which the expressions A,
Bi and Cj are all atoms). In such a rule, the predicate symbol of the head A is the one being
deﬁned. Input predicates are deﬁned by exhaustive enumeration of their extensions. That is, their
deﬁnitions consist of sets of facts, i.e., rules of form (4) that have empty bodies and contain no
variables. For facts, the symbol ←is often omitted from the notation. Auxiliary predicates are
deﬁned by sets of rules (4) that specify these symbols by describing how to derive their extensions
from the extensions of the generated and input symbols.
4 This
is
illustrated
by
the
Texas
Action
Group
discussion
on
the
matter
(http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/vl/tag/choice_discussion).

20
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
Finally, the test part eliminates some generated candidate answer sets. It consists of constraint
rules:
←B1, . . . , Bn, not C1, . . . , not Cm,
(6)
where Bi and Cj are atoms. Each constraint rule eliminates those candidate answer sets, in which
all Bi are true and all Cj are false.
As such, the GDT methodology identiﬁes different components of programs by assigning
them a particular operational task (e.g., “generate search space”, “test candidate solution”) in the
computation of answer sets. Thus, it is about the computation process of answer sets and not
about the meaning of expressions in ASP programs. In other words, the GDT methodology does
not specify an informal semantics for GDT programs.
We call ﬁnite sets of choice, normal, and constraint rules core ASP programs. For these core
ASP programs, we will adopt the formal semantics proposed by Ferraris et al. (2011). The main
concepts of this semantics are brieﬂy reviewed in the appendix; we omit the details, as they are
not relevant for the purposes of this paper.
While syntactically simple, core ASP programs are expressive enough to support the GDT
methodology. Moreover, they are a part of almost all ASP dialects, modulo minor syntactic dif-
ferences. Thus, they form a convenient target language for our study of GDT programs. However,
the GDT methodology is not restricted to core ASP. Many applications rely on extensions such
as aggregates and weight expressions, or use different means to implement the generate task
(pairs of rules P ←not P ∗, P ∗←not P; disjunctions P ∨P ∗; or rules P ←not not P). The
discussion we present here also applies to programs that contain such expressions. We touch on
this subject in Section 8.
To illustrate the GDT methodology, we present a core ASP program that encodes the Hamil-
tonian cycle problem.
generate
{In(x, y)} ←Edge(x, y).
deﬁne
Node(V ). . . . Node(W ).
Edge(V, V ′). . . . Edge(W, W ′).
T (x, y) ←In(x, y).
T (x, y) ←T (x, z), T (z, y).
test
←In(x, y), In(x, z), y ̸= z.
←In(x, z), In(y, z), x ̸= y.
←Node(x), Node(y), not T (x, y).
(7)
The long horizontal lines indicate the partition of the program into the generate, deﬁne, and
test parts respectively. The short lines inside the deﬁne part separate groups of rules deﬁning
individual predicates. Inside the test part, they separate individual constraints. Predicate symbol
In is a generated symbol, symbols Node and Edge are input symbols, and T is an auxiliary
one. The generate part speciﬁes all subsets In of the Edge relation as candidate solutions. The
relations Node and Edge represent all vertices and edges of the input graph and are deﬁned
by enumeration. The relation T represents the auxiliary concept of the transitive closure of the
relation In. The test part “weeds out” those candidate answer sets, whose In relation does not

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
21
correspond to a Hamiltonian cycle. The auxiliary relation T is necessary to state the constraint
that a Hamiltonian cycle connects every pair of vertices.
As this example illustrates, a GDT program often has a rich internal structure. For instance, in
the example above
• rules can be partitioned into three groups generate, deﬁne and test
• deﬁne contains separate deﬁnitions for three predicates Node, Edge and T , and
• test consists of three independent constraints.
The fact that the internal structure of programs remains implicit in the standard ASP formalism
motivates us to introduce the ASP-FO language in the next section that makes the structure
of programs explicit. In ASP-FO, rules in generate, deﬁne and test can be further split out in
independent modules called G-modules, D-modules and T-modules.
5 The logic ASP-FO
We now turn to our goal of developing an informal semantics for GDT programs. To this end,
motivated by the GDT methodology, we propose a logic ASP-FO and develop for it an informal
semantics. We design the logic ASP-FO so that each core ASP program can be cast as an ASP-
FO program without any essential changes. In this way, the informal semantics for ASP-FO can
be used for ASP programs and, as we argue, becomes particularly effective in explaning the
meaning of GDT programs.
5.1 Syntax
As in FO, expressions of ASP-FO are built from predicate and function symbols of some vo-
cabulary Σ. Theories of ASP-FO consist of three types of modules: G-modules, D-modules and
T-modules.
A choice rule is an expression of the form:
∀¯x ({P(¯t)} ←ϕ),
(8)
where ϕ is an FO formula, P(¯t) is an atom, and ¯x includes all free variables appearing in the
rule. We call the expression {P(¯t)} the head of the rule and refer to P as its head predicate. We
call ϕ the body of the rule.
Deﬁnition 6 (G-module)
A G-module is a ﬁnite set of choice rules with the same head predicate. Moreover, the head
predicate may not appear in the body of the rules.
While many modern ASP solvers allow recursive choice rules, our concept of G-modules is
more restrictive. This is in keeping with our view of G-modules as modules that generate the
search space from a given problem instance. To generate such a search space, recursion does not
seem to be required.
Recursion is allowed and, in fact, necessary in the deﬁne part. A deﬁne rule is an expression
of the form
∀¯x (P(¯t) ←ϕ),
(9)
where ϕ is an FO formula, P(¯t) is an atom, and ¯x includes all free variables appearing in the rule.
The concepts of the head, the head predicate and the body of the rule are deﬁned in an obvious
way similarly as above.

22
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
Deﬁnition 7 (D-module)
A D-module D is a pair ⟨Def, Π⟩, where Def is a ﬁnite set of predicates, called deﬁned predicates,
and Π is a ﬁnite set of deﬁne rules such that the head predicate of each rule belongs to Def.
For a D-module D, we denote the set Def of its deﬁned predicate symbols by Def(D). We write
Par(D) for the set of all predicate and function symbols in Π other than the deﬁned predicates.
We call Par(D) the set of parameter symbols of D.
For a set of deﬁne rules Π, by hd(Π) we denote the set of all predicate symbols appearing
in the heads of rules in Π. Note that if Π is the set of deﬁne rules of a D-module D, then
hd(Π) ⊆Def(D). If the inclusion is proper, the D-modules ⟨hd(Π), Π⟩and D are different; the
latter makes all predicates in Def(D) \ hd(Π) universally false. In the following, we use Π as a
shorthand notation for a D-module ⟨hd(Π), Π⟩.
Deﬁnition 8 (T-module)
A T-module is an FO sentence.
While G-modules and D-modules are sets of expressions, a T-module is not. Since any ﬁnite
set of FO sentences ϕ1, . . . , ϕn can be equivalently represented by its conjunction ϕ1 ∧· · ·∧ϕn,
the restriction of T-modules to single formulas does not result in any loss of generality.
Deﬁnition 9
An ASP-FO theory is a ﬁnite set of G-modules, D-modules, and T-modules.
We say that an ASP-FO module or theory Ψ is over vocabulary Σ if every non-logical symbol
mentioned in Ψ belongs to Σ. In case of a D-module ⟨Def, Π⟩, also symbols in Def should belong
to Σ.
We say that a predicate is speciﬁed by a G-module or D-module if it is the head predicate
of the G-module or a deﬁned predicate of the D-module. Unless stated differently, we assume
that no predicate is speciﬁed by more than one module in an ASP-FO theory as this sufﬁces to
express GDT programs. However, the formal deﬁnitions of syntax and semantics of ASP-FO do
not require this limitation.
5.2 From Core ASP to ASP-FO Informally
There is an obvious match between language constructs of ASP-FO and those used in ASP to
express generate, deﬁne and test. Speciﬁcally, an ASP choice rule (5) corresponds to an ASP-FO
choice rule
∀¯x ({A} ←B1 ∧· · · ∧Bn ∧¬C1 ∧· · · ∧¬Cm),
a normal rule (4) corresponds to an ASP-FO deﬁne rule
∀¯x (A ←B1 ∧· · · ∧Bn ∧¬C1 ∧· · · ∧¬Cm),
and an ASP constraint (6) corresponds to the T-module given by the FO sentence
∀¯x (¬(B1 ∧· · · ∧Bn ∧¬C1 ∧· · · ∧¬Cm)),
where in each case, ¯x is the set of variables occurring in the ASP expression (5), (4) and (6),
respectively. These syntactical translations turn both the constraint operator ←and the negation-
as-failure symbol not in (6) into the negation symbol ¬.
Consider the encoding (7) of the Hamiltonian cycle problem. It can be embedded in ASP-FO

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
23
in several ways, including the following encoding that makes explicit the hidden structure of that
program:
generate {∀x∀y({In(x,y)} ←Edge(x, y))}
deﬁne
{Node(V ) ←⊤, . . . , Node(W ) ←⊤}
{Edge(V, V ′) ←⊤, . . . , Edge(W,W ′) ←⊤}
 ∀x∀y(T (x,y) ←In(x, y))
∀x∀y∀z(T (x,y) ←T (x, z) ∧T (z, y))

test
∀x∀y∀z¬(In(x,y) ∧In(x, z) ∧y ̸= z)
∀x∀y∀z¬(In(x,z) ∧In(y, z) ∧x ̸= y)
∀x∀y¬(Node(x) ∧Node(y) ∧¬T (x, y))
(10)
Merging the three D-modules into one would yield another embedding, with less internal struc-
ture.
Any answer set program written in the base formalism of Section 4 has a straightforward syn-
tactic translation to an ASP-FO theory: choice rules are grouped according to their head predi-
cate; normal rules are grouped together in one D-module, and each constraint can be represented
as a single T-module (in each case, after rewritings described above). In the case of a D-module
we can often reveal its hidden structure by splitting it into several smaller D-modules (as we
did in the theory (10)). Section 5.5 provides a detailed formal account on the relation between
answer set programs and ASP-FO theories.
5.3 Semantics
We now introduce the formal semantics of ASP-FO. As in FO and in a growing number of ASP
semantics, the semantics is based on the standard notion of Σ-structures instead of literal sets. Us-
ing the terminology of logic programming and ASP, we call Σ-structures also Σ-interpretations.
A crucial feature of the semantics of ASP-FO is modularity: a structure/interpretation is a
model of an ASP-FO theory T if it is a model of each of its modules. In other words, an ASP-FO
theory can be understood as a standard monotone conjunction of its modules.
Deﬁnition 10
An interpretation A satisﬁes (is a model of) an ASP-FO theory T , written A |= T , if A satisﬁes
(is a model of) each module in T .
To complete the deﬁnition of the semantics of ASP-FO theories, we now deﬁne the semantics
of individual modules.
T-modules The case of T-modules is straightforward. T-modules are FO sentences and we use
the classical deﬁnition of satisfaction (cf. Deﬁnition 3) to specify when a T-module holds in a
structure.
G-modules The role of choice rules in GDT programs is to “open up” some atoms P(¯t) —
to allow them to take any of the values true and false. We take this idea as the basis of our
formalization of the semantics of G-modules.
Deﬁnition 11

24
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
An interpretation M is a model of a G-module G with head predicate P if for each tuple ¯d of
elements in the domain of M such that M[¯x : ¯d] |= P(¯x), there is a choice rule ∀¯y ({P(¯t)} ←
ϕ) in G and a tuple ¯d′ so that M[¯x : ¯d, ¯y : ¯d′] |= ϕ.
D-modules We deﬁne the semantics of D-modules by adapting the stable semantics of deﬁni-
tions introduced by Pelov et al. (2007). That semantics is based on the three-valued immediate
consequence operator. It is obtained as a special case from the approximation ﬁxpoint theory
(Denecker et al., 2000), which deﬁnes stable and well-founded ﬁxpoints for arbitrary lattice op-
erators. The semantics proposed by Pelov et al. (2007) is a generalization of the original Gelfond-
Lifschitz formal semantics. In particular, unlike the original semantics it is not restricted to Her-
brand interpretations only. Our presentation follows that proposed by Vennekens et al. (2007)
and developed further by Denecker et al. (2012).
Deﬁnition 12 (Satisfaction by pairs of interpretations)
Let ϕ be an FO formula, A and B interpretations of all free symbols in ϕ (including free vari-
ables) such that A and B have the same domain and assign the same values to all function
symbols. We deﬁne the relation (A, B) |= ϕ by induction on the structure of ϕ (for simplicity,
we consider only the connectives ¬ and ∨, and the existential quantiﬁer ∃):
−(A, B) |= P(¯t) if A |= P(¯t);
−(A, B) |= ¬ϕ if (B, A) ̸|= ϕ;
−(A, B) |= ϕ ∨ψ if (A, B) |= ϕ or (A, B) |= ψ;
−(A, B) |= ∃x ψ if for some d ∈dom(A), (A[x : d], B[x : d]) |= ψ.
When ϕ is a sentence, we deﬁne ϕ(A,B) = t if (A, B) |= ϕ and ϕ(A,B) = f otherwise.
This is the standard satisfaction relation, except that positive occurrences of atoms are interpreted
in A, and negative occurrences in B. When A = B, this relation collapses to the standard
satisfaction relation of FO so that if ϕ is a sentence then ϕA = ϕ(A,A). Also if A ≤t A′ and
B′ ≤t B, then ϕ(A,B) ≤t ϕ(A′,B′) (and so, in particular, ϕ(·,·) is monotone in its ﬁrst and
antimonotone in its second argument). These two properties imply that the satisﬁability relation
in Deﬁnition 12 can be used to approximate the standard truth value, in the sense that if Al ≤t
A ≤t Au, then for each sentence ϕ, ϕ(Al,Au) ≤t ϕA ≤t ϕ(Au,Al).
Essentially, this satisfaction relation represents Kleene’s and Belnap’s three- and four-valued
truth assignment functions (Feferman, 1984). The connection is based on the bilattice correspon-
dence between the four truth values f, t, u, i and pairs of lower and upper estimates (f, f), (t, t), (f, t),
and (t, f), respectively. In this view, three- and four-valued interpretations ˜A correspond to pairs
of interpretations (Al, Au) sharing the domain and the interpretations of function symbols, and
the truth value ϕ˜A ∈{f, t, u, i} corresponds to the pair (ϕ(Al,Au), ϕ(Au,Al)).
Deﬁnition 13
A pair of interpretations (A, B) sharing the domain and the interpretations of function symbols
satisﬁes a deﬁne rule ∀¯x (P(¯t) ←ϕ) if for each tuple ¯d of domain elements, if (A[¯x : ¯d], B[¯x :
¯d]) |= ϕ then A[¯x : ¯d] |= P(¯t).
In the context of Herbrand interpretations, the two deﬁnitions reﬂect the way Gelfond and
Lifschitz used the reduct to deﬁne stable models of normal logic programs. Let us recall that an
extended logic program is normal if it consists of normal program rules only, and let us consider
a D-module that corresponds to a normal program Π. Let M be an Herbrand interpretation. For

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
25
a body ϕ of a rule in grnd(Π) (the ground instantiation of Π), we write ϕM for its reduced
form obtained by replacing the negative literals in ϕ by their evaluation in M. Clearly, for every
rule P ←ϕ in grnd(Π), an Herbrand interpretation A satisﬁes the reduced body ϕM if and
only if (A, M) |= ϕ. Since the reduct grnd(Π)M can essentially be viewed as obtained from
grnd(Π) by replacing the body of each rule by its reduced form, we have the following property
explaining the connection of Deﬁnitions 12 and 13 to the concept of a stable model of a normal
program.
Proposition 1 (Denecker et al. (2012))
For a normal program Π and Herbrand interpretations A and M, the interpretation A is a model
of the reduct grnd(Π)M if and only if the pair of interpretations (A, M) satisﬁes all rules of
Π (viewed as deﬁne rules). Further, M is a stable model of Π if and only if M is the ≤t-least
Herbrand interpretation A such that (A, M) satisﬁes all rules of Π (viewed as deﬁne rules).
In the setting of D-modules we must account for the parameters (input symbols) that may
appear in the rules. For two structures A and B that have the same domain and interpret disjoint
vocabularies, let A ◦B denote the structure that
1. interprets the union of the vocabularies of A and B,
2. has the same domain as A and B, and
3. coincides with A and B on their respective vocabularies.
Following Gelfond and Lifschitz, to deﬁne a parameterized version of the stable-model seman-
tics, we perform minimization with respect to the truth order ≤t.
Deﬁnition 14 (Parameterized stable-model semantics)
For a D-module D, an interpretation M of Def(D) is a stable model of D relative to an interpre-
tation Ap of Par(D) if M is the ≤t-least among all interpretations A of Def(D) such that A has
the same domain as Ap and (Ap ◦A, Ap ◦M) satisﬁes all rules of D.5
This parameterized stable-model semantics of D-modules extends the original stable-model
semantics of normal logic programs in three ways:
1. it is parameterized, that is, it builds stable models on top of a given interpretation of the
parameter symbols;
2. it handles FO bodies; and
3. it works for arbitrary (also non-Herbrand) interpretations.
It shares these properties with other recent generalizations of the original ASP formalism, such
as Pearce and Valverde (2005), Lee and Meng (2008), Ferraris et al. (2011), Zhang and Zhou
(2010) Zhou and Zhang (2011) and Asuncion et al. (2012).
The parameterized stable-model semantics turns a D-module D into a non-deterministic func-
tion from interpretations of Par(D) to interpretations of Def(D). An interpretation A satisﬁes
D if it agrees with the function deﬁned by D, i.e., if its interpretation of Def(D) is one of the
possible images under this function of its interpretation of Par(D).
5 It is a simple consequence of the monotonicity of (A, B) |= ϕ in A that this ≤t-least interpretation always exists
(Vennekens et al., 2007).

26
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
Deﬁnition 15 (The semantics of D-modules)
An interpretation A is a model of a D-module D, written A |= D, if A|Def(D) is a stable model
of D relative to A|Par(D).
We stress that we use the term model here to distinguish the present concept from the stable
model relative to an interpretation (Deﬁnition 14).
Example 11
Let us consider a D-module:
D =
 ∀x (p(x) ←¬q(x))
∀x (q(x) ←∀y r(y, x)).

There are no function symbols here, r is the only parameter of D, and p and q are the deﬁned
symbols. Each interpretation Ap of the parameter r determines the corresponding set of stable
models relative to Ap. Each such stable model is an interpretation of the deﬁned symbols p and
q. Let us investigate how these stable models are to be obtained.
The class of candidates for a stable model relative to a given Ap consists of interpretations M
of the deﬁned symbols p, q that have the same domain as Ap. For each such M, Ap ◦M is an
interpretation of all symbols occurring in Π, that matches Ap on the parameters and M on the
deﬁned symbols. Let us ﬁx one such M and consider the set of all interpretations A such that
(Ap ◦A, Ap ◦M) satisﬁes this rule set. In the evaluation of the ﬁrst rule, q occurs negatively and
so, it is evaluated with respect to Ap ◦M. Moreover, since q is a deﬁned predicate, it is evaluated
in M. For the second rule, the parameter r is evaluated in Ap. Thus, the set of all interpretations
A such that (Ap ◦A, Ap ◦M) satisﬁes D contains each interpretation A such that
−qA ⊇{d ∈dom(Ap)|∀d′ ∈dom(Ap) : (d′, d) ∈rAp}.
−pA ⊇dom(Ap) \ qM
According to the deﬁnition, M is a stable model of D relative to Ap if it is the smallest inter-
pretation of p and q to satisfy this condition. This is the case precisely if neither of these two set
inclusions is strict, that is, if
−qM = {d ∈dom(Ap)|∀d′ ∈dom(Ap) : (d′, d) ∈rAp}
−pM = dom(Ap) \ qM = {d ∈dom(Ap)|∃d′ ∈dom(Ap) : (d′, d) ̸∈rAp}.
This shows that each interpretation Ap of r determines a unique stable model of D.
Applying Deﬁnition 15 to this example, we see that an interpretation A of the vocabulary
Σ = {r, p, q} is a model of the D-module D if M = A|{p,q} satisﬁes the equations on p and q
obtained from the equations for pM and qM by substituting M|{r} for Ap.
The language design of ASP-FO was guided by our aim to develop an informal semantics for
the most basic expressions and connectives of ASP. It is straightforward to extend the language
ASP-FO with additional types of modules and language expressions. Section 5.4 introduces one
new module called an Herbrand module. In Section 8 we discuss other possible extensions with
aggregates, weight expressions and disjunction in the head.
5.4 Herbrand Modules
In applications where the domain of all relevant objects is known, it is common to design a
vocabulary Σ such that each domain element is denoted by exactly one ground term. In such

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
27
a case, considering Herbrand interpretations is sufﬁcient. ASP is tailored to such applications.
Consequently, it typically restricts its semantics to Herbrand interpretations only. The logic ASP-
FO is an open domain logic with uninterpreted function symbols. We now introduce an Herbrand
module into the language of ASP-FO. Its role is to express the proposition that the domain of
discourse is the Herbrand universe. It allows us to restrict the semantics of ASP-FO to Herbrand
interpretations and will facilitate the formal embedding of (standard) ASP into ASP-FO.
Deﬁnition 16
An Herbrand module over a set σ of function symbols is the expression H(σ). We say that M
is a model of H(σ), denoted M |= H(σ), if dom(M) is the set of terms that can be built from
σ, and if for each such term t, tM = t.
If ΣF is the set of all function symbols of Σ, then the models of the Herbrand module H(ΣF )
are precisely the Herbrand interpretations of Σ.
We now extend the deﬁnition of an ASP-FO theory as follows: an ASP-FO theory is a ﬁnite
set of G-modules, D-modules, T-modules, and Herbrand modules.
An Herbrand module H(σ) in ASP-FO can be seen as a shorthand for the combination of
the domain closure axiom DCA(σ) and the FO unique name axioms UNA(σ). A combination
DCA(σ) and UNA(σ) can also be expressed in ASP-FO by means of D- and T-modules.6 De-
necker (2000) illustrated how the logic FO(ID) captures this combination. The same method
is applicable in ASP-FO. The idea is to introduce a new predicate symbol U/1 and then the
D-module:



. . .
∀x1 . . . ∀xn(U(fj(x1, . . . , xn)) ←U(x1) ∧· · · ∧U(xn))
. . .



that has one such rule as above for every function symbol fj/n in σ. In the case of a constant
symbol C, the rule reduces to U(C) ←⊤. This D-module deﬁnes U as the set of all ground
terms of σ. The following T-module is added to express that there are no other objects in the
domain:
∀x U(x).
Combining the above D-module and T-module with FO axioms UNA(σ) yields an ASP-FO
theory whose models are (isomorphic to) the structures satisfying H(σ). Thus Herbrand modules
are redundant in ASP-FO and serve only as useful and intuitive abbreviations.
5.5 Formal Relation to ASP
We now show that ASP-FO is a conservative extension of the core ASP language so that we
can formally relate core ASP programs and ASP-FO theories. For a core ASP program Π, by bΠ
we denote the collection of rules obtained by rewriting the rules in Π in the syntax of ASP-FO
as illustrated in Section 5.2. Further, for a vocabulary Σ we write ΣP and ΣF for the sets of
predicate and function symbols in Σ, respectively.
What we are looking for is a connection between an ASP program and an ASP-FO theory
that in the case of GDT programs makes their implicit structure explicit. To establish such
6 It is a well-known consequence of the compactness theorem for FO that DCA(σ) cannot be represented in FO if σ
contains at least one constant and one function symbol of arity ≥1.

28
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
a connection, we use the results by Ferraris et al. (2009) on “splitting”. Splitting is a com-
mon method for uncovering the structure of programs for their further analyses. For instance,
Erdo˘gan and Lifschitz (2004) use it to prove correctness of GDT programs.
Let Π be a core ASP program of the syntactic form considered in Section 4 with rules of the
form (5), (4) and (6). We deﬁne the positive predicate dependency graph of Π as the directed
graph that has all predicates of Π as its vertices and that has an edge from a predicate P to a
predicate Q whenever P appears in the head of a rule that has a non-negated Q in its body. We
say that P positively depends on Q if there is a non-zero length path from P to Q in this graph.
Deﬁnition 17
A partition {Π1, . . . , Πn} of Π is a splitting of Π if:
−each Πi that contains a constraint is a singleton;
−for each predicate P, all rules with P in the head belong to the same Πi; and
−if two predicates positively depend on each other, their rules belong to the same module Πi.
Splitting tends to decompose a program in components that can be understood independently.
For instance, the horizontal lines in the Hamiltonian cycle program (7) identify a splitting in
which each component has a simple and natural understanding.
Deﬁnition 18
A splitting {Π1, . . . , Πn} of Π is proper if no module Πi contains choice rules for two different
predicates, or both a normal rule and a choice rule. In addition, no head predicate of a choice
module may positively depend on itself.
The following proposition is straightforward. We use here a simpliﬁed notation, where bΠ de-
notes the D-module ⟨hd(bΠ), bΠ⟩.
Proposition 2
If Π has a proper splitting {Π1, . . . , Πn} then {bΠ1, . . . , bΠn} is a well-formed ASP-FO theory.
For instance, the splitting of the Hamiltonian cycle program (7) identiﬁed by the horizontal lines
is a proper splitting, and its translation is the ASP-FO theory (10).
Typically, a program Π with a proper splitting {Π1, . . . , Πn} is equivalent to the corresponding
ASP-FO theory augmented with the Herbrand module. However, this is not the case for programs
that contain predicates which do not appear in the head of any rule. In core ASP, such predicates
are universally false. To obtain the same effect in ASP-FO, we add an additional “empty” D-
module (Def , {}), where Def is the set of these predicates.
Theorem 3
Let Π be a core ASP program over a ﬁnite vocabulary Σ with a proper splitting {Π1, . . . , Πn}.
Then an interpretation M is an answer set of Π if and only if M is a model of the ASP-FO
theory {H(ΣF ), bΠ1, . . . , bΠn, (Def , {})}, where Def = ΣP \ hd(Π).
This theorem essentially follows from the splitting result of Ferraris et al. (2011). We present an
argument in the appendix, as it requires technical notation and concepts not related to the main
topic of the paper.
Theorem 3 implies that answer sets of the GDT program (7) coincide with Herbrand models
of the ASP-FO theory (10). More generally, Theorem 3 states that properly splittable ASP pro-
grams can be embedded in ASP-FO while preserving their implicit internal structure. It therefore

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
29
implies that such a program can be understood as the monotone conjunction of the ASP-FO mod-
ules of which it consists. Thus, even though ASP is a nonmonotonic logic, its nonmonotonicity
is restricted to individual ASP-FO modules of which it consists. In this way, the theorem paves
the way towards an informal semantics of GDT programs by reducing the problem to ﬁnding the
informal semantics of their generate, deﬁne and test modules.
6 Informal semantics of ASP-FO
In this section, we develop the theory of informal semantics OBI for ASP-FO. We use the Hamil-
tonian cycle ASP-FO theory (10) as a test case. Through the model-preserving embedding of
Theorem 3, this informal semantics applies to the original GDT program (7).
The Hamiltonian cycle theory expresses that a graph In is a Hamiltonian cycle of graph Edge:
a linear cyclic subgraph of Edge that includes all vertices. The intended interpretation I of the
predicate symbols of this theory can be speciﬁed as follows:
• I(Node): “#1 is a vertex”
• I(Edge): “there is an edge from #1 to #2 in graph Edge”
• I(In): “there is an edge from #1 to #2 in graph In” and
• I(T ): “#2 is reachable from #1 in graph In”.
In addition to the above predicate symbols, the vocabulary of this theory also contains a num-
ber of constant symbols v, w, . . .. These are intended to represent the nodes of the graph. We
therefore also add the Herbrand module H(ΣF ) to the theory.
The composition operator of ASP-FO theories
Formally, a structure A is a model of an ASP-FO theory if it is a model of each of its modules. In
our Tarskian perspective, this means that a world is possible according to a theory if it is possible
according to each of its modules. Thus, as for FO, the composition operator that describes how
the meaning of a theory depends on the meaning of its elements is simply the standard conjunc-
tion: if an ASP-FO theory T consists of modules Ψ1, . . . , Ψn, then OBL
I(T ) is the conjunction of
the statements OBL
I(Ψi), . . ., OBL
I(Ψn). Therefore, adding a new module to an ASP-FO theory
is a monotone operation, in the same way that adding an additional formula to an FO theory is.
Theorem 3 shows that a GDT program (to be precise, a core ASP program with a proper
splitting) can be viewed as a monotone conjunction of its components. Thus, the nonmonotonic-
ity of an ASP program in the GDT style is conﬁned to individual components. Indeed, we will
see that the informal composition operators that construct G-modules and D-modules from in-
dividual rules are not monotone. That is, the meaning of G-modules and D-modules cannot be
understood as a simple conjunction of the meanings of their rules.
Informal semantics of T-modules (FO sentences)
Formally, a T-module T consists of FO sentences under their classical semantics. Therefore, we
set OBI(T ) = FOI(T ). In the case of theory (10), this yields the following readings for its
T-modules. The T-module
∀x∀y∀z¬(In(x, y) ∧In(x, z) ∧y ̸= z)

30
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
states that for all x, for all y and for all z, it is not the case that there are edges from x to y and
from x to z in graph In and that y and z are not the same. This can be restated as: each domain
element is the start of at most one edge in the graph In.
The T-module
∀x∀y∀z¬(In(x, z) ∧In(y, z) ∧x ̸= y)
has a similar reading, which can be equivalently stated as: each domain element is the end of
most one edge in the graph In. The T-module
∀x∀y¬(Node(x) ∧Node(y) ∧¬T (x, y))
says that for every x and for every y, it is not the case that x and y are nodes, and y is not
reachable from x in graph In. This can be equivalently stated as: every node is reachable from
every other node in graph In.
The three propositions above are precisely the properties that the graph In should satisfy to
be a Hamiltonian cycle of the graph Edge. They therefore represent precisely what the ASP
programmer intended to encode.
Informal semantics of G-modules (choice rules) Choice rules in ASP are often explained in a
computational way, as “generators of the search space.” In this section, we develop a declarative
interpretation for choice rules in ASP-FO.
We start by rewriting G-modules using a process similar to predicate completion (Clark, 1978).
First, every choice rule (8) in a G-module is rewritten as
∀¯y ({P(¯y)} ←∃¯x(¯y = ¯t ∧ϕ)).
Second, all resulting choice rules, say,
∀¯x ({P(¯x)} ←ϕi),
for i = 1, . . . , n
are combined into a single one:
∀¯x ({P(¯x)} ←ϕ1 ∨· · · ∨ϕn).
(11)
We denote the result of this rewriting of a G-module G to a singleton G-module by S(G). It is
evident that the rewriting preserves models.
Theorem 4
Every G-module G is equivalent to the singleton G-module S(G).
This result is important because singleton G-modules have a simple representation as FO
sentences.
Theorem 5
An interpretation M satisﬁes a singleton G-module {∀¯x ({P(¯x)} ←ϕ)} if and only if M
satisﬁes FO sentence ∀¯x (P(¯x) ⇒ϕ).
Proof. By Deﬁnition 11, M satisﬁes {∀¯x ({P(¯x)} ←ϕ)} if and only if for each variable
assignment θ such that M, θ |= P(¯x) it holds that M, θ |= ϕ. This is precisely the condition for
M to satisfy ∀¯x (P(¯x) ⇒ϕ).
QED
For instance, the singleton G-module
{∀x∀y({In(x, y)} ←Edge(x, y))}

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
31
of the ASP-FO theory (10) corresponds to the FO sentence
∀x∀y(In(x, y) ⇒Edge(x, y)).
(12)
We call the result of ﬁrst rewriting a G-module G to a singleton G-module and then translating
the latter to FO the completion of G. We denote it by Gcompl(G). The following consequence of
Theorem 4 provides the key property of Gcompl(G).
Corollary 6
Every G-module G is equivalent to the FO sentence Gcompl(G).
This corollary demonstrates that G-modules can be simulated by T-modules. It follows that
ASP-FO theories can be seen as consisting of FO sentences and D-modules.
A G-module G for a predicate P is a set of choice rules
{ {P(¯t1)} ←ϕ1, . . . , {P(¯tn)} ←ϕn }.
(13)
By Corollary 6, such G is equivalent to Gcompl(G):
∀¯y(P(¯y) ⇒∃¯x1(¯y = ¯t1 ∧ϕ1) ∨· · · ∨∃¯xn(¯y = ¯tn ∧ϕn)).
Thus, given some intended interpretation I for a vocabulary Σ, and a G-module G over Σ of
the form (13), the informal semantics OBI(G) must be equivalent to the informal semantics
FOI(Gcompl(G)). With this in mind, we deﬁne OBI(G) by restating FOI(Gcompl(G)) as
follows:
In general, for each ⃗x, P I[⃗x] is false. However, there are exceptions as expressed by the following rules:
−If FOI(ϕ1), then it might be that FOI(P(¯t1)).
. . .
−If FOI(ϕn), then it might be that FOI(P(¯tn)).
−There are no other exceptions.
This deﬁnition implicitly speciﬁes the meaning of the logical connectives occurring in choice
rule bodies, the rule operator ←, and the composition operator that forms a G-module out of its
rules. We now make this meaning explicit.
First, in the translation of G-modules to FO sentences, choice rule bodies ϕi are treated as
“black boxes,” that are simply copied and pasted into FO expressions. This shows that choice rule
bodies in ASP-FO not only look like, but in fact are FO expressions, with all FO logical symbols
retaining their informal semantics. In particular, this illustrates that the negation operator in the
bodies of choice rules of an ASP-FO G-module is just classical negation.
Second, to explicate the informal semantics of the rule operator and the composition operator
of G-modules, we note that the informal reading OBI(G) interprets a G-module as a local closed
world assumption (LCWA) on predicate P (local refers to the scope of the assumption, which is
restricted to P), but provides an exception mechanism to relax it. Each rule of a G-module ex-
presses an exception to the LCWA and reinstalls uncertainty, the open world assumption (OWA),
on the head atom. For instance, the G-module
{{In(x, y)} ←Edge(x, y)}
states that “The Hamiltonian path (In) is empty except that if (x, y) is an edge of the graph
G, then (x, y) might belong to it.” We note that this yields an informal but precise linguistic
reading of G and of rules in G, a reading that is indeed equivalent to the informal semantics of
G’s translation into FO which states that In is a subgraph of Edge.

32
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
It can be seen in OBI(G) that the rule operator in G-modules has unusual semantic properties.
Each rule of a G-module is a conditional “if ...then P(¯t) might be true”. Its “conclusion” re-
moves information (namely that P(¯t) is false) rather than adding some. This is unlike any other
conditional or expression in logic that we are aware of.
Also the semantic properties of the composition operator of G-modules are unique. The com-
position operator underlying G-modules is neither conjunction nor disjunction. It is also not truth
functional and not monotone. Adding a rule to a module corresponds to adding a disjunct to the
corresponding FO sentence. Hence, the underlying composition operator is anti-monotone: the
module becomes weaker with each rule added. This agrees with the role of a choice rule for
expressing an exception to the LCWA on P. The more rules there are, the more exceptions and
hence, the weaker the LCWA.
To recap, G-modules are given a precise informal semantics OBI(G) as a form of LCWA with
an exception mechanism to relax it. Logical connectives in the bodies of choice rules retain their
classical meaning. From a logical point of view, the rule operator and the composition operator
of G-modules have uncommon semantical properties. Still, OBI(G) identiﬁes a natural language
conditional that explains formal choice rules in a declarative way. For example, when applied to
the G-module of ASP-FO theory (10), it yields a correct reading of its G-module.
Informal semantics of D-modules
Humans use deﬁnitions to express abstractions of concepts they encounter. These abstractions
are necessary for us to understand the world in which we live and function, and to the ability to
relay this understanding to others. We communicate these deﬁnitions in natural language; already
as children, we are trained to compose, understand, and use them effectively. Deﬁnitions also
appear in the rigorous setting of scientiﬁc discourse. In fact, they are the main building blocks
of formal science. In scientiﬁc and mathematical texts, deﬁnitions embody the most precise and
objective forms of human knowledge. While deﬁnitions in a mathematical and scientiﬁc context
are typically formulated with more precision than the deﬁnitions we use in everyday life, they
are still informal, in the sense that they are not written in a formal language. We therefore refer
to the unambiguous, precise natural language deﬁnitions of concepts we ﬁnd in everyday life or
in science and mathematics as informal deﬁnitions.
The stated goal of D-modules of an ASP-FO theory (and the deﬁne components of a GDT
program) is to deﬁne concepts formally. We will now provide D-modules with an informal se-
mantics matching precisely the formal one. The linguistic constructs used by humans to so ef-
fectively specify (informal) deﬁnitions are natural candidates for that task. We therefore start by
reviewing some of these natural language expressions.
While there are no “ofﬁcial” linguistic rules on how to write an informal deﬁnition in a math-
ematical or scientiﬁc text, several conventions exist. Simple deﬁnitions often take the form of
“if” or “if and only if”-statements. More complex cases are inductive (recursive) deﬁnitions,
which are frequently represented as a set of informal rules, possibly with an induction order.
A good example is Deﬁnition 3, where the satisfaction relation |= is deﬁned over the sub-
formula induction order. When written according to these linguistic conventions, a deﬁnition
has a precise and objective meaning to us. Consider an intended interpretation I for a vo-
cabulary Σ, a D-module D = ⟨Def , Π⟩in this vocabulary, with Def = {P1, . . . , Pn}, and
Π = {∀¯x1(A1 ←ϕ1), . . . , ∀¯xm(Am ←ϕm)}. Assume the following translation OBI(D) of D
into natural language.

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
33
We deﬁne the relations P I
1 , . . . , P I
n in terms of Par(D)I by the following (simultaneous) induction:
−OBI(A1) if OBI(ϕ1)
. . .
−OBI(Am) if OBI(ϕm)
−In no other cases, P I
1 , . . . , P I
n hold.
This last clause (“In no other cases ...”) is usually left implicit if it is clear that we are giving a
deﬁnition. The question that we address here is whether this is a suitable informal semantics for
D-modules.
The above translation turns a D-module D into a natural language statement that follows the
linguistic conventions used to express inductive deﬁnitions. If the D-module is not recursive,
the phrase “by the following simultaneous induction” should be dropped; what remains then is
a deﬁnition by exhaustive enumeration, in which each rule represents one case. This translation
again makes use of the natural language connective “if”. As before, however, when this word is
encountered in the context of a case of an inductive deﬁnition, it has a precise and unambigu-
ous meaning which is clear to any mathematician. We refer to this meaning as the “deﬁnitional
implication”. We later discuss how this conditional relates to material implication.
We now test the stated informal semantics on the three D-modules of the Hamiltonian cycle
theory (10). The ﬁrst two modules correspond to non-recursive deﬁnitions by exhaustive enu-
meration of elements in the extensions of the Node and Edge relations, respectively. The reading
OBI(D) of the remaining D-module is as follows:
We deﬁne T in terms of the graph In by induction:
−for every x, for every y, y is reachable from x in the graph In if there is an edge from x to y graph
in In
−for every x, for every y, for every z, y is reachable from x in the graph In if z is reachable from x
in the graph In and y is reachable from z in the graph In
This is a standard monotone inductive deﬁnition of the transitive closure of graph In, which is
the intended interpretation of T/2.
Thus, we now have a proposal for a precise informal semantics OBI(·) for D-modules, and,
through the embedding result of Theorem 3, therefore also for deﬁne components in GDT pro-
grams. The informal semantics we speciﬁed reﬂects the role of these deﬁne components in the
GDT-methodology. The rest of the section is concerned with the following questions:
(a) For which D-modules D is OBI(D) a sensible informal deﬁnition of the relations in Def (D)?
(b) If OBI(D) is a sensible informal deﬁnition, are the relations deﬁned by this informal deﬁ-
nition indeed the same relations as produced by the parametrized stable semantics of the
D-module?
(c) What is the meaning of the logical connectives in such D-modules and, through the embed-
ding of GDT programs, in deﬁne components of GDT programs?
In the case of FO, and therefore also of T-modules and G-modules, the correspondence be-
tween the informal semantics FOI(ϕ) and the formal semantics of FO is made plausible by
the great similarity between Table 1 and Deﬁnition 3. In the case of D-modules, however, the
situation is more complex. The reason for this is that there is no obvious connection between
the way (parametrized) stable models are deﬁned and the way we understand informal inductive
deﬁnitions.
To address the questions (a) - (c), we will borrow from the work on the logic FO(ID) (Denecker,

34
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
2000; Denecker and Ternovska, 2008). The logic FO(ID) was conceived as a conservative exten-
sion of FO with a formal deﬁnition construct. Syntactically, FO(ID) corresponds to the fragment
of ASP-FO without G-modules. A deﬁnition in the logic FO(ID) is a set of rules of exactly the
same form as rules in D-modules. There is however a semantic difference: formal deﬁnitions in
FO(ID) are interpreted under the two-valued parametrized well-founded semantics rather than
the stable semantics.
The three questions formulated above for D-modules of the logic ASP-FO arise also for
FO(ID)’s deﬁnitions. They were investigated in detail by Denecker and Vennekens (2014). The
view taken in that study is that an informal inductive or recursive deﬁnition deﬁnes a set by
specifying how to construct it: starting from the empty set, it proceeds by iterated rule applica-
tion (possibly along some induction order) until the constructed set is saturated under rule ap-
plication. Denecker and Vennekens formalized this induction process for FO(ID) deﬁnitions D
parameterized by a Par(D)-structure A, and compared it with the well-founded model construc-
tion. They argued that if the well-founded model is two-valued, the informal semantics OBI(D)
of such a formal rule set is a sensible inductive deﬁnition and proved that all formal induction
processes converge to the well-founded model. If the well-founded model is not two-valued, then
the informal semantics OBI(D) of such a formal rule set is not a sensible informal deﬁnition and
the induction processes do not converge. This motivated them to call a deﬁnition D of FO(ID)
total in a Par(D)-structure A if the parametrized well-founded model of D in A is two-valued.
Their punch line is that for deﬁnitions D that are total in A, the informal semantics OBI(D)
presented above is a sensible informal deﬁnition and the relations that it deﬁnes are given by the
well-founded model of D extending A.
We now observe that the logics FO(ID) and ASP-FO are tightly related, not only syntactically,
but also semantically. As long as we restrict attention to D-modules that have two-valued well-
founded models, both logics are identical.
Theorem 7 (Pelov et al. (2007))
Let D be a formal deﬁnition of FO(ID) or a D-module of ASP-FO, and let A be a Par(D)-
structure. If D is total in A, then the parameterized well-founded model of D in A is the unique
parametrized stable model of D that expands A.
Thus, we obtain an answer to question (b) for the logic ASP-FO. Provided that a D-module
D is total in A (a Par(D)-structure), OBI(D) is a correct and precise informal semantics for D
under the parametrized stable-model semantics.
The totality condition on D-modules (or FO(ID) deﬁnitions) addresses the question (a) as
it serves as a general semantic criterion for a sensible deﬁnition. Broad classes of D-modules
(FO(ID) deﬁnitions) are total in every context A. Others are total only in some contexts A. To
provide some sense of scope, the classes of non-recursive, deﬁnite, stratiﬁed and locally stratiﬁed
logic programs have straightforward generalizations as D-modules in ASP-FO (deﬁnitions in
FO(ID)). Non-recursive, deﬁnite, and stratiﬁed normal programs give rise to D-modules that
are total in every interpretation of the parameter symbols (Denecker and Ternovska, 2008) and
can be thought of as formalizations of sensible deﬁnitions in every context A. Locally stratiﬁed
normal programs give rise to deﬁnitions that are total in any Herbrand interpretation, and hence
in the context of any theory that contains H(σ).
Informal semantics of connectives in D-modules in ASP-FO and FO(ID) We now address ques-
tion (c). Just as in the case of G-modules, the informal semantics OBI(D) of D-modules im-

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
35
plicitly determines the informal semantics of the logical connectives occurring in D-module rule
bodies and of the rule operator ←. Moreover, it also determines the semantical composition op-
erator that “forms” the meaning of a D-module from its rules. The discussion below is restricted
to D-modules D for which OBI(D) is a sensible inductive deﬁnition.
The translation OBI(D) treats a rule body ϕ by simply applying the standard informal se-
mantics of FO to it. All logical symbols in rule bodies therefore retain their classical meaning.
In particular, the negation symbol in rule bodies of a D-module, and therefore, the negation as
failure symbol in rule bodies of GDT-programs is classical negation. After nearly 40 years of
controversy on the nature of negation as failure, this can be called a surprising conclusion.
The rule operator ←in D-modules represents the sort of conditional that is found in inductive
deﬁnitions in mathematical text. For example, we can phrase
OBI(∀x(Even(S(x)) ←¬Even(x)))
as the conditional “n + 1 is even if n is not even”. In the context of a deﬁnition, such a rule
sounds like a material implication. However, while it indeed entails the material implication (i.e.,
its head must be true whenever its body is true), it is in fact much stronger than that (in particular,
its head may not be arbitrarily true) and is not even a truth functional object. In particular, each
rule is an “instruction” in the iterative “recipe” provided by an informal deﬁnition to construct
the deﬁned relations. This is the third kind of conditional that we encounter in this paper. In
other studies of inductive deﬁnitions, this kind of conditional has also been called a production
(Martin-L¨of, 1971).
The remaining question concerns the global informal composition operator of D-modules. In
mathematical text, this composition operator and the modular nature of deﬁnitions surface most
clearly when an existing informal deﬁnition is extended with new cases. For instance, the syntax
of modal propositional logic may be derived from that of propositional logic by a phrase such as:
“We extend the deﬁnition of propositional logic with the additional case that if ϕ is a formula,
then so is Kϕ”. In our terminology, this natural language statement is invoking the informal
composition operator of inductive deﬁnitions to add an additional rule to an existing deﬁnition.
Such an additional rule has an impact on the construction process speciﬁed by the deﬁnition, and
therefore also on the relation that is eventually constructed. After the addition, the deﬁned set of
formulas becomes strictly larger since more formulas can be constructed. However, the extension
has a non-monotonic effect (in the sense used in the area of non-monotonic reasoning). Indeed,
before the addition, the deﬁnition entailed for each propositional symbol p that Kp was not a
formula; after adding the rule, the deﬁnition entails that Kp is a formula. This is a revision and
neither monotone nor antimonotone.
We observe that from a logical perspective, the rule operator and the global D-module com-
position have very unusual properties and are truly non-classical. In themselves, they are not
truth-functional. Yet, the deﬁnitions they form are — a deﬁnition expresses a particular logical
relation between parameter and deﬁned symbols that can be true or false in structures interpreting
these symbols. In summary, these non-standard features do not stop human experts from under-
standing inductive deﬁnitions and the compositional nature of deﬁnitions, allowing them e.g., to
properly judge how an additional case changes the deﬁned concept.

36
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
How much of ASP practice is covered by OBI(·)?
The transformation to ASP-FO in Theorem 3 is equivalence preserving. Consequently, OBI(·)
provides a precise informal semantics that captures the content of splittable ASP programs, under
the condition that the resulting D-modules are total. Here, we assess how much of ASP practice
is covered by these translations.
Theorem 3 applies to core ASP programs Π that have a proper splitting. Experience suggests
that deﬁne components in GDT programs map frequently to classes of D-modules that are known
to be total (non-recursive, deﬁnite, stratiﬁed, locally stratiﬁed). For example, in the Hamiltonian
cycle program (7), two D-modules are non-recursive and one is negation-free. In an attempt
to verify this on a broader scale, we examined benchmark programs of the 2013 ASP system
competition (Alviano et al., 2013a). In this experiment, we used an extended version of ASP-
FO that supports weight constraints and aggregate expressions which occur in many practical
ASP programs. The reading OBI and Theorem 3 can be generalized for this formalism (see the
next section). A few of the benchmarks such as the strategic company program contain disjunc-
tion in the head; to these our theory does not apply. Other benchmarks were properly splittable
and could easily be translated into ASP-FO following almost literally the embedding of Theo-
rem 3. In most cases, we could split and apply the trivial syntactic transformations exempliﬁed
in transforming (7) to (10). Few places required more than these trivial transformations to ex-
press generate parts. Most importantly, we observed that in all our experiments, the D-modules
obtained after splitting yielded total deﬁnitions. Indeed, the rule sets belonged to one of the afore-
mentioned classes of total D-modules (non-recursive, positive, stratiﬁed or locally stratiﬁed) and
they clearly expressed deﬁnitions of the head predicates in terms of the parameter symbols. Thus,
OBI(·) provided a precise and correct interpretation for the benchmark programs considered.
This observation provides experimental evidence for the claim that the GDT paradigm requires
only total D-modules, and that the informal semantics OBI(D) therefore sufﬁces to cover GDT
practice. A similar observation was made by Erdo˘gan and Lifschitz (2004), who note that
[w]e expect the rules in the deﬁne part of a program to not add or remove potential solutions, but just to
extend each of them by adding the deﬁned atoms appropriately.
This is obviously in keeping with our restriction to total D-modules, which have a unique stable
model for each interpretation of their parameters. To ensure this property, Erdo˘gan and Lifschitz
(2004) restrict attention to D-modules without negated occurrences of deﬁned atoms—i.e., those
that correspond to monotone inductive deﬁnitions such as that of transitive closure. Using the
results of Denecker and Ternovska (2008) allows us to be more general, by considering also
stratiﬁed non-monotone inductive deﬁnitions such as that of the satisfaction relation.
Table 8 recaps the essence of the new theory OBI of informal semantics. Here, rows 9 and 10
give the informal semantics of T- and G-modules, whereas row 11 gives the informal semantics
for deﬁnitional rules for D-modules. Row 12 speciﬁes that the informal composition operator
underlying D-modules is the one underlying inductive deﬁnitions. Row 13 gives the implicit
composition operator of ASP-FO itself (i.e., it explains what it means to gather a number of
modules into a theory). As a comparison to Table 1 shows, the D-module composition operator
(row 12) and the rule operator (row 11) are the only non-classical elements.

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
37
Table 8. The objective informal semantics for ASP-FO.
ϕ
OBI(ϕ)
1
f(t1, . . . , tn)
I(f)⟨FOL
I(t1), . . . , FOL
I(tn)⟩
2
P(t1, . . . , tn)
I(P)⟨FOL
I(t1), . . . , FOL
I(tn)⟩
3
ϕ ∨ψ
OBI(ϕ) or OBI(ψ) (or both)
4
ϕ ∧ψ
OBI(ϕ) and OBI(ψ)
5
¬ϕ
it is not the case that OBI(ϕ)
(i.e., OBI(ϕ) is false)
6
ϕ ⇒ψ
if OBI(ϕ) then OBI(ψ)
(in the sense of material implication)
7
∃x ϕ
there exists an x in the universe of discourse such that
OBI(ϕ)
8
∀x ϕ
for all x in the universe of discourse, OBI(ϕ)
9
T-module {ϕ}
FOI(ϕ)
10
G-module G
FOI(Gcompl(G))
11
A ←ϕ
if OBI(ϕ) then OBI(A)
(in the sense of deﬁnitional implication)
12
D-module
D = {r1, . . . , rn}
The relations I(Def(D)) are deﬁned in terms of
I(Par(D)) by the following (simultaneous) induc-
tion:
• OBI(r1)
• . . .
• OBI(rn)
13
ASP-FO theory
T = {M1, . . . , Mn}
OBI(M1) and . . . and OBI(M1)
7 ASP-FO as a classical logic
The presented informal semantics OBI is for the most part classical. Thus, we expect ASP-FO
to share many properties with FO. If not, then OBI should be easily refutable. In this section,
we investigate a number of FO properties in the context of ASP-FO.
The following simple property is a direct consequence of our deﬁnitions.
Proposition 8

38
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
Let Φ be an ASP-FO module over vocabulary Σ. If A, B are two interpretations such that A|Σ =
B|Σ, then A |= Φ if and only if B |= Φ.
This result states that, like an FO formula, an ASP-FO module does not impose constraints on
symbols that do not appear in it, i.e., any expansion of a model of an ASP-FO module is again a
model. In particular, ASP-FO has no implicit global closed world assumption (CWA).
A key property of FO is that substituting a formula ϕ for a formula ψ that is equivalent to ϕ
preserves equivalence. We should hope that the same proposition holds in ASP-FO. The follow-
ing theorem states this property for T-modules and G-modules.
Theorem 9 (Substitution property for G- and T-modules)
Let ψ, ϕ be two equivalent FO formulas. Let T ′ be obtained from an ASP-FO theory T by
substituting any number of occurrences of ψ for ϕ in T-modules and in the bodies of rules in
G-modules. Then T and T ′ have the same models.
Proof. This is a consequence of the substitution property in FO and the fact that T-modules
are FO formulas and G-modules are equivalent to FO formulas through the transformation of
Corollary 6.
QED
The situation is less straightforward for D-modules, where the formal semantics depends on
the concept of the Kleene three-valued truth assignment (Kleene, 1952). As explained in the
discussion following Deﬁnition 12, Kleene’s three-valued truth assignment can be derived from
the notion of the satisfaction relation for pairs of interpretations. Nevertheless, here it is useful to
give the explicit deﬁnition.
Let ˜A be a three-valued structure, i.e., one which interprets each predicate symbol P/n as a
function from dom(˜A)n to the set of truth values {t, f, u}. We order these truth values under the
truth order as f ≤t u ≤t t and deﬁne the complement operator f−1 = t, t−1 = f and u−1 = u.
Proceeding by induction in a similar way as in Deﬁnition 3, we deﬁne the truth value ϕ˜A,θ of a
formula ϕ with respect to ˜A. This deﬁnition follows Kleene’s weak truth tables.
−P(t1, . . . , tn)
˜A := P ˜A(t˜A
1 , . . . , t˜A
n);
−(¬ψ)
˜A := (ψ ˜A)−1;
−(ψ ∧ϕ)
˜A := Min≤(ψ ˜A, ϕ˜A,);
−(ψ ∨ϕ)
˜A := Max≤(ψ ˜A, ϕ˜A);
−(∃x ψ)
˜A := Max≤({ψ ˜A[x:d]|d ∈D});
−(∀x ψ)
˜A := Min≤({ψ ˜A[x:d]|d ∈D}).
To link this deﬁnition with Deﬁnition 12, each three-valued structure ˜A corresponds to a pair
(Al, Au) of two-valued structures. To obtain Al and Au from ˜A, u is mapped to f and to t,
respectively. Consequently, Al represents a lower approximation of the (two-valued) structures
represented by A, and Au represents an upper approximation. The relationship between ϕ˜A and
(ϕ(Al,Au), ϕ(Au,Al)) is given by the following correspondences: t ↔(t, t), f ↔(f, f), and u ↔
(f, t). The tuple (t, f) does not arise since Al ≤t Au.
Deﬁnition 19
We call FO formulas ψ, ϕ 3-equivalent, denoted ψ ≡3 ϕ, if for every three-valued structure ˜A
interpreting all symbols of ψ, ϕ, ψ ˜A = ϕ˜A.

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
39
Two 3-equivalent FO formulas are also equivalent since (two-valued) interpretations are a
special case of three-valued interpretations. The inverse is not true and some properties of FO,
such as the law of excluded middle, do not hold in three-valued logic. For instance, ⊤(true) and
ϕ∨¬ϕ, or ϕ and (ϕ∧ψ)∨(ϕ∧¬ψ) are not 3-equivalent. However, most standard equivalences
are also 3-equivalences:
−¬¬ϕ ≡3 ϕ (double negation);
−¬(ϕ ∧ψ) ≡3 ¬ϕ ∨¬ψ (De Morgan);
−¬(ϕ ∨ψ) ≡3 ¬ϕ ∧¬ψ (De Morgan);
−(ϕ ∧ψ) ∨(¬ϕ ∧¬ψ) ≡3 (¬ϕ ∨ψ) ∧(ϕ ∨¬ψ) (these are two rewritings of ϕ ⇔ψ);
−¬∀¯x ϕ ≡3 ∃¯x ¬ϕ;
−¬∃¯x ϕ ≡3 ∀¯x ¬ϕ;
−distributivity laws, commutativity and associativity laws, idempotence, etc.
Theorem 10 (Substitution property for D-modules)
Let formulas ψ and ϕ be 3-equivalent. If an ASP-FO theory T ′ is obtained from an ASP-FO
theory T by substituting any number of occurrences of ψ for ϕ in bodies of rules in D-modules,
then T and T ′ have the same models.
Proof. In (Pelov et al., 2007), it was shown that the parametrized stable models of a D-module
D can be characterized as a speciﬁc kind of ﬁxpoints, called stable ﬁxpoints, of the three-valued
immediate consequence operator associated to D. Since any substitution of a formula by a 3-
equivalent formula preserves the operator, it also preserves its stable models. Consequently,
models are preserved, too.
QED
Thus, most standard FO transformations are equivalence preserving D-modules as well. In
other words, virtually all standard “laws of thought” apply in ASP-FO: the De Morgan laws,
double negation, distributivity, associativity, commutativity, idempotence. This property of ASP-
FO has deep practical implications. It means that the programmer has (almost) the same freedom
as in FO to express an informal proposition in ASP-FO. It also implies that the correctness of the
programmer’s formalization does not depend on subtleties of the formalization that go beyond
common understanding.
Here is an example of a standard FO transformation that is not equivalence preserving in the
context of a D-module. Since the law of excluded middle does not hold in 3-valued logic, the
formulas ⊤and P ∨¬P are equivalent but not 3-equivalent. Substituting the second for the ﬁrst
in the body of the rule of the D-module:
{P ←⊤}
results in the non-equivalent D-module:
{P ←P ∨¬P}.
Indeed, the ﬁrst module has a unique model {P}, while the second has no models. Thus,
reasoning by cases does not in general preserve equivalence in D-modules. The explanation
of this phenomenon lies in the nature of inductive deﬁnitions (and not in, e.g., the nature of
negation in D-modules). Indeed, (inductive) deﬁnitions are sensitive to negated propositions
in rule bodies, because such propositions constrain the order in which rules may be applied
(Denecker and Vennekens, 2014). Therefore, rewriting rule bodies while adding such propo-
sitions may disturb the rule application process in an irrecoverable way and turn a sensible

40
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
deﬁnition in a non-sensible one. Denecker and Vennekens (2014) demonstrate that similar phe-
nomenon can be observed in mathematical texts.
While this example shows that reasoning by cases cannot be applied in general, the following
theorem illustrates that any equivalence preserving transformation of classical logic, including
reasoning by cases, can be applied to D-module rule bodies, provided it is used with care. In
particular, the transformation should not destroy the totality of the deﬁnition.
Theorem 11 (Second substitution property for D-modules)
Let ψ ≡ϕ and let T ′ be obtained from the ASP-FO theory T by substituting occurrences of ψ
for ϕ in the bodies of rules in D-modules. If T and T ′ are both total, then T and T ′ have the
same models.
Proof. Also this theorem was proven by Pelov et al. (2007). In fact, it is a consequence of a more
general property (Pelov et al., 2007) that if two D-modules have the same 2-valued immediate
consequence operator, then the well-founded models of both may be different but they are not
contradicting each other. That is: there are no atoms that are true in one and false in the other.
Any application of an equivalence preserving rule on a body of a D-module obviously preserves
the 2-valued immediate consequence operator. If both D-modules are total, their well-founded
models are 2-valued and hence, identical. These models are also the unique stable models of the
two D-modules.
QED
These results essentially show that we are free to apply any equivalence preserving transfor-
mation of FO to the rule bodies of a D-module, as long as we are careful not to turn the D-module
into a nonsensical inductive deﬁnition.
8 Related Work and Discussion
This section discusses the scope of the results in this article and situates them within the ASP
literature.
Extending the core ASP language A limitation of the core ASP language studied in this arti-
cle is that it lacks aggregates or weight constraints. Indeed, such constructs are used in many
ASP applications. Pelov et al. (2007) extend FO(ID) with aggregates. That work can be adopted
“verbatim” to the case of the logic ASP-FO. Importantly, extending OBI(ϕ) to theories with
aggregates is also not problematic. A clear-cut example of a D-module involving induction over
aggregates is the following deﬁnition specifying that a company x controls a company y if the
sum of the shares of y that x owns directly and of the shares of y owned by companies c con-
trolled by x is more than 50%.



∀x(Cont(x, y) ←50 <
Sum

(s, c) : (c = x ∧Shares(x, y, s))∨
(Cont(x, c) ∧Shares(c, y, s))

)



This is an example of a monotone inductive deﬁnition with recursion over aggregate expressions.
Under the intended informal semantics for the Sum aggregate, OBI(·) produces the following
informal reading of this D-module:
The relation “x controls y” is deﬁned in terms of the relation “x holds s percent of shares in y” by the
following induction:

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
41
• Consider the sum of the percentages s for companies c such that either c and x are the same and
x holds s percent of shares in y or x controls c and c holds s percent of shares in y. If this sum is
greater then 50, then x controls y.
This informal inductive deﬁnition provides a precise and meaningful interpretation of the recur-
sion over an aggregate in the D-module above.
Links to other developments in ASP Pearce (1997) proposed to use the logic of Here and There
(HT) as a meta-logic to study ASP semantics. Pearce’s work maps an ASP program to a theory
in HT and characterizes its answer sets as a speciﬁc subclass of the models of this theory, called
equilibrium models. Pearce and Valverde (2004, 2005) generalized these ideas to arbitrary ﬁrst
order formulas. Also Ferraris et al. (2011) conservatively lifted ASP to the full FO syntax using a
form of circumscription – an operator SM deﬁned in second order logic. These characterizations
proved to be useful for analyzing and extending ASP semantics. For example, the logic HT was
shown to underlie the notion of strong equivalence of programs (Lifschitz et al., 2001, 2007),
while the use of operator SM provided an elegant alternative to the deﬁnition of stable models
of logic programs containing choice rules. The relation between these different approaches was
investigated in Lin and Zhou (2011).
While these characterizations are powerful formal tools (e.g., our Theorem 3 follows from a
result proved by Ferraris et al. (2011) about the SM operator), they do not in themselves directly
contribute to the understanding of the informal semantics of ASP. For example, neither the in-
formal semantics of HT nor of equilibrium logic has been developed so far. Similar arguments
apply to the semantics of logic programs under operator SM, where the effect of this operator on
the informal semantics of the formulas has not yet been studied.
Several features of ASP-FO also appear in other variants of ASP. As we observed earlier, the
intuitive structure of a GDT-program is hidden in an ASP program. Techniques developed in ASP
to cope with this include splitting to detect natural components of the program (Lifschitz and Turner,
1994; Janhunen et al., 2009; Ferraris et al., 2009), and module systems, e.g., in (Gelfond, 2002;
Oikarinen and Janhunen, 2008; Lierler and Truszczynski, 2013).
Due to its non-Herbrand semantics, ASP-FO imposes neither Domain Closure Axiom nor the
Unique Names Axiom. Thus, function symbols that are not constrained by a Herbrand module
act as function symbols in classical logic. Recent extensions of ASP with similar features are
open domain ASP logics such as those of Ferraris et al. (2011); Lifschitz et al. (2012) and ASP
with functions (Lin and Wang, 2008; Balduccini, 2012; Cabalar, 2011). The progression seman-
tics of Zhang and Zhou (2010) and Zhou and Zhang (2011) also allows non-Herbrand models
and makes a distinction between the intensional and extensional predicates of a theory. The
ordered completion semantics (Asuncion et al., 2012) provides another way to deﬁne ASP for
non-Herbrand models, which has also been extended to aggregates (Asuncion et al., 2012). A
detailed comparison with these languages would be interesting but is beyond the scope of this
paper.
Well-founded versus stable semantics Comparisons between the well-founded and stable seman-
tics have long been the subject of discussion. Our position is that once these semantics are gen-
eralized to their parametrized versions and the internal structure of a program (in particular its
deﬁne components) is identiﬁed, then the differences between both semantics disappear for prac-
tically relevant programs. They are just different mathematical formalizations for the same in-
formal semantics: sets of clauses that deﬁne certain predicates/relations in terms of parameter

42
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
symbols. However, while the two semantics are equivalent in the case of sensible (i.e., total) def-
initions, they are not equivalent in the case of other rule sets. The well-founded semantics iden-
tiﬁes non-total deﬁnitions by producing a 3-valued model. In the stable semantics, nonsensical
deﬁnitions are revealed by the absence of stable models or by multiple stable models. However,
some programs have a unique stable model, but are not sensible deﬁnitions. For instance, the
following logic program with three deﬁned symbols a, b and f and no parameter symbols



f ←¬f ∧b
a ←¬b
b ←¬a



has a unique stable model {a} but does not represent a sensible deﬁnition of a, b, and f.
In practice, if ASP programmers avoid rule sets with cycles over negation, deﬁnitions are
total and the two semantics coincide. The evolving GDT-programming methodology in ASP dis-
courages cycles over negation as an encoding technique in favour of more direct representations
based on the use of choice rules. This means that the debate between both semantics is losing its
practical relevance.
Tools for ASP-FO and FO(ID) ASP-FO is more than a theoretical mechanism for a semantic
study of GDT programs. It is also a viable logic for which efﬁcient tools already exist.
Similarly to FO and FO(ID), ASP-FO is an open domain logic and its models can be inﬁnite.
In general, its satisﬁability problem is undecidable (and not just co-semidecidable) — this can be
proved by adapting the corresponding result concerning the logic FO(ID) (Denecker and Ternovska,
2008). In many search problems, however, a ﬁnite domain is given. That opens a way to practical
problem solving. One can apply, e.g., ﬁnite model checking, ﬁnite satisﬁability checking, ﬁnite
Herbrand model generation or, in case the domain and data are available as an input structure,
model expansion (Mitchell and Ternovska, 2005).
Answer set programmingsolvers such as Smodels (Niemel¨a and Simons, 2000), DLV (Leone et al.,
2006), CMODELS (Giunchiglia et al., 2006), clasp (Gebser et al., 2007a), and WASP (Alviano et al.,
2013b) can be viewed as systems supporting a subset of ASP-FO (modulo the rewriting that we
proposed). Also, ASP-FO/FO(ID) is formally an extension of Abductive Logic Programming,
and hence, abductive reasoners such as the solver A-system (Kakas et al., 2001) can be seen to
implement abductive reasoning for a fragment of ASP-FO/FO(ID).
Several systems have been designed with the intention to support extensions or variants of
FO with rules. An early ﬁnite Herbrand model generator that supported a fragment of ASP-
FO/FO(ID) was developed by East and Truszczynski (2006). This system supports clausal logic
and a set of deﬁnite Horn rules under the minimal model semantics; in our terminology this is a
negation-free D-module representing a monotone inductive deﬁnition. Another solver is the En-
fragmo system (Aavani et al., 2012) that supports model expansion for FO and non-recursive def-
initions. Both systems support aggregates. Also, Microsoft’s system FORMULA (Jackson and Schulte,
2013) supports a form of satisﬁability checking for a similar logic.
At present, the IDP system (Wittocx et al., 2008; Bruynooghe et al., 2015) offers the most
complete implementation of ASP-FO as well as FO(ID). IDP is a knowledge base system that
provides various forms of inference, including model expansion and Herbrand model generation.
From a KR point of view, the system was developed to support essentially the GDT methodology:
the representation of assertional knowledge (corresponding to G- and T-modules) and deﬁnitional
knowledge (D-modules). The language supported by IDP includes FO, D-modules, aggregates,

The informal semantics of Answer Set Programming: A Tarskian perspective
43
quantiﬁed existential quantiﬁers, multiple deﬁnitions, bounded forms of arithmetic, uninterpreted
functions and constructor functions, etc. G-modules are to be “emulated” by FO formulas. A ﬂag
can be used to select the parametrized stable or well-founded semantics for rule sets; this switches
the system effectively between (extensions of) ASP-FO and FO(ID).
ASP-FO and FO(ID) in a historical perspective Originally, logic programming was seen as the
Horn fragment of classical logic. This view soon became untenable due to negation as failure.
One of the earliest proposed explanations was the view of logic programs as deﬁnitions. It under-
lied the work of Clark (1978) and Chandra and Harel (1982). It was also present in Kowalski’s
book (1979). In 1988, Gelfond and Lifschitz proposed the autoepistemic view of logic programs
as a synthesis of logic programming and nonmonotonic reasoning. This proposal led to the de-
velopment of ELP in 1991. Note that nonmonotonic reasoning, one of the roots of ELP, had
been developed ﬁfteen years earlier as a reaction against the shortcomings of classical logic for
common-sense knowledge representation.
The research direction set out by Chandra and Harel was followed up by Apt et al. (1988) and
Van Gelder et al. (1991). Although the link between logic programs and inductive deﬁnitions
was at the heart of these developments, it was not made explicit. The link was strengthened again
by Schlipf (1995) and later fully explicated by Denecker et al. (2001); it led to the logic FO(ID)
(Denecker, 2000; Denecker and Ternovska, 2008). Interestingly, the latter logic grew out of a
semantic study of another knowledge representation extension of logic programming: Abduc-
tive Logic Programming (Kakas et al., 1992). In ASP-FO and FO(ID), the main relict of logic
programs is the D-module which is viewed as a (possibly inductive) deﬁnition. Our Tarskian
perspective is a proposal to “backtrack” to the early view of logic programs as deﬁnitions. Thus,
the present paper is a conﬂuence of many research directions. ASP arose at the meeting point
of two logic paradigms—nonmonotonic reasoning and logic programming—that in origin were
antitheses to classical logic. One of the contributions here is to reconcile ASP with the objec-
tive informal semantics of classical logic. This is the crucial step towards a synthesis of these
languages, as is achieved in ASP-FO and FO(ID).
9 Conclusion
The goal of this paper was to develop a theory of the informal semantics of ASP that:
• explains the ASP practice of GDT programming, and
• matches the informal reading of an ASP expression with the informal proposition that the
human programmer has in mind when he writes it.
To conduct our analysis, we presented the formalism ASP-FO, whose modular structure is geared
speciﬁcally towards the GDT paradigm and in which the internal structure of GDT programs is
made explicit. By reinterpreting answer sets as objective possible worlds rather than as belief
sets, we obtained an informal semantics for the GDT fragment of ASP that combines modules
by means of the standard conjunction, and captures the roles of different modules in GDT-based
programs. This allowed us to clarify the nature of the three sorts of conditionals found in ASP,
and of the negation symbol in G, D, and T-modules. In addition, the close connection between
ASP-FO and FO(ID) assisted us in providing, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst argument for
the correctness of the stable model semantics as a formalization of the concept of an (inductive)
deﬁnition.

44
Denecker, Lierler, Truszczynski and Vennekens
A study of a logic’s informal semantics is an investigation into the foundations of the logic.
We showed that explaining ASP from a Tarskian point of view has a deep impact on our view of
the ASP language. All together, our study forces us to reconsider the intuitive meaning of ASP’s
basic connectives, it redeﬁnes ASP’s position in the spectrum of logics and it shows much tighter
connections with existing logics including FO and FO(ID).
