1 
 
Prediction of a Mobile Solid State in Dense Hydrogen 
under High Pressures 
Hua Y. Geng*, Q. Wu, and Y. Sun 
 National Key Laboratory of Shock Wave and Detonation Physics, Institute of Fluid Physics, 
CAEP; P.O.Box 919-102 Mianyang, Sichuan, P. R. China, 621900 
 
Abstract 
Solid rigidity and liquid-scale mobility are thought incompatible in 
elemental substances. One cannot have an elemental solid that is long-range 
positionally ordered wherein the atoms flow like in a liquid simultaneously. The 
only exception might be the hypothetical supersolid state of 4He. In this work, we 
demonstrate that such exotic state could exist even in the classical regime. Using 
ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) and ab initio path integral molecular 
dynamics (AI-PIMD), a novel state of dense hydrogen which simultaneously has 
both long-range spatial ordering and liquid-scale atomic mobility is discovered at 
1~1.5 TPa (1 TPa10000000 atmospheric pressures). The features distinct from a 
normal solid and liquid are carefully characterized, with the stability and 
melting behavior are investigated. Extensive AI-PIMD simulations further 
revealed that this state might be (meta-)stable even at ultra-low temperatures, 
suggesting an emerging candidate for an alternative type of supersolid state in 
dense metallic hydrogen. 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
Table of Contents (TOC) Graphic 
 
 
 

3 
 
The solid state of matter is usually characterized by the structural rigidity and 
spontaneous resistance to the change in its shape against external forces. The particles 
in a typical solid are tightly bound to each other, and vibrate around their equilibrium 
sites. In a crystalline state, particles distribute in a regular geometric lattice, thus 
giving long-range positional ordering.1 Amorphous or glassy states are also 
considered as solid, except there particles distribute irregularly. Usually a crystalline 
state must be a solid, and to crystallize is always equivalent to make a solid. The 
liquid state, on the other hand, is flowing, thus being homogeneous and isotropic. It is 
absence of any long-range spatial ordering, which is a consequence of the free 
mobility of particles at both microscopic and macroscopic scales in this state.2,3 For 
this reason, anisotropy could also be considered as a precursor of crystallization. The 
intermediate state between them, or mesomorphic phase, is fascinating and attracts 
broad attention. One of the well-known examples is liquid crystal, which always 
involves highly anisotropic molecules or polymers.3-5 Another category close to this 
concept is superionic compounds, in which the heavy ions form a solid framework 
whereas the light component becomes molten and migrates through the lattice as in a 
fluid.6 Typical superionic solid has at least two or more constituents. Recently a 
similar phenomenon was also predicted in hydrides, where the hydrogen sublattice 
exhibits diffusive or liquidlike properties.7,8 So far, there is no report on elementary 
mesophase in which the same element participates in both the crystalline framework 
and moving through the lattice, thus as a genuine mobile solid. In quantum regime, it 
has long been proposed that helium might have such an exotic state that was termed as 
supersolid, though yet to be confirmed by experiment.9,10 In supersolid, large 
zero-point motion delocalizes self-vacancies of the matter to enter a Bose-Einstein 
condensate state, which allows 4He to become a superfluid while maintaining the solid 

4 
 
lattice simultaneously, mainly due to the non-locality of quantum mechanics.10 Note 
that the phase stability of crystalline helium increases rapidly with compression, thus 
it does not expect to have large atomic mobility at low temperature under high 
pressures.  
Search for an elementary mesomorphic phase is a long-standing open issue in 
physics and chemistry. The difficulty mainly roots in the tremendous degrees of 
freedom in the many-body system, which leads to complicated correlations and even 
becomes intractable in theoretical analysis. In terms of the potential energy surface, a 
crystalline state may be represented by a point on that surface defined in the 
configurational space. A homogenous liquid, on the other hand, covers a broad region 
and comprises transient configurations that might be visited by the liquid state.2 The 
exact characteristics of a mobile solid, however, are very hard to imagine. Its atomic 
motion pattern, which should maintain lattice geometry and undergo a large-scale 
liquid-like diffusion simultaneously, is quite counterintuitive.  
Fast evolved advanced computer simulation provides an alternative route to 
investigate this challenging problem. By employing path integral and ab initio 
molecular dynamics (AIMD), we will demonstrate below for the first time that even 
in the classical regime the fluid-scale atomic diffusion and three-dimensional 
long-range positional ordering can coexist harmonically in elementary substance, with 
hydrogen under extreme compression as a probable example. In this bizarre state the 
same elemental atoms participate in both the crystalline lattice formation and the mass 
transportation (or hopping) between lattice sites. The predicted existence of a classical 
mobile solid demonstrates the richness of physics and chemistry in mesophases, and 
might eventually lead to an alternative realization of supersolid state other than 
helium.10  

5 
 
The calculation is carried out using AIMD (with protons being treated as 
classical) and path integral AIMD (AI-PIMD), in which density functional theory 
(DFT) is employed to describe the electronic structures within Born-Oppenheimer 
approximation. Details of the computation are given in Methods section. At pressures 
between 1 and 1.5 TPa, we frequently observed an interesting phase of liquid dense 
hydrogen at 50 K in AI-PIMD simulations. As shown in Fig. 1, in this phase the 
diffusivity of protons, as manifested as the root of the mean square displacement 
(rMSD) evaluated with AI-PIMD, is unusually high. It is orders higher by comparison 
with regular solids with defects or dislocations at similar temperatures.11-13 By 
carefully inspecting the atomic structure and MD trajectories, we failed to find any 
well-defined dislocations or grain boundaries. Instead, it looks like all atoms 
participate in the diffusion process concertedly, though not simultaneously. Thus it is 
a bulk behavior, rather than migration confined to dislocations or boundaries. Because 
we know that bulk flowing is an intrinsic characteristic of liquid, this raises the 
speculation that in this phase the protons could be considered as a flow as in a liquid.  
This observation is consistent with previous simulations, where it was taken as a 
normal liquid.14 However, we noticed that though the calculated radial distribution 
function (RDF) gives a feature very similar to a typical liquid, a distorted lattice 
pattern still presents through the long-time averaged proton density distribution (the 
inset in the left panel of Fig. 1). This is at odds with the assumption that it is in an 
isotropic liquid state. Furthermore, the projected RDFs15 (right panel in Fig. 1) unveil 
a strong anisotropy and long-range positional ordering. This is quite different from 
our understanding about a typical liquid, in which the particle density distribution 
must not have any local or long-range features and the system must be isotropic. The 
unexpected emergence of anisotropy implies that the matter still have some crystalline 

6 
 
features, which is a strong indicator for a solid state. For these reasons, it seems 
plausible to tentatively interpret it as a novel matter state in which the solid and liquid 
features coexist harmonically in one pure phase.  
On the other hand, the observed structure pattern and anisotropy are maintained 
over a wide temperature range. As shown in Fig. 1 that was calculated with AI-PIMD 
simulations at 100 K, the increase of temperature does not change the structure pattern 
very much, and the accumulated RDF and projected RDFs are almost the same as that 
at 50 K. But interestingly, the rMSD (thus the self-diffusion mobility) is greatly 
enhanced. In other words, in this phase the atomic diffusivity can be enhanced without 
at the expense of the solid framework.  
This phenomenon inspires the conjecture that a genuine mobile solid could exist 
in this simple elemental substance. Alternatively, one might attempt to interpret this 
unexpected phenomenon by using the non-locality of quantum mechanics, being 
analogous to the hypothesized concept of supersolid.10 Nonetheless, by closely 
inspecting the bead trajectories in AI-PIMD simulations, we found that the particle 
wave function is well localized, and no tunneling events were observed.15 This signals 
that the quantum non-locality is not a necessity for this novel state to exist.  
Based on these observations, we suppose that some specific aspects in the 
potential energy surface might be the key for this bizarre state to appear. If it is true, 
then the same phase should manifest even in the classical regime. In order to verify 
this supposition, AIMD simulations with protons being treated as classical were 
intentionally carried out, in which the electronic part was accurately described with 
DFT.  
As envisioned above, the main features of the exotic state observed in AI-PIMD 

7 
 
simulations are perfectly preserved in classical AIMD simulations. Furthermore, the 
positional ordering becomes sharper and more distinct in the latter case. This could be 
due to that we have neglected the zero point motion here, which is large in hydrogen 
and always prefers to isotropic state. As shown in Fig. 2 (that marked as the fine 
potential curve), at low temperature limit, the diffusion constant is close to that of a 
typical solid state, and is at the same level of the migration of hydrogen impurity in 
solid iron.16 However, the magnitude of the proton self-diffusion constant jumps about 
4 orders higher when temperature increases from 100 to 300 K. It even becomes 
comparable to that of a typical liquid when above 225 K, as the hatched region drawn 
in Fig. 2 shows. Especially, the mobility of protons in this novel state is even 
comparable with that of air or hydrogen gas in water.16 The rapid increase of the 
diffusivity might imply a phase transition into a normal liquid phase. Nonetheless, 
simulations unveiled that the averaged positional ordering is preserved very well even 
when temperature approaches 400 K, where the diffusion constant enters a new 
regime and marks the end of the transition (see the proton density distribution patterns 
illustrated in Fig. 2). Therefore it is not a conventional melting we are familiar with. 
Rather it can be compared to the liquid crystals of anisotropic molecules.  
It is necessary to point out that nuclear quantum effect (NQE) usually broadens 
particle distribution. This is analogous to the classical kinetic effects in solid or 
liquid.17,18 Therefore a system with large quantum dispersion at low temperature can 
qualitatively be mirrored to the classical counterpart at higher temperatures if 
considered only the long-time averaged atomic structural features.15,19 We thus 
speculate that the distortion or imperfectness presented in the structure as shown in 
Fig. 1 could be mainly due to NQE. This argument is corroborated by Fig. 2, in which 
a similar proton density distribution pattern is found. But the distinct crystalline 

8 
 
features gradually fade away with increased classical kinetic motion of particles. 
On the other hand, even in these AIMD simulations the jump in the diffusivity 
is not very sharp. It proceeds with several stages. This might originate in the 
complicated energy landscape of dense hydrogen around this pressure range.20,21 In 
order to sharpen our understanding and to acquire a more clear physics picture, it 
might be helpful to go beyond the true physical world and use less accurate 
interactions that can capture the main characteristics of the potential surface. This can 
be done by a slightly coarse sampling of the k-points in DFT calculations. Degrading 
the k-point sampling resolution from a fine grid of 222 to two special k-points (the 
2KPM as defined in Ref. 15) keeps the essential physics observed here. Note that the 
resultant coarse effective interatomic potential does not correspond to the real dense 
hydrogen accurately. Rather it is a physical model to aid us in understanding about the 
underlying mechanism of the novel state just discovered.  
In this approximate model, the transition from the normal solid to the exotic 
state becomes clean-cut, as exhibited in Figs. 2 (the coarse potential curve) and 3. The 
corresponding normal solid at low temperatures is a perfect crystalline phase. It 
contains no defects or grain boundaries. The primitive cell has 48H with a space 
group of P21/c. The transition to the exotic state at ~350 K greatly enhances the 
proton mobility, which is parallel to the results of the fine potential calculated with 
accurate DFT simulations. The positional ordering (as unveiled by the proton density 
distributions in Fig. 2) is perfectly preserved after the transition finished, 
unequivocally demonstrates that it is not a typical liquid. It is worthwhile to remark 
that the increased diffusivity cannot be due to defect migration, since the latter is of 
orders smaller. For example, hydrogen diffusion constant is only about 10-8~10-7 Å2/fs 
at 672~823 K in solid LiH with point defects.22  

9 
 
In this model system, the calculated classical rMSD exhibits a typical liquid 
diffusivity at temperatures above 350 K. But at low temperatures it is of typical solid 
characteristics [Fig. 3(c)]. This is in good agreement with the diffusion constant 
shown in Fig. 2. Please notice the small hysteresis in Fig. 3(b) that occurs at 340 and 
350 K, which suggests that the transition from P21/c is first order.  
Besides the diffusivity and rMSD, a sharp change in RDF 𝑔(𝑟) also can be 
found at about 350 K [Fig. 3(a)]. Beyond this transition, the second peak of 𝑔(𝑟) 
becomes diminishing. Therefore, if inspecting only the short-range correlations, say, 
less than 2 Å, one might incorrectly conclude it as a conventional melting to the 
isotropic liquid.14 Nonetheless, long-range correlations actually persist up to 970 K 
(see also Fig. S4), and the true melting temperature of this model system thus must be 
higher.  
An intuitive comprehension about this state can be obtained via the proton 
density distribution from MD simulations, as well as its correlation with 
pressure/potential energy. For a normal solid, the particle density distribution usually 
forms well localized and separated pockets even at the vicinity of the melting 
temperature, as illustrated by the gold as an example in the Fig. S3 of the Supporting 
Information. For dense hydrogen in the 2KPM model approximation, however, there 
is a sharp jump in both the pressure and potential energy at ~350 K along the isochore 
that manifested in Fig. 3(b), which is in accordance with the exotic state transition as 
presented in Figs. 1 and 2. On the other hand, the proton density distribution forms 
isolated pockets when below 350 K, showing that under this condition the model 
system is a typical solid. Nevertheless, as the temperature increases, these pockets 
develop into interconnections and form diffusion channels. This unveils the collective 
nature of proton drift in this state. In other words, it is the long-time averaged 

10 
 
diffusion channels rather than the transient coordinates of individual particles that 
constitute the observed lattice. This mechanism is simply sketched in Fig. 3(d~f), 
which naturally accounts for the long-range positional correlations as appearing in 
RDF and projected RDFs and the high atomic mobility as revealed in self-diffusivity. 
For this state to occur, it requires anisotropy in the potential energy landscape to 
facilitate anisotropic particle diffusion. Anisotropy is rare in simple elemental metals, 
but gradually becomes common with increased compression,23 which is partially 
ascribed to the population of electrons on p orbitals that was predicted at both low 
pressures of 300 GPa23 and ultra-high pressures of 3 TPa.24 The excitation of electrons 
to p orbitals in dense hydrogen24,25 might be the ultimate source of the anisotropy 
encountered here. 
With further increase of the temperature, the lattice of this exotic state is 
gradually dissolved, eventually enters a homogeneous and isotropic liquid. The 
variation of potential energy and pressure along the isochore for this transition is 
continuous and smooth. This continuous feature also reflects in the change of proton 
density distribution, from which the melting point can roughly be estimated at 
between 1100 and 1300 K for the 2KPM classical model. The mean field theory 
dictates that any 3D melting should be first order.3 In this system, we did not find 
strong hysteresis around the melting; therefore it is likely a weak first-order transition. 
Alternatively, it also could be a physical realization of the continuous melting (or 
critical melting), which has been hypothesized and pursued for a long time.26-28     
In summary, we present a clear and intuitive example in which liquid mobility 
and crystalline long-range positional ordering coexist harmonically in both quantum 
and classical regimes, and demonstrate unequivocally that the exotic state observed in 
dense hydrogen might be a mobile solid. The solid-liquid duality in this state strongly 

11 
 
implies a supersolid state when protons become quantum, since the fluid component 
of dense hydrogen was predicted to undergo a superfluid transition.29 This mechanism 
is different from that proposed by Andreev and Lifshitz, where the delocalization of 
boson defectons is the key to make 4He have macro-scale mobility at ambient 
pressure.30 This observation marks the importance to search for a quantum liquid state 
of dense hydrogen and the emerging of an exotic supersolid state under extreme 
compressions.  
 
Methods. We use VASP31 to perform the AIMD simulations, with PAW 
pseudopotential and PBE exchange-correlation functional being employed. The 
Nose-Hoover thermostat is employed to equilibrate the temperature. The supercell 
with periodic boundary conditions contains 480 hydrogen atoms. Using such a large 
supercell reduces the possible finite size effects to a minimal level.15,24 The energy 
cutoff for the plane-wave function basis set is 600 eV. The integration over the first 
Brillouin zone was carried out using a 222 k-point grid. Denser grids of 333 and 
444 were also used to check the convergence, with the errors in pressure and 
energy are less than 0.7 GPa and 8 meV/H, respectively. The influence on atomic 
structure is negligible. The coarse potential model system was generated with a 
similar method, but use a coarse k-points set, i.e., the 2KPM as reported in Ref. (15). 
This produces a coarse effective inter-atomic potential between hydrogen atoms. The 
P21/c structure is obtained by melting the Fddd phase of dense H into liquid, and then 
followed by a long time annealing and structure optimization procedure within 2KPM. 
It is the crystalline phase that is mostly proximate to the mobile solid. It is necessary 
to point out that previous studies revealed that PBE functional is not accurate enough 
to describe H2 dissociation quantitatively.17,18 But its performance in atomic hydrogen 

12 
 
beyond 600 GPa actually is very good, as Refs. (32,33) reported. On the other hand, 
the dissociation of H2 makes the shortest interatomic distance in dense hydrogen at 
TPa scale slightly larger than in the low-pressure molecular phases, and this 
counterintuitive phenomenon validates to use the standard pseudopotential of H at the 
pressures we studied.24  
The quantum effects of protons are fully included via the path integral 
formalism of quantum statistical mechanics.34.35 AI-PIMD simulations were 
performed using a homemade path integral MD code,34 in which VASP was employed 
to produce the required inter-atomic forces. Both 32 and 64 beads along the imaginary 
time were used to discretize the Trotter decomposition of the propagators to check the 
convergence quality of the path integral. Though trial simulations showed that 32 
beads are enough to reproduce an acceptable path integral when at 50 K, only the 
highly converged results using 64 beads are reported here. The functions of RDF 
𝑔(𝑟) and MSD 〈𝑟2(𝑡)〉= 〈|𝑟𝑖(𝑡) −𝑟𝑖(0)|2〉 were calculated by ensemble average 
over the centroid coordinates of each particle. The self-diffusion constant D is 
calculated as the long time limit of the slope of the MSD, by using the Einstein 
relation 𝐷=
1
6 lim
𝑡→∞
〈𝑟2(𝑡)〉
𝑡
. The proton density distribution is generated by ensemble 
statistics of AIMD and AI-PIMD trajectories over a time range of 2 ps, by using the 
formula of 𝜌(𝒓) =
1
𝑁〈∑
𝛿(𝒓−𝒓𝑖)
𝑁
𝑖=1
〉. The initial configuration of the mobile solid in 
2KPM model is generated from the inter-mediate phase in the melting process of 
Fddd phase.15 Additional thermal cycle processes, i.e., heating and followed carefully 
annealing, were carried out using NPT ensemble to ensure its thermodynamic stability 
and to remove all possible dislocations and defects. In the classical case with a coarse 
potential model (2KPM), a perfect crystalline phase P21/c was obtained. Full AIMD 

13 
 
and AI-PIMD simulations were then carried out with canonical NVT ensemble starting 
from this structure, which spontaneously becomes a mobile solid when NQE is 
included or when the temperature is above 350 K in the classical 2KPM case. This 
procedure guarantees that the obtained mobile solid state is thermodynamically stable. 
Other settings of the computation and analysis methods are referenced to Ref. (15).   
 
Acknowledgement. This work was supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 11274281 and 11672274, the CAEP Research 
Projects 2012A0101001 and 2015B0101005. Part of the computation was performed 
using CCMS of the Institute for Materials Research at Tohoku University, Japan. 
H.Y.G. appreciates Prof. Roald Hoffmann of Cornell University for reading the 
manuscript and giving invaluable comments. 
 
Supporting Information. Extended discussions on the anisotropy in the mobile solid 
state, the NQE influence on the melting temperature, the finite size effect, and particle 
diffusion trajectory.
