A how-to guide for code-sharing in biology 
Richard J. Abdill1*, Emma Talarico2, Laura Grieneisen2 
1 - Section of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA 
2 - Department of Biology, University of British Columbia, Okanagan Campus, Kelowna, BC, Canada 

Abstract 
Computational biology continues to spread into new fields, becoming more accessible to 
researchers trained in the wet lab who are eager to take advantage of growing datasets, falling 
costs, and novel assays that present new opportunities for discovery even outside of the much-
discussed developments in artificial intelligence. However, guidance for implementing these 
techniques is much easier to find than guidance for reporting their use, leaving biologists to guess 
which details and files are relevant. Here, we provide a set of recommendations for sharing code, 
with an eye toward guiding those who are comparatively new to applying open science principles 
to their computational work. Additionally, we review existing literature on the topic, summarize the 
most common tips, and evaluate the code-sharing policies of the most influential journals in 
biology, which occasionally encourage code-sharing but seldom require it. Taken together, we 
provide a user manual for biologists who seek to follow code-sharing best practices but are unsure 
where to start. 
Introduction 
Reproducible computational practices, and open science more broadly, are the subject of many 
discussions: transparency is good, but its implementation is time-intensive and poorly incentivized 
[1]. Open research is associated with more citations and more media coverage [2], but it can 
expose researchers to new avenues for harassment and suppression [3]. There are also many 
resources promoting particular approaches to performing computational work [4,5] and 
developing research software [6]. But amidst the discussions of how to perform computational 
research, where to publish it and how to organize your files, there is a dearth of information on 
how to be transparent about work that’s already been done, particularly for biologists who may 
not specialize in computational work—many are unsure how to share code or, as a recent 
Springer Nature survey found, even where to upload it [7]. 

1 
A complicating factor is the broad variation between fields in the standards for data and code 
sharing, as well as the types of data sets and code used. For example, data sharing standards 
are well-reviewed in the ecological literature [8,9], and major journals in the field of ecology have 
extensive data sharing policies such as Ecological Society of America’s Open Research Policy 
‘Definitions’ page [10]. However, these practices are less standardized in other fields of biology. 
This means that research and journals at the intersection of multiple fields, such as microbiome 
science’s integration of medicine, ecology, and computational biology, may not have scientists 
trained in uniform standards of data and code sharing. Finally, many established best practices 
papers focus on how to design a study from the outset to fit into a reproducible science framework. 
However, science is messy, and as projects and datasets are passed between lab members, the 
researchers who are assembling the final paper for submission often inherit files and code that 
were not created using best practices. As such, a resource that guides researchers in how to 
apply open science sharing practices as best as possible to this ‘inherited’ code is needed. 
The goal of our paper, therefore, is to provide an integrative guide for preparing and sharing code, 
such that these practices can be implemented across biological subfields and stages of the 
research process. We focus on the implementation details particular to reproducible results—
those that can be regenerated using the original data—as opposed to replicable results, in which 
another group is able to draw similar conclusions from new data [11,12]. Below, we outline what 
constitutes code versus data, provide a how-to guide for code sharing, and conduct a survey of 
integrative biology journals to highlight how data versus code sharing requirements differ. Finally, 
we discuss which code best practices can be applied on inherited versus novel data sets. 
Journal policy survey 
We performed a policy survey of prominent biology journals to determine the current state of 
publisher code-sharing requirements. We reviewed the author instructions and editorial policies 
for 100 of the most highly cited journals using data from the Scimago Journal & Country Rank 
portal [13]. Briefly, we started with a list of 10,433 journals in the life sciences, removed 7090 
journals with less than 100 publications per year, and filtered out all journals that averaged less 
than 10 citations per article (see Methods), resulting in the final list of 100 journals. 
We found that while the majority of journals now mandate the sharing of sequencing data, very 
few (10%) require authors to share analytical code. We found 10 journals that require code to be 
shared in some form: Nucleic Acids Research “requires all authors, where ethically possible, to 

2 
provide access to all data and software code underlying the results presented in their article at 
submission” and, after acceptance, to publicly release “raw data, processed data, codes, scripts 
etc.” [14]. Radiology also requires public deposition of “all computer code used for modeling 
and/or data analysis,” as does Science, Science Advances, Science Immunology, and Science 
Translational Medicine [15]. The remaining four journals require sharing, though not via public 
deposition [16–19]. 
We further categorized journal policies by evaluating their requirements for sharing across three 
categories: sequencing data (or “large-scale datasets” such as proteomics), general datasets, 
and code. The majority of journals (55%) require public deposition of sequencing data, but only 
11% require public deposition of all other data supporting a paper’s results (Figure 1). A further 
36% of journals require authors to share their raw (non-sequencing) data but allow it to be 
available “upon request.” 10% of journals require the sharing of analytical code. For this analysis, 
we were searching for policies regarding analytical code, rather than software explicitly designed 
to be shared. Many journals have policies regarding the sharing or even peer review of code for 
articles describing new tools or novel algorithms, but we consider this a separate issue from 
sharing the details of computation that is incidental to the results. This latter category of 
computation is more likely to be done by biologists who are less familiar with programming best 
practices and community norms. 

3 
 
Figure 1. Journal sharing policies. An alluvial plot illustrating the relationship between journal 
requirements for the three types of data (General data, Sequencing data, and Analysis code). 
‘General data’ includes policies for sharing general data supporting a paper’s conclusions. 
‘Sequencing data’ includes sequencing data and other large-scale datasets such as proteomics. 
(There were no journals in the light green “Sharing required” category for sequencing data.). ‘Analysis 
code’ includes code. Each of the 100 journals was placed into a single category for each of three 
data types, and the relative height of the colors represents the proportion of journals in each category 
for the given data type. The ribbons connecting each column are colored according to the “General 
data” category and illustrate the overlap between categories in neighboring columns: For example, 
the pink “No mandate” ribbon extending from the left column over to the “Public deposition required” 
category in the center column indicates that there are five journals with no mandate for sharing 
general data but that require public deposition of sequencing data. This pink ribbon then extends to 
the “No mandate” section in the third column, indicating all five journals also have no mandate for 
analysis code. 
Public deposition required
Sharing required
Statement required
No mandate
Public deposition required
Statement required
No mandate
Public deposition required
Sharing required
Statement required
No mandate
General data
Sequencing data
Analysis code

4 
It is difficult to gauge whether journal-level code mandates are becoming more common: A 2013 
study found 12 out of 170 surveyed journals (7.1%) required the sharing of code, though the 
journals were from a broader selection of fields including statistics and materials science [20]. 
And at least one biology journal has softened its position, at least on paper: Science announced 
in a 2011 editorial that they were “extending our data access requirement listed above to include 
computer codes involved in the creation or analysis of data” [15], and their policy has been quoted 
as saying, “All computer codes involved in the creation or analysis of data must also be available 
to any reader of Science” [20–23], at least as recently as 2016 [24]. By 2021, however, the policy 
was modified to its current form, which says code must be shared if it is “central to the findings 
being reported” [25,26]. Because of the 2011 editorial, we categorized Science (and its sibling 
journals listed above) as mandating public code deposition, though we suggest that an essay 
from 12 years ago should not be needed to clarify what a publisher requires. Research, a “Science 
Partner Journal” also published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science 
(AAAS), states this much more clearly, and mandates that readers have access to “all data and 
materials (including computer codes) necessary to understand, assess and extend the 
conclusions of the manuscript” [18]. 
Given the diversity of research environments and the changing technology landscape, it’s not 
surprising that many policies are difficult to parse. For example, the Journal of Medical Virology, 
published by Wiley, states in their author instructions that the journal “expects that data supporting 
the results in the paper will be archived in an appropriate public repository” [27] However, the 
publisher’s central policy page reveals that Wiley has multiple tiers of requirements, and that 
“expects data sharing” is a separate level from “mandates data sharing” [28]. Other publishers, 
such as PLOS, “expect” researchers to make “all author-generated code available without 
restrictions,” but “may require” it for some papers [29]. 
Some publishers require sharing of some code, but not all. Cell Press, for example, requires 
sharing of only “original code reported in the paper,” which suggests code actually discussed in-
text, such as novel algorithm implementations, would be required, but general analysis code may 
not be; no examples are offered [16]. Another prominent publisher, BioMed Central (BMC), states 
that “Submission of a manuscript to a BMC journal implies that materials described in the 
manuscript, including all relevant raw data, will be freely available to any scientist wishing to use 
them for non-commercial purposes.” However, the following sentence states, “BMC strongly 
encourages that all datasets on which the conclusions of the paper rely should be available to 
readers.” Neither “strongly encourages” nor “implies” explicitly defines a mandate like the one 

5 
described for sequencing data [30]. Nature and its sibling journals similarly state in bold text that 
“authors are required to make materials, data, code, and associated protocols promptly available 
to readers,” but the later section on code availability clarifies that authors must only address 
whether they will be sharing “custom code or mathematical algorithm [sic] that is deemed central 
to the conclusions” [31]. The policy later notes, “Nature Portfolio journals consider it best practice 
to release custom computer code in a way that allows readers to repeat the published results,” 
but stops short of a mandate. 
There are also surprising gaps: For example, The editors of Radiology “request that all computer 
code used for modeling and/or data analysis be deposited in a publicly accessible repository upon 
publication,” but their only data sharing guidance is in the section devoted to clinical trials [32]. 
American Psychologist more explicitly states something similar: Authors need only disclose 
whether they will share “the raw and/or processed data upon which study conclusions are based,” 
but it is a journal requirement that authors must share all “computer code or syntax needed to 
reproduce analyses in an article” [17]. While this may work differently in practice, there are at least 
two journals with stated policies requiring authors to share analysis code but not the data it was 
actually analyzing. Interestingly, this inversion resembles results from Sharma et al. [33], in which 
65% of surveyed papers published in 2021 shared code, but only 38% shared data. 
Methods 
Journal list. We retrieved journal-level information from the Scimago Journal & Country Rank 
portal [13], which uses data from the Scopus database (https://www.scopus.com) to generate 
summary statistics for almost 28,000 academic publications. We downloaded the most recent 
data (2022 release) for all journals listed in the following categories: “Agricultural and Biological 
Sciences,” “Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology,” “Immunology and Microbiology,” 
“Medicine,” “Multidisciplinary,” and “Neuroscience.” After removing duplicates, this resulted in a 
list of 10,433 journals. We removed 7,090 journals that had fewer than 300 citable documents 
published over the last three years, and an additional 103 journals which averaged 80 or more 
references per document, to exclude review journals. We then filtered the list to include only 
journals that averaged at least 10 citations per document. This resulted in a list of 108 journals; 
after removing the remaining review journals (such as Trends in Cancer and Current Opinion in 
Food Science) that satisfied all other criteria but did not have applicable policies, we evaluated 
the remaining 100 journals manually. 

6 
Each journal’s online policy documents and author instructions were reviewed independently by 
two authors. Each journal was placed in a single category reflecting its policies on sharing data 
and code; in order of openness: 1) no data or code sharing policy, 2) data sharing is encouraged, 
but not required, 3) an availability statement is required, but not sharing, and 4) data and/or code 
sharing is required. Where the two evaluators disagreed, the journal policies were re-evaluated 
to determine a final category. Journals who mandated any kind of sharing were then further 
evaluated at a more specific level that clarifies how the policies specifically apply to sequencing 
data, general data, and code. 
Recommendations 
We can all share code—if not because someone else may use it in the future, then at least 
because we already did. The code used to analyze data, perform statistical tests and build 
visualizations is no less critical to a project than reagents used at the bench and should be 
disclosed for the same reasons: In addition to providing critical information about the conditions 
under which the study was performed, sharing this information enables others to more easily 
validate computationally derived conclusions. It also reduces the effort required to apply similar 
methods in new projects by providing an example to others which allows them to avoid issues 
you may have solved. A 2023 study across dozens of participants from 13 countries found broad 
support for publications that clearly state whether code was shared openly, with a persistent 
identifier (such as a DOI) and a clear license [34]. Sharing code also helps protect us against 
what Donoho et al. [35] called “the ubiquity of error” at the heart of the scientific method, which 
drives scientists to expend effort primarily “in recognizing and rooting out error”: Even the most 
diligent scientists can miss a typo in a command or misunderstand parameters of a complex 
function in a package developed elsewhere. Sharing this code—essentially a fine-grained 
addendum to a methods section—can help bring these issues to the surface and help future 
researchers avoid them. 
In this discussion, we use “code” as a shorthand for any of the documents interpreted by a 
computer to generate information used in your manuscript. That covers software you’ve 
developed to perform analyses (a new read alignment tool, for example), but it also includes 
commands used to perform statistical tests and the scripts used to generate figure panels. Most 
manuscripts don’t come bundled with an entirely new software application, but many—especially 

7 
those that include the analysis of genomic sequencing data—required code to be written for the 
generation of their results. 
Files to share 
1. New software applications. If you wrote a whole new program to perform your work, it’s 
essential to provide as much transparency as possible about how it works. The editorial 
staff at the journal should provide guidance about how to handle software that you don’t 
intend to make open-source. Best practices for tool development have been well-covered 
elsewhere [36–41] and are outside the scope of this review, but if you’ve developed a tool 
that is useful but not the primary focus of your work, it could be helpful to submit a separate 
software paper or “application note” about your program to a computational journal [42]. 
2. Scripts for data-cleaning and analysis. Nothing is too mundane! These steps make it 
easier for others to reproduce your work and can clarify exactly what was done and, 
crucially, in what order: For example, it may seem silly to share the exact Python statement 
you used to perform a straightforward logistic regression, but the “LogisticRegression” 
function from the popular Python package scikit-learn defaults to using L2 regularization 
[43,44], while R’s built-in “glm” function doesn’t include similar penalties even as an option 
[45]—one of many potentially important details about model development [46] that may 
not be obvious but could be tracked down using the original code. 
3. Data visualization code. Sharing the code you used to generate your figure panels can 
help people who want to visualize their data in a similar way and clarify finer points of the 
figure that have been omitted from the legend, intentionally or not. The code can also 
show exactly how data was filtered and modified before visualization. This could be useful 
to readers, who can now explore your results with “living figures” they can modify to look 
at different subsets of your data [47]; it may also serve as valuable documentation for your 
future reference. 
4. Parameters used to configure and launch command-line utilities. Many 
computational biology tools such as Trimmomatic are executed from the Linux command 
line, with relevant parameters included directly in the command, specifying the location of 
input and output files, for example, or setting other configuration values such as thresholds 
or file formats. Ideally, a single script could be executed to run each command and perform 
your entire analysis process [48]. Even if that isn’t how you executed these operations, 
however, including a file of ordered commands could be useful for those trying to evaluate 

8 
minor implementation details, either for reproducing a paper’s findings or for applying a 
similar process to their own data. (It’s also worth noting that running commands using 
scripts is highly preferable to attempting to reconstruct these commands after the fact—
see “Set yourself up for success” below for other techniques to keep in mind.) 
5. Pipeline specifications and configuration files. Using workflow automation tools such 
as Snakemake [49] or Nextflow [50] can streamline your own bioinformatics work and 
make it easier to reproduce. Even in situations where your pipeline code is written to work 
only for your data or to run only on a specific computing cluster, the code can serve as 
valuable documentation of the process: which Docker containers were launched at each 
stage, which versions of software were used, and which options were passed to each tool 
can all be gleaned from this code by interested parties, even if they can’t execute the exact 
code. 
6. A list of dependencies. Providing a very specific list of all software dependencies in your 
pipeline may make a critical difference in how reliably your work can be reproduced: 
Python packages you import into your scripts, for example, may change dramatically 
between releases. For one, the popular Python library NumPy is used for many linear 
algebra operations, but the functionality of its matrix multiplication function was 
unintentionally changed when version 1.16.0 was released, then fixed with the release of 
version 1.16.6 nearly a year later [51,52]. There have been dozens of releases since, but 
a script that worked one way in 2019 may work very differently now—unless you record 
the version numbers. Placing a call to “sessionInfo()” within R scripts should print all 
package versions in the output of the script, for example, and in Python, running “pip 
freeze” (or its equivalent, if you’re using a different tool such as conda for installing 
packages) will print out the installed versions of the packages installed in your 
environment. It would provide a more complete accounting to provide a Docker container 
with everything installed already, but even a list of library versions will cover most 
contingencies that don’t involve low-level factors such as drivers and differences in 
hardware. 
How to prepare the code 
First things first: Your code is good enough to share [53]! It may be messy and disorganized and 
cobbled together by self-taught coders writing just enough to get the job done, but you aren’t the 
only person for whom that’s true. If you trust the code enough that you’ve written a paper about 

9 
its results, it’s certainly worthy of sharing. Scientific code can be split into two broad categories: 
products that are intended to be reused by others (such as a new software package), and products 
that aren’t. The preparation, packaging and archiving of code differs greatly between these two 
categories, and this paper deals mostly with the latter—code shared to demonstrate the 
computational approach to a single paper, but that others should not expect to work like a broadly 
applicable tool with a friendly user interface. The recommendations here describe considerations 
that are helpful, but if some are not practical to implement, it’s important to note that whatever you 
can share is almost always better than sharing nothing. 
The most important files to include are the source code files themselves—the files with extensions 
such as “.py” and “.R” and “.cpp” that were written by those performing the analyses. Byproducts 
of these scripts or their dependencies are not necessary to share—files such as those ending in 
“.pyc” and those created by the installation of packages are not necessary to include because 
they will be regenerated by the user doing their own installations. A simple exercise for 
distinguishing these files is to try re-running your code on a machine that was uninvolved in the 
original analysis—some files are regenerated by running the code on the new machine, some 
files can be downloaded instead, but the ones that you need to move manually are likely the ones 
most important to share. 
Switching workstations can also help highlight aspects of your code that will get in the way of 
others trying to run it themselves. Removing things like passwords and API keys is critical, but 
other workstation-specific settings can also trip up others: hard-coded file paths will likely only 
work on a machine connected to that exact file system, even when pointing at common utilities. 
Storing strings like these in variables declared at the top of your script will provide clues to future 
users that this is a value they need to specify themselves, or an important variable that is used in 
multiple places. This is also why it’s important to specify dependencies with enough detail that 
others can reproduce as much of your environment as possible. Other components of your 
pipeline may not be “dependencies” per se, but they can be critical to reproducing your work. 
Reference databases, for example, don’t need to be shared with your code (assuming they are 
publicly available), but noting the version in your methods section is important—unsurprisingly, 
different reference databases can result in different results [54], even between minor versions of 
the same database [55]. Similarly, it is also helpful to note the operating system on which the 
code was run, particularly if you’re using command-line utilities. Implementation details of tools 
such as “sed” can vary between platforms, and commands that work on a Linux machine may fail 

10 
on macOS or even slightly different distributions of Linux—or worse, they may finish “successfully” 
and return different results. 
You may also encounter situations where there are computational steps that do not have any 
executable scripts associated with them: perhaps the tool requires a commercial license, or 
there’s no programmatic interface and the “point and click” approach is the only option. In 
situations like this, share whatever you can. It can be helpful to write out the computational steps 
both before and after the proprietary step and provide a bridge between sections of usable code 
by indicating where the difficult step is located. Providing users with the output of these tricky 
steps will enable them to skip over that step and pick up where you left off. 
Finally, consider adding documentation to your repository; even a “README” text file providing a 
cursory description of how to follow the pipeline could make a big difference in how useful your 
files are to others, doubly so if you provide more detail about things like important parameters, 
installing tricky dependencies, and where to place input files. 
Once you have pulled together all the documents you want to share, they must then be deposited. 
Repository services such as GitHub, GitLab and Sourceforge are reliable tools for collaboration 
and distribution [56], particularly for ongoing software projects, but many organizations such as 
university libraries [57,58] and groups like the Software Sustainability Institute [59] are skeptical 
of a reliance on the no-cost perpetual hosting of digital artifacts by commercial enterprises that 
haven’t explicitly stated that as one of their goals. In contrast, repositories such as Zenodo are 
free, publicly funded projects with decades-long retention plans [60]. Depositing files in a 
repository that mints digital object identifiers (DOIs) improves their citability and makes links less 
likely to break over time by providing a canonical URL through the DOI resolution service available 
at doi.org. Deposits with these services are intended to be immutable artifacts, however, so it is 
preferable to wait until you have a “final” version before sharing there. 
Set yourself up for success 
These recommendations were developed as guidance mainly to those who are preparing to share 
completed work. However, much of this will be easier—and more effective—if a project is set up 
with reproducibility in mind from the beginning. It can be frustrating to step back from investigation 
to set up peripheral systems like code repositories and Nextflow pipelines when an ad-hoc 
solution will move things forward more quickly. However, these shortcuts can backfire later when 
trying to repeat an analysis, recall who did which work, which subset of the data was used for a 

11 
figure panel, or exactly which version of a program was used for an important computational step. 
Still, there is a balance to be found: Software developers looking at code from computational 
biology papers were shocked at its content, confusing structure and lack of documentation [61], 
but, as others have argued, optimizing process past a point of practical reproducibility may not be 
worthwhile [62], particularly when competing priorities leave researchers with few professional 
incentives to tackle the time-consuming work of sharing digital materials. 
There are many guides for reproducible computational biology available online, both peer-
reviewed and independently published [e.g. 9], covering everything from telling stories with 
computational notebooks [63,64] to standards and checklists that provide very specific examples 
[48,65]. Rather than duplicate this effort, here we review the most common recommendations and 
urge readers to investigate the implementation details in referenced papers and software 
documentation. 
The first key to sharing your code is to use code in the first place: While many tools simplify their 
operation using a graphical user interface (GUI), this point-and-click approach can be difficult to 
document and even more difficult to replicate. Figuring out command-line tools and their 
parameterization can be a challenge, but running these operations a second time requires simply 
pasting the command into the terminal, rather than carefully following step-by-step instructions on 
which buttons to click in which order [66]. From here, code style and organization is a recurring 
theme in the literature. In short, consider approaching your code as if it were intended to be read, 
rather than executed [67]. Keep humans in mind: Give variables helpful names, rather than “foo” 
or “x,” and leave plenty of comments to explain what different sections of code are doing and 
reasons for unconventional design decisions that users may be tempted to modify [66]. Use a 
consistent directory structure that makes it easy to distinguish raw data from intermediate files 
and final results [65,68,69]. When manipulating your data specifically for a visualization, save the 
version of the data that’s actually displayed [70]: This will be a more convenient file for readers to 
evaluate, but it also means rebuilding your figure requires only loading that file, rather than loading 
the original dataset and performing all the processing steps again. Minimize manual intervention 
required to run your scripts, and ideally organize them in a way that allows users to run them from 
start to finish [48]. Provide a “README” file that, at minimum, walks a user through the intended 
execution of your code and documents key steps [71]. 
There is also guidance available for performing analysis. Importantly, emphatically avoid manual 
editing of intermediate files [9,69,70,72]—for example, if script A processes raw data into a table 

12 
of gene expression levels, and script B summarizes this table by pathway, mental alarms should 
go off if there is a step after script A that requires a user to open the table and edit fields by hand 
to prepare the data for script B. Such quick fixes can be tempting, but they also add risk: A 
researcher could easily add a typo, corrupt a file in unexpected ways [73] or forget the step 
altogether. 
Similarly, keep an eye out for opportunities to reduce coding errors by using custom functions to 
do repeated operations [9], and store important values in prominently commented variables, 
rather than hard-coding them somewhere deep in the script where a future user may not notice 
it. For example, if you write out a multi-step process that prepares data for a particular 
visualization, then find later that you need to perform the same steps for a different subset of data 
in a new figure panel, avoid copying that code and pasting it farther down in your analysis script—
if you later find an error in this code or simply modify it to change a threshold or reorganize the 
output, it’s easy to forget to scroll back down and change it in two (or more!) places. Even if you 
do remember, the background noise of keeping track of your various copy/paste maneuvers only 
builds over time. Repetitive code is one example of “code smell”: Code that may work as intended, 
but that is suggestive of a larger design flaw that could cause hard-to-find bugs or make 
modification of the program more complicated [74]. Tools such as linters may help detect some 
of these issues, but eventually you will develop a “nose” for intuiting when you may be wandering 
down an ill-advised path. 
There are many other recommendations that appear in the literature even without expanding your 
search beyond papers focused on computational biology: Version control and code review are 
frequent topics of discussion [9,66,69,75–77], as is “defensive programming” [67], or performing 
what may feel like excessive validation of the inputs and outputs of functions to make sure 
unexpected states are detected before they can cause problems. Automated testing is another 
practice that can make your code more robust, particularly for complicated procedures where a 
small change may have unintended effects elsewhere [78]. While modules such as “unittest” and 
frameworks like “pytest” can help you define and track granular verifications of specific 
functionality, it can be helpful to write a separate script, potentially with fake, easier to manage 
data, that you can run to validate that different sections of your code are returning expected 
values. 

13 
Conclusion 
Here, we have reviewed almost three dozen articles about reproducible research practices to 
summarize their recommendations for those seeking to comply with code-sharing requirements 
from journals or funders—or, more commonly, simply seeking to share their code because they 
are enthusiastic about participating in the open science ecosystem [30]. The factors involved in 
the sharing of data and code—and in open science issues more broadly—are complex, both for 
researchers and research subjects, particularly in relation to the equitable participation of 
marginalized communities [79–82]. If you’ve decided to share your code these recommendations 
will provide a starting point for the effort and connections to more detailed sources. Finally, we 
note that code sharing best practices should be taught early in the science curriculum alongside 
other Open Science approaches [83–87]. 
Other information 
Funding 
This study was supported by ASPIRE funds at the University of British Columbia- Okanagan (LG). 
Data and code availability 
The detailed results of the journal policy survey and code used to generate Figure 1 are available 
at http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10459940. 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
