arXiv:1701.08954v2  [cs.LG]  27 Mar 2017
Workshop track - ICLR 2017
COMMAI: EVALUATING THE FIRST STEPS TOWARDS A
USEFUL GENERAL AI
Marco Baroni, Armand Joulin, Allan Jabri, Germ´an Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou,∗
Klemen Simonic & Tomas Mikolov
Facebook Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research

ABSTRACT
With machine learning successfully applied to new daunting problems almost ev-
ery day, general AI starts looking like an attainable goal (LeCun et al., 2015).
However, most current research focuses instead on very speciﬁc applications, such
as image classiﬁcation or machine translation. We believe this to be largely due
to the lack of objective ways to measure progress towards broad machine intelli-
gence. In order to ﬁll this gap, we propose here a set of concrete desiderata for
general AI, together with a platform to test machines on how well they satisfy
such desiderata, while keeping all further complexities to a minimum.
1
DESIDERATA FOR THE EVALUATION OF MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Rather than trying to deﬁne intelligence in abstract terms, we take a pragmatic approach: we would
like to develop AIs that are useful for us. This naturally leads to the following desiderata.
Communication through natural language
An AI will be useful to us only if we are able to
communicate with it: assigning it tasks, understanding the information it returns, and teaching it
new skills. Since natural language is by far the easiest way for us to communicate, we require our
useful AI to be endowed with basic linguistic abilities. The language the machine is exposed to in
the testing environment will inevitably be very limited. However, given that we want the machine
to also be a powerful, fast learner (see next point), humans should later be able to teach it more
sophisticated language skills as they become important to instruct the machine in new domains.
In concrete, the environment should not only expose the machine to a set of tasks, but provide
instructions and feedback about the tasks in simple natural language. The machine should rely on
this form of linguistic interaction to efﬁciently solve the tasks.
Learning to learn
A useful AI should be ﬂexible. As our needs change, the AI should help
us with the new challenges we face: from solving a scientiﬁc problem in the morning at work
to stocking our fridge at night. Progress towards AI should thus be measured on the ability to
master a continuous ﬂow of new tasks, with data-efﬁciency in solving new tasks as a fundamental
evaluation component, and without distinguishing train and test phases. We must distinguish this
learning to learn ability, pertaining to generalization across tasks (Ring, 1997; Schmidhuber, 2015;
Silver et al., 2013; Thrun & Pratt, 1997), from 1-shot learning, that is, the challenging but more
limited ability to generalize to new classes within the same task (e.g., extending an object classiﬁer
to recognize unseen objects from just a few examples; Lake et al., 2015). It’s generally agreed that,
in order to generalize across tasks, a program should be capable of compositional learning, that is, of
storing and re-combining solutions to sub-problems across tasks (Fodor & Lepore, 2002; Lake et al.,
2016; Minsky, 1986). The testing environment should thus feature sets of related tasks, such that
a compositional learner can bootstrap skills from one task to the other. Finally, mastering language
skills might be a crucial component of learning to learn, since understanding linguistic instructions
allows us to quickly learn how to accomplish tasks we have never performed before.
Feedback
As we grow up, we learn to master complex tasks with decreasing amounts of explicit
reward. A useful AI should possess similar capabilities. Consequently, in our testing environment,
∗Now at DeepMind.
1

Workshop track - ICLR 2017
reward should decrease with time. Conversely, the machine should be able to learn from perfor-
mance cues that are not directly linked to an explicit reward score, such as purely linguistic feed-
back (see also Weston, 2016), or observing other agents that are correctly performing a task (as in
learning by demonstration, Argall et al., 2009). The testing environment should include such cues.
Interface
The interface between the machine and the world should be maximally general. The
machine itself should learn the best way to process different kinds of input and output streams,
with no need for manual re-programming as we apply it to different domains. We thus assume
the simplest possible interface. At each time step, the machine receives one bit and sends one bit,
without any further structure imposed on the bit stream (a separate channel is used for reward in the
initial stages of the simulation).
We do not claim that satisfying our desiderata will lead to a full-ﬂedged intelligent machine, but we
see them as prerequisites to be able to efﬁciently teach it more advanced skills.
2
THE COMMAI FRAMEWORK
We call the evaluation framework satisfying the desiderata above CommAI (communication-based
AI), given the prominence we give to communication skills. We have developed the open source
CommAI-env platform1 to implement sets of CommAI tasks. As a concrete example of a set of sim-
ple tasks already satisfying many of the requirements above, we brieﬂy present here the CommAI-
mini tasks (described in more detail in the Supplementary Materials).
In a CommAI-mini task, the environment presents a (simpliﬁed) regular expression to the learner. It
then asks it to either recognize or produce a string matching the expression. The environment listens
to the learner response and it provides linguistic feedback on the learner’s performance (possibly
assigning reward). All exchanges take place at the bit level. Some examples follow:
Environment:
Learner:
description: C or D; verify: CCCC.
fkljfd.
wrong; correct: true.
...
description: HL and RM and BT; verify:
RMBTBTHLHLBT.
true.
right. (+1 reward)
...
description: not AB; verify:
ADFCFHGHADDDB.
...
description: C; produce.
ABCD.
wrong; example correct: CCC.
...
description: C; produce two distinct strings.
...
Learning-to-learn is a must, since the learner will rarely, if ever, be tested on exactly the same
target grammar, grammars become more complex with time, and the learner is asked to use the
same grammar in different ways (e.g., for recognition or production). Compositionality plays an
important role at multiple levels: (i) Skills such as chunking bit sequences into characters and parsing
messages into predictable parts (the description, the test string, the delimiters, etc.) will greatly
help the learner to generalize across tasks. (ii) Succeeding at the recognition tasks should help in
solving the equivalent production tasks (and vice versa). (iii) We control moreover the complexity
of the stringsets and their descriptions, by incrementally adding operators to the regular expressions.
1https://github.com/facebookresearch/CommAI-env/
2

Workshop track - ICLR 2017
For example, checking if a string contains all n-grams in a set requires checking the presence of
the n-grams in the string, so a compositional learner should be faster at a task involving n-gram
conjunction after it has solved the task disjunction tasks.
The tasks are different from standard artiﬁcial grammar learning (Reber, 1967), in that the learner
is given explicit instructions in simpliﬁed English about the target stringset and what to do with it
(description:, verify:, produce...), as well as verbal feedback on its performance. We thus satisfy
our linguistic communication desideratum.
Importantly, although the CommAI-mini tasks are fully “linguistic”, in the sense that they pertain
to character string recognition and production, we chose the regular grammar domain just because
it’s simple and well-understood (incidentally, one could also think of the test strings as denoting
non-verbal acoustic or visual stimulus sequences). What satisﬁes the language desideratum is not
the nature of the tasks, but the fact that the environment provides meta-information about them
(instructions, feedback) in simpliﬁed English. Other CommAI task sets could, for example, be
based on simple physics tasks, where sensory information would be passed through the bit-based
channel, together with instructions and feedback that would still be expressed in simpliﬁed English
(e.g., move the red block over the blue block; see Andreas et al., 2016 for somewhat related ideas).
Despite their simplicity, we conjecture that solving the CommAI-mini tasks without astronomical
amounts of training examples is out of the scope of current machine learning methods (more ad-
vanced task examples can be found on the CommAI-env site). We hope the CommAI-mini challenge
is at the right level of complexity to stimulate researchers to develop genuinely new models.
3
RELATED WORK
We can identify two broad approaches to benchmarking general AI. Some researchers, like us, take a
top-down view, deriving their requirements from psychological or mathematical considerations (for
example, Adams et al., 2012, Lake et al., 2016, and see the extensive review in Hern´andez-Orallo,
2017). We sympathize with this principled approach, but we are not aware of others having empha-
sized the same set of practical desiderata that we outlined above, nor proposing a concrete framework
for evaluation like we do with CommAI-env.
Others focus on existing applications that are considered of sufﬁcient complexity to measure
progress towards general-purpose intelligence. For example, games such as Go (Silver et al., 2016)
and StarCraft (Onta˜n´on et al., 2013) require sophisticated planning skills intuitively associated with
intelligence. While current results in these domains are impressive, we think this approach is at
the same time too simple and too complex as a general AI benchmark. On the one hand, the focus
shifts from domain-independent skills to more limited game-speciﬁc strategies. On the other, raw
input pre-processing and adapting to game-speciﬁc dynamics might require heavy computational
resources and advanced domain-speciﬁc know-how, with high entry cost for researchers that are not
already working in the target domains. These issues are partially addressed by platforms that provide
a uniﬁed interface to multiple games and other programs.2 However, simply pooling a large number
of existing applications will make for a ragtag collection of benchmarks, with no clear uniﬁed goal
in terms of evaluating general intelligence.
The bAbI tasks (Weston et al., 2015) are superﬁcially similar to CommAI tasks, but they evaluate
general text understanding phenomena, rather than compositional learning-to-learn abilities.
