Visual Interpretability for Deep Learning: a Survey
Quanshi Zhang and Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles
Abstract
This paper reviews recent studies in understanding
neural-network representations and learning neural
networks with interpretable/disentangled middle-
layer representations. Although deep neural net-
works have exhibited superior performance in
various tasks, the interpretability is always the
Achilles’ heel of deep neural networks. At present,
deep neural networks obtain high discrimination
power at the cost of low interpretability of their
black-box representations.
We believe that high
model interpretability may help people to break
several bottlenecks of deep learning, e.g.
learn-
ing from very few annotations, learning via human-
computer communications at the semantic level,
and semantically debugging network representa-
tions. We focus on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), and we revisit the visualization of CNN
representations, methods of diagnosing represen-
tations of pre-trained CNNs, approaches for dis-
entangling pre-trained CNN representations, learn-
ing of CNNs with disentangled representations,
and middle-to-end learning based on model inter-
pretability. Finally, we discuss prospective trends
in explainable artiﬁcial intelligence.
1
Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [LeCun et al., 1998a;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017]
have achieved superior performance in many visual tasks,
such as object classiﬁcation and detection. However, the end-
to-end learning strategy makes CNN representations a black
box. Except for the ﬁnal network output, it is difﬁcult for peo-
ple to understand the logic of CNN predictions hidden inside
the network. In recent years, a growing number of researchers
have realized that high model interpretability is of signiﬁcant
value in both theory and practice and have developed models
with interpretable knowledge representations.
In this paper, we conduct a survey of current studies in un-
derstanding neural-network representations and learning neu-
ral networks with interpretable/disentangled representations.
We can roughly deﬁne the scope of the review into the fol-
lowing six research directions.
• Visualization of CNN representations in intermediate
network layers. These methods mainly synthesize the
image that maximizes the score of a given unit in a pre-
trained CNN or invert feature maps of a conv-layer back
to the input image. Please see Section 2 for detailed dis-
cussion.
• Diagnosis of CNN representations. Related studies may
either diagnose a CNN’s feature space for different ob-
ject categories or discover potential representation ﬂaws
in conv-layers. Please see Section 3 for details.
• Disentanglement of “the mixture of patterns” encoded
in each ﬁlter of CNNs.
These studies mainly disen-
tangle complex representations in conv-layers and trans-
form network representations into interpretable graphs.
Please see Section 4 for details.
• Building explainable models. We discuss interpretable
CNNs [Zhang et al., 2017c], capsule networks [Sabour
et al., 2017], interpretable R-CNNs [Wu et al., 2017],
and the InfoGAN [Chen et al., 2016] in Section 5.
• Semantic-level
middle-to-end
learning
via
human-
computer interaction. A clear semantic disentanglement
of CNN representations may further enable “middle-to-
end” learning of neural networks with weak supervision.
Section 7 introduces methods to learn new models via
human-computer interactions [Zhang et al., 2017b] and
active question-answering with very limited human su-
pervision [Zhang et al., 2017a].
Among all the above, the visualization of CNN representa-
tions is the most direct way to explore network representa-
tions. The network visualization also provides a technical
foundation for many approaches to diagnosing CNN repre-
sentations. The disentanglement of feature representations of
a pre-trained CNN and the learning of explainable network
representations present bigger challenges to state-of-the-art
algorithms. Finally, explainable or disentangled network rep-
resentations are also the starting point for weakly-supervised
middle-to-end learning.
Values of model interpretability: The clear semantics in
high conv-layers can help people trust a network’s prediction.
As discussed in [Zhang et al., 2018b], considering dataset
and representation bias, a high accuracy on testing images
still cannot ensure that a CNN will encode correct represen-
arXiv:1802.00614v2  [cs.CV]  7 Feb 2018

tations. For example, a CNN may use an unreliable context—
eye features—to identify the “lipstick” attribute of a face im-
age. Therefore, people usually cannot fully trust a network
unless a CNN can semantically or visually explain its logic,
e.g. what patterns are used for prediction.
In addition, the middle-to-end learning or debugging of
neural networks based on the explainable or disentangled net-
work representations may also signiﬁcantly reduce the re-
quirement for human annotation. Furthermore, based on se-
mantic representations of networks, it is possible to merge
multiple CNNs into a universal network (i.e. a network en-
coding generic knowledge representations for different tasks)
at the semantic level in the future.
In the following sections, we review the above research di-
rections and discuss the potential future of technical develop-
ments.
2
Visualization of CNN representations
Visualization of ﬁlters in a CNN is the most direct way of
exploring visual patterns hidden inside a neural unit. Differ-
ent types of visualization methods have been developed for
network visualization.
First, gradient-based methods [Zeiler and Fergus, 2014;
Mahendran and Vedaldi, 2015; Simonyan et al., 2013; Sprin-
genberg et al., 2015] are the mainstream of network visualiza-
tion. These methods mainly compute gradients of the score
of a given CNN unit w.r.t. the input image. They use the
gradients to estimate the image appearance that maximizes
the unit score. [Olah et al., 2017] has provided a toolbox of
existing techniques to visualize patterns encoded in different
conv-layers of a pre-trained CNN.
Second, the up-convolutional net [Dosovitskiy and Brox,
2016] is another typical technique to visualize CNN represen-
tations. The up-convolutional net inverts CNN feature maps
to images. We can regard up-convolutional nets as a tool that
indirectly illustrates the image appearance corresponding to a
feature map, although compared to gradient-based methods,
up-convolutional nets cannot mathematically ensure that the
visualization result exactly reﬂects actual representations in
the CNN. Similarly, [Nguyen et al., 2017] has further intro-
duced an additional prior, which controls the semantic mean-
ing of the synthesized image, to the adversarial generative
network. We can use CNN feature maps as the prior for visu-
alization.
In addition, [Zhou et al., 2015] has proposed a method
to accurately compute the image-resolution receptive ﬁeld of
neural activations in a feature map. The actual receptive ﬁeld
of neural activation is smaller than the theoretical receptive
ﬁeld computed using the ﬁlter size. The accurate estimation
of the receptive ﬁeld helps people to understand the represen-
tation of a ﬁlter.
3
Diagnosis of CNN representations
Some methods go beyond the visualization of CNNs and di-
agnose CNN representations to obtain insight understanding
of features encoded in a CNN. We roughly divide all relevant
research into the following ﬁve directions.
Studies in the ﬁrst direction analyze CNN features from a
global view. [Szegedy et al., 2014] has explored semantic
meanings of each ﬁlter. [Yosinski et al., 2014] has analyzed
the transferability of ﬁlter representations in intermediate
conv-layers. [Lu, 2015; Aubry and Russell, 2015] have com-
puted feature distributions of different categories/attributes in
the feature space of a pre-trained CNN.
The second research direction extracts image regions that
directly contribute the network output for a label/attribute to
explain CNN representations of the label/attribute. This is
similar to the visualization of CNNs. Methods of [Fong and
Vedaldi, 2017; Selvaraju et al., 2017] have been proposed
to propagate gradients of feature maps w.r.t. the ﬁnal loss
back to the image plane to estimate the image regions. The
LIME model proposed in [Ribeiro et al., 2016] extracts im-
age regions that are highly sensitive to the network output.
Studies of [Zintgraf et al., 2017; Kindermans et al., 2017;
Kumar et al., 2017] have invented methods to visualize
areas in the input image that contribute the most to the
decision-making process of the CNN. [Wang et al., 2017;
Goyal et al., 2016] have tried to interpret the logic for vi-
sual question-answering encoded in neural networks. These
studies list important objects (or regions of interests) detected
from the images and crucial words in questions as the expla-
nation of output answers.
The estimation of vulnerable points in the feature space of
a CNN is also a popular direction for diagnosing network rep-
resentations. Approaches of [Su et al., 2017; Koh and Liang,
2017; Szegedy et al., 2014] have been developed to compute
adversarial samples for a CNN. I.e. these studies aim to es-
timate the minimum noisy perturbation of the input image
that can change the ﬁnal prediction. In particular, inﬂuence
functions proposed in [Koh and Liang, 2017] can be used to
compute adversarial samples. The inﬂuence function can also
provide plausible ways to create training samples to attack the
learning of CNNs, ﬁx the training set, and further debug rep-
resentations of a CNN.
The fourth research direction is to reﬁne network represen-
tations based on the analysis of network feature spaces. Given
a CNN pre-trained for object classiﬁcation, [Lakkaraju et al.,
2017] has proposed a method to discover knowledge blind
spots (unknown patterns) of the CNN in a weakly-supervised
manner. This method grouped all sample points in the entire
feature space of a CNN into thousands of pseudo-categories.
It assumed that a well learned CNN would use the sub-space
of each pseudo-category to exclusively represent a subset of a
speciﬁc object class. In this way, this study randomly showed
object samples within each sub-space, and used the sample
purity in the sub-space to discover potential representation
ﬂaws hidden in a pre-trained CNN. To distill representations
of a teacher network to a student network for sentiment analy-
sis, [Hu et al., 2016] has proposed using logic rules of natural
languages (e.g. I-ORG cannot follow B-PER) to construct
a distillation loss to supervise the knowledge distillation of
neural networks, in order to obtain more meaningful network
representations.
Finally, [Zhang et al., 2018b] has presented a method to
discover potential, biased representations of a CNN. Fig. 1
shows biased representations of a CNN trained for the estima-

Original
Masked
Pasted
+16.93
+12.17
+19.77
Score of “wearing lipstick”
wearing lipstick
...
Figure 1: Biased representations in a CNN [Zhang et al., 2018b].
Considering potential dataset bias, a high accuracy on testing images
cannot always ensure that a CNN learns correct representations. The
CNN may use unreliable co-appearing contexts to make predictions.
For example, people may manually modify mouth appearances of
two faces by masking mouth regions or pasting another mouth, but
such modiﬁcations do not signiﬁcantly change prediction scores for
the lipstick attribute. This ﬁgure shows heat maps of inference pat-
terns of the lipstick attribute, where patterns with red/blue colors are
positive/negative with the attribute score. The CNN mistakenly con-
siders unrelated patterns as contexts to infer the lipstick.
tion of face attributes. When an attribute usually co-appears
with speciﬁc visual features in training images, then the CNN
may use such co-appearing features to represent the attribute.
When the used co-appearing features are not semantically re-
lated to the target attribute, these features can be considered
as biased representations.
Given a pre-trained CNN (e.g. a CNN that was trained to
estimate face attributes), [Zhang et al., 2018b] required peo-
ple to annotate some ground-truth relationships between at-
tributes, e.g. the lipstick attribute is positively related to the
heavy-makeup attribute, and is not related to the black hair
attribute. Then, the method mined inference patterns of each
attribute output from conv-layers, and used inference patterns
to compute actual attribute relationships encoded in the CNN.
Conﬂicts between the ground-truth and the mined attribute re-
lationships indicated biased representations.
4
Disentangling CNN representations into
explanatory graphs & decision trees
4.1
Disentangling CNN representations into
explanatory graphs
Compared to the visualization and diagnosis of network rep-
resentations in previous sections, disentangling CNN features
into human-interpretable graphical representations (namely
explanatory graphs) provides a more thorough explanation of
network representations. [Zhang et al., 2018a; Zhang et al.,
2016] have proposed disentangling features in conv-layers of
a pre-trained CNN and have used a graphical model to repre-
sent the semantic hierarchy hidden inside a CNN.
As shown in Fig. 2, each ﬁlter in a high conv-layer of a
CNN usually represents a mixture of patterns. For exam-
ple, the ﬁlter may be activated by both the head and the tail
parts of an object. Thus, to provide a global view of how vi-
sual knowledge is organized in a pre-trained CNN, studies of
[Zhang et al., 2018a; Zhang et al., 2016] aim to answer the
following three questions.
• How many types of visual patterns are memorized by
each convolutional ﬁlter of the CNN (here, a visual pat-
Feature maps 
of a filter
Feature maps 
of a filter
Feature maps 
of a filter
Feature maps 
of a filter
Figure 2: Feature maps of a ﬁlter obtained using different input im-
ages [Zhang et al., 2018a]. To visualize the feature map, the method
propagates receptive ﬁelds of activated units in the feature map back
to the image plane. In each sub-feature, the ﬁlter is activated by var-
ious part patterns in an image. This makes it difﬁcult to understand
the semantic meaning of a ﬁlter.
Feature maps 
of different 
conv-layers
Input 
image
…
Explanatory 
graph
Parts corresponding to 
each graph node
Neck 
pattern
Head 
pattern
Figure 3: Explanatory graph [Zhang et al., 2018a]. An explanatory
graph represents the knowledge hierarchy hidden in conv-layers of
a CNN. Each ﬁlter in a pre-trained CNN may be activated by dif-
ferent object parts. [Zhang et al., 2018a] disentangles part patterns
from each ﬁlter in an unsupervised manner, thereby clarifying the
knowledge representation.
tern may describe a speciﬁc object part or a certain tex-
ture)?
• Which patterns are co-activated to describe an object
part?
• What is the spatial relationship between two co-activated
patterns?
As shown in Fig. 3, the explanatory graph explains the
knowledge semantic hidden inside the CNN. The explana-
tory graph disentangles the mixture of part patterns in each
ﬁlter’s feature map of a conv-layer, and uses each graph node
to represent a part.
• The explanatory graph has multiple layers. Each graph
layer corresponds to a speciﬁc conv-layer of a CNN.
• Each ﬁlter in a conv-layer may represent the appearance
of different object parts. The algorithm automatically
disentangles the mixture of part patterns encoded in a
single ﬁlter, and uses a node in the explanatory graph to
represent each part pattern.
• Each node in the explanatory graph consistently repre-
sents the same object part through different images. We
can use the node to localize the corresponding part on

Figure 4: Image patches corresponding to different nodes in the explanatory graph [Zhang et al., 2018a].
L=1
L=2
L=3
L=4
L=1
L=2
L=3
L=4
Figure 5: Heat maps of patterns [Zhang et al., 2018a]. A heat map visualizes the spatial distribution of the top 50% patterns in the L-th layer
of the explanatory graph with the highest inference scores.
the input image. To some extent, the node is robust to
shape deformation and pose variations.
• Each edge encodes the co-activation relationship and the
spatial relationship between two nodes in adjacent lay-
ers.
• We can regard an explanatory graph as a compression of
feature maps of conv-layers. A CNN has multiple conv-
layers. Each conv-layer may have hundreds of ﬁlters,
and each ﬁlter may produce a feature map with hundreds
of neural units. We can use tens of thousands of nodes
in the explanatory graph to represent information con-
tained in all tens of millions of neural units in these fea-
ture maps, i.e. by which part patterns the feature maps
are activated, and where the part patterns are localized
in input images.
• Just like a dictionary, each input image can only trigger
a small subset of part patterns (nodes) in the explana-
tory graph. Each node describes a common part pattern
with high transferability, which is shared by hundreds or
thousands of training images.
Fig. 4 lists top-ranked image patches corresponding to dif-
ferent nodes in the explanatory graph. Fig. 5 visualizes the
spatial distribution of object parts inferred by the top 50%
nodes in the L-th layer of the explanatory graph with the high-
est inference scores. Fig. 6 shows object parts inferred by a
single node.
Application: multi-shot part localization
There are many potential applications based on the explana-
tory graph. For example, we can regard the explanatory graph
as a visual dictionary of a category and transfer graph nodes
to other applications, such as multi-shot part localization.
Given very few bounding boxes of an object part, [Zhang
et al., 2018a] has proposed retrieving hundreds of nodes that
are related to the part annotations from the explanatory graph,
and then use the retrieved nodes to localize object parts in pre-
viously unseen images. Because each node in the explanatory
graph encodes a part pattern shared by numerous training im-
ages, the retrieved nodes describe a general appearance of the
target part without being over-ﬁtted to the limited annotations
of part bounding boxes. Given three annotations for each ob-
ject part, the explanatory-graph-based method has exhibited
superior performance of part localization and has decreased
by about 1/3 localization errors w.r.t. the second-best base-
line.
4.2
Disentangling CNN representations into
decision trees
[Zhang et al., 2018c] has further proposed a decision tree to
encode decision modes in fully-connected layers. The deci-
sion tree is not designed for classiﬁcation. Instead, the deci-
sion tree is used to quantitatively explain the logic for each
CNN prediction. I.e. given an input image, we use the CNN
to make a prediction. The decision tree tells people which ﬁl-

Pattern of 
Node 1
Pattern of 
Node 2
Pattern of 
Node 3
Pattern of 
Node 4
Figure 6: Image regions inferred by each node in an explanatory graph [Zhang et al., 2018a]. The method of [Zhang et al., 2018a] successfully
disentangles object-part patterns from representations of every single ﬁlter.
Mode for long-
neck birds
Mode for 
standing birds
Mode for 
flying birds
...
y=0.9
…
A head filter
A feet filter
A torso filter
Disentangled 
representations
contribute 23.2%
contribute 7.2%
contribute 12.1%
...
Input 
image
Most generic 
rationales
(the target)
Most specific 
rationales
࢏
࢏
࢏
Figure 7: Decision tree that explains a CNN prediction at the seman-
tic level [Zhang et al., 2018c]. A CNN is learned for object classiﬁ-
cation with disentangled representations in the top conv-layer, where
each ﬁlter represents a speciﬁc object part. The decision tree en-
codes various decision modes hidden inside fully-connected layers
of the CNN in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner. Given an input image, the
decision tree infers a parse tree (red lines) to quantitatively analyze
rationales for the CNN prediction, i.e. which object parts (or ﬁl-
ters) are used for prediction and how much an object part (or ﬁlter)
contributes to the prediction.
ters in a conv-layer are used for the prediction and how much
they contribute to the prediction.
As shown in Fig. 7, the method mines potential decision
modes memorized in fully-connected layers. The decision
tree organizes these potential decision modes in a coarse-
to-ﬁne manner. Furthermore, this study uses the method of
[Zhang et al., 2017c] to disentangle representations of ﬁlters
in the top conv-layers, i.e. making each ﬁlter represent a spe-
ciﬁc object part. In this way, people can use the decision tree
to explain rationales for each CNN prediction at the semantic
level, i.e. which object parts are used by the CNN to make
the prediction.
ReLU
Conv
ReLU
Conv
Loss for filter 1
Loss for filter 2
Loss for filter 3
Traditional 
Conv-layer
Interpretable 
Conv-layer
x
Figure 8: Structures of an ordinary conv-layer and an interpretable
conv-layer [Zhang et al., 2017c]. Green and red lines indicate the
forward and backward propagations, respectively.
Figure 9: Templates [Zhang et al., 2017c].
Each template Tµi
matches to a feature map when the target part mainly triggers the
i-th unit in the feature map.
5
Learning neural networks with
interpretable/disentangled representations
Almost all methods mentioned in previous sections focus on
the understanding of a pre-trained network. In this section,
we review studies of learning disentangled representations
of neural networks, where representations in middle layers
are no longer a black box but have clear semantic mean-
ings. Compared to the understanding of pre-trained networks,
learning networks with disentangled representations present
more challenges. Up to now, only a few studies have been
published in this direction.

Figure 10: Visualization of interpretable ﬁlters in the top conv-layer [Zhang et al., 2017c]. We used [Zhou et al., 2015] to estimate the
image-resolution receptive ﬁeld of activations in a feature map to visualize a ﬁlter’s semantics. An interpretable CNN usually encodes head
patterns of animals in its top conv-layer for classiﬁcation.
5.1
Interpretable convolutional neural networks
As shown in Fig. 8, [Zhang et al., 2017c] has developed a
method to modify an ordinary CNN to obtain disentangled
representations in high conv-layers by adding a loss to each
ﬁlter in the conv-layers. The loss is used to regularize the
feature map towards the representation of a speciﬁc object
part.
Note that people do not need to annotate any object parts
or textures to supervise the learning of interpretable CNNs.
Instead, the loss automatically assigns an object part to each
ﬁlter during the end-to-end learning process. As shown in
Fig. 9, this method designs some templates. Each template
Tµi is a matrix with the same size of feature map. Tµi de-
scribes the ideal distribution of activations for the feature map
when the target part mainly triggers the i-th unit in the feature
map.
Given the joint probability of ﬁtting a feature map to a tem-
plate, the loss of a ﬁlter is formulated as the mutual informa-
tion between the feature map and the templates. This loss
encourages a low entropy of inter-category activations. I.e.
each ﬁlter in the conv-layer is assigned to a certain category.
If the input image belongs to the target category, then the loss
expects the ﬁlter’s feature map to match a template well; oth-
erwise, the ﬁlter needs to remain inactivated. In addition, the
loss also encourages a low entropy of spatial distributions of
neural activations. I.e. when the input image belongs the tar-
get category, the feature map is supposed to exclusively ﬁt a
single template. In other words, the ﬁlter needs to activate a
single location on the feature map.
This study assumes that if a ﬁlter repetitively activates var-
ious feature-map regions, then this ﬁlter is more likely to de-
scribe low-level textures (e.g. colors and edges), instead of
high-level parts. For example, the left eye and the right eye
may be represented by different ﬁlters, because contexts of
the two eyes are symmetric, but not the same.
Fig.10 shows feature maps produced by different ﬁlters of
an interpretable CNN. Each ﬁlter consistently represents the
same object part through various images.
Configuration
Parse tree
Configuration
Parse tree
Figure 11: Detection examples of the proposed method [Wu et al.,
2017]. In addition to predicted bounding boxes, the method also
outputs the latent parse tree and part conﬁgurations as the qualita-
tively extractive rationale in detection. The parse trees are inferred
on-the-ﬂy in the space of latent structures, which follow a top-down
compositional grammar of an AOG.
5.2
Interpretable R-CNN
[Wu et al., 2017] has proposed the learning of qualitatively
interpretable models for object detection based on the R-
CNN. The objective is to unfold latent conﬁgurations of
object parts automatically during the object-detection pro-
cess.
This method is learned without using any part an-
notations for supervision.
[Wu et al., 2017] uses a top-
down hierarchical and compositional grammar, namely an
And-Or graph (AOG), to model latent conﬁgurations of ob-
ject parts. This method uses an AOG-based parsing opera-
tor to substitute for the RoI-Pooling operator used in the R-
CNN. The AOG-based parsing harnesses explainable compo-
sitional structures of objects and maintains the discrimination
power of a R-CNN. This idea is related to the disentangle-
ment of the local, bottom-up, and top-down information com-
ponents for prediction [Wu et al., 2007; Yang et al., 2009;
Wu and Zhu, 2011].
During the detection process, a bounding box is interpreted
as the best parse tree derived from the AOG on-the-ﬂy. Dur-
ing the learning process, a folding-unfolding method is used

to train the AOG and R-CNN in an end-to-end manner.
Fig. 11 illustrates an example of object detection. The pro-
posed method detects object bounding boxes. The method
also determines the latent parse tree and part conﬁgurations
of objects as the qualitatively extractive rationale in detection.
5.3
Capsule networks
[Sabour et al., 2017] has designed novel neural units, namely
capsules, in order to substitute for traditional neural units to
construct a capsule network. Each capsule outputs an activ-
ity vector instead of a scalar. The length of the activity vec-
tor represents the activation strength of the capsule, and the
orientation of the activity vector encodes instantiation param-
eters. Active capsules in the lower layer send messages to
capsules in the adjacent higher layer. This method uses an
iterative routing-by-agreement mechanism to assign higher
weights with the low-layer capsules whose outputs better ﬁt
the instantiation parameters of the high-layer capsule.
Experiments showed that when people trained capsule net-
works using the MNIST dataset [LeCun et al., 1998b], a cap-
sule encoded a speciﬁc semantic concept. Different dimen-
sions of the activity vector of a capsule controlled different
features, including 1) scale and thickness, 2) localized part,
3) stroke thickness, 3) localized skew, and 4) width and trans-
lation.
5.4
Information maximizing generative
adversarial nets
The information maximizing generative adversarial net [Chen
et al., 2016], namely InfoGAN, is an extension of the gen-
erative adversarial network.
The InfoGAN maximizes the
mutual information between certain dimensions of the latent
representation and the image observation. The InfoGAN sep-
arates input variables of the generator into two types, i.e. the
incompressible noise z and the latent code c. This study aims
to learn the latent code c to encode certain semantic concepts
in an unsupervised manner.
The InfoGAN has been trained using the MNIST
dataset [LeCun et al., 1998b], the CelebA dataset [Liu et al.,
2015], the SVHN dataset [Netzer et al., 2011], the 3D face
dataset [Paysan et al., 2009], and the 3D chair dataset [Aubry
et al., 2014]. Experiments have shown that the latent code
has successfully encoded the digit type, the rotation, and the
width of digits in the MNIST dataset, the lighting condition
and the plate context in the SVHN dataset, the azimuth, the
existence of glasses, the hairstyle, and the emotion in the
CelebA dataset, and the width and 3D rotation in the 3D face
and chair datasets.
6
Evaluation metrics for network
interpretability
Evaluation metrics for model interpretability are crucial for
the development of explainable models. This is because un-
like traditional well-deﬁned visual applications (e.g. object
detection and segmentation), network interpretability is more
difﬁcult to deﬁne and evaluate. The evaluation metric of net-
work interpretability can help people deﬁne the concept of
network interpretability and guide the development of learn-
ing interpretable network representations. Up to now, only
very few studies have discussed the evaluation of network
interpretability. Proposing a promising evaluation metric is
still a big challenge to state-of-the-art algorithms. In this sec-
tion, we simply introduce two latest evaluation metrics for
the interpretability of CNN ﬁlters, i.e. the ﬁlter interpretabil-
ity proposed by [Bau et al., 2017] and the location instability
proposed by [Zhang et al., 2018a].
6.1
Filter interpretability
[Bau et al., 2017] has deﬁned six types of semantics for CNN
ﬁlters, i.e. objects, parts, scenes, textures, materials, and col-
ors. The evaluation of ﬁlter interpretability requires people
to annotate these six types of semantics on testing images at
the pixel level. The evaluation metric measures the ﬁtness
between the image-resolution receptive ﬁeld of a ﬁlter’s neu-
ral activations1 and the pixel-level semantic annotations on
the image. For example, if the receptive ﬁeld of a ﬁlter’s
neural activations usually highly overlaps with ground-truth
image regions of a speciﬁc semantic concept through differ-
ent images, then we can consider that the ﬁlter represents this
semantic concept.
For each ﬁlter f, this method computes its feature maps
X = {x = f(I)|I ∈I} on different testing images. Then, the
distribution of activation scores in all positions of all feature
maps is computed. [Bau et al., 2017] set an activation thresh-
old Tf such that p(xij > Tf) = 0.005, to select top activations
from all spatial locations [i, j] of all feature maps x ∈X as
valid map regions corresponding to f’s semantics. Then, the
method scales up low-resolution valid map regions to the im-
age resolution, thereby obtaining the receptive ﬁeld of valid
activations on each image. We use SI
f to denote the receptive
ﬁeld of f’s valid activations w.r.t. the image I.
The compatibility between a ﬁlter f and a speciﬁc seman-
tic concept is reported as an intersection-over-union score
IoU I
f,k =
∥SI
f ∩SI
k∥
∥SI
f ∪SI
k∥, where SI
k denotes the ground-truth mask
of the k-th semantic concept on the image I. Given an image
I, ﬁlter f is associated with the k-th concept if IoU I
f,k > 0.04.
The probability of the k-th concept being associated with the
ﬁlter f is given as Pf,k = meanI:with k-th concept1(IoU I
f,k > 0.04).
Thus, we can use Pf,k to evaluate the ﬁlter interpretability of
f.
6.2
Location instability
Another evaluation metric is location instability. This met-
ric is proposed by [Zhang et al., 2018a] to evaluate the ﬁt-
ness between a CNN ﬁlter and the representation of an object
part. Given an input image I, the CNN computes a feature
map x ∈RN×N of ﬁlter f. We can regard the unit xi,j
(1 ≤i, j ≤N) with the highest activation as the location
inference of f, where N × N is referred to as the size of the
feature map. We use ˆp to denote the image position that cor-
responds to the inferred feature map location (i, j), i.e. the
1The method propagates the receptive ﬁeld of each activated
unit in a ﬁlter’s feature map back to the image plane as the image-
resolution receptive ﬁeld of a ﬁlter.

Inferred 
position
Annotated 
landmark
ࢊࡵ૚
ࢎࢋࢇࢊ
ࢊࡵ૚
࢚ࢇ࢏࢒
ࢊࡵ૚
࢈ࢇࢉ࢑
ࢊࡵ૛
ࢎࢋࢇࢊ
ࢊࡵ૜
ࢎࢋࢇࢊ
ࢊࡵ૜
࢈ࢇࢉ࢑
ࢊࡵ૜
࢚ࢇ࢏࢒
Figure 12: Notation for the computation of a ﬁlter’s location insta-
bility [Zhang et al., 2018a].
center of the unit xi,j’s receptive ﬁeld when we backward
propagated the receptive ﬁeld to the image plane. The eval-
uation assumes that if f consistently represented the same
object part (the object part may not have an explicit name
according to people’s cognition) through different objects,
then distances between the image position ˆp and some object
landmarks should not change much among different objects.
For example, if ﬁlter f represents the shoulder, then the dis-
tance between the shoulder and the head should remain stable
through different objects.
Therefore, people can compute the deviation of the dis-
tance between the inferred position ˆp and a speciﬁc ground-
truth landmark among different images. The average devia-
tion w.r.t. various landmarks can be used to evaluate the lo-
cation instability of f. As shown in Fig. 12, let dI(pk, ˆp) =
∥pk−ˆp∥
√
w2+h2 denote the normalized distance between the inferred
part and the k-th landmark pk on image I.
√
w2 + h2 de-
notes the diagonal length of the input image. Thus, Df,k =
p
varI[dI(pk, ˆp)] is reported as the relative location deviation
of ﬁlter f w.r.t. the k-th landmark, where varI[dI(pk, ˆp)] is
referred to as the variation of the distance dI(pk, ˆp). Because
each landmark cannot appear in all testing images, for each
ﬁlter f, the metric only uses inference results with the top-
M highest activation scores on images containing the k-th
landmark to compute Df,k. In this way, the average of rela-
tive location deviations of all the ﬁlters in a conv-layer w.r.t.
all landmarks, i.e. meanfmeanK
k=1Df,k, measures the location
instability of a CNN, where K denotes the number of land-
marks.
7
Network interpretability for middle-to-end
learning
Based on studies discussed in Sections 4 and 5, people may
either disentangle representations of a pre-trained CNN or
learn a new network with interpretable, disentangled rep-
resentations.
Such interpretable/disentangled network rep-
resentations can further enable middle-to-end model learn-
ing at the semantic level without strong supervision.
We
brieﬂy review two typical studies [Zhang et al., 2017a;
Zhang et al., 2017b] of middle-to-end learning as follows.
7.1
Active question-answering for learning
And-Or graphs
Based on the semantic And-Or representation proposed in
[Zhang et al., 2016], [Zhang et al., 2017a] has developed a
method to use active question-answering to semanticize neu-
ral patterns in conv-layers of a pre-trained CNN and build a
model for hierarchical object understanding.
Terminals
Deformation 
range
Conv-layer
Conv-layer
Conv-layer
 
Input 
image
(AND) part 
template
(OR) latent 
patterns
(OR) semantic part
(AND) part 
template
(OR) latent 
patterns
(OR) semantic part
output
FC
FC
output
FC
FC
Heatmap of the 
selected CNN 
units in all 
conv-layers 
Image 
reconstructed 
using CNN 
responses
Visualization
sub-part
context
Vsem
Vtmp
Vlat
Vunt
Figure 13: And-Or graph grown on a pre-trained CNN as a semantic
branch [Zhang et al., 2017a]. The AOG associates speciﬁc CNN
units with certain image regions. The red lines indicate the parse
graph.
As shown in Fig. 13, the CNN is pre-trained for object
classiﬁcation. The method aims to extract a four-layer in-
terpretable And-Or graph (AOG) to explain the semantic hi-
erarchy hidden in a CNN. The AOG encodes four-layer se-
mantics, ranging across the semantic part (OR node), part
templates (AND nodes), latent patterns (OR nodes), and neu-
ral units (terminal nodes) on feature maps.
In the AOG,
AND nodes represent compositional regions of a part, and
OR nodes encode a list of alternative template/deformation
candidates for a local part. The top part node (OR node) uses
its children to represent some template candidates for the part.
Each part template (AND node) in the second layer uses chil-
dren latent patterns to represent its constituent regions. Each
latent pattern in the third layer (OR node) naturally corre-
sponds to a certain range of units within the feature map of
a ﬁlter. The latent pattern selects a unit within this range to
account for its geometric deformation.
To learn an AOG, [Zhang et al., 2017a] allows the com-
puter to actively identify and ask about objects, whose neural
patterns cannot be explained by the current AOG. As shown
in Fig. 14, in each step of the active question-answering, the
current AOG is used to localize object parts among all the
unannotated images. The method actively selects objects that
cannot well ﬁt the AOG, namely unexplained objects. The
method predicts the potential gain of asking about each un-
explained object, and thus determines the best sequence of
questions (e.g. asking about template types and bounding
boxes of unexplained object parts). In this way, the method
uses the answers to either reﬁne an existing part template or
mine latent patterns for new object-part templates, to grow
AOG branches. Fig. 15 compares the part-localization perfor-
mance of different methods. The QA-based learning exhibits
signiﬁcantly higher efﬁciency than other baselines. The pro-
posed method uses about 1/6–1/3 of the part annotations for
training, but achieves similar or better part-localization per-

Annotations of 
existing part 
templates
Q: Is it a correct localization of the head ? Is it a 
flipped head belonging to part template 1?
Part localization
Appearance type
A1
Correct
Correct
A2
Incorrect
Correct
A3
Incorrect
Incorrect
A4
Incorrect
New appearance
A5
Do not contain
‐‐‐
Part 
annotation
1) Part template 4
2) Flipped pose
0
50
100
150
200
Different object samples
)
(I
KL

Part 
template 1
Part 
template 2
Part 
template 3
Part 
template 4
Figure 14: Illustration of the QA process [Zhang et al., 2017a]. (top)
The method sorts and selects unexplained objects. (bottom) Ques-
tions for each target object.
Normalized distance
Part annotation number
Interactive‐DPM
PL‐DPM‐Part
SS‐DPM‐Part
fc7+linearSVM
fc7+RBF‐SVM
CNN‐PDD
CNN‐PDD‐ft
Fast‐RCNN (2 fts)
Fast‐RCNN (1 ft)
AoG w/o QA
Ours+fastRCNN
Figure 15: Part localization performance on the Pascal VOC Part
dataset [Zhang et al., 2017a].
formance than fast-RCNN methods.
7.2
Interactive manipulations of CNN patterns
Let a CNN be pre-trained using annotations of object bound-
ing boxes for object classiﬁcation. [Zhang et al., 2017b] has
explored an interactive method to diagnose knowledge rep-
resentations of a CNN, in order to transfer CNN patterns to
model object parts. Unlike traditional end-to-end learning of
CNNs that requires numerous training samples, this method
mines object part patterns from the CNN in the scenario of
one/multi-shot learning.
More speciﬁcally, the method uses part annotations on very
few (e.g.
three) object images for supervision.
Given a
bounding-box annotation of a part, the proposed method ﬁrst
uses [Zhang et al., 2016] to mine latent patterns, which are re-
lated to the annotated part, from conv-layers of the CNN. An
AOG is used to organize all mined patterns as the representa-
tion of the target part. The method visualizes the mined latent
patterns and asks people to remove latent patterns unrelated
to the target part interactively. In this way, people can simply
prune incorrect latent patterns from AOG branches to reﬁne
the AOG. Fig. 16 visualizes initially mined patterns and the
remaining patterns after human interaction. With the guid-
ance of human interactions, [Zhang et al., 2017b] has exhib-
ited superior performance of part localization.
Patterns in the 
original AOG
Patterns in conv-
layers 5-7 after 
interactions
Patterns in conv-
layers 8-10 after 
interactions
Figure 16: Visualization of patterns for the head part before and after
human interactions [Zhang et al., 2017b].
8
Prospective trends and conclusions
In this paper, we have reviewed several research directions
within the scope of network interpretability. Visualization of
a neural unit’s patterns was the starting point of understand-
ing network representations in the early years. Then, peo-
ple gradually developed methods to analyze feature spaces of
neural networks and diagnose potential representation ﬂaws
hidden inside neural networks.
At present, disentangling
chaotic representations of conv-layers into graphical models
and/or symbolic logic has become an emerging research di-
rection to open the black-box of neural networks. The ap-
proach for transforming a pre-trained CNN into an explana-
tory graph has been proposed and has exhibited signiﬁcant ef-
ﬁciency in knowledge transfer and weakly-supervised learn-
ing.
End-to-end learning interpretable neural networks, whose
intermediate layers encode comprehensible patterns, is also a
prospective trend. Interpretable CNNs have been developed,
where each ﬁlter in high conv-layers represents a speciﬁc ob-
ject part.
Furthermore, based on interpretable representations of
CNN patterns, semantic-level middle-to-end learning has
been proposed to speed up the learning process. Compared
to traditional end-to-end learning, middle-to-end learning al-
lows human interactions to guide the learning process and can
be applied with very few annotations for supervision.
In the future, we believe the middle-to-end learning will
continuously be a fundamental research direction. In addi-
tion, based on the semantic hierarchy of an interpretable net-
work, debugging CNN representations at the semantic level
will create new visual applications.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by ONR MURI project N00014-16-1-
2007 and DARPA XAI Award N66001-17-2-4029, and NSF
IIS 1423305.
