arXiv:2201.04259v1  [cs.NI]  12 Jan 2022
1
Toward Experience-Driven Trafﬁc Management and
Orchestration in Digital-Twin-Enabled 6G Networks
Muhammad Tariq, Senior Member, IEEE, Faisal Naeem, Member, IEEE, and H. Vincent Poor, Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The envisioned 6G networks are expected to sup-
port extremely high data rates, low-latency, and radically new
applications empowered by machine learning. The futuristic
6G networks require a novel framework that can be used
to operate, manage, and optimize its underlying services such
as ultra-reliable and low-latency communication, and Internet
of everything. In recent years, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has
demonstrated signiﬁcant success in optimizing and designing
networks. The AI-enabled trafﬁc orchestration can dynamically
organize different network architectures and slices to provide
quality of experience considering the dynamic nature of the
wireless communication network. In this paper, we propose a
digital twin enabled network framework, empowered by AI to
cater the variability and complexity of envisioned 6G networks,
to provide smart resource management and intelligent service
provisioning. Digital twin paves a way for achieving optimizing
6G services by creating a virtual representation of the 6G
network along with its associated communication technologies
(e.g., intelligent reﬂecting surfaces, terahertz and millimeter
communication), computing systems (e.g., cloud computing and
fog computing) with its associated algorithms (e.g., optimization
and machine learning). We then discuss and review the existing
AI-enabled trafﬁc management and orchestration techniques and
highlight future research directions and potential solutions in 6G
networks.
Index Terms—Software Deﬁned Networking, Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning, 6G, Ultra-reliable and Low-latency Communica-
tion, Digital Twin
I. INTRODUCTION
The dramatic development of adaptive and complex com-
munication technologies has triggered the emergence of new
architectures such as Internet of Things (IoT), Intelligent
transportation systems (ITS), smart healthcare, and Intelligent
reﬂecting surfaces (IRSs). Speciﬁcally, the next-generation
networks incorporating the IRS-enabled systems are based on
radical new applications that have their performance require-
ments, such as Internet of everything (IoE), ultra-reliable and
low-latency communication (uRLLC), massive machine-type
communication (mMTC), and enhanced mobile broadband
(eMBB). The 5G wireless networks have not been able to
fully address the challenges and requirements, brought by the
massive data and real-time requirements of services [1].
Muhammad Tariq si with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Na-
tional University of Computer & Emerging Sciences, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Faisal Naeem is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University

H. Vincent Poor is with the Department of Electrical and Computer

Corresponding author is Muhammad Tariq
In contrast to the previous generations, envisioned 6G
networks promise to revolutionize and transform the wire-
less networks from “connecting things” to “connected in-
telligence”. Even though the development of 6G network
is at the initial stage, however, it intends to achieve very
high data rates, up to 1 Tb/s, end-to-end delay requirements
(less than 1 msec), and connected intelligence with artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) capability. Moreover, the network’s capacity
requirement is much higher than the 5G networks and has
to utilize the frequency spectrum in the range of 100 GHz
to 3 GHz. Nevertheless, besides the network capacity and
end-to-end delay requirements, IRS-enabled unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) and terrestrial networks will have capacity
and energy-efﬁciency requirements. As a result more detailed
requirements are needed in the context of trafﬁc optimization
considering the dynamic and complex environment of the
envisioned 6G networks.
Network trafﬁc control (NTC) can play a vital role in
designing routing optimization techniques with diverse net-
work requirements and varying channel conditions in 6G
networks. However, the Best-effort architecture cannot provide
ﬂexible network management in highly mobile and dynamic
networks. The programmability feature of the software-deﬁned
networking (SDN) provides intelligence in the network and
can provide better incentives for NTC to optimize the trafﬁc
in 6G networks. NTC techniques are usually formulated as
an optimization problem and cannot accurately model the
dynamic and time-varying channel conditions for the antic-
ipated 6G networks. Thus, intelligent and adaptive techniques
are required that can satisfy the network requirements of the
envisioned 6G networks.
Machine learning (ML) is regarded as a paradigm shift
in achieving intelligence in the networks for the envisioned
6G networks. Reinforcement learning (RL) is an AI-based
algorithm that can achieve human-level intelligence. In RL,
a smart agent interacts with the environment in an episodic
manner, and as a result, it receives the reward and next state
to learn the optimal policies. In the context of 6G networks,
it is expected that they will need to operate in highly mobile
and complex environments especially in the case where IRSs
will be deployed in a terrestrial and UAV-enabled networks.
TRL can enable the next-generation networks such as those
incorporating IRSs to intelligently and actively monitor their
environments by learning the optimal policies and proactively
taking the actions to maximize a pre-deﬁned reward. More-
over, RL-aided decision-making is a key-enabler for 6G ser-
vices, particularly those that have stringent QoS requirements
and highly dynamic wireless propagation environments. In

2
Fig. 1. RL-aided architecture for trafﬁc optimization in 6G Networks
fact, if well designed, RL optimization techniques provide self-
healing, self-optimizing, and self-organizing solutions for a
broad range of applications of 6G within the context of trafﬁc
optimization.
A digital twin (DT) is a technology that creates the virtual
representation of the dynamics and elements of a physical
system. DT uses data analytic and ML techniques to learn
the dynamic characteristics of a communication network. DT
can play a vital role in trafﬁc optimization by creating a
virtual representation of a physical network depending on
implementation factors (such as IRSs, multiple-input-multiple-
output MIMO, UAVs etc.,). It captures the time-varying
characteristics between the communication network and sur-
rounding network. The combination of SDN, DT, network
function virtualization (NFV), and network slicing (NS) with
RL can achieve zero-touch network orchestration, manage-
ment, and optimization, which can be an effective strategy
for the paradigm shift from 5G to 6G networks. RL-aided
network orchestration can dynamically orchestrate network
slices and architecture and satisfy the dynamic applications
and services. RL-aided network optimization can globally
monitor a real-time network’s key performance indicators
(KPI) and adaptively learn the network policies to satisfy the
KPIs continuously. As a result, the RL and DT will play a
signiﬁcant role in learning the optimal routing policies in 6G
networks.
The key contribution of the paper are as follow.
1) Realizing the network intelligence capabilities in en-
visioned 6G networks for trafﬁc optimization, an AI-
assisted intelligent digital-twin enabled trafﬁc orchestra-
tor framework for trafﬁc management in proposed.
2) Moreover, a review of the recent AI-enabled trafﬁc or-
chestration techniques in envisioned 6G networks, and the
challenges and future research directions are discussed in
detail at the end.
II. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we proposed the most eye-catching digital
twin-empowered architecture for trafﬁc optimization in envi-
sioned 6G networks as shown in Fig.1. The proposed RL-
enabled and digital twin empowered architecture is mainly
divided into four layers: smart application layer, digital twin
layer. data analytic layer, and intelligent control layer.
1) Smart application layer: This layer is responsible for de-
livering the application-dependent requirements of smart
applications such as IRSs, smart cities, ITS, virtual and
tactile reality. The real-time networks in 6G such as,
extremely reliable and low-latency communications (ER-
LLC), extremely low-power communications (ELPC),
eMBB and mMTC, will forward their key performance
indicators (KPI) using the smart application layer.
2) Digital twin layer: The digital twin layer enables digital
representation of the physical systems and virtual model
of the physical models. The proposed digital twin layer
will mirror the dynamic characteristics of the 6G-enabled
physical wireless communication network based on the
type of implementation (IRS, MIMO, UAV etc.,) and
will make predictions. The digital twin in the proposed
architecture will construct the dynamic characteristics of
the physical communication network, training of machine
learning parameters, i.e., stochastic task arrival process
and dynamic changes in network resources. Finally, the
digital twin objects will be created dynamically to opti-
mize resource allocation and ofﬂoading policy of the 6G
applications such as mMTC, eMBB, and ERLLC.

3
3) Distributed learning: The network control system has
gone through a centralized approach to the distributed
structure. The envisioned 6G network will have diverse
network requirements such as uRLLC where the single
agent controller cannot optimize the resources of the net-
work efﬁciently. Furthermore, to increase the computing
resources and intelligence in the network, advanced dis-
tributed learning techniques will be integrated in the smart
agents such multi-access edge computing (MEC) with
RL-aided algorithms that can be utilized for optimizing
the routing for smart applications (e.g., transportation,
agriculture and healthcare).
4) Intelligent control layer: The combination of AI and
SDN/NFV/NS in the intelligent control layer can achieve
optimization, orchestration and a ﬂexible decision making
process in envisioned 6G networks. The smart agents in
the distributed layers forward the learned optimal policy
to the intelligent control plane to intelligently learn and
optimize the global optimal policies. The multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) learns the policy in a
network based on joint actions of all the agents. In the
MARL process, the training is done in the centralized
approach and execution of the policy is done in a dis-
tributed approach. Thus, the SDN controller will play a
vital role in centralized training of MARL algorithms for
the trafﬁc optimization.
5) Data-plane layer: The control plane learns the optimal
trafﬁc routing policies while the data-plane layer acts as
a forwarding device and is used for forwarding the trafﬁc
to the end-users.
III. RECENT ADVANCES IN RL-AIDED TRAFFIC
OPTIMIZATION
More recently, the model-free advanced ML algorithms
such as RL and DRL have been incorporated in the control
plane for trafﬁc optimization. The RL approach learns the
optimal routing optimization policy from its observation by
interacting with the network environment. These approaches
are not dependent on pre-deﬁned policies and have the ability
to intelligently adapt to the dynamic environment. We provide
a comprehensive literature review of the exiting RL-aided tech-
niques used for trafﬁc optimization using the SDN approach
and discuss whether they can be applied to the envisioned 6G
networks or not.
A. Single-agent reinforcement learning for trafﬁc optimization
The single agent RL algorithms perform well for a small-
network. However, the performance degrades when the scale
of the network increases. A single agent deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) is proposed for solving the trafﬁc optimization
issue in case of wireless communication networks. However,
the next-generation networks such as 6G will have complex,
continuous state and action variables, where DRL approach
cannot perform well. In [2], the authors used a DRL based
deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm for op-
timizing the routing in SDN scenario. The actor-critic based
DDPG framework is used for solving the quality of service
(QoS) and QoE in networks. The AC-based DDPG algorithm
performs well compared to the DRL technique.
The authors proposed a DDPG model [3], which uses a con-
volutional neural network (CNN) as a function approximator
for improving the routing performance. The paper combines
multiple network resources such as (bandwidth and cache) by
improving their contribution in reducing the delay. The trafﬁc
engineering (TE) problem using the DDPG algorithm cannot
have satisfactory performance due to its uniform sampling
technique for experience replay, which ignores the importance
of transition samples in the replay buffer. Thus, DDPG frame-
work cannot perform well for the trafﬁc optimization prob-
lems. In [4], the authors proposed a recurrent neural network-
based DRL technique for routing optimization in an SDN-
enabled network. The algorithm is implemented on a test-bed
and simulation result shows that the proposed long short-term
memory (LSTM) based DRL reduces the trafﬁc delay and
loss as compared to the traditional open shortest path ﬁrst
(OSPF) routing technique. This approach does not perform
better when an agent is introduced to a new environment.
The TE problem based on DDPG are used for global ofﬂine
routing as the greedy online QoS optimization poses issues
such as avoiding network loops, variance in selecting optimal
actions and learning the optimal paths considering multiple
QoS metrics. To solve the issue, the intelligent nature of the
SDN controller implements and calculates the routing policies
on a real-time and forwards the policies to the switches. The
decoupled nature of the control plane provides ﬂexibility and
data management and performs several functionalities such as
trafﬁc detection, trafﬁc prediction and resource management.
The envisioned 6G networks will generate high dimensional
states from heterogeneous networks, where the existing single
controller-based RL algorithms will not be able to manage
large number of ﬂows arriving at a time on controller and
can result in a switch migration problem (SMP). Thus, a
multi-agent reinforcement learning based trafﬁc optimization
techniques are needed.
B. Multi-agent reinforcement learning for trafﬁc optimization
The authors in [8] proposed a distributed control plane
as a multi-agent approach and formulate the multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) to solve the scalability and
load balancing issue in large-scale networks. The MARL is
used for learning the optimal policies in distributed systems.
In the distributed control plane, each control plane acts as a
DRL agent and all agents in the network forms a multi-agent
system. Each agent in the network interacts with its neighbour
and exchange the information with other agents. Finally, the
important information is retrieved from all agents and a
global optimal policy is learnt for ﬂexible load management.
The paper also designed a zero-sum game technique for the
MARL for the stability of the model. The results show that
MARL reduced the processing time of controller by 25% and
improves the overhead ratio generated through the control
plane request by 27.3%.
The existing RL techniques for TE for multi-region network
learn the optimal policy based on its own regional network

4
Table I
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING ALGORITHMS FOR TRAFFIC OPTIMIZATION USING SDN APPROACH
