Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
Alejandro Torre˜no · Eva Onaindia · ´Oscar Sapena
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract This paper proposes FMAP (Forward Multi-
Agent Planning), a fully-distributed multi-agent plan-
ning method that integrates planning and coordina-
tion. Although FMAP is speciﬁcally aimed at solving
problems that require cooperation among agents, the
ﬂexibility of the domain-independent planning model
allows FMAP to tackle multi-agent planning tasks of
any type. In FMAP, agents jointly explore the plan
space by building up reﬁnement plans through a com-
plete and ﬂexible forward-chaining partial-order plan-
ner. The search is guided by hDT G, a novel heuris-
tic function that is based on the concepts of Domain
Transition Graph and frontier state and is optimized
to evaluate plans in distributed environments. Agents
in FMAP apply an advanced privacy model that allows
them to adequately keep private information while com-
municating only the data of the reﬁnement plans that
is relevant to each of the participating agents. Exper-
imental results show that FMAP is a general-purpose
approach that eﬃciently solves tightly-coupled domains
that have specialized agents and cooperative goals as
well as loosely-coupled problems. Speciﬁcally, the em-
pirical evaluation shows that FMAP outperforms cur-
rent MAP systems at solving complex planning tasks
that are adapted from the International Planning Com-
petition benchmarks.
Alejandro Torre˜no
Departamento de Sistemas Inform´aticos y Computaci´on
Universtitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia
Camino de Vera, s/n, 46022, Valencia, Spain

Eva Onaind´ıa

´Oscar Sapena

Keywords Distributed Algorithms · Multi-Agent
Planning · Heuristic Planning · Privacy
1 Introduction
Multi-agent planning (MAP) introduces a social ap-
proach to planning by which multiple intelligent entities
work together to solve planning tasks that they are not
able to solve by themselves, or to at least accomplish
them better by cooperating [40]. MAP places the focus
on the collective eﬀort of multiple agents to accomplish
tasks by combining their knowledge and capabilities.
The complexity of solving a MAP task directly de-
pends on its typology. In order to illustrate the features
of a MAP task, let us introduce a brief application ex-
ample.
Example 1 Consider the transportation task in Fig. 1,
which involves three diﬀerent agents. There are two
transport agencies (ta1 and ta2), each of which has a
truck (t1 and t2, respectively). The two agencies work
in two diﬀerent geographical areas, ga1 and ga2, respec-
tively. The third agent is a factory, f, which is placed
in the area ga2. To manufacture products, factory f re-
quires raw materials (rm) that are gathered from area
ga1. In this task, ta1 and ta2 have the same capabilities,
but they act in diﬀerent areas; i.e., they are spatially
distributed agents. Additionally, the factory agent f is
functionally diﬀerent from ta1 and ta2. The goal of this
task is for f to manufacture a set of ﬁnal products. In
order to carry out the task, ta1 will send its truck t1 to
load the raw materials rm located in l2 and then trans-
port them to a storage facility (sf) that is placed in the
intersection of both geographical areas. Then, ta2 will
complete the delivery by using its truck t2 to transport
arXiv:1501.07250v1  [cs.AI]  28 Jan 2015

2
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
f
l4
l3
l1
l2
sf
ga1
ga2
t2
t1
rm
Fig. 1 Example of a transportation task
the materials from sf to f, which will in turn manu-
facture the ﬁnal products. Therefore, this task involves
three specialized agents that are spatially and function-
ally distributed which must cooperate to accomplish a
common goal.
Example 1 emphasizes most of the key elements of
a MAP task. First, the spatial and/or functional distri-
bution of planning agents gives rise to specialized agents
that have diﬀerent knowledge and capabilities. In turn,
this information distribution stresses the issue of pri-
vacy, which is one of the basic aspects that should be
considered in multi-agent applications [33].
Since the three parties involved in Example 1 are
specialized in diﬀerent functional or geographical ar-
eas of the task, most of the information managed by
factory f is not relevant for the transport agencies and
vice-versa. The same occurs with the transport agencies
ta1 and ta2. Additionally, agents may not be willing to
share the sensitive information of their internal proce-
dures with the others. For instance, ta1 and ta2 are
cooperating in this particular delivery task, but they
might be potential competitors since they work in the
same business sector. Therefore, agents in a MAP con-
text want to minimize the information they share with
each other, either for strategic reasons or simply be-
cause it is not relevant for the rest of the agents in
order to address the planning task.
Besides the need for computational or information
distribution, privacy is also one of the reasons to adopt
a multi-agent approach. This aspect, however, has been
traditionally relegated in MAP, particularly by the plan-
ning community [21]. While some approaches deﬁne a
basic notion of privacy [2,25], others allow agents to
share detailed parts of their plans or do not take pri-
vate information into account at all [22].
The complexity of a MAP task is often described
by means of its coupling level [4], which is measured
as the number of interactions that arise among agents
during the resolution of a MAP task. According to this
parameter, MAP tasks can be classiﬁed into loosely-
coupled tasks (which present few interactions among
agents) and tightly-coupled tasks (which involve many
interactions among agents). The coupling level, how-
ever, does not take into consideration one key aspect of
MAP tasks: the presence of cooperative goals; i.e., goals
that cannot be solved individually by any agent since
they require the cooperation of specialized agents. Ex-
ample 1 illustrates a tightly-coupled task with one such
goal since none of the agents can achieve the manu-
facturing of the ﬁnal products by itself. Instead, they
must make use of their specialized capabilities and in-
teract with each other to deliver the raw materials and
manufacture the ﬁnal products.
In this paper, we present FMAP (Forward MAP),
which is a domain-independent MAP system that is de-
signed to cope with a great variety of planning tasks of
diﬀerent complexity and coupling level. FMAP is a fully
distributed method that interleaves planning and coor-
dination by following a cooperative reﬁnement planning
approach. This search scheme allows us to eﬃciently
coordinate agents’ actions in any type of planning task
(either loosely-coupled or tightly-coupled) as well as to
handle cooperative goals.
FMAP relies on a theoretical model which deﬁnes
a more sophisticated notion of privacy than most of
the existing MAP systems. Instead of using a single
set of private data, FMAP allows agents to declare
the information they will share with each other. For
instance, the transport agency ta2 in Example 1 will
share with factory f information that is likely to be
diﬀerent from the information shared with agent ta1.
Our system enhances privacy by minimizing the infor-
mation that agents need to disclose. FMAP is a com-
plete and reliable planning system that has proven to be
very competitive when compared to other state-of-the-
art MAP systems. The experimental results will show
that FMAP is particularly eﬀective for solving tightly-
coupled MAP problems with cooperative goals.
This article is organized as follows: section 2 presents
some related work on multi-agent planning, with an
emphasis on issues like the coupling level of planning
tasks, privacy, or cooperative goals. Section 3 formal-
izes the notion of a MAP task; section 4 describes the
main components of FMAP, the search procedure, and
the DTG-based heuristic function; ﬁnally, section 5 pro-
vides a thorough experimental evaluation of FMAP and
section 6 concludes the paper.
2 Related work
In the literature, there are two main approaches for
solving MAP tasks like the one described in Exam-
ple 1. Centralized MAP involves using an intermediary
agent that has complete knowledge of the task. The dis-
tributed or decentralized approach spreads the planning

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
3
responsability among agents, which are in charge of in-
teracting with each other to coordinate their local so-
lutions, if necessary [28,18]. The adoption of a central-
ized approach is aimed at improving the planner perfor-
mance by taking advantage of the inherent structure of
the MAP tasks [22,8]. Centralized approaches assume
a single planning entity that has complete knowledge
of the task, which is rather unrealistic if the parties
involved in the task have sensitive private information
that they are not willing to disclose [32]. In Example
1, the three agents involved in the task want to protect
the information regarding their internal processes and
business strategies, so a centralized setting is not an
acceptable solution.
We then focus on fully distributed MAP, that is, the
problem of coordinating agents in a shared environment
where information is distributed. The distributed MAP
setting involves two main tasks: the planning of local
solutions and the coordination of the agents’ plans into
a global solution. Coordination can be performed at
one or various stages of the distributed resolution of a
MAP task. Some techniques are used for problems in
which agents build local plans for the individual goals
that they have been assigned. MAP is about coordinat-
ing the local plans of agents so as to mutually beneﬁt
by avoiding the duplication of eﬀort. In this case, the
goal is not to build a joint plan among entities that are
functionally or spatially distributed but rather to apply
plan merging to coordinate the local plans of multiple
agents that are capable of achieving the problem goals
by themselves [7].
There is a large body of work on plan-merging tech-
niques. The work in [7] introduces a distributed co-
ordination framework based on partial-order planning
that addresses the interactions that emerge between the
agents’ local plans. This framework, however, does not
consider privacy. The proposal in [36] is based on the it-
erative revision of the agents’ local plans. Agents in this
model cooperate by mutually adapting their local plans,
with a focus on improving their common or individual
beneﬁt. This approach also ignores privacy and agents
are assumed to be fully cooperative. The approach in
[39] uses multi-agent plan repair to solve inconsisten-
cies among the agents’ local plans while maintaining
privacy. µ-SATPLAN [9] extends a satisﬁability-based
planner to coordinate the agents’ local plans by study-
ing positive and negative interactions among them.
Plan-merging techniques are not very well suited for
coping with tightly-coupled tasks as they may introduce
exponentially many ordering constraints in problems
that require great coordination eﬀort [7]. In general,
plan merging is not an eﬀective method for attaining
cooperative goals since this resolution scheme generally
assumes that each agent is able to solve a subset of the
task’s goals by itself. However, some approaches use
plan merging to coordinate local plans of specialized
agents. In this case, the eﬀort is placed on discovering
the interaction points among agents through the pub-
lic information that they share. For instance, Planning
First [25] introduces a cooperative MAP approach for
loosely-coupled tasks, in which specialized agents carry
out planning individually through a state-based plan-
ner. The resulting local plans are then coordinated by
solving a distributed Constraint Satisfaction Problem
(CSP) [16]. This combination of CSP and planning to
solve MAP tasks was originally introduced by the MA-
STRIPS framework [4].
Another major research trend in MAP interleaves
planning and coordination, providing a more uniﬁed vi-
sion of cooperative MAP. One of the ﬁrst approaches
to domain-independent MAP is the Generalized Par-
tial Global Planning (GPGP) framework [23]. Agents
in GPGP have a partial view of the world and commu-
nicate their local plans to the rest of the agents, which
in turn merge this information into their own partial
global plan in order to improve it. Approaches to con-
tinual planning (interleaving planning and execution in
a world undergoing continual change), assume there is
uncertainty in the world state and therefore agents do
not have a complete view of the world [5]. Speciﬁcally in
[5], agents have a limited knowledge of the environment
and limited capabilities, but the authors do not explic-
itly deal with a functional distribution among agents
or cooperative goals. TFPOP is a fully centralized ap-
proach that combines temporal and forward-chaining
partial-order planning to solve loosely-coupled MAP
tasks [22]. The Best-Response Planning algorithm de-
parts from an initial joint plan that is built through
the Planning First MAP system [25] and iteratively im-
proves the quality of this initial plan by applying cost
optimal planning [17]. Agents can only access the pub-
lic information of the other agents’ plans thereby pre-
serving privacy, and they optimize their plans with the
aim to converge to a Nash equilibrium regarding their
preferences. MAP-POP is a fully distributed method
that eﬀectively maintains the agents’ privacy [38,37].
Agents in MAP-POP perform an incomplete partial-
order planning search to progressively develop and co-
ordinate a joint plan until its completion.
Finally, MAPR is a recent planner that performs
goal allocation to each agent [2]. Agents iteratively solve
the assigned goals by extending the plan of the previ-
ous agent. In this approach, agents work under lim-
ited knowledge of the environment by obfuscating the
private information in their plans. MAPR is particu-
larly eﬀective for loosely-coupled problems, but it can-

4
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
not deal with tasks that feature specialized agents and
cooperative goals since it assumes that each goal is
achieved by a single agent. Section 5 will show a com-
parative performance evaluation between MAPR and
FMAP, our proposed approach.
3 MAP task formalization
Agents in FMAP work with limited knowledge of the
planning task by assuming that information that is not
represented in an agent’s model is unknown to the agent.
The states of the world are modeled through a ﬁnite
set of state variables, V, each of which is associated to
a ﬁnite domain, Dv, of mutually exclusive values that
refer to the objects in the world. Assigning a value d to
a variable v ∈V generates a ﬂuent. A positive ﬂuent is
a tuple ⟨v, d⟩, which indicates that the variable v takes
the value d. A negative ﬂuent is of the form ⟨v, ¬d⟩,
indicating that v does not take the value d. A state S
is a set of positive and negative ﬂuents.
An action is a tuple α = ⟨PRE(α), EFF(α)⟩, where
PRE(α) is a ﬁnite set of ﬂuents that represents the pre-
conditions of α, and EFF(α) is a ﬁnite set of positive
and negative variable assignments that model the ef-
fects of α. Executing an action α in a world state S
leads to a new world state S′ as a result of applying
EFF(α) over S. An eﬀect of the form (v = d) assigns
the value d to the variable v, i.e., it adds the ﬂuent
⟨v, d⟩to S′ as well as adding a set of ﬂuents ⟨v, ¬d′⟩
for each other value d′ in the variable domain in order
to have a consistent state representation. Additionally,
any ﬂuent in S of the form ⟨v, ¬d⟩or ⟨v, d′′⟩, d′′ ̸= d, is
removed in state S′. This latter modiﬁcation removes
any ﬂuent that contradicts ⟨v, d⟩. On the other hand,
an assignment (v ̸= d) adds the ﬂuent ⟨v, ¬d⟩to S′ and
removes ⟨v, d⟩from S′, if such a ﬂuent exists in S.
For instance, let us suppose that the transportation
task in Example 1 includes a variable pos-rm that de-
scribes the position of the raw materials rm, which can
be any of the locations in the task. Let S be a state that
includes a ﬂuent ⟨pos-rm, l2⟩, which indicates that rm
is placed in its initial location (see Fig. 1). Agent ta1
performs an action to load rm into its truck t1, which
includes an eﬀect of the form (pos-rm = t1). The ap-
plication of this action results in a new world state S′
that will include a ﬂuent ⟨pos-rm, t1⟩and ﬂuents of the
form ⟨pos-rm, ¬l⟩for each other location l ̸= t1; the
ﬂuent ⟨pos-rm, l2⟩will no longer be in S′.
Deﬁnition 1 A MAP task is deﬁned as a tuple TMAP =
⟨AG,V,I, G, A⟩. AG = {1, . . . , n} is a ﬁnite non-empty
set of agents. V = S
i∈AG Vi, where Vi is the set of state
variables known to an agent i. I = S
i∈AG Ii is a set
of ﬂuents that deﬁnes the initial state of TMAP . Since
specialized agents are allowed, they may only know a
subset of I. Given two agents i and j, Ii ∩Ij may
or may not be ∅; in any case, the initial states of the
agents never contradict each other. G is the set of goals
of TMAP , i.e., the values of the state variables that
agents have to achieve in order to accomplish TMAP .
Finally, A = S
i∈AG Ai is the set of planning actions of
the agents. Ai and Aj of two specialized agents i and j
will typically be two disjoint sets since the agents have
their own diﬀerent capabilities; otherwise, Ai and Aj
may overlap. A includes two ﬁctitious actions αi and
αf that do not belong to the action set of any par-
ticular agent: αi represents the initial state of TMAP ,
i.e., PRE(αi) = ∅and EFF(αi) = I, while αf repre-
sents the global goals of TMAP , i.e., PRE(αf) = G, and
EFF(αf) = ∅.
As discussed in Example 1, our model considers spe-
cialized agents that can be functionally and/or spatially
distributed. This specialization deﬁnes the local view
that each agent has of the MAP task. Local views are a
typical characteristic of multi-agent systems and other
distributed systems. For instance, distributed CSPs use
local views, such that agents only receive information
about the constraints in which they are involved [16,
41]. Next, we deﬁne the information of an agent i on a
planning task TMAP .
The view of an agent i on a MAP task TMAP is de-
ﬁned as T i
MAP = ⟨Vi, Ai, Ii, G⟩. Vi is the set of state
variables known to agent i; Ai ⊆A is the set of its
capabilities (planning actions); Ii is the subset of ﬂu-
ents of the initial state I that are visible to agent i;
and G is the set of global goals of TMAP . Since agents
in FMAP are fully cooperative, they are all aware of
the global goals of the task. Obviously, because of spe-
cialization, a particular agent may not understand the
goals as speciﬁed in G; deﬁning G as global goals im-
plies that all agents contribute to the achievement of G,
either directly (achieving a g ∈G) or indirectly (intro-
ducing actions whose eﬀects help other agents achieve
g).
The state variables of an agent i are determined
by the view the agent has on the initial state, Ii, the
planning actions it can perform, Ai, and the set of goals
of TMAP . This also aﬀects the domain Dv of a variable
v. We deﬁne Di
v ⊆Dv as the set of values of the variable
v that are known to agent i.
Consider again the pos-rm variable in Example 1.
The domain of pos-rm contains all the locations in
the transportation task, including the factory f, the
storage facility sf, and the trucks; that is, Dpos-rm =
{l1, l2, l3, l4, f, sf, t1, t2}. However, agents ta1 and ta2

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
5
have local knowledge about the domain of pos-rm be-
cause some of the values of such variable refer to ob-
jects of TMAP that are unknown to them. Hence, ta1
will manage Dta1
pos-rm = {l1, l2, sf, t1}, while ta2 will
manage Dta2
pos-rm = {l3, l4, sf, f, t2}.
Agents in FMAP interact with each other by sharing
information about their state variables. For each pair
of agents i and j, the public information they share
is deﬁned as Vij = Vji = Vi ∩Vj. Additionally, some
of the values in the domain of a variable can also be
public to both agents. The set of values of a variable v
that are public to a pair of agents i and j is deﬁned as
Dij
v = Di
v ∩Dj
v.
As Example 1 indicates, the pos-rm variable is pub-
lic to agents ta1 and ta2. The values that are public to
both agents are deﬁned as the intersection of the values
that are known to each of them, Dta1 ta2
pos-rm = {sf}. This
way, the only public location of rm for agents ta1 and
ta2 is the storage facility sf, which is precisely the in-
tersection between the two geographical areas. Hence,
if agent ta1 places rm in sf, it will inform ta2 accord-
ingly, and vice versa. This allows agents ta1 and ta2 to
work together while minimizing the information they
share with each other.
Our MAP model is a multi-agent reﬁnement plan-
ning framework, which is a general method based on
the reﬁnement of the set of all possible plans. The in-
ternal reasoning of agents in FMAP is conﬁgured as a
Partial-Order Planning (POP) search procedure. Other
local search strategies are applicable, as long as agents
build partial-order plans. The following concepts and
deﬁnitions are standard terms from the POP paradigm
[12], which have been adapted to state variables. Ad-
ditionally, deﬁnitions also account for the multi-agent
nature of the planning task and the local views of the
task by the agents.
Deﬁnition 2 A partial-order plan or partial plan is
a tuple Π = ⟨∆, OR, CL⟩. ∆= {α|α ∈A} is the set of
actions in Π. OR is a ﬁnite set of ordering constraints
(≺) on ∆. CL is a ﬁnite set of causal links of the form
α
⟨v,d⟩
→β or α
⟨v,¬d⟩
→
β, where α and β are actions in
∆. A causal link α
⟨v,d⟩
→β enforces precondition ⟨v, d⟩∈
PRE(β) through an eﬀect (v = d) ∈EFF(α) [12].
Similarly, a causal link α
⟨v,¬d⟩
→
β enforces ⟨v, ¬d⟩∈
PRE(β) through an eﬀect (v ̸= d) ∈EFF(α) or (v =
d′) ∈EFF(α), d′ ̸= d.
An empty partial plan is deﬁned as Π0 = ⟨∆0, OR0,
CL0⟩, where OR0 and CL0 are empty sets, and ∆0 con-
tains only the ﬁctitious initial action αi. A partial plan
Π for a task TMAP will always contain αi.
The introduction of new actions in a partial plan
may trigger the appearance of ﬂaws. There are two
types of ﬂaws in a partial plan: preconditions that are
not yet solved (or supported) through a causal link, and
threats. A threat over a causal link α
⟨v,d⟩
→β is caused
by an action γ that is not ordered w.r.t. α or β and
might potentially modify the value of v [12] ((v ̸= d) ∈
EFF(γ) or (v = d′) ∈EFF(γ), d′ ̸= d), making the
causal link unsafe. Threats are addressed by introduc-
ing either an ordering constraint γ ≺α (this is called
demotion because the causal link is posted after the
threatening action) or an ordering β ≺γ (this is called
promotion because the causal link is placed before the
threatening action) [12].
A ﬂaw-free plan is a threat-free partial plan in which
the preconditions of all the actions are supported through
causal links.
Planning agents in FMAP cooperate to solve MAP
tasks by progressively reﬁning an initially empty plan Π
until a solution is reached. The deﬁnition of reﬁnement
plan is closely related to the internal forward-chaining
partial-order planning search performed by the agents.
Reﬁnement planning is a technique that is widely used
by many planners, speciﬁcally in anytime planning, where
a ﬁrst initial solution is progressively reﬁned until the
deliberation time expires [31]. We deﬁne a reﬁnement
plan as follows:
Deﬁnition 3 A reﬁnement plan Πr = ⟨∆r, ORr,
CLr⟩over a partial plan Π = ⟨∆, OR, CL⟩is a ﬂaw-free
partial plan that extends Π, i.e., ∆⊂∆r, OR ⊂ORr
and CL ⊂CLr. Πr introduces a new action α ∈∆r
in Π, resulting in ∆r = ∆∪α. All the preconditions
in PRE(α) are linked to existing actions in Π through
causal links; i.e., all preconditions are supported: ∀p ∈
PRE(α), ∃β
p→α ∈CLr, where β ∈∆.
Reﬁnement plans in FMAP include actions that can
be executed in parallel by diﬀerent agents. Some MAP
models consider that two parallel or non-sequential ac-
tions are mutually consistent if neither of them modi-
ﬁes the value of a state variable that the other relies on
or aﬀects [5]. We also consider that the preconditions
of two mutually consistent actions have to be consis-
tent [3]. Hence, two non-sequential actions α ∈Ai and
β ∈Aj are mutually consistent if none of the following
conditions hold:
–
∃(v = d) ∈EFF(α) and ∃(⟨v, d′⟩∈PRE(β) ∨
⟨v, ¬d⟩∈PRE(β)), where v ∈Vij, d ∈Dij
v , d′ ∈Dj
v
and d ̸= d′, or vice versa; that is, the eﬀects of α
and the preconditions of β (or vice versa) do not
contradict each other under the speciﬁed conditions.

6
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
–
∃(v = d) ∈EFF(α) and ∃((v = d′) ∈EFF(β) ∨
(v ̸= d) ∈EFF(β)), where v ∈Vij, d ∈Dij
v , d′ ∈
Dj
v and d ̸= d′, or vice versa; that is, the eﬀects of α
and the eﬀects of β (or vice versa) do not contradict
each other under the speciﬁed conditions.
– ∃⟨v, d⟩∈PRE(α) and ∃(⟨v, d′⟩∈PRE(β)∨⟨v, ¬d⟩∈
PRE(β)), where v ∈Vij, d ∈Dij
v , d′ ∈Dj
v and
d ̸= d′, or vice versa; that is, the preconditions of
α and the preconditions of β (or vice versa) do not
contradict each other under the speciﬁed conditions.
Agents address parallelism by the resolution of threats
over the causal links of the plan. Thus, consistency be-
tween any two non-sequential actions introduced by dif-
ferent agents is always guaranteed as reﬁnement plans
are ﬂaw-free plans.
Finally, a solution plan for TMAP is a reﬁnement
plan Π = ⟨∆, OR, CL⟩that addresses all the global
goals G of TMAP . A solution plan includes the ﬁcti-
tious ﬁnal action αf and ensures that all its precondi-
tions (note that PRE(αf) = G) are satisﬁed; that is,
∀g ∈PRE(αf), ∃β
g→αf ∈CL, β ∈∆, which is the
necessary condition to guarantee that Π solves TMAP .
3.1 Privacy in partial plans
Every time an agent i reﬁnes a partial plan by introduc-
ing a new action α ∈Ai, it communicates the resulting
reﬁnement plan to the rest of the agents in TMAP . As
stated above, the information that is public to a pair of
agents is deﬁned according to the common state vari-
ables and domain values. In order to preserve privacy,
agent i will only communicate to agent j the ﬂuents in
action α whose variables are common to both agents.
The information of a reﬁnement plan Π that agent j
receives from agent i conﬁgures its view of that plan,
viewj(Π). More speciﬁcally, given two agents i and j
and a ﬂuent ⟨v, d⟩, where v ∈Vi and d ∈Di
v (equiva-
lently for a negative ﬂuent ⟨v, ¬d⟩), we distinguish the
three following cases:
– Public ﬂuent: if v ∈Vij and d ∈Dij
v , the ﬂuent
⟨v, d⟩is public to both i and j, and thus agent i will
send agent j all the causal links, preconditions, and
eﬀects regarding ⟨v, d⟩.
– Private ﬂuent to agent i: if v ̸∈Vij, the ﬂuent
⟨v, d⟩is private to agent i w.r.t. agent j, and thus
agent i will occlude the preconditions and eﬀects re-
garding ⟨v, d⟩to agent j. Causal links of the form
α
⟨v,d⟩
→
β will be sent to agent j as ordering con-
straints α ≺β.
– Partially private ﬂuent to agent i: if v ∈Vij but
d ̸∈Dij
v , the ﬂuent ⟨v, d⟩is partially private to agent
i w.r.t. agent j. Instead of ⟨v, d⟩, agent i will send
agent j a ﬂuent ⟨v, ⊥⟩, where ⊥is the undeﬁned
value. Hence, preconditions of the form ⟨v, d⟩will
be sent as ⟨v, ⊥⟩, eﬀects of the form (v = d) will be
replaced by (v =⊥), and causal links α
⟨v,d⟩
→β will
adopt the form α
⟨v,⊥⟩
→β.
If an agent j receives a ﬂuent ⟨v, ⊥⟩, ⊥is interpreted
as follows: ∀d ∈Dj
v, ⟨v, ¬d⟩. That is, ⊥indicates that
v is not assigned any of the values known to agent j
(Dj
v). This mechanism is used to inform an agent that
a resource is no longer available in its inﬂuence area. For
instance, suppose that agent ta2 in Example 1 acquires
the raw material rm from sf by loading it into its truck
t2. Agent ta2 communicates to ta1 that rm is no longer
in sf, but agent ta1 does not know about the truck t2.
To solve this issue, ta2 sends ta1 the ﬂuent ⟨pos-rm, ⊥⟩,
meaning that the resource rm is no longer available in
the geographical area of agent ta1. Consequently, ta1 is
now aware that rm is not located in any of its accessible
positions Dta1
pos-rm = {l1, l2, sf, t1}.
Fig. 2 shows the view that the transport agents ta1
and ta2 in Example 1 have of a simple reﬁnement plan
Πr. In this plan, agent ta1 drives the truck t1 from
l1 to l2 and loads rm into t1. As shown in Fig. 2a,
viewta1(Πr) contains all the information of both ac-
tions in the plan since agent ta1 has introduced them.
Agent ta2, however, does not know about the truck
t1, and hence the variable pos-t1, which models the
position of t1, is private to ta1 w.r.t. ta2. This way,
all the preconditions and eﬀects related to the ﬂuents
⟨pos-t1, l1⟩and ⟨pos-t1, l2⟩are occluded in viewta2(Πr)
(see Fig. 2b). Additionally, the causal links regarding
these two ﬂuents are replaced by ordering constraints
in viewta2(Πr). On the other hand, the variable pos-rm
is public to both agents, but the load action refers to the
locations t1 and l2, which are not in Dta2
pos-rm. Therefore,
ﬂuents ⟨pos-rm, l2⟩and ⟨pos-rm, t1⟩are partially pri-
vate to agent ta1 w.r.t. ta2. This way, in viewta2(Πr),
the precondition ⟨pos-rm, l2⟩and the eﬀect (pos-rm =
t1) of the load action are replaced by ⟨pos-rm, ⊥⟩and
(pos-rm =⊥), respectively. The ﬂuent ⟨pos-rm, l2⟩is
also replaced by ⟨pos-rm, ⊥⟩in the causal link αi
⟨pos-rm,l2⟩
→
load t1 rm l2.
3.2 MAP deﬁnition language
There is a large body of work on planning task speciﬁ-
cation languages. Since planning has been traditionally
regarded as a centralized problem, the most popular
deﬁnition languages, such as the diﬀerent versions of

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
7
!"#$%&'()*+,
!"#$%&'()*',
-i
-f
./
*#.0)&')12)*+
01345)&')*')*+
6/
!"#$%&'()*',
7"#$%&'8*+/
!"#$%&'()*+,
!"#$%12()*+,
7"#$%128&'/
!"#$%12()*+,
-i
-f
-1
-0
!"#$%12()⊥,
7"#$%128)⊥/
!"#$%12()⊥,
Fig. 2 A reﬁnement plan Πr as viewed by: a) agent ta1 b)
agent ta2
PDDL (the Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language1),
are designed to model single-agent planning tasks. MAP
introduces a set of requirements that are not present
in single-agent planning, such as privacy or specialized
agents, which motivate the development of speciﬁcation
languages for multi-agent planning.
There are many diﬀerent approaches to MAP as de-
scribed in section 2. MA-STRIPS [4], which was de-
signed as a minimalistic extension to STRIPS [10], is
one of the most common MAP languages. It allows
deﬁning a set of agents and associating the planning
actions they can execute. FMAP presents several ad-
vanced features that motivated the deﬁnition of our own
PDDL-based speciﬁcation language (the language syn-
tax is detailed in [38]) rather than using MA-STRIPS.
Since the world states in FMAP are modeled through
state variables instead of predicates, our MAP language
is based on PDDL3.1 [20], the latest version of PDDL.
Unlike its predecessors, which model planning tasks
through predicates, PDDL3.1 incorporates state vari-
ables that map to a ﬁnite domain of objects of the task.
In a single-agent language, the user speciﬁes the do-
main of the task (planning operators, types of objects,
and functions) and the problem to be solved (objects of
the task, initial state, and goals). In FMAP, we write a
domain and a problem ﬁle for each agent, which deﬁne
the typology of the agent, and the agent’s local view
of the MAP task, respectively. The domain ﬁles keep
the structure of a regular PDDL3.1 domain ﬁle. The
problem ﬁles, however, are extended with an additional
:shared-data section, which speciﬁes the information
that an agent can share with each of the other partici-
pating agents in the task.
4 FMAP reﬁnement planning procedure
FMAP is based on a cooperative reﬁnement planning
procedure in which agents jointly explore a multi-agent,
plan-space search tree. A multi-agent search tree is one
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planning_Domain_
Definition_Language
!i
!f
"0
!i
!f
"00
#$%&'(
)*(+*(+,
!i
!f
"01
#$%&'(
)*(+*(-.
!i
!f
"02
#$%&'(
),(+/(-.
!i
!f
"03
#$%&'(
),(+/(.
)0*
)0,
Fig. 3 FMAP multi-agent search tree example
in which the partial plans of the nodes are built with
the contributions of one or more agents.
Fig. 3 shows the ﬁrst level of the multi-agent search
tree that would be generated for the transportation task
of Example 1. At this level, agents ta1 and ta2 each
propose two reﬁnement plans, speciﬁcally the plans to
move their trucks within their geographical areas. In
each of these reﬁnement plans, the agent adds one ac-
tion and the corresponding orderings and causal links.
Agent f does not contribute here with any reﬁnement
plan because the initial empty plan Π0 does not have
the necessary supporting information for f to insert any
of its actions. In a subsequent iteration (expansion of
the next tree node), agents can in turn create new re-
ﬁnement plans. For instance, if node Π00 in Fig. 3 is se-
lected next for expansion, the three agents in the prob-
lem (ta1, ta2, or f) will try to create reﬁnement plans
over Π00 by adding one of their actions and supporting
it through the necessary causal links and orderings.
Agents keep a copy of the multi-agent search tree,
storing the local view they have of each of the plans
in the tree nodes. Given a node Π in the multi-agent
search tree, an agent i maintains viewi(Π) in its copy
of the tree.
FMAP applies a multi-agent A* search that iter-
atively explores the multi-agent tree. One iteration of
FMAP involves the following: 1) agents select one of
the unexplored leaf nodes of the tree for expansion; 2)
agents expand the selected plan by generating all the
reﬁnement plans over this node; and 3) agents evaluate
the resulting successor nodes and communicate the re-
sults to the rest of the agents. Instead of using a broad-
cast control framework, FMAP uses democratic leader-
ship, in which a coordinator role is scheduled among the
agents. One of the agents adopts the role of coordina-
tor at each iteration, thus leading the procedure in one
iteration (initially, the coordinator role is randomly as-
signed to one of the participating agents). More specif-
ically, a FMAP iteration is as follows:
– Base plan selection: Among all the open nodes
(unexplored leaf nodes) of the multi-agent search
tree, the coordinator agent selects the most promis-
ing plan, Πb, as the base plan to reﬁne in the current

8
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
iteration. Πb is selected according to the evaluation
of the open nodes (details on the node evaluation
and selection are presented in section 4.3). In the
initial iteration, the base plan is the empty plan Π0.
– Reﬁnement plan generation: Agents expand Πb
and generate its successor nodes. A successor node
is a reﬁnement plan over Πb that an agent generates
individually through its embedded forward-chaining
partial-order planner (see subsection 4.1).
– Reﬁnement plan evaluation: Each agent i evalu-
ates its reﬁnement plans Πr by applying a classical
A* evaluation function (f(Πr) = g(viewi(Πr)) +
h(viewi(Πr))). The expression g(viewi(Πr)) stands
for the number of actions of Πr. Since agents view
all the actions of the plans (but not necessarily all
their preconditions and eﬀects), g(viewi(Πr)) is equiv-
alent to g(Πr). h(viewi(Πr)) applies our DTG-based
heuristic (see subsection 4.3) to estimate the cost of
reaching a solution plan from Πr.
– Reﬁnement plan communication: Each agent
communicates its reﬁnement plans to the rest of the
agents. The information that an agent i communi-
cates about its plan Πr to the rest of the agents
depends on the level of privacy speciﬁed with each
of them. Along with the reﬁnement plan Πr, agent
i communicates the result of the evaluation of Πr,
f(Πr).
Once the iteration is completed, the leadership is
handed to another agent, which adopts the coordinator
role, and a new iteration starts. The next coordinator
agent selects the open node Π that minimizes f(Π)
as the new base plan Πb, and then, agents proceed to
expand it. This iterative process carries on until Πb
becomes a solution plan that supports the ﬁnal action
αf, or when all the open nodes have been visited, in
which case, the agents will have explored the complete
search space without ﬁnding a solution for the MAP
task TMAP .
A reﬁnement plan Π is evaluated only by the agent
that generates it. The agent communicates Π along
with f(Π) to the rest of the agents. Therefore, the de-
cision on the next base plan is not aﬀected by the agent
that plays the coordinator role since all of the agents
manage the same f(Π) value for every open node Π.
In the example depicted in Fig. 3, agent ta1 evalu-
ates its reﬁnement plans, Π00 and Π01, and communi-
cates them along with f(Π00) and f(Π01) to agents ta2
and f; likewise, ta2 with ta1 and f. In this ﬁrst level
of the tree, agents ta1 and ta2 have a complete view
of the reﬁnement plans, that they have generated since
these plans only contain an action that they themselves
introduced. However, when ta1 and ta2 communicate
their plans to each other, they will only send the ﬂu-
!i
!f
"#$%&'
()'*+',-
"#$%&'
()'*)'*+
!i
!f
"#$%&'
()'*+',-
"#$%&'
()'*)'*+
*./"'()'
#0'*+
!i
!f
"#$%&'
()'*+',-
"#$%&'
()'*)'*+
FS
*./"'()'
#0'*+
"#$%&'
()',-'*+
/1
21
3001
Fig. 4 Loading rm in plan Π001: a) inserting actions from
a frontier state b) inserting actions using FLEX
ents according to the level of privacy deﬁned between
them, as described in subsection 3.1. This way, ta1 will
send viewta2(Π00) and viewta2(Π01) to agent ta2, and
viewf(Π00) and viewf(Π01) to agent f.
The following subsections analyze the key elements
of FMAP, that is, the search algorithm that agents
use for the generation of the reﬁnement plans and the
heuristic function they use for plan evaluation. We also
include a subsection that addresses the completeness
and correctness of the algorithm as well as a subsection
that describes the limitations of FMAP.
4.1 Forward-Chaining Partial-Order Planning
Agents in FMAP use an embedded ﬂexible forward-
chaining POP system to generate the reﬁnement plans;
this will be referred to as FLEX in the remainder of the
paper. Similarly to other approaches, FLEX explores
the potential of forward search to support partial-order
planning. OPTIC [1], for instance, combines partial-
order structures with information on the frontier state
of the plan. Informally speaking, the frontier state of
the partial plan of a tree node is the resulting state
after executing the actions in such a plan. Given a re-
ﬁnement plan Π = ⟨∆, OR, CL⟩, we deﬁne its frontier
state FS(Π) as the set of ﬂuents ⟨v, d⟩achieved by
actions α ∈∆| ⟨v, d⟩∈EFF(α), such that any ac-
tion α′ ∈∆that modiﬁes the value of the variable v
(⟨v, d′⟩∈EFF(α′) | d ̸= d′) is not reachable from α by
following the orderings and causal links in Π.
The only actions that OPTIC adds to a plan are
those whose preconditions hold in the frontier state.
This behaviour forces OPTIC to some early commit-
ments; however, this does not sacriﬁce completeness,
because search can backtrack. Also, TFPOP [22] ap-
plies a centralized forward-chaining POP for multiple
agents, keeping a sequential execution thread per agent.
The aforementioned approaches only permit intro-
ducing actions that are applicable in the frontier state
of the plan. In contrast, FLEX allows inserting actions
at any position of the plan without assuming that any

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
9
action in the plan has already been executed. This is a
more ﬂexible approach that is also more compliant with
the least-commitment principle that typically guides
backward-chaining POP. Fig. 4 shows the advantages
of our ﬂexible search strategy. Consider the reﬁnement
plan Π001, which is the result of a reﬁnement of agent
ta1 on plan Π00 (see Fig. 3) after including the action
(drive t1 l1 sf). This is not the best course of action
for taking the raw material rm to the factory f as ta1
should load rm into t1 before moving to sf. The fron-
tier state FS(Π001) reﬂects the state of the world after
executing the plan Π001, in which the truck t1 would be
at sf. Planners like OPTIC would only introduce ac-
tions that are applicable in the frontier state FS(Π001).
In this example, OPTIC would ﬁrst insert the action
(drive t1 sf l2) to move the truck t1 back to l2 in or-
der to be able to apply the action (load t1 rm l2) (see
Fig. 4a). FLEX, however, is able to introduce actions
at any position in the plan, so the load action can be
directly placed between both drive actions, thus mini-
mizing the length of the plan (see Fig. 4b).
Algorithm 1: FLEX search algorithm for an
agent i
RP i ←∅
if potentiallySupportable(αf, viewi(Πb)) then
return solutionPlans
CandidateActions ←∅
forall the α ∈Ai do
if potentiallySupportable(α, viewi(Πb)) then
CandidateActions ←CandidateActions ∪α
forall the α ∈CandidateActions do
Plans ←{viewi(Πb)}
repeat
Select and extract Πs ∈Plans
Flaws(Πs) ←
unsupportedPrecs(α, Πs) ∪Threats(Πs)
if Flaws(Πs) = ∅then
RP i ←RP i ∪Πs
else
Select and extract Φ ∈Flaws(Πs)
Plans ←Plans ∪solveFlaw(Πs, Φ)
until Plans = ∅
return RP i
Algorithm 1 summarizes the FLEX procedure in-
voked by an agent i to generate reﬁnement plans, and
Fig. 5 shows how agent ta1 in Example 1 uses the FLEX
algorithm to reﬁne plan Π00 in Fig. 3. The ﬁrst oper-
ation of an agent i that executes FLEX is to check
whether the ﬁctitious ﬁnal action αf is supportable in
Πb, that is, if a solution plan can be obtained from Πb.
If so, the agent will generate a set of solution plans that
!"#$
Potentially
Supportable
Actions
Estimate
load t1 
rm l2
drive 
t1 l2 sf
drive 
t1 l2 l1
drive 
t1 l1 sf
Leaf nodes
(Reﬁnement plans)
Candidate Actions ⊆ !"#$
Independent POP 
trees for each action
%i
%f
drive 
t1 l1 l2
&00
&000
&001
&002
drive 
t1 l1 l2
Base plan
Fig. 5 FLEX algorithm as applied by agent ta1 over plan
Π00
covers all the possible ways to support the preconditions
of αf through causal links.
If a solution plan is not found, agent i analyzes
all its planning actions Ai and estimates if they are
supportable in Πb. Given an action α ∈Ai, the func-
tion potentiallySupportable(α, Πb) checks if ∀⟨v, d⟩∈
PRE(α), ∃β ∈∆(Πb) | (v = d) ∈EFF(β), i.e., the
agent estimates that α is supportable if for every pre-
condition of α there is a matching eﬀect among the
actions of Πb.
Fig. 5 shows an example of potentially supportable
actions. Agent ta1 evaluates all the actions in Ata and
ﬁnds ﬁve candidate actions. In αi, the initial state of
Π00, the truck t1 is at location l1. Consequently, ta1
considers (drive t1 l1 sf) and (drive t1 l1 l2) as poten-
tial candidate actions for its reﬁnements. Note that ac-
tion (drive t1 l1 l2) is already included in plan Π00. Ac-
tions (drive t1 l2 sf), (drive t1 l2 l1), and (load t1 rm l2)
are also classiﬁed as candidates since they are applica-
ble after the action (drive t1 l1 l2), which is already in
plan Π00.
It is possible to introduce an action multiple times
in a plan; for instance, a truck may need to travel back
and forth between two diﬀerent locations several times.
For this reason, ta1 again considers (drive t1 l1 l2) as a
candidate action when reﬁning Π00, even if this action
is already included in Π00. By estimating potentially
supportable actions in any position of the plan, FLEX
follows the least commitment principle and does not
leave out any potential reﬁnement plan.
The potentiallySupportable procedure is an esti-
mate because it does not actually check the possible
ﬂaws that arise when supporting an action. Hence, an
agent analyzes the alternatives that support each candi-
date action α by generating a POP search tree for that
particular action (repeat loop in Algorithm 1). All the
leaf nodes of the tree (stored in the Plans list in Algo-
rithm 1) are explored, thereby covering all the possible
ways to introduce α in Πb.

10
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
As in backward-chaining POP, FLEX introduces the
action α in Πb by supporting its preconditions through
causal links and solving the threats that arise during
the search. The set of ﬂaw-free plans obtained from this
search are stored in RP i as valid reﬁnement plans of
agent i over Πb. This procedure is carried out for each
candidate action. Completeness is guaranteed since all
the possible reﬁnement plans over a given base plan are
generated by the agents involved in TMAP .
Fig. 5 shows that, for every candidate action, ta1
performs an independent POP search aimed at support-
ing the action. Actions (load t1 rm l2), (drive t1 l2 sf),
and (drive t1 l2 l1) lead to three diﬀerent reﬁnement
plans over Π00: {Π000, Π001, Π002}. These plans will
then be inserted into ta1’s copy of the multi-agent search
tree. Agent ta1 will also send the information of these
plans to agents ta2 and f according to the level of pri-
vacy deﬁned with each one. ta2 and f also store the
received plans in their copies of the tree.
Candidate action (drive t1 l1 sf) does not produce
valid reﬁnement plans because it causes an unsolvable
threat. This is because truck t1 cannot simultaneously
move to two diﬀerent locations from l1, which causes a
conﬂict between the existing action (drive t1 l1 l2) ∈
∆(Π00) and (drive t1 l1 sf). Similarly, action (drive t1 l1 l2)
does not yield any valid reﬁnements. The resulting plan
would have two actions (drive t1 l1 l2) in parallel, both
of which are linked to αi, which causes an unsolvable
threat because t1 cannot perform two identical drive
actions in parallel.
4.2 Completeness and Soundness
As explained in the previous section, agents reﬁne the
base plan concurrently by analyzing all of the possible
ways to support their actions in the base plan. Since
this operation is done by every agent and for all their
actions, we can conclude FMAP is a complete proce-
dure that explores the whole search space.
As for soundness, a partial-order plan is sound if it is
a ﬂaw-free plan. The FLEX algorithm addresses incon-
sistencies among actions in a partial plan by detecting
and solving threats.
When an agent i introduces an action α in a base
plan Π, FLEX studies the threats that α causes in the
causal links of Π and the threats that the actions of Π
may cause in the causal links that support the precon-
ditions of α. In both cases, i is able to detect all threats
whatever its view of the plan is, viewi(Π). That is,
FMAP soundness is guaranteed regardless of the level
of privacy deﬁned between agents.
With regard to the threats caused by the eﬀects of a
new action, privacy may prevent the agent from viewing
some of the causal links of the plan. Suppose that agent
i introduces an action αt with an eﬀect (v = d′) in plan
Π. Additionally, there is a causal link in Π of the form
cl = α0
⟨v,d⟩
→α1 introduced by an agent j; as cl is not
ordered with respect to αt, this situation generates a
threat. According to viewi(Π), agent i may ﬁnd one of
the following situations:
– If ⟨v, d⟩is public to i and j, then cl is in viewi(Π),
and thus the threat between cl and αt will be cor-
rectly detected and solved by promoting or demot-
ing αt.
– If ⟨v, d⟩is private to j w.r.t. i, then αt cannot con-
tain an eﬀect (v = d′) because v ̸∈Vi. Therefore,
the threat described above can never occur in Π.
– If ⟨v, d⟩is partially private to j w.r.t. i, then cl =
α0
⟨v,d⟩
→
α1 will be seen as cl = α0
⟨v,⊥⟩
→
α1 in
viewi(Π). Since ⊥̸= d, agent i will be able to detect
and address the threat between αt and cl.
Consequently, an agent can always detect the arising
threats when it adds a new action, αt, in the plan. Now,
we should study whether the potential threats caused
by actions in Π on the causal links that support the
action αt are correctly detected by agent i. Suppose
that there is a causal link cl′ = β
⟨v′,e⟩
→
αt, and an
action γ with an eﬀect (v′ = e′) which is not ordered
with respect to αt. Again, agent i may ﬁnd itself in three
diﬀerent scenarios according to its view of (v′ = e′):
– If (v′ = e′) is public to i and j, the threat between
cl′ and γ will be correctly detected by i.
– If (v′ = e′) is private to j w.r.t. i, then none of
the variables in PRE(αt) are related to v′ because
v′ ̸∈Vi. Thus, this threat will never arise in Π.
– If (v′ = e′) is partially private to j w.r.t. i, (v′ = e′)
will be seen as (v′ =⊥) in viewi(Π). Since ⊥̸= e, the
threat between γ and cl′ will be correctly detected
by agent i.
Note that privacy does not prevent agents from de-
tecting and solving threats nor does it aﬀect the com-
plexity of the process. If the ﬂuent is public or partially
private, the agent that is reﬁning the plan will be able
to detect the threat because it either sees the value of
the variable or sees ⊥, and both contradict the value of
the variable in the causal link. If the ﬂuent is private,
then there is no such threat. This proves that FMAP is
sound.
4.3 DTG-based Heuristic Function
The last aspect of FMAP to analyze is how agents eval-
uate the reﬁnement plans. FMAP guides the search

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
11
f
l1
sf
ga1
ga2
t1
rm
Fig. 6 Reduced transport example task
pos-rm
<pos-t1, f>
f
<pos-t1, f>
t1
<pos-t1, l1>
l1
<pos-t1, l1>
sf
<pos-t1, sf>
<pos-t1, sf>
<pos-t1, l1>
l1
<pos-t1, l1>
<pos-t1, f>
<pos-t1, f>
pos-rm (agent ta1)
pos-rm (agent ta2)
ta2
ta2
⊥
t1
f
ta1
ta1
⊥
t1
sf
<pos-t1, sf>
<pos-t1, sf>
sf
<pos-t1, sf>
<pos-t1, sf>
Fig. 7 Centralized and distributed DTG of the variable
⟨pos-rm⟩
through a domain-independent heuristic function, as
most planning systems do [30]. It uses the information
provided by the frontier states to perform the heuristic
evaluation of the plans contained in the tree nodes.
According to the deﬁnition shown in section 4.1,
the frontier state of a plan Π, FS(Π), can be easily
computed as the ﬁnite set of ﬂuents that results from
executing the actions of the plan Π in I, the initial
state of TMAP . Since reﬁnement plans are not sequential
plans, the actions in ∆have to be linearized in order
to compute the frontier state. The linearization of a
reﬁnement plan Π involves establishing a total order
among the actions in ∆. Given two actions α ∈∆and
β ∈∆, if α ≺β ∈OR or β ≺α ∈OR, we keep this
ordering constraint in the linearized plan. If α and β
are non-sequential actions, we establish a total ordering
among them. Since plans returned by FLEX are free of
conﬂicts, it is irrelevant how non-sequential actions are
ordered.
Frontier states allow us to make use of state-based
heuristics such as hF F , the relaxed planning graph (RPG)
heuristic of FF [15]. However, the distributed approach
and the privacy model of FMAP makes the applica-
tion of hF F inadequate to guide the search. Since none
of the agents has knowledge that is complete enough
to build an RPG by itself, using hF F to estimate the
quality of a reﬁnement plan involves agents building
a distributed RPG [42]. This is a costly process that
requires many communications among agents to coor-
dinate which each other, and it has to be repeated for
the evaluation of each reﬁnement plan. Therefore, the
predictable high computational cost of the application
of hF F led us to discard this choice and opt for de-
signing a heuristic that is based on Domain Transition
Graphs (DTGs) [14].
A DTG is a directed graph that shows the ways in
which a variable can change its value [14]. Each transi-
tion is labeled with the necessary conditions for this to
happen; i.e., the preconditions that are common to all
the actions that induce the transition. Since DTGs are
independent of the state of the plan, recalculations are
avoided during the planning process.
Privacy is kept in DTGs through the use of the un-
deﬁned value ⊥. This value is represented in a DTG like
the rest of the values of the variables, the only diﬀer-
ence being that transitions from/to ⊥are labeled with
the agents that induce them.
Consider a reduced version of Example 1 that is de-
picted in Fig. 6. In this example, both transport agents
ta1 and ta2 can use truck t1 within their geographi-
cal areas ga1 and ga2, respectively. Fig. 7 shows the
DTG of the variable ⟨pos-rm⟩. In a single-agent task
(upper diagram) all the information is available in the
DTG. However, in the multi-agent task (bottom dia-
grams), agent ta1 does not know the location of rm if
ta2 transports it to f, while ta2 does not know the ini-
tial placement of rm, since location l1 lies outside ta2’s
geographical area, ga2. In order to evaluate the cost
of achieving ⟨pos-rm, f⟩from the initial state, ta1 will
ﬁrst check its DTG, thus obtaining the cost of loading
rm in t1. As shown in Fig. 7, the transition between val-
ues t1 and ⊥is labeled with agent ta2. Therefore, ta1
will ask ta2 for the cost of the path between values t1
and f to complete the calculation. Communications are
required to evaluate multi-agent plans, but DTGs are
more eﬃcient than RPGs because they remain constant
during planning, so agents can minimize the overhead
by memorizing paths and distances between values.
For a given plan Π, our DTG-based heuristic func-
tion (hDT G in the following) returns the number of ac-
tions of a relaxed plan between the frontier state FS(Π)
and the set of goals of TMAP , G. hDT G performs a back-
ward search introducing the actions that support the
goals in G into the relaxed plan until all their precondi-
tions are supported. Hence, the underlying principle of
hDT G is similar to hF F , except for the fact that DTGs
are used instead of RPGs to build the relaxed plan.
The hDT G evaluation of a plan Π begins by cal-
culating the frontier state FS(Π). Next, an iterative
procedure is performed to build the relaxed plan. This
procedure manages a list of ﬂuents, openGoals, initially
set to G. The process iteratively extracts a ﬂuent from
openGoals and supports it through the introduction of
an action in the relaxed plan. The preconditions of such

12
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
an action are then included in the openGoals list. For
each variable v ∈V, the procedure manages a list of
values, V aluesv, which is initialized to the value of v
in the frontier state FS(Π). For each action added to
the relaxed plan that has an eﬀect (v = d′), d′ will be
stored in V aluesv. An iteration of the hDT G evaluation
process executes the following stages:
– Open goal selection: From the openGoals set, the
procedure extracts the ﬂuent ⟨v, dg⟩∈openG that
requires the largest number of value transitions to
be supported.
– DTG path computation: For every value d0 in
V aluesv, this stage calculates the shortest sequence
of value transitions in v’s DTG from d0 to dg. Each
path is computed by applying Dijkstra’s algorithm
between the nodes d0 and dg in the DTG associated
to variable v. The path with the minimum length is
stored as minPath = ((d0, d1), (d1, d2), . . . , (dg−1, dg)).
– Relaxed plan construction: For each value tran-
sition (di, di+1) ∈minPath, the minimum-cost ac-
tion αmin that produces such a transition is intro-
duced in the relaxed plan; that is, ⟨v, di⟩∈PRE(αmin)
and (v = di+1) ∈EFF(αmin). The cost of an action
is computed as the sum of the minimum number of
value transitions required to support its precondi-
tions. The unsupported preconditions of αmin are
stored in openGoals, so they will be supported in
the subsequent iterations. For each eﬀect (v′ = d′) ∈
EFF(αmin), the value d′ is stored in V aluesv′, so
d′ can be used in the following iterations to support
other openGoals.
The iterative evaluation procedure carries on un-
til all the open goals have been supported, that is,
openGoals = ∅, and hDT G returns the number of ac-
tions in the relaxed plan.
4.4 Limitations of FMAP
In this section, we present some limitations of FMAP
that are worth discussing. FMAP builds upon the POP
paradigm, so it can handle plans with parallel actions
and only enforces an ordering when strictly necessary.
FMAP, however, does not yet explicitly manage time
constraints nor durative actions. A POP-based planner
can easily be extended to incorporate time because the
application of the least-commitment principle provides
a high degree of execution ﬂexibility. Additionally, POP
is independent of the assumption that actions must be
instantaneous or have the same duration and allows ac-
tions of arbitrary duration and diﬀerent types of tem-
poral constraints to be deﬁned as long as the conditions
under which actions interfere are well deﬁned [34]. In
short, POP represents a natural and very appropriate
way to include and handle time in a planning frame-
work.
FLEX involves the construction of a POP tree for
each potentially supportable action (see Fig. 5). This
procedure is more costly than the operations required
by a standard planner to reﬁne a plan. However, the
search trees are independent of each other, which makes
it possible to implement FLEX by using multiple execu-
tion threads. Parallelization improves the performance
of FLEX and the ability of FMAP to scale up. Section
5 provides more insight into the FLEX implementation.
Currently, FMAP is limited to cooperative goals,
which means that all the goals are deﬁned as global
objectives to all the participating agents (see section
3). Nevertheless, as a future work, we are considering
an extension of FMAP to support self-interested agents
with local goals.
FMAP is a general procedure aimed at solving any
kind of MAP task. In particular, solving tightly-coupled
tasks requires a great amount of coordination. Multi-
agent coordination in distributed systems where agents
must cooperate is always a major issue. This depen-
dency on coordination makes FMAP a communication-
reliant approach. Agents not only have to communicate
the reﬁnement plans that they build at each iteration,
but they also have to communicate during the heuristic
evaluation of the reﬁnement plans in order to maintain
privacy (see subsection 4.3). The usage of a coordinator
agent eﬀectively reduces the need for communication.
The experimental results will show that FMAP can ef-
fectively tackle large problem instances (see section 5).
Nevertheless, reducing communication overhead while
keeping the ability to solve any kind of task remains
an ongoing research topic that we plan to consider for
future developments.
Privacy management is another issue that poten-
tially worsens the performance of FMAP. In section 3.1,
we deﬁned a mechanism to detect and address threats
in partial plans, even when agents do not have a com-
plete view of such plans. Privacy does not add extra
complexity to FLEX since agents manage the undeﬁned
value ⊥as any other value in the domain of a variable.
It does, however, make the reﬁnement-plan communi-
cation stage more complex because, when an agent i
sends viewj(Π) to an agent j, this implies that i must
previously adapt the information of Π according to the
privacy rules deﬁned w.r.t. to j.
Privacy also aﬀects the heuristic evaluation of the
plans in terms of quality. Since a reﬁnement plan is
only evaluated by the agent that generates it and this
evaluation is inﬂuenced by the agent’s view of the plan,

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
13
the result may not be as accurate as if the agent had had
a complete view of the plan. Empirical results, however,
will show that, even with these limitations, our heuristic
function provides good performance in a wide variety
of planning domains (see section 5).
5 Experimental results
In order to assess the performance of FMAP, we ran ex-
perimental tests with some of the benchmark problems
from the International Planning Competitions2 (IPC).
More precisely, we adapted the STRIPS problem suites
of 10 diﬀerent domains from the latest IPC editions to
a MAP context. The tests compare FMAP with two
diﬀerent state-of-the-art MAP systems: MAPR [2] and
MAP-POP [37]. We excluded Planning First [25] from
the comparison because it is outperformed by MAP-
POP [37].
This section is organized as follows: ﬁrst, we pro-
vide some information on the FMAP implementation
and experimental setup. Then, we present the features
of the tested domains and we analyze the MAP adap-
tation performed for each domain. Next, we show a
comparative analysis between FMAP and the afore-
mentioned planners, MAPR [2] and MAP-POP [37].
Then, we perform a scalability analysis of FMAP and
MAPR. Finally, we summarize and discuss the results
obtained by FMAP and how they compare to the other
two planners.
5.1 FMAP implementation and experimental setup
Most multi-agent applications nowadays make use of
middleware multi-agent platforms that provide them
with the communication services required by the agents
[27]. The entire code of FMAP is implemented in Java
and builds upon the Magentix2 platform3 [35]. Magen-
tix2 provides a set of libraries to deﬁne the agents’
behavior, along with the communication resources re-
quired by the agents. Magentix2 agents communicate
by means of the FIPA Agent Communication Language
[26]. Messaging is carried out through the Apache QPid
broker4, which is a critical component for FMAP agents.
FMAP is optimized to take full advantage of the
CPU execution threads. The FLEX procedure, which
generates reﬁnement plans over a given base plan, de-
velops a POP search tree for each potentially support-
able action of the agent’s domain. As the POP trees are
2 http://ipc.icaps-conference.org/
3 http://www.gti-ia.upv.es/sma/tools/magentix2
4 http://qpid.apache.org/
completely independent from each other, the processes
for building the trees run in parallel for each agent.
Agents synchronize their activities at the end of the
reﬁnement plan generation stage. Consequently, FMAP
assigns the same number of execution threads to each
agent so that they all spend a similar amount of time
to complete the FLEX procedure (note that if we al-
locate extra threads to a subset of the agents, they
would still have to wait for the slowest agent to synchro-
nize). FLEX builds as many POP search trees in par-
allel as execution threads agents have been allocated.
The hDT G heuristic is implemented in a similar way.
An agent can simultaneously evaluate as many plans as
execution threads it has been allocated.
All the experimental tests were performed on a sin-
gle machine with a quad-core Intel Core i7 processor
and 8 GB RAM (1.5 GB RAM available for the Java
VM). The CPU used in the experimentation has eight
available execution threads, which are distributed as
follows: in tasks that involve two agents, FMAP allo-
cates four execution threads per agent; in tasks with
three or four agents, each agent has two available ex-
ecution threads; ﬁnally, in tasks involving ﬁve or more
agents, each agent has a single execution thread at its
disposal. For instance, the three agents in Example 1
would get two diﬀerent execution threads in this par-
ticular machine. Hence, in the FLEX example depicted
in Fig. 5, agent ta1 would be able to study two candi-
date actions simultaneously, thus reducing the execu-
tion time of the overall procedure.
5.2 Planning domain taxonomy
The benchmark used for the experiments includes 10
diﬀerent domains of the IPCs that are suitable for a
multi-agent adaptation. The IPC benchmarks come from
(potential) real-world applications of planning, and they
have become the de facto mechanism for assessing the
performance of single-agent planning systems. The ele-
vators domain, for instance, is inspired by a real prob-
lem of Schindler Lifts Ltd. [19]; the satellite domain is
motivated by a NASA space application [24]; the rovers
domain deals with the decision of daily planning activ-
ities of Mars rovers [6]; and the openstacks domain is
based on the minimum maximum simultaneous open
stacks combinatorial optimization problem. Hence, all
the domains from the IPCs resemble practical scenarios
and they are modeled to keep, as much as possible, both
their structure and complexity. In MAP, there is not a
standardized collection of planning domains available.
Instead, MAP approaches adapt some well-known IPC

14
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
Domain
Typology
IPC
Agents
Cooperative goals
Applicability
MAPR
FMAP
MAP-POP
Blocksworld
Loosely-coupled
’98
robot
No


Driverlog
Loosely-coupled
’02
driver
No


Rovers
Loosely-coupled
’06
rover
No


Satellite
Loosely-coupled
’04
satellite
No


Zenotravel
Loosely-coupled
’02
aircraft
No


Depots
Tightly-coupled
’02
depot/truck
Yes


Elevators
Tightly-coupled
’11
fast-elevator/slow-elevator
Yes


Logistics
Tightly-coupled
’00
airplane/truck
Yes


Openstacks
Tightly-coupled
’11
manager/manufacturer
Yes


Woodworking
Tightly-coupled
’11
machine
Yes


Table 1 Features of the MAP domains
domains to a multi-agent context, namely the satellite,
rovers, and logistics domains [2,25,37].
Converting planning domains into a multi-agent ver-
sion is not always possible due to the domain charac-
teristics. While some IPC domains have a straightfor-
ward multi-agent decomposition, others are inherently
single-agent. We developed a domain-dependent tool to
automatically translate the original STRIPS tasks into
our PDDL-based MAP language.
The columns in Table 1 describe the main features
of the 10 MAP domains that are included in the bench-
mark. Typology indicates whether the MAP tasks of
the domain are loosely-coupled or tightly-coupled. IPC
shows the last edition of the IPC in which the domain
was included. Agents indicates the types of object used
to deﬁne the agents. Cooperative goals indicates the
presence or absence of these goals in the tasks of each
domain. Finally, Applicability shows the MAP systems
that are capable of coping with each domain.
In order to come up with a well-balanced bench-
mark, we put the emphasis on the presence (or absence)
of specialized agents and cooperative goals. Besides the
adaptation to a multi-agent context, the 10 selected
domains are a good representative sample of loosely-
coupled domains with non-specialized agents and tightly-
coupled domains with cooperative goals.
Privacy in each domain is deﬁned according to the
nature of the problem and the type of agents involved,
while maintaining a correlation and identiﬁcation with
the objects in a real-world problem.
5.2.1 Loosely-coupled domains
The ﬁve loosely-coupled domains presented in Table 1
are: Blocksworld, Driverlog, Rovers, Satellite, and Zeno-
travel. The prime characteristic of these domains is that
agents have the same planning capabilities (operators)
such that each task goal can be individually solved by
a single agent. That is, tasks can be addressed without
cooperation among agents. Next, we provide some in-
sight into the features of these domains and the MAP
adaptations.
Satellite [24]. This domain oﬀers a straightforward
multi-agent decomposition [25,37]. The MAP domain
features one agent per satellite. The resulting MAP
tasks are almost decoupled as each satellite can attain
a subset of the task goals (even all the goals in some
cases) without interacting with any other agent. The
number of agents in the tasks of this domain vary from
1 to 12. The location, orientation, and instruments of
a satellite are private to the agent, only the informa-
tion on the images taken by the satellites is deﬁned as
public.
Rovers [24]. Like the Satellite domain, Rovers also
oﬀers a straightforward decomposition [25,37]. The MAP
domain features one agent per rover. Rovers collect
samples of soil and rock and hardly interact with each
other except when a soil or rock sample is collected by
an agent, and so it is no longer available to the rest
of the agents. The number of agents ranges from 1 to
8 rovers per task. As in the Satellite domain, only the
information related to the collected samples is deﬁned
as public.
Blocksworld. The MAP version of this domain intro-
duces a set of robot agents (four agents per task), each
having an arm to arrange blocks. Unlike the original do-
main, the MAP version of Blocksworld allows handling
more than one block at a time. All the information in
this domain is considered to be public.
Driverlog [24]. In this MAP domain, the agents are
the drivers of the problem, ranging between 2 and 8
agents per task. Driver agents are in charge of driving
the available trucks and delivering the packages to the
diﬀerent destinations. All the information in the do-
main (status of drivers, trucks, and packages) is publi-
cized by the driver agents.
Zenotravel [24]. This domain deﬁnes one agent per
aircraft. The simplest tasks include one agent and the

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
15
most complex ones up to ﬁve agents. Aircraft can di-
rectly transport passengers to any city in the task. As
in the Blocksworld and Driverlog domains, all the infor-
mation concerning the situation of the passengers and
the current location of each aircraft is publicly available
to all the participating agents.
5.2.2 Tightly-coupled domains
We also analyzed ﬁve additional domains that feature
specialized agents with diﬀerent planning capabilities:
Depots, Elevators, Logistics, Openstacks and Woodwork-
ing. The features of these domains give rise to complex,
tightly-coupled tasks that require interactions or com-
mitments [13] among agents in order to be solved.
Depots [24]. This domain includes two diﬀerent types
of specialized agents, depots and trucks, that must co-
operate in order to solve most of the goals of the tasks.
This domain, which is the most complex one in our
MAP benchmark, leads to tightly-coupled MAP tasks
with many dependences among agents. Depots tasks
contain a large number of participating agents, rang-
ing from 5 to 12 agents. Only the location of packages
and trucks is deﬁned as public information.
Elevators. Each agent in this domain can be a slow-
elevator or a fast-elevator. Operators in the STRIPS
domain are basically the same for both types of eleva-
tors since the diﬀerences between them only aﬀect the
action costs. Elevator agents, however, are still special-
ized because the ﬂoors they can access are limited. This
leads to tasks that require cooperation to fulﬁll some of
the goals. For instance, an elevator may not be able to
take a passenger to a certain ﬂoor, so it will stop at
an intermediate ﬂoor so that the passenger can board
another elevator that goes to that ﬂoor. Tasks include
from 3 to 5 agents. Agents share the information re-
garding the location of the diﬀerent passengers.
Logistics. This domain presents two diﬀerent types
of specialized agents: airplanes and trucks. The delivery
of some of the packages involves the cooperation of sev-
eral truck and airplane agents (similarly to the example
task introduced in this article). Tasks feature from 3 to
10 diﬀerent agents. Information regarding the position
of the packages is deﬁned as public.
Openstacks [11]. This MAP domain includes two
specialized agents in all of the tasks; the manager is
in charge of handling the orders, and the manufacturer
controls the diﬀerent stacks and manufactures the prod-
ucts. Both agents depend on each other to perform their
activities, thus resulting in tightly-coupled MAP tasks
with inherently cooperative goals. Most of the infor-
mation regarding the diﬀerent orders and products is
public since both agents need it to interact with each
other.
Woodworking. This domain features four diﬀerent
types of specialized agents (a planer, a saw, a grinder
and a varnisher) that represent the machines in a pro-
duction chain. In most cases, the output of one machine
constitutes the input of the following one, so Wood-
working agents have to cooperate to fulﬁll the diﬀerent
goals. All the tasks include four agents (a machine of
each type). All the information on the status of the dif-
ferent wood pieces is publicized since agents require this
information in order to operate.
5.3 FMAP vs. MAPR comparison
This subsection compares the experimental results of
FMAP and MAPR [2]. MAPR is implemented in Lisp
and uses LAMA [29] as the underlying planning system,
without using a middleware platform for multi-agent
systems. Each experiment is limited to 30 minutes.
Table 2 shows the comparative results for FMAP
and MAPR. The Solved columns refer to the number
of tasks solved by each approach. The average num-
ber of actions, makespan (plan duration), and search
time consider only the tasks solved by both FMAP
and MAPR (the Common column shows the number
of tasks solved by both planners). Actions, makespan,
and time values in MAPR are relative to the results ob-
tained with FMAP. The values nx in Table 3 indicate
”n times as much as the FMAP result”. Therefore, an
Actions or Makespan value that is higher than 1x is a
better result for FMAP and a value lower than 1x is a
worse result for FMAP. However, a Time value higher
than 1x indicates a better result for FMAP.
Of the most recent MAP systems, MAPR is one
that oﬀers excellent performance in comparison to other
state-of-the-art MAP approaches [2]. However, as re-
ﬂected in Table 1, MAPR is only compatible with the
loosely-coupled domains in the benchmark. This limita-
tion is due to the planning approach of MAPR. Specif-
ically, MAPR applies a goal allocation procedure, de-
composing the MAP task into subtasks and giving each
agent a subset of the task goals to solve. Each agent
subtask is solved with the single-agent planner LAMA
[29] such that the resulting subplans are progressively
combined into a global solution. This makes MAPR an
incomplete planning approach that is limited to loosely-
coupled tasks without cooperative goals. That is, MAPR
is built under the assumption that each goal must be
addressed by at least one of the agents in isolation [2].
Whereas the communication overhead is relatively
high in FMAP (to a large extent, this is due to the use

16
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
Domain
Tasks
Common
FMAP
MAPR
Solved
Actions
Makespan
Time
Solved
Actions
Makespan
Time
Blocksworld
34
19
19
17,79
13,68
86,17
34
1,27x
1,20x
0,04x
Driverlog
20
15
15
24,64
13,93
42,02
18
1,19x
1,53x
0,06x
Rovers
20
19
19
32,63
14,95
53,82
20
0,97x
0,85x
0,05x
Satellite
20
15
16
27,27
16,47
177,65
18
1,14x
1,03x
0,03x
Zenotravel
20
18
18
25,50
13,94
180,62
20
1,24x
1,32x
0,02x
Table 2 Comparison between FMAP and MAPR
of the Magentix MAS platform), agents in MAPR do
not need to communicate during the plan construction
because each agent addresses its allocated subgoals by
itself. This setup has a rather positive impact on the ex-
ecution times and the number of problems solved (cov-
erage). As expected, Table 2 shows that execution times
in MAPR are much lower than FMAP. With respect to
coverage, MAPR solves 110 out of 114 loosely-coupled
tasks (roughly 96% of the tasks), while FMAP solves
87 of such tasks (76%).
However, in most domains, FMAP comes up with
better quality plans than MAPR, taking into account
the number of actions as well as the makespan. MAPR
is limited by the order in which agents solve their sub-
tasks. The ﬁrst agent that computes a subplan cannot
take advantage of the potential synergies that may arise
from other agents’ actions; the second agent has only
the information of the ﬁrst agent’s subplan, and so on.
Additionally, the allocation of goals to each agent may
lead to poorly balanced plans. Although FMAP is a
more time-consuming approach, it avoids these limita-
tions because agents work together to build the plan
action by action. Thus, FMAP provides agents with a
global view of the plan at each point of the construction
process, while agents in MAPR keep a local view of the
plan at hand.
The Driverlog domain, while being loosely-coupled,
oﬀers many possible synergies between agents. For in-
stance, a driver agent can use a truck to travel to its
destination and load a package on its way, while an-
other agent may take over the truck and complete the
delivery. If the ﬁrst agent acted in isolation, it would
deliver the package and then go back to its destination,
which would result in a worse plan. Robot agents in
the Blocksworld domain can also cooperate to improve
the quality of the plans: for instance, a robot can pick
up a block so that another robot can retrieve the block
below. Goal balance is also a key aspect in Zenotravel
since aircraft agents have limited autonomy. If an air-
craft solves too many goals it may be forced to refuel
thereby worsening the plan quality.
Fig. 8 illustrates the MAPR limitations by show-
ing the solution plans obtained by both approaches for
task 8 of the Zenotravel domain. The goals of this task
involve transporting three diﬀerent people and ﬂying
plane1 to city3. The ﬁrst three goals are achievable
by all the plane agents, but the last goal can only be
completed by agent plane1.
MAPR starts with agent plane3, which solves all of
the goals that it can. Then, plane1 receives the subplan
and completes it by solving the remaining goal. The
resulting joint plan is far from the optimal solution.
Agent plane3 requires 10 time units to solve its subplan
because it transports all of the passengers. The high
number of fly actions forces the agent to introduce
additional actions to refuel its tank. On the other hand,
agent plane1 ﬂies directly to its destination without
transporting any passengers.
In contrast, agents in FMAP progressively build the
solution plan together without using an a-priori goal al-
location, which allows them to obtain much better qual-
ity plans, taking advantage of synergies between actions
of diﬀerent agents and eﬀectively balancing the work-
load among agents. Fig. 8 shows that, in FMAP, agent
plane1 transports person6 to its destination, thus sim-
plifying the activities of plane3, which avoids refueling.
The resulting plan is a much shorter and better bal-
anced solution than the MAPR plan (only 6 time steps
versus 10 time steps in MAPR) and it requires fewer
actions (13 actions versus 16 in MAPR).
Table 2 shows that FMAP noticeably improves plan
quality except in the most decoupled domains, namely
Rovers and Satellite (in the latter, FMAP results are
slightly better than MAPR results). In these domains,
synergies among agents are minimal or even nonex-
istent. Consequently, MAPR is not penalized by its
search scheme, obtaining plans of similar quality to
FMAP.
5.4 FMAP vs. MAP-POP comparison
We compared FMAP with another recent MAP sys-
tem, MAP-POP [37]. Like FMAP, MAP-POP agents
explore the space of multi-agent plans jointly. This set-
up allows MAP-POP to overcome some of the lim-
itations of MAPR since it is able to tackle tightly-
coupled tasks with cooperative goals. However, MAP-
POP has two major disadvantages. Much like MAPR,

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
17
Plane3
Plane1
board person3 
plane3 city2
ﬂy plane3 city0 
city2
ﬂy plane3 city2 
city1
board person1 
plane3 city1
debark person3 
plane3 city2
ﬂy plane3 city1 
city0
debark person1 
plane3 city0
zoom 
plane1 city0 
city3
ﬂy plane1 
city3 city4
board 
person6 
plane1 city4
ﬂy plane1 
city4 city2
debark 
person6 
plane1 city2
ﬂy plane1 
city2 city3
ﬂy plane3 city0 
city2
ﬂy plane1 
city0 city2
board person3 
plane3 city2
ﬂy plane1 
city2 city4
ﬂy plane3 city2 
city4
ﬂy plane1 
city4 city3
board person6 
plane3 city4
ﬂy plane3 city4 
city2
debark person6 
plane3 city2
refuel plane3 
city2
ﬂy plane3 city2 
city1
debark person3 
plane3 city1
refuel plane3 
city2
board person1 
plane3 city1
ﬂy plane3 city1 
city0
debark person1 
plane3 city0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
FMAP
MAPR
Fig. 8 Zenotravel task 8 solution plan as obtained by FMAP (upper plan) and MAPR (lower plan)
Domain
Tasks
Common
FMAP
MAP-POP
Solved
Actions
Makespan
Time
Solved
Actions
Makespan
Time
Blocksworld
34
6
19
9,20
7,80
7,57
6
0,91x
0,74x
21,49x
Driverlog
20
2
15
9,50
7,00
0,66
2
1,11x
1,00x
949,39x
Rovers
20
6
19
32,63
14,95
53,82
6
1,01x
1,04x
29,27x
Satellite
20
7
16
17,14
12,57
16,00
7
1,03x
0,89x
0,37x
Zenotravel
20
3
18
7,67
4,33
1,25
3
1,00x
1,00x
87,54x
Depots
20
1
6
14,00
9,00
10,56
1
0,86x
1,00x
2,77x
Elevators
30
22
30
21,32
11,36
14,60
22
1,04x
1,37x
14,23x
Logistics
20
7
10
32,29
12,71
18,26
7
0,97x
0,91x
5,89x
Openstacks
30
0
23
53,13
41,78
268,62
0
-
-
-
Woodworking
30
0
22
16,50
4,45
100,88
0
-
-
-
Table 3 Comparison between FMAP and MAP-POP
MAP-POP is an incomplete approach because it implic-
itly bounds the search tree by limiting its branching fac-
tor. This may prevent agents from generating potential
solution plans [37]. Additionally, MAP-POP is based
on backward-chaining POP technologies, thus relying
on heuristics that oﬀer a rather poor performance in
most MAP domains.
Table 3 shows the comparison between FMAP and
MAP-POP. As in Table 2, the average results consider
only the tasks solved by both approaches (the FMAP
results for Openstacks and Woodworking domains in-
clude all the tasks solved by this approach because
MAP-POP does not solve any of the tasks). The ﬁg-
ures in FMAP show the results obtained using FMAP
for the common problems; MAP-POP values are rela-
tive to the results of FMAP.
In general, FMAP results are better than MAP-
POP results in almost every aspect. In terms of cover-
age, FMAP clearly outperforms MAP-POP, solving 178
out of 244 tasks (roughly 73% of the tasks in the bench-
mark), while MAP-POP solves only 54 tasks (22%).
Overall, in MAP-POP there are problems with some
of the most complex tightly-coupled domains (specif-
ically, Depots, Openstacks, and Woodworking), but it
performs well in the Elevators domain. With respect to
the loosely-coupled domains, MAP-POP attains only
the simplest tasks, solving from three to seven tasks
per domain.
It is diﬃcult to compare the results related to plan
quality due to the low coverage of MAP-POP. Focus-
ing on the domains in which MAP-POP solves a sig-
niﬁcant number of tasks, we observe that MAP-POP
obtains slightly better solution plans than FMAP in
Blocksworld and Satellite. FMAP, however, outperforms
MAP-POP in Elevators, the domain in which both ap-
proaches solve the largest number of tasks.
Finally, the results show that FMAP is much faster
than MAP-POP, from 5 times faster in Logistics to even
1000 times faster in the Driverlog domain. MAP-POP
only obtains faster times than FMAP in the seven Satel-
lite tasks.
5.5 Scalability analysis
We prepared two additional experiments to analyze the
ability of FMAP and MAPR to scale up. The ﬁrst test
analyzes how both planners scale up when the number
of agents of a task is increased, keeping the rest of the

18
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
t2
l4
l3
l6
l5
p4
p3
t1
l2
l1
p2
p1
t3 ... t15
Fig. 9 Logistics-like scalability task
Fig. 10 Scalability results for the logistics-like task
parameters unchanged. More speciﬁcally, we designed a
loosely-coupled logistics-like transportation task, which
is shown in Fig. 9. The basic task includes two diﬀerent
trucks, t1 and t2. Truck t1 moves between locations l1
and l2, and truck t2 moves between locations l3 and l4;
there is no connection between t1’s and t2’s locations.
The trucks have to transport a total of four packages,
p1 . . . p4, as shown in Fig 9. In order to ensure that
MAPR is able to solve the task, both t1 and t2 can
solve two of the four problem goals by themselves: t1
will deliver p1 and p2, while t2 will transport p3 and
p4. Therefore, cooperation is not required in this task,
as opposed to the IPC logistics domain.
We deﬁned and ran 14 diﬀerent tests for this basic
task. In each test, the number of agents in the task is in-
creased by one, ranging from 2 to 15 truck agents. The
problems are modeled so that the extra truck agents,
t3 . . . t15, are placed in a separate location l5, from
which there is no access to the locations that t1 and
t2 can move through. Therefore, the additional agents
included in each task are unable to solve any of the
task goals. However, they do propose reﬁnement plans
in FMAP (more precisely, they introduce an action to
move to l6, as shown in Fig. 9), increasing the com-
plexity of the task in terms of both the number of mes-
sages exchanged and the branching factor of the FMAP
search tree.
The plot in Fig. 10 separately depicts the time re-
quired by each process in FMAP. We show the time
required by FLEX to generate the reﬁnement plans,
the time consumed by the hDT G evaluation procedure,
and the time spent by agents to communicate and syn-
Fig. 11 Scalability results for the satellite task
chronize, which includes the base plan selection and the
exchange of plans among agents. Every task was solved
by FMAP in 14 iterations, resulting in a 12-action so-
lution plan (truck t1 and truck t2 each introduced six
actions).
As Fig. 10 shows, FLEX has a noticeably low im-
pact on the overall execution time. This proves that,
even when dealing with privacy and building a tree for
each potentially supportable action, FLEX oﬀers good
performance and does not limit FMAP’s scalability.
Even though each task only required 14 iterations to
be solved, the growing number of agents increases the
size of the search tree. In the two-agent task, the agents
generate an average of 3.3 reﬁnement plans per itera-
tion, while in the 15-agent task, the average branching
factor goes up to 11.8 reﬁnement plans. Nevertheless,
this does not aﬀect the time consumed by hDT G, which
remains relatively constant in all tasks. Since agents
evaluate plans simultaneously, the evaluation time hardly
grows when the number of participants increases.
Fig. 10 conﬁrms that communications among agents
are the major bottleneck of FMAP. As the number of
agents increases, so does the branching factor. There-
fore, each agent has to communicate more reﬁnement
plans to a higher number of participants. Synchronizing
a larger number of agents is also more complex, which
increases the number of exchanged messages. All these
communications are managed by a centralized compo-
nent, the QPid broker, which is negatively aﬀected by
the communication overhead of the system.
The behaviour of MAPR remains constant in all
of the tests, taking about 0.2 seconds to resolve each
task. Since MAPR does not require communications,
the growing number of agents does not aﬀect its per-
formance. Note that if we consider only the time spent
by hDT G (around 0.8 seconds per test) and FLEX (ap-
proximately 0.02 seconds), FMAP execution times are
quite similar to MAPR.

FMAP: Distributed Cooperative Multi-Agent Planning
19
The resolution of this loosely-coupled task does not
require coordination in order to be able to compare with
MAPR. However, the coordination mechanism and mes-
sage exchange of FMAP is equally applied to all plan-
ning tasks. Hence, the ability to solve tightly-coupled
tasks requires great coordination, which is not the case
for MAPR.
We performed a second experiment based on the
satellite domain to assess the scalability of the two plan-
ners when both the number of agents and the number
of goals increase, thus increasing the complexity of the
task. We also deﬁned 14 MAP tasks, ranging from 2
to 15 satellite agents. The simplest task comprises two
satellite agents, s1 and s2, which must take an image
of two diﬀerent planets. The satellites are conﬁgured
so that each one of them can capture an image of a
single planet. The instruments they have on board are
turned on and calibrated, so the agent can directly re-
orient and acquire the image. Unlike the ﬁrst test, each
satellite task adds one more goal over the previous task,
as well as an extra agent. Then, the additional agents,
s3 . . . s15, must each solve a goal by themselves. This
increases the branching factor as well as the number of
iterations for solving a task.
Fig. 11 shows the results for this scenario. The solu-
tion plans obtained by FMAP range from 4 actions (in
the two-agent task) to 30 actions (in the 15-agent task).
FMAP required 31 iterations to solve the 15-agent task
and only 4 iterations for the two-agent task. The grow-
ing complexity also aﬀects the average branching factor,
which ranges from 25.67 to 255.06 plans.
As Fig 11 shows, the complexity of the tasks does
not aﬀect FLEX, which takes less than 0.2 seconds in
each task. In general, the performance of FLEX only
decreases when handling very large base plans in do-
mains with many applicable actions. We can therefore
conclude that FLEX is an eﬃcient and highly scalable
component of FMAP.
With regard to the hDT G heuristic, evaluation times
range from 0.35 seconds for the simplest task to 26.64
seconds for the most complex one. Although the evalu-
ation time is slightly higher than the generation time,
we can aﬃrm that this is a good performance consid-
ering that: 1) the branching factor and the number of
iterations increase from task to task, which results in
a much larger number of plans to evaluate; and 2) un-
like FLEX, the evaluation function hDT G also involves
some communications among agents, which obviously
increase when the number of agents goes up. All in
all, and considering just the times of hDT G and FLEX,
FMAP is only about 9 times slower in the 15-agent task
than MAPR, which completes this task in 3 seconds.
In summary, both tests conﬁrm that communica-
tion overhead is the main issue of FMAP with regard
to scalability. Communicating plans and synchronizing
agents are rather costly tasks, especially when dealing
with complex tasks that combine a large branching fac-
tor and a high number of participating agents.
5.6 Discussion of the results
The experimental results support our initial claim: FMAP
is a domain-independent approach that oﬀers a good
trade-oﬀbetween coverage and execution times being
and is able to solve any typology of MAP task.
We compared FMAP against two diﬀerent state-of-
the-art MAP approaches. On the one hand, MAPR
is designed as a fast MAP solver. The results show
that MAPR provides excellent execution times, but its
performance comes at a cost: it completely rules out
tightly-coupled domains that require cooperation. Many
real-world domains, such as logistics or production supply-
chains, require cooperation between independent enti-
ties. Hence, non-cooperative planners for solving dis-
joint subtasks in which agents can eﬀectively avoid in-
teractions are not suitable for many real-world MAP
problems. Overall, in the experiments, MAPR solves
45% of the whole benchmark while FMAP solves 73%
of the tasks.
On the other hand, MAP-POP is a general approach
that is capable of solving any type of planning task
like FMAP. The approach followed by MAP-POP is
clearly inﬂuenced by the use of backward-chaining POP
technologies and, in particular, by the application of
low-informative heuristics. This planner oﬀers the worst
results in terms of coverage and execution times, thus
indicating that FMAP represents a step ahead in multi-
agent cooperative planning.
With regard to the scalability tests, it has been
proved that the FMAP ability to scale up is only af-
fected by communications. While MAPR performance
is unaltered when the number of agents increases, FMAP
performance is aﬀected by its heavy dependency on
agent communications. These results lead us to one of
our future lines of work, studying techniques to reduce
overhead communication without losing the ability to
tackle any kind of MAP task.
6 Conclusions
FMAP is a general-purpose MAP model that supports
inherently distributed domains and deﬁnes an advanced
notion of privacy. Agents in FMAP use an internal
POP procedure to calculate all possible ways to reﬁne

20
Alejandro Torre˜no et al.
a plan, which guarantees FMAP completeness. Agents
exchange plans and their evaluations by means of a
communication mechanism that is governed by a co-
ordinator agent. FMAP exploits the structure of dis-
tributed state-independent domain transition graphs for
the heuristic evaluation of the plans, thus avoiding hav-
ing to recalculate estimates in each node of the POP
search tree.
Privacy is maintained throughout the entire search
process. Agents only communicate the relevant infor-
mation they share with the rest of the agents. This
advanced notion of privacy is very useful for model-
ing real-world problems. The experiments show that
dealing with privacy has a relatively low impact on the
overall performance of FMAP.
The exhaustive testing on IPC benchmarks shows
that FMAP outperforms other state-of-the-art MAP
frameworks because it is capable of solving tightly-coupled
domains with specialized agents and cooperative goals
as well as loosely-coupled problems. The performance
of FMAP is only aﬀected by the extensive communi-
cations among agents. To the best of our knowledge,
FMAP is currently likely to be the most competitive
domain-independent cooperative MAP system.
Acknowledgements This work has been partly supported
by the Spanish MICINN under projects Consolider Ingenio
2010 CSD2007-00022 and TIN2011-27652-C03-01, the Valen-
cian Prometeo project II/2013/019, and the FPI-UPV schol-
arship granted to the third author by the Universitat Polit`ecnica
de Val`encia.
