Transforming Multi-Conditioned Generation from Meaning
Representation
Joosung Lee
Kakao Enterprise Corp., South Korea

Abstract
In task-oriented conversation systems, natu-
ral language generation systems that gener-
ate sentences with speciﬁc information related
to conversation are useful. Our study focuses
on language generation by considering vari-
ous information representing the meaning of
utterances as multiple conditions of genera-
tion. Data-to-text generation, the conditions
for sentence meaning, generally goes through
two steps: sentence planning and surface re-
alization. However, we propose a simple one-
stage framework to generate utterances di-
rectly from MR (Meaning Representation).
Our model is based on GPT2 and generates ut-
terances with ﬂat conditions on slot and value
pairs, which does not need to determine the
structure of the sentence. We evaluate several
systems in the E2E dataset with 6 automatic
metrics. Our system is a simple method, but it
demonstrates comparable performance to pre-
vious systems in automated metrics. In addi-
tion, using only 10% of the dataset without any
other techniques, our model achieves compara-
ble performance, and shows the possibility of
performing zero-shot generation and expand-
ing to other datasets.
1
Introduction
In many conversation systems, generating sen-
tences with speciﬁc information is useful. For ex-
ample, it can be used in chatbot systems or spoken
dialogue systems to generate utterances that con-
tain meaning representations (MRs) corresponding
to a user’s query. In order to train the NLG sys-
tem that reﬂects this variety of information, a large
amount of labeled data is required. At the 2017
E2E challenge (Duˇsek et al., 2019), a large dataset
was released, which consisted of pairs of MRs rep-
resenting restaurant reviews and corresponding ut-
terances. Table 1 shows an example. MRs can be
regarded as the multi-conditions type of utterance
MR (slot[value])
name[Giraffe], eatType[pub], food[Fast food],
area[riverside], familyFriendly[yes]
Utterance
On the riverside the Giraffe is
a Fast food, kid friendly pub.
Table 1: An example of an E2E dataset consists of pairs
of a MR and an utterance. The purpose of the E2E chal-
lenge is to create a system that generates utterance that
reﬂects MR.
generation, which consists of slots and values, and
the corresponding utterances are references writ-
ten by humans. We focus on training the model to
generate utterances directly from MRs.
Many of the previous NLG research are a two-
stage approach through sentence planning and sur-
face realization. Sentence planning determines the
overall sentence structure and surface realization is
the process of ﬂattening the sentence structure. In
recent studies (Konstas and Lapata, 2013; Duˇsek
and Jurˇc´ıˇcek, 2016; Juraska et al., 2018), the neural
network model processes these two-stage at once
by training end-to-end without the need for aligned
data.
When generating sentences from an input (ﬂat
or structured MR), there are a template-based ap-
proach and a neural network-based approach. Smi-
ley et al. (2018); Puzikov and Gurevych (2018);
Wiseman et al. (2018) generate sentences based
on template. The template method is to obtain the
structural sets of sentences corresponding to MRs
from training data and apply the template appro-
priate to the test data to generate the sentences. In
Smiley et al. (2018); Puzikov and Gurevych (2018),
a template is formed based on rules, and Wiseman
et al. (2018) learns the template structure of a sen-
tence as a neural network.
There is also a way to generate a natural lan-
guage with a neural network without using a tem-
plate. Duˇsek and Jurˇc´ıˇcek (2016); Smiley et al.
(2018); Puzikov and Gurevych (2018); Juraska et al.
arXiv:2101.04257v2  [cs.CL]  28 Jul 2021

(2018); Elder et al. (2019); Gehrmann et al. (2018)
are sequence-to-sequence models of encoders and
decoders, which have a one-stage framework, and
Duˇsek and Jurˇc´ıˇcek (2016) is the model used by
E2E challenge organizers. In Balakrishnan et al.
(2019), the encoder and decoder model converts
ﬂat MRs to structure MRs, and outputs the sentence
through constrained decoding.
Template and neural network methods each
have advantages and disadvantages. The template
method guarantees a certain performance but limits
the diversity and possibilities of the output. The
neural network method generally performs better
than the template method, but requires a lot of data
and has limitations in the naturalness and semanti-
cal correctness of sentences (Nayak et al., 2017).
We propose a novel approach using the Trans-
former decoder as a simple one-stage framework.
In our model, GPT2-small (Radford et al., 2019)
is the backbone, and (si, vi) pairs of the meaning
representation are put into multiple conditions to
generate a sentence. In the previous works (Juraska
et al., 2018; Balakrishnan et al., 2019; Smiley et al.,
2018; Puzikov and Gurevych, 2018; Duˇsek and
Jurˇc´ıˇcek, 2016), when receiving the meaning repre-
sentation as input, the value is delexicalized. Specif-
ically, all values corresponding to the same slot are
delexicalized to a placeholder so that unseen inputs
can be processed. However, Nayak et al. (2017);
Juraska et al. (2018) report that delexicalization of-
ten leads to inappropriate behavior in scenarios. For
example, the word ”cheap” can be reﬂected in the
utterance that matches the value of ”less than $20”.
Also, when food[Italian] is given as slot[value],
”Italian food” is an appropriate phrase in a gener-
ated utterance, but in the case of food[fast food],
”fast food food” is an incorrect phrase. Addition-
ally, the combination of eatType[coffee shop] and
food[Italian] is rather weird, and the combination
of name[The Rice Boat] and area[riverside] is ap-
propriate, so delexicalization doesn’t fully utilize
the characteristics of tokens. We, therefore, treat
the slot as a special token and the value as a regular
token of vocabulary without delexicalization in the
training. Nevertheless, in testing for unseen values,
the model generates appropriate utterances and is
described in Section 4.3. Our method is consid-
ered as generating a sentence as a simple one-stage
framework directly from ﬂat MRs.
Our model is tested on the E2E dataset. In
addition to the evaluation metrics used in the
E2E challenge, the systems are evaluated with
BERTScore (Zhang* et al., 2020). BERTScore is
an evaluation metric used in general text genera-
tion. It obtains a semantic similarity score between
two sentences. Our approach shows the best per-
formance in BLEU, METEOR, and BERTScore
and competitive performance in other metrics. By
leveraging the pre-trained model GPT2, we quickly
converge the model with only a few epochs and
generate ﬂuent utterances without considering the
structure of the sentence. In addition, even if only
10% of the training data is used, it achieves perfor-
mance comparable to previous systems.
2
Related Work
In
many
NLP
tasks,
the
Transformer-
based (Vaswani et al., 2017) models have
recently shown good performance.
Gehrmann
et al. (2018) is a previous work using the Trans-
former encoder and decoder in the E2E task.
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) composed only of the
Transformer encoder is used a lot in NLU tasks,
and GPT (Radford et al., 2019) composed only
of the Transformer decoder is used a lot in NLG
tasks. These models are trained as large-scale
open-domain corpora. By leveraging pre-trained
models trained on large datasets and applying them
to downstream tasks, many NLP tasks achieve
better performance.
The generation of utterances from MRs is quite
similar to machine translation, one of the sequence-
to-sequence tasks. Also, in terms of generating
sentences with certain restrictions, it is similar
to style transfer (Logeswaran et al., 2018; Lam-
ple et al., 2019; Lee, 2020), which is one of
sequence+condition-to-sequence tasks. However,
the generation of utterances from MRs is not ex-
actly the same as the above tasks because of the
condition-to-sequence perspective. Since the E2E
task does not have a given sequence as the input
of the model, we approach the sentence generation
using only the decoder without sequence encoding.
We choose a language model of the Transformer
decoder that performs better than LSTM and uses
the pre-trained model GPT2 as a backbone.
3
Our Approach
3.1
Problem Statement
E2E
dataset
The
domain
of
the
E2E
dataset
is
a
restaurant
and
consists
of
D
=
{(M1, u1), · · · , (Mn, un)}. Mi is the

E2E Dataset
MRs
