The Exact Closest String Problem as a
Constraint Satisfaction Problem
Tom Kelsey∗
University of St Andrews
St Andrews, KY16 9SX United Kingdom

Lars Kotthoff
University of St Andrews
St Andrews, KY16 9SX United Kingdom

Abstract
We report (to our knowledge) the ﬁrst evaluation of Constraint Satisfaction as a computational
framework for solving closest string problems. We show that careful consideration of symbol occur-
rences can provide search heuristics that provide several orders of magnitude speedup at and above
the optimal distance. We also report (to our knowledge) the ﬁrst analysis and evaluation – using any
technique – of the computational difﬁculties involved in the identiﬁcation of all closest strings for a
given input set. We describe algorithms for web-scale distributed solution of closest string problems,
both purely based on AI backtrack search and also hybrid numeric-AI methods.
1
Introduction
The closest string problem (CSP) takes as input a set of strings of equal length over a ﬁxed alphabet.
A solution is a string with the smallest possible maximum Hamming distance from any input string.
(Strictly speaking, distance with respect to any suitable metric can be minimised; the Hamming distance
is the standard edit distance metric used for this class of problems.) CSP has applications in coding and
information theories (in these ﬁelds the problem is also known as minimum radius), but when the input
strings consist of nucleotide sequences over the letters A, C, G and T, (or of mRNA sequences over the
letters A, C, G and U, or of amino acid sequences over an alphabet of size 20) the CSP has important
applications in computational biology (where the problem class is also known as centre string). Examples
include the identiﬁcation of consensus patterns in a set of unaligned DNA sequences known to bind a
common protein [12], ﬁnding conserved secondary structure motifs in unaligned RNA sequences [19],
discovering motifs in ranked lists of DNA sequences [6], ﬁnding DNA regulatory motifs within unaligned
noncoding sequences [22], the identiﬁcation of sister chromatids by DNA template strand sequences [8],
and DNA motif representation with nucleotide dependency [2]. Our aim is to provide theoretical and
practical results – together with empirical supporting evidence – that lead to improved CSP solution for
biological problems, so in this paper the base alphabet Σ will always consist of four symbols.
A Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP) consists of a set of constraints involving variables taking
discrete values. A solution to a CSP is an assignment of values to variables such that no constraint is
violated. CSP solvers are used for many important classes of problems for which solutions must take
discrete values, but, to our knowledge, the closest string problem has not been modelled and solved as
a CSP. The research question under consideration, therefore, is “Is CSP a useful framework for solving
CSP instances?”
In this paper we investigate approaches to developing and solving such models. We demonstrate that
a careful choice of search heuristic can give several orders of magnitude speedup in general. We show
that CSP modelling and solution are effective tools for the related problem of obtaining all closest strings.
We consider the distribution of closest string problems across a cloud (or grid, or cluster) of computing
nodes, and identify two potential super-linear speedups that can be achieved in practice. Finally we
∗To whom all correspondence should be addressed.
1
arXiv:1005.0089v1  [cs.AI]  1 May 2010

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
identify the strengths and weaknesses of existing numeric approaches, and suggest hybrid discrete and
numeric methods that combine the best features of CSP search and numeric search for solutions.
In the rest of this introduction we discuss existing methods for the CSP with respect to theoretical
complexity results, give brief overviews of Constraint Satisfaction theory and the Minion CSP solver,
and formally deﬁne the theoretical concepts upon which the research is based. In Section 2 we model
closest string problems as CSPs, compare search heuristics, and provide results for the all closest string
problem. We describe distributed algorithms in Section 3, both for pure CSP models and heuristics, and
for hybrid CSP-numeric methods. In Section 4 we discuss the relative strengths and limitations of CSP
as a framework for closest string identiﬁcation, and identify future avenues of research.
1.1
Computational Complexity and Existing Methods
CSP has been shown to be NP-complete for binary strings [9] and for alphabets of arbitrary size [14].
Intuitively there are |Σ| choices for each of the L positions in any candidate closest string where Σ is the
alphabet, and for any algorithm that fails to check each of this exponential number of cases one could
devise a CSP for which the algorithm returns an incorrect result.
Approximate solutions to within (4/3+ε) of the minimal d can be obtained in polynomial time [14,
16], with several practically useful implementations available, notably those based on genetic algorithms
[13]. However, in this paper we are concerned with ﬁrst ﬁnding exact solutions, and then (given that we
know the minimal distance d) ﬁnding all closest strings that are within d of S. Clearly, an approximate
method will not, in general, identify the minimal d, and therefore can not be used as a basis for ﬁnding
all solutions.
Excellent exact results – provided that close bounds have already been identiﬁed – have been obtained
by modelling the CSP as an Integer Programming Problem [17], and solving the resulting instances using
numerical branch and bound methods [15]. This form of search differs from the backtrack search used
by CSP solvers by having a much less organised search pattern. This is often advantageous, but can be a
hindrance when searching for all solutions: IP branch and bound is optimised for optimisation, as it were,
rather than exhaustive search for all candidates for a constant objective function. If the IP formulation
suggested in [17] is used, then the feasible region deliberately excludes optimal solutions in order to
reduce the numbers of variables, in which case no search for all solutions can be made.
A linear time algorithm exists for solutions to the CSP for ﬁxed distance d [11]. The exponential
complexity is now in the coefﬁcient, as the method is O(NL + Nddd) where the problem has N strings
of length L.
1.2
Constraint Satisfaction Problems
Deﬁnition. A Constraint Satisfaction Problem ϒ is a set of constraints C acting on a ﬁnite set of vari-
ables ∆:= {A1,A2,...,An}, each of which has a ﬁnite domain of possible values Di := D(Ai) ⊆Λ. A
solution to ϒ is an instantiation of all of the variables in ∆such that no constraint in C is violated.
The class of CSPs is NP-complete as it is a generalisation of propositional satisﬁability (SAT). The
Handbook of Constraint Programming [21] provides full details of CSP theory and techniques. A key
observation is that different models (i.e. choices of variables, values and constraints) for the same prob-
lem (or class of problems) will often give markedly different results when the instances are solved, but,
as with numeric Linear, Mixed-Integer and Quadratic Programming, there is no general way to decide in
advance which candidate models and heuristics will lead to faster search.
A typical solver operates by building a search tree in which the nodes are assignments of values
to variables, and the edges lead to assignment choices for the next variable. If a constraint is violated
at any node, then search backtracks. If a leaf is reached, then all constraints are satisﬁed, and the full
2

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
set of assignments provides a solution. These search trees are obviously exponential, and in the worst-
case scenario every node may have to constructed. However, large-scale pruning of the search tree
can occur by judicious use of consistency methods. The idea is to do a small amount of extra work
that (hopefully) identiﬁes variable-value assignments that are already logically ruled out by the current
choice of assignment, meaning that those branches of the search tree need not be explored. While there
are no guarantees that this extra work is anything other than an overhead, in practice enough search is
pruned to give efﬁcient solutions for otherwise intractable problems. Taking a speciﬁc example from
the empirical evaluation reported later in this paper, an all closest string problem for a ﬁxed distance
involving strings of length 25 with a 4-symbol alphabet will require at most 425 ≈1.1 × 1015 nodes to
be searched. An efﬁcient solver will search only 3 or 4 ×109 nodes, with the remainder being ruled out
by efﬁcient propagation of the logical results of the assignments during search. Moreover, an efﬁcient
solver will search around 300,000 of the remaining nodes per CPU second. It is this efﬁcient reduction
in search space that allows CSP practitioners to solve otherwise intractable problems.
Heuristics exist for choices of variable-value pair for the next node, and as before these may have
no effect on the number of nodes visited. Again, in general, variable and value orderings designed for
speciﬁc problem classes can lead to several orders of magnitude reduction in the number of nodes needed
to ﬁnd a solution. Standard choices for variable orderings include random, smallest domain, largest
domain, most-constrained (i.e. chooses avariable that appears in a maximal number of constraints),
least-constrained, etc. Results will vary with the problem class and model under consideration. Taking
another speciﬁc example from experiments in this paper involving closest string problems, enforcing
singleton singleton arc consistency – a limited depth procedure that aims to prune entire branches near
the root, see [1] for a full analysis – at the root node of a search tree can be a huge loss. It can take three
times longer to reach the ﬁrst closest string at a given distance than it takes to ﬁnd all closest strings.
In summary, the solution performance for instances of a class of CSPs will depend crucially on
choices of model, consistency, search order and the solver used. Moreover, empirical evaluation is often
the only way to decide which of these choices is better for a given set of circumstances.
1.2.1
The Minion CSP solver
The constraint solver Minion [10] uses the memory architecture of modern computers to speed up the
backtrack process compared to other solvers. Minion has an extensive set of constraints, together with
efﬁcient propagators that enforce consistency levels very rapidly. Minion has been used to solve open
problems in combinatoric algebra [5], ﬁnding billions of solutions in a search space of size 10100 in a
matter of hours. Minion is used as the solver for this investigation as it offers both fast and scalable
constraint solving, which are important factors when solving closest string problems. Moreover, the user
can easily specify bespoke variable orderings, and less easily specify value orderings.
1.3
Formal Deﬁnitions and Results
Before proceeding to the technical Sections, we ﬁrst formalise Hamming Distances and Diameters, and
closest strings:
Deﬁnition. Let S1 and S2 be strings of length L over an alphabet Σ. Let D be the binary string of length
L such that
D(i) =
 1
S1(i) ̸= S2(i)
0
otherwise
The Hamming Distance hd(S1,S2) is deﬁned as the sum from i = 1 to L of the D(i).
3

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
Deﬁnition. Let S = {S1,S2,...,SN} be a set of strings of length L over an alphabet Σ. A Closest String
to S is deﬁned as any string CS of length L over Σ such that
hd(CS,Si) ≤d
∀i ∈{1,2,...,N}
with d being the minimal such distance for S. The Hamming diameter HD of S is deﬁned as
HD(S) = max(hd(Si,Sj))
∀i, j ∈{1,2,...,N}.
A solution to a closest string problem involving the strings in S is therefore a string CS and a minimal
distance d such that each member of S is within d of CS. The Hamming distance is an edit distance
that quantiﬁes the number of substitutions from Σ required to turn one string into another. It is easy to
show that Hamming distance is a metric, satisfying the triangle inequality. It is clear that the Hamming
Diameter is an upper bound for the distance of a closest string: a candidate closest string at a greater
distance can be replaced by any member of S, reducing the maximal distance to HD(S). We can obtain
a lower bound for the distance of a closest string by observing that the distance can not be less than half
the Hamming Diameter:
Lemma 1. Let S = {S1,S2,...,SN} be a set of strings of length L over an alphabet Σ. A closest string
CS to S must be within ⌈HD(S)/2⌉of S.
Proof. Let Si and Sj be two strings from S for which the Hamming Diameter is achieved, and let Sk be
any other string of length L over Σ. By the triangle inequality H(S) = hd(Si,Sj) ≤hd(Si,Sk)+hd(Sj,Sk).
If (without loss of generality) hd(Si,Sk) < ⌈HD(S)/2⌉then hd(Sj,Sk) ≥⌈HD(S)/2⌉. Hence any distance
less than ⌈HD(S)/2⌉can not be a maximal distance from Sk to any string in S.
Search space reduction can be achieved by noting that any value not appearing in position j of any
of the strings in S need not appear in a closest string solution. It should be noted that this only applies
when searching for the ﬁrst optimal solution. When searching for all solutions, any symbol from Σ can,
in principle, appear at any position in CS.
Lemma 2. Let S = {S1,S2,...,SN} be deﬁned as in Lemma 1. Let Σj for j ∈1,2,...,L denote the subset
of Σ obtained by selecting every symbol that appears in position j of a string in S. Then any symbol in
position j of a closest string to S must also be in Σ j.
Proof. Suppose symbol s in Σ\Σj appears in position j of a solution CS. Let CS∗be the string consisting
of CS with s replaced by a symbol from Σ j at position j. Then CS∗is strictly closer to those strings in S
with that symbol at that position, and distance to all other strings is unchanged. Hence if the current d is
optimal for CS, it remains optimal for CS∗.
The ﬁnal deﬁnition needed for this investigation encapsulates frequencies of symbol appearances per
string position, and will be used in Section 2.1 to direct backtrack search for closest strings.
Deﬁnition. Let S = {S1,S2,...,SN} be a set of strings of length L over an alphabet Σ. A Position Weight
Matrix (PWM) for S is an |Σ| × L matrix with entries PMSS(i, j) deﬁned as the frequency of symbol i
appearing at position j in S.
An example Position Weight Matrix is given in Figure 1.
4

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
Figure 1: Five strings of length 8 are shown above, with their PWM shown below.
2
Closest String as a Constraint Satisfaction Problem
Using the terminology from Sections 1.2 and 1.3, we now construct a CSP instance from a given closest
string problem. For the purposes of this paper, the alphabet Σ consists of the numbers 1, 2 ,3 and 4,
representing A, C, G and T respectively. Clearly this artiﬁcial restriction can easily be relaxed in order
to model arbitrary alphabets.
Given S, a set of N strings of length L over alphabet Σ, we ﬁrst compute the Hamming Diameter
HD(S) and use this to provide a lower bound, dmin, for the optimal distance d, as shown in Lemma 1.
ϒ(S,dmin,HD(S)) denotes the CSP instance in which the set of variables is ∆:= ∆1 ∪∆2 ∪∆3 ∪∆4, where
1. ∆1 is the array [CS1,CS2,...,CSL] of variables representing the closest string, each such variable
having domain 1 through 4
2. ∆2 is an N ×L array of binary variables used to calculate Hamming Distances from ∆1 to the input
strings S
3. ∆3 is the array [D1,D2,...,DN] of variables representing the distance of each string in S to the
current CS candidate, each such variable having domain dmin through HD(S)
4. ∆4 is the single distance variable d with domain dmin through HD(S).
The constraints are:
1. ∆2(i, j) = 0 iff Si(j) = ∆1(j)
2. ∆3(k) is the sum of row k of ∆2
3. ∆4 is the maximum value appearing in ∆3
5

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
4. ∆4 is minimised: if a solution is found with ∆4 = d, search for another solution with ∆4 = d −1
(unless d = dmin).
∆1 are the search variables: nodes of the search tree consist of values assigned to these variables. ∆4 is
the objective function (or cost function). A returned solution is ∆1 ∪∆4, a closest string together with
the optimal distance. Solving ϒ(S,dmin,HD(S)) is guaranteed to return a solution, although it is not
impossible that all 4L nodes are visited for every current minimal d. Restricting the domains of ∆3 will
save computational effort when a solution is found with d = dmin and will have no effect otherwise.
Restricting the domains of the ∆1 variables in line with lemma 2 also reduces the search space, although
the restrictions can not apply when searching for all solutions.
To ﬁnd all closest strings ϒ(S,dmin,HD(S)) is solved to obtainCS and dopt. By restricting the domains
of ∆3 to dmin through dopt and removing the optimisation constraint we obtain a new CSP ϒ∗(S,dmin,d)
which can be solved for all solutions. The search undertaken to ﬁnd the ﬁrst solution CS need not be
repeated: constraints can be added that rule out those parts of the search tree already processed. It should
also be noted that CS and d need not be obtained using the Constraint Satisfaction approach: any method
that returns an optimal solution can be used to create an all closest strings CSP.
2.1
Position Weight Matrix Variable and Value Ordering
We now use results from computational biology to devise a bespoke variable and value ordering schema
for ϒ(S,dmin). By precalculating a Position Weight Matrix for S as deﬁned in Section 1.3 we can order the
search variables by maximum frequency. For each variable, we order the values assigned during search
by decreasing relative frequency. Tie breaks are either random or by least index. In the example given as
Figure 1 the variable ordering by position 1 through 8 would be 1: position 4 (having 5 occurrences), 2 –
5: positions 2, 3, 6, and 8 in any order (each having 4 occurrences), 6–8: positions 1 and 7 in any order
(having the least highest frequency of 3). The value ordering for position 5 in the ﬁgure would be 1: A
(most frequent), 2–3: T and C in any order, 4: G (least frequent). By Lemma 2, when seeking a single
solution it is safe to exclude values that don’t appear at a given position from their respective variable
domains before search. Hence in for the example in Figure 1 the value ordering would be values typeset
in blue followed by values typeset in red, with black values excluded.
The idea behind this search heuristic is that search starts close to (in the sense of maximum likeli-
hood) an optimal solution. Only if no such solution is found does search progress to less likely (but not
impossible) parts of the search tree .
2.2
Comparison of Search Heuristics
In this Section we test the hypothesis that PMS-based search heuristics reduce the search needed for
solutions to ϒ(S,dmin) CSP instances when compared to a standard heuristic. Figure 2 illustrates the
results from 200 closest string problems. Each problem was run ﬁrst with smallest domain variable
ordering and ascending value ordering (Minion defaults), and then with PWM-based variable and value
ordering as described in Section 2.1.
For exact solutions – upper panel of Figure 2 – we observe an improvement of PWM over SDF in
almost all cases. The speedup is as high as several orders of magnitude in some cases. The difference is
statistically signiﬁcant at the 0.001 level. These results are as expected: the PWM reﬂects the maximum
likelihood of a closest string, so a search that respects these likelihoods will nearly always be highly
efﬁcient, but will visit very many non-essential nodes on the few occasions that the maximum likelihood
does not lead to a closest string. A key observation is that the magnitude of speedup increases with
increasing string length, which is highly encouraging since the complexity of closest sting is exponential
in string length.
6

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
20.0
50.0
100.0
200.0
number of strings
speedup
length = 10
0.0279955 s
length = 15
0.055491 s
length = 20
1.132327 s
length = 25
54.410228 s
length = 30
1346.360321 s
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
0.0001
0.1000
100.0000
100000.0000
number of strings
speedup
length = 10
0.000001 s
length = 15
0.0039995 s
length = 20
0.1934705 s
length = 25
17.266875 s
length = 30
325.193563 s
Figure 2: Empirical data from 200 instances of 3, 4, 5 and 6 strings of lengths 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30.
For each combination of parameters, 10 random instances were generated with results summarised in the
boxes which show median values (thick line), 25th–75th percentiles (boxed) and 0th–100th percentiles
(dashed lines). In the top panel we compare the exact optimal solution times. In the lower panel we show
the times taken to obtain an optimal result, omitting the time needed to certiﬁcate that result. In both
ﬁgures the y axis shows the speedup of Position Weight Matrix over Smallest Domain First ordering on
a logarithmic scale, and the times given below the string lengths are the median CPU time taken over
all strings of that length. The experiments were conducted on a dual quad-core 2.66 GHz Intel X-5430
processor with 16 GB of RAM.
7

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
If we only consider the search effort needed to ﬁnd an optimal solution (not taking into account the
work needed to provide a certiﬁcate of optimality by ruling out closer strings at lower distance) then
the speedup of PWM over smallest domain is at the level of orders of magnitude in the general case –
Figure 2, lower panel. This indicates that heuristics are less important when searching exhaustively at a
lower than optimal distance: most of the practical complexity of closest string search is associated with
providing certiﬁcates of optimality, rather than identifying close strings which turn out to be optimal.
0.0001
0.0100
1.0000
100.0000
10000.0000
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
time [s]
times optimal distance
Figure 3: Convergence towards optimal Hamming distance. The upper line is the maximum relative
distance, the lower line the minimum and the middle line the mean of the 200 experiments performed.
The y axis denotes multiples of the optimal Hamming distance, the x axis denotes CPU time for the
PWM heuristic on a logarithmic scale. The experiments were conducted on a dual quad-core 2.66 GHz
Intel X-5430 processor with 8 GB of RAM.
Figure 3 shows that we achieve a good approximation very quickly, in line with existing results that
guarantee approximation to four thirds of optimality in polynomial time [14, 16]. This motivates the hy-
brid symbolic-numeric methods detailed in Section 3.4: practitioners can use CSP to obtain good bounds
quickly, then use either numeric methods or AI search methods – or indeed both using a distributed
architecture – to explore the remaining search space for an exact solution plus certiﬁcate of optimality.
Taken together the results indicate that:
1. CSP search with PWM variable-value ordering will (in general) efﬁciently ﬁnd candidate solutions
to closest string problems with decreasing maximum distance d
2. CSP search with any sensible search ordering can be used to exhaustively rule out the distance
below the optimal d
3. our empirical evidence is in line with previously reported results: an approximate solution to
closest string can be computed in polynomial time, but computation of the necessary certiﬁcates
of optimality remains intractable in the general case
4. sequential, single-processor CSP search for problems having more strings of greater length (and
possibly a larger alphabet) will become intractable due to the inherent NP-completeness of closest
string.
8

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
Figure 4: Empirical data from 6 instances of 5 randomly generated strings of length 25. SDF and PWM
indicate smallest domain and position weight heuristics respectively. All timings were calculated using
a dual quad-core 2.66 GHz Intel X-5430 processor with 16 GB of RAM.
2.3
All Closest Strings
To our knowledge, no study has investigated the problem of ﬁnding all closest strings for a given set S.
This may be due to the additional computational complexity involved: it is hard enough to ﬁnd single ex-
act closest strings without performing a systematic search for all such strings having the same maximum
distance from S. It may also be the case that the problem is not interesting: the important information
in a CSP solution being the distance returned, with the closest string being merely an exemplar at that
distance. It seems likely, however, that knowledge of how much self similarity an input set has – rather
than just the degree of self similarity – could be useful information in sequence analysis.
Despite this uncertainty, we wish to investigate the effect that modelling has on the set of all solutions.
In our CSP model described in Section 2 we reduce the search space for a ﬁrst solution by forbidding any
variable to take a value that is not present at that position in one of the input strings. Similar restrictions
were made by Meneses et al. when formulating CSP as an Integer Programming problem [17]. The
questions are:
1. Are many otherwise closest strings ruled out by these restrictions?
2. How much extra computational effort is required to identify each and every closest string?
In Figure 4 we show the results of sample calculations for six instances of 5 randomly generated
strings of length 25 . We see that in all cases (columns headed PWM Restricted Domains) it is relatively
easy using Minion to identify all closest strings if we restrict search to those alphabet symbols that have
non-zero values in the position weight matrix for the instance. We also ﬁnd that search using PMW
ordering heuristics performs marginally better than straightforward smallest domain heuristics.
When the variable-value assignments that have been ruled out because the value does not appear
at the variable’s position in any element of S are added back to the domains of the search variables,
we can perform full search for all closest strings (Figure 4, columns headed by Unrestricted Domains).
The percentage of new closest strings found ranges from 0% to 22%, but increase in search required is
typically two orders of magnitude. It should be noted however that:
1. Minion is searching far fewer than the 425 possible search nodes for each instance, the majority be-
ing pruned by efﬁcient propagation of the logical consequences of the variable-value assignments
9

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
implicit at each node, and
2. Minion is searching 250,000 – 300,000 nodes per second in addition to the work involved in
identifying search sub-trees that need not be explored.
3
Distributed and Hybrid Computing Strategies
Input : A CSP ϒ, a cutoff period Tmax and a branching factor K
Output: Either the ﬁrst solution, or a guarantee that there are no solutions
while not Solved?(ϒ) do
Send ϒ to a node
Run solver with input ϒ for 0 ≤t ≤Tmax
if Solved?(ϒ) then
Return solution
else
ϒ ←ϒ with new constraints ruling out search already performed
Split ϒ into K subproblems ϒ1,ϒ2,...,ϒK
do in parallel
for 1 ≤k ≤K do
Solve(ϒk, Tmax,K)
end
end
end
end
Algorithm 1: A recursive distributed algorithm to solve any CSP
3.1
Distributed CSP
Given the inherently exponential increase in search effort involved in providing a certiﬁcate for an opti-
mal closest string distance by ruling out any closest strings with with lower distance, the exact solution
of large-scale problems is not expected to be tractable using purely sequential search. In this Section we
describe algorithms that distribute search across multiple compute nodes. These algorithms will solve
closest string problems either on a cluster (a local group of homogeneous nodes), a grid (a more loosely
coupled, heterogeneous and geographically dispersed set of nodes), or a cloud (a set of an unknown
number of nodes in unknown locations, each having unknown architecture and resource). Generally
speaking, a cluster is more controllable but smaller than a cloud, with a grid being either the best or
worst of both worlds, depending on one’s point of view. For our purposes we do not require any com-
munication across nodes (although computational efﬁciencies could be obtained if that were the case),
and can therefore treat the three distributed paradigms as a single approach. The only disadvantage to
using a cloud is that empirical evaluation is often impossible since the times reported in virtual machines
are not reliable. This is because clocks of virtual machines can be slowed down or sped up by the VM
management software. We therefore prototype our computational methodology on a cluster, and, when
satisﬁed that it is efﬁcient, deploy using a cloud to take advantage of the very large number of nodes
available.
Algorithm 1 gives the basic structure of our distributed search. The predicate Solved? returns true
whenever the input CSP ﬁnds the ﬁrst solution or ﬁnishes searching the entire tree without ﬁnding a
10

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
solution. It returns false if either the computation has timed out, or the node has suddenly stopped
working for some reason. If all solutions to the input CSP are required, then we modify Algorithm 1 so
that all solutions found so far are returned whenever the Solved? predicate fails.
It should be stressed that Algorithm 1 is not a contribution to the results of this paper. The algorithm
has been implemented, tested, optimised and deployed on clusters, grids and clouds. It has been – and is
being – used to attack CSP instances requiring an estimated 200 CPU years for exact solution [4].
3.1.1
Distributed CSPs Using Minion
In common with Integer Programming problems, CSPs distribute naturally across multiple compute
nodes [7]. Signiﬁcant research has been invested in the distribution of CSPs across multiple computers [3,
25, 18]. In particular the area of balancing the load among the nodes is an area of active research [20].
Instead of the more sophisticated approaches, we choose a simple technique that does not impose
any constraints on the problem to be solved and is targeted towards very large problems. Our algorithm
closely follows Algorithm 1 – we run Minion with a time out and when this time out is reached, we
split the remaining search space into two parts. The subproblems are inserted into a FIFO queue and
processed by the computational nodes, splitting them again if necessary.
One of the drawbacks of our approach is that it does not parallelise small problems well. For n
compute nodes, we only achieve full capacity utilisation after log2 n splits, i.e. after timeout × log2 n
seconds. We do not consider this to be a limiting factor however because the split timeout can be adapted
dynamically to at ﬁrst quickly split the problem and when full utilisation has been achieved increase it.
For the large problems we have focused on when implementing this technique, requiring days or even
years of CPU time, this is not a limiting factor.
The main advantage of our way of distributing problems over other approaches is that we explicitly
keep the split subproblems in ﬁles. This means that at any point we can stop, suspend, resume, move
or cancel the computation and lose a maximum of timeout×n seconds of work, much less in practice.
Apart from contributing to the robustness of the overall system, we can also easily move subproblems
that cannot be solved using the available computational resources, for example because of memory lim-
itations, to nodes with a higher speciﬁcation that are not always available to us.
In the absence of global symmetry breaking constraints that can affect different parts of the search
tree, it is easy to subdivide a typical CSP into several non-overlapping sub-problems. Although there is
an inherent latency in sending problem instances to, and receiving solutions from, either a grid or a cloud,
for large enough problems a speedup linear in the number of compute nodes is achieved. Recent results
using a computational grid indicate that a super-linear speedup can be achieved using Minion, whenever
a root node consistency check reduces the search tree [4]. There is no guarantee of this, however, since
root consistency checks are heuristics that will at times provide no beneﬁt for the extra work involved.
Cloud computing is becoming an important computational paradigm, and the Minion developers have
produced robust, fault-tolerant, methods for distributing Minion instances across different underlying ar-
chitectures, including clouds. By leveraging existing technologies, in particular the Condor distributed
computing framework [23], we can distribute problems across hundreds of CPUs and combine clus-
ter, grid and cloud architectures for web-scale computing. This enables us to tackle problems which
have previously been thought to be unsolvable because of the amount of computation required to ﬁnd a
solution.
3.2
Distributed Closest String
Algorithm 2 describes our approach to the distributed solution of closest string problems formalised as
Constraint Satisfaction problems. We ﬁrst run Minion on the original problem with the PWM ordering
11

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
Input : ϒ(S,dmin,HD(S)), Tmax and K
Output: A closest string to S with its maximum Hamming distance to S
for 0 ≤t ≤Tmax do
Runϒ(S,dmin,HD(S)) in Minion
if Solved?(ϒ(S,dmin,HD(S))) then
Return CS and d, and halt all computation
else dhigh ←the best d found so far
ϒ(S,dmin,HD(S)) ←ϒ(S,dmin,dhigh) plus constraints ruling out search already
performed
end
end
do in parallel
for dmin ≤dlow < dhigh do
DistSolve(ϒ∗(S,dmin,dlow), Tmax, K)
if Solved?(ϒ∗(S,dmin,dlow)) then
Return CS and d = dlow, and halt all computation
else Update all (sub-)instances with new lower bound dlow +1
end
end
for 2 ≤k ≤K +1 do
DistSolve(ϒk(S,dmin,dlow), Tmax, K)
if Solved?(ϒk(S,dmin,dhigh)) with dnew < dhigh then
if dnew = dhigh −1 then Return CS and d = dnew, and halt all computation
else Update all (sub-)instances with upper bound dhigh = dnew
end
end
end
if not Solved?( ϒk(S,dmin,dhigh) ∀k) ∧not Solved?(any ﬁxed dlow instance) then
Return current dhigh as d, and the string found that achieved distance dhigh as CS
end
Algorithm 2: Solve the CSP ϒ(S,dmin,HD(S)) by distributing search for high and low distances
heuristic as a single process. Our empirical evaluation in Section 2.2 indicates that nearly always this
process will highly efﬁciently lower the upper bound for the problem. Once we have a reasonable upper
bound, we start searching for the optimal distance both above and below. From above, we carry on
optimising as before, but we use the recursive DistSolve algorithm to distribute. From below we create
instances each having a ﬁxed distance, the idea being to exhaustively rule out any closest strings at these
distances. These instances are run on the computational nodes at the same time as the optimisation sub-
problems. If at any stage we obtain a candidate closest string at a distance for which all lower distances
have been ruled out, then this is our solution. This can happen both from above and below.
As mentioned in Section 3.1.1, we expect a super-linear speedup by performing a root node consis-
tency check for each sub-instance. By keeping track of the best distance obtained so far during search
from above, and of any lower distances for which no solution has been found, we expect to obtain a
further super-linear speedup in the majority of instances. A large part of the search tree is pruned by
updating all instances (either waiting for input to a node, or currently being processed by a node) with
improved distance bounds as they become available.
12

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
3.3
Preliminary Evaluation of Distributed Closest String
For a ﬁrst evaluation, we ran the algorithm on 6 random strings of lengths 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 and 30. We
chose a time limit of 1 hour to reduce communication overheads. The problems with strings of length
25, 26 and 27 were solved to completion within this limit.
The remaining three instances were split after one hour and distributed across multiple machines. As
suggested by Figure 3, the solutions converged towards the optimal distance extremely quickly. For only
one of the instances was a better Hamming distance found in one of the sub-instances. The remaining
sub-instances proved the optimality of the previously found solution.
These tests demonstrate the practical applicability of our distributed approach. We have not per-
formed a large-scale evaluation, nor have we obtained evidence for the super-linear speedups associated
with bounds updates and an increased number of consistency checks at the root of sub-instances. Our
experience with the distributed solution of other classes of CSP suggests that our system will scale
seamlessly to grids or clouds containing an essentially unlimited number of compute nodes: there is no
communication across nodes, a node failure can be recovered from with no extra search needed (the
search tree already explored is reported whenever search is interrupted for any reason), and the order in
which sub-instances are solved can be tuned.
3.4
Hybrid Methods
Input : ϒ0(S,dmin,HD(S))
TOL, a limit for the gap between the highest and lowest computed distances
Output: A closest string to S with its maximum Hamming distance to S
Seek closer distance bounds for ϒ0(S,dmin,HD(S)) using CSP alone;
while |dhigh −dlow| < TOL do
Run Algorithm 2 on ϒ0(S,dmin,HD(S))
Output dlow and dhigh when updated
end
Once bounds are close enough, send to numeric IP or linear time search;
if TOL > 1∧|dhigh −dlow| ≤TOL then
Formulate the remaining problem as an Integer Programming problem
Search for solution using numeric branch and bound
end
if |dhigh −dlow| = TOL = 1 then
Formulate the remaining problem as a ﬁxed d instance
Search for solution using linear time methods
end
Algorithm 3: Solve the CSP ϒ(S,dmin,HD(S)) using hybrid CSP and numerical methods
The empirical results obtained so far suggest that CSP formulation with PWM ordering is an effec-
tive approach for ruling out high distances: Minion will often ﬁnd a ﬁrst solution very quickly, given the
search space involved. However, at least for the approach suggested in this paper, CSP formulation re-
quires much more time to provide a certiﬁcate that an optimal solution is indeed optimal. As discussed in
Section 1.1, efﬁcient methods have been reported in the literature for when the upper and lower distance
bounds are close [17], and for problems where the distance is ﬁxed [11]. In this Section we propose a
hybrid approach that aims to take advantage of the best methods available. Algorithm 3 takes a closest
string instance and partially solves it using Algorithm 1. If the upper and lower bounds come to within a
13

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
pre-deﬁned tolerance, then numeric branch and bound methods are used to solve an Integer Programming
formulation of the problem not yet solved by Minion. If the distance under consideration ever becomes
ﬁxed, then the linear time methods set out in [11] can be applied.
It should be stressed that these three methods (CSP, IP branch and bound, and linear time) need
not be exclusive: once tolerance achieving bounds are found by Minion, the distributed Minion search
can continue, and the CSP and numeric methods are then competing to ﬁnd the ﬁrst solution. This of
course pre-supposes that computational resource is not a problem, but that is why we are using web-scale
facilities in the ﬁrst place.
4
Discussion
We have performed (to our knowledge) the ﬁrst evaluation of Constraint Satisfaction as a computational
framework for solving closest string problems. We have shown that careful consideration of symbol
occurrences can provide search heuristics that give, in general, several orders of magnitude speedup
when computing approximate solutions. We have also shown that CSP is less effective when searching
for certiﬁcates of distance optimality. This result motivated our detailed description of algorithms for
web-scale distributed CSP computation, and also our design of hybrid distributed algorithms that can
take advantage of the strengths of both numeric and CSP computational techniques.
We have also performed (to our knowledge) the ﬁrst analysis of the computational difﬁculties in-
volved in the identiﬁcation of all closest strings for a given input set, irrespective of the computational
framework used. Our results for all closest strings motivate the question of which deﬁnition of self-
similarity is suitable for the computational biology setting. In terms of information theory the all closest
strings problem can not exclude alphabet symbols and still be correct. However, when seeking to quan-
tify the self-similarity of DNA sequences it may be perfectly justiﬁable to exclude closest strings that can
have no symbol in common with the sequences in question at a given point. If this were to be the case,
then the computational efﬁciency of the search for all closest strings would be greatly increased (Figure
4).
We have designed, implemented and deployed a computational methodology for distributed search
for closest string solutions. This contribution provides a practically useful means of attacking the NP-
complete instances by division into smaller sub-problems. Our system is guaranteed never to perform the
same search twice, will recover seamlessly from any unforseen loss of compute nodes, and is extendable
to web-scale clouds.
The limitations of this study are that we have not been able to compare numeric solutions to CSP
solutions directly, (nor assess the hybrid numeric-CSP algorithm described in the paper), and that we have
not attacked real world problems in a distributed setting, instead solving randomly-generated instances.
We have outlined the possibility of super-linear speedups for distributed search, but present no supporting
evidence as our distributed implementation has as yet been tested solely for accuracy, scalability and
robustness.
4.1
Future Work
Possible future avenues of research include
• Performing full-scale cloud searches for solutions to real-world closest string problems (rather
than concentrating on randomly-generated problem instances as for this paper)
• The provision of a fully distributed IP branch and bound solver for use in Algorithm 3
14

The CSP as a CSP
Kelsey, Kotthoff
• Experimentation with the directed graph CSP formulation described by Meneses et al. [17] to
improve their IP formulation as an alternative CSP model for closest strings
• Investigating other NP-hard string sequence problems such as closest substring, farthest string and
n-mismatch – an obvious candidate is consensus string, which differs from closest string only in
that the objective is to minimise the sum of the distances, rather than minimise the maximum
individual distance
• Search for more complicated metrics than Hamming distance that better capture the concepts of
difference and similarity for nucleotide sequences – recent results involving Markov models [24]
suggest that judicious choice of metric has profound implications for both the theory and practice
of identifying self-similarity amongst sequences.
4.2
