Computing Networks:
A General Framework to Contrast
Neural and Swarm Cognitions
Carlos Gershenson
Computer Sciences Department
Instituto de Investigaciones en Matem´aticas Aplicadas y en Sistemas
Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico
Ciudad Universitaria, A.P. 20-726
01000 M´exico D.F. M´exico

June 6, 2022
Abstract
This paper presents the Computing Networks (CNs) framework.
CNs are used
to generalize neural and swarm architectures. Artiﬁcial neural networks, ant colony
optimization, particle swarm optimization, and realistic biological models are used as
examples of instantiations of CNs. The description of these architectures as CNs allows
their comparison. Their diﬀerences and similarities allow the identiﬁcation of properties
that enable neural and swarm architectures to perform complex computations and
exhibit complex cognitive abilities. In this context, the most relevant characteristics
of CNs are the existence multiple dynamical and functional scales. The relationship
between multiple dynamical and functional scales with adaptation, cognition (of brains
and swarms) and computation is discussed.
Keywords: cognition, computation, neural architecture, swarm architecture, swarm
cognition, multiple scales.
1
Introduction
The complex behavior exhibited by swarms has been actively studied in recent decades
(H¨olldobler and Wilson, 1990; Aron et al., 1990; Reznikova, 2007; Ryabko and Reznikova,
2009) and exploited in engineering (Bonabeau et al., 1999; Dorigo and St¨utzle, 2004; Dorigo
et al., 2004). Recent research has highlighted the similarities between swarms and brains,
noting that swarms are capable of performing cognitive tasks (Chialvo and Millonas, 1995;
Couzin, 2009; Marshall et al., 2009; Passino et al., 2008; Trianni and Tuci, 2009). Contribut-
ing to the eﬀort of understanding these similarities, with biological and engineering aims,
1
arXiv:1001.5244v3  [cs.NE]  26 Jul 2010

this paper generalizes models of swarm and neural architectures. In particular, artiﬁcial
neural networks (ANNs), ant colony optimization (ACO), and particle swarm optimization
(PSO) are described under the same general framework. The generalization, named com-
puting networks (CNs), provides a common ground for comparison and for studying the
underlying mechanisms and the computational properties common to neural and swarm ar-
chitectures. As a guiding principle, we can say that neural and swarm architectures compute
“unknown” functions f, i.e. they explore phase spaces of functions until a satisfactory f is
found according to certain criteria.
Swarm cognition (Trianni and Tuci, 2009) studies the intersection of the scientiﬁc study
of natural swarms and neural cognition, with the aim of increasing our understanding of
cognition relating it to the self-organization of swarms. CNs provide a general framework to
contrast the cognition exhibited by brains and swarms. This particular aim for deﬁning CNs
restricts their usefulness, i.e. the purpose of CNs is to increase our understanding of cognitive
architectures, not to produce better models or more powerful computational algorithms.
In the next section, the computing networks are deﬁned. In the following sections, CNs
are used to describe ANNs, ACO & PSO. These architectures were chosen for their gen-
erality and widespread use.
More realistic biological models are also presented in terms
of CNs within these sections.
This is followed by a comparison and discussion.
In this
section, similarities and diﬀerences of the architectures are explored, followed by the dis-
cussion multiple dynamical and functional scales. Also, the suitability and equivalence of
diﬀerent architectures is considered. The discussion continues dealing with the cognition of
swarm and neural architectures, followed by an examination of alternate descriptions of the
architectures. Conclusions close the paper.
2
Computing Networks: A General Descriptive Frame-
work
Many systems can be described as networks, i.e. nodes connected by edges (Newman, 2003;
Newman et al., 2006). In this paper, we use the concept of computing network (CN) as
a generalization of artiﬁcial neural networks (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Hopﬁeld, 1988), ant
colony optimization (Dorigo et al., 1991; Dorigo and St¨utzle, 2004; Dorigo and Blum, 2005;
Dorigo, 2007), and particle swarm optimization (Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995, 2001; Dorigo
et al., 2008). In this way, the similarities and diﬀerences between these characteristic models
of neural and swarm intelligence are studied under the same formalism.
A computing network C(N, K, a, f) is deﬁned as a set of nodes N linked by a set
of edges K used by an algorithm a to compute a function f. Nodes and edges
can have internal variables that determine their state, and functions that deter-
mine how their state changes. This is a very general deﬁnition, and can be applied to
describe many architectures and models beyond those discussed in this paper. Computing
networks can be stochastic or deterministic (depending on the determinism of functions and
algorithms), synchronous or asynchronous (depending on the updating used for the change
of states of nodes and edges (Gershenson, 2002, 2004b)), discrete (Wuensche, 1998) or con-
tinuous (depending on the type of variables of nodes and edges).
2

3
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) were originally proposed as logical models of the neo-
cortex (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943). However, their computing power (Hopﬁeld, 1982) has
shifted the research focus from their plausibility as neural models to their application in
diﬀerent ﬁelds. There are many diﬀerent types of ANNs, with diﬀerent properties and im-
plementations (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Kohonen, 2000). Here there will be no focus on any
particular type of ANN.
In an ANN instantiation of a CN, nodes are neurons or units. Each neuron i typically
has a continuous state (output) determined by a function yi which is composed by two other
functions: the weighted sum Si of its inputs ¯xi and an activation function Ai such as the
hyperbolic tangent. Directed edges ij (synapses) relate outputs yi of neurons i to inputs xj
of other neurons j, as well as external inputs and outputs with the network. Edges have a
continuous state wij (weight) that relates the states of neurons. The function f may be given
by the states of a subset of N (outputs ¯y), or by the complete set N. ANNs usually have two
dynamical scales: a “fast” scale where the network function f is calculated by the functional
composition of the function yi of each neuron i, and a “slow” scale where an algorithm a
adjusts the weights wij (states) of edges. There is a broad diversity of algorithms a used to
update weights in diﬀerent types of ANN. Figure 1 illustrates ANNs as CNs.
yi=Ai(Si(x̄i))
yij, wij
f⊆y̅
a→Δwij, ∀i,j
Figure 1: Schematic of an ANN instantiation of a CN. Nodes have a function yi that is
computed from its inputs (¯xi). Edges have weights wij to determine the importance of the
interaction and also carry the output of neurons and network inputs. The network function
f or output is given by a subset of node functions ¯y. The algorithm a changes weights on
edges.
4
Ant Colony Optimization
Ant colony optimization (ACO) is a population-based metaheuristic that can be used to ﬁnd
approximate solutions to diﬃcult optimization problems (Dorigo, 2007). ACO is inspired in
the collective behavior of ants and their stigmergic interactions through pheromones.
3

In an ACO instantiation of a CN, nodes are locations that contain a list of “artiﬁcial ants”
at their location. Each ant k has a path which represents a partial solution sp
k, from which
variables such as distance travelled and nodes visited can be extracted. Edges (trails) have
two variables: heuristic value ηij (e.g. distance or cost between two nodes) and pheromone
value τij.
There have been diﬀerent algorithms proposed to calculate function f, which
is given by the shortest path found. As in ANNs, in ACO there are also two timescales:
a “fast” one in which ants travel through the network, generating paths (solutions) by
choosing edges probabilistically at each visited node depending on their state ηij,τij, and a
“slow” one, where the pheromone values τij of edges are updated. This is similar to weight
adjustment in ANNs. The pheromone update consists of an “evaporation” phase, where all
levels are reduced (similar to “forgetting” in some ANNs) and an additive phase (similar
to “reinforcement” in some ANNs), where pheromone levels associated with good solutions
are increased. In some versions of ACO, there is a “middle” scale, where “demon” (problem
speciﬁc) actions are taken, such as the application of a local search (Dorigo, 2007). Figure
2 illustrates ACO as a CN.
           ...
ηij, τij
f=min(sk
p, ∀k)
a→Δτij, ∀i,j
sk
p
Figure 2: Schematic of an ACO instantiation of a CN. Nodes contain ants that construct
paths sp
k. Edges contain heuristic ηij and pheromone τij values. The function f is given by
the best path found. Algorithm a adjusts pheromone concentrations τij.
It can be argued that ACO—while inspired in the behavior of social insects (Garnier
et al., 2007)—does not serve as a realistic biological model.
However, CNs can also be
used to represent realistic models. Here the models of optimal decision-making presented
by Marshall et al. (2009) are discussed. The problem of decision-making can be stated as
choosing the best among two or more alternatives. It has been found that cortical neurons
and social insects can approach an optimal balance between speed and accuracy in decision-
making.
Diﬀerent individuals (neurons, insects, nodes in CNs) explore possibilities and
interact (via synapses, pheromones, edges in CNs) to possibly change individual opinions.
When a threshold is reached, i.e. enough individuals have made the same choice, the system
selects that as a decision. The particularities (function f, algorithm a) of each model change,
but all of them can be represented in terms of CNs. Here ACO is used as an example, but
CNs can be used to compare more realistic models of swarms and brains.
4

5
Particle Swarm Optimization
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) is a population-based stochastic approach for solving
continuous and discrete optimization problems (Dorigo et al., 2008). It was originally inspired
by ﬂocking algorithms (Reynolds, 1987) and social psychology research. In PSO, “particles”
move in a search space. Their position represents a candidate solution. Particles adjust their
position and velocity depending on their neighboring particles in a graph.
In a PSO instantiation of a CN, nodes are particles with position ¯xi, velocity ¯vi, value
of the best solution found ¯bi, and a function y(¯xi) that the network is trying to optimize.
The position ¯xi represents a tentative solution. The function f is simply the best solution
found by N. Edges represent the relationships between neighboring particles. Typically
they contain information about the neighborhood’s best solution, which can be represented
as ¯lij = max(¯bi,¯bj) for nodes i, j related by edge ij. There is a variety of algorithms to relate
the way in which particles adjust their state. Again, two timescales can be identiﬁed: a “fast”
one, where particles evaluate the function they are trying to optimize (y(¯xi)), and a “slow”
one, where the velocity and position of particles are adjusted by algorithm a depending on
their previous states and those of their neighbors (links). Figure 3 illustrates PSO as a CN.
For PSO, hypernetworks (Johnson, 2010) can be used as a generalization, so that a single
edge can link more than two nodes and to represent the best solution of a neighborhood ¯lj.
x̅i
v̅i
b̅i
y(x̅i)
l̅ij
f=min(b̅i, ∀i)
a→Δx̅i,v̅i, ∀i
Figure 3: Schematic of an PSO instantiation of a CN. Each node contains the position ¯xi
and velocity ¯vi of a particle, as well as its best solution found ¯bi and a function y(¯xi). Edges
contain the neighborhood’s best solution ¯lij. Function f is the best solution found by all
particles. Algorithm a changes the position ¯xi and velocity ¯vi of particles depending on the
values of their neighbors.
Like with ACO, PSO and other ﬂocking algorithms are inspired in biology (Reynolds,
1987; Rauch et al., 1995), but not quite realistic (Nagy et al., 2010). Nevertheless, CNs
can also be used to model realistic models of of ﬂocking. Here we focus on the model of
ﬂocking and schooling presented by Couzin et al. (2002). Individuals (birds, ﬁsh, nodes)
move in space, trying to maintain a minimum distance with their neighbors, i.e.
avoid
collisions. Also, individuals try to be attracted to their neighbors and align with them. A
similar CN instantiation as the one shown in Figure 3 can be used to represent this model,
which is considered to be realistic, even when it simpliﬁes local interactions. More complex
5

models (Nagy et al., 2010)—where individuals have diﬀerent interaction strengths according
to their social heirarchy—can also be represented in terms of CNs.
6
Comparison and Discussion
Table 1 shows a comparison of the language used to relate ANNs, ACO, and PSO in terms
of CNs. It can be seen that all three architectures have the same basic components: nodes,
edges, an algorithm, and a function. However, there are diﬀerences in the particularities of
each architecture.
Table 1: Particular instantiations of CNs: ANN, ACO, and PSO.
CN
ANN
ACO
PSO
Nodes
Neurons or units (func-
tion yi = Ai(Si(¯xi)))
Nodes (ants k (path sp
k))
Particles (position
¯xi,
velocity ¯vi, best solution
¯bi, function y(¯xi))
Edges
Synapses (weight wij.)
Trails (heuristic value
ηij, pheromone concen-
tration τij.)
Relationships
(neigh-
borhood’s best solution
¯lij)
Algorithm
Adjust edges (∆wij.)
Adjust edges (∆τij.)
Adjust
nodes
(∆¯xi,
∆¯vi)
Function
Composition
of
func-
tions of nodes
Shortest path (min(sp
k))
Best solution (min(¯bi))
ACO and PSO have been used mainly for optimization. This explains why their f is
the minimum (best) of the solutions found. In contrast, ANNs have been used to solve
many diﬀerent tasks, e.g. classiﬁcation, generalization, recognition, error correction, and
time sequence retention.
Still, all of the architectures can be described as computing a
function f in a distributed fashion. This is because they require the interaction of nodes to
produce f.
It is interesting to note that, even when ACO and PSO are inspired by swarming systems,
algorithms of ANN and ACO are more similar between themselves than with PSO, in the
sense that they update edges, while PSO algorithms update nodes. However, the models
can be extended from networks to hypernetworks (Johnson, 2010), where there is a duality
between nodes and edges, i.e. one can exchange nodes and edges while preserving the func-
tionality of the hypernetwork. In this case, PSO particles can be described as hyperedges,
and their interactions as nodes. Then, the PSO algorithm a would update hyperedges.
6.1
Dynamical scales
One common characteristic among all three architectures studied is that they have “slow”
(a) and “fast” (f) dynamical scales. This is no coincidence. Having multiple dynamical
6

scales is a requirement for computing complex functions1 that change in time, i.e. are non-
stationary. If there is only change at a single scale, then the phase space of f, i.e. all its
possible values and potentially its optimum, can be explored, but it cannot be changed.
Having two dynamical scales, the changes in the phase space of f can be explored as well.
This property is essential when f is not known beforehand: the algorithm explores diﬀerent
phase spaces until one that satisﬁes f is found.
The tasks solved by real neural and swarm systems also need to exploit the advantages
of multiple dynamical scales. In the case of neural systems, learning (synapse modiﬁcation)
enables the correct adjustment of a particular function of a circuit, e.g. categorization. For
swarming insects, local interactions (direct or stigmergic) enable the colony to make complex
decisions, e.g. choosing a new nest.
Would it be useful to have three dynamical scales? This would imply the exploration of
changes in the space of phase spaces of f. For example, this is used in “evo-devo” (Fontana,
2002; Munteanu and Sol´e, 2008) or epigenetic (Balkenius et al., 2001) algorithms, where
there is a function f, its phase space is explored through the “lifetime” of an “organism”
(learning), and the space of possible organisms is explored at an evolutionary scale, e.g. with
evolutionary algorithms. An example can be seen with the work of Botee and Bonabeau
(1998), where a genetic algorithm is used to ﬁnd the best parameters of ACO. Figure 4
illustrates the change possible at one, two and three dynamical scales.
A
f
B
f
C
f
Figure 4: Changes at diﬀerent dynamical scales: (A) single scale: values can vary only along
f, (B) double scale: apart from changes along f, f can also be varied, and (C) triple scale:
changes in ways in which f can be varied can also be explored. Note that these diagrams
are only illustrative. f can certainly be multidimensional, i.e. in Rn.
It should be noted that multiple dynamical scales are an important feature to enable
adaptation (Holland, 1975, 1995). A system can function at a “fast” scale, while adaptation
can work at a “slow” scale. When the situation of the system changes, adaptation can change
the function of the system to cope with the new situation.
1A complex function will not be deﬁned formally, but it can be understood as a function that is non-
trivially described, explored or optimized.
7

A question that arises is whether CNs with three dynamical scales are computationally
equivalent, or more powerful, than CNs with two dynamical scales. The reader is invited to
ponder on this question, which is already out of the scope of this paper.
6.2
Functional scales and the relevance of interactions
Apart from having multiple dynamical scales, CNs have multiple functional scales. The most
clear scales are those of node (local) and network (global). Subnetworks, modules, layers, or
motifs can also form intermediate scales. In CNs, nodes compute certain “local” functions.
These functions are combined to produce the CN’s “global” function f. However, f cannot
be reduced to the node functions alone. Since the states of the nodes depend on other nodes,
interactions are relevant to determine the future state of nodes, and thus f.
As in the case of dynamical scales, having multiple functional scales is a requirement for
computing complex functions. In this context, interactions can be described as operators.
Local structures (e.g. nodes, motifs) can store certain information and can compute certain
functions.
However, in many cases, the information produced by local structures is less
complex than the one that produced by the global structure (i.e. network). This is because
the interactions between local structures integrate information produced at the lower scales
to compute the global f. The exceptions are trivial, e.g. when all the interactions are weak or
absent, or the local structures are redundant. In these cases, one can say that the complexity
of the local structures is the same as the complexity of the global one.
This will be clearer introducing a deﬁnition of what is meant by complexity: Complex-
ity is the amount of information necessary to describe a phenomenon at a particular scale
(Bar-Yam, 2004; Prokopenko et al., 2009; Gershenson, 2007b). With a CN, in most cases
more information is necessary to describe the whole network than the collection of all its
nodes, namely because of the information contained in edges, which represent interactions.
Repeating what was stated above, f cannot be reduced to N only, namely because of K.
A clear example of the relevance of interactions can be seen with cellular automata (CA)
(von Neumann, 1966; Wolfram, 1986; Wuensche and Lesser, 1992; Wolfram, 2002), which
incidentally can also be described in terms of CNs. The states of cells (nodes) depend on the
state of their neighbors (edges) according to a certain rule. In the case of elementary cellular
automata (ECA) 110 (Wolfram, 2002; Ju´arez Mart´ınez et al., 2007), the state at time t + 1
of each cell depends on its state and of its closest neighbors (3 cells in total) at time t. The
updating is done synchronously according to the values shown in Table 2. Figure 5 shows
the temporal evolution of ECA 110 for a particular initial state. Even when the behavior of
ECA 110 is determined by very simple rules, it is capable of universal computation (Cook,
2004), exploiting the interactions between emergent structures (Ju´arez Mart´ınez et al., 2007)
(slow scale) that arise from the simple interactions (fast scale) of the local neighborhoods.
With ECA 110, the relevance of interactions is clearly seen. CNs with simple nodes and
functions are capable of complex computations because of the relevant information contained
in edges. Note that interactions are not necessarily physical, but they are real. For diﬀerent
systems, there are diﬀerent “implementations” of edges, e.g. synapses, pheromones, or cues
(Couzin, 2009). Still, they all have the same role: to relate states of nodes to compute a
distributed function f. Using the CN formalism, it can be explained how the computational
power of a brain is much more complex than that of a large collection of isolated neurons, and
8

Figure 5: Temporal evolution of ECA 110. Each cell is represented by a column and time
ﬂows downwards, i.e. each row represents the state of the CA at successive time steps. Black
cells represent ’0’ and white cells represent ’1’. The ﬁrst row (initial state) consists of a
single ’1’. The state of other rows depends on the state of the row above. It is not possible
to compute a priori the state of the last row from the ﬁrst row without computing all the
intermediate states.
9

Table 2: ECA 110 lookup table. The ﬁrst column shows the eight possible states of the 3
cells used to update every cell, while the second column shows the state of the updated cell.
t
t + 1
000
0
001
1
010
1
011
1
100
0
101
1
110
1
111
0
the computational power of a swarm is much more complex than that of a group of isolated
insects. Not only interactions are important, but also multiple dynamical and functional
scales.
For functional scales, we can also ask whether only two scales are less powerful than more
than two scales. However, again, the question is beyond the scope of this paper, although
many have discussed the advantages of modularity (Simon, 1996; Schlosser and Wagner,
2004; Callebaut and Rasskin-Gutman, 2005).
6.3
Which architecture is the best?
One might wonder which architecture—ANNs, ACO, or PSO—is the best.
There is no
best architecture independently of a speciﬁc context (Wolpert and Macready, 1995, 1997;
Gershenson, 2004a). Diﬀerent implementations of CNs will be more adequate for diﬀerent
problems, either giving better solutions, or improved speed. The convenience of a particular
architecture does not depend only on the problem: diﬀerent methods will be more useful for
diﬀerent people, depending on their experience and expertise.
A valid question would be: which architecture—ANNs, ACO, or PSO—is more compu-
tationally powerful? Since the architectures are so general, it can be conjectured that they
are computationally equivalent. For example, one could implement e.g. an ANN based on
ACO or PSO, e.g. where the function of a node is itself determined by an ACO or PSO
CN. Similarly, one can implement an ACO or PSO based on ANNs. Finally, one can also
develop ACO based on PSO and vice versa. It might not be useful at all, but the idea shows
that computationally (in Turing’s (1936) sense) they all have similar capacities. A formal
proof of this conjecture is beyond the scope of this paper. There will be more diﬀerences on
particular implementations of ANNs (e.g. given by number of nodes and edges) than between
a given ANN and an equivalent ACO or PSO.
The literature is rich in examples of hybrid systems, where some properties of one archi-
tecture are combined with those of another one, e.g. (Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995; Wang
et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2004; Blum and Socha, 2005; Mozafari et al., 2006; Martin and
Reggia, 2010) to cite a few of them. Actually, the original PSO paper (Kennedy and Eber-
10

hart, 1995) used PSO as an example to train an ANN. This illustrates that for a particular
problem and for a particular expertise of the developers, no single approach gives the best
solutions.
Having discussed the similarity of the computational capacities of neural and swarm
architectures, we can continue with the discussion about the role of the architectures in
cognition.
6.4
Cognition
Cognition comes from the Latin cognoscere, which means “get to know”. We can say that a
system is cognitive if it knows something (Gershenson, 2004a). With this deﬁnition,
it is not possible to draw a boundary between cognitive and non-cognitive systems. Since
somebody has to judge whether a system knows or not, it is partly observer-dependent.
Instead of discussing whether a system is cognitive or not, it is more fruitful to distinguish
diﬀerent types of cognition (e.g. human, animal, biological (including plant and bacterial),
social, artiﬁcial, adaptive, systemic (Gershenson, 2004a)), to compare and better understand
them.
From this perspective, it is clear that swarms are cognitive systems because they know
how to forage, ﬁnd sites, build nests, and even add and subtract small numbers (Reznikova,
2007; Ryabko and Reznikova, 2009). Neural architectures are cognitive because they know
how to categorize, classify, remember, etc.
(Hopﬁeld, 1982).
To compare both types of
cognition, we can use the concept of computing networks proposed in this paper.
Cognition can be seen as the ability to compute a function f. This is because if
a system can compute f, we can say that it knows how to calculate f. This vocabulary does
not aim at ascribing to CNs a “mind”, “consciousness”, or other diﬃcult-to-deﬁne property
usually associated with human cognition. The aim of this use of language is to be able to
compare the cognitive capacities of neural and swarm architectures. As discussed in the
previous subsection, neural and swarm architectures have similar computational abilities,
shown by their generalization as CNs. If we describe cognition as computation, it naturally
follows that neural and swarm architectures have similar cognitive capacities, in theory. In
practice, diﬀerent implementations will have diﬀerent cognitive abilities, just as a human
brain has diﬀerent abilities as a rat brain: the former is potentially better at poetry, the
latter is potentially better at navigation. Also, diﬀerences of timescale are important, i.e.
brains usually compute at faster timescales than swarms.
The great advantage of swarm and neural cognition is that they manage to exploit the
beneﬁts of multiple functional and dynamical scales to exhibit complex cognitive abilities.
As discussed above, multiple scales enable CNs to compute more complex functions and to
adapt to changes in the environment. In cognitive terms, the structure represented by CNs
enables neural and swarm architectures to exhibit a more complex cognition, as compared to
a system with a single functional or dynamical scale, e.g. a thermostat. We can see that there
are cognitive systems with more than two scales, e.g. group cognition (Stahl, 2006), which
exploit and combine the cognitive abilities of a collection of humans. Naturally, swarms
are another example of multiple scale cognition, since the cognition of individual insects is
provided by a neural architecture.
11

6.5
Alternative descriptions
The description of ANN, ACO, and PSO in terms of computing networks is only one of
several possible languages that can be used to compare the architectures. For example, a
multi-agent description can be also used: Nodes can be described as agents and edges can
be described as interactions.
An algorithm regulates the interactions between agents to
reach a global state (equivalent to function f). This global state can be described as being
reached by self-organization (Gershenson and Heylighen, 2003). This self-organization in
a multi-agent system is comparable to the distributed computation of f. The system can
compute the same function f, only the description changes. For the purposes pursued in
this paper, the network description seems more appropriate. A multi-agent description can
be valuable in the process of designing algorithms, since goals of agents and systems can
be deﬁned. Then, the algorithm should minimize “friction” (i.e. negative interactions) and
promote “synergy” (positive interactions) (Gershenson, 2007a). This will necessarily increase
the system’s “satisfaction”, which is basically what we want the system to do, i.e. f.
Yet another description that can be used is that of information (Gershenson, 2007b).
Nodes, edges, algorithms, and functions can be all seen as information, while computation
can be seen as a change of information. This is a more general description, so it is not so
useful for making a comparison as the one presented here. The information framework might
be useful for ﬁnding general principles across disciplines, since everything can be described
in terms of information.
Neural and swarm architectures can also be described in terms of diﬀerential equations,
dynamical systems theory, object-oriented programming, rules, zeros and ones, etc. Diﬀer-
ent descriptions are suitable for diﬀerent contexts and purposes (Gershenson, 2004a). The
purpose of computing networks is speciﬁcally the comparison of neural and swarm architec-
tures. CNs will not be as good as the original descriptions for developing e.g. new learning
algorithms in ANNs or new optimization algorithms in ACO. This is because the computing
networks description is more general and vague than an actual instantiation of an ANN or
PSO. More details are required at the implementation level, which were neglected here. The
goal of deﬁning CNs is more theoretical than practical: to understand the similarities and
diﬀerences of neural and swarm architectures, not to improve current technical algorithms.
CNs are not better or worse that other descriptions. Here they were useful to understand
the relevance of multiple scales and some computational principles common to neural and
swarm architectures at a general level. It might have been made with a diﬀerent description,
but CNs seemed the most appropriate for the purposes of this work.
7
Conclusions
As Trianni and Tuci suggest (Trianni and Tuci, 2009), the principles of swarms can be use-
ful tools for studying the neuroscientiﬁc basis of cognition. Here it was shown that both
swarm and neural architectures share similar computational and cognitive abilities. This
was achieved by deﬁning computing networks (CNs), which are able to generalize neural
and swarm architectures, allowing their comparison.
CNs can also be useful to general-
ize and compare other swarm intelligence algorithms, e.g. (Pham et al., 2006; Yang, 2009;
12

Krishnanand and Ghose, 2009). By studying the general principles that enable CNs to per-
form complex computations, one can understand better what are the requirements of neural
and swarm systems to exhibit complex cognition. In this paper, the importance of having
multiple dynamical and functional scales to exhibit complex cognition and adaptation was
discussed. From a cognitive perspective, CNs support the thesis of neural and swarm archi-
tectures having similar cognitive abilities. CNs also show that neural and swarm architecture
have similar computational abilities.
