arXiv:1602.06897v1  [cs.LO]  22 Feb 2016
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Enablers and Inhibitors in
Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs∗
Pedro Cabalar and Jorge Fandinno
Department of Computer Science
University of Corunna, Spain

submitted October 21 2015; revised January 26 2016; accepted February 22 2016
Abstract
To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming (TPLP). In this paper we propose an extension
of logic programming (LP) where each default literal derived from the well-founded model is associated
to a justiﬁcation represented as an algebraic expression. This expression contains both causal explanations
(in the form of proof graphs built with rule labels) and terms under the scope of negation that stand for
conditions that enable or disable the application of causal rules. Using some examples, we discuss how
these new conditions, we respectively call enablers and inhibitors, are intimately related to default negation
and have an essentially different nature from regular cause-effect relations. The most important result is a
formal comparison to the recent algebraic approaches for justiﬁcations in LP: Why-not Provenance (WnP)
and Causal Graphs (CG). We show that the current approach extends both WnP and CG justiﬁcations
under the Well-Founded Semantics and, as a byproduct, we also establish a formal relation between these
two approaches.
KEYWORDS: causal justiﬁcations, well-founded semantics, stable models, answer set programming.
1 Introduction
The strong connection between Non-MonotonicReasoning (NMR) and Logic Programming (LP)
semantics for default negation has made possible that LP tools became nowadays an impor-
tant paradigm for Knowledge Representation (KR) and problem-solving in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (AI). In particular, Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Niemel¨a 1999; Marek and Truszczy´nki 1999)
has established as a preeminent LP paradigm for practical NMR with applications in diverse ar-
eas of AI including planning, reasoning about actions, diagnosis, abduction and beyond. The
ASP paradigm is based on the stable models semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) and is also
closely related to the other mainly accepted interpretation for default negation, well-founded
semantics (WFS) (Van Gelder et al. 1991). One interesting difference between these two LP se-
mantics and classical models (or even other NMR approaches) is that true atoms in LP must be
founded or justiﬁed by a given derivation. These justiﬁcations are not provided in the semantics
∗This is an extended version of a paper presented at the Logic Programming and Nonmonotonic Reasoning Conference
(LPNMR 2015), invited as a rapid communication in TPLP. The authors acknowledge the assistance of the conference
program chairs Giovambattista Ianni and Miroslaw Truszczynski.

2
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
itself, but can be syntactically built in some way in terms of the program rules, as studied in sev-
eral approaches (Specht 1993; Denecker and Schreye 1993; Pemmasani et al. 2004; Gebser et al. 2008;
Pontelli et al. 2009; Oetsch et al. 2010; Schulz and Toni 2013).
Rather than manipulating justiﬁcations as mere syntactic objects, two recent approaches have
considered extended multi-valued semantics for LP where justiﬁcations are treated as algebraic
constructions: Why-not Provenance (WnP) (Dam´asio et al. 2013) and Causal Graphs (CG) (Cabalar et al. 2014a).
Although these two approaches present formal similarities, they start from different understand-
ings of the idea of justiﬁcation. On the one hand, WnP answers the query “why literal L might
hold” by providing conjunctions of hypothetical modiﬁcations on the program that would al-
low deriving L. These modiﬁcations include rule labels, expressions like not(A) with A an
atom, or negations ‘¬’ of the two previous cases. As an example, a justiﬁcation for L like
r1 ∧not(p)∧¬r2 ∧¬not(q) means that the presence of rule r1 and the absence of atom p would
allow deriving L (hypothetically) if both rule r2 were removed and atom q were added to the
program. If we want to explain why L actually holds, we have to restrict to justiﬁcations without
‘¬’, that is, those without program modiﬁcations (which will be the focus of this paper).
On the other hand, CG-justiﬁcations start from identifying program rules as causal laws so
that, for instance, (p ←q) can be read as “event q causes effect p.” Under this viewpoint, (pos-
itive) rules offer a natural way for capturing the concept of causal production, i.e. a continuous
chain of events that has helped to cause or produce an effect (Hall 2004; Hall 2007). The expla-
nation of a true atom is made in terms of graphs formed by rule labels that reﬂect the ordered rule
applications required for deriving that atom. These graphs are obtained by algebraic operations
exclusively applied on the positive part of the program. Default negation in CG is understood as
absence of cause and, consequently, a false atom has no justiﬁcation.
The explanation of an atom A in CG is more detailed than in WnP, since the former contains
graphs that correspond to all relevant proofs of A whereas in WnP we just get conjunctions that
do not reﬂect any particular ordering among rule applications. However, as explained before,
CG does not capture the effect of default negation in a given derivation and, sometimes, this
information is very valuable, especially if we want to answer questions of the form “why not.”
As in the previous paper on CG (Cabalar et al. 2014a), our ﬁnal goal is to achieve an elabora-
tion tolerant representation of causality that allows reasoning about cause-effect relations. Under
this perspective, although WnP is more oriented to program debugging, its possibility of dealing
with hypothetical reasoning of the form “why not” would be an interesting feature to deal with
counterfactuals, since several approaches to causality (see Section 5) are based on this concept.
To understand the kind of problems we are interested in, consider the following example. A
drug d in James Bond’s drink causes his paralysis p provided that he was not given an antidote a
that day. We know that Bond’s enemy, Dr. No, poured the drug:
p
←
d, nota
(1)
d
(2)
In this case it is obvious that d causes p, whereas the absence of a just enables the application
of the rule. Now, suppose we are said that Bond is daily administered an antidote by the MI6,
unless it is a holiday h:
a ←noth
(3)
Adding this rule makes a become an inhibitor of p, as it prevents d to cause p by rule (1). But
suppose now that we are in a holiday, that is, fact h is added to the program (1)-(3). Then, the

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
3
inhibitor a is disabled and d causes p again. However, we do not consider that the holiday h is
a (productive) cause for Bond’s paralysis p although, indeed, the latter counterfactually depends
on the former: “had not been a holiday h, Bond would have not been paralysed.” We will say that
the fact h, which disables inhibitor a, is an enabler of p, as it allows applying rule (1).
In this work we propose dealing with these concepts of enablers and inhibitors by augmenting
CG justiﬁcations with a new negation operator ‘∼’ in the CG causal algebra. We show that this
new approach, which we call Extended Causal Justiﬁcations (ECJ), captures WnP justiﬁcations
under the Well-founded Semantics, establishing a formal relation between WnP and CG as a
byproduct.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section deﬁnes the new approach. Sec-
tions 3 and 4 explain the formal relations to CG and WnP through a running example. Section 5
studies several examples of causal scenarios from the literature and ﬁnally, Section 6 concludes
the paper. Appendix A contains an auxiliary ﬁgure depicting some common algebraic properties
and Appendix B contains the formal proofs of theorems from the previous sections.
2 Extended Causal Justiﬁcations (ECJ)
A signature is a pair ⟨At,Lb⟩of sets that respectively represent atoms (or propositions) and labels.
Intuitively, each atom in At will be assigned justiﬁcations built with rule labels from Lb. In prin-
ciple, the intersection At ∩Lb does not need to be empty: we may sometimes ﬁnd it convenient
to label a rule using an atom name (normally, the head atom). Justiﬁcations will be expressions
that combine four different algebraic operators: a product ‘∗’ representing conjunction or joint
causation; a sum ‘+’ representing alternative causes; a non-commutative product ‘·’ that captures
the sequential order that follows from rule applications; and a non-classical negation ‘∼’ which
will precede inhibitors (negated labels) and enablers (doubly negated labels).
Deﬁnition 1 (Terms)
Given a set of labels Lb, a term, t is recursively deﬁned as one of the following expressions
t ::= l | ∏S | ∑S | t1 ·t2 | ∼t1 where l ∈Lb, t1,t2 are in their turn terms and S is a (possibly
empty and possibly inﬁnite) set of terms. A term is elementary if it has the form l, ∼l or ∼∼l
with l ∈Lb being a label.
□
When S = {t1,...,tn} is ﬁnite we simply write ∏S as t1∗···∗tn and ∑S as t1 +···+tn. Moreover,
when S = /0, we denote ∏S by 1 and ∑S by 0, as usual, and these will be the identities of the
product ‘∗’ and the addition ‘+’, respectively. We assume that ‘·’ has higher priority than ‘∗’
and, in turn, ‘∗’ has higher priority than ‘+’.
Deﬁnition 2 (Values)
A (causal) value is each equivalence class of terms under axioms for a completely distributive
(complete) lattice with meet ‘∗’ and join ‘+’ plus the axioms of Figures 1 and 2. The set of
(causal) values is denoted by VLb.
□
Note that ⟨VLb,+,∗,∼,0,1⟩is a completely distributive Stone algebra (a pseudo-complemented,
completely distributive, complete lattice which satisﬁes the weak excluded middle axiom) whose
meet and join are, as usual, the product ‘∗’ and the addition ‘+’. Informally speaking, this means
that these two operators satisfy the properties of a Boolean algebra but without negation.
Note also that all three operations, ‘∗’, ‘+’ and ‘·’ are associative. Product ‘∗’ and addition
‘+’ are also commutative, and they hold the usual absorption and distributive laws with respect
to inﬁnite sums and products of a completely distributive lattice.

4
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
Associativity
t · (u·w)
=
(t·u) · w
Absorption
t
=
t + u · t · w
u · t · w
=
t ∗u · t · w
Identity
t
=
1 · t
t
=
t · 1
Annihilator
0
=
t · 0
0
=
0 · t
Idempotency
x · x = x
Addition distributivity
t · (u+w)
=
(t·u) + (t·w)
(t + u) · w
=
(t·w) + (u·w)
Product distributivity
c·d ·e
=
(c·d)∗(d ·e) with d ̸= 1
c·(d ∗e)
=
(c·d)∗(c·e)
(c∗d)·e
=
(c·e)∗(d ·e)
Fig. 1. Properties of the ‘·’ operator (c,d,e are terms without ‘+’ and x is an elementary term).
Distributivity is also satisﬁed over inﬁnite sums and products.
Pseudo-complement
t ∗∼t =
0
∼∼∼t = ∼t
De Morgan
∼(t+u) = (∼t ∗∼u)
∼(t ∗u) = (∼t+∼u)
Weak excl. middle
∼t + ∼∼t = 1
appl. negation
∼(t · u) = ∼(t ∗u)
Fig. 2. Properties of the ‘∼’ operator.
The axioms for ‘·’ in Figure 1 are directly extracted from the CG algebraic structure. For a
more detailed explanation on their induced behaviour see (Cabalar et al. 2014a). The new contri-
bution in this paper with respect to the CG algebra is the introduction of the ‘∼’ operator whose
meaning is captured by the axioms in Figure 2. As we can see, this operator satisﬁes De Morgan
laws and acts as a complement for the product t ∗∼t = 0. However, it diverges from a classical
Boolean negation in some aspects. In the general case, the axioms ∼∼t = t (double negation)
and t +∼t = 1 (excluded middle) are not valid. Instead1, we can replace a triple negation ∼∼∼t
by ∼t, and we have a weak version of the excluded middle axiom ∼t + ∼∼t = 1. The negation
of an application is deﬁned as the negation of the product ∼(t · u) def= ∼(t ∗u) which, in turn, is
equivalent to ∼(u∗t), since ∗is commutative. In other words, under negation, the rule application
ordering is disregarded. It is not difﬁcult to see that we can apply the axioms of negation to reach
an equivalent expression that avoids its application to other operators. We say that a term is in
negation normal form (NNF) if no other operator is in the scope of negation ‘∼’. Moreover, an
NNF term is in disjuntive normal form (DNF) if: (1) no sum is in the scope of another operator;
(2) only elementary terms are in the scope of application; and (3) every product is transitively
closed, that is, of the form of a·b ∗b·c ∗a·c. Without loss of generality, we assume from now
that all functions deﬁned over causal terms are applied over their DNF form, although, we will
usually write them in NNF for short.
The lattice order relation is deﬁned as usual in the following way:
t ≤u
iff
(t ∗u = t)
iff
(t + u = u)
Consequently 1 and 0 are respectively the top and bottom elements with respect to relation ≤.
Deﬁnition 3 (Labelled logic program)
1 This behaviour coincides indeed with the properties for default negation obtained in Equilibrium Logic (Pearce 1996)
or the equivalent General Theory of Stable Models (Ferraris et al. 2007).

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
5
Given a signature ⟨At,Lb⟩, a (labelled logic) program P is a set of rules of the form:
ri : H ←B1,..., Bm, notC1,..., notCn
(4)
where ri ∈Lb is a label or ri = 1, H (the head of the rule) is an atom, and Bi’s and Ci’s (the body
of the rule) are either atoms or terms.
□
When n = 0 we say that the rule is positive, furthermore, if in addition m = 0 we say that the
rule is a fact and omit the symbol ‘←.’ When ri ∈Lb we say that the rule is labelled; otherwise
ri = 1 and we omit both ri and ‘:’. By these conventions, for instance, an unlabelled fact A is
actually an abbreviation of (1 : A ←). A program P is positive when all its rules are positive, i.e.
it contains no default negation. It is uniquely labelled when each rule has a different label or no
label at all. In this paper, we will assume that programs are uniquely labelled. Furthermore, for
the sake of clarity, we also assume that, for every atom A ∈At, there is an homonymous label
A ∈Lb, and that each fact A in the program actually stands for the labelled rule (A : A ←). For
instance, following these conventions, a possible labelled version for the James Bond’s program
could be program P1 below:
r1 : p
←
d,nota
r2 : a
←
noth
d
h
where facts d and h stand for rules (d : d ←) and (h : h ←), respectively.
An ECJ-interpretation is a mapping I : At −→VLb assigning a value to each atom. For in-
terpretations I and J we say that I ≤J when I(A) ≤J(A) for each atom A ∈At. Hence, there
is a ≤-bottom interpretation 0 (resp. a ≤-top interpretation 1) that stands for the interpretation
mapping each atom A to 0 (resp. 1). The value assigned to a negative literal notA by an interpre-
tation I, denoted as I(notA), is deﬁned as I(notA) def= ∼I(A), as expected. Similarly, for a term t,
I(t) def= [t] is the equivalence class of t.
Deﬁnition 4 (Model)
An interpretation I satisﬁes a rule like (4) iff
 I(B1)∗...∗I(Bm)∗I(notC1)∗...∗I(notCn)

·ri ≤I(H)
(5)
and I is a (causal) model of P, written I |= P, iff I satisﬁes all rules in P.
□
As usual in LP, for positive programs, we may deﬁne a direct consequence operator TP s.t.
TP(I)(H)
def= ∑
  I(B1)∗...∗I(Bn)

·ri | (ri : H ←B1,...,Bn) ∈P
	
for any interpretation I and atom H ∈At. We also deﬁne TP ↑α (0) def= TP(TP ↑α−1 (0)) for any
successor ordinal α and
TP ↑α (0)
def= ∑
β<α
TP ↑β (0)
for any limit ordinal alpha. As usual, ω denotes the smallest inﬁnite limit ordinal. Note that 0 is
considered a limit ordinal and, thus, TP ↑0 (0) = ∑β<0TP ↑β (0) = 0.
Theorem 1
Let P be a (possibly inﬁnite) positive logic program. Then, (i) the least ﬁxpoint of the TP operator,
denoted by lfp(TP), satisﬁes lfp(TP) = TP ↑ω (0) and it is the least model of P, (ii) furthermore,
if P is positive and has n rules, then lfp(TP) = TP ↑ω (0) = TP ↑n (0).
□

6
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
Theorem 1 asserts that, as usual, positive programs have a ≤-least causal model. As we will
see later, this least model coincides with the traditional least model (of the program without
labels) when one just focuses on the set of true atoms, disregarding the justiﬁcations explaining
why they are true. For programs with negation we deﬁne the following reduct.
Deﬁnition 5 (Reduct)
Given a program P and an interpretation I we denote by PI the positive program containing a
rule of the form
ri : H ←B1,...,Bm, I(notC1),..., I(notCn)
(6)
for each rule of the form (4) in P.
□
Program PI is positive and, from Theorem 1, it has a least causal model. By ΓP(I) we denote the
least model of program PI. The operator ΓP is anti-monotonicand, consequently, Γ2
P is monotonic
(Proposition 4 in the appendix) so that, by Knaster-Tarski’s theorem, it has a least ﬁxpoint LP and
a greatest ﬁxpoint UP
def= ΓP(LP). These two ﬁxpoints respectively correspond to the justiﬁcations
for true and for non-false atoms in the (standard) well-founded model (WFM), we denote as WP.
For instance, in our running example, LP1(d) = Γ2
P1 ↑α (0)(d) = d for 1 ≤α points out that
atom d is true because of fact d. Similarly, LP1(h) = h and LP1(a) = ∼h·r2 reveals that atom h
is true because of fact h, and that atom a is not true because fact h has inhibited rule r2.
Furthermore,
LP1(p) = Γ2
P1 ↑α (0)(p) = (∼(∼h·r2)∗d)·r1 = (∼∼h ∗d)·r1 + (∼r2 ∗d)·r1
for 2 ≤α. That is, Bond has been paralysed because fact h has enabled drug d to cause the
paralysis by means of rule r1. This corresponds to the justiﬁcation (∼∼h ∗d)·r1. Notice how
the real cause d is a positive label (not in the scope of negation) whereas the enabler h is in the
scope of a a double negation ∼∼h. Justiﬁcation (∼r2 ∗d)·r1 means that d·r1 would have been
sufﬁcient to cause p, had not been present r2. This example is also useful for illustrating the
importance of axiom appl. negation. By directly evaluating the body of rule r1, we have seen that
Γ2
P1 ↑2 (0)(p)=(∼(∼h ·r2)∗d)·r1. Then, axiom appl. negation allows us to break the depen-
dence between ∼h and r2 into enablers and inhibitors: ∼(∼h ·r2) = ∼(∼h ∗r2) = ∼∼h + ∼r2
and, applying distributivity, we obtain one enabled justiﬁcation, (∼∼h ∗d)·r1, and one disabled
one, (∼r2 ∗d)·r1.
In our previous example, the least and greatest ﬁxpoint coincided LP1 = UP1 = Γ2
P1 ↑2 (0). To
illustrate the case where this does not hold consider, for instance, the program P2 formed by the
following negative cycle:
r1 : a ←notb
r2 : b ←nota
In this case, the least ﬁxpoint of Γ2
P assigns LP2(a) = ∼r2·r1 and LP2(b) = ∼r1·r2, while, in its
turn, the greatest ﬁxpoint of Γ2
P corresponds to UP2(a) = r1 and UP2(b) = r2. If we focus on
atom a, we can observe that it is not concluded to be true, since the least ﬁxpoint LP has only
provided one disabled justiﬁcation ∼r2·r1 meaning that r2 is acting as a disabler for a. But, on the
other hand, a cannot be false either since the greatest ﬁxpoint provides an enabled justiﬁcation r1
for being non-false (remember that UP provides justiﬁcations for non-false atoms). As a result,
we get that a is left undeﬁned because r2 prevents it to become true while r1 can still be used to
conclude that it is not false.

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
7
To capture these intuitions, we provide some deﬁnitions. A query literal (q-literal) L is either
an atom A, its default negation ‘notA’ or the expression ‘undef A’ meaning that A is undeﬁned.
Deﬁnition 6 (Causal well-founded model)
Given a program P, its causal well-founded model WP is a mapping from q-literals to values s.t.
WP(A) def= LP(A)
WP(notA) def= ∼UP(A)
WP(undef A) def= ∼WP(A)∗∼WP(notA)
□
Let l be a label occurrence in a term t in the scope of n ≥0 negations. We say that l is an odd
or an even occurrence if n is odd or even, respectively. We further say that l is a strictly even
occurrence if it is even and n > 0.
Deﬁnition 7 (Justiﬁcation)
Given a program P and a q-literal L we say that a term E with no sums is a (sufﬁcient causal)
justiﬁcation for L iff E ≤WP(L). Odd (resp. strictly even) labels2 in E are called inhibitors
(resp. enablers) of E. A justiﬁcation is said to be inhibited if it contains some inhibitor and it is
said to be enabled otherwise.
□
True atoms will have at least one enabled justiﬁcation, whereas false atoms only contain dis-
abled justiﬁcations. As an example of a query for a plain atom A, take the already seen explana-
tion for p in Bond’s example program P1: WP1(p)=LP1(p)=(∼∼h ∗d)·r1 + (∼r2 ∗d)·r1. We
have here two justiﬁcations for atom p, let us call them E1 =(∼∼h∗d)·r1 and E2 = (∼r2 ∗d)·r1.
Justiﬁcation E1 is enabled because it contains no inhibitors (in fact, E1 is the unique real support
for p). Moreover, h is an enabler in E1 because it is strictly even (it is in the scope of double
negation) whereas d is a productive cause, since it is not in the scope of any negation. On the
contrary, E2 is disabled because it contains the inhibitor r2 (it occurs in the scope of one nega-
tion). Intuitively, r2 has prevented d·r1 to become a justiﬁcation of p. On the other hand, for
atom a we had WP1(a) = ∼h · r2 that only contains an inhibited justiﬁcation (being h the in-
hibitor), and so, atom a is not true. Now, if we query about the negative q-literal nota, we obtain
WP1(nota)= ∼UP1(a) which in this case happens to be ∼LP1(a)= ∼(∼h · r2) = ∼∼h + ∼r2.
That is, q-literal nota holds, being enabled by h. Moreover, ∼r2 points out that removing r2
would sufﬁce to cause nota too. It is easy to see that the explanations we can get for q-literals
notA or undef A will have all their labels in the scope of negation (either as inhibitors or as
enablers).
To illustrate a query for undef A, let us return to program P2 whose standard well-founded
model left both a and b undeﬁned. Given the values we obtained in the least and greatest ﬁxpoints,
the causal WFM will assign WP2(a) = ∼r2·r1 and WP2(b) = ∼r1·r2, that is, r2 prevents r1
to cause a and r1 prevents r2 to cause b. Furthermore, the values assigned to their respective
negations, WP2(nota) = ∼r1 and WP2(notb) = ∼r2, point out that atoms a and b are not false
because rules r1 and r2 have respectively prevented them to be so. Finally, we obtain that undef a
is true because
WP(undef a) = ∼WP2(a)∗∼WP2(nota) = (∼∼r2 + ∼r1)∗∼∼r1 = ∼∼r2 ∗∼∼r1
that is, rules r1 and r2 together have made a undeﬁned. Similarly, b is also undeﬁned because of
rules r1 and r2, WP(undef b) = ∼∼r1 ∗∼∼r2.
2 We just mention labels, and not their occurrences because terms are in NNF and E contains no sums. Thus, having
odd and even occurrences of a same label at a same time would mean that E = 0.

8
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
The next theorem shows that the literals satisﬁed by the standard WFM are precisely those
ones containing at least one enabled justiﬁcation in the causal WFM.
Theorem 2
Let P be a labelled logic program over a signature ⟨At,Lb⟩where Lb is a ﬁnite set of labels and let
WP its (standard) well-founded model. A q-literal L holds with respect to WP if and only if there
is some enabled justiﬁcation E of L, that is, E ≤WP(L) and E does not contain odd negative
labels.
□
Back to our example program P1, as we had seen, atom p had a unique enabled justiﬁcation
E1 = (∼∼h ∗d)·r1. The same happens for atoms d and h whose respective justiﬁcations are
just their own atom labels. Therefore, these three atoms hold in the standard WFM, WP1. On
the contrary, as we discussed before, the only justiﬁcation for a, WP1(a) = ∼h·r2, is inhibited
by h, and thus, a does not hold in WP1. The interest of an inhibited justiﬁcation for a literal
is to point out “potential” causes that have been prevented by some abnormal situation. In our
case, the presence of ∼h in WP1(a) = ∼h·r2 points out that an exception h has prevented r2 to
cause a. When the exception is removed, the inhibited justiﬁcation (after removing the inhibitors)
becomes an enabled justiﬁcation.
In our running example, if we consider a program P3 obtained by removing the fact h from P1,
then WP3(a) = r2 points out that a has been caused by rule r2 in this new scenario. This intuition
about inhibited justiﬁcations is formalized as follows.
Deﬁnition 8
Given a term t in DNF, by ρx : VCG
Lb −→VCG
Lb , we denote the function that removes the elementary
term x from t as follows:
ρx(t) def=







ρx(u)⊗ρx(w)
if t = u ⊗v with ⊗∈{+,∗,·}
1
if ∼∼t is equivalent to ∼∼x
0
if t is equivalent to ∼x
Note that we have assumed that t is in DNF. Otherwise, ρx(t) def= ρx(u) where u is an equivalent
term in DNF.
□
Theorem 3
Let P be a program over a signature ⟨At,Lb⟩where Lb is a ﬁnite set of labels. Let Q be the result
of removing from P all rules labelled by some ri ∈Lb. Then, the result of removing ri from the
justiﬁcations of some atom A with respect to program P are justiﬁcations of A with respect to Q,
that is, ρ∼ri(WP(A)) ≤WQ(A).
3 Relation to Causal Graph Justiﬁcations
We discuss now the relation between ECJ and CG approaches. Intuitively, ECJ extends CG causal
terms by the introduction of the new negation operator ‘∼’. Semantically, however, there are more
differences than a simple syntactic extension. A ﬁrst minor difference is that ECJ is deﬁned in
terms of a WFM, whereas CG deﬁnes (possibly) several causal stable models. In the case of
stratiﬁed programs, this difference is irrelevant, since the WFM is complete and coincides with
the unique stable model. A second, more important difference is that CG exclusively considers
productive causes in the justiﬁcations, disregarding additional information like the inhibitors or

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
9
enablers from ECJ. As a result, a false atom in CG has no justiﬁcation – its causal value is 0
because there was no way to derive the atom. For instance, in program P1, the only CG stable
model I just makes I(a) = 0 and we lose the inhibited justiﬁcation ∼h · r2 (default r2 could not
be applied). True atoms like p also lose any information about enablers: I(p) = d·r1 and nothing
is said about ∼∼h. Another consequence of the CG orientation is that negative literals notA are
never assigned a cause (different from 0 or 1), since they cannot be “derived” or produced by
rules. In the example, we simply get I(nota) = 1 and I(not p) = 0.
To further illustrate the similarities and differences between ECJ and CG, consider the follow-
ing program P4 capturing a variation of the Yale Shooting Scenario.
dt+1 : deadt+1
←shoott, loadedt, notabt
lt+1 : loadedt+1 ←loadt
at+1 : abt+1
←watert
loaded0
dead0
ab0
load1
water3
shoot8
plus the following rules corresponding inertia axioms
Ft+1 ←Ft, notFt+1
Ft+1 ←Ft, notFt+1
for F ∈{loaded, ab, dead}. Atoms of the form A represent the strong negation of A and we
disregard models satisfying both A and A. Atom dead9 does not hold in the standard WFM of P4,
and so there is no CG-justiﬁcation for it. Note here the importance of default reasoning. On the
one hand, the default ﬂow of events is that the turkey, Fred, continues to be alive when nothing
threats him. Hence, we do not need a cause to explain why Fred is alive. On the other hand,
shooting a loaded gun would normally kill Fred, being this a cause of its death. But, in this
example, another exceptional situation – water spilled out – has inhibited this existing threat and
allowed the world to ﬂow as if nothing had happened (that is, following its default behaviour).
In the CG-approach, dead9 is simply false by default and no justiﬁcation is provided. How-
ever, a gun shooter could be “disappointed” since another conﬂicting default (shooting a loaded
gun normally kills) has not worked. Thus, an expected answer for the shooter’s question “why
notdead9?” is that water3 broke the default, disabling d9. In fact, ECJ yields the following in-
hibited justiﬁcation for dead9:
WP4(dead9) = (∼water3 ∗shoot8 ∗load1·l2)·d9
(7)
meaning that dead9 could not be derived because inhibitor water3 prevented the application of
rule d9 to cause the death of Fred. Note that inertia rules are not labelled, which, as mentioned
before, is syntactic sugar for rules with label 1. Since 1 is the identity of product and application,
this has the effect of not being traced in the justiﬁcations. Note also that, according to Theorem 3,
if we remove fact water3 (the inhibitor) from P4 leading to a new program P5, then we get:
WP5(dead9) = (shoot8 ∗load1·l2)·d9
(8)
which is nothing else but the result of removing ∼water3 from (7). In fact, the only CG stable
model of P5 makes this same assignment (8) which also corresponds to the causal graph depicted
in Figure 3. In the general case, CG-justiﬁcations intuitively correspond to enabled justiﬁcations
after forgetting all the enablers. Formally, however, there is one more difference in the deﬁnition
of causal values: CG causal values are deﬁned as ideals for the poset of a type of graphs formed
by rule labels.
Deﬁnition 9 (Causal graph)

10
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
shoot8
)
load1

shoot8
)

load1



l2
t
l2
t
e
d9
d9
F
G2
G∗
2
Fig. 3. G2 is the cause of dead9 in program P4 while G∗
2 is its associated causal graphs, that is,
its reﬂexive and transitive closure.
Given some set Lb of (rule) labels, a causal graph (c-graph) G ⊆Lb × Lb is a reﬂexively and
transitively closed set of edges. By GLb, we denote the set of causal graphs. Given two c-graphs
G and G′, we write G ≤G′ when G ⊇G′.
□
Intuitively, causal graphs, like G2 in Figure 3, are directed graphs representing the causal
structure that has produced some event. Furthermore, G ≤G′ means that G contains enough
information to yield the same effect as G′, but perhaps more than needed (this explains G ⊇
G′). For this reason, we sometimes read G ≤G′ as “G′ is stronger than G.” Causes will be ≤-
maximal (or ⊆-minimal) causal graphs. Formally, including reﬂexive and transitive edges allows
to capture this intuitive relation simply by the subgraph relation. Note that, since causal graphs
are reﬂexively closed, every vertex has at least one edge (the reﬂexive one) and, thus, we can
omit the set of vertices. Besides, for the sake of clarity, we only depict the minimum set of edges
necessary for deﬁning a causal graph (transitive and reﬂexive reduction). For instance, graph G2
in Figure 3 is the transitive and reﬂexive reduction of the causal graph G∗
2.
Deﬁnition 10 (CG Values in Cabalar et al. 2014a)
Given a set of labels Lb, a CG causal value is any ideal (or lower-set) for the poset ⟨GLb,≤⟩.
By ICG
Lb , we denote the set of CG causal values. Product ‘∗’, sums ‘+’ and the ≤-order relation are
deﬁned as the set intersection, union and the subset relation, respectively. Application is given
by U·U′ def= { G′′ ≤G·G′  G ∈U and G′ ∈U′ }.
□
It has been shown in (Fandinno 2015a) that CG values can be alternatively characterised as a
free algebra generated by rule labels under the axioms of a complete distributive lattice plus the
axioms of Figure 1.
Deﬁnition 11 (CG Values in Fandinno 2015a)
Given a set of labels Lb, a CG term is a term without negation ‘∼’. CG causal values are the
equivalence classes of CG terms for a completely distributive (complete) lattice with meet ‘∗’
and join ‘+’ plus the axioms of Figure 1. By VCG
Lb , we denote the set of CG causal values.
□
Theorem 4 (Causal values isomorphism from Fandinno 2015a)
The function term : ICG
Lb −→VCG
Lb
given by
term(U) 7→∑
G∈U
∏
(v1,v2)∈G
v1·v2
is an isomorphism between algebras ⟨ICG
Lb ,+,∗,·,GLb, /0⟩and ⟨VCG
Lb ,+,∗,·,1,0⟩.
□

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
11
Theorem 4 states that CG causal values can be equivalently described either as ideals of causal
graphs or as elements of an algebra of terms. Furthermore, by abuse of notation, by G we also
denote the ideal whose maximum element is G, corresponding to term(G) as well. For instance,
for the causal graph G2 in Figure 3, it follows G2 = term(G2) = term(↓G2) with ↓G2 the ideal
whose maximum element is G2. Moreover, from the equivalences in Figure 1, it also follows that
G2 = shoot8·d9 ∗load1·l2 ∗l2·d9 ∗α
= shoot8·d9 ∗load1·l2 ∗l2·d9
= shoot8·d9 ∗load1·l2·d9
= (shoot8 ∗load1·l2)·d9
where α = load1·d9 ∗shoot8·shoot8 ∗d9·d9 ∗load1·load1 ∗l2·l2 ∗d9·d9 is a term that, as we can
see, can be ruled out and corresponds to the transitive and reﬂexive doted edges in G∗
2. That
is, justiﬁcation (8) associated to atom dead9 by the causal well-founded model of program P5
actually corresponds to causal graph G2.
Theorem 4 also formalises the intuition that opens this section: ECJ extends CG causal terms
by the introduction of the new negation operator ‘∼’. We formalise next the correspondence
between CG and ECJ justiﬁcations.
Deﬁnition 12 (CG mapping)
We deﬁne a mapping λ c : VLb −→VCG
Lb from ECJ values into CG values in the following recur-
sive way:
λ c(t) def=











λ c(u)⊗λ c(w)
if t = u ⊗v with ⊗∈{+,∗,·}
1
if t = ∼∼l with l ∈Lb
0
if t =
∼l with l ∈Lb
l
if t =
l with l ∈Lb
Note that we have assumed that t is in DNF. Otherwise, λ c(t) def= λ c(u) where u is an equivalent
term in DNF.
□
Function λ c maps every negated label ∼l to 0 (which is the annihilator of both product ‘∗’ and
application ‘·’ and the identity of addition ‘+’). Hence λ c removes all the inhibited justiﬁca-
tions. Furthermore λ c maps every doubly negated label ∼∼l to 1 (which is the identity of both
product ‘∗’ and application ‘·’). Therefore λ c removes all the enablers (i.e. doubly negated labels
∼∼l) for the remaining (i.e. enabled) justiﬁcations.
A CG interpretation is a mapping ˜I : At −→VCG
Lb . The value assigned to a negative literal notA
by a CG interpretation ˜I, denoted as ˜I(notA), is deﬁned as: ˜I(notA) def= 1 if ˜I(A) = 0; ˜I(notA) def= 0
otherwise. A CG interpretation ˜I is a CG model of rule like (4) iff
  ˜I(B1)∗...∗˜I(Bm)∗˜I(notC1)∗...∗˜I(notCn)

·ri ≤˜I(H)
(9)
Notice that the value assigned to a negative literal by CG and ECJ interpretations is different.
According to (Cabalar et al. 2014a), a CG interpretation ˜I is a CG stable model of a program P
iff ˜I is the least model of the program P˜I. In the following, we provide an ECJ based character-
isation of the CG stable models that will allow us to relate both approaches. By λ c(I) we will
denote a CG interpretation ˜I s.t. ˜I(A) = λ c(I(A)) for every atom A.

12
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
Deﬁnition 13 (CG stable models)
Given a program P, a CG interpretation ˜I is a CG stable model of P iff there exists a ﬁxpoint I of
the operator Γ2
P, i.e. ΓP(ΓP(I)) = I, such that ˜I = λ c(I) = λ c(ΓP(I)).
□
Theorem 5
Let P be a program over a signature ⟨At,Lb⟩where Lb is a ﬁnite set of labels. Then, the CG sta-
ble models (Deﬁnition 13) are exactly the causal values and causal stable models deﬁned in
(Cabalar et al. 2014a).
□
Theorem 5 shows that Deﬁnition 13 is an alternative deﬁnition of CG causal stable models.
Furthermore, it settles that every causal model corresponds to some ﬁxpoint of the operator Γ2
P.
Therefore, for every enabled justiﬁcation there is a corresponding CG-justiﬁcation common to
all stable models. In order to formalise this idea we just take the deﬁnition of causal explanation
from (Cabalar et al. 2014b).
Deﬁnition 14 (CG-justiﬁcation)
Given an interpretation I we say that a c-graph G is a (sufﬁcient) CG-justiﬁcation for an atom A
iff term(G) ≤˜I(A).
□
Since term(·) is a one-to-one correspondence, we can deﬁne its inverse graph(v) def= term−1(v)
for all v ∈VCG
Lb .
Theorem 6
Let P be a program over a signature ⟨At,Lb⟩where Lb is a ﬁnite set of labels. For any en-
abled justiﬁcation E of some atom A w.r.t. WP, i.e. E ≤WP(A), there is a CG-justiﬁcation
G def= graph(λ c(E)) of A with respect to any stable model ˜I of P.
□
As happens between the (standard) well-founded and stable model semantics, the converse of
Theorem 6 does not hold in general. That is, we may get a justiﬁcation that is common to all
CG-stable models but does not occur in the ECJ well-founded model. For instance, let P6 be the
program consisting on the following rules:
r1 : a ←notb
r2 : b ←nota, notc
c
r3 : c ←a
r4 : d ←b, notd
The (standard) WFM of program P6 is two-valued and corresponds to the unique (standard) sta-
ble model {a,c}. Furthermore, there are two causal explanations of c with respect to this unique
stable model: the fact c and the pair of rules r1·r3. Note that when c is removed {a,c} is still the
unique stable model, but all atoms are undeﬁned in the WFM. Hence, r1·r3 is a justiﬁcation with
respect to the unique stable model of the program, but not with respect to its WFM.
4 Relation to Why-not Provenance
An evident similarity between ECJ and WnP approaches is the use of an alternating ﬁxpoint
operator (Van Gelder 1989) which has been actually borrowed from WnP. However, there are
some slight differences. A ﬁrst one is that we have incorporated from CG the non-commutative
operator ‘·’ which allows capturing not only which rules justify a given atom, but also the depen-
dencies among these rules. The second is the use of a non-classical negation ‘∼’ that is crucial to
distinguish between productive causes and enablers. This distinction cannot be represented with
the classical negation ‘¬’ in WnP since double negation can always be removed. Apart from the

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
13
interpretation of negation in both formalisms, there are other differences too. As an example, let
us compare the justiﬁcations we obtain for dead9 in program P5. While for ECJ we obtained (8)
(or graph G2 in Figure 3), the corresponding WnP justiﬁcation has the form:
l2 ∧d9 ∧load1 ∧shoot8
∧not(ab1)∧not(ab2)∧...∧not(ab7)∧not(water0)∧...∧not(water6)
(10)
A ﬁrst observation is that the subexpression l2 ∧d9∧load1∧shoot8 constitutes, informally speak-
ing, a “ﬂattening” of (8) (or graph G2) where the ordering among rules has been lost. We get,
however, new labels of the form not(A) meaning that atom A is required not to be a program
fact, something that is not present in CG-justiﬁcations. For instance, (10) points out that water
can not be spilt on the gun along situations 0,...,7. Although this information can be useful for
debugging (the original purpose of WnP) its inclusion in a causal explanation is obviously in-
convenient from a Knowledge Representation perspective, since it explicitly enumerates all the
defaults that were applied (no water was spilt at any situation) something that may easily blow
up the (causally) irrelevant information in a justiﬁcation.
An analogous effect happens with the enumeration of exceptions to defaults, like inertia. Take
program P7 obtained from P4 by removing all the performed actions, i.e., facts load1, water3,
and shoot7. As expected, Fred will be alive, deadt, at any situation t by inertia. ECJ will assign
no cause for deadt, not even any inhibited one, i.e. WP(deadt) = 1 and WP(deadt) = 0 for any t.
The absence of labels in WP(deadt) = 1 is, of course, due to the fact that inertia axioms are
not labelled, as they naturally represent a default and not a causal law. Still, even if inertia were
labelled, say, with ink per each situation k, we would obtain a unique cause for WP(deadt) =
in1 · ... ·int for any t > 0 while maintaining no cause for WP(deadt) = 0. However, the number
of minimal WnP justiﬁcations of deadt grows quadratically, as it collects all the plans for killing
Fred in t steps loading and shooting once. For instance, among others, all the following:
d9 ∧¬not(load0)∧r2 ∧¬not(shoot1)∧not(water0)∧
not(ab1)
d9 ∧¬not(load0)∧r2 ∧¬not(shoot2)∧not(water0)∧not(water1)∧not(ab1)∧not(ab2)
d9 ∧¬not(load1)∧r2 ∧¬not(shoot3)∧not(water0)∧
∧not(water1) ∧not(water2)∧
not(ab1) ∧not(ab2)∧not(ab3)
...
are WnP-justiﬁcations for dead9. The intuitive meaning of expressions of the form ¬not(A) is
that dead9 can be justiﬁed by adding A as a fact to the program. For instance, the ﬁrst conjunction
means that it is possible to justify dead9 by adding the facts load0 and shoot1 and not adding the
fact water0. We will call these justiﬁcations, which contain a subterm of the form ¬not(A),
hypothetical in the sense that they involve some hypothetical program modiﬁcation.
Deﬁnition 15 (Provenance values)
Given a set of labels Lb, a provenance term t is recursively deﬁned as one of the following
expressions t ::= l | ∏S | ∑S | ¬t1 where l ∈Lb, t1 is in its turn a provenance term and S is
a (possibly empty and possible inﬁnite) set of provenance terms. Provenance values are the
equivalence classes of provenance terms under the equivalences of the Boolean algebra. We
denote by BLb the set of provenance values over Lb.
□
Informally speaking, with respect to ECJ, we have removed the application ‘·’ operator, whereas
product ‘∗’ and addition ‘+’ hold the same equivalences as in Deﬁnition 2 and negation ‘∼’

14
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
has been replaced by ‘¬’ from Boolean algebra. Thus, ‘¬’ is classical and satisﬁes all the ax-
ioms of ‘∼’ plus ¬¬t = t. Note also that, in the examples, we have followed the convention
from (Dam´asio et al. 2013) of using the symbols ‘∧’ and ∨to respectively represent meet and
join. However, in formal deﬁnitions, we will keep respectively using ‘∗’ and ‘+’ for that purpose.
We deﬁne a mapping λ p : VLb −→BLb in the following recursive way:
λ p(t) def=











λ p(u)⊗λ p(w)
if t = u ⊗v with ⊗∈{+,∗}
λ p(u) ∗λ p(w)
if t = u ·v
¬λ p(u)
if t = ∼u
l
if t = l with l ∈Lb
Deﬁnition 16 (Provenance)
Given a program P, the why-not provenance program P(P) def= P ∪P′ where P′ contains a la-
belled fact of the form (∼not(A) : A) for each atom A ∈At not occurring in P as a fact. We will
write P instead of P(P) when the program P is clear by the context. We denote by WhyP(L) def=
λ p(WP(L)) the why-not provenance of a q-literal L. We also say that a justiﬁcation is hypothet-
ical when not(A) occurs oddly negated in it, non-hypothetical otherwise.
□
Theorem 7
Let P be program over a ﬁnite signature ⟨At,Lb⟩. Then, the provenance of a literal according to
Deﬁnition 16 is equivalent to the provenance deﬁned by (Dam´asio et al. 2013).
□
Theorem 8
Let P be program over a ﬁnite signature ⟨At,Lb⟩. WP is the result of removing all non-hypothetical
justiﬁcation from WP and each occurrence of the form ∼∼not(A) for the remaining ones, that
is, WP = ρ(WP) where ρ is the result of removing every label of the form not(A), that is ρ is
the composition of ρnot(A1) ◦ρnot(A2) ◦...◦ρnot(An) with At = {A1,A2,...,An}.
□
On the one hand, Theorem 7 shows that the provenance of a literal can be obtained by replacing
the negation ‘∼’ by ‘¬’ and ‘·’ by ‘∗’ in the causal WFM of the augmented program P. On the
other hand, Theorem 8 asserts that non-hypotheticaljustiﬁcations of a program and its augmented
one coincide when subterms of the form ∼∼not(A) are removed from justiﬁcations of the latter.
Consequently, we can establish the following correspondence between the ECJ justiﬁcations and
the non-hypothetical WnP justiﬁcations.
Theorem 9
Let P be program over a ﬁnite signature ⟨At,Lb⟩. Then, the ECJ justiﬁcations of some atom A
(after replacing “·” by “∗” and “∼” by “¬”) correspond to the WnP justiﬁcations of A (after
removing every label of the form not(B) with B ∈At), that is, λ p(WP)(A) = ρ(WhyP)(A) where
ρ is the result of removing every label of the form not(A) as in Theorem 8.
□
Theorem 9 establishes a correspondence between non-hypothetical WnP-justiﬁcations and (ﬂat-
tened) ECJ justiﬁcations. In our running example, (7) is the unique causal justiﬁcation of dead9,
while (11) (below) is its unique non-hypothetical WnP justiﬁcation.
¬water3 ∧shoot8 ∧load1 ∧l2 ∧d9 ∧
∧not(dead1)∧...∧not(dead9)∧not(ab1)∧...∧not(ab8)
(11)

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
15
It is easy to see that, by applying λ p to (7) we obtain
λ p (∼water3 ∗shoot8 ∗load1·l2)·d9

= ¬water3 ∧shoot8 ∧load1 ∧l2 ∧d9
(12)
which is just the result of removing all labels of the form ‘not(A)’ from (11). The correspondence
between the ECJ justiﬁcation (8) and the WnP justiﬁcation (10) for program P5 can be easily
checked in a similar way.
Hypothetical justiﬁcations are not directly captured by ECJ, but can be obtained using the
augmented program P as stated by Theorem 7. As a byproduct we establish a formal relation
between WnP and CG.
Theorem 10
Let P be a program over a ﬁnite signature ⟨At,Lb⟩. Then, every non-hypothetical and enabled
WnP-justiﬁcation D of some atom A (after removing every label of the form not(B) with B ∈At)
is a justiﬁcation with respect to every CG stable model ˜I (after replacing “·” by “∗” and “∼” by
“¬”), that is D ≤WhyP(A) implies ρ(D) ≤λ p(˜I)(A) where ρ is the result of removing every
label of the form not(B) as in Theorem 8.
□
Note that, as happened between the ECJ and CG justiﬁcations, the converse of Theorem 10 does
not hold in general due to the well-founded vs stable model difference in their deﬁnitions. As an
example, the explanation for atom c at program P6 has a unique WnP justiﬁcation c as opposed
to the two CG justiﬁcations, c and r1·r3.
5 Contributory causes
Intuitively, a contributory cause is an event that has helped to produce some effect. For instance,
in program P5, it is easy to identify both actions, load1 and shoot8, as events that have helped
to produce dead9 and, thus, they are both contributory causes of Fred’s death. We may deﬁne
the above informal concept of contributory cause as: any non-negated label l that occurs in a
maximal enabled justiﬁcation of some atom A. Similarly, a contributory enabler can be deﬁned as
a doubly negated label ∼∼l that occurs in a maximal enabled justiﬁcation of some atom A. These
deﬁnitions correctly identify load1 and shoot8 as contributory causes of dead9 in program P5 and
d as a contributory cause of p in program P1. Fact h is considered a contributory enabler of p.
These deﬁnitions will also sufﬁce for dealing with what Hall (2007) calls trouble cases: non-
existent threats, short-circuits, late-preemption and switching examples.
It is worth to mention that, in the philosophic and AI literature, the concept of contributory
cause is usually discussed in the broader sense of actual causation which tries to provide an
unique everyday-concept of causation. Pearl (2000) studied actual and contributory causes re-
lying on causal networks. In this approach, it is possible to conclude cause-effect relations like
“A has been an actual (resp. contributory) cause of B” from the behaviour of structural equa-
tions by applying, under some contingency (an alternative model in which some values are ﬁxed)
the counterfactual dependence interpretation from (Hume 1748): “had A not happened, B would
not have happened.” Consider the following example which illustrates the difference between
contributory and actual causes under this approach.
Example 1 (Firing Squad)
Suzy and Billy form a two-man ﬁring squad that responds to the order of the captain. The shot of
any of the two riﬂemen would kill the prisoner. Indeed, the captain gives the order, both riﬂemen
shoot together and the prisoner dies.
□

16
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
On the one hand, the captain is an actual cause of the prisoner’s death: “had the captain not
given the order, the riﬂemen would not have shot and the prisoner would not have died.” On
the other hand, each riﬂeman alone is not an actual cause: “had one riﬂeman not shot, the pris-
oner would have died anyway because of the other riﬂeman.” However, each riﬂeman’s shot is
a contributory cause because, under the contingency where the other riﬂeman does not shoot,
the prisoner’s death manifests counterfactual dependence on the ﬁrst riﬂeman’s shot. Later ap-
proaches like (Halpern and Pearl 2001; Halpern and Pearl 2005; Hall 2004; Hall 2007) have not
made this distinction and consider the captain and the two riﬂemen as actual causes of the pris-
oner’s death, while (Halpern 2015) considers the captain and the conjunction of both riﬂemen’s
shoots, but not each of them alone, as actual causes. We will focus here on representing the
above concept of contributory cause and leave to the reader whether this agrees with the concept
of cause in the every-day discourse or not.
As has been slightly discussed in the introduction, Hall (2004; 2007), has emphasized the dif-
ference between two types of causal relations: dependence and production. The former relies on
the idea that “counterfactual dependence between wholly distinct events is sufﬁcient for causa-
tion.” The latter is characterised by being transitive, intrinsic (two processes following the same
laws must be both or neither causal) and local (causes must be connected to their effects via
sequences of causal intermediates).
These two concepts can be illustrated in Bond’s example by observing the difference between
pouring the drug (atom d), which is a cause under both understandings, and being a holiday (atom
h), which is not considered a cause under the production viewpoint, although it is considered a
cause under the dependence one.
In this sense, all the above approaches to actual causation, but (Hall 2004), can be classiﬁed
in the dependence category. ECJ and CG do not consider h a productive cause of d because the
default (or normal) behaviour of rule (1) is that “d causes p.” This default criterion is also shared
by (Hall 2007; Halpern 2008; Hitchcock and Knobe 2009; Halpern and Hitchcock 2011). Note
that, ECJ (but not CG) captures the fact that d counterfactually depends on h, as it considers it
an enabler. In (Hall 2004), the author relies on intrinsicness for rejecting h as a productive cause
of d: any causal structure (justiﬁcation) including h and p would have to include the absence of
the antidote (atom a), and it would be enough that Bond had taken the antidote by another reason
to break the counterfactual dependence between h and p. By applying the above contributory
cause deﬁnition to the WnP justiﬁcation h ∧d ∧r1 of Bond’s paralysis (atom p) in program P1,
we can easily identify that h is being considered a cause in WnP, thus, a causal interpretation
of WnP clearly follows the dependence-based viewpoint. On the other hand, the unique CG
justiﬁcation d·r1 only considers d as a cause, which illustrates the fact that CG is mostly related
to the concept of production. ECJ combines both understandings, and what is a cause under the
dependence viewpoint is either an enabler or a cause under the production viewpoint.
In order to illustrate how ECJ can be used for representing the so-called non-existent threat
scenarios, consider a variation of Bond’s example where today is not a holiday and, thus, Bond
takes the antidote. The poured drug d is a threat to Bond’s safety, represented as s, but that threat
is prevented by the antidote. We may represent this scenario by program P8 below:
r1 : p ←d,nota
r2 : a ←noth
r3 : s ←not p
a
d

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
17
The causal WFM of program P8 assigns
WP8(s) = ∼∼r2·r3 + ∼d·r3 + ∼r1·r3
which recognises rule r2 (taking the antidote) as a contributory enabler of Bond’s safety. The
difﬁculty in this kind of scenarios consists in avoiding the wrong recognition of r2 as an enabler
when the threat d does not exist. If we remove fact d from P8 to get the new program P9 then we
obtain that WP9(d) = 0 and, consequently, WP9(s) = r3. Intuitively, in the absence of any threat,
Bond is just safe because that is his default behaviour as stated by rule r3.
Short-circuit examples consist in avoiding the wrong recognition of an event as a contributory
enabler that provokes a threat that eventually prevents itself. Consider the program P10 below:
r1 : p ←a, not f
r2 :
f ←c, notb
r3 : b ←c
a
c
Here, c is a threat to p, since it may cause f through rule r2. However, c eventually prevents r2,
since it also causes b through rule r3. The causal WFM of program P10 assigns
WP10(p) = (a ∗∼∼r3)·r1 + (a ∗∼r2)·r1 + (a ∗∼c)·r1
which correctly avoids considering c as a contributory enabler of p and recognises r3 as the
enabler of p. Note that c is actually considered an inhibitor due to justiﬁcation (a∗∼c)·r1 point-
ing out that, had c not happened, then a·r1 would have been an enabled justiﬁcation. But then,
(a ∗∼∼r3)·r1 would stop being a justiﬁcation since (a ∗∼∼r3)·r1 + a·r1 = a·r1.
To illustrate late-preemention consider the following example from (Lewis 2000).
Example 2 (Rock Throwers)
Billy and Suzy throw rocks at a bottle. Suzy throws ﬁrst and her rock arrives ﬁrst. The bottle
shattered. When Billy’s rock gets to where the bottle used to be, there is nothing there but ﬂying
shards of glass. Who has caused the bottle to shatter?
□
The key of this example is to recognise that Suzy, and not Billy, has caused the shattering. The
usual way of representing this scenario in the actual causation literature is by introducing two
new ﬂuents hit suzy and hit billy in the following way (Hall 2007; Halpern and Hitchcock 2011;
Halpern 2014; Halpern 2015):
hit suzy
←throw suzy
(13)
hit billy
←throw billy, ¬hit suzy
(14)
shattered ←hit suzy
(15)
shattered ←hit billy
(16)
It is easy to see that such a representation mixes, in law (14), both the description of the world and
the narrative fact asserting that Suzy threw ﬁrst. This may easily lead to a problem of elaboration
tolerance. For instance, if we have N shooters and they shoot sequentially we would have to
modify the equations for all of them in an adequate way, so that the last shooter’s equation would
have the negation of the preceding N-1 and so on. Moreover, all these equations would have to
be reformulated if we simply change the shooting order. On the other hand, we may represent

18
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
this scenario by a program P11 consisting of the following rules
st+1 :
shatteredt+1 ←throw(A)t, not shatteredt
shattered0
throw(suzy)0
throw(billy)1
with A ∈{suzy, billy}, plus the following rules corresponding to the inertia axioms
shatteredt+1 ←shatteredt, not shatteredt+1
shatteredt+1 ←shatteredt, not shatteredt+1
Atom shattered2 holds in the standard WFM of P11 and its justiﬁcation corresponds to
throw(suzy)0·s1 + (∼throw(suzy)∗throw(billy)1)·s2 + (∼s1 ∗throw(billy)1)·s2
On the one hand, the ﬁrst addend points out that fact throw(suzy)0 has caused shattered2 by
means of rule s1. On the other hand, the second addend indicates that throw(billy)1 has not
caused it because Suzy’s throw has prevented it. Finally, the third addend means that throw(billy)1
would have caused the shattering if it were not for rule s1. This example shows how our semantics
is able to recognise that it was Suzy, and not Billy, who caused the bottle shattering. Furthermore,
it also explains that Billy did not cause it because Suzy did it ﬁrst.
Finally, consider the following example from (Hall 2000).
Example 3 (The Engineer)
An engineer is standing by a switch in the railroad tracks. A train approaches in the distance. She
ﬂips the switch, so that the train travels down the right-hand track, instead of the left. Since the
tracks reconverge up ahead, the train arrives at its destination all the same; let us further suppose
that the time and manner of its arrival are exactly as they would have been, had she not ﬂipped
the switch.
□
This has been a controversial example. In (Hall 2000), the author has argued that the switch
should be considered a cause of the arrival because switch has contributed to the fact that the
train has travelled down the right-hand track. In a similar manner, it seems clear that the train
travelling down the right-hand track has contributed to the train arrival. If causality is consid-
ered to be a transitive relation, as (Hall 2000) does, the immediate consequence of the above
reasoning is that ﬂipping the switch has contributed to the train arrival. In (Hall 2007) he argues
otherwise and points out that commonsense tells that the switch is not a cause of the arrival.
(Halpern and Pearl 2005) had considered switch a cause of arrival depending on whether the
train travelling down the tracks is represented by one or two variables in the model. Although
our understanding of causality is closer to the one expressed in (Hall 2007), it is not the aim of
this work to go more in depth in this discussion, but to show instead how both understandings
can be represented in ECJ. Consider the following program P12
r1 :
arrival ←right
r2 :
arrival ←left
r3 :
right
←train, notswitch
r4 :
left
←train, notswitch
switch ←notswitch
switch ←notswitch
train
switch
where switch represents the strong negation of switch. The two unlabelled rules capture the idea
that the switch behaves classically, that is, it must be activated or not. The literal notswitch in
the body of rule r3 points out that the switch position is an enabler and not a cause of the track

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
19
taken by the train. This representation can be arguable, but the way in which the rule has been
written would be expressing that if a train is coming, then a train will cross the right track by
default unless switch prevents it. In that sense, the only productive cause for right (a train in the
right track) is train (a train is coming) whereas the switch position just enables the causal rule to
be applied. A similar default r4 is built for the left track, ﬂipping the roles of switch and switch.
The causal WFM of program P12 corresponds to
WP12(arrival) = (train ∗∼∼switch)·r3·r1 + (train ∗∼switch)·r4·r2
It is easy to see that switch is a doubly-negated label occurring in the maximal enabled justiﬁ-
cation E1 = (train ∗∼∼switch)·r3·r1 and, thus, we may identify it as a contributory enabler of
arrival, but not its productive cause. On the other hand, by looking at the inhibited justiﬁcation
E2 = (train∗∼switch)·r4·r2, we observe that switch is also preventing rules r4 and r2 to produce
the same effect, arrival, that is helping to produce in E1.
If we want to ignore the way in which the train arrives, one natural possibility is using the
same label for all the rules for atom arrival, reﬂecting in this way that we do not want to trace
whether r1 or r2 has been actually used. Suppose we label r2 with r1 instead, leading to the new
program P13
r1 :
arrival ←right
r1 :
arrival ←left
r3 :
right
←train, notswitch
r3 :
left
←train, notswitch
switch ←notswitch
switch ←notswitch
train
switch
whose causal WFM corresponds to
WP12(arrival) = (train ∗∼∼switch)·r3·r1 + (train ∗∼switch)·r3·r1 = train·r3·r1
As we can see, this justiﬁcation does not consider switch at all as a cause of the arrival (nor even
a contributory enabler, as before). In other words, switch is irrelevant for the train arrival, which
probably coincides with the most common intuition.
However, we do not ﬁnd this solution fully convincing yet, because the explanation we obtain
for right, WP13(right) = (train∗∼∼switch)·r3 is showing that switch is just acting as an enabler,
as we commented before. If we wanted to represent switch as a contributory cause of right,
we would have more difﬁculties to simultaneously keep switch irrelevant in the explanation of
arrival. One possibility we plan to explore in the future is allowing the declaration of a given
atom or ﬂuent, like our switch, as classical so that we include both, the the rule:
switch ←notnotswitch
in the logic program3 and the axiom ∼∼switch = switch in the algebra. The latter immediately
implies switch + ∼switch = 1 (due to the weak excluded middle axiom).
3 This implication actually corresponds to a choice rule 0{switch}1, commonly used in Answer Set Programming.

20
P. Cabalar & J. Fandinno
Then, P13 could be simply expressed as
r1 :
arrival ←right
r1 :
arrival ←left
r3 :
right
←train, switch
r3 :
left
←train, notswitch
train
switch
and the justiﬁcation of right and left would become
WP(right) = (train ∗switch)·r3
WP(left) = (train ∗∼switch)·r3
pointing out that switch is a cause (resp. an inhibitor) of the train travelling down the right (resp.
left) track. Then, the justiﬁcation of arrival would be
WP(arrival) = (train ∗switch)·r3·r1 + (train ∗∼switch)·r3·r1 = train·r3·r1
We leave the study of this possibility for a future deeper analysis.
6 Conclusions and other related work
In this paper we have introduced a unifying approach that combines causal production with en-
ablers and inhibitors. We formally capture inhibited justiﬁcations by introducing a “non-classical”
negation ‘∼’ in the algebra of causal graphs (CG). An inhibited justiﬁcation is nothing else but
an expression containing some negated label. We have also distinguished productive causes from
enabling conditions (counterfactual dependences that are not productive causes) by using a dou-
ble negation ‘∼∼’ for the latter. The existence of enabled justiﬁcations is a sufﬁcient and neces-
sary condition for the truth of a literal. Furthermore, our justiﬁcations capture, under the Well-
Founded Semantics, both Causal Graph and Why-not Provenance justiﬁcations. As a byproduct
we established a formal relation between these two approaches.
We have also shown how several standard examples from the literature on actual causation can
be represented in our formalism and illustrated how this representation is suitable for domains
which include dynamic defaults – those whose behaviour are not predetermined, but rely on some
program condition – as for instance the inertia axioms. As pointed out by (Maudlin 2004), causal
knowledge can be structured by a combination of inertial laws – how the world would evolve if
nothing intervened – and deviations from these inertial laws.
In addition to the literature on actual causes cited in Section 5, our work also relates to papers
on reasoning about actions and change (Lin 1995; McCain and Turner 1997; Thielscher 1997).
These works have been traditionally focused on using causal inference to solve representational
problems (such as, the frame, ramiﬁcation and qualiﬁcation problems) without paying much at-
tention to the derivation of cause-effect relations. Focusing on LP, our work obviously relates to
explanations obtained from ASP debugging approaches (Specht 1993; Denecker and Schreye 1993;
Pemmasani et al. 2004; Gebser et al. 2008; Pontelli et al. 2009; Oetsch et al. 2010; Schulz and Toni 2013).
The most important difference of these works with respect to ECJ, and also WnP and CG, is
that the last three provide fully algebraic semantics in which justiﬁcations are embedded into
program models. A formal relation between (Pontelli et al. 2009) and WnP was established in
(Dam´asio et al. 2013) and so, using Theorems 7 and 9, it can be directly extended to ECJ, but at
the cost of ﬂattening the graph information (i.e. losing the order among rules).
Interesting issues for future study are incorporating enabled and inhibited justiﬁcations to the

Enablers and Inhibitors in Causal Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs
21
stable model semantics and replacing the syntactic deﬁnition in favour of a logical treatment of
default negation, as done for instance with the Equilibrium Logic (Pearce 1996) characterisation
of stable models. Other natural steps would be the consideration of syntactic operators, for cap-
turing more speciﬁc knowledge about causal information as done in (Fandinno 2015b) capturing
sufﬁcient causes in the CG approach, and also the representation of non-deterministic causal
laws, by means of disjunctive programs or the incorporation of probabilistic knowledge.
Acknowledgements We are thankful to Carlos Dam´asio for his suggestions and comments on
earlier versions of this work. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their help to improve
the paper. This research was partially supported by Spanish Project TIN2013-42149-P.
