ViZDoom: DRQN with Prioritized Experience Replay, Double-Q
Learning, & Snapshot Ensembling*
Christopher Schulze, Marcus Schulze

Abstract— ViZDoom is a robust, ﬁrst-person shooter rein-
forcement learning environment, characterized by a signiﬁcant
degree of latent state information. In this paper, double-Q
learning and prioritized experience replay methods are tested
under a certain ViZDoom combat scenario using a competitive
deep recurrent Q-network (DRQN) architecture. In addition,
an ensembling technique known as snapshot ensembling is
employed using a speciﬁc annealed learning rate to observe
differences in ensembling efﬁcacy under these two methods.
Annealed learning rates are important in general to the training
of deep neural network models, as they shake up the status-
quo and counter a model’s tending towards local optima. While
both variants show performance exceeding those of built-in AI
agents of the game, the known stabilizing effects of double-Q
learning are illustrated, and priority experience replay is again
validated in its usefulness by showing immediate results early on
in agent development, with the caveat that value overestimation
is accelerated in this case. In addition, some unique behaviors
are observed to develop for priority experience replay (PER)
and double-Q (DDQ) variants, and snapshot ensembling of
both PER and DDQ proves a valuable method for improving
performance of the ViZDoom Marine.
I. INTRODUCTION
Increasingly, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is the
topic of great discussion in the artiﬁcial intelligence com-
munity . For reinforcement learning (RL) experts, RL has
always shown great promise as a robust construct for solving
task oriented problems. Recently, the DRL variant has gained
signiﬁcant public attention. But to be clear, much remains
to be done at large in the ﬁeld concerning high state-action
dimensional problems that approximate well some real world
problems of interest. From board games like Go in recent
engagements with agents from Deep Mind to very high
state-action dimensional games like those from the real time
strategy (RTS) and ﬁrst person shooter (FPS) video game
genres, DRL has established itself, presently, as a prime
construct for solving highly complex problems without direct
supervision for most, if not all, of its training.
Given the success, much work has been done recently to
improve upon models of DRL, including that of the Deep
Q-Network (DQN). Priority experience replay (PER) and
Double-Q learning (DDQ) are two such methods that can
be used to improve a DQN agent’s rate of improvement
or degree of learning stability, respectively, during training.
However, to the authors knowledge, these two methods have
yet to be tested under the ViZDoom [8] environment - a
setting characterized by a higher degree of latent information
*This work was not supported by any organization
relative to Atari and other popular RL environments - in
the context of a speciﬁc, effective deep recurrent learning
architecture. Replicating the DRQN structure in the paper
from Lample et al.[5], the authors in this paper test the
beneﬁts offered by PER and DDQ methods under an efﬁcient
ensembling method.
Fig. 1: Defend the Center Scenario: melee enemies converge
towards the center
II. DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
OVERVIEW
A. Reinforcement Learning, Q-Learning, and Deep Q-
Networks
The ﬁeld of reinforcement learning frames a learning prob-
lems using two separate entities: an agent and an environ-
ment. As Sutton discusses [10], it is useful to conceptualize
this framework as follows: an agent is deﬁned as an actor
attempting to learn a given task. The agent is delineated from
the environment by deﬁning its characteristics and action
set as items encompassed by its realm of inﬂuence and
under its complete control; all other aspect of the learning
problem are then attributed to the environment. Generally,
the environment can be described as the setting in which the
learning problem takes place. The agent receives its current
state st from the environment, and it proceeds to interact
and affect the environment through action at , which is
derived from a policy πt . The environment takes in action
arXiv:1801.01000v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2018

at and updates the current state of the agent to st+1 along
with sending a reward signal rt to the agent, indicating the
value of st to st+1 transition via action at. Given the RL
framework, we can deﬁne discounted rewards at time i = 0
as :
R =
T
X
i=0
γiri
(1)
, where γ ∈[0,1). Rewards are discounted to simulate the
concept of delayed rewards to the agent, the importance of
the discounted being directed by the value of γ. γ values
close to 0 indicate immediate rewards are more important;
whereas γ values close to 1 indicate to the agent that longer
of sequences of actions are important to consider to achieve
high rewards. The goal of the agent is to maximize its
rewards as seen by the environment over the course of a
single experience or series of experiences (i.e games) by
developing a policy. This policy dictates what action an agent
performs given its current state.
To obtain an approximation of optimal values correspond-
ing to state-action pairs, the temporal difference method [11]
Q-learning, ﬁrst developed by Watkins [3] in 1989, can be
used. The Q-function for a given state-action pair with policy
π is as follows,
Qπ(s, a) = E[Ri|si = s, ai = a]
(2)
The task is then to ﬁnd the optimal policy, giving:
Q∗(s, a) = maxπ(Qπ) = maxπ(E[Ri|si = s, ai = a])
(3)
Thus, Bellman optimality is then satisﬁed by the optimal
Q-function, as the above can be rewritten as:
Q∗(s, a) = maxπ(Qπ) = E[r + γ ∗maxa′(Q∗(s′, a′))|s, a]
(4)
For most problems - with large state-action spaces -
direct, recursive methods, including dynamic programming
methods, are impractical. Rather, the optimal Q-function
is approximated by a parametrized method. In particular,
deep learning architectures have proven very successful at
approximating the optimal value of high-dimensional target
spaces. Let Qw be deﬁned as a Q-function with parameters
w. For updates to the Qw function, the loss can be deﬁned
as:
Lt(wt) = Es,a,r,s′[lt(yt −Qw(s, a))]
(5)
, where lt is any reasonable transformation of the temporal
difference error for training deep neural networks, including
L1 (proportional to mean absolute value error) and L2
(proportional to mean squared error) losses, among others,
and
yt = r + γ ∗maxa(Qw(s′, a))
Given successes with stochastic gradient descent updates,
we can instead lose the expectation and give stochastic up-
dates to Qw using the following as loss for backpropagation:
Lt(wt) = lt(yt −Qw(s, a))
(6)
To gain experiences in the environment, ϵ-greedy training
can be used, wherein the agent randomly acts at with
probability ϵ or choses what it deems its best action with
probability 1 - ϵ. Using this strategy, ϵ is decayed over the
course of training, usually starting with a value of 1 and
having a minimum value of 0.1.
To stabilize Q-values during learning, a replay memory is
used to remember s, a, r, s′ experiences as the agent interacts
with the environment; the agent then learns by sampling
from this replay memory uniformly after a set number of
games played and ﬁtting against the selected experiences.
The replay memory along with a target Q-function were
introduced to counter the algorithms strong afﬁnity to local
optima given these greedy updates.
Enter the modern framework for Deep Q-Networks in
full. Deep Q-Networks (DQNs) are a a parametrized, model-
free, off-policy method; speciﬁcally, it uses Q-learning for
value estimation. Two deep neural network architectures are
used to learn the Q-values for each experience sampled from
replay memory. An online network Qw learns in a greedy
fashion, and the target network ˜Qw acts as a tether point to
reduce the likelihood of the online network from falling into
a local optima due to its greedy updates.
Let Q(s, a) be deﬁned as the online network, and ˜Q(s, a)
be deﬁned as the target network. During training using replay
memory after a number of games have been played, the
online network is updated using the following target:
Qtarget(s, a) = r + γmaxa( ˜Q(s′, a))
(7)
B. Deep Recurrent Q-Networks
A variant of DQN, deep recurrent Q-Networks (DRQNs)
have shown exceptional performance in a variety of RL
problems. In environments characterized by signiﬁcant latent
information, recurrency offers a way to ﬁll in the gaps of
missing knowledge for a given state[7]. The RL environment
of ViZDoom is no exception; as a ﬁrst person shooter, the
agent is bound by a ﬁrst-person, 90-degree view of objects
in front of it. There is no radar - a HUD display of enemies
around the player in a 360 degree arc is present in many
other FPS games - or other indicators of what could be in
the other 270 degrees.
As such, rather than receiving states st as in the RL
framework, it is more aptly put that the agent in ViZDoom re-
ceives partial observations ot of its current state st [7]. Thus,
using a DQN, the objective is to estimate not Q(st, at) but
instead Q(ot, at), putting the agent at a distinct disadvantage
concerning state level information. One way to counter this
is to include state information from the previous sequence
of states, thereby allowing the agent to instead estimate
Q(ot, ht−1, at) where ht−1 represents information gathered

at state t −1 and passed to state t. The long-term, short-
term memory cell, LSTM, is one recurrent construct capable
of doing this; at a given time t, the LSTM cell takes in ot
and ht−1 and outputs ht. Instead of Q(ot, at), the network
then estimates Q(ht, at), increasing the level of information
available to the agent for a given state-action pair.
C. Double-Q Learning
Double-Q learning advances upon DQN in a simple, yet
remarkably effective way: let the loss used in learning by
the agent be deﬁned by the value-maximizing actions of the
online network with the Q-values of the target network asso-
ciated with those maximizing actions. With the decoupling
of the maximizing action from its value, it is possible to
eliminate the maximization bias present in Q-Learning [6].
Speciﬁcally, the loss is deﬁned as follows:
Lt(wt) = lt(yt −Qw(s, a))
(8)
,where lt is a transformation of the temporal difference
(TD) error and
yt = r + γ ˜Qw(s, aonline))
aonline = argmaxa(Q(s, a))
This innovation was spurred by the observation that Q-
learning tends to overestimate the values of state-actions
pairs. Through experimentation of deep double-Q learning
using myriad, diverse Atari game environments, Hasselt et.
al. ﬁnd that deep double Q-networks(DDQNs) show marked
improvement in the estimation of values for state-action
pairs [14]. Furthermore, Double-Q learning introduces a level
of stability in Q-learning updates, which allows for more
complex behavior to be learned.
D. Prioritized Experience Replay
During training, the DQN agent samples uniformly from
its replay memory to populate a batch training set and
subsequently learn on this set. This is done many times
over the course of the experiment, allowing the agent to
continue to learn from previous experiences. The construct of
replay memory was created to simulate learning from expe-
riences that are sampled i.i.d (independently and identically
distributed). Without approximating i.i.d sampling, the agent
can quickly overﬁt to recent state-action pairs, inhibiting
learning and adaptation. The method of prioritized experi-
ence replay innovates on this front by biasing the sampling
of experiences [12]. Speciﬁcally, experiences are weighted
and sampled with higher probability according to the TD
error observed for that sample - the larger the TD error, the
higher the probability with which a given experience will
be sampled. The intuition behind this is that experiences
that signiﬁcantly differ from the agents expectation will have
more didactic potential. Concerning empirical validation of
the method, Schaul et al. created PER and showed that it
affords signiﬁcant performance improvement across many
Atari-based RL environments. The authors here apply PER to
a DRQN model and train and test it in the defend-the-center
ViZDoom scenario (see IV. A. Scenario section).
E. Ensembles of Deep Q-Networks - Snapshot Ensembles
Ensembling of models has proven useful in many situ-
ations, countering, to an extent, the tendency of nonlinear
models to over-ﬁt to a given training distribution. However,
the generation of ensembles for deep neural networks can
prove onerous, requiring the training of multiple networks
in parallel or - even worse, in terms of total training time -
sequentially. Recently, methods have been proposed to gain
the advantages of ensembling while reducing the time to
generate such a set of models. Snapshot ensembling is one
such example, employing a cosine annealing learning rate to
generate M models over T total epochs from the training
of a single model over those T epochs [4]. This is done by
using the cosine annealing learning rate to train the single
model and take snapshots of its current weights every T/M
epochs. Thus, only a single model is trained while, at the
same time, providing a diverse model population for the
ensemble through use of the cosine annealing learning rate.
The authors here use the snapshot ensemble method to
analyze performance improvement of the aforementioned
model (DRQN) in the context of the ViZDoom Reinforce-
ment Learning Environment, utilizing the learning enhance-
ment methods of PER and DDQ.
F. Review of Modern RL Game Environments
For Reinforcement Learning, Why Video Games?
A burgeoning ﬁeld of work has been created using the
VizDoom environment due to the unique problems that the 3-
D ﬁrst-person shooter (FPS) engine can provide. Navigation,
recognition of objects in the space, and decision making
when other objects or actors are encountered are all obsta-
cles that an FPS environment presents. Another important
obstacle is that the agent will never have a complete view
of the given state space. Recent deep reinforcement learning
methods applied to this environment have focused primarily
on the free-for-all death match setting to train their models.
Instead, the authors here choose to train and test models
using the Defend the Center mode.
Including ViZDoom, there are a number of diverse game-
based RL frameworks in current use. In general, video games
have increasingly become an important tool for AI research
and development. It is easy to see why, as video games
allow for an environment rich with parameters, feedback,
and end goals for agents to gauge their success. Originally,
the frameworks tested were simple 2-D environments from
games originally on the Atari 2600 that allowed for simple
movement and near fully observable states. On the other
hand, the engines for FPS environments provide a wealth of
data and multiple obstacles and objectives for the AI agents
to learn from. One of the most important obstacles provided
by the FPS setup is the lack of complete information for
a given state. This obstacle mimics real world problems for

autonomous agents, as they must be able to act with a limited
view of the world around them.
Arcade Learning Environments
The classic 2D video games of the past have been used to a
great extent for deep learning. The main platforms for these
games are the Atari 2600, Nintendo NES, Commodore 64
and ZX Spectrum. One of the most used emulator environ-
ments is Stella, which uses the Atari 2600 and has 50 games
available. Methods previously used in these environments
include Double DQN, Bootstrapped DQN, Dueling DQN,
and Prioritized DQN. Montezumas Revenge is a notable
game from this genre as it requires memorization of other
rooms that arent immediately available to the agent. Methods
used in this space are DQN-PixelCNN, DQN-CTS, and H-
DQN [2, 9].
Real Time Strategy
StarCraft: Brood War is a popular real time strategy (RTS)
game in which the objective is to destroy all of the enemy
structures and claim victory. Players move towards victory
by gathering resources to create attacking units that can
then be directed in various actions. The obstacles for the
agent are many as the state space is complex and not fully
observable by the agent at any one time. There are three
factions available in this environment that all have their own
unique characters and abilities. Even if the agent is limited
to learning to play only a single faction, there are still 3
different match ups that could be encountered. Each of these
match ups will have their own strategies and units that will
be needed to counter different compositions of units built
from different structures.
Another important skill that the agent needs to learn is
intelligence gathering - understanding of both map layout and
composition of the opponent’s army. At the start of the game,
the map is under what is called fog of war, which blacks
out any area that doesnt have a controlled unit to provide
vision. In summary, the agent must navigate the environment
and gather intelligence on the opposing player, build an
appropriate base from which to train units to defend and
attack the opponent, maneuver these units into advantageous
positions in the environment, engage opponent units and
manage the abilities available to units, and manage resources.
All of these tasks must also be performed without complete
knowledge of the state space. The combination of the many
problems experienced in the course of one game has led
deep learning researchers to focus on speciﬁc problems in the
game as the sparsity of rewards makes the training of highly
non-linear functions, such as neural networks, difﬁcult. The
main problem that has been the focus of many researchers
has been the micromanagement of units in combat scenarios.
Methods such as IQL, COMA, Zero Order, and BiCNet have
been performed with promising results [9].
Open World Games
Open world games are another avenue of research, as the
nature of open world games positions issues of exploration
and objective setting as the main challenges to the agent.
Project Malmo is an overlay built onto the Minecraft engine
that can be used to deﬁne the environment and allow for
objectives to be imposed on an agent in a normally free task
environment. These large and open problems are commonly
used to test reinforcement learning methods. Methods such
as H-DLRN and variations of NTMs have been successful
in preforming varying tasks in the space [9].
Racing Games
Racing games are another popular genre for AI research
as there are many challenges here as well. Depending on
the game chosen, the inputs for control can be as complex
as having a gear stick, clutch and handbrakes, while others
are much more simpliﬁed. Challenges for this environment
include positioning of the vehicle on the course for optimal
distance traveled, adversarial actions to block or impede
other drivers when other vehicles are present, and sometimes
the management of resources. This genre is also useful
because the entire state is not available to the agent in the
ﬁrst or third person view. Methods that have been used in
this genre include Direct Perception, Deep DPG and A3C,
with a popular environment for this genre being the simulator
TORCS [9].
First-Person Shooter
VizDoom is based off of the popular video game Doom
and is a ﬁrst person shooter. In this environment there are
many challenges that make it a useful tool for training
AI. There are many modes of play within the VizDoom
environment, two of which are mentioned here: Defend the
Center and Deathmatch. In Defend the Center, the agent is
spawned in the center of a circular room and is limited to
turning left or right to ﬁnd and eliminate the enemies that
spawn. At most, only 5 melee enemies are present on the
map at any one time. These are spawned against the wall;
they then make their way towards the agent in the center.
As enemies are eliminated, others are spawned to take their
place. The objective is to hold out for as long as possible with
a limited amount of ammunition. Having limited ammo helps
to constrain episodes to a limited time limit, as when ammo
is depleted, defeat is inevitable. In Deathmatch the objective
is to reach a certain amount of frags (i.e. kills) before other
actors on the map or to have the most frags when time runs
out. The view of the agent is determined by the resolution of
the screen chosen and varies between 90 and 110 degrees,
meaning that the agent doesnt have complete knowledge
of its full state at any time. Other obstacles include the
recognition of enemies in the space, aiming weapons, and
navigation of space. Methods that have been used in this
environment include DQN+SLAM, DFP, DRQN+Auxiliary
Learning, and A3C+Curriculum Learning [8, 9].
III. MODEL ARCHITECTURE AND AGENT
TRAINING
A. Deep Neural Network Architecture
The authors here use the DRQN model architecture (Fig-
ure 2) speciﬁed by Lample et al. [5]. This model architecture

Fig. 2: DRQN Architecture
was used in all experiments, as it was noteworthy in its
performance without the additions of PER and DDQ; thus
the authors here endeavored to use PER and DDQ to observe
how such variants can aid a deep learning architecture that
is well suited to this RL problem. A general description of
the architecture is as follows:
• input to the network is a single frame, i.e. the 3 channels
(RGB) of a frame, with each frame being resized to
60x108 pixels
• input is sent through two convolutional layers
• the output of the ﬁnal convolutional layer Cf is ﬂattened
and sent to two destinations
• output of Cf is sent to a dense layer and then to a
subsequent dense layer Ed with sigmoid activation of
size 1. This is sent to a recurrent layer Rl and is also
used for loss
• output of Cf is ﬂattened and then sent directly to the
recurrent layer Rl
• Rl then outputs to a dense layer with ReLu activation
and then to a subsequent dense layer with linear acti-
vation of size three, as there are three actions that can
be performed at a given time (turn left, turn right, and
shoot) in the Defend-the-Center scenario.
The size-1 dense layer is a boolean indicator for enemy
detection and is ﬁtted by querying the game engine for
enemies in the agents vision; if there are any enemies in the
agents view, the true value is 1, otherwise it is 0. The feeding
of predicted enemy detection information into the recurrent
layer was found by Lample et al. to be very beneﬁcial
in training in a related ViZDoom RL scenario known as
Deathmatch, where agents engage in a competitive, FPS
match.
B. Frame Skipping, Fitting, and Reward Structure
Frame skipping is quite crucial in the training of RL
agents that use video data with a reasonably fast frames-
per-second (fps) value [10]. For example, using a frame-skip
value of 2, the agent will make an action on frame 0, f0.
That same action will be performed for the skipped frames,
f1 and f2. There are many reasons for using frame-skipping,
one of the main beneﬁts being that it prevents the agent
from populating the replay memory with experiences that
differ almost imperceptibly from one another. Without frame-
skipping, this can pose a serious issue for training DRQNs,
as the elements of sequences that are sampled for training
will be practically the same, often causing the agent to learn
degenerate, loop-like behavior where it performs a single
action over and over. For all experiments, the ViZDoom
engine was run at 35 fps. The authors here experimented
initially with various frame skip values, opting for a frame-
skip value of approximately 10 for reported results.
For training of a DRQN, sequential updates are important
in order to take advantage of the recurrent layer. Here, the
authors sampled sequences of length 7, used the ﬁrst four
experiences as primer for training - passing LSTM cell state
information sequentially from the previous experience to the
next - and trained on the ﬁnal 3 experiences.
Agents were trained for a total of 11500 games in the
defend-the-center scenario, using ϵ-greedy training. Here, ϵ
was decayed from 1.0 to 0.1 over the course of training.
For the three experiments without snapshot ensembling, a
linearly decaying, cosine annealed (small amplitude) learning
rate was used. For the other three using snapshot ensembling,
a cosine annealed learning rate was used. Instead of using
Adam, which combines classical momentum with the norm-
based beneﬁts of RMSProp, all models were optimized using
the Nesterov Adam optimizer, as this swaps out classical

momentum for an improved momentum formulation, Nes-
terovs accelerated gradient (NAG) [13]. In terms of reward
structure, the agent was given a reward during training of +1
for frags of enemy units, and a penalty of −0.5 for deaths.
A penalty proportional to the amount of health lost was also
included.
C. Hyperparameters
Hyperparameter values for all experiments are as follows:
• γ value of 0.9
• for PER, a β0 value of 0.5 was used, and β was
increased to 1.0 linearly over the course of each ex-
periment
• for PER, α value of 0.7
• for PER, ϵ offset of 0.05 for non-singular priority values
• a batch size of 20 with sequence length 7 was used for
replay memory training
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Scenario
Previous literature concerning ViZDoom has focused on
using the Deathmatch scenario to train their agents in nav-
igation, combat, and enemy recognition. The authors here
focus on the problem of spatial recognition as opposed
to navigation. In order to emphasize this, the game mode
Defend the Center available in the Vizdoom engine was
chosen. This goal of this game type is to frag as many
adversaries as possible before you are overrun. The agent
is allowed no movement in the center of this circular arena
other than the adjustment of its angle of view. With this
limitation, the authors here aim to have agents learn spatial
awareness and to prioritize the targets based on distance from
the agent. As a review of Section II F, in the Defend the
Center scenario, the agent is spawned in the center of a
circular room and is limited to altering the degree of its
view to ﬁnd and eliminate the enemies that spawn. At most
Fig. 3: Defend the Center Scenario: enemies spawn at a
distance from the agent
only 5 melee enemies are spawned against the wall (Figure
3) that will then make their way towards the agent in the
center. The objective is to hold out for as long as possible
with a limited amount of ammunition.
B. Software and Hardware
Six experiments in total were performed, two sets of 3 ex-
periments each. The ﬁrst set was to test the base DRQN and
PER and DDQ variants without snapshot ensembling, while
the second set employed the use of snapshot ensembling.
In both cases, the authors here use the proportional PER
version, rather than rank PER. In all experiments, agents
were trained for approximately 12 hours for a total of 11500
games of the ViZDoom defend-the-center scenario on an
NVIDIA GeForce Titan X GPU using Python 3.7 and the
neural network library Keras, with Tensorﬂow backend and
the NVIDIA CUDA Deep Neural Network library (cuDNN).
C. Results
The aim of these experiments is to test the learning
beneﬁts offered by DDQ and PER - relative to the baseline
DRQN architecture that was formulated by Lample et al.
and reproduced here - in the context of ViZDoom, an
environment where a great deal of state information is hidden
from the agent at each time step. Speciﬁcally, the authors
here studied effects of DDQ and PER on the early phases
of learning, using a sizeable frame-skip value. As stated
above, a frame-skip value of approximately 10 was used
for training of all agents. Given that most research using
ViZDoom has studied RL agents using much smaller values
of frame-skip (around 5), this work allows a look at RL agent
learning rate improvements at higher frame-skip values in the
context of this FPS environment. As noted by Braylan et al.,
using larger frame-skip values greatly accelerates learning
[1]. Such behavior was also noted by authors here; larger
frame-skips led to signiﬁcant accelerations in learning rate,
albeit at the cost of the agents precision. With larger frame-
skip values, the agent can overshoot an enemy when turning
toward the target, decreasing the ability of the agent to center
on target before shooting. At the other end of the spectrum,
too few frame-skips can cause the agent to learn degenerate,
repetitive behavior - as noted earlier in this paper - such as
assigning higher value, irrespective of input, to the action
with the highest variance in value.
For testing, snapshots of each agent - base DRQN, DRQN
with DDQ, and DRQN with PER - were taken at 100 game
intervals over the course of the full 11500 games of training.
These snapshots were then tested in defend-the-center games
and, as with training, tasked with gaining as many frags as
possible. Speciﬁcally, each snapshot was given 100 games to
accumulate frags. In addition, three sets of ﬁve models each
were used in creating snapshot ensembles - one ensemble
each for the base DRQN, DRQN with DDQ, and DRQN
with PER agent types.
Given the higher frame-skip used, the authors, unsurpris-
ingly, observed that in all cases the performance of agents
plateaued after roughly 6000 out of the 11500 games. Given

(a) DRQN
(b) DDQ DRQN
(c) PER DRQN
Fig. 4: Average Enemy ID Cross Entropy Loss - Normalized
by Max Loss
that the subject of interest here is the rate of learning in early
development of the agent, this is not an issue. However, it
does serve as a basis for further research. In particular, one
might ask what the upper limit of performance would be at
smaller frame-skip values using the aforementioned DRQN
architecture with the addition of either PER or DDQ. This
is one of a set of future targets for further investigation.
Concerning metrics of performance, cross entropy loss and
K/D ratio are used to measure agents success at various
time points in development. Cross entropy loss was used
to measure the agent’s recognition of an enemy or enemies
in the current input frame, calculated using the output of the
size-1 dense layer (see Figure 2). K/D ratio is the frags-to-
deaths ratio, i.e. the number of total frags by the agent over
its total number of lives. Roughly speaking, this translates to
frags-to-games-played ratio.
In the case of DRQN with PER, the agent quickly achieved
impressive levels of performance, reaching an average K/D
of 5.62 after 400 games trained (see Figure 5). The maximum
average value (averaged over 100 games for each model and
then ﬁnding max over all models) for enemy identiﬁcation
cross entropy loss was 0.2196 (see Figure 4 - all loss was
normalized by the max loss value observed for each graph),
with a mean average K/D of 4.82 and an average K/D
standard deviation of 0.614. The snapshot ensemble method
improved upon the mean average K/D of DRQN with PER
by over a standard deviation, achieving an average K/D of
5.51. Likely, the snapshot ensemble of PER was so successful
due to PERs aggressive tendency to ﬁt against challenging
samples mixed with the snapshot ensemble methods ability
to create similar and yet competitively diverse committees
using its cosine annealing learning rate.
TABLE I: K/D and Enemy ID Loss
DRQN
DDQ DRQN
PER DRQN
Mean Average K/D
4.65
3.90
4.82
Average K/D Standard Dev.
0.620
0.393
0.614
Max Enemy ID Loss
0.269
0.298
0.2196
For the DRQN with DDQ, the authors report a set of
agents characterized by consistency. Cumulatively, these
agents had a mean average K/D of 3.90 and an average K/D
standard deviation of 0.393, and the maximum average value
for enemy identiﬁcation cross entropy loss was 0.298. The
snapshot ensemble method improved upon DRQN with DDQ
by over a standard deviation as well, achieving an average
K/D of 4.37 .
Using the DRQN architecture mentioned here (without
PER or DDQ), the agent achieved a max average K/D of
5.25, never reaching an average K/D to rival the max average
K/D observed by the agent with PER. Furthermore, the base
DRQN agent had an average K/D standard deviation of
nearly double that of the agent with DDQ, illustrating its
lack of consistency relative to the DDQ version of itself. To
elaborate, the base DRQN agent had a mean average K/D
of 4.65, an average K/D standard deviation of 0.620, and

(a) DRQN
(b) DDQ DRQN
(c) PER DRQN
Fig. 5: Average K/D over 100 Defend the Center Games
the maximum average value for enemy identiﬁcation cross
entropy loss was 0.269. No improvement was observed using
the snapshot ensemble of base DRQNs, indicating potentially
that increased value overestimation in such an environment
led to development of a committee of models that were too
dissimilar to allow for advantages offered by ensembling.
Note that the DRQN architecture used here is efﬁcient and
very competitive, allowing for quick learning of complex
tasks. Thus, PER and DDQ should be looked on as boosts
to a well tuned learning architecture.
In all experiments, successful enemy detection was
achieved by 1000 games by all agent types. In terms of
qualitative notes on agent behavior, DDQ DRQN agents were
better at developing and maintaining an ammo conservation
strategy. Speciﬁcally, it was noted that DDQ agents would
hold ﬁre longer than other agents, allowing enemies to come
closer. This in turn, reduced the possibility of missing a
shot. DRQN PER agents, on the other hand, were observed
to more quickly respond to enemies attacking from behind.
When the agent is damaged, its screen will ﬂash red, and
the amount of health remaining is indicated in the lower left
of the screen. PER agents were seen to more quickly turn to
address and neutralize attackers from behind as well as from
the ﬂanks.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the authors tested double-Q learning and
prioritized experience replay in the context of the ViZ-
Doom reinforcement learning environment. In addition, these
methods were coupled with the use of the efﬁcient deep
neural network ensemble creation method known as snap-
shot ensembling. This breaks new ground in the ViZDoom
environment, as DDQ and PER had not been tested using
this clever, ensembling method - populating members of an
ensemble by effectively training a single model, in this case
a deep recurrent neural network, with the use of a cosine
annealing learning rate. Furthermore, snapshot ensembling
yielded signiﬁcant results, improving DDQ and PER agent
performance by over a standard deviation above the mean in
both cases.
Following this, there are a number of avenues for further
research. One of these consists of examining other DRL
models at higher frame-skip values using ViZDoom. To what
extent are other DRL model structures (dueling network ar-
chitectures, actor-critic models, asynchronous variants, etc.)
affected? Not only does frame-skipping accelerate training,
it can also be looked on as modeling a potential scenario
for autonomous agents in physical 3D space. If on a mission
for example, a search-and-rescue agent’s visual sensors are
damaged and only every 11th frame on average of its video
feed is a valid image, a reasonable question that arises is:
will the agent, trained on a frame-skip distribution with a
mean of x be able to cope with the new, shifted frame-
skip distribution with mean x + k, where k is the addi-
tional number of frames, on average, that must be skipped
before a valid frame is observed? At what values of k
does performance begin to degrade signiﬁcantly. This is also

assuming the distribution shape remains unchanged; what
are the limitations of learning from a certain type of frame-
skip distribution (uniform, Gaussian, Landau, etc.)? Given
its emerging research community and solid RL environment,
the authors here note ViZDoom as a promising setting to test
further research questions such as these.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors here would like to thank: 1) the ViZDoom
development team for their continued maintenance and ex-
tension of this remarkable RL framework, and 2) IEEE CIG
for their support of the annual ViZDoom Limited and Full
Deathmatch Competitions.
