arXiv:2001.09742v1  [cs.CY]  7 Jan 2020
Can an Algorithm be My Healthcare Proxy?
Duncan C McElfresh1, Samuel Dooley1, Yuan Cui2, Kendra Griesman3, Weiqin
Wang4, Tyler Will5, Neil Sehgal1, and John P Dickerson1
1 University of Maryland, College Park

2 Oberlin College
3 Haverford College
4 Pennsylvania State University
5 Michigan State University
Abstract. Planning for death is not a process in which everyone par-
ticipates. Yet a lack of planning can have vast impacts on a patient’s
well-being, the well-being of her family, and the medical community as
a whole. Advance Care Planning (ACP) has been a ﬁeld in the United
States for a half-century. Many modern techniques prompting patients
to think about end of life (EOL) involve short surveys or questionnaires.
Diﬀerent surveys are targeted to diﬀerent populations (based oﬀof likely
disease progression or cultural factors, for instance), are designed with
diﬀerent intentions, and are administered in diﬀerent ways. There has
been recent work using technology to increase the number of people
using advance care planning tools. However, modern techniques from
machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence could be employed to make
additional changes to the current ACP process. In this paper we will
discuss some possible ways in which these tools could be applied. We
will discuss possible implications of these applications through vignettes
of patient scenarios. We hope that this paper will encourage thought
about appropriate applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in ACP as well as
implementation of AI in order to ensure intentions are honored.
Keywords: Artiﬁcial Intelligence · Machine Learning · Advance Care
Planning.
1
Introduction
Modern medicine is exceptional at prolonging life. New devices, drugs, and med-
ical procedures can stave oﬀdeath in cases that–until recently–were immediately
fatal. Legal and ethical norms dictate that each patient may decide for them-
selves whether or not to receive these life-sustaining treatments (LST); however
patients in need of EOL care are often physically or cognitively unable to make
these decisions. In anticipation of this, some people use Advance Care Plan-
ning (ACP) in order to better understand their care options and ensure they
receive only the care they want. Medical decision-making is challenging in gen-
eral, and each patient’s unique values and health conditions complicate things

2
D.C. McElfresh et al.
further. ACP is often an iterative process with many conversations–involving the
patient’s family, medical professionals, and sometimes ethicists, lawyers, and re-
ligious representatives. In the best case, ACP culminates in a written description
of the patient’s wishes, such as an Advance Directive (AD) or Physician Orders
for Life Sustaining Treatment (POLST); these documents are intended to rep-
resent the patient’s wishes to their family and medical professionals, when the
patient is unable to do so.
However, most people do not participate in ACP; in the US, completion rates
are especially low among less-educated, poorer, and non-white people [26]. With-
out ACP, EOL care decisions are often left to a proxy decision maker–usually a
family member or friend. It is a well-known, tragic fact that proxies often make
decisions that contradict their patient’s wishes. Usually this means providing
LST until it becomes medically or ﬁnancially impossible. Insuﬃcient care plan-
ning has ethical, legal, and ﬁnancial implications; LST is often inconsistent with
patients’ authentic wishes, expensive, and emotionally and morally burdensome
for the proxy decision maker. Some of these problems persist even with ACP
since existing forms do not address all EOL care scenarios, and may not lead to
preferred outcomes.
With Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)–and in particular Machine Learning (ML)–
being adopted in various medical and health ﬁelds, we pose the question: what
role can and should AI play in ACP? We begin in Section 2 with a brief history
of ACP, including modern automated and web-based applications. Then in Sec-
tion 3 we look forward to new AI methods that might soon play a role in ACP.
Indeed, the medical community already employs AI for a variety of tasks; it is
easy to imagine such an application for ACP. In Section 4 we discuss two hypo-
thetical applications in this space and discuss their implications. We conclude
in Section 5 with a high-level discussion and recommendations for future work.
2
A Brief History of Advance Care Planning
Formal ACP was ﬁrst proposed in 1967 [15], based on the legal premise that
patients cannot be subjected to medical treatment without consent. This gave
way to the ﬁrst formal ACP documentation, a living will (LW), in which pa-
tients document exactly when to provide–and when to withhold–LST. LWs were
rapidly accepted across the US; by 1986, 41 states had enacted LW statutes [15].
The limitations of LWs became rapidly apparent: their directives were often too
vague, or too particular, to inﬂuence care decisions.
In response, policymakers created a mechanism allowing patients to appoint
a medical power of attorney (MPOA)6, often a family member or close friend, to
make care decisions on their behalf when they could not do so themselves [28].
Around the same time, states began enacting protocols to recognize Do Not
Resuscitate (DNR) and Do Not Intubate (DNI) orders.
6 Nomenclature varies by state and may be phrased as Durable Power of Attorney for
Health Care, Health Care Proxy, Surrogate Decision Maker

Can an Algorithm be My Healthcare Proxy?
3
The latest innovation in ACP is the POLST, a process for translating a
patient’s goals and wishes into concrete medical guidance [4]. POLSTs involve
in-depth conversations between a patient and her provider, and are meant to
go beyond the rigid structure of ADs to capture the patient’s unique health
conditions and goals.
Modern ADs include most of the components described above: precise LW
statements for EOL care, DNR/DNI statements under varying circumstances,
and general wishes or treatment goals. Yet modern methods have still not fulﬁlled
the lofty and important goals of ACP [7,17].
Two primary challenges persist: (1) it is diﬃcult to translate patients’ unique
preferences and goals into care decisions, and (2) few people actually participate
in ACP (30% of adults in the US [26,33]). To address these challenges, some
have turned to automation and the internet.
2.1
Computer-Based ACP
While ACP is traditionally a human-focused endeavor, many computer- and
web-based applications have been developed in recent decades. These applica-
tions range in their focus and function: some simply provide information, while
others help patients complete ADs; some are illness-speciﬁc, while others are
more general [6]. We outline two popular applications here:
PREPARE7 helps elderly users eﬀectively identify and communicate their
wishes for care. This application uses several information sources such as testi-
monials, videos, and narratives to mitigate cultural and communication barri-
ers. PREPARE does not create an AD, but provides a printable “action plan”
recording the user’s wishes. According to the app’s creators, PREPARE leads
to greater rates of documentation and engagement than traditional methods [31].
MyDirectives8 allows users to create and update a digital AD. Users are asked
a series of questions about values and goals; many of these questions are supple-
mented with clarifying information on the relevant medical procedures or health
conditions. The app’s creators claim their application enables patients to cre-
ate a more nuanced AD, and is also more accessible to a wider audience than
traditional methods [12].
Existing applications such as PREPARE and MyDirectives have been shown
to help engage people in ACP. But modern ACP applications still fall short: they
do not capture patients’ nuanced values and wishes, and often fail to inﬂuence
care decisions [27]. With these challenges in mind, we now turn to the future of
AI and ACP.
7 https://prepareforyourcare.org/
8 https://mydirectives.com//

4
D.C. McElfresh et al.
3
Looking Forward: An ACP Decision Aid
Computers and modern AI techniques have been shaping the medical profession
in myriad ways. Early examples include decision-aids for diagnosis and treatment
planning [30,19]; modern ML methods have been broadly applied to detect can-
cers [20]; automated alerts are widely used to detect drug interactions [18] and
sepsis [29].
Future applications for ACP will likely take the form of decision aids, de-
signed to help care providers make better decisions for their patients. Com-
puterized decision aids have been developed for a variety of purposes including
diagnosis, prevention, disease management, and prescription management; how-
ever their impact on patient outcomes is not always clear [13]. These applications
leverage expert knowledge to make predictions (e.g., a diagnosis) or recommen-
dations (e.g., a treatment) to a care provider. In ACP, the decision question
is often whether or not to provide LST, and for how long and in what forms.
Answering these questions is not a matter of expert knowledge, but rather one
of patient goals and wishes. And patient preferences are not simple: they depend
on a variety of factors, such as personal values, religious beliefs, goals of care,
cultural background, and family preferences [24,16,21,32].
An eﬀective ACP decision aid would understand, and accurately represent,
a patient’s wishes for care. This is a complicated task, but recent advancements
in computational methods for preference elicitation and recommender systems
could provide innovation. We brieﬂy describe these ﬁelds here.
Preference Elicitation is the study of people’s preferences, usually by learn-
ing a utility function. This ﬁeld has its roots in marketing and economics though
recent applications include healthcare [22] and public policy [2]. The AI com-
munity has developed a wealth of elicitation methods which can be applied to a
huge variety of scenarios (e.g., see [5,1]).
Recommender Systems share a similar lineage with preference elicitation.
Used mostly in commercial settings, recommender systems use consumer data
to suggest products (e.g., Amazon), content (e.g., Netﬂix), or social connections
(e.g., Facebook) to users; for a review, see [23].
Preference elicitation is the study of what people want; once a person’s pref-
erences are known (or inferred), recommender systems identify an action or
outcome consistent with their preferences. We anticipate that an ACP decision
aid would leverage similar techniques to learn–allowing care providers to take
action on–a patient’s care preferences.
Every AI application has risks. Automating healthcare can threaten patient
autonomy, privacy, and can worsen existing disparities in healthcare [8,14]. These
risks are especially high in ACP, which focuses on life-and-death decisions. Our
goal in this paper is to anticipate these applications, and their potential impact
on patient outcomes. Next, to spark discussion, we outline two hypothetical
AI-based ACP applications.

Can an Algorithm be My Healthcare Proxy?
5
4
Applications
We present two applications with the same goal – to improve patient care out-
comes through ACP. Further, the data and algorithms they use are very similar
(if not identical). However the role they play in ACP is quite diﬀerent, as are
their implications.
4.1
Application 1: CareDecider
First we consider CareDecider, an AI-driven healthcare proxy. CareDe-
cider consists of two diﬀerent web interfaces: one for patients, and one for
care providers. Patients create a proﬁle and enter basic demographic and health
information; they might be prompted to answer some follow-up questions resem-
bling those on ADs. After answering these questions, each user is instructed to
print and sign an MPOA, designating CareDecider as their proxy (in the US
this is a matter of state law). As with (human) healthcare proxy forms, patients
provide copies to their family and care providers. Most importantly, the Care-
Decider proxy form provides a unique patient login code, which care providers
use to access a patient’s CareDecider proﬁle. When a provider logs in, they
answer several questions regarding the patient’s state, prognosis, and the treat-
ment options being considered. Upon entering this data, CareDecider provides
an estimate of whether or not the patient would want to receive aggressive LST.
Consider the following example:
Example A middle-aged woman arrives in a hospital’s emergency department
after suﬀering a major head injury in a car accident. She is in a coma and unable
to communicate, though she is otherwise healthy. Her physician determines that
she has almost no chance of cognitive recovery, and will likely require artiﬁcial
nutrition and hydration (ANH) for the rest of her life if she survives the acute
episode. The hospital has a copy of the patient’s CareDecider proxy form on
ﬁle, so the physician logs in to CareDecider using the patient’s unique code.
The physician answers several questions about the patient’s prognosis (coma
with little chance of recovery) and the treatment option being considered (ANH
versus allowing natural death). Using this information, CareDecider makes an
inference about the patient’s preferences: when creating her proﬁle, she stated
that she is strongly religious; in the CareDecider database, 97% of other pa-
tients who reported being strongly religious also stated they want to receive LST
no matter the circumstances. Using this (among other factors), CareDecider
states that, with 94% conﬁdence, the patient wants to receive ANH and other
aggressive measures to keep her alive despite her injuries.
Back-End Behind the scenes, CareDecider resembles a standard ML appli-
cation – predicting patient care preferences using training data. In this case,
training data might consist of care decisions made by other patients in the past
(from hospital records, or the application itself). Engineers might encode these

6
D.C. McElfresh et al.
decisions into numerical vectors representing each patient’s state and the treat-
ment option considered (i.e., the input variables), and whether they decided
to receive the treatment or not (i.e., the output variables). Using modern ML
methods, CareDecider’s engineers train a model that infers patient care pref-
erences (e.g., they learn a utility function for the patient). When a user creates a
CareDecider proﬁle, they are prompted with additional questions to provide
providing personalized training data.
These additional questions might be selected using techniques from active
learning (a ML subﬁeld) or preference elicitation. When a care provider logs in
and ﬁlls out the requested information, they receive an estimation of the patient’s
preferences.
While apocryphal, CareDecider represents a simple and technically feasi-
ble use of AI in healthcare. Deploying this application would only require suﬃ-
cient training data, and a web interface to initialize and query patient’s person-
alized ML model. From a ML perspective, CareDecider allows care providers
to directly query the (approximation of) a patient’s utility function. Indeed
this is the general structure of hypothetical applications proposed for a similar
purpose–predicting patient mortality to facilitate EOL care discussions [3,25].
In the best case, CareDecider might represent patient goals and wishes
more accurately than their AD or (human) proxy. In the worst case, CareDe-
cider might misrepresent a patient’s wishes, or violate patient autonomy (e.g.,
making decisions that the patient never considered). Perhaps the greatest risk is
that CareDecider will encode human biases into its predictions, and will dis-
proportionally impact already-disadvantaged groups (e.g. people without health
insurance or access to a doctor) [9]. We leave further discussion to future work.
While some of these risks are inherent to any AI-based system, others are a
matter of design. Next we consider an ACP application that – using very similar
methods to CareDecider – avoids (or perhaps conceals) some of the apparent
risk.
4.2
Application 2: PrefList
Next we consider PrefList, which closely resembles existing web-based appli-
cations such as MyDirectives. However unlike these applications, PrefList uses
an AI back-end to create a unique list of questions for each patient to answer.
The patient-facing interface of PrefList is identical to that of CareDecider:
patients enter demographic and health information, followed by some additional
questions, similar to those on modern ADs. However the provider-facing interface
is far simpler: it displays only the information provided by the patient, including
their answers to any AD-style questions. In this way, PrefList ﬁts into the
existing ﬁeld of AD tools, while also leveraging modern AI methods. Consider
the following example:
Example A 73 year-old man with lung cancer in remission creates a PrefList
account. Using answers to his initial health questions, PrefList determines that
his cancer may return, and this may change his care preferences. In addition to

Can an Algorithm be My Healthcare Proxy?
7
the standard AD questions, PrefList asks the man two additional questions:
how would his preferences change if he had a terminal illness and only 1 year to
live? He states that his preferences would not change, and PrefList asks if his
preferences would change with only 1 month to live.
Back-End Behind the scenes, PrefList may be identical to CareDecider.
However unlike CareDecider, the patient’s personalized ML model is only
used to select questions–and is not directly available to care providers. Yet this
ML model still plays an important role in PrefList, by guiding the interac-
tion between patient and questioner. Methods from active learning, preference
elicitation, and recommender systems can still be applied in this setting, with a
less-direct impact on patient outcomes.
The beneﬁts of PrefList seem clear: patients can create personalized ACP
(similar to POLST), without the assistance of a medical professional. Further-
more, the AI back-end might identify which questions are most important for
each patient to answer, given their unique goals and wishes. PrefList doesn’t
appear to raise any risk to patient autonomy, at least not compared to Care-
Decider. However many risks inherent to AI might still be present, and less
apparent, in PrefList.
In particular, issues of bias would be less apparent, yet still present in an
elicitation-focused application such as PrefList. For example, if training data
includes only decisions and health conditions of (say) older white men, the utility
of this application will be questionable for other groups. Using a biased model,
PrefList might guide patients to answer uninformative questions.
Yet another concern is raised by any interaction of AI systems with humans.
It is not immediately clear how a doctor would perceive or react to a description
from a computer about a human’s desires. For instance, does the doctor trust the
computer more over time and eventually stop questioning its authority? There is
some initial evidence that stated accuracy–not just observed accuracy–impacts
a humans trust in an AI system [34], which might also lead to questions of
manipulation. On the patient’s side, she might form a relationship with a system
like PrefList which could develop complacency around her EOL decisions.
5
Discussion
ACP, by nature, is an interdisciplinary social problem. As technology evolves, it
becomes natural to ask about the appropriate use of that technology in existing
areas. In the area of ACP, these questions are just beginning to be asked with
respect to AI. Even the introduction of computers in ACP is a recent devel-
opment. But, to immediately incorporate techniques from artiﬁcial intelligence
without regard for their implications, is unwise. In this paper, we have identiﬁed
some applications that could possibly be developed; we encourage the the ACP
community, medical ethicists, and other AI researchers to discuss their appro-
priateness. Future work must be done in ethical, quantitative, and qualitative
aspects of this problem.

8
D.C. McElfresh et al.
Before any technological intervention in peoples’ lives, particularly in the
medical ﬁeld, there should be considered attention given to whether that inter-
vention is appropriate. To facilitate this dialog, there should be more formal dis-
cussion between AI researchers and medical ethicists where collaboration occurs.
Possible questions to be asked here include whether if a computer should/could
make health decisions on behalf of a human, and if so, how will conﬂicts between
a patients computer-assisted AD and a human MPOA be resolved?
Additionally, there are further technological research needs. For instance,
there should be a concrete formalism describing potential medical actions and
current patient states. Further, for any proposed technological intervention into
the current ACP process, there must be a rigorous method to evaluate what
added beneﬁt the AI system has over current survey techniques. If the theory
behind the use of AI in ACP holds that the surveys used will be more detailed and
exhaustive, then does that hold true when compared to other EOL questionnaires
(e.g., [10,11])?
This paper does not attempt to solve problems in ACP; it aims to open a
door to deeper thought on the intersection of AI and ACP.
Acknowledgments. Dickerson, Dooley, and McElfresh were supported in part
by NSF CAREER Award IIS-1846237 and by a generous gift from Google.
Cui, Griesman, Wang, and Will were supported via an REU grant, NSF CCF-
1852352, and were advised by Dickerson at the University of Maryland. Many
thanks to Patty Mayer, who provided thoughtful guidance from the perspective
of clinical ethics.
