June 2011 
Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review 
1 
 
 
 
Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review 
José A. García Gutiérrez, Carlos Cotta, and Antonio J. Fernández-Leiva 
Dept. Lenguajes y Ciencias de la Computación, ETSI Informática, 
Campus de Teatinos, Universidad de Málaga, 
29071 Málaga – Spain 

In general Evolutionary Computation (EC) includes a number of optimization methods inspired by biological 
mechanisms of evolution. The methods catalogued in this area use the Darwinian principles of life evolution to 
produce algorithms that returns high quality solutions to hard-to-solve optimization problems. The main strength of 
EC is that they provide good solutions even if the computational resources (e.g., running time) are limited.  
Astronomy and Astrophysics fields often require optimizing problems of high complexity or analyzing a huge amount 
of data and the so-called complete optimization methods are inherently limited by the size of the problem/data. 
Reliable analysis of large blocks of data is central to modern astronomical sciences in general.  EC techniques 
perform well where other optimization methods are inherently limited (as complete methods applied to NP-hard 
problems). For this reason  in the last ten years, numerous proposals have come up that apply with greater or lesser 
success methodologies of evolutional computation to common engineering problems.  Some of these problems, such 
as the estimation of non-lineal parameters, the development of automatic learning techniques, the implementation of 
control systems, or  the resolution of multi-objective optimization problems, have a special repercussion in the fields 
and EC emerges as a feasible alternative for traditional methods. In this paper, we discuss some promising 
applications in this direction and a number of recent works in this area; the paper also includes a general description 
of EC to provide a global perspective to the reader and gives some guidelines of application of EC techniques for 
future research.   
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Researchers on Physics often work creating theoretical 
models to fit empirical known phenomena. These models 
serve to guide empirical research and also feed on the new 
data for generally obtain an incremental improving on 
accuracy of theoretical hypothesis. In many cases the 
parameterization of these models may be very expensive. 
Sometimes, small adjustments need involvement of experts 
knowledgeable in the problem domain. And in too many 
cases the knowledge they have of the problem domain is 
insufficient, more inaccurate or not right enough to get the 
expected quality results in reasonable time. In other cases, 
simply the dimension of the problem is such that it is 
impossible to cover all possibilities by conventional 
scanning techniques. The reader will find examples of these 
situations in their own area of study but to cite a current 
example consider the European mission GAIA planned for 
launch in mid-2013. The probe GAIA will be a new and 
important challenge that will test our technological capacity 
in the treatment and processing of large amounts of data 
[43,44] and is a perfect candidate for machine learning 
techniques. During 5 years of planned mission, GAIA will 
remain in a Lissajous orbit around the L2 Sun-Earth point 
getting a catalog of about a billion stars up to magnitude 20 
performing up to 70 measurements of each star for 
determining position, distance and movement on an 
incredible accuracy up to 200 and at least 20 microseconds 
of arc. During this journey, GAIA will participate in the 
detection and orbital classification of dozens of thousands of 
extra-solar planetary systems (see 3.1.1) performing a 
comprehensive survey of objects ranging from a large 
number of Solar System minor bodies to objects of great 
scientific interest in the nearby universe. Probably the raw 
data of GAIA will take years to qualify and be processed 
after the end of the mission. On the following pages will 
discuss the virtues of evolutionary algorithms and their 
applicability to the study of raw data streams and will see 
how evolutionary computing techniques can help in the 
classification of large volumes of information and also in the 
processing of high dimensionality. We will also talk about 
how such techniques have been successfully applied in the 
recognition of characteristics and signal patterns search and 
in the setting of mathematical models to experimental 
evidence, and how evolutionary algorithms can adapt 
successfully to repetitive problems that need to be re-
parameterized.  
2. BRIEF RUN THROUGH EVOLUTIONARY 
COMPUTATION. 
The first question we must answer is: I need to use 
Evolutionary algorithms?. To answer that question we must 
ask a simpler: Which are the benefits of Evolutionary 
algorithms over other kind of techniques? First, evolutionary 
computation 
techniques 
are 
primarily 
a 
family 
of 
multivariate optimization techniques with a high scalability, 
for this, are widely applied to problems of optimization with 
large and complex search areas (e.g. complex landscapes, 
noisy environments etc), recurrent and frequent scenarios in 
physics and especially in the field that concerns us in our 
study. We can to find an academic example in our star. The 
sun is barely eight light-minutes of distance from the Earth, 
since the beginnings of astronomy the study of the sun and 
solar flares has played an important role due to the large 

June 2011 
Techniques of Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review. 
2 
 
 
influence that it exerts over our planet (the sun is the 
principal motor of climatic changes, the source of energy 
that maintains photosynthesis and for that reason the base of 
the trophic chain, and the origin of the seasonal variations). 
Because of all this, a numbers of studies have been aimed to 
studying the sun, dynamics of heliosphere, and the forces 
acting on the solar corona. [1-3, 12-17]; and in spite of it, 
our knowledge of the same is still limited and there does not 
exist a complete mathematical understanding permits us to 
carry out trustworthy predictions about behavior of the sun 
or its evolution in a short or medium term. 
 
 
Figure 1. A photograph of the solar surface showing its 
complex patterns due to convection and magnetic forces.  
Image: Courtesy NASA/JPL-Caltech 
 For example, according to Cayrel y other recent 
publications [10,11] Lithium is 200 times more scarce in the 
sun than is predicted by the physical models, and it seems 
that this deficiency is also to be found in the solar-type stars 
near us [4,5], but the reason for this scarcity is unknown. 
Study of composition, evolution and stellar dynamics need 
of costly numerical models which feed off hundreds of 
variables becomes computationally unmanageable. However 
metaheuristic techniques such as evolutionary algorithms 
allow us to incorporate empirical knowledge, or obtain 
acceptable solutions even with a partial or incomplete 
knowledge of the problem. Consider the behavior of the 
solar corona; some authors suggest that the balance of forces 
acting in the solar corona can be considered as a system that 
tends to a minimum energy state [85]. Evolutionary 
algorithms can be excellent candidates to these problems, 
because they are very efficient to find sub-optimal solutions 
and to recalculate good approximations from a set of 
boundary conditions. A proposal in this regard can be found 
at Gibson et al. paper “Empirical modeling of solar corona 
using genetic algorithms” [86]. 
 Problems where the deterministic exact algorithms haven’t 
be able to find best solution or simply doesn’t work tend to 
be the most adequate for evolutionary methods. Due to the 
fact that the evolutionary algorithms are heuristic, they don’t 
ensure obtaining the global optimum on all occasions, but 
they normally are able to obtain a very acceptable solution in 
a computational time which is considerably low, as well as 
the fact that they don’t require very specific knowledge 
about the problem to resolve.  In order to be able to 
approximate these problems, in research, simulation models 
are used to allow validating the work developed inside 
realistically 
acceptable 
margins. 
The 
Evolutionary 
Algorithms in that environment appear as a new and 
innovating way of finding good adjustments and calibration 
parameters for mathematical models of great analytical 
complexity, giving also the advantage of being enormously 
tolerant to the necessity of re-parameterizing the model or 
carrying out fine adjustments when a new group of 
conditions appears in the system.  
 
2.1 BASICS OF EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS  
 
Although not are new in concept, many researchers are 
unaware of the evolutionary computation techniques, or do 
not differentiate the existing variants. Some people use them 
without knowing, inside toolboxes or integrated into 
commercial or third party routines. Or do not exploit their 
potential to ignore its possibilities parameterization. 
Evolutionary Computation includes a group of heuristics that 
base their functioning on the mechanism for the natural 
selection proposed by biology Darwinism. A good review 
paper of these principles was elaborated by Goowin et al. in 
[19]. 
 In evolutionary computation, a population is composed of 
various individuals; an individual is a candidate solution to 
the problem and is codified according to the necessities (e.g. 
it can be a binary vector); the medium where this individual 
develops is represented by the objective function; and the 
restrictions to the problem tell us just how apt that individual 
is to survive in that environment [18]. During searching, 
over these individuals (parents) of the population are applied 
probabilistic operators (typically crossover and mutation) to 
obtain new individuals (offspring of new candidate 
solutions) that maintain a set of properties of the ancestors 
which are conserved or are eliminated via a selection 
(deterministic o probabilistic), this process is carried out 
with each one of the individuals of the population until a 
new population is formed.  This process repeats itself during 
a certain number of cycles (called generations in 
evolutionary computation) until acceptable result is 
achieved. 
Exist various variations and improvements to this basic 
idea, but for simplicity, we may consider, in spite of the 
wide range of available different algorithms, they are all 
similar in their basic approach and in the usage that they 
give to evolutionary concepts, and differ principally in the 
way they represent the information and in the priority of 
operators 
applied. 
The 
algorithms 
of 
evolutionary 
optimization (EAs) represent the parameters to optimize 
inside a structure similar to natural genes and, consequently, 
mechanisms derived from the Darwinian ideas of natural 
selection and population as drift, are used. Genetic 
Algorithms (GAs) as a particular case, are a type of 
evolutionary algorithm that has proved to be very effective 
in the optimization of non-lineal processes [6, 7], or with 
noise saturation.  Also, the GAs algorithms can embrace and 
apply themselves with success to a wide spectrum of 
problems and for its design it is enough to have a minimal a 

June 2011 
Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review 
3 
 
 
 
priori knowledge of the system.  This converts the genetic 
algorithms into a paradigm of desirable applicability in a 
large number of areas where the complexity of the problem 
makes other types of methodologies inadvisable. 
 
 A different evolutionary approximation is the Genetic 
Programming (GP). This paradigm permits embracing non 
lineal optimization problems based on a symbolic language.  
The paradigm used in genetic programming also uses 
Darwinian selection principals such as selection based on 
fitness, but the genetic operators now acts over symbolic 
trees.  For example, each one of these trees could be made 
up of sentences of a determined programming language.  
This leaves behind the conventional schema and differs from 
the GAs principally in what respects its representation 
system.  The structures subjected to adaptation are generally 
complete and feasible programs, o hierarchical wholes of 
appraisable rules of dynamic form and with distinct sizes 
and shapes. 
 
Despite the variety of variants and diverse paradigms in 
evolutionary computation [20], most authors agree in 
classifying the different variants as: 
 
- 
Evolutionary programming 
 
- 
Evolutionary strategies 
 
- 
Genetic algorithms 
 
- 
Genetic programming 
 
The following paragraphs give a quick look at each of 
these variants. 
 
2.1.1 EVOLUTIONARY PROGRAMMING 
This was proposed by Fogel in [21].  In this paradigm, 
intelligence is viewed as an adaptive behavior.  Fogel used 
the evolutionary programming to evolve a finite state 
automata,  in such a way that they were capable of predicting 
future sequences of symbols that they were to receive.  Fogel 
used a compensation function to indicate if automata was 
good or not at predicting a certain symbol.  A generic   
algorithm for evolutionary programming method is listed as 
Algorithm 1. 
 
Algorithm 1: Evolutionary Programming. 
 
1. Randomly generate a population 
2. Evaluate the aptitude of the population 
3. Repeat 
4. Apply mutation operator to each individual 
of the population 
5. Evaluate each candidate which has resulted 
from the mutation 
6. Carry out the selection via roulette between 
parents and child 
 
7. Until the finish condition is achieved. 
 
In evolutionary programming no recombination operator 
is applied, the reason is it simulates the evolution on the 
level of the species, and as we know, different species can’t 
recombine to create new individuals. 
 
2.1.2 EVOLUTIONARY STRATEGIES 
These were developed by Rechenberg in [22] in an 
attempt to resolve industrial hydrodynamics problems. The 
first version, called (1+1)-EE or two-member evolutionary 
strategy used only one parent and one child.  This child self-
maintained by itself if it was better than the parent.  In the 
generation the new individuals used the function: 
)
,0
(
1
σ
N
X
X
t
t
+
=
+
 
(1) 
Where t refers to the current generation and N is a vector 
of Guassian numbers with a medium of 0 and a standard 
deviation σ.  An algorithm of the evolutionary strategies is 
shown in Algorithm 2. 
 
Algorithm 2: Evolutionary Strategies 
 
1. Randomly generate an initial population 
2. Evaluate the population fitness 
3. Repeat 
4. Apply mutation operator to each individual 
of the population 
5. Apply recombination operator 
6. Evaluate each resulting child 
7. Carry out the selection 
8. Until the finish condition is achieved. 
 
Further, Rechenberg extended the concept of population 
and proposed the (µ+1) – EE [23], in which there are µ 
parents that generate only one child, which ever replace a 
worse father of the population.  Some years later, Schwefel 
introduced the use of multiple children (µ+λ) - EE and (µ,λ) 
- EE [24].  In the first case, in the selection offspring and 
parents are taken equally into consideration; in the second 
case only the offspring are taken into consideration in the 
selection. 
The 
selection 
of 
the 
evolutionary 
strategies 
is 
deterministic, for which reason only the best individuals pass 
on to the next generation.  The principal operator is the 
mutation and the recombination operator plays a secondary 
role and can be omitted. The evolutionary strategies simulate 
the evolutionary process on the level of individuals, for 
which reason recombination is possible. 
 
2.1.3 GENETIC ALGORITHMS 
These were developed by Holland in the beginnings of the 
1960s in the context of machine learning [25], but weren’t 
known about until the publication of his book in 1975 [26].  
However, the genetic algorithms have been used a lot in 
optimization, currently becoming a very popular technique.  
A generic genetic algorithm schema is shown in Algorithm 
3. 
 

June 2011 
Techniques of Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review. 
4 
 
 
Algorithm 3: Genetic Algorithm 
 
1. Randomly generate an initial population 
2. Evaluate the aptness of the population 
3. Repeat 
4. Carry out the selection of the parents 
5. Apply recombination operator 
6. Apply mutation operator to each individual 
of the population 
7. Evaluate each resulting child 
8. Until the stop condition is achieved. 
 
The genetic algorithm emphases the importance of the 
operator of recombination (now is the main operator) over 
mutation, and uses probabilistic selection. The binary 
codification is the most common in the genetic algorithms, 
and given its universality, the basic operators of a genetic 
algorithm are defined as of the given representation.  In the 
terminology adopted in evolutionary computation, the binary 
chain that codifies a group of solutions is called 
chromosome.  Traditionally in a genetic algorithm each 
segment of the chain that codifies a variable is called gene 
and the value of each chromosome position alelo in 
parallelism a biological notation. 
 
2.1.4   GENETIC PROGRAMMING 
Genetic programming (GP) [87] was initially considered a 
variant of genetic algorithms as retains the basic outline of 
these but differs in its internal coding and how to implement 
its operators. In GP, a population of solutions consists of 
programs that encode a given task and objective of the 
optimization will evolve to meet the desired task best. The 
evaluation of the solutions is also different because it is not 
based on the content of the trees as is usually done in genetic 
algorithms, genetic programs but are rated according to their 
behavior when run as a program. Programs often acquire 
genetic elegant solutions with a degree of subtlety not 
provided by the programmer. 
The fitness function in a genetic algorithm typically uses 
an interpretation function to convert its internal codification, 
for example a binary vector, in the parameters of the 
objective 
functions being 
optimized. The 
algorithm 
manipulates the bit strings without regard to their possible 
interpretation. Performance functions are typically very 
simple, usually as simple as a conversion of a bit string to a 
real number. In genetic programming, the interpretation of a 
tree of a particular expression is carried out not according to 
their position but their semantics and semantic association 
between that and the compartments of the program can be 
complex. Depending on the type of semantics used can be 
found complex genetic operators, eg crossover operators that 
preserve the meaning, based on logical operations, or that 
keep 
the 
tree 
balanced 
consistency. 
The 
genetic 
programming applications are increasing in fields of 
aeronautics and space exploration, the design of control 
sequences, and autonomous navigation [88-91], and also in 
computer vision and detection of anomalies [94, 95]. 
  
2.1.5 HYBRID ALGORITHMS AND OTHERS BIO-
INSPIRATED ALGORITHMS 
In analyzed articles we found that in a large percentage 
using of hybrid techniques. Using hybrid techniques we can 
take advantage of the qualities of the different families of 
methods. 
Many 
bio-inspired 
techniques, 
including 
evolutionary methods can are used on hybridization. 
Evolutionary algorithms are population-based techniques, so 
are complementary to other techniques such as those based 
on agents [81], based on pattern recognition [79-80], or 
making logical decisions [82]. For example, GP-Fuzzy 
algorithms [8] includes a population of diffuse rules / 
symbolic structures which are the candidates to be solutions 
to given problem and evolution is consider as an answer to a 
selective pressure induced by its relative success in the 
implementation of the desired conduct. Fuzzy logic, 
neuronal networks and evolutionary paradigms can be 
complementary methods for design and the implementation 
of intelligent systems. Neural networks, for example, are 
very important for plasticity in the design of adaptive 
systems and the recognition of shapes, signs or patterns. The 
reader will find interesting reading the "Neural networks in 
Astronomy" and the paper "Introduction: Neural networks 
for analysis of complex scientific data: Astronomy and 
geosciences" both published by Tagliaferri et al. at 2003 and 
2004 [83,84].  
 
2.1.5 ADVANTAGES OF THE EVOLUTIONARY 
ALGORITHMS 
All the algorithms described above share a number of 
characteristics and qualities that make them unique and 
appropriate for use in research. Among them briefly and 
could highlight the qualities most interesting evolutionary 
computation algorithms are, among others, the following: 
 
- 
They operate over  all population (or group of 
solutions) that avoids that the search gets stuck in 
local optimums 
 
- 
They don’t require expert previous knowledge about 
the problem to be resolved 
 
- 
They can combine with other search techniques to 
improve their performance 
 
- 
They permit parallelization in a simple way 
 
- 
They are conceptually easy to implement and use 
 
 
Analyzing each of these qualities is not the object of this 
paper and the interested reader can be directed to other 
specialized papers for details on each. However there is one 
that 
makes 
evolutionary 
computation techniques 
of 
particular interest to the researcher in physics. This feature is 
the poblational nature of evolutive algorithms. Majority of 
the classic mathematical methods for multi-objective 
optimization operates on only one individual at a time so is 
necessary to execute them on various occasions in order to 

June 2011 
Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review 
5 
 
 
be able to find a group of solutions to locate to allow 
identifying of pareto front.  Evolutionary algorithms have 
the advantage of working with a population (a solutions 
front), which permit it to generate various solutions not 
dominated in a single execution. 
 
3. EVOLUTIONARY TECHNIQUES AS A 
RESEARCH TOOL IN ASTRONOMY AND 
ASTROPHYSICS. 
The number of papers that make use of bio-inspired 
techniques in general and particularly of evolutionary 
techniques has had an exponential growth in the last 15 
years. In particular, the use of these techniques in astronomy 
and astrophysics has developed dramatically. Figure 3 may 
be the number of papers found in the consulted sources and 
increase to reach more than 150 articles published for last 
year.  
In next sections, we conducted a survey of the number and 
topics of articles published and a detailed analysis of some 
of them. The articles analyzed are representative of a wide 
range of areas of research which highlights the high 
applicability of this family of algorithms in this field. You 
can see a detailed topics classification on figure 2. 
As the study of each of these topics separately no sense in 
the context of our study we decided to reduce the number of 
subject areas to four, within which can be grouped most of 
the records found: 
 
- 
Study of distant bodies for optical and radio band 
 
- 
Solar dynamics, helioseismology and stellar evolution 
 
- 
Study of galaxies and other supermassive bodies. 
 
- 
Monitoring and study of high energy events and 
associated theory  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Grouping of topics according to the most 
significant thematic clusters 
 
 The percentages shown are virtually unchanged (or show 
no significant changes) throughout the study period except, 
perhaps, the most cutting-edge areas as the study of extra-
solar planetary systems or search for gravitational waves, 
which barely existed at the beginning of the period but have 
shown a big development in the last decade. 
 
In the following subsections we will develop each of the 
described topics, highlighting the more relevant works and 
that we believe are the more important contributions of the 
authors. 
 
3.1 
EVOLUTIVE 
ALGORITHMS 
ON 
USE 
OF 
OBSERVATIONAL ANOMALIES ON OPTICAL AND 
RADIO ASTRONOMY FOR STUDY OF DISTANT 
BODIES. 
 
It is possible to consider the moment of the popularization 
of radio-astronomy at the end of the forties as a great point 
of inflection in the comprehension of the stellar systems, 
comparable in magnitude to the discovery of astronomical 
spectroscopy at the beginnings of the century because it 
allowed us for first time to explore the universe without 
limitations of the visible spectrum and consequently, opened 
the gate to development of radio-interferometry and the 
discovery or confirmation of dozens of new stellar objects 
types that changed our understanding of physics: black 
holes, quasars, neutron stars, or magnetars [27]. 
 
 
Figure 3. Papers on A&A related areas using 
evolutionary computation techniques. Appearance of 
trend line and moving averages. 
 
However, only the development of the space age and the 
unfolding of scientific satellites permitted increasing the 
rhythm of discoveries, bringing volumes of information 
unknown before to any scientific branch.  Are many the 
fields that open given this perspective for artificial 
intelligence and the number of applications increases as new 
and more sophisticated instruments are launched.  Among 
these instruments we could cite the space telescope Kepler 
[28] launched in 2009, capable of observing simultaneously 
150.000 stars in search of disturbances that indicate the 
existence of extra-solar planets, the Gamma-ray Large Area 
Space Telescope (Fermi) launched in June 2008 and that has 
been for two years tracing a map of gamma radiation sources 
that will permit studying the evolution of the galaxies and 

June 2011 
Techniques of Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review. 
6 
 
 
the history of its formation, and the future Laser 
Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) [30] which will allow 
detection of the presence of gravitational waves and will 
help to validate one of the most controversial aspect of the 
general theory of relativity (see 3.4) in which the 
evolutionary algorithms are already having an important role 
working with databases of simulated sensor data that allow 
making the mission profitable from the first moment and 
guaranteeing  the obtaining of satisfactory information.  
One of the research areas that most publications have 
generated in recent years in is the search for planets with 
potential for life beyond our solar system. After the 
discovery of the first exo-planet orbiting the star 51-Pegasi b 
in 1995 [31], the pace of discoveries and the techniques that 
permit indirect detection of these types of bodies have 
increased exponentially to reach the 61 planets discovered in 
the year 2009 and a total in 2010 of 466 planets.  With the 
launching of the European mission Corot [29] and the 
American space Telescope Kepler, mentioned above, 
missions specialized on search for exo-planets using the 
transit method is hoped that the number of discoveries will 
considerably increase over the next 5 years. The planetary 
transits are very short and rarely visible from Earth, besides 
the possibility of detecting them is inversely proportional to 
the axis of planetary orbit and directly proportional to the 
time of continuous observation. So this technique is really 
effective when 
you monitor the number of stars 
simultaneously is very large (eg. Kepler mission uses 
photometers capable of detecting variations in the shining of 
150,000 stars simultaneously and up to 20 parts per million).  
In 2010, Chwatal et al. successfully applied evolution 
strategy algorithm to the problem of detecting planetary 
transits in systems from multiple time-series data from Corot 
and Kepler [96] (as described previously both observatories 
use the transit method). A simplified formula to calculate the 
approximate duration of the transit of an exo-planet is 
showed as equation 2. In formula given, d* is the diameter 
of the star expressed in solar radii, a is the axis of the 
planet's orbit in astronomical units and m* is the mass of the 
star measured in solar masses. As you can see the transit 
times are very small compared to the planet's orbital period. 
This means that there are other more direct methods for their 
detection. One of the most popular methods for the 
discovery of extra-solar planets has been the method based 
on radial velocity (RV). This method bases its functioning on 
the gravitational influence, that although small, the planetary 
body exert on its star. In 1997, Lazio et al. used a basic 
genetic algorithm to fit Keplerian orbits and to explain the 
irregularities in the periods of some pulsar by the presence of 
other secondary bodies [60]. They observed the genetic 
algorithm was more efficient and found better solutions than 
the traditional exact methods and the new precision allowing 
the discovery of a planetary companion to the pulsar PSR 
B0329 +54 and identified two other potential candidates: 
B1911-04 and B1929 +10.  In the stars, little orbit anomalies 
as influence of planets can be measured via the Doppler shift 
in the light spectrum that can be measured and to reveal the 
presence of a planet, two planets, or a complete planetary 
system.   
hrs
a
m
a
d
C
∗
≅
=
13
*
/
*
13
τ
 
(2) 
Mainly the complexity of this process  is to detect the 
fluctuations that the planetary system altogether provokes on 
the orbit of the star, which can lead to months of careful 
observations, for which reason the model should start from 
the supposition of a system and find the levels in 
concordance with the data observed based on a variable 
number of possible planets, that also do not have to have 
similar orbital configurations, since there could exist stable 
systems made up of planets with distinct orbital inclinations, 
with distinct eccentricity, from almost circular orbits to 
orbits as elliptical as those of the comets, with distinct 
masses, and densities, with moons or without them, and 
which orbit their star at distinct velocities.  This variety of 
situations makes traditional analysis, as based on Fourier’s 
transformed events, that tries to split the original signal in a 
series of signals that in total explain that the wave observed 
(minimizing residual noise) is not correct due mostly to the 
fact that in this approach the orbits need to be approximated 
as circular orbits, which has the result that idealized 
adjustments are reached.  On the contrary, from the point of 
view of an evolutionary algorithm it proves easy to explore 
the group of possible solutions and propose tentative 
solutions with relative rapidity.  It is for this reason that 
these types of techniques are applied each time more 
assiduity to the analysis of observational raw data. In 2010, 
Rozenkiewicz y Gozdziewski [32] proposed a hybrid 
algorithm using a genetic algorithm and a simplex algorithm 
[33] to study star HD240210 which showed abnormalities 
that were not explained in the 1-planet keplerian model but 
could be interpreted in context of the existence of an 
additional planet.  The genetic algorithm was used to explore 
possible variations for orbital parameters like orbital 
eccentricities, orbital periods, and time of periastron passage 
and eccentricity. The algorithm prioritized solutions that 
produced best-fit model parameters for a 2:1 mean motion 
resonance configuration. The results of experiments ended in 
the discovery and subsequent confirmation of planet 
HD240210b.  
In the study of other more massive bodies, like galaxies, 
already at 1995, Charbonneau et al. proposed an open 
framework that would allow integration of different 
techniques, including several evolutionary techniques in 
field work and research in physical sciences. These efforts 
resulted in the software PIKAIA [34] which was 
successfully used in the study of the solar core rotation and 
galaxies interaction. It would be the basis for many 
subsequent studies. Also in 1995, Lazio and Cordes, 
proposed a possible method for searching of partner bodies 
and possible planets around pulsars of known frequency by 
using a genetic algorithm to explore possible systems within 
a given acceptance and margins basing on the manner those 
secondary bodies could affect to pulses creating small but 
measurable perturbations in their pulsation frequency [35]. 
At 2008, Chwatal et al. carried out other particularly 
interesting work [36], in which they proposed the use of 
evolution strategies for the characterization of extra-solar 
planets for detection of planets inside its habitability zones. 

June 2011 
Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review 
7 
 
 
 
Evolution strategies are considered by many researchers [38, 
39] as more effective solving optimization problems with 
continuous parameters that genetic algorithms. This is 
mainly due to limitations in the way of encoding the AGs 
and the absence of self-adaptive mechanisms to allow 
exploring the fitness landscape structure. As we described 
earlier, in Evolution Strategies algorithms, mutation and not 
crossover is considered the main operator, while the 
selection is usually performed deterministically. In the 
classic process of mutation, the mutations may affect one or 
several parameters of one or more individuals of the same 
generation. In the algorithm proposed by Chwatal the 
mutation operator is forced to act for the subset of 
parameters for a single planet in the system each time. This 
type of mutation imitates the evolution of planetary systems 
in real interactions. In view to improve the possibilities of  
convergence of the algorithm, they limits the solution space 
to disallow unstable systems considered unstable by the Hill 
stability criterion which we can calculate the minimum 
radius that should keep the orbits of two planets between 
them to ensure that no destabilizing to each other and 
therefore end up crashing. 
 
Name
R/RE
Orbital 
period 
S.major 
axis 
Estimated 
surface 
temperature 
Spectral 
type 
KOI 
701.03 
1,73
122,4 
days 
0,45 
UA 
262 K (-11º 
C) 
K type 
(4869K) 
KOI 
1026.01 
1,77
94 
days 
0,33 
UA 
242 K (-31º 
C) 
M type 
(3802K) 
KOI 
854.01 
1,91
56,05 
days 
0,22 
UA 
248 K (-25º 
C) 
M type 
(3743K) 
KOI 
268.01 
1,75
110,37 
days 
0,41 
UA 
295 K (22º C)
K type 
(4808K) 
KOI 
70.03 
1,96
77,61 
days 
0,35 
UA 
333 K (60º C)
G type 
(5342K) 
 
Table 1. Some planet candidates similar to the Earth 
discovered by Kepler. Currently Kepler team recognizes 
error range for size is 25-33%. And the error in the values 
of temperatures could approach 20%. 
Also is contemplated a special situation according to 
which, if a planet is on the edge of his Hill's area can jump to 
another different orbit creating a sort of tunnel effect that 
will be very interesting concept for escaping from local 
minima. For example, we can suppose the case in that most 
of the planetary orbits parameters have been determined but 
the final position of a planet that is difficult to determine, 
and is incorrect even in the model. In this circumstance, this 
mechanism can be very useful to allow the planet to reach 
configurations that are more responsive to the model. As an 
additional mechanism to accelerate the convergence 
preventing the algorithm falling on solutions that are even 
close to being valid no have value because it does not fully 
represent the sampled data. They also define a new 
mechanism named as evolution path which consist on 
establish a maximum time of survival for each family of 
solutions. The way of evolution path is to encourage that if a 
set of solutions that have exhausted their survival time then 
the planet's worst fit is removed and replaced by a new one 
that occupies a random orbit consistent with the system, 
thereby increasing the ability of the algorithm to explore 
new areas. To perform a realistic comparison the authors 
used two previous papers referring to v-Andromedae and to 
55-Cancri systems [40, 41], both reporting discoveries 
contrasted using conventional methods, obtaining the same 
or better planetary configurations. 
 In the same line, Konacki and Gózdziewski proposed in 
[61] a modified genetic algorithm that integrates the checks 
of stability as inner fitting procedure. Calculation of this 
stability criterion is based on estimation of Lyapunov 
Exponent for a Hamiltonian, this indicator uses concepts 
from theory of attractors and their behavior is related to the 
measure of chaoticity of a system. The algorithm described, 
named GAMP (genetic algorithm with MEGNO penalty) 
was 
shown 
particularly 
good 
at 
finding 
planetary 
configurations in low-order mean motion resonances. 
Another interesting variation is proposed in the paper of 
2008 signed by Attia et al. [77] which in this case proposes a 
genetic algorithm with dynamic population adjustment to fit 
orbital parameters of the invisible star in the binary system 
η-Bootis basing on the variations in radial velocity for 
visible component observed by Moore in 1905 and 
confirmed by Bertiau in 1957 [42]. Datasets from different 
observations was unified and normalized resulting in an 
optimization problem of moderate difficulty. The orbits of 
the system elements were characterized by 6 parameters: p, 
the orbital period, τ, time of perihelion passage, ψ, the 
longitude of perihelion, e, the orbital eccentricity, K, the 
orbital velocity amplitude and Vo, the system’s radial 
velocity. The proposed algorithm associate crossover and 
mutation rates with each chromosome in every generation 
depending on the fitness value of this chromosome. This 
technique is so called feedback capability and was 
introduced in 1994 by Srinivas and Patnaik [43]. The 
algorithm starts by performing a wide search which allows a 
large range of values for the parameters considered only 
bounded by the observational constraints to locate the area 
of the fitness landscape that is more promising for, once 
located,  perform a search of fine tuning that permits to 
locate the optimum. The results were compared with those 
obtained in the same system [44], achieving greater 
precision in the value of the parameters which have 
repercussions 
on 
higher 
quality 
adjustment 
and 
a 
computational time seven times lower than conventional 
methods. 
 
3.2 EVOLUTIVE ALGORITHMS ON STUDY OF 
SOLAR DYNAMIC AND HELIOSISMOLOGY 
The study of interacting forces inside stars and stellar 
evolution is fundamental to our understanding of the 
universe. The physics of stars is inferred through observation 
and theoretical construction, and development of complex 
mathematical models of its internal structure [92, 46, 65]. On 
simple terms, stars genesis occurs in regions that are dense 

June 2011 
Techniques of Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review. 
8 
 
 
in gas and dust as nebulae. When destabilized, some parts of 
the cloud may collapse under the influence of the gravity, to 
form a proto-star. If the agglomeration is sufficiently dense 
and hot, the core starts a nuclear fusion, creating a main 
sequence star. The characteristics of the resulting star 
depend primarily on its initial mass. The more massive the 
star will become more luminous and therefore faster exhaust 
the hydrogen fuel at its core, although this also depends on 
the type of fusion reaction that predominates in the star [93].  
During this time the star produces energy by hydrogen 
fusion, a process known as proton-proton reaction, the most 
important cycle in terms of energy production in solar-type 
stars. The different paths of stellar evolution known 
representing the most important star types are listed in the 
actually accepted Hertzsprung-Russell diagram drew in 
Figure 4 showing evolutionary path different colors for the 
four types of stellar masses more representative.  
The most direct way to study a star is by studying its light; 
Across the spectrum of a star is not only possible to 
determine the chemical composition of the surface layers, 
but also some characteristic parameters of the star, for 
example: The speed of rotation of a star can be determined 
by observing the absorption lines sharpness; where the most 
defined corresponds at lower speeds, and more blurred 
higher speeds. When the spectral lines are widened with 
pressure is indicative of more frequent atomic collisions in a 
dense gas become diffusing certain energy levels. And when 
a spectrum is split absorption lines indicates the presence of 
strong magnetic fields (this phenomenon is known as the 
Zeeman Effect).  
 
 
Figure 4. Same stellar evolutionary tracks for single 
stars, zero initial rotational velocity, and solar metallicity: 
AGS Asymptotic Giant Branch, RG Red Giant, SubG 
Subgiant, MS Main Sequence, RC Red Clump, BSG Blue 
Supergiant, YSG Yellow Supergiant RSG Red Supergiant, 
WR Wolf-Rayet stars, LBV Luminous blue variables.    
Image: Wikimedia Commons, reproducible under the 
Creative Commons Attribution/Share-Alike License 
The first work that we find where evolutionary techniques 
applied to the analysis of stellar spectra dates from 1999 and 
is signed by Metcalfe [50]. It proposed using a genetic 
algorithm to infer the characteristics for binary stellar 
systems by adjusting the observed light curves with those 
generated by theoretical models as proposed by Wilson-
Devinney [48] and Stagg and Milone [49]. Due to the 
computational weight of calculations they had to implement 
a distributed infrastructure on a grid of twenty-five 
workstations that will deal with the simulations commanded 
by a central server where the genetic algorithm will to 
organize the population and take control of work 
assignments.  The proposed algorithm began generating a set 
of 1000 arrays of randomly distributed parameters which are 
sent to the slave nodes to be responsible for calculating the 
theoretical curves according to the model UBV [51] (The 
letters U, B, and V stand for ultraviolet, blue, and visual 
magnitudes, which are measured for a star in order to 
classify it in the UBV system.); after receiving the results the 
master node sent a new job to slave node and uses the 
calculated curve to measure the differences between the data 
and the actual data observed. The fitness value for all 
parameter sets are assigned based on the magnitude of the 
observed differences. As expected they found that the 
performance of the algorithm is not significantly decreased 
with increasing number of parameters, allowing a greater 
number of parameterized variables exceeding expectations at 
the beginning of the study. 
A little time earlier, in 1996, Gibson and Charbonneau 
[58] had successfully applied a genetic algorithm to solar 
coronal 
modeling, 
an 
area 
particularly 
interesting 
consequence of the nonconformity appreciated in actual 
measurements with respect to the theoretical measures. 
In 2000, Jagielski [99] proposed a genetic programming 
algorithm for prediction of solar flares, based on predicted 
series generated from the information on sunspots and solar 
flares available since 1850. The data set was divided into 
two parts, 10% of the series is split into "training sets of 200 
records," while the rest was reserved for testing the quality 
of the predictions. The results obtained exceeded the 
percentages obtained in previous studies using neural 
networks [97, 98]. Currently and under the European 
program MIERS (Mitigation of Ionospheric Effects on 
Radio Systems), genetic programming algorithms are used 
along with other prediction and forecasting methods like 
neuro-fuzzy predictors to anticipate solar flares that could 
damage satellites and critical communications systems 
through sophisticated models Ionosphere geomagnetic 
activity [100]. 
 In 2002, Metcalfe and Charbonneau publish a possible 
implementation for a distributed genetic algorithm for 
determining the globally optimal parameters for a 
mathematical model used to obtain physical and structural 
information about the stars through the observation of their 
oscillation frequencies [78]. The mathematical model was 
adjusted over a dataset that was obtained from sampling the 
behavior of a white dwarf star getting interesting physical 
results and providing insights into the history of the nuclear 
reactions that took place in the star getting estimations about 

June 2011 
Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review 
9 
 
 
 
the amount of carbon that has been formed on their core, or 
if have formed heavier elements like oxygen, and other 
parameters allowing to characterize the star and know the 
moment of their lifecycle. Although less ambitious, this 
work has a clear precedent in the paper of Tomezyk et al. of 
1995 [59] considering of the application of genetic 
algorithms in the field of helio-seismology. 
 Helio-seismology is especially important on the study and 
determination of stellar evolution history. For example, 
solar-type stars finish their lives when the hydrogen, which 
maintains its primary nuclear cycles, begins to run low. At 
this time the helium that has been produced during the life of 
the star begins to contract by the action of gravity increasing 
the rate of burning hydrogen in the layers surrounding the 
core, converting the star a red giant several times greater 
than the original star (see Figure 4, green evolution path). 
While the helium core continues to compress further under 
the gravitational influence of its own mass, temperatures and 
densities reached start getting the fusion of helium into 
heavier elements like carbon. This carbon in turn can 
combine with two atoms to form helium and oxygen, and 
larger stars even heavier elements. At the end of the life of 
the red giant phase now known as Asymptotic Giant Branch 
(marked by red line on figure), these elements are dispersed 
to form a planetary nebula and in the center of the system is 
a hot white dwarf. In this type of stars already nuclear 
reactions do not occur so its brightness is due to its high 
temperature and decays while the star loses heat to space. 
The way it produces this cooling process can create gravity 
waves and to do vibrate to the star periodically in a certain 
manner; in this case we talk about of pulsating white dwarf 
stars. These vibrations send waves into the depths of the star 
in the form of seismic waves and earthquakes turn these 
small changes in brightness appreciably (only about 1%). 
Using high-speed photometric detectors, researchers can 
look closely at these changes and build computer models 
that reveal the internal structure of the white dwarf and its 
nuclear history. To know more about the physical processes 
that occur in the formation of planetary nebulae can be 
consulted [51, 52]. They are also a valuable source of 
information over the subject the papers of S. Turck-Chieze, 
W. Dapper and teams in particle physics and the standard 
solar model [53].  
Currently are known 26 types of variable white dwarf 
stars, these stars are called in the literature ZZ Ceti stardue to 
the first star of its kind was discovered in the Cetus 
constellation. Usually, these stars have a carbon-oxygen core 
surrounded by a wrapper of pure helium, and over it floats a 
smaller layer of hydrogen. The pulses emitted by ZZ Ceti 
stars are non-radial pulse multi-period, with periods between 
100 seconds and 30 minutes. A radial pulse when the star is 
oscillating around an equilibrium state by changing its radius 
while maintaining its spherical shape. The radial pulse is 
only a special case of non-radial pulsation. Non-radial 
pulsation occurs when parts of the star's surface feel pushed 
in one direction while other parties do so in a different 
direction at the same time. The algorithm they proposed was 
a parallel genetic algorithm based on that developed by 
Charbonneau in 1995 [34] that operates within a client-
server 
architecture. 
It 
would 
really 
be 
considered 
questionable whether the algorithm implemented as a 
parallel genetic algorithm since it is not taking advantage 
implied the use of parallelism in these kinds of algorithms 
[54] but used this as a resource against the high 
computational cost of constructing and simulation of 
different models. The algorithm is running in a Linux cluster 
composed by a variable number of nodes; the server node 
running the master program that initialize a client application 
on each of the slave nodes. The master program creates one 
parameter vector for each node (initially content is random) 
and generates with them a population of candidate solutions, 
then the server sends one of these candidates to each client 
to be evaluated its potential as a solution. The client 
manages information about mass, temperature, composition 
and structure inside its parameters vector and initializes a 
simulation model that will advance the state of the star so far 
measured. Based on resultations algorithm calculate the 
pulsation periods should occur in the star following the 
currently accepted model described by Kawaler and Bradley 
in 1994 [55-57]. Obtaining the observed data not only 
provides valuable information but that indirectly involves 
the validation of theoretical models. 
An interesting contribution is the proposal by Ordonez and 
Dafonte in 2010 [69]. In this paper the authors propose a 
hybrid algorithm that uses a genetic algorithm to adjust the 
recognition fee of a neural network that handles the 
classification and characterization of stellar mass objects by 
studying their emission spectrum. The experiments were 
developed from a simulated dataset of 9048 samples in 
wavelengths between 847.58nm and 873.59nm consistent 
with the data expected to be generated by the satellite GAIA 
RVS instrument. It is expected that data from GAIA 
inevitably contain noise of different nature (level of sensor 
sensitivity, background noise, and instrumental noise, etc). 
Thus is introduced artificial noise in the samples at different 
levels. The genetic algorithm allows efficient handling of 
this dirty information and also work well with the high 
dimensionality of the data selecting the most relevant 
features of the spectrum. The genetic algorithm utilized is 
quite simple, applies regular cross-over strategy and 
algorithm selection classic roulette wheel and as in previous 
cases elitist behavior is introduced. A novel idea is the way 
of choosing the objective function; in this case it comes to 
optimize the recognition capability of the neuronal network. 
Therefore, the objective function is based on the accuracy 
achieved by the network for a correct classification. For this 
end, the training method, reserve 30% of the data for the 
configuration phase, so that the remaining 70% of the 
samples will be those really destined achieving results. Thus, 
the genetic algorithm is responsible for maximizing the use 
of the learning phase, significantly improving the effective 
capacity of the network classification, demonstrating the 
capacity of evolutionary algorithms to work with other 
techniques into hybrid solutions to improve the results of the 
two techniques separately.  
 

June 2011 
Techniques of Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review. 
10 
 
 
  4.2.3 EVOLUTIVE ALGORITHMS ON STUDY OF 
GRAVITATIONAL INTERACTIONS AND PHYSICS OF 
GALAXIES AND OTHER SUPERMASSIVE BODIES. 
In the early universe, star formation rate was higher than 
today, frequently colliding galaxies, generating a wealth of 
new stars with each encounter. Although these events are 
now relatively uncommon, galactic interactions continue to 
forge stars and galaxies shaping.  The study of galaxies is 
similar to the study of continental plates on Earth. When 
dealing with time scales much greater than the length of a 
human life is impossible to empirically observe the event. 
However, the dynamics of interactions between galaxies and 
deformation characteristics and ways that these interactions 
act can to give a lot of information and allow us a projection 
through time. However, these simulations typically require 
many hours of computer and need huge precisions due to the 
size of physical magnitudes implied. 
Theis et al. in 1999 [70] used a modified version of the 
Charbonneau algorithm of 1995 [34] to study the 
evolutionary history of the galaxy NGC4449, a dwarf galaxy 
of Magellanic type which is currently very active star 
formation through its gravitational interaction with DDO125 
other nearby dwarf galaxy. Mathematically the proposed 
problem can approach like the optimization problem of 
fitting an N-body simulation for a given observed dataset. 
The precision of these measurements depends largely on the 
increase in accessible particle number. The individuals in the 
population encode a set of fitting parameters which will 
input values for simulations. Among the parameters 
considered are the encounter eccentricity, the mass ratio, the 
orientation of the orbital plane, the inclination axis, and the 
position of the galactic disks. The quality of individuals is 
measured using a quality function based on the similarity 
between the data obtained by simulation and observed data 
where unstable parameter sets or impossible configurations 
are penalized. They used roulette-wheel selection and 
uniform crossover, which together with mutation mechanism 
are responsible for generating variability. Introduced 
mutation rate is relatively high, 0.5%, and the algorithm is 
responsible for adapting during the course of the search to 
avoid inbreeding (homogenization of gene pool by one or a 
few dominant genes). During testing was found that the 
genetic algorithm typically converged after 100 generations, 
which is about 10 ^ 4 simulations. And while for similar 
results using a traditional model 3CPU GRAPE would have 
needed 3.4 years, the presented model reduced the CPU 
requirement to 5.6 hours on a 150MHz-Sparc10, which 
represents a difference large enough to make a problem 
manageable previously unmanageable.  In the same line, in 
1997, Wahde et al. proposed the application of a genetic 
algorithm to obtain scientific information of interest for the 
characterization of galaxies. They take same characteristical 
values like the scale radii, scale heights, disc inclinations, 
velocity dispersions, or Masses ratio from real observations 
if galaxies on interaction where had parameters unknown 
and some measures been strongly affected by noise [71]. The 
final results were very good despite the was not much 
innovation in the type of algorithm used, but so in the way of 
choosing the most promising solutions that now considers 
the existence of certain characteristic shapes such as bars, 
rings, ovals or spirals, thereby introducing much more 
specific knowledge and improving the quality of the results. 
 In a more recently paper, in 2001, Wahde et al. [62] used 
a genetic algorithm to study the influence of past interaction 
between and the galaxy NGC5195 and the Messier M51 
(commonly known as the Whirlpool Galaxy). On this 
occasion, the information encoded on chromosomes up to 11 
parameters of both galaxies, as their masses, their position 
relative to the observation points, their radial velocities, 
direction of their axes of rotation or inclination and position 
angles. In this case the novelty of this study is how to 
perform the simulations. The simulation model does not 
focus on highlighting the interactions in a short period of 
time but that the positions of both systems are integrated 
from beginning to influence each other as point particles 
until it reaches the time of observation, trying to understand 
the mechanisms of the interactions between. During testing, 
the algorithm works with samples of 5000 particles in each 
simulation and the simulated time period exceeds 1.05 Gyr 
(1000 time units). The population size was 50 individuals 
per generation and the algorithm seemed to converge on 
average in generation 70. Although a second phase of the 
experiments got a greater accuracy result using populations 
of 250 individuals, where the algorithm converged after 200 
generations. What is interesting here was that the increase in 
the time it takes the algorithm to find a solution within the 
established acceptance margins did not grow the way you 
would expect from a traditional algorithm to grow the 
number of points. Two years later, in 2003, Theis and 
Spinneker created the first high resolution intensity and 
velocity maps for the M51 system based on these data where 
in-depth study of the asymmetry of the spiral arms of this 
galaxy [63]. In same year, Teuben proposed an algorithm 
based on genetic programming [102] to approximate the 
dynamics of galactic interaction using the toolbox based 
NEMO (Stellar Dynamics Toolbox) [101]. Later, in 2004, 
Li, Yao and Frayn, proposed an evolutionary approach using 
genetic programming to mathematical modeling of the 
brightness distribution in elliptical galaxies [103]. In this 
case using an encoding based on mathematical operators. 
We also consider especially remarkable work carried out by 
Cantu and Kamath in 2002 [64] which propose a hybrid 
solution AG-ANN, consisting of a genetic algorithm and 
back-propagation neural network with one hidden layer. In 
this paper, genetic algorithm performs the task of finding the 
best weights vector, and finds also the smallest number of 
input features to allow the neural network correctly 
classified observations of distant galaxies. They used a 
genetic algorithm with a population of 50 individuals, binary 
encoding, pair-wise tournament selection and multipoint 
crossover. Although this simple model, algorithm reached in 
some configurations accuracy above 72.69 percent. Again 
the hybrid solution results exceeded expectations and were 
better than expected. Neural networks are often used in 
hybrid solutions as a substitute for genetic programming 
algorithms. In this case the knowledge is lost less specific 
encoding is stored in the network connections.  
 

June 2011 
Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review 
11 
 
 
 
4.2.4 EVOLUTIVE ALGORITHMS ON SUPERNOVAE 
STUDY 
AND 
OTHERS 
HIGH-ENERGY 
EVENTS 
REGISTRY. 
The fate of a star depends primarily on its mass, the stars 
of mass greater than eight times the Sun usually finish their 
lives in a core-collapse supernova, while the smaller stars, 
probably end up forming a planetary nebula, or become 
white dwarfs [104]. In turn, the remnant of a supernova may 
have different endings depending on its mass [45- 47]. If the 
initial mass of the star is greater than about 30 solar masses 
(the exact limit depends of the star metallicity), part of the 
outer layers can’t escape of the gravitational pull of the 
neutron star and fall on it for causing a second collapse and 
creating a black hole as the final remnant (marked by blue 
and purple lines on figure 4). Two close binary stars can 
follow more complex evolutionary paths, such as mass 
transfer onto a white dwarf companion that can potentially 
cause a supernova. Some types of supernova as the 
hypernovae is often associated with one or more shoots of 
high-energy emissions generally in the form of gamma rays 
(and also other lower-frequency emissions in X-rays, 
ultraviolet and visible light). These emissions are very 
important in the field cosmological because they are 
detectable at huge distances. For example, the detection of a 
gamma-ray burst to 13 billion light years away by the NASA 
SWIFT observatory in 2009 allowed to confirm the farthest 
supernova explosion recorded. This event lasted only a few 
seconds was named GRB 090423.  
But gamma-ray bursts are not something exclusive to the 
collapse of stars but also may to reveal many of the most 
violent events in the universe for example interactions of 
objects which have huge mass, this is the case of super-
massive black holes or by interactions in binary systems 
consisting of two black holes or a black hole and a neutron 
star. This is the assuming that Zwart et al. studied in 
2001[72]. In this work they used an evolutionary algorithm 
for fitting a set of numerical models to several real 
observations of gamma emissions and tried to explain these 
by generation of  high-energy emission jets in a rotation 
system where particles of ray interacts with the interstellar 
medium. His model needed a total of 14 parameters, so the 
algorithm chosen follows a scheme where each chromosome 
is formed by a vector containing each of these 14 real values. 
The selected mutation rate was very high for this kind of 
algorithms, over 5%, allowing exploratory high capacity 
although it might not be appropriate in some cases. Both, the 
mutation as in the crossover operators parameters are 
monitored and they are maintained within margins of 
acceptance established based on observed data and the 
limitations of physical variables and criterions to avoid 
occurrence of very similar solutions (within certain ranges of 
similarity). In this manner, variability in the offspring was 
forced to obtain a greater explorative capacity. Crossover 
was performed in a uniform manner, so that a gene belongs 
to a parent has a 50% chance to spread her son but the paper 
does not detail how recombination occurs and whether this 
will retain the solutions with or without physical sense.  
Descripted scenery is one of many situations where 
gamma emissions can occur, some this sceneries can product 
another event of equal scientific interest; it is the generation 
of gravitational waves. Gravitational waves are an untested 
theoretical result of the theory of general relativity according 
to which an extremely massive rotating body should create a 
distortion in the form of space in a manner similar to the 
waves as they move on a fluid. These gravitational 
distortions although very weak and undetectable from the 
ground 
would 
be 
measurable 
by 
high-precision 
interferometers. To accomplish this task, in 2004 the United 
States lunch to orbit the observatory LIGO (Laser 
Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory). Many 
papers have been proposed to suggest the use of different 
techniques of data mining to study of LIGO data streams. 
One of the most interesting is the proposal of Lightman et al. 
at 2006 [73] which proposes the implementation of an 
genetic programming algorithm to maximize the chances of 
detecting gravitational waves minimizing the risk of false 
alarms in LIGO. In Lightman algorithm a chromosomes 
encode a tree structure where each node is formed by logical 
rules that represent a logical clause and each branch forms a 
decision path that allows to detection algorithm to deduce 
whether affirmative or negative cases. The fitness of a 
candidate is given by its ability to generate a correct 
detection. Result of the selected encoding the crossover 
operator has to work at the logical level. Given to both 
parents, the algorithm creates new sub-tree, choosing at 
random points in the parent trees that create a logical 
partition clause, generating the new offspring as the union of 
two sub-trees retain a logical coherence. The operation of 
mutation, consist in this case to change a logical operator in 
the clause (in the simplest case) or the introduction of a new 
full sub-tree (in the case more complex). The fitness function 
takes in consideration the penalty for false positives and 
other characteristics like the tree size or the difficulty of 
processing. The results suggest that the evolutionary 
program proposed helped to create effective solutions 
potentially valid for the detection of gravitational waves 
from the LIGO raw datasets and identify unitary building 
blocks in these solutions that could help improve existing 
detection algorithms and discover new creative solutions. 
 The LIGO mission is a natural successor in the probe 
LISA. This mission seems much more interesting for future 
studies. First, as a consequence of its higher resolution and 
for larger volume of data generated and secondly, by its 
greater ability of this study the origin of the detection 
objects.  The first paper that made use of genetic algorithms 
applied to the analysis of data from LISA was introduced by 
Crowder and Cornish in 2006 [74]. It presents an effective 
method to isolate potential sources of gravitational waves 
from the possible tens of thousands of overlapping signals in 
the LISA sensors data stream, reducing the level of 
confusing noise. The evolutionary approach is used as a first 
step in cleaning up the signal and constraining the 
parameters and allowing a further refining process using a 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm. Each candidate 
solution represents a waveform template and within each 
individual a chromosome is formed by set of the parameters 
that define the shape of the signal. Again is used uniform 
crossover operator witch to take the center point of array 

June 2011 
Techniques of Evolutionary Computation in Astronomy and Astrophysics: A Review. 
12 
 
 
parameters as partition point, and recombination is thus 
carried by one half from each parent. More interesting is the 
mutation operation used; In the article the authors present a 
comprehensive empirical study where they test different 
mutation rates and their influence on the speed and quality of 
convergence. Also is weighted the influence of parameters 
such as the existence of elitism and population growth. The 
study proposes an improved algorithm where these 
parameters are analyzed as to optimize parameters allowing 
it to evolve and adapt dynamically. For example, they take 
greater probability of mutation in the early stages of the 
search (about 0.4) and much lower (less than 0.02) when the 
convergence is close. In a similar research, in 2009, Petiteau 
et al. [76] presented several improvements to this algorithm 
by introducing some interesting ideas, for example, the 
concept of temperature which is used in other techniques as 
simulated annealing to dynamically adjust the operating 
capability of the algorithm. Or the concept of brother, to 
explore new areas based on promising areas already 
explored. And two closely related concepts, the local 
mutation and freeze bits, both allowing fine adjustment in 
advanced stages and a better control over the premature 
convergence. The genetic programming algorithms can also 
be useful in detecting high-energy events and in particle 
characterization. In 2005, a multidisciplinary team of 
scientists from the U.S., South America, Europe and Korea 
[106] proposed a genetic programming algorithm that 
showed promising results in detecting and predicting 
trajectories of high energy particles within the FOCUS 
project [105]. Again in this case the encoding used by the 
mathematical algorithm is a tree where each node represents 
a simple math (arithmetic, trigonometric, logical), and each 
branch a variable kinematic or a characterization parameter 
of the particle. 
 Finally we consider interesting to mention the extensive 
paper published by Gair and Porter in 2010 [75]. They 
investigated 
new 
methods 
of 
collaborating 
mixture 
techniques in which a genetic algorithm, similar to that 
described in previous papers, formed by a nested sampling 
algorithm [66,67] and a Metropolis-Hasting method [68] (a 
more efficient variant of the family of Monte Carlo Markov 
Chain methods) were used together in a collaborative 
manner. In this approach which could be classified as a 
mixed hybrid algorithm, the genetic algorithm is responsible 
for guiding the search, locating areas of interest within 
which there will be a competitive process to form islands of 
local search. In this case the fitness function is the Fisher 
Matrix related with estimation errors. The crossover 
operation also takes place within each island so that the best 
solution of the group and the second best solution will give 
rise to new offspring. Tests from the mock LISA data set 
behaved extremely reliable manner and required only small 
execution times even on computers of modest benefit, 
besides allowing the simultaneous detection of several 
sources.  
 
 
4. CONCLUSION, RESEARCH IMPLICATIONS 
AND LIMITATIONS 
Although the application of evolutionary techniques in 
some fields as astronomical sciences is still incipient, these 
techniques are beginning to show its potential as a powerful 
analysis, configuration, and optimization tool in complex 
search space problems not treatable by conventional 
methods or in noisy situations, overlap or signal degradation. 
The combined use of these techniques together others 
specialized in clustering or classification issues allows 
obtaining of complex patterns and extracting valuable 
information from raw data. Its great adaptability and 
tolerance to the erroneous data also make it good tools for 
optimization and parameter fitting of complex functions as 
common in empirical science. An added benefit over other 
techniques of mathematical optimization evolutionary 
algorithms allow obtaining many multiple solutions, quasi-
optima solutions, approximate, or in time bounded, and an 
easy way to avoid the dreaded local minima in complex 
landscapes. Perhaps the biggest limitation of these 
techniques is, that, as with all heuristics, in an evolutionary 
algorithm is vitally important to choose a correct guiding 
function and give to algorithm enough specific knowledge of 
the problem to achieve a successful convergence in 
computational time. Despite this, a GA does not need to 
make any assumptions about how the search space, hence its 
wide applicability. 
5. SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER 
RESEARCH 
The rapid adoption of new techniques is closely related to 
these benefits. In this paper we have seen that these benefits 
exist and future research undoubtedly find new ways and 
areas of applicability where initial studies show promising 
results. The fields of research are many, from data fitting and 
parameterization of models, where these techniques have 
shown interesting features such as to be scalable 
(performance does not worsen significantly by increasing the 
number of dimensions), its insensitivity to corruption and 
noise, or its tolerance to local minima, until data mining 
applications, search for components in n-dimensional data, 
training of machine learning algorithms, or as efficient 
alternative to analytical optimization methods of intensive 
CPU usage. Future papers should evaluate these possibilities 
and to incorporate new advances in algorithms to the fields 
of applied research that are already known.  
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Dr. Alberto Castro-Tirado for their corrections 
and suggestions to this paper.
