Scalable Communication for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Xudong Guo , Daming Shi , Wenhui Fan
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Communication can impressively improve co-
operation in multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL), especially for partially-observed tasks.
However, existing works either broadcast the mes-
sages leading to information redundancy, or learn
targeted communication by modeling all the other
agents as targets, which is not scalable when the
number of agents varies. In this work, to tackle
the scalability problem of MARL communication
for partially-observed tasks, we propose a novel

nism (TEM). The agents adopt local communica-
tion to send messages only to the ones that can
be observed without modeling all the agents. In-

ing, we design message chains to forward informa-
tion to cooperate with the agents outside the ob-
servation range. We introduce Transformer to en-
code and decode the message chain to choose the
next receiver selectively. Empirically, TEM outper-
forms the baselines on multiple cooperative MARL
benchmarks. When the number of agents varies,
TEM maintains superior performance without fur-
ther training.
1
Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved re-
markable success in many complex challenges, especially in
game playing [OpenAI et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019].
MARL shows great potential to solve cooperative multi-agent
real-world tasks, such as autonomous vehicle teams [Shalev-
Shwartz et al., 2016], robotics control [Kober et al., 2013]
and intelligent traffic control [Wei et al., 2019]. However,
some essential obstacles still exist for MARL to reach satis-
factory performance. When training the MARL algorithms,
the agents keep updating their policies and causing dynam-
ics in the environment, which may hinder the model con-
vergence. Worse still, in most cooperative multi-agent tasks,
agents can only observe part of the environment. Partial ob-
servability and non-stationarity make it harder to success-
fully cooperate, even though some works employ centralized
Figure 1:

are trying to surround and capture the target (square). The dotted
circle is the observation range for the agent with the same color.
The black lines are message chains. ⟨·⟩denotes concatenating. The
cross denotes not sending or forwarding after receiver selection. The
agents a, b and c indirectly cooperate by sending (ma) and forward-
ing (⟨ma, mb⟩) messages to capture the target T. As they are not in

training and decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm to im-
port a critic to coordinate the whole team [Yu et al., 2021;
Lowe et al., 2020; Son et al., 2019; Rashid et al., 2018].
Inspired by the ways how humans and animals cooperate,
communication is introduced to share information between
agents.
Some works broadcast the messages to all the
other agents [Zhang et al., 2019; Sukhbaatar et al., 2016;
Foerster et al., 2016], and other recent works try to learn
targeted peer-to-peer communication to reduce the commu-
nication bandwidth [Ding et al., 2020; Jiang and Lu, 2018;
Yuan et al., 2022]. Attention mechanism from Transformer
[Vaswani et al., 2017] is also employed to learn the commu-
nication [Jiang and Lu, 2018]. However, the existing meth-
ods rely on modeling every teammate in the environment by
ID to decide whether to communicate, which will bring huge
computational overhead when the number of agents is large.
As the modeling network is trained by a specific amount of
IDs, the learned communication mechanism is not scalable to
reuse when the number of agents changes. In fact, the agent
cannot know the state of an agent outside the observation
range, and cannot judge whether the information is useful for
arXiv:2301.01919v2  [cs.MA]  12 Jun 2023

it, so it is unreasonable to directly share information with such
an agent. For example, for applications to autonomous vehi-
cles, only the vehicles nearby are worth communicating with
to avoid collisions. Moreover, communication with other ve-
hicles should adapt to different numbers of agents as the traf-
fic situation varies a lot.
In this work, to tackle this new problem - the scalability
of MARL communication, we propose a scalable multi-agent

Mechanism (TEM) to tackle the abovementioned challenges
as shown in Fig 1. We adopt local communication to send
messages only to the agents in the observation range, with-
out modeling all the agents. The agent will decide whom to
communicate with by its own intention and by observing the
agents in the range. Thus, no matter how the overall num-
ber of the agents changes, the learned communication mech-
anism is scalable. To better utilize the key information and
indirectly cooperate with the agents outside the range, we de-

ing to form a message chain. The agents can send and for-
ward the messages so that the chain connects agents from
different ranges. For example, the agent a in Fig 1 would
like to surround and capture the target T with other agents,
thus the agent a may send a message to the agent b instead of
d, though d is the nearest. Then the agent b can forward the
message together with the information from itself to c, so that
a, b and c can cooperate for the same goal though there is no
direct communication between them. Similarly, in our daily
life, cooperation in a big company or organization relies on

hard to directly find the exact contact in another department.
To suit the unfixed length of the message chain and ensure
the communication mechanism is scalable, we design a new
message network and employ Transformer to encode and de-
code the sequence of messages. Furthermore, augmented by
the attention mechanism in the Transformer, the communi-
cation is selective by modeling the correlation between the
messages and the observation. The message network is inde-
pendent and can be plugged into any CTDE method. What’s
more, we design a loss to guide the agent to estimate the im-
pact of the message on other agents. Note that we do not

communication efficient.
For evaluation, we test TEM on three partial-observation
cooperative MARL benchmarks: the Starcraft Multi-Agent
Challenge (SMAC) [Samvelyan et al., 2019], Predator Prey
(PP) [Kim et al., 2019] and Cooperative Navigation (CN)
[Lowe et al., 2020], where TEM reaches better performance
than the baselines. We also evaluate the scalability of TEM.
Without extra training, TEM can suit both situations where
the number of agents increases and decreases, and still out-
performs the baselines.
In sum, the proposed TEM has three advantages: 1⃝decen-
tralized without a central communication scheduler, which
is more practical; 2⃝selective to send and forward informa-
tion to the agent who needs it most, while other methods use
broadcast which may bring redundant information and the
communication cost is high; 3⃝scalable without retraining
since TEM does not model all the agents as other methods.
2
Related Works
Learning how to communicate is a popular research domain
in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Research in this do-
main focus mainly on cooperative scenarios, where agents
could communicate with each other explicitly. In the early
works, RIAL and DIAL [Foerster et al., 2016] are designed
to learn communication, where messages are delivered from
one timestep to the next timestep in a broadcast way. Comm-
Net [Sukhbaatar et al., 2016] proposes a hidden layer as com-
munication and allows the agents to communicate repeatedly
in each step. IC3Net [Singh et al., 2018] brings in the gat-
ing mechanism to control communication based on Comm-
Net. Both of BiC-Net [Peng et al., 2017] and ATOC [Jiang
and Lu, 2018] implement the communication layer as bidi-
rectional RNN, which inputs the observations of all agents
and outputs the action or the integrated thought of each agent.
However, these methods either broadcast the messages or rely
on a centralized communication layer, which is high-cost and
not stable. Communication should not only serve as an inte-
gration of information, instead, the agents should share infor-
mation selectively through peer-to-peer communication.
To avoid broadcasting messages, recent works try to de-
sign more intelligent communication mechanisms.
CTDE
paradigms are also imported to implement decentralized com-
munication. Some works are based on QMIX [Rashid et al.,
2018]: VBC [Zhang et al., 2019] proposes a request-reply
mechanism and a variance-based regularizer to eliminate the
noisy components in messages. TMC [Zhang et al., 2020]
maximizes the mutual information between the decentralized
Q functions and the communication messages while minimiz-
ing the entropy of messages between agents. MAIC [Yuan
et al., 2022] allows each agent to learn to generate incen-
tive messages by modeling every teammate and bias other
agents’ value functions directly. Some are based on another
CTDE framework MADDPG [Lowe et al., 2020]: TarMAC
[Das et al., 2019] proposes a targeted communication behav-
ior via a signature-based soft attention mechanism. Besides
the message, the sender broadcasts a key used by the receivers
to gauge the message’s relevance. I2C [Ding et al., 2020]
learns a prior net via causal inference for peer-to-peer com-
munication. The influence of one agent on another is inferred
via the joint action-value function and quantified to label the
necessity of peer-to-peer communication. Nevertheless, the
methods above need to model every other agent in the envi-
ronment to achieve individual communication, which is not
scalable and practical.
To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing MARL
communication methods considers the communication scala-

3
Background
3.1
Policy Gradient (PG) Reinforcement Learning
Policy Gradient (PG) reinforcement learning has the advan-
tage of learning a policy network explicitly, in contrast to
value-based reinforcement learning methods. PG methods
optimize the policy parameter θ to maximize its objective
function J(θ) = ES(Vπθ(s)). However, due to the variance
of environments, it is hard to choose a subtle learning rate in

reinforcement learning. To resolve this problem and ensure
the safe optimization of policy learning, the Trust Region Pol-
icy Optimization (TRPO) [Schulman et al., 2015] increases
the constraint of the parameter difference between policy up-
dates.
Based on TRPO, a simplified version Proximal Policy Op-
timization [Schulman et al., 2017] is carried out, maintaining
the motivation to constrain the learning step while more ef-
ficient and easy to be implemented. The object function of
PPO can be written as:
L(s, a, θk, θ) =min[ πθ(a|s)
πθk(a|s)Aπθk (s, a),
clip( πθ(a|s)
πθk(a|s)), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Aπθk (s, a)],
(1)
which forces the ratio of πθ(a|s)
πθk (a|s) to locate in the interval (1−
ϵ, 1 + ϵ), so that the new θ is not too far away from old θk.
3.2
MAPPO Algorithm
Multi-agent PPO (MAPPO) introduces PPO into the multi-
agent scenario [Yu et al., 2021]. MAPPO mainly considers
decentralized partially observable Markov decision processes
(DEC-POMDP). In an environment with n agents, s ∈S de-
notes the state of the environment. The agent i only has a
local observation of environment oi = O(s) and chooses its
action based on its observation and policy ai = πi(ai|oi).
The joint action A = (a1, ..., an) denotes the set of actions of
all agents. Then, the environment transits its state based on
the transition probability P(s′|s, A). In MARL, all the agents
will get rewards based on the transition of state and their ac-
tions (or more likely joint action) ri = R(s, A). Each agent is
supposed to get a higher accumulated reward P
t rt
i. There-
fore, the agents optimize their policy to maximize the dis-
count accumulated reward J(θ) = Eat,st[P
t γtR(st, at)],
where γ ∈(0, 1] is the discount factor.
MAPPO utilizes parameter sharing within homogeneous
agents, i.e., homogeneous agents share the same set of net-
work structure and parameters during training and testing.
MAPPO is also a CTDE framework, namely, each PPO agent
maintains an actor network πθ to learn the policy and a critic
network Vϕ(s) to learn the value function, where θ and ϕ are
the parameters of policy network and value network, respec-
tively. The value function requires the global state and only
works during training procedures to reduce variance. In our
work, we take MAPPO as our baseline and backbone, and
add TEM as the communication mechanism into MAPPO.
4
Methods
In this section, we introduce the detailed structure and de-
sign of TEM. Before each action decision-making, the agents
communicate with each other following the designed proto-
col, sharing the key information efficiently and selectively.
We design a message module based on Transformer to en-
code the messages received. At the same time, the module
is able to decide whether to communicate and whom to com-
municate with. The message module works together with the
original action decision module from MAPPO, to form the
Figure 2: Workflow of TEM during one time step. A denotes the
actor network, C denotes the critic network, E denotes the environ-
ment. One training step has three phases: communication, action
and learning. The execution only includes the first two phases and
the critic will not work.
actor network in the CTDE structure. The workflow of TEM
is presented in Fig 2 and Algorithm 1. We design an indepen-
dent loss to encourage the message module to maximize the
messages’ impact on other agents. The whole model has the
scalability to transfer from one scenario to another. As the
message module is parallel to the action module, our model
can be plugged into any CTDE structure.
4.1
Communication Protocol Design
We design a communication protocol following the way how

a forwarding chain: the chain starts with an agent with key in-
formation to share, and the following agents merge their own
information into the chain and then forward the new message
to the next agent. The chain ends when the final agent finds
the message useless for others, or there are no more potential
communication objects.
When designing the communication protocol, we mainly
consider the following questions: (1) Whether to communi-
cate? (2) Whom to communicate with? (3) What to commu-
nicate? (4) How to utilize the messages?
(1) Whether to communicate? As shown in Fig 2, in ev-
ery step of execution and training, the first stage is commu-
nication. When the communication stage is done, the actor
networks for each agent will make the action decisions by
the observations and messages. In the communication stage,
each agent has the chance to decide whether to start a new
chain and send a message. And the agents who receive mes-
sages can decide whether to continue forwarding the mes-
sages. Multiple message chains are allowed and the informa-
tion from different chains is merged if a shared node exists.
(2) Whom to communicate with? For partial-observation
(PO) problems, communication with all the agents is not rea-
sonable and effective. The direct communication with the
agent outside the observation range may not bring helpful in-
formation as the sender does not even know the receiver’s

Figure 3: Network structure of TEM. (a) Actor network of agent i, including an action network and a message network. Emb denotes the
embedding network. (b) Encoder module. (c) Decoder module, where m_dec0
i = o_fi.
state. Therefore, we do not model all the other agents to de-
cide whether to communicate with them like in some previous
works [Ding et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2022]. Instead, when
the agent i chooses communication objects, we only consider
the agents in the observation range Oi , and in our experi-
ments, Oi includes the nearest several agents of the agent i.
By training the message module, the agent can predict the
impact of the message on other agents, and is more likely to
choose the one with the highest impact to communicate.
We combine the two decisions (1) and (2) into one commu-
nication action. The communication actions of agent i m_ai
include not sending at all m_ai = 0, and sending to one agent
j in the observation range m_ai = j, (j ∈Oi). Namely:
P(m_ai = 0) +
X
j∈Oi
(P(m_ai = j)) = 1.
(2)
This way, the agent can decide when and whom to commu-
Algorithm 1 Execution workflow of agent i in one time step
1: stop_flagi = 0, m_rei =Null, sender_listi =Null
2: for com_stepi = 0 →max_com_steps do
3:
Merge the received message m_rei to the buffer m_bi,
and add the senders of m_rei to sender_listi
4:
if stop_flagi == 0 then
5:
Get the target m_ai by oi and m_bi
6:
if m_ai in sender_listi then
7:
stop_flagi = 1
8:
end if
9:
if m_ai ̸= 0 and stop_flagi ̸= 1 then
10:
Send the message to the agent m_ai as m_rem_ai
11:
end if
12:
end if
13: end for
14: Compute the action ai by oi and m_bi
15: Interact with the environment to get the new oi
nicate by one action, simplifying the modeling and learning.
(3) What to communicate? To keep the information from
the head nodes in the chain, and merge the information from
different chains, every agent maintains a message buffer to
store the messages. In practice, the message buffer is im-
plemented as a queue, with a fixed storage length, but can
flexibly push in and pop out elements as the communication
goes (First Input First Output, FIFO). We use m_bi to de-
note all the messages inside the agent i ’s message buffer.
When sending the new message, the agent i merges its own
observation into the chain, then the message chain expands to
⟨m_bi, oi⟩. Here, the operation ⟨·⟩denotes pushing into the
queue to concatenate the messages. The buffer is clear when
every step starts.
(4) How to utilize the messages? Instead of some previ-
ous works [Zhang et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2022], we do not
think the messages directly influence the value estimation of
other agents is the natural way of communication. The infor-
mation exchange should be separated from the information
utilization. And the final effects of the messages should be
determined by the receiver instead of the sender. Thus, in our
model, messages are taken as a counterpart of the observa-
tion, serving as part of the inputs of the actor network.
4.2
Network Design
The schematics of the network design in our model are shown
as Fig 3. Each agent has an actor network to observe the envi-
ronment and communicate with other agents. The actor net-
work of the agent i will output the action to interact with the
environment ai, the action to communicate m_ai (whether
to communicate and whom to communicate with), and the
corresponding message to be sent mi. To better utilize the
history information and get a smoother action sequence, an
RNN is employed in the actor network. Thus the agent i also
keeps a hidden state ht
i, and updates it every time step.
The actor network consists of two sub-networks, the ac-
tion network and the message network. The action network

mainly concentrates on the task itself and tries to get bet-
ter rewards by outputting reasonable actions. The message
network concentrates on the communication to share infor-
mation with other agents instead. The two sub-networks ex-
change the representation feature of the observations o_fi and
that of the messages m_fi to merge the information.
In the action network, o_fi is learned by a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP), and then the action network concatenates
o_fi and m_fi to input into the RNN together with the hid-
den state from the last time step ht−1
i
. Another MLP, in the
end, processes the output of the RNN to get the action ai.
On the other hand, the messages from other agents like

inbox. The embedding layer (we implement it as a full con-
nected (FC) layer by practice) converts the messages to fit
the input dimensions of the encoders. Ne sequential encoder
modules and Nd sequential decoder modules are followed by
the embedding layer. The output of encoder modules m_fi
serves as the representation of all the messages in the buffer,
with the key information emphasized by the attention mecha-
nism. The decoder modules further combine the information
from both of m_fi and o_fi to get the output m_deci. Fi-
nally, one MLP produces the communication decision m_ai.
For each encoder module, it takes in m_encne−1
i
from the
embedding layer or the last encoder, then generates m_encne
i
as the input for the next layer. The transformer in the mod-
ule can model the sequential information and is flexible to
fit message chains with different lengths. Also, the attention
mechanism will help the agent to pick out the key informa-
tion from the chain. ne implies the position of the layer in
the encoder sequence. To prevent gradient vanishing, the en-
coder module employs the residual connections to link the
self-attention mechanism and the MLP [Wen et al., 2022].
The structure of the self-attention mechanism is the same as
the attention network in the decoder while k, q and v are gen-
erated from the same input m_encne−1
i
.
In the decoder module, the first m_dec0
i is the representa-
tion of the observations o_fi. In the attention network, full
connected layers generates key k and query q by m_decnd−1
i
and m_fi, respectively. Also, the third FC layer generates
value v from m_decnd−1
i
. k and q are used for calculating
the weights α of the value v as Equation 3.
α = Softmax(exp(qkT
√dk
)).
(3)
In fact, the weight α learns the correlations between the
m_decnd−1
i
and m_fi. By multiplying v and α, then we get
the weighted representation of m_decnd−1
i
from the ending
FC layer. With a similar structure of the residual connections
and MLP, we get m_decnd
i
as the input for the next layer.
4.3
Loss Function Design
The communication among the agents in a collaborative task
aims to share the key information that one believes is use-
ful for some specific agents. So the learning of the message
network is driven by the impact of the message to be sent.
As the communication will not change either the action of
other agents or the loss of the action network, an indepen-
dent loss to model the influence of the messages on other
agents’ actions is needed.
We denote the communication
loss as L(i)
m (θ), where θ is the parameters of the actor net-
work. The action of an agent j is sampled from the categorical
distribution P(aj|oj, m_bj) learned by the action network.
Then, when considering the new message from the agent i mi,
we can estimate the distribution P(aj|oj, ⟨m_bj, mi⟩) as the
consequence of the communication. Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence is widely used to measure the discrepancy be-
tween these two conditional probability distributions. Thus,
the causal effect Γ(i)
j
of the message from agent i on agent j
can be defined as:
Γ(i)
j
= DKL (P(aj|oj, ⟨m_bj, mi⟩)||P(aj|oj, m_bj)) . (4)
By considering all the possible agents to send the message to
in the observation range, we can get the expectation of the
causal effect of the message EΓ(i)(θ) by Equation 5:
EΓ(i)(θ) =
X
j∈Oi

Pθ(m_ai = j|oi, m_bi)Γ(i)
j

,
(5)
where Oi denotes the observation range of the agent i. The
communication decision of agent i is sampled form the cat-
egorical distribution Pθ(m_ai|oi, m_bi) learned by the mes-
sage network. Pθ denotes that the gradient of this item should
be propagated when training.
The expectation EΓ(i)(θ) represents the overall effect the
message mi can bring to the whole system, which we should
maximize in the loss function.
However, communication
should also be sparse and efficient.
If we do not control
the communication times by the external guidance, the agents
will tend to send as many messages as possible to get higher
EΓ(i)(θ).
Therefore, we also designed another item for
communication loss to reduce the communication overhead.
When the agent i chooses not to send the message to any
agents in the observation range for most of the times, the
probability Pθ(m_ai = 0|oi, m_bi) should be relatively high.
So we need to maximize this probability at the same time.
So far, we can get the final communication loss L(i)
m (θ) by
the following equation and maximize it when training.
L(i)
m (θ) = EΓ(i)(θ) + δPθ(m_ai = 0|oi, m_bi),
(6)
where δ is the weight of the communication reduction.
The loss of the action network L(i)
a (θ) is defined followed
by Equation 1 in MAPPO as:
L(i)
a (θ) =min[r(i)
θ A(i)
πθold, clip(r(i)
θ , 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)A(i)
πθold],
(7)
where r(i)
θ
=
πθ(a(i)|o(i))
πθold(a(i)|o(i)), A(i)
πθold is the advantage function.
What’s more, to encourage more exploration when train-
ing, we adopt an entropy loss L(i)
e (θ) as [Yu et al., 2021]:
L(i)
e (θ) = S(πθ(oi)).
(8)
We can get the overall loss function for the actor network
when training:
L(θ) =
n
X
i=1

L(i)
a (θ) + λmL(i)
m (θ) + λeL(i)
e (θ)

,
(9)
where n is the number of the agents, and λm, λe are the coef-
ficients to weight the corresponding losses.
The loss of critic network keeps the same as MAPPO.

Figure 4: Test win rate for the SMAC map 5m vs. 6m, the shaded
regions represent the 95% confidence intervals over 5 seeds. FC:
Full Communication, RC: Randomly-stop Communication.
5
Experiments
We evaluate the performance of TEM on three widely-used
partially-observed multi-agent cooperative tasks: the Star-
craft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC), Predator Prey (PP) and
Cooperative Navigation (CN). We compare the training pro-
cess of TEM with the baselines and analyze the performance.
We test the scalability of TEM to scenarios with different
numbers of agents and targets when zero-shot transferring.
5.1
Starcraft Multi-Agent Challenge
StarCraft II is a real-time strategy game serving as a bench-
mark in the MARL community. In the Starcraft Multi-Agent
Challenge (SMAC) task, N units controlled by the learned al-
gorithm try to kill all the M enemies, demanding proper coop-
eration strategies and micro-control of movement and attack.
We choose the hard map 5m vs. 6m to evaluate TEM. TEM
controls 5 Marines to fight with 6 enemy Marines.
The baselines include MAPPO, MADDPG, Full Com-
munication (FC) and Randomly-stop Communication (RC).
MAPPO is the CTDE backbone we are using in the follow-
ing experiments, which is proven to have state-of-the-art per-
formance on several MARL cooperative benchmarks [Yu et
al., 2021]. MADDPG is another classic CTDE approach for
multi-agent cooperation tasks [Lowe et al., 2020]. FC and
RC are two special cases of TEM. We keep the communica-
tion protocol the same, but disable the decoder in the mes-
sage module, instead, the agents choose the communication
targets by pre-defined rules. In FC, the agent will keep ran-
domly choosing someone to communicate with, to extend the
message chain until no one is available. In RC, the agent will
randomly stop the message chain by a probability p, or keep
forwarding to a random one.
We run the experiments over five seeds. For each seed, we
compute the win rate over 32 test games after each training
iteration as shown in Fig. 4. TEM gets the highest win rate
over the baselines. FC and RC perform worse than MAPPO
benchmark.
One possible reason is that targeted commu-
nication by TEM could improve cooperation while random
communication by FC and RC may bring redundant informa-
tion for decision-making. The win rate of MADDPG remains
zero, showing that it is hard to defeat an army with more units.
5.2
Predator Prey
In the Predator Prey (PP) task, N predators try to chase, sur-
round and finally capture M preys, as shown in Fig 1. The
Figure 5: Learning curves for Predator Prey (PP) .
predators are the agents to be trained and the preys flee in the
opposite direction of the closest predator at a faster speed fol-
lowing pre-defined rules. So the predators have to be grouped
automatically and cooperate to surround each prey, and it is
impossible for one predator to capture a prey itself. In prac-
tice, we set N as 7 and M as 3, denoted as 7-3 scenario.
Different from the PP task in some previous works, here,
the agents can only partially observe the teammates and tar-
gets. The rewards are the sum of the agents’ negative dis-
tances to their closest preys or landmarks. In addition, the
agents are penalized for collisions with other agents.
The baselines include MAPPO, I2C, MADDPG, DDPG,
FC and RC. I2C proposes an individual communication
mechanism [Ding et al., 2020]. DDPG is a classic deep re-
inforcement learning algorithm for continuous control [Lill-
icrap et al., 2019]. We apply DDPG independently to each
agent as a baseline without considering cooperation.
As shown in Fig 5, while other baselines gradually con-
verge at the last episodes, TEM keeps raising the rewards and
improves the final reward by 17.2% compared with MAPPO.
5.3
Cooperative Navigation
In the Cooperative Navigation (CN) task, N agents try to
occupy N stationary landmarks separately, as shown in Fig
7. The positions of landmarks and agents are randomly ini-
tialized. The best strategy is that each agent has a different
target from the beginning through communication instead of
rescheduling when collisions happen because of choosing the
same target. In practice, we set N as 7, denoted as 7-7 sce-
nario. The baselines and reward settings are the same as PP.
We compare TEM with the baselines on the training perfor-
mance Fig 6. We can see that TEM converges to the highest
Figure 6: Learning curves for Cooperative Navigation (CN) .

Figure 7: Comparison between (a) TEM and (b) MAPPO on CN.
Five timesteps are illustrated. Green: trajectories of the agents (pur-
ple) to occupy the landmarks (black). Pink: message chains.
reward than all the baselines. FC and RC are only slightly bet-
ter than MAPPO, suggesting that the communication actions
m_a learned by TEM are targeted, and the message chain
brings helpful information to the ones that really need it.
We compare the illustrations on CN between TEM and
MAPPO in Fig 7. In (a), the TEM agents Agent 1 and Agent 4
notice Landmark 1 by communication (pink message chain).
Thus each agent moves straight forward to the corresponding
landmarks. While in (b), the MAPPO agents miss Landmark
1, so for Agent 4, there will be nowhere to go. Agent 4 first
tries to scramble with Agent 1 but fails, then turns to Agent
2. Agent 2 is forced to leave to avoid collision and turns to
Agent 3. We can see that communication brought by TEM
can improve cooperation and reduce internal strife.
5.4
Scalability of TEM
We further examine the scalability of TEM on PP in Table
1. We take average episode rewards (R), successful capture
times (S), collision times (C) as the metrics. For R and S, the
performance is better when the values are higher, while for C,
the performance is better when the values are lower. Note that
the existing selective MARL communication approaches are
not scalable due to the modeling of each agent, so the base-
lines are the transferred MAPPO and the specifically trained
MAPPO. We directly transfer the learned model from the 7-3
scenario to 9-3 and 3-1 scenarios without further training. For
9-3 scenario, two new agents are included so the task will be
easier. But more agents also increase the risks of collision, so
the cooperation mode could be different and the agents need
to communicate to suit the new scenario. For TEM, the av-
erage episode rewards rise from -40.5 to -17.9, and the gain
is 55.8%, while for MAPPO, the gain of rewards is 52.3%.
TEM does not only perform better after transferring, but also
gains more. For 3-1 scenario, both the numbers of the agents
and preys change. The results show that TEM still keeps a
better performance on all the metrics. Moreover, it shows that
after TEM learns how to communicate in a complex scenario,
it can successfully transfer to simple ones.
We also train MAPPO from scratch specifically on 9-3
and 3-1 (denoted as MAPPO (learned)), and the performance
of transferred TEM (trained on 7-3) is close to MAPPO
(learned) on 9-3 without training. But the transferred TEM
works worse on 3-1, and we suggest that cooperation by com-
munication may not play an essential role in such a simple
environment. We further finetune TEM (7-3) on the new sce-
TEM (7-3)
MAPPO (7-3)
MAPPO (learned)
TEM (finetuned)
7-3
R
-40.5±4.7
-44.9±4.3
-
-
S
61.6±18.3
49.0±16.5
-
-
C
1.4±0.6
12.6±2.6
-
-
3-1
R
-10.6±4.7
-12.7±5.9
-7.52±2.6
-7.0±2.8
S
18.7±14.0
13.5±12.7
36.5±13.2
31.7±13.4
C
1.2±1.2
3.6±2.7
1.8±1.8
0.8 ±0.6
9-3
R
-17.9±5.0
-21.3±7.5
-17.1± 8.2
-14.0 ±2.6
S
107.2±23.6
69.3±32.0
109.5±18.7
127.9±5.9
C
16.2±1.8
30.6±6.7
7.2±1.9
5.4±1.6
Table 1: Scalability of TEM on PP. R: average episode rewards, S:
successful capture times, C: collision times. TEM (7-3) and MAPPO
(7-3) are trained on the scenario 7-3: 7 agents to capture 3 preys,
and tested on ten random environments on 7-3, 3-1, 9-3 scenarios.
MAPPO (learned) is specifically trained from scratch on the corre-
sponding test environments. TEM (finetuned) is the TEM model
trained on 7-3 and tuned on the corresponding test environments.
narios and the finetuned models even outperform the specially
learned MAPPO.
Similar experiments are conducted on CN as shown in Ta-
ble 2. TEM keeps the scalability when transferred from 7-
7 scenario to 6-6 and 9-9, and outperforms the transferred
MAPPO. Surprisingly, the transferred TEM even outper-
forms the MAPPO trained from scratch (denoted as MAPPO
(learned)) on most metrics. It suggests that CN requires more
communication to coordinate the agents to explore all the
landmarks. The results also show that the communication
pattern learned from 7-7 still works well in other scenarios.
Similarly, the finetuned TEM gets even better performance.
TEM (7-7)
MAPPO (7-7)
MAPPO (learned)
TEM (finetuned)
7-7
R
-38.8±15.1
-46.6±14.8
-
-
S
35.8± 6.2
23.3±9.0
-
-
C
2.8±0.3
4.2±0.2
-
-
6-6
R
-39.8±5.3
-45.0±8.0
-43.6±10.1
-36.7 ±5.2
S
35.3±6.2
20.0±5.9
19.3±6.8
36.1±5.9
C
7.2±0.4
8.4±0.4
4.8±0.4
4.8 ±0.2
9-9
R
-45.8±23.9
-57.5±25.3
-50.8±12.9
-41.1 ±11.4
S
39.4±4.9
26.6±8.7
29.0±6.6
38.9±5.2
C
9.0±0.3
28.8±0.4
10.8±0.2
8.0±0.2
Table 2: Scalability of TEM on CN. TEM (7-7) and MAPPO (7-7)
are trained on the scenario 7-7: 7 agents to occupy 7 landmarks, and
tested on ten random environments on 7-3, 6-6, 9-9 scenarios.
6
Conclusions
To tackle the scalability problem of MARL communication,
this paper proposes a novel framework Transformer-based

sage chains, which set up bridges among partial-observation
ranges. We introduce Transformer to encode and decode the
message chain to choose the next receiver selectively. Em-
pirical results in diverse multi-agent cooperative tasks show
that our method outperforms the baselines. Furthermore, we
can directly apply TEM to a new environment with a different
number of agents without retraining. Better performance than
the baselines when zero-shot transferring shows the scalabil-
ity of TEM. Based on TEM, communication for hundreds of
agents and further tailored message generation can be devel-
oped, which may be an important step for MARL applications
to real-world tasks.
