arXiv:1601.06180v2  [cs.AI]  28 Oct 2016
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
1
On the Latent Variable Interpretation in
Sum-Product Networks
Robert Peharz, Robert Gens, Franz Pernkopf, Senior Member, IEEE, and Pedro Domingos
Abstract—One of the central themes in Sum-Product networks (SPNs) is the interpretation of sum nodes as marginalized latent
variables (LVs). This interpretation yields an increased syntactic or semantic structure, allows the application of the EM algorithm and
to efﬁciently perform MPE inference. In literature, the LV interpretation was justiﬁed by explicitly introducing the indicator variables
corresponding to the LVs’ states. However, as pointed out in this paper, this approach is in conﬂict with the completeness condition in
SPNs and does not fully specify the probabilistic model. We propose a remedy for this problem by modifying the original approach for
introducing the LVs, which we call SPN augmentation. We discuss conditional independencies in augmented SPNs, formally establish
the probabilistic interpretation of the sum-weights and give an interpretation of augmented SPNs as Bayesian networks. Based on
these results, we ﬁnd a sound derivation of the EM algorithm for SPNs. Furthermore, the Viterbi-style algorithm for MPE proposed in
literature was never proven to be correct. We show that this is indeed a correct algorithm, when applied to selective SPNs, and in
particular when applied to augmented SPNs. Our theoretical results are conﬁrmed in experiments on synthetic data and 103 real-world
datasets.
Index Terms—Sum-Product Networks, Latent Variables, Mixture Models, Expectation-Maximization, MPE inference
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
S
UM-PRODUCT NETWORKS are a promising type of prob-
abilistic model, combining the domains of deep learning
and graphical models [1], [2]. One of their main advantages
is that many interesting inference scenarios are expressed as
single forward and/or backward passes, i.e. these inference
scenarios have a computational cost linear in the SPN’s rep-
resentation size. SPNs have shown convincing performance
in applications such as image completion [1], [3], [4], com-
puter vision [5], classiﬁcation [6] and speech and language
modeling [7], [8], [9]. Since their proposition [1], one of
the central themes in SPNs has been their interpretation as
hierarchically structured latent variable (LV) models. This
is essentially the same approach as the LV interpretation in
mixture models. Consider for example a Gaussian mixture
model with K components over a set of random variables
(RVs) X:
ppXq “
K
ÿ
k“1
wk NpX | µk, Σkq,
(1)
where Np¨ | ¨q is the Gaussian PDF, µk and Σk are the
means and covariances of the kth component, and wk are
the mixture weights with wk ě 0, ř wk “ 1. The GMM can
be interpreted in two ways: i) It is a convex combination of
PDFs and thus itself a PDF, or ii) it is a marginal distribution
‚
R. Peharz is with the Institute of Physiology (iDN), Medical University
of Graz and BioTechMed–Graz.

‚
R. Gens and P. Domingos are with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Washington.

‚
F. Pernkopf is with the Signal Processing and Speech Communication Lab,
Graz University of Technology.

Manuscript received November 12, 2015; revised June 20, 2016; accepted
September 30, 2016.
of a distribution ppX, Zq over X and a latent, marginal-
ized variable Z, where ppX | Z “ kq “ NpX | µk, Σkq
and ppZ “ kq “ wk. The second interpretation, the LV
interpretation, yields a syntactically well-structured model.
For example, following the LV interpretation, it is clear how
to draw samples from ppXq by using ancestral sampling.
This structure can also be of semantic nature, for instance
when Z represents a clustering of X or when Z is a
class variable. Furthermore, the LV interpretation allows
the application of the EM algorithm – which is essentially
maximum-likelihood learning under missing data [10], [11]
– and enables advanced Bayesian techniques [12], [13].
Mixture models can be seen as a special case of SPNs
with a single sum node, which corresponds to a single LV.
More generally, SPNs can have arbitrarily many sum nodes,
each corresponding to its own LV, leading to a hierarchically
structured model. In [1], the LV interpretation in SPNs
was justiﬁed by explicitly introducing the LVs in the SPN
model, using the so-called indicator variables corresponding
to the LVs’ states. However, as shown in this paper, this
justiﬁcation is actually too simplistic, since it is potentially
in conﬂict with the completeness condition [1], leading to
an incompletely speciﬁed model. As a remedy we propose
the augmentation of an SPN, which additionally to the IVs
also introduces the so-called twin sum nodes, in order to
completely specify the LV model. We further investigate
the independency structure of the LV model resulting from
augmentation and ﬁnd a parallel to the local independence
assertions in Bayesian networks (BNs) [14], [15]. This allows
us to deﬁne a BN representation of the augmented SPN.
Using our BN interpretation and the differential approach
[16], [17] in augmented SPNs, we give a sound derivation of
the (soft) EM algorithm for SPNs.
Closely related to the LV interpretation is the inference
scenario of ﬁnding the most-probable-explanation (MPE),

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
2
i.e. ﬁnding a probability maximizing assignment for all
RVs. Using results form [18], [19], we ﬁrst point out that
this problem is generally NP-hard for SPNs. In [1] it was
proposed that an MPE solution can be found efﬁciently
when maximizing over both model RVs (i.e. non-latent
RVs) and LVs. The proposed algorithm replaces sum nodes
by max nodes and recovers the solution by using Viterbi-
style backtracking. However, it was not shown that this
algorithm delivers a correct MPE solution. In this paper,
we show that this algorithm is indeed correct, when applied
to selective SPNs [20]. In particular, since augmented SPNs
are selective, this algorithm obtains an MPE solution in
augmented SPNs. However, when applied to non-augmented
SPNs, the algorithm still returns an MPE solution of the
augmented SPN, but implicitly assumes that the weights
for all twin sums are deterministic, i.e. they are all 0 except
a single 1. This leads to a phenomenon in MPE inference
which we call low-depth bias, i.e. more shallow parts of the
SPN are preferred during backtracking.
The main contribution in this paper is to provide a sound
theoretical foundation for the LV interpretation in SPNs and
related concepts, i.e. the EM algorithm and MPE inference.
Our theoretical ﬁndings are conﬁrmed in experiments on
synthetic data and 103 real-world datasets.
The paper is organized as follows: In the remainder of
this section we introduce notation, review SPNs and discuss
related work. In Section 2 we propose the augmentation of
SPNs, show its soundness as hierarchical LV model and give
an interpretation as BN. Furthermore, we discuss indepen-
dency properties in augmented SPNs and the interpretation
of sum-weights as conditional probabilities. The EM algo-
rithm for SPNs is derived in Section 3. In Section 4 we
discuss MPE inference for SPNs. Experiments are presented
in Section 5 and Section 6 concludes the paper. Proofs for
our theoretical ﬁndings are deferred to the Appendix.
1.1
Background and Notation
RVs are denoted by upper-case letters W, X, Y and Z.
The set of values of an RV X is denoted by valpXq,
where corresponding lower-case letters denote elements of
valpXq, e.g. x is an element of valpXq. Sets of RVs are
denoted by boldface letters W, X, Y and Z. For RV set
X “ tX1, . . . , XNu, we deﬁne valpXq “ ŚN
n“1 valpXnq
and use corresponding lower-case boldface letters for ele-
ments of valpXq, e.g. x is an element of valpXq. For a sub-
set Y Ď X, xrYs denotes the projection of x onto Y.
The elements of valpXq can be interpreted as complete
evidence, assigning each RV in X a ﬁxed value. Partial
evidence about X is represented as a subset X Ď valpXq,
which is an element of the sigma-algebra AX induced by RV
X. For all RVs we use AX “ tX P B | X Ď valpXqu, B be-
ing the Borel-sets over R. For discrete RVs, this choice yields
the power-set AX “ 2valpXq. For example, partial evidence
X “ t1, 3, 5u for a discrete RV X with valpXq “ t1, . . . , 6u
represents evidence that X takes one of the states 1, 3 or
5, and Y “ r´8, πs for a real-valued RV Y represents
evidence that Y takes a value smaller than π. Formally
speaking, partial evidence is used to express the domain
of marginalization or maximization for a particular RV.
For sets of RVs X “ tX1, . . . , XNu, we use the product
sets HX :“ tŚN
n“1 Xn | Xn P AXnu to represent partial
evidence about X. Elements of HX are denoted using
boldface notation, e.g. X . When Y Ď X and X P HX,
we deﬁne XrYs :“ txrYs | x P Xu. Furthermore, we use
e to symbolize any combination of complete and partial
evidence, i.e. for RVs X we have some complete evidence
x1 for X1 Ď X and some partial evidence X 2 P HX2 for
X2 “ XzX1.
Given a node N in some directed graph G, let chpNq and
papNq be the set of children and parents of N, respectively.
Furthermore, let descpNq be the set of descendants of N,
recursively deﬁned as the set containing N itself and any
child of a descendant. Similarly, we deﬁne ancpNq as the
ancestors of N, recursively deﬁned as the set containing N
itself and any parent of an ancestor. SPNs are deﬁned as
follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Sum-Product Network). A Sum-Product net-
work (SPN) S over a set of RVs X is a tuple pG, wq where
G is a connected, rooted and acyclic directed graph, and w is
a set of non-negative parameters. The graph G contains three
types of nodes: distributions, sums and products. All leaves of
G are distributions and all internal nodes are either sums or
products. A distribution node (also called input distribution or
simply distribution) DY : valpYq ÞÑ r0, 8s is a distribution
function over a subset of RVs Y Ď X, i.e. either a PMF (discrete
RVs), a PDF (continuous RVs), or a mixed distribution function
(discrete and continuous RVs mixed). A sum node S computes
a weighted sum of its children, i.e. S “ ř
CPchpSq wS,C C, where
wS,C is a non-negative weight associated with edge S Ñ C, and w
contains the weights for all outgoing sum-edges. A product node
P computes the product over its children, i.e. P “ ś
CPchpPq C.
The sets SpSq and PpSq contain all sum nodes and all product
nodes in S, respectively.
The size |S| of the SPN is deﬁned as the number of nodes and
edges in G. For any node N in G, the scope of N is deﬁned as
scpNq “
#
Y
if N is a distribution DY
Ť
CPchpNq scpCq
otherwise.
(2)
The function computed by S is the function computed by its root
and denoted as Spxq, where without loss of generality we assume
that the scope of the root is X.
We use symbols D, S, P, N, C and F for nodes in SPNs,
where D denotes a distribution, S denotes a sum, and P
denotes a product. Symbols N, C and F denote generic
nodes, where C and F indicate a child or parent relationship
to another node, respectively. The distribution pS of an SPN
S is deﬁned as the normalized output of S, i.e. pSpxq9Spxq.
For each node N, we deﬁne the sub-SPN SN rooted at N as
the SPN deﬁned by the graph induced by the descendants
of N and the corresponding parameters.
Inference in unconstrained SPNs is generally intractable.
However, efﬁcient inference in SPNs is enabled by two
structural constraints, completeness and decomposability [1].
An SPN is complete if for all sums S it holds that

(3)
An SPN is decomposable if for all products P it holds that

(4)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
3
Furthermore, a sum node S is called selective [20] if for all
choices of sum-weights w and all possible inputs x it holds
that at most one child of S is non-zero. An SPN S is called
selective if all its sum nodes are selective.
As shown in [17], [19], integrating Spxq over arbitrary
sets X P HX, i.e. marginalization over X , reduces to the
corresponding integrals at the input distributions and eval-
uating sums and products in the usual way. This property
is known as validity of the SPNs [1], and key for efﬁcient
inference. In this paper we only consider complete and
decomposable SPNs. Without loss of generality [17], [21],
we assume locally normalized sum-weights, i.e. for each sum
node S we have ř
CPchpSq wS,C “ 1, and thus pS ” S, i.e. the
SPN’s normalization constant is 1.
For RVs with ﬁnitely many states, we will use so-called
indicator variables (IVs) as input distributions [1]. For a ﬁnite-
state RV X and state x P valpXq, we introduce the IV
λX“xpx1q :“ 1px “ x1q, assigning all probability mass to x.
A complete and decomposable SPN represents the (extended)
network polynomial of pS, which can be used in the differential
approach to inference [1], [16], [17]. Assume any evidence e
which is evaluated in the SPN. The derivatives of the SPN
function with respect to the IVs (by interpreting the IVs as
real-valued variables, see [16], [17] for details) yield
BSpeq
BλX“x
“ SpX “ x, ezXq,
(5)
representing the inference scenario of modiﬁed evidence,
i.e. evidence e is modiﬁed such that X is set to x. The com-
putationally attractive feature of the differential approach is
that (5) can be evaluated for all X P X and all x P valpXq
simultaneously using a single back-propagation pass in the
SPN, after evidence has been evaluated. Similarly, for the
second (and higher) derivatives, we get
B2Speq
BλX“xλY “y
“
#
SpX “ x, Y “ y, eztX, Y uq
if X ­“ Y
0
otherwise.
(6)
Furthermore, the differential approach can be generalized to
SPNs with arbitrary input distributions, i.e. SPNs over RVs
with countably inﬁnite or uncountably many states (cf. [17]
for details).
1.2
Related Work
SPNs are related to negation normal forms (NNFs), a poten-
tial deep network representation of propositional theories
[22], [23], [24]. Like in SPNs, structural constraints in NNFs
enable certain polynomial-time queries in the represented
theory. In particular, the notions of smoothness, decompos-
ability and determinism in NNFs translate to the notions of
completeness, decomposability and selectivity in SPNs, re-
spectively. The work on NNFs led to the concept of network
polynomials as a multilinear representation of BNs over
ﬁnitely many states [16], [25]. BNs were cast into an inter-
mediate d-DNNF (deterministic decomposable NNF) repre-
sentation in order to generate an arithmetic circuit (ACs),
representing the BNs network polynomial. ACs, when re-
stricted to sums and products, are equivalent to SPNs but
have a slightly different syntax. In [26], ACs were learned by
optimizing an objective trading off the log-likelihood on the
training set and the inference cost of the AC, measured as
the worst-case number of arithmetic operations required for
inference (i.e. the number of edges in the AC). The learned
models still represent BNs with context-speciﬁc indepen-
dencies [27]. A similar approach learning Markov networks
represented by ACs is followed in [28]. SPNs were the ﬁrst
time proposed in [1], where the represented distribution
was not deﬁned via a background graphical model any
more, but directly as the normalized output of the network.
In this work, SPNs were applied to image data, where
a generic architecture reminiscent to convolutional neural
networks was proposed. Structure learning algorithms not
restricted to the image domain were proposed in [2], [3], [4],
[29], [30], [31]. Discriminative learning of SPNs, optimizing
conditional likelihood, was proposed in [6]. Furthermore,
there is a growing body of literature on theoretical aspects
of SPNs and their relationship to other types of probabilistic
models. In [32] two families of functions were identiﬁed
which are efﬁciently representable by deep, but not by
shallow SPNs, where an SPN is considered as shallow if
it has no more than three layers. In [17] it was shown that
SPNs can w.l.o.g. be assumed to be locally normalized and
that the notion of consistency does not allow exponentially
more compact models than decomposability. These results
were independently found in [21]. Furthermore, in [17], a
sound derivation of inference mechanisms for generalized
SPNs was given, i.e. SPNs over RVs with (uncountably)
inﬁnitely many states. In [21], a BN representation of SPNs
was found, where LVs associated with sum nodes and the
model RVs are organized in a two layer bipartite structure.
The actual SPN structure is captured in structured condi-
tional probability tables (CPTs) using algebraic decision dia-
grams. Recently, the notion of SPNs was generalized to sum-
product functions over arbitrary semirings [33]. This yields
a general unifying framework for learning and inference,
subsuming, among others, SPNs for probabilistic modeling,
NNFs for logical propositions and function representations
for integration and optimization.
2
LATENT VARIABLE INTERPRETATION
As pointed out in [1], each sum node in an SPN can be
interpreted as a marginalized LV, similar as in the GMM
example in Section 1. For each sum node S, one postulates a
discrete LV Z whose states correspond to the children of S.
For each state, an IV and a product is introduced, such that
the children are switched on/off by the corresponding IVs,
as illustrated in Fig. 1.1 When all IVs in Fig. 1b are set to 1,
S still computes the same value as in Fig. 1a. Since setting
all IVs of Z to 1 corresponds to marginalizing Z, the sum S
should be interpreted as a latent, marginalized RV.
However, when we regard a larger structural context
in Fig. 1b, we recognize that this justiﬁcation is actually
too simplistic. Explicitly introducing the IVs renders the
ancestor S1 incomplete, when S is no descendant of N, and
Z is thus not in the scope of N. Note that setting all IVs
to 1 in an incomplete SPN generally does not correspond to
1. In graphical representations of SPNs, IVs are depicted as nodes
containing a small circle, general distributions as nodes containing a
Gaussian-like PDF, and sum and products as nodes with ` and ˆ
symbols. Empty nodes are of arbitrary type.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
4
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 1. Problems occurring when IVs of LVs are introduced. (a): Excerpt
of SPN containing a sum S, corresponding to LV Z. (b): Introducing IVs
for Z renders S1 incomplete, assuming that S R descpNq. (c): Remedy
by extending SPN further, introducing twin sum node ¯S.
marginalization. Furthermore, note that also S1 corresponds
to an LV, say Z1. While we know the probability distribution
of Z if Z1 is in the state corresponding to P, namely the
weights of S, we do not know this distribution when Z1 is
in the state corresponding to N. Intuitively, we recognize
that the state of Z is irrelevant in this case, since it does
not inﬂuence the resulting distribution over the model RVs
X. Nevertheless, the probabilistic model is not completely
speciﬁed, which is unsatisfying.
A remedy for these problems is shown in Fig. 1c. We
introduce the twin sum node ¯S whose children are the
IVs corresponding to Z. The twin ¯S is connected as child
of an additional product node, which is interconnected
between S1 and N. Since this new product node has scope
scpNq Y tZu, S1 is rendered complete now. Furthermore, if
Z1 takes the state corresponding to N (or actually the state
corresponding to the new product node), we now have a
speciﬁed conditional distribution for Z, namely the weights
of the twin sum node. Clearly, given that all IVs of Z are
set to 1, the network depicted in Fig. 1c still computes
the same function as the network in Fig. 1a (or Fig. 1b),
since ¯S constantly outputs 1, as long as we use normalized
weights for it. Which weights should be used for the twin
sum node ¯S? Basically, we can assume arbitrary normalized
weights, which will cause ¯S to constantly output 1, where,
however, a natural choice would be to use uniform weights
for ¯S (maximizing the entropy of the resulting LV model).
Although the choice of weights is not crucial for evaluating
evidence in the SPN, it plays a role in MPE inference, see
Section 4. For now, let us formalize the explicit introduction
of LVs, denoted as augmentation.
2.1
Augmentation of SPNs
Let S be an SPN over X. For each S P SpSq we assume
an arbitrary but ﬁxed ordering of its children chpSq “
tC1
S, . . . , CKS
S u, where KS “ |chpSq|. Let ZS be an RV on the
same probability space as X, with valpZSq “ t1, . . . , KSu,
where state k corresponds to child Ck
S. We call ZS the
LV associated with S. For sets of sum nodes S we deﬁne
ZS “ tZS | S P Su. To distinguish X from the LVs, we will
refer to the former as model RVs. For node N, we deﬁne the
sum ancestors/descendants as
ancSpNq :“ ancpNq X SpSq,
(7)
descSpNq :“ descpNq X SpSq.
(8)
1: procedure AUGMENTSPN(S)
2:
S1 Ð S
3:

let wS,k “ wS,Ck
S , ¯wS,k “ ¯wS,Ck
S
4:
for S P SpS1q do
5:
for k “ 1 . . . KS do
6:
Introduce a new product node Pk
S in SpS1q
7:
Disconnect Ck
S from S
8:
Connect Ck
S as child of Pk
S
9:
Connect Pk
S as child of S with weight wS,k
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
for S P SpS1q do
13:
for k P t1, . . . , KSu do
14:
Connect new IV λZS“k as child of Pk
S
15:
end for
16:
if ScpSq ­“ H then
17:
Introduce a twin sum node ¯S in S1
18:

and let w¯S,λZS“k “ ¯wS,k
19:
for Sc P ScpSq do
20:
for k P tk | S R descpPk
Scqu do
21:
Connect ¯S as child of Pk
Sc
22:
end for
23:
end for
24:
end if
25:
end for
26:
return S1
27: end procedure
Fig. 2. Pseudo-code for augmentation of an SPN.
For each sum node S we deﬁne the conditioning sums as
ScpSq :“ tSc P ancSpSqztSu | DC P chpScq: S R descpCqu.
(9)
Furthermore, we assume a set of locally normalized twin-
weights ¯
w, containing a twin-weight ¯wS,C for each weight
wS,C in the SPN. We are now ready to deﬁne the augmenta-
tion of an SPN.
Deﬁnition 2 (Augmentation of SPN). Let S be an SPN over
X, ¯w be a set of twin-weights and S1 be the result of algorithm
AUGMENTSPN, shown in Fig. 2. S1 is called the augmented
SPN of S, denoted as S1 “: augpSq. Within the context of S1,
Ck
S is called the kth former child of S. The introduced product
node Pk
S is called link of S, Ck
S and λZS“k, respectively. The sum
node ¯S, if introduced, is called the twin sum node of S. With
respect to S1, we denote S as the original SPN.
In steps 4–11 of AUGMENTSPN we introduce the links
Pk
S which are interconnected between sum node S and its kth
child. Each link Pk
S has a single parent, namely S, and simply
copies the former child Ck
S. In steps 13–15, we introduce
IVs corresponding to the associated LV ZS, as proposed
in [1]. As we saw in Fig. 1 and the discussion above, this
can render other sum nodes incomplete. These sums are
clearly the conditioning sums ScpSq. Thus, when necessary,
we introduce a twin sum node in steps 17–23, to treat this
problem. The following proposition states the soundness of
augmentation.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
5
Proposition 1. Let S be an SPN over X, S1 “ augpSq and
Z :“ ZSpSq. Then S1 is a complete and decomposable SPN over
X Y Z with S1pXq ” SpXq.
Proposition 1 states that the marginal distribution over
X in the augmented SPN is the same distribution as rep-
resented by the original SPN, while being a completely spec-
iﬁed probabilistic model over X and Z. Thus, augmentation
provides a sound way to generalize the LV interpretation
from mixture models to more general SPNs. An example of
augmentation is shown in Fig. 3.
Note that we understand the augmentation mainly as a
theoretical tool to establish and work with the LV interpreta-
tion in SPNs. In most cases, it will be neither necessary nor
advisable to explicitly construct the augmented SPN.
An interesting question is how the sizes of the original
SPN and the augmented SPN relate to each other. A lower
bound is |S1| P Ωp|S|q, holding e.g. for SPNs with a single
sum node. An asymptotic upper bound is |S1| P Op|S|2q.
To see this, note that the introduction of links, IVs and twin
sums cause at most a linear increase of the SPN’s size. The
number of edges introduced when connecting twins to the
links of conditioning sums is bounded by |S|2, since the
number of twins and links are both bounded by |S|. There-
fore, we have |S1| P Op|S|2q. This asymptotic upper bound
is indeed achieved by certain types of SPNs: Consider e.g. a
chain consisting of K sum nodes and K ` 1 distribution
nodes. For k ă K the kth sum is the parent of the pk ` 1qth
sum and the kth distribution, and the Kth sum is the parent
of the last two distributions. For the kth sum, all preceding
sums are conditioning sums, yielding k ´ 1 introduced
edges. In total this gives řK
k“2pk ´ 1q “ K pK´1q
2
“ K2´K
2
edges, i.e. in this case |S1| indeed grows quadratically in |S|.
2.2
Conditional Independencies in Augmented SPNs
and Probabilistic Interpretation of Sum-Weights
It is helpful to introduce the notion of conﬁgured SPNs,
which takes a similar role as conditioning in the literature
on DNNFs [22], [23], [24].
Deﬁnition 3 (Conﬁgured SPN). Let S be an SPN over X, Y Ď
ZSpSq and y P valpYq. The conﬁgured SPN Sy is obtained
by deleting the IVs λY “y and their corresponding link for each
Y P Y, y ­“ yrY s from augpSq, and further deleting all nodes
which are rendered unreachable from the root.
Intuitively, the conﬁgured SPN isolates the computa-
tional structure selected by y. All sum edges which ”sur-
vive” in the conﬁgured SPN are equipped with the same
weights as in the augmented SPN. Therefore, a conﬁgured
SPN is in general not locally normalized. We note the
following properties of conﬁgured SPNs.
Proposition 2. Let S be an SPN over X, Y Ď ZSpSq and
Z “ ZSpSqzY. Let y P valpYq and let S1 “ augpSq. It holds
that
1)
Each node in Sy has the same scope as its corresponding
node in S1.
2)
Sy is a complete and decomposable SPN over XYYYZ.
3)
For any node N in Sy with scpNq X Y “ H, we have
that Sy
N “ S1
N.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. Augmentation of an SPN. (a): Example SPN over X
“
tX1, X2, X3u, containing sum nodes S1, S2, S3 and S4. (b): Augmented
SPN, containing IVs corresponding to ZS1, ZS2, ZS3, ZS4, links and twin
sum nodes ¯S2, ¯S3, ¯S4. For nodes introduced by augmentation, smaller
circles are used.
4)
For y1 P valpYq it holds that
SypX, Z, y1q “
#
S1pX, Z, y1q
if y1 “ y
0
otherwise
(10)
The next theorem shows certain conditional independen-
cies in the augmented SPN. For ease of discussion, we make
the following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 4. Let S be a sum node in an SPN and ZS its
associated LV. All other RVs (model RVs and LVs) are divided
into three sets:
‚
Parents Zp, which are all LVs ”above” S, i.e. Zp “
ZancSpSqzZS.
‚
Children Yc, which are all model RVs and LVs ”below”
S, i.e. Yc “ scpSq Y ZdescSpSqzZS.
‚
Non-descendants Yn, which are the remaining RVs,
i.e. Yn “ pX Y ZSpSqqzpZp Y Yc Y ZSq.
We will show that the parents, children and non-
descendants play the likewise role as for independencies in

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
6
Fig. 4. Dependency structure of augmented SPN from Fig. 3, repre-
sented as BN.
BNs [14], [15], i.e. ZS is independent of Yn given Zp. We will
further show that the sum-weights of S are the conditional
distribution of ZS, conditioned on the event that ”Zp select
a path to S”. One problem in the original LV interpretation
[1] was, that no conditional distribution of ZS was speciﬁed
for the complementary event. Here, we will show that the
twin-weights are precisely this conditional distribution. This
requires that the event “Zp select a path to the twin ¯S” is
indeed the complementary event to “Zp select a path to S”.
This is shown in following lemma.
Lemma 1. Let S be an SPN over X, let S be a sum node in S
and Zp be the parents of ZS. For any z P valpZpq, the conﬁgured
SPN Sz contains either S or its twin ¯S, but not both.
We are now ready to state the our theorem concerning
conditional independencies in augmented SPNs.
Theorem 1. Let S be an SPN over X and S1 “ augpSq. Let
S be an arbitrary sum in S and wk “ wS,Ck
S , ¯wk “ ¯wS,Ck
S ,
k “ 1, . . . , KS. With respect to S, let Zp be the parents, Yc be the
children and Yn be the non-descendants, respectively. Then there
exists a two-partition of valpZpq, i.e. Z, ¯Z : Z Y ¯Z “ valpZpq,
Z X ¯Z “ H, such that

(11)

(12)
From Theorem 1 it follows that the weights and twin-
weights of a sum node S can be interpreted as conditional
probability tables (CPTs) of ZS, conditioned on Zp and that
ZS is conditionally independent of Yn given Zp, i.e.
S1pZS “ k | Yn, zq “ S1pZS “ k | zq “
#
wk
if z P Z
¯wk
if z P ¯Z.
(13)
Using this result, we can deﬁne a BN representing the
augmented SPN as follows: For each sum node S, connect
Zp as parents of ZS, and all RVs scpSq as children of ZS. By
doing this for each LV, we obtain our BN representation of
the augmented SPN, serving as a useful tool to understand
SPNs in the context of probabilistic graphical models. An
example of the BN interpretation is shown in Fig. 4.
Note that the BN representation by Zhao et al. [21] can
be recovered from the BN representation of augmented
SPNs. They proposed a BN representation of SPNs using
a bipartite structure, where an LV is a parent of a model
RV if it is contained in the scope of the corresponding sum
node. The model RVs and LVs are unconnected among each
other, respectively. When we constrain the twin-weights to
be equal to the sum-weights, we can see in (13) that ZS
becomes independent of Zp. This special choice of twin
weights effectively removes all edges between LVs, recov-
ering the BN structure in [21]. In the next section, we use
the augmented SPN and the BN interpretation to derive the
EM algorithm for SPNs.
3
EM ALGORITHM
The EM algorithm is a general scheme for maximum like-
lihood learning, when for some RVs complete evidence is
missing [10], [11]. Thus, augmented SPNs are amenable for
EM due to the LVs associated with sum nodes. Moreover,
the twin-weights can be kept ﬁxed, so that EM applied
to augmented SPNs actually optimizes the weights of the
original SPN. This approach was already pointed out in
[1], where it was suggested that for evidence e and for
any LV ZS, the marginal posteriors should be given as
ppZS “ k | eq9wS,Ck
S
BSpeq
BSpeq , which should be used for EM
updates. These updates, however, cannot be the correct
ones, as they actually leave the weights unchanged. Here,
using augmented SPNs, we formally derive the standard
EM updates for sum-weights and the input distributions,
when they are chosen from an exponential family.
3.1
Updates for Weights
Assume a dataset D “ tep1q, . . . , epLqu of L i.i.d. samples,
where each eplq is any combination of complete and partial
evidence for the model RVs X, cf. Section 1.1. Let Z “ ZSpSq
be the set of all LVs and consider an arbitrary sum node
S. Eq. (13) shows that the weights can be interpreted as
conditional probabilities in our BN interpretation, where
S1pZS “ k | Zp “ zq “
#
wk
if z P Z
¯wk
if z P ¯Z.
(14)
As mentioned above, the twin-weights ¯wk are kept ﬁxed.
Using the well-known EM-updates in BNs over discrete
RVs [10], [15], the updates for sum-weight wk are given by
summing over the expected statistics
S1pZS “ k, Zp P Z | eplqq,
(15)
followed by renormalization. We make the event Zp P Z
explicit, by introducing a switching parent YS of ZS: When
the twin sum of S exists, YS assumes the two states
valpYSq “ tyS, y¯Su, where YS “ yS ô Zp P Z and
YS “ y¯S ô Zp P ¯Z. When the twin sum does not exist,
YS just takes the single value valpYSq “ tySu. Clearly, when
observed, YS renders ZS independent from Zp. The switch-
ing parent can be explicitly introduced in the augmented
SPN, as depicted in Fig. 5. Here we simply introduce two
new IVs λYS“yS and λYS“y¯S, which switch on/off the output
of S and ¯S, respectively. It is easy to see that when these
IV are constantly set to 1, i.e. when YS is marginalized, the
augmented SPN performs exactly the same computations
as before. It is furthermore easy to see that completeness
and decomposability of the augmented SPN are maintained

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
7
S
¯S
looooomooooon
λZS“1 λZS“2 λZS“3
(a)
S
¯S
looooomooooon
λZS“1 λZS“2 λZS“3
λYS“yS
λYS“y¯S
P
(b)
Fig. 5. Explicitly introducing a switching parent YS in an augmented
SPN. (a): Part of an augmented SPN containing a sum node with three
children and its twin. (b): Explicitly introduced switching parent YS using
IVs λYS“yS and λYS“y¯S.
when the switching parent is introduced. Using the switch-
ing parent, the required expected statistics (15) translate to
S1pZS “ k, YS “ yS | eplqq.
(16)
To compute (16), we use the differential approach, [16], [17],
[19], cf. also Section 1.1. First note that
S1pZS “ k, YS “ yS, eplqq “
B2S1peplqq
BλYS“ySBλZS“k
.
(17)
The ﬁrst derivative is given as
BS1peplqq
BλYS“yS
“ BS1peplqq
BP
Speplqq
(18)
“ BS1peplqq
BP
KS
ÿ
k“1
λZS“k wk Ck
Speplqq,
(19)
where P is the common product parent of S and λYS“yS in
the augmented SPN (see Fig. 5b). Differentiating (19) after
λZS“k yields the second derivative
B2S1peplqq
BλYS“ySBλZS“k
“ BS1peplqq
BP
wk Ck
Speplqq,
(20)
delivering the required posteriors
S1pZS “ k, YS “ yS | eplqq “
1
S1peplqq
BS1peplqq
BP
wk Ck
Speplqq.
(21)
We do not want to construct the augmented SPN explicitly,
so we express (21) in terms of the original SPN. Since all
LVs are marginalized, it holds that S1peplqq “ Speplqq and
BS1peplqq
BP
“ BSpeplqq
BS
, yielding
S1pZS “ k, YS “ yS | eplqq “
1
Speplqq
BSpeplqq
BS
wk Ck
Speplqq,
(22)
delivering the required statistics for updating the sum-
weights. We now turn to the updates of the input distri-
butions.
3.2
Updates for Input Distributions
For simplicity, we derive updates for univariate input distri-
butions, i.e. for all distributions DY we have |scpDYq| “ 1.
Similar updates can rather easily be derived also for multi-
variate input distributions. In [17], the so-called distribution
selectors (DSs) were introduced to derive the differential
approach for generalized SPNs. Similar as the switching
parents for (twin) sum nodes, the DSs are RVs which render
the respective model RVs independent from the remaining
RVs. More formally, for each X P X, let DX be the set
of all input distributions which have scope tXu. Assume
an arbitrary but ﬁxed ordering of DX and let rDXs be the
index of DX in this ordering. Let the DS WX be a discrete
RV with |DX| states. The so-called gated SPN Sg is obtained
by replacing each distribution by the product node
DX Ñ DX ˆ λWX“rDXs.
(23)
The introduced product is denoted as gate. As shown in [17],
X is rendered independent from all other RVs in the SPN
when conditioned on WX. Moreover, DX is the conditional
distribution of X given WX “ rDXs. Therefore, each X and
its DS WX can be incorporated as a two RV family in our BN
interpretation. When each input distribution DX is chosen
from an exponential family with natural parameters θDX,
the M-step is given by the expected sufﬁcient statistics
θDX Ð
ř
l SgpWX “ k | eplqq ş DXpx | eplqqθDXpxqdx
ř
l SgpWX “ k | eplqq
, (24)
where k “ rDXs. When eplq contains complete evidence x1
for X, then the integral
ş
DXpx | eplqqθDXpxqdx reduces to
θDXpx1q. When eplq contains partial evidence X, then
ż
DXpx | eplqqθDXpxqdx “
ş
X DXpxqθDXpxqdx
ş
X DXpxqdx
.
(25)
Depending on X and the the type of DX, evaluating (25) can
be more or less demanding. A simple but practical case is
when DX is Gaussian and X is some interval, permitting a
closed form solution for integrating the Gaussian’s statistics
θpxq “ px, x2q, using truncated Gaussians [34].
To obtain the posteriors SgpWX “ k | eplqq required in
(24), we again use the differential approach. Note that
SgpWX “ k, eplqq “ BSgpeplqq
BλWX“k
“ BSgpeplqq
BP
DXpeplqq, (26)
where k “ rDXs and P is the gate of DX, cf. (23). If we do
not want to construct the gated SPN explicitly, we can use
the identity BSgpeplqq
BP
“ BSpeplqq
BDX
. Thus the required posteriors
are given as
SgpWX “ k | eplqq “
1
Speplqq
BSpeplqq
BDX
DXpeplqq.
(27)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
8
1: procedure EXPECTATION-MAXIMIZATION(S)
2:
Initialize w and input distributions
3:
while not converged do
4:

5:

6:
for l “ 1 . . . L do
7:
Input eplq to S
8:
Evaluate S (upward-pass)
9:
Backprop S (backward-pass)
10:
for S P SpSq, C P chpSq do
11:
nS,C Ð nS,C ` 1
S
BS
BS C wS,C
12:
end for
13:
for X P X, DX P DX do
14:
if eplq is complete w.r.t. X then
15:
x Ð complete evidence for X
16:
θ Ð θpxq
17:
else
18:
X Ð partial evidence for X
19:
θ Ð
ş
X DXpxqθpxqdx
ş
X DXpxqdx
20:
end if
21:
p Ð 1
S
BS
BDX DX
22:
θDX Ð θDX ` p θ
23:
nDX Ð nDX ` p
24:
end for
25:
end for
26:

nS,C
ř
C1PchpSq nS,C1
27:

θDX
nDX
28:
end while
29:
return S
30: end procedure
Fig. 6. Pseudo-code for EM algorithm in SPNs.
The EM algorithm for SPNs, both for sum-weights and
input distributions, is summarized in Fig. 6. In Section
5.1 we empirically verify our derivation of EM and show
that standard EM successfully trains SPNs when a suitable
structure is at hand.
Note that recently Zhao and Poupart [35] derived a
concave-convex procedure (CCCP) which yield the same
sum-weight updates as the EM algorithm presented here
and in [19]. This result is surprising, as EM and CCCP are
rather different approaches in general.
4
MOST PROBABLE EXPLANATION
In [1], [4], [7], SPNs were applied for reconstructing data
using MPE inference. Given some distribution p over
X and evidence e, MPE can be formalized as ﬁnding
arg max
xPe
ppxq, where we assume that p actually has a
maximum in e. MPE is a special case of MAP, deﬁned as
ﬁnding arg max
yPerYs
ş
erZs ppy, zq dz, for some two-partition of
X, i.e. X “ Y Y Z, Y X Z “ H. Both MPE and MAP are
generally NP-hard in BNs [36], [37], [38], and MAP is inher-
ently harder than MPE [37], [38]. Using the result in [18],
it follows that MAP inference is NP-hard also in SPNs. In
particular, Theorem 5 in [18] shows that the decision version
of MAP is NP-complete for a Naive Bayes model, when the
class variable is marginalized. Naive Bayes is represented
by the augmentation of an SPN with a single sum node,
the LV representing the class variable. Therefore, MAP in
SPNs is generally NP-hard. Since MAP in the augmented
SPN representing the Naive Bayes model corresponds to
MPE inference in the original SPN, i.e. a mixture model,
it follows that also MPE inference is generally NP-hard in
SPNs. A proof tailored to SPNs can be found in [19].
However, when considering the the sub-class of selective
SPNs (cf. Section 1.1 and [20]), an MPE solution can be
obtained using a Viterbi-style backtracking algorithm in
max-product networks.
Deﬁnition 5 (Max-Product Network). Let S be an SPN over
X. We deﬁne the max-product network (MPN) ˆS, by replacing
each distribution node D by a maximizing distribution node
ˆD: HscpDq ÞÑ r0, 8s, ˆDpYq :“ max
yPY Dpyq,
(28)
and each sum node S by a max node
ˆS :“ max
ˆCPchpˆSq
wˆS,ˆCˆC.
(29)
A product node P in S corresponds to a product node ˆP in ˆS.
Theorem 2. Let S be a selective SPN over X and let ˆS
the corresponding MPN. Let N be some node in S and ˆN its
corresponding node in ˆS. Then, for every X P HscpNq we have
ˆNpXq “ max
xPX Npxq.
Theorem 2 shows that the MPN maximizes the prob-
ability in its corresponding selective SPN. The proof (see
appendix) also shows how to actually ﬁnd a maximizing
assignment. For a product, a maximizing assignment is
given by combining the maximizing assignments of its
children. For a sum, a maximizing assignment is given
by the maximizing assignment of a single child, whose
weighted maximum is maximal among all children. Here
the children’s maxima are readily given by the upwards
pass in the MPN. Thus, ﬁnding a maximizing assignment of
any node in an selective SPN recursively reduces to ﬁnding
maximizing assignments for the children of this node; this
can be accomplished by a Viterbi-like backtracking proce-
dure. This algorithm, denoted as MPESELECTIVE, is shown
in Fig. 7. Here Q denotes a queue of nodes, where Q ð N
and N ð Q denote the en-queue and de-queue operations,
respectively. Note that Theorem 2 has already been derived
for a special case, namely for arithmetic circuits representing
network polynomials of BNs over discrete RVs [39].
A direct corollary of Theorem 2 is that MPE inference is
tractable in augmented SPNs, since augmented SPNs are
selective SPNs over X and Z. This can easily be seen in
AUGMENTSPN, as for any z and any sum S, exactly one
IV of ZS is set to 1, causing that at most one child of S (or
¯S) can be non-zero. Therefore, we can use MPESELECTIVE
in augmented SPNs, in order to ﬁnd an MPE solution over
both model RVs and LVs. Note that an MPE solution for the
augmented SPN does in general not correspond to an MPE
solution for the original SPN, when discarding the states
of the LVs. However, this procedure is a frequently used
approximation for models where MPE is tractable for both
model RVs and LVs, but not for model RVs alone.
In [1], MPESELECTIVE was applied to original SPNs, not
to augmented SPNs, but also with the goal to recover an

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
9
1: procedure MPESELECTIVE(S, e)
2:
Initialize zero-vector x˚ of length |X|
3:
Evaluate e in corresponding MPN ˆS (upwards pass)
4:
Q ð root node of MPN
5:
while Q not empty do
6:
ˆN ð Q
7:
if ˆN is a max node then
8:
Q ð arg max
ˆCPchpˆNq
!
wˆN,ˆC ˆC
)
9:
else if ˆN is a product node then
10:

11:
else if ˆN is a maximizing distribution node then
12:
N Ð corresponding distribution node
13:
x˚rscpNqs “ arg max
xPerscpNqs
Npxq
14:
end if
15:
end while
16:
return x˚
17: end procedure
Fig. 7. Pseudo-code for MPE inference in selective SPNs.
MPE solution over both model RVs and LVs. The states of
the LVs were assigned during max-backtracking, as sum-
children and LV states are in one-to-one correspondence.
The states of the LVs whose sums are not visited during
backtracking, are not assigned – again, this causes some
confusion, since some LVs appear to be undeﬁned in some
contexts, cf. the illustrations in Section 2. However, since this
algorithm was used as approximation for MPE over model
RVs by discarding the states of the LVs, this situation was
not paid any further attention.
Nevertheless, as we show here, applying MPESELEC-
TIVE to original (non-selective) SPNs effectively “simulates”
MPESELECTIVE in the corresponding augmented SPN.
Thereby, however, deterministic twin-weights are implicitly
assumed, i.e. twin-weights which are 0, except a single 1. To
see this, let us modify MPESELECTIVE, such that it can be
applied to an original SPN, but returning an MPE solution
for the corresponding augmented SPN. First note that in
the augmented MPN, every twin node simply outputs the
maximal twin-weight among all children whose states are
contained in evidence e. For twin node ¯S, let this maximal
weight be denoted by ˆw¯S. The effect of the twin nodes can
now be simulated in the original SPN by replacing each
weight wS,C in the original SPN by wS,C ˆ ˜wS,C. Here ˜wS,C
is a correction factor and given as ˜wS,C “ ś
¯S ˆw¯S, where
the product runs over all twins of those sums for which
S is a conditioning sum. By using these corrected weights,
each max node in the corresponding MPN gets the same
input as in the MPN of the augmented SPN, i.e. the twin
nodes are simulated. We can identify the maximizing states
of those LVs whose sums are visited during backtracking, as
in [1]. The states of the sums which are not visited are given
by the child which correspond to the maximal twin-weight
ˆw¯S. Pseudo-code for this somewhat technical modiﬁcation
of MPESELECTIVE can be found in [19].
We see that the algorithm used in [1] is essentially equiv-
alent to MPESELECTIVE in augmented SPNs when ˜wS,C “ 1
for all sum nodes, which implies that the twin-weights are
Fig. 8. Illustration of the low-depth bias using an SPN over RVs
tX1, X2, X3u. The structure introduced by augmentation is depicted by
small nodes and edges. When deterministic twin-weights are used, the
state of ZS1 corresponding to P1 is preferred over P2 and P3, since their
probabilities are “dampened” by the weights of S2 and S3, respectively.
deterministic. Therefore, although the LV model in [1] is not
completely speciﬁed and it was not shown that the Viterbi-
like algorithm recovers an MPE solution, it nevertheless
corresponds to MPE inference in the augmented SPN for
special twin-weights, i.e. deterministic weights.
However, using deterministic twin-weights is a rather
unnatural choice, since this prefers one arbitrary state over
the others in cases where this LV is actually “rendered
irrelevant”. In this case, MPE inference also has a bias
towards less structured sub-models, which we call low-
depth bias. This is illustrated in Fig. 8, which shows an
SPN over three RVs X1, X2, X3. The augmented SPN has
two twin sum nodes ¯S2 and ¯S3, corresponding to S2 and
S3, respectively. When their twin-weights are deterministic,
the selection of the state of ZS1 is biased towards the state
corresponding to P1, which is a distribution assuming inde-
pendence among X1, X2 and X3. This comes from the fact,
that the values of P2 and P3 are dampened by the weights of
S2 and S3, respectively, which are generally smaller than 1.
Therefore, when using deterministic weights for twin sum
nodes, we introduce a bias towards the selection of sub-
SPNs that are less deep and less structured. Using uniform
weights for twin sum nodes is somewhat “fairer”, since in
this case P1 gets dampened by ¯S2 and ¯S3, P2 by S2 and
¯S3, and P3 by ¯S2 and S3. Uniform weights are to some
extend the opposite choice to deterministic twin-weights:
the former represent the strongest possible dampening via
twin-weights and therefore actually penalize less structured
distributions. Investigating these effects further is subject to
future work.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
10
5
EXPERIMENTS
5.1
Experiments with EM Algorithm
In [1], [40] SPNs were applied to image data, where a generic
architecture reminiscent to convolutional neural networks
was proposed. We refer to this architecture as PD archi-
tecture. Standard EM was not used in experiments for two
reasons: First, explicitly constructing the proposed structure
and to train it with standard EM is hardly possible with
current hardware, since the number of nodes grows Opl3q,
where l is the square-length of the modeled image domain
in pixels [19]. Instead, a sparse hard EM algorithm was used,
which virtualizes the PD structure, i.e. sum and products
are generated on the ﬂy (see [40] for details). Second, using
standard EM seemed unsuited to train large and dense
SPNs, either because it is trapped in local optima or due
to the gradient vanishing phenomenon.
In our experiments,2 we investigated three questions:
1)
Is our derivation of EM correct, both for complete
and missing data?
2)
Can the result of hard EM [1] be improved by
standard EM?
3)
Given a suited sparse structure, does EM yield a
good solution for parameters?
Question 1) is important since the original derivation con-
tained an error. Questions 2) and 3) are concerned with the
general applicability of EM for training SPN.
We used the same datasets and SPN structures as in
[1], obtainable from [40]. The datasets comprise Caltech-101
(inclusive background class) [42] and the ORL face images
[43], i.e. in total 103 datasets. The input distributions in these
SPNs are single-dimensional Gaussians (4 for each pixel),
where means were set to the averages of the 4-quantiles
and variances were constantly 1. We ran EM (Fig. 6) for 30
iterations, with various settings:
‚
Update any combination of the three different types
of parameters, i.e. sum-weights, Gaussian means and
Gaussian variances. Each set of parameters types is
encoded by a string of letters W (weights), M (means)
and V (variances). (7 combinations)
‚
Use original parameters for initialization, obtained
from [40], or use 3 random initialization, where sum-
weights are drawn from a Dirichlet distribution with
uniform α “ 1 hyper-parameter (i.e. uniform dis-
tribution on the standard simplex), Gaussian means
are uniformly drawn from r´1, 1s and Gaussian
variances from r0.01, 1s. Only parameters which are
actually updated are initialized randomly; otherwise
the original parameters [1] are used and kept ﬁxed.
(4 combinations)
‚
Use complete data or missing training data, ran-
domly discarding 33% or 66% of the observations,
independently for each sample. (3 combinations)
Thus, in total we ran EM 7 ˆ 4 ˆ 3 ˆ 103 “ 8652 times,
yielding 259560 EM-iterations. To avoid pathological solu-
tions we used a lower bound of 0.01 for the Gaussian vari-
ances. In no iteration we observed a decreasing likelihood
2. Code available under [41].
Iteration
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Train log-likelihood
-7000
-6000
-5000
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
W
M
WM
V
WV
MV
WMV
(a)
Iteration
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Test log-likelihood
-6500
-6000
-5500
-5000
W
M
WM
V
WV
MV
WMV
(b)
Fig. 9. Normalized log-likelihood over EM-iterations, averaged over all
103 datasets and 3 random initializations. (a): Training set. (b): Test
set; Curves for V and WV are outside the displayed region, for better
readability of the other curves. They start at approximately ´8000 nats
and decreased to approximately ´11000 nats.
on the training set,3 i.e. our derived EM algorithm showed
monotonicity in our experiments. Moreover, as can be seen
in Fig. 9a, the training log-likelihood actually increased over
iterations. The curves for the missing data scenarios are
similar. This gives afﬁrmative evidence for question 1).
Fig. 9b shows the log-likelihood on the test set. Note
that optimizing the parameter sets V and WV led to severe
overﬁtting: while achieving extremely high likelihoods on
the training set, they achieved extremely poor likelihoods
on the test set. Also the parameter sets MV and WMV tend
to overﬁt, although not as strong as V and WV.
Regarding question 2), we closer inspected the test log-
likelihood when the original parameters are used for ini-
tialization, i.e. when the parameters obtained by [40] are
post-trained using EM. Table 1 summarizes the results.
When parameter sets not including Gaussian variances are
optimized (i.e. W, M, and WM), the test log-likelihood
increased most of the time, i.e. for 83.5% (M) to up to
92.23% (WM) of the datasets. Furthermore, having oracle
knowledge about the ideal number of iterations (i.e. column
best), the average log-likelihood increased by 0.58% (M)
to up to 1.39% (WM) relative to the original parameters.
Most of this improvement happens in the ﬁrst iteration,
yielding 0.52% (M) up to 1.05% (WM) improvement. These
results indicate that the parameters obtained by [40] slightly
underﬁt the given datasets. Similar as in Fig. 9, we see
that parameter sets including the Gaussian variances (V,
3. Except for tiny occasional decreases (always ă 10´8) after EM had
converged, which can be attributed to numerical artifacts.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
11
TABLE 1
Changes in test log-likelihoods when original parameters are
post-trained using EM. % inc.: percentage of datasets where
log-likelihood increased in the ﬁrst iteration. % all, % pos., % neg.:
relative change of log-likelihood, averaged over all datasets, datasets
with positive change, datasets with negative change, respectively.
after 1st iteration
best
% inc.
% all.
% pos.
% neg.
% all
% pos.
% neg.
W
91.26
0.55
0.61
-0.03
0.87
0.96
-0.03
M
83.50
0.52
0.67
-0.21
0.58
0.73
-0.21
WM
92.23
1.06
1.18
-0.30
1.39
1.53
-0.30
V
39.81
-13.47
14.44
-31.93
-13.45
14.51
-31.93
WV
39.81
-13.41
14.79
-32.06
-13.33
14.98
-32.06
MV
38.83
-17.24
14.27
-37.25
-17.21
14.35
-37.25
WMV
38.83
-17.18
14.63
-37.37
-17.12
14.78
-37.37
TABLE 2
Log-likelihoods when sum-weights (W) are trained, using random
initialization. % ą: percentage of data sets, where log-likelihood is
larger than for original parameters. % all, % pos., % neg.: relative
log-likelihood w.r.t. original parameters, for all data sets, data sets
where relative log-likelihood is positive/negative, respectively.
after 1st iteration
best
%ą
% all.
% pos.
% neg.
%ą
% all
% pos.
% neg.
train
70.87
0.68
1.38
-1.00
100.00
3.97
3.97
-
test
41.75
-0.11
0.40
-0.48
67.96
0.46
0.76
-0.18
WV, MV, WMV) are prone to overﬁtting: more than 60% of
the datasets decreased their test log-likelihood during EM.
However, in the remaining 40% of the datasets, the test log-
likelihood could be improved substantially by at least 14%
on average.
We now turn to question 3). As pointed out above, a hard
EM variant was used in [1], [40] which at the same time
ﬁnds the effective SPN structure. Optimizing W using the 3
random initialization amounts to using the oracle structure
obtained by [1], [40], discarding the learned parameters. For
each dataset we selected the random initialization which
yielded the highest likelihood on the training set in iteration
30. For this run, we compared the log-likelihoods with the
log-likelihoods obtained by the original parameters. The
results are summarized in Table 2. We see that on all data
sets the log-likelihood on the training set is larger than
for the original parameters. This is also the case for each
individual random start (not just best one) – every random
restart always yielded a higher training log-likelihood than
the original parameters. Thus, by considering the actual
optimization objective – the likelihood on the training set –
EM successfully trains SPNs, given a suited oracle structure.
Furthermore, as can be seen in Table 2, EM is also not more
prone to overﬁtting than the algorithm in [1]: on 67.96%
of the datasets, EM delivered a higher test log-likelihood
than the original parameters, when using oracle knowledge
about the ideal number of iterations (column best).
5.2
Experiments with MPE Inference
To illustrate correctness of MPESELECTIVE (Fig. 7) when
applied to augmented SPNs, we generated SPNs using the
PD architecture [1], arranging 4, 9 and 16 binary RVs in a
2ˆ2, 3ˆ3 and 4ˆ4 grid, respectively. As inputs we used two
indicator variables for each RV representing their two states.
The sum-weights were drawn from a Dirichlet distribution
TABLE 3
Differences of log-likelihood to the ground-truth MPE solution found by
exhaustive enumeration, averaged over 100 independent draws of
sum-weights. Numbers in parentheses are the number of times where
an MPE solution was found. Results for augmented SPNs using
uniform twin-weights.
MPEDET
MPEUNI
α “ 0.5
0.00 (100)
0.00 (100)
4 RVs
α “ 1.0
0.00 (100)
0.00 (100)
α “ 2.0
0.00 (100)
0.00 (100)
α “ 0.5
-0.10 (70)
0.00 (100)
9 RVs
α “ 1.0
-0.10 (68)
0.00 (100)
α “ 2.0
-0.11 (62)
0.00 (100)
α “ 0.5
-0.63 (19)
0.00 (100)
16 RVs
α “ 1.0
-0.85 (12)
0.00 (100)
α “ 2.0
-0.82 (12)
0.00 (100)
TABLE 4
Similar as in Table 3. Results for augmented SPNs using deterministic
twin-weights.
MPEDET
MPEUNI
α “ 0.5
0.00 (100)
0.00 (100)
4 RVs
α “ 1.0
0.00 (100)
0.00 (100)
α “ 2.0
0.00 (100)
0.00 (100)
α “ 0.5
0.00 (100)
-0.10 (70)
9 RVs
α “ 1.0
0.00 (100)
-0.12 (68)
α “ 2.0
0.00 (100)
-0.15 (62)
α “ 0.5
0.00 (100)
-0.89 (19)
16 RVs
α “ 1.0
0.00 (100)
-1.11 (12)
α “ 2.0
0.00 (100)
-1.01 (12)
with uniform α-parameters, where α P t0.5, 1, 2u. For all
networks we drew 100 independent parameters sets. We
ran MPESELECTIVE on the augmented SPN, once equipped
with uniform twin-weights and once with deterministic
twin-weights. For uniform twin-weights, we denote the
result obtained by MPESELECTIVE as MPEUNI. For deter-
ministic twin-weights, we denote the result as MPEDET. As
described in Section 4, MPEDET corresponds essentially to
the result when MPESELECTIVE is applied to the original
SPN [1]. For each assignment, the log-likelihoods were eval-
uated in the augmented SPN with deterministic weights, the
augmented SPN with uniform weights and in the original
SPN (discarding the states of the LVs). Additionally, we
found ground truth MPE assignments in the two augmented
SPNs and the original SPN using exhaustive enumeration.
The results relative to the ground truth MPE solutions are
shown in Tables 3, 4, and 5. As can be seen, MPEUNI always
ﬁnds an MPE solution in the augmented SPN with uniform
twin-weights and MPEDET always ﬁnds an MPE solution
in augmented SPNs with deterministic twin-weights. This
gives empirical evidence for the correctness of MPESELEC-
TIVE for MPE inference in augmented SPNs.
Furthermore, we wanted to investigate the quality of
both algorithms when serving as approximation for MPE
inference in the original SPNs. For the SPNs considered
here, MPEDET delivered on average slightly better approx-
imations than MPEUNI. However, these results should be
interpreted with caution, due to the rather similar nature
of the distributions considered here. Closer investigating
approximate MPE for (original) SPNs is an interesting di-
rection and will be subject to future research.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
12
TABLE 5
Similar as in Table 3. Results for original SPNs.
MPEDET
MPEUNI
α “ 0.5
-0.06 (72)
-0.06 (72)
4 RVs
α “ 1.0
-0.09 (59)
-0.09 (59)
α “ 2.0
-0.10 (52)
-0.10 (52)
α “ 0.5
-0.31 (32)
-0.38 (27)
9 RVs
α “ 1.0
-0.47 (12)
-0.48 (12)
α “ 2.0
-0.40 (6)
-0.37 (7)
α “ 0.5
-0.76 (5)
-1.04 (4)
16 RVs
α “ 1.0
-0.76 (3)
-1.18 (2)
α “ 2.0
-0.67 (1)
-0.92 (0)
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper we revisited the interpretation of SPNs as
hierarchically structured LV model. We pointed out that
the original approach to explicitly incorporate LVs does
not produce a sound probabilistic model. As a remedy
we proposed the augmentation of SPNs and proved its
soundness as LV model. Within augmented SPNs, we in-
vestigated the independency structure represented as BN,
and showed that the sum-weights can be interpreted as
structured CPTs within this BN. Using augmented SPNs,
we derived the EM algorithm for sum-weights and single-
dimensional input distributions from exponential families.
While MPE-inference is generally NP-hard in SPNs, we
showed that a Viterbi-style backtracking algorithm recovers
an MPE solution in selective SPNs, and in particular in aug-
mented SPNs. In experiments we give empirical evidence
supporting our theoretical results. We furthermore showed
that standard EM can successfully train generative SPNs,
given a suitable network structure at hand.
APPENDIX A
PROOFS
A.1
Proof of Proposition 1
If S1 is a complete and decomposable SPN over X Y Z, then
S1pXq ” SpXq is immediate: Computing S1pxq for any x P
valpXq is done by marginalizing Z, i.e. setting all λZS“k “
1. In this case, it is easy to see that none of the structural
changes modiﬁes the output of the SPN, i.e. the outputs of
S and S1 agree for each x, i.e. S1pXq ” SpXq.
It remains to show that S1 is complete and decompos-
able, and that the root’s scope is X Y Z. Steps 4–11 in
AUGMENTSPN introduce the links, representing ”private
copies” of the sum’s children, and clearly leave the SPN
complete and decomposable. In steps 13–15 the LV ZS is
introduced in the scope of S and thus in the scope of the root.
Since this is done for all sum nodes, all Z are introduced in
the root’s scope. Steps 13–15 cannot render products non-
decomposable, since this would imply that S is reachable
by two distinct children of this product – a contradiction to
the fact that the SPN was decomposable before. However,
as shown in Fig. 1, steps 13–15 can render ancestor sums
incomplete. These are treated in steps 17–23. The twin sum
¯S, if introduced, is clearly complete and has scope tZu.
Furthermore, incompleteness of any conditioning sum Sc
can only be caused by links not having ZS in their scope.
The scope of these links is augmented by ZS in step 21.
These links clearly remain decomposable and moreover, Sc
is rendered complete now.
A.2
Proof of Proposition 2
ad 1.) When deleting the IVs and their links, the scopes of
any (twin) sum remains the same, since it is complete and
is left with one child. Thus also the scope of any ancestor
remains the same.
ad 2.) The graph of Sy is rooted and acyclic, since the
root cannot be a link and deleting nodes and edges cannot
introduce cycles. When an IV λY “y is deleted, also the link
Py
SY is deleted, so no internal nodes are left as leaves. The
roots in Sy and S1 are the same, and by point 1., XYYYZ is
the scope of the root. Sy is also complete and decomposable:
Whenever an IV and its link are deleted, the corresponding
sum node and twin sum node remain trivially complete,
since they are left with a single child. Furthermore, com-
pleteness and decomposability of any ancestor of SY or ¯SY
is left intact, since neither SY nor ¯SY changes its scope.
ad 3.) According to point 1., the scope of N is the same in
S1 and Sy. Since scpNq X Y “ H, the disconnected IVs and
deleted links are no descendants of N, i.e. no descendants of
N are disconnected during conﬁguration. Since N is present
in Sy, it must still be reachable from the root. Therefore also
all descendants of N are reachable, i.e. Sy
N “ S1
N.
ad 4.) When the input is ﬁxed to x, z, y, all IVs and links
which are deleted from the conﬁgured SPN Sy evaluate to
zero in the augmented SPN S1. The outputs of all sums and
twin sums are therefore the same in S1 and Sy. Therefore,
also the output of all other nodes remains the same. This
includes the root and therefore Sypx, z, yq “ S1px, z, yq, for
any x, z.
When y1 ­“ y, then there must be a Y P Y such that
the IV λY “y1rY s has been deleted, i.e. λY “y1rY s R descpNq,
where N is the root of Sy. Using Lemma 1 in [17], it follows
that Sypx, z, y1q “ 0.
A.3
Proof of Lemma 1
Sz must contain either S or ¯S, since ZS is in the scope of the
root by Proposition 2. To show that not both are in Sz, let
Πk denote the set of paths of length k from the root to any
node N with ZS P scpNq. For k ą 1, all paths in Πk can be
constructed by extending each path in Πk´1 with each child
of this path’s last node, if it has ZS in its scope. Let K be the
smallest number such that there is a path in Πk containing
S or ¯S.
We show by induction, that |Πk| “ 1, k “ 1, . . . , K.
Note that Π1 contains a single path pNq, where N is the
root, therefore the induction basis holds.
For the induction step, we show that given |Πk´1| “ 1,
then also |Πk| “ 1. Let pN1, . . . , Nk´1q be the single path in
Πk´1. If Nk´1 is a product node, then it has a single child
C with ZS P scpCq, due to decomposability. If Nk´1 is a
sum node, then it must be in ancSpSqztSu, and therefore
has a single child in the conﬁgured SPN. Therefore, there is
a single way to extend the path and therefore |Πk| “ 1, k “
1, . . . , K. This single path does either lead to S or ¯S. Since
S R descp¯Sq and ¯S R descpSq, Sz contains a single path to
one of them, but not to both.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, ACCEPTED PRE-PRINT VERSION, OCTOBER 2016
13
A.4
Proof of Theorem 1
By Lemma 1, for each z P valpZpq the conﬁgured SPN Sz
contains either S or ¯S, but not both. Let Z be the subset of
valpZpq such that S is in Sz and ¯Z be the subset of valpZpq
such that ¯S is in Sz.
Fix ZS “ k and z P Z. We want to compute S1pZS “
k, Yn, zq, i.e. we marginalize Yc. According to Proposition 2
(4.), this equals SzpZS “ k, Yn, zq. According to Proposi-
tion 2 (3.), the sub-SPN rooted at former child Ck
S is the
same in S1 and Sz. Since S1 is locally normalized, this sub-
SPN is also locally normalized in Sz. Since the scope of the
former child Ck
S is a sub-set of Yc, which is marginalized,
and λZS“k “ 1, the link Pk
S outputs 1. Since λZS“k1 “ 0 for
k1 ­“ k, the sum S outputs wk.
Now consider the set of nodes in Sz which have ZS in
their scope, not including λZS“k and Pk
S. Clearly, since ¯S
is not in Sz, this set must be ancpSq. Let N1, . . . , NL be a
topologically ordered list of ancpSq, where S is N1 and NL
is the root. Let Yn,l :“ scpNlq X Yn and Zl :“ scpNlq X Zp.
We show by induction that for l “ 1, . . . , L, we have
NlpZS “ k, Yn,l, zrZlsq “ wk NlpYn,l, zrZlsq.
(30)
Since Yn,1 “ H and Z1 “ H, and N1pZS “ kq “ wk,
the induction basis holds. Assume that (30) holds for all
N1, . . . , Nl´1. If Nl is a sum, we have due to completeness
NlpZS “ k, Yn,l, zrZlsq “
ÿ
CPchpNlq
wNl,C wk CpYn,l, zrZlsq
(31)
“ wk NlpYn,l, zrZlsq,
(32)
i.e. the induction step holds for sums. When Nl is a product,
due to decomposability, it must have a single child with ZS
in its scope. Hence, this child must be a node Nm P ancpSq
We have
NlpZS “ k, Yn,l, zrZlsq
(33)
“ wk NmpYn,m, zrZmsq
ź
CPchpNlqzNm
CpYn,l X scpCqq (34)
“ wk NlpYn,l, zrZlsq,
(35)
i.e. the induction step holds for products. Therefore, by
induction, (30) also holds for the root, and (11) follows.
Now we show (12). If the twin sum ¯S does not exist, ¯Z
is empty and (12) holds trivially. Otherwise, ﬁx the input to
ZS “ k and z P ¯Z. Clearly, ¯S outputs ¯wk and (12) can be
shown in similar way as (11).
A.5
Proof of Theorem 2
We prove the theorem using an inductive argument. The
theorem clearly holds for any ˆD by deﬁnition. Consider a
product ˆP and assume the theorem holds for all chpˆPq. Then
the theorem also holds for ˆP, since
ˆPpXq “
ź
CPchpˆPq
max
xPX Cpxq “ max
xPX
ź
CPchpˆPq
Cpxq “ max
xPX Ppxq,
(36)
where the max and the product can be switched due to
decomposability.
Now consider a max node ˆS and its corresponding sum
node S. Let the support of an SPN-node N be the set supN :“
tx | Npxq ą 0u. Since S is selective, its support is partitioned
by the supports of its children, i.e. supS “ Ť
CPchpSq supC,
supC1 Ş supC2 “ H, for C1 ­“ C2. Assuming that the theorem
holds for all chpˆSq, we have
ˆSpX q “ max
CPchpSqwS,C max
xPX Cpxq
(37)
“ max
CPchpSqwS,C
max
xPsupC XX Cpxq
(38)
“ max
CPchpSq
max
xPsupC XX wS,C Cpxq
(39)
“
max
xPsupS XX Spxq “ max
xPX Spxq.
(40)
In (38) we have a slight abuse of notation, as we actually
should use suprema over the sets supC XX and deﬁne the
supremum over the empty set as 0. In (39) we used the
fact that the support of the sum node is partitioned by the
supports of its children and that for selective sums we have
S “ wS,C C whenever we have single child with C ą 0.
We see that the induction step also holds for ˆS. Therefore,
the theorem holds for all nodes.
