LEARNING COMPLEX SPATIAL BEHAVIOURS IN ABM: AN
EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONAL STUDY. ∗
Sedar Olmez
School of Geography
University of Leeds
Seminary St, Woodhouse, Leeds LS2 9JT
The Alan Turing Institute
2QR, John Dodson House, 96 Euston Rd, London NW1 2DB

Dan Birks
School of Law
University of Leeds
Belle Vue Rd, Woodhouse, Leeds LS2 9JT
The Alan Turing Institute
2QR, John Dodson House, 96 Euston Rd, London NW1 2DB

Alison Heppenstall
School of Social & Political Sciences
University of Glasgow
University of Glasgow Adam Smith Building Bute Gardens Glasgow, G12 8RT
The Alan Turing Institute
2QR, John Dodson House, 96 Euston Rd, London NW1 2DB

ABSTRACT
Capturing and simulating intelligent adaptive behaviours within spatially explicit individual-based
models remains an ongoing challenge for researchers. While an ever-increasing abundance of real-
world behavioural data are collected, few approaches exist that can quantify and formalise key
individual behaviours and how they change over space and time. Consequently, commonly used agent
decision-making frameworks, such as event-condition-action rules, are often required to focus only
on a narrow range of behaviours. We argue that these behavioural frameworks often do not reﬂect
real-world scenarios and fail to capture how behaviours can develop in response to stimuli. There has
been an increased interest in Machine Learning methods and their potential to simulate intelligent
adaptive behaviours in recent years. One method that is beginning to gain traction in this area is
Reinforcement Learning (RL). This paper explores how RL can be applied to create emergent agent
behaviours using a simple predator-prey Agent-Based Model (ABM). Running a series of simulations,
we demonstrate that agents trained using the novel Proximal Policy Optimisation (PPO) algorithm
behave in ways that exhibit properties of real-world intelligent adaptive behaviours, such as hiding,
evading and foraging.
Keywords Agent-Based Model · Reinforcement Learning · Decision Making · Intelligent Agents · Data Analysis ·
Unity3D
∗Citation: Authors. Title. Pages.... DOI:000000/11111.
arXiv:2201.01099v1  [cs.MA]  4 Jan 2022

1
Introduction
In this research, intelligent adaptive behaviour is deﬁned as agents using their knowledge about the environment to
make decisions that allow them to adapt to new and novel situations. Understanding how these behaviours change
over space and time is vital to understanding the processes that shape complex systems and how they change. Social
systems, for example, contain dynamic processes that evolve over space and time. [1] discusses the changes that occur
at the neighbourhood level and describes the social processes that are created by these changes. According to [1], social
systems are driven by potentially inﬁnite individual-level decisions. [2], develops this view by suggesting that social
systems are comprised of individuals linked by networks with information transmitted between them. Any attempt to
simulate individual decision-making and behaviour must capture social processes at the individual level.
An ABM (a type of individual-based model) is a computational model used for simulating the actions and interactions
of autonomous agents [3]. ABM has grown in popularity over the past decade; this widespread adoption is observed
by the applications of these models in various domains, for example, economics, sociology, criminology, geography
[4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Most recently, some scholars have considered how ABM might be applied to support our understanding
of the Covid-19 pandemic and societal responses to it [9, 10].
While the upsurge in new data sources, including footfall cameras, pollution monitors and mobile navigation, provides
novel insights into behaviour and movements of individuals [11, 12, 13], identifying individual-level behaviours to
embed within ABM remains a challenge. However, efforts have been directed towards constructing frameworks for
handling behaviour in ABMs [14, 15, 16].
Almost all ABMs implement some aspect of decision-making [17, 18, 6, 19, 20]. However, the frameworks applied to
these models vary in their purpose and complexity. A common drawback of ABMs is that pre-determined decision rules
constrain the decision-making process; these are often based on the analysis of historical data. Such models can only
replicate a narrow set of behaviours often constrained to a speciﬁc period through their decision-making. [15] points
out that many factors must be considered when decisions are made, such as the environment, the rewards and penalties
the environment provides, the complex internal state of the organism and its incomplete knowledge of the environment.
[14] states that the process of modelling complex decision-making has many levels of complexity, including cognitive
(such as reactive, deliberative, neurologically inspired agents), learning (the learning agents undergo, including neural
networks), social (including communication and social networks). By contrast to existing agent decision-making
frameworks, this research will explore how agents can learn to exhibit intelligent adaptive behaviours that vary across
space and time. To achieve this, this paper presents the results of efforts to imbue agents within a simple illustrative
predator-prey model with behaviours derived through reinforcement learning (RL) - a well-known machine learning
technique.
The goal of RL algorithms is to learn how to apply an action in a given situation; RL does this by mapping situations
(states) to actions through trial-and-error and uses an objective function to measure how well a set of actions are in
maximising the rewards. Thus, the agent learns behaviour and is not told explicitly what action to take [21, 22]. A
real-world example of such behavioral learning is a dog and its owner; the owner rewards the dog with treats when it
behaves and tells it off if it displays unwanted reactions such as barking or biting. Over time, the dog is conditioned to
learn to behave appropriately (as deﬁned by the owner).
RL has previously been applied within ABM research, [23] for instance, applied RL to simulate adaptive drone
behaviour; the goal was to learn how to cover unfamiliar terrain to get to a target. [24] further developed Schelling’s
model, a well-known ABM which explores segregation dynamics [25], utilising an RL decision-making framework to
capture novel insights, such as evidencing that segregated areas are more likely to host older people than diverse areas,
which attract younger ones. [26] harnessed the group-learning ability of RL (multi-agent systems where agents learn
collectively as a group) to develop collaborative management dynamics of air trafﬁc control. Similarly, [27] applied RL
to develop policies for service management of cloud computing infrastructure. The agent’s goal is to gain experience in
determining the optimal place in which a given task should be executed. Most similar to this study, [28] conduct an
exploratory study that demonstrates how PPO can be used to develop intelligent agent behaviour. In their study [28]
demonstrate how static environmental changes (i.e. new platforms, barriers) impact the behaviour of interacting agents.
While not explored by [28], RL may also offer means to explore how dynamic changes to the model impact behaviour
- likely key to ’adaptive’ behaviour - and something that more traditional ABM decision-making frameworks would
struggle to capture. Within the model in this paper, this idea is extended by exploring how dynamic stimuli unbeknown
to agents during training, effect the decisions agents develop post-training. Furthermore, another unexplored area by
the aforementioned study is the length of training time. There is a consensus among some scholars in RL that training
models for longer lead to agents that are better at completing tasks [29, 30], we test this idea in a relatively small scale.
2

Sedar Olmez et al.
While these studies have demonstrated that RL is capable of exploring intelligent behaviour, the implementation of RL
presents a number of signiﬁcant challenges. Firstly, there are currently no systematic methods available to validate the
behaviours that emerge from RL, while by contrast condition-action behavioural rules are relatively easily inspected as
the modeller knows which action is being applied as this is implemented as a rule in the model. Secondly, logistically
speaking RL models are both more complex to implement and the computational complexity associated with their
application is many orders of magnitude greater than traditional decision making frameworks, making RL appealing to
only those with access to high-performance computing facilities. The impact of this is that fewer models are developed
and fewer applications are explored.
This research will evaluate the utility of a relatively new RL algorithm, namely proximal-policy optimisation [31] for
simulating intelligent adaptive behaviours and the subsequent variability of spatial patterns that emerge from these
behaviours. This algorithm was chosen as it has been shown to outperform the majority of RL algorithms it was
benchmarked against (sub-section 2.1) [31].
This research is not attempting to describe empirically validated ecologically veriﬁed behaviours of predator-prey
interactions. However, the research does develop a simple illustrative model containing two interacting entities that can
easily be tested and examined.
The objective of this research is to demonstrate the usability of RL in developing intelligent adaptive behaviours in an
illustrative agent-based model and subsequently, to interpret these emerging behaviours qualitatively and quantitatively.
To achieve this objective, we devise two experiments, where (1) looks at the impact training length has on task efﬁciency,
answering the question: does learning for a longer duration lead to behaviours with better outcomes than those trained
for a shorter period? In experiment (2), three model scenarios are devised, these are: prey agents are trained without
the predator, and the predator is not present post-training (Scenario 1), prey agents are trained with the predator, and
predator is present post-training (Scenario 2); lastly, the prey agents are trained without the predator, while the predator
is introduced post-training (Scenario 3). The question to be answered is: how do agents adapt to the presence of an
unknown stimulus? Does this have an adverse effect on task efﬁciency? Given the two experiments, we aim to compile
outputs from these experiment scenarios and (1) assess the quantitative outputs by comparing task efﬁciency across the
different experiment scenarios. (2) analyse the individual behaviours from recorded simulations to interpret intelligent
adaptive behaviours.
The research objective is achieved by: developing a simple ABM containing two types of agents (prey and predator) in
the Unity software platform using the ml-agents software package [30]. Training this model under several experimental
conditions using PPO [31], and subsequently examining the outcomes of the trained models both quantitatively and
qualitatively. Finally, a framework is devised to record, analyse and interpret real-time behaviours agents portray during
the simulation runs.
1.1
Simulating Behaviour using Reinforcement Learning
Many ABMs within the literature study behaviour within a particular domain, for example, ecological economics,
animal movement or crime [32, 33, 34, 35]. Typically, these models use frameworks that handle reactive behaviours
or contain agents that adopt frameworks in line with bounded rationality [36, 37, 38], such as belief-based methods
[39]. This can make it difﬁcult to see how reﬂective of the real world these models can be. [40] describe the issues that
ABMs for economic policy encounter. Once they deviate from perfectly rational agents, they encounter many degrees
of freedom on what to assume for the behaviour of an agent.
Intelligent adaptive behaviours are challenging to develop using current agent-based decision-making frameworks as
these behaviours can be inconsistent or unexpected (irrational) [41]. Some argue that these behaviours are constrained
in the following way: a behavioural entity should be able to perceive its environment, should have a knowledge database
and several degrees of freedom of action on the environment [42].
The goal of RL is to allow agents to experience their immediate environment, gather information from this environment
using sensors, and over time learn which combination of decisions (policies) can lead to the desired outcome. This
training phase (sub-section 4.1) allows a neural network (Figure 14) to capture action, state, outcome data, which agents
can use to infer decisions post-training. The main concern of this research is the behaviours that subsequently emerge
during the agents’ activities post-training and how these behaviours can be quantiﬁed [22, 43, 21, 44].
In their research on applying behavioural frameworks in competitive game scenarios to study strategy equilibria, [45]
outlines the main theories inspired by behavioural psychology that RL adopts; these are The Law of Effect [46]:
decisions that have led to positive outcomes in the past, are more likely to be repeated in the future. The Power Law
of Practice [47]: Learning curves initially tend to be steep and then ﬂatter over time. After numerous experiments
comparing RL against belief-based models, researchers found that RL is more responsive, allowing it to adapt to other
3

agents’ changing behaviour, improving the models’ predictive power. Furthermore, when comparing higher-rationality
decision making, such as belief-based learning to lower-rationality RL, the former does not have an advantage over the
latter on the datasets tested [45].
The strengths of RL include knowledge retention (collecting observational sensory data and devising policies using
these data to achieve long-term goals) of agents and knowledge sharing between agents [48]. The drawbacks of RL
agents include the exponential growth of the discrete state-action space in the number of state and action variables and
the exploration-exploitation trade-off. This trade-off requires RL algorithms to balance the exploitation of the agent’s
current knowledge and exploratory information-gathering actions taken to improve that knowledge [44].
Some RL applications in ABMs focus on energy expenditure, economic forecasting, and game theory. [49] developed
an agent-based decision support system for a patient diagnosis. The authors apply an RL algorithm as it provides
approximation methods to make trade-offs between accuracy and speed. As a result, many cases were solved in a
shorter period. Similarly, [50] developed a simulation for optimising the radiography process using ABMs and RL.
The proposed approach contains two steps; the ﬁrst is the ABM, which simulates different radiotherapy scenarios. The
second step involves Q-learning [51], a popular RL algorithm used to optimise the radiation dose and fractionation
scheme. Finally, the learning algorithm parameters are ﬁne-tuned until the optimal treatment plans are achieved to cure
tumours with minimal side effects.
Generally, RL applications in modelling can be split into two categories. In category (1), we have studies that adopt RL
in their simulation to identify the optimal solution to a particular problem [23, 26, 27, 49, 50]. In category (2), we have
studies that use RL as a decision-making framework to investigate a known phenomenon and observe new insights
from this phenomenon, that may have not previously been identiﬁed due to constrained decision-making frameworks
[24, 45, 52, 53, 54, 55]. This research does not fall into either of the categories; instead, it aims to apply RL to agents
such that intelligent adaptive behaviours organically grow across multiple training conditions, as would be the case
in the real-world. Capturing and interpreting these behaviours could, in future, allow models to represent realistic
behaviours better.
Another contribution made by this research is to introduce specialised software, namely game engines, to the academic
modelling community; in the following paragraph, the rich features available in Unity that can help modellers develop
more realistic models are described.
Unity is a 3D development platform that consists of a rendering and physics engine. Unity has received widespread
adoption in several industries, including gaming, automotive, and ﬁlm [30]. Modern games development software such
as Unity are powerful tools for simulating complex interactions between agents with varying physiological/mental
capacities. Thus, games development software are perfectly poised to provide solutions for the foreseeable future of AI
research [30]. Furthermore, advances in RL have primarily been driven by the ability of neural networks to process
large amounts of visual, auditory and text-based data [56]. Many of the applied tasks researchers are interested in
solving with AI involve not only rich sensory information but a rich control scheme in which agents can interact with
their dynamic environments in complex ways [57, 28].
In Section 2, the PPO RL algorithm is described, including how it works, its features and relative strengths and
weaknesses. Section 3 outlines the ABM, the types of agents, environment, rewards and penalties that agents yield.
Section 4 deﬁnes the steps taken during training of the RL model; this includes the parameters used for training, formal
deﬁnition of these parameters and subsequently, the results from the training process. Section 5 details the simulation
results; these results are quantitatively analysed using various data science techniques. The individual behaviours
from these experiments are qualitatively described; a systematic approach was developed to ascribe visually inspected
behaviours to determine intelligent adaptive behaviours. Finally, Section 6 discusses the research outcome, what was
learnt from the research and how the research would be useful in future applications conducted by ABM researchers.
2
Implementing Reinforcement Learning Algorithms in Unity
This section describes the novel PPO RL algorithm [31, 30]. The algorithm is illustrated by outlining the main
components, including the underlying formulae and pseudocode.
2.1
Proximal Policy Optimisation (PPO)
PPO is a policy gradient method; these are a type of RL methods that depend on optimising parameterised policies
concerning the expected return (long-term cumulative reward) by gradient descent [21].
The PPO algorithm used in this research was developed by OpenAI researchers [31]. These algorithms alternate
between sampling data by interacting with the environment and optimising a proxy objective function using the
4

Sedar Olmez et al.
stochastic gradient descent algorithm [58]. The developers of PPO argue that given the recent advancements made in
RL algorithms that adopt neural network function approximators. There are still areas that could be improved, such as
making these algorithms scalable to larger models (even more so given the COVID-19 pandemic and the need for large
scale models that simulate population behaviours), parallel computation applications and solving multiple problems
without the need for hyper-parameter tuning [31].
During testing, [31] compared the PPO algorithm against algorithms that are known to perform well at solving
continuous control problems. The algorithms compared were: Trust Region Policy Optimisation (TRPO) [59], Cross-
Entropy Method (CEM) [60], Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) [61], A2C with Trust Region [62]. During these tests,
PPO outperformed the algorithms mentioned above in almost all instances of continuous control scenarios.
LCP I(θ) = ˆEt
 πθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st)
ˆAt

= ˆEt
h
rt(θ) ˆAt
i
(1)
In the above Formula 1, CPI stands for "conservative policy iteration" [63]. Without a constraint, maximisation of
LCP I would lead to an extremely large policy update; therefore, the objective function needs to be modiﬁed to penalise
changes to the policy that shift rt(θ) away from 1. Subsequently, the following Formula 2 was developed [31].
The previous variant of the PPO algorithm detailed in [31] used an adaptive Kullback-Leibler divergence (a measure of
how one probability distribution is different from a second, reference probability distribution) [64] penalty to control the
change of policy at each iteration. The newly updated variant of the PPO algorithm adopts a different objective function
(a method to measure the quality of any solution to a problem) proposed by [31] which can be found below (Formula 2).
LCLIP (θ) = ˆEt[min(rt(θ) ˆAt, clip(rt(θ), 1 −ε, 1 + ε) ˆAt)]
(2)
Where θ is the policy parameter, π is the policy, a and s are action and state respectively, ˆEt is the empirical expectations
over time steps. rt is the ratio of the probability under the new and old policies, respectively. ˆAt is the estimated
advantage at time t. ε is a hyperparameter, usually between 0 and 1; the hyperparameter value is used to control
the learning process. As described by [31], the ﬁrst term inside the min is LCP I (Formula 1). The second term,
clip(rt(θ), 1 −ε, 1 + ε) ˆAt), adjusts the surrogate objective by clipping the probability ratio, which eliminates the
incentive for moving rt outside of the period [1 −ε, 1 + ε]. Finally, the minimum of the clipped and unclipped objective
is taken, so the ultimate objective is a lower bound (also known as a pessimistic bound) on the unclipped objective.
Given this system, the change in probability ratio is ignored if the objective improves; conversely, it is only included
when it makes the objective worse.
The PPO Actor-Critic algorithm outlined by [31] is deﬁned below in pseudocode (see Algorithm 1). For each iteration,
every agent adopts an initial policy (a set of action/state combinations) πθold (as utilised in Formula 1) in the environment
for T time steps. The advantage estimates ˆAt (as utilised in Formulas 1 and 2) are calculated for each time step. The
algorithm then constructs the surrogate loss given the policy parameter θ on these NT time steps of data and optimises
it with a Minibatch Stochastic Gradient Descent (this is a variation of gradient descent that splits training data into
small batches that are used to calculate model error and update model coefﬁcients) for K epochs.
Algorithm 1: PPO, Actor-Critic Style
initialization;
for iteration=1,2... do
for actor=1,2,...,N do
Run policy πθold in environment for T timesteps
Compute advantage estimates ˆA1,..., ˆAT
end
Optimise surrogate L wrt θ, with K epochs and minibatch size M ≤NT
θold ←θ
end
The ability to deploy PPO in Unity as a decision-making framework for agents with relative ease and its performance
against other learning algorithms outlined previously, made it the top contender of algorithms to adopt in this research.
Similarly, being able to solve multiple problems with varying complexities without the need to tune training parameters
made it suitable for the experimental conditions we aim to conduct [30, 31, 28].
5

In ml-agents [30] PPO uses an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) to approximate the ideal function that maps an agent’s
observations to the best action an agent can take in a given state (Figure 14).
Robotics researchers adopted PPO to develop a Mobile robot navigation application whereby robots learn to navigate
a terrain without any knowledge of the map [65]. Similarly, researchers adopted PPO to simulate a multi-agent
environment between two groups of agents. The actor-critic variant of PPO, where a policy network produces an action
distribution and the critic network predicts the discounted future returns [21] produced some valuable results, proving
that PPO can be used to simulate complex behaviours [28]. A common drawback from these speciﬁc studies is the
spatial patterns that emerge from environmental changes that were not explored in detail. We know from the literature
that individual behaviours can be different and evolve through time [21, 30, 28, 24]; however, what do these individual
behaviours look like? What are the environmental implications of these individual behaviours? These are the questions
this study is interested in.
The drawbacks of PPO are: acquiring good results via Policy Gradient methods is demanding because they are sensitive
to the choice of step size - too small, and progress is unbearably slow; too large, and the signal is overwhelmed by the
noise [31]. As model complexity increases, solving these problems using RL can become computationally intensive;
therefore, in some cases, high-performance computing clusters may be required to adopt PPO in research. Lastly,
trained agents may be unable to adapt to changes in the environment; this is commonly referred to as overﬁtting in
machine learning. One mechanism to alleviate this and train more efﬁcient agents is to expose agents to these changes
during training [30]. As a model becomes more complex and training environments become more dissimilar to test
scenarios, overﬁtting becomes more likely. It is recommended to use separate training/test scenarios (with varying
levels of stochasticity) while ensuring some similarities [66]. This study proposes a simplistic model with only two
agent types and a static environment, with relatively short training time than other large-scale models [23, 26, 27].
Therefore, overﬁtting is less likely to occur and could be identiﬁable when individual behaviours are quantitatively and
qualitatively interpreted.
3
Model Description
The model contains two agents: a predator agent to catch the prey agents; and prey agents that avoid the predator
and forage points. The model simulates agents interacting in a simple three-dimensional environment that contains
physical barriers that block the vision and movement of all agents. Through several experiments, this research explores
how agents that adopt PPO devise intelligent adaptive behaviours, given the environmental surroundings they ﬁnd
themselves in.
Predator-prey models are not new; they have been previously used to simulate the interactions of wildlife in ecology
[67, 68, 69]. As mentioned in the Introduction section, the predator-prey scenario is a simple scenario to model. Thus,
this domain was chosen to promote explainability and reproducibility.
In this research, interest is centred around learned behaviours that emerge given the environmental factors the agents
ﬁnd themselves in. For example, barriers were added to the environment to test if prey agents utilise them in hiding
from the predator. Prey agents have no inherent defence mechanism to deploy against the predator. The behaviours
we aim to observe have been identiﬁed in past literature, especially those in ﬁsh biology research of predator-prey
behaviours. [70] describe the interactions among two types of ﬁsh; they describe the primary defence for prey ﬁsh as
"detection of pursuit". This behavioural strategy includes "ﬁsh visually tracking the predator’s movement, and when it
swims within their line of sight, they then get away from it at the nearest opportunity". Given the behaviours observed
in these predator-prey scenarios, it is expected that the following behaviours are observed in the model:
• prey evade the predator.
• prey forage rewards.
• prey use the environment to hide from the predator.
This research is interested in training agents to learn and enact simple to more complex spatial behaviours. Some
of these complex behaviours are outlined above. Thus, the environment has been designed to motivate the above
behaviours and allow prey to utilise these behaviours in novel situations.
3.1
Purpose
The ABM was developed in Unity using the ml-agents software package [30], the model allows the modeller to simulate
hypothetical activities of prey and predator agents in 3D space.
6

Sedar Olmez et al.
3.2
Agents
Prey agents are rewarded for foraging positive points placed on the environment and penalised for foraging negative
points and being caught by the predator. The predator agent follows any prey that falls within its ﬁeld of view.
The prey agents adopt the PPO RL framework for learning, while the predator agent’s decision-making framework
is a set of condition-action rules such as IF prey-within-view THEN chase-prey. The predator moves around the
environment randomly and tries to catch prey agents while the prey agents learn how to adapt to this. Once the predator
physically touches the prey agent, the prey agent is caught, leading to a penalty. The agents were created this way to
reduce the impact on computational demand as having two types of agents, both applying RL, would be computationally
expensive.
For the predator agent parameters, Table 6 and Table 7 for the prey agent parameters. The values for each agent type are
relative to that agent’s size and mass. For both agents, an appropriate view radius was chosen relative to the environment
and the agent’s physical features, preventing one from physically being superior.
In the model, prey agents share the same characteristics. This ensures no prey agent has abilities that can make it
superior to others, e.g. speed or vision - as this would arguably introduce additional complexity in interpreting model
outcomes during the two experiments (as described in Section 1). The environment randomly distributes positive points
(which prey collect) and negative points (which prey should avoid). These point objects are used as a training indicator;
if the reward increases, agents are learning (Figure 6).
The physical representation of both agents can be seen in Figure 1. The predator ﬁeld of view and viewing angle allows
it to identify objects (Figure 2). Prey agents move on the surface of the environment and can perceive the world through
ray-cast sensors collecting observations. A ﬁrst-person observation can be found in Figure 15.
Figure 1: The predator agent (left) and a prey agent (right) in the Environment.
The predator moves randomly around the environment until a prey agent falls within its vision cone; this is the patrolling
phase. The predator makes its movement unpredictable; thus, prey agents can be trained for all circumstances. As
mentioned earlier, the condition-action rules for the predator are;
• Chase the prey if the prey is within view.
• While the simulation is running, move randomly on the surface of the environment.
3.3
Environment
The environment includes the following Unity components;
• Plane - a 3D ﬂat surface area for agents to stand on.
• Wall - a 3D object that acts as a barrier stopping agents from falling off the plane.
• Camera - A camera pointing at the environment and agents.
• Directional light - A light ray pointing at the environment with soft shadows helps the observer see the
environment.
The environment provides the prey agents with enough information to allow them to learn intelligent adaptive behaviours.
If barriers were not present, the prey agents could not learn how to hide. Similarly, if the predator does not exist, there is
7

Figure 2: The area in which the predator can see (A). The model environment and the vision cone of the predator
looking for prey agents (B).
no motivation for prey agents to learn how to evade capture. Each element of the environment has several customisable
properties (Table 8) and can be changed depending on speciﬁc requirements.
The parameters described in Table 8, if implemented, would produce the 3D environment scene in Figure 3 (B).
Figure 3: The initial state of the environment (A). The environment scene once parameters from Table 8 are applied (B).
The positive and negative points are randomly distributed on the environment surface so that the prey agents can forage
them (Figure 4). If the points are collected, they re-appear at a random location within the environment. For every point
collected, the prey agent is either rewarded or penalised.
Figure 4: Environment with positive point objects (blue spheres) and negative point objects (red spheres).
8

Sedar Olmez et al.
4
Training Process
To successfully train an RL algorithm, training parameters are selected to ensure the performance of learning processes
and quality of generated motions [29, 30]. An RL model is performing well if the cumulative reward is increasing
during training [71]. To conduct the experiments outlined in Section 1, three neural network models will be trained
using parameters that coincide with the experiment objectives, the differences between experiments are the training
length and presence of a novel stimulus Table 1.
4.1
Training Parameters
The ml-agents package [30] simpliﬁes the training process of artiﬁcial agents in Unity (Figure 5). The Learning
Environment component contains the Unity scene, which includes the environment agents can act, observe and learn
from. The "brain" component takes the observed data from agents (known as Vector Observations) and is trained using
the Academy (Table 1). The Academy connects the brain to the python trainer, where the artiﬁcial neural network
training commences. Once the training process ends (Figure 6), the output neural network is attached to the agents
post-training, and thus, the agents can infer decisions from the trained model (Tables 2 and 4).
Figure 5: A block diagram of ml-agents
In this research, the default training parameters provided by ml-agents [30] were used for training; ml-agents researchers
recommended these parameters as suitable for the majority of tested environments (Table 1). Furthermore, these
parameters were within the recommended ranges (Table 9). These parameters led to successful learning sessions
(Figure 6). The training process outputted three fully trained artiﬁcial neural network models (ANNs). For the model
architecture, refer to Figure 14.
In Table 1, the only differences between the models are the max_steps variable for scenario one, which is 580,000-time
steps, and in scenario three, the predator was not present during training. While training, the algorithm only started to
successfully learn how to increase cumulative rewards at 100,000-time steps. This was identiﬁed as the lower bound.
To then identify the upper bound and the point at which cumulative rewards stabilise, the model was trained for longer,
and 1,000,000 time steps were identiﬁed as the point in which rewards were no longer being gained (scenarios two and
three in Table 1). The reason behind this process is to produce models that coincide with the two experiments outlined
earlier. For other models or research questions, the training max_steps would be different given the model complexity.
[72] describe the adaptability of an RL agent by "making a major or minor change to the system after it has learnt
the optimal policy and analyse the learning algorithm adapt to these changes". To test this theory, model training
conﬁguration three (scenario three in Table 1) was conceived. Conﬁgurations two and three were trained for the same
time. The former was trained with the predator, while the latter was trained without the predator.
9

Parameter
Scenario 1 (w/predator)
Scenario 2 (w/predator)
Scenario 3 (wo/predator)
Trainer
PPO
PPO
PPO
Batch_size
1024
1024
1024
β
1.0e-2
1.0e-2
1.0e-2
Buffer_size
10240
10240
10240
ϵ
0.2
0.2
0.2
Hidden_units
128
128
128
GAE λ
0.95
0.95
0.95
Learning_rate
3.0e-4
3.0e-4
3.0e-4
Learning_rate_schedule Linear
Linear
Linear
Max_steps
580000
1.0e6
1.0e6
Memory_size
256
256
256
Normalize
false
false
false
Num_epoch
3
3
3
Num_layers
2
2
2
Time_horizon
64
64
64
Sequence_length
64
64
64
Summary_freq
10000
10000
10000
Use_recurrent
false
false
false
Reward_signals
extrinsic: strength: 1.0, γ: 0.99
extrinsic: strength: 1.0, γ: 0.99
extrinsic: strength: 1.0, γ: 0.99
Table 1: PPO training parameters for all three scenarios.
4.2
Training Results
Figure 6 highlights the results from the training process outlined earlier in Table 1.
Figure 6: Six graphs from the PPO training process each line corresponds to a scenario the model applied during
training, outlined in Table 1. x-axis: number of time-steps in training, y-axis: value.
Descriptions of the results presented in Figure 6 can be found below:
• Cumulative reward (Figure 6, top left) - the mean cumulative episode reward over all agents should increase
during a successful training session.
• Policy loss (Figure 6, middle left) - the mean magnitude of the policy loss function. Correlates to how much the
policy (process for deciding actions) is changing. The magnitude of this should decrease during a successful
training session.
10

Sedar Olmez et al.
• Value loss (Figure 6, bottom left) - the mean loss of the value function update. Correlates to how well the
model predicts the value of each state, should increase while the agent is learning, and then decrease once the
reward stabilises.
• Entropy (Figure 6, top right) - represents how random the decisions of the model are. Should slowly decrease
during a successful training process. If it decreases too quickly, the β parameter should increase.
• Extrinsic reward (Figure 6, middle right) - this corresponds to the mean cumulative reward received from the
environment per episode.
• Extrinsic value estimate (Figure 6, bottom right) - the mean value estimate for all states visited by the agent.
Should increase during a successful training session.
In Figure 6, we observe that the training parameters for scenario three were the most successful compared to scenarios
one and two. The only difference between scenarios two and three was the predator. Thus, these training outcomes show
that the predator’s presence impacts how the prey agents behave regarding rewards; when the predator is not present, the
prey agents can forage more rewards. Furthermore, agents’ policies frequently change over time, meaning prey agents
identify good policies more frequently. The Policy Extrinsic Reward results suggest that for all three scenarios, prey
agents tend to increase their rewards over time; this also means they are more likely to reduce their penalties, including
predator avoidance. Ultimately, the results from these data show that all three training scenarios and model setup was
successful, i.e. prey agents were designed to successfully learn policies from their immediate environment, which they
can apply post-training. Lastly, scenarios one and two led to different training outcomes (the only difference was the
max_steps parameter); the reason for this is the stochasticity of the model; for each epoch, prey, points and predator are
randomly distributed.
5
Simulation Results
Before examining the behaviours learnt by the prey agents operating under PPO, several experiments are developed.
The training phase of PPO ensures agents learn to develop policies that will be subsequently used in the testing phase.
Analysis of the trained models is conducted through the following experiments. These include the length of time agents
train for (speciﬁed in time steps) and the stimuli presented to prey agents during the training phase (in this case, the
presence or absence of the predator agent) and, in turn, the impact of this stimulus on their subsequent behaviour in the
testing phase.
In the ﬁrst experiment, identical initial populations of prey agents are compared across two conditions. In condition
one, agents are trained for 580,000 cycles (Table 2, Model Condition one). In the second condition, they are trained
for 1,000,000 cycles (Table 2, Model Condition two). The hypothesis is that agents that train for longer may develop
more effective strategies which they utilise within the test scenario. A task-efﬁciency measure is conceived to evaluate
agents under both conﬁgurations to assess if this is the case. This is achieved by measuring the amount of reward and
penalties collected by agents under each conﬁguration. A single dependent variable was produced by combining these
measures, consisting of a formula containing the mean of the total positive points collected PosTotal. The mean of the
total negative points NegTotal. Finally, the mean of the total number of times agents are caught CaughtTotal which
produces the task efﬁciency formula:
(PosTotal × 1) + (NegTotal × −0.2) + (CaughtTotal × −1)
(3)
The Task Efﬁciency formula is weighted by reward and penalty values. The rewards and penalties, set during the
training parameter selection stage, allow prey agents to know that getting caught by the predator and foraging negative
points lead to negative outcomes while foraging positive point objects lead to positive outcomes. The rewards for
foraging positive points are +1, and the penalty for foraging a negative point is -0.2, while the penalty for being caught
by the predator is -1. The task efﬁciency formula was devised to distinguish between agents that forage positive points
while avoiding negative points and the predator. Compared to agents with lower task efﬁciency, where agents were
less capable in foraging positive points and avoiding penalties. In both experiments, rewards and penalties averaged
over multiple model runs over two conditions are compared. These are short training and long training for experiment
one and the predator’s presence either pre or post-training or both for experiment two. This research is interested in
the behaviours that emerge when prey agents interact with a predator; however, some extra elements such as points
are added to the environment to introduce spatial complexity. This ensures prey agents train to achieve a goal such as
foraging positive points (a metric used to identify how well they are doing) and not randomly roaming the environment
waiting to encounter the predator. The penalty for foraging a negative point is smaller than being caught by the predator
as we wish to introduce complexity toward agents’ decision-making process. Similarly, if the penalty for foraging a
11

negative point was -1, then the severity of foraging negative points and being caught by the predator would be equal.
Consequently, prey agents may prefer being caught by the predator in certain situations.
In the second experiment, interest is centred around the notion of behavioural adaptation to stimuli. This idea is
based on how RL agents behave when presented with stimuli in the testing phase, which were not present during the
training phase (some sub-optimal measure of their adaptability). Furthermore, how this impacts agent decision-making
relative to other agents exposed to the stimuli during training is quantiﬁed. As a result, these agents should have
already developed behaviours to respond. Three model conﬁgurations are compared across the previously envisaged
task-efﬁciency measure (Formula 3) to explore this. Using identical initial populations of prey agents, in the ﬁrst
model condition, the effectiveness of prey agents who train without the predator agent and complete their task in the
testing phase without the predator is measured (Table 4, Model Condition one). This baseline experiment provides a
comparative measure of the upper bounds of task efﬁciency in our model. In the second model condition, task efﬁciency
for prey agents who train with the predator and subsequently test with the predator present is measured (Table 4, Model
Condition two). In the ﬁnal condition, the task efﬁciency of prey agents who train without the predator but are tested
with the predator is observed (Table 4, Model Condition three).
Due to the stochastic nature of each post-training test, to verify the experiments, each model condition is tested ﬁfty
times for the same duration across all conditions. A summary of results, including task efﬁciency, can be viewed in the
following sub-sections.
5.1
Experiment 1, exploring the impact of training length on task efﬁciency
Experiment one was developed to identify the impact training length has on how well agents complete tasks. Are agents
that adopt RL as a decision-making process, if trained for longer, more effective at their task?
Model Condition
1
2
Training Cycles
580k
1 mil
Predator in Training
Present
Present
Predator in Testing
Present
Present
Positive Points
326.88 (34.231)
779.4 (57.434)
Negative Points
320.44 (35.595)
706.88 (53.059)
Caught by Predator
55.48 (15.931)
72.7 (11.784)
Task Efﬁciency
207.312 (33.835)
565.324 (53.164)
Table 2: Summary of the mean and (std) for each variable including task efﬁciency measure over all experiment one
model conditions.
When inspecting model conditions one and two (Table 2), it becomes clear that training agents for an extended period
lead to agents that can learn better policies such as foraging more positive points. The task efﬁciency for model
condition two has done relatively better than model condition one. However, agents in model condition two still forage
a relatively large amount of negative points. Furthermore, agents are caught more often compared to model condition
one; this shows that positive point foraging in model condition two outweighs the penalties for negative points and
being caught by the predator. Due to the weighting of Formula 3, we would expect to see Caught_by_Predator occur
less often than Negative_Points, while Positive_Points would be greater than the former two variables.
Statistics accompanying the quantitative results from Table 2, can be found in Table 3.
Variable
Condition 1
Condition 2
F score
p
Cohen’s d
Task Efﬁciency (Pos −Neg −
Caught)
207.312
565.324
1613.742
0.000
-8.034
Positive Point
326.88
779.4
2290.235
0.000
-9.571
Negative Point
320.44
706.88
1829.039
0.000
-8.553
Caught by Predator
55.48
72.7
37.758
0.000
-1.228
Table 3: Summary One-Way ANOVA and Cohen’s d results over all experiment one model conditions.
It should be noted that the p values for Tables 3 and 5 should be read with caution, as more observations will make the
One-Way ANOVA signiﬁcant.
The outcome of the statistical tests (Table 3) shows that the data collected from these two model conditions vary. As
demonstrated by Cohen’s d, the difference between the means of the task efﬁciency for the two groups is large; this
12

Sedar Olmez et al.
conﬁrms the earlier point that agents that train for longer are better at foraging positive points than agents who train for
a shorter time. However, the same cannot be said for avoiding the predator. To conclude, agents that train for longer are
better at ﬁnding optimal solutions for foraging but lack the same level of strategic behaviour to avoid the predator than
agents trained for a shorter time.
5.2
Experiment 2, exploring the impact of stimuli on task efﬁciency
Experiment two was conceived to determine how agents adapt to the presence of an unknown stimulus. For this example,
the stimulus is the predator agent.
In this experiment, three model conditions are compared, the independent variables are; the presence of the predator
either in training, testing or both. To examine how well agents perform relative to the predator, the task efﬁciency
measure is used.
When comparing task efﬁciency across these conditions, several things become apparent. In model conditions where
the predator is not present during training (Table 4, Model Conditions one and three), the difference between positive
and negative points is large. Agents tend to collect more positive points while keeping the negative points minimal.
However, agents are caught more often in model condition three compared to model condition two, which suggests
agents that have not learnt policies to deal with the predator are caught more often.
Model Condition
1
2
3
Training Cycles
1 mil
1 mil
1 mil
Predator in Training
Not Present
Present
Not Present
Predator in Testing
Not Present
Present
Present
Positive Points
1455.18 (111.235)
779.4 (57.434)
1476.62 (122.026)
Negative Points
491.24 (42.519)
706.88 (53.059)
504.98 (44.173)
Caught by Predator
0
72.7 (11.784)
102.08 (14.475)
Task Efﬁciency
1356.93 (108.803)
565.324 (53.164)
1273.544 (124.072)
Table 4: Summary of the mean and (std) for each variable including task efﬁciency measure over all experiment two
model conditions.
Given all three model conditions, when agents train without the predator, they collect more positive points than agents
that train with the predator present. Furthermore, agents trained with the predator weigh the risks of getting caught with
the risk of foraging a negative point (Table 4).
Comparing the task efﬁciency of model conditions two and three (see Table 5) shows agents in model condition three
produce statistically signiﬁcantly higher task efﬁciency scores than those in model condition two. These results may
seem counter-intuitive. However, one way to interpret this outcome is that agents in model condition two have likely
devised policies that encourage predator avoidance to the detriment of foraging positive points. Conversely, in model
condition three, agents are focused solely on foraging positive points. As emphasised by Cohen’s d, the effect size of
model condition two compared to model conditions one and three is large; this shows the predator signiﬁcantly impacts
how well prey agents forage.
Task Efﬁciency (Pos −Neg −
Caught)
Condition 1
Condition 2
F score
p
Cohen’s d
Model condition 1 vs 3
1356.93
1273.544
12.767
0.001
0.714
Model condition 2 vs 3
565.324
1273.544
1376.41
0.000
-7.420
Model condition 1 vs 2
1356.93
565.324
2136.585
0.000
9.244
Table 5: Summary of One-Way ANOVA and Cohen’s d results for Task Efﬁciency over all experiment two model
conditions.
Collectively the results of both experiments indicate that within the simulation:
• Agents that train for longer are more effective in devising goal-oriented strategies (experiment one model
condition two, experiment two model conditions one, two and three).
• Agents that weigh the risks between multiple penalties (negative points and being caught by the predator)
perform sub-optimally in achieving a goal (experiment one, both model conditions and experiment two, model
condition two) compared to agents that focus solely on a single reward and penalty (experiment two, model
condition one).
13

Agents that train with the predator present weigh the risks between rewards and penalties. This cannot be said with
certainty for agents that are trained without the predator present. The behaviours that emerge from agents in both
experiments (experiment one, both conditions, experiment two conditions one and three) should differ. We expect to
observe more sophisticated behaviours from experiment one as agents devise different ways to avoid the predator while
acquiring positive points compared to experiment two model conditions one and three where agents ignore the predator.
The quantitative results above provide a means to make conﬁdent assertions regarding how well prey agents have
done foraging and avoiding the predator. The spatio-temporal patterns that emerge from these behaviours must not be
neglected. It would be helpful to compare the occupied spaces within the environment for both agent types against the
different model conditions. These data should allow us to observe the effect the predator has on prey agents.
The Spatio-temporal movement patterns re-enforce the ﬁndings from Table 2 showing how well the prey agents do
in avoiding the predator for model condition one (Figures 7a and 7b), compared to model condition two (Figures 7c
and 7d) in experiment one. The prey agents in experiment one, model condition one learn to avoid the centre of the
environment where the predator occupies; for model condition two, we do not see similar patterns; the prey agents
move diagonally more often and explore most of the environment. This is possibly the consequence of training for
longer; thus, learning for longer makes the prey agents more goal-oriented (forage points) to the detriment of avoiding
the predator (Figures 7c and 7d). In experiment two, model condition three (Figures 7e and 7f), the prey agents explore
the entire environment while avoiding the barriers. Prey do navigate in areas occupied by the predator and get caught
more often; however, compared to scenarios where prey are trained with the predator, agents are caught less often
(Figures 7c and 7d). To conclude, when agents are trained using RL under various conditions, the spatio-temporal
patterns reﬂect these differences. These quantitative results show that emerging complex behaviours are likely to be
observed at an individual level; we see that the two experiments, namely, training length and unknown stimulus, lead to
different spatio-temporal patterns.
To answer the main research question, the agents’ behaviours for these experiments must be analysed. Agents are
more effective in avoiding the predator for some experiments. Conversely, in other experiments, agents perform more
strongly in foraging positive points. To better understand these differences at an individual level, the behaviours of
agents at an individual level need to be examined.
14

Sedar Olmez et al.
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
xAxisPos
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
zAxisPos
0.0000000
0.0000447
0.0000585
0.0000655
0.0000711
0.0000847
0.0001017
0.0001183
0.0001441
0.0001679
(a) Prey: Experiment 1, Model Condition 1.
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
xAxisPos
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
zAxisPos
0.000000
0.000190
0.000415
0.000646
0.000871
0.001097
0.001335
0.001590
0.001876
0.002204
(b) Predator: Experiment 1, Model Condition 1.
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
xAxisPos
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
zAxisPos
0.0000000
0.0000442
0.0000669
0.0000798
0.0000904
0.0001002
0.0001098
0.0001177
0.0001228
0.0001366
(c) Prey: Experiment 1, Model Condition 2.
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
xAxisPos
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
zAxisPos
0.000000
0.000140
0.000300
0.000471
0.000659
0.000854
0.001053
0.001276
0.001512
0.001744
(d) Predator: Experiment 1, Model Condition 2.
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
xAxisPos
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
zAxisPos
0.0000000
0.0000502
0.0000696
0.0000839
0.0000974
0.0001082
0.0001194
0.0001319
0.0001429
0.0001544
(e) Prey: Experiment 2, Model Condition 3.
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
xAxisPos
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
zAxisPos
0.000000
0.000112
0.000247
0.000415
0.000589
0.000757
0.000926
0.001102
0.001286
0.001457
(f) Predator: Experiment 2, Model Condition 3.
Figure 7: A sample of spatio-temporal KDE plots of prey and predator movement patterns.
15

5.3
Individual Behaviour Analysis
This sub-section describes the behaviours traced given the previous experiments conducted to explore whether intelligent
adaptive behaviours occur when agents operate under the PPO framework. To recap, agents trained with the predator
weigh the risks of getting caught with foraging a negative point. Furthermore, agents that train for longer outperform
agents that train for a shorter time. Lastly, agents trained without the predator focus solely on foraging points; thus, they
outperform their peers trained with the predator. However, these agents are caught by the predator more often.
This sub-section contains behaviours traced from all model conditions, and they are described frame-by-frame following
the systematic approach below;
1. Recording the experiment from start to ﬁnish.
2. Playing back the experiment recording and taking note of the model scenario, i.e. one, two or three.
3. Watching the movement of the predator agent to see if it interacts with a prey agent or if the predator is not
present, only focusing on the prey.
4. Every time the predator interacts with the prey; the video is paused and played frame-by-frame.
5. The behaviour of the prey is captured frame-by-frame during the encounter until it has moved away and
continues foraging points (known as the foraging behaviour).
6. The frame-by-frame interactions are inspected closely; the behaviours observed are noted and compared with
the quantitative analysis from the experiment sub-sections 5.1 and 5.2 to try to interpret how the prey agent
has behaved.
At the current time, the only way learned, intelligent behaviours can be identiﬁed is by visualising the model runs and
qualitatively interpreting these behaviours; therefore, this was the chosen methodology. An accompanying video of
some behaviours can be found at the following link: https://youtu.be/-0bozJWC6l4.
The visually observed behaviours from the model are utilised, as these are the best indicators of intelligent adaptive
behaviours in the model, as has been the case in past literature [30, 73, 50, 23, 26, 72].
Following the visual inspection approach, several important examples of behaviours traced during each experiment are
described below. These results come in the form of ﬁgures; each frame in a ﬁgure represents a state of the model from 1
to N time steps. The red box in each ﬁgure focuses the viewer on where the speciﬁc behaviour in question is occurring.
The green circle indicates a prey agent and the orange circle is the predator agent.
5.3.1
Hiding Behaviour
In Figure 8, a prey agent in the top right of the environment; spots the predator in the second frame; then it moves
towards the opposite side of the closest barrier and hides; this behaviour indicates that prey agents have learned that the
predator cannot see through obstacles in the environment. Consequently, the prey agent positions itself with its back
towards the wall. This hiding behaviour is also observed in Figure 10.
5.3.2
Co-operative Behaviour
Prey agents are not designed to be adversarial nor cooperative; however, in experiment one, model condition one, what
can be interpreted as cooperative behaviour is observed; however, this may be coincidental. Figure 9 depicts a scenario
from model condition one, where prey agents recognise the predator and move in opposite directions to evade capture.
It could be argued that a wide range of actions could have led to a rewarding outcome. However, these prey agents
adopt a policy that involves them moving away from each other.
5.3.3
Evading Behaviour
Figure 10 depicts a blocking behaviour where a prey agent recognises a barrier, then realises the predator moving
towards it; it successfully evades the predator and passes it using the barrier to block the predator’s ﬁeld of view.
This learned behaviour considers the distance of the predator from the prey agent; as soon as the prey agent realises its
presence, it takes immediate action to avoid it.
Figure 11 depicts a prey agent that intuitively dodges the incoming predator and allows it to collide with the barrier
behind it. This behaviour might indicate prey agents have learned how quick predator agents move and thus can devise
policies that take this information into account.
16

Sedar Olmez et al.
Figure 8: Experiment one, model condition one; a prey agent looking for a wall to hide behind.
Figure 9: Experiment one, model condition one; two prey agents identify each other and move in opposite directions to
avoid the incoming predator.
17

Figure 10: Experiment one, model condition two; a prey agent moves away from approaching predator and tries to use
the barrier to evade the predator.
Figure 11: Experiment one, model condition two; a prey agent dodges incoming predator making it collide with the
barrier.
18

Sedar Olmez et al.
5.3.4
Foraging behaviour
Figure 12 depicts foraging behaviour captured during experiment two, model condition one. In this experiment, we
recall that prey agents developed policies in the absence of the predator agent. As the predator is not present, prey
agents learn behaviours that only entail foraging points.
Figure 12: Experiment two, model condition one; the prey agents explore the environment foraging rewards.
5.3.5
Circling Behaviour
In experiment two, model condition three (Table 4), prey agents are trained in a setting without a predator, then situated
in an environment that contains a predator post-training. Agents appear to continue foraging positive points and avoiding
negative ones. Agents move around in circles until they are close to a positive point; once they identify a positive point,
they move to it (Figure 13).
Figure 13: Experiment two, model condition three; prey agents move in a circular motion continuously while moving
nearer to the closest positive point.
Prey agents are prone to being caught by the predator in experiment two, model condition three, as they have not devised
strategies to deal with the predator (Table 4). However, prey agents have learned that moving in circles (Figure 13)
increases their chances of foraging a positive point while avoiding incoming negative points. This behaviour was not
observed in any of the other conditions. This behaviour may have developed due to the sphere-shaped points moving on
the environment’s surface more often during training than previous model conditions.
This sub-section analysed the behaviours and outcomes of model conditions for both experiments using a systematic
approach. Various behaviours were identiﬁed. These behaviours can be interpreted as ‘intelligent adaptive behaviours’
such as hiding behind objects, evading the predator, using the environment to their advantage. The majority of these
intelligent behaviours emerge from model conditions where the predator was present during training. These results
show agents learn and apply policies that focus on foraging positive points while intuitively avoiding predators.
Agents trained without the predator focus on a speciﬁc task, i.e. forage points and avoid negative ones. There is
a clear distinction between behaviours that emerge in conditions where the predator was present during training
compared to conditions it was not. These results also show that agents trained using PPO can function in different
situations/environments while achieving a goal.
19

6
Discussion and Conclusion
This research set out to assess the effectiveness of developing an ABM in conjunction with the PPO technique as a
behavioural framework. The research found that the RL technique supports agents in the behavioural evolution of
intelligent decision making that resemble those observed in the real world. There have been several examples of ABMs
that utilise RL. However, the majority of these have either deployed RL as an extension to extract the optimal set
of steps in decision making, or they have lacked any investigation of the impact of RL algorithm features, i.e. the
impact of novel stimulus on the subsequent behaviours of agents [74, 49, 75, 73]. The model presented in this paper
suggests that training time directly impacts an agent’s ability to improve its behavioural goals, i.e. foraging a large
number of rewards compared to agents that have trained for a shorter period. However, agents that devise policies
inﬂuenced by multiple penalties weigh the impact of these penalties and try to minimise the most impactful compared
to the less impactful. Furthermore, the research highlights the ability for agents to operate under conditions in which
they were never trained to encounter and continue to perform relatively well. While the points mentioned above seem
apparent, this research attempted to quantify the degree to which such outcomes transpired. Finally, where this research
diverges from past literature is the fact that individual-level behaviours that were procured from the experiments were
subjectively interpreted by following a set of comprehensive steps from procurement to interpretation.
Limitations of this work include the difﬁculty of identifying training parameters that allow the algorithm to train the
model efﬁciently. If the parameter values are not appropriate for the model conﬁguration this can negatively impact the
outcome of training; for example, agents may behave erratically and diverge from achieving any goal. In this research,
the default parameters provided by the software library ml-agents [30] were adopted as these were tested extensively on
multiple training environments; however, in future research, the impact of these choices should be assessed.
Another limitation of the research relates to the identiﬁcation and interpretation of individual-level agent behaviours.
Core to understanding the advantages and disadvantages of RL for developing realistic agent behaviours is assessing the
behaviours generated by the RL algorithms. When writing this paper, the literature provides no agreed-upon methods
for identifying and subsequently interpreting behaviours that agents enact during model testing. This limitation is an
indicator of the lack of research done in this area. In response, this research attempted to identify a comprehensive set
of steps in interpreting the observable behaviours that agents enact. However, this time-intensive technique may not be
applicable for more complex models.
The accessibility of model development using novel technologies such as Unity and the subsequent programming
language C# is challenging. As the complexity of the ABM increases, so do the computational requirements. Due to
rapid advancements in computing, this challenge is not insurmountable.
Despite the lack of literature and steep learning curve in developing an ABM in Unity with RL, these techniques
together can lead to valuable outcomes. The research shows that if PPO is adopted as a decision-making mechanism,
agents can organically grow behaviours through achieving rewards and punishments. Furthermore, agents can weigh
multiple risks and rewards and act accordingly. These attributes that agents develop can be observed in real-world
situations, i.e. when people weigh the risks of being captured by the police before attempting a crime, or predatory
animals weighing the risks of the prey escaping before deciding to pursue or ignore. This research indicates that agents
can portray behaviours that would be considered "intelligent" without any explicit prior knowledge of these behaviours,
which is one of the core strengths of RL. Moreover, agents have been shown to adapt to non-deterministic dynamic
changes within the environment; these agents can continue achieving their relative goals within these scenarios.
An avenue for future research is using the techniques presented here to explore the relationships between people and
enforced rules to prevent a contagious virus from moving through the population. This research is also applicable to
population dynamics by simulating changing populations and the individual level interactions among populations.
To conclude, this research demonstrates that RL can provide a means for developing agents through training that
exhibits ’intelligent’ behaviours that evolve through space and time. This research shows that behaviours are encouraged
by the environmental surroundings of agents. The experiments conducted highlight that training time impacts agent
performance and that agents can adapt to environmental changes and behave sub-optimally when multiple penalties
are considered. The spatial patterns of agent movement for each experiment condition vary, showing a strong spatial
inﬂuence in decision making. The research demonstrates that agents with varying decision-making frameworks can
co-exist within an environment, i.e. the predator agent applied simple if-then-else rules while prey agents utilised RL.
This research shows that RL is a viable option as a decision-making framework for future ABMs and that the use of RL
within ABM research could be revolutionary.
20

Sedar Olmez et al.
Data & Model Access
• The model was developed in Unity using the C# programming language. The predator-prey model and
statistical analysis of simulation results can be found in the main ABM project’s (Github) repository: https:
//github.com/SedarOlmez94/Agent_Based_Modelling_Projects
• Speciﬁcally, scripts and instructions to run the experiments are available at: https://github.com/
SedarOlmez94/Agent_Based_Modelling_Projects/tree/master/Predator-prey_RL_model
Funding
This project has recieved funding from the Economic and Social Research Council, grant number: ES/P000401/1; the
Economic and Social Research Council and The Alan Turing Institute, grant number: ES/R007918/1.
Author Contributions
SO - developed the agent-based model, including the reinforcement learning application, developed the experiments
and analysis of the output data using data science techniques, wrote the paper and designed the study. DB - critically
reviewed the article, suggested minor corrections. AH - critically reviewed the article, suggested minor corrections and
acquired the funding for the project. All authors gave ﬁnal approval for publication and agree to be held accountable for
the work performed therein.
Notes
1. ML-agents Unity extension can be found here: here.
2. Unity can be downloaded here.
3. ML-agents architecture documentation can be found here.
4. PPO hyper parameter best practices can be found here.
5. ABM developed and trained on the following desktop: Intel Core i7-7700K, 32 GB RAM, 256 GB SSD Plus 2
TB HDD, 2 x NVIDIA GTX 1070 8 GB Graphics, Windows 10 Home.
6. ABM is run on the following laptop: MacBook Pro (15-inch, 2018), 2.6 GHz Intel Core i7, 32 GB 2400 MHz
DDR4, Intel UHD Graphics 630 1536 MB
21

Appendix A: Supplementary Materials
Figure 14: Artiﬁcial Neural Network Architecture.
22

Sedar Olmez et al.
Figure 15: First person view from Prey agent’s perspective.
Variable
Description
Value
Movement_speed
The speed of movement
20
Rigidbody
The 3D agent object has a rigid body property
Capsule
The 3D agent’s shape property
Capsule_Collider
A component used to trigger an event when it comes into contact with another
object
AIPredator.cs
The C# script component allows the predator to perform actions in the environ-
ment
View_camera
A camera component traces the movement of the agent in ﬁrst person
Velocity
The velocity of the agent (take both axes X, Y normalise them then multiply by
Movement_speed)
View_radius
The radius of the ﬁeld of view for the agent
10.33
View_angle
The angle of view within the View_radius is between 0 and 360
80
Target_mask
A layer tag for objects the agent considers as targets
Target
Obstacle_mask
A layer tag for objects the agent considers as obstacles
Obstacle
Visible_targets
A list of all the targets the agent has seen
Table 6: Predator agent’s parameters.
Variable
Description
Value
Rigidbody
The 3D agent object has a rigid body property
Cube
The 3D agent’s shape property
Box_Collider
A component used to trigger an event when it comes into contact with another
object
Prey.cs
The C# script component allows the agent to perform actions in the environment
Camera
A camera component traces the movement of the agent in ﬁrst person
Velocity
The velocity of the agent
Turn_speed
The speed of which the agent turns
300
Move_speed
The speed of which the agent moves on the X, Z axis
2
Normal_material
Normal material (agent is neither rewarded or penalised if it interacts with these)
GreenAgent
Good_material
Good material (agent is rewarded if it interacts with these)
PositivePoint
Bad_material
Bad material (agent is penalised if it interacts with these)
NegativePoint
Use_Vector_Obs
If checked, the agent will send information to the neural network during training
Ray_Perception_Sensor A sensor which identiﬁes objects within a given perimeter
Table 7: Prey agent’s parameters.
23

Component
Property
Value
Plane
Position, Rotation and Scale
along the X, Y, Z coordinates
P[0, 0 ,0], R[0, 0, 0], S[10, 1, 10]
Wall 1
Position, Rotation, Scale and
Box Collider
P[-5.11, 0.8, 0], R[0, 0, 0], S[0.2, 1.7, 10], Box Collider
[1, 1, 1]
Wall 2
Position, Rotation, Scale and
Box Collider
P[5.11, 0.8, 0], R[0, 0, 0], S[0.2, 1.7, 10], Box Collider [1,
1, 1]
Wall 3
Position, Rotation, Scale and
Box Collider
P[-0.04, 0.8, -5.07], R[0, 90, 0], S[0.2, 1.7, 10], Box
Collider [1, 1, 1]
Wall 4
Position, Rotation, Scale and
Box Collider
P[-0.04, 0.8, 5.07], R[0, 90, 0], S[0.2, 1.7, 10], Box Col-
lider [1, 1, 1]
Camera
Position,
Rotation,
Scale,
Clear Flags, Culling Mask
and Projection
P[-1.13409, 32.80403, 125.6395], R[26.565, -180, 0], S[1,
1, 1], Clear Flags = Skybox, Culling Mask = Everything,
Projection = Perspective
Directional
Light
Position,
Rotation,
Scale,
Type and Mode
P[0, 3, 0], R[50, -30, 0], S[1, 1, 1], Type = Directional,
Mode = Realtime
Table 8: Environment parameters.
Parameter
Deﬁnition
Range
Batch_size
The amount of experiences that transpire in each iteration of gradient descent. This parameter must always be a fraction
of buffer_size.
(Continuous):
[512,
5120],
(Discrete): [32,
512]
β
The strength of entropy regularisation. This parameter ensures that agents accurately explore the action space during
training. Increasing this will ensure that more arbitrary actions are taken frequently.
[1e-4, 1e-2]
Buffer_size
The quantity of observed sensory information (experiences) to accumulate before updating the policy model. This
parameter corresponds to how many experiences (observations, actions and rewards obtained) should be secured before
learning begins or updating the model. This should be a multiple of batch_size.
[2048, 409600]
ϵ
This parameter determines how fast the policy can evolve during training. Epsilon corresponds to the adequate threshold
of divergence between the old and new policies during gradient descent updating. Setting this value small will end in
more stable updates but will also slow the training process.
[0.1, 0.3]
Hidden_units
The number of units in the hidden layers of the neural network.
[32, 512]
GAE λ
This parameter corresponds to the lambda parameter used when determining the Generalised Advantage Estimate (GAE).
This can be considered how much the agent relies on its current value estimate when determining an updated value
estimate. Low values correspond to relying more on the current value estimate (which can lead to bias), and large values
correspond to relying more on the actual rewards received in the environment (which can be considerable variance).
[0.9, 0.95]
Learning_rate
The initial learning rate for gradient descent. This parameter relates to the strength of each gradient descent update step.
[1e-5, 1e-3]
Max_steps
The greatest number of simulation steps to run during a training session.
[5e5, 1e7]
Memory_size
The size of the memory an agent must keep; this is generally utilised if use_recurrent is true. The parameter relates to the
size of the array of ﬂoating-point numbers used to store the hidden state of the recurrent neural network. This value must
be a multiple of 4 and should scale with the amount of information the agent will need to remember to complete the task.
[64, 512]
Normalise
If true, will automatically normalise observations. This normalisation is based on the running average and variance of
the vector observation. Normalisation can be effective in complex continuous control problems but may be harmful with
more straightforward discrete control problems.
[true, false]
Num_epoch
The number of passes to make through the experience buffer when performing gradient descent optimisation. Decreasing
this will ensure more stable updates at the cost of slower learning.
[3, 10]
Num_layers
The number of hidden layers in the neural network. This parameter corresponds to how many hidden layers are present
after the observation input or after the Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) encoding of the visual observation. For more
minor problems, fewer layers are likely to train faster and more efﬁciently. More layers may be necessary for more
signiﬁcant control problems.
[1, 3]
Horizon (T)
Corresponds to the number of steps of experience to collect per-agent before appending it to the experience buffer. When
this limit is reached before the end of an episode, a value estimate is used to predict the overall anticipated reward from
the agent’s current state. As such, this parameter trades off between a less biased but higher variance estimate (long time
horizon) and more biased but less varied estimate (short time horizon). If there are many rewards within an episode or
episodes are prohibitively large, a smaller number can be more ideal.
[32, 2048]
Sequence_length
Corresponds to how long the sequences of encounters must be while training (only used with Recurrent Neural Networks).
[4, 128]
Summary_freq
A Tensorboard speciﬁc parameter used to identify how often to log training statistics during a training session.
[1e3, 5e4]
Use_recurrent
Set to true if a Recurrent Neural Network is to be used, else a default Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) is applied.
[true, false]
γ
This parameter corresponds to the discount factor for future rewards. This can be thought of as how remote into the
future the agent should care about possible rewards. When the agent should be operating in the present to prepare for
rewards in the distant future, this value should be large. In instances when rewards are more immediate, they can be
smaller.
[0.8, 0.995]
Table 9: Formal deﬁnition of the training parameters and recommended range, where [x, y] inclusive, source: [30].
24

Sedar Olmez et al.
