Dynamics of Belief: Abduction, Horn Knowledge
Base And Database Updates
Radhakrishnan Delhibabu
Informatik 5, Knowledge-Based Systems Group
RWTH Aachen, Germany

Abstract. The dynamics of belief and knowledge is one of the major
components of any autonomous system that should be able to incorpo-
rate new pieces of information. In order to apply the rationality result of
belief dynamics theory to various practical problems, it should be gen-
eralized in two respects: ﬁrst it should allow a certain part of belief to
be declared as immutable; and second, the belief state need not be de-
ductively closed. Such a generalization of belief dynamics, referred to as
base dynamics, is presented in this paper, along with the concept of a
generalized revision algorithm for knowledge bases (Horn or Horn logic
with stratiﬁed negation). We show that knowledge base dynamics has an
interesting connection with kernel change via hitting set and abduction.
In this paper, we show how techniques from disjunctive logic program-
ming can be used for eﬃcient (deductive) database updates. The key
idea is to transform the given database together with the update request
into a disjunctive (datalog) logic program and apply disjunctive tech-
niques (such as minimal model reasoning) to solve the original update
problem. The approach extends and integrates standard techniques for
eﬃcient query answering and integrity checking. The generation of a hit-
ting set is carried out through a hyper tableaux calculus and magic set
that is focused on the goal of minimality. The present paper provides a
comparative study of view update algorithms in rational approach. For,
understand the basic concepts with abduction, we provide an abductive
framework for knowledge base dynamics. Finally, we demonstrate how
belief base dynamics can provide an axiomatic characterization for inser-
tion a view atom to the database. We give a quick overview of the main
operators for belief change, in particular, belief update versus database
update.
Keyword: AGM, Belief Revision, Belief Update, Horn Knowledge Base
Dynamics, Kernel Change, Abduction, Hyber Tableaux, Magic Set, View
update, Update Propagation.
1
Introduction
We live in a constantly changing world, and consequently our beliefs have to be
revised whenever there is new information. When we encounter a new piece of
information that contradicts our current beliefs, we revise our beliefs rationally.
arXiv:1501.06206v2  [cs.LO]  27 Jan 2015

In the last three decades, the ﬁeld of computer science has grown substan-
tially beyond mere number crunching, and aspires to imitate rational thinking
of human beings. A separate branch of study, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has
evolved, with a number of researchers attempting to represent and manipulate
knowledge in a computer system. Much work has been devoted to study the
statics of the knowledge, i.e. representing and deducting from ﬁxed knowledge,
resulting in the development of expert systems. The ﬁeld of logic programming,
conceived in last seventies, has proved to be an important tool for handling
static knowledge. However, such ﬁxed Horn knowledge based systems can not
imitate human thinking, unless they are accomplish revising their knowledge in
the light of new information. As mentioned before, this revision has to take place
rationally. This has led to a completely new line of research, the dynamics of
belief.
Studies in dynamics of belief are twofold: What does it mean to rationally
revise a belief state? How can a belief state be represented in a computer and
revised? The ﬁrst question is more philosophical theory, and a lot of works have
been carried out from epistemological perspective to formalize belief dynamics.
The second question is computation oriented, and has been addressed diﬀer-
ently from various perspectives of application. For example, a lot of algorithms
have been proposed in logic programming to revise a Horn knowledge base or
a database represented as a logic program; number of algorithms are there to
carry out a view update in a rational database; algorithm to carry out diagnosis;
algorithm for abduction reasoning and so on. We need the concept of ”change”
in some form or other and thus need some axiomatic characterization to ensure
that the algorithms are rational. Unfortunately, till this date, these two tracks
remain separate, with minimal sharing of concepts and results. The primary
purpose of the paper is to study these two developments and integrate them.
When a new piece of information is added to a Horn knowledge base (Del-
grande 2008 and Delgrande & Peppas 2011), (Papini 2000) it may become incon-
sistent. Revision means modifying the Horn knowledge base in order to maintain
consistency, by keeping the new information and removing the least possible pre-
vious information. In our case, update means revision and contraction, that is
insertion and deletion in database perspective. Previous works (Aravindan &
Dung 1994), (Aravindan 1995) have explained connections between contraction
and knowledge base dynamics. Our Horn knowledge base dynamics is deﬁned in
two parts: an immutable part (Horn formulae) and updatable part (literals) (for
deﬁnition and properties see the works of Nebel 1998, Segerberg 1998, Hansson
et al 2001 and Ferm´e & Hansson 2001). Knowledge bases have a set of integrity
constraints. In the case of ﬁnite knowledge bases, it is sometimes hard to see how
the update relations should be modiﬁed to accomplish certain Horn knowledge
base updates. .

2
Motivation
In the general case of arbitrary formulae, the revision problem for knowledge
bases is hard to solve. So we restrict the revision problem to Horn formulae.
The connection between belief change and database change is an interesting one
since so far the two communities have independently considered two problems
that are very similar, and our aim is to bring out this connection.
We aim to bridge the gap between philosophical and database theory. In
such a case, Hansson’s (Hansson 1997) kernel change is related to the abductive
method. Aliseda’s (Aliseda 2006) book on abductive reasoning is one of our key
motivation. Wrobel’s (Wrobel 1995) deﬁnition of ﬁrst-order theory revision was
helpful to frame our algorithm. On the other hand, we are dealing with the view
update problem. Keller and Minker’s (Keller 1985 and Minker 1996) work is one
the motivation for the view update problem. In Figure 1 understand the concept
of view update problem in rational way. Figure show that foundation form Belief
Revision theory, intermediate step handle to Horn knowledge base, this step very
impairment that agent have background knowledge and he/she made decision
with postulate may require to process next step. Target of the application is
connect database updates via Horn knowledge base with abduction reasoning.
All clear procedure shown in each section.
Fig. 1. Layout of the paper
Following example illustrates the motivation of the paper:
Example 1. Consider a database with an (immutable) rule that a staﬀmember
is a person who is currently working in a research group under a chair. Addi-
tional (updatable) facts are that matthias and gerhard are group chairs, and

delhibabu and aravindan are staﬀmembers in group infor1. Our ﬁrst integrity
constraint (IC) is that each research group has only one chair ie. ∀x, y, z (y=z) ←
group chair(x,y) ∧group chair(x,z). Second integrity constraint is that a person
can be a chair for only one research group ie. ∀x, y, z (y=z)←group chair(y,x)
∧group chair(z,x).
Immutable part: staﬀchair(x,y)←staﬀgroup(x,z),group chair(z,y).
Updatable part: group chair(infor1,matthias)←
group chair(infor2,gerhard)←
staﬀgroup(delhibabu,infor1)←
staﬀgroup(aravindan,infor1)←
Suppose we want to update this database with the information, staﬀchair(aravin-
dan,gerhard); From the immutable part, we can deduce that this can be achieved
by asserting staﬀgroup(aravindan,z) V group chair(z,gerhard)
If we are restricted to deﬁnite clauses, there are three plausible ways to do
this: ﬁrst case is, aravindan and gerhard belong to infor1, i.e, staﬀgroup(aravind-
an,infor1) V group chair(info1,gerhard). We need to delete both base facts group -
chair(infor1,matthias)←and group chair(infor2,gerhard)←, because our ﬁrst IC
as well as second IC would be violated otherwise. In order to change the view, we
need to insert group chair(infor1,gerhard)←as a base fact. Assume that we have
an algorithm that deletes the base facts staﬀgroup(delhibabu,infor1)←from the
database. But, no rational person will agree with such an algorithm, because the
fact staﬀgroup(delhibabu,infor1)←is not ”relevant” to the view atom.
Second case, aravindan and gerhard belong to infor2, that is staﬀgroup(aravin-
dan,infor2) V group chair(infor2,gerhard). Simply, insert the new fact staﬀgroup-
(aravindan,infor2)←to change the view. Suppose an algorithm deletes the base
facts staﬀgroup(aravindan,infor1)←from the database, then it can not be ”ra-
tional” since these facts are not ”relevant” to the view atom.
Third case, aravindan and gerhard belong to infor3 (free assignment of the
group value), that is staﬀgroup(aravindan,infor3) V group chair(info3,gerhard).
Suppose, we insert new base fact group chair(infor3,gerhard) ←, our second IC
does not follow. Suppose an algorithm inserts the new base fact staﬀgroup(aravin-
dan,infor2)←or staﬀgroup(aravindan,infor1)←is deleted, then it can not be
”rational”.
The above example highlights the need for some kind of ”relevance policy”
to be adopted when a view atom is to be inserted to a deductive database.
How many such axioms and policies do we need to characterize a ”good” view
update? When are we sure that our algorithm for view update is ”rational”?
Clearly, there is a need for an axiomatic characterization of view updates. By
axiomatic characterization, we mean explicitly listing all the rationality axioms
that are to be satisﬁed by any algorithm for view update.
The basic idea in (Behrend & Manthey 2008), (Aravindan & Baumgartner
1997) is to employ the model generation property of hyper tableaux and magic
set to generate models, and read oﬀdiagnosis from them. One speciﬁc feature

of this diagnosis algorithm is the use of semantics (by transforming the system
description and the observation using an initial model of the correctly working
system) in guiding the search for a diagnosis. This semantical guidance by pro-
gram transformation turns out to be useful for database updates as well. More
speciﬁcally we use a (least) Herbrand model of the given database to transform
it along with the update request into a logic program in such a way that the
models of this transformed program stand for possible updates.
We discuss two ways of transforming the given database together with the
view update (insert and delete) request into a logic program resulting in two vari-
ants of view update algorithms. In the ﬁrst variant, a simple and straightforward
transformation is employed. Unfortunately, not all models of the transformed
program represent a rational update using this approach. The second variant of
the algorithm uses the least Herbrand model of the given database for the trans-
formation. In fact what we referred to as oﬄine preprocessing before is exactly
this computation of the least Herbrand model. This variant is very meaningful
in applications where views are materialized for eﬃcient query answering. The
advantage of using the least Herbrand model for the transformation is that all
models of the transformed logic program (not just the minimal ones) stand for
a rational update.
When dealing with the revision of a Horn knowledge base (both insertions
and deletions), there are other ways to change a Horn knowledge base and it
has to be performed automatically also (Ferm´e 1992 and Rodrigues& Benevidas
1994). Considering the information, change is precious and must be preserved as
much as possible. The principle of minimal change (G¨ardenfors 1998, Dalal 1988
and Herzig & Riﬁ1999), (Schulte 1999) can provide a reasonable strategy. On the
other hand, practical implementations have to handle contradictory, uncertain,
or imprecise information, so several problems can arise: how to deﬁne eﬃcient
change in the style of Carlos Alchourr´on, Peter G¨ardenfors, and David Makinson
(AGM) (Alchourron et al. 1985b); what result has to be chosen (Lakemeyer
1995), (Lobo & Trajcevski 1997), (Nayak et al. 2006); and ﬁnally, according to
a practical point of view, what computational model to explore for the Horn
knowledge base revision has to be provided?
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: First we start with preliminar-
ies in Section 3. In Section 4, we give a quick overview of belief changes and
belief update. In Section 5, we introduce knowledge base dynamics along with
the concept of generalized revision, and revision operator for knowledge base.
Section 6 studies the relationship between knowledge base dynamics and ab-
duction and shows how abductive procedures could be used to realize revision.
In Section 7, we give a quick overview of belief update versus knowledge base
update. In Section 8, we discuss an important application of knowledge base
dynamics in providing an axiomatic characterization for insertion view atoms to
databases; and nature of view update problem for incomplete to complete infor-
mation shown. We give a quick overview of belief update versus database update
in Section 9. In Section 10, we provide an abductive framework for Horn knowl-
edge base dynamics in ﬁrst order version. In Section 11, we give brief overview

of related works. In Section 12, we draw conclusions with a summary of our
contribution and indicate future directions of our investigation.
3
Preliminaries
We consider a propositional language LP deﬁned from a ﬁnite set of proposi-
tional variables P and the standard connectives. We use a, b, x, y, ...ϕ, φ, ψ, ...
for propositional formulae. Sets of formulae are denoted by upper case Roman
letters A, B, F, K, ..... A literal is an atom (positive literal), or a negation of an
atom (negative literal).
For any formula ϕ, we write E(ϕ) to mean the set of the elementary letters
that occur in ϕ. The same notation also applies to a set of formulae. For any set
F of formulae, L(F) represents the sub-language generated by E(F), i.e. the set
of all formulae ϕ with E(ϕ) ⊆E(F).
Horn formulae are deﬁned (Delgrande & Peppas 2011) as follows:
1. Every a ∈Φ where Φ ∈LP ∪{⊥} , a and ¬a are Horn clauses.
2. a ←a1 ∧a2 ∧...∧an is a Horn clause, where n ≥0 and a, ai ∈Φ (1 ≤i ≤n).
3. Every Horn clause is a Horn formula, a is called head and ai is body of the
Horn formula.
4. If ϕ and ψ are Horn formulae, so is ϕ ∧ψ.
A deﬁnite Horn clause is a ﬁnite set of literals (atoms) that contains exactly
one positive literal which is called the head of the clause. The set of negative
literals of this deﬁnite Horn clause is called the body of the clause. A Horn
clause is non-recursive, if the head literal does not occur in its body. We usually
denote a Horn clause as head←body. Let LH be the set of all Horn formulae
with respect to LP. A formula φ is a syntactic consequence within LP of a set
Γ of formulas if there is a formal proof in LP of φ from the set Γ ⊢LP φ.
A Horn logic with stratiﬁed negation (Jackson & Schulte 2008) is similar to
a set of Horn formulae. An immutable part is a function-free clause of the form
a ←a1 ∧a2 ∧... ∧an, with n ≥1 where a is an atom denoting the immutable
part’s head and a1 ∧a2 ∧... ∧an are literals. i.e. positive or negative atoms,
representing the body of the Horn clauses.
Formally, a ﬁnite Horn knowledge base KB (Horn or Horn logic with strati-
ﬁed negation) is deﬁned as a ﬁnite set of formulae from language LH, and divided
into three parts: an immutable theory KBI is a Horn formula (head←body),
which is the ﬁxed part of the knowledge; updatable theory KBU is a Horn
clause (head←); and integrity constraint KBIC representing a set of clauses
(Horn logic with stratiﬁed negation) (←body).
Deﬁnition 1 (Horn Knowledge Base). A Horn knowledge base, KB is a
ﬁnite set of Horn formulae from language LH, s.t KB = KBI ∪KBU ∪KBIC,
KBI ∩KBU = ∅and KBU ∩KBIC = ∅.
Horn knowledge base change deals with situations in which an agent has to
modify its beliefs about the world, usually due to new or previously unknown

incoming information, also represented as formulae of the language. Common
operations of interest in Horn knowledge base change are the expansion of an
agent’s current Horn knowledge base KB by a given Horn clause ϕ (usually de-
noted as KB+ϕ), where the basic idea is to add regardless of the consequences,
and the revision of its current beliefs by ϕ (denoted as KB * ϕ), where the in-
tuition is to incorporate ϕ into the current beliefs in some way while ensuring
consistency of the resulting theory at the same time. Perhaps the most basic
operation in Horn knowledge base change, like belief change, is that of contrac-
tion AGM (Alchourron et al. 1985b), which is intended to represent situations
in which an agent has to give up ϕ from its current stock of beliefs (denoted as
KB-ϕ).
Deﬁnition 2 (AGM Contraction). Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, and α
a belief that is present in KB. Then contraction of KB by α, denoted as KB −α,
is a consistent belief set that ignore α
Deﬁnition 3 (Levi Identity). Let - be an AGM contraction operator for KB.
A way to deﬁne a revision is by using Generalized Levi Identity:
KB ∗α = (KB −¬α) ∪α
Then, the revision can be trivially achieved by expansion, and the axiomatic
characterization could be straightforwardly obtained from the corresponding
characterizations of the traditional models (Alchourron, CE et al 1985). The
aim of our work is not to deﬁne revision from contraction, but rather to con-
struct and axiomatically characterize revision operators in a direct way.
4
Belief Changes
Working at an abstract philosophical level, the aim of belief dynamics is to for-
malize the rationality of change, without worrying much about the syntactic
representation of belief. However, it is not possible to completely ignore be-
lief representation, and works on belief dynamics assume as little necessary
things as possible about the representation of the belief. In this Section based on
Konieczny’s (Konieczny 2011) work, we recall the deﬁnition of the main belief
change operators and the links between them. We focus on the classical case,
where the belief represent use propositional logic. This is a very quick presenta-
tion of belief change theory. For a complete introduction the reader is referred to
seminal books on belief revision ((G¨ardenfors 1992 & 1998), (Hansson 1997a),
(Rott 2001)) or the recent special issue of Journal of Philosophical Logic on the
25 Years of AGM Theory (Ferme & Hansson 2011).
A belief base K is a ﬁnite set of propositional formulae. In order to simplify
the notations we identify the base K with the formula. which is the conjunction
of the formulae of K 1
1 There are two major interpretations of belief bases. One of them, supported by Dalal
1998, uses belief bases as mere expressive devices; hence if Cn(B1) = Cn(B2) then

Belief revision aims at changing the status of some beliefs in the base that
are contradicted by a more reliable piece of information. Several principles are
govern this revision operation:
– First is the primacy of update principle: the new piece of information has to
be accepted in the belief base after the revision. This is due to the hypothesis
that the new piece of information is more reliable than the current beliefs 2
– Second is the principle of coherence: the new belief base after the revision
should be a consistent belief base. Asking the beliefs to be consistent is a
natural requirement if one wants to conduct reasoning tasks from her belief
base
– Third is the principle of minimal change: the new belief base after the revision
should be as close as possible from the current belief base. This important
principle aims at ensuring that no unnecessary information (noise) is added
to the beliefs during the revision process, and that no unnecessary infor-
mation is lost during the process: information/beliefs are usually costly to
obtain, we do not want to throw them away without any serious reason.
let ψ and µ be two formulae denoting respectively the belief base, and a new
piece of information. Then ψ ◦µ is a formula representing the new belief base.
An operator ◦is an AGM belief revision operator if it satisﬁes the following
properties.
Deﬁnition 4 (Belief revision).
(R1) ψ ◦µ implies µ.
(R2) If ψ ∧µ is satisﬁable, then ψ ◦µ ≡ψ ∧µ.
(R3) If µ is satisﬁable, then so is ψ ◦µ.
(R4) If ψ1 ≡ψ2 and µ1 ≡µ2, then ψ1 ◦µ1 ≡ψ2 ◦µ2.
(R5) (ψ ◦µ) ∧φ implies ψ ◦(µ ∧φ).
(R6) If (ψ ◦µ) ∧φ is satisﬁable, then ψ ◦(µ ∧φ) implies (ψ ◦µ) ∧φ.
When one works with a ﬁnite propositional language the above postulates, pro-
posed by Katsuno and Mendelzon (Katsuno, H & Mendelzon, AO. 1991b), are
equivalent to AGM ((Alchourron et al 1985b) and (G¨ardenfors 1998)) (R1) states
that the new piece of information must be believed after the revision. (R2) says
that when there is no conﬂict between the new piece of information and the cur-
rent belief, the revision is just the conjunction. (R3) says that revision always
a consistent belief base, unless the new piece of information is not consistent.
(R4) is an irrelevance of syntax condition, it states that logically equivalent bases
B1 and B2 represent the same belief state and yield the same outcome under all
operations of change. The other, more common approach treats inclusion in the
belief base as epistemically signiﬁcant. The belief base contains those sentences that
have an epistemic standing of their own (Ferme 2011)
2 If this is not the case one should use a non-prioritized revision operator (Hansson
1997b)

must lead to the same result. (R5) and (R6) give conditions on the revision by
a conjunction.
AGM also deﬁned contraction operators, that aim to remove some piece of
information from the beliefs of the agent. These contraction operators are closely
related to revision operators, since each contraction operator can be used to
deﬁne a revision operator, through the Levy identity and conversely each revision
operator can be used to deﬁne a contraction operator through the Harper identity
((Alchourron et al 1985b) and (G¨ardenfors 1998)). So one can study indiﬀerently
revision or contraction operators. So we focus on revision here.
Several representation theorems, that give constructive ways to deﬁne AGM
revision/ contraction operators, have been proposed, such as partial meet con-
traction/revision (Alchourron et al 1985b), epistemic entrenchments (G¨ardenfors
1992) and (G¨ardenfors & Makinson 1988), safe contraction (Alchourron et al
1985a), etc. In (Katsuno & Mendelzon 1991b and 1992) (Benferhat et al. 2005),
Katsuno and Mendelzon give a representation theorem, showing that each revi-
sion operator corresponds to a faithful assignment, that associates to each base
a plausibility preorder on interpretations (this idea can be traced back to Grove
systems of spheres (Grove 1988)).
Assume a total pre-order ≤ψ on W (set of possible world). That is to say,
KB = min(W, ≤ψ). As usual we take ≤ψ to be an ordering of plausibility on the
worlds, with worlds lower down in the ordering seen as more plausible. In what
follows ≃ψ will always denote the symmetric closure of ≤ψ, i.e., W1 ≃ψ W2 iﬀ
both W1 ≤ψ W2 and W2 ≤ψ W1.
Deﬁnition 5 ((Konieczny 2011)). A faithful assignment is a function map-
ping each base ψ to a pre-order ≤ψ over interpretations such that
1. if ω |= ψ and ω′ |= ψ, then ω ≃ψ ω′
2. if ω |= ψ and ω′ ̸|= ψ, then ω <ψ ω′
3. if ψ ≡ψ′, then ≤ψ=≤ψ′
Theorem 1 ((Katsuno & Mendelzon 1991b and 1991b)). An operator ◦
is an AGM revision operator (i.e. it satisﬁes (R1)-(R6)) if and only if there
exists a faithful assignment that maps each base ψ to a total pre-order ≤ψ such
that mod(ψ ◦µ)= min(mod(µ), ≤ψ).
Proof. Follows from the deﬁnition 5 and the result of Konieczny 2011.
One of the main problems of this characterization of belief revision is that it
does not constrain the operators enough for ensuring a good behavior when we do
iteratively several revisions. So one needs to add more postulates and to represent
the beliefs of the agent with a more complex structure than a simple belief base.
In (Darwiche & Pearl 1997) Darwiche and Pearl proposed a convincing extension
of AGM revision. This proposal have improved by an additional condition in
((Booth & Meyer 2006) and (Jin & Thielscher 2007), (Konieczny, et al. 2010)
and (Konieczny & Pino Prez 2008)) deﬁne improvement operators that are a
generalization of iterated revision operators.

Whereas belief revision should be used to improve the beliefs by incorporating
more reliable pieces of evidence, belief update operators aim at maintaining
the belief base up-to-date, by allowing modiﬁcations of the base according to a
reported change in the world. This distinction between revision and update was
made clear in Katsuno & Mendelzon 1991 and 1992, where Katsuno & Mendelzon
1991 proposed postulates for belief update.
Deﬁnition 6 (Belief Update).
An operator ⋄is a (partial) update operator if it satisﬁed the properties (U1)-
(U8). It is a total update operator if it satisﬁes the property (U1)-(U5),(U8),(U9).
(U1) ψ ⋄µ implies µ.
(U2) ifψ implies µ, then ψ ⋄µ ≡ψ
(U3) ifψ not implies ⊥and µ not implies ⊥then ψ ⋄µ not implies ⊥
(U4) If ψ1 ≡ψ2 and µ1 ≡µ2, then ψ1 ⋄µ1 ≡ψ2 ⋄µ2.
(U5) If (ψ ⋄µ) ∧φ implies ψ ⋄(µ ∧φ)
(U6) If (ψ ⋄µ1) implies µ2 and (ψ ⋄µ2) implies µ2 then ψ ⋄µ1 ≡ψ ⋄µ2
(U7) If ψ is a complete formula, then (ψ ⋄µ1) ∧(ψ ⋄µ2) implies ψ ⋄(µ1 ∨µ2)
(U8) (ψ1 ∨ψ2) ⋄µ ≡(ψ1 ⋄µ) ∨(ψ2 ⋄µ)
(U9) If ψ is a complete formula and (ψ ⋄µ) ∧ψ not implies ⊥then ψ ⋄(µ ∧ψ)
implies (ψ ⋄µ) ∧ψ
Most of these postulates are close to the ones of revision. The main diﬀerences
lie in postulate (U2) that is much weaker than (R2): conversely to revision, even
if the new piece of information is consistent with the belief base, the result
is generally not simply the conjunction. This illustrates the fact that revision
can be seen as a selection process of the most plausible worlds of the current
beliefs with respect to the new piece information, whereas update is a transition
process: each world of the current beliefs have to be translated to the closest
world allowed by the new piece of information. This world-by-world treatment
is expressed by postulate (U8).
As for revision, there is a representation theorem in terms of faithful assign-
ment.
Deﬁnition 7 ([25]). A faithful assignment is a function mapping each inter-
pretation ω to a pre-order ≤ω over interpretations such that if ω , ω′, then
ω <ω ω′
Theorem 2. An update operator ⋄satisﬁes (U1)-(U8) if and only if there exists
a faithful assignment that maps each interpretation ω to a partial pre-order ≤ω
such that mod(ψ ⋄µ)=S
ω|=ψ min(mod(µ), ≤ω).
Proof. Follows from the observation and the result of Konieczny 2011.
But there is also a second theorem corresponding to total pre-orders.
Theorem 3. An update operator ⋄satisﬁes (U1)-(U5), (U8) and (U9) if and
only if there exists a faithful assignment that maps each interpretation ω to a
total preorder ≤ω such that mod(ψ ⋄µ)=S
ω|=ψ min(mod(µ), ≤ω).

Proof. Follows from the observation and the result of Konieczny 2011.
Deﬁnition 8 ([3]). Let M=(W.w) be a K-model and µ a formula. A k-model
M ′ = (W ′, w′) is called a possible resulting k-model after updating M with µ if
and only if the following conditions hold:
1. M’|= µ;
2. there does not exist another k-model M ′′ = (W ′′, w′′) such that M ′′ |= µ and
M ′′ <M M ′.
The set of all possible resulting k-models after updating M with µ as Res(M,µ).
Theorem 4. Knowledge update operator ⋄deﬁned in deﬁnition 8 satisﬁes (U1)-
(U9).
Proof. Follows from the deﬁnition 8 and the result of Baral & Zhang 2005.
Note 1. Horn knowledge base is a subset of belief base, KB ⊆B, so everything
that follows for belief base, also follows for Horn Knowledge base.
5
Horn Knowledge base dynamics
In the AGM framework, a belief set is represented by a deductively closed set of
propositional formulae. While such sets are inﬁnite, they can’t always be ﬁnitely
representable. However, working with deductively closed, inﬁnite belief sets is
not very attractive from a computational point of view. The AGM approach to
belief dynamics is very attractive in its capture the rationality of change, but it
is not always easy to implement either Horn formula based partial meet revision
or generalized kernel revision. In artiﬁcial intelligence and database applications,
what is required is to represent the knowledge using a ﬁnite Horn knowledge base.
Further, a certain part of the knowledge is treated as immutable and should not
be changed.
AGM (Alchourron et al. 1985b) proposed a formal framework in which revi-
sion is interpreted as belief change. In this section, we focus on the Horn knowl-
edge base revision and propose new rationality postulates that are adopted from
AGM postulates for revision.
Deﬁnition 9. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base with an immutable part KBI.
Let α and β be any two Horn clauses from LH. Then, α and β are said to be
KB-equivalent iﬀthe following condition is satisﬁed: ∀set of Horn clauses E
⊆LH and IC: KBI ∪E ∪IC ⊢α iﬀKBI ∪E ∪IC ⊢β.
These postulates stem from three main principles: the new item of informa-
tion has to appear in the revised Horn knowledge base, the revised base has
to be consistent and revision operation has to change the least possible beliefs.
Now we consider the revision of a Horn clause α with respect to KB, written as
KB ∗α. The rationality postulates for revising α from KB can be formulated.

Deﬁnition 10 (Rationality postulates for Horn knowledge base revi-
sion).
(KB*1)
Closure: KB ∗α is a Horn knowledge base.
(KB*2)
Weak Success: if α is consistent with KBI ∪KBIC then α ⊆KB ∗α.
(KB*3.1) Inclusion: KB ∗α ⊆Cn(KB ∪α).
(KB*3.2) Immutable-inclusion: KBI ⊆Cn(KB ∗α).
(KB*4.1) Vacuity 1: if α is inconsistent with KBI ∪KBIC then KB ∗α = KB.
(KB*4.2) Vacuity 2: if KB ∪α ⊬⊥then KB ∗α = KB ∪α.
(KB*5)
Consistency: if α is consistent with KBI ∪KBIC then KB ∗α con-
sistent with KBI ∪KBIC.
(KB*6)
Preservation: If α and β are KB-equivalent, then KB ∗α ↔KB ∗β.
(KB*7.1) Strong relevance: KB ∗α ⊢α if KBI ⊬¬α
(KB*7.2) Relevance: If β ∈KB\KB ∗α, then there is a set KB′ such that
KB ∗α ⊆KB′ ⊆KB ∪α, KB′ is consistent KBI ∪KBIC with α, but
KB′ ∪{β} is inconsistent KBI ∪KBIC with α.
(KB*7.3) Weak relevance: If β ∈KB\KB ∗α, then there is a set KB′ such that
KB′ ⊆KB ∪α, KB′ is consistent KBI ∪KBIC with α, but KB′ ∪{β} is
inconsistent KBI ∪KBIC with α.
To revise KB by α, only those informations that are relevant to α in some
sense can be added (as example in the introduction illustrates). (KB ∗7.1) is
very strong axiom allowing only minimum changes, and certain rational revision
can not be carried out. So, relaxing this condition (example with more details
can be found in (Aravindan 1995, Hansson, SO 1997a, Ferme & Hansson 2011
and Falappa, MA et al 2012), this can be weakened to relevance. (KB ∗7.2) is
relevance policy that still can not permit rational revisions, so we need to go
next step. With (KB ∗7.3) the relevance axiom is further weakened and it is
referred to as ”core-retainment”.
5.1
Revision function
Suppose that we want to revise Horn knowledge base KB with respect to a single
clause without using negation. We may construct revision using generalizing
techniques from classical belief (base) revision (Falappa et al. 2012). Partial meet
revision operator is syntax dependent and based on the foundational approach.
In order to deﬁne it, ﬁrst we need to deﬁne α-consistent-remainders.
Deﬁnition 11 (Remainder Set). Let a Horn knowledge base KB be a set of
Horn formulae, where α is Horn clause. The α-consistent-remainders of KB,
noted by KB ↓⊤α, is the set of KB′ such that:
1. KB′ ⊆KB, ensuring that KBI ⊆KB′ and KBIC ⊆KB′.
2. KB′ ∪α is consistent with KBI ∪KBIC.
3. For any KB” such that KB′ ⊂KB′′ ⊆KB then KB′′ ∪α is inconsistent
with KBI ∪KBIC.

That is, KB ↓⊤α is the set of maximal KB-subsets consistent with α.
Example 2. Suppose that KB={KBI : p ←a ∧b, p ←a, q ←a ∧b; KBU : a ←,
b ←; KBIC : ∅} and α= ←p. Then we have that:
- KB ↓⊤α= {{p ←a ∧b}, {p ←a},{←a}, {←b}}.
Revision by a Horn clause is based on the concept of a α-consistent-remainders.
In order to complete the construction, we must deﬁne a selection function that
selects consistent remainders.
5.2
Principle of minimal change
Let a Horn knowledge base KB be a set of Horn formulae and ψ is a Horn clause
such that KB = {φ | ψ ⊢φ} is derived by φ. Now we consider the revision of a
Horn clause α wrt KB, that is KB ∗α.
The principle of minimal change (PMC) leads to the deﬁnition of orders
between interpretations. Let I be the set of all the interpretations and Mod(ψ)
be the set of models of ψ. A pre-order on I, denoted ≤ψ is linked with ψ. The
relation <ψ is deﬁned from ≤ψ as usual:
I <ψ I′ iﬀI ≤ψ I′ and I′ ≰ψ I.
The pre-order ≤ψ is faithful to ψ if it veriﬁes the following conditions:
1) If I, I′ ∈Mod(ψ) then I <ψ I′ does not hold;
2) If I ∈Mod(ψ) and I′ < Mod(ψ) then I <ψ I′ holds;
3) if ψ ≡φ then ≤ψ=≤φ.
A minimal interpretation may thus be deﬁned by:
M ⊆I, the set of minimal interpretations in M according to ≤ψ is denoted
Min(M, ≤ψ). And I is minimal in M according to ≤ψ, if I ∈M and there is
no I′ ∈M such that I′ <ψ I.
Revision operation * satisﬁes the postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3)
if and only if there exists a total pre-order ≤ψ such that:
Mod(ψ ∗φ) = Min(Mod(φ), ≤ψ).
Deﬁnition 12 (Selection function). Let KB be a Horn knowledge base. γ is
a selection function for KB iﬀfor all Horn clauses α
1. If KB ↓⊤α , ∅then ∅, γ(KB ↓⊤α) ⊆KB ↓⊤α.
2. If KB ↓⊤α = ∅then γ(KB ↓⊤α) = {KB}
Observation 1 Let KB, KB’ be an Horn knowledge base, KB’ be consistent.
Suppose that α ∈KB and α ∈KB′. Then α ∈X for all X ∈KB ↓⊤KB′ and,
therefore, α ∈T(KB ↓⊤KB′).

From the above observation and deﬁnition 11 it follows that all the Horn
knowledge base of KB ∩α are ”protected”, in the sense that they are included in
the intersection of any collection of remainders. That is, a consolidated selection
function selects a subset of the set KB ↓⊤α whose elements all contain the set
KB ∩α.
Deﬁnition 13 (Partial meet revision). Let KB be a Horn knowledge base
with an immutable part KBI and γ a selection function for KB. The partial
meet revision on KB that is generated by γ is the operator ∗γ such that, for all
Horn clauses α:
KB ∗γ α =
∩γ(KB ↓⊤α) ∪α
if α is consistent with KBI ∪KBIC
KB
otherwise.
An operator * is a generalized revision (partial meet revision) on KB if and
only if there is a selection function γ for KB such that for all Horn clauses α,
KB*α = KB∗γα.
Example 3. Given KB={KBI : p ←a ∧b, p ←a, q ←a ∧b; KBU : a ←, b ←;
KBIC : ∅}, α= ←p and KB ↓⊤α= {{p ←a ∧b}, {p ←a}, {←a}, {←b}}.
We have two possible results for the selection function and its associated partial
meet revision operator
γ1(KB ↓⊤α) = {←p} and KB ∗γ1 α = {p ←a ∧b, ←a, ←b}
γ2(KB ↓⊤α) = {←p} and KB ∗γ2 α = {p ←a, ←a}
The partial meet revision on KB that is generated by γ2 gives minimal in-
terpretation with respect to PMC.
Theorem 5. For every Horn knowledge base KB, ∗is a generalized revision
function iﬀit satisﬁes the postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
Proof.
(If part) * satisﬁes (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3). We must show that
∗is a generalized revision. When KBI ⊢α, (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3)
imply that KB ∗α = KB is coinciding with generalized revision.
When KBI ⊢¬α, the required result follows from the two observations:
1. ∃KB′ ∈KB ↓⊤α s.t.KB ∗α ⊆KB′ (when KB ∗α = KB ∪{α})
Let γ be an selection function for KB and ∗γ be the generalized revision
on KB that is generated by γ. Since * satisﬁes closure (KB*1), KB ∗γ α
is KB contained in α. Also, satisfaction of weak success postulate (KB*2)
ensures that α ⊆KB∗γ α. Every element of KB ↓⊤α is a inclusion maximal
subset that does drive α, and so any subset of KB that does derive α must
be contained in a member of KB ↓⊤α.
2. T(KB ↓⊤α) ⊆KB ∗γ α (when KB ∗α = KB ∪{α})
Consider any β ∈T(KB ↓⊤α). Assume that β < KB ∗α. Since * satisﬁes
weak relevance postulate (KB*7.3), it follows that there exists a set KB’ s.t.
KB′ ⊆KB ∪α; KB′ is consistent with α; and KB′ ∪{β} is inconsistent
with α. But this contradicts the that β is present in every maximal subset
of KB that does derive α. Hence β must not be in KB ∗γ α.

(Only if part) Let KB ∗α be a generalized revision of α for KB. We have
to show that KB ∗α satisﬁes the postulate (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
Let γ be an selection function for KB and ∗γ be the generalized revision on
KB that is generated by γ.
Closure Since KB ∗γ α is a Horn knowledge base, this postulate is trivially
shown.
Weak Success Suppose that α is consistent. Then it is trivial by deﬁnition
that α ⊆KB ∗γ α.
Inclusion Since every X ∈KB ↓⊤α is such that X ⊆KB then this postulate
is trivially shown.
Immutable-inclusion Since every X ∈KB ↓⊤α is such that X ⊆KBI then
this postulate is trivially shown.
Vacuity 1 Trivial by deﬁnition.
Vacuity 2 If KB ∪{α} is consistent then KB ↓⊤α = {{KB}}. Hence KB ∗γ α
= KB ∪{α}.
Consistency Suppose that α is consistent. Then KB ↓⊤α ,= ∅and by deﬁni-
tion, every X ∈KB ↓⊤α is consistent with α. Therefore, the intersection of
any subset of KB ↓⊤α is consistent with α. Finally, KB ∗γ α is consistent.
Uniformity If α and β are KB-equivalent, then KB ↓⊤α = KB ↓⊤β
Weak relevance Suppose that KB ↓⊤α , ∅. Let β ∈KB. Then there is
some X ∈KB ↓⊤α such that β < X. Therefore, there is some X such that
β < X ⊆KB, X ∪α is consistent but X ∪α ∪{β} is inconsistent.
Suppose that KB ↓⊤α = {∅} in which case α is inconsistent. By deﬁnition,
KB ∗γ α = KB and weak relevance is vacuously satisﬁed.
5.3
Horn knowledge base revision with hitting set
In this section, we show that Horn knowledge base revision has an interesting
connection with kernel change via hitting set.
Kernel revision system
To revise a Horn formula α from a Horn knowledge base KB, the idea of kernel
revision is to keep at least one element from every inclusion-minimal subset of KB
that derives α. Because of the immutable-inclusion postulate, no Horn formula
from KBI can be deleted.
Deﬁnition 14 (Kernel sets). Let a Horn knowledge base KB be a set of Horn
formulae, where α is Horn clause. The α-inconsistent kernel of KB, noted by
KB⊥⊥α, is the set of KB′ such that:
1. KB′ ⊆KB ensuring that KBI ⊆KB′ and KBIC ⊆KB′.
2. KB′ ∪α is inconsistent with KBI ∪KBIC .
3. For any KB” such that KB′′ ⊂KB′ ⊆KB then KB′′ ∪α is consistent with
KBI ∪KBIC.

That is, given a consistent α, KB⊥⊥α is the set of minimal KB-subsets
inconsistent with α.
Example 4. Suppose that KB={KBI : p ←a ∧b, p ←a, q ←a ∧b; KBU : a ←
, b ←; KBIC : ∅} and α= ←p. Then we have that:
KB⊥⊥α= {{p ←a ∧b}, {p ←a}}.
Revision by a Horn clause is based on the concept of a α-inconsistent-kernels.
In order to complete the construction, we must deﬁne a incision function that
cuts in each inconsistent-kernel.
Deﬁnition 15 (Incision function). Let KB be a set of Horn formulae. σ is
a incision function for KB if and only if, for all consistent Horn clauses α
1. σ(KB⊥⊥α) ⊆S KB⊥⊥α
2. If KB′ ∈KB⊥⊥α then KB′ ∩(σ(KB⊥⊥α)) , 0
Deﬁnition 16 (Hitting set). A hitting set H for KB⊥⊥α is deﬁned as a set
s.t. (i) H ⊆S(KB⊥⊥α), (ii) H∩KBI is empty and (iii) ∀X ∈KB⊥⊥α, X , ∅
and X ∩KBU is not empty, then X ∩H , ∅.
A hitting set is said to be maximal when H consists of all updatable state-
ments from S(KB⊥⊥α) and minimal if no proper subset of H is a hitting set
for KB⊥⊥α.
Observation 2 Let KB, KB’ be an Horn knowledge base, KB’ be consistent.
Suppose that α ∈KB and α ∈KB′. Then α < S(KB⊥⊥KB′) and, therefore,
KB′ ∩S(KB⊥⊥KB′) = 0
From the above observation and deﬁnition 15 it follows that all the Horn
knowledge base of α are ”protected”, in the sense that they can not be consid-
ered for removing by the consolidated incision function. That is, a consolidated
incision function selects among the sentences of KB\α that make KB ∪α in-
consistent.
Deﬁnition 17 (Generalized Kernel revision). An incision function for KB
is a function s.t. for all α, σ(KB⊥⊥α) is a hitting set for KB⊥⊥α. Generalized
kernel revision on KB that is generated by σ is the operator ∗σ such that, for all
Horn clauses α:
KB ∗σ α =
(KB\σ(KB⊥⊥α) ∪α
if α is consistent KBI ∪KBIC
KB
otherwise.
An operator ∗is a generalized kernel revision for KB if and only if there is an
incision function σ for KB such that for all Horn clauses α, KB ∗α = KB ∗σ α.
From the deﬁnition of hitting set, it is clear that when KB ⊢¬α, α is
the hitting set of KB⊥⊥α. On the other hand, when KBI ⊢α, the deﬁnition
ensures that only updatable elements are inserted, and α does follow from the
revision. Thus, weak success (KB*2), immutable-inclusion (KB*3.2) and vacuity
(KB*4.1) are satisﬁed by generalized kernel revision of α from KB.

Example 5. Given KB={KBI : p ←a ∧b, p ←a, q ←a ∧b; KBU : a ←, b ←
; KBIC : ∅}, α= ←p and KB⊥⊥α = {{p ←a ∧b}, {p ←a}}. We have
two possible results for the incision function and its associated kernel revision
operator:
σ1(KB⊥⊥α) = {p ←a ∧b} and KB ∗σ1 α = {{←a}, {←b}},
σ2(KB⊥⊥α) = {p ←a} and KB ∗σ2 α = {{←a}}.
Incision function σ2 produces minimal hitting set for KB⊥⊥α.
Theorem 6. For every Horn knowledge base KB, ∗σ is a generalized kernel
revision function iﬀit satisﬁes the postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
Proof.
(If part) * satisﬁes (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3). We must show that ∗
is a generalized kernel revision. Let σ be a incision function and α Horn formula.
When KBI ⊢α, (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3) imply that KB ∗α = KB
coincides with generalized revision and follow PMC.
When KBI ⊢¬α, the required result follows from the two observations:
1. ∃KB′ ∈KB⊥⊥α s.t.KB ∗α ⊆KB′ (when KBI ⊢α)
Let σ be an incision function for KB and ∗σ be the generalized revision on
KB that is generated by σ. Since * satisﬁes closure (KB*1), KB ∗σ α is KB
contained in α. Also, satisfaction of weak success postulate (KB*2) ensures
that α ⊆KB ∗σ α. Every element of KB⊥⊥α is a inclusion minimal subset
that does derive α, and so any subset of KB that does derive α must be
contained in a member of KB⊥⊥α.
2. T(KB⊥⊥α) ⊆KB ∗σ α (when KBI ⊢α)
Consider any β ∈T(KB⊥⊥α). Assume that β < KB ∗α. Since * satisﬁes
weak relevance postulate (KB*7.3), it follows that there exists a set KB’ s.t.
KB′ ⊆KB ∪α; KB′ is a consistent with α; and KB′ ∪{β} is inconsistent
with α. But this contradicts that β is present in every minimal subset of KB
that does derive α. Hence β must not be in KB ∗σ α.
(Only if part) Let KB ∗α be a generalized revision of α for KB. We have
to show that KB ∗α satisﬁes the postulate (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
Let σ be an incision function for KB and ∗σ be the generalized revision on
KB that is generated by σ.
Closure Since KB ∗σ α is a Horn knowledge base, this postulate is trivially
shown.
Weak Success Suppose that α is consistent. Then it is trivial by deﬁnition
that α ⊆KB ∗σ α.
Inclusion Trivial by deﬁnition.
Immutable-inclusion Since every X ∈KB⊥⊥α is such that X ⊆KBI then
this postulate is trivially shown.
Vacuity 1 Trivial by deﬁnition.

Vacuity 2 If KB ∪{α} is consistent then KB⊥⊥α = {{KB}}. Hence KB ∗σ α
= KB ∪{α}.
Consistency Suppose that α is consistent. Then KB⊥⊥α ,= ∅and by deﬁni-
tion, every X ∈KB⊥⊥α is consistent with α. Therefore, the intersection of
any subset of KB⊥⊥α is consistent with α. Finally, KB ∗σ α is consistent.
Uniformity If α and β are KB-equivalent, then KB⊥⊥α = KB⊥⊥β
Weak relevance Let β ∈KB and β < KB ∗σ α. Then KB ∗σ α , KB and,
from the deﬁnition of ∗σ,it follows that:
KB ∗σ α=(KB\σ(KB⊥⊥α)) ∪α
Therefore, from β < (KB\σ(KB⊥⊥α)) ∪α and β ∈KB, we can conclude
that β ∈σ(KB⊥⊥α). By deﬁnition σ(KB⊥⊥α) ⊆S KB⊥⊥α, and it follows
that there is some X ∈KB⊥⊥α such that β ∈X. X is a minimal KB-subset
inconsistent with α. Let Y = X\{β}. Then Y is such that Y ⊂X ⊆KB ⊆
KB ∪α. Y is consistent with α but Y ∪{β} is consistent with α.
From the Theorem 5 and 6, it immediately follows that a revision operation
on a Horn knowledge base is a generalized kernel revision iﬀit is a generalized
revision. The following theorem formalizes this with additional insights into the
relationship between kernel and generalized revisions.
Theorem 7.
1. A revision operation over a Horn knowledge base KB is a generalized kernel
revision over KB iﬀit is a generalized revision over KB.
2. When the incision function σ is minimal, i.e. the hitting set deﬁned by σ
is inclusion-minimal, then the generalized kernel revision deﬁned by σ is a
partial meet revision of α from KB.
3. When the incision function σ is maximal, i.e. σ(KB⊥⊥α) consists of all
updatable statements from S(KB⊥⊥α), then the kernel contraction deﬁned
by σ is the minimal generalized revision of α from KB.
Proof. Follows from the Deﬁnition 16, Theorem 5 and 6
6
Knowledge base dynamics and abduction
In this Section, we study the relationship between Horn knowledge base dynam-
ics, discussed in the previous Section, and abduction that was introduced by
the philosopher Peirce (see Aliseda 2006, Boutilier & Beche 1995 and Pagnucco
1996). We show how an abduction grammar could be used to realize revision
with an immutability condition. A special subset of literals (atoms) of language
LH, abducibles Ab, are designated for abductive reasoning. Our work is based
on atoms (literals), so we combine Christiansen and Dahl (Christiansen & Dahl
2009) grammars approach. Simply, we want to compute abducibles for Horn
knowledge base (Horn or Horn logic with stratiﬁed negation).

Example 6. Consider a Horn logic with stratiﬁed negation knowledge base KB
with immutable part KBI, updatable part KBU and integrity constraint KBIC.
KBI : flies(x) ←bird(x), not ab(x), KBU :bird(tweety) ←
KBIC : ∅
ab(x) ←broken wing(x)
bird(opus) ←
broken wing(tweety) ←
If we observe that tweety ﬂies, there is a good reason to assume that the
wound has already healed. Then, removing the fact broken wing(tweety) from
the KB explains the observation ﬂies(tweety). On the other hand, suppose that
we later notice that opus does not ﬂy anymore. Since ﬂies(opus) is entailed by
KBI, we now have to revise the Horn knowledge base to block the derivation
of ﬂies(opus) by assuming, for instance, broken wing(opus). In nonmonotonic
theories, deletion of formulae may introduce new formulae, thus positive (∆+)
and negative (∆−) explanations play a complementary role in accounting for
an observation in nonmonotonic theories. (more explanation in Sakama & Inoue
2003)
Deﬁnition 18 (Abductive grammar). A abductive grammar Γ is a 6-tuple
⟨N, T, IC,
KB, R, S⟩where:
- N are nonterminal symbols in the immutable part (KBI).
- T is a set of terminal symbols in the updatable part (KBU).
- IC is the set of integrity constraints for the Horn knowledge base (KBIC).
- KB is the Horn knowledge base which consists of KB = KBI∪KBU ∪KBIC.
- R is a set of rules, R ⊆KB.
- S is the revision of literals (atoms), called the start symbol.
Example 7. Consider a Horn knowledge base KB (with immutable part KBI,
updatable part KBU and integrity constraint KBIC) and a Horn clause α (p is
α) be revise.
KBI : p ←q ∧a
KBU : a ←
KBIC : ←b
p ←r ∧b
r ←
q ←c ∧d
r ←e ∧f
p ←b
KB be a Horn knowledge base, represented by the grammar (Γ = ⟨N, T, KB, R, S⟩)
as follows:
N={p}
T={a,b,c,d,e,f,q,r}
IC={b}
KB=KBI ∪KBU ∪KBIC
R={p ←q, a; p ←r, b; q ←c, d; r ←e, f; p ←b; a; r}

S={p}
Deﬁnition 19 (Constraint system). A constraint system for abduction is a
pair ⟨KBAb,
KBBG⟩, where KBAb(∆) is a set of propositions (abducibles) and KBBG a
background Horn knowledge base.
Note 2. In the sequel, without any loss of generality, we assume that KBI is a set
of rules and KBU is a set of abducibles from Horn knowledge base perspective.
With respect to the considered grammars, KBBG is a set all Horn formulae from
R and KBAb is set of abducibles from T.
Note 3. Given a Horn knowledge base KB and a Horn clause α, the problem
of abduction is to explain α in terms of an abduction, i.e. to generate a set of
abducibles KBAb, ∆s.t. KBBG ∪∆⊢α.
Deﬁnition 20 (Minimal abductive explanation). Let KB be a Horn knowl-
edge base and α an observation to be explained. Then, for a set of abducibles
(KBAb), ∆is said to be an abductive explanation with respect to KBBG iﬀ
KBBG ∪∆⊢α. ∆is said to be minimal with respect to KBBG iﬀno proper
subset of ∆is an abductive explanation for α, i.e. ∄∆
′ s.t. KBBG ∪∆
′ ⊢α.
Since an incision function is adding and removing only updatable elements
from each member of the kernel set, to compute a generalized revision of α from
KB, we need to compute only the abduction in every α-kernel of KB. So, it is
now necessary to characterize precisely the abducibles present in every α-kernel
of KB. The notion of minimal abductive explanation is not enough to capture
this, and we introduce locally minimal and KB-closed abductive explanations
explanations.
Deﬁnition 21 (Local minimal abductive explanations). Let KBBG′ be
a subset of KBBG, s.t ∆is a minimal abductive explanation of α with respect
to KBBG′ (for some ∆). Then ∆is called local minimal for α with respect to
KBBG.
Example 8. From example 7, suppose {p ←q ∧a, p ←a}, where a and f are
abducibles in the grammar system R. Clearly, ∆1 = {a} is the only minimal
abductive explanation for p with respect to R. ∆2 = {a, q} is an abductive
explanation for p with respect to R, but not a minimal one. However, ∆2 is
a locally minimal abductive explanation for p with respect to R, since it is a
minimal explanation for p with respect to {p ←q ∧a} which is a subset of R.
The concept of locally minimal abductive explanation is computationally
attractive, since minimal abductive explanation is more expensive to compute
(Aravindan 1995). To ﬁnd a minimal admissible and denial literal (atom) from
KBAb that is positive and negative literal (atom) from KBAb, we need to intro-
duce a constraint system (C) with integrity constraint (IC).

Deﬁnition 22 (Constraint abduction system). A constrained abductive gram-
mar is a pair ⟨Γ, C⟩, where Γ is an abductive grammar and C a constraint system
for abduction, Γ=⟨N, T, R, S⟩and C=⟨KBBG, KBAb, IC⟩.
Given a constrained abductive grammar ⟨Γ, C⟩as above, the constrained
abductive recognition problem for τ ∈T ∗is the problem of ﬁnding an admissi-
ble and denial knowledge base (Horn knowledge base contained set of positive
and negative literal (atoms)) from KBAb and such that τ ∈LP (ΓKBAb) where
LP (ΓKBAb) is propositional language over abducibles in Γ, where ΓKBAb =
⟨N, T, KBBG ∪KBAb, R, S⟩. In this case, KBAb is called a constrained (abduc-
tive) system of τ. Such that KBAb is minimal whenever no proper subset of it
is in τ given ⟨Γ, C⟩.
Example 9. We extend example 7, in order to show that C is constraint system
C, with C =⟨KBBG, KBAb, IC⟩
KBBG = {p ←q, a; p ←r, b; q ←c, d; r ←e, f; p ←b; a; r}
KBAb = {a, b, c, d, e, f, q, r}
IC
={←b}
Note 4. Let KBAb ∈({∆+, ∆−}). Here ∆+ refers to admission Horn knowledge
base (positive atoms) and ∆−refers to denial Horn knowledge base (negative
atoms) with respect to given α. The abduction problem is to explain ∆with
abducibles (KBAb), s.t. KBBG ∪∆+ ∪∆−|= α and KBBG ∪∆+ |= α ∪∆−are
both consistent with IC.
An admission and denial Horn knowledge base, based on ⟨KBBG, KBAb⟩
is a set KBAb of atoms (literals) whose propositions are in KBAb such that
KBBG ∪KBAb is consistent with IC.
Example 10. From Example 9 and Note 4, the constraint system C, with C
=⟨KBBG, KBAb, IC⟩
KBBG = {p ←q, a; p ←r, b; q ←c, d; r ←e, f; p ←b; a; r}
KBAb = {∆+ = {a, c, d, e, f, q, r} and ∆−= {a, b, r}}
IC
={←b}
Deﬁnition 23 (KB-closed abductive explanations). For a set of abducibles
(KBAb), ∆+ and ∆−are said to be closed abductive explanations with respect
to KBBG iﬀKBBG ∪∆+ ∪∆−|= α and KBBG ∪∆+ |= α ∪∆−. ∆+ and
∆−are said to be minimal with respect to KBBG iﬀno proper subset of ∆+
and ∆−is an abductive explanation for α, i.e. ∄∆+
′
⊊∆+ and ∄∆−
′
⊊∆−s.t.
KBBG ∪∆+
′
∪∆−
′
|= α and KBBG ∪∆+
′
|= α ∪∆−
′
both consistent with IC.
KB-closed abductive explanations are also known as KB-closed local minimal
explanations.

Observation 3 Let KBBG′ be a smallest subset of KBBG s.t, ∆+ and ∆−
minimal abductive explanations of α with respect to KBAb′ and KBBG′ (for
some ∆+ and ∆−). Then ∆+ and ∆−are called locally minimal for α with
respect to KBAb′ and KBBG and consistent with IC.
Example 11. ∆+ = {a, c, d} and ∆−= {c} with respect to IC are only locally
minimal abductive explanations for p with respect to KBBG′ (more explanations
can be found in (Lu W 1999)).
From example 10 and deﬁnition 23, we want to show that the constraint
system C, with C =⟨KBBG, KBAb, IC⟩
KBBG = {p ←q, a; q ←c, d; a; c; d}
KBAb = {∆+ = {a, c, d} and ∆−= {b, r}} and IC
={←b}
Now, we need to connect the grammar system Γ to the Horn (stratiﬁed)
knowledge base KB, such that KBI ∪KBU ∪KBIC = KBBG ∪KBAb ∪IC
holds. The connection between locally minimal abductive explanation for α with
respect to KBI and α-kernel of KB, which is shown by the following lemma
immediately follows from their respective deﬁnitions.
Observation 4
1. Let KB be a Horn (stratiﬁed) knowledge base and α a Horn clause s.t. ⊬¬α.
Let ∆+ and ∆−be a KB-closed locally minimal abductive explanation for α
with respect to KBI. Then, there exists an α-kernel X of KB s.t. X∩KBU =
∆+ ∪∆−.
2. Let KB be a Horn (Horn logic with stratiﬁed negation) knowledge base and α
a Horn clause s.t. ⊬¬α. Let X be a α-kernel of KB and ∆+∪∆−= X∩KBU.
Then, ∆+ and ∆−are KB - closed locally minimal abductive explanations
for α with respect to KBI.
Proof.
1. The fact that ⊬¬α and there exists a KB - closed locally minimal abductive
explanation for α with respect to KBI, it is clear that there exists at least
one α- kernel of KB. Suppose ∆(∆∈∆+ ∪∆−) is empty (i.e. KBI |= ¬α),
then the required result follows immediately. If not, since ∆is a locally
minimal abductive explanation, there exists a minimal subset KB′
I ⊆KBI,
s.t. ∆is minimal abductive explanation of α with respect to KB′
I. Since, ∆
is KB-closed, it is not diﬃcult to see that KB′
I ∪∆+ ∪∆−is a α - kernel of
KB.
2. Since X is a α - kernel of KB and ∆is the set of all abducibles in X, it
follows that ∆+ ∪∆−is a minimal abductive explanation of ∆with respect
to X\∆−∪∆+. It is obvious that ∆+ ∪∆−is KB- closed, and so ∆is a
KB-closed locally minimal abductive explanation for α with respect to KBI.

Theorem 8. Consider a constrained abductive grammar AG = ⟨Γ, C⟩with Γ =
⟨N, T, KB, R, S⟩and C = ⟨KBBG, KBAb, IC⟩. Construct a abductive grammar
∆(AG) = ⟨N, T, KBBG, R, S⟩by having, for any (∆+) (or) (∆−) from KBAb,
the set of acceptable results for accommodate (α, KBBG ∈∆+) being of the
form (KBAb\∆+) where (∆+ ∈KBAb′). ∆+ is a locally minimal set of atoms
(literals) KBBG∪∆+ and KBBG∪∆+ |= α is consistent with IC; if (∆−) exists
procedure is similar, (like denial (∆−) being of the form (KBAb\∆−). ∆−is a
locally minimal set of atoms (literals) KBBG ∪∆−and KBBG ∪∆−|= α is
consistent with IC), otherwise accommodate (α, KBBG ∈∆−) is not possible.
Proof. From Observation 3, Let KBBG′ be a smallest subset of KBBG s.t, ∆+
and ∆−minimal abductive explanations of α with respect to KBAb′ and KBBG′
(for some ∆+ and ∆−). Then ∆+ and ∆−are called locally minimal for α with
respect to KBAb′ and KBBG and consistent with IC.
From Observation 4, (∆−) is follow to the kernel of KB and ∆is the set of all
abducibles in (α, KBBG ∈∆+), it follows that ∆+ ∪∆−is a minimal abductive
explanation of ∆with respect to KB\∆−∪∆+. It is obvious that ∆+ ∪∆−is
KB- closed, and so ∆is a KB-closed locally minimal abductive explanation for
α with respect to KBI.
(∆−) is not follow from KB - closed locally minimal abductive explanation
for α with respect to KBI, it is clear that there exists at least one α- kernel of
KB.
An immediate consequence of the above observation 4 is that it is enough
to compute all the KB-closed locally minimal abductive explanations for α with
respect to KBI in order to revise α from KB. Thus, a well-known abductive
procedure to compute an abductive explanation for α with respect to KBI could
be used:
Theorem 9. Let KB be a Horn (stratiﬁed) knowledge base and α a Horn clause.
1. If Algorithm 1 produces KB′ as a result of revision α to KB, then KB′ is a
generalized revision of α from KB.
2. If KB′ is a generalized revision of α from KB, then there exists an incision
function σ s.t. KB′ is produced by Algorithm 1 as a result of revision α from
KB, using σ.
Proof. Follows from Observation 4 and Theorem 7
6.1
Generalized revision algorithm
The problem of Horn knowledge base revision is concerned with determining
how a request to change can be appropriately translated into one or more atoms
or literals. In this section we develop a new generalized revision algorithm. Note
that it is enough to compute all the KB-locally minimal abduction explanations
for α with respect to KBI ∪KBU ∪KBIC. If α is consistent with KB then
a well-known abductive procedure for compute an abductive explanation for α

with respect to KBI could be used to compute kernel revision.
Algorithm 1
Generalized revision algorithm
Input :
A Horn knowledge base KB = KBI ∪KBU ∪KBIC
and a Horn clause α to be revised.
Output:
A new Horn knowledge base KB′ = KBI ∪KB∗
U ∪KBIC,
s.t. KB′is a generalized revision α to KB.
Procedure KB(KB, α)
begin
1.
Let V:= {c ∈KBIC | KBI ∪KBIC inconsistent with α with respect to c}
P := N := ∅and KB′ = KB
2.
While (V , ∅)
select a subset V ′ ⊆V
For each v ∈V ′, select a literal to be
remove (add to N) or a literal to be added (add to P) with respect to KB
Let KB := KR(KB, P, N)
Let V:= {c ∈KBIC | KBI inconsistent with α with respect to c}
return
3.
Produce a new Horn knowledge base KB′
end.
Procedure KR(KB, ∆+, ∆−)
begin
1.
Let P := {e ∈∆+| KBI ̸|= e} and N := {e ∈∆−| KBI |= e}
2.
While (P , 0) or (N , 0)
select a subset P ′ ⊆P or N ′ ⊆N
Construct a set S1 = {X | X is a KB-closed locally
minimal abductive wrt P explanation for α wrt KBI}.
Construct a set S2 = {X | X is a KB-closed locally
minimal abductive wrt N explanation for α wrt KBI}.
3.
Determine a hitting set σ(S1) and σ(S2)
If ((N = 0) and (P , 0))
Produce KB′ = KBI ∪{(KBU ∪σ(S1)}
else
Produce KB′ = KBI ∪{(KBU\σ(S2) ∪σ(S1)}
end if
If ((N , 0) and (P = 0))
Produce KB′ = KBI ∪{(KBU\σ(S2)}
else
Produce KB′ = KBI ∪{(KBU\σ(S2) ∪σ(S1)}
end if
4.
return KB′
end.

Reasoning about Abduction
Deﬁnition 24 ((Teniente & Olive 1995)). Let KB=(KBI, KBU, KBIC) be
a Horn knowledge base, T is updatable part from KB. We deﬁne the abduction
framework ⟨KBBG, KBAb, IC⟩. After Algorithm 1 is executed, u is derived part
from KB′. The abduction explanation for u in ⟨KBI ∪KB∗
U, KBIC⟩is any set
Ti, where Ti ⊆KBAb such that: KBI ∪KB∗
U ∪T |= u.
An explanation Ti is minimal if no proper subset of Ti is also an explanation,
i.e. if it does not exist any explanation Tj for u such that Tj ⊂Ti
Reasoning about Deduction
Deﬁnition 25 ((Teniente & Olive 1995)). Let KB=(KBI, KBU, KBIC) be
a Horn knowledge base, T is updatable part from KB. After Algorithm 1 is exe-
cuted, u is derived part from KB′. The deduction consequence on u due to the
application of T, KBI ∪KB∗
U ∪T ∪u is the answer to any question.
Example 12. Consider a Horn knowledge base KB with immutable part KBI,
updatable part KBU and integrity constraint KBIC, compute closed local min-
imum with respect to to p.
KBI : p ←q ∧a
KBU : a ←
KBIC : ←b
p ←r ∧b
r ←
q ←c ∧d
r ←e ∧f
p ←b
From algorithm 1, the above example execute following steps:
Step number with execution
(Input) KBI : p ←q ∧a, p ←r ∧b, q ←c ∧d, r ←e ∧f, p ←b
KBU : a ←, r ←
KBIC :←b
(0) {p ←q, a; p ←r, b; q ←c, d; r ←e, f; p ←b; a; r}
(1) {V = b}
(2) {P = {a, c, d, e, f, q, r} and N = {a, r}}
(2.1) {∆+ = {a, c, d, e, f, q, r} and ∆−= {a, r}}
(2.2) {∆+ = {a, c, d} and ∆−= {}}
(3) {p ←q, a; q ←c, d; a; c; d; r}
(Output) KBI : p ←q ∧a, p ←r ∧b, q ←c ∧d, r ←e ∧f, p ←a, p ←b
KB∗
U : a ←, c ←, d ←, r ←
KBIC :←b
Theorem 10. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base and α is (Horn or Horn logic
with stratiﬁed negation) formula.
1. If Algorithm 1 produced KB’ as a result of revising α from KB, then KB’
satisﬁes all the rationality postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).

2. Suppose KB′′ satisﬁes all these rationality postulates for revising α from
KB, then KB′′ can be produced by Algorithm 1.
Proof. Follows from Theorem 6 and Theorem 9
7
Belief update VS Knowledge base update
In this section we give overview of how belief update is related to knowledge base
update. This section is motivated by the works of Konieczny 2011 and Baral &
Zhang 2005.
7.1
Belief revision vs Belief update
Intuitively, revision operators bring a minimal change to the base by selecting
the most plausible models among the models of the new information. Whereas
update operators Konieczny 2011 bring a minimal change to each possible world
(model) of the base in order to take into account the change described by the
new information, whatever the possible world.
Theorem 11 ([29]). If ◦is a revision operator (i.e. it satisﬁes (R1)-(R6)), then
the update operator ⋄deﬁned by ψ ⋄µ = W
w|=ψ ψ{w} ◦µ is an update operator
that satisﬁes (U1)-(U9).
This theorem states that update can be viewed as a kind of pointwise revision.
7.2
Knowledge base revision vs Knowledge base update
Generalized revision algorithm brings principle of minimal change, according to
new information; how a request to change Horn knowledge base can be appro-
priately translated into one or more literals. Whereas update operators (Baral
& Zhang 2005). bring a minimal change to each possible world (model) of the
base in order to take into account the change described by the new information.
Theorem 12 ([3]). If ∗σ is a revision operator (i.e. it satisﬁes (KB*1)-(KB*6)
and (KB*7.3) and Theorem 9 and Lemma 4), then the update operator ⋄deﬁned
by ψ ⋄µ = W
w|=ψ ψ{w} ∗σ µ is an update operator that satisﬁes (U1)-(U9).
7.3
Belief update vs Knowledge base update
Formally speaking, both updates are aiming at maintaining the base of the
knowledge or belief up-to-date.
Theorem 13. If ◦are revision operators (i.e. they satisfy (R1)-(R6)), then the
update operator ⋄deﬁned by ψ ⋄µ = W
w|=ψ ψ{w} ◦µ is an update operator that
satisﬁes (U1)-(U9).

Fig. 2. Belief Update Vs Knowledge base Update
8
Deductive database
A Deductive database DDB consists of three parts: an intensional database IDB
(KBI), a set of deﬁnite program clauses, extensional database EDB (KBU), a
set of ground facts; and integrity constraints IC. The intuitive meaning of DDB
is provided by the Least Herbrand model semantics and all the inferences are
carried out through SLD-derivation. All the predicates that are deﬁned in IDB
are referred to as view predicates and those deﬁned in EDB are referred to as
base predicates. Extending this notion, an atom with a view predicate is said
to be a view atom, and similarly an atom with base predicate is a base atom.
Further we assume that IDB does not contain any unit clauses and no predicate
deﬁned in a given DDB is both view and base.
Two kinds of view updates can be carried out on a DDB: An atom, that
does not currently follow from DDB, can be inserted, or an atom, that currently
follows from DDB can be deleted. When an atom A is to be updated, the view
update problem is to insert or delete only some relevant EDB facts, so that the
modiﬁed EDB together with IDB will satisfy the update of A to DDB.
Note that a DDB can be considered as a Horn knowledge base to be revised.
The IDB is the immutable part of the Horn knowledge base dynamics, while
the EDB forms the updatable part. In general, it is assumed that the language
underlying a DDB is ﬁxed and the semantics of DDB is the least Herbrand
model over this ﬁxed language. We assume that there are no function symbols
implying that the Herbrand Base is ﬁnite. Therefore, the IDB is practically a
shorthand of its ground instantiation 3 written as IDBG. In the sequel, techni-
cally we mean IDBG when we refer simply to IDB. Thus, a DDB represents a
Horn knowledge base dynamics where the immutable part is given by IDBG and
updatable part is the EDB. Hence, the rationality postulates (KB*1)-(KB*6)
and (KB*7.3) provide an axiomatic characterization for updating (insert and
delete) a view atom A into a deﬁnite database DDB.
But before discussing the rationality postulates and algorithm, we want to
make it precise, how a relational database, along with operations on relations,
3 a ground instantiation of a deﬁnite program P is the set of clauses obtained by
substituting terms in the Herbrand Universe for variables in P in all possible ways

can be represented by deﬁnite deductive database. We assume the reader is
familiar with relational database concepts. A relation scheme R can be thought
of as a base predicate whose arguments deﬁne the attributes A of the scheme.
Its relational extension r, is a ﬁnite set of base atoms R(A) containing the
predicate R. A database schema consists of ﬁnite collection of relational schemes
< R1, . . . , Rn >, and a relational database is a speciﬁc extension of database
schema, denoted as < r1, . . . , rn >. In our context, relational database can be
represented by EDB = S
i=1,...,n Ri(Ai).
Join is a binary operator for combining two relations. Let r and s be two
relational extensions of schema R (with attributes R) and S (with attributes
S), respectively. Let T = R ∪S. The join of r and s, written as r ⊗s, is the
relational extension q(T) of all tuples t over T such that there are tr ∈r and
ts ∈s, with tr = t(R) and ts = t(S). Join can be captured by a constraint clause
Q(T) ←R(R), S(S).
Let us consider two relational schemes R and S from Example 1, with at-
tributes R={Group,Chair} and S={Staﬀ,Group}.Consider the following exten-
sions r and s: (see deﬁnition and properties of similarity in works of Christiansen
(Christiansen & Rekouts 2007) and Godfrey (Godfrey et al. 1998)).
Example 13.
s
Staﬀ
Group
delhibabu infor1
aravindan infor2
r Group
Chair
infor1 matthias
infor2 gerhard
Table 1. Base table for s and r
The following rule, T(Staﬀ,Group,Chair) ←S(Staﬀ,Group),R(Group,Chair) rep-
resents the join of s and r, which is given in Table 5.2:
s ⊗r
Staff
Group
Chair
delhibabu infor1 matthias
aravindan infor2 gerhard
Table 2. s ⊗r
Our ﬁrst integrity constraint (IC) is that each research group has only one
chair ie. ∀x, y, z (y=z) ←group chair(x,y) ∧group chair(x,z). Second integrity
constraint is that a person can be a chair for only one research group ie. ∀x, y, z
(y=z)←group chair(y,x) ∧group chair(z,x).
An update request U = A, where A is a set of base facts that are not true in
KB. Then, we need to ﬁnd a transaction T = Tins ∪Tdel, where Tins(∆i) (resp.

Tdel(∆j)) is the set of facts, such that U is true in DDB′ = ((EDB −Tdel ∪
Tins) ∪IDB ∪IC). Since we consider stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive databases,
SLD-trees can be used to compute the required abductive explanations. The idea
is to get all EDB facts used in a SLD-derivation of A with respect to DDB, and
construct that as an abductive explanation for A with respect to IDBG.
Traditional methods translate a view update request into a transaction
combining insertions and deletions of base relations for satisfying the
request (Mota-Herranz et al. 2000). Furthermore, a stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deduc-
tive database can be considered as a knowledge base, and thus the rationality
postulates and insertion algorithm from the previous section can be applied for
solving view update requests in deductive databases.
There are two ways to ﬁnd minimal elements (insertion and deletion) in
the presence of integrity constraints. Algorithm 2 ﬁrst checks consistency with
integrity constraints and then reduces steps with abductive explanation for A .
Algorithm 3 is doing vice versa, but both algorithm outputs are similar.
Algorithm 2
Algorithm to compute all DDB-closed locally minimal
abductive explanation of an atom(literals)
Input :
A deﬁnite deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC an literals
A
Output :
Set of all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanations
for A wrt IDBG
begin
1.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A wrt c }
While (V , 0)
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A wrt DDB.
For every successful branch i: construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB
and D is used as an input clause in branch i}
For every unsuccessful branch j: construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB
and D is used as an input clause in branch j}
Produce set of all ∆i and ∆j computed in the previous step
as the result.
return
2.
Produce all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive
explanations in ∆i and ∆j
end.
Horn knowledge base revision algorithm 1, may be applied to compute all
DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanation of an atom (literals). Unfor-
tunately, this algorithm does not work as intended for any deductive database,
and a counter example is produced below. Thus, general algorithms 2 and 3
produced some unexpected sets in addition to locally minimal abductive expla-
nations

Algorithm 3
Algorithm to compute all DDB-closed locally minimal
abductive explanation of an atom(literals)
Input :
A deﬁnite deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC an literals
A
Output :
Set of all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanations
for A wrt IDBG
begin
1.
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A wrt DDB.
For every successful branch i: construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB
and D is used as an input clause in branch i}
For every unsuccessful branch j: construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB
and D is used as an input clause in branch j}
2.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A wrt c }
While (V , 0)
Produce set of all ∆i and ∆j is consistent with IC
as the result.
return
Produce all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive
explanations in ∆i and ∆j
end.
Example 14. Consider a stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database DDB as fol-
lows:
IDB : p ←a ∧e
EDB : e ←
IC : ←b
q ←a ∧f
f ←
p ←b ∧f
q ←b ∧e
p ←q
q ←a
Suppose we want to insert p. First, we need to check consistency with IC and
afterwards, we have to ﬁnd ∆i and ∆j via tree deduction.
(Input) IDB : p ←a ∧e, q ←a ∧f, p ←b ∧f, q ←b ∧e, p ←q, q ←a
EDB : e ←, f ←
IC :←b
(0) {p ←a, e; q ←a, f; p ←b, f; q ←b, e; p ←q; q ←a; e; f}
(1) {V = b}
(2)
←p
←a, e
■
←q
←a, f
■
←a
■
←b, e
□
←b, f
□

(3-4) ∆i = {a, e} and ∆j = {}
(5) p ←a, e; q ←a, f; p ←q; q ←a; b; e; f
(Output) IDB : p ←a ∧e, q ←a ∧f, p ←q, q ←a
EDB′ : a ←, e ←, f ←
IC :←b
From the step, it is easy to conclude which branches are consistent with
respect to IC (indicated in the depicted tree by the symbol ■). For the next
step, we need to ﬁnd minimal accommodate (positive literal) and denial literal
(negative literal) with with respect to to p. The subgoals of the tree are ←a, e
and ←a, f, which are minimal tree deductions of only facts. Clearly, ∆i =
{a, e} and ∆j = {f} with respect to IC, are the only locally minimal abductive
explanations for p with respect to IDBG, but these result are not closed-locally
minimal explanations.
For processing a given view update request, a set of all explanations for
that atom has to be generated through a complete SLD-tree. The resulting
hitting set of these explanations is then a base update of the EDB satsifying
the view update request. We present a diﬀerent approach which is also rational.
The generation of a hitting set is carried out through a hyper tableaux calculus
(bottom-up) for implementing the deletion process as well as through the magic
sets approach (top-down) for performing insertions focussed on the particular
goal given.
8.1
View update method
View update (Behrend & Manthey 2008) aims at determining one or more base
relation updates such that all given update requests with respect to derived
relations are satisﬁed after the base updates have been successfully applied.
Deﬁnition 26 (View update). Let DDB = ⟨IDB, EDB, IC⟩be a stratiﬁable
(deﬁnite) deductive database DDB(D). A VU request νD is a pair ⟨ν+
D, ν−
D⟩where
ν+
D and ν−
D are sets of ground atoms representing the facts to be inserted into D
or deleted from D, resp., such that pred(ν+
D ∪ν−
D) ⊆pred(IDB), ν+
D ∩ν−
D = ∅,
ν+
D ∩PMD = ∅and ν−
D ⊆PMD.
Note that we consider again true view updates only, i.e. ground atoms which
are presently not derivable for atoms to be inserted, or are derivable for atoms to
be deleted, respectively. A method for view update determines sets of alternative
updates satisfying a given request. A set of updates leaving the given database
consistent after its execution is called VU realization.
Deﬁnition 27 (Induced update). Let DDB = ⟨IDB, EDB, IC⟩be a strat-
iﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database and DDB = νD a VU request. A VU real-
ization is a base update uD which leads to an induced update uD→D′ from D to
D′ such that ν+
D ⊆PMD′ and ν−
D ∩PMD′ = ∅.

There may be inﬁnitely many realizations and even realizations of inﬁnite
size which satisfy a given VU request. A breadth-ﬁrst search (BFS) is employed
for determining a set of minimal realizations τD = {u1
D, . . . , ui
D}. Any ui
D is
minimal in the sense that none of its updates can be removed without losing the
property of being a realization for νD.
Magic Set (Top-down computation):
Given a VU request νDDB, view update methods usually determine further
VU requests in order to ﬁnd relevant base updates. Similar to delta relations for
UP we will use the notion VU relation to access individual view updates with
respect to the relations of our system. For each relation p ∈pred(IDB ∪EDB)
we use the VU relation ∇+
p (x) for tuples to be inserted into DDB and ∇−
p (x)
for tuples to be deleted from DDB. The initial set of delta facts resulting from
a given VU request is again represented by so-called VU seeds.
Deﬁnition 28 (View update seeds). Let DDB(D) be a stratiﬁable (deﬁnite)
deductive database and νDDB = ⟨ν+
D, ν−
D⟩a VU request. The set of VU seeds
vu seeds(νD) with respect to νD is deﬁned as follows:
vu seeds(νD) :=

∇π
p(c1, . . . , cn)|p(c1, . . . , cn) ∈νπ
D and π ∈{+, −}
	
.
Deﬁnition 29 (View update rules). Let IDB be a normalized stratiﬁable
(deﬁnite) deductive rule set. The set of VU rules for true view updates is denoted
IDB∇and is deﬁned as the smallest set satisfying the following conditions:
1. For each rule of the form p(x) ←q(y) ∧r(z) ∈IDB with vars(p(x)) =
(vars(q(y)) ∪vars(r(z))) the following three VU rules are in IDB∇:
∇+
p (x) ∧¬q(y) →∇+
q (y)
∇−
p (x) →∇−
q (y) ∨∇−
r (z)
∇+
p (x) ∧¬r(z) →∇+
r (z)
2. For each rule of the form p(x) ←q(x) ∧¬r(x) ∈IDB the following three
VU rules are in IDB∇:
∇+
p (x) ∧¬q(x) →∇+
q (x)
∇−
p (x) →∇−
q (x) ∨∇+
r (x)
∇+
p (x) ∧r(x) →∇−
r (x)
3. For each two rules of the form p(x) ←q(x) and p(x) ←r(x) the following
three VU rules are in IDB∇:
∇−
p (x) ∧q(x) →∇−
q (x)
∇+
p (x) →∇+
q (x) ∨∇+
r (x)
∇−
p (x) ∧r(x) →∇−
r (x)
4. a) For each relation p deﬁned by a single rule p(x) ←q(y) ∈IDB with
vars(p(x)) = vars(q(y)) the following two VU rules are in IDB∇:
∇+
p (x) →∇+
q (y)
∇−
p (x) →∇−
q (y)

b) For each relation p deﬁned by a single rule p ←¬q ∈IDB the following
two VU rules are in IDB∇:
∇+
p →∇−
q
∇−
p →∇+
q
5. Assume without loss of generality that each projection rule in IDB is of the
form p(x) ←q(x, Y ) ∈IDB with Y < vars(p(x)). Then the following two
VU rules
∇−p(x) ∧q(x, Y ) →∇−
q (x, Y )
∇+
p (x) →∇+
q (x, c1) ∨. . . ∨∇+
q (x, cn) ∨∇+
q (x, cnew)
are in IDB∇where all ci are constants from the Herbrand universe UDDB
of DDB and cnew is a new constant, i.e. cnew < UDDB.
Theorem 14. Let DDB = ⟨IDB, EDB, IC⟩be a stratiﬁable (deﬁnite)deductive
database(D), νD a view update request and τD = {u1
D, . . . , un
D} the corresponding
set of minimal realizations. Let D∇= ⟨EDB ∪vu seeds(νD), IDB ∪IDB∇⟩be
the transformed deductive database of D. Then the VU relations in PM ∇
D with
respect to base relations of D correctly represent all direct consequences of νD.
That is, for each realization ui
D = ⟨ui+
D , ui−
D ⟩∈τD the following condition holds:
∃p(t) ∈ui+
D : ∇+
p (t) ∈MS∇
D ∨∃p(t) ∈ui−
D : ∇−
p (t) ∈MS∇
D.
Proof. Follows from the result of (Behrend & Manthey 2008).
Hyper Tableau (Bottom-up computation):
In (Aravindan & Baumgartner 1997) a variant of clausal normal form tableaux
called ”hyper tableaux” is introduced for view deletion method. Since the hyper
tableaux calculus constitutes the basis for our view update algorithm, Clauses,
i.e. multisets of literals, are usually written as the disjunction A1 ∨A2 ∨· · · ∨
Am ∨not B1 ∨not B2
· · · ∨not Bn (M ≥0, n ≥0). The literals A1, A2, . . . Am (resp. B1, B2, . . . , Bn)
are called the head (resp. body) of a clause. With L we denote the complement
of a literal L. Two literals L and K are complementary if L = K.
From now on D always denotes a ﬁnite ground clause set, also called database,
and Σ denotes its signature, i.e. the set of all predicate symbols occurring in it.
We consider ﬁnite ordered trees T where the nodes, except the root node, are
labeled with literals. In the following we will represent a branch b in T by the
sequence b = L1, L2, . . . , Ln (n ≥0) of its literal labels, where L1 labels an
immediate successor of the root node, and Ln labels the leaf of b. The branch
b is called regular iﬀLi , Lj for 1 ≤i, j ≤n and i , j, otherwise it is called
irregular. The tree T is regular iﬀevery of its branches is regular, otherwise
it is irregular. The set of branch literals of b is lit(b) = {L1, L2, . . . , Ln}. For
brevity, we will write expressions like A ∈b instead of A ∈lit(b). In order to
memorize the fact that a branch contains a contradiction, we allow to label a
branch as either open or closed. A tableau is closed if each of its branches is
closed, otherwise it is open.

Deﬁnition 30 (Hyper Tableau). A literal set is called inconsistent iﬀit con-
tains a pair of complementary literals, otherwise it is called consistent. Hyper
tableaux for D are inductively deﬁned as follows:
Initialization step: The empty tree, consisting of the root node only, is a
hyper tableau for D. Its single branch is marked as ”open”.
Hyper extension step: If (1) T is an open hyper tableau for D with open
branch b, and (2) C = A1∨A2∨· · ·∨Am ←B1∧B2 · · ·∧Bn is a clause from D (n ≥
0, m ≥0), called extending clause in this context, and (3) {B1, B2, . . . , Bn} ⊆b
(equivalently, we say that C is applicable to b)then the tree T is a hyper tableau
for D, where T is obtained from T by extension of b by C: replace b in T by the
new branches
(b, A1), (b, A2), . . . , (b, Am), (b, ¬B1), (b, ¬B2), . . . , (b, ¬Bn)
and then mark every inconsistent new branch as ”closed”, and the other new
branches as ”open”.
The applicability condition of an extension expresses that all body literals
have to be satisﬁed by the branch to be extended. From now on, we consider
only regular hyper tableaux. This restriction guarantees that for ﬁnite clause
sets no branch can be extended inﬁnitely often. Hence, in particular, no open
ﬁnished branch can be extended any further. This fact will be made use of below
occasionally. Notice as an immediate consequence of the above deﬁnition that
open branches never contain negative literals.
This paper work focused on stratiﬁed (deﬁnite) deductive database without
any auxiliary variable. In magic set rule play in minimal case, our future goal is
similar foundation using auxiliary variable (Deductive Databases) side and more
details found in Behrend’s (Behrend & Manthey 2008) work.
8.2
View update algorithm
The key idea of the algorithm presented in this paper is to transform the given
database along with the view update request into a logic program and apply
known minimality techniques to solve the original view update problem. The
intuition behind the transformation is to obtain a logic program in such a way
that each (minimal) model of this transformed program represent a way to up-
date the given view atom. We present two variants of our algorithm. The one
that is discussed in this section employs a trivial transformation procedure but
has to look for minimal models; and another performs a costly transformation,
but dispenses with the requirement of computing the minimal models.
Minimality test
We start presenting an algorithm for stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive databases
by ﬁrst deﬁning precisely how the given database is transformed into a logic pro-
gram for the view deletion process (Aravindan & Baumgartner 1997)

Deﬁnition 31 (IDB Transformation). Given an IDB and a set of ground
atoms S, the transformation of IDB with respect to S is obtained by translating
each clause C ∈IDB as follows: Every atom A in the body (resp. head) of C
that is also in S is moved to the head (resp. body) as ¬A.
Note 5. If IDB is a stratiﬁable deductive database then the transformation
introduced above is not necessary.
Deﬁnition 32 (IDB∗Transformation). Let IDB∪EDB be a given database.
Let S0 = EDB ∪{A | A is a ground IDB atom}. Then, IDB∗is deﬁned as the
transformation of IDB with respect to S0.
Note 6. IDB∗is in general a logic program. The negative literals (¬A) appearing
in the clauses are intuitively interpreted as deletion of the corresponding atom
(A) from the database. Technically, a literal ¬A is to be read as a positive atom,
by taking the ¬-sign as part of the predicate symbol. To be more precise, we
treat ¬A as an atom with respect to IDB∗, but as a negative literal with respect
to IDB.
Note that there are no facts in IDB∗. So when we add a delete request such
as ¬A to this, the added request is the only fact and any bottom-up reasoning
strategy is fully focused on the goal (here the delete request)
Deﬁnition 33 (Update Tableaux Hitting Set). An update tableau for a
database IDB ∪EDB and delete request ¬A is a hyper tableau T for IDB∗∪
{¬A ←} such that every open branch is ﬁnished. For every open ﬁnished branch
b in T we deﬁne the hitting set (of b in T) as HS(b) = {A ∈EDB|¬A ∈b}.
The next step is to consider the view insertion process (Behrend & Manthey
2008):
Deﬁnition 34 (IDB• Transformation). Let IDB∪EDB be a given database.
Let S1 = EDB ∪{A | A is a ground IDB atom} (that is either body or head
empty). Then, IDB• is deﬁned as the transformation of IDB with respect to
S1.
Note 7. IDB is in general a (stratiﬁable) logic program. The positive literals
(A) appearing in the clauses are intuitively interpreted as an insertion of the
corresponding atom (A) from the database.
Deﬁnition 35 (Update magic Hitting Set). An update magic set rule for
a database IDB ∪EDB and insertion request A is a magic set rule M for
IDB• ∪{A ←} such that every close branch is ﬁnished. For every close ﬁnished
branch b in M we deﬁne the magic set rule (of b in M) as HS(b) = {A ∈
EDB|A ∈b}.
Example 15. Given stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database DDB = IDB ∪
EDB ∪IC and insert p.

IDB : p ←a ∧e
EDB : a ←
IC : ∅
q ←a ∧e
c ←
p ←a ∧f
q ←c
IDB∗Transformation:
IDB∗: ¬a ∨¬e ←¬p
EDB : a ←
IC : ∅
¬a ∨¬e ←¬q
c ←
¬a ∨¬f ←¬p
¬c ←¬q
IDB• Transformation: (Body empty)
IDB• : p ∨¬a ∨¬e ←
EDB : a ←
IC : ∅
q ∨¬a ∨¬e ←
c ←
p ∨¬a ∨¬f ←
q ∨¬c ←
IDB• Transformation: (Head empty)
IDB• : ←¬p ∧a ∧e
EDB : a ←
IC : ∅
←¬q ∧a ∧e
c ←
←¬p ∧a ∧f
←¬q ∧c
The set S0 is determined by all the IDB atoms and the current EDB atoms
and in our case it is {p, q, a, c, e, f}. IDB∗and IDB• is the transformation of
IDB with respect to S0 which is given above.
Suppose a ground view atom A is to be insert. Then, an update tableau
for IDB• with insert request A (IDB∗with delete request ¬A) is built. The
intuition is that the set of EDB atoms appearing in a model (open/close branch)
constitute a hitting set, and removing/adding this set from EDB should achieve
the required view insertion. Unfortunately, this does not result in a rational
insertion, as relevance policy may be violated.
Example 16. Let us continue with example 15 Suppose the view atom p is to
be insert. Then according to the above proposal, an update tableau for IDB•
( IDB∗) and p (¬p) is to be built. This is illustrated in the accompanying
ﬁgure below. As shown, open/close branches constitute two hitting sets {a} and
{f, a} ({¬a} and {¬f, ¬a}). It is not diﬃcult to see that {f, a}({¬f, ¬a}) does
not satisfy any of the relevance policies (KB*7.1) or (KB*7.2) or (KB*7.3).
Hence simple model computation using hyper tableau calculus does not result in
rational hitting sets. The branch is closed if the corresponding hitting set does
not satisfy this strong relevance postulate.

a.
¬a
¬e
¬q
¬p
b.
¬a
¬e
¬ q
{¬a}
□
¬ p
¬f
{¬f, ¬a}
■
c.
a
e
q
{a}
□
p
f
{f, a}
■
Fig. 3. IDB∗and IDB• transformation with hitting set
Deﬁnition 36 (Minimality test). Let T be an update tableau for IDB∗∪
EDB and delete request ¬A. We say that open ﬁnished branch b in T satisﬁes
the strong minimality test iﬀ∀s ∈HS(b) : IDB∗∪EDB\HS(b) ∪{s} ⊢¬A.
Deﬁnition 37 (Update Tableau satisfying strong minimality). An up-
date tableau for given IDB ∪EDB and delete request ¬A is transformed into
an update tableau satisfying strong minimality by marking every open ﬁnished
branch as closed which does not satisfy strong minimality.
The next step is to consider the view insertion process (Behrend & Manthey
2008):
Deﬁnition 38 (Minimality test). Let M be an update magic set rule for
IDB ∪EDB and insert request A. We say that close ﬁnished branch b in M
satisﬁes the strong minimality test iﬀ∀s ∈HS(b) : IDB• ∪EDB\HS(b)∪{s} ⊢
A.
Deﬁnition 39 (Update magic set rule satisfying strong minimality). An
update magic set rule for given IDB ∪EDB and insert request A is transformed
into an update magic set rule satisfying strong minimality by marking every close
ﬁnished branch as open which does not satisfy strong minimality.
Example 17. Continuing with the above example, after constructing the branch
corresponding to the hitting set {f, a}({¬f, ¬a}), the strong minimality test is
carried out as follows: It is checked if the resulting database with each member of
hitting set implies the insert atom p. For example, IDB ∪EDB\{f, a}∪{a} ⊬p,
and hence this branch fails the strong minimality test.
Interestingly, this minimality test is equivalent to the groundedness test
used for generating minimal models of logic programs. The key idea of the
groundedness test is to check if the members in the model are implied by the
program together with the negation/positive of the atoms not present in the
model. The groundedness test for generating minimal models can be stated

as follows: Let T be an update tableau for IDB ∪EDB and insert request
A.We say that open ﬁnished branch b in T satisﬁes the groundedness test iﬀ
∀s ∈HS(b) : IDB• ∪EDB\HS(b) ∪{A} ⊢s, similar for IDB∗(∀s ∈HS(b) :
IDB∗∪EDB\HS(b) ∪{¬A} ⊢¬s). It is not diﬃcult to see that this is equiv-
alent to the minimality test. This means that every minimal model (minimal
with respect to the base atoms) of IDB∗∪{A} provides a minimal hitting set
for insertion the ground view atom A.
Algorithm 4
View update Algorithm based on minimality test
Input :
A stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC
an literals A
Output:
A new stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) database IDB ∪EDB′ ∪IC
begin
1.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A with respect to c }
While (V , ∅)
2.
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A with respect to DDB.
3.
For every successful branch i:construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch i.
Construct a branch i of an update tableau satisfying minimality
for IDB ∪EDB and delete request ¬A.
Produce IDB ∪EDB\HS(i) as a result
4.
For every unsuccessful branch j:construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch j.
Construct a branch j of an update magic set rule satisfying minimality
for IDB ∪EDB and insert request A.
Produce IDB ∪EDB\HS(j) as a result
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A with respect to c }
return
5.
Produce DDB as the result.
end.
This means that every minimal model (minimal with respect to the base
atoms) of IDB∗∪{¬A} (IDB•∪{A} )provides a minimal hitting set for deleting
the ground view atom A. Similarly, IDB∗∪{A} provides a minimal hitting set
for inserting the ground view atom A. We are formally present our algorithms.
Given a database and a view atom to be updated, we ﬁrst transform the
database into a logic program and use hyper tableaux calculus to generate mod-
els of this transformed program for deletion of an atom. Second, magic sets trans-
formed rules are used is used to generate models of this transformed program
for determining an induced insertion of an atom. Models that do not represent
rational update are ﬁltered out using the strong minimality test. The procedure
for stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive databases is presented in Algorithms in 4 and
5.

Algorithm 5
View update Algorithm based on minimality test
Input :
A stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC
an literals A
Output:
A new stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) database IDB ∪EDB′ ∪IC
begin
1.
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A with respect to DDB.
2.
For every successful branch i:construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch i.
3.
For every unsuccessful branch j:construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch j.
4.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A with respect to c }
While (V , ∅)
Construct a branch i of an update tableau satisfying minimality
for IDB ∪EDB and delete request ¬A.
Produce IDB ∪EDB\HS(i) as a result
Construct a branch j of an update magic set rule satisfying minimality
for IDB ∪EDB and insert request A.
Produce IDB ∪EDB\HS(j) as a result
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A with respect to c }
return
5.
Produce DDB as the result.
end.
Lemma 1. The strong minimality test and the groundedness test are equivalent.
Proof. Follows from the result of (Aravindan & Baumgartner 1997).
Example 18.
IDB : p ←a ∧e
EDB : a ←
IC : ←b
q ←a ∧e
f ←
p ←b ∧f
q ←b ∧f
p ←g ∧a
q ←p
Suppose we want to insert p. First, we need to check consistency with IC and
afterwards, we have to ﬁnd ∆i and ∆j via tree deduction.
From algorithm 4 or 5 (only diﬀerent is checking IC condition), the above
example execute following steps:
Step number with execution
(Input) IDB : p ←a ∧e; q ←a ∧e; p ←b ∧f; q ←b ∧f; p ←g ∧a; q ←p
EDB : a ←, f ←
IC :←b

(0) {p ←a, e; q ←a, e; p ←b, f; q ←b, f; p ←g, a; q ←p; a; f}
(1) {V = b}
(2.1) a.
a
e
q
p
b.
f
b
a
e
q
p
c.
f
b
a
e
q
p
q
d.
g
f
b
a
e
q
p
q
e.
g
f
b
a
e
q
□
p
q
■

(2.2) a.
a
e
q
p
b.
a
e
q
p
c.
a
e
q
p
q
d.
g
a
e
q
p
q
e.
g
a
e
q
□
p
q
■
(3-4) ∆i = {a, e, g} and ∆j = {}
(5) p ←a, e; q ←a, e; p ←g, a; q ←p; a; e; f; g
(Output) IDB : p ←a ∧e; q ←a ∧e; p ←g ∧a; q ←p
EDB′ : a ←, e ←, f ←, g ←
IC :←b
To show the rationality of this approach, we study how this is related to the
previous approach presented in the last section, i.e. generating explanations and
computing hitting sets of these explanations. To better understand the relation-
ship it is imperative to study where the explanations are in the hyper tableau
approach and magic set rules. We ﬁrst deﬁne the notion of an EDB-cut and
then view update seeds.
Deﬁnition 40 (EDB-Cut). Let T be update tableau with open branches b1, b2, . . . , bn.
A set S = {A1, A2, . . . , An} ⊆EDB is said to be EDB-cut of T iﬀ¬Ai ∈bi
(Ai ∈bi), for 1 ≤i ≤n.
Deﬁnition 41 (EDB seeds). Let M be an update seeds with close branches
b1, b2, . . . ,bn. A set S = {A1, A2, . . . , An} ⊆EDB is said to be a EDB-seeds of
M iﬀEDB seeds vu seeds(νD) with respect to νD is deﬁned as follows:
vu seeds(νD) :=

∇π
p(c1, . . . , cn)|p(c1, . . . , cn) ∈νπ
D and π ∈{+, −}
	
.
Lemma 2. Let T be an update tableau for IDB ∪EDB and update request A.
Similarly, for M be an update magic set rule. Let S be the set of all EDB-closed
minimal abductive explanations for A with respect to. IDB. Let S′ be the set of
all EDB-cuts of T and EDB-seeds of M . Then the following hold

• S ⊆S′.
• ∀∆′ ∈S′ : ∃∆∈Ss.t.∆⊆∆′.
Proof.
1. Consider a ∆(∆∈∆i ∪∆j) ∈S. We need to show that ∆is generated
by algorithm 4 at step 2. From observation 4, it is clear that there exists
a A-kernel X of DDBG s.t. X ∩EDB = ∆j and X ∪EDB = ∆i. Since
X ⊢A, there must exist a successful derivation for A using only the elements
of X as input clauses and similarly X ⊬A. Consequently ∆must have been
constructed at step 2.
2. Consider a ∆′((∆′ ∈∆i ∪∆j) ∈S′. Let ∆′ be constructed from a successful
(unsuccessful) branch i via ∆i(∆j). Let X be the set of all input clauses used
in the refutation i. Clearly X ⊢A(X ⊬A). Further, there exists a minimal
(with respect to set-inclusion) subset Y of X that derives A (i.e. no proper
subset of Y derives A). Let ∆= Y ∩EDB (Y ∪EDB). Since IDB does
not (does) have any unit clauses, Y must contain some EDB facts, and so
∆is not empty (empty) and obviously ∆⊆∆′. But, Y need not (need)
be a A-kernel for IDBG since Y is not ground in general. But it stands for
several A-kernels with the same (diﬀerent) EDB facts ∆in them. Thus, from
observation 4, ∆is a DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanation for
A with respect to IDBG and is contained in ∆′. minimal.
The above lemma precisely characterizes what explanations are generated
by an update tableau. It is obvious then that a branch cuts through all the
explanations and constitutes a hitting set for all the generated explanations.
This is formalized below.
Lemma 3. Let S and S′ be sets of sets s.t. S ⊆S′ and every member of S′\S
contains an element of S. Then, a set H is a minimal hitting set for S iﬀit is
a minimal hitting set for S′.
Proof.
1. (Only if part) Suppose H is a minimal hitting set for S. Since S ⊆S′, it
follows that H ⊆S S′. Further, H hits every element of S′, which is evident
from the fact that every element of S′ contains an element of S. Hence H is
a hitting set for S′. By the same arguments, it is not diﬃcult to see that H
is minimal for S′ too.
(If part) Given that H is a minimal hitting set for S′, we have to show that
it is a minimal hitting set for S too. Assume that there is an element E ∈H
that is not in S S. This means that E is selected from some Y ∈S′\S. But
Y contains an element of S, say X. Since X is also a member of S′, one
member of X must appear in H. This implies that two elements have been

selected from Y and hence H is not minimal. This is a contradiction and
hence H ⊆S S. Since S ⊆S′, it is clear that H hits every element in S,
and so H is a hitting set for S. It remains to be shown that H is minimal.
Assume the contrary, that a proper subset H′ of H is a hitting set for S.
Then from the proof of the only if part, it follows that H′ is a hitting set
for S′ too, and contradicts the fact that H is a minimal hitting set for S′ .
Hence, H must be a minimal hitting set for S.
Lemma 4. Let T be an update tableau for IDB ∪EDB and update request A
that satisﬁes the strong minimality test. Similarly, for M be an updating magic
set rule. Then, for every open (close) ﬁnished branch b in T, HS(b) (M, HS(b))
is a minimal hitting set of all the abductive explanations of A.
Proof. Follows from the Observation 4 (minimal test) in and (Behrend & Man-
they 2008).
So, Algorithms 4 and 5 generate a minimal hitting set (in polynomial space)
of all EDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanations of the view atom to be
deleted. From the belief dynamics results recalled in section 5.3, it immediately
follows that Algorithms 4 and 5 are rational, and satisfy the strong relevance
postulate (KB*7.1).
Theorem 15. Algorithms 4 and 5 are rational, in the sense that they satisfy
all the rationality postulates (KB*1)-(KB*6) and the strong relevance postulate
(KB*7.1). Further, any update that satisﬁes these postulates can be computed by
these algorithms.
Proof. Follows from Observation 4,4 and Theorem 7.
8.3
Materialized view
In many cases, the view update to be materialized, i.e. the least Herbrand Model
is computed and kept, for eﬃcient query answering. In such a situation, rational
hitting sets can be computed without performing any minimality test. The idea
is to transform the given IDB with respect to the materialized view.
Deﬁnition 42 (IDB+ Transformation). Let IDB∪EDB be a given database.
Let S be the Least Herbrand Model of this database. Then, IDB+ is deﬁned as
the transformation of IDB with respect to S.
Note 8. If IDB is a stratiﬁable deductive database then the transformation
introduced above is not necessary.
Deﬁnition 43 (Update Tableau based on Materialized view). An update
tableau based on materialized view for a database IDB∪EDB and delete request
¬A is a hyper tableau T for IDB+ ∪{¬A ←} such that every open branch is
ﬁnished.

Deﬁnition 44 (IDB−Transformation). Let IDB∪EDB be a given database.
Let S1 be the Least Herbrand Model of this database (that is either body or head
empty). Then, IDB−is deﬁned as the transformation of IDB with respect to
S1.
Deﬁnition 45 (Update magic set rule based on Materialized view). An
update magic set rule based on materialized view for a database IDB ∪EDB
and insert request A is a magic set M for IDB+ ∪{A ←} such that every close
branch is ﬁnished.
Now the claim is that every model of IDB+ ∪{¬A ←} (A ←) constitutes
a rational hitting set for the deletion and insertion of the ground view atom
A. So, the algorithm works as follows: Given a database and a view update
request, we ﬁrst transform the database with respect to its Least Herbrand Model
(computation of the Least Herbrand Model can be done as a oﬄine preprocessing
step. Note that it serves as materialized view for eﬃcient query answering). Then
the hyper tableaux calculus (magic set rule) is used to compute models of this
transformed program. Each model represents a rational way of accomplishing
the given view update request. This is formalized in Algorithms 6 and 7.
Like the approach with minimality test, this algorithm runs on not polyno-
mial space. This approach require minimality test, but our focus on integrity
constrain open/close branch. Again, this requires some oﬄine pre-processing of
computing the Least Herbrand Model. Note that, our future direction to con-
struct minimality test, this method may generate a non-minimal (but rational)
hitting set.
Example 19. Given stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database DDB = IDB ∪
EDB ∪IC and insert p.
IDB :
p ←a
EDB : c ←
IC : ∅
q ←a
d ←
q ←c ∧b
q ←p
IDB+ Transformation:
IDB+ :
¬a ←¬p
EDB : c ←
IC : ∅
¬a ←¬q
d ←
¬c ∨¬b ←¬p
¬p ←¬q
IDB−Transformation: (Body empty)
IDB−:
p ∨¬a ←
EDB : c ←
IC : ∅
q ∨¬a ←
d ←
q ∨¬c ∨¬b ←
q ∨¬p ←
IDB−Transformation: (Head empty)

IDB−:
←¬p ∧a
EDB : c ←
IC : ∅
←¬q ∧a
d ←
←¬g ∧c ∧b
←¬q ∧p
a.
¬a
¬q
¬p
b.
¬a
¬ q
{¬a}
■
¬ p
¬b
{¬b, ¬a}
□
c.
a
q
{a}
■
p
b
{b, a}
□
Fig. 4. IDB+ and IDB−transformation with hitting set
The Least Herbrand Model of this database is {p, q, a, b}. The transformed
database IDB+ and IDB−based on this model, together with an update
tableaux for insertion request p based on materialised view is as above ﬁgure:
Observe that the last two clauses are never used and the necessarily failing
attempt of deleting t to delete p is never made, thus greatly reducing the search
space. Also note that the two cuts with only EDB atoms {a, b} and {a} are ex-
actly the two locally minimal explanations for p. The two open branches provide
the two models of IDB+ ∪{¬p} (IDB−∪{p} which stand for the hitting sets
{a, b} and {a}. Clearly, {a, b} not minimal.

Algorithm 6
View update algorithm based on Materialized view
Input :
A stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC
an literals A
Output:
A new stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) database IDB ∪EDB′ ∪IC
begin
1.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A with respect to c }
While (V , ∅)
2.
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A with respect to DDB.
3.
For every successful branch i:construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch i.
Construct a branch i of an update tableau based on view
for IDB ∪EDB and delete request ¬A.
Produce IDB ∪EDB\HS(i) as a result
4.
For every unsuccessful branch j:construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch j.
Construct a branch j of an update magic set rule based on view
for IDB ∪EDB and insert request A.
Produce IDB ∪EDB\HS(j) as a result
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A with respect to c }
return
5.
Produce DDB as the result.
end.
Example 20.
IDB :
p ←a
EDB : f ←
IC : ←b
q ←a
g ←
p ←b ∧f
q ←b ∧f
p ←g ∧a
Suppose we want to insert p. First, we need to check consistency with IC and
afterwards, we have to ﬁnd ∆i and ∆j via tree deduction.
From algorithm 6 or 7 (only diﬀerent is checking IC condition), the above
example execute following steps:

Algorithm 7
View update algorithm based on Materialized view
Input :
A stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC
an literals A
Output:
A new stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) database IDB ∪EDB′ ∪IC
begin
1.
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A with respect to DDB.
2.
For every successful branch i:construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch i.
3.
For every unsuccessful branch j:construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch j.
4.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A with respect to c }
While (V , ∅)
Construct a branch i of an update tableau satisfying based on view
for IDB ∪EDB and delete request A.
Produce IDB ∪EDB\HS(i) as a result
Construct a branch j of an update magic set rule based on view
for IDB ∪EDB and insert request A.
Produce IDB ∪EDB\HS(j) as a result
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A with respect to c }
return
5.
Produce DDB as the result.
end.
Step number with execution
(Input) IDB : p ←a, q ←a, p ←b ∧f, q ←b ∧f, p ←g ∧a
EDB : f ←, g ←
IC :←b
(0) {p ←a; q ←a; p ←b, f; q ←b, f; p ←g, a; b; g}
(1) {V = b}
(2.1) a.
a
q
p
b.
f
b
a
q
p
c.
f
b
a
q
p
g

d.
g
f
b
a
q
■
p
g
□
(2.2) a.
a
q
p
b.
a
q
p
c.
a
q
p
g
d.
g
a
q
■
p
g
□
(3-4) ∆i = {a, g} and ∆j = {}
(5) p ←a; q ←a; p ←g ∧a; a, f, g
(Output) IDB : p ←a, q ←a, p ←g ∧a
EDB′ : a ←; f ←; g ←
IC :←b
This approach for view update may not satisfy (KB*7.1) in general. But,
as shown in the sequel, conformation to (KB*7.3) is guaranteed and thus this
approach results in rational update.
Lemma 5. Let T be an update tableau based on a materialized view for IDB ∪
EDB and delete request ¬A (A), Similarly, let M be an update magic set rule.
Let S be the set of all EDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanations for A
with respect to IDB. Let S′ be the set of all EDB-cuts of T and EDB-seeds of
M. Then, the following hold:

• S ⊆S′.
• ∀∆′ ∈S′ : ∃∆∈S s.t. ∆⊆∆′.
• ∀∆′ ∈S′ : ∆′ ⊆S S.
Proof.
1. Consider a ∆(∆∈∆i ∪∆j) ∈S. We need to show that ∆is generated
by algorithm 6 at step 2. From observation 4, it is clear that there exists
a A-kernel X of DDBG s.t. X ∩EDB = ∆j and X ∪EDB = ∆i. Since
X ⊢A, there must exist a successful derivation for A using only the elements
of X as input clauses and similarly X ⊬A. Consequently ∆must have been
constructed at step 2.
2. Consider a ∆′((∆′ ∈∆i ∪∆j) ∈S′. Let ∆′ be constructed from a success-
ful(unsuccessful) branch i via ∆i(∆j). Let X be the set of all input clauses
used in the refutation i. Clearly X ⊢A(X ⊬A). Further, there exists a min-
imal (with respect to set-inclusion) subset Y of X that derives A (i.e. no
proper subset of Y derives A. Let ∆= Y ∩EDB (Y ∪EDB). Since IDB
does not (does) have any unit clauses, Y must contain some EDB facts, and
so ∆is not empty (empty) and obviously ∆⊆∆′. But, Y need not (need)
be a A-kernel for IDBG since Y is not ground in general. But it stands for
several A-kernels with the same (diﬀerent) EDB facts ∆in them. Thus, from
observation 4, ∆is a DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanation for
A with respect to IDBG and is contained in ∆′. minimal.
Lemma 6. Let S and S’ be sets of sets s.t. S ⊆S′ and for every member X of
S′\S: X is a superset of some member of S and X is a subset of S S. Then, a
set H is a hitting set for S iﬀit is a hitting set for S’
Proof.
1. (If part) Given that H is a hitting set for S′, we have to show that it is a
hitting set for S too. First of all, observe that S S = S S′, and so H ⊆S S.
Moreover, by deﬁnition, for every non-empty member X of S′, H ∩X is not
empty. Since S ⊆S′, it follows that H is a hitting set for S too.
(Only if part) Suppose H is a hitting set for S. As observed above, H ⊆
S S′ . By deﬁnition, for every non-empty member X ∈S, X ∩H is not
empty. Since every member of S′ is a superset of some member of S, it is
clear that H hits every member of S′, and hence a hitting set for S′ .
Lemma 7. Let T and M as in Lemma 5. Then HS(b) is a rational hitting set
for A, for every open ﬁnished branch b in T (close ﬁnished branch b in M).
Proof. Follows from the observation 4 (materialized view) in and (Behrend &
Manthey 2008)

Theorem 16. Algorithms 6 and 7 are rational, in the sense that they satisfy all
the rationality postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
Proof. Follows from Observation 4,7 and Theorem 7.
8.4
Incomplete to Complete Information
Many of the proposals in the literature on incomplete databases have focussed
on the extension of the relational model by the introduction of null values. In
this section, we show how view update provides completion of incomplete infor-
mation. More detailed surveys of this area can be found in (Meyden 1998).
The earliest extension of the relational model to incomplete information was
that of Codd (Codd 1979) who suggested that missing values should be repre-
sented in tables by placing a special null value symbol ′∗′ at any table location
for which the value is unknown. Table 5.3, shows an example of a database us-
ing this convention. Codd proposed an extension to the relational algebra for
tables containing such nulls, based on three valued logic and a null substitution
principle.
In terms of our general semantic scheme, the intended semantics of a database
D consisting of Codd tables can be described by deﬁning Mod(D) to be the
set of structures MD′, where D′ ranges over the relational databases obtained
by replacing each occurrence of ′∗′ in the database D by some domain value.
Diﬀerent values may be substituted for diﬀerent occurrences.
A plausible integrity constraint on the meaning of a relational operator on
tables in T is that the result should be a table that represents the set of relations
obtained by pointwise application of the operator on the models of these tables.
For example, if R and S are tables in T then the result of the join R Z S should
be equal to a table T in T such that
Mod(T) = {r Z t | r ∈Mod(R), s ∈Mod(S)}
In case the deﬁnitions of the operators satisfy this integrity constraint (with
respect to the deﬁnition of the semantics Mod on T ).
Let us consider what above equation requires if we take R and S to be the
Codd Tables 5.3. First of all, note that in each model, if we take the value of
the null in the tuple (delhibabu,*) to be v, then the join will contain one tuples
(delhibabu, v), which include the value v. If T is to be a Codd table, it will need
to contain tuples (delhibabu,X) to generate each of these tuples, where X are
either constants or ’*’. We now face a problem. First, X cannot be a constant c,
for whatever the choice of c we can ﬁnd an instance r ∈Mod(R) and s ∈Mod(S)
for which the tuple (delhibabu, c) does not occur in r Z s. If they were, X would
have their values in models of T assigned independently.
Here the repetition of ∗indicates that the same value is to be occurrence of
the null in constructing a model of the table. Unfortunately, this extension does
not suﬃce to satisfy the integrity constraint (∀x, y, z (y=x) ←group chair(x,y)
∧group chair(x,z)).

Staﬀ
Group
delhibabu infor1
delhibabu
*
Group
Chair
infor1
mattias
*
aravindan
Table 3. Base Table after Transaction
In the model of these tables in which ∗= infor1, the join contains the tuple
(delhibabu, infor1) and (infor1, aravindan).
If ∗1 = infor1 then (delhibabu, infor1) ∈R Z S
If ∗2 = infor1 then (infor1, aravindan) ∈R Z S
The following table shows when transaction is made to base table:
Staﬀ
Group
Chair
delhibabu infor1
mattias
delhibabu
*
aravindan
Table 4. s ⊗r after Transaction
The following table shows completion of incomplete information with appli-
cation of integrity constraint and redundancy:
Staﬀ
Group
Chair
delhibabu infor1 aravindan
Table 5. Redundant Table
8.5
A Comparative Study of view update algorithm and integrity
constraint with our axiomatic method
During the process of updating database, two interrelated problems could arise.
On one hand, when an update is applied to the database, integrity constraints
could become inconsistent with request, then stop the process. On the other
hand, when an update request consist on updating some derived predicate, a view
update mechanism must be applied to translate the update request into correct
updates on the underlying base facts. Our work focus on the integrity constraint
maintenance approach. In this section, we extend Mayol and Teniente’s (Mayol
& Teniente 1999) survey for view update and integrity constraint.

The main aspects that must be taken into account during the process of view
update and integrity constraint enforcement are the following: the problem ad-
dressed, the considered database schema, the allowed update requests, the used
technique, update change and the obtained solutions. These six aspects provide
the basic dimensions to be taken into account. We explain each dimension in
this section and results are presented in Appendix.
Problem Addressed
(Type) - What kind of program to be used (stratiﬁed (S), Horn clause (H),
Disjunctive database (D), Normal Logic program (N) and Other (O)).
(View Update) - Whether they are able to deal with view update or not (indicated
by Yes or No in the second column in the appendix section).
(integrity-constraint Enforcement) - Whether they incorporate an integrity con-
straint checking (C)or an integrity constraint maintenance (M) or both apply
(C-M) approach (indicated by check or maintain in the third column).
(Run/Comp) - Whether the method follows a run-time (transaction) or a compile-
time approach (indicated by Run or Compile in the fourth column).
Database Schema Considered
(Deﬁnition Language) - The language mostly used is logic (L), although some
methods use a relational language (R) and also uses an object-oriented (O-
O).
(The DB Schema Contains Views) - All methods that deal with view update
need views to be deﬁned in the database schema. Some of other method
allow to deﬁne views.
(Restrictions Imposed on the Integrity Constraints) -
Some proposals impose
certain restrictions on the kind of integrity constraints that can be deﬁned
and, thus, handled by their methods.
(Static vs Dynamic Integrity Constraints) -
Integrity constraints may be ei-
ther static (S), and impose restrictions involving only a certain state of the
database, or dynamic (D).
Update Request Allowed
(Multiple Update Request) - An update request is multiple if it contains several
updates to be applied together to the database.
(Update Operators) - Traditionally, three diﬀerent basic update operators are
distinguished: insertion (ι), deletion (δ) and modiﬁcation (χ). Modiﬁcation
can always be simulated by a deletion followed by an insertion.
Update Processing Mechanism
(Applied Technique) - The techniques applied by these methods can be classiﬁed
according to four diﬀerent kinds of procedures, unfolding, SLD, active and
predeﬁned programs, respectively.
(Taking Base Facts into Account - Base facts can either be taken into account
or not during update processing.

(User Participation) - User participation during update processing or not.
Update Changing Mechanism
(Type of modiﬁcation) - Changing table by singleton like atom (S), sets of each
types of modiﬁcation(SS) and group of changes (G).
(Changing Base Fact) -
Base fact can be changed either using principle of
minimal change or complete change (maximal change).
(Changing View Deﬁnition) - Whether update process view deﬁnition is changed
or not.
Obtained Solution
(Our Axiom follow) - When update process done, we are comparing our axioma-
tized method and which relevance policy holds ((KB*1) to (KB*6),(KB*7.1),(KB*7.2)
and (KB*7.3) is enumerated 1 to 9)
(Soundness) - A method is correct if it only obtains solutions that satisfy the
requested update, note NP mean Not Proved.
(Completeness) - A method is complete if it is able to obtain all solutions that
satisfy a given update request.
Results of each method according to these features are summarized in Ap-
pendix.
9
Belief Update Vs Database Update
In this section we give overview of how belief update is related to database
update. This section is motivated by works of Hansson’s (Hansson 1991) and
Keller’s (Keller 1985)
9.1
View update vs Database update
Fig. 5. View Update Vs Database Update

The view update problem exists already three decades Chen & Liao 2010
and Minker 1996. We are taking proof from Keller 1985, given a view deﬁnition
of the question of choosing a view update translator arises.
This requires understanding the ways in which individual view update re-
quests may be satisﬁed by database updates. Any particular view update request
may result in a view state that does not correspond to any database state. Such a
view update request may not be translated without relaxing the constraint which
precludes view side eﬀects. Otherwise, the update request is rejected by the view
update translator. If we are lucky, there will be precisely one way to perform
the database update that results in the desired view update. Since the view is
many-to-one, the new view state may correspond to many database states. Of
these database states, we would like to choose one that is ”as close as possible”,
under some measure, to the original database state. That is, we would like to
minimize the eﬀect of the view update on the database.
9.2
Belief update vs Database update
If we look closely to the section (6.3 and 8.1), we easily ﬁnd the following re-
sults. With evidence of Hansson’s (Hansson 1991) and Liberatore (Liberatore
& Schaerf 2004). Here BR and BU mean Belief Revision and Belief Update,
respectively.
Fig. 6. Belief Update Vs Database Update
10
Abductive framework for Horn knowledge base
dynamics
As discussed in Section 5, we introduced Horn knowledge base dynamics to
deal with two important points: ﬁrst, to handle belief states that need not be

deductively closed; and the second point is the ability to declare certain parts of
the belief as immutable. There is yet another, radically new approach to handle
this problem, and this Section addresses this. In fact, this approach is very close
to the Hansson’s (Hansson 1992) dyadic representation of belief. In the similar
abduction model by Boutilier & Beche 1995 and Pagnucco 1996 Here, we consider
the immutable part as deﬁning a new logical system. By a logical system, we
mean that it deﬁnes its own consequence relation and closure operator. Based
on this, we provide an abductive framework for Horn knowledge base dynamics.
A ﬁrst order language consists of an alphabet A of a language L. We assume
a countable universe of variables Var, ranged over x,y,z, and a countable universe
of relation (i.e. predicate) symbols, ranged over by A are ﬁnite. The following
deﬁnes FOL, the language of ﬁrst order logic with equality and binary relations:
ϕ ::= x = x | a(x, x) | ¬ϕ | W φ | V φ | ∃X : φ.
Here φ ⊆FOL and X ⊆V ar are ﬁnite sets of formulae and variables,
respectively.
Deﬁnition 46 (Normal Logic Program (NLP) [22]). By an alphabet A of
a language L we mean disjoint sets of constants, predicate symbols, and function
symbols, with at least one constant. In addition, any alphabet is assumed to
contain a countably inﬁnite set of distinguished variable symbols. A term over A
is deﬁned recursively as either a variable, a constant or an expression of the form
f(t1, ..., tn) where f is a function symbol of A, n its arity, and the ti are terms.
An atom over A is an expression of the form P(t1, ..., tn) where P is a predicate
symbol of A and the ti are terms. A literal is either an atom A or its default
negation not A. We dub default literals those of the form not A. A term (atom
or literal) is said ground if it does not contain variables. The set of all ground
terms (atoms) of A is called the Herbrand universe (base) of A. A Normal Logic
Program is a possibly inﬁnite set of rules (with no inﬁnite descending chains of
syntactical dependency) of the form:
H ←B1, ..., Bn, not C1, ..., not Cm, (with m, n ≥0)
Where H,Bi and Cj are atoms, and each rule stands for all its ground in-
stances. In conformity with the standard convention, we write rules of the form
H ←also simply as H (known as fact). An NLP P is called deﬁnite if none of
its rules contain default literals. H is the head of the rule r, denoted by head(r),
and body(r) denotes the set {B1, ..., Bn, not C1, ..., not Cm} of all the literals in
the body of r.
When doing problem modeling with logic programs, rules of the form
⊥←B1, ..., Bn, not C1, ..., not Cm, (with m, n ≥0)
with a non-empty body are known as a type of integrity constraints (ICs),
speciﬁcally denials, and they are normally used to prune out unwanted can-
didate solutions. We abuse the not default negation notation applying it to

non-empty sets of literals too: we write not S to denote {not s : s ∈S}, and
duality of not not a ≡a. When S is an arbitrary, non-empty set of literals
S = {B1, ..., Bn, not C1, ..., not Cm} we use:
- S+ denotes the set {B1, . . . , Bn} of positive literals in S .
- S−denotes the set {not C1, . . . , not Cm} of negative literals in S .
- |S| = S+ ∪(not S−) denotes the set {B1, . . . , Bn, C1, . . . , Cm} of atoms of
S.
As expected, we say a set of literals S is consistent iﬀS+ ∩|S−| = ∅. We
also write heads(P) to denote the set of heads of non-IC rules of a (possibly
constrained) program P, i.e. heads(P) = {head(r) : r ∈P}\{⊥}, and facts(P)
to denote the set of facts of P - facts(P) = {head(r) : r ∈P ∧body(r) = ∅}.
Deﬁnition 47 (Level mapping[4]). Let P be a normal logic program and BP
its Herbrand base. A level mapping for P is a function ∥: BP →N of ground
atoms to natural numbers. The mapping ∥is also extended to ground literals by
assigning | ¬A | = | A | for all ground atoms A ∈BP . For every ground literal
L, | L | is called as the level of L in P.
Deﬁnition 48 (Acyclic program [4]). Let P be a normal logic program and ∥
a level mapping for P. P is called as acyclic with respect to ∥if for every ground
clause H ←L1, ..., Ln (with n ≥0 and finit) in P the level of A is higher then
the level of every Li (1 ≤i≤n). Moreover P is called acyclic if P is acyclic with
respect to some level mapping for P.
Unlike Horn knowledge base dynamics, where knowledge is deﬁned as a set
of sentences, here we wish to deﬁne a Horn knowledge base KB with respect to
a language L, as an abductive framework < P, Ab, IC, K >, where,
* P is an acyclic normal logic program with all abducibles in P at level 0
and no non-abducible at level 0. P is referred to as a logical system. This
in conjunction with the integrity constraints corresponds to immutable part
of the Horn knowledge base, here P is deﬁned by immutable part. This is
discussed further in the next subsection;
* Ab is a set of atoms from L, called the abducibles. This notion is required in
an abductive framework, and this corresponds to the atoms that may appear
in the updatable part of the knowledge;
* IC is the set of integrity constraints, a set of sentences from language L.
This speciﬁes the integrity of a Horn knowledge base and forms a part of the
knowledge that can not be modiﬁed over time;
* K is a set of sentences from L. It is the current knowledge, and the only part
of KB that changes over time. This corresponds to the updatable part of
the Horn knowledge base. The main requirement here is that no sentence in
K can have an atom that does not appear in Ab.

10.1
Logical system
The main idea of our approach is to consider the immutable part of the knowledge
to deﬁne a new logical system. By a logical system, we mean that P deﬁnes
its own consequence relation |=P and its closure Cnp. Given P, we have the
Herbrand Base HBP and GP , the ground instantiation of P.
An abductive interpretation I is a set of abducibles, i.e. I ⊆Ab. How I
interprets all the ground atoms of L 4 is deﬁned, inductively on the level of
atoms with respect to P, as follows:
* An atom A at level 0 (note that only abducibles are at level 0) is interpreted
as: A is true in I iﬀA ∈I, else it is false in I.
* An atom (literal) A at level n is interpreted as: A is true in I iﬀ∃clause
A ←L1, . . . , Ln in GP s.t. ∀Lj (1 ≤j ≤n) if Lj is an atom then Lj is true
in I, else if Lj is a negative literal ¬Bj, then Bj is false in I.
This interpretation of ground atoms can be extended, in the usual way, to
interpret sentences in L, as follows (where α and β are sentences):
* ¬α is true in I iﬀα is false in I.
* α ∧β is true in I iﬀboth α and β are true in I.
* α ∨β is true in I iﬀeither α is true in I or β is true in I.
* ∀α is true in I iﬀall ground instantiations of α are true in I.
* ∃α is true in I iﬀsome ground instantiation of α is true in I.
Given a sentence α in L, an abductive interpretation I is said to be an
abductive model of α iﬀα is true in I. Extending this to a set of sentences K, I
is a abductive model of K iﬀI is an abductive model of every sentence α in K.
Given a set of sentences K and a sentence α, α is said to be a P-consequence
of K, written as K |=P α, iﬀevery abductive model of K is an abductive model
of α also. Putting it in other words, let Mod(K) be the set of all abductive models
of K. Then α is a P-consequence of K iﬀα is true in all abductive interpreta-
tions in Mod(K). The consequence operator CnP is then deﬁned as CnP (K) =
{α | K |=P α} = {α | α is true in all abductive interpretations in Mod(K)}.
K is said to be P-consistent iﬀthere is no expression α s.t. α ∈CnP (K) and
¬α ∈CnP (K). Two sentences α and β are said to be P-equivalent to each
other, written as α ≡β, iﬀthey have the same set of abductive models , i.e.
Mod(α) = Mod(β).
Properties of consequences operator
Since a new consequence operator is deﬁned, it is reasonable, to ask whether it
satisﬁes certain properties that are required in the Horn knowledge base dynam-
ics context. Here, we observe that all the required properties, listed by various
researchers in Horn knowledge base dynamics, are satisﬁed by the deﬁned con-
sequence operator. The following propositions follow from the above deﬁnitions,
and can be veriﬁed easily.
4 the set of all the ground atoms of L, in fact depends of L, and is given as HBP , the
Herbrand Base of P

CnP satisﬁes inclusion, i.e. K ⊆CnP (K).
CnP satisﬁes iteration, i.e. CnP (K) = CnP (CnP (K)).
Anther interesting property is monotony, i.e. if K ⊆K′, then CnP (K) ⊆
CnP (K′). CnP satisﬁes monotony. To see this, ﬁrst observe that Mod(K′) ⊆
Mod(K).
CnP satisﬁes superclassicality , i.e. if α can be derived from K by ﬁrst order
classical logic, then α ∈CnP (K).
CnP satisﬁes deduction , i.e. if β ∈CnP (K ∪{α}), then (β ←α) ∈Cn(K).
CnP satisﬁes compactness , i.e. if α ∈CnP (K), then α ∈CnP (K′) for some
ﬁnite subset K′ of K.
Statics of a Horn knowledge base
The statics of a Horn knowledge base KB, is given by the current knowledge
K and the integrity constraints IC. An abductive interpretation M is an abduc-
tive model of KB iﬀit is an abductive model of K ∪IC. Let Mod(KB) be the
set of all abductive models of KB. The belief set represented by KB, written as
KB• is given as,
KB• = CnP (K ∪IC) = {α|α is true in every abductive model of KB}.
A belief (represented by a sentence in L) α is accepted in KB iﬀα ∈KB• (i.e.
α is true in every model of KB). α is rejected in KB iﬀ¬α ∈KB• (i.e. α is
false in every model of KB). Note that there may exist a sentence α s.t. α is
neither accepted nor rejected in KB (i.e. α is true in some but not all models of
KB), and so KB represents a partial description of the world.
Two Horn knowledge bases KB1 and KB2 are said to be equivalent to each
other, written as KB1 ≡KB2, iﬀthey are based on the same logical system and
their current knowledge are P-equivalent, i.e. P1 = P2, Ab1 = Ab2, IC1 = IC2
and K1 ≡K2. Obviously, two equivalent Horn knowledge bases KB1 and KB2
represent the same belief set, i.e. KB•
1 = KB•
2.
10.2
Horn knowledge base dynamics
In AGM (Alchourron et al. 1985b) three kinds of belief dynamics are deﬁned:
expansion, contraction and revision. We consider all of them, one by one, in the
sequel.
Expansion
Let α be new information that has to be added to a knowledge base KB.
Suppose ¬α is not accepted in KB. Then, obviously α is P - consistent with
IC, and KB can be expanded by α, by modifying K as follows:
KB + α ≡< P, Ab, IC, K ∪{α} >

Note that we do not force the presence of α in the new K, but only say that α
must be in the belief set represented by the expanded Horn knowledge base. If
in case ¬α is accepted in KB (in other words, α is inconsistent with IC), then
expansion of KB by α results in a inconsistent Horn knowledge base with no
abductive models, i.e. (KB + α)• is the set of all sentences in L.
Putting it in model-theoretic terms, KB can be expanded by a sentence α,
when α is not false in all models of KB. The expansion is deﬁned as:
Mod(KB + α) = Mod(KB) ∩Mod(α).
If α is false in all models of KB, then clearly Mod(KB+α) is empty, implying
that expanded Horn knowledge base is inconsistent.
Revision
As usual, for revising and contracting a Horn knowledge base, the rationality
of the change is discussed ﬁrst. Later a construction is provided that complies
with the proposed rationality postulates.
Rationality postulates
Let KB =< P, Ab, IC, K > be revised by a sentence α to result in a new
Horn knowledge base KB ∔α =< P ′, Ab′, IC′, K′ >.
When a Horn knowledge base is revised, we do not (generally) wish to modify
the underlying logical system P or the set of abducibles Ab. This is refereed to
as inferential constancy by Hansson (Hansson 1991 & 1992).
(∔1) (Inferential constancy) P ′ = P and Ab′ = Ab,IC′ = IC.
(∔2) (Success)α is accepted in KB ∔α , i.e. α is true in all models of KB ∔α.
(∔3) (Consistency) α is satisﬁable and P-consistent with IC iﬀKB ∔α is P-
consistent, i.e. Mod({α} ∪IC) is not empty iﬀMod(KB ∔α) is not empty.
(∔4) (Vacuity) If ¬α is not accepted in KB, then KB ∔α ≡KB + α, i.e. if α is
not false in all models of KB, then Mod(KB ∔α) = Mod(KB) ∩Mod(α).
(∔5) (Preservation)If KB ≡KB′ and α ≡β, then KB ∔α ≡KB′ ∔β, i.e. if
Mod(KB) = Mod(KB′) and Mod(α) = Mod(β), then Mod(KB ∔α) =
Mod(KB ∔β).
(∔6) (Extended Vacuity 1)(KB ∔α) + β implies KB ∔(α ∧β), i.e. (Mod(KB ∔
α) ∩Mod(β)) ⊆Mod(KB ∔(α ∧β)).
(∔7) (Extended Vacuity 2)If ¬β is not accepted in (KB ∔α), then KB ∔(α ∧β)
implies (KB ∔α) + β, i.e. if β is not false in all models of KB ∔α, then
Mod(KB ∔(α ∧β)) ⊆(Mod(KB ∔α) ∩Mod(β)).
Construction
Let S stand for the set of all abductive interpretations that are consistent with
IC, i.e. S = Mod(IC). We do not consider abductive interpretations that are
not models of IC, simply because IC does not change during revision. Observe
that when IC is empty, S is the set of all abductive interpretations. Given a Horn

knowledge base KB, and two abductive interpretations I1 and I2 from S, we
can compare how close these interpretations are to KB by using an order ≤KB
among abductive interpretations in S. I1 <KB I2 iﬀI1 ≤KB I2 and I2 ≰KB I1.
Let F ⊆S. An abductive interpretation I ∈F is minimal in F with re-
spect to ≤KB if there is no I′ ∈F s.t. I′ <KB I. Let, Min(F, ≤KB) =
{I | I is minimal in
F with respect to ≤KB}.
For any Horn knowledge base KB, the following are desired properties of
≤KB:
(≤1) (Pre-order)≤KB is a pre-order , i.e. it is transitive and reﬂexive.
(≤2) (Connectivity)≤KB is total in S, i.e. ∀I1, I2 ∈S: either I1 ≤KB I2 or I2 ≤KB
I1.
(≤3) (Faithfulness)≤KB is faithful to KB, i.e. I ∈Min(S, ≤KB) iﬀI ∈Mod(KB).
(≤4) (Minimality)For any non-empty subset F of S, Min(F, ≤KB) is not empty.
(≤5) (Preservance)] For any Horn knowledge base KB’, if KB ≡KB′ then
≤KB=≤KB′.
Let KB (and consequently K) be revised by a sentence α, and ≤KB be a
rational order that satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5). Then the abductive models of the
revised Horn knowledge base are given precisely by: Min(Mod({α}∪IC), ≤KB).
Note that, this construction does not say what the resulting K is, but merely
says what should be the abductive models of the new Horn knowledge base.
Representation theorem
Now, we proceed to show that revision of KB by α, as constructed above,
satisﬁes all the rationality postulates stipulated in the beginning of this section.
This is formalized by the following lemma.
Lemma 8. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, ≤KB an order among S that
satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5). Let a revision operator ∔be deﬁned as: for any sen-
tence α, Mod(KB ∔α) = Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB). Then ∔satisﬁes all the
rationality postulates for revision (∔1) to (∔7).
Proof.(∔1) P ′ = P and Ab′ = Ab and IC′ = IC
This is satisﬁed obviously, since our construction does not touch P and Ab,
and IC follows from every abductive interpretation in Mod(KB ∔α).
(∔2) α is accepted in KB ∔α
Note that every abductive interpretation M ∈Mod(KB + α) is a model of
α. Hence α is accepted in KB ∔α.
(∔3) α is satisﬁable and P-consistent with IC iﬀKB ∔α is P-consistent.
If part: If KB ∔α is P-consistent , then Mod(KB ∔α) is not empty. This
implies that Mod({α} ∪IC) is not empty, and hence α is satisﬁable and
P-consistent with IC.
Only if part: If α is satisﬁable and P-consistent with IC, then Mod({α}∪IC)
is not empty, and (≤4) ensures that Mod(KB ∔α) is not empty. Thus,
KB ∔α is P-consistent.

(∔4) If ¬α is not accepted in KB, then KB ∔α ≡KB + α.
We have to establish that Min(Mod({α}∪IC), ≤KB) = Mod(KB)∩Mod(α).
Since ¬α is not accepted in KB, Mod(KB) ∩Mod(α) is not empty. The re-
quired result follows immediately from the fact that ≤KB is faithful to KB
(i.e. satisﬁes ≤3), which selects only and all those models of α which are
also models of KB.
(∔5) If KB ≡KB′ and α ≡β then KB ∔α = KB′ ∔β
(≤5) ensures that ≤KB=≤KB′. The required result follows immediately
from this and the fact that Mod(α) = Mod(β).
(∔6) (KB ∔α) + β implies KB ∔(α ∧β).
We consider this in two cases. When ¬β is accepted in KB ∔α, (KB ∔α)+β
is the set of all sentences from L, and the postulate follows immediately.
Instead when ¬β is not accepted in KB ∔α, this postulates coincides with
the next one.
(∔7) If ¬β is not accepted in KB ∔α, then KB ∔(α ∧β) implies (KB ∔α) + β.
Together with the second case of previous postulate, we need to show that
KB ∔(α ∧β) = (KB ∔α) + β. In other words, we have to establish that
Min(Mod({α ∧β} ∪IC), ≤KB) = Mod(KB ∔α) ∩Mod(β). For the sake
of simplicity, let us represent Min(Mod({α ∧β} ∪IC), ≤KB) by P, and
Mod(KB ∔α) ∩Mod(β), which is the same as Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB
) ∩Mod(β), by Q. The required result is obtained in two parts:
1) ∀(abductive interpretation)M: if M ∈P, then M ∈Q
Obviously M ∈Mod(β). Assume that M < Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB).
This can happen in two cases, and we show that both the cases lead to
contradiction.
Case A: No model of β is selected by ≤KB from Mod({α} ∪IC). But this
contradicts our initial condition that ¬β is not accepted in KB ∔α.
Case B: Some model, say M ′, of β is selected by ≤KB from Mod({α}∪IC).
Since M is not selected, it follows that M ′ <KB M. But then this contradicts
our initial assumption that M ∈P. So, P ⊆Q.
2) ∀(abductive interpretation)M: if M ∈Q, then M ∈P
M ∈Q implies that M is a model of both α and β, and M is selected by
≤KB from Mod({α}∪IC). Note that Mod({α∧β}∪IC) ⊆Mod({α}∪IC).
Since M is selected by ≤KB in a bigger set (i.e. Mod({α}∪IC)), ≤KB must
select M from its subset Mod({α ∧β} ∪IC) also. Hence Q ⊆P.
But, that is not all. Any rational revision of KB by α, that satisﬁes all the
rationality postulates, can be constructed by our construction method, and this
is formalized below.
Lemma 9. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base and ∔a revision operator that
satisﬁes all the rationality postulates for revision (∔1) to (∔7). Then, there exists
an order ≤KB among S, that satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5), and for any sentence α,
Mod(KB ∔α) is given in Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB).
Proof. Let us construct an order ≤KB among interpretations in S as follows:
For any two abductive interpretations I and I′ in S, deﬁne I ≤KB I′ iﬀeither

I ∈Mod(KB) or I ∈Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)), where form(I, I′) stands for
sentence whose only models are I and I′. We will show that ≤KB thus constructed
satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5) and Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB) = Mod(KB ∔α).
First, we show that Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB) = Mod(KB ∔α).Suppose
α is not satisﬁable, i.e. Mod(α) is empty, or α does not satisfy IC, then there
are no abductive models of {α} ∪IC, and hence Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB)
is empty. From (∔3), we infer that Mod(KB ∔α) is also empty. When α is
satisﬁable and α satisﬁes IC, the required result is obtained in two parts:
1) If I ∈Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB), then I ∈Mod(KB ∔α)
Since α is satisﬁable and consistent with IC, (∔3) implies that there exists at
least one model, say I′, for KB∔α. From (∔1), it is clear that I′ is a model of
IC, from (∔2) we also get that I′ is a model of α, and consequently I ≤KB I′
(because I ∈Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB)). Suppose I ∈Mod(KB), then
(∔4) immediately gives I ∈Mod(KB ∔α). If not, from our deﬁnition of
≤KB, it is clear that I ∈Mod(KB∔form(I, I′)). Note that α∧form(I, I′) ≡
form(I, I′), since both I and I′ are models of α. From (∔6) and (∔7), we
get Mod(KB ∔α)∩{I, I′} = Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)). Since I ∈Mod(KB ∔
form(I, I′)), it immediately follows that I ∈Mod(KB ∔α).
2) If I ∈Mod(KB ∔α), then I ∈Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB).
From (∔1) we get I is a model of IC, and from (∔2), we obtain I ∈Mod(α).
Suppose I ∈Mod(KB), then from our deﬁnition of ≤KB, we get I ≤KB
I′, for any other model I′ of α and IC, and hence I ∈Min(Mod({α} ∪
IC), ≤KB). Instead, if I is not a model of KB, then, to get the required
result, we should show that I ∈Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)), for every model I′
of α and IC. As we have observed previously, from (∔6) and (∔7), we get
Mod(KB ∔α)∩{I, I′} = Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)). Since I ∈Mod(KB ∔α),
it immediately follows that I ∈Mod(KB∔form(I, I′)). Hence I ≤KB I′ for
any model I′ of α and IC, and consequently, I ∈Min(Mod({α}∪IC), ≤KB
).
Now we proceed to show that the order ≤KB among S, constructed as per
our deﬁnition, satisﬁes all the rationality axioms (≤1) to (≤5).
(≤1) ≤KB is a pre-order.
Note that we need to consider only abductive interpretations from S. From
(∔2) and (∔3), we have Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)) = {I}, and so I ≤KB
I. Thus ≤KB satisﬁes reﬂexivity. let I1 ∈Mod(IC) and I2 < Mod(IC).
Clearly, it is possible that two interpretations I1 and I2 are not models of
KB, and Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2)) = {I1}. So, I1 ≤KB I2 does not neces-
sarily imply I2 ≤KB I1, and thus ≤KB satisﬁes anti-symmetry.
To show the transitivity, we have to prove that I1 ≤KB I3, when I1 ≤KB I2
and I2 ≤KB I3 hold. Suppose I1 ∈Mod(KB), then I1 ≤KB I3 follows imme-
diately from our deﬁnition of ≤KB. On the other case, when I1 < Mod(KB),
we ﬁrst observe that I1 ∈Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2)), which follows from deﬁ-
nition of ≤KB and I1 ≤KB I2. Also observe that I2 < Mod(KB). If I2 were

a model of KB, then it follows from (∔4) that Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2)) =
Mod(KB)∩{I1, I2} = {I2}, which is a contradiction, and so I2 < Mod(KB).
This, together with I2 ≤KB I3, implies that I2 ∈Mod(KB ∔form(I2, I3)).
Now consider Mod(KB + form(I1, I2, I3)). Since ∔satisﬁes (∔2) and (∔3),
it follows that this is a non-empty subset of {I1, I2, I3}. We claim that
Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2, I3)) ∩{I1, I2} can not be empty. If it is empty, then
it means that Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2, I3)) = {I3}. Since ∔satisﬁes (∔6)
and (∔7), this further implies that Mod(KB ∔form(I2, I3)) = Mod(KB ∔
form(I1, I2, I3))∩{I2, I3} = {I3}. This contradicts our observation that I2 ∈
Mod(KB ∔form(I2, I3)), and so Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2, I3))∩{I1, I2} can
not be empty. Using (∔6) and (∔7) again, we get Mod(KB∔form(I1, I2)) =
Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2, I3)) ∩{I1, I2}. Since we know that I1 ∈Mod(KB ∔
form(I1, I2)), it follows that I1 ∈Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2, I3)). From (∔6)
and (∔7) we also get Mod(KB∔form(I1, I3)) = Mod(KB+form(I1, I2, I3))∩
{I1, I3}, which clearly implies that I1 ∈Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I3)). From our
deﬁnition of ≤KB, we now obtain I1 ≤KB I3. Thus, ≤KB is a pre-order.
(≤2) ≤KB is total.
Since ∔satisﬁes (∔2) and (∔3), for any two abductive interpretations I and
I′ in S, it follows that Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)) is a non-empty subset of
{I, I′}. Hence, ≤KB is total.
(≤3) ≤KB is faithful to KB.
From our deﬁnition of ≤KB, it follows that ∀I1, I2 ∈Mod(KB) : I1 <KB I2
does not hold. Suppose I1 ∈Mod(KB) and I2 < Mod(KB). Then, we have
I1 ≤KB I2. Since ∔satisﬁes (∔4), we also have Mod(KB ∔form(I1, I2)) =
{I1}. Thus, from our deﬁnition of ≤KB, we can not have I2 ≤KB I1. So, if
I1 ∈Mod(KB) and I2 < Mod(KB), then I1 <KB I2 holds. Thus, ≤KB is
faithful to KB.
(≤4) For any non-empty subset F of S, Min(F, ≤KB) is not empty.
Let α be a sentence such that Mod({α} ∪IC) = F. We have already shown
that Mod(KB ∔α) = Min(F, ≤KB). Since, ∔satisﬁes (∔3), it follows that
Mod(KB ∔α) is not empty, and thus Min(F, ≤KB) is not empty.
(≤5) If KB ≡KB′, then ≤KB=≤KB′.
This follows immediately from the fact that ∔satisﬁes (∔5).
Thus, the order among interpretations ≤KB, constructed as per our deﬁni-
tion, satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5), and Mod(KB ∔α) = Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB).
So, we have a one to one correspondence between the axiomatization and the
construction, which is highly desirable, and this is summarized by the following
representation theorem.
Theorem 17. Let KB be revised by α, and KB ∔α be obtained by the con-
struction discussed above. Then, ∔is a revision operator iﬀit satisﬁes all the
rationality postulates (∔1) to (∔7).
Proof. Follows from Lemma 8 and Lemma 9

Contraction
Contraction of a sentence from a Horn knowledge base KB is studied in the
same way as that of revision. We ﬁrst discuss the rationality of change during
contraction and proceed to provide a construction for contraction using duality
between revision and contraction.
Rationality Postulates
Let KB =< P, Ab, IC, K > be contracted by a sentence α to result in a new
Horn knowledge base KB ˙−α =< P ′, Ab′, IC′, K′ >.
( ˙−1) (Inferential Constancy)P ′ = P and Ab′ = Ab and IC′ = IC.
( ˙−2) (Success)If α < CnP (KB), then α is not accepted in KB ˙−α, i.e. if α is not
true in all the abductive interpretations, then α is not true in all abductive
interpretations in Mod(KB ˙−α).
( ˙−3) (Inclusion)∀(belief) β:if β is accepted in KB ˙−α, then β is accepted in KB,
i.e. Mod(KB) ⊆Mod(KB ˙−α).
( ˙−4) (Vacuity)If α is not accepted in KB, then KB ˙−α = KB, i.e. if α is not true
in all the abductive models of KB, then Mod(KB ˙−α) = Mod(KB).
( ˙−5) (Recovery)(KB ˙−α)+α implies KB, i.e. Mod(KB ˙−α)∩Mod(α) ⊆Mod(KB).
( ˙−6) (Preservation)If KB ≡KB′ and α ≡β, then KB ˙−α = KB′ ˙−β, i.e. if
Mod(KB) = Mod(KB′) and Mod(α) = Mod(β), then Mod(KB ˙−α) =
Mod(KB′ ˙−β).
( ˙−7) (Conjunction 1) KB ˙−(α ∧β) implies KB ˙−α ∩KB ˙−β, i.e. Mod(KB ˙−(α ∧
β)) ⊆Mod(KB ˙−α) ∪Mod(KB ˙−β).
( ˙−8) (Conjunction 2)If α is not accepted in KB ˙−(α ∧β), then KB ˙−α implies
KB ˙−(α ∧β), i.e. if α is not true in all the models of KB ˙−(α ∧β), then
Mod(KB ˙−α) ⊆Mod(KB ˙−(α ∧β)).
Before providing a construction for contraction, we wish to study the duality
between revision and contraction. The Levi and Harper identities still holds in
our case, and is discussed in the sequel.
Relationship between contraction and revision
Contraction and revision are related to each other. Given a contraction func-
tion ˙−, a revision function ∔can be obtained as follows:
(Levi Identity)
Mod(KB ∔α) = Mod(KB ˙−¬α) ∩Mod(α)
The following theorem formally states that Levi identity holds in our approach.
Theorem 18. Let ˙−be a contraction operator that satisﬁes all the rationality
postulates ( ˙−1) to ( ˙−8). Then, the revision function ∔, obtained from ˙−using
the Levi Identity, satisﬁes all the rationality postulates (∔1) to (∔7).
Proof. Let KB =< P, Ab, IC, K > be contracted by a sentence α to result in a
new Horn knowledge base KB ˙−α =< P ′, Ab′, IC′, K′ >.

(∔1) (Inferential constancy) P ′ = P and Ab′ = Ab,IC′ = IC.
(∔2) (Success)α is accepted in KB∔α , i.e. α is true in all models of (Mod(KB ˙−¬α)∩
Mod(α)).
(∔3) (Consistency) α is satisﬁable and P-consistent with IC iﬀKB ∔α is P-
consistent, i.e. (Mod({α} ∪IC)) is not empty iﬀMod(KB ˙−¬α) ∩Mod(α)
is not empty.
(∔4) (Vacuity) If ¬α is not accepted in KB, then KB ∔α ≡KB + α, i.e. if α
is not false in all models of KB, then (Mod(KB ∔α)) = (Mod(KB ˙−¬α) ∩
Mod(α)) ∩Mod(α)
(∔5) (Preservation)If KB ≡KB′ and α ≡β, then KB ∔α ≡KB′ ∔β, i.e. if
Mod(KB) = Mod(KB′) and Mod(α) = Mod(β), then (Mod(KB ˙−¬α) ∩
Mod(α)) = (Mod(KB ˙−¬β) ∩Mod(β)).
(∔6) (Extended Vacuity 1)(KB ∔α) + β implies ((KB ˙−¬α) ∩(α)) ∧β), i.e.
(Mod(KB ∔α) ∩Mod(β)) ⊆Mod(KB ∔(α ∧β)).
(∔7) (Extended Vacuity 2)If ¬β is not accepted in (KB ∔α), then ((KB ˙−¬α) ∩
(α)) ∧β) implies (KB ∔α) + β, i.e. if β is not false in all models of KB ∔α,
then Mod(KB ∔(α ∧β)) ⊆(Mod(KB ∔α) ∩Mod(β)).
Similarly, a contraction function ˙−can be constructed using the given revi-
sion function ∔as follows:
(Harper Identity)
Mod(KB ˙−α) = Mod(KB) ∪Mod(KB ∔¬α)
Theorem 19. Let ∔be a revision operator that satisﬁes all the rationality pos-
tulates (∔1) to (∔7). Then, the contraction function ˙−, obtained from ∔using
the Harper Identity, satisﬁes all the rationality postulates ( ˙−1) to ( ˙−8).
Proof. Let KB =< P, Ab, IC, K > be contracted by a sentence α to result in a
new Horn knowledge base KB ˙−α =< P ′, Ab′, IC′, K′ >.
( ˙−1) (Inferential Constancy)P ′ = P and Ab′ = Ab and IC′ = IC.
( ˙−2) (Success)If α < CnP (KB), then α is not accepted in KB ˙−α, i.e. if α is not
true in all the abductive interpretations, then α is not true in all abductive
interpretations in Mod(KB) ∪Mod(KB ∔¬α).
( ˙−3) (Inclusion)∀(belief) β:if β is accepted in KB ˙−α, then β is accepted in KB,
i.e. Mod(KB) ⊆(Mod(KB) ∪Mod(KB ∔¬α)).
( ˙−4) (Vacuity)If α is not accepted in KB, then KB ˙−α = KB, i.e. if α is not true
in all the abductive models of KB, then Mod(KB ˙−α) = Mod(KB).
( ˙−5) (Recovery)(KB ˙−α)+α implies KB, i.e. (Mod(KB ˙−α)∩Mod(α)) ⊆Mod(KB).
( ˙−6) (Preservation)If KB ≡KB′ and α ≡β, then KB ˙−α = KB′ ˙−β, i.e.
if Mod(KB) = Mod(KB′) and Mod(α) = Mod(β), then (Mod(KB) ∪
Mod(KB ∔¬α)) = (Mod(KB) ∪Mod(KB ∔¬β)).
( ˙−7) (Conjunction 1) KB ˙−(α ∧β) implies KB ˙−α ∩KB ˙−β, i.e. Mod(KB ˙−(α ∧
β)) ⊆(Mod(KB) ∪Mod(KB ∔¬α)) ∪(Mod(KB) ∪Mod(KB ∔¬β)).
( ˙−8) (Conjunction 2)If α is not accepted in KB ˙−(α ∧β), then KB ˙−α implies
KB ˙−(α ∧β), i.e. if α is not true in all the models of KB ˙−(α ∧β), then
(Mod(KB) ∪Mod(KB ∔¬α)) ⊆Mod(KB ˙−(α ∧β)).

Construction
Given the construction for revision, based on order among interpretation in
S, a construction for contraction can be provided as:
Mod(KB ˙−α) = Mod(KB) ∪Min(Mod({¬α} ∪IC), ≤KB),
where ≤KB is the relation among interpretations in S that satisﬁes the ratio-
nality axioms (≤1) to (≤5). As in the case of revision, this construction says
what should be the models of the resulting Horn knowledge base, and does not
explicitly say what the resulting Horn knowledge base is.
Representation theorem
Since the construction for contraction is based on a rational contraction for
revision, the following lemma and theorem follow obviously.
Lemma 10. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, ≤KB an order among S that
satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5). Let a contraction operator ˙−be deﬁned as: for any
sentence α, Mod(KB ˙−α) = Mod(KB) ∪Min(Mod({¬α} ∪IC), ≤KB). Then
˙−satisﬁes all the rationality postulates for contraction ( ˙−1) to ( ˙−8).
Proof. Follows from Theorem 17 and Theorem 19
Lemma 11. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base and ˙−a contraction operator
that satisﬁes all the rationality postulates for contraction ( ˙−1) to ( ˙−8). Then,
there exists an order ≤KB among S, that satisﬁes(≤1) to (≤5), and for any
sentence α, Mod(KB ˙−α) is given as Mod(KB)∪Min(Mod({¬α}∪IC), ≤KB).
Proof. Follows from Theorem 18 and Theorem 19.
Theorem 20. Let KB be contracted by α, and KB ˙−α be obtained by the con-
struction discussed above. Then ˙−is a contraction operator iﬀit satisﬁes all the
rationality postulates ( ˙−1) to ( ˙−8).
Proof. Follows from Lemma 10 and Lemma 11
10.3
Relationship with the coherence approach of AGM
Given Horn knowledge base KB =< P, Ab, IC, K > represents a belief set KB•
that is closed under CnP . We have deﬁned how KB can be expanded, revised, or
contracted. The question now is: does our foundational approach (with respect to
classical ﬁrst-order logic) on KB coincide with coherence approach (with respect
to our consequence operator CnP ) of AGM on KB•?
There is a problem in
answering this question (similar practical problem Baral & Zhang 2005) , since
our approach, we require IC to be immutable, and only the current knowledge
K is allowed to change. On the contrary, AGM approach treat every sentence in
KB• equally, and can throw out sentences from CnP (IC). One way to solve this
problem is to assume that sentences in CnP (IC) are more entrenched than oth-
ers. However, one-to-one correspondence can be established, when IC is empty.
The key is our consequence operator CnP , and in the following, we show that
coherence approach of AGM with this consequence operator, is exactly same as
our foundational approach, when IC is empty.

Expansion
Expansion in AGM (Alchourron et al. 1985b) framework is deﬁned as KB#α =
CnP (KB• ∪{α}), is is easy to see that this is equivalent to our deﬁnition of
expansion (when IC is empty), and is formalized below.
Theorem 21. Let KB + α be an expansion of KB by α. Then (KB + α)• =
KB#α.
Proof. By our deﬁnition of expansion, (KB + α)• = CnP (IC ∪K ∪{α}), which
is clearly the same set as CnP (KB• ∪{α}).
Revision
AGM puts forward rationality postulates (∗1) to (∗8) to be satisﬁed by a
revision operator on KB•. reproduced below:
(*1) (Closure) KB• ∗α is a belief set.
(*2) (Success) α ∈KB• ∗α.
(*3) (Expansion 1) KB• ∗α ⊆KB•#α.
(*4) (Expansion 2) If ¬α < KB•, then KB•#α ⊆KB• ∗α.
(*5) (Consistency)KB• ∗α is inconsistent iﬀ⊢¬α.
(*6) (Preservation) If ⊢α ↔β, then KB• ∗α = KB• ∗β.
(*7) (Conjunction 1) KB• ∗(α ∧β) ⊆(KB• ∗α)#β.
(*8) (Conjunction 2) If ¬β < KB• ∗α, then,(KB• ∗α)#β ⊆KB• ∗(α ∧β).
The equivalence between our approach and AGM approach is brought out
by the following two theorems.
Theorem 22. Let KB a Horn knowledge base with an empty IC and ∔be a
revision function that satisﬁes all the rationality postulates (∔1) to (∔7). Let
a revision operator ∗on KB• be deﬁned as: for any sentence α, KB• ∗α =
(KB∔α)•. The revision operator *, thus deﬁned satisﬁes all the AGM-postulates
for revision (∗1) to (∗8).
Proof.
(*1) KB• ∗α is a belief set.
This follows immediately, because (KB ∔α)• is closed with respect to CnP .
(*2) α ∈KB• ∗α.
This follows from the fact that ∔satisﬁes (∔2).
(*3) KB• ∗α ⊆KB•#α.
(*4) If ¬α < KB•, then KB•#α ⊆KB• ∗α.
These two postulates follow from (∔4) and theorem 21.
(*5) KB• ∗α is inconsistent iﬀ⊢¬α.
This follows from from (∔3) and our assumption that IC is empty.
(*6) If ⊢α ↔β, then KB• ∗α = KB• ∗β.
This corresponds to (∔5).
(*7) KB• ∗(α ∧β) ⊆(KB• ∗α)#β. This follows from (∔6) and theorem 21.

(*8) If ¬β < KB• ∗α, then,(KB• ∗α)#β ⊆KB• ∗(α ∧β).
This follows from (∔7) and theorem 21
Theorem 23. Let KB a Horn knowledge base with an empty IC and * a revi-
sion operator that satisﬁes all the AGM-postulates (∗1) to (∗8). Let a revision
function + on KB be deﬁned as: for any sentence α, (KB ∔α)• = KB• ∗α.
The revision function +, thus deﬁned, satisﬁes all the rationality postulates (∔1)
to (∔7).
Proof.
(∔1) P, Ab and IC do not change.
Obvious.
(∔2) α is accepted in KB ∔α.
Follows from (∗2).
(∔3) If α is satisﬁable and consistent with IC, then KB ∔α is consistent.
Since we have assumed IC to be empty, this directly corresponds to (∗5).
(∔4) If ¬α is not accepted in KB, then KB ∔α ≡KB + α.
Follows from (∗3) and (∗4).
(+5) If KB ≡KB′ and α ≡β, then KB ∔α ≡KB′ ∔β.
Since KB ≡KB′ they represent same belief set, i.e. KB• = KB′•. Now,
this postulate follows immediately from (∗6).
(∔6) (KB ∔α) + β implies KB ∔(α ∧β).
Corresponds to (∗7).
(∔7) If ¬β is not accepted in KB ∔α, then KB ∔(α ∧β) implies (KB ∔α) + β.
Corresponds to (∗8).
Contraction
AGM puts forward rationality postulates (−1) to (−8) to be satisﬁed by a
contraction operator on closed set KB•, reproduced below:
(−1) (Closure) KB• −α is a belief set.
(−2) (Inclusion) KB• −α ⊆KB•.
(−3) (Vacuity) If α < KB•, then KB• −α = KB•.
(−4) (Success) If ⊬α, then α < KB• −α.
(−5) (Preservation) If ⊢α ↔β, then KB• −α = KB• −β.
(−6) (Recovery) KB• ⊂(KB• −α) + α.
(−7) (Conjunction 1)KB• −α ∩KB• −β ⊆KB• −(α ∧β).
(−8) (Conjunction 2) If α < KB• −(α ∧β), then KB• −(α ∧β) ⊆KB• −α.
As in the case of revision, the equivalence is brought out by the following
theorems. Since contraction is constructed in terms of revision, these theorems
are trivial.
Corollary 1. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base with an empty IC and ˙−be a
contraction function that satisﬁes all the rationality postulates ( ˙−1) to ( ˙−8). Let
a contraction operator −on KB• be deﬁned as: for any sentence α, KB• −α =
(KB ˙−α)•. The contraction operator −, thus deﬁned, satisﬁes all the AGM -
postulates for contraction (−1) to (−8).

Proof. Follows from Theorem 18 and Theorem 22
Corollary 2. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base with an empty IC and −be a
contraction operator that satisﬁes all the AGM- postulates (−1) to (−8). Let a
contraction function ˙−on KB be deﬁned as: for any sentence α, (KB ˙−α)• =
KB• −α. The contraction function ˙−, thus deﬁned, satisﬁes all the rationality
postulates ( ˙−1) to ( ˙−8).
Proof. Follows from Theorem 19 and Theorem 23
10.4
Realizing Horn knowledge base dynamics using abductive
explanations
In this section, we explore how belief dynamics can be realized in practice (see
(Aravindan & Dung 1994), (Aravindan 1995) and (Bessant et al. 1998)). Here,
we will see how revision can be implemented based on the construction using
models of revising sentence and an order among them. The notion of abduction
proves to be useful and is explained in the sequel.
Let α be a sentence in L. An abductive explanation for α with respect to KB
is a set of abductive literals 5 ∆s.t. ∆consistent with IC and ∆|=P α (that is
α ∈CnP (∆)). Further ∆is said to be minimal iﬀno proper subset of ∆is an
abductive explanation for α.
The basic idea to implement revision of a Horn knowledge base KB by a
sentence α, is to realize Mod({α} ∪IC) in terms of abductive explanations for
α with respect to KB. We ﬁrst provide a useful lemma.
Deﬁnition 49. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, α a sentence, and ∆1 and
∆2 be two minimal abductive explanations for α with respect to KB. Then, the
disjunction of ∆1 and ∆2, written as ∆1 ∨∆2, is given as:
∆1 ∨∆2 = (∆1 ∩∆2) ∪{α ∨β|α ∈∆1\∆2 and β ∈∆2\∆1}.
Extending this to ∆•, a set of minimal abductive explanations for α with respect
to KB, ∨∆• is given by the disjunction of all elements of ∆•.
Lemma 12. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, α a sentence,and ∆1 and ∆2 be
two minimal abductive explanations for α with respect to KB. Then,Mod(∆1 ∨
∆2) = Mod(∆1) ∪Mod(∆2).
Proof. First we show that every model of ∆1 is a model of ∆1 ∨∆2. Clearly, a
model M of ∆1 satisﬁes all the sentences in (∆1 ∩∆2). The other sentences in
(∆1 ∨∆2) are of the form α ∨β, where α is from ∆1 and β is from ∆2. Since
M is a model of ∆1, α is true in M, and hence all such sentences are satisﬁed
by M. Hence M is a model of ∆1 ∨∆2 too. Similarly, it can be shown that every
model of ∆2 is a model of ∆1 ∨∆2 too.
5 An abductive literal is either an abducible A from Ab, or its negation ¬A.

Now, it remains to be shown that every model M of ∆1∨∆2 is either a model
of ∆1 or a model of ∆2. We will now show that if M is not a model of ∆2, then
it must be a model of ∆1. Since M satisﬁes all the sentences in (∆1 ∩∆2), we
need only to show that M also satisﬁes all the sentences in ∆1\∆2. For every
element α ∈∆1\∆2: there exists a subset of (∆1 ∨∆2), {α ∨β|β ∈∆2\∆2}.
M satisﬁes all the sentences in this subset. Suppose M does not satisfy α, then
it must satisfy all β ∈∆1\∆2. This implies that M is a model of ∆2, which is
a contradictory to our assumption. Hence M must satisfy α, and thus a model
∆1. Similarly, it can be shown that M must be a model of ∆2 if it is not a model
of ∆1.
As one would expect, all the models of revising sentence α can be realized
in terms abductive explanations for α, and the relationship is precisely stated
below.
Lemma 13. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, α a sentence, and ∆• the set of
all minimal abductive explanations for α with respect to KB. Then Mod({α} ∪
IC) = Mod(∨∆•).
Proof. It can be easily veriﬁed that every model M of a minimal abductive expla-
nation is also a model of α. Since every minimal abductive explanation satisﬁes
IC, M is a model of α ∪IC. It remains to be shown that every model M of
{α} ∪IC is a model of one of the minimal abductive explanations for α with
respect to KB. This can be veriﬁed by observing that a minimal abductive expla-
nation for α with respect to KB can be obtained from M.
Thus, we have a way to generate all the models of {α} ∪IC, and we just
need to select a subset of this based on an order that satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5).
Suppose we have such an order that satisﬁes all the required postulates, then
this order can be mapped to a particular set of abductive explanations for α with
respect to KB. This is stated precisely in the following theorem. An important
implication of this theorem is that there is no need to compute all the abductive
explanations for α with respect to KB. However, it does not say which abductive
explanations need to be computed.
Theorem 24. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, and ≤KB be an order among
abductive interpretations in S that satisﬁes all the rationality axioms (≤1) to
(≤5). Then, for every sentence α, there exists ∆• a set of minimal abductive
explanations for α with respect to KB, s.t. Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB) is a
subset of Mod(∨∆•), and this does not hold for any proper subset of ∆•.
Proof. From Lemma 12 and Lemma 13, it is clear that Mod({α} ∪IC) is the
union of all the models of all minimal abductive explanations of α with respect
to KB. Min selects a subset of this, and the theorem follows immediately. .
The above theorem 24, is still not very useful in realizing revision. We need to
have an order among all the interpretations that satisﬁes all the required axioms,
and need to compute all the abductive explanations for α with respect to KB.

The need to compute all abductive explanations arises from the fact that the
converse of the above theorem does not hold in general. This scheme requires
an universal order ≤, in the sense that same order can be used for any Horn
knowledge base. Otherwise, it would be necessary to specify the new order to be
used for further modifying (KB ∔α). However, even if the order can be worked
out, it is not desirable to demand all abductive explanations of α with respect
to KB be computed. So, it is desirable to work out, when the converse of the
above theorem is true. The following theorem says that, suppose α is rejected in
KB, then revision of KB by α can be worked out in terms of some abductive
explanations for α with respect to KB.
Theorem 25. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, and a revision function ∔
be deﬁned as: for any sentence α that is rejected in KB, Mod(KB ∔α) is a
non-empty subset of Mod(∨∆•), where ∆• is a set of all minimal abductive
explanations for α with respect to KB. Then, there exists an order ≤KB among
abductive interpretations in S, s.t. ≤KB satisﬁes all the rationality axioms (≤1)
to (≤5) and Mod(KB ∔α) = Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB).
Proof. Let us construct an order ≤KB among interpretations in S as follows:
For any two abductive interpretations I and I′ in S, deﬁne I ≤KB I′ iﬀeither
I ∈Mod(∨∆•) or I ∈Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)), where form(I, I′) stands for
sentence whose only models are I and I′. We will show that ≤KB thus constructed
satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5) and Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB) = Mod(KB ∔α).
First, we show that Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB) = Mod(KB ∔α).Suppose
α is not satisﬁable, i.e. Mod(α) is empty, or α does not satisfy IC, then there
are no abductive models of {α} ∪IC, and hence Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB)
is empty. From (∔3), we infer that Mod(KB ∔α) is also empty. When α is
satisﬁable and α satisﬁes IC, the required result is obtained in two parts:
1) If I ∈Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB), then I ∈Mod(KB ∔α)
Since α is satisﬁable and consistent with IC, (∔3) implies that there exists at
least one model, say I′, for KB∔α. From (∔1), it is clear that I′ is a model of
IC, from (∔2) we also get that I′ is a model of α, and consequently I ≤KB I′
(because I ∈Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB)). Suppose I ∈(Mod(∨∆•)), then
(∔4) immediately gives I ∈Mod(KB ∔α). If not, from our deﬁnition of
≤KB, it is clear that I ∈Mod(KB∔form(I, I′)). Note that α∧form(I, I′) ≡
form(I, I′), since both I and I′ are models of α. From (∔6) and (∔7), we
get Mod(KB ∔α)∩{I, I′} = Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)). Since I ∈Mod(KB ∔
form(I, I′)), it immediately follows that I ∈Mod(KB ∔α).
2) If I ∈Mod(KB ∔α), then I ∈Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB).
From (∔1) we get I is a model of IC, and from (∔2), we obtain I ∈Mod(α).
Suppose I ∈(Mod(∨∆•)), then from our deﬁnition of ≤KB, we get I ≤KB
I′, for any other model I′ of α and IC, and hence I ∈Min(Mod({α} ∪
IC), ≤KB). Instead, if I is not a model of KB, then, to get the required
result, we should show that I ∈Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)), for every model I′
of α and IC. As we have observed previously, from (∔6) and (∔7), we get
Mod(KB ∔α)∩{I, I′} = Mod(KB ∔form(I, I′)). Since I ∈Mod(KB ∔α),

it immediately follows that I ∈Mod(KB∔form(I, I′)). Hence I ≤KB I′ for
any model I′ of α and IC, and consequently, I ∈Min(Mod({α}∪IC), ≤KB
).
Every model of Mod(KB ∔α) is strictly minimal than all other interpre-
tations. It is easy to verify that such a pre-order satisﬁes (≤1) to (≤5). In
particular, since α is rejected in KB, (≤3) faithfulness is satisﬁed, and since
non-empty subset of Mod(∨∆•) is selected, (≤4) is also satisﬁed.
An important corollary of this theorem is that, revision of KB by α can be
realized just by computing one abductive explanation of α with respect to KB,
and is stated below.
Corollary 3. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base, and a revision function ∔be
deﬁned as: for any sentence α that is rejected in KB, Mod(KB ∔α) is a non-
empty subset of Mod(∆), where ∆is an abductive explanations for α with respect
to KB. Then, there exists an order ≤KB among abductive interpretations in S,
s.t. ≤KB satisﬁes all the rationality axioms (≤1) to (≤5) and Mod(KB ∔α) =
Min(Mod({α} ∪IC), ≤KB).
The precondition that α is rejected in KB is not a serious limitation in
various applications such as database updates and diagnosis, where close world
assumption is employed to infer negative information. For example, in diagnosis
it is generally assumed that all components are functioning normally, unless
otherwise there is speciﬁc information against it. Hence, a Horn knowledge base
in diagnosis either accepts or rejects normality of a component, and there is
no ”don’t know” third state. In other words, in these applications the Horn
knowledge base is assumed to be complete. Hence, when such a complete Horn
knowledge base is revised by α, either α is already accepted in KB or rejected
in KB, and so the above scheme works ﬁne.
11
Related Works
We begin by recalling previous work on view deletion. Aravindan (Aravindan &
Dung 1994), (Aravindan 1995), deﬁnes a contraction operator in view deletion
with respect to a set of formulae or sentences using Hansson’s (Hansson 1997a)
belief change. Similar to our approach (Delhibabu & Lakemeyer 2013, Delhibabu
& Behrend, 2014, Delhibabu 2014a, Delhibabu 2014b) he focused on set of for-
mulae or sentences in knowledge base revision for view update with respect to
insertion and deletion and formulae are considered at the same level. Aravindan
proposed diﬀerent ways to change knowledge base via only database deletion,
devising particular postulate which is shown to be necessary and suﬃcient for
such an update process.
Our Horn knowledge base consists of two parts, immutable part and updat-
able part, but our focus is on minimal change computations. The related works
are, Eiter (Eiter & Makino 2007), Langlois (Langlois et al. 2008) and Delgrande

(Delgrande & Peppas 2011) are focus on Horn revision with diﬀerent perspec-
tives like prime implication, logical closure and belief level. Segerberg (Segerberg
1998) deﬁned a new modeling technique for belief revision in terms of irrevoca-
bility on prioritized revision. Hansson constructed ﬁve types of non-prioritized
belief revision. Makinson (Makinson 1997) developed dialogue form of revision
AGM. Papini (Papini 2000) deﬁned a new version of knowledge base revision. In
this paper, we considered the immutable part as a Horn clause (Ferm´e & Hansson
2001 shown shielded contraction similar to immutable part, the success postu-
late does not hold in general; some non-tautological beliefs are shielded from
contraction and cannot be given up. Shielded contraction has close connections
with credibility limited revision shown Hansson et al 2001) and the updatable
part as an atom (literal). Knowledge bases have a set of integrity constraints.
Hansson’s (Hansson 1997a) kernel change is related to abductive method.
Aliseda’s (Aliseda 2006) book on abductive reasoning is one of the motivation
step. Christiansen’s (Christiansen & Dahl 2009) work on dynamics of abductive
logic grammars exactly ﬁts our minimal change (insertion and deletion). Wrobel’s
(Wrobel 1995) deﬁnition of ﬁrst order theory revision was helpful to frame our
algorithm.
On the other hand, we are dealing with view update problem. Keller’s (Keller
1985) thesis is motivation of the view update problem. There are many papers
related to the view update problem (for example, the recent survey paper on
view update by Chen and Liao (Chen & Liao 2010) and the survey paper on
view update algorithms by Mayol and Teniente (Mayol & Teniente 1999). More
similar to our work is the paper presented by Bessant (Bessant et al. 1998), which
introduces a local search-based heuristic technique that empirically proves to be
often viable, even in the context of very large propositional applications. Laurent
(Laurent et al. 1998), considers updates in a deductive database in which every
insertion or deletion of a fact can be performed in a deterministic way.
Furthermore, and at a ﬁrst sight more related to our work, some work has
been done on ”core-retainment” (Hansson 1991) in the model of language split-
ting introduced by Parikh (Parikh 1999). More recently, Doukari (Doukari et al.
2008), ¨Oz¸cep (¨Oz¸cep 2012) and Wu (Wu et al. 2011) applied similar ideas for
dealing with knowledge base dynamics. These works represent motivation step
for our future work. Second, we are dealing with how to change minimally in
the theory of ”principle of minimal change”, but current focus is on ﬁnding sec-
ond best abductive explanation (Liberatore & Schaerf 2004 and 2012), 2-valued
minimal hypothesis for each normal program (Pinto & Pereira 2011). Our work
reﬂected in the current trends on Ontology systems and description logics (Qi
and Yang (Qi & Yang 2008) and Kogalovsky (Kogalovsky 2012)). Finally, when
we presented Horn knowledge base change in abduction framework, we did not
talk about compilability and complexity (see the works of Liberatore (Liberatore
1997) and Zanuttini (Zanuttini 2003)).
The signiﬁcance of our work can be summarized in the following:
– To deﬁne a new kind of revision operator on Horn knowledge base and obtain
axiomatic characterization for it.

– To propose new generalized revision algorithm for Horn knowledge base dy-
namics, and study its connections with kernel change and abduction proce-
dure.
– To develop a new view insertion algorithm for databases.
– To design a new view update algorithm for stratiﬁable Deductive Database
(DDB), using an axiomatic method based on Hyper tableaux and magic sets.
– To study an abductive framework for Horn knowledge base dynamics.
– To present a comparative study of view update algorithms and integrity
constraint.
– Finally, to shown connection between belief update versus database update.
12
Conclusion and remarks
The main contribution of this research is to provide a link between theory
of belief dynamics and concrete applications such as view updates in databases.
We argued for generalization of belief dynamics theory in two respects: to han-
dle certain part of knowledge as immutable; and dropping the requirement that
belief state be deductively closed. The intended generalization was achieved by
introducing the concept of Horn knowledge base dynamics and generalized revi-
sion for the same. Further, we studied the relationship between Horn knowledge
base dynamics and abduction resulting in a generalized algorithm for revision
based on abductive procedures. The successfully demonstrated how Horn knowl-
edge base dynamics provide an axiomatic characterization for update an literals
to a stratiﬁable (deﬁnite) deductive database.
In bridging the gap between belief dynamics and view updates, we observe
that a balance has to be achieved between computational eﬃciency and ratio-
nality. While rationally attractive notions of generalized revision prove to be
computationally ineﬃcient, the rationality behind eﬃcient algorithms based on
incomplete trees is not clear at all. From the belief dynamics point of view,
we may have to sacriﬁce some postulates, vacuity, to gain computational eﬃ-
ciency. Further weakening of relevance has to be explored, to provide declarative
semantics for algorithms based on incomplete trees.
On the other hand, from the database side, we should explore various ways
of optimizing the algorithms that would comply with the proposed declarative
semantics. We believe that partial deduction and loop detection techniques, will
play an important role in optimizing algorithms. Note that, loop detection could
be carried out during partial deduction, and complete SLD-trees can be eﬀec-
tively constructed wrt a partial deduction (with loop check) of a database, rather
than wrt database itself. Moreover, we would anyway need a partial deduction
for optimization of query evaluation.
We have presented two variants of an algorithm for update a view atom from
a deﬁnite database. The key idea of this approach is to transform the given
database into a logic program in such a way that updates can be read oﬀfrom
the models of this transformed program. We have also shown that this algorithm
is rational in the sense that it satisﬁes the rationality postulates that are justiﬁed

from philosophical angle. In the second variant, where materialized view is used
for the transformation, after generating a hitting set and removing corresponding
EDB atoms, we easily move to the new materialized view. An obvious way is to
recompute the view from scratch using the new EDB (i.e., compute the Least
Herbrand Model of the new updated database from scratch) but it is certainly
interesting to look for more eﬃcient methods.
Though we have discussed only about view updates, we believe that Horn
knowledge base dynamics can also be applied to other applications such as view
maintenance, diagnosis, and we plan to explore it further (see works (Biskup
2012) and (Caroprese et al. 2012)). Still, a lot of developments are possible, for
improving existing operators or for deﬁning new classes of change operators. In
the relation of Horn KB revision with hitting set as to be describe similar con-
struction for description logic. In particular assuming the T-Box to the hitting
set and the rest with the A-Box (Delgrande, JP & Wassermann 2013). We did not
talk about complexity (see the works of Liberatore ((Liberatore 1997) and (Lib-
eratore & Schaerf 2004)), Caroprese (Caroprese 2012), Calvanese’s (Calvanese
2012), and Cong (Cong et al. 2012)). In this thesis answer impotent question
for experimental people that is,any real life application for AGM in 25 year the-
ory? (Ferme & Hansson 2011). The revision and update are more challenging
in logical view update problem (database theory), we extended the theory to
combine our results similar in the Konieczny’s (Konieczny 2011) and Nayak’s
(Nayak 2011).
Acknowledgement
I would like to thanks Chandrabose Aravindan and Gerhard Lakemeyer both my
Indian and Germany PhD supervisor, give encourage to write the paper. I owe
my deepest gratitude to Ramaswamy Ramanujam from Institute of Mathemat-
ical Sciences and Ulrich Furbach from University Koblenz-Landau for my PhD
thesis member. I thank to my PhD thesis examiner’s Eduardo Ferm´e from Uni-
versity of Madeira, Mohua Banerjee from Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
and Arindama Singh form Indian Institute of Technology Madras. The author
acknowledges the support of SSN College of Engineering research funds and
RWTH Aachen, where he is visiting scholar with an Erasmus Mundus External
Cooperation Window India4EU by the European Commission.

Method
Problem
Database schema
Update req.
Mechanism
Update Change
Solutions
Type View
IC
Run/
Def.
View IC
Kind of
Mul. Update Tech-
Base User Type Base View Axiom Sound. Complete.
Update Enforce. Comp. Lang.
def.
IC
Operat. nique
Facts Part.
facts def.
[69]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
No
ι δ
SLDNF
No
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
No
Not
proved
[86]
N
Yes
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
SLDNF
No
No
S
Yes
No
—
No
No
[96]
S
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
—
Yes
No
SS
Yes
Yes
1-6,7
Not
Not
proved proved
[118]
N
No
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
—
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,7
No
No
proved proved
[70]
S
Yes
Check
Comp. Relation. No
No
Static
Yes
ι δ χ
predef.
Yes
No
G
Yes
No
—
No
No
Maintain Run
Logic
Programs
[51]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
No
Static
Yes
ι δ
predef
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,7
Not
No
Programs
Proved
[146]
S
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ χ
SLDNF
No
No
SS
Yes
No
1-6,7
Yes
No
Maintain
[71]
N
Yes
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
No
Static
Yes
ι δ
Unfold
Yes
No
SS
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
[114]
N
Yes
Maintain Comp. Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ χ
SLDNF
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Not
Not
Run
Dynamic
proved proved
[150]
S
Yes
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
Unfold.
No
Yes
S
Yes
No
1-6,7
Not
No
proved
[8]
H
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
SLD
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
[26]
N
No
Maintain Comp Relation Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ χ
Active
Yes
Yes
S
Yes
No
—
No
No
Run
Logic
[66]
N
No
Maintain Comp Relation No
Flat
Static
Yes
ι δ χ
Active
Yes
Yes
S
Yes
No
—
No
No
Run
Logic
Limited Dynamic
[29]
H
Yes
Check
Comp. O-O
Class Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
Active
Yes
No
SS
Yes
No
1-6,9
No
Yes
Maintain Run
Att.
[37]
N
Yes
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Flat
Static
Yes
ι δ
Unfold.
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Not
Yes
Limited
proved
[107]
N
Yes
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Limited Static
No
ι δ
Active
Yes
No
SS
Yes
No
1-6,7
Yes
Not
proved
[145]
N
Yes
Maintain Comp Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
SLDNF
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
Run
Dynamic
[138]
S
Yes
Maintain Comp Logic
No
Flat
Static
Yes
ι δ
predef
—
Yes
G
No
Yes
—
No
Not
Limited
Programs
proved
Tab. 1. Summary of view-update and integrity constraint with our axiomatic method
Appendix A

Method
Problem
Database schema
Update req.
Mechanism
Update Change
Solutions
Type View
IC
Run/
Def.
View IC
Kind of
Mul. Update Tech-
Base User Type Base View Axiom Sound. Complete.
Update Enforce. Comp. Lang.
def.
IC
Operat. nique
Facts Part.
facts def.
[144]
N
No
Maintain Comp Logic
Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ χ
Predef
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,7
Yes
No
Program
[10]
H
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
SLD
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
[40]
N
Yes
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
SLDNF
No
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,7
No
Not
Proved
[105]
N
Yes
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Flat
Static
Yes
ι δ
Unfold
No
Yes
G
Yes
No
1-6,7
Not
No
Limited
proved
[151]
H
No
Maintain Comp. Relation Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ χ
Unfold
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,7
Not
Not
Run
Dynamic
proved proved
[109]
N
No
Maintain Comp Logic
No
Flat
Static
Yes
ι δ
Active
Yes
No
G
No
No
—
No
No
Restore
Run
Limited Dynamic
[139]
N
No
Maintain Comp Relation No
Flat
Static
Yes
ι δ
Active
Yes
No
S
No
No
—
No
No
Run
Limited
[108]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
SLD
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
[1]
O
No
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
—
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
—
No
No
[140]
N
No
Maintain Comp Relation No
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
Predef
No
No
G
No
No
—
No
No
Program
[72]
N
No
Maintain Comp Logic
Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
—
No
No
S
No
No
—
No
No
[30]
N
No
Maintain Comp. Relation Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
—
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
—
Not
Not
Run
Dynamic
proved proved
[52]
H
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
Predef
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,7
Yes
Not
Programs
proved
[78]
O
Yes
Check
Run
Relation Yes
Limited Static
No
ι δ
Unfold
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
[14]
O
Yes
Check
Run
Relation Yes
Limited Static
No
ι δ
Unfold
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
[56]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
SLDNF
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
[132]
N
No
Maintain Run
Logic
Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
Predef
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,7
Yes
Not
Programs
proved
[81]
O
No
Maintain Comp Relation Yes
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
—
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
—
No
No

Method
Problem
Database schema
Update req.
Mechanism
Update Change
Solutions
Type View
IC
Run/
Def.
View IC
Kind of
Mul. Update Tech-
Base User Type Base View Axiom Sound. Complete.
Update Enforce. Comp. Lang.
def.
IC
Operat. nique
Facts Part.
facts def.
[135]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
No
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
SLDNF
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
[57]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
No
ι δ
SLDNF
No
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Not
No
proved
[113]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
No
ι δ χ
SLD
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
—
No
No
Maintain
[19]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
No
ι δ χ
SLD
Yes
No
SS
Yes
No
1-6,7
Yes
Not
Maintain Comp
proved
[31]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ χ
Predef
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
Maintain
Dynamic
Program
[25]
N
Yes
Check
Comp Logic
Yes
Yes
Dynamic Yes
ι δ
Predef
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
—
Not
No
Programs
Proved proved
[32]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ χ
Predef
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
Maintain
Dynamic
Program
[35]
N
No
Maintain Comp Logic
Yes
No
—
Yes
ι δ
—
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
—
No
No
[154]
N
No
Maintain Run
Relation Yes
No
—
Yes
ι δ χ
Unfold
Yes
No
SS
No
No
—
Not
Not
proved proved
[79]
O
No
Maintain Comp. Logic
Yes
No
—
Yes
ι δ
—-
Yes
No
G
No
No
—
Yes
Not
Run
proved
[15]
S
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Flat
Static
Yes
ι δ
SLDNF
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Not
Limited
proved
[53]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
—
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
—
No
No
[27]
O
No
Maintain Run
Relation Yes
No
Static
Yes
ι δ
SLD
Yes
Yes
G
No
No
—
Not
Not
proved proved
[16]
O
No
Maintain Comp Relation Yes
No
Static
Yes
ι δ χ
—
Yes
No
SS
Yes
No
—
No
No
[4]
O
No
Maintain Comp. Relation No
Limited Static
Yes
ι δ
—
Yes
No
G
Yes
No
—
No
No
Run
Dynamic
[111]
N
No
Maintain Comp Relation No
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ χ
Unfold
No
Yes
SS
No
No
—
No
No
[137]
N
No
Check
Comp Logic
No
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
Active
Yes
No
G
Yes
No
—
No
No
[41]
N
Yes
Check
Run
Logic
Yes
Yes
Static
Yes
ι δ
SLD
Yes
No
S
Yes
No
1-6,9
Yes
Yes
