Transformer-based Conditional Variational Autoencoder
for Controllable Story Generation
Le Fang†, Tao Zeng§, Chaochun Liu§, Liefeng Bo§, Wen Dong†, Changyou Chen†
†University at Buffalo,
§JD Finance America Corporation, AI Lab

Abstract
We investigate large-scale latent variable models (LVMs) for
neural story generation—an under-explored application for
open-domain long text—with objectives in two threads: gener-
ation effectiveness and controllability. LVMs, especially the
variational autoencoder (VAE), have achieved both effective
and controllable generation through exploiting ﬂexible distri-
butional latent representations. Recently, Transformers and
its variants have achieved remarkable effectiveness without
explicit latent representation learning, thus lack satisfying con-
trollability in generation. In this paper, we advocate to revive
latent variable modeling, essentially the power of representa-
tion learning, in the era of Transformers to enhance controlla-
bility without hurting state-of-the-art generation effectiveness.
Speciﬁcally, we integrate latent representation vectors with
a Transformer-based pre-trained architecture to build condi-
tional variational autoencoder (CVAE). Model components
such as encoder, decoder and the variational posterior are all
built on top of pre-trained language models—GPT2 speciﬁ-
cally in this paper. Experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art
conditional generation ability of our model, as well as its ex-
cellent representation learning capability and controllability.
Introduction
Neural text generation has achieved remarkable success to
enable both effective and controllable generation at a level
that computational models can write like humans to satisfy
practical needs. Among various research objectives, the most
signiﬁcant ones are the effectiveness and the controllability
of generation, where there are always emerging opportunities
and challenges.
Deep latent variable models (LVMs), especially variational
autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013; Rezende,
Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) have been a signiﬁcant class
of methods to achieve both effective and controllable gener-
ation (Bowman et al. 2015; Miao, Yu, and Blunsom 2016;
Zhao, Zhao, and Eskenazi 2017; Zhao, Lee, and Eskenazi
2018; Zhou and Neubig 2017; Hu et al. 2017; Bao et al.
2019b; Shah and Barber 2018). These models generally work
with recurrent neural networks (RNN) such as Long short-
term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)
and Gated recurrent unit networks (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014).
The advantage of LVMs is to learn and exploit ﬂexible dis-
tributional latent representations to capture holistic features
of input and further guide the generation of sentences. Such
powerful representation learning can deal with both the effec-
tiveness and the controllability of generation.
In recent years, Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) and
its variants have become the main-stream workhorses and
boosted previous generation effectiveness by large margins.
Models based on similar self-attention architectures (Devlin
et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2018, 2019) could leverage both big
models and big training data. A dominant paradigm emerges
to be “pre-training + ﬁne-tuning” on a number of natural
language processing tasks. Even without explicitly learning
latent representations, Transformer-based models could ef-
fectively learn from training data and generate high-quality
text. It’s thrilling to witness computational models generate
consistent long text in thousands of words with ease. How-
ever, given state-of-the-art generation effectiveness, control-
lability of these models—especially when generating long
text—is still under-explored. The emerging challenge is, how
to achieve controllable generation in the era of Transformers
and a long text setting?
In this paper, we advocate to revive latent variable mod-
eling, essentially the power of representation learning, in
the era of Transformers to enhance controllability without
hurting state-of-the-art generation effectiveness. Speciﬁcally,
we integrate latent representation vectors with self-attention
based pre-trained architecture to build a conditional vari-
ational autoencoder (CVAE). Model components such as
encoder, decoder and the variational posterior are all built on
top of pre-trained language models—GPT2 (Radford et al.
2019) speciﬁcally. We demonstrate excellent representation
learning capability and controllability of our Transformer-
based LVMs through learning and manipulating the latent
representation vectors.
On the application side, we emphasize a much challeng-
ing and under-explored task, i.e. neural story generation,
which creatively writes open-domain long text in hundreds
or thousands of words conditioned on very short and abstract
prompts (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018). The task featured
with much longer output leads to higher complexity and more
ﬂexibility in a broader space than short text generation. Pre-
vious literature (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018; Mao et al.
2019; See et al. 2019; Ziegler et al. 2019) have at most stud-
ied how to effectively learn the mapping between prompt and
story through explicit end to end (end2end) training. How-
ever, controllability in such a setting has rarely been studied.
arXiv:2101.00828v2  [cs.CL]  8 Jul 2021

For instance, how to control story development and semantic
transition during the spanning of long text? Pure end2end
learning seems quite rigid, which could miss ﬂexible and
controllable mechanisms inside a black box. A reasonable
solution for this issue is to introduce latent representation
vectors, which is the treatment we consider in this paper.
To summarize, our paper is among the ﬁrst works, by our
knowledge, to build Transformer-based latent variable mod-
els to solve the controllability issue in the setting of long text
generation. Recently, we notice an independent parallel work
(Li et al. 2020), which proposes similar Transformer-based
architecture to incorporate latent representation vectors. We
note that there are a number of differences between this work
and ours. Most signiﬁcantly, we considered both VAE and
CVAE in a long text setting, while Li et al. (2020) considered
a pre-trained VAE model in traditional short text setting. Our
datasets and source code is available on GitHub1.
The Model Architecture
Conditional Variational Autoencoder
Conditional story generation (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018)
refers to generating open-domain long text based on a short
prompt, which provides either a starting point or an ab-
stract summary for the writing. In this paper, we propose
a Transformer-based conditional variational autoencoder to
learn the generative process from prompt to story.
Figure 1: Graphical Model of VAE and CVAE. In control-
lable story generation, x and y refer to a prompt and a story,
respectively. z refers to a latent variable.
Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
(Bowman et al. 2015)
Figure 1 illustrates the graphical model of VAE, an unsu-
pervised learning method for unconditional generation. VAE
consists of a generative network (decoder) and an inference
network (encoder). Given a language dataset D = {yi}|D|
i=1,
where yi = [y1i, · · · , yT i] represents ith sentence of length
T. With a prior distribution p(z), VAE generates a sentence
y using the deep generative network pθ(y|z) parameterized
by θ. The prior p(z) is typically assumed to be a standard
multivariate Gaussian. The decoder pθ(x|z) typically takes
an auto-regressive form pθ(x|z) = QT
t=1 pθ(xt|x<t, z). In
this paper, we will build the decoder based on the pre-trained
GPT2 rather than traditional recurrent neural networks.
The goal of VAE training is to maximize the marginal
data log-likelihood Ey∼D[log pθ(y)]. However, poste-
rior inference is generally intractable. Consequently, an
1https://github.com/fangleai/TransformerCVAE
φ-parameterized encoder is introduced to approximate
pθ(z|y) ∝pθ(y|z)p(z) with a variational distribution
qφ(z|y). Variational inference is employed for VAE learning,
yielding the following evidence lower bound (ELBO):
Ex∼Dlogpθ(x) ≥
Ex∼D

Ez∼qφ(z|x)logpθ(x|z)

−Ex∼D [KL (qφ(z|x) ∥p(z))]
(1)
Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE)
(Zhao,
Zhao, and Eskenazi 2017) Figure 1 also illustrates the
CVAE, an adaptation of VAE to ﬁt supervised learning
and conditional generation. Given a training dataset of
pairs D = {xi, yi}|D|
i=1, where xi = [x1i, · · · , xT i], yi =
[y1i, · · · , yT i] represents ith sentence of length T. In con-
trollable story generation, x and y refer to a prompt and a
story, respectively. Given an input x, CVAE encodes the prior
knowledge of latent code as p(z|x), and generates target y
using the deep generative network pθ(y|x, z) parameterized
by θ.
The goal of CVAE is to maximize the conditional data
log-likelihood Ex,y∼D[log pθ(y|x)]. Similarly, variational
inference is employed for CVAE learning, yielding the fol-
lowing evidence lower bound (ELBO):
Ex,y∼Dlogpθ(y|x) ≥
Ex,y∼D

Ez∼qφ(z|x,y)logpθ(y|x, z)

−Ex,y∼D [KL (qφ(z|x, y) ∥p(z|x))]
(2)
Note that both the prior pθ(z|x) and posterior qφ(z|x, y)
are learnable in CVAE.
Architecture Design
Our model architecture is illustrated in Figure 3. Basically,
it consists of a prior, posterior and conditional generator
based on multi-layer self-attention architecture (Vaswani et al.
2017), more speciﬁcally on top of pre-trained models.
Parameter initialization with GPT2
In order to exploit
the power of pre-trained models, we propose to reuse the
GPT2 model (Radford et al. 2019) as our decoder. For ease
of computation, we adopt the smallest public version with
L = 12 layers, H = 12 heads per layer, model dimension of
d = 768 units and total parameters of 117M. The encoder has
L1=6 unmasked/bi-directional self-attention layers, whose
parameters are initialized to the parameters of the ﬁrst L1 lay-
ers of the GPT2 model (initialized but not shared afterwards).
Moreover, the word embedding and positional embedding
tables in the encoder and decoder are shared.
Comparing with masked/uni-directional structure in de-
coder for auto-regressive generation, the key point is to have
unmasked/bi-directional structure in the encoder to allow
full information scope. In this sense, our design is compara-
ble with (Li et al. 2020) to reuse BERT in the encoder and
GPT2 in the decoder. However, we avocate two main design
differences: 1) We note that BERT uses word piece (WPE)
embeddings for tokenization and GPT-2 uses Byte Pair En-
coding (BPE), leading to totally different vocabulary books.

Figure 2: Self-attention (SA) and pseudo self-attention (PSA).
SA is widely used in our model including the attention-
average block, when pseudo self-attention can be used as
the 2⃝way to feed latent code (key and value colored in light
red) to the decoder.
(Li et al. 2020) resorts to keeping both tokenizations for all
inputs and outputs; while our design has none of such issues.
2) (Li et al. 2020) only works with short sentences typically
less that 64 words, while our model works with hundreds or
thousands of words in a minimal run. In our case, a model
with a full layer encoder (L1=12) is empirically too large to
ﬁt a single GPU memory. In order to save memory and con-
sidering that the ﬁrst several layers of GPT2 may implicitly
serve to encode features, our model only use L1=6 layers in
the encoder2.
Latent code from the encoder
Traditional RNN/LSTM
encoders typically only use the last hidden state from the
encoder to produce a latent space. This is insufﬁcient to
summarize sequential data and keep long-term knowledge.
In our model, representations from self-attention layers are a
sequence of vectors with total number equal to the number
of input tokens. To utilize all the information, we deﬁne an
attention-average block right afterwards to merge variable
length sequence of vectors into a single vector. The attention
average block essentially perform a multi-head self-attention
as Figure 2(a) using a learnable single query Q = qavg ∈Rd,
and K = V taken as the variable length sequence of vectors
from the last blocked self-attention layer. The single vector
representation is then passed to linear layers to predict prior
and posterior distribution, respectively.
In terms of model components, we deﬁne both the prior
and the variational posterior as isotropic Gaussian distribu-
tions, i.e., N(µ, σ2I), with learnable mean vector and “log σ”
vector. The KL divergence between the prior and posterior in
Eq. 2 is therefore analytically solvable. Traditional reparame-
terization trick (Kingma and Welling 2013) is used to allow
gradient passing through Gaussian sampling. Note that in our
model, the prior distribution p(z|x) and variational posterior
distribution qφ(z|x, y) share all the parameters except the
linear layers predicting their mean and variances to promote
prior posterior alignment.
In contrast to Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) and other
models that learn sequence of encoding vectors, our model
is dedicated to learning a single vector as an explicit latent
representation.
2Our experiment conﬁrms that using full layers in encoder has
limited improvement in performance comparing to using L1=6
layers in encoder.
Feeding latent code to the decoder
With a single latent
code representation3 z ∈Rd and a “GPT2” decoder, we
investigate three mainstream ways of latent code injection
inspired by previous literatures (Cheng et al. 2019; Ziegler
et al. 2019; Wang and Wan 2019).
1⃝INPUT: z is added to each input token during decoding, i.e.,
added with word embeddings and positional embeddings
element-wisely.
2⃝PSA4: inject latent code z in a per-layer basis. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrst project z ∈Rd into zL ∈Rd×L through a linear
layer, so that it can be split into L vectors [z1, · · · , zL],
with zl being fed into the l-th blocked self-attention layer.
As presented in (Ziegler et al. 2019) and shown in Fig-
ure 2(b), pseudo self-attention could absorb extra encoding
embeddings into a pre-trained GPT2 self-attention struc-
ture through
PSA(Q, K′, V ′) = softmax(QK′T
√dk
)V ′
(3)
where Q, K, V ∈Rl×d are the original input embeddings
participating self-attention; K′ =
zK
K

∈R(1+l)×d,
V ′ =
zV
V

∈R(1+l)×d are augmented key and value
matrices with projected latent code zK, zV from z ﬁlling
the ﬁrst row;
·
·

means concatenation by rows. Here, we
abbreviate per-layer code zl to z for notation simplicity.
3⃝SOFTMAX: in the original GPT2, an embedding vector
h ∈Rd from the last blocked attention layer is projected
to a pre-softmax logit vector p ∈RV through a linear head,
where V is the vocabulary size used in tokenization. When
a latent code should be injected in such a position, a new
and shared linear head will be initialized and learned in
order to project z ∈Rd into pz ∈RV . Finally we send
p + pz for the softmax and output.
We empirically study all the three ways of latent code
injection into the decoder, and present comparison in the
experiment section.
Training and Generation
We train our CVAE model according to the negative loss
objective in (2). For conditional story generation, the in-
put to the prior distribution p(z|x) is purely the prompt
and the input to posterior distribution qφ(z|x, y) is the con-
nected sequence of prompt and story split by a special to-
ken ‘<|endoftext|>”. The conditional generative distribution
pθ(y|x, z) is implemented as decoding with a text preﬁx
“prompt + <|endoftext|>” and feeding the latent code.
3Latent code can have dimension d′ ̸= d, in which case lin-
ear projection layers are needed before feeding latent code to the
decoder to ensure identical dimensions.
4In recent literature (Li et al. 2020), they also studied a way of la-
tent injection described as “Memory” vector. Essentially, “Memory”
is identical or equivalent to our “PSA”.

Figure 3: Our CVAE model architecture. Note that we use CVAE 1⃝, CVAE 2⃝, CVAE 3⃝to represent model variants that use the
1⃝, 2⃝, 3⃝way of latent code injection respectively. The ﬁnal model are not meant to use all ways but only subset combinations
as implied by performance.
To avoid learning deviation caused by random initialized
parameters, we freeze pre-trained parameters initialized from
GPT2 in the ﬁrst several iterations of training, i.e. 10K itera-
tions, and unfreeze them afterwards.
To alleviate the notorious posterior collapse issue, we take
a cyclic annealing schedule (Fu et al. 2019) by adjusting the
coefﬁcient β before KL divergence in (2). Speciﬁcally, we
have kept β close to zero in the ﬁrst half of cyclic schedule,
linearly annealed β to 1 in the next one fourth of cyclic
schedule and kept β = 1 in the remaining one fourth of
cyclic schedule. The purpose of such schedule is to exploit
the period that β is close to zero, which pushes the model
towards a pure autoencoder. Note that autoencoder (Bourlard
and Kamp 1988) learns point estimate of latent code instead
of distributional representation to generate target data, which
could improve generation effectiveness.
During generation, a short prompt text is fed to the en-
coder, and a latent code is sampled from the prior distribution
to guide the decoding. This procedure is the same as how
traditional CVAE works.
Related Work
Controllable Story Generation
Most of previous works on text generation consider a setting
of short text. For controllable generation, they mainly con-
sider certain global aspects of text, with the most common
aspects being sentiment and topic (Shen et al. 2017; Zhao
et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2017; Fang et al. 2019; Dathathri et al.
2019; Keskar et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020).
Researchers have attempted short story generation with ﬁne-
grained control through plots, plans or the so-called story-
lines (Peng et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2019), leading to a wide
usage and benchmark on 5-lines story dataset ROCStories
(Mostafazadeh et al. 2016).
In recent years, (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018) proposes

story generation as a test bed of open-domain long text gen-
eration (Fang et al. 2021). (Ziegler et al. 2019) initiates the
research of conditionally generating story based on a pre-
trained GPT2.
Though achieving promising results, very few works have
been presented to improve controllability in the setting of
long text. This work is, by our knowledge, the ﬁrst work to
build a Transformers-based latent variable model to improve
controllable open-domain long text generation.
Transformers-based LVMs
Recently, there are several works building latent variable
models on top of the Transformer. One main class of work
is conditional VAEs with Transformer-based components
in non-autoregressive sequence generation, especially non-
autoregressive machine translation (Shu et al. 2020; Ma et al.
2019; Kasai et al. 2020; Han et al. 2020). Another class of
work is on dialogue generation with conditional VAEs (Bao
et al. 2019a; Lin et al. 2020) for response diversity.
From another perspective, (Wang and Wan 2019) aims
to learn latent representations for story completion, where
latent variables are only used to ﬁll very short text blank.
(Cheng et al. 2019) proposes a semi-supervised method us-
ing a Transformer-based VAE to solve aspect-term sentiment
analysis problem. The method also disentangles latent space
for aspect-speciﬁc sentiment and the lexical context, respec-
tively. A recently released literature (Li et al. 2020) proposes
large-scale VAE as a pre-trained model. The model is ﬁrst
pre-trained with massive unlabelled corpus and then ﬁne-
tuned in various down-stream generation tasks that traditional
RNN/LSTM based VAEs have attempted.
Our paper indeed gets some inspirations from previous
works of Transformer-based latent variable models on archi-
tecture side. However, our model is motivated to enhance
controllability of generation and deals with a challenging
setting of long-text generation.
Experimental Results and Discussions
Pre-Experiment on VAE Architecture
In order to verify our idea of Transformer-based latent vari-
able models, we ﬁrst conduct a pre-experiment with the VAE
architecture on two small datasets. The VAE implemented
is a simpler version of our CVAE model shown in Figure 3,
where the prior is deﬁned as standard spherical Gaussian
N(1, I). Moreover, the VAE conducts pure unsupervised
learning, where unlabelled language texts are encoded into a
distributional representation space and then decoded back.
Datasets:
The two relatively small datasets are introduced
in the following for VAE learning respectively with statistics
shown in Table 1.
The Arxiv is an online dataset (Sergio 2019) that extracts
abstracts from “arxiv” articles. Speciﬁcally, a topic query is
searched among arxiv abstracts and the matched ones are
collected. The three topic queries we used are “artiﬁcial in-
telligence”, “computer vision” and “language generation”,
leading to around 12K article abstracts respectively having
such topic words. The Yelp is a public dataset (Yang et al.
Dataset
Num. of text
Split
Avg. length
Arxiv
35228
90-5-5
233
Yelp
120 K
10-1-1
96.7
Table 1: Statistics of datasets in VAE pre-experiment.
(a) Arxiv.
(b) Yelp.
Figure 4: Representation learning of stories in pre-experiment.
(a) Arxiv: Topic are draw in different colors: red for artiﬁcial
intelligence; blue for computer vision; green for language
generation; (b) Yelp: Sentiment are draw in two colors: red
for negative; blue for positive.
2017; He et al. 2018) with restaurant reviews collected from
the “Yelp” website. Reviews are associated with user ratings
from one to ﬁve stars. We binarize reviews with user rating
above three as positive, and below three as negative, leading
to a binary sentiment dataset.
Visualization Results
Figure 4 visualizes the posterior z
of texts in the test dataset in 2D space using t-SNE (Maaten
and Hinton 2008). As we can see, meaningful latent spaces
can be learned, which are able to cluster high-dimension data
according to proximity between their latent codes. Interest-
ingly, for the Arxiv dataset, cluster of “artiﬁcial intelligence”
lies between clusters of “computer vision” and “language
generation”, which coincides with our understanding of these
topics. Such visualization shows encouraging signs on repre-
sentation learning power of our model.
Experimental Settings
Datasets:
We conduct conditional story generation on two
datasets, WritingPrompts and WikiPlots, with statistics
shown in Table 2. The datasets are publicly available and meet
our target of open-domain long text corpora. We have investi-
gated several other most commonly used public datasets in
conditional text generation. Another dataset commonly used
in story-plot generation is ROCStories (Mostafazadeh et al.
2016; Yao et al. 2019), which consists of 5-lines stories, thus
are too short to use in our task.
For the two datasets adopted, the WritingPrompts is a
dedicated large scale hierarchical story generation dataset
collected from Reddit’s “WritingPromts” forum (Fan, Lewis,
and Dauphin 2018; Mao et al. 2019). Given a prompt as a

Dataset
Num.
stories
Split
Prompt
avg.
len.
Story
avg.
len.
Story
avg.
paragraphs
WP
303 K
90-5-5
25.4
674.5
6.3
WI
113 K
90-5-5
3.4
332.9
3.1
Table 2: Statistics of datasets for controllable story generation.
WP: WritingPrompts; WI: WikiPlots.
rough guide or starting point, stories are multi-paragraph
short novels written by human users; the WikiPlots5 con-
tains story plot about books, novels, ﬁlms, and etc, extracted
from English language Wikipedia. Each story plot is paired
with a short title, which is used similarly as prompt in the
WritingPrompts.
Benchmark Models
Each of our benchmark models serves designated purposes.
Note that we don’t benchmark with other pre-trained lan-
guage model bases which may be much more powerful than
GPT2. We also don’t choose some popular controllable text
generators such as (Hu et al. 2017; Dathathri et al. 2019)
since they either only work in a short text setting or discuss a
different notion of control.
By
comparing
with
a
state-of-the-art
specialized-
architecture task-speciﬁc story generation model (Fan, Lewis,
and Dauphin 2018), we evaluate models’ in-domain gen-
eration performances. Fusion models in (Fan, Lewis, and
Dauphin 2018) takes a convolutional seq2seq model struc-
ture with a fusion training mechanism. Although similar
self-attention architectures are used, the fusion model is still
different with our Transformer-based architectures on the
design of key and value vectors.
By comparing with a state-of-the-art transfer learning
method based on GPT-2 models—pseudo self attention (PSA)
(Ziegler et al. 2019), we compare our CVAE model with a
pure supervised training method for conditional generation.
The pseudo self attention introduces new projection matrices
to absorb a sequence of embedding vectors from input to
the self-attention computational framework. Note that we
may use pseudo self attention (PSA) as one way of latent
code injection ( 2⃝), but there are key differences: our model
only injects a single encoded vector, rather than a sequence
of encoding vectors in original PSA; our CVAE model has
exploited the notion of distributional representation to learn
a representation space to enable ﬂexible controllability. In
another words, our CVAE learns encoded vector together
with a posterior distribution, when pure PSA doesn’t.
By comparing with a simple way of transfer learning called
“ﬁne-tuning with special tokens” (FIST) (Fang et al. 2021),
we investigate the effect of incorporating a latent code into
the decoding. FIST does not learn a latent code, but only ﬁne
tunes a pre-trained GPT2 model with augmented language
texts, i.e., directly connecting prompt with story and put a
special token ‘<|endoftext|>” in between.
5https://github.com/markriedl/WikiPlots
By comparing different ways of latent code injection, we
evaluate their effectiveness accordingly. We label our CVAE
model with the latent code injections 1⃝, 2⃝and 3⃝as CVAE-
1⃝, CVAE- 2⃝and CVAE- 3⃝, respectively, as is reﬂected in
Figure 3.
Implementation Details
We implement our models using the “Huggingface Trans-
formers” library in Pytorch (Wolf et al. 2019). In evaluation,
we generate stories using the top-k top-p random sampling
scheme (Holtzman et al. 2019; Keskar et al. 2019) with
k = 100 and p = 0.9. Temperature smoothing technique
is also applied with T = 0.9. Considering the two relatively
large test datasets, we randomly decode one story per test
input, rather than sampling several stories per test prompt
and selecting the best one.
Evaluation Results
Automatic Metrics:
We evaluate the following automatic
metrics towards target stories:
• Perplexity (PPL) is used to evaluate language models and
often regarded as a proxy for generation quality. All mod-
els based on GPT-2 use the BPE tokenization scheme,
where PPL values are not directly comparable with some
previous models such as (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018)
with PPLs computed at the natural word level. Similar to
(See et al. 2019), we additionally compute the word-level
perplexity of GPT-2 models to enable the comparison with
previous models. That is, we normalize the total negative
log probability of the target text by the number of word
level tokens.
• ROUGE scores are computed as n-gram overlap of test
generated stories versus given target stories. For complete-
ness, we report ROUGE scores (ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2,
and ROUGE-L) (Lin and Hovy 2002) of n-gram overlap
with both precision (P), recall (R), and F1.
Automatic Evaluation Results:
The results are presented
in Table 3.
Overall, our CVAE model achieves generally better, at
least comparable, metrics in terms of lower PPL and higher
ROUGE scores, demonstrating state-of-the-art conditional
story generation performance.
Methods based on pre-trained models (PSA / FIST /
CVAE) show better overall performance with relatively less
task speciﬁc efforts than the Fusion models, demonstrating
the power of large-scale pre-training with Transformer-based
architecture. Fusion models still show relatively high preci-
sion scores, especially in WritingPrompts, due to its dedi-
cated design for story generation.
When comparing CVAE 2⃝with PSA, we observe perfor-
mance improvement due to the ﬂexible learned representation
space. Note that CVAE merges a sequence of encoding repre-
sentation vectors into a single latent vector, which is the key
difference with original PSA.
When comparing CVAE variants with FIST, we observe
the beneﬁt of latent representation modeling as a powerful
addition to pure occurance modeling.

Methods
Perplexity↓
ROUGE-1↑
ROUGE-2↑
ROUGE-L↑
Word
BPE
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
Dataset: WritingPrompts
Fusion
36.0
-
0.223
0.386
0.157
0.038
0.074
0.026
0.206
0.358
0.145
PSA
31.6
21.3
0.265
0.316
0.228
0.047
0.054
0.041
0.248
0.296
0.213
FIST
30.2
25.9
0.181
0.339
0.123
0.023
0.046
0.015
0.17
0.321
0.116
CVAE 1⃝
26.4
23.2
0.265
0.332
0.221
0.046
0.067
0.035
0.244
0.353
0.187
CVAE 2⃝
26.8
23.2
0.266
0.325
0.225
0.049
0.074
0.037
0.253
0.348
0.199
Dataset: WikiPlots
Fusion
108.2
-
0.185
0.185
0.185
0.026
0.027
0.025
0.15
0.149
0.151
PSA
79.5
47.8
0.188
0.188
0.189
0.026
0.025
0.027
0.172
0.171
0.173
FIST
38.9
26.5
0.166
0.253
0.124
0.018
0.032
0.013
0.15
0.231
0.111
CVAE 1⃝
37.6
25.4
0.196
0.211
0.183
0.026
0.027
0.025
0.187
0.196
0.178
CVAE 2⃝
37.6
26.4
0.190
0.221
0.167
0.030
0.035
0.026
0.169
0.197
0.148
Table 3: Automatic metrics for conditional story generation evaluated on two datasets.
When comparing different ways of latent code injection
in CVAE, we observe that it is hard to made option 3⃝work
empirically; options 1⃝and 2⃝perform comparably well.6
Our observation is different from (Li et al. 2020), which
claims 2⃝works signiﬁcantly better than 1⃝. We suspect this
is due to an inherently different experiment setting, where
we work with signiﬁcantly longer text.
Qualitative Evaluation:
When conducting training on
the WikiPlots dataset, we observe similar representation
learning results as shown in Figure 5. A story prompt in
WikiPlots may have extractable key words to reveal the
item types, such as TV series, ﬁlm, music, manga, novel,
and game, etc. We observe that item types from test story
prompts are clearly clustered in the latent code space, which
implies effective representation learning to capture inherent
characteristic of the prompts.
We further present qualitative generation examples on the
test datasets in Tables 4–11. We observe that stories are se-
mantically and grammatically sound, and more importantly,
highly conditioned on and consistent with given prompts. A
large scale human evaluation is underway, which is quite
expensive due to text length and evaluation scale.
Controllability Experiments:
To verify the effect of the
learned latent representation vectors in generation, we con-
duct an interesting “control” experiment: given two prompt
x1 and x2, we generate story from pθ(y|x1, z2), i.e., con-
ditioning on x1 preﬁx and feeding in latent code z2 along
the decoding. In this way, the generated story will lie in the
combination semantic space of the two prompt x1 and x2,
especially after the latent code z2 takes effect and dominates.
Generation examples from the two test datasets are pre-
sented in Tables 7 and 11. We colorize key words in generated
6We also observe that using both 1⃝and 2⃝does not consistently
improve performance.
Figure 5: Visualization of prompts in WikiPlots test dataset
through t-SNE. Item types are draw in different colors: red
for TV series; blue for ﬁlms; yellow for manga and comic;
black for novel.
stories that coincides with given prompts x1 and x2 accord-
ingly. Such examples conﬁrm the effect of latent codes in
generation, indicating our model as a principal way to en-
hance controllability.
Conclusion and Future Research
In this paper, we propose Transformer-based latent variable
models to enhance story controllability while maintaining
state-of-the-art generation effectiveness. Our test bed is a
much more challenging and under-explored long-text appli-
cation than the traditional short-text generation. Our results
indicate the superiority of Transformer-based latent variable
models, and appeal more efforts to be invested in the domain.
