DISCOVERY OF THE D-BASIS IN BINARY TABLES BASED ON
HYPERGRAPH DUALIZATION
K. ADARICHEVA AND J. B. NATION
Abstract. Discovery of (strong) association rules, or implications, is an im-
portant task in data management, and it ﬁnds application in artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, data mining and the semantic web. We introduce a novel approach
for the discovery of a speciﬁc set of implications, called the D-basis, that pro-
vides a representation for a reduced binary table, based on the structure of
its Galois lattice.
At the core of the method are the D-relation deﬁned in
the lattice theory framework, and the hypergraph dualization algorithm that
allows us to eﬀectively produce the set of transversals for a given Sperner hy-
pergraph. The latter algorithm, ﬁrst developed by specialists from Rutgers
Center for Operations Research, has already found numerous applications in
solving optimization problems in data base theory, artiﬁcial intelligence and
game theory. One application of the method is for analysis of gene expression
data related to a particular phenotypic variable, and some initial testing is
done for the data provided by the University of Hawaii Cancer Center.
1. Introduction
Knowledge retrieval from large data sets remains an essential problem in infor-
mation technology and its many usages in ﬁnance, biology, economy and social
sciences. The data is often recorded in binary tables with rows consisting of the
objects and columns of the attributes, that mark whether a particular object has or
does not have a particular attribute. The dependencies existing between the sub-
sets of the attributes in the form of association rules, or implications, can uncover
the laws, causalities and trends hidden in the data; see R. Agrawal et al. [4].
An implication X →Y (also referred to as a strong association rule in data
mining, see M. Kryszkiewicz [28], with parameter of conﬁdence equal to 1) has
the meaning that every object in the data set that possesses each attribute in the
subset X will also possess every attribute from the set Y . Such implications provide
an essential hidden connection between diﬀerent attributes. Sets of implications
which are called bases provide an alternative way of storing the tabled data: they
generate all possible implications that hold in the set of attributes, as their logical
consequences, and also allow the restoration of the tabled data. Sometimes, only the
implications X →b pertinent to a distinguished attribute b could be of particular
importance in various experiments that produce tabled data.
One particular type of a table could be medical data where b may stand for
a phenotypic attribute, while other attributes are the expression levels of speciﬁc
genes. Then each association rule may represent a speciﬁc hypothesis of how the
2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 05A05, 06B99, 52B05.
Key words and phrases. Binary table, Galois lattice, implicational basis, hypergraph dualiza-
tion, association rules.
The research was partially supported by Grant N 13/42 of Nazarbayev University, 2013–2105.
1
arXiv:1504.02875v2  [cs.DB]  31 Jan 2016

2
K. ADARICHEVA AND J. B. NATION
expression of several genes directly impacts the expression of another gene, and via a
chain of direct interactions, indirectly impacts the phenotypic variation. Biologists
may then pick some of these hypotheses to verify the interactions with the inventory
of biochemical methods or animal models. To discriminate between the rules that
are biologically relevant and those that are not, the concept of the support of the
rule X →b may be applied, which is a portion of the rows of the table where all
attributes from X are present. The rules with the highest support could be the
targets of prime interest.
In this paper we propose a novel algorithm for the retrieval of the strong associa-
tion rules between the sets of attributes in large binary tables, which is particularly
suited for retrieval of targeted implications X →b with a ﬁxed attribute b. At the
heart of the algorithm lies the connection between an arbitrary binary table and an
associated algebraic structure known as a Galois lattice. A generating set of strong
association rules, called a basis, often gives a more concise representation of the
tabled data and its Galois lattice. Nevertheless, the existing algorithms developed
in the framework of Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) are time-exponential in the
size of the table, and they become ineﬀective on large data sets.
Our approach retrieves a complete generating set of implications known as the
D-basis, that was introduced and tested in K. Adaricheva et al. [2]. This new type of
basis is amenable to parallel processing, and can be used to ﬁnd the rules that target
a particular attribute without constructing the entire Galois lattice. Signiﬁcantly, it
employs the powerful optimization algorithm known as the hypergraph dualization,
see M. Fredman and L. Khachiyan [17]. Similar arrpoach was used in U. Ryssel,
F. Distel and D. Borchmann [32] for the retreival of the canonical direct unit basis,
of which the D-basis is a subset.
The code implementations of the dualization
algorithm were successfully tested on the models of the large size in E. Boros et
al. [9]. While one can employ the algorithm for arbitrary tables, it could especially
be eﬀective in tables with the number of attributes considerably larger than the
number of the objects. One ﬁnds this type of data in biological studies, where the
set of attributes may include millions of genetic variations.
The paper is organized as follows. We present the association rules and parame-
ters of support and the conﬁdence, as they are known in data mining, in section 2.
Then we give a general overview for the Galois lattices and FCA methods in section
3 and the hypergraph dualization algorithm in section 4. Section 5 describes the
D-basis, and section 6 gives the general properties of Galois lattices. Our main
result is in section 7: an algorithm to recover the D-basis from a binary table. We
demonstrate the algorithm on an example in section 8, provide some preliminary
results of testing the code implementation in section 9, and give an overview of the
future work in section 10.
2. Association rules in data mining
The leading algorithmic approach in recovery of association rules in data mining
was formulated in the form of the Apriori algorithm in R. Agrawal et al. [4]. Two
parameters are essential for association rules: the thresholds of the support and the
conﬁdence. The support of any set X of attributes is the value SA(X) (formally
deﬁned in section 6), which is essentially the number of rows of the table that have
ones in all columns from X. The set X is called δ-frequent, if the ratio of SA(X) to
the number of all rows in the table is greater than the given value of the threshold δ.

DISCOVERY OF THE D-BASIS
3
The ﬁrst part of the Apriori algorithm aims at discovery of the maximal δ-frequent
sets, for a given threshold value δ.
The second part of the algorithm is devoted to splitting any maximal frequent
set X into Y ∪Z so that the conﬁdence SA(Y ∪Z)/SA(Y ) exceeds a given threshold
µ. In this case, Y →Z is an association rule that satisﬁes both thresholds δ and µ.
The time required to build maximal frequent sets, in the bottom-up way as in
Apriori, is asymptotically proportional to the number of frequent sets, and the
latter may be exponentially larger than the number of maximal frequent sets. The
number of maximal frequent sets itself may also be exponential in the size of the
attributes of the table. The time required to build maximal frequent sets can be
used as a norm to evaluate the complexity relative to the size of both input and
output, in other words, the time delay in computation of the next maximal frequent
set.
According to a result of E. Boros et al. [11], given any subset S of maximal
frequent sets, the problem of deciding whether it is complete (i.e., includes all max-
imal sets) is NP-hard, even if the number of maximal frequent sets is exponential
in the number of attributes n, and S is of size O(nα) for small α.
All this makes the Apriori heuristic inadequate for large data sets, in particular
with many frequent sets of large size. Another weakness of the Apriori approach is
its inability to target speciﬁc attributes in the conclusion of association rules. Due to
the nature of the algorithm, the decision about the splitting of a maximal frequent
set into antecedent and conclusion happens in the second part of the algorithm,
after the main eﬀort on obtaining the frequent sets is already spent. See further
details in section 9.
3. Formal Concept Analysis and basis retrieval
3.1. Retrieval of the canonical basis. The path from the tabled data to fre-
quent sets of attributes, and then to bases of implications, can be built via the
Galois relation existing between objects and attributes, and via the structure as-
sociated with this relation known in the algebraic literature as the Galois lattice.
For example, maximal frequent subsets of the attribute set, which are targeted in
data mining of transaction tables, are particular elements of the Galois lattice, see
P. Valtchev et al. [34], while the strong association rules (with the conﬁdence = 1)
form the implicational basis of this lattice.
The ﬁrst study of the Galois lattice appeared in 1940 in G. Birkhoﬀ[8]. It was
developed further in M. Barbut and B. Monjardet [6], and taken into a ﬁeld of
its own, under the name Formal Concept Analysis (or FCA), in B. Ganter and R.
Wille [21]. FCA took oﬀas a technical tool since the 1980s, mostly for the data
visualization for various business applications. The applications range from knowl-
edge representation and data mining to knowledge management and the semantic
web, see J. Poelmans et al. [31].
Most recently, there were several projects in European Commonwealth where
FCA was involved in biological studies of temporal Boolean networks modeling
genetic data.
See, for example, [3, 15, 35, 36].
There are growing applications
of Galois lattices in ontology mappings [37, 38, 39] and in description logics [33].
A generalization of Galois lattices, known as “pattern structures” in B. Ganter
and S. Kuznetsov [20], deals with data more complex than binary tables. Some

4
K. ADARICHEVA AND J. B. NATION
applications of these techniques can be found in C. Carpineto and G. Romano [12]
and M. Kaytoue et al. [25].
The FCA approach is centered around a special implicational basis known in the
literature as the canonical basis (also stem basis, or Duquenne-Guigues basis). This
basis has the minimum number of implications, and has a fundamental connection
to any other basis deﬁning a given Galois lattice and/or binary table.
The attribute exploration algorithm to recover the canonical basis, developed in
the FCA framework, see B. Ganter [19], requires a search over the entire Galois
lattice, with respect to some linear order established on the power set of attributes.
As a result, the algorithm runs in times dependent on at least the size of the
Galois lattice, which is normally exponential in the number of attributes. Recent
theoretical results suggest that existing approaches to calculation of the canonical
basis may not produce algorithms with better worst-case complexity, see [5, 14].
At its core, the implications of the canonical basis are deﬁned by recognizing
pseudo-closed sets X that are placed into the premises of implications: X →Y .
There is no possibility to use parallel computation of pseudo-closed sets, since every
new one depends on its subsets being recognized earlier in the process.1 Moreover,
it may happen that the same attribute b will appear on the right side in several
implications from the basis. Thus, even if we were interested only in implications
of the form X →b, for this particular b, one would need to reconstruct the whole
basis.
3.2. Canonical direct unit basis. The canonical direct unit basis is discussed
in K. Bertet and B. Monjardet [7] as a basis unifying various deﬁnitions given to
this concept in the literature. As the Duquenne-Guigues basis, it can be deﬁned
in the abstract framework of a general closure system on a ﬁnite set. It consists
of implications X →b with the property of minimality of X with respect to set
containment, for any ﬁxed b. In other words, no implication X′ →b holds, where
X′ is a proper subset of X.
The canonical direct unit basis has considerably more implications compared to
the Duquenne-Guigues basis, but it has a nice feature of being iteration-free basis,
or direct basis. In fact, it is contained in any other direct basis deﬁning the same
closure system. Section 11 of [2] contains experimental results on the time needed
to compute the closure of a randomly chosen set, in the closure systems on 6 and
7-element sets, given three bases: canonical basis of Duquenne-Guigues, in its unit
form, the canonical direct unit basis and the D-basis.
For the closure systems
in these computational experiments, we found that the length of the Duquenne-
Guigues basis was on the order of half the length of the canonical direct basis. On
the other hand, not being direct or ordered direct, it took on the order of twice as
long to compute the closure as the other two.
Recently, U. Russel et al. [32] proposed a method of retrieval of the canonical
direct unit basis that would employ the hypergraph dualization algorithm. While
the actual coding applied some back-tracking and simple heuristics instead of ac-
tual implementation of dualization, the computer test results showed considerably
shorter running times when compared to existing FCA implementations: on a par-
ticular data table of size 26 × 79 the new algorithm would return the basis of 86
1We mention that some eﬀorts were spent on parallelization of algorithms building a Galois
lattice from the binary table, such as in P. Krajca et al. [27], but possible utilization of these
approaches for computation of pseudo-closed sets has not yet been developed.

DISCOVERY OF THE D-BASIS
5
implications in 0.1 sec compared to 6.5 hours of the FCA implementation, and, on
random tables of size 20 × 40, it spent about 1/50 of time needed for the FCA
algorithm.
We note that the D-basis which we deal with in this paper is a subset of the
canonical direct unit basis, see more details in section 5 and in [2].
4. Hypergraph dualization
Let A be a ﬁnite set of cardinality |A| = n. For a hypergraph (set family) H ⊆
2A, consider the family of its maximal independent subsets, i.e., maximal subsets
of A not containing any edge of H. The complement of a maximal independent
subset is a minimal transversal of H, i.e., a minimal subset of A intersecting all
edges of H. (Minimal transversals are also called minimal hitting sets.)
The collection Hd of minimal transversals is called the dual or transversal hy-
pergraph of H. It is easy to see that Hd is a Sperner hypergraph, i.e., no edge of
Hd contains another edge of Hd. If H is also Sperner then H = (Hd)d. Given a
Sperner hypergraph, a frequently arising task is the generation of the transversal
hypergraph Hd. This problem, known as dualization, can be stated as follows:
DUAL(H, G)::Given a complete list of all edges of H, and a set of minimal
transversals G ⊆Hd, either prove that G = Hd, or ﬁnd a new transversal g ∈
Hd \ G.
Clearly, one can generate all of the minimal transversals in Hd (equivalently, all
the maximal independent sets for H) by initializing G = ∅and iteratively solving
the above problem |Hd| + 1 times. Since |Hd| can be exponentially large in both
|H| and |A|, the complexity of generating Hd is customarily measured in the input
and output sizes.
According to a result in [16], the problem DUAL(H, G) can be solved in incre-
mental quasi-polynomial time, i.e., in O(n) + m(o(log (m)) time, where n = |A| and
m = |H| + |G|. Moreover, Hd can be generated in incremental polynomial time
(i.e. DUAL(H, G) can be solved in time polynomial in |A|, |H|, and |G|) for many
classes of hypergraphs, see [9, 10, 16].
The hypergraph dualization algorithm is one of various optimizations in database
theory, artiﬁcial intelligence, game theory, and learning theory, to name a few. See
the survey articles [16] and [9], also the most complete recent account in [23]. Its
eﬃcient implementation is described and tested in L. Khachiyan et al. [26]. While
it was shown that the implementation achieves the same theoretical worst bound,
practical experience with this implementation shows that it can be substantially
faster. In particular, the code can produce, in a few hours, millions of transversals
for hypergraphs with hundreds of vertices and thousands of hyper-edges. Further-
more, the experiments also indicate that the delay per transversal scales almost
linearly with the number of vertices and number of hyper-edges. A more recent
implementation by K. Murakami and T. Uno [30] not only demonstrates even bet-
ter time performance, but also runs fast on large-scale inputs, for which earlier
algorithms do not terminate in practical time.
5. D-basis
The idea of the D-basis comes from concept of the D-relation developed in a
lattice theoretic framework. The deﬁnition of this relation goes back to the work

6
K. ADARICHEVA AND J. B. NATION
of B. J´onsson, A. Day, R. Freese, and J.B. Nation, which showed that this relation
played a critical role in the description of the structure of free lattices. See the
monograph R. Freese et al. [18]. The D-relation plays a key role in deﬁning the
OD-graph of a ﬁnite lattice in J.B. Nation [29], which was widely used in computer
science literature. This concept was translated into the D-basis in the recent work
[2].
Essentially, the D-basis is a subset of the canonical direct unit basis that consists
of implications x →b (binary part), as well as X →b with |X| > 1, such that
whenever any x ∈X is replaced by any set Y for which x →y holds for all y ∈Y ,
and Y →x does not hold, the implication no longer holds. In particular, when
Y = ∅, this also means that the implication X′ →b fails for every proper subset
X′ ⊂X.
For each implication X →b in the D-basis, the subset X is called a minimal
cover for b, in lattice theory framework, and the D-relation is the binary relation
on the base set of a closure system deﬁned as follows: bDx if x ∈X, for some
minimal cover X for b.
As we will see in section 6, the closure system of interest for us will be deﬁned
on the base set A′ of attributes of a (reduced, per discussion in section 6.2) binary
table, which will also become the set of join irreducible elements of the Galois lattice
L. We will revisit the connection between the D-relation and the D-basis in section
6.5.
The OD-graph of a ﬁnite closure system or a ﬁnite lattice is deﬁned as a collection
of all minimal covers, if any, for join irreducible elements of the lattice, together
with the partially ordered set of all join irreducibles in the lattice. The latter is
reﬂected in the binary part of the D-basis, or any other basis for the lattice.
Example 1.
Consider the lattice L on Fig.1 in section 8. The set of join irreducible elements
is Ji L = {a1, a2, c1, c2, b}. The OD-graph of the lattice contains ⟨Ji L, ⩽⟩, where
⩽is inherited from the lattice, i.e., the non-trivial relations are c1 ⩽a1, b and
c2 ⩽a2, b. Thus, implications b →c1, a1 →c1 and a2 →c2,b →c2 should be
either included into or follow from any set of implications deﬁning closure system
represented by L.
OD-graph will also contain the minimal covers, as pairs (X, y), where X ⊆Ji L,
y ∈Ji L and X is a minimal cover for y. Not that {a1, a2} is not a minimal cover
for b, since a1 →c1 (while c1 →a1 does not hold) and a1 can be replaced by c1 so
that c1a2 →b holds . Thus, the OD-graph will have only two minimal covers for
b: {a1, c2}, {a2, c1}, and one minimal cover for each of a1, a2: {a2, c1} and {a1, c2},
respectively.
Finally, the D-basis is the implicational form of the OD-graph and consists of
implications: a1 →c1, b →c1, a2 →c2, b →c2, a1c2 →b, a1c2 →a2, a2c1 →b
and a2c1 →a1.
The canonical direct unit basis will have three extra implications: a1a2 →b,
ba1 →a2 and ba2 →a1, which are not included in the D-basis.
An important feature of the D-basis is that it is ordered direct, which means that
it is iteration-free when a special ordering is imposed on the implications. For the
D-basis, the ordering only requires that all binary implications x →b precede all
non-binary implications X →c. This property of the basis has an advantage of easy

DISCOVERY OF THE D-BASIS
7
parsing for the processing of its logical consequences. Such processing shows faster
times than the forward chaining algorithm, which is widely used in industrial logic
programming, or LINCLOSURE algorithm in data bases, see [2], section 7. Thus
it retains the important property of directness of the canonical direct unit basis,
while having, on average, only a portion of implications from the latter. According
to the test results in [2], the average number of implications in the D-basis, for
closure systems on a domain of size 7, are between 0.55 and 0.70 of the size of the
canonical unit basis.
6. Galois lattice
6.1. Support function and concepts. Many data sets in computer science are
presented in the form of binary tables. By a ﬁnite binary table we understand a
relation R ⊆U ×A, for the set of objects U (rows of the table) and set of attributes
A (columns of the table). If r = (u, a) ∈R, then the position in row u and column
a is marked by 1.
This can be interpreted as meaning that object u possesses
attribute a. Otherwise, the position is marked with a 0.
This table represents a Galois connection, and allows us to form the correspond-
ing Galois lattice. In order to deﬁne the Galois lattice, one needs to deﬁne the
support function on each of the sets 2U and 2A with respect to R.
SA : 2A →2U is called a support function on 2A if, for every X ⊆A, SA(X) =
{y ∈U : (x, y) ∈R, for all x ∈X}. Similarly, the support function SU : 2U →2A
is deﬁned for all Y ⊆U as SU(Y ) = {x ∈A : (x, y) ∈R, for all y ∈Y }. One may
use the symbol S for notation of both SA and SU, since it is usually clear from the
context which one should be applied.
The pair (X, Y ) ∈2A × 2U is called a concept of the relation R, if Y = S(X)
and X = S(Y ). It is easy to show that if (X1, Y1) and (X2, Y2) are two concepts
with X1 ⊆X2, then Y2 ⊆Y1. Thus, the set of all concepts can be ordered with
respect to the set containment order on their ﬁrst components, or with respect to
containment order of their second component, producing two partially ordered sets
that are dual to each other.
Moreover, each of these partially ordered sets actually forms a lattice, LR, or re-
spectively, L∗
R, and one may refer to one or the other (depending on the preferences
between sets U or A) as the Galois lattice (concept lattice in FCA) of the relation
R.
Since the structure of the Galois lattice LR is fully determined by its ﬁrst com-
ponent (or its dual lattice L∗
R is fully determined by its second component), one can
establish an isomorphism between the Galois lattice LR and the lattice of closed
sets of a closure operator deﬁned on 2A by means of the support function. In-
deed, it is straightforward to show that the operator φA : 2A →2A deﬁned as
φA(X) = SU(SA(X)) for X ∈2A is, in fact, a closure operator on A, and the
closed sets with respect to φA are exactly the ﬁrst components of the concepts of
R. Thus, Cl(A, φA) = LR, where Cl(A, φA) denotes the lattice of closed sets of a
closure system (A, φA).
6.2. Reductions of the table. There is a well-developed procedure for reducing
the given relation R to a relation R′ ⊆U ′ × A′, where U ′ ⊆U, A′ ⊆A and
R′ = R|U ′×A′, so that |U ′| and |A′| are minimal with respect to property L′
R ≃LR.
See, for example, section 2 of [2], for the general theoretical outline, and section
XI.3 in [18] for algorithmic details. In other words, one may leave only essential

8
K. ADARICHEVA AND J. B. NATION
objects and attributes in the relation and remove the others. Any analysis can be
done on the smaller table, while easily extending the outcome to the original sets of
objects and attributes. In fact, every removed element a ∈A\A′ will be associated
with some Xa ⊆A′ such that φA′(a) = φA′(Xa).
When the procedure of reduction is completed and one obtains the reduced table
R′, one can establish an important relationship between the elements of the set of
objects U ′, the set of attributes A′, and the special subset of elements in the Galois
lattice L′
R. Namely, the set A′ can be interpreted as the set of join irreducible
elements Ji L′
R of the Galois lattice L′
R, and U ′ as the set of meet irreducible
elements Mi L′
R.2 Moreover, an element 1 at the intersection of row i and column
j is equivalent to j ⩽i in the lattice L′
R.
6.3. Arrow relations in the table. We may assume that after the reduction the
table has rows of n objects and columns of m attributes. The binary table allows
one to quickly recover additional information on L′
R:
(1) Establishing a partial order (U ′, ⩽) = (Mi L′
R, ⩽);
(2) Establishing a partial order (A′, ⩽) = (Ji L′
R, ⩽);
(3) Establishing arrow relations ↑, ↓, and ↕.
Recall that for i ∈Ji L′
R and j ∈Mi L′
R, i ↑j is deﬁned to hold iﬀj is a maximal
element among elements of L′
R that are not greater than i. (In lattice terms, it is
equivalent to: i ∨j = j∗, where j∗is the unique upper cover of j).
Dually, i ↓j iﬀi is a minimal element among elements of L′
R that are not less
than j. (This is equivalent to: i ∧j = i∗, where i∗is the unique lower cover of i).
Finally, i ↕j, if both i ↑j and i ↓j hold.
It is clear that algorithmically, the reconstruction of arrow relations is equivalent
to ﬁnding maximal or minimal elements in a particular partially ordered set, which
are sub-posets of either (U ′, ⩽) or (A′, ⩽). So there is a straightforward process to
recover these relations. Thus, we may assume that the reduced table of lattice L′
R
is given equipped with the arrow relations.
6.4. Implicational basis. The Galois lattice can be fully determined by a set
of implications deﬁned on the set A′, or dually, on the set U ′. By deﬁnition, an
implication on the set A′ is an ordered pair (X, Y ) ∈2A′ × 2A′ with X, Y ̸= ∅.
Very often the implication (X, Y ) is written in the form X →Y . A subset Z ⊆A′
respects an implication X →Y , if whenever X ⊆Z one also has Y ⊆Z. If Σ is
a set of implications, then Z respects Σ whenever Z respects every implication σ
from Σ.
There exists a classical connection between closure operators deﬁned on A′ and
sets of implications on A′:
(1) every set of implications Σ deﬁnes a closure operator φΣ by setting φΣ(Y )
as the smallest overset of Y that respects Σ;
(2) every closure operator φ can be deﬁned by some set of implications Σ such
that the φ-closed sets are exactly sets that respect Σ.
While every set of implications deﬁnes the closure operator uniquely, there are
multiple possibilities to deﬁne a set of implications for any given operator. A set of
2It is a matter of taste which of the two Galois lattices, dual to each other, one chooses.
For that matter, the set A′ may be associated with the set of meet irreducibles rather than join
irreducibles, which often happens in publications of FCA.

DISCOVERY OF THE D-BASIS
9
implications for a given closure operator, satisfying some conditions of minimality,
is usually called an implicational basis of this closure system. One can refer to
the survey article [11] for further details on connections between closure operators,
their closure lattices, and sets of implications.
For application purposes, most often the implications on A′ provide an essential
hidden connection between diﬀerent attributes in the given data set. For example,
an implication a1a2 →b, where a1, a2, b ∈A′, means that every object in the data
set that possesses both attributes a1 and a2 also possesses attribute b.
6.5. Connection between D-basis and D-relation. As we mentioned earlier,
the name of the D-basis is directly connected to the D-relation deﬁned in a lattice
theory framework. Lemma 2.31 in [18] can be formulated as follows.
Lemma 2. Given two elements b, c ∈Ji L, the relation bDc holds iﬀthere exists
an implication X →b in the D-basis of L such that c ∈X.
In particular, for every implication X →b in the D-basis, we have X ⊆bD =
{x ∈Ji L : bDx}.
7. Recovery of the D-basis from the table
The goal of this section is to prove the main result of the paper.
Theorem 3. Given a reduced table (U ′, A′, R′), R′ ⊆U ′×A′, one can polynomially
(in the size of the table) reduce the problem of recovery of the D-basis to (parallel)
solution of the hypergraph dualization problem formed for each b ∈A′.
Proof. Recall from section 6.3 that set A′ can be interpreted as the set of join irre-
ducible elements Ji L of the Galois lattice L. The key observation for the recovery
of the D-basis is contained in [18, Lemma 11.10] that connects the arrow relations
of the reduced table with the D-relation on the set of join irreducible elements of
its Galois lattice:
bDc iﬀb ↑p and c ↓p, for some p ∈Mi L′
R.
This allows us to recover eﬀectively the sets bD = {c ∈A′ : bDc}, for every b ∈Ji L.
According to Lemma 2 in section 6.5, for every ﬁxed b, every implication of the
D-basis of the form X →b will satisfy X ⊆bD = {x ∈Ji L : bDx}.
Another important subset associated with each b is M(b) = {m ∈Mi L : b ↑m}.
Recall that these are the maximal elements in L which are not greater than b. The
following statement is a simple lattice theoretical observation.
Claim. For every b ∈Ji L and Y ⊆Ji L, Y →b holds in L iﬀfor every m ∈M(b)
there exists y ∈Y such that y ̸⩽m.
This observation reduces the problem of ﬁnding the D-basis to the problem of
ﬁnding the minimal transversal sets of a particular Sperner hypergraph.
Let ﬁrst consider the general setting of an optimization problem which has a
standard reduction to the hypergraph dualization problem. Given any set X and
family M = {M1, . . . Mk} ⊆2X of its subsets, which, we may assume, are pairwise
incomparable, consider an order ideal J generated by this family. In other words,
J = {Y ⊆X : Y ⊆Mi, for some i ⩽k}.
Apparently, the family of subsets
2X \ J = {Z ⊆X : Z /∈J } forms an order ﬁlter F in the poset 2X. A well-known

10
K. ADARICHEVA AND J. B. NATION
optimization problem asks to ﬁnd all the minimal elements of F, i.e., sets Y1, . . . , Ys
such that F = {Z ⊆X : Yi ⊆Z for some i ⩽s}.
The standard reduction to the hypergraph dualization is done by deﬁning the
hypergraph (X, H), where H = {M c
1, . . . , M c
k}, M c
i = X \ Mi. Apparently, any
transversal T of this hypergraph has at least one element from M c
i for each i ⩽k,
so that T does not belong to the ideal J generated by M1, . . . , Mk. Therefore,
it belongs to 2X \ J = F. Vice versa, any element Y ∈F cannot be a subset
of any Mi, i ⩽k, hence, Y ∩M c
i ̸= ∅. Therefore, Y must be a transversal of
the hypergraph (X, H). In the conclusion, ﬁnding the minimal elements of F is
equivalent of ﬁnding the minimal transversals of (X, H).
We will proceed by setting an instance of optimization problem above, for each
b ∈A′. Let X = bD = {c ∈A′ : bDc}. Consider family of subsets M = {Mm =
bD ∩[0, m] : m ∈M(b)}. Here 0 stands for the smallest element of the lattice L
and [0, m] = {x ∈L : x ⩽m}. For each m, this is equivalent to taking only those
elements from bD that are in the relation R′ with m.
Let J be an order ideal in 2X = 2bD generated by a family M. According to
the Claim, we need to ﬁnd subsets Y ⊆bD that do not belong to J . Thus, ﬁnding
the minimal such sets Y is equivalent to an instance of the optimization problem
we discussed above.
Note that, in comparison with the method of [32], we build a hypergraph on bD
rather than whole A′, which gives the reduction of the hypergraph size.
The hypergraph dualization problem would search for the minimal elements of
F = 2bD \ J , where J is the order ideal in 2bD generated by the family M.
If Y1, Y2 . . . , Ys are such minimal elements, then the set of implications Yi →b,
i = 1, . . . k, gives a set of implications satisfying two properties:
• Yi is a minimal subset X such that X →b holds;
• Yi ⊆bD.
In particular, all these implications belong to the canonical unit basis, and every
implication from the D-basis of the form X →b is included into this list. The full
D-basis will be recovered, when this process is applied to all bD ̸= ∅, b ∈A′.
As a result, the problem to recover the D-basis is polynomially reduced to at most
t runs of the dualization algorithm on 2Xi, Xi ⊆A′, where t = |A′| is the number
of the attributes. It is possible, however, that some of the recovered implications
are not in the D-basis, so the recovered set of implications may contain the D-basis
properly.
□
8. Example
Let us consider the procedure on a small table with 6 objects and 7 attributes.
All symbols in the table other than 1 should be ﬁrst interpreted as 0s.
Here U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, A = {b, a1, a2, c1, c2, u, v}. Since S(c1) = S(u), at-
tribute u can be reduced. Attribute v also can be reduced, because S(S(v)) = A,
and A \ v is not a ﬁrst component of any concept.
One can also reduce ob-
ject 5 due to S(5) = S(4), and reduce object 6 because 6 ∈S(S(i)), for every
i ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Thus, one can consider the reduced table with U ′ = {1, 2, 3, 4},
A′ = {b, a1, a2, c1, c2}, and complement the basis (on A) of a reduced table by
implications c1 →u, u →c1, v →A \ v.
The order relation on A′ consists of c1 ⩽a1, b and c2 ⩽a2, b. The order relation
on U ′ consists of 2 ≥4. This allows us to determine the arrow relations between

DISCOVERY OF THE D-BASIS
11
b
a1
a2
c1
c2
u
v
1
↑
1
↑
1
↕
1
0
2
1
↕
↕
1
1
1
0
3
↑
↑
1
↕
1
0
0
4
↕
↓
↓
1
1
1
0
5
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
6
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
elements of A′ and U ′, which are shown in the table. The Galois lattice L′
R of the
reduced table in shown on Fig. 1. Note that objects of the reduced table correspond
to the following (meet irreducible) elements of the lattice: 1 = a1, 2 = b, 3 = a2
and 4 = c1 ∨c2.
a1
c1
b
a2
c2
Figure 1. Galois lattice from the table
In order to recover all implications X →b, for some X ⊆A′, ﬁrst identify
elements of bD = {a1, a2, c1, c2}. Also, M(b) = {1, 3, 4}. Taking any m ∈M(b),
we ﬁnd corresponding subsets of family M: M1 = {a1, c1}, M3 = {a2, c2}, M4 =
{c1, c2}. This is done by picking the support of each element m ∈M(b) within
bD. The hypergraph dualization problem ﬁnds the minimal elements in 2bD \ J,
where J is the order ideal in 2bD generated by the family M = {M1, M3, M4}.
Evidently, these will be Y1 = {a1, c2}, Y2 = {a2, c1}, and Y3 = {a1, a2}. This gives
all implications from the basis with the conclusion b: a1c2 →b, a2c1 →b and
a1a2 →b.
We note that the last implication is not in the D-basis and one can use the
algorithm from [2] to remove it.
We can mention that the reduction of the retrieved basis can be considerable,
and the size of the reduced part may depend on the number of binary implications
in the basis, i.e., implications of the form x →y. For example, one of the tests
on a small matrix of size 10 × 22 found 9 binary implications in the basis, and the
D-basis had a total of 635 implications, after 212 implications were reduced in the
last phase of the algorithm. No reduction will occur if the binary part of the basis
is empty: in this rare case the canonical direct basis and D-basis coincide.

12
K. ADARICHEVA AND J. B. NATION
9. Results of initial testing
The algorithm of D-basis recovery described in section 7 was implemented in
C++ code by the team of undergraduate students of Yeshiva University. They were
able to implement the call to an existing subroutine that performs the hypergraph
dualization, and which is publicly available via repository maintained by T. Uno:
http://research.nii.ac.jp/∼uno/dualization.html
Further optimizations of the code were done in collaboration with T. Uno and
U. Norbisrath. The retrieval of the full implicational basis for a random matrix
20 × 40 and density 0.2 (20% of entries of the matrix are ones) took 0.27 sec, for
1616 implications. A similar test in U. Russel et al. [32] mentioned in section 3,
showed 0.9 sec for 1476 implications.
Further tests with the new code were done on larger random matrices. On a
table of size 50-by-100, the D-basis with 49,000 implications was obtained in 3
min 30 sec. All the implications X →b, for a requested column b of a randomly
generated matrix of size 50-by-200, were obtained in 25 min.
For the initial comparisons with Apriori algorithm, we ran two types of tests.
The ﬁrst data set was taken from the Frequent Itemset Mining Dataset Repos-
itory, publicly available at http://ﬁmi.ua.ac.be/data/retail.dat. It was retail mar-
ket basket data from an anonymous Belgian retail store. We took ﬁrst 90 rows
converting them to a binary matrix format with size 90-by-502 and (low) density
0.0162. Running time was about 42 sec resulting in 104 mostly binary implications
of maximal support 5 and conﬁdence = 1. For the Apriori, we used Microsoft SQL
Server Business Intelligence Development Studio, 2008 (Data Mining Technique -
Microsoft Association Rules) [24, 40]. The result of this run, together with setup
of the input, took about 4 min 30 sec, with a considerably larger set of association
rules, most of which have conﬁdence < 1. We point that Apriori was designed
speciﬁcally for mining association rules in retail data, and the speciﬁcally for data
that is presented by large sets of item-sets. When converted to matrix form, it
usually contains large number of rows (transactions) with comparably few columns
(number of items at sale), and normally has low density.
Our second data set was of a diﬀerent nature, where we believe our novel ap-
proach may have an edge over Apriori.
The data-set was kindly provided by the research group of Dr. G. Okimoto from
the University of Hawaii Cancer Center. It contained the gene expression levels for
550 pre-selected genes, in 22 patients, some healthy and others with liver cancer.
There are multiple approaches how to convert this matrix into binary format. For
comparison of D-basis algorithm with Apriori, one of them was taken as test data of
size 22-by-1112 and density 0.4684. Columns 1111 and 1112 represent the attributes
of being healthy and having cancer, correspondingly.
Microsoft Association Rules output was restricted to only 2000 frequent sets with
minimum support 15 and conﬁdence = 1, and there were no association rules with
attributes 1111 and 1112. On the other hand, with the D-basis code we were able
to reveal the equivalence of attribute 1111 to the set of 9 other attributes, and to
ﬁnd 14819 implications with the target attribute 1112, whose support = 8 and the
conﬁdence at least 21/22.

DISCOVERY OF THE D-BASIS
13
10. Further theoretical work and implementation
Recovery of the implicational basis directly relates to knowledge discovery, espe-
cially if one is concerned with the targeted set of implications in the basis. Addi-
tional testing of biological data provided by the collaborators at the University of
Hawaii Cancer Center and medical group in Astana, Kazakhstan, were aiming at
data of a larger size, and at the retrieval of speciﬁc targeted association rules. The
results of this testing were recently presented at the FCA conference [1].
From a theoretical point of view, the future plans include the generalization of
the algorithm for the retrieval of association rules with the threshold of conﬁdence
µ < 1 (see section 2), and here some initial results are achieved, which may be
implemented in the code. This will allow us to take into account the possibility
of incomplete and erroneous data. On the other hand, a diﬀerent approach exists
which allows us to utilize the existing implementation. Namely, the algorithm can
be run multiple times on the proper subsets of existing sets of rows. For example,
if the original data contains 100 rows, then the algorithm can be run on all subsets
of 95 rows, which will result in obtaining all association rules of conﬁdence at least
95%. This can be achieved easily with the assistance of a specialist in distributed
computing.
As far as the goal of the current paper, theoretical results of the D-basis recovery
are supported by the practical evidence tested in [32] and initial testing presented
in section 9, that the recovery of the implicational basis based on the hypergraph
dualization algorithm will bring a considerable cut in run-times when dealing with
tabled data. This will make the new approach critical for analysis of large data
sets.
Acknowledgments. The results of this paper were prompted by the discussion of
the hypergraph dualization algorithm with E. Boros and V. Gurvich, at the RUT-
COR seminar during the ﬁrst author’s visit in 2011. The test results of section 9
were possible due to code implementation done by J. Blumenkopf and T. Moldwin
(Yeshiva College, New York), assistance of T. Uno (National Institute of Informat-
ics, Tokyo), U. Norbisrath and A. Amanbekkyzy (Nazarbayev University, Astana),
and data provided by G. Okimoto (University of Hawaii, Honolulu).
