The Parametric Cost Function Approximation: A new approach for
multistage stochastic programming
Warren B. Powell
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering
Saeed Ghadimi
University of Waterloo
January 4, 2022
arXiv:2201.00258v1  [math.OC]  1 Jan 2022

Abstract
The most common approaches for solving multistage stochastic programming problems in the re-
search literature have been to either use value functions (“dynamic programming”) or scenario trees
(“stochastic programming”) to approximate the impact of a decision now on the future. By contrast,
common industry practice is to use a deterministic approximation of the future which is easier to
understand and solve, but which is criticized for ignoring uncertainty. We show that a parameterized
version of a deterministic optimization model can be an eﬀective way of handling uncertainty with-
out the complexity of either stochastic programming or dynamic programming. We present the idea
of a parameterized deterministic optimization model, and in particular a deterministic lookahead
model, as a powerful strategy for many complex stochastic decision problems. This approach can
handle complex, high-dimensional state variables, and avoids the usual approximations associated
with scenario trees or value function approximations. Instead, it introduces the oﬄine challenge of
designing and tuning the parameterization. We illustrate the idea by using a series of application
settings, and demonstrate its use in a nonstationary energy storage problem with rolling forecasts.
Keywords: Stochastic Optimization, Policy Search, Stochastic Programming, Approximate Dy-
namic Programming, Simulation-Optimization, Parametric Cost Function Approximation

1
Introduction
There is an extensive history in the academic literature of solving sequential decision problems over
time, under uncertainty, using the idea of approximating the future using sampled scenario trees,
dating to the original paper by Dantzig (1955). Since this time thousands of papers have been written
using this approach for making decisions under uncertainty.
A parallel literature has evolved estimating the value of being in a downstream state using
statistical approximations estimated using machine learning that have evolved under names such as
approximate (or adaptive) dynamic programming, neuro-dynamic programming, and (more recently)
reinforcement learning (although this is an umbrella for an entire family of methods). In the arena
of stochastic linear programs, we can approximate the value of being in a state using Bender’s cuts,
a method known as stochastic dual dynamic programming. Other methods have evolved under the
heading of robust optimization (when used in the setting of sequential decision problems), which
optimizes over an uncertainty set.
All of these methods are computationally demanding which has sharply limited their use in
practice. At the same time, when used in the context of complex operational problems (our primary
focus in this paper), all of these methods are solving approximations of lookahead models which
means that none of them are oﬀering optimal or even asymptotically optimal policies (an optimal
solution of an approximate problem is not an optimal policy).
By contrast, there has been a long history in industry of using deterministic optimization models
to make decisions that are then implemented in a stochastic setting. Grid operators use deterministic
forecasts of wind, solar and loads to plan energy generation (Wallace & Fleten, 2003); utilities use
rolling estimates to plan the storage of natural gas (Lai et al., 2008); airlines use deterministic esti-
mates of ﬂight times to schedule aircraft and crews (Lan et al., 2006); and retailers use deterministic
estimates of demands and travel times to plan inventories (Harrison & Van Mieghem, 1999). There
is an extensive literature using deterministic lookahead models for dynamic vehicle routing problems
(Pillac et al., 2013). All of us use the solution of deterministic shortest path problems produced by
in-vehicle navigation systems to plan our route through stochastic, dynamic traﬃc networks. These
models have been widely criticized by the research community for not accounting for uncertainty,
but this criticism ignores the creative use of parametric modiﬁcations that help these models account
for uncertainty.
While these parameterized policies have been dismissed as industrial heuristics in the stochastic
optimization community, we argue that they parallel parametric functions that have been studied in
statistics for over 100 years and widely used in practice. The ﬁeld of parametric statistics requires
that a knowledgeable human choose the structure of a parameterized model, which might be linear
or nonlinear in the parameters (this includes neural networks), and then uses data and algorithms to
choose the parameters. Our use of parameterized deterministic models similarly requires a domain
expert to design the parameterized optimization problem, after which algorithms have to be used
to ﬁnd the best values of the parameters. With parametric statistics, we need a training dataset
to estimate the parameters. With a parameterized policy, we need a model of the problem that is

captured in a dataset, although it is possible to do online training in the ﬁeld.
In this paper, we characterize these modiﬁed deterministic models as parametric cost function
approximations (CFAs) which puts them into the same category as other parameterized policies
that have been used in computer science for solving simpler problems under the umbrella of “policy
search.” Policy search is the same as stochastic search applied to the context of tuning parameterized
policies for sequential decision problems. The diﬀerence is that using a parameterized optimization
model for a policy allows us to solve dramatically more complex problems than we can with sim-
ple analytical functions that are the focus of the policy search literature (Sutton & Barto (2018),
Deisenroth et al. (2013), Levine & Koltun (2013)). Instead of controlling a robot or computer game,
parametric cost function approximations can be used to dispatch thousands of trucks, schedule an
airline, manage a network of hydroelectric reservoirs, or plan energy generation for a power grid.
Our paper takes these ideas into the arena of multistage stochastic programming problems, which
has been dominated in the research community by methods based on lookahead policies using sce-
nario trees or, for special cases, Benders’ decomposition (Birge & Louveaux (2011); Sen & Zhou
(2014); Bayraksan & Morton (2009); Zhao et al. (2013)). Our use of modiﬁed linear programs is
new to the policy search literature, where “policies” are typically parametric models such as linear
models (“aﬃne policies”), structured nonlinear models (such as (s, S) policies for inventories) or
neural networks (such as Han & E (2016)). These more classical “policies” are limited to scalar or
low-dimensional problems which could not be applied to the domain of high-dimensional resource
allocation problems.
There are two dimensions to our approach:
1) The design of the parameterized lookahead model which serves as the policy for making decisions.
2) The optimization of the parameters so that the policy performs as well as policy in expectation.
The process of designing the parameterization involves the same art as the design of any statistical
model or parametric policy; it requires exploiting the structure of the problem which would be
associated with a particular problem domain. The optimization of the parameters is a more classical
algorithmic challenge which we formulate and solve as a stochastic optimization problem (more
precisely, a stochastic search problem). Both dimensions are challenging, but the end result is a
model that is no harder to solve than a classical deterministic lookahead model. By contrast, policies
based on stochastic programming produce stochastic lookahead models that are much harder to
solve in the ﬁeld than a parameterized deterministic model. In addition, we argue below that a
parameterized deterministic model may easily produce higher quality solutions.
We feel that classical stochastic programs based on scenario trees suﬀer from several limitations:
• They are much harder to solve than deterministic lookahead models.
• Two-stage stochastic programs, which are the most widely used approach in stochastic pro-
gramming, require a number of modeling approximations, including:
2

– The replacement of fully sequential, multistage stochastic decision problems with two-
stage approximations.
– The need to use a sample of outcomes, and often a fairly small sample.
– The inability to model interactions between decisions and exogenous information (relevant
in some applications).
• There are many problems where the eﬀect of uncertainty on the behavior of the policy is well
known. Yet, two-stage stochastic programs using modest numbers of scenarios do not provide
any mechanism to capture this intuition.
Methods based on value function approximations, which includes SDDP (Pereira & Pinto (1991),
Birge & Louveaux (2011), Kall & Wallace (2009)), and approximate dynamic programming (Powell
(2011), Bertsekas (2017)) represent an alternative approach for optimizing over a stochastic lookahead
model. There are many complex problems where ADP is not a viable method for solving the full
model, but might be a useful approach for solving an approximate stochastic lookahead model. We
revisit this issue later.
This paper formalizes the idea that an eﬀective way to solve certain classes of complex stochastic
optimization problems is to shift the modeling of uncertainty from an approximate lookahead model
to the stochastic base model, typically implemented as a simulator but which might also be the real
world. Tuning a model in a stochastic simulator makes it possible to handle arbitrarily complex
dynamics, avoiding the many approximations that are standard in stochastic programming. This
strategy also means that we transition from methods that are hard to solve in the ﬁeld, to methods
that are (relatively) easy to solve in the ﬁeld, but which require serious research in the laboratory to
design and tune model parameterizations.
The parametric CFA makes it possible to incorporate problem structure for handling uncertainty.
Some examples include:
• Supply chains handle uncertainty by introducing buﬀer stocks.
• Hospitals can handle uncertainty in blood donations and the demand for blood by maintaining
supplies of O-minus blood, which can be used by anyone.
• People will use the estimated time for the shortest path when driving to a destination, but will
then leave early to accommodate the uncertainty in the travel times.
• Grid operators handle uncertainty in generator failures, as well as uncertainty in energy from
wind and solar, by requiring reserve generator capacity.
Central to our approach is the ability to manage uncertainty by recognizing eﬀective strategies
for responding to unexpected events.
We would argue that this structure is apparent in many
settings, especially in complex resource allocation problems. We oﬀer that our approach represents
an interesting, and very practical, alternative to classical stochastic programming. We also argue
3

that this approach is a perfectly valid form of stochastic optimization that may easily outperform
methods based on solutions of approximate stochastic lookahead models.
Our presentation is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a canonical model for sequential
decision problems and describes two strategies for designing policies: policy search, which searches
over classes of policies (and policies within a class) to ﬁnd the ones that work best over time (sec-
tion 3 provides more detail), and policies based on lookahead models which make good decisions by
creating the best approximation of the impact of a decision now on the future (section 4 provides
more detail). Basic cost function approximations fall within the policy search class, but we will be
considering hybrids that combine deterministic lookaheads (from the lookahead class) with param-
eterizations (from the policy search class). Section 5 provides a series of examples of cost function
approximations, divided between parameterizations of the objective function, and parameterizations
of the constraints. Then, section 6 illustrates the idea of a parameterized, deterministic lookahead
policy using the setting of a time-dependent energy storage problem using rolling forecasts, a com-
mon modeling device which has been largely overlooked in the research literature. Section 7 oﬀers
some closing remarks.
2
Canonical model and solution strategies
We begin by writing a sequential decision problem as the sequence
(S0, x0, W1, . . . , St, xt, Wt+1, . . . , ST )
where St is our state at time t which includes physical state variables Rt (this captures physical
resources such as inventories or the location on a graph), information It (this could be prices, speeds,
weather), and beliefs Bt which captures what we know about uncertain quantities and parameters.
Let Ct(St, xt) be the cost we incur given what we know in St and our decision xt. Wt+1 is information
that arrives after we make a decision, which can depend on St and/or xt. We make decisions xt using
a method we call a policy that we write as Xπ(St). The state variable evolves according to a transition
function
St+1 = SM(St, xt = Xπ(St), Wt+1),
where the transition can span updating inventories, tracking the movement of a vehicle, updating
prices and weather, or updating estimates or beliefs about uncertain quantities and parameters.
Our goal is to ﬁnd a policy π that solves
min
π∈Π E
( T
X
t=0
Ct(St, Xπ
t (St))
 S0
)
,
(1)
where St+1 = SM(St, Xπ
t (St), Wt+1) and given an information model for (S0, W1, . . . , WT ). We will
sometimes refer to (1) as the base model, which will typically be a simulator but is sometimes the
real world.
4

This canonical model is the foundation for a wide range of sequential decision problems. Powell
(2019b) describes two fundamental strategies for designing policies: policy search, where we search
over classes of functions for making decisions to ﬁnd the function that works the best over time, and
policies based on lookahead approximations which combine the immediate cost of a decision plus an
approximation of costs incurred as a result of the decision.
Each of these two strategies can be applied in two diﬀerent ways, creating four classes of policies
which encompass every possible method for making decisions (Powell, 2019b):
• Policy search strategies:
1) Policy function approximations (PFAs) - These are analytical functions that map states to
decisions.
2) Cost function approximations (CFAs) - These are parameterized static or single-period
optimization problems that yield a decision.
• Policies based on lookahead approximations:
3) Policies based on value function approximations (VFAs) - A value function approximation
estimates the future cost from the next state we land in after making decision xt now.
4) Policies based on approximations of direct lookahead models (DLAs) - Here we form an
approximate model over some horizon, which we solve to make a decision now. Lookahead
models can be divided into two broad classes:
– Deterministic lookahead models.
– Stochastic lookahead models.
We can also create hybrids, as we will below when we create a parameterized, deterministic lookahead
policy that is a hybrid DLA/CFA.
Policy function approximations have received considerable attention in computer science under
the banner of “policy search” (Ng & Jordan, 2000; Peshkin et al., 2000; Hu et al., 2007; Mannor et
al., 2003). Parameterized policies such as order-up-to inventory ordering policies have been studied
since 1960 (Clark & Scarf, 1960), along with a host of other specially structured policies in dynamic
programming (Puterman (2014), Powell (2022)[Chapter 14]). Policy search uses classical stochastic
search methods applied to parameterized analytical functions for making decisions, drawing on an
extensive literature in derivative-based and derivative-free methods dating to 1951. We review this
literature in section 3.3.
Policies based on value functions and value function approximations have been investigated ex-
tensively, building on the foundation of Bellman’s equation (Puterman, 2014; Bertsekas, 2017) or
Hamilton-Jacobi equations (Kirk, 2012; Stengel, 1986; Sontag, 1998; Sethi, 2019; Lewis et al., 2012).
Value function approximations have been studied under names such as approximate dynamic pro-
gramming (Powell, 2011; Bertsekas, 2017) with applications in trucking (Simao et al., 2009), rail
(Bouzaiene-Ayari et al., 2014), and health (Bartroﬀ& Lai, 2010); reinforcement learning (Sutton
& Barto, 1998, 2018) with applications in robotics (Si et al., 2004; Deisenroth et al., 2013) and
5

games (Fu, 2017); adaptive dynamic programming (Lewis & Vrabie, 2009; Wang et al., 2009), neuro-
dynamic programming (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996) and heuristic dynamic programming (Si et
al., 2004). The stochastic programming community has developed the idea of approximating value
functions using Bender’s cuts under the heading of stochastic dual dynamic programming (SDDP)
(Pereira & Pinto, 1991; Shapiro et al., 2014) with applications in hydroelectric planning (Shapiro,
2011; Philpott et al., 2000).
Direct lookahead policies represent an umbrella for a number of strategies that have been studied
under names such as model predictive control (Camacho & Alba, 2013) and stochastic programming
(Birge & Louveaux, 2011; Kall & Wallace, 2009; Bayraksan & Morton, 2009; Zhao et al., 2013; Sen
& Zhou, 2014). This approach has been developed in many books and thousands of papers, with
applications that include unit commitment (Jin et al. (2011)), hydroelectric planning (Carpentier et
al. (2015)), and transportation (Lium et al. (2009)).
Another form of direct lookahead policy has evolved more recently using robust optimization
which replaces scenario trees with uncertainty sets (Ben-Tal et al., 2009; Wiesemann et al., 2014).
Ben-Tal et al. (2005) illustrates robust optimization as a lookahead policy for an inventory problem.
See Bertsimas et al. (2011) for a review of other applications of robust optimization.
Cost function approximations, however, have been largely overlooked by the academic research
community. CFAs are parameterized optimization models, where the speciﬁc parameterization is
designed (as would be the case with any parametric model in machine learning) to incorporate
intuition into how uncertainty would aﬀect the solution. The use of parameterized optimization
models has been widely used in industry, but in an ad hoc manner.
There is one example of a cost function approximation which has received extensive attention
from the research literature. The problem of ﬁnding the best performer out of a discrete set of
alternatives (drugs, products, ads) is known as the multiarmed bandit problem. A widely studied
class of policies are known as upper conﬁdence bounding, ﬁrst introduced by Lai & Robbins (1985).
A simple version (introduced by Kaelbling (1993)) is given by
XUCB(St|θ)
=
arg max
x
 ¯µn
x + θ¯σn
x

,
(2)
where ¯µn
x is the current estimate of the performance of discrete alternative x ∈{x1, . . . , xM} (e.g.
the expected sales from advertising product x), and ¯σn
x is the standard deviation of ¯µn
x (note that
St = Bt = (¯µn
x, ¯σn
x)). There is by now an extensive literature proving various regret bounds on the
performance of the policy XUCB(St) (see e.g. Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi (2012)). This is particularly
important for this paper, since XUCB(St) is, ﬁrst and foremost, a class of parametric cost function
approximation given that there is an imbedded “arg maxx” within the policy. The regret bounds
that have been derived for UCB policies (of which (2) is just one example) represents a rare set of
provable bounds for the quality of a CFA policy.
PFAs and VFAs tend to be limited to problems that are relatively simple, or which enjoy special
structure that can be exploited to estimate the required function (the policy or the value function).
Stochastic lookaheads have attracted considerable attention in the research literature, but relatively
6

little of this work has made its way into practice. For this reason the most common approach used in
practice for more complex decision problems is a deterministic approximation, which may be either
static or single-period optimization models, or deterministic lookaheads.
In this paper, we want to shine a light on the power of using parameterized deterministic models,
particularly for the complex problems that often arise in real applications. We are not going to
argue that this is a panacea that can replace all other methods, but we do feel that it is a powerful
and overlooked strategy that belongs alongside widely studied (but rarely used) methods such as
stochastic programming or approximate dynamic programming.
We next provide an overview of the policies based on policy search where we cover PFAs and
static/single-period CFAs (section 3), and policies based on lookahead approximations where we cover
policies based on VFAs and deterministic or stochastic DLAs (section 4). Ultimately we are going to
take the idea of policy search that originated with PFAs, and apply it to the idea of parameterized
optimization models with special emphasis on parameterized, deterministic lookaheads. We are going
to argue that this is often going to be a more eﬀective strategy in practice for complex sequential
decision problems than policies based on VFAs or stochastic DLAs.
3
Policies based on policy search
We begin with the principle of creating parameterized policies (broadly deﬁned), which we divide
between policy function approximations and cost function approximations.
3.1
Policy function approximations (PFAs)
Policy function approximations are analytical functions that map states to decisions. The functions
can be lookup tables, parametric functions (linear or nonlinear), or nonparametric (in particular,
locally parametric). PFAs (using any of a wide range of approximation strategies) have been widely
studied in the computer science literature under the umbrella of policy search (see e.g., Sutton
& Barto (2018)[Chapter 13], Hadjiyiannis et al. (2011); Lillicrap et al. (2015); Levine & Abbeel
(2014)). Although limited to relatively simple problems, the fundamental idea of policy search is
quite powerful, and an idea that we are going to exploit.
An example of a PFA is a linear decision rule (also known as an aﬃne policy) which can be
written
Xπ(St|θ) =
X
f∈F
θfφf(St).
(3)
where φf(St) is a feature drawn from the information in St and θf is the coeﬃcient for that feature.
We might wish to use a nonlinear model to choose the price xbid
t
to bid for a set of keywords to
7

maximize ad-clicks such as
Xπ(St|θ) =
e
P
f∈F θfφf(St)
1 + e
P
f∈F θfφf(St) .
More generally, we could represent a policy using a neural network, in which case θ might have many
thousands (or millions) of parameters.
We have to choose the type of function f ∈F (for a neural network, f would specify the network
structure, number of layers and nodes per layer). For a given function type f we have to choose
θ ∈Θf.
The choice of function f is the art of policy search (just as it is with machine learning). If this
were a machine learning problem where we are given a training dataset (xn, yn)N
n=1, we would be
solving
min
(f∈F,θ∈Θf)
N
X
n=1
(yn −f(xn|θ))2.
(4)
Policy search for PFAs would be written similarly
min
π=(f,θ)∈(F,Θf) E
( T
X
t=0
Ct(St, Xπ
t (St|θ))
S0
)
,
(5)
where
St+1
=
SM(St, xt
=
Xπ(St|θ), Wt+1)
and
where
we
are
given
a
model
for
(S0, W1, . . . , WT ). We note that machine learning (4) requires a training dataset while policy search
for sequential decision problems in (5) requires a model of the decision problem (costs, constraints,
transition function and exogenous information model).
The comparison with machine learning hints at the limitation of PFAs: they only work for
relatively simple decision problems.
For example, the response y is typically scalar, although it
might be a low dimensional vector. We could never use a PFA to, say, schedule machines, dispatch
a ﬂeet of trucks, ﬁnd a shortest path or optimize ﬂows in a supply chain.
3.2
Cost function approximations (CFAs)
The second class of policy is cost function approximations (CFAs) which are parametrically modi-
ﬁed optimization problems. Eventually we are going to include optimization problems that extend
into the future, but for now we limit ourselves to static or single-period optimization models. We
emphasize that with the notable exception of upper conﬁdence bounding policies (equation (2)) for
multiarmed bandit problems, CFAs have received virtually no attention in the research literature.
We can create a CFA by modifying either the objective function or the constraints. For this
8

reason, we begin by deﬁning
¯Cπ
t (St, xt|θ)
=
the modiﬁed objective function as determined by the policy π, where θ rep-
resents the tunable parameters,
X π
t (θ)
=
the modiﬁed set of constraints (that is, the feasible region) determined by
policy π, with tunable parameters θ.
We might modify the objective function with a linear correction factor which we could write
¯Cπ
t (St, xt|θ) = C(St, xt) +
X
f∈F
θfφf(St, xt).
(6)
As an illustration of how constraints can be modiﬁed, assume that we start with linear constraints
Atxt
=
bt,
(7)
xt
≤
ut,
(8)
xt
≥
0.
(9)
We might modify these using
Aπ
t (θa)˜xt
=
θb ⊙bt + θc,
(10)
xt
≤
ut −θu,
(11)
xt
≥
0 + θℓ.
(12)
where θb⊗bt is the element by element product of the vector bt with the similarly dimensioned vector
of coeﬃcients θb, plus a shift vector θc. We can enter schedule slack by parameterizing the matrix
Aπ
t (θa). We then reduce the upper bounds ut by a shift vector θu, and possibly raise the lower
bounds by θℓ. Our constraints are now parameterized by the (possibly high-dimensional) vector
θ = (θa, θb, θc, θℓ, θu).
A parametric CFA policy can then be written
XCFA(St|θ) = arg
min
xt∈X π
t (θ)
¯Cπ(St, xt|θ).
(13)
We provide examples of CFAs in section 5.
3.3
Algorithms for policy search
PFAs and CFAs both involve tuning a vector θ. Once we have the structure of the policy f ∈F,
which is typically chosen by a knowledgeable human guided by intuition, we tune θ using
min
θ
E
( T
X
t=0
Ct(St, Xπ
t (St|θ))
S0
)
.
(14)
9

The tools for optimizing the parameters using (14) fall under the broad umbrella of stochastic search
which can be approached using both derivative-based algorithms, with a literature that dates to
Robbins & Monro (1951), and derivative-free algorithms, with a literature that dates to Box &
Wilson (1951).
The derivative-based stochastic optimization literature is extensive, beginning with the body
of research building oﬀof Robbins & Monro (1951) in the 1950s and later (see, e.g., Dvoretzky
(1956)), initially for unconstrained problems. A separate literature evolved in the context of con-
strained stochastic gradient problems (Shor (1979), Ermoliev (1983)). In addition, the simulation-
optimization community (see Fu (2015)) has developed powerful tools for taking derivatives of sim-
ulations (see Glasserman (1991), Ho (1992), Kushner & Yin (2003), Cao (2008)); a nice tutorial is
given in Chau et al. (2014). Much of this literature focuses on derivatives of discrete event simula-
tions, but there is an equally extensive literature on methods based on numerical derivatives such as
SPSA (Spall (2003); Nesterov & Spokoiny (2017); Ghadimi & Lan (2013)). More recently is work on
derivatives of parameterized policies for discrete dynamic programs from the reinforcement learning
literature under the umbrella of the policy gradient theorem (Sutton et al. (2000), Sutton & Barto
(2018)[Chapter 13]).
There is a parallel literature in derivative-free algorithms for stochastic search which is equally
extensive. This literature spans active learning problems (Settles, 2010), multiarmed bandit problems
(Gittins et al., 2011), and optimal learning (Powell & Ryzhov, 2012). See Powell (2022)[Chapter 7]
for an overview of this rich ﬁeld.
While both PFAs and CFAs require parameter tuning, the characteristics of the tuning problems
for PFAs and CFAs tend to be quite diﬀerent. It is well known that scaling is a major issue in
stochastic search. Consider the linear decision rule in equation (3). The scaling of each coeﬃcient
θf depends heavily on the characteristics of the feature φf(St). By contrast, the coeﬃcients θ used
in a parametric CFA tend to be scaled by the structure of the deterministic optimization model. In
section 6, we demonstrate a parametric CFA for a stochastic inventory control problem where the
optimal coeﬃcients are all equal to 1.0 if the forecasts are perfect. Given imperfect forecasts, the
optimal coeﬃcients all appear to be in the interval [0, 2].
4
Policies based on lookahead approximation
The second strategy for creating policies is to construct policies based on approximations of the
downstream impact of a decision xt made while in state St. An optimal policy can be written
X∗
t (St) = arg min
xt∈Xt
 
Ct(St, xt) + E
(
min
π∈Π E
(
T
X
t′=t+1
Ct′(St′, Xπ
t′(St′))
St+1
)
St, xt
)!
.
(15)
Equation (15) is called a lookahead policy. Not surprisingly this is computationally intractable for
any realistic problem (this includes all the problems that we are interested in).
Just as we divided the policy search strategy into two classes (PFAs and CFAs), there are two
10

classes of policies that we can use to approximate equation (15). These are policies based on value
function approximations (VFA policies) and policies based on approximations of the direct lookahead
approximations (DLA policies). We describe these in more detail in sections 4.1 and 4.2 below.
4.1
Policies based on value function approximations
Equation (15) is basically Bellman’s equation although it is more conventional to write
X∗
t (St) = arg min
xt∈Xt
 Ct(St, xt) + E {Vt+1(St+1)|St, xt}

(16)
where
Vt+1(St+1) = min
π∈Π E
(
T
X
t′=t+1
Ct′(St′, Xπ
t′(St′))
St+1
)
.
(17)
Alternatively, we can write the expression for value functions recursively using
Vt(St) = min
xt
 Ct(St, xt) + E {Vt+1(St+1)|St, xt}

.
(18)
Equation (18) is the most common way of writing Bellman’s equation, but it is mathematically
equivalent to equation (15) assuming that we can compute Vt(St) using either (17) or (18), which is
never the case for the problems that we are interested in.
When xt is a vector, it is customary to eliminate the expectation in (16) and (18) by using the
post-decision state variable Sx
t (see Powell (2011) and Shapiro (2011)). We then replace the post-
decision value function V x
t (Sx
t ) (which we could never compute) with an approximation ¯V x
t (Sx
t ),
giving us the policy
XV FA
t
(St) = arg min
xt
 Ct(St, xt) + ¯V x
t (Sx
t )

,
(19)
where ¯V x
t (Sx
t ) might be a linear model, separable piecewise linear functions, or Benders cuts.
While this approach has attracted considerable attention in the literature (see e.g., Powell et al.
(2004); Powell (2011); Bertsekas (2011); Sutton & Barto (2018)), it is limited to a surprisingly narrow
set of problems. For example, while SDDP has been widely studied in the stochastic programming
community, applications are generally limited to fairly simple resource allocation problems such as
hydroelectric planning problems (Shapiro, 2011; Philpott & De Matos, 2012) which is known as a
single layer resource allocation problem (water is the only resource). For example, you could never
use SDDP for dynamic vehicle routing problems, complex inventory planning problems, or dynamic
shortest path problems.
As an indication of how easy it is to “break” approximate dynamic programming, ADP (or SDDP)
is very eﬀective for solving a blood management problem as long as the surgeries requiring blood
11

having to be completed at a particular point in time (this might be some time during a week). If we
have elective surgeries that can be delayed, creating eﬀective value functions becomes dramatically
more diﬃcult.
Even more complex problems include dynamic vehicle routing, where you have to optimize the
movement of vehicles and the timing of deliveries, or scheduling machines to complete a series of
tasks. In short, value function approximations are eﬀective when there is structure (such as linearity
or convexity) that can be exploited. Later, we are going to illustrate a CFA in the solution of a
time-dependent inventory problem with rolling forecasts. Rolling forecasts create complex, high-
dimensional state variables that are completely intractable using methods based on value function
approximations.
4.2
Policies based on direct lookahead approximations
The most commonly used approach used to solve complex time-dependent problems is to solve an
approximate lookahead model on a rolling basis. Here we ﬁrst create an approximate sequential
decision problem that we are going to use as an approximate model of the future. We represent this
approximate sequential decision problem as
( ˜Stt, ˜xtt, ˜Wtt, . . . , ˜Stt′, ˜xtt′, ˜Wt,t′+1, . . .),
where ˜Stt′, ˜xtt′ and ˜Wt,t′+1 are approximations of St′, xt′ and Wt′ for a decision we are making at
time t.
While there are a variety of strategies for approximating lookahead models, the two that have
received the most attention are:
• Deterministic lookaheads - This is the approach most widely used in practice, but it has a
substantial academic following under the umbrella “model predictive control.” Using a deter-
ministic lookahead model reduces equation (15) to
XDLA
t
(St)
=
arg min
˜xtt
 
C( ˜Stt, ˜xtt) +
min
˜xt,t+1,...,˜xt,t+H
t+H
X
t′=t+1
C( ˜Stt′, ˜xtt′)
!
=
arg
min
˜xtt,˜xt,t+1,...,˜xt,t+H
t+H
X
t′=t
C( ˜Stt′, ˜xtt′).
(20)
Equation (20) is so widely used it is known under a number of names including rolling hori-
zon procedure, receding horizon procedure, model predictive control, or deterministic direct
lookahead (Sethi & Sorger (1991); Camacho & Alba (2013), Powell (2022)[Chapter 19]).
• Stochastic programming - First introduced by Dantzig (1955), the most common approach is
to replace the fully sequential decision problem in the future with a two-stage approximation
which means our sequence of decisions and information looks like
 ˜xtt, ( ˜Wt,t+1(ω), ˜Wt,t+2(ω), . . . , ˜Wt,t+H(ω)), (˜xt,t+1(ω), ˜xt,t+1(ω), . . . , ˜xt,t+H(ω))

.
12

This model assumes we make a single decision now, ˜xtt, then observe a complete sample path
of realizations:
( ˜Wt,t+1(ω), ˜Wt,t+2(ω), . . . , ˜Wt,t+H(ω)),
and then make a complete set of decisions for each sample path ω:
(˜xt,t+1(ω), ˜xt,t+1(ω), . . . , ˜xt,t+H(ω)).
This approach insures that the decision now, xt = ˜xtt, does not depend on what outcome
happens in the future, but future decisions, ˜xtt′ for t′ > t are allowed to see the entire history
of future information. Next we create a set of scenarios of ˜Wtt′(ω) that we denote ˜Ωt. Our
policy is then written
Xπ
t (St) = arg
min
˜xtt,(˜xtt′(ω))t+H
t′=t+1,∀ω∈Ω[t,t+H]

˜C( ˜Stt, ˜xtt) +
X
ω∈Ω[t,t+H]
˜C( ˜Stt′(ω), ˜xtt′(ω))

.
(21)
The optimization problem in (21) is typically around |˜Ωt| times bigger than the deterministic
problem in equation (20), but at least it is solvable.
The deterministic lookahead, which is also known as “model predictive control” in the optimal
control literature, is largely dismissed by the stochastic optimization community as little more than
a “deterministic approximation.” By contrast, the policy based on the two-stage stochastic program
in (21) has appeared in thousands of academic publications, often without recognizing that it is a
suboptimal policy for the original optimization problem in equation (1). See Powell (2019a) for a
discussion of the limitation of scenario trees for the stochastic unit commitment problem.
4.3
Discussion
Policies based on solving lookahead models depend on the accuracy of the model to produce good de-
cisions. The problem is that the solution of full, multistage stochastic decision problems is inherently
intractable, forcing the use of very strong approximations such as two-stage stochastic programs.
We propose to extend the idea of a parametric cost function approximation, which we ﬁrst intro-
duced for state or single-period problems (in section 3.2), to deterministic lookahead models. Then,
instead of depending on developing an accurate stochastic lookahead model, we exploit structure in
the problem to parameterize the deterministic lookahead model to produce behaviors that make the
optimal solution more robust. We then depend on the tuning using a realistic, stochastic simulator
(equation (1)) to produce the best values of the parameters.
Some advantages of this approach include:
• The tuning is done in a realistic simulator (equation (1)) that does not need to make simpliﬁ-
cations such as an exogenous information process that is independent of decisions.
13

• The simulator can capture any level of detail in the dynamics of the system.
• The parameterization of the policy can exploit structure and the modeler’s intuition about
how uncertainty is likely to aﬀect the solution (an assumption that is made in virtually all
parametric models in machine learning).
• The resulting policy will generally have the same computational demands as a classical (unpa-
rameterized) deterministic lookahead, which would be much easier than solving any stochastic
lookahead model.
• This idea has been widely used in industry in an ad-hoc manner. Speciﬁcally, industrial ap-
plications will insert parameters without a) recognizing that they are creating a class of policy
that is a solution (albeit a suboptimal one) to the optimization problem (1) and b) without
recognizing that the parameters need to be tuned using the framework of (1).
At the same time, we have to consider:
• We need to have the intuition into how uncertainty changes the solution we would get from a
deterministic lookahead model.
• Despite over 60 years of research into stochastic search, parameter tuning remains diﬃcult, but
the diﬃcult part is in the research lab where it belongs, not in the ﬁeld.
A major goal of this paper is bring to the attention of the research community in stochastic
optimization that a parameterized deterministic lookahead is as valid an approach to the stochastic
optimization in (1) as any policy based on a stochastic lookahead. We believe that there are problems
where the parameterized deterministic lookahead, in addition to its computational advantages, may
outperform a two-stage stochastic program in terms of its ability to solve (1).
5
Examples of cost function approximations
Recall that there are two ways to parameterize an optimization problem: in the objective function,
as we did in equation (6), and in the constraints as we did in equations (10) - (12). In this section
we are going to provide more concrete examples.
5.1
CFAs for dynamic assignment problems
The truckload trucking industry matches drivers to loads over time. Let
xtdℓ
=
1 if we assign driver d to load ℓat time t, 0 otherwise,
ctdℓ
=
the contribution of assigning driver d ∈Dt to load ℓ∈Lt at time t, including
the revenue generated by the load, the cost of moving empty to the load, as
well as penalties for late pickup or delivery.
14

We can perform a myopic assignment of drivers to loads by solving
XAssign(St) = arg max
xt
X
d∈Dt
X
ℓ∈Lt
ctdℓxtdℓ.
(22)
A potential problem with a myopic policy is that there may be loads that are not assigned and are
then held in the hope that a driver may be found to move the load at a later time. However, the
load may be in a location where we do not traditionally have drivers. We can create an artiﬁcial
incentive. Let
τtℓ
=
the amount of time that load ℓhas been held at time t.
Now consider the following modiﬁed optimization problem
XAssign(St|θ) = arg min
xt
X
d∈Dt
X
ℓ∈Lt
(ctdℓ−θτtℓ)xtdℓ.
(23)
XAssign(St|θ) is now a parameterized cost function approximation with a modiﬁed objective function.
5.2
A dynamic shortest path problem
Everyone is familiar with the process of navigation systems repeatedly solving shortest path problems
to a destination as it receives updates to estimates of travel times around the network. This is, of
course, a fully sequential decision problem that can be modeled as a dynamic program. We can
model the problem as a sequential decision problem.
Let Rt be the location of the traveler at time t, and let ¯ctij be our estimate of the cost of traversing
link (i, j) given what we know at time t. The estimates ¯ct evolve over time according to
¯ct+1,ij = ¯ct,ij + δ¯ct+1,ij.
(24)
where δ¯ct+1,ij is the change in the estimate of ¯ctij given new observations of traﬃc.
We assume that at each time t we are at an intersection where we have to make a decision given
by
xtij
=
 1
if we traverse link i to j when we are at i at time t,
0
otherwise.
We make this decision using a policy Xπ(St), where the state St is given by
St = (Rt, ¯ct).
15

Models of shortest path problems typically overlook the need to include the vector of estimates ¯ct in
the state variable. This is precisely why we cannot solve this problem (at least not optimally) using
classical shortest path algorithms.
Our challenge is to then ﬁnd the best policy Xπ(St) that solves
min
π F π(θ) = E



T
X
t=0
X
(i,j)
ˆctijXπ(St|θ)|S0


,
(25)
where ˆctij is the actual cost we experience traversing link (i, j) at time t + 1.
A natural strategy is to ﬁx the vector of estimates of link costs ¯ct and solve a shortest path problem
to the destination, updating the shortest path as ¯ct evolves to ¯ct+1 (and the traveler transitions to
a new node). This is a lookahead policy based on a lookahead model that uses ﬁxed estimates ¯ct
rather than modeling their stochastic evolution.
The question is: Can we do better? A limitation of the classical approach of solving sequences
of deterministic lookaheads is that it fails to recognize that some links can have long tails, which
introduces the risk of arriving late. An alternative is to replace ¯ctij with the θ-percentile of the
distribution for each link. Let
¯cπ
t,ij(θ)
=
the θ-percentile of the travel time for link (i, j) given our estimate at time t.
This means we still have a deterministic shortest path problem, but now we have to tune θ using
(25) using our tools from stochastic search.
6
An energy storage example with rolling forecasts
One of the most overlooked modeling issues in operations research is the proper handling of rolling
forecasts. We use the setting of an energy storage system (depicted in ﬁgure 1) which draws energy
from a wind farm or the power grid to serve a time-varying load, with a ﬁnite capacity storage device
(and ﬁxed transmission constraints) to help smooth the variations.
Our energy system has some important characteristics that make it unusually diﬃcult as a
stochastic optimization problem:
• The energy demands follow a highly time-dependent diurnal pattern (see ﬁgure 2(a)).
• The energy from wind is highly stochastic. We have rolling forecasts, updated every hour, but
these rolling forecasts evolve considerably over time, as indicated in ﬁgure 2(b). Our rolling
wind forecast data was obtained courtesy of PJM Interconnections.
• There is unlimited power available from the grid, but at highly stochastic prices. We can buy
from, and sell to, the grid.
16

0
2000
4000
6000
0
50
100
150
Battery 
storage
Demand (load)
Wind energy
Grid prices
Figure 1: Energy storage system, including a renewable source (wind), energy from the grid at
real-time prices, battery storage, and a load.
• The battery has ﬁxed capacity, and the transmission lines are also capacitated, which limits
our ability to transmit and store power. For this reason, the ability to anticipate surges and
dips in wind energy requires that we be able to plan into the future.
We use a martingale model of forecast evolution (MMFE) (Heath & Jackson, 1994; Graves et al.,
1986) where forecasts (for energy from the wind farm and the demand) evolve according to
fE
t+1,t′ = fE
tt′ + εE
t+1,t′,
(26)
fD
t+1,t′ = fD
tt′ + εD
t+1,t′.
(27)
where εE
t+1,t′ ∼N(0, σ2
E) and εD
t+1,t′ ∼N(0, σ2
D) represents the exogenous change in the forecast of
energy from the wind farm and the demand for time t′.
2    4     6     8    10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24
Hour of day
Load (demand)
Actual
Rolling forecasts, 
updated each hour.



Forecast made 
at midnight:
2          4           6           8          10         12        14         16         18         20        22         24
Hour of day
Energy generation from wind              
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: (a) Energy load by hour of day and (b) rolling forecast, updated hourly.
17

6.1
A model of the energy system
Our model consists of ﬁve elements: state variables St, decision variables xt, exogenous information
variables Wt+1, the transition function St+1 = SM(St, xt, Wt+1), and the objective function. These
are given below:
State variables:- The state of the system at time t is all the information we need to model our
system from time t onward, which means the information need to compute costs and constraints,
making a decision, and compute the transition function. For the energy problem this information is:
Dt
=
Demand (“load”) for power during hour t.
Et
=
Energy generated from renewables (wind/solar) during hour t.
Rt
=
Amount of energy stored in the battery at time t.
ut
=
Limit on how much generation can be transmitted at time t (this is known
in advance).
pt
=
Price to be paid for energy drawn from the grid at time t.
,
fD
tt′
=
Forecast of Dt′ made at time t.
fE
tt′
=
Forecast of Et′ made at time t.
These variables make up our state variable:
St = (Rt, Dt, Et, (fD
tt′)t′≥t, (fE
tt′)t′≥t).
Rolling forecasts are widely used in dynamic models, but the recognition that the forecast itself
belongs in the state variable has been recognized by only a small handful of authors, including Chen
et al. (1999),Iida & Zipkin (2006) and Lai et al. (2008).
Decision variables: - These are the ﬂows between each of the elements of our energy system:
xt
=
Planned generation of energy during hour t which consists of the following
elements:
xED
t
=
ﬂow of energy from wind to demand,
xEB
t
=
ﬂow of energy from wind to battery,
xGD
t
=
ﬂow of energy from grid to demand,
xGB
t
=
ﬂow of energy from grid to battery,
xBD
t
=
ﬂow of energy from battery to demand.
We would normally write out the constraints that these ﬂows have to satisfy. These consist of the
ﬂow conservation constraints, as well as upper bounds due to transmission constraints, in addition to
nonnegativity constraints on all the variables except xGB
t
since energy is allowed to ﬂow both ways
18

between the grid and the battery. For compactness, we are going to represent the constraints using
Atxt
=
Rt,
xt
≤
ut,
xt
≥
0.
Exogenous information - For the variables with forecasts (demand and wind energy), the exoge-
nous information is the change in the forecast, or the deviation between forecast and actual:
εD
t+1,τ
=
Change in the forecast of demand (for τ > 1 periods in the future) that we
ﬁrst learn at time t + 1, or the deviation between actual and forecast (for
τ = 1).
εE
t+1,τ
=
Change in the forecast of wind energy (for τ > 1 periods in the future) that
we ﬁrst learn at time t+1, or the deviation between actual and forecast (for
τ = 1).
We assume that prices evolve purely exogenously with deviations:
ˆpt+1
=
Change in grid prices between t and t + 1.
Our exogenous information is then
Wt+1 = ((εD
t+1,τ, εE
t+1,τ)τ≥1, ˆpt+1).
Transition function - The variables that evolve exogenously are
fD
t+1,t′
=
fD
tt′ + εD
t+1,t′−t−1,
t′ = t + 2, . . . ,
Dt+1
=
fD
t+1,t′ + εD
t+1,1,
fE
t+1,t′
=
fE
tt′ + εE
t+1,t′−t−1,
t′ = t + 2, . . . ,
Et+1
=
fE
t+1,t′ + εE
t+1,1,
pt+1
=
pt + ˆpt+1.
The energy in storage evolves according to
Rt+1 = Rt + xEB
t
+ xGB
t
−xBD
t
.
These equations make up our transition function St+1 = SM(St, xt, Wt+1).
Objective function - Our single-period contribution function is
C(St, xt) = pt
 xGB
t
+ xGD
t

.
19

Our objective function, then, would be
max
π=(f∈F,θ∈Θf) F π(θ) = E
( T
X
t=0
C(St, Xπ(St|θ))|S0
)
,
(28)
where St+1 = SM(St, xt = Xπ(St|θ), Wt+1), and given a model of the uncertainty that enters our
system through the initial state S0 and the exogenous information sequence W1, W2, . . . , WT . As in
the past, we can estimate this objective function by simulating our policy, which we present next.
6.2
Designing a policy
There is a very small literature that addresses inventory problems while explicitly recognizing rolling
forecasts ft = (fD
tt′, fE
tt′)t′≥t. Iida & Zipkin (2006) shows that an order-up-to policy parameterized
by θ(ft) is optimal, but does not attempt to compute the multidimensional function θ(ft). Lai et
al. (2008) considers price forecasts in the context of natural gas storage, formulating the dynamic
program with ft in the state variable and showing that an order-up-to policy θ(ft) is optimal but
also proposes an approximation based on supporting hyperplanes. Chen et al. (1999) formulates an
inventory problem with rolling forecasts and attempts to use approximate dynamic programming,
but is limited to about a half dozen dimensions. None of these papers considers the much more
diﬃcult problem of bounds on order quantities and storage, which makes the problem much harder,
and invalidates the optimality proofs of order-up-to policies that can be written as θ(ft) (they have
to be time-dependent, and state-dependent θt(St) where St includes all the elements of the state
variable).
Drawing on the framework of a parametric cost function approximation, we are going to start
with a classical deterministic lookahead model. We begin by creating the decision variables for our
lookahead model
˜xtt′ = (˜xED
tt′ , ˜xEB
tt′ , ˜xGD
tt′ , ˜xGB
tt′ , ˜xBD
tt′ ), t + 1 ≤t′ ≤t + H,
which parallels the elements of xt for each time t′ in the future.
This is a time-dependent problem with complex interactions between the uncertain supply of
wind energy, the price of energy from the grid, and the time-dependent nature of demands that have
to be satisﬁed over a capacitated grid. It seems natural to start by creating a policy based on a
deterministic lookahead model given by:
XDLA(St) = arg
max
xt,(˜xtt′,t′=t+1,...,t+H)
 
pt(xGB
t
+ xGD
t
) +
t+H
X
t′=t+1
˜ptt′(˜xGB
tt′ + ˜xGD
tt′ )
!
(29)
20

subject to the following constraints: First, for time t we have
xBD
t
−xGB
t
−xEB
t
≤
Rt,
(30)
˜Rt,t+1 −(xGB
t
+ xEB
t
−xBD
t
)
=
Rt,
(31)
xED
t
+ xBD
t
+ xGD
t
=
Dt,
(32)
xEB
t
+ xED
t
≤
Et,
(33)
xGD
t
, xEB
t
, xED
t
, xBD
t
≥
0,
(34)
Then, for t′ = t + 1, . . . , t + H we have
˜xBD
tt′ −˜xGB
tt′ −˜xEB
tt′
≤
˜Rtt′,
(35)
˜Rt,t′+1 −(˜xGB
tt′ + ˜xEB
tt′ −˜xBD
tt′ )
=
˜Rtt′,
(36)
˜xED
tt′ + ˜xBD
tt′ + ˜xGD
tt′
=
fD
tt′,
(37)
˜xEB
tt′ + ˜xED
tt′
≤
fE
tt′.
(38)
The weakness in this model is the forecasts of wind energy fE
tt′ and demand fD
tt′. One idea would
be to “discount” these forecasts by multiplying each forecast with coeﬃcients θE
t′−t and θD
t′−t that
depend on how far into the future we are trying to forecast.
Using this approach, we create a
parameterized policy by replacing equations (37) and (38) with
˜xED
tt′ + ˜xBD
tt′ + ˜xGD
tt′
=
θD
t′−tfD
tt′,
(39)
˜xEB
tt′ + ˜xED
tt′
≤
θE
t′−tfE
tt′.
(40)
The problem of tuning the parameter vector θ is not easy, but there are a number of strategies
we can draw on. We designed an algorithm (Ghadimi & Powell, 2022) using a stochastic gradi-
ent algorithm based on Spall’s simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation algorithm Spall
(2003) which is well suited to problems with multidimensional parameters. We then compared the
performance of the optimized parametric policy against a base policy with θ = 1. The results are
shown in ﬁgure 3 for optimized θ using a range of diﬀerent starting points, where the left-most bar
uses an initial starting point of θ0 = 1. Most of the results show improvements of 20 to 50 percent.
We claim that the roughly 30 percent improvement is quite signiﬁcant, given that it does not
come at any additional computational cost in the ﬁeld. At the same time we observe that there is
no alternative computational strategy that would be guaranteed to be better. Two-stage stochastic
programs do not even attempt to model the evolution of estimates of the forecasts. Approximate
dynamic programming would not be able to capture the complex nonlinearities of forecasts in the
state variable, especially for the capacitated problem that we are solving.
21

Pct. Improvement over benchmark lookahead
Starting point              
𝜃଴ൌ1 
𝜃଴∈ሾ0,1ሿ 
𝜃଴∈ሾ0.5,1.5ሿ 
𝜃଴∈ሾ1.0,2.0ሿ 
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
Figure 3: Relative performance of optimized parameterized lookahead policy to the performance of
a deterministic lookahead with θ = 1.
7
Closing remarks
The major goal of this paper is to make the argument that a parameterized deterministic optimization
model is a perfectly valid basis for a policy for (stochastic) sequential decision problems. The research
community needs to accept that tuning a parameterized policy using a stochastic base model such
as that given in equation (1) is a form of stochastic optimization, even if the policy requires solving
a deterministic optimization problem.
Deterministic lookahead models are widely used in practice because they easily handle complexity,
and are relatively easy to solve. The use of parameterized cost function approximations enjoys several
signiﬁcant strengths, especially in the context of complex problems. Some examples are:
• The parametric cost function approximations naturally handles the dynamics of a highly time-
dependent problem with complicating constraints (as we encountered in the energy storage
problem) that emphasize the importance for planning into the future.
• Although a time-dependent problem requires time-dependent behavior, the eﬀect of incorporat-
ing a rolling forecast produces a stationary policy. The function Xπ(St) is not time dependent,
and the vector θ is not time-dependent. This property signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the search process
for θ.
• Rolling forecasts arise in many settings, yet introduce complex stochastic interactions between
forecasts and decisions in the future, which impact the decisions made now. Capturing this in
a stochastic lookahead policy is exceptionally diﬃcult, but is quite easy in a simulator.
• Parametric deterministic lookahead policies can capture complex state variables (the rolling
forecast is just one example) much more easily than policies based on stochastic lookaheads.
Similarly, simulating complex state variables for the purpose of parameter tuning is also quite
easy.
22

• The parametric deterministic lookahead policy is generally easy to compute in the ﬁeld.
While this approach is both attractive (since it is easy to implement) and promising (see ﬁgure
3), serious research issues remain:
• Designing the best parameterization is diﬃcult, but closely parallels the challenges of model
design in machine learning. For our energy storage problem, we might say that multiplying
coeﬃcients θ times the forecasts is intuitively appealing, but other parameterizations are possi-
ble, such as ensuring that the energy in storage in future time periods stays above a minimum
level (as a reserve) and below a maximum level (so we can store unexpected surges in wind).
We suspect that most industrial applications at best use intuitive parameterizations without
the beneﬁts of experimental testing in a simulator.
• Stochastic search remains a challenge. For example, the objective function (28) is nonconvex
in θ (when we limit the search over θ). Simulating policies can also be quite noisy.
• While it is natural to assume that we can tune the parameters using a simulator, there will
be many settings where a simulator is not available (or would not be trusted). An important
research challenge is to perform online parameter tuning in the ﬁeld so that the policy adapts
to changing conditions.
We hope that the thoughts in this paper encourage the stochastic optimization community to
include parameterized deterministic models as valid policies for stochastic optimization problems.
This initiative is likely to be warmly endorsed by industry that is already implementing parameterized
deterministic models, without the beneﬁts of careful design of the parameterization and parameter
tuning.
