MOBILEAGENT: ENHANCING MOBILE CONTROL VIA
HUMAN-MACHINE INTERACTION AND SOP INTEGRATION
Tinghe Ding, Yang Wu, Chenyi Zhuang, Xiaodong Zheng, Guannan Zhang
Ant Group

ABSTRACT
Agents centered around Large Language Models (LLMs) are now capable of automating mobile
device operations for users. After fine-tuning to learn a user’s mobile operations, these agents
can adhere to high-level user instructions online. They execute tasks such as goal decomposition,
sequencing of sub-goals, and interactive environmental exploration, until the final objective is
achieved. However, privacy concerns related to personalized user data arise during mobile operations,
requiring user confirmation. Moreover, users’ real-world operations are exploratory, with action
data being complex and redundant, posing challenges for agent learning. To address these issues, in
our practical application, we have designed interactive tasks between agents and humans to identify
sensitive information and align with personalized user needs. Additionally, we integrated Standard
Operating Procedure (SOP) information within the model’s in-context learning to enhance the agent’s
comprehension of complex task execution. Our approach is evaluated on the new device control
benchmark AitW, which encompasses 30K unique instructions across multi-step tasks, including
application operation, web searching, and web shopping. Experimental results show that the SOP-
based agent achieves state-of-the-art performance in LLMs without incurring additional inference
costs, boasting an overall action success rate of 66.92%. The code and data examples are available at
https://github.com/alipay/mobile-agent.
Keywords agent · mobile control · SOP · human-machine interaction
1
Introduction
Due to the advanced capabilities and increasing popularity of LLMs [1, 2], researchers are now using these models to
develop AI agents with enhanced perceptual and action abilities, employing strategies such as multimodal perception
and tool utilization [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. These agents facilitate user interactions with electronic devices through clicks,
gestures, and text, thereby streamlining complex tasks [10, 11, 12, 13]. Significant research in this domain includes
web-based projects like WebGum[14], Webagent[15], Mind2Web[4], Webshop[7], and mobile-focused initiatives
such as Auto-UI[12], BC agent [10]. The development of these intelligent agents typically involves task planning,
environment perception, intent recognition, and understanding operation sequences to make execution decisions. These
decisions encompass determining task statuses and generating operation types[10]. Current research highlights three
critical factors influencing their practical application on user mobile.
• Firstly, it is challenging for agents to establish a relationship between current page operations and task
objectives from fragmented and redundant user operational behaviors. User operational behaviors available
for agent learning are characterized by a degree of arbitrariness, necessitating that the agent comprehends
historical user behavior to refine its automated execution skills [10, 12]. Training samples often consist of
complex or repetitive user actions. For example, a user’s persistent scrolling and browsing during a purchase,
or their repeated searches and browsing for related queries, are typical of such behaviors. To efficiently process
these intricate actions, the large model must accurately identify the essential task pipeline throughout the entire
task execution.
arXiv:2401.04124v3  [cs.HC]  17 Jan 2024

Figure 1: The overview describes an automated operational tool app used in a chat scenario for scheduling hospital
appointments. The process involves: (a) The user commanding the AI agent in the chat to schedule an appointment. (b)
The AI agent navigating the hospital app to book an appointment. (c) The agent identifying different hospital branches,
organizing this information, and displaying it in the chat. (d) The user selecting a branch in the chat, and the agent
interacting with the app accordingly. (e) The agent recognizing and presenting essential pre-appointment details in the
chat. (f) The user confirms, and the agent completes subsequent steps.
• Moreover, some privacy-related decisions cannot be fully automated, as they necessitate user awareness and
confirmation. As agent capabilities advance, human involvement becomes increasingly crucial to guide and
monitor agents’ actions, ensuring they align with human requirements and objectives [8, 9, 16, 17]. Often, in
real-world scenarios, machines do not need to perform certain tasks autonomously, particularly when handling
sensitive information. As depicted in Figure 1, our developed application automates operations based on user
commands in a chat scenario. For instance, scheduling a hospital appointment via an app must involve user
input for privacy authorization, clinic selection, and receiving pre-visit guidelines.
• The ultimate challenge in enhancing predictive methods often leads to increased computational demands
during online deployment. For example, integrating smaller models to complement the LLM with additional
information, or employing techniques such as planning and chaining actions for predictions, can significantly
slow down the prediction process [15, 18, 19]. This slowdown is contrary to the essential principle of rapid
execution, which is crucial for large-scale automation models.
In response, we have developed a more versatile range of execution types for practical applications. This involves
identifying key information and structuring it for user interaction, aligning more closely with real-world scenarios.
For more advanced task instructions, the agent must understand the intent and then decompose it into a series of
subtasks, where their understanding of the tools significantly influences the decomposition process. Furthermore, SOP
[20, 21, 22, 23], defined as detailed instructions for consistency and quality in complex tasks, are pivotal in automation.
We have integrated a vital operation pipeline and the monitoring of sub-task execution statuses within the current
environment. This approach has improved predictive performance without increasing online prediction costs.
2
Related Work
AI agent, leveraging a substantial language model as its core processing unit, is capable of engaging in dialogues,
executing tasks, reasoning, and displaying a degree of independent action. To augment its autonomy, such an agent
requires integration with extensive databases, a memory system, and access to reasoning tools. Prompt engineering
equips these agents with advanced capabilities for analysis, planning, implementation, evaluation, and continuous
improvement. With appropriate information and prompts, they can manage self-sufficient workflows, albeit under some
human supervision[8, 9].
Regarding manipulation tasks for agent, there are two particularly popular areas: web page manipulation and mobile
application operation[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Overall, the task-oriented agent follows high-level user instructions, performing
tasks like goal decomposition [15, 24], planning the sequence of sub-goals[12, 24, 25], and interactive exploration of
the environment [7, 14, 26], until the final objective is attained. Figure 2 is an example of a basic operation instruction
generation for mobile application operation.
2

Figure 2: Overview of the process of an automated execution tool. Extracting information from a mobile page as DOM
context. Subsequently, the task goal, agent role, DOM information, and historical operations are combined to form
the model’s input prompt. Inputting the prompt to the AI agent to generate execution commands, and carrying out
operations on the mobile page based on these commands.
Agents must have the capability to comprehend instructions in complex scenarios, adapt to changes like noisy text and
dynamic HTML web pages or DOM application pages, and gradually generalize successful operations to ensure the
completion of advanced task objectives through extended operational processes[26]. Researchers have begun leveraging
the advanced HTML reading and visual perception abilities of LLM, such as understanding entire page source codes
[4] and employing a multimodal corpus containing screenshots [12, 14, 27, 28], to enhance understanding capabilities.
In addition to generating the final operational objective, specific details such as element coordinates or XPath (XML
Path Language) [29] are crucial for task execution. Various models adopt different approaches: some integrate these
coordinates as both input and output [10, 12], while others focus on predicting the element objects and employ strategies
to align them with the corresponding coordinates [4, 13].
In the process of observing the execution environment, maintaining synchronization between the agent’s state and
the subgoals is significant. Some researchers employ agent to decompose high-level task instructions into a series
of sub-goals [25], basic skill sequences [30], or fundamental keyboard/mouse operations [31]. In terms of control
strategies, planning the sequence of sub-goals requires decomposing complex tasks into multiple subtasks. This not
only enables a better understanding of the intent behind user operations but also allows for the accomplishment of a
significantly greater workload [8, 9].
When handling tasks related to sensitive information, involving agents in collaboration with humans is an effective
approach. Humans can offer guidance and help regulate the safety, legality, and ethical conduct of agents [9]. For
example, in travel decision-making, agents can enhance the experience by empowering tourists to actively seek highly
relevant information through a question-and-answer mode, essentially placing them in the driver’s seat of the decision
process [32]. But it is challenging to ascertain privacy information during an agent’s execution and to proactively
inform users through dialogue. Consequently, agents must be capable of dynamically recognizing emerging privacy
information within the operational environment. Subsequently, this information should be structured and presented to
users for confirmation of the execution details.
3
Method
In this field, use LLM to plan the sequence of sub-goals increases the perplexity of inference. For instance, in our
collected training tasks, the same task and environment can have multiple execution pipelines. In such tasks, LLMs
struggle to generate consistent sub-goal sequences. If recall techniques are used to place related subtask pipelines
into the LLM’s in-context, this approach faces issues with recall accuracy and also increases the time consumed
in the execution chain. Therefore, we will discuss how introducing SOP method can enhance model Performance.
Additionally, We developed structured instructions to identify and extract privacy information, thereby increasing
human interaction, and we implemented the latest data processing methods based ’Enlarged-element’ operations. We
will address this topic focusing on Sample Handling, Structured Instruction, and SOP Design.
Sample Handling: Many existing methods incorporate the coordinates of page elements into the model’s input, whereas
the coordinates of user clicks or the start and end points of swipes are processed as outputs. Despite the numerical
connection between these two types of coordinates, accurately discerning their relationships poses a challenge for large
models. To address this, we employ ’Enlarged-element’ operations, which map coordinates to specific page elements
by expanding each element’s coordinate bounding box. This approach ensures unique association of click coordinates
with designated elements. In the case of click operations, the coordinates are mapped to specific elements, which are
3

then identified as the predicted targets. For swipe operations, we limit the output to the swipe direction, with each
direction corresponding to a predetermined sliding distance. The predictive targets for each operation type and their
corresponding coordinate transformations are detailed in Appendix Table 6.
Structured Instruction: To ensure user privacy and address personalized needs, we have developed structured
instructions in addition to the common operational and task status instructions. For application pages that require user
awareness and authorization, the agent is designed to accurately identify and enable the production of well-structured
messages and user operation choices. This empowers users to select operations themselves, effectively replacing the
model’s direct execution of commands. Examples of all types of instructions can be found in the Appendix Figure 5.
SOP Design: MetaGPT [22] introduces a groundbreaking approach by leveraging SOP to orchestrate multi-agent
systems driven by LLM, revolutionizing collaborative task resolution. In our research, we utilize SOPs to break down
complex tasks into more manageable segments, assigning subtasks and monitoring their completion status within
the current action environment. Unlike traditional plan-based methods, SOPs function as a blueprint for the model’s
instruction execution pipeline on the input side, while a plan dictates future action strategies during the output phase.
SOPs abstract and generalize operational instructions, eschewing the specification of explicit operation types. To
execute a task such as ’Search for the best rated headphones on Amazon,’ the SOP can be structured as follows: First,
conduct a search on the website; second, view and click on page content to access Amazon; third, type ’Best Rated
Headphones’ into Amazon’s search bar; fourth, view and select relevant products by clicking on their page content;
finally, complete the task. We also integrate the current status of task execution into the SOPs, enabling the model to
more effectively understand past actions and anticipate future tasks.
In our approach, we introduce an abstraction Y that encapsulates various types of instructions generated from the
model’s input prompt X. The input prompt includes the task goal, agent role, DOM information, and historical
operations. Mathematically, we can formalize this process as follows: The conditional entropy of directly predicting Y
given X is denoted as H(Y |X). Upon introducing the abstract SOP representation Z, we define the conditional entropy
for predicting Y with the knowledge of both X and Z as H(Y |X, Z). According to the chain rule of information
theory, it is known that:
H(Y |X, Z) ≤H(Y |X)
This implies that the uncertainty of Y , given both X and Z, is potentially reduced compared to when only X is known.
Therefore, the presence of Z can lead to a reduction in entropy—or equivalently, an increase in the information available
for the prediction of Y —which can consequently improve the accuracy of the prediction.
4
Experiments
We have enhanced our Ant Intelligent Assistant (AIA) application by integrating the capability of large models
to recognize privacy permissions and generate structured information, thereby improving the functionality of user
interactions in automation execution. Furthermore, we have developed a LLM agent based on SOP technology, utilizing
Google’s AitW dataset [10], to objectively assess the accuracy and time efficiency of our method.
4.1
AIA
The AIA is a product currently in the testing and development phase, not yet released for public use, designed and
developed for dialogue scenarios where large models generate instructions to aid user automation in mobile applications.
Within AIA, we have formulated Operational Instructions, Task Status Instructions, and Structured Instructions to
enhance user interaction, the interactions example can be found in Appendix Figure 5. From the model’s perspective,
the input is a prompt comprising task goals, operation sequences, and the DOM information of the current page. The
model outputs three distinct types of instructions.
• Operational Instructions: These include commands such as clicking, scrolling, and typing, which facilitate
basic mobile phone operations.
• Task Status Instructions: These instructions represent the completion of a task, indicating the status of the
instruction, such as successful completion or infeasibility.
• Structured Instructions: This category involves identifying necessary user interactions on the current page and
transforming disorganized DOM fragment data into a well-structured data format.
Strctured Instructions
Exploring the Structured Instruction functionality, this aspect focuses on identifying pages
that necessitate the recognition of personal privacy information authorization, the confirmation of message notifications,
and the selection of slot content. As illustrated in Figure 3, when processing a medical page with pop-up information,
including medical instructions, we start by organizing the fragmented and disorganized DOM data. This cleaned-up
4

"搜索科室、医生",
"预约须知",
"确定",
"选择科室",
"中医科",
"中医内科",
"各位病友：",
"感谢您对本院的信任，选择来我院就诊，为保证您能顺利完成手机挂号及后续就诊，请您认真阅读并遵守本手机挂号规则，充分理解各条款内容。",
"重点提醒:","1)请做好个人防护，全程佩戴口罩，感谢您的配合。",
"2)14周岁以上患者，具有发热症状或体温≥37.5℃，请至发热门诊就诊。",
"3)为减少医院人员聚集，门诊就诊实行非必要不陪同。",
"1.浙江省立同德医院实行实名制预约挂号，添加就诊人不可超过5人，请您确保所添加就诊人信息的真实性，包括姓名、证件号、手机号及医院绑定账号"，
如患者就诊时，医院发现就诊患者与挂号患者信息不符，",
我院将对本次挂号无效，并不予退费。","2.预约挂号可预约一周内号源，请提前7天的15:00之后至提前1天15:00之前预约。",
取号截止时间上午号11：00前，下午号16:00前。过时未取号，则号源作废且视为爽约。"
Structured Information:
\n预约须知：\n\n各位病友：\n感谢您对本院的信任，选择来我院就诊，为保证您能顺利完成手机挂号及后续就诊，请您认真阅读并遵守本手机挂号规
则，充分理解各条款内容。\n\n重点提醒:\n1)请做好个人防护，全程佩戴口罩，感谢您的配合。\n2)14周岁以上患者，具有发热症状或体温≥37.5℃，请
至发热门诊就诊。\n3)为减少医院人员聚集，门诊就诊实行非必要不陪同。\n\n1.浙江省立同德医院实行实名制预约挂号，添加就诊人不可超过5人，请您
确保所添加就诊人信息的真实性，包括姓名、证件号、手机号及医院绑定账号，如患者就诊时，医院发现就诊患者与挂号患者信息不符，我院将对本次挂
号无效，并不予退费。\n2.预约挂号可预约一周内号源，请提前7天的15:00之后至提前1天15:00之前预约。取号截止时间上午号11：00前，下午号16:00
前。过时未取号，则号源作废且视为爽约。\n'
Structured Options:
确定
DOM
fragments
Extracting 
structured interaction information
Figure 3: The prediction process in the notification confirmation scenario.
data is then used to formulate a prompt for the AI agent. Subsequently, the AI agent generates structured notification
content and user-required confirmation options, such as ’I understand’.
SOP Details
In our AIA medical application, the primary action involves clicking on text elements. We have
delineated 13 fundamental SOP sub-tasks within the medical in-context, including Select Department, Others, Consent
Information, Select Clinic Area, Order Payment, Select Appointment Time, Outpatient Registration, Outpatient Payment,
View Reports, Check Expenses, Registration History, Electronic Invoices, and Inpatient Services, each linked to specific
text elements for interaction. Utilizing this framework, we trained a BERT-based classification model [33]. In this setup,
each click text in the user’s action sequence is categorized into a corresponding sub-task, culminating in the formation
of the SOP pipeline. For instance, phrases like ’confirm’, ’I understand’, ’agree to authorize’, and ’log in’ are classified
by the BERT model into the ’Consent Information’ sub-task, while text elements such as ’urology’, ’general surgery’,
and ’reproductive clinic’ fall under the ’Select Department’ sub-task. Thus, every click text is assigned to a pertinent
SOP task, constructing an SOP pipeline. However, click texts categorized under the ’Others’ task are excluded from the
SOP pipeline.
Evaluation Measures
Task completion rate is utilized as a metric to evaluate the effectiveness of predictions. Initially,
a partial score is determined by dividing the number of correct actions by the episode length. Subsequently, the task
completion score is computed as the average of all partial scores.
Results
In response to privacy concerns, the use of online user data was ruled out. Consequently, we engaged ten
external contractors to conduct testing operations over a two-week period. Some of these participants were assigned
the responsibility of manually documenting their envisioned utilization of medical scenarios within the Alipay app,
while others operated the Alipay application to simulate these specific scenarios. Following this, we collected their
data with the aim of constructing model samples. Additionally, we collected corresponding tasks from 38 hospital
applications, amassing a total of approximately 20,000 episodes. Of these, around 2,000 episodes were allocated for
testing purposes. Regarding the model, we utilized QWen-7B [34] to conduct Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) with
LoRA on our chinese dataset. The related evaluation metrics are detailed below in Table 1. Integrating SOP content
within the model’s in-context learning significantly improves the accuracy of instruction generation.
Instruction
Qwen-7B
Qwen-7B-SOP
Operational
0.895
0.926
Task Status
0.792
0.942
Structured
0.46
0.606
Table 1: Diverse Instruction Types and Their Corresponding Impact on Models’ Predictive Performance (task complete
score).
4.2
AitW
The AitW dataset [10] is highly regarded in the domain of mobile device control, comprising human-curated demonstra-
tions of natural language instructions, user interface (UI) screens, and actions across a range of human tasks. AitW is a
well-recognized dataset in the field of mobile operations, extensively utilized by numerous academic institutions and
research organizations for research purposes. The AitW task example show as Appendix Figure 4. To objectively assess
5

Dataset
Episodes
Screens
Instructions
General
9,476
85,413
545
Install
25,760
250,058
688
GoogleApps
625,542
4,903,601
306
Single
26,303
85,668
15,366
WebShopping
28,061
365,253
13,473
Table 2: Dataset statistics.
the effectiveness of our SOP technology in enabling large models to quickly learn tool usage, we conducted evaluations
using this dataset.
Dataset
The dataset comprises human demonstrations of device interactions, encompassing screens, actions, and
corresponding natural language instructions. It contains 715,000 episodes, covering 30,000 unique instructions. The
benchmark dataset is segmented into five subsets: General, Install, GoogleApps, Single, and WebShopping. Each subset
is further divided into training, validation, and test sets on an episode-wise basis. Detailed descriptions and statistics for
the subsets of the benchmark dataset are provided in Table 2.
• GOOGLEAPPS: This subset encompasses high-level tasks, some of which overlap with PixelHelp, and
involves interactions with various Google applications like Gmail, Calendar, Photos, Settings, etc.
• INSTALL: This category includes tasks related to installing and uninstalling apps, managing app logins, and
addressing support issues (e.g., "forgot password") for 88 applications on the Google Play Store.
• WEBSHOPPING: Focused on E-commerce activities, this subset covers tasks such as searching for products,
adding items to a shopping cart, and reviewing cart contents.
• GENERAL: A diverse collection of tasks, primarily centered on question-answering (e.g., "How much does a
2-bedroom apartment rent for in San Francisco?") and interactions with third-party apps and websites.
• SINGLE: Comprised of single-step tasks, annotated with hindsight relabeling, predominantly sourced from
the WEBSHOPPING category (e.g., "Close the pop-up, then add the first item to the cart").
Baseline
We employed various baseline models, specifically:
• In-context learning LLMs: This includes Palm 2[35] and ChatGPT-3.5[36]. These models were used without a
fine-tuning process but with extra samples. They input a textual description of the screen in HTML syntax,
incorporating UI element information from OCR and icon detection. The models are tasked with predicting
actions from predefined options, such as providing the index of the clicked UI element for click actions or
specifying the scroll direction for scrolling actions. In the ChatGPT-3.5 model, 5-shot CoT prompting is
utilized to enhance performance.
• Fine-tuned LLMs: For this category, we selected Llama 2[37] as the baseline and fine-tuned it using LoRA.
The model receives user instructions and screen descriptions, similar to the format used for in-context learning
LLMs. The expected output from the model includes the action type and the specific element. For details on
the sample design, please refer to Figure 2 above. Training methods similar to SOP were also employed for
control comparisons. This included incorporating the execution plan as well as integrating both the plan and
task status into the output, we name them Llama 2+plan and Llama 2+plan+state.
• Multimodal LLMs: This category includes ChatGPT-4V[38]. For ChatGPT-4V, screen images are directly
utilized, exploring the integration of historical behaviors or OCR-decoded text.
• SOP-based LLMs: Similar to the fine-tuned LLMs, we also used Llama 2, based on enlarged-element
operations, as the foundational model. In the training phase of the SOP model, we incorporated the task’s
SOP process into the in-context input and mixed it with the original samples. During the prediction phase, this
approach allows consistency with the original prompt, eliminating the need for additional tasks. This mixed
training method does not increase the length of the output tokens, ensuring that the time taken for prediction
remains unchanged.
LLMS Details
Figure 3 clearly illustrates the differences between various techniques by presenting the model’s input
and output.
6

• The topmost Llama 2 model serves as the basic baseline version. Its input prompt consists of task role, previous
action, Environment (structured DOM info), and instruction. The output response includes action type and
element type (text, type).
• The Llama 2+plan model adds the complete plan pipeline for executing the instruction to the output response.
In this in-context, the term ’task plan’ refers to the abstract concept of subtasks, rather than the detailed
step-by-step operations.
• The Llama 2+plan+state model adds information about whether the plan has been completed to the output
plan.
• The Llama 2+SOP approach involves adding key abstract subtask pipelines to the input prompt while also
marking the completion status of each subtask in the current process. The method of incorporating SOP in the
input in-context is quite similar to adding plan and state in the output.
Model
Prompt
Response
Llama 2
Given a mobile screen and a question, provide the action based
on the screen information.
action: TYPE
Previous Actions:id:0,type:DUAL_POINT,text:G, ui_type:...
Environment: id:0, text:Bass Headsets, type:TEXT ...
text: best rated headphones
Instruction: Search for the best rated headphones on Amazon.
Answer:
+plan
Given a mobile screen and a question, provide the action based
PLAN:
Llama 2
on the screen information.
id:0 search on the website
Previous Actions:id:0,type:DUAL_POINT,text:G, ui_type: ...
id:1 view and click page content
Environment: id:0, text:Bass Headsets, type:TEXT ...
id:2 type ’best rated headphones’
Instruction: Search for the best rated headphones on Amazon.
id:3 view and click page content
Answer:
id:4 task complete
action: TYPE
text: best rated headphones
+plan+state
Given a mobile screen and a question, provide the action based
PLAN&STATE:
Llama 2
on the screen information.
id:0 search on the website,state:finish
Previous Actions:id:0,type:DUAL_POINT,text:G, ui_type: ...
id:1 view and click page content,state:finish
Environment: id:0, text:Bass Headsets, type:TEXT ...
id:2 type ’best rated headphones’,state:unfinish
Instruction: Search for the best rated headphones on Amazon.
id:3 view and click page content,state:unfinish
Answer:
id:4 task complete,state:unfinish
action: TYPE
text: best rated headphones
Given a mobile screen and a question, provide the action based
on the screen information.
Llama 2
SOP:
id:0 search on the website,state:finish
+SOP
id:1 view and click page content,state:finish
action: TYPE
id:2 type ’best rated headphones’,state:unfinish
text: best rated headphones
id:3 view and click page content,state:unfinish
id:4 task complete,state:unfinish
Previous Actions:id:0,type:DUAL_POINT,text:G, ui_type: ...
Environment: id:0, text:Bass Headsets, type:TEXT ...
Instruction: Search for the best rated headphones on Amazon.
Answer:
Table 3: The model and corresponding prompts and responses. The first line details the construction of the Llama 2
sample, with bold text in other models highlighting the differences compared to Llama 2.
SOP Details
Even with the same instructions, the SOP for different tasks vary and are intricately linked to the specific
execution operations of the current task. To distill key subtask sequences into standardized processes, we identified
commonly executed actions and designated them as specific tasks. We excluded certain negative actions, such as ’going
back’ or ’closing,’ and consolidated similar subtasks. Subsequently, in the current execution environment, each task
7

was assigned a completion state.
For instance, If the semantic understanding of mobile screens [39] interprets the text context as the digit ’9’ or the
letter ’g.’, but the actual user action involves clicking on the Google icon, this task would be classified as ’search on the
website.’ For an in-depth definition of click types and their correlation with SOPs, please refer to the Appendix Table 7.
Implementation Details
We conducted four sets of experiments: Llama 2, Llama 2+plan, Llama 2+plan+state, and
Llama 2+SOP. The relationship among these experiments can be understood as follows: ’plan’ requires the model to
predict the overall plan during inference, ’plan+state’ adds the completion status of each subtask to the ’plan’, and
’SOP’ can be viewed as transferring ’plan+state’ to the input side, thereby guiding the model in generating executable
instructions.
For each experiment, we utilized the computational power of 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs during the training phase. The
training process spanned 5 epochs with a learning rate set at 5e-5. Regarding the Google APP dataset, which is notably
extensive, we sampled 10% of the data. For other datasets, we conducted comprehensive training using the entire
dataset.
Results
The results of the comparative experiments are presented in Table 4. Our model exhibits the highest
performance in all experiments, with its overall average metrics surpassing the previously best-performing model by
66.92%, a significant increase of 1.49%. Specifically, in individual domains, our model achieved superior results in four
areas, while in the SINGLE domain, its performance is comparable to that of ChatGPT-4V.
From the perspective of the training process, models subjected to fine-tuning exhibit better performance compared to
those relying solely on in-context predictions. This is because the fine-tuning process introduces more comprehensive
and precise data into the model, as well as aligning LLM with our task instructions. In the in-context method, the
multimodal ChatGPT-4V significantly surpasses pure LLM. This enhancement is attributed not only to the advanced
capabilities of the model itself but also to the inclusion of direct image data, enriching the information fed into the
model.
In experiments involving pure LLMs, the integration of a plan led to a noticeable decline in performance. Our analysis
indicates that, on average, each instruction in the dataset is associated with 29 different operation pipelines, presenting
a considerable challenge for the model to learn and accurately generate unique pipelines for each instruction. The
complexity and variability of the data hinder the model’s ability to precisely fit the results. While adding the state status
to each task atop the plan does introduce execution-relevant plan information into the model, the improvement observed
is relatively minor.
We explored the factors contributing to the enhanced performance of models following the inclusion of SOP. First, SOP
encapsulate historical operational behaviors and outline subsequent actions, enabling the model to more effectively
comprehend the overall operational pipeline and gain a deeper insight into complex historical operations. Second, the
introduction of SOP during the in-context stage significantly bolsters the model’s inferential and predictive capabilities.
Model
Overall
General
Install
GoogleApps
Single
WebShopping
ChatGPT-CoT (5-shot)
7.72
5.93
4.38
10.47
9.39
8.42
Palm 2
39.6
-
-
-
-
-
GPT-4V ZS +text
50.54
41.66
42.64
49.82
72.83
45.73
GPT-4V ZS image-only
51.92
42.44
49.18
48.26
76.34
43.35
GPT-4V ZS +history
52.96
43.01
46.14
49.18
78.29
48.18
Llama 2
65.43
55.3
73.65
62.33
74.82
61.07
Llama 2+plan
62.08
52.1
71.65
56.23
74.18
56.22
Llama 2+plan+state
62.86
53.77
69.1
61.19
73.51
56.74
Llama 2+SOP
66.92
55.8
74.98
63.95
76.27
63.61
Table 4: Different Types of Instructions and Their Cor- responding Models’ Predictive Performance (task complete
score).The Overall dataset calculates the average metrics of the five subsets.
Computation Cost
Table 5 compares the inference speed of the four models. Each model employs the vLLM
framework [40] for accelerated predictions, with inference parameters configured to a maximum output length of 128
and a precision setting of float16. According to the comparison results, our model aligns with the original Llama 2
method in terms of speed and is ten times faster than the Llama 2+plan+state method.
8

Model
Inference (s/n)
Token Length
Llama 2
0.071
21
Llama 2+plan
0.117
108
Llama 2+plan+state
0.123
123
Llama 2+SOP
0.071
21
Table 5: Computation Cost of Each Model: The computational efficiency of each model is determined by dividing
the time taken (in seconds) by the number of inferences (n). The calculation of token length specifically relates to the
response component.
5
Conclusion
In our automation execution application, we have integrated user interaction features to effectively manage privacy
authorizations and related information. This is further enhanced by incorporating the flow of tasks as per SOP within
the in-context. For offline training, we utilize a combination of samples, ensuring that this approach incurs no additional
costs in practical usage. This method not only elevates the predictive performance baseline of the existing AitW dataset
to a new level but also has potential applicability to similar models with operational workflows. To achieve heightened
performance in this domain, directly inputting image data into multimodal large models is a key strategy. In the realm
of multimodal systems, our future endeavor involves leveraging SOP to assist the model in comprehending historical
operation sequences represented in image format.
