Generate Natural Language Explanations for Recommendation
Hanxiong Chen
Rutgers University

Xu Chen
Tsinghua University

Shaoyun Shi
Tsinghua University

Yongfeng Zhang
Rutgers University

ABSTRACT
Providing personalized explanations for recommendations can help
users to understand the underlying insight of the recommendation
results, which is helpful to the eﬀectiveness, transparency, persua-
siveness and trustworthiness of recommender systems. Current
explainable recommendation models mostly generate textual ex-
planations based on pre-deﬁned sentence templates. However, the
expressiveness power of template-based explanation sentences are
limited to the pre-deﬁned expressions, and manually deﬁning the
expressions require signiﬁcant human eﬀorts.
Motivated by this problem, we propose to generate free-text nat-
ural language explanations for personalized recommendation. In
particular, we propose a hierarchical sequence-to-sequence model
(HSS) for personalized explanation generation. Diﬀerent from con-
ventional sentence generation in NLP research, a great challenge
of explanation generation in e-commerce recommendation is that
not all sentences in user reviews are of explanation purpose. To
solve the problem, we further propose an auto-denoising mecha-
nism based on topical item feature words for sentence generation.
Experiments on various e-commerce product domains show that
our approach can not only improve the recommendation accuracy,
but also the explanation quality in terms of the oﬄine measures
and feature words coverage. Tis research is one of the initial steps
to grant intelligent agents with the ability to explain itself based
on natural language sentences.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Information systems →Recommender systems; •Computing
methodologies →Natural language processing;
KEYWORDS
Explainable Recommendation; Explainable AI; Collaborative Filter-
ing; Natural Language Generation
ACM Reference format:
Hanxiong Chen, Xu Chen, Shaoyun Shi, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2019. Gen-
erate Natural Language Explanations for Recommendation. In Proceedings
of SIGIR 2019 Workshop on ExplainAble Recommendation and Search, Paris,
France, July 25, 2019 (EARS’19), 10 pages.
DOI: 10.475/123 4
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
EARS’19, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 123-4567-24-567/08/06...$15.00
DOI: 10.475/123 4
1
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems are playing an important role in many online
applications. Tey provide personalized suggestions to help user
select the most relevant items based on their preferences. Collabora-
tive Filtering (CF) has been one of the most successful approaches to
generate recommendations based on historical user behaviors [31].
However, the recently popular latent representation approaches to
CF – including both shallow or deep models – can hardly explain
their rating prediction and recommendation results to users [46].
Researchers have noticed that appropriate explanations are im-
portant to recommendation systems [46], which can help to im-
prove the system eﬀectiveness, transparency, persuasiveness and
trustworthiness. As a result, researchers have looked into explain-
able recommendation [46] and search [2] in the recent years [1, 4–
7, 17, 18, 29, 39–41, 46, 47], which can not only provide users with
the recommendation lists, but also intutive explanations about why
these items are recommended.
Recommendation explanations can be provided in many diﬀer-
ent forms, and among the many, a frequently used one is textual
sentence explanation. Current textual explanation generation mod-
els can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories – template-based
methods and retrieval-based methods. Template-based models,
such as [39, 47], deﬁne one or more explanation sentence templates,
and then ﬁll diﬀerent words into the templates according to the
corresponding recommendation so as to generate diﬀerent expla-
nations. Such words could be, for example, item feature words that
the target user is interested in. However, template-based method
requires extensive human eﬀorts to deﬁne diﬀerent templates for
diﬀerent scenarios, and it limits the expressive power of explanation
sentences to the pre-deﬁned templates. Retrieval-based methods
such as [4], on the other hand, atempt to retrieve particular sen-
tences from user reviews as the explanations of a recommendation,
which improves the expression diversity of explanation sentences.
However, the explanations are limited to existing sentences and
the model cannot produce new sentences for explanation.
Considering these problems, we propose to conduct explainable
recommendation by generating free-text natural language expla-
nations, meanwhile keep a high prediction accuracy. Tere exist
three key challenges to build and evaluate a personalized natural
language explanation system. 1) Data bias – the most commonly
used text resources for training explainable recommender systems
are user-generated reviews. Although the reviews are plentiful,
informative and contain valuable information about users opinions
and product features [21, 47], they can be very noisy and not all
the sentences in a review are of explanation purpose. Take Figure
arXiv:2101.03392v1  [cs.IR]  9 Jan 2021

1 as an example, only the underlined sentence is really comment-
ing about the product. To train a good explanation generator, our
model should have the ability of auto-denoising so as to focus on
the training of explanation sentences. 2) Personalization – since
diﬀerent users may pay atention to diﬀerent product features, a
good explainable recommendation system should have the ability
to provide tailored explanations for diﬀerent users according to
the features that the user cares about. 3) Evaluation – although
explainable recommendation has been widely researched in recent
years, our understanding is still limited regarding which metric(s)
is appropriate to evaluate the explainability of explanations. Re-
cent research adopt readability measures in NLP (such as ROUGE
score) for evaluation, but since explainability is not equivalent to
readability, only generating readable sentences is not suﬃcient,
and we need to take the eﬀectiveness of recommendation into con-
sideration. Tis problem involves deep understandings of natural
language, and it also contributes technical merit to natural language
processing research.
Motivated by these challenges, we propose a hierarchical sequence-
to-sequence model (HSS) with auto-denoising for personalized rec-
ommendation and natural language explanation generation. In
particular, the paper makes the following contributions:
• We design a hierarchical generation model, which is able to
collaboratively learn over multiple sentences from diﬀerent users
for explanation sentence generation.
• Based on item feature words extracted from reviews, we design
a feature-aware atention model to implicitly select explanation sen-
tences from reviews for model learning, and we further introduce
a feature atention model to enhance the feature-level personality
of the explanations.
• We adopt three oﬄine metrics – BLEU score, ROUGE score
and feature coverage – to evaluate the quality of the generated
explanations. Te ﬁrst two metrics are classical measures for neu-
ral machine translation and text summarization. BLEU score is
precision-based while ROUGE score is relatively recall-based. Tey
are complement to each other and it would be reasonable to report
both scores to reﬂect the quality of machine generated text. We
also use feature words coverage to show how well a model can cap-
ture the real user personalized preferences. In the meanwhile, the
feature words coverage is a possible measure of the explainability
of the generated explanation sentences.
In the following, we ﬁrst review some related work in Section
2, and then explain the details of our framework in Section 3. We
describe the three oﬄine experimental results to verify the per-
formance of the proposed approach in terms of rating prediction
and explanation in Section 4. In Section 5, we will analyze the
results and make discussions about what we learned from the ex-
periments. Finally, we conclude this work and provide our visions
of the research in Section 6.
2
RELATED WORK
Collaborative ﬁltering (CF) [33] has been an important approach to
modern personalized recommendation systems. Early collaborative
ﬁltering methods adopted intuitive and explainable methods, such
as user-based [30] or item-based [32] collaborative ﬁltering, which
makes recommendation based on similar users or similar items.
Later approaches to CF more and more advanced to more accu-
rate but less transparent latent factor approaches, beginning from
various matrix factorization algorithms [15, 26, 34, 36], to more
recent deep learning and neural modeling approaches [44, 45, 49].
Tough eﬀective in ranking and rating prediction, the latent nature
of these approaches makes it diﬃcult to explain the recommenda-
tion results to users, which motivated the research on explainable
recommendation [46].
Researchers have explored various approaches towards model-
based explainable recommendation. Since user textual reviews are
informative and beter reﬂect user preferences, a lot of research
explored the possibility of incorporating user reviews to improve
the recommendation quality [3, 20, 22, 43, 49] and recommendation
explainability [4, 6, 18, 29, 39, 47], which helps to enhance the
eﬀectiveness, transparency, trustworthiness and persuasiveness of
recommendation system [12, 47].
Early approaches to explainable recommendation models gener-
ate explanations based on pre-deﬁned explanation templates. For
example, Zhang et al [47] proposed an explicit factor model (EFM),
which generates explanations by ﬁlling a sentence template with
the item features that a user is interested in. However, generating
explanation sentences in this way needs extensive human eﬀorts
to deﬁne various templates in diﬀerent scenarios. Moreover, the
predeﬁned templates limit the expressive power of explanation
sentences. Li et al [18] leveraged neural rating regression and text
generation to predict the user ratings and user-generated tips for
recommendation, which helps to improve the prediction accuracy
and the eﬀectiveness of recommendation results. However, not all
of the tips are of explanation purposes for the recommendations
because they do not always explicitly comment about the product
features. To alleviate the problem, Costa et al [9] atempted to
train generation models based on user reviews and automatically
generate fake reviews as explanations. One problem here is that
not all of the sentences in the user reviews are appropriate for
explanation purposes, because users may write sentences that are
irrelevant to the corresponding item, which makes it diﬃcult to
generate explanations when the user reviews are too long with too
much noise. Considering these deﬁciencies, we propose an auto-
denoising mechanism for text generation and produce personalized
natural language explanations for personalized recommendations.
Recently, deep neural network models have been used in various
natural language processing tasks, such as question answering [50]
and text summarization [27]. A well trained neural network could
learn lower-dimension dense representations to capture grammat-
ical and semantical generalizations [11]. Tis property of neural
network is useful for natural language generation tasks. Recurrent
neural network (RNN) [24] has shown notable success in sequen-
tial modeling tasks. Te long short-term memory unit (LSTM)
[13] and gated recurrent unit (GRU) [8] are among the most com-
monly used neural networks for natural language modeling to
avoid the gradient vanishing problem when dealing with long se-
quences. A demonstration of potential utility of recurrent networks
for natural language generation was provided by [35], which used
a character-level LSTM model for the generation of grammatical
English sentences. Character-level models can obviate the Out-of-
Vocabulary(OOV) problem and reduce the vector representation

Figure 1: An example of user reviews in e-commerce. Te
sentences with red underlines are good for explanations.
spaces for language modeling. However, they are generally outper-
formed by word-level models [25]. Considering the performance
of these two modeling strategies, our proposed approach, in partic-
ular, works on word-level with GRU to generate natural language
explanations.
3
THE FRAMEWORK
3.1
Overview
An explainable recommender system can not only give an accurate
prediction of rating score by given a user and an item, but also
generate explanations to interpret the recommendation results. In
our framework, we have two major modules: a rating prediction
module and a natural language explanation generation module.
Both modules take shared user and item latent factors as input.
Since the input space is shared, the extra information can be utilized
from the other module during training process to improve the
general performance of our framework. During the testing stage,
only user and item latent factors as well as the extracted feature
words information are provided.
At the training stage, the training data consists of users, items,
user generated reviews and ratings. We use X to represent the
training dataset; U and I are user set and item set respectively;
𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤is the set of sentences in the user generated reviews; R rep-
resents the set of user ratings; K is the feature words set, where K
is the subset of vocabulary V. We have X = {U, I, 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤, R, K}.
Te key notations in this paper are listed in Table 1.
In the rating regression module, only the user latent factors U
and item latent factors V are given as the input. Ten the multi-
layer perceptron would project these latent factors into a single
value as the rating prediction. Afer that, we calculate the mean
square error loss and optimize the loss function.
In the personalized natural language explanation generation
module, we design a hierarchical GRU to map the user and item
latent factors into a sequence of words. Te overview of our frame-
work is shown in Figure 2. Te hierarchical GRU contains a context
GRU and a sentence GRU. Context GRU is used to generate the
initial hidden state for sentence GRU to generate the sequence of
Table 1: A summary of key notations in this work.
Notation
Explanation
X
training dataset
U
user set
I
item set
V
vocabulary
K
feature words set
S
Te set of generated sequences
𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤
Te set of sentences in the reviews
R
Te set of user ratings
U
Te set of user latent factors
V
Te set of item latent factors
u
user latent factor
v
item latent factor
k
feature word embedding
o
atentive feature-aware vector
Θ
Te set of neural network parameters
𝛽𝑖
Te supervised factor of the i-th sentence
𝑑
latent factor dimension
𝑟𝑢,𝑖
rating of user 𝑢to item 𝑖
𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ
hyperbolic tangent activation function
𝜎
sigmoid activation function
𝜙
rectiﬁed linear unit activation function
𝜍
sofmax function
words. Te atention model is employed to improve the personal-
ization of the generated sentences. It can be interpreted as which
feature word or feature word should we pay more atention to when
generating the current sentence. Since not all the words in the vo-
cabulary are good for explanations and not all the feature words
are suitable for each speciﬁc user item pair, we expect the model
to learn to generate a more related and personalized explanation
sentences by applying atention model. Moreover, we design an
auto-denoising mechanism by applying a supervised factor on the
corresponding generated sentence loss function. Te key point
here is that we believe the sentence with higher proportion of fea-
ture words would be more important for training the model. Te
eﬀect of those sentences with less or zero proportion of feature
words would automatically be weakened during training process by
applying zero or very small supervised factor on their loss function.
Finally, all the neural network parameters, user and item latent
factors, word embedding in both modules are learned by a multi-
task learning approach. Te model can be trained through back-
propagation algorithms.
3.2
Neural Rating Regression
Te goal of doing neural rating regression is to make rating pre-
dictions by given user and item latent factors. We borrow the idea
from paper [18] which is to learn a function 𝑓𝑟(·) to project user
latent factors U and item latent factors V to rating scores ˆr. Here
𝑓𝑟(·) is represented as a multi-layer perceptron (MLP):
ˆr = MLP(U, V)
(1)

where U ∈R𝑑×𝑚and V ∈R𝑑×𝑛are in diﬀerent latent vector spaces;
𝑚is the number of users and 𝑛is the number of items; 𝑑is the
latent factor dimension for both user and item representations. We
ﬁrst map user and item latent factors into a hidden state:
h𝑟= 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(W𝑟
𝑢ℎu + W𝑟
𝑣ℎv + b𝑟
ℎ)
(2)
where W𝑟
𝑢ℎ∈R𝑑×𝑑and W𝑟
𝑣ℎ∈R𝑑×𝑑; b𝑟
ℎ∈R𝑑×1 is the bias
term. We add more layers and use tanh activation function to do
non-linear transformation to improve the performance of rating
prediction:
h𝑟
𝑙= 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(W𝑟
ℎℎ𝑙h𝑟
𝑙−1 + b𝑟
ℎ𝑙)
(3)
where W𝑟
ℎℎ𝑙∈R𝑑×𝑑is a mapping matrix; 𝑙is the index of hidden
layer. We denote the last hidden layer as h𝑟
𝐿. Te output layer maps
the last hidden state into a predicted rating score ˆ𝑟:
ˆ𝑟= W𝑟
ℎℎ𝐿h𝑟
𝐿+ 𝑏𝑟
ℎ𝐿
(4)
where W𝑟
ℎℎ𝐿∈R1×𝑑. Te objective function of this rating regres-
sion problem is deﬁned as:
L𝑟=
1
|X|
∑︁
𝑢∈U,𝑖∈I
(ˆ𝑟𝑢,𝑖−𝑟𝑢,𝑖)2
(5)
ˆ𝑟𝑢,𝑖is the predicted rating score by user 𝑢given item 𝑖and 𝑟𝑢,𝑖is
the corresponding ground truth. We can optimize this objective
function to learn neural network parameters Θ as well as user and
item latent representations U and V.
3.3
Personalized Natural Language
Explanation Generation
Te key point of doing this work is to generate personalized natural
language explanations. Although some research works have already
implemented deep neural models to generating reviews [10] or
tips [18], not many researchers work on explanation generation.
In this section, we will introduce: 1) auto-denosing strategy; 2)
feature-aware atention for personalized explanation generation; 3)
hierarchical GRU model for sentence generation.
3.3.1
Auto-denoising. User review usually contains multiple
sentences. However, not all of them are good representations of
user’s purchase intention. Our goal is to promote the quality of
generated explanation text by introducing a supervised factor to
control the training process, so that our model can learn from those
more important sentences while ignoring those useless sentences.
To implement this idea, we ﬁrst extract all the feature words by
using toolkit Sentires1[47, 48], represented as K and K ⊆V, from
the data set. Ten the supervised factor of the 𝑖-th sentence in the
review is calculated as:
𝛽𝑖=
𝑁𝑖
𝑘
𝑁𝑖𝑤
(6)
where 𝑁𝑖
𝑘is the number of feature words in the 𝑖-th sentence; 𝑁𝑖𝑤is
the total number of words in the 𝑖-th sentence. We can multiply this
supervised factor to the loss function of this sentence to control the
training process. We believe that the sentence with higher feature
words proportion would be more important. Te eﬀect of those
sentences with lower or zero proportion of feature words would be
1htps://github.com/evison/Sentires
automatically weakened by multiplying zero or quite small factor
on their loss function.
3.3.2
Feature-aware Atention. Feature words are the words
which describe the features of a product. For example, ”memory”,
”screen”, ”sensitivity” can be feature words in electronics dataset.
However, ”use”, ”good”, ”day” are not feature words, since they are
not used to describe the feature of an item. Since users may pay
diﬀerent atention to these feature words and each product may
only relate to some feature words, inspired by [42], we implement
a feature-aware atention mechanism to improve the personality.
Mathematically, given a hidden state h𝑡and the 𝑖−th feature word
embedding k𝑖, the atention score of the feature word k𝑖at time 𝑡
is computed as:
x𝑖= h𝑡; k𝑖
𝑎(𝑖, h𝑡) = w𝑇
2 𝜙(W𝑎
1x𝑖+ b𝑎
1) + 𝑏𝑎
2
(7)
where x𝑖∈R2𝑑×1 is the concatenation of the hidden vector at time
𝑡and the 𝑖-th feature word vector; W𝑎
1 ∈R𝑑×2𝑑is the mapping
matrix for the ﬁrst layer network; b𝑎
1 ∈R𝑑×1 is the ﬁrst layer bias;
w2 ∈R𝑑×1 and 𝑏𝑎
2 ∈R are the neural parameters for the second
layer; 𝜙(·) is the ReLU activation function which is deﬁned as:
𝜙(𝑥) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0,𝑥)
(8)
Te ﬁnal atention weights are obtained by normalizing above aten-
tive scores using sofmax, which can be interpreted as how much
atention do we pay to the feature word in term of corresponding
hidden state during the training process.
𝛼(𝑖, h𝑡) =
𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑎(𝑖, h𝑡))
Í|K |
𝑖=1 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑎(𝑖, h𝑡))
(9)
Finally, the atentive feature-aware vector at time 𝑡is calculated as:
o𝑡=
|K |
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝛼(𝑖, h𝑡)k𝑖
(10)
Tis atentive feature-aware vector will be used to compute the
initial hidden state for generating the 𝑖-th sentence in 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑤𝑟𝑑,
which will be introduced in the following subsection.
3.3.3
Context-level GRU (𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑐𝑡𝑥). As shown in Figure 2, the
review sentences are generated by 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑤𝑟𝑑, which will be intro-
duced in the next subsection. However, the initial hidden states are
given by 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑐𝑡𝑥. By leveraging this hierarchical recurrent neural
network, we can generate multiple sentences by given one pair of
user and item latent factors. Since each generated sentence has its
own loss function, we are able to apply the auto-denoising strategy
mentioned above to reduce the eﬀects of unrelated sentences in the
user generated reviews during training process.
Suppose that for each user and item pair, there are 𝑛sentences
in the review. Ten we have 𝑛context representations.
𝐶= {C1, C2, . . . , C𝑛}
We use 𝐶to denote the collection of all the context representations
and C𝑖denotes a speciﬁc context representation. When a sentence
is generated, the context representation would be updated by the
following equation:
C𝑛= 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑐𝑡𝑥(C𝑛−1, h𝑤
𝑛−1,𝐿)
(11)

Explanation Text Generation
Topic-Aware 
Attention
MLP
Cn
k1
k2
kn
…
a1 a2
an
…
+
a1
on
Topic-Aware Attention
u
v
o1
C1
C1
C2
hw
1,1
hw
1,1
hw
1,2
hw
1,2
hw
1,3
hw
1,3
MLP
u
v
o2
C2
w1,1
u
v
MLP
w1,1
w1,2
<eos>
MLP
k1
k2
kn
…
feature words
MLP
u
v
C0
Hierarchical GRU
Enhanced Input
u
v
MLP
ˆr
Rating Regression
<soc>
Figure 2: Overview of our HSS model. Tere are two major modules—explanation text generation module and rating regression
module. Te yellow boxes represent latent factors, such as user latent factor u, item latent factor v, word vector w; blue boxes
represent hidden states; gray boxes represent multi-layer perceptron; pink boxes represent the attention weights for each
feature word vector.
C𝑛−1 is the previous context representation; h𝑤
𝑛−1,𝐿is the last hid-
den state of the 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑤𝑟𝑑. Ten the 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑐𝑡𝑥state is updated by the
following operations:
r𝑐
𝑛= 𝜎(W𝑐
ℎ𝑟h𝑤
𝑛−1,𝐿+ W𝑐
𝑐𝑟C𝑛−1 + b𝑐
𝑟)
z𝑐
𝑛= 𝜎(W𝑐
ℎ𝑧h𝑤
𝑛−1,𝐿+ W𝑐
𝑐𝑧C𝑛−1 + b𝑐
𝑧)
g𝑐
𝑛= tanh(W𝑐
ℎ𝑔h𝑤
𝑛−1,𝐿+ W𝑐
𝑐𝑔(r𝑐
𝑛⊙C𝑛−1) + b𝑐
𝑔)
C𝑛= z𝑐
𝑛⊙C𝑛−1 + (1 −z𝑐
𝑛) ⊙g𝑐
𝑛
(12)
To start the whole process, we utilize the user latent factor u
and item latent factor v to initialize the ﬁrst hidden state C0.
C0 = 𝜙(W𝑐0
𝑢u + W𝑐0𝑣v + b𝑐0)
(13)
3.3.4
Word-level GRU (𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑤𝑟𝑑). Tis part is to generate the
words for explanation sentences. Te main idea can be descripbed
as follow:
𝑝(𝑤𝑛,𝑡|𝑤𝑛,1,𝑤𝑛,2, . . . ,𝑤𝑛,𝑡−1) = 𝜍(h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡)
(14)
where 𝑤𝑛,𝑡is the 𝑡-th word of the 𝑛-th review sentence. 𝜍(·) is the
sofmax function which is deﬁned as follow:
𝜍(𝑥𝑖) =
𝑒𝑥𝑖
Í
𝑗𝑒𝑥𝑗
(15)
h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡is the sequence hidden state of the 𝑛-th sentence at the time
𝑡. It depends on the previous hidden state h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡−1 and the current
input w𝑛,𝑡:
h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡= 𝑓(h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡−1, w𝑛,𝑡)
(16)
Te 𝑓(·) can be LSTM, GRU or Vanilla RNN. Here we utilize GRU
for eﬃciency consideration. Te states are updated by following
operations:
r𝑤
𝑛,𝑡= 𝜎(W𝑤
𝑤𝑟w𝑛,𝑡+ W𝑤
ℎ𝑟h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡−1 + b𝑤
𝑟)
z𝑤
𝑛,𝑡= 𝜎(W𝑤
𝑤𝑧w𝑛,𝑡+ W𝑤
ℎ𝑧h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡−1 + b𝑤
𝑧)
g𝑤
𝑛,𝑡= tanh(W𝑤
𝑤𝑔w𝑛,𝑡+ W𝑤
ℎ𝑔(r𝑤
𝑛,𝑡⊙h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡−1) + b𝑤
𝑔)
h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡= z𝑤
𝑛,𝑡⊙h𝑤
𝑛,𝑡−1 + (1 −z𝑤
𝑛,𝑡) ⊙g𝑤
𝑛,𝑡
(17)
where r𝑤
𝑛,𝑡is the reset gate; z𝑤
𝑛,𝑡is the update gate; ⊙represents
element-wise multiplication; tanh denotes hyperbolic tangent ac-
tivation function; w𝑛,𝑡can simply to be the vector representation
of the word 𝑤𝑛,𝑡, which is the word in the 𝑛-th sentence in the
review at time 𝑡. However, we expect to bring more personalized
information into the text generation model. Inspired by [37] we
concatenate word embedding of word 𝑤at time 𝑡with user embed-
ding u and item embedding v, to get an enhanced input embedding
s𝑛,𝑡. Ten we feed this embedding into a multi-layer perceptron to
produce input vector w𝑛,𝑡:
s𝑛,𝑡= e𝑛,𝑡; u; v
h𝑠= 𝜙(W𝑠s𝑛,𝑡+ b𝑠)
(18)
where e𝑛,𝑡is the vector representation of word 𝑤in the 𝑛-th sen-
tence at time 𝑡; h𝑠is the hidden state afer doing non-linear trans-
formation on the enhanced embedding. We can add more layers
and ﬁnally feed the output of the last layer hidden state h𝑠
𝐿into an
output layer to get the input vector w𝑛,𝑡:
w𝑛,𝑡= W𝑠
𝐿h𝑠
𝐿+ b𝑠
𝐿
(19)
where W𝑠∈R𝑑×3𝑑, W𝑠
𝐿∈R𝑑×𝑑; b𝑠and b𝑠
𝐿are in R𝑑.
To start the explanation sentences generation process, we need
an initial hidden state. We use the output of 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑐𝑡𝑥C𝑛, user latent
factor u, item latent factor v and the 𝑖-th sentence feature-aware
atentive context vector o𝑛together to compute the initial hidden
state h𝑤
𝑛,0:
h𝑤
𝑛,0 = W𝑖
𝑛,2
𝑇𝜙(W𝑖
𝑛,1(C𝑛; u; v; o𝑛) + b𝑖
𝑛,1) + b𝑖
𝑛,2
(20)

where W𝑖
𝑛,1 ∈R𝑑×4𝑑, b𝑖
𝑛,1 ∈R𝑑×1, W𝑖
𝑛,2 ∈R𝑑×𝑑, b𝑖
𝑛,2 ∈R𝑑×1. Te
feature-aware atentive context vector o𝑛is calculated as described
in subsection 3.3.2, where the hidden state h𝑡is replaced with C𝑛
and the feature-aware atentive context vector is represented as
o𝑛instead of o𝑡. Tis can be interpreted as how much atention
do the model pay to the feature words when generating the 𝑛-th
explanation sentence. Te equation (20) uses two layers neural
network to calculate initial hidden state for 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑤𝑟𝑑. You can
choose to add more layers here.
By obtaining the h𝑤
𝑛,0, GRU can conduct the sequence decoding
process. Afer obtaining all the hidden states of the sequences,
we then feed them into a ﬁnal output layer to predict the word
sequence in the review.
ˆy𝑡+1 = 𝜍(W𝑤
ℎh𝑤
𝑡+ b𝑤)
(21)
𝜍(·) is sofmax function which was deﬁned in Equation 15; h𝑤
𝑡∈
R𝑑×𝑙is the hidden state matrix, where𝑙is the length of the sequence;
W𝑤
ℎ∈R|V |×𝑑; ˆy𝑡+1 can be considered as a multinomial distribution
over vocabulary V on review text. Ten the model can generate
the next word 𝑤∗
𝑡+1 from ˆy𝑡+1 by selecting the one with the largest
probability. Here we use 𝑤𝑖to indicate the 𝑖-th word in vocabulary.
Ten we have
𝑤∗
𝑡+1 = argmax
𝑤𝑖∈𝑉
ˆy(𝑤𝑖)
𝑡+1
(22)
To train the model, we use Negative Log-Likelihood as the loss
function. Our goal is to make the words in the review have higher
probabilities than others. Here 𝐼𝑤is the index of word 𝑤in the
vocabulary V. Te loss function of the 𝑖−th sentence is represented
as:
L𝑠
𝑖= −
∑︁
𝑤∈𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤
log ˆy(𝐼𝑤)
(23)
In the testing stage, we introduce beam search to search for the
best sequence 𝑠∗with maximum log-likelihood.
𝑠∗= argmax
𝑠∈S
∑︁
𝑤∈𝑠
log ˆy(𝐼𝑤)
(24)
S is the set of generated sequences. |S| is the beam size.
3.4
Multi-task Learning
Te framework contains two major modules. We integrate both
parts into one multi-task learning process. Te ﬁnal objective func-
tion is deﬁned as:
J =
min
U,V,E,Θ
 L𝑟+
|𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤|
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝛽𝑖L𝑠
𝑖+ 𝜆(||U||2
2 + ||V||2
2 + ||Θ||2
2) (25)
where E ∈R𝑑×|V | is the word embedding matrix; Θ is the set
of neural parameters; 𝜆is the penalty weight; L𝑟is the rating
regression loss function; 𝛽𝑖is the supervised factor of the 𝑖-th
sentence; 𝛽𝑖L𝑠
𝑖is the weighted loss function of the 𝑖-th generated
sentence for auto-denoising.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Datasets
Our datasets are built upon Amazon 5-core 2 [23] which includes
user generated reviews and metadata spanning from May 1996 to
2htp://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon
Table 2: Statistics of the datasets in our experiments.
Electronics
Beauty
#Users
45,224
5,122
#Items
61,687
11,616
#Reviews
744,453
90,247
#features
434
518
| V |
20,568
7,152
sparsity
99.999%
99.998%
July 2014 without duplicated records. Te dataset covers 24 diﬀerent
categories and we select Electronics and Beauty two datasets to
cover diﬀerent domains and diﬀerent scales in our experiment.
Instead of using original 5-core version, we ﬁlter the dataset by
selecting the users who has at least 10 shopping records. Te reason
of doing this ﬁltering operation is that the model would not be well
trained to learn the personalized preference for those users with
very few reviews. Afer the original 5-core data is ﬁltered, we
move those records with less item frequencies into training set to
get avoid of cold start issue in testing stage. For review text pre-
processing, we keep all the punctuation and numbers in the raw text
and we do not remove long sentences by seting a length threshold.
In other words, our dataset is noisy which is challenging for text
generation models. Te ”Electronics” dataset contains 45,224 users,
61,687 items, 744,453 reviews and 434 extracted feature words; the
”Beauty” dataset is a smaller dataset which contains 5,122 users,
11,616 items, 90,247 reviews and 518 extracted feature words. Te
statistical details of our datasets are in Table 2.
We ﬁlter out the words with frequency lower than ten to build
the vocabulary V. Ten the whole dataset is splited into three
subsets: training, validation and testing (80%/10%/10%).
4.2
Rating Regression Evaluation
4.2.1
Baselines. To evaluate the performance of rating pre-
diction, we compare our HSS model with three methods, namely
BiasedMF, SVD++ and DeepCoNN. Te ﬁrst two methods only uti-
lize the ratings information and the third method involves user
generated review for rating prediction.
• BiasedMF [15]: Biased Matrix Factorization. It only uses
rating matrix to learn two low-rank user and item matrices
to do rating prediction. By adding biases into plain matrix
factorization model, it is able to depict the independent
interaction of a user or an item on a rating value.
• SVD++ [14]: It extends Singular Value Decomposition by
integrating implicit feedback into latent factor modeling.
• DeepCoNN[49]: Deep Cooperative Neural Networks. Tis
is a state-of-art deep learning method that exploits user
reviews information to jointly model user and item. Te
author has shown that their model signiﬁcantly outper-
forms some strong topic modeling based methods such as
HFT[22] and CTR[38]. We use the implementation by [4]
in our experiments.
4.2.2
Evaluation Metric. To evaluate the performance of rat-
ing prediction, we employ the well-known Root Mean Square Error
(RMSE) as our evaluation metric.

4.3
Explanation Sentence Generation Evaluation
4.3.1
Baseline. To evaluate the performance of text generation
module, we compare our work with Att2SeqA[16]. Tis work is
to automatically generate product reviews by given user, item and
corresponding rating information. Teir model treat user, item
and rating as atributes and encode the three atributes into latent
factors through multi-layer perceptron. Ten the decoder would
take the encoded latent factor as the initial hidden state of LSTM
for review generation. In our implementation, we also use the
two-level stacked LSTM for text generation as the paper proposed.
Tere are three reasons for choosing this model as our baseline:
• Similar input: both our HSS and their Att2SeqA would
learn user and item latent factor as the input for text gener-
ation. Te diﬀerence is that their model would take rating
information as the direct input while our model would
learn to predict the rating score.
• Use atention mechanism: their model introduces atention
mechanism to enhance the text generation quality while
our model also uses atention model to improve the per-
sonality of the generated explanations.
• Use review data: both methods use user generated reviews
for training the model. Te diﬀerence is that their model is
to learn from user writen review to automatically generate
fake reviews while our model is to generate explanation
sentences.
Considering these three reasons, we believe that this model is the
most suitable and competitive model for comparison.
Tere is another related model called NRT proposed in [18].
In that paper, they also do rating regression and text generation
simultaneously. However, their goal is to generate tips. Te data
source used by their model is the summary in Amazon dataset.
Te summary can be treated as the title of a user review. It only
contains one short sentence expresses the general feeling of a user
to a product such as ”So good”, ”Excellent”, ”I don’t like it”. Since
the summaries or tips are too general to depict the features of an
item that a user is preferred, we cannot use summaries for training
an explanation generation model. Te NRT model is very useful for
simulating user feelings on a speciﬁc item. However, considering
the diﬀerences from data source and the designing purposes, we
would not use this model as our baseline.
4.3.2
Evaluation Metrics. We use three evaluation metrics
to evaluate generated explanation sentence quality: BLEU[28],
ROUGE[19] and feature words coverage.
• BLEU: this is a precision-based measure which is used for
automatically evaluating machine generated text quality.
It measures how well a machine generated text (candidate)
matches a set of human reference texts by counting the
percentage of n-grams in the machine generated text over-
lapping with the human references. Te precision score
for n-gram is calculated as:
𝑝𝑛=
Í
𝐶∈{𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠}
Í
𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚∈𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝(𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚)
Í
𝐶′∈{𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠}
Í
𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚′∈𝐶′ 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚′)
where 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝means that the count of each word in
the machine generated text is truncated to not exceed the
largest count observed in any single reference for that
word. For more details, please refer to the paper [28].
• ROUGE: this is another classical evaluation metric for eval-
uating machine generated text quality. It is a recall-related
measure which shows how much the words in the human
reference texts appear in the machine generated text. Te
ROUGE-N is computed as:
ROUGE-N =
Í
𝑆∈{𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠}
Í
𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚∈𝑆𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚)
Í
𝑆∈{𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠}
Í
𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚∈𝑆𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚)
where 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚) is the maximum number of n-
grams co-occurring in a machine generated text and a set
of human reference texts. In our experiments, we use recall,
precision and F-measure of ROUGE-1(uni-gram), ROUGE-
2(bi-gram), ROUGE-L(longest common subsequence) and
ROUGE-SU4(skip gram) to evaluate the quality of gener-
ated explanation sentences. We use the standard option 3
for evalutaion.
• Feature words coverage: this measure is to reﬂect how well
our model can capture the user personalized preferences.
Assuming that the number of feature words in the human
reference texts is 𝑁𝑟and the number of covered feature
words in the machine generated sentences is 𝑁𝑐, the feature
words coverage is calculated as:
𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒= 𝑁𝑟
𝑁𝑐
We use this measure to reﬂect how well our model gener-
ated sentences can capture the users personalized prefer-
ences. In the meanwhile, this is also the measure we use
to evaluate the explainability of the generated explanation
sentences.
4.4
Experimental Settings
In our HSS model, we use 300 as the dimension of user and item
latent factors. Te dimension of hidden size and word vector are
set to 300. Te number of layers for rating regression model is 4
and for explanation generation is 3. Te training batch size is 100.
We add gradient clip on 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑐𝑡𝑥and 𝐺𝑅𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑛by seting the norm
of gradient clip to 1.0. Te L2 regularization weight parameter
𝜆= 0.001, dropout rate is 0.1. Te beam size is set to 4 for both
our model and the baseline model. All the linear layers parameter
matrices are initialized from a normal distribution with mean is
0, standard deviation is 0.05. Te parameter matrices in GRU are
initialized with random orthogonal matrices. We set the learning
rate to 0.002. Te opitmizer is SGD with momentum equal to 0.9.
For the At2SeqA model, we set the user, item and rating latent
factor to 64. Te hidden size and word vector size is 512. Training
batch size is set to 100. Te dropout rate is 0.2. Learning rate is
0.002. Te optimizer is RMSprop with alpha equal to 0.95.
For both HSS and At2SeqA, we set the length of the generated
sequence to 100 but only keep the ﬁrst two sentences by search-
ing for the tag of the end of sentence ”EOS”. Te remainder of
the generated sequence would be discarded. We use these two
sentences for evaluation. Te reason why we do this is because a
shorter explanation would be easier for users to get the point of a
3ROUGE-1.5.5.pl -n 4 -w 1.2 -m -2 4 -u -c 95 -r 1000 -f A -p 0.5

Table 3: RMSE values for rating regression
Electronics
Beauty
BiasedMF
1.096
1.030
SVD++
1.104
1.034
DeepCoNN
1.089
1.028
HSS
1.090
1.027
speciﬁc item quickly. However, if the explanation is too short, for
example one sentence, that one sentence may not cover enough
information to improve the recommendation quality. We think two
is a reasonable good length for explanation sentences.
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
5.1
Ratings
Our HSS model can not only generate natural language explanation
sentences, but also provide predicted rating scores. Te results of
rating prediction of our model and baseline models are given in
Table 3. It shows that our model can outperforms all the baselines
on Beauty dataset. On Electronics dataset, the RMSE score of our
HSS is beter than BiasedMF and SVD++. Although the performance
is not beter than the state-of-art model DeepCoNN, the result is
still comparable. In general, the topic-based deep neural network
model DeepCoNN and HSS are beter than tradition collaborative
ﬁltering based methods. It is because that DeepCoNN and HSS
takes user reviews to improve the representation ability of user
and latent factors, while the traditional methods only use rating
information.
Te diﬀerence between our HSS and DeepCoNN is the way of
using the reivew data. In our HSS, we use GRU to learn to gener-
ate a sequence of words. Te review data is used for maximizing
the log likelihood of generated words. Te DeepCoNN maps the
user review content into a set of word embedding. Ten pass the
word embedding into convolution layers, max-pooling layer and
fully connected layers to map the word embedding into a rating
score. Although the way of using the review data is diﬀerent, the
experimental results on both models show that it is helpful to make
use of user review information to improve the recommendation
performance.
5.2
Personalized Explanation Sentence
Generation Qality
In order to evaluate the quality of generated sentences, we report
recall, precision and F-measure of ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, ROUGE-
L, ROUGE-SU4. Te results are shown in Table 5–6. According
to the results, our model almost outperforms the baseline model
on all the measures and only the recall on ROUGE-SU4 is slightly
lower than the baseline model. From the results we can see that
both models achieve good recall scores on all the measures except
for ROUGE-2. One possible reason is that both models employ
atention mechanism during the sequence generation process. Te
experiment result reﬂect that by adding atention context vector on
word generation process can help to generate the sentences which
are more related to the user and the product.
One diﬀerence between our model and the At2SeqA model
is that we implement the atention model by leveraging feature
Table 4: BLEU-1 (B-1), BLEU-4 (B-4) and Feature words cov-
erage (FC) on Electronics and Beauty dataset (in percentage)
Electronics
Beauty
B-1
B-4
FC
B-1
B-4
FC
At2SeqA
7.32
2.17
2.16
8.54
1.61
1.69
HSS
12.36
4.17
6.74
9.55
3.49
6.05
words. We believe that not all the feature words are related to
a speciﬁc item and each user has their own preferred features.
Considering this property in the e-commerce scenario, we calculate
the atention weights on each of the feature word embedding with
the context level hidden state on current time stamp. Ten we apply
the atention weights on each of the feature words embedding and
integrate all the weighted embedding into a atentive context vector.
Tis context vector represents how much atention do the model pay
to each feature word when generating current sentence. However,
At2SeqA model obtains the atentive context vector with user, item
and rating latent factors, which are the atributes as mentioned in
the paper [16]. Ten the author combines this context vector with
the output of GRU on each time stamp to predict the next word.
Since their atention mechanism is not for improving the feature
word coverage, our model get much higher score on feature words
coverage as shown in Table 4. In another word, to do atention on
feature words do help the model to cover more feature words in
the generated sentences.
Another observation is that our model gives much higher pre-
cision score than the baseline model. It means that our model
generated sequences can hit much more words in human reference
texts than those generated by At2SeqA. As shown in Table 4, the
BLEU-score, which is a precision-based metric for text generation
evaluation, also gives a higher score to HSS than At2SeqA.
5.3
Multi-sentence Generation Performance
Our model has the ability of generating multiple sentences. To
evaluate the multiple sentences generation quality, we do experi-
ments on Beauty dataset. We choose the number of sentences in the
range of 1 to 3 during trainig and testing stages. For example, when
the number of sentences is set to 1, we only use the ﬁrst sentence
of each review to train the model. During the testing stage, we
only generate one sentence and calculate ROUGE and BLEU score
based on the ﬁrst sentence in the human reference text. We report
the changing of recall, precision and F-measure of ROUGE scores
with respect to the number of sentences in Figure 4(a), 4(b) and
4(c). From the results, we can see that our model can have beter
recall on all the measures when to generate more than one sentence.
Te ROUGE precision score on multiple sentences generation is
slightly lower than the one sentence case. A possible reason is that
the more sentences involved in the training and testing, the more
challenging for the generation model to cover the information in
the human reference texts.
5.4
Case study
One thing we need to claim is that we do not do the length alignment
on the review data. Tat means some review only contains one
sentence while some of them may contains 2 or more sentences.
For each sentence, the length also varies. Tis is a big challenge

Table 5: ROUGE score on Electronics dataset (in percentage)
ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-L
ROUGE-SU4
recall
precision
F1
recall
precision
F1
recall
precision
F1
recall
precision
F1
At2SeqA
22.80
7.79
10.19
0.45
0.14
0.18
19.93
6.77
8.85
9.26
1.07
1.38
HSS
26.76
15.72
18.36
3.01
1.77
2.05
22.51
13.31
15.47
9.69
3.51
4.10
Table 6: ROUGE score on Beauty dataset (in percentage)
ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-L
ROUGE-SU4
recall
precision
F1
recall
precision
F1
recall
precision
F1
recall
precision
F1
At2SeqA
26.55
8.67
12.03
0.70
0.19
0.27
22.96
7.57
10.46
11.54
1.31
1.91
HSS
28.40
13.49
16.85
4.07
1.85
2.31
24.64
11.66
14.57
11.43
2.73
3.48
Table 7: Example of generated sentences. Te feature words are marked in bold.
Description
Explanation Sentences
good explanation on Beauty
Te bottle is very light and the smell is very strong.
good explanation on Electronics
Te price is great. Te sound quality is great
cover feature words but not ﬂuent
Te scent is a good product. I have to use this product. I have used to use the hair.
ﬂuent but wrong description
the price is a great. Te sound is great
Figure 3: ROUGE scores change on the number of generated sentences
22.09
28.4
30.7
3.26
4.07
3.79
20.4
24.64
26.01
10.02
11.43
12.03
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1
2
3
Scores in percentage %
Number of sentences
ROUGE Recall on Beauty Dataset
ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-L
ROUGE-SU4
22.09
28.4
30.7
3.26
4.07
3.79
20.4
24.64
26.01
10.02
11.43
12.03
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1
2
3
Scores in percentage %
Number of sentences
ROUGE Recall on Beauty Dataset
ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-L
ROUGE-SU4
10.73
13.49
14.97
1.74
1.85
1.77
10.05
11.66
12.64
2.98
2.73
2.87
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
1
2
3
Scores in percentage %
Number of sentences
ROUGE Precision on Beauty Dataset
ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-L
ROUGE-SU4
12.8
16.85
19.02
1.87
2.31
2.26
11.92
14.57
16.06
3.22
3.48
3.96
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1
2
3
Scores in percentage %
Number of sentences
ROUGE F1 on Beauty Dataset
ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-L
ROUGE-SU4
to the RNN-based sentence generation model. One reason is that
the training of quite long sentences would suﬀer from gradient
vanishing problem which would be hard for deep neural network
to learning the parameters. Our hierarchical GRU model could help
to solve this problem. It is because that our context level GRU could
capture the long dependency so that the length of sequence for
each generation process is reduced. Te experiment results verify
that our model has the ability of generating multiple sentences.
In Table 7 we list some generated explanations which cover the
good sentences with explainability, sentence with feature word
but not quite ﬂuent, bad sentence with wrong description of the
item. For the last example, the wrong description means that the
item is a wireless router but the sentence is not describing the
item correctly. Tis is a common issue we encountered during the
experiments. A possible reason is that the dataset is very sparse so
the corresponding item vector is not well trained, which result in
the wrong description issue.
6
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we proposed a deep learning framework called hier-
archical sequence-to-sequence (HSS) model, which can not only
make accurate rating predictions but also generate explanation
sentences to improve the eﬀectiveness and the trustworthiness of
the recommender systems. For rating prediction, our model can
outperform the CF-based BiasedMF and SVD++ algorithms and
achieve a comparable result to the state-of-art DeepCoNN model.
For the explanation generation module, we designed a hierarchical
GRU with feature-aware atention mechanism to generate personal-
ized explanation sentences. We also introduced an auto-denoising
method to reduce the eﬀect of unrelated sentences in training pro-
cess. In the future, we expect to do research work to solve the
wrong description issue mentioned in the previous section. We
will also apply this framework on other datasets to test its robust-
ness, and consider knowledge-enhanced explanation generation
for explainable AI.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank the reviewers for the careful reviews and constructive sug-
gestions. Tis work was partly supported by the National Science
Foundation under IIS-1910154. Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this paper are the authors and
do not necessarily reﬂect those of the sponsors.
