Active Learning of Inverse Models with
Intrinsically Motivated Goal Exploration in
Robots ∗
Adrien Baranes and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
INRIA and Ensta-ParisTech, France
November 27, 2024
Highlights:
1) SAGG-RIAC is an architecture for active learning of inverse models in high-
dimensional redundant spaces
2) This allows a robot to learn eﬃciently distributions of parameterized motor
policies that solve a corresponding distribution of parameterized tasks
3) Active sampling of parameterized tasks, called active goal exploration, can
be signiﬁcantly faster than direct active sampling of parameterized policies
4) Active developmental exploration, based on competence progress, autonomously
drives the system to progressively explore tasks of increasing learning complex-
ity.
Abstract
We introduce the Self-Adaptive Goal Generation - Robust Intelligent
Adaptive Curiosity (SAGG-RIAC) architecture as an intrinsically moti-
vated goal exploration mechanism which allows active learning of inverse
models in high-dimensional redundant robots. This allows a robot to eﬃ-
ciently and actively learn distributions of parameterized motor skills/policies
that solve a corresponding distribution of parameterized tasks/goals. The
architecture makes the robot sample actively novel parameterized tasks
in the task space, based on a measure of competence progress, each of
which triggers low-level goal-directed learning of the motor policy param-
eters that allow to solve it.
For both learning and generalization, the
system leverages regression techniques which allow to infer the motor pol-
icy parameters corresponding to a given novel parameterized task, and
based on the previously learnt correspondences between policy and task
parameters.
∗Baranes, A., Oudeyer, P-Y. (2012) Active Learning of Inverse Models with Intrinsically
Motivated Goal Exploration in Robots, Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(1), pp. 49-73.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2012.05.008
1
arXiv:1301.4862v1  [cs.LG]  21 Jan 2013

We present experiments with high-dimensional continuous sensorimo-
tor spaces in three diﬀerent robotic setups: 1) learning the inverse kine-
matics in a highly-redundant robotic arm, 2) learning omnidirectional lo-
comotion with motor primitives in a quadruped robot, 3) an arm learning
to control a ﬁshing rod with a ﬂexible wire. We show that 1) exploration
in the task space can be a lot faster than exploration in the actuator space
for learning inverse models in redundant robots; 2) selecting goals maxi-
mizing competence progress creates developmental trajectories driving the
robot to progressively focus on tasks of increasing complexity and is sta-
tistically signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient than selecting tasks randomly, as well
as more eﬃcient than diﬀerent standard active motor babbling methods;
3) this architecture allows the robot to actively discover which parts of its
task space it can learn to reach and which part it cannot.
Keywords: Active Learning, Competence Based Intrinsic Motivation,
Curiosity-Driven Task Space Exploration, Inverse Models, Goal Babbling,
Autonomous Motor Learning, Developmental Robotics, Motor Develop-
ment.
1
Motor Learning and Exploration of Forward
and Inverse Models
To operate robustly and adaptively in the real world, robots need to know how
to predict the consequences of their actions (called here forward models, map-
ping typically X = (S, πθ), where S is the state of a robot and πθ : S →A
is a parameterized action policy, to the space of eﬀect, or task space, Y ). Re-
versely, they need to be able to compute the action policies that can generate
given eﬀects (called here inverse models, (S, Y ) →πθ). These models can be
quite varied, for example mapping joint angles to hand position in the visual
ﬁeld, oscillation of the legs to body translation, movement of the hand in the
visual ﬁeld to movement of the end point of a tool, or properties of a hand
tap an object to the sound it produces. Some of these models can be analyt-
ically elaborated by an engineer and provided to a robot (e.g.
forward and
inverse kinematics of a rigid body robot). But in many cases, this is impos-
sible either because the physical properties of the body itself cannot be easily
modeled (e.g. compliant bodies with soft materials), or because it is impossible
to anticipate all possible objects the robot might interact with, and thus the
properties of objects. More generally, it is impossible to model a priori all the
possible eﬀects a robot can produce on its environment, especially when robots
are targeted to interact with in everyday human environments, such as in as-
sistive robotics. As a consequence, learning these models through experience
becomes necessary. Yet, this poses highly diﬃcult technical challenges, due in
particular to the combination of the following facts: 1) these models are often
high-dimensional, continuous and highly non-stationary spatially, and some-
times temporally; 2) learning examples have to be collected autonomously and
incrementally by robots; 3) learning, as we will detail below, can happen either
through self-experimentation or observation, and both of these takes signiﬁcant
2

physical time in the real world. Thus, the number of training examples that
can be collected in a life-time is strongly limited with regards to the size and
complexity of the spaces. Advanced statistical learning techniques dedicated to
incremental high-dimensional regression have been elaborated recently, such as
[107, 72]. Yet, these regression mechanisms are eﬃcient only if the quality and
quantity of data is high enough, which is not the case when using unconstrained
exploration such as random exploration. Fundamental complementary mecha-
nisms for guiding and constraining autonomous exploration and data collection
for learning are needed.
In this article, we present a particular approach to address constrained ex-
ploration and learning of inverse models in robots, based on an active learning
process inspired by mechanisms of intrinsically motivated learning and explo-
ration in humans. As we will explain, the approach studies the combination of
two principles for learning eﬃciently inverse models in high-dimensional redun-
dant continuous spaces:
• Active goal/task exploration in a parameterized task space: The
architecture makes the robot sample actively novel parameterized tasks
in the task space, each of which triggers low-level goal-directed learning
of the motor policy parameters that allow to solve it.
This allows to
leverage the redundancies of the sensorimotor mapping, leading the system
to explore densely only subregions of the space of action policies that are
enough to achieve all possible eﬀects.
Thus, it does not need to learn
a complete forward model and contrasts with approaches that directly
sample action policy parameters and observe their eﬀects in the task space.
The system also leverages regression techniques which allow to infer the
motor policy parameters corresponding to a given novel parameterized
task, and based on the previously learnt correspondences between policy
and task parameters.
• Interestingness as empirically evaluated competence progress:
The measure of interestingness for a given goal/task is based on com-
petence progress empirically evaluated, i.e.
how previous attempts of
low-level optimization directed at similar goals allowed to improve the
capability of the robot to reach these goals.
In the rest of the section, we review various related approaches to constrain-
ing exploration for motor learning.
1.1
Constraining the Exploration
A common way to carry out exploration is to use a set of constraints on guid-
ing mechanisms and maximally reduce the size and/or dimensionality of ex-
plored spaces. Social guidance is an important source of such constraints, widely
studied in robot learning by demonstration/imitation where an external human
demonstrator assists the robot in its learning process [1, 63, 18, 24, 59, 26, 60].
Typically, a robot teacher manually interacts with the robot by showing it a few
3

behaviors corresponding to a desired movement or goal that it will then have to
reproduce. This strategy prevents the robot from performing any autonomous
exploration of its space and requires an attentive demonstrator. Some other
techniques allow more freedom to the human teacher and the robot by allowing
the robot to explore. This is typically what happens in the reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) framework where no demonstration is originally required and only a
goal has to be ﬁxed (as a reward) by the engineer who conceives the system
[114, 84, 117]. Nevertheless, when the robot evolves in high-dimensional and
large spaces, the exploration still has to be constrained. For instance, studies
presented in [80] combine RL with the framework of learning by demonstration.
In their experiments, an engineer has to ﬁrst deﬁne a speciﬁc goal in a task space
as a handcrafted reward function, then, a human demonstrator provides a few
examples of successful motor policies to reach that goal, which is then used to
initialize an optimization procedure. The Shifting Setpoint Algorithm (SSA)
introduced by Schaal and Atkeson [92] proposes another way to constrain the
exploration process. Once a goal ﬁxed in an handcrafted manner, a progressive
exploration process is proposed: the system explores the world gradually from
the start position and toward the goal by creating a local model around the
current position and shifting in direction of the goal once this model is reliable
enough, and so on. These kinds of techniques therefore restrain the exploration
to narrow tubes of data targeted at learning speciﬁc tasks/goals that have to
be deﬁned by a human, either the programmer or a non-engineer demonstrator.
These methods are eﬃcient and useful in many cases. Nevertheless, in a
framework where one would like a robot to learn a variety of tasks inside un-
prepared spaces like in developmental robotics [129, 77, 128, 5], or more simply
full inverse models (i.e. having a robot learn to generate in a controlled man-
ner many eﬀects rather than only a single goal), it is not conceivable that a
human being interacts with a robot at each instant or that an engineer designs
and tunes a speciﬁc reward function for each novel task to be learned.
For
this reason, it is necessary to introduce mechanisms driving the learning and
exploration of robots in an autonomous manner.
1.2
Driving Autonomous Exploration
Active learning algorithms can be considered as organized and constrained self-
exploration processes [41, 30, 89, 105, 60]. In the regression setting, they are
used to learn a regression mapping between an input space X and an output
space Y while minimizing the sample complexity, i.e. with a minimal number
of examples necessary to reach a given performance level. These methods, typi-
cally beginning by random and sparse exploration, build meta-models of perfor-
mances of the motor learning mechanisms and concurrently drive the exploration
in various sub-spaces for which a notion of interest is deﬁned, often consisting in
variants of expected informational gain. A large diversity of criteria can be used
to evaluate the utility of given sampling candidates, such as the maximization
of prediction errors [118], the local density of already queried points [131], the
maximization of the decrease of global model variance [30], expected improve-
4

ment [51], or maximal uncertainty of the model [119] among others. There have
been active-extensions to most of the existent learning methods, e.g. logistic
regression [93], support vector machines [103], gaussian processes [53, 56, 57].
Only very recently have these approaches been applied to robotic problems, and
even more recently if we consider examples with real robots. Nevertheless exam-
ples that consider robotic problems already exist for a large variety of problems:
building environment maps [67, 118], reinforcement learning [12], body schema
learning [25], imitation [61, 27], exploration of objects and body properties [77],
manipulation [46], among many others.
Another approach to exploration came from an initially diﬀerent problem,
that of understanding how robots could achieve cumulative and open-ended
learning autonomously. This raised the question of the task-independent mech-
anisms that may allow a robot to get interested in practicing skills and learn
new tasks that were not speciﬁed at design time.
Two communities of re-
searchers, the ﬁrst one in reinforcement learning [115, 96, 12, 100], the second
one in developmental robotics [48, 21, 75, 77, 95], formalized, implemented and
experimented several mechanisms based on the concept of intrinsic motivation
(sometimes called curiosity-driven learning) grounded into theories of motiva-
tion, spontaneous exploration, free play and development in humans [130, 35, 13]
as well as in recent ﬁndings in the neuroscience of motivation [104, 52, 83].
As argumented in [96, 12, 8, 62], architectures based on intrinsically moti-
vated learning can be conceptualized as active learning mechanisms which, in
addition to allowing for the self-organized formation of behavioral and develop-
mental complexity, can also also allow an agent to eﬃciently learn a model of the
world by parsimoniously designing its own experiments/queries. Yet, in spite of
these similarities between work in active learning and intrinsic motivation, these
two strands of approaches often diﬀer in their underlying assumptions and con-
straints, leading to sometimes very diﬀerent active learning algorithms. In many
active learning models, one often assumes that it is possible to learn a model
of the complete world within lifetime, and/or that the world is learnable every-
where, and/or where noise is homogeneous everywhere. Given those assump-
tions, heuristics based on the exploration of parts of the space where the learned
model has maximal uncertainties or where its prediction are maximally wrong
are often very eﬃcient. Yet, these assumptions typically do not hold in real world
robots in an unconstrained environment: the sensorimotor spaces, including the
body dynamics and its interactions with the external world, are simply much too
large to be learned entirely in a life time; there are typically subspaces which are
unlearnable due to inadequate learning biases or unobservable variables; noise
can be strongly homogeneous. Thus, diﬀerent authors claimed that typical crite-
ria used in traditional active learning approaches, such as the search for maximal
uncertainty or prediction errors, might get trapped or become ineﬃcient in sit-
uations that are common in open-ended robotic environments [100, 77, 8, 101].
This is the reason why new active learning heuristics have been proposed in
developmental robotics, such as those based on the psychological concept of in-
trinsic motivations [90, 35, 14] which relate to mechanisms that drive a learning
agent to perform diﬀerent activities for their own sake, without requiring any
5

external reward [96, 12, 109, 110, 65, 68, 94, 97, 48, 7, 76, 64, 40]. Diﬀerent
criteria were elaborated, such as the search for maximal reduction in empir-
ically evaluated prediction error, maximal compression progress, or maximal
competence progress [96, 100, 77]. For instance, the architecture called Robust-
Intelligent Adaptive Curiosity (RIAC) [8], which is a reﬁnement of the IAC
architecture which was elaborated for open-ended learning of aﬀordances and
skills in real robots [77], deﬁnes the interestingness of a sensorimotor subspace
by the velocity of the decrease of the errors made by the robot when predicting
the consequences of its actions, given a context, within this subspace. As shown
in [77, 8], it biases the system to explore subspaces of progressively increasing
complexity.
Nevertheless, RIAC and similar ”knowledge based” approaches (see [74])
have some limitations: ﬁrst, while they can deal with the spatial or temporal
non-stationarity of the model to be learned, they face the curse-of-dimensionality
and can only be eﬃcient when considering a moderate number of control dimen-
sions (e.g. up to 9/10). Indeed, as many other active learning methods, RIAC
needs a certain level of sampling density in order to extract and compare the
interest of diﬀerent areas of the space. Also, because performing these measure
costs time, this approach becomes more and more ineﬃcient as the dimension-
ality of the control space grows [19]. Second, they focus on the active choice
of motor commands and measures of their consequences, which allows learning
forward models that can be re-used as a side eﬀect for achieving goals/tasks
through online inversion: this approach is sub-optimal in many cases since it
explores in the high-dimensional space of motor commands and consider the
achievement of tasks only indirectly.
A more eﬃcient approach consists in directly actively exploring task spaces,
which are also often much lower-dimensional, by actively self-generating goals
within those task spaces, and then learn associated local coupled forward/inverse
models that are useful to achieve those goals. Yet, as we will see, the process is
not as straightforward as learning the forward model, since because of the space
redundancy it is not possible to learn directly the inverse model (and this is
the reason why learning the forward model and then only inversing it has often
been achieved). In fact, exploring the task space will be used to learn a sub-
part of the forward model that is enough for reaching most of reachable parts in
the task space through local inversion and regression, leveraging techniques for
generalizing policy parameters corresponding to novel task parameters based on
previously learnt correspondences, such as in [20, 8, 55, 108].
1.3
Driving the Exploration at a Higher Level
In a framework where a system should be able to learn to perform a maximal
amount of diﬀerent tasks (here this means achieving many goals/tasks in a pa-
rameterized task space) before focusing on diﬀerent ways to perform the same
tasks (here this means ﬁnding several alternative actions to achieve the same
goal), knowledge-based exploration techniques like RIAC cannot be eﬃcient in
robots with redundant forward models. Indeed, they typically direct a robotic
6

system to spend copious amounts of time exploring variations of action policies
that produce the same eﬀect, at the disadvantage of exploring other actions that
might produce diﬀerent outcomes, useful to achieve more tasks. An example
of this is learning 10 ways to push a ball forward instead of learning to push a
ball in 10 diﬀerent directions. One way to address this issue is to take inspi-
ration infant’s motor exploration/babbling behavior, which has been argued to
be teleological via introducing goals explicitly inside a task space and driving
exploration at the level of these goals [126, 87, 124, 123]. Once a goal/task is
chosen, the system would then try to reach it with a lower-level goal-reaching ar-
chitecture typically based on coupled inverse and forward models, which might
include a lower-level goal-directed active exploration mechanism.
Two other developmental constraints, playing an important role in infant
motor development, and presented in the experimentations of this paper, can
also play an important role when considering such a task-level exploration pro-
cess. First, we use motor synergies which have been shown as simplifying mo-
tor learning by reducing the number of dimensions for control (nevertheless,
even with motor synergies, the dimensionality of the control space can easily
go over several dozens, and exploration still needs to be organized).
These
motor synergies are often encoded using Central Pattern Generators (CPG)
[49, 36, 34, 58, 15] or as more traditional innate low-level control loops which
are part of the innate structure allowing a robot to bootstrap the learning of
new skills, as for example in [77, 47] where it is combined with intrinsically
motivated learning. Second, we will use a heuristic inspired by observations
of infants who sometimes prepare their reaching movements by starting from
a same rest position [17], by resetting the robot to such a rest position, which
allows reducing the set of starting states used to perform a task.
In this paper, we propose an approach which allows us to transpose some
of the basic ideas of IAC and RIAC architectures, combined with ideas from
the SSA algorithm, into a multi-level active learning architecture called Self-
Adaptive Goal Generation RIAC algorithm (SAGG-RIAC) (an outline
and initial evaluation of this architecture was presented in [9]). Unlike RIAC
which was made for active learning of forward models mapping action policy
parametes to eﬀects in a task space, we show that this new algorithm allows
for eﬃcient learning of inverse models mapping parameters of tasks to param-
eters of action policies that allow to achieve these tasks in redundant robots.
This is achieved through active sampling of novel parameterized tasks in the
task space, based on a measure of competence progress, each of which triggers
low-level goal-directed learning of the motor policy parameters that allow to
solve it. This takes advantage of both the typical redundancy of the mapping
and of the fact that very often the dimensionality of the task space considered
is much smaller than the dimensionality of motor primitives/action parameter
space. Such an architecture also leverages both techniques for optimizing action
policy parameters for a single predeﬁned tasks (e.g. [79, 112]), as well as re-
gression techniques allowing to infer the motor policy parameters corresponding
to a given novel parameterized task, and based on the previously learnt corre-
spondences between policy and task parameters (e.g. [20, 8, 55, 108]). While
7

approaches such as [79, 112] or [20, 55, 108] do not consider the problem of
autonomous life-long exploration of novel parameterized tasks, they are very
complemetary to the present work as they could be used as the low-level tech-
niques for low-level learning of action parameter policies for self-generated tasks
in the SAGG-RIAC architecture.
SAGG-RIAC can be considered as an active learning algorithm carrying out
the concept of competence based intrinsically motivated learning [74] and is in
line with concepts of mastery motivation, Flow, Optimal Level theories and
zone of Proximal Development introduced in psychology [37, 31, 82, 3, 127]. In
a competence based active exploration mechanism, according to the deﬁnition
[74], the robot is pushed to perform an active exploration in the goal/operational
space as opposed to motor babbling in the actuator space.
Several strands of previous research have began exploration various aspects
of this family of mechanisms.
First, algorithms achieving competence based
exploration and allowing general computer programs to actively and adaptively
self-generate abstract computational problems, or goals, of increasing complex-
ity were studied in a theoretical computer science perspective [98, 99, 102].
While the high expressivity of these formalisms allows in principle to tackle
a wide diversity of problems, they were not designed nor experimented for the
particular family of problems of learning high-dimensional continuous models in
robotics. While SAGG-RIAC also actively and adaptively self-generates goals,
this is achieved with a formalism based on applied mathematics and dedicated
to the problem of learning inverse models in continuous redundant spaces.
Measures of interestingness based on a measure of competence to perform a
skill were studied in [6], as well as in [94] where a selector chooses to perform
diﬀerent skills depending on the temporal diﬀerence error to reach each skill.
The study proposed in [111] is based on the competence progress, which they use
to select goals in a pre-speciﬁed set of skills considered in a discrete world. As
we will show, SAGG-RIAC also uses competence progress, but targets learning
in high-dimensional continuous robot spaces.
A mechanism for passive exploration in the task space for learning inverse
models in high-dimensional continuous robotics spaces was presented in [85, 86],
where a robot has to learn its arm inverse kinematics while trying to reach in
a preset order goals put on a pre-speciﬁed grid informing the robot about the
limits of its reachable space. In SAGG-RIAC exploration is actively driven in
the task space, allowing the learning process to minimize its sample complexity,
and as we will show, to reach a high-level of performances in generalization and
to discover automatically its own limits of reachability.
In the following sections we introduce the global architecture and formal-
ization of the Self-Adaptive Goal-Generation SAGG-RIAC architecture. Then,
we study experimentally its capabilities to allow a robot eﬃciently and actively
learn distributions of parameterized motor skills/policies that solve a corre-
sponding distribution of parameterized tasks/goals, and in the context of three
experimental setups: 1) learning the inverse kinematics in a highly-redundant
robotic arm, 2) learning omnidirectional locomotion with motor primitives in
a quadruped robot, 3) an arm learning to control a ﬁshing rod with a ﬂexible
8

wire. More precisely, we focus on the following aspects and contributions of the
architecture:
• SAGG-RIAC creates developmental trajectories driving the robot to pro-
gressively focus on tasks of increasing complexity of learnability;
• Drives the learning of a high variety of parameterized tasks (i.e. capability
to reach various regions of the goal/task space) instead of numerous ways
to perform the same task;
• Allows learning ﬁelds of tasks in high-dimensional high-volume control
spaces as long as the task space is low-dimensional (it can be high-volume);
• Allows learning in task-spaces where only small and initially unknown
subparts are reachable;
• Drives the learning of inverse models of highly-redundant robots with dif-
ferent body schemas;
• Guides the self-discovery of the limits of what the robot can achieve in its
task space;
• Allows improving signiﬁcantly the quality of learned inverse models in
terms of speed of learning and generalization performance to reach goals in
the task space, compared to diﬀerent methods proposed in the literature;
2
Competence Based Intrinsic Motivation: The
Self-Adaptive Goal Generation RIAC Archi-
tecture
2.1
Global Architecture
Let us consider the deﬁnition of competence based models outlined in [74], and
extract from it two diﬀerent levels for active learning deﬁned at diﬀerent time
scales (Fig. 1):
1. The higher level of active learning (higher time scale) takes care of the
active self-generation and self-selection of goals/tasks in a parameterized
task space, depending on a measure of interest based on the level of com-
petences to reach previously generated goals (e.g. competence progress);
2. The lower level of active learning (lower time scale) considers the goal-
directed active choice and active exploration of lower-level actions to be
taken to reach the goals selected at the higher level, and depending on
local measures of interest related to the evolution of the quality of learned
inverse and/or forward models;
9

Goal
Interest Computation
Goal
Self-Generation
Goal-Directed Low-
Level Actions Interest 
Computation
Goal Directed 
Exploration and 
Learning
Lower Level of Active Learning
Higher level of Active Learning
Figure 1: Global Architecture of the SAGG-RIAC architecture. The structure
is comprised of two parts deﬁning two levels of active learning: a higher level
which considers the active self-generation and self-selection of goals, and a lower
level, which considers the goal-directed active choice and active exploration of
low-level actions, in order to reach the goals selected at the higher level.
2.2
Model Formalization
Let us consider a robotic system described in both a state/context space S,
and a task space Y which is a ﬁeld of parameterized tasks/goals that can be
viewed as deﬁning a ﬁeld of parameterized reinforcement learning problems. For
a given context s ∈S, a sequence of actions a = {a1, a2, ..., an} ∈A, potentially
generated by a parameterized motor synergy πθ : S →A (alternatively called
an “option” and including a self-termination mechanism), allows a transition
toward the new states y ∈Y such that (s, a) →y, also written (s, πθ) →
y.
For instance, in the ﬁrst experiment introduced in the following sections
where we use a robotic manipulator, S represents its actuator/joint space, Y
the operational space corresponding to the cartesian position of its end-eﬀector,
and A relates to velocity commands in the joints. Also, in the second experiment
involving a quadruped where we use motor synergies, the context s is always
reset to a same state and has thus no inﬂuence on the learning, A relates to the
24 dimensional parameters of a motor synergy which considers the frequency
and amplitude of sinusoids controlling the position of each joints over time, and
Y relates to the position and orientation of the robot after the execution of the
synergy during a ﬁxed amount of time.
SAGG-RIAC drives the exploration and learning of how to reach goals given
starting contexts/states. Starting states are formalized as conﬁgurations s ∈S
and goals as a desired yg ∈Y . All states are considered to be potential starting
10

states; therefore, once a goal has been generated, the low-level goal directed
exploration and learning mechanism always tries to reach it by starting from
the current state of the system as formalized and explained below.
When the initiation position sstart, the goal yg and constraints ρ (e.g. linked
with the spent energy) are chosen, it generates a motor policy πθ(Data)(sstart, yg, ρ)
parameterized by sstart, yg and ρ as well as parameters θ of internal forward
and inverse models already learned with previously acquired data Data. Also, it
is important to notice that πθ(Data)(sstart, yg, ρ) can be computed on the ﬂy, as
in the experiments below, with regression techniques allowing to infer the motor
policy parameters corresponding to a given novel parameterized task, and based
on the previously learnt correspondences between policy and task parameters,
such as in [20, 8, 55, 108].
We can make an analogy of this formalization with the Semi-Markov Option
framework introduced by Sutton [116]. In the case of SAGG-RIAC, when con-
sidering an option ⟨I, π, β⟩, we can ﬁrst deﬁne the initiation set I : S →[0; 1],
where I is true everywhere, because, as presented before, every state can here
be considered as a starting state. Also, goals are related to the terminal con-
dition β and β = 1 when the goal is reached, and the policy π encodes the
skill learned through the process induced by the lower-level of active learning
and shall be indexed by the goal yg, i.e. πyg. More formally, as induced by
the use of semi-markov options, we deﬁne policies and termination conditions
as dependent on all events between the initiation of the option, and the current
instant.
This means that the policy π, and β are depending on the history
htτ = {st, at, st+1, at+1..., sτ} where t is the initiation time of the option, and τ,
the time of the latest event. Denoting the set of all histories by Ω, the policy and
termination condition become deﬁned by π : Ω× A →[0; 1] and β : Ω→[0; 1].
Moreover, because we have to consider cases where goals are not reachable
(either because of physical impossibility or because the robot is not capable of
doing it at that point of its development), we need to deﬁne a timeout tmax
which can stop a goal reaching attempt once a maximal number of actions has
been executed. htτ is thus needed to stop π, (i.e. the low-level active learning
process), if τ > tmax.
Eventually, using the framework of options, we can deﬁne the process of
goal self-generation, as the self-generation and self-selection of parameterized
options, and a goal reaching attempt corresponding to the learning of a par-
ticular option. Therefore, the global SAGG-RIAC process can be described as
exploring and learning ﬁelds of options.
2.3
Lower Time Scale:
Active Goal Directed Exploration and Learning
In SAGG-RIAC, once a goal has been actively chosen at the high-level, the goal
directed exploration and learning mechanism at the lower can be carried out in
numerous ways: the architecture makes only little assumptions about them, and
thus is compatible with many methods such as those described below (this is
the reason why SAGG-RIAC is an architecture deﬁning a family of algorithms).
11

Its main idea is to guide the system toward the goal by executing low-level
actions which allow a progressive exploration of the world toward this speciﬁc
goal and that updates at the same time the local corresponding forward and
inverse models, leveraging previously learnt correspondences with regression.
The main assumptions about the methods that can be used for this lower level
are:
• Incremental learning and generalization: based on the data collected
incrementally, the method must be able to build incrementally local for-
ward and inverse models that can be reused later on, in particular when
considering other goals, such as the task-space regression techniques pre-
sented in [20, 8, 55, 108];
• Goal-directed optimization: when a goal is set, an optimization pro-
cedure can improve the parameters of the action policy to reach the goal,
such as policy gradient methods [78, 112] or stochastic optimization [45];
A optional feature, which is a variant of the second assumption above, is:
• Active optimization: goal-directed optimization of the parameters of
the action policy for reaching a self-generated goal. A learning feedback
mechanism has to be added such that the exploration is active, and the
selection of new actions depends on local measures about the quality of
the learned model.
In the following experiments that will be introduced, we will use two diﬀerent
methods: one mechanism where optimization is inspired by the SSA algorithm
[92], coupled with memory-based local forward and inverse regression models
using local Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverses, and a more generic optimization al-
gorithm mixing stochastic optimization with memory-based regression models
using pseudo-inverse. Other kinds of techniques could be used. For the op-
timization part, algorithms such as natural actor-critic architectures in model
based reinforcement learning [78], algorithms of convex optimization [33], algo-
rithms of stochastic optimization like CMA (e.g. [45]), or path-integral methods
(e.g. [113, 112]).
For the regression part, we are here using a memory-based approach, which
if combined with eﬃcient data storage and access structures [4, 70], scales well
from a computational point of view. Yet, if memory limits would be a lim-
ited resource, and as little assumption about the low-level regression algorithms
are made in the SAGG-RIAC architecture, parameterized models allowing to
control memory requirements such as Neural networks, Support Vector Regres-
sion, Gaussian Process Regression could instead be considered [107], such as in
[20, 8, 55, 108].
2.4
Higher Time Scale:
Goal Self-Generation and Self-Selection
The Goal Self-Generation and Self-Selection process relies on a feedback de-
ﬁned using the concept of competence, and more precisely on the competence
12

improvement in given regions (or subspaces) of the task space where goals are
chosen. The measure of competence can be computed at diﬀerent instants of the
learning process. First, it can be estimated once a reaching attempt in direction
of a goal has been declared as terminated. Second, for robotic setups which
are compatible with this option, competence can be computed during low-level
reaching attempts. In the following sections, we detail these two diﬀerent cases:
2.4.1
Measure of Competence for a Terminated Reaching Attempt
A reaching attempt for a goal is considered terminated according to two condi-
tions:
• A timeout related to a maximum number of iterations allowed by the
low-level of active learning has been exceeded.
• The goal has eﬀectively been reached.
We introduce a measure of competence for a given goal reaching attempt as
dependent on two metrics: the similarity between the point in the task space
yf attained when the reaching attempt has terminated, and the actual goal yg;
and the respect of constraints ρ. These conditions are represented by a cost, or
competence, function C deﬁned in [−∞; 0], such that higher C(yg, yf, ρ) will be,
the more a reaching attempt will be considered as eﬃcient. From this deﬁnition,
we set a measure of competence Γyg directly linked with the value of C(yg, yf, ρ):
Γyg =
 C(yg, yf, ρ)
if C(yg, yf, ρ) ≤εsim < 0
0
otherwise
where εsim is a tolerance factor such that C(yg, yf, ρ) > εsim corresponds
to a goal reached. We note that a high value of Γyg (i.e. close to 0) represents
a system that is competent to reach the goal yg while respecting constraints ρ.
A typical instantiation of C, without constraints ρ, is deﬁned as C(yg, yf, ∅) =
−∥yg−yf∥2, and is the direct transposition of prediction error in RIAC [77, 8] to
the task space in SAGG-RIAC. Yet, this competence measure might take some
other forms in the SAGG-RIAC architecture, such as the variants explored in
the experiments below.
2.4.2
Measure of Competence During a Reaching Attempt or Dur-
ing Goal-Directed Optimization
When the system exploits its previously learnt models to reach a goal yg, us-
ing a computed πθ through adequate local regression, or when it is using the
low-level goal-directed optimization to optimize the best current πθ to reach
a self-generated goal yg, it does not only collect data allowing to measure its
competence to reach yg, but since the computed πθ might lead to a diﬀerent
eﬀect ye ̸= yg, it also allows to collect new data for improving the inverse model
and the measure of competence to reach other goals in the locality of ye. This
allows to use all experiments of the robot to update the model of competences
over the space of paremeterized goals.
13

2.4.3
Deﬁnition of Local Competence Progress
The active goal self-generation and self-selection relies on a feedback linked
with the notion of competence introduced above, and more precisely on the
monitoring of the progress of local competences. We ﬁrst need to deﬁne this
notion of local competence. Let us consider a subspace called a region R ⊂
Y . Then, let us consider diﬀerent measures of competence Γyi computed for
diﬀerent attempted goals yi ∈R, in a time window consisting of the ζ last
attempted goals. For the region R, we can compute a measure of competence
Γ that we call a local measure such that:
Γ
=
 P
yj∈R(Γyj)
|R|
!
(1)
with |R|, cardinal of R.
Let us now consider diﬀerent regions Ri of Y such that Ri ⊂Y , S
i Ri =
Y (initially, there is only one region which is then progressively and recur-
sively split; see below and see Fig.
2).
Each Ri contains attempted goals
{yi1,t1, yi2,t2, ..., yik,tk}Ri and corresponding competences obtained {Γyi1,t1, Γyi2,t2, ..., Γyik,tk }Ri,
indexed by their relative time order of experimentation t1 < t2 < ... < tk|tn+1 =
tn + 1 inside this precise subspace Ri (ti are not the absolute time, but integer
indexes of relative order in the given region).
An estimation of interest is computed for each region Ri.
The interest
interesti of a region Ri is described as the absolute value of the derivative of local
competences inside Ri, hence the amplitude of local competence progress, over
a sliding time window of the ζ more recent goals attempted inside Ri (equation
2):
interesti =



|Ri|−ζ
2
X
j=|Ri|−ζ
Γyj

−


|Ri|
X
j=|Ri|−ζ
2
Γyj



ζ
(2)
By using a derivative, the interest considers the variation of competences, and
by using an absolute value, it considers cases of increasing and decreasing com-
petences. In SAGG-RIAC, we will use the term competence progress with its
general meaning to denote this increase and decrease of competences.
An increasing competence signiﬁes that the expected competence gain in
Ri is important. Therefore, potentially, selecting new goals in regions of high
competence progress could bring both a high information gain for the learned
model, and also drive the reaching of not previously achieved goals.
Depending on the starting position and potential evolution of the environ-
ment or of the body (e.g. breaking of a body part), a decrease of competences
inside already well-reached regions can arise. In this case, the system should be
able to focus again in these regions in order to at least verify the possibility to
14

Figure 2: Task space and example of regions and subregions split during the
learning process according to the competence level. Each region displays its
competence level over time, measure which is used for the computation of the
interest according to equation 2.
re-establish a high level of competence inside. This explains the usefulness to
consider the absolute value of the competence progress as shown in equation 2.
Using a sliding window in order to compute the value of interest prevents
the system from keeping each measure of competence in its memory, and thus
limits the storage resource needed by the core of the SAGG-RIAC architecture.
2.4.4
Goal Self-Generation Using the Measure of Interest
Using the previous description of interest, the goal self-generation and self-
selection mechanism carries out two diﬀerent processes:
1. Splitting of the space Y where goals are chosen, into subspaces, according
to heuristics that allows to maximally discriminate areas according to their
levels of interest.
2. Selecting the next goal to perform.
Such a mechanism has been described in the RIAC algorithm introduced in [8],
but was previously applied to the actuator space S rather than to the goal/task
space Y as is done in SAGG-RIAC. Here, we use the same kind of methods
such as a recursive split of the space, each split being triggered once a prede-
ﬁned maximum number of goals gmax has been attempted inside. Each split
is performed such that it maximizes the diﬀerence of the interest measure de-
scribed above in the two resulting subspaces. This allows the easy separation
of areas of diﬀering interest and therefore of diﬀering reaching diﬃculty. More
precisely, here the split of a region Rn into Rn+1 and Rn+2 is done by select-
ing among m randomly generated splits, a split dimension j ∈|Y | and then a
position vj such that:
• All the yi of Rn+1 have a jth component smaller than vj;
• All the yi of Rn+2 have a jth component higher than vj;
15

• The quantity Qual(j, vj) = card(Rn+1).card(Rn+2).∥interestRn+1−interestRn+2∥
is maximal;
Finally, as soon as at least two regions exist after an initial random explo-
ration of the whole space, goals are chosen according to the following heuristics,
selected according to probabilistic distributions:
1. mode(1): in p1% percent (typically p1 = 70%) of goal selections, a random
goal is chosen along a uniform distribution inside a region which is selected with
a probability proportional to its interest value:
Pn =
interestn −min(interesti)
P|Rn|
i=1 interesti −min(interesti)
(3)
Where Pn is the selection probability of the region Rn, and interesti corresponds
to the current interest of the region Ri.
2. mode(2): in p2% (typically p2 = 20% of cases), a random goal is chosen
inside the whole space Y .
3. mode(3): in p3% (typically p3 = 10%), a region is ﬁrst selected according to
the interest value (like in mode(1)) and then a new goal is generated close to
the already experimented one which received the lowest competence estimation.
2.4.5
Reduction of the Initiation Set
In order to improve the quality of the learned inverse model, we add a heuristic
inspired by two observations on infant motor exploration and learning. The ﬁrst
one, proposed by Berthier et al. [17] is that infant’s reaching attempts are often
preceded by movements that either elevate their hand or move their hand back
to their side. And the second one, noticed in [85], is that infants do not try to
reach for objects forever but sometimes relax their muscles and rest. Practically,
these two characteristics allow them to reduce the number of initiation positions
that they use to reach an object, which simpliﬁes the reaching problem by letting
them learn a reduced number of reaching movements.
Such mechanism can be transposed in robotics to motor learning of arm
reaching tasks as well as other kind of skills such as locomotion or ﬁshing as
shown in experiments below. In such a framework, it directly allows a highly-
redundant robotic system to reduce the space of initiation states used to learn to
reach goals, and also typically prevent it from experimenting with too complex
actuator conﬁgurations. We add such a process in SAGG-RIAC, by specifying
a rest position (srest, yrest) reachable without any need of planning from the
system, that is set for each r subsequent reaching attempts (we call r the reset
value, with r > 0).
2.5
New Challenges of Unknown Limits of the Task Space
In traditional active learning methods and especially knowledge-based intrinsi-
cally motivated exploration [11, 77, 65, 96, 21], the system is typically designed
to select actions to perform inside a set of values inside an already known interval
16

(for instance, the range of angles that can be taken by a motor, or the phases
and amplitudes of CPGs which can be easily identiﬁed). In these cases, the
challenge is to select which areas would potentially give the most information
to the system, to improve its knowledge, inside this ﬁxed range of possibilities.
As argued earlier, a limit of these approaches is that they become less and less
eﬃcient as the dimensionality of the control space increases. Competence based
approaches allow to address this issue when a low-dimensional task space can
be identiﬁed. Nevertheless, in that case, a new problem arises when consider-
ing unbounded learning: the space where goals are reachable can be extremely
large and it is generally very diﬃcult to predict its limits and undesirable to
ask the engineer to identify them. Therefore, when carried out in large spaces
where the reachable area is only a small part of it, the algorithm could neces-
sitate numerous random goal self-generations to be able to estimate interests
of diﬀerent subregions. In order to reduce this number, and help the system
to converge easily toward regions where competence can be improved, we em-
phasize two diﬀerent mechanisms that can be used in SAGG-RIAC, during a
reaching attempt:
1. Conservation of every point reached inside the task space even if they do
not correspond to the attempted goal (see section 2.4.2): when the robot
performs a reaching attempt toward a goal y, and, instead of reaching
it, terminates at another state y′, we consider y′ as a goal reached with
a value of competence depending on constraints ρ.
In cases where no
constraints are studied, we can consider the y′ as another goal reached
with the highest level of competence.
2. Addition of subgoals: in robotic setups where the process of goal reaching
can be subdivided and described using subgoals which could be ﬁxed on
the pathway toward the goal, we artiﬁcially add states y1, y2, ..., yn that
have to be reached before y while also respecting the constraints ρ, and
estimate a competence measure for each one.
The consideration of these two heuristics has important advantages: ﬁrst, they
can signiﬁcantly increase the number of estimations of competence, and thus
the quantity of feedback returned to the goal self-generation mechanism. This
reduces the number of goals that have to be self-generated to bootstrap the sys-
tem, and thus the number of low-level iteration required to extract ﬁrst inter-
esting subspaces. Also, by creating areas of diﬀerent competence values around
already reached states, they inﬂuence the discovery of reachable areas. Finally,
they result in an interesting emergent phenomena: they create a growing area
of increasing competence around the ﬁrst discovered reachable areas. Indeed,
by obtaining values of competences inside reachable areas, the algorithm is able
to split the space ﬁrst in these regions, and compute values of interest. These
values of interest will typically be high in already reached areas and inﬂuence
the goal self-generation process to create new goals in its proximity. Once the
level of competence becomes important and stabilized in eﬃciently reached ar-
17

eas, the interest becomes null, then, new areas of interest close to these ones
will be discovered, and so on.
2.6
PseudoCode
Pseudo-code 1 and algorithm 2 present the ﬂow of operations in the SAGG-
RIAC architecture. Algorithms 3 and 4 are simple alternative examples of low-
level goal-directed optimization algorithms that are used in the experimental
section, but they could be replaced by other algorithms like PI2 −CMA [112],
CMA [45], or those presented in [79]. The function Ineﬃcient can also be built
in numerous manners and will not be described in details in the pseudo-code
(examples will be described then for each experimentation). Its function is to
judge if the current model has been eﬃcient enough to reach or come closer to
the decided goal, or if the model has to be improved in order to reach it.
In the following sections, we will present two diﬀerent kinds of experiments.
The ﬁrst one is a reaching experiment where a robotic arm has to learn its
inverse kinematics to reach self-generated end-eﬀector positions.
It uses an
evolving context s ∈S, also called setpoint in SSA, representing its current
joint conﬁguration. Therefore, it can be described by the relationship (s, a) →y
where s, a and y can evolve. It is thus possible to use a goal-directed optimization
algorithm very similar to SSA in this experiment, like the one in algorithm 3.
In the two other experiments, in contrast, we control the robots using pa-
rameterized motor synergies and consider a ﬁxed context (a rest position) s ∈S
where the robot is reset before each action: we will ﬁrst consider a quadruped
learning omnidirectional locomotion, and then an arm controlling a ﬂexible ﬁsh-
ing rod learning to put the ﬂoat in precise self-generated positions on top of the
water. Thus, these systems can be described by the relationship (s, πθ) →y,
where s will here be ﬁxed and θ will be the parameters of the motor synergy
used to control the robots. Thus, a variation of setpoint being prevented here,
a variant of SSA will be proposed for such experiments (similar to a more tra-
ditional optimization algorithm), where the context will not evolve and always
be reset, like in algorithm 4.
3
Experimental Setup 1: Learning Inverse Kine-
matics with a Redundant Arm
In this section, we propose an experiment carried out with a robotic arm which
has to explore and learn its forward and inverse kinematics.
Also, before
discussing the details of our active exploration approach in this ﬁrst experi-
mentation case, we ﬁrstly deﬁne the representations of the models and control
paradigms involved in this experiment. Here, we focus on robotic systems whose
actuators are settable by positions and velocities, and restrict our analysis to
discrete time models.
Allowing robots to be self-adaptive to environmental conditions and changes
in their own geometry is an important challenge of machine learning. These
18

changes in the robot geometry directly have an impact on its Inverse Kinemat-
ics IK, relating workspace coordinates (where tasks are usually speciﬁed), to
actuators coordinates (like joint position, velocity, or torque used to command
the robot). Learning inverse kinematics is useful in numerous machine learning
cases, such as when no accurate kinematic model of a robot is available or when
an online calibration is needed due to sensor or motor imprecision. Moreover, in
developmental robotics studies, the a priori knowledge of a precise model of the
body is often avoided, because of its implausibility from the biological point of
view. In the following experiment, we assume that the inverse kinematics of our
system is totally unknown, and we are interested in studying how SAGG-RIAC
can eﬃciently guide the discovery and learning of its inverse kinematics.
3.1
Control Paradigms for Learning Inverse Kinematics
Let us mathematically formulate forward and inverse kinematics relations. We
deﬁne the intrinsic coordinates (joint/actuator positions) of a manipulator as
the n-dimensional vector S = α ∈Rn, and the position and orientation of the
manipulator’s end-eﬀector as the m-dimensional vector y ∈Rm. Relative to
this formalization, actions of the robot corresponds to speed commands param-
eterized by a vector θ = ˙α ∈Rn which controls the instantaneous speed of each
of the n joints of the arm. The forward kinematic function of this system is
generally written as y = f(α), and inverse kinematics relationship is deﬁned as
α = f −1(y).
When a redundant manipulator is considered (n > m), or when m = n,
solutions to the inverse relationship are generally non-unique [106]. The problem
posed to inverse learning algorithms is thus to determine particular solutions to
α = f −1(y), when multiple solutions exists. A typical approach used for solving
this problem considers local methods, which learn relationships linking small
changes ∆α and ∆y :
˙y
=
J(α) ˙α
(4)
where J(α) is the Jacobian matrix.
Then, using the Jacobian matrix and inverting it to get a single solution ˙α
corresponding to a desired ˙y raises the problem of the non-convexity property
of this last equation.
A solution to this non-convex problem has then been
proposed by Bullock in [23] who converted it into a convex problem, by only
considering the learning task within the spatial vicinity b˙α of a particular α :
˙y
=
J(α)b˙α
(5)
3.2
Representation of Forward and Inverse Models to be
Learnt
We use here non-parametric models which typically determine local models in
the vicinity of a current datapoint. By computing a model using parameterized
19

xg
xf
D(xg, xf)
xstart
D(xstart, xg)
✓1
✓2
✓3
✓4
✓5
✓6
✓7
↵1
↵2
↵3
↵4
↵5
↵6
↵7
Figure 3: Values used to compute the competence Γyg, considering a manipu-
lator of 7 degrees-of-freedom, in a 2 dimensions operational/task space. Here,
the arm is set in a position called rest position which is not straight and slightly
bent. (αrest, yrest).
functions on datapoints restrained to a locality, they have been proposed as
useful for real time queries, and incremental learning. Learning inverse kine-
matics typically deals with these kind of constraints, and these local methods
have thus been proposed as an eﬃcient approach to IK learning [125, 107]. In
the following study, we use an incremental version of the Approximate Near-
est Neighbors algorithm (ANN) [70], based on a tree split using the k-means
process, to determine the vicinity of the current α. Also, in the environments
that we use to introduce our contribution, we do not need highly robust, and
computationally very complex regression methods. Using the pseudo-inverse of
Moore-Penrose [2] to compute the pseudo-inverse J+(α) of the Jacobian J(α) in
a vicinity b˙α is thus suﬃcient. Possible problems happening due to singularities
[106, 28, 91] being bypassed by adding noise in the joint conﬁgurations (see [86]
for a study about this problem).
Also, in the following equation, we use this method to deduce the change
∆α corresponding to a ∆x, for a given joint position α:
˙α
=
J+(α) ˙y
(6)
3.3
Robotic Setup
In the following experiments, we consider a n-dimensional manipulator con-
trolled in position and speed (as many of today’s robots), updated at discrete
time values. The vector α ∈Rn which represents joint angles corresponds to the
context/state space S and the vector y ∈Rm which is the position of the ma-
nipulator’s end-eﬀector in m dimensions in the Euclidian space Rm corresponds
to the task space Y (see Fig. 3 where n = 7 and m = 2). We evaluate how
20

the SAGG-RIAC architecture can be used by a robot to learn how to reach all
reachable points in the environment Y with this arm’s end-eﬀector. Learning the
inverse kinematics is here an online process that arises each time a micro-action
θ = ∆α ∈A is executed by the manipulator: by doing each micro-action, the
robot stores measures (α, ∆α, ∆x) in its memory and creates a database Data
which contains elements (αi, ∆αi, ∆yi) representing the discovered change ∆yi
corresponding to a given ∆αi in the conﬁguration αi (this learning entity can
be called a schema according to the terminology of Drescher [38]). These mea-
sures are then reused online to compute the Jacobian J(α) = ∆y/∆α locally
to move the end-eﬀector in a desired direction ∆ydesired ﬁxed toward the self-
generated goal. Therefore, we consider a learning problem of 2n dimensions,
the relationship that the system has to learn being (α, ∆α) →∆y. Also, in
this experiment, where we suppose Y Euclidian, and do not consider obstacles,
the direction to a goal can be deﬁned as following a straight line between the
current end-eﬀector’s position and the goal.
3.4
Evaluation of Competence
In this experiment, in order to clearly illustrate the main contribution of our
algorithm, we do not consider constraints ρ and only focus on the reaching of
goal positions yg. It is nevertheless important to notice that a constraint ρ has
a direct inﬂuence on the low-level of active learning of SAGG-RIAC, and thus
an indirect inﬂuence on the higher level. As using a constraint can require a
more complex exploration process guided at the low-level, a more important
number of iterations at this level can be required to reach a goal, which could
have an inﬂuence on the global evolution of the performances of the learning
process used by the higher-level of SAGG-RIAC.
We deﬁne here the competence function C with the Euclidian distance
D(yg, yf), between the goal position and the ﬁnal reached position yf, which
is normalized by the starting distance D(ystart, yg), where ystart is the end-
eﬀector’s starting position. This allows, for instance, to give a same competence
level when considering a goal at 1cm from the origin position, which the robot
approaches at 0.5cm and a goal at 1mm, which the robot approaches at 0.5mm.
C(yg, yf, ystart)
=
−D(yg, yf)
D(ystart, yg)
(7)
where C(yg, yf, ystart) = 0 if D(ystart, yg) < εC (the goal is too close from
the start position) and C(yg, yf, ystart) = −1 if D(yg, yf) > D(ystart, yg) (the
end-eﬀector moved away from the goal).
3.5
Addition of subgoals
Computing local competence progress in subspaces/regions typically requires
the reaching of numerous goals. Because reaching a goal can necessitate several
micro-actions, and thus time, obtaining competence measures can be long. Also,
21

without biasing the learning process and as already explained in section 2.5, we
improve this mechanism by taking advantage of the Euclidian nature of Y : we
increase the number of goals artiﬁcially, by adding subgoals on the pathway
between the starting position and the goal, where competences are computed.
Therefore, considering a starting state ystart in Y , and a self-generated goal yg,
we deﬁne the set of l subgoals {y1, y2, ..., yl} where yi = (i/l) × (yg −ystart),
that have to be reached before attempting to reach the terminal goal yg.
We also consider another way to increase the number of competence measures
which is to take into consideration each experimented position of the end-eﬀector
as a goal reached with a maximal competence value. This will typically help
the system to distinguish which regions are eﬃciently covered, and to discover
new regions of interest.
3.6
Active Goal Directed Exploration and Learning
Here we propose a method inspired by the SSA algorithm to guide the system to
learn on the pathway toward the selected goal position yg. This instantiation of
the SAGG-RIAC architecture uses algorithm 3 and considers evolving contexts,
as explained below.
3.6.1
Reaching Phase
The reaching phase deals with creating a pathway to the current goal position
yg. This phase consists of determining, from the current position yc, an optimal
micro-action which would guide the end-eﬀector toward yg. For this purpose,
the system computes the needed end-eﬀector’s displacement ∆ynext = v. yc−yg
∥yc−yg∥
(where v is the velocity bounded by vmax and
yc−yg
∥yc−yg∥a normalized vector in
direction of the goal), and performs the action ∆αnext = J+.∆ynext, with J+,
pseudo-inverse of the Jacobian estimated in the close vicinity of α and given
the data collected by the robot so far. After each action ∆ynext, we compute
the error ε = ∥f
∆ynext −∆ynext∥, and trigger the exploration phase in cases
of a too high value ε > εmax > 0. εmax is thus a parameter which has to be
set depending on the range of error ε that can be experienced, and will be set
depending on a tolerance that can be conceded to allow reaching goal positions
with the current learned data.
While a too high value of εmax will prevent
exploring and learning new data (the system spending potentially too important
amounts of time exploring around a same conﬁguration and get trapped in local
minima), too low values of εmax will prevent an eﬃcient local optimization.
3.6.2
Exploration Phase
This phase consists in performing q ∈N small random explorative actions ∆αi,
around the current position α, where the variations can be derandomized such
as in [45]. This allows the learning system to improve its regression model of
the relationship (α, ∆α) →∆y, in the close vicinity of α, which is needed to
compute the inverse kinematics model around α. During both phases, a counter
22

is incremented for each micro-action and reset for each new goal. The timeout
used to deﬁne a goal as unreached and to stop a reaching attempt uses this
counter. A maximal quantity of micro-actions is ﬁxed for each goal as directly
proportional to the number of micro-action it requires to be reached. In the
next experiments, the system is allowed to perform up to 1.5 times the distance
between ystart and yg before stopping the reaching attempt.
3.7
Qualitative Results for a 15 DOF Simulated Arm
In the simulated experiment introduced in this section, we consider the robotic
arm presented Fig. 3 with 15 DOF, each limb of the robot having the same
length (considering a 15 DOF arm corresponds to a problem of 32 continuous
dimensions, with 30 dimensions in the actuator/state space and 2 dimensions
in the goal/task space). We set the dimensions of the task space Y as bounded
in intervals yg ∈[0; 150] × [−150; 150], where 50 units is the total length of the
arm, which means that the arm covers less than 1/9 of the space Y where goals
can be chosen (i.e. the majority of areas in the operational/task space are not
reachable, which has to be self-discovered by the robot). We ﬁx the number of
subgoal per goal to 5, and the maximal number of elements inside a region before
a split to gmax = 50. We also set the desired velocity v = 2 units/micro-action,
and the number of explorative actions q = 20. Moreover, we reset the arm to
the rest position (αrest, yrest) (position displayed in Fig. 3) every r = 1 reaching
attempts. This allows reducing the initiation set and prevent the system from
experimenting with too complex joint positions where the arm is folded, and
where the Jacobian is more diﬃcult to compute. Using a low value of r is an
important characteristic for the beginning of the learning process. A too high
value of r prevents learning rapidly how to achieve a maximal amount of goal
position, due to the diﬃculty to reuse the previously learned data when the arm
is folded in unknown positions.
The bent character of the rest position is also useful to avoid to begin a
micro-action close to a singularity like when the arm is totally unfolded. Also,
in this experiment, we consider each experimented position of the end-eﬀector
as if it was a goal reached with the maximal competence level (these numerous
positions are not displayed in the following ﬁgures in order to not overload the
illustrations).
3.7.1
Evolution of Competences over Time
Fig. 4 represents the whole distribution of self-generated goals and sub-goals
selected by the higher-level of active learning module, and their corresponding
competences after the execution of 30000 micro-actions. The global shape of
the distribution of points allows observing the large values of competence levels
inside the reachable space and its close vicinity, and the global low competence
inside the remaining space.
The progressive increase of competences is displayed on Fig. 5 where we
evaluate over time (indexed here by the number of goals self-generated) the
23

Figure 4: Competence values corresponding to the entire set of self-generated
goals collected over an experiment of 30000 micro-actions on a 15 DOF arm.
The heterogeneous set of competence values situated inside the reachable space
illustrates the typical measures of competence that can be measured in this
region over a whole experiment. For a visualization of the evolution of these
competence values, see ﬁgure 5
global competence of the system to reach positions situated on a grid which
covers the entire task space. From these estimations of competence, we can ex-
tract two interesting phenomena: ﬁrst of all, the two ﬁrst subﬁgures, estimated
after the self-generation of 42 and 83 goals, show that the system is, at the be-
ginning of the exploration and learning process, competent to only attain areas
situated close to the limits of the reachable space. Then, the 4 other subﬁgures
show the progressive increase of competences inside the reachable space follow-
ing an increasing radius whose the origin is situated around the end-eﬀector rest
position.
The ﬁrst observation is due to the reaching mechanism in itself, which, when
possessing a few data acquired, does not allow the robot to experiment complex
joint movements, but only simple ones which typically leads to the limits of
the arm. The second phenomenon is due to the coupling of the lower-level of
active learning inspired by SSA with the heuristic of returning to yrest every
subsequent goals. Indeed, the necessity to be conﬁdent in the local model of
24

Figure 5: Evolution of competence values corresponding to self-generated goals
collected during an experiment of 30000 micro-actions on a 15 DOF arm. Time
is indexed by the number of self-generated goals. Higher values (dark red) corre-
sponds to position that has been reached using learned data. (For interpretation
of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article)
the arm to shift toward new positions makes the system progressively explore
the space, and resetting it to its rest position makes it progressively explore
the space by beginning close to yrest. Finally, goal positions that are physically
reachable but far from this radius typically present a low competence to be
reached initially, before the radius spreads enough to reach them.
3.7.2
Global Exploration over Time
Fig. 6 shows histograms of goal positions self-generated during the execution
of the 30000 micro-actions (only goals, not subgoals for an easy reading of the
ﬁgure). Each subﬁgure corresponds to a speciﬁed time window indexed by the
number of generated goals: the ﬁrst one (upper-left) shows that, at the onset
of learning, the system already focuses in a small area around the end-eﬀector’s
rest position, and thus discriminates diﬀerences between a subpart of the reach-
able area and the remaining space (the whole reachable zone being represented
by the black half-circle on each subﬁgure of Fig. 6). In the second subﬁgure,
the system is, inversely, focusing almost only on regions of the space which are
not reachable by the arm. This is due to the imprecise split of the space at
this level of the exploration, which left very small reachable areas (which have
already been reached with a high competence), at the edge inside each large un-
reachable regions. This typically gives a high mean competence to each of these
region when they are created. Then, due to the very large part of unreachable
25

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150
-150 0
150
1-42 Goals
42-83 Goals
84-125 Goals
125-166 Goals
167-208 Goals
208-249 Goals
0
150 0
150
150
-150 0
150 0
150 0
150
0
0
Figure 6: Evolution of the distribution of self-generated goals displayed over
time windows indexed by the number of performed goals, for an experiment of
30000 micro-actions on a 15 DOF arm measuring 50 units. The black half-circle
represents the contour of the area reachable by the arm. Higher values (dark
red) corresponds to higher density of self-generated goals. (For interpretation
of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article)
areas, in comparison to reachable ones, the mean competence decreases over
time. This brings interest to the region, thanks to the mathematical deﬁnition
of the interest level, which, by using an absolute value, pushes the robot to-
ward areas where the competence is decreasing. This complex process which
allows driving the exploration in these kind of heterogeneous regions then allows
dividing eﬃciently the task space into reachable and unreachable regions.
Then, considering a global observation of subﬁgures 3 to 6, we can conclude
that the system eﬀectively autonomously discovers its own limits by focusing
the goal self-generation inside reachable areas during the largest part of the
exploration period. The system is indeed discovering that only a subpart is
reachable due to the interest value becoming null in totally unreachable areas
where the competence value is low.
3.7.3
Exploration over Time inside Reachable Areas
A more precise observation of subﬁgures 3 to 6 is presented in Fig. 8 where
we can speciﬁcally observe the self-generated goals inside the reachable area.
First, we can perceive that the system is originally focusing in an area around
the end-eﬀector’s rest position yrest (shown by gray points in Fig. 8).
Then, it increases the radius of its exploration around yrest and focuses on
areas further aﬁeld to the end-eﬀector’s rest position. Subﬁgures 2 and 3 shows
26

2
4
6
8
2
4
6
8
150
-150 0
150
42 Goals
83 Goals
125 Goals
166 Goals
208 Goals
249 Goals
0
150 0
150
150
-150 0
150 0
150 0
150
0
0
Figure 7: Evolution of the splitting of the task/goal space and creation of subre-
gions indexed by the number of goals self-generated (without counting subgoals),
for the experiment presented in Fig. 6.
167-208 Goals
208-249 Goals
125-166 Goals
84-125 Goals
-50
50
0
-50
50
0
-50
50
0
-50
50
0
xrest
Figure 8: Details of the evolution of the distribution of self-generated goals
inside the reachable area for the experiment presented in Fig. 6. Gray points
represent the end-eﬀector rest position yrest.
that the system explores new reachable parts corresponding to the right part
close to its basis (subﬁgure 2), and then, the left part close to its basis (subﬁgures
3).
Also, comparing the two ﬁrst subﬁgures, and the two last ones, we observe
a shift of the maximum exploration peak toward the arm basis. This is ﬁrst
linked with the loss of interest of self-generating goals around the end-eﬀector’s
rest position. Indeed, because the system becomes highly eﬃcient inside this
region, the competence level becomes high and stationary over time, which leads
to low interest values. At the same time, this phenomenon is also linked with
the increase of competences in new reachable positions far from the end-eﬀector
rest position yrest, closer to its basis, which creates new regions of interest (see
the four last subﬁgures of Fig. 5).
27

3.7.4
Emergent Process
The addition of subgoals and the consideration of each end-eﬀector’s position
as a goal reached with the highest competence level have important inﬂuences
on the learning process. If we look at traditional active learning algorithms
which cannot deal with open-ended learning [30, 43, 32], as well as RIAC-like
algorithms diﬀerent from SAGG-RIAC [77, 65, 94, 69, 96, 8], we can notice that
even if these techniques deal with avoiding excessive exploration in unlearnable
or extremely complex areas, the learning process still has to begin by a period
of random exploration of the whole space, to distinguish and extract which
subparts are the most interesting according to the used deﬁnition of interest.
Thanks to the addition of sub-goals and/or the consideration of every end-
eﬀector’s position in SAGG-RIAC, in addition to exploring in the task space,
we reduce the number of needed random global exploration, and improve the
capability of the system to deal with large (i.e. when the volume of reachable
space is small as compared to the volume of the whole space) task spaces. Using
subgoals indeed creates a concentration of goals around the current end-eﬀector’s
position, which progressively grows according to new experimented positions.
Furthermore, the consideration of each end-eﬀector’s position for the estima-
tion of competence allows discovering progressively which positions are reach-
able with a high competence level, and gives a fast indication of ﬁrst subregions
where these high competences are situated. This increases the number of sub-
regions close to the reachable areas and allows computing the interest values
in the growing vicinity of the end-eﬀector’s experimented positions (see Fig. 7
where the progressive split of subregions in reachable areas is displayed).
Therefore, these additions of competence measures allow the system to dis-
cover and focus on areas where the competence is high in a very low number
of goal self-generation, and tackle the typical problem of fast estimation and
distinction of interesting areas. Nevertheless, this emergent process only helps
to increase the number of feedbacks required by the goal self-generation mech-
anism to split the space, and do not inﬂuence the low-level active learning.
Then, the timeout which deﬁnes a goal as unreached during a single reaching
attempt becomes crucial when considering high-volume task spaces with large
unreachable parts as introduced in the following section.
3.7.5
Robustness in High-Volume Task Spaces
in the previous experiment, the timeout which describes a goal as not reached
and stops a reaching attempt is deﬁned as directly proportional to the number
of micro-actions required to reach each goal. Practically, as introduced section
3.6.2, we allowed the system to perform 1.5 times the distance between ystart
and yg before declaring a goal as not reached (including explorative movements).
This timeout is eﬃcient enough to learn eﬃciently by discriminating regions
of diﬀerent complexities in the middle-size space S′ = [0; 150] × [−150; 150]
considered in this experiment. Nevertheless, it can have an important inﬂuence
on the SAGG learning process when considering extremely large task spaces
28

1 to 336 Goals
337 to 672 Goals
673 to 1008 Goals
1009 to 1334 Goals
1345 to 1680 Goals
1681 to 2015 Goals
-500
500
0
0
500
-500
500
0
0
500 0
500 0
500
0
500 0
500
Figure 9: Histograms of self-generated goals displayed over time windows in-
dexed by the number of performed goals, for an experiment of 30000 micro-
actions on a 15 DOF arm, for a high-volume task space S = [−500; 500]×[0; 500],
according to the reachable space contained in [−50; 50] × [0; 50] (the black half-
circle represents the contour of the area reachable by the arm according to its
length of 50 units).
with small underlying reachable areas. For instance, if we consider a task space
Y = [−500; 500] × [−0; 500] where only [−50; 50] × [0; 50] is reachable, the low-
level of active learning will spend an extremely large number of iterations trying
to reach each unreachable goal if this kind of timeout is used.
Therefore, when considering such high-volume spaces, the deﬁnition of a new
timeout becomes crucial. In Fig. 9, we demonstrate the high discriminating
factor of SAGG-RIAC in such a task space (Y = [−500; 500] × [−0; 500]) when
using a timeout which is not only based on the distance to the goal. This one has
also been designed to stop a reaching attempt according to the following blocking
criteria: let us consider a self-generated goal yg that the low-level exploration
and reaching mechanisms try to reach. Then, if the system is not coming closer
to the goal even after some low-level explorations, the exploration toward this
precise goal stops. In a practical way, when w consecutive low-level explorations
are triggered (typically w ≥2) and thus no progress to the goal was made,
we declare a goal as unreached, and compute the corresponding competence
level. Using such a deﬁnition, the rapidity of discovering blocking situations
will depend on both values of w and number of explorative actions q. Minimal
values of these two parameters allows the fastest discoveries, but decrease the
quality of the low-level exploration mechanism when exploring reachable spaces
(in the experiment presented in Fig. 9 we use q = 5 and w = 3).
29

3.7.6
Conclusion of Qualitative Results
When considering low-level mechanisms allowing an eﬃcient progressive learn-
ing, the SAGG-RIAC algorithm is capable to discriminate very eﬃciently reach-
able areas in such high-volume spaces. Then, it is also able to drive a progressive
self-generation of goals through reachable subspaces of progressively growing
complexities of reachability.
In this experiment, the reachable region in the task space was convex and
with no obstacles. Yet, as we will see in the ﬁshing experiment below, SAGG-
RIAC is capable of identifying correctly its zones of reachability, given a low-level
optimization algorithm, even if there are “holes” or obstacles: goals initially
generated in unreachable positions or in positions for which obstacles prevent
their reaching provide a low level of competence progress, and thus the system
stops trying to reach them. It is also possible to imagine that some given self-
generated goals might be reachable only by an action policy going around an
obstacle. Such a capability is not a property of the SAGG-RIAC architecture
by itself, but a property of the optimization algorithm, and action represen-
tation, that is used at the low-level goal-directed mechanism. In the present
experiment, low-level optimization was a simple one only considering action
policies going in a straight line to the goal. Yet, if one would have used more
complex optimization leveraging continuous domain planning techniques (e.g.
[121]), the zones of reachability would be increased if obstacles are introduced
since the low-level system could learn to go around them.
3.8
Quantitative Results for Experiments
with Task Spaces of Diﬀerent Sizes
In the following evaluation, we consider the same robotic system than previously
described (15DOF arm of 50 units) and design diﬀerent experiments. For each
one, we estimate the eﬃciency of the inverse model learned by testing how it
allows in average the robot to reach positions selected inside a test database of
100 reachable positions (uniformly distributed in the reachable area and inde-
pendent from the exploration of the robot). We will also compare SAGG-RIAC
to three other types of exploration techniques:
1. SAGG-RANDOM, where goals are chosen randomly (higher-level of active
learning (RIAC) disabled)
2. ACTUATOR-RANDOM, where small random micro-actions ∆α are exe-
cuted. This method corresponds to classical random motor babbling.
3. ACTUATOR-RIAC, which corresponds to the original RIAC algorithm
that uses the decrease in prediction errors (α, ∆α) →∆x to compute an
interest value and split the space (α, ∆α).
Also, to be comparable to SAGG-RIAC, each ACTUATOR technique will have
the position of the arm reset to the rest position every max micro-actions, max
being the number of micro-actions needed to reach the more distant reachable
30

position. max is proportional to the desired velocity which is here of v = 2
units/micro-action as well as the size of the task space (this will explain the
diﬀerent results of each ACTUATOR methods when used with task spaces of
diﬀerent sizes).
In every graph, we present statistical results obtained after
launching the same experiment with diﬀerent random seeds 15 times.
3.8.1
Exploration in the Reachable Space
The ﬁrst quantitative experiment is designed to compare the quality of inverse
models learned using babbling in the task/operational space (i.e. using goals),
instead of more traditional motor babbling heuristics executed in the conﬁgu-
ration/actuator space. We still consider a n=15 DOF arm of 50 units, also,
to be suited for the ﬁrst study, dimensions of Y will be bounded in intervals
yg ∈[0; 50] × [−50; 50] which means that the arm can reach almost all the space
Y where goals can be chosen (the limits of reachability are thus almost given
to the robot). In this experiment, we ﬁx q = 20 for the SAGG methods and
use a timeout only relative to the distance to the current goal (a end-eﬀector
movement of 1.5 times the one needed is allowed).
Fig. 10 shows the evolution of the capability of the system to reach the 100
test goals using the inverse model learned by each technique, starting from the
rest position. This capability is computed using the mean Euclidian distance
between the goal and the ﬁnal state of a reaching attempt.
Globally, these results show that in order to learn inverse kinematics of
this highly-redundant arm, exploration in the goal/operational space is signif-
icantly more eﬃcient than exploration in the actuator space using either ran-
dom exploration or RIAC-like active learning. Moreover, better performances
of ACTUATOR-RANDOM compared to ACTUATOR-RIAC emphasizes that
the original version of RIAC has not been designed for the eﬃcient learning
of inverse models of highly-redundant systems (high-dimension in the actuator
space).
Focusing on the evaluation of the two mechanisms which use SAGG, we can
also make the important observation that SAGG-RIAC is here more eﬃcient
than SAGG-RANDOM when considering a system which already knows its own
limits of reachability. More precisely, we observe both increase in learning speed
and ﬁnal generalization performances (this results resonates with results from
more classic active learning, see [29]). These improvement signiﬁes that SAGG-
RIAC is eﬃciently able to progressively discriminate and focus on areas which
bring the highest informational amount (i.e. areas which have not been visited
enough). It brings to the learning system more useful data to create an eﬃcient
inverse model, contrarily to the SAGG-RANDOM approach which continues to
select goals in already eﬃciently reached areas.
3.8.2
Robustness in Large Task Spaces
in the following experiment, we would like to test the capability of SAGG-RIAC
to focus on reachable areas when facing high volume task spaces (will call this
31

Reaching Error
Distance
Number of Actions (time steps)
15
20
0
5
10
25
30000
0
SAGG-RIAC
SAGG-RANDOM
ACTUATOR-RANDOM
ACTUATOR-RIAC
Figure 10: Evolution of mean distances between the goal and the end eﬀector
after reaching attempts over an independently randomly generated set of test
goals. Here SAGG-RIAC and SAGG-RANDOM are only allowed to choose goals
within Y = [0; 50] × [−50; 50] (i.e. most eligible goals are physically reachable).
Standard deviations are computed over 15 experiments at the same instants for
each curve, and shifted in graphs for an easy reading.
phenomenon the discrimination capability). Therefore, we will here consider
a task space Y = [0; 500] × [−500; 500]. Fig. 11 shows the learning eﬃciency
of SAGG-RIAC using the timeout with blocking criteria as described in the
section 3.7.5. This allows to test the quantitative aspect of the discrimination
capability of SAGG-RIAC and its comparison with the three other techniques
when facing high volume task spaces where only small subparts are reachable.
As Fig. 11 shows, SAGG-RIAC is here the only method able to drive an eﬃcient
learning in such a space. SAGG-RANDOM actually spends the majority of the
time trying to reach unreachable positions.
Also, the size of the task space
has an inﬂuence on the two ACTUATOR algorithms if we compare results in
Y = [0; 50] × [−50; 50] introduced Fig. 10 and in Y = [0; 500] × [−500; 500]
introduced Fig. 11. This is due to the value max of micro-actions performed
by ACTUATOR methods which is proportional to the size of the task space as
explained section 3.8. Results considering the space Y = [0; 500] × [−500; 500]
seems more eﬃcient for these methods, where the value of max is higher than
in Y = [0; 50] × [−50; 50]. An increase of max thus allows these methods to
32

Reaching Error
Distance
Number of Actions (time steps)
50000
25000
0
15
20
0
5
10
25
SAGG-RIAC
SAGG-RANDOM
ACTUATOR-RANDOM
ACTUATOR-RIAC
Figure 11: Evolution of mean distances between the goal and end eﬀector after
reaching attempts over an independently randomly generated set of test goals,
averaged over 15 experiments. Here SAGG-RIAC and SAGG-RANDOM are
allowed to choose goals within a large space corresponding to the one in Fig.
9, deﬁne as Y = [0; 500] × [−500; 500] (i.e. most eligible goals are physically
unreachable).
explore more eﬃciently the reachable space whose exploration is limited when
considering a too low value of max.
3.8.3
Robustness in Very Large Task Spaces
Finally, we test the robustness of SAGG-RIAC in task spaces larger than in
the previous section. Fig. 12 shows the behavior of SAGG-RIAC when used
with task spaces of diﬀerent sizes, from 1 to 900 times the size of the reachable
space, and compare these results with a random exploration in the actuator
space when the value of max is ﬁxed as when Y = [0; 500] × [−500; 500]. We
can notice here that, although the high discriminative capacity of SAGG-RIAC
in large spaces such as Y = [0; 500] × [−500; 500], as shown previously, the
performances of this technique decrease when the size of the considered task
space increases. Therefore, we can observe that SAGG-RIAC obtains better re-
sults than ACTUATOR-RANDOM since 5000 micro-actions when considering
spaces smaller than Y = [0; 500] × [−500; 500]. Then, this method shows bet-
33

ter results than ACTUATOR-RANDOM only after 10000 micro-actions when
considering the space Y = [0; 500] × [−500; 500]. And ﬁnally, this one becomes
less eﬃcient than ACTUATOR-RANDOM when the considered space increases
in comparison to the reachable space, as shown by results when considering
spaces Y = [0; 1000] × [−1000; 1000] and Y = [0; 1500] × [−1500; 1500]. These
results clearly show that SAGG-RIAC is robust in spaces up to 100 times larger
than the reachable space, but has some diﬃculties to explore even larger spaces.
Therefore, despite the fact that SAGG-RIAC is very eﬃcient in large spaces,
it seems that the challenge of autonomous exploration in un-prepared spaces
can not be totally resolved by this algorithm, a human supervisor being still
necessary to deﬁne a set of (even very approximate) limits for the task space.
As it will be emphasized in the perspective of this work, some complementary
techniques should be used in order to bring robustness to such spaces, such as
mechanisms inspired by the notion of maturational constraints which are able
to ﬁx limits on the task space since the beginning of the exploration process.
0
0 5
1
1 5
2
2 5
3
3 5
4
4 5
5
25
15
5
0
10
20
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
S’ = [0;50]x[-50;50]
SAGG-RIAC
S’ = [-0;150]x[150;150]
S’ = [-0;500]x[500;500]
S’ = [-0;1000]x[1000;1000]
S’ = [-0;1500]x[1500;1500]
ACTUATOR-RANDOM
Distance
Number of Actions (time steps)
Reaching Error
Figure 12: Quantitative results of SAGG-RIAC when used with task spaces of
diﬀerent sizes and comparison with ACTUATOR-RANDOM.
3.9
Quantitative Results for Experiments
with Arm of Diﬀerent Number of DOF and Geome-
tries
In every experiment, we set the dimensions of Y as bounded by the intervals
yg ∈[0; 150] × [−150; 150], where 50 units is the total length of the arm, which
means that the arm covers less than 1/9 of the space Y where goals can be chosen
(i.e. the majority of areas in the operational/task space are not reachable, which
has to be discovered by the robot).
34

0
5
10
15
5
10
15
20
25
30
x104
x104
0
5
10
15
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
0
5
10
15
5
10
15
20
25
Distance To Reach
Distance
30 Dim Decreasing Size
7 Dim Decreasing Size
15 Dim Decreasing Size
x104
SAGG-RIAC
SAGG-Random
ACTUATOR-Random
ACTUATOR-RIAC
0
5
10
15
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
7 Dim Equal Size
15 Dim Equal Size
30 Dim Equal Size
0
5
10
15
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
0
5
10
15
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
x104
x104
x104
Distance
SAGG-RIAC
SAGG-Random
ACTUATOR-Random
ACTUATOR-RIAC
Number of Actions (time steps)
Reaching Errors
Number of Actions (time steps)
Figure 13: Evolution of mean distances between the goal and end eﬀector after
reaching attempts over an independently randomly generated set of test goals,
averaged over 15 experimentations. Here SAGG-RIAC and SAGG-random are
only allowed to choose goals within Y = [0; 150] × [−150; 150] (i.e. the set of
reachable goals is only a small subset of eligible goals).
For each experiment, we set the desired velocity v = 0.5 units/micro-action,
and the number of explorative actions q = 20. Moreover, we reset the arm to
the rest position (αrest, yrest) every r = 2 reaching attempts, which increases
the complexity of the reaching process.
We present a series of experiments aiming to test the robustness of SAGG-
RIAC in arm setups with diﬀerent shapes and numbers of degrees-of-freedom.
Performed tests used 7, 15, and 30 DOF arms whose each limb has either the
same length or a decreasing length depending on its distance from the arm’s
base (we use the golden number to specify the relative size of each part, taking
inspiration from the architecture of human limbs). These experiments permit
testing the eﬃciency of the algorithm for highly redundant systems (considering
a 30 DOF arm corresponds to a problem of 62 continuous dimensions, with 60
35

dimensions in the actuator/state space and 2 dimensions in the goal/task space),
and diﬀerent morphologies.
Also, to stress the capability of the system to make the robot self-discover
its own limits, we remove the consideration of each end-eﬀector position exper-
imented as a goal reached with the highest level of competence (see 3.7.4). In
these experiments, the competence level is therefore evaluated only for goals
and subgoals. We ﬁx q = 100, and compute tests of inverse models over 200000
micro-actions.
3.9.1
Quantitative Results
Fig. 13 illustrates the performances of the learned inverse models when used
to reach goals from an independent test database and evolving along with the
number of experimented micro-actions. First, we can globally observe the slower
decreasing velocity (over the number of micro-actions) of SAGG-RANDOM and
SAGG-RIAC, compared to the previous experiment, which is due to the higher
value of q and the removed consideration of every end-eﬀector position. Graphs
on the ﬁrst line of Fig. 13 present the reaching errors of 7, 15 and 30 DOF
arms with decreasing lengths.
The ﬁrst subﬁgure shows that when consid-
ering 7 DOF, which is a relatively low number of degrees of freedom, SAGG-
RANDOM is not the second more eﬃcient algorithm. Indeed, the ACTUATOR-
RANDOM method is here more eﬃcient than SAGG-RANDOM after 25000
micro-actions and is then stabilized, while SAGG-RANDOM is progressively
decreasing, reaching the same level as ACTUATOR-RANDOM at the end of
the experiment. This is due to the high focalization of SAGG-RANDOM outside
the reachable area, which leads to numerous explorations toward unreachable
positions. As shown also in this subﬁgure, adding the RIAC active component to
SAGG eﬃciently improves the learning capabilities of the system; SAGG-RIAC
reaching errors were indeed the lowest for this 7 DOF system.
Experiments with 15 DOF and 30 DOF shows that both SAGG methods
are here more eﬃcient than actuator methods, SAGG-RIAC showing a signiﬁ-
cant improvement compared to every other algorithm (for 15DOF, the level of
signiﬁcance is p = 0.002 at the end of the experiment (200000 micro-actions)).
Experiments presented with 7, 15 and 30 DOF arms where each limb has
the same length show the same kind of results. The 7 DOF experiment shows
that ACTUATOR-RANDOM can be more eﬃcient than SAGG-RANDOM, and
that the addition of RIAC allows obtaining a signiﬁcant improvement in this
case, but also when considering 15 and 30 DOF.
3.9.2
Conclusion of Quantitative Results
Globally, quantitative results presented here emphasize the high eﬃciency and
robustness of SAGG-RIAC when carried out with highly redundant robotic se-
tups of diﬀerent morphologies, compared to more traditional approaches which
explore in the actuator (input) space. They also showed that random explo-
ration in the goal (output) space can be very eﬃcient when used in high-
36

1 to 29 Goals
29 to 57 Goals
57 to 85 Goals
85 to 113 Goals
113 to 141 Goals
141 to 169 Goals
Observation of the Camera (Goal Space)
Figure 14: Histograms of self-generated goals displayed over time windows in-
dexed by the number of performed goals, for an experiment of 10000 micro-
actions on a real 8 DOF arm. Each histogram represents the surface covered by
the camera, which here deﬁnes the task space.
dimensional systems, even when considering a task space more than 9 times
larger than the reachable subspace. These results therefore indicate the high
potential of competence based motor learning for IK learning in highly-
redundant robots.
3.10
Qualitative Results for a Real 8 DOF Arm
In this section, we test the robustness of the algorithm in a qualitative point of
view when considering a real robotic setup (not simulated) which corresponds
to the simulation presented above: we use a 8 DOF arm controlled in position.
Also, helping to test the robustness of our method, we use low quality motors
whose averaged noise is 20% for each movement. The ﬁxed task space corre-
sponds to the whole surface observable by a camera ﬁxed on top of the robot,
which is more than three times larger than the reachable space (see the left part
of Fig. 14). In order to allow the camera to distinguish the end-eﬀector of the
arm and to create a visual referent framework on the 2D surface, we used visual
tags and the software ARToolKit Tracker [81].
Fig. 14 (right part) shows histograms of self-generated goals displayed over
sliding time windows indexed by the number of performed goals (without count-
ing subgoals) for an experiment of 10000 micro-actions. We can observe that the
algorithm manages to discover the limits of the reachable area and drives the
exploration inside after the goal 57. Then, the system continues to focus on the
reachable space until the end of the experimentation, alternating between diﬀer-
ent areas inside. More precisely, we can notice while comparing the bottom-left
subﬁgure to the two positioned on the second line, that the system seems to
concentrate only after some time on the areas situated close to its basis, and
therefore more diﬃcult to reach. The progressive increase of the complexity of
37

positions explored which appeared in simulation therefore also happens here.
Finally, the last subﬁgure shows that the system continues its exploration to-
ward an area more central of the reachable part. This is due to the high level of
noise of the motor control: while the system is originally not very robust in this
part of the space, an improvement of the generalization capacity of the learning
algorithm allows obtaining an increase of competences in already visited areas
of the task space.
This experiment shows the eﬃciency of the SAGG-RIAC architecture to
drive the learning process in real noisy robotic setups with only a few iterations,
as well as its capacity to still control the complexity of the exploration when
considering highly-redundant systems.
4
Experimental Setup 2: Learning Omnidirec-
tional Quadruped Locomotion with Motor Syn-
ergies
Sometimes stemming from pre-wired neuronal structures (e.g. central pattern
generators [44, 73, 49]), motor synergies are deﬁned as the coherent activations
(in space or time) of a group of muscles. They have been proposed as building
blocks simplifying the scaﬀolding of motor behaviors because allowing the re-
duction of the number of parameters needed to represent complex movements
[34, 58, 15, 120]. Described as crucial for the development of motor abilities,
they can be seen as encoding an unconscious continuous control of muscles which
simpliﬁes the complexity of the learning process: learning complex tasks using
parameterized motor synergies (such as walking, or swimming) indeed corre-
sponds to the tuning of relatively low-dimensional (but yet which can have a
few dozen dimensions) high-level control parameters, compared to the impor-
tant number of degrees of freedom which have to be controlled (thousand in the
human body, see [16]).
4.1
Formalization
In the two following experiments, we simplify the learning process by using
such parameterized motor synergies controlling amplitude, phase, and velocity
of Central Pattern Generators (CPGs). Mathematically, using motor synergies
simpliﬁes the description of the considered robotic system. In the framework
introduced above (section 2.2) we deﬁned our system as being represented by
the relationship (s, a) →y, where for a given conﬁguration s ∈S, a sequence of
actions a = {a1, a2, ..., an} ∈A allows a transition toward y ∈Y .
In the current framework we consider the sequence of actions as being gen-
erated directly by parameterized motor synergies πθ, which means that the
sequence of actions is directly encoded and controlled (using feedbacks internal
to the synergy) by setting parameters θ speciﬁed at the beginning of an action.
For instance, in the experiment described in this section, we deﬁne a synergy as
38

✓
u
v
3 DOF/Leg
φ
Figure 15: 12 degrees-of-freedom quadruped controlled using motor synergies
parameterized with 24 values : 12 for the amplitudes and 12 others for the
phases of a sinusoid tracked by each motor. Experiments consider a task space
u, v, α which corresponds to the 2D position and orientation of the quadruped.
a set of parameterized sinusoids (one on each joint) that a motor joint has to
track with a low-level pre-programmed PID-like controller. Eventually, motor
synergies can be seen as a way to encapsulate the low-level generation of se-
quences of micro-actions, allowing the system to directly focus on the learning
of models (s, πθ) →y, with s ∈S ﬁxed (the rest position of the robot) and θ a
set of parameters controlling the synergy (we will remove the ﬁxed context s in
the next notations for a easier reading and only write πθ →y).
4.2
Robotic Setup
In the following experiment, we consider a quadruped robot simulated using
the Breve simulator [54] (physics simulation is based on ODE). Each of its leg
is composed of 2 joints, the ﬁrst (closest to the robot’s body) is controlled by
two rotational DOF, and the second, one rotation (1 DOF). Each leg therefore
consists of 3 DOF, the robot having in its totality 12 DOF (See Fig. 15).
This robot is controlled using motor synergies piθ whose parameters θ ∈Rn
directly specify the phase and amplitude of each sinusoid which controls the pre-
cise rotational value of each DOF over time. These synergies are parameterized
using a set of 24 continuous values, 12 representing the phase ph of each joint,
and the 12 others, the amplitude am; θ = {ph1,2,..,12; am1,2,..,12}, where each
joint i receives the command am×sin(ωt+ph), with ω a ﬁxed frequency. Each
experimentation consists of launching a motor synergy πθ for a ﬁxed amount
of time, starting from a ﬁxed position. After this time period, the resulting
position yf of the robot is extracted into 3 dimensions: its position (u, v), and
39

its rotation φ. The correspondence θ →(u, v, φ) is then kept in memory as a
learning exemplar.
The three dimensions u, v, φ are used to deﬁne the task space of the robot.
Also, it is important to notice that precise areas reachable by the quadruped
using these motor synergies cannot be estimated beforehand. In the following,
we set the original dimensions of the task space to [−45; 45]×[−45; 45]×[−2π; 2π]
on axis (u, v, φ), which was a priori larger than the reachable space. Then, after
having carried out numerous experimentations, it appeared that this task space
was actually more than 25 times the size of the area accessible by the robot (see
red contours in Fig. 16).
The implementation of our algorithm in such a robotic setup aims to test if
the SAGG-RIAC driving method allows the robot to learn eﬃciently and accu-
rately to attain a maximal amount of reachable positions, avoiding the selection
of many goals inside regions which are unreachable, or that have previously been
visited.
4.3
Measure of competence
In this experiment, we do not consider constraints ρ and only focus on reaching
of the goal positions yg = (ug, vg, φg).
In every iteration the robot is reset
to a same conﬁguration called the origin position (see Fig.
17).
We deﬁne
the competence function C using the Euclidian distance goal/robot’s position
D(yg, yf) after a reaching attempt, which is normalized by the original distance
between the origin position yorigin, and the goal D(yorigin, yg) (See Fig. 17).
In this measure of competence, we compute the Euclidian distance using
(u, v, φ) where dimensions are rescaled in [0; 1]. Each dimension therefore has
the same weight in the estimation of competence (an angle error of φ =
1
2π is
as important as an error u =
1
90 or v =
1
90).
C(yg, yf, ystart)
=
−D(yg, yf)
D(ystart, yg)
(8)
where C(yg, yf, ystart) = 0 if D(ystart, yg) = 0.
4.4
Active Goal Directed Exploration and Learning
Reaching a goal yg necessitates the estimation of a motor synergy πθi leading
to this chosen state yg.
Considering a single starting conﬁguration for each
experimentation, and motor synergies πθ, the forward model which deﬁnes this
system can be written as the following:
θ →(u, v, φ)
(9)
Here, we have a direct relationship which only considers the 24 dimensional
parameter vector θ = {ph1,2,..,12; am1,2,..,12} of the synergy as inputs of the sys-
tem, and a position in (u, v, φ) as output. We thus have a ﬁxed context and use
40

Figure 16: Positions explored by the quadruped inside the task space u, v, φ
after 10000 experiments (running a motor synergy during a ﬁxed amount of
time), using diﬀerent exploration mechanisms. Red lines represents estimated
limits of reachability. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article)
here an instantiation of the SAGG-RIAC architecture with local optimization
algorithm Alg. 4, detailed below.
41

Goal Position
Reached Position
ug
vg
✓g
✓f
uf
vf
(ug, vg, θg)
(uf, vf, θf)
φ
φ
φ
φ
Figure 17: Example of experimentation of the quadruped and illustration of be-
ginning position, goal position (ug, vg, φg), and a corresponding reached position
(uf, vf, φf) whose value are used to compute the measure of competence.
4.4.1
Reaching Phase
The reaching phase deals with reusing the data already acquired and use local
regression to compute an inverse model ((u, v, φ) →θ)L in the locality L of
the intended goal yg = (ug, vg, φg).
In order to create such a local inverse
model (numerous other solutions exist, such as [20, 8, 55, 108]), we extract the
potentially more reliable data using the following method:
We ﬁrst extract from the learned data the set L of the l nearest neighbors
of (ug, vg, φg) and then retrieve their corresponding motor synergies using an
ANN method [70]:
L
=
{{u, v, φ, θ}1, {u, v, φ, θ}2, ..., {u, v, φ, θ}l}
(10)
Then, we consider the set M which contains l sets of m elements:
M =







M1 : {{u, v, φ, θ}1, {u, v, φ, θ}2, ..., {u, v, φ, θ}m}1
M2 : {{u, v, φ, θ}1, {u, v, φ, θ}2, ..., {u, v, φ, θ}m}2
...
Ml : {{u, v, φ, θ}1, {u, v, φ, θ}2, ..., {u, v, φ, θ}m}l







(11)
where each set {{u, v, φ, θ}1, {u, v, φ, θ}2, ..., {u, v, φ, θ}m}i corresponds to the m
nearest neighbors of each θi, i ∈L, and their corresponding resulting position
(u, v, φ).
For each set {{u, v, φ, θ}1, {u, v, φ, θ}2, ..., {u, v, φ, θ}m}i, we estimate the
standard deviation σ of the parameters of their motor synergies θ :
σ(Mj)
=
σ (θj ∈{{u, v, φ, θ}1,...,m})
(12)
Finally, we select the set Mk = {{u, v, φ, θ}1, {u, v, φ, θ}2, ..., {u, v, φ, θ}m}
inside M such that it minimizes the standard deviation of its synergies:
Mk = argmini σ(Mi)
(13)
42

From Mk, we estimate a local linear inverse model ((u, v, φ) →θ) by using
a pseudo-inverse as introduced in the reaching experiment, and use it to esti-
mate the motor synergy parameters θg which correspond to the desired goal
(ug, vg, φg).
4.4.2
Exploration Phase
The system here continuously estimates the distance between the goal yg and
already reached position yc which is the closest from the goal. If the reaching
phase does not manage to make the system come closer to yg, i.e. D(yg, yt) >
D(yg, yc), with yt as last eﬀectively reached point in an attempt toward yg, the
exploration phase is triggered.
In this phase the system ﬁrst considers the nearest neighbor yc = (uc, vc, φc)
of the goal (ug, vg, φg) and gets the corresponding known synergy θc. Then,
it adds a random noise rand(24) to the 24 parameters {ph1,2,..,12, am1,2,..,12}c
of this synergy θc which is proportional to the Euclidian distance D(yg, yc).
The next synergy θt+1 = {ph1,2,..,12, am1,2,..,12}t+1 to experiment can thus be
described using the following equation:
θt+1
=
 {ph1,2,..,12, am1,2,..,12}c
+ λ.rand(24).D(yg, yc)

(14)
where rand(i) returns a vector of i random values in [−1; 1], λ > 0 and
{ph1,2,..,12, am1,2,..,12}c the motor synergy which corresponds to yc.
4.5
Qualitative Results
Fig. 16 presents the positions explored by the quadruped inside the task space
u, v, φ after 10000 experimentations (running of motor synergies during the same
ﬁxed amount of time) using the exploration mechanisms introduced previously.
ACTUATOR-RANDOM and ACTUATOR-RIAC select parameters of motor
synergies in this experiment, whereas SAGG-RANDOM and SAGG-RIAC self-
generate goals (u, v, φ).
Comparing the two ﬁrst exploration mechanisms (ACTUATOR-RANDOM
and ACTUATOR-RIAC) we cannot distinguish any notable diﬀerence, the space
explored appears similar and the extent of explored space on the (u, v) axis is
comprised in the interval [−5; 5] for u and [−2.5; 2.5] for v on both graphs.
Moreover, we notice that the diﬀerence between u and v scales is due to the
inherent structure of the robot, which simpliﬁes the way to go forward and
backward rather than shifting left or right.
Considering SAGG methods, it is important to note the diﬀerence between
the reachable area and the task space. In Fig. 16, red lines correspond to the
estimated reachable area which is comprised of [−10; 10] × [−10; 10] × [−π; π],
whereas the task space is much larger: [−45; 45] × [−45; 45] × [−2π; 2π]. We are
also able to notice the asymmetric aspect of its repartition according to the v
axis, which is due to the decentered weight of the robot’s head.
43

Reaching Error
Distance
Number of Actions (time steps)
SAGG-RIAC
SAGG-Random
ACTUATOR-Random
ACTUATOR-RIAC
10000
0
1
6
3
2
4
5
Figure 18: Quantitative results for the quadruped measured using the reaching
error over the number of experimentations.
First, the SAGG-RANDOM method seems to slightly increase the space
covered on the u and v axis compared to ACTUATOR methods, as shown by
the higher concentration of positions explored in the interval [−5; −3] ∪[3; 5]
of u.
However, this change does not seem very important when comparing
SAGG-RANDOM to these two algorithm.
Second, SAGG-RIAC, contrary to SAGG-RANDOM, shows a large explo-
ration range: the surface in u has almost twice as much coverage than using
previous algorithms, and in v, up to three times; there is a maximum of 7.5 in
v where the previous algorithms were at 2.5. These last results emphasize the
capability of SAGG-RIAC to drive the learning process inside reachable areas
which are not easily accessible (hardly discovered by chance).
4.6
Quantitative Results
In this section, we aim to test the eﬃciency of the learned forward/inverse mod-
els to guide the quadruped to reach a set of goal positions from an independently
generated test database. Here we consider a test database of 100 goals, gen-
erated independantly and covering approximately uniformly the reachable part
of the task space, and compute the distance between each goal attempted, and
44

the reached position. Fig. 18 shows performances of the 4 methods introduced
previously. First of all, we can observe the higher eﬃciency of SAGG-RIAC
compared to the other three methods which can be observed after only 1000
iterations. The high decreasing velocity of the reaching error (in the number of
experimentations) is due to the consideration of regions limited to a small num-
ber of elements (30 in this experiment). It allows creating a very high number
of regions within a small interval of time, which helps the system to discover
and focus on reachable regions and its surrounding area.
ACTUATOR-RIAC shows slightly more eﬃcient performances than ACTUATOR-
RANDOM. Also, even if SAGG-RANDOM is less eﬃcient than SAGG-RIAC,
we can observe its highly decreasing reaching errors compared to ACTUATOR
methods, which allows it to be signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient than these method
when considered at 10000 iterations. Again, as in the previous experiment, we
can also observe that SAGG-RIAC does not only allow to learn faster how to
master the sensorimotor space, but that the asymptotic performances also seem
to be better [30].
4.7
Conclusion of Results for the Quadruped Experiment
These experiments ﬁrst emphasize the high eﬃciency of methods which drives
the exploration of motor synergies in terms of their eﬀects in the task space. As
illustrated by qualitative results, SAGG methods, and especially SAGG-RIAC,
allows driving the exploration in order to explore large spaces containing areas
hardly discovered by chance, when limits of reachability are very diﬃcult to
predict. Then, quantitative results showed the capability of SAGG-RANDOM
and SAGG-RIAC methods to learn inverse models eﬃciently when considering
highly-redundant robotic systems controlled with motor synergies.
5
Experimental Setup 3: Learning to Control a
Fishing Rod with Motor Synergies
5.1
Robotic Setup
This experiments consists of having a robot learning to control a ﬁshing rod
(with a ﬂexible wire) in order to attain certain positions of the ﬂoat when it
touches the water. This setup is simulated using the Breve simulator, such as
in the previous experiment. The rod is ﬁxed on a 4 DOF arm controlled with
motor synergies which aﬀect the velocity of each joint, and are parameterized
by the values θ = (v1, v2, v3, v4), vi ∈[0; 1]. More precisely, for each experimen-
tation of the robot we use a low-level pre-programmed PID controller which
tracks the desired velocity vi of each joint i during a ﬁxed short amount of time
(2 seconds), starting from a ﬁxed rest position, until suddenly stopping the
movement. During the movement, as well as a few second after, we monitor the
3D position of the ﬂoat in order to detect a potential contact with the water (a
ﬂat plane corresponding to the water level). If the water is touched, we extract
45

Figure 19: 4 degrees-of-freedom arm with a ﬁxed ﬁshing rod at its extrem-
ity. The arm is controlled using motor synergies which aﬀect the velocity of
each joint, and are parameterized by 4 values. Experiments consider a two-
dimensional task space x, y which corresponds to the position of the ﬂoat when
touching the water after performing a movement.
the 2D coordinates (x, y) of the ﬂoat on the plane (if not, we do not consider
this trial). These coordinates, as well as the parameters of the synergies will
be used to describe the forward model of the system as (v1, v2, v3, v4) →(x, y).
Learning will thus be performed while recording each set {(v1, v2, v3, v4), (x, y)}i
as a learning exemplar. In such a sensorimotor space, studying the behavior of
SAGG-RIAC is relevant according to the ﬂexible aspect of the line, which makes
this system very diﬃcult to model analytically, because it is highly redundant
and highly sensitive to small variations of inputs. In the following experiment,
the task space will consist of a limited area of the water surface. We will con-
sider the basis of the arm as ﬁxed on the coordinates (0, 0), the limits of the task
space will be ﬁxed to [−3; 3] × [−3; 3] while the reachable region corresponds to
a disk whose radius is 1, and can be contained in [−1; 1] × [−1; 1] (see Fig. 19).
5.2
Qualitative Results
Fig. 20 shows histograms of the repartition of positions reached by the ﬂoat
on the water surface computed after 10000 ”water touched” trials (a ”water
touched” trial corresponds to a reaching attempt where the ﬂoat eﬀectively
touches the surface), after running ACTUATOR-RANDOM and SAGG-
RIAC exploration processes. The point situated at the center corresponds to
the base to which the arm handling the ﬁshing rod is situated (see Fig. 19).
While observing the two ﬁgures, we can note a repartition of positions sit-
uated inside a disk, which radius delimits position reached when the line is
maximally slack.
Yet, the distribution of reached (and reachable) positions
within this disk is both asymetrical among and between the two exploration
processes. The asymetries on each ﬁgure are in fact reﬂecting the asymetries
46

of the robot setup (see Fig. 19): the geometry of the robot is not symmetric
and its starting/rest conﬁguration is also not symmetric.
Coupled with the
structure of motor primitives, this makes that the structure of the reachable
positions is complex and asymetric, and this can be observed especially in the
ACTUATOR-RANDOM sub-ﬁgure, since it shows the asymetric distribu-
tion of ﬂoat position reached when the parameters of the action primitives are
sampled uniformly (and thus symmetrically). Comparing the two histograms,
we note that SAGG-RIAC drives the exploration toward positions of the ﬂoat
not explored by ACTUATOR-RANDOM, such as the large part situated
at the bottom of the reachable area. Thus, SAGG-RIAC drives here the ex-
ploration toward more diverse regions of the space. SAGG-RIAC is therefore
able to avoid spending large amounts of time exclusively guiding the exploration
toward the same areas, as ACTUATOR-RANDOM does. Extended exper-
imentation with this setup showed that the distribution of reached points with
SAGG-RIAC (right sub-ﬁgure) corresponds closely to the actual whole reach-
able space. Eventually, these qualitative results emphasize that SAGG-RIAC
is able to drive the exploration process eﬃciently when carried out with highly
redundant and complex robots with compliant/soft parts.
SAGG-RIAC
ACTUATOR-Random
Figure 20: Histograms of positions reached by the ﬂoat when entering in contact
with the water in the ﬁshing experiment, after 10000 contact ﬂoat/water, using
ACTUATOR-RANDOM and SAGG-RIAC exploration methods.
5.3
Quantitative Results
Fig. 21 shows the mean reaching errors obtained using ACTUATOR-RANDOM
and SAGG-RIAC, statistically computed after 10 experiments with diﬀerent
random seeds. Here, the comparison of these two methods shows that SAGG-
RIAC led to signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient results after 1000 successful trials. Also,
after 6000 trials, we can observe a small increase in reaching errors of SAGG-
RIAC. This phenomenon is due to the discovery of new motor synergies which
47

Reaching Error
Distance
Number of Actions (time steps)
SAGG-RIAC
ACTUATOR-Random
10000
0
10
30
20
Figure 21: Quantitative results for the ﬁshing experiment measured using the
reaching error over the number of experimentations.
led to already mastered goal positions. This discovered redundancy reduces the
generalization capability for computing the inverse model for a small amount of
time until these new parameters of motor synergy have been explored enough
to disambiguate the invert model (i.e. two distinct local inverse models are well
encoded and do not interfere).
6
Conclusion and Future Work
This paper introduced the Self-Adaptive Goal Generation architecture, SAGG-
RIAC, for active learning of inverse models in robotics through intrinsically mo-
tivated goal exploration. First, we demonstrated the high eﬃciency of learning
inverse models by performing an exploration driven by the active self-generation
of high-level goals in the parameterized task space instead of traditional motor
babbling speciﬁed inside a low-level control space. Active exploration in the
task space leverages the redundancy often characterizing sensorimotor robotic
spaces: this strategy drives robots to learn a maximal amount of tasks (i.e.
learn to generate in a controlled manner a maximal number of eﬀects in the
task space), instead of numerous ways to perform the same tasks (i.e. learn
48

many action policies to achieve the same eﬀect in the task space). Coupling
goal babbling and sophisticated intrinsically motivated active learning also al-
lows a robot to perform eﬃcient autonomous learning of its limits of reachability,
and of inverse models with unknown high-dimensional body schemas of diﬀer-
ent architectures. Intrinsically motivated active learning was here driven by the
active stochastic search of areas in the task space where competence progress
is maximal. This also allowed emerging developmental trajectories by driving
the robot to progressively focus and learn tasks of increasing complexities, while
discovering its own limits of reachability, avoiding to spend much exploration
time trying to perform impossible tasks.
While we showed that such an approach could allow eﬃcient learning when
the action space was continuous and high-dimensional, the experiments per-
formed here were assuming that a low-dimensional task space was initially pro-
vided. It is frequent to have such low-dimensional task spaces for useful engi-
neering problems in robotics, where one can assume that an engineer helps the
robot learner by designing by hand the task space (including the choice of the
variables and parameters specifying the task space). On the other hand, if one
would like to use an architecture like SAGG-RIAC in a developmental frame-
work, where one would not assume low-dimensional task spaces pre-speciﬁed to
the robot, some additional mechanisms should be added to equip the robot with
the following two related capabilities:
• Find autonomously low-dimensional task spaces. Indeed, a too high di-
mension of a task space would make the evaluation of “competence progress”
suﬀer from the curse of dimensionality;
• Explore actively multiple task spaces (potentially an open-ended number
of task space), thus opening the possibility to learn ﬁelds of skills which
may be of diﬀerent kinds;
There are several potential approaches that could be used to address these issues
that include:
• Mechanisms for higher-level stochastic generation of task spaces,
and their active selection through global measures of competence progress,
forming an architecture with three levels of active learning (active choice
of a task space inside a space of tasks spaces, active choice of goals inside
the chosen task space, and active choice of actions to learn to reach the
chosen goal) would be a natural extension of the work presented in this
article.
• Social guidance and learning by interaction: social guidance mechanisms
allowing a non-engineer human to drive the attention of a robot toward
particular task spaces, through physical guidance [24, 71] or human-robot
interfaces allowing the robot to be attracted toward particular dimen-
sions of the environment [88], may be introduced. Inverse reinforcement
learning mechanisms, which are able to extract reward functions thanks
49

to examples of action policies could also be seen as a mean to infer in-
teresting task spaces from human demonstrations [50]. Social guidance
may also be used as a mechanism to bootstrap the evaluation of compe-
tence progress, and the identiﬁcation of zones of reachability, in very large
or high-dimensional spaces such as shown in [71], which presents an ap-
proach to combine intrinsically motivated learning like SAGG-RIAC with
techniques for learning by demonstration.
• Maturational constraints: Although SAGG-RIAC highly simpliﬁes the
learning process by using goal babbling and drives it eﬃciently thanks to
intrinsic motivations, learning still have to begin by a period of random
exploration in order to discriminate unreachable areas as well as areas of
diﬀering interests. This becomes a problem when the volume of reachable
areas in the task space is a lot smaller than the task space itself or when
the task space becomes itself high-dimensional. An important direction
for future work is to take inspiration from the maturational processes
of infants which are constrained in their learning and development by
numerous physiological and cognitive mechanisms such as the limitation
of their sensorimotor apparatus, as well as the evolving capabilities of
their brain [16, 122, 22, 66]. For instance, infants have a reduced visual
acuity which prevents them from accessing high visual frequencies as well
as distinguishing distant objects. This acuity then progressively grows as
the maturation process evolves. Using such constraints in synergy with
goal babbling and intrinsic motivation, such as explored in [10], would
potentially allow to constrain and simplify further learning since the ﬁrst
actions of the robot [39, 42], and could be crucial when considering life-
long learning in unbounded task spaces.
Acknowledgment
We thank everyone who gave us their feedback on the paper. This research was
partially funded by ERC Grant EXPLORERS 240007
