SUDO: a framework for evaluating clinical artificial
intelligence systems without ground-truth
annotations
Dani Kiyasseh1,*, Aaron Cohen2,3, Chengsheng Jiang2, and Nicholas Altieri2
1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, USA
2Flatiron Health, New York City, New York
3New York University School of Medicine, New York City, New York

ABSTRACT
A clinical artificial intelligence (AI) system is often validated on a held-out set of data which it has not been exposed to before
(e.g., data from a different hospital with a distinct electronic health record system). This evaluation process is meant to mimic
the deployment of an AI system on data in the wild; those which are currently unseen by the system yet are expected to be
encountered in a clinical setting. However, when data in the wild differ from the held-out set of data, a phenomenon referred
to as distribution shift, and lack ground-truth annotations, it becomes unclear the extent to which AI-based findings can be
trusted on data in the wild. Here, we introduce SUDO, a framework for evaluating AI systems without ground-truth annotations.
SUDO assigns temporary labels to data points in the wild and directly uses them to train distinct models, with the highest
performing model indicative of the most likely label. Through experiments with AI systems developed for dermatology images,
histopathology patches, and clinical reports, we show that SUDO can be a reliable proxy for model performance and thus
identify unreliable predictions. We also demonstrate that SUDO informs the selection of models and allows for the previously
out-of-reach assessment of algorithmic bias for data in the wild without ground-truth annotations. The ability to triage unreliable
predictions for further inspection and assess the algorithmic bias of AI systems can improve the integrity of research findings
and contribute to the deployment of ethical AI systems in medicine.
Introduction
The competence of a clinical artificial intelligence (AI) system
in achieving some task (e.g., diagnosing prostate cancer1) is
assessed by first exposing it to training data and subsequently
evaluating it on a held-out set of data which it has not been
exposed to before. This widely-adopted evaluation process
makes the assumption that the held-out set of data is represen-
tative of data points in the wild2; those which are currently
unseen by the AI system yet are expected to be encountered in
a clinical setting. For example, an AI system may be trained
on data from one electronic health record (EHR) system and
subsequently deployed on data from another EHR system.
However, data points in the wild often (a) follow a distribution
which is different from that of the held-out set of data, oth-
erwise known as distribution shift and (b) lack ground-truth
labels for the task at hand (Fig. 1a).
While distribution shift can adversely affect the behaviour
of an AI system3, the absence of ground-truth labels makes
it difficult to confirm the quality of AI predictions. As such,
it becomes challenging to identify AI predictions to rely on,
select a favourable AI system for achieving some task, and
even perform additional checks such as assessing algorithmic
bias4. Incorrect AI predictions, stemming from data distribu-
tion shift, can lead to inaccurate decisions, decreased trust,
and potential issues of bias. As such, there is a pressing need
for a framework that enables more reliable decisions in the
face of AI predictions on data in the wild.
Previous work assumes highly-confident predictions are
reliable5,6, even though AI systems can generate highly-
confident incorrect predictions7. Recognizing these limita-
tions, others have demonstrated the value of modifying AI-
based confidence scores through explicit calibration methods
such as Platt scaling8 or through ensemble models9. Such cal-
ibration methods, however, can be ineffective when deployed
on data in the wild that exhibit distribution shift10. Regardless,
quantifying the effectiveness of calibration methods would
still require ground-truth labels, a missing element of data
in the wild. Another line of research focuses on estimating
the overall performance of models with unlabelled data11,12.
However, it tends to be model-centric, overlooking the data-
centric decisions (e.g., identifying unreliable predictions) that
would need to be made upon deployment of these models, and
makes the oft fallible assumption that the held-out set of data
is representative of data in the wild, and therefore erroneously
extends findings in the former setting to those in the latter.
In this study, we propose pseudo-label discrepancy (SUDO),
a framework for evaluating an AI system deployed on data
exhibiting distribution shift and without ground-truth labels.
Through experiments on two diverse clinical datasets (derma-
tology images and clinical reports), we show that SUDO can
act as a reliable proxy for model performance and can thus be
used to identify unreliable AI predictions. This ability holds
even when used with overconfident models. We also show
arXiv:2403.17011v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jan 2024

Figure 1. SUDO is a framework to evaluate AI systems without ground-truth labels. (a) an AI system is often deployed
on data in the wild, which can vary significantly from those in the held-out set (distribution shift), and which can also lack
ground-truth labels. (b) SUDO is a 5-step framework that circumvents the challenges posed by data in the wild. First, deploy
an AI system on data in the wild to obtain probability values. Second, discretize those values into quantiles. Third, sample data
points from each quantile and pseudo-label (temporarily label) them with a possible class (SUDO Class 0). Sample data points
with ground-truth labels from the opposite class to form a classification task. Fourth, train a classifier to distinguish between
these data points. Repeat the process with a different pseudo-label (SUDO Class 1). Finally, evaluate and compare the
performance of the classifiers on the same held-out set of data with ground-truth labels, deriving the pseudo-label discrepancy.
This discrepancy and the relative classifier performance indicate whether the sampled data points are more likely to belong to
one class than another.
2/17

that SUDO informs the selection of models upon deployment
on data in the wild. By stratifying the value of SUDO across
various groups of patients, we demonstrate that it also allows
for the previously out-of-reach assessment of algorithmic bias
for data without ground-truth annotations.
Results
Overview of the SUDO framework
SUDO is a framework that helps identify unreliable AI pre-
dictions, select favourable AI systems, and assess algorithmic
bias for data in the wild without ground-truth labels. We
outline the mechanics of SUDO through a series of steps
(Fig. 1b).
Step 1
Deploy probabilistic AI system on data points in
the wild to produce output p ∈[0,1] reflecting probability of
positive class for each data point.
Step 2
Generate distribution of output probabilities and
discretize them into several predefined intervals (e.g., deciles).
Step 3
Sample data points in the wild from each interval and
assign them a temporary class label (pseudo label). Retrieve
an equal number of data points in the training set from the
opposite class.
Step 4
Train a classifier to distinguish between the newly
pseudo-labelled data points and those with a ground-truth
label.
Step 5
Evaluate classifier on held-out set of data with
ground-truth labels (e.g., using any metric such as AUC).
A performant classifier provides evidence in support of the
pseudo-label. However, data points in each interval may be-
long to multiple classes, exhibiting class contamination. To
detect this contamination, we repeat these steps yet cycle
through the different pseudo-labels.
Pseudo-label discrepancy
Calculate the discrepancy be-
tween the performance of the classifiers with different pseudo
labels. The greater the discrepancy between classifiers, the
less class contamination there is, and the more likely that the
data points belong to one class. We refer to this discrepancy
as the pseudo-label discrepancy or SUDO.
SUDO correlates with model performance on Stan-
ford diverse dermatology images dataset
We used SUDO to evaluate predictions made on the Stan-
ford diverse dermatology image (DDI) data13 (n : 656) (see
Description of datasets). We purposefully chose two AI mod-
els (DeepDerm14 and HAM1000015) that were performant
on their respective data (AUC = 0.88 and 0.92) and whose
performance degraded drastically when deployed on the DDI
data (AUC = 0.56 and 0.67), suggesting the presence of dis-
tribution shift.
Confirming previous findings, we found that these models
struggle to distinguish between benign (negative) and malig-
nant (positive) lesions in images. This is evident by the lack
of separability of the AI-based probabilities corresponding to
the ground-truth negative and positive classes (Fig. 2a and b).
We set out to determine whether SUDO can quantify this class
contamination (without ground-truth labels). By following the
steps of SUDO (see Overview of the SUDO framework), we
found that it correlates (ρ = −0.84 and −0.76 for DeepDerm
and HAM10000, respectively) with the proportion of positive
instances in each of the chosen probability intervals (Fig. 2c
and d). Such a finding, which holds even if we use a different
evaluation metric for SUDO (Supplementary Fig. 5), suggests
that SUDO can act as a reliable proxy for the accuracy of
predictions. Notably, this ability holds irrespective of the
underlying performance of the AI model being evaluated, as
evidenced by the high correlation values for the two models
with different performance metrics (AUC = 0.56 and 0.67).
SUDO informs model selection with Stanford diverse
dermatology images dataset
As a proxy for the accuracy of AI predictions, SUDO can
identify two tiers of predictions: those which are sufficiently
reliable for downstream analyses and others which are unre-
liable and might require further inspection by a human ex-
pert. This creates a trade-off between the completeness of AI
predictions (i.e., are all predictions included in downstream
analyses?) and the reliability of such predictions. Ideally, both
of these elements are maximized for AI predictions. We lever-
age this intuition and introduce the reliability-completeness
curve as a way of rank ordering models when ground-truth
annotations are unavailable (Fig. 2e, see Producing reliability-
completeness curve for details).
We found that the ordering of the performance of the mod-
els is consistent with that presented in previous studies13.
Specifically, HAM10000 and DeepDerm achieve an area un-
der the reliability-completeness curve (AURCC = 0.864 and
0.621, respectively) and, with ground-truth annotations, these
models achieve (AUC = 0.67 and 0.56). We note that the
emphasis here is on the relative ordering of models and not on
their absolute performance. These consistent findings suggest
that SUDO can help inform model selection on data in the
wild without annotations.
SUDO helps assess algorithmic bias without ground-
truth annotations
Algorithmic bias often manifests as a discrepancy in model
performance across two protected groups (e.g., male and fe-
male patients). Traditionally, this would involve comparing
AI predictions to ground-truth labels. Viewing SUDO as a
proxy for model performance, we hypothesized that it can help
assess such bias even without ground-truth labels. We tested
this hypothesis on the Stanford DDI dataset by stratifying
the AI predictions according to the skin tone of the patients
(Fitzpatrick scale I-II vs. V-VI) and implementing SUDO for
each of these stratified groups. A difference in the resultant
SUDO values would indicate a higher degree of class contam-
ination (and therefore poorer performance) for one group over
another. Having found that SUDOAUC = 0.60 and 0.58 for
3/17

Figure 2. SUDO can be a reliable proxy for model performance on the Stanford diverse dermatology image dataset.
Two models (left column: DeepDerm, right column: HAM10000) are pre-trained on the HAM10000 dataset and deployed on
the entire Stanford DDI dataset. (a-b) Distribution of the prediction probability values produced by the two models
colour-coded based on the ground-truth label (negative vs. positive) of the data points. (c-d) Correlation of SUDO with the
proportion of positive data points in each probability interval. Results are shown for ten mutually-exclusive probability
intervals that span the range [0,1]. A strong correlation indicates that SUDO can be used to identify unreliable predictions. (e)
Reliability-completeness curves of the two models, where the area under the reliability-completeness curve (AURCC) can
inform the selection of an AI system without ground-truth annotations.
the two groups, respectively, we supported the validity of this
bias by using the ground-truth labels to calculate the negative
predictive value of the predictions (NPV). With NPV = 0.83
and 0.78, respectively, we found that both SUDO and the tra-
ditional approach (with ground-truth labels) identified a bias
in favour of patients with a Fitzpatrick scale of I-II; the main
distinction is that SUDO did not require ground-truth labels
for the dataset being evaluated. Moreover, these bias findings
are consistent with those reported in a previous study13.
SUDO correlates with model performance on
Camelyon17-WILDS histopathology dataset
We provide further evidence that SUDO can identify unre-
liable predictions on datasets that exhibit distribution shift.
Here, we trained a model on the Camelyon17-WILDS dataset
to perform binary tumour classification (presence vs. absence)
based on a single histopathological image, and evaluated the
predictions on the corresponding test set (n : 85,054) (see De-
scription of datasets). This dataset has been constructed such
4/17

that the test set contains data from a hospital unseen during
training, and is thus considered in the wild.
We found that the trained model achieved an average ac-
curacy ≈0.85 despite being presented with images from an
unseen hospital. This is supported by the relative separability
of the class-specific distributions of the AI-based probabilities
(Fig. 3a). We then used SUDO to quantify the class contami-
nation at various probability intervals (Fig. 3b), finding that
it continues to correlate (ρ = −0.79) with the proportion of
positive instances in each of the chosen probability intervals.
SUDO can even be used with overconfident models
AI systems are prone to producing erroneous overconfident
predictions, and thereby making it difficult to rely on their
confidence scores alone to identify unreliable predictions. It
is in these settings where SUDO would add most value. To
demonstrate this, we first trained a natural language process-
ing (NLP) model to distinguish between negative (n : 1000)
and positive (n : 1000) sentiment in product reviews with dis-
tribution shift as part of the Multi-Domain Sentiment dataset16
(see Description of datasets). We showed that SUDO con-
tinues to correlate with model performance, pointing to the
applicability of the framework across data modalities. To
simulate an overconfident model, we then overtrained (i.e., ex-
tended training for an additional number of epochs) the same
NLP model, as confirmed by the more extreme distribution
of the prediction probability values (Supplementary Fig. 1b).
Notably, we found that SUDO continues to correlate well
with model performance despite the presence of overconfident
predictions (Supplementary Fig. 1h). This is because SUDO
leverages pseudo-labels to quantify class contamination and
is not exclusively dependent on confidence scores.
Exploring the limits of SUDO with simulated data
To shed light on the scenarios in which SUDO remains useful,
we conducted experiments on simulated data that we can
finely control (see Description of datasets). Specifically, we
varied the data in the wild to encompass distribution shift
(a) with the same two classes observed during training, (b)
with a severe imbalance (8 : 1) in the number of data points
from each class, and (c) alongside data points from a third
and never-seen-before class. As SUDO is dependent on the
evaluation of classifiers on held-out data (see Fig. 1, Step 5),
we also experimented with injecting label noise into such data.
We found that SUDO continues to strongly correlate with
model performance, even in the presence of a third class (|ρ| >
0.87, Supplementary Fig. 2). This is not surprising as SUDO
is designed to simpy quantify class contamination in each
probability interval, regardless of the data points contributing
to that contamination. However, we did find that SUDO
requires held-out data to exhibit minimal label noise, where
ρ = 0.99 →0.33 upon randomly flipping 50% of the labels
in the held-out data to the opposite class. We also found that
drastically changing the relationship between class-specific
distributions of data points in the wild can disrupt the utility
of SUDO (Supplementary Fig. 3).
SUDO correlates with model performance on Flat-
iron Health ECOG Performance Status dataset
To demonstrate the applicability of SUDO to a range of
datasets, we investigated whether it also acts as a reliable
proxy for model performance on the Flatiron Health Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS)
dataset. Building on previous work17, we developed an NLP
model to infer the ECOG PS, a value reflecting a patient’s
health status, from clinical notes of oncology patient visits
(see Methods for description of data and model).
In this section, we exclusively deal with data which (a)
do not exhibit distribution shift and (b) are associated with a
ground-truth label. The motivation behind these experiments
was to first demonstrate that we can learn an NLP model that
accurately classifies ECOG PS as a prerequisite for applying
SUDO to the target setting in which distribution shift exists
and ground-truth labels do not.
We found that the NLP model performs well in classify-
ing ECOG PS from clinical notes of oncology patient visits
(precision = 0.97), recall = 0.92, and AUC = 0.93). We hy-
pothesize that these results are driven by the discriminative
pairs of words that appear in clinical notes associated with
low and high ECOG PS. For example, typical phrases found
in low ECOG PS clinical notes include “normal activity” and
“feeling good” whereas those found in high ECOG PS clinical
notes include “bedridden” and “cannot carry”. This strong
discriminative behaviour can be seen by the high separabil-
ity of the two prediction probability distributions (Fig. 4a).
Although it was possible to colour-code these distributions
and glean insight into the degree of class contamination, this
is not possible in the absence of ground-truth labels. SUDO
attempts to provide this insight despite the absence of ground-
truth labels.
We found that data points with p ≈0 are more likely to
belong to the low ECOG PS label than to the high ECOG
PS label, and vice versa for data points with p ≈1. This is
evident by the large absolute SUDOAUC values at either end
of the probability spectrum (Fig. 4c). This is not surprising
and is in line with expectations. Consistent with findings pre-
sented earlier, SUDO also correlates with model performance
on this dataset. This can be seen by the strong correlation
(|ρ| = 0.95) between SUDO and the proportion of positive in-
stances in each of the chosen probability intervals. This bodes
well for when we ultimately use SUDO to identify unreliable
predictions without ground-truth annotations.
Sensitivity analysis of SUDO’s hyperparameters
To encourage the adoption of SUDO, we conducted several
experiments on the Flatiron Health ECOG PS dataset to mea-
sure SUDO’s sensitivity to hyperparameters. Specifically, we
varied the number of data points sampled from each proba-
bility interval (Fig. 1b, Step 3), the type of classifier used to
distinguish between pseudo- and ground-truth labelled data
points (Fig. 1b, Step 4), and the amount of label noise in the
held-out data being evaluated on (Fig. 1b, Step 5). We found
5/17

Figure 3. SUDO can be a reliable proxy for model performance on the Camelyon17-WILDS histopathology dataset. (a)
Distribution of the prediction probability values produced by a model colour-coded based on the ground-truth label (negative vs.
positive) of the data points. (b) SUDO values colour-coded according to the most likely label of the predictions in each
probability interval.
that reducing the number of sampled data points (from 200
to just 50) and using different classifiers (logistic regression
and random forest) continued to produce a strong correlation
between SUDO and model performance (|ρ| > 0.94) (Sup-
plementary Fig. 4). Such variations, however, altered the
directionality (net positive or negative) of the SUDO values
(from one experiment to the next) in the probability intervals
with a high degree of class contamination. For example, in
the interval 0.20 < p < 0.25 (Fig. 4a), SUDOAUC = 0.05 and
SUDOAUC = −0.05 when sampling 50 and 200 data points,
respectively. We argue that such an outcome does not practi-
cally affect the interpretation of SUDO, as it is the absolute
value of SUDO that matters most when it comes to identifying
unreliable predictions. We offer guidelines on how to deal
with this scenario in a later section.
Using SUDO to identify unreliable predictions on
Flatiron Health ECOG Performance Status dataset
To further illustrate the utility of SUDO, we deployed the
NLP model on the Flatiron Health ECOG PS data in the wild
without ground-truth annotations. It is likely that such data
(clinical notes without ECOG PS labels) follow a distribution
that is distinct from that of the training data (clinical notes
with ground-truth ECOG PS labels). This is supported by
the distinct distributions of the prediction probability values
across these datasets (see Fig 4a and b). Such a shift can
make it ambiguous to identify unreliable predictions based
exclusively on confidence scores. To resolve this ambiguity,
we implemented SUDO for ten distinct probability intervals,
choosing more granular intervals in the range 0 < p < 0.40
to account for the higher number of predictions (Fig. 4d).
These results suggest that predictions with 0 < p < 0.20 are
more likely to belong to the low ECOG PS class than to the
high ECOG PS class. The opposite holds for predictions with
0.30 < p < 1. Such insight, which otherwise would have been
impossible without ground-truth annotations, can now better
inform the identification of unreliable predictions.
Validating SUDO-guided predictions with a survival
analysis
To gain further confidence in SUDO’s ability to identify un-
reliable predictions, we leveraged the known relationship be-
tween ECOG PS and mortality: patients with a higher ECOG
PS are at higher risk of mortality18. As such, we can compare
the overall survival estimates of patients for whom the AI sys-
tem’s output probabilities fell in particular quantiles to those
of patients with known ECOG PS values (e.g., patients in the
training set). The intuition is that if such overall survival esti-
mates are similar to one another, then we can become more
confident in the ECOG PS labels that were newly assigned
to clinical notes from oncology patient visits. While this ap-
proach makes the assumption that the ECOG PS label is the
primary determinant of overall survival, we acknowledge that
additional confounding factors, beyond the ECOG PS label,
may also play a role19.
For patients in the training set of the Flatiron Health ECOG
Performance Status dataset, we present their survival curves
stratified according to whether they have a low or high ECOG
PS (Fig. 4e). For patients in the data in the wild, for whom we
do not have a ground-truth ECOG PS label, we first split them
into three distinct groups based on the SUDO value (Fig. 4d),
employing the intuition that a higher absolute value is reflec-
tive of more reliable predictions (e.g., |SUDOAUC| > 0.05).
We refer to these groups based on their corresponding predic-
tions: low ECOG PS group (0 < p ≤0.2, n : 12,603), high
ECOG PS group (0.5 ≤p < 1.0, n : 552), and an uncertain
ECOG PS group (0.2 < p < 0.5, n : 3729). As demonstrated in
an earlier section, the chosen SUDO threshold creates a trade-
off between the reliability and completeness of the predictions.
We present the group-specific survival curves (Fig. 4f). To
control for confounding factors, we only considered data sam-
ples associated with the first line of therapy where patients are
6/17

Figure 4. SUDO correlates with model performance and can identify unreliable predictions on the Flatiron Health
ECOG Performance Status data without ground-truth annotations. Results are shown for the (left column) test set with
ground-truth annotations and (right column) data in the wild without ground-truth annotations. (a-b) Distribution of the
prediction probability values produced by an NLP model. (c-d) SUDO values colour-coded according to the most likely label
of the predictions in each probability interval. (e-f) Survival curves for patient groups identified via (e) ground-truth
annotations and (f) SUDO values: we identify reliable low ECOG PS predictions (0 < p < 0.2) and high ECOG PS predictions
(0.5 < p < 1.0), and unreliable predictions (0.2 < p < 0.5). (g-h) Correlation between SUDO and proportion of positive
instances in each probability interval (using ground-truth annotations) and the median survival time of patients in each
probability interval (without ground-truth annotations).
7/17

provided their first medication in their treatment pathway (see
Methods for more details).
There are two main takeaways. First, and in alignment
with our expectations and established clinical observations,
we found that patients in the low ECOG PS group do indeed
exhibit a longer median survival time than patients in the high
ECOG PS group (1.87 vs. 0.68 years, respectively) (Fig. 4f).
Second, the chosen probability intervals based on which the
survival analysis was stratified reasonably identified distinct
patient cohorts. This is evident by the distinct survival curves
of the patient cohorts with 0 < p ≤0.2 and 0.5 ≤p < 1 and
their similarity to the survival curves of patients with a ground-
truth ECOG PS label (Fig. 4e). For example, the median
survival estimates of these two patient cohorts are 2.07 (vs.
1.87) and 0.95 (vs. 0.68) years, respectively. Although we do
not expect such values to be perfectly similar, due to potential
hidden confounding factors we cannot control for, they are
similar enough to suggest that these newly-identified patient
cohorts correspond to low and high ECOG PS patient cohorts.
Demonstrating that SUDO correlates with a meaningful
variable can engender trust in its design. When ground-truth
annotations are available, we chose this variable to be the pro-
portion of positive instances in each probability interval (i.e.,
accuracy of predictions). Without ground-truth annotations,
we chose the median survival time of patients in each interval.
Specifically, we quantified the correlation between SUDO
and the median survival time of patient cohorts in each of the
ten chosen probability intervals (Fig. 4h). We found that that
these two variables are indeed strongly correlated (|ρ| = 0.97).
Such a finding suggests that SUDO can provide useful insight
into the clinical characteristics of patient cohorts in datasets
without ground-truth labels (see Discussion for benefits and
drawbacks of such an approach).
Practical guidelines for using SUDO
We have made the case and presented evidence that SUDO
can evaluate AI systems without ground-truth annotations.
We now take stock of our findings to offer practical guide-
lines around SUDO. First, we demonstrated that SUDO works
well across multiple data modalities (images, text, simulation).
We therefore recommend using SUDO irrespective of the
modality of data a model is evaluated on. Second, we showed
that SUDO is agnostic to the neural network architecture
of the AI system being evaluated (convolutional for images,
feed-forward for text). The only requirement is that the neu-
ral network returns a probabilistic value. Third, we showed
that SUDO can deal with as few as 50 data points sampled
from each probability interval (on the Stanford DDI dataset).
Although sampling too few data points did not change the
absolute value of SUDO, and thereby reliably quantifying
class contamination, it did alter its directionality (negative or
positive), affecting the perceived proportion of the majority
class in a set of predictions. To avoid being misled by this
behaviour, we recommend sampling at least 50% of the data
points in each probability interval in order to capture a rep-
resentative set of predictions. We also note that the absolute
value of SUDO should take precedent for determining unreli-
able predictions. Only if that value is large enough (i.e., low
class contamination) should its directionality be considered.
Fourth, we showed that SUDO is unperturbed by an imbal-
ance in the number of data points from each class or by the
presence of a third-and-unseen class (on the simulated dataset).
If data in the wild are suspected to exhibit these features, then
SUDO can still be used. Fifth, we showed that SUDO is
sensitive to the quality of the labels in the held-out set of
data. As such, we recommend curating a dataset with minimal
label noise when using SUDO. Furthermore, we showed that
SUDO produces consistent results irrespective of the classifier
used to distinguish between pseudo-labelled and ground-truth
data points and of the metric used to evaluate these classifiers.
We therefore recommend using a lightweight classifier (to
speed up computation) and the metric most suitable for the
task at hand.
Discussion
The competence of a trained AI system has long been assessed
on a held-out set of data, with the assumption that such data
are representative of data in the wild. When this assumption
is violated, as is often the case with clinical data, it becomes
difficult to trust the predictions made by an AI system. The ab-
sence of ground-truth annotations further hampers the ability
to confirm the reliability of such predictions.
We have shown that SUDO can comfortably assess the
reliability of predictions of AI systems deployed on data with-
out ground-truth annotations. Notably, we demonstrated that
SUDO can supplement confidence scores to identify unre-
liable predictions, help in the selection of AI systems, and
assess the algorithmic bias of such systems despite the ab-
sence of ground-truth annotations. Although we have pre-
sented SUDO primarily for clinical AI systems and datasets,
we believe its principles can be applied to almost any other
discipline involving a probabilistic model.
Compared with previous studies, our study offers a wider
range of applications for predictions on data without ground-
truth annotations. These applications include identifying unre-
liable predictions, selecting favourable models, and assessing
algorithmic bias. Previous work tends to be more model-
centric than SUDO, focusing on estimating model perfor-
mance11,12,20,21 and assessing algorithmic bias22 using both
labelled and unlabelled data. It therefore overlooks the myr-
iad data-centric decisions that would need to be made upon
deployment of an AI system, such as identifying unreliable
predictions. The same limitation holds for other studies that
attempt to account for verification bias23,24, a form of distribu-
tion shift brought about by only focusing on labelled data. In
contrast, SUDO provides the optionality of guiding decisions
at the model level (e.g., relative model performance) and at
the data level (e.g., identifying unreliable predictions).
Most similar to our work is the concept of reverse testing25
and reverse validation26,27 where the performance of a pair
8/17

of trained AI systems is assessed by deploying them on data
without annotations, pseudo-labelling these data points, and
training a separate classifier to distinguish between these data
points. The classifier that performs better on a held-out set of
labelled data is indicative of higher quality pseudo-labels and,
by extension, a favourable AI system. SUDO differs from this
line of work in two main ways. First, reverse testing assigns
a single AI-based pseudo-label to each data point in the wild
whereas we assign all possible pseudo-labels to that data point
(through distinct experiments) in order to determine the most
likely ground-truth label. Second, given the probabilistic out-
put of an AI system, reverse testing performs pseudo-labelling
for data points that span the entire probability spectrum for the
exclusive purpose of model selection. As such, it cannot be
used for identifying unreliable predictions. Notably, previous
work heavily depends on the assumption that the held-out
set of data is representative of data in the wild. SUDO cir-
cumvents this assumption by operating directly on data in the
wild.
SUDO’s ability to identify unreliable predictions has far-
reaching implications. From a clinical standpoint, data points
whose predictions are flagged as unreliable can be sent for
manual review by a human expert. By extension, and from a
scientific standpoint, this layer of human inspection can im-
prove the integrity of research findings. We note that SUDO
can be extended to the multi-class setting (e.g., c > 2 classes)
by cycling through all of the pseudo-labels and retrieving data
points from the mutually-exclusive classes (Fig. 1b, Step 3)
to train a total of c classifiers (Fig. 1b, Step 4). The main
difference to the binary setting is that SUDO would now be
calculated as the maximum difference in performance across
all classifiers (Fig. 1b, Step 5). SUDO’s ability to select
favourable (i.e., more performant) AI systems implies the
deployment of more accurate systems that contribute to im-
proved patient care. SUDO’s ability to assess algorithmic bias,
which was not previously possible for data without ground-
truth labels, can contribute to the ethical deployment of AI
systems. This ensures that AI systems perform as expected
when deployed on data in the wild. We note that SUDO
can also be used to assess algorithmic bias across multiple
groups by simply implementing SUDO for data points from
each group. Bias would still manifest as a discrepancy in the
SUDO value across the groups. Overall, our study offers a
first step towards a framework of inferring clinical variables
which suffer from low completeness in the EHR (such as
ECOG PS) in the absence of explicit documentation in their
charts and ground-truth labels.
There are several challenges that our work has yet to ad-
dress. First, SUDO cannot identify the reliability of a predic-
tion for an individual data points. This is because we often
calculated SUDO as a function of prediction probability in-
tervals. This is in contrast to previous work on uncertainty
quantification and selective classification. While SUDO can
be applied to individual data points, this is not practical as it
depends on the learning of predictive classifiers, which typi-
cally necessitate a reasonable number of training data points.
We do note, though, that SUDO was purposefully designed
to assess the relative reliability of of predictions across prob-
ability intervals. It is also worth noting that SUDO may be
considered excessive if the amount of data in the wild is small
and can be annotated by a team of experts with reasonable
effort. However, when presented with large-scale data in
the wild, SUDO can yield value by acting as a data triage
mechanism, funneling the most unreliable predictions for fur-
ther inspection by human annotators. In doing so, it stands
to reduce the annotation burden placed on such annotators.
Furthermore, despite having presented evidence of SUDO’s
utility on multiple real-world datasets with distribution shift,
we have not explored how SUDO would behave for the entire
space of possible distribution shifts. It therefore remains an
open question whether a particular type of distribution shift
will render SUDO less meaningful. On some simulated data,
for example, we found that SUDO is less meaningful upon
introducing drastic label noise or changing the class-specific
distributions of the data points in the wild. More generally,
we view SUDO merely as one of the first steps in informing
decision-making processes. Subsequent analyses, such as
statistical significance tests, would be needed to gain further
confidence in the resulting conclusions.
To validate SUDO without ground-truth annotations, we
measured its correlation with median survival time, a clinical
outcome with a known relationship to ECOG PS. This ap-
proach was made possible by leveraging domain knowledge.
In settings where such a relationship is unknown, we recom-
mend identifying clinical features in the labelled data that are
unique to patient cohorts. These features can include the type
and dosage of medication patients receive and whether or not
they were enrolled in a clinical trial. A continuous feature
(e.g., medication dosage) may be preferable to a discrete one
(e.g., on or off medication) in order to observe a graded re-
sponse with the prediction probability intervals. If identifying
one such feature is difficult and time-consuming, a data-driven
alternative could involve clustering patients in the labelled
data according to their clinical characteristics. Distinct clus-
ters may encompass a set of features unique to patient cohorts.
Prediction on data in the wild can then be assessed based on
the degree to which they share these features. On the other
hand, the more severe the distribution shift, the less likely it is
that features will be shared across the labelled and unlabelled
data.
There are also important practical and ethical considera-
tions when it comes to using SUDO. Without SUDO, human
experts would have to painstakingly annotate all of the data
points in the wild. Such an approach does not scale as datasets
grow in size. Moreover, the ambiguity of certain data points
can preclude their annotation by human experts. SUDO offers
a way to scale the annotation process while simultaneously
flagging unreliable predictions for further human inspection.
However, as with any AI-based framework, over-reliance
on SUDO’s findings can pose risks particularly related to
9/17

mislabelling data points. This can be mitigated, in some re-
spects, by choosing a more conservative operating point on
the reliability-completeness curve.
Moving forward, we aim to expand the application areas of
SUDO to account for the myriad decisions that AI predictions
inform. This could include using SUDO to detect distribution
shift in datasets, thereby informing whether, for example, an
AI system needs to be retrained on updated data. Another line
of research includes improving the robustness of SUDO to
label noise, expanding its applicability to scientific domains in
which label noise is rampant. We look forward to seeing how
the community leverages SUDO for their own applications.
Methods
Description of datasets
Stanford diverse dermatology images
The Stanford diverse dermatology images (DDI) dataset con-
sists of dermatology images collected in the Stanford Clinics
between 2010 and 2020. These images (n : 656) reflect either
a benign or malignant skin lesion from patients with three
distinct skin tones (Fitzpatrick I-II, III-IV, V-VI). For further
details, we refer interested readers to the original publica-
tion13. We chose this as the data in the wild due to a recent
study reporting the degradation of several models’ perfor-
mance when deployed on the DDI dataset. These models
(see Description of models) were trained on the HAM10000
dataset, which we treated as the source dataset.
HAM10000 dataset
The HAM10000 dataset consists of dermatology images col-
lected over 20 years from the Medical University of Vi-
enna and the practice of Cliff Rosendahl15. These images
(n : 10015) reflect a wide range of skin conditions ranging
from Bowen’s disease and basal cell carcinoma to melanoma.
In line with a recent study13, and to remain consistent with the
labels of the Stanford DDI dataset, we map these skin condi-
tions to a binary benign or malignant condition. We randomly
split this model into a training and held-out set using a 80 : 20
ratio. We did not use a validation set as publicly-available
models were already available and therefore did not need to
be trained from scratch.
Camelyon17-WILDS dataset
The Camelyon17-WILDS dataset consists of histopathology
patches from 50 whole slide images collected from 5 different
hospitals28. These images (n : 450,000) depict lymph node
tissue with or without the presence of a tumour. We use the
exact same training (n : 302,436), validation (n : 33,560),
and test (n : 85,054) splits constructed by the original au-
thors3. Notably, the test set contains patches from a hospital
whose data was not present in the training set. This setup is
therefore meant to reflect the real-world scenario in which
models are trained on data from one hospital and deployed on
those from another. We chose this dataset as it was purpose-
fully constructed to evaluate the performance of models when
presented with data distribution shift.
Simulated dataset
We generated a dataset to include a training and held-out set,
and data in the wild. To do so, we sampled data from a two-
dimensional Gaussian distribution (one for each of the two
classes) with diagonal covariance matrices. Specifically, data
points from class 1 (x1) and class 2 (x2) were sampled as
follows: x1 ∼N ([1,1],[0.8,0.8]), x2 ∼N ([2,2],[0.1,0.1]).
We assigned 500 and 200 data points to the training and held-
out sets. As with the DDI dataset, we did not create a valida-
tion set because there was no need to optimize the model’s
hyperparameters. As for the data in the wild (xW), these
were sampled from different distributions based on the experi-
ment we were conducting. In the out-of-domain setting with
and without an imbalance in the number of data points from
each class, xW
1 ∼N ([2,−1],[1,1]) and xW
2 ∼N ([3,0],[1,1]).
Data points from a third class were sampled as follows:
xW
3 ∼N ([3,−1],[1,1]). We assigned 1000 data points to
each class for the data in the wild, except for in the label
imbalance experiment where we assigned 4000 data points
to class 1 and 500 data points to class 2, reflecting an 8 : 1
ratio. For the scenario in which we inject label noise into the
held-out dataset, we randomly flip 50% of the labels to the
opposite class.
Multi-Domain Sentiment
The multi-domain sentiment dataset consists of reviews of
products on Amazon. These products span four different
domains from books and electronics to kitchen and DVDs.
Each review is associated with either a negative or positive
label reflecting the sentiment of the review. In each domain,
there are n = 1000 reviews reflecting positive and negative
sentiment (n = 2000 total). When conducting experiments
with this dataset, we split the reviews in each domain into
training, validation, and test sets using a 60 : 20 : 20 split.
Flatiron Health ECOG Performance Status (PS)
The nationwide electronic health record (EHR)-derived lon-
gitudinal Flatiron Health Research database, comprises de-
identified patient-level structured and unstructured data cu-
rated via technology-enabled abstraction, with de-identified
data originating from ~280 US cancer clinics (~800 sites of
care)29. The majority of patients in the database originate from
community oncology settings; relative community/academic
proportions may vary depending on study cohort. Our dataset,
which we term the Flatiron Health ECOG Performance Sta-
tus database, included 20 disease specific databases avail-
able at Flatiron Health as of October 2021 including acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), metastatic breast cancer (mBC),
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), metastatic colorectal
cancer (mCRC), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL),
early breast cancer (eBC), endometrial cancer, follicular lym-
phoma (FL), advanced gastro-esophageal cancer (aGE), hepa-
tocellular carcinoma (HCC), advanced head and neck cancer
(aHNC), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), advanced melanoma
(aMel), multiple myeloma (MM), advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (aNSCLC), ovarian cancer, metastatic pancre-
10/17

atic cancer, metastatic prostate cancer, metastatic renal-cell
carcinoma (mRCC), small cell lung cancer (SCLC), and ad-
vanced urothelial cancer. For these patients, the database
contains dates of line of therapy (LOT) which is a sequence of
anti-neoplastic therapies that a patient receives following the
disease cohort inclusion date. The start and end dates of the
distinct lines of therapy were captured from both structured
and unstructured data sources in the EHR via previously-
developed and clinically-informed algorithms. Furthermore,
our dataset also contains unstructured clinical notes generated
by clinicians that are time-stamped with the visit date (e.g.,
June 1st, 2017).
ECOG PS labels
ECOG PS is a clinical variable that re-
flects the performance status of an oncology patient. It ranges
from 0 (patient has no limitations in mobility) to 5 (patient
deceased)30 and has been largely used within the context of
clinical trials but is also often used by physicians in clinical
practice as they make treatment decisions for patients31,32.
Additionally, in the context of real world evidence, ECOG
PS can be used to identify study cohorts of interest (typically
those with ECOG PS < 233).
In the Flatiron Health ECOG Performance Status database,
the ECOG PS is captured as part of the EHR in either a
structured or unstructured form, as outlined next (see Table 1).
Structured ECOG PS refers to ECOG values captured in the
structured fields of the EHR, such as from drop down lists.
In contrast, extracted and abstracted ECOG PS both refer to
ECOG values that are captured in unstructured oncologist-
generated clinical notes in the EHR. Extracted ECOG PS
implies that an NLP symbol-matching (regular expressions)
algorithm was used to extract it from clinical notes. This
regular expression algorithm was previously developed by
researchers at Flatiron Health. Finally, abstracted ECOG PS
implies that a human abstractor was able to extract it through
manual inspection of clinical notes.
ECOG task description
We developed a model which lever-
ages oncology clinical notes to infer a patient’s ECOG PS
within a window of time (e.g., 30 days) prior to the start of
distinct lines of therapy. In oncology research, it is often im-
portant to know a patient’s ECOG PS at treatment initiation.
This allows researchers to investigate the interplay between
ECOG PS and different lines of therapy. To achieve this, we
consolidated clinical notes within a window of time prior to
distinct line of therapy start dates, and combined ECOG PS
values (where applicable) using the following strategies.
Combining clinical notes across time. We hypothesized
that clinical notes up to one month (30 days) before the start
date of a line of therapy would contain sufficient information
about the performance status of the patient to facilitate the
inference of ECOG PS. Given that a patient’s ECOG PS can
fluctuate over time, retrieving clinical notes further back be-
yond a month would have potentially introduced superfluous,
or even contradictory, information that exacerbated an NLP
model’s ability to accurately infer ECOG PS. Conversely, ex-
Source of ECOG PS
Scenario
Structured
Unstructured
Extracted
Abstracted
A
list
✗
human
B
✗
regex
human
C
✗
✗
human
D
✗
✗
✗
Table 1. Examples of potential sources of the ECOG PS
label. The ECOG PS clinical variable can be structured;
derived from a drop-down list, extracted; through the use of a
Flatiron-specific regular expression (regex) algorithm, or
abstracted; through the manual inspection of clinical notes by
human abstractors. ✗indicates the absence of an ECOG PS
value from a particular source. The development of an NLP
model to infer the ECOG PS is therefore most valuable when
none of the the aforementioned sources can produce an
ECOG PS value (Scenario D).
clusively retrieving clinical notes too close to the start date of
the LOT might avoid picking up on valuable information fur-
ther back in time. Based on this intuition, we concatenated all
of a patient’s clinical notes time-stamped up to and including
30 days before the start date of each of their lines of therapy.
Combining ECOG PS from multiple sources. A particu-
lar line of therapy for a patient may sometimes be associated
with a single ECOG PS (e.g., in structured form) or multiple
ECOG PS values (e.g., in extracted and an abstracted form).
When multiple sources of ECOG PS scores were available, we
consolidated them by only considering the largest value (e.g.,
assign ECOG PS 1 if structured ECOG PS = 0 and abstracted
ECOG PS = 1).
Moreover, and without loss of generality, we combined
ECOG PS such that [0,1] map to low ECOG PS and [2,3,4]
map to high ECOG PS. We chose this binary bucketing since
clinical trials in medical oncology typically only include pa-
tients with an ECOG PS < 2. The distribution of low and high
ECOG PS scores in our study cohort was 82 : 18.
Description of data sample. Given the above two consol-
idation strategies, each sample of data our NLP model was
exposed to consisted of (a) concatenated clinical notes for a
patient up to 30 days before an LOT and, where available, (b)
an ECOG PS label associated with that LOT. Such samples
are referred to as labelled. We refer to samples of concate-
nated clinical notes without an associated ECOG PS label (for
details on why, see next section on missingness of ECOG PS)
as unlabelled. It is in this scenario where inferring a patient’s
ECOG PS is most valuable. (see Table 1).
Missingness of ECOG PS
There exist a myriad of reasons
behind the missingness of the ECOG PS score. For example,
in some cases, documenting an ECOG PS score may simply
not be a part of a clinician’s workflow or may be difficult
to document. Alternatively, not documenting an ECOG PS
11/17

score could be directly related to the qualitative assessment
of a patient’s health status where its absence could suggest an
underlying low ECOG PS value. These reasons, in a majority
of settings, imply that the unlabelled clinical notes might
follow a distribution that is different from that followed by
labelled clinical notes. This discrepancy is also known as
covariate shift. As such, we are faced with unlabelled data that
exhibit distribution shift. Although our framework’s design
was motivated by these characteristics, quantifying its utility
exclusively on this dataset is challenging due to the absence
of ground-truth ECOG PS labels.
Samples with and without ECOG PS labels
Our first
study cohort consists of n = 117,529 samples associated
with ECOG PS labels. As outlined above, each sample con-
sists of concatenated clinical notes before a particular line
of therapy for a patient. When conducting experiments with
this cohort, we split the data into training, validation, and test
sets using a 70 : 10 : 20 split. This amounted to n = 81,909,
n = 11,806, n = 23,814 samples, respectively. Our second
study cohort consists of n = 33,618 samples not associated
with ECOG PS labels.
Description of models
Models for image-based datasets
For the image-based datasets (Stanford DDI and HAM10000),
we used two publicly-available models (DeepDerm14 and
HAM1000015) that had already been trained on the
HAM10000 dataset. We refer readers to the respective studies
for details on how these models were trained. In this study,
we directly used these models (without retraining) as part
of the SUDO experiments. As for the Camelyon17-WILDS
dataset, we trained a DenseNet121 model using the default
hyperparameters recommended by the original authors3.
Models for language-based datasets
For language-based datasets (Multi-Domain Sentiment and
Flatiron Health ECOG PS), we developed a neural network
composed of three linear layers which received text as input
and returned the probability of it belonging to the positive
class, which is positive sentiment for the Multi-Domain Sen-
timent dataset, and high ECOG PS for the Flatiron Health
ECOG Performance Status dataset. An in-depth description
of how we pre-processed the input text can be found in the
Methods section.
Pre-processing of text
We represented text via a bag of
words (BoW). This first involved identifying a fixed vocabu-
lary of pairs of words (also known as bigram tokens) present in
the training set. After experimenting with a different number
of tokens (e.g., 500, 1000, 5000, 10000), we decided to focus
on the 1000 most common tokens as we found that number
to provide enough information to learn a generalizable NLP
model while not being computationally intensive. The remain-
ing experiments did not result in improved performance. Each
document was thus converted into a 1000-dimensional repre-
sentation (1 dimension for each token) where each dimension
reflected the frequency of a particular token in the document.
The token mean and standard deviation was calculated across
training samples in order to standardize each bigram represen-
tation. We found this to result in slightly better performance
than settings without input scaling.
Details of SUDO framework
SUDO is a framework that helps identify unreliable predic-
tions, select favourable AI models, and assess the algorithmic
bias of such systems on data without ground-truth labels. To
implement SUDO, we recommend following the steps out-
lined in the Results (Fig.1b). Here, we provide additional
details and intuition about SUDO, mentioning how they align
with the previously-outlined steps.
Let us assume we have a probabilistic model that returns a
single value reflecting the probability, p, that an input belongs
to the positive class (e.g., high ECOG PS in the Flatiron
Health ECOG PS dataset). We can generate a distribution of
such probability values for all data points and discretize the
distribution in probability intervals (Fig. 1b, Step 1 and Step
2).
Sample data points
From each probability interval p ∈(p1, p2] where p1 < p2,
we sampled a subset of the data points (Fig. 1b, Step 3). To
avoid sampling more data points from one probability interval
than from another, and potentially affecting the reliability of
estimates across intervals, we fixed the number of data points,
m, to sample from each interval. Specifically, m was chosen
based on the lowest number of data points within an interval,
across all probability intervals. For example, if the interval p ∈
(0.4,0.5] contains the lowest number of data points (e.g., 50),
then we sample m = 50 data points from each interval. This
also ensures that we sample data points without replacement
to avoid a single data point from appearing multiple times in
our experiments and biasing our results. Next, we assigned
these sampled data points a temporary label, also known as a
pseudo-label, hypothesizing that they belong to a certain class
(e.g., class 0).
Train classifier
We then trained a classifier, gφ, to distinguish between such
newly-labelled data points and data points with a ground-truth
label from the opposite class (e.g., class 1) (Fig. 1b, Step 4).
It is worthwhile to mention that this classifier need not be
the exact same model as the one originally used to perform
inference (i.e., gφ ̸= fθ). The prime desiderata of the classifier
are that it (i) is sufficiently expressive such that it can discrim-
inate between positive and negative examples and (ii) can
ingest the input data. Such a modular approach, where one
model is used for the original inference (Fig. 1b, Step 1) and
another is used to distinguish between positive and negative
examples ((Fig. 1b, Step 4) is less restrictive for researchers
and can obviate the need to (re)train potentially computation-
ally expensive inference models. This line of argument also
extends to settings with different data modalities (e.g., im-
12/17

ages, time-series, etc.), and, as such, makes SUDO agnostic
to the modality of the data used for training and evaluating
the model.
Evaluate classifier
After training gφ, we evaluated it on a held-out set of data
comprising data points with ground-truth labels (from both
class 0 and class 1) (Fig. 1b, Step 5). The intuition here is that
a classifier which can successfully distinguish between these
two classes, by performing well on the held-out set of data, is
indicative that the training data and the corresponding ground-
truth labels are relatively reliable. Since the data points from
class 1 are known to be correct (due to our use of ground-truth
labels), then a highly-performing classifier would suggest that
the class 0 pseudo-labels of the remaining data points are
likely to be correct. In short, this step quantifies how plausible
it is that the sampled unlabelled data points belong to class 0.
As presented, this approach determines how plausible it
is that the sampled set of data points in some probability
interval, p ∈(p1, p2], belongs to class 0. It is entirely possible,
however, that a fraction of these sampled data points belong
to the opposite class (e.g., class 1). We refer to this mixture
of data points from each class as class contamination. We
hypothesized (and indeed showed) that the degree of this class
contamination increases as the probability output, p, by an AI
system steers away from the extremes (p ≈0 and p ≈1). To
quantify the extent of this contamination, however, we also
had to determine how plausible it was that the sampled set of
data points belong to class 1, as we outline next.
Cycle through the pseudo-labels
We repeated the above approach (Fig. 1b, Steps 3, 4, and 5)
however with two distinct changes. First, we pseudo-labelled
the sampled data points with class 1 (instead of class 0). In
doing so, we are hypothesizing that these data points belong to
class 1. Second, we trained a classifier to distinguish between
such newly-labelled data points and data points with ground-
truth labels from class 0.
When experimenting with the distinct pseudo-labels, we
always sample the same set of data points, as enforced by
a random seed. Doing so ensures that any difference in the
predictive performance of the learned classifiers, gφ, is less
attributable to differences in the sampled data points and, in-
stead, more attributable to the pseudo-labels that we have
assigned. Moreover, to ensure that our approach is not con-
strained by a particular subset of sampled data points, we
repeat this entire process multiple (k = 5) times, each time
sampling a different subset of data points from each prob-
ability interval, as enforced by a random seed (e.g., 0 to 4
inclusive).
Deriving the pseudo-label discrepancy
The discrepancy between, and ranking of, the classifier per-
formances above is indicative of data points that are more
likely to belong to one class than another. Concretely, if the
classifier, gφ, achieves higher performance when presented
with sampled data points that are pseudo-labelled as class 0
than as class 1, then the set of pseudo-labelled data points are
more likely to belong to class 0. We refer to this discrepancy
in performance under different scenarios of pseudo-labels as
the pseudo-label discrepancy, or SUDO.
Implementation details of SUDO experiments
SUDO involves selecting several hyperparameters. These can
include the granularity and number of probability intervals,
the number of data points to sample from each probability
interval, the number of times to repeat the experiment, and
the type of classifier to use. We offer guidelines on how to
select these hyperparameters in the Results.
Stanford DDI dataset
For the DeepDerm model (Fig 2a),
we selected ten mutually-exclusive and equally-sized probabil-
ity intervals in the range 0 < p < 1, and sampled 10 data points
from each probability interval. For the HAM10000 model
(Fig 2b), we selected ten mutually-exclusive and equally-sized
probability intervals in the range 0 < p < 0.5, and sampled
50 data points from each probability interval. In the latter set-
ting, we chose a smaller probability range and more granular
probability intervals to account for the high concentration of
data points as p →0.
To amortize the cost of training classifiers as part of the
SUDO experiments, we extracted image representations of-
fline (before the start of the experiments) and stored them for
later retrieval. To capture a more representative subset of the
data points and obtain a better estimate of the performance
of these classifiers, we repeated these experiments 5 times
for each probability interval and pseudo-label. To accelerate
the experiments, we used a lightweight classifier such as a
logistic regression, discovering that more complex models
simply increased the training overhead without altering the
findings. Unless otherwise noted, we adopted this strategy for
all experiments.
Camelyon17-WILDS dataset
We selected eleven mutually-
exclusive and equally-sized probability intervals in the range
0.10 < p < 0.75 which was chosen based on where the AI-
based probability values were concentrated. We sampled 1000
data points from each probability interval. To remain consis-
tent with the other experiments in this study, we used the pro-
vided in-distribution validation set as the held-out set (Fig. 1,
Step 5). As with the Stanford DDI dataset, to minimize the
cost of conducting the SUDO experiments, we first extracted
and stored the image representations of the histopathology
patches using the trained DenseNet121 model. We otherwise
followed the same approach as that mentioned above.
Multi-Domain Sentiment dataset
We also selected ten
mutually-exclusive and equally-sized probability intervals in
the range 0 < p < 1, and sampled 50 and 10 data points from
each probability interval when dealing with a network that
was not overconfident and one that was trained to be over-
confident. We sampled fewer data points in the latter setting
because prediction probability values were concentrated at
13/17

the extreme ends of the probability range (p →0 and p →1),
leaving fewer data points in the remaining probability inter-
vals. As demonstrated in the Results, SUDO can deal with
such data-scarce settings.
Simulated dataset
We selected ten mutually-exclusive and
equally-sized probability intervals in the range 0 < p < 1, and
sampled 50 data points from each probability interval.
Flatiron Health ECOG PS dataset
On the Flatiron Health
ECOG Performance Status dataset with ECOG PS labels, we
sampled 200 data points from each probability interval. This
value was chosen to capture a sufficient number of predic-
tions from each probability interval without having to sample
with replacement. On the Flatiron Health ECOG Performance
Status dataset without ECOG PS labels (data in the wild),
we sampled 500 data points from each interval in the range
(0,0.45] and 100 data points from each interval in the range
(0.45,1]. This was due to the skewed distribution of the prob-
ability values generated in such a setting (see Fig. 4b).
Implementation details of algorithmic bias experi-
ment
To demonstrate that SUDO can help assess algorithmic bias
on data without ground-truth annotations, we conducted ex-
periments on the Stanford DDI dataset because those images
could be categorized based on a patient’s skin tone (Fitzpatrick
I-II, III-IV, V-VI). As such, we would be able to assess the bias
of the pre-trained AI systems against particular skin tones.
We followed the same steps to implement SUDO (see
Fig. 1b). The main difference is that we first stratified the
data points according to skin tone. Based on the bias reported
in a recent study13, we focused on skin tone I-II and V-VI. Al-
though such stratification can be done within each probability
interval, after having observed the the HAM10000 model’s
prediction probability values (Fig. 2b), we considered a single
probability interval 0 < p < 0.20 where data points would be
classified as negative (benign lesions). We sampled 200 data
points from this probability interval for each group (I-II and
V-VI) to conduct the SUDO experiments and calculated the
AUC of the subsequently-learned classifiers.
Applications of SUDO
SUDO can help with identifying unreliable clinical predic-
tions, selecting favourable AI systems, and assessing the bias
of such systems, as outlined next.
Identifying unreliable AI-based predictions
Identifying
unreliable AI-based predictions, those whose assigned label
may be incorrect, is critical for avoiding the propagation of
error through downstream research analyses. SUDO allows
for this as it provides an estimate of the degree of class con-
tamination for data points whose corresponding AI-based
output probabilities are in some probability interval. Specifi-
cally, a ↓|D| (small difference in classifier performance across
pseudo-label settings) implies ↑class contamination. As such,
by focusing on probability intervals with |D| < τ where τ is
some predefined cutoff, one can now identify unreliable AI-
based predictions. As we will show, there is an even greater
need to identify such contamination when dealing with over-
confident AI systems.
Selecting AI systems
An AI system is often chosen based
on its reported performance on a held-out set of data. We
define a favourable AI system as that which performs best on
a held-out set of data compared to a handful of models. The
ultimate goal is to deploy the favourable model on data in the
wild. However, with data in the wild exhibiting a distribution
shift and lacking ground-truth labels, it is unknown what the
performance of the chosen AI system would be on the data
in the wild, thereby making it difficult to assess whether it
actually is favourable for achieving its goal.
Assessing algorithmic bias
Assessing algorithmic bias is
critical for ensuring the ethical deployment of AI systems.
A common approach to quantify such bias is through a dif-
ference in AI system performance across groups of patients
(e.g., those in different gender groups)34. The vast majority
of these approaches, however, requires ground-truth labels
which are absent from data points in the wild thereby mak-
ing an assessment of bias out-of-reach. However, SUDO, by
producing a reliable proxy for model performance, allows for
this capability.
Implementation details of survival analysis
We assessed real world overall survival defined as time from
the start of first line of therapy (LOT = 1) to death35. If
death was not observed by the study end date (October 2021),
patients were censored at the date of a patient’s latest clinical
visit. We estimated survival using the Kaplan Meier method
and used lifelines package to conduct our analysis36. To avoid
confounding due to lines of therapy, we conducted all survival
analyses for patients receiving their first line of therapy only
(i.e., LOT = 1). No other adjustments were made.
Steps to generate Fig. 4e
We first filtered our data samples
with known ground-truth ECOG PS labels (n = 117,529)
to only consider those tagged with the first line of therapy
(LOT= 1). Using these samples, we conducted two survival
analyses: one with data samples for patients with a low ECOG
PS label and another for patients with a high ECOG PS label.
Steps to generate Fig. 4f
We filtered our data samples
in the data in the wild (n = 33,618) to only consider those
tagged with the first line of therapy (LOT= 1). However, since
these data samples were not associated with a ground-truth
ECOG PS label, we split them into three groups based on a
chosen threshold on the pseudo-label discrepancy presented
in Fig. 4d. Using the intuition that a higher absolute pseudo-
label discrepancy is indicative of more reliable predictions,
we chose three probability intervals to reflect the three distinct
patient cohorts: low ECOG PS group (0 < p ≤0.2), high
ECOG PS group (0.5 ≤p < 1.0), and an uncertain ECOG PS
group (0.2 < p < 0.5). We subsequently conducted a survival
analysis using the data samples in each group.
14/17

Steps to generate Fig. 4h
We conducted multiple survival
analyses. Each analysis was performed as described above
and for the subset of patients whose associated AI-based
predictions fell in a probability interval (e.g., 0 < p ≤0.05,
0.05 < p < 0.10, etc.). Since there were 14 probability inter-
vals in total, we performed 14 survival analyses and calculated
the median survival time in each analysis. This allowed us to
correlate the median survival time, per probability interval, to
the derived pseudo-label discrepancy.
Producing reliability-completeness curves
The completeness of a variable (the proportion of missing
values that are inferred) is equally important as the reliability
of the predictions that are being made by a model. However,
these two goals of data completeness and data reliability are
typically at odds with one another. Quantifying this trade-off
confers a twofold benefit. It allows researchers to identify
the level of reliability that would be expected when striving
for a certain level of data completeness. Moreover, it allows
for model selection, where preferred models are those that
achieve a higher degree of reliability for the same level of
completeness. To quantify this trade-off, we needed to quan-
tify the reliability of predictions without ground-truth labels
and their completeness. We outline how to do so next.
Quantify reliability
SUDO reflects the degree of class con-
tamination within a probability interval. The higher the abso-
lute value of SUDO, the lower the degree of class contami-
nation. Given a set of low probability thresholds, α ∈A, and
high probability thresholds, β ∈B, we can make predictions
ˆy of the following form,
ˆy =
(
0,
p ≤α
1,
p ≥β
(1)
To calculate the reliability RA,B of such predictions, we could
average the absolute values of SUDO for the set of probability
thresholds (A, B),
RA,B =
1
2·|A||B|
∑
α∈A,β∈B
|SUDO(α)|+|SUDO(β)| (2)
Quantify completeness
By identifying the maximum prob-
ability threshold in the set, A, and the minimum probability
threshold in the set, B, the completeness, CA,B ∈[0,1], can be
defined as the fraction of data points that fall within this range
of probabilities,
CA,B =
M
∑
j=1
1[pj ≤max(A) or p j ≥min(B)]
(3)
Generate reliability-completeness curve
After iterating
over K sets of A and B, we can populate the reliability-
completeness (RC) curve for a particular model of interest
(see Fig. 2e). From this curve, we derive the area under the
reliability-completeness curve, or the AURCC ∈[0,1].
AURCC = 1
2K
K
∑
k=1
RA,B(k)+RA,B(k +1)
∆CA,B
(4)
Whereas the area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC) summarizes the performance of a model
when deployed on labelled instances, the AURCC does so on
unlabelled data points. Given this capability, the AURCC can
also be used to compare the performance of different models.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The
Stanford
diverse
dermatology
images
(DDI)
dataset
is
publicly
available
and
can
be
accessed
here:
https://ddi-dataset.github.io/
index.html#access.
The
Camelyon17-WILDS
dataset is publicly available and can be access here:
https://wilds.stanford.edu/get_started/.
The Multi-Domain Sentiment dataset is publicly available
and can be accessed here: https://www.cs.jhu.edu/
~mdredze/datasets/sentiment/index2.html.
The Flatiron Health ECOG PS dataset is not publicly
available.
Code availability
Our code is publicly available and can be accessed at https:
//github.com/flatironhealth/SUDO.
