1
Matching-based Service Ofﬂoading for
Compute-less Driven IoT Networks
Boubakr Nour, Member, IEEE, and Soumaya Cherkaoui, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—With the advent of the Internet of Things (IoT)
and 5G networks, edge computing is offering new opportunities
for business model and use cases innovations. Service providers
can now virtualize the cloud beyond the data center to meet
the latency, data sovereignty, reliability, and interoperability
requirements. Yet, many new applications (e.g., augmented
reality, virtual reality, artiﬁcial intelligence) are computation-
intensive and delay-sensitivity. These applications are invoked
heavily with similar inputs that could lead to the same output.
Compute-less networks aim to implement a network with a
minimum amount of computation and communication. This can
be realized by ofﬂoading prevalent services to the edge and thus
minimizing communication in the core network and eliminating
redundant computations using the computation reuse concept.
In this paper, we present matching-based services ofﬂoading
schemes for compute-less IoT networks. We adopt the matching
theory to match service ofﬂoading to the appropriate edge
server(s). Speciﬁcally, we design, WHISTLE, a vertical many-to-
many ofﬂoading scheme that aims to ofﬂoad the most invoked
and highly reusable services to the appropriate edge servers.
We further extend WHISTLE to provide horizontal one-to-many
computation reuse sharing among edge servers which leads
to bouncing less computation back to the cloud. We evaluate
the efﬁciency and effectiveness of WHISTLE with a real-world
dataset. The obtained ﬁndings show that WHISTLE is able
to accelerate the tasks completion time by 20%, reduce the
computation up to 77%, and decrease the communication up to
71%. Theoretical analyses also prove the stability of the designed
schemes.
Index Terms—edge computing, compute-less network, compu-
tation reuse, computation ofﬂoading
I. INTRODUCTION
The raise number of connected Internet of Things (IoT)
devices and the massive amount of generated data led to
radical changes not only in the nature of applications’ design
but also in their requirements and needs [1]. For instance,
real-time applications demand response times in the sub of
100 ms or even the sub of 10 ms range [2]. With the
massive volume of generated low-value time-series data and
the complex data analysis process, transmitting these data
to distant cloud servers might be costly over a shared core
network and shatter the low/ultra-low latency needs, which
in return fail to meet the desired quality of service (QoS)
requirements [3].
Edge computing [4] has been introduced to overcome nu-
merous issues, such as low/ultra-low latency, lack of high-
speed connectivity, security, data sovereignty, reliability, and
B. Nour and S. Cherkaoui are with are with the INTERLAB Re-
search
Laboratory,
Faculty
of
Engineering,
Department
of
Electrical
and
Computer
Science
Engineering,
Université
de
Sherbrooke,
Sher-

interoperability with legacy systems. Edge computing enables
service providers to virtualize the cloud beyond their data
center [5]. Indeed, computations and workloads created in
the cloud can now be ofﬂoaded towards edge servers that
are located near to users (essentially at the edge network,
one hop from the application). Appropriate data analysis
and computation can be performed at the edge network and
hence meet the desired QoS requirements [6]. Cloud and
edge computing are complementary in relation to analytic
processing workloads and computation. Indeed, the edge and
cloud servers need to maintain a communication channel to
exchange statistics regarding the change in the workload,
computation, and requests’ distribution. These statistics will
lead to an efﬁcient ofﬂoading decision, where only worthiness
services will be moved to edge servers [7].
With a deep view of these statistics (e.g., for both com-
munication and computation), we found that the same service
can be invoked multiple times with identical, similar, or semi-
similar input data. These data, even with the non-identical
feature, lead to the same output [8]. For example, object/person
detection and recognition in a smart city, road signs detection
and identiﬁcation in smart vehicles, crossing people and obsta-
cles detection in autonomous vehicles, handwriting detection
in optical character recognition share the same characteristics
(regardless of the application’s context) where the same service
will most likely receive multiple invocations with different
input data that produce the same output (results) [9]. Con-
ventional computation at the edge network blindly computes
redundant tasks multiple times (e.g., vehicles driving on the
same road will redundantly detect the same road signs), which
deﬁciently utilizes the edge resources and impacts the QoS.
Compute-less networking [10], an extended design on top
of edge computing, tends to further optimize edge computing.
It aims to design a network with a minimum of computation
and communication costs [11]. In doing so, different com-
munication and computation techniques need to take place,
including computation ofﬂoading, in-network computing, and
computation reuse [12]. The ﬁrst one attempts to ofﬂoad
the most used services from distant cloud servers to edge
network [13], the second endeavors to provide computation at
the network level [14], while the last one serves to store the
previously computed tasks on a local data structure, known as
Reuse Table, and use their results to satisfy the newly received
similar tasks [15]. Indeed, by leveraging these mechanisms,
a compute-less network will perform less computation and
communication (e.g., fewer data traversing the network, fast
computation at the edge), which will improve the quality
of service/experience, optimize the resource utilization, and
arXiv:2201.04195v1  [cs.NI]  11 Jan 2022

2
Micro Datacenters
Manufacturing
Energy/Utilities
Transportation
Retail
Centralized Datacentres
Interconnection 3rd Party Datacenters
End-users
Edge
Core/Cloud
High resources
High latency
Low computation load
Long-term data analysis
Storage
Moderate resources
Low latency
Moderate/low computation 
Short-term data analysis
Ultra-low/low latency
Low latency
Medium latency
Ultra-low/low latency
Low latency
Medium latency
Large number of tasks
Limited resources
High computation delay
Reuse Table
Computation Reuse
Computation Offlaoding
Fig. 1: Reference network for computation ofﬂoading at the edge.
enhance the overall network performance [16], [17].
Existing computation ofﬂoading schemes [18] aims to of-
ﬂoad services from the cloud to the edge by targeting a
speciﬁc objective (e.g., delay, resources, budget). Based on the
frequency of invocation and users’ location, the same service
can be ofﬂoaded to multiple edge servers. Various optimization
techniques have been used to solve the computation ofﬂoad-
ing problems, such as matching theory, genetic algorithms,
simulated annealing, greedy algorithms [19]. Matching game,
in particular, comes up with an efﬁcient matching strategy to
match multiple services with multiple servers to satisfy some
constraints [20]. In this work, we design a compute-less driven
IoT network by adopting matching theory. Compared with
conventional computation ofﬂoading solutions, we further ap-
pend the computation reuse feature to implement a QoS-aware
ofﬂoading scheme. The combination of these techniques, at
the ofﬂoading decision level, helps in improving the decision-
making and the quality of service, which consequently en-
hances the overall network performance. Compared with other
ofﬂoading schemes, the matching theory provides dynamic and
scalable decision-making considering the nature of services,
networks, and users’ demands. The major contributions of this
work are:
• We investigate service ofﬂoading in compute-less net-
works. Instead of focusing only on the computation, we
join the computation caching and reuse in the ofﬂoading
formula.
• We formulate the service ofﬂoading problem as a match-
ing theory problem. We design, WHISTLE, a vertical
service ofﬂoading scheme. The verticalness refers to the
relationship between cloud and edge servers (cloud ↕
edge) in deciding/providing computation. WHISTLE is
a many-to-many matching game scheme that tends to
ofﬂoad the most invoked services with high reusability
gain from the cloud to a set of edge servers.
• We design, EXTENDED WHISTLE, a horizontal computa-
tion ofﬂoading scheme between edge servers. The hori-
zontalness refers to the cooperative relationship between
edge servers (edge ↔edge) in providing costless com-
putation. EXTENDED WHISTLE is a one-to-one matching
scheme that aims to satisfy the tasks for the non-ofﬂoaded
services by forwarding them to the near edge server rather
than bouncing them back to a distant cloud server.
• We provide an extensive simulation using Alibaba Cluster
Dataset. The obtained results show the effectiveness and
efﬁciency of the designed schemes in reducing both
communication and computation as well as meeting the
desired QoS requirements.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II introduces the system model, network entities, as
well as problem formulation. Section III presents the vertical
service ofﬂoading scheme (WHISTLE) between cloud and edge
servers. Similarly, Section IV presents the extended compu-
tation ofﬂoading scheme (EXTENDED WHISTLE) that tends
to share the computation reuse between multi-edge servers.
Section V presents the evaluation performance and discusses
the obtained results. In Section VI, we overview existing work
that falls under the umbrella of compute-less networks and
computation ofﬂoading. Finally, we conclude the paper in
Section VII.
II. SYSTEM MODEL & PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. Network Architecture
In this work, we consider a cloud-edge network, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 1, where a service provider manages a
distant cloud server C and a set of edge servers distributed
geographically E, |E| = n. The cloud server, with immense
computation resources, manages a set of services S, |S| = m.
The service provider has the authority to ofﬂoad its services
to (multiple) edge servers based on the available resources

3
TABLE I: Summary of the most used notation in this paper.
Notation
Description
S
Set of services
E
Set of edge servers
fc
Resources capacities at the cloud
bc
Minimum bandwidth towards the cloud
fe
Resources capacities at the edge e
be
Minimum bandwidth towards the edge e
Se
Set of services ofﬂoaded to edge e
T s
List of tasks invoking the service s
It
Task’s input data
Ft
Task’s execution complexity
Dt
Task’s output data
Γ(t)
Task’s communication cost
χ(t)
Task’s execution cost
ζt
Task’s completion cost
L
Lookup cost in reuse table
υs
e
Network delay of ofﬂoading service s to edge e
xe
t
1-0 Ofﬂoading variable:
xe
t = 1: task computation is ofﬂoaded to edge e
yt
1-0 Reuse variable:
yt = 1: computation reuse is applied to execute task t
rt
1-0 Full reuse variable:
rt = 1: Task t is executed via full reuse
and the frequency of invocations. For readability purposes, the
index on edge servers (E) is denoted by e and the index on
services (S) is denoted by s. In the rest of this model, notations
are presented for a period of time, τ, and are summarized in
Table I.
Service Modeling. Services are initially offered by the
cloud server C and could be ofﬂoaded to different edge servers
{e} ∈E. A service s ∈S is deﬁned by the following tuple:
s = ⟨δs, σs, ρs ⟩,
where δs denotes the service granularity, σs denotes the service
potential reusability, and ρs denotes the service punishment
metric.
Deﬁnition 1 (Service Granularity). It deﬁnes how much the
received input data is similar. It is calculated, as shown in
Eq. (1), based on the total number of received data (Ir) and
the number of distinct data (Id), for a period of time τ.
δs =
1
1 + e−Ir
Id
(1)
Deﬁnition 2 (Service Potential Reusability). It refers to the
rate that a service s can beneﬁt from processing similar input
data (e.g., how much reuse we can achieve). This metric, as
shown in Eq. (2), is based on the service granularity.
σs =
1
1 + e−1
δs
(2)
Deﬁnition 3 (Service Punishment). It aims to diminish the
chances of an already evicted service from being re-ofﬂoaded
to the same edge server. This eviction mainly corresponds to a
change in the received task’s distribution of the service. Thus,
re-ofﬂoading the same service may not help in achieving better
performance. It is calculated, as shown in Eq. (3), based on
the service potential reusability.
ρs =
(
σs,
if s has not been evicted,
1 −σs, otherwise.
(3)
Let Se ⊂S denote the list of services ofﬂoaded at the edge
e ∈E. A service s ∈Se is deﬁned by the following tuple:
s = ⟨δs, ϕs ⟩,
where δs denotes the service granularity, and ϕs denotes the
gain of service ofﬂoading.
Deﬁnition 4 (Ofﬂoading Gain). It indicates the reduced com-
munication and computation that will be witnessed when the
said service is ofﬂoaded. The gain is based on the average size
of the received input data and the execution complexities, for
a period of time τ, and deﬁned by the following tuple:
ϕs = ⟨σs.avg(
X
It),
σs.avg(
X
ft) ⟩
Task Modeling. Due to their limitations in resources, IoT
users send their tasks for remote execution, which we consider
an M/M/1 queuing system following Little’s Law. Let T s
denote the list of tasks invoking the service s ∈S. A task
t ∈T s is deﬁned with the following tuple:
t = ⟨It, Ft, Dt ⟩,
where It is the task’s input data to execute the target service,
Ft is the task’s execution complexity and deﬁnes the required
resources to execute the given task with the provided input
data, and Dt is output data after a successful execution.
Communication Modeling. Let Γ(t) denote the task’s
communication cost. The cost is based on the task’s input data
(It) and the minimum bandwidth between end-user and cloud
(bc) or edge server (be). The communication cost is deﬁned as
shown in Eq. (4).
Γ(t) = xe
t. It
be + (1 −xe
t).It
bc ,
∀e ∈E
(4)
where xe
t denotes whether a task t is sent to an edge server
(xe
t = 1) or the cloud (xe
t = 0) for execution. We call xe
t the
ofﬂoading decision variable.
Computation Modeling. Let χ(t) denote the task’s execu-
tion cost. χ(t) depends on the task’s complexity (Ft) and the
server’s resources. Let f c and f e denote the resources at the
cloud and the edge server, respectively. The execution cost is
deﬁned as shown in Eq. (5).
χ(t) = xe
t.Ft
f e + (1 −xe
t).Ft
f c ,
∀e ∈E
(5)

4
If a service s is ofﬂoaded to an edge, its associated tasks
will be executed at the assigned edge and will not be bounced
back to the cloud server.
If computation reuse is applied, we differentiate two cases:
(i) full computation reuse: the stored output in the Reuse Table
will be used to fully satisfy the received task, the execution
cost is equal to the lookup cost to ﬁnd a match in the Reuse
Table; and (ii) partial computation reuse: the stored output in
the Reuse Table will be used to partially satisfy the received
task while the rest of the task will be executed, the execution
cost is equal to the sum of the lookup process and reset of
computation to fulﬁll the whole task’s execution. The cost is
then deﬁned as shown in Eq. (6).
η(t) = rt.L + (1 −rt).(L + χ(t′))
(6)
where rt denotes whether a task t is satisﬁed via a full
computation reuse (rt = 1) or a partial computation reuse
(rt = 0), and t′ ⊂t is the remained part of the task t to be
executed.
Finally, the overall task’s completion cost (ζt) is deﬁned as
shown in Eq. (7).
ζt = (1 −xe
t).(It
bc + Ft
f c )
|
{z
}
At cloud
+ xe
t(1 −yt).( It
be + Ft
f e )
|
{z
}
At edge without reuse
+
xe
tyt.( It
be + rt.L)
|
{z
}
At edge with full reuse
+ xe
tyt.( It
be + (1 −rt).(L + χ(t′)))
|
{z
}
At edge with partial reuse
= Γ(t) + (1 −yt).χ(t) + yt.η(t)
(7)
where yt denotes if computation reuse (yt = 1) or computation
from scratch (yt = 0) is applied at the edge server.
B. Problem Formulation
For any time period, τ, the service provider determines
which services need to be ofﬂoaded to the which edge server
for remote execution in order to minimize the overall task’s
completion cost. This results in maximizing the computation
reuse gain and reducing the overall edge/network resource
utilization based on an optimal service ofﬂoading and com-
putation reuse strategy. Thus, we can formulate the service
ofﬂoading problem as:
min
x,y,r
n
X
t=1
m
X
e=1
ζt
(8)
subject to,
X
t∈T s
xe
tFt ≤f e
∀e ∈E,
(9a)
X
t∈T s
xe
tIt ≤be
∀e ∈E,
(9b)
xe
t ∈{0, 1}
∀t ∈T, ∀e ∈E,
(9c)
yt, rt ∈{0, 1}
∀t ∈T,
(9d)
yt ≥xe
t
∀t ∈T, ∀e ∈E,
(9e)
rt ≥ye
t
∀t ∈T.
(9f)
The objective function (8) tends to minimize the overall
task completion cost, subject to a set of constraints: (9a) the
aggregate task complexity for a given edge server should
not exceed the edge’s resource capacity, (9b) the overall
data traversed the network should not exceed the available
bandwidth, (9c)-(9d) the decision variables are binary, and
(9e)-(9f) impose the variables’ boundary.
Theorem 1. The problem (8) is NP-hard.
Proof. The objective of cloud-edge service ofﬂoading is to
minimize the overall execution time. The problem formulated
in (8) can be represented as a 0-1 Knapsack problem. The list
of ofﬂoad-able services is considered as items, ofﬂoading gain
(ϕ) as item’s weight, and the capacity of the edge server as
the maximum weight capacity. The 0-1 Knapsack problem is
an NP-complete, and therefore, the presented problem in (8)
is NP-hard.
III. WHISTLE: WHICH SERVICE TO OFFLOAD FOR
REMOTE EXECUTION
As its name stands for, WHISTLE aims at answering the
question of which services need to be ofﬂoaded for remote
execution? To achieve this goal, WHISTLE relies on matching
theory. The fundamental objective of the matching theory is
to ﬁnd an optimal strategy to match players from two separate
sets by formulating relationships that beneﬁt all interested
players while taking into account their particular preferences.
In this work, we consider a vertical ofﬂoading scenario with
two sets: edge servers E and services S hosted at the cloud.
The objective is to match the most used services (in terms
of invocation frequency and high computation reuse) with the
appropriate edge servers. Communication, computation, and
reuse have been taking into consideration when deﬁning the
preferences for each player. In this section, we will start by
providing details about the matching theory and how it relates
to our ofﬂoading problem, and then we will dive into technical
details of the proposed ofﬂoading schemes.
A. Deﬁnitions
In the following, we recall the basic deﬁnitions of matching
game theory and relate them to our service ofﬂoading problem.
Deﬁnition 5. Given two sets of players S and E, a matching
game is a pair (S, E) on which two preference relations ≻s
and ≻e are deﬁned. These relations allow each player to
express its preferences over the opposite players, e.g., which
service s ∈S prefers to be ofﬂoaded on which edge server
e ∈E, and vice versa.
A matching game produces a matching function µ, which
is deﬁned as follows.

5
Deﬁnition 6. Given two sets of players S and E, the function
µ : S ×E →S ×E is a matching function if conditions (10a)
and (10b) are veriﬁed.
µ(µ(w)) = w,
∀w ∈S × E,
(10a)
µ(s) ∈E, µ(e) ∈S,
∀s ∈S, ∀e ∈E.
(10b)
The matching function µ(·) exploits the preference relations
≻to determine the relation for a given player on one set to
a given player on the opposite set. For each element on one
set, the preference relation reﬂects the level of satisfaction in
being matched with each element on the other set, and vice
versa.
Deﬁnition 7. A utility function is utilized to quantify the
preferences between elements belonging to two different sets.
Let Θs(·) and Φe(·) denote the utility functions of service
s and edge server e, respectively. If Θs(e1) > Θs(e2), then
the service s prefers the edge server e1 to the edge server
e2 on where it can be ofﬂoaded. Such situation is expressed
by the preference relation e1 ≻s e2. Similarly, s1 ≻e s2
means that the edge server e prefers the service s1 to s2 to
be ofﬂoaded on it, hence the associated preference relation is
Φe(s1) > Φe(s2).
B. WHISTLE: Service Ofﬂoading Scheme
A vertical computation ofﬂoading aims at moving services
from the cloud to edge servers. Fig. 2 depicts the overall prin-
ciples of the proposed ofﬂoading scheme, namely WHISTLE.
WHISTLE tends to ofﬂoad multiple services to multiple edge
servers, which can be formed as a many-to-many matching.
Hence, it builds a communication channel between the cloud
server that hosts services and a set of edge servers ready to
host the ofﬂoaded services. The channel helps in exchanging
statistical information that is used for ofﬂoading decision-
making. In order to minimize the task’s completion time,
WHISTLE requires a matching between services and available
edge servers. Thus, generating preference lists is necessary
before proceeding with optimal ofﬂoading decisions.
1) Preference Lists: Each service at the cloud level seeks
to be ofﬂoaded to at least one edge server to minimize the
communication and computation costs. Similarly, each edge
server attempts to host as many services to satisfy the large
number of received tasks to execute. Each player manages
to satisfy some quality of service requirements related to
communication, computation, and resources.
Service’s Preference List. For a given service s ∈S,
the utility function Θs(·) is evaluated by considering the
communication cost, the service potential reusability, and the
service punishment, and is given as shown in Eq. (11).
Θs(e) =
1
Γ(s) + σs −ρs
,
∀e ∈E.
(11)
Edge’s Preference List. For a given edge server e ∈E,
the utility function Φe(·) is evaluated by considering the
computation cost, the reuse cost, and the ofﬂoading gain, and
is given as shown in Eq. (12).
Φe(s) =
1
χ(s) + η(s) + ϕs
,
∀s ∈S.
(12)
2) WHISTLE Scheme: In order to ensure optimal ofﬂoading
results, WHISTLE tends to meet the preference lists of both
services and edge servers with the best possible match. The
ofﬂoading is achieved by selecting the convenient services
to the adequate edge server(s), while the edge server hosts
the relevant service(s). In doing so, WHISTLE is performed
in two main phases and two-matching stage, as illustrated in
Algorithm 1, and detailed as follows:
Phase 1. Jump-Starting Phase: This phase is executed
before any ofﬂoading decision (Algorithm 1, Lines 1-5),
where all tasks are forwarded directly to the cloud server
for remote execution. At this phase, the cloud server has
no prior information about the distribution of tasks and the
utility of each service. Thus, it starts by (i) monitoring all
the received tasks; and (ii) calculating, for each service, the
service granularity (δs) and the service potential reusability
(σs).
The end of this phase is marked by deciding what service(s)
could be ofﬂoaded to which edge server(s). This decision
is based on the collected and calculated information, and
proceeded on two matching stages:
Stage 1. The ﬁrst matching stage begins after discovering
services and edge servers that are interested in the ofﬂoading
process. In this phase, both preference lists of services and
edge servers are constructed according to Eqs. 11 and 12,
respectively. The process seeks to develop context awareness
of the service computation cost and reuse gain towards each
conceivable edge server, taking communication costs and
available resources into account (Algorithm 1, Lines 6-11).
To efﬁciently exploit the available resources, we have ex-
tended the Deferred Acceptance Algorithm (DAA) [21] in
Micro
Datacenters
Centralized Datacentres
Computation at Cloud
1
2
3
4
6
7
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
Tasks Monitoring
Service Offloading
Statistics Sharing
Services Re-distribute
Computation/Reuse at Edge
7 Out-Edge Reuse
5
6
Fig. 2: Overview of WHISTLE service ofﬂoading scheme.

6
Algorithm 1: WHISTLE ofﬂoading scheme.
1 for (each period of time τ) do
2
Monitor received tasks;
3
Calculate service granularity (δs);
4
Calculate service potential reusability (σs);
5 end
6 for (each service s ∈S) do
7
Construct the preference list Θs(·) (Eq. 11);
8 end
9 for (each edge server e ∈E) do
10
Construct the preference list Φe(·) (Eq. 12);
11 end
12 for (each requested edge server s) do
13
if (capacity is not full) then
14
Ofﬂoad the proposed service to edge server e;
15
else
16
Reject the proposed service with DAA;
17
end
18 end
19 do
20
for (each non-ofﬂoaded service s) do
21
Update Θs(·) (Eq. 11);
22
Propose the prefered edge server;
23
end
24
for (each requested edge server e) do
25
Accept the preferred service among candidates;
26
Reject other services;
27
end
28 while (all services are not ofﬂoaded);
order to deduce a preliminary matching (Algorithm 1, Lines
12-18). Each service s picks the most preferred edge server
e based on ≻s. Similarly, as long as the edge server e does
not reach the maximum capacity f e, it accepts any service
ofﬂoading request. Supposing the maximum capacity f e is
reached, and the said edge server receives a new ofﬂoading
request for a service that is favored above at least one of
the previously accepted requests. The edge server e, in this
case, accepts the received service and rejects the least preferred
service on its list based on ≻s. Finally, if a service experiences
a rejection, it does not eliminate the edge server from its
preference list, but it jumps for the next preferred edge server
on its list.
Stage 2. The second stage of the WHISTLE scheme (Algo-
rithm 1, Lines 19-28) tends to allocate services to the best-
preferred edge server. For each non-ofﬂoaded service s, the
cloud server evaluates Θs(e) for each e ∈E. Similarly, each
edge server e evaluates Φe(s) for each service s that is not
already ofﬂoaded. Then, for each non-ofﬂoaded service s,
the cloud server submits the ofﬂoading request to the top-
ranked edge server according to ≻s. When the edge server e
receives a service ofﬂoading request, it selects the preferred
ones among those submitted. At the end of the matching,
appropriate services are ofﬂoaded to the adequate edge servers,
while edge servers host the relevant services.
Phase 2. Steady-State Phase: Since the frequency of
service invocations may change over time (e.g., change in
the distribution of users, the popularity of service, mobility
of users, etc.), the service provider needs to redistribute its
ofﬂoaded services based on the new statistics. Thus, each edge
server periodically shares the locally collected statistics with
the centralized cloud server. The latter recalculates service
granularity (δs), service potential reusability (σs), and the
service punishment (ρs), and redistributes services accord-
ingly. Compared with the jump-starting phase, the service
punishment metric is included in the procedure to measure
how worth is re-ofﬂoading a service after the eviction. This
will result in better preference list construction and hence
better services’ redistribution.
C. Performance Analysis
In the following, we analyze the performance of the pro-
posed ofﬂoading scheme (Algorithm 1).
Theorem 2. The proposed algorithm achieves the stability of
service ofﬂoading decision.
Proof. Since service invocation and preferences can vary dur-
ing the service’s lifetime, the study of the outcome matching
stability is not a trivial dilemma. A service s may prefer to be
ofﬂoaded to a speciﬁc edge server e1 ≻s e2, and abruptly it
does not e1 ⊁s e2. The sudden and unexpected change leads
to triggering an exchange request, thereby causing a potential
unstable situation.
According to [22], a many-to-many matching game is stable
if it ends up being a two-sided exchange-stable matching.
Deﬁnition 8 (Two-sided exchange-stable matching). a given
outcome matching game µ is a two-sided exchange-stable
matching if there does not exist a pair of services (s1, s2)
such that:
Θs1(µ(s2)) ≥Θs1(µ(s1)),
(13a)
Θs2(µ(s1)) ≥Θs2(µ(s2)),
(13b)
Φµ(s1)(s2) ≥Φµ(s1)(s1),
(13c)
Φµ(s2)(s1) ≥Φµ(s2)(s2),
(13d)
∃z ∈{s1, s2, µ(s1), µ(s2)}.
(13e)
so that any of the above conditions (13a)-(13e) is strictly
veriﬁed.
According to this deﬁnition, two services can change their
ofﬂoading destination only if both gain a beneﬁt from the
exchange. Similarly, if two edge servers want to exchange the
ofﬂoading request of two services, the associated services have
to get an advantage on that. Indeed, an exchange is approved
only if both involved players (i.e., services and edge servers)
requesting service ofﬂoading, strictly improves their overall
reuse gain and reduces their cost.

7
Let S1 denote the set of services to be ofﬂoaded at the end
of the ﬁrst stage of jump-starting phase. It can be clearly noted
that |S1| > 0 and is bounded by the capacity of the edge server.
We can say that for an ofﬂoaded service s ∈S1, the associated
edge servers cannot change their service ofﬂoading decision
(i.e., all services in S1 are stably ofﬂoaded to the appropriate
edge servers). This is because Θs() and Φe(), deﬁned in
Eqs. (11) and (12), respectively, are unable to change since
all of the terms they rely on stay constant regardless of any
possible exchange. In addition, for each service s that still
needs to be ofﬂoaded at the end of the ﬁrst stage of jump-
starting phase, we have a stable matching by providing a
reductio ad absurdum.
In the following, we assume that at a time instant τ ∗of
stage 2 completion where all services have been ofﬂoaded to
the associated edge servers, there exists a services pair (s1, s2)
such that conditions (13a)-(13e) are veriﬁed.
Focusing on condition (13a), we must have:
Θs1(e2) ≥Θs1(e1).
(14)
Supposing that s1 and s2, at the allocation time τ with
τ < τ ∗, are ofﬂoaded to edge server e1 and e2, respectively,
we must have Θs1(e1) ≥Θs1(e2), hence:
1
τ + υs1
e1
≥
1
τ + υs2
e2
.
(15)
where υs
e is the experienced network delay of ofﬂoading
service s to edge e.
As a consequence, we must have the allocation time for s1
during τ is equal to the allocation time during τ ∗, otherwise
(14) would be impossible. This is due to the second step of the
jump-starting phase, where it does not take out any previously
accepted service ofﬂoading request and by consequence, the
expected waiting time on a given edge server cannot be
reduced. Similarly, we can undertake the same analysis on
conditions (13b)–(13d). We will have at the end the allocation
time for s1 during τ is equal to the allocation time during
τ ∗. As a consequence, condition (13e) cannot be veriﬁed.
This results in contradicting our initial assumption, and hence
we can conclude that the proposed algorithm is a two-sided
exchange-stable matching.
IV. EXTENDED WHISTLE: OUT-EDGE REUSE SHARING
SCHEME
Since edge servers are limited in resources compared with
boundless cloud servers, it is not feasible to ofﬂoad all services
from the cloud to the edge. Multiple (near) edge servers
may host different services according to their preference lists.
It is likely possible that an edge server receives tasks for
execution in which their associated services have not been
ofﬂoaded to the said server. Bouncing back these tasks to the
cloud for remote execution is the only solution, which might
fail to address the latency requirements. Indeed, redirecting
the task’s computation to a near edge server that has the
requested service is better than ofﬂoading the task to the
cloud. In the following, we extend WHISTLE to perform a
horizontal computation ofﬂoading between near edge servers
instead of arranging a vertical ofﬂoading with the cloud.
EXTENDED WHISTLE tends to match one service to multiple
near edge servers, which can be formed at one-to-many
matching. As long as the computation reuse is concerned, the
computation reuse will be shared outside the local edge server.
That being the case, the preference lists need to be adjusted
accordingly considering the service reusability.
A. Preference Lists
For each received task with a non-ofﬂoaded service, the
edge server tries to ﬁnd the near edge server that has the
requested service and is able to execute the task with the
minimum cost compared to ofﬂoading the task to a distant
cloud server. Similarly, each neighbor edge server tries to
select which tasks can execute with the available resources.
Service’s Preference List. For a given service s ∈S,
the utility function Θ′
s(·) is evaluated by considering the
communication cost and the service potential reusability, and
is given as shown in Eq. (16):
Θ′
s(i) =
1
Γ(s) + σs
,
∀e ∈E′.
(16)
where E′ deﬁnes the list of neighbor edge servers located in
one-hop.
Edge’s Preference List. Similarly, for a given edge server
e ∈E, the utility function Φ′
e(·) is evaluated by considering
the computation cost, the reuse cost, and the ofﬂoading gain,
and is given as shown in Eq. (17):
Φ′
e(s) =
1
χ(s) + η(s) + ϕs
,
∀s ∈S′.
(17)
where S′ deﬁnes the list of ofﬂoaded services at the said edge
server.
B. EXTENDED WHISTLE Scheme
EXTENDED WHISTLE scheme (shown in Algorithm 2)
starts by constructing the preference lists for both services
and neighbor edge servers (lines 1-6). An edge server after
receiving a task non-associated with any local hosted service,
try to ﬁnd a better match with the available list of near edge
servers.
The two-matching stage is conducted for all non-ofﬂoaded
services at the current edge server yet available at near-edge
servers. The aim is to ﬁnd the best edge server that can execute
the task with less computation, mainly by using computation
reuse instead of computation from scratch. Hence, the current
edge selects the most suitable near edge server to execute
the received task based on the preference list. If a preferable
edge is running out of resources, the DAA algorithm jumps to
the next desirable edge server. The process is repeated until
matching with an edge server that can execute the task. The
best matching case is achieved with full computation reuse
while the least matching case is done with computation from
scratch. If no match is found, the task is forwarded to the
cloud for remote execution.

8
Algorithm 2: EXTENDED WHISTLE scheme.
1 for (each service s ∈S′) do
2
Construct the preference list Θs(·) according to
Eq. 16;
3 end
4 for (each edge server e ∈E′) do
5
Construct the preference list Φe(·) according to
Eq. 17;
6 end
7 for (each requested task) do
8
off ←False;
9
for (each available edge server e) do
10
if capacity is not full then
11
Ofﬂoad the received task to edge server e;
12
off ←True;
13
else
14
Reject the proposed edge with DAA;
15
end
16
end
17
if (off is False) then
18
Ofﬂoad the task to cloud;
19
end
20 end
21 do
22
for (each non-ofﬂoaded service s) do
23
Update Θ′
s(·);
24
Propose the prefered edge server;
25
end
26
for each (requested edge server e) do
27
Accept the preferred service among candidates;
28
Reject other services;
29
end
30 while (all tasks are non-ofﬂoaded);
C. Performance Analysis
Now, we analyze the performance of EXTENDED WHISTLE
scheme, a one-to-many matching strategy (Algorithm 2).
Theorem 3. The proposed algorithm achieves a stable match-
ing.
Proof. Before proving the stability matching of the proposed
algorithm, let us start with some deﬁnitions:
Deﬁnition 9 (Blocking Pair). a service s and an edge server
e form a blocking pair if both prefer the others than their
currently matched results.
Deﬁnition 10 (Stable Matching). a one-to-many matching
game µ is deﬁned as stable game if it is not blocked by any
pair.
Assuming that the outcome of the matching game µ(s) = e′,
but e and s form a blocking pair, which means that both
e and s prefer to be matched each other, but they have not
been matched. Thus, we have µ(s) = e, e ≻s e′. However,
according to Algorithm 2, µ(s) = e is not the matching result,
which means that the edge e has abandoned the service s
during the matching process. Furthermore, the ﬁnal match
for s is e′, that is e′ ≻s e. This results in contradicting
our initial assumption, and hence we can conclude that the
proposed computation ofﬂoading algorithm achieves a stable
matching.
V. EVALUATION PERFORMANCE
This section presents the evaluation performance of the
proposed schemes. We will start by describing the simulation
setup, evaluated metrics, and then discussing the obtained
results.
A. Simulation Setup
The proposed schemes have been implemented using the
Python programming language. The implementation includes
computation ofﬂoading, computation reuse, and out-edge reuse
sharing. We have evaluated WHISTLE in comparison with:
• Cloud: all tasks are forwarded to the cloud for remote
execution. The cloud has immense computation resources
but is located far away from users.
• Native Edge: services are ofﬂoaded to the edge server
randomly. The edge server provides only computation
without applying the computation reuse concept.
• Genetic Algorithm (GA): the service provider searches for
a good set of services to ofﬂoad aiming at minimizing the
delay. The initial population is a set of services with the
highest frequency, while the ﬁtness score is calculated
based on the service invocation number.
• Simulated Annealing (SA): the service provider selects
randomly a service and ofﬂoads it to the edge server. If
the selected service improves the overall delay, then it
is accepted. Otherwise, the service provider makes the
selection with some probability less than 1. The proba-
bility decreases exponentially with the ineffectiveness of
the service selection.
• Greedy Algorithm: services are ofﬂoaded to the edge
server using a greedy algorithm. By saying greedy, we
mean that the service provider tends to fully utilize the
available resources at the edge server.
• Matching Algorithm: service provider matches, using
matching theory strategy, the existing services with avail-
able resources in order to decide the service ofﬂoading
process. The decision is based on the preference lists
without including the service reusability. The edge server
provides only computation without utilizing the compu-
tation reuse concept.
To further demonstrate the effectiveness of computation reuse,
we implemented each ofﬂoading scheme with and without
reuse feature. The evaluation has been carried on an Intel Core
i7-1075 CPU system clocked at 2.6 GHz, with 16 GB of RAM,
running Windows 10 Education 64-bit. Table II provides a
summary of the used parameters.
The evaluation has been conducted using Alibaba Clus-
ter Dataset [23]. We have used the tasks’ batch that has
up to 14295730 tasks. The computation workload has been
implemented to match the tasks in the dataset. These tasks
are grouped into 12 distinct services. Table III shows the

9
TABLE II: Experimental parameters.
Parameter
Value
Hops to the edge
1
Hops to cloud
[5 −10]
Edge capacity
6 −10 services simultaneously
Number of tasks
[1000 −10000]
Tasks arrival rate
[10 −50] tasks per seconds
Input redundancy
[10 −80]%
Replacement policy
LFU
Dataset
Alibaba Cluster Dataset
Number of trials
10
frequency and redundancy of each type of service. We have
also implemented Least Frequency Used (LFU) policy in order
to clean the Reuse Table by removing the entries that have a
smaller frequency rate and keep room for popular inputs.
B. Evaluated Metrics
We present the 90th percentile of the results collected
after running 10 trials. Hereafter, we measured the following
metrics:
• Task completion time: refers to the sum of communication
and computation time to execute a task. It is calculated
as the sum of the time elapsed between the generation of
a task by the end-user, the execution of the task (either
at the edge or the cloud server), and the reception of the
results by the requested end-user.
• Task computation time: refers to the time elapsed between
the reception of the task by the edge or cloud server
and the production of the result. This metric indicates
the computation time (e.g., computation from scratch
or computation with reuse) and the waiting time before
execution.
• Resource utilization: refers to the claimed capacity of the
resources utilized by the server to execute the received
tasks.
• Computation load: refers to the amount of computation
executed at the cloud, at the edge, and at the edge after
performing computation reuse to satisfy received tasks.
TABLE III: Service’s Redundancy.
Service
Frequency
Redundancy (%)
S1
12
0.00008
S2
488
0.00341
S3
5519
0.03861
S4
6543
0.04577
S5
8889
0.06218
S6
28777
0.20130
S7
35061
0.24526
S8
53933
0.37727
S9
322929
2.25892
S10
399489
2.79446
S11
1226388
8.57870
S12
12207702
85.39404
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
 7000
 8000
 9000
 10000
Avg. Completion Time (s)
No. of Tasks
Edge wo Reuse
Matching wo Reuse
Greedy wo Reuse
GA wo Reuse
SA wo Reuse
Cloud
Whistle
Greedy w Reuse
GA w Reuse
SA w Reuse
Fig. 3: Tasks completion time.
• Reduction rate: refers to the amount of reduced commu-
nication and computation while using computation reuse
at the edge. This metric indicates the gain earned with
WHISTLE and EXTENDED WHISTLE schemes.
C. Experimental Results
Fig. 3 shows the average completion time when the num-
ber of tasks increased. The results indicate that completing
the execution of tasks at the cloud has the largest delay
since transmitting large size of inputs data requires more
time especially when the core network is congested. Indeed,
ofﬂoading the computation at the edge may provide better
results, but only when selecting the suitable service to ofﬂoad.
For instance, random computation ofﬂoading at the edge
exceeds the large time produced by the cloud. This is due
to the randomness of decision-making. On the other hand,
greedy, simulated annealing, genetic algorithm, and matching
schemes without reuse perform better than the cloud since
the ofﬂoading decisions are well-rounded, but with better
strategies that address that consider the server capacity and
distribution of tasks. We also notice that simulated annealing
is better than greedy since it uses a probabilistic technique
to approximate a global optimum. Similarly, the matching
theory is better than the genetic algorithm due to the scalability
of matching services with edge servers without performing
thermodynamics principles. The same behavior occurs when
computation reuse is applied. Indeed, applying computation
reuse at the edge grants better results since more tasks gain
less computation. WHISTLE outperforms all schemes because
of the optimal ofﬂoading decision that takes into account
the reusability of computation. Moreover, we can notice that
WHISTLE exempliﬁes an inverse correlation, where the num-
ber of tasks increases the completion time decreases. This
is due to the redundancy in input data that leads to more
computation reuse and less computation overload.
Fig. 4 presents the average computation time when the
number of tasks increases. The results show that random
ofﬂoading at the edge has the worse output since most of
the ofﬂoaded services have fewer invocations and hence tasks
need to be bounced back after a long waiting time for remove
execution at the cloud. Similarly, greedy, simulated annealing,
genetic algorithm, and matching schemes without reuse have

10
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
 7000
 8000
 9000
 10000
Avg. Computation Time (s)
No. of Tasks
Edge wo Reuse
Matching wo Reuse
Greedy wo Reuse
GA wo Reuse
SA wo Reuse
Cloud
Whistle
Greedy w  Reuse
GA w Reuse
SA w Reuse
Fig. 4: Task’s Computation Time.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
10
20
40
60
80
Resource Utilization (%)
Edge Capacity (%)
Edge wo Reuse
Greedy wo Reuse
SA wo Reuse
GA wo Reuse
Matching wo Reuse
Greedy w Reuse
SA w Reuse
GA w Reuse
Whistle
Fig. 5: Resource utilization.
better results compared with random ofﬂoading, yet the com-
putation witnesses more waiting time to satisfy all received
tasks with limited computation resources. On the other hand,
cloud computing had better results when considering a small
number of tasks, but when the number of tasks increases, and
even though with unbounded resources, the cloud does not
outperform WHISTLE. The latter beneﬁts from computation
reuse and performs only the lookup process at Reuse Table
instead of computation from scratch. A lookup operation has
a very light load compared with the task’s execution. We
can also notice that when the number of tasks increases, the
average computation time decreases due to the fact that the
received tasks have more redundancy in their inputs that lead
to more computation reuse.
Fig. 5 shows the percentage of resource utilization when
executing tasks. Here, we ﬁx the number of tasks to 10000 and
for each trial, we increase the capacity of the edge server and
observe the resource utilization. The results demonstrate that
ofﬂoading schemes without reuse utilize the entire resources
since more computation is required to satisfy the received
tasks. When computation reuse is applied, we can notice
that fewer resources (with variations based on the ofﬂoading
scheme) are utilized since the reusability of services has not
been taken into consideration. On the other hand, WHISTLE
utilizes only 16% of resources to satisfy all received tasks.
This is due to the fact that lookup operations on tables are not
costly compared with a full task’s execution.
Fig. 6 proves afore-obtained results and depicts the nor-
Fig. 6: Computation load.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
 7000
 8000
 9000
 10000
Reduction Rate
No. of Tasks
Computation
Communication
Fig. 7: Reduction rate.
malized load. We can notice that in the ofﬂoading schemes
without computation reuse, a small ratio of computation is
executed at the edge while more computation is executed at
the cloud. This is due to (i) not all the appropriate services
are ofﬂoaded to the edge and/or (ii) the ofﬂoaded services
could not satisfy a large number of received tasks with the
available resources. However, when we increase the edge
capacity, less computation is bounced back to the cloud since
the edge server can accommodate more services. We also
notice that by applying computation reuse, the results are
improved compared with conventional computation. Finally,
WHISTLE efﬁciently utilizes the edge resources by ofﬂoading
the most invoked services with high reusability at the edge.
Thus, most of the computation (almost 99%) is executed at
the edge server. Combined with Fig. 5’s outputs, we can
conclude that WHISTLE efﬁciently and effectively utilizes the
edge resources.
Fig. 7 shows the reduction rate, for both communication and
computation, when the number of tasks increased. The results
show that with WHISTLE, we could reduce the communication
up to 71% since it restrains the number of traversed data in the
core network. Similarly, WHISTLE reduces the computation
(workload) up to 77% since it eliminates redundant computa-
tion and uses only lightweight lookup operations instead.
Although WHISTLE achieves better results compared to
other schemes, some tasks are bounced back to the cloud

11
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
 7000
 8000
 9000
 10000
Avg. Completion Time (s)
No. of Tasks
Whistle
Extended Whistle
Fig. 8: Task’s completion time.
for remote computation. Their associated services are not
ofﬂoaded to the local edge server. Fig. 8 evaluates the per-
formance of EXTENDED WHISTLE. From the results, we can
see that, with EXTENDED WHISTLE, and just by forwarding
the computation to the near edge server, we could improve the
completion time by 13%, since bouncing the computation to
the cloud consumes more times compared with forwarding it
to the near edge server.
VI. RELATED WORK
Edge computing aims at moving computation and data
analysis from the cloud to edge devices, which will increase
the system’s overall analytic capacity. In fact, edge computing
has shown a great increase in capacity and resiliency, gain
better security and privacy protection, and leverage the 5G
network’s reduced latency. Computation ofﬂoading is one of
the active research in edge computing. For instance, Xu et
al. [24] focused on computation ofﬂoading from end-users to
edge servers. The edge server caches different services in-
cluding their libraries so that the ofﬂoaded computation can be
executed. The authors designed an online algorithm that jointly
optimizes dynamic services caching and task ofﬂoading in
dense cellular networks. Chen et al. [25] designed a three-step
algorithm to jointly manage computation and communication
resources aiming to minimize the overall energy, computa-
tion, and delay. The designed algorithm comprises a semi-
deﬁnite relaxation, alternating optimization, and sequential
tuning. Sundar et al. [26] focused on ofﬂoading dependent
tasks with communication delay and deadline constraints.
The authors designed a heuristic-greedy allocation scheme
that tends to allocate a completion deadline for each task
and greedily optimizes the scheduling of each task subject
to its time allowance. Zhang et al. [27] investigated the
task ofﬂoading and resource allocation problem in ultra-dense
networks. The authors designed an online task ofﬂoading and
resource allocation scheme based on Lyapunov optimization
using decomposition methods, matching games, and geometric
programming.
With the massive increase in connected devices and the
nature of applications, various attempts have been proposed to
further enhance the performance of edge computing. Computa-
tion reuse is one of the pillar mechanisms used in compute-less
networking. Computation reuse aims at caching the inputs and
output of popular computation and use it to fulﬁll the newly
coming tasks that have similar input data. By doing so, a large
number of redundant computations will be eliminated and
hence both computation resources and end-to-end delay will
be improved. Al Azad et al. [28] discussed the promise and
challenges to achieve pervasive computation deduplication and
reuse at the edge of the network. The concept of computation
deduplication aims at inferring whether computation reuse
is possible for the arrived task compared with the already
executed/stored tasks. Drolia et al. [29] designed an image
recognition system to meet the latency-sensitive nature of the
application. The designed system uses a web cache to store
different computation at the edge and use it to recognize
similar inputs. The authors also balanced computation between
edge and cloud so that they achieve larger latency. Lee et
al.
[30] presented an empirical study for using computa-
tion reuse at edge networks. The authors motivated their
studies with different use cases and scenarios where users
send redundant tasks (i.e., redundant input data). Through
this study, the authors showed computation reuse at the edge
has the potential to reduce resource utilization and lessen
the time needed for the completion. Guo et al.
[31], [32]
designed a compute-less architecture that eliminates redun-
dant architecture by performing approximate deduplication.
The designed architecture uses locality-sensitive hashing to
identify similar input data, store the computation, and then
share the processing results between applications. Although
the architecture maximizes deduplication opportunities, cross-
sharing the computation between applications requires further
investigation in security and privacy. Other efforts have been
proposed to merge next-generation Internet architecture, such
as Information-Centric Networking (ICN) or Named Data
Networking at the edge networking by leveraging computation
reuse. Mastorakis et al. [33] studied the merger of edge
computing with ICN by using naming abstraction. The authors
proposed to use computation reuse at the edge to satisfy tasks
at the edge with the minimum cost.
Game theory is an important tool for decision-making in
communication networks [34]. Various attempts have been
presented in the literature that uses game theory for optimal
assignment tasks. For instance, Zhang et al. [27] studied task
computation ofﬂoading in mobile edge networks. The authors
used matching theory for sub-channel allocation in order to
optimize the efﬁciency of network energy and service delay.
Amine et al. [35] used matching theory to address the energy
issues in mobile cellular ultra-dense networks. The authors
modeled the co-channel deployment problem as a many-to-
many matching game and then introduced a many-to-many
stable matching scheme that assigns each macro-indoor user
to the most suitable base station. Filali et al.
[36] used a
one-to-many matching game to assign each switch to SDN
controllers with a minimum quota. The quota represents the
utilization of the processing capacity of the controller. Liu et
al.
[37] focused on multi-user computation ofﬂoading in
vehicular networks. The problem is modeled as a game theory
and a distributed algorithm is designed to provide an efﬁcient
computation ofﬂoading. Similarly, Messous et al. [38] studied

12
computation ofﬂoading in unmanned aerial vehicle networks
and designed a non-cooperative game that tends to optimally
provide computation locally, at the edge server, or powerful
edge server so that achieve better performance.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we designed WHISTLE, a compute-less driven
network that adopts service ofﬂoading and computation reuses
concepts. WHISTLE is a many-to-many matching game that
enables service providers to ofﬂoad their most invoked and
highly reusable services to the edge servers so that meet the
desired quality of service requirements. We further extended
WHISTLE to provide a one-to-many matching and allow
computation sharing among near edge servers, and hence
eliminate bouncing the computation back to the cloud. The
designed schemes have been extensively evaluated using real-
world datasets. We were able to achieve the best performance
in terms of task completion time, resource utilization, compu-
tation load, and computation/communication reduction against
various ofﬂoading schemes due to the efﬁciency of matching
strategy and computation caching/reuse. We also provided
theoretical analyses to prove the stability of the designed
strategies.
