Multi-Genre Music Transformer - Composing Full Length Musical Piece
Abhinav Kaushal Keshari (Purdue University)
Abstract
In the task of generating music, the art factor plays
a big role and is a great challenge for AI. Previ-
ous work involving adversarial training (Dong
et al., 2018) to produce new music pieces and
modeling the compatibility (Huang et al., 2021)
of variety in music (beats, tempo, musical stems)
demonstrated great examples of learning this task.
Though this was limited to generating mashups
or learning features from tempo and key distri-
butions to produce similar patterns. Compound
Word Transformer (Hsiao et al., 2021) was able
to represent music generation task as a sequence
generation challenge involving musical events de-
ﬁned by compound words. These musical events
give a more accurate description of notes progres-
sion, chord change, harmony and the art factor.
The objective of the project is to implement a
Multi-Genre Transformer which learns to produce
music pieces through more adaptive learning pro-
cess involving more challenging task where gen-
res or form of the composition is also considered.
We built a multi-genre compound word dataset,
implemented a linear transformer (Katharopoulos
et al., 2020) which was trained on this dataset.
We call this Multi-Genre Transformer, which was
able to generate full length new musical pieces
which is diverse and comparable to original tracks.
The model trains 2-5 times faster than other mod-
els discussed.
1. Related Work
Despite achieving great success in generation challenges
using Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Natural Language Genera-
tion (NLG) there is a factor of art that still makes them
different from human like performance. In terms of NLG
we can relate it to something like the difference between
computer generated article and a piece of art like novels,
biography, etc. For music art factor always come into ac-
count and despite able to produce musical compositions
through Adversarial networks or mixing stems using super-
vised learning the solution still is very different from an
original piece of music which we discuss below.
1.1. Music Generation using GANs
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have provided sig-
niﬁcant progress in producing text, videos and images. Sim-
ilar efforts have been made to bring neural networks to
artistic domain of music. MuseGAN(Dong et al., 2018)
brought a novel model for generating multi-track music.
Until 2018, the progress in using AI to compose music had
been able to produce
• Single-track (monophonic) music
• Multi-track (polyphonic) music by combining several
monophonic melodies in chronological order
Music usually being an art involving multiple instruments
played together requires music to be multi-track and because
music notes are made up of chords, arpeggios or melodies
the idea of using a chronological order setting prevents it
from being generalized.
The paper(Dong et al., 2018) address this challenge in gen-
eralising real music by discussing current technical lacks in
neural network models and how it relates to the real world
music.
1. Music is an art of time and has characteristics of coher-
ence, rhythm, tension and emotion ﬂow. This requires
it to have a Temporal Model.
2. Music compositions usually involves different instru-
ments interacting with one another making the compo-
sitions to be harmonic. To solve this issue a Composer
Model is required.
3. Musical notes are built of chords, arpeggios or
melodies and how they unfold over time; thus introduc-
ing chronological generation of notes is not suitable.
To address this the paper introduces using bars (seg-
ment of time) instead of notes as the basic unit for
composition. And then generate music bar by bar us-
ing transposed convolutional neural networks to learn
translation-invariant patterns.
The paper(Dong et al., 2018) makes contributions in terms
of both ability to artiﬁcially compose realistic music and
use of generative adversarial framework with temporal and
composition models. In short the contributions are:
arXiv:2301.02385v1  [cs.SD]  6 Jan 2023

Multi-Genre Music Transformer - Composing Full Length Musical Piece
• First GAN based model for generating multi-track se-
quence.
• First model which can generate multi-track polyphonic
music.
• Same model can be used as a music accompaniment.
• Creates a new Lakh Pianoroll Dataset (LPD) for multi-
track piano-rolls
• For future work metrics in the domain of artiﬁcial mu-
sic a new set of objective metrics are proposed.
MuseGAN model proposed considers two sub-network gen-
erator Gtemp (temporal structure generator) and Gbar (bar
generator) making the overall generator:
G(z) =

Gbar(Gtemp(z)(t))
	T
t=1
where z is the input noise vector. The strength of the model
is the ability to generate samples having chord like inter-
vals (learning features from temporal model) and melodies
involving pitch overlap among guitar, piano and strings
(learning features from composer model).
The model introduces multi-track by modeling interdepen-
dency of tracks by proposing 3 different generator model
(Jamming, Composer and Hybrid), but the author brings up
these based on the understanding of pop music composition.
This possibly restricts the generator to explore on a broad
spectrum of music and prevents it from being generalised.
Also worth mentioning is that the work relies on multi-track
interdependency, but misses to study about the compatibility
of these tracks which can signiﬁcantly increase the quality
of music being generated. We will see this issue being
addressed in the next paper.
1.2. Modeling the Compatibility of Stem Tracks to
Generate Music Mashups(Huang et al., 2021)
Source separation(Jansson et al., 2017; D´efossez et al.,
2019) makes it possible to generate a music mashup with iso-
lated stems like vocals, drums, piano, etc. The challenge lies
in producing music which has compatibility between these
stems. This paper creates a mashup generation pipeline and
trains a model to predict the compatibility by automatically
learning to adjust key and tempo (characteristics of quality
mashups in real world).
General models trained for harmonic compatibility
(Bernardes et al., 2017; Macas et al., 2018) fails to con-
sider subtle features or surprise mixes of disparate samples
which is quite common in this art domain. Other issue that
arises is audio compatibility models like Neural Loop Com-
biner (Chen et al., 2020) having lack of vocal source and
variety of genres.
The authors designed a self supervised learning model
by recombining the original combination of stems before
source separation to serve as examples of ground truth. To
avoid highly polarized model, semi-supervised learning
was introduced which included producing several random
mashups by mixing different stems and treated them as
unlabeled instances. Label smoothing regularization for
outliers (Zheng et al., 2017) was used to assign uniform
distribution to the unlabeled data for loss computation. This
helps in regularization.
The ﬁnal architecture consists of 3 modules:
1. Music Source Separation:
Uses MSS algorithm
(Jansson et al., 2017) to get different stems vocals,
drums, bass and other.
2. Mashup Database (MashupDB): Using Madmom
(B¨ock et al., 2016) different features from the music
clips are extracted like key, tempo and downbeat in-
formation. Using these features and separate stem
combinations a mashup database is created which will
act as either harmonic or percussion stem candidates
for mashup generation process.
3. Mashup Generation: It uses candidate stems from
MashupDB and adjusts key and tempo to produce
mashups within 3 conditions - original, matched and
unmatched.
The model (Huang et al., 2021) is deﬁned by p(y|V, H, P)
where V , H, and P are input signals for respective stems
vocal, harmonic, and percussion. The output probability p
is used as the mashup compatibility and y ∈{0, 1} stating
good or bad.
The model (Huang et al., 2021) implementation tries to
mimic learning compatibility for producing new mashups
and provides objective and subjective evaluation by cross
validation among multiple different datasets. This technique
becomes easier because of the ability of the model to ex-
tract different stems and features and build its own mashup
candidates. This also makes the model training process not
dependent on human labeled data. The model is also ro-
bust as negative data is added along with positive data for
supervised learning. The range of music coverage is also
extensive and the source separation step makes it easier for
the model to be extended to different genres for training.
But the current model design lacks the effective embedding
of different stems while producing a mashup and makes
it dependent on tuning of key and tempo. Currently the
implementation comes up with ﬁxed range of key and tempo
difference for compatibility and does not explain in detail
how they came up with these numbers. Although deﬁning
a range prevents large pitch shifting and time stretching.
Additionally the results of the model ranks positive labeled
data (original) over unlabeled data which might lead to

Multi-Genre Music Transformer - Composing Full Length Musical Piece
concerns of ﬂexibility. Another major challenge of the
model is the large training time which is around 3 days using
an NVIDIA Tesla-V100 GPU whereas using transformer
model signiﬁcantly reduces the training time.
1.3. Music Transformers
With state-of-the art neural network we managed to learn
features in music by deﬁning certain rules on matching
tempo, beats or compatibility. In the previous paper we
also tried to learn compatibility with the help of supervised
learning. The model though suffered with bias as compati-
bility was favoured for matched key or tempo and also lacks
generalization. Compound Word Transformer (Hsiao et al.,
2021) considers music as sequence of events and uses a
Transformer (neural sequence model) (Vaswani et al., 2017)
to generate a new musical sequence.
A musical note can be described by note’s pitch, chord, bar,
duration, velocity (dynamics), placement (onset time). If
we consider these as tokens we can then deﬁne music as
sequence of tokens and these tokens are a part of pre-deﬁned
vocabulary. As music is multi-faceted a particular type of
token can capture only a certain feature like melody, rhythm,
harmony. All the neural networks until now treated these
tokens as equal and thus lacked heterogeneity.
Compound Word Transformer (Hsiao et al., 2021) generates
music in a conceptually different way as it allows tokens
to be of speciﬁc types and let them have their own proper-
ties. Tokens can be of note type (pitch, duration) or metric
type (beginning of new beat, bar). We then deﬁnes a mu-
sical event by combination of such tokens which allows to
capture co-occurrence relationship among the tokens. This
combination of tokens are termed as compound words. So,
now we can represent a music piece (X) as a sequence (S)
of compound words (cp) or S = g(X) = {cpt}T
t=1 where
g(.) is the conversion function to convert music into time-
ordered sequence of musical events and T is the length of
the music sequence.
Theoretically, the model learns over discrete-time dynamic
directed hypergraphs. Consider a graph G = (V, E) (Figure
1) the vertices (V ) are tokens and edges (E) are sequence of
token. Collection of vertices can be deﬁned as a compound
word and hyperedge in this graph represents sequence of
compound words. In ﬁgure 1 v1, v2, v5 are the tokens and
the edge E1 deﬁnes a sequence of tokens whereas e1, e2
deﬁnes a hyperedge (connecting more than 2 nodes). And
transitioning from one hyperedge to another deﬁnes the
sequence of composition words which we are trying to learn.
Using a transformer we are trying to learn the next musi-
cal event or compound word (combination of tokens). The
self attention part of the transformer learns the dependency
among the elements in musical sequence and different feed-
Figure 1. Graphical Representation of Music Space
forward head is used for tokens of different type. In short
the implementation groups tokens to form compound words
and then perform sequence modeling in this sequence of
compound words, the major contributions are:
• Compose pop-piano music of full song length.
• Compound word sequencing with linear transformer
providing state-of-the-art results in terms of quality
with 5-10x faster training and inference time.
• Music deﬁned as Dynamic Directed Hypergraph.
Generating a new musical event or a group of tokens to
be combined as a compound word at each time step is the
backbone of this model, but it relies on assuming that no
two musical events can occur together. The new hyperedge
generated by the Transformer decoder marks other tokens as
[ignore] once an event of a particular token type is detected.
Can this limit the music generation task? Additionally the
model is trained using only pop music which limits the
expressing power of the transformer.
2. Implementation
Compound Word Transformer (Hsiao et al., 2021) was able
to represent music generation task as a sequence generation
challenge involving musical events deﬁned by compound
words. Leveraging this representation we implement a neu-
ral model which learns to produce music pieces through
more adaptive learning process involving more challenging
task where genres or form of the composition is also con-
sidered. This adds the richness of music art in the learning
process of attention driven sequential learning. We will call
this model Multi-Genre Music Transformer and following
are the steps involved for implementing this:
• Building Dataset: This involves generating compound
word dictionary for songs of different genres.

Multi-Genre Music Transformer - Composing Full Length Musical Piece
• Implementing Transformer Model: We implement
our Transformer class, the training steps and the gener-
ation logic for inference.
• Adaptive Learning: We allow our tuned model to
be adaptable by training on a smaller and multi-genre
dataset.
2.1. Building Dataset
To be able to provide a more generalised learning process
for our transformer it needs to be trained with a piano roll
dataset involving musical pieces of variety of genres/style.
The dataset should be based on compound words (Hsiao
et al., 2021) to represent different musical tokens as a com-
bined unit for sequence modeling which is different from
traditional musical dataset (MIDI, REMI).
Figure 2. Dataset Building Pipeline
This required us to build a dataset by selecting music clip-
pings and converting them to piano roll using Onsets and
Frames (Hawthorne et al., 2017). Extracting downbeat and
beat information from these songs using madmom, a mu-
sic signal processing library (B¨ock et al., 2016). Finally
representing these metadata into a compound word repre-
sentation using the dataset generation scripts provided in the
compound word transformer repository1. This also adds on
to the AILabs.tw Pop1K7 dataset (Hsiao et al., 2021) which
currently only includes pop music. Figure 2 demonstrates
the pipeline for creating a new dataset.
Following the pipeline above we managed to create a Com-
pound Word (Hsiao et al., 2021) dataset which involved
1https://github.com/YatingMusic/compound-word-
transformer/blob/main/dataset/Dataset.md
piano roll for 150 musical pieces from 3 different genres
including Electronic Dance Music (EDM), Indie and Hip-
Hop.
2.2. Implementing Transformer Model
We implement a linear transformer(Katharopoulos et al.,
2020) to address long sequence dependency which is a very
relevant factor in music generation due to the presence of
a context or a rhythm in the entire musical piece. Hav-
ing an independent feed-forward head in the Transformer
Decoder allows to improve the loss of independent tokens.
This allows the model to scale for additional perspective
(like genre, form or involving a particular chord progres-
sion) in the music by adding an additional token type. We
implement our transformer model in a generic way which
allows user to deﬁne its own token sampling model, token
embedding model and these can be scalable for any number
of token types. The loss observed at each feed-forward head
is shown in Figure 6. This shows adding a new token (for
genre/style/form) for model to learn can be simply achieved
by adding an independent feed-forward head for the same.
2.2.1. TOKEN EMBEDDING
Figure 3. Demonstrates how each token undergoes independent
embedding before combining with Positional Encoding. Here
T1, T2...Tk are K different tokens for our Transformer each having
its own embedding function and dimension. We are assuming the
Transformer supports K type of tokens.
The input to a transformer requires positional encoding
added to the embedding vector of our input sequence el-
ements. As each element in our sequence is a compound
word (Hsiao et al., 2021) which is combined of different
tokens, we embed each token separately (allowing to have
adaptive size) and then concatenate them. Having an adap-

Multi-Genre Music Transformer - Composing Full Length Musical Piece
tive token size allows to use smaller embedding dimension
for a token type with smaller vocabulary and when we con-
catenate all of these we get an embedding dimension of 512
for our model. Refer to Figure 3 for detailed steps of token
embedding.
2.2.2. TOKEN SAMPLING
For inference, sampling plays a crucial role to avoid degen-
eration and improve diversity. To avoid degeneration we
follow Nucleus Sampling (Holtzman et al., 2019), which is
a stochastic temperature controlled process. This method
samples from the smallest subset of tokens whose cumu-
lative probability mass exceeds a threshold. We also had
each token to have a separate sampling policy by deﬁning
different threshold p and different temperature parameter
τ (Ackley et al., 1985) for reshaping the probability be-
fore sampling. We reused the inference implementation
from Compound Word Transformer (Hsiao et al., 2021) and
tweaked τ to have higher values for chord to allow more
diverse chord progressions. Figure 4 shows the sampling
process and individual feed-forward layer for each token in
the transformer.
Figure 4. Transformer with N self-attention layers and independent
feed-forward head for each token. We ﬁrst predict the Token Type
for the particular time-step and then perform a nucleus sampling
before predicting the remaining tokens.
2.3. Adaptive Learning
After deﬁning the model, the next important step is to imple-
ment the training steps. To support scalable token deﬁnition
in our generalised transformer we make the training steps
modular and general to variable number of token types. This
allows easy addition of a new token and independently mon-
itor gradient descent optimization for the respective loss.
We trained our model in parallel for 2 different conditions.
The ﬁrst set of training was performed on the original AIL-
abs.tw Pop1K7 dataset (Hsiao et al., 2021). The second set
of training took into consideration to provide multi-genre
learning environment for the transformer as it involved train-
ing on a dictionary that was generated from 3 different
genres (EDM, Indie, Hip-Hop).
3. Evaluation and Results
To train a multi-genre transformer the primary objective
was to provide it with a dataset which is richer in variety
than the original pop only dataset. With the help of dataset
building pipeline we managed to create a token set which
has a higher variance allowing the model to have a broader
expressive power. Figure 5 shows the comparison of tokens
between the 2 datasets used.
Figure 5. Left image shows token distributions for the songs in the
generated multi-genre dataset and the right image shows similar
distribution for AILabs.tw Pop1K7 dataset (Hsiao et al., 2021).
After training the model for both the datasets we also ob-
serve (refer to Figure 6) the individual token loss and total
average loss is similar and indicates the model converging.
Additionally, the gradient descent is more gradual using the
multi-genre dataset displaying a more settled progression.
We trained the model with 12 self-attentions layers, 8 feed-
forward heads with model dimension of 512 and batch size
of 4 for 180 epochs which took around 17hrs. Then using
the trained model we generated 20 new full length musical
pieces with an average inference time of 12.56sec/song
which is faster than the compound-word transformer though
having slightly less number of average tokens per song.
Table 1 shows a more detailed comparison.

Multi-Genre Music Transformer - Composing Full Length Musical Piece
Figure 6. Loss vs Epoch for different token types. The last plot corresponds to the average loss for all different token types.
For a qualitative evaluation of the musical pieces that were
produced we compare (Figure 7) the piano rolls of these
with the piano rolls of original tracks that were used to train
the model.
Original Songs
Generated Songs
Figure 7. Piano roll of original and generated songs. We can see a
rich and complete content for the generated songs similar to some
original tracks.
4. Conclusion
In this project we produce music as a sequence of musical
events produced by a trained Transformer. We leverage the
deﬁnition of Compound Word (Hsiao et al., 2021) to deﬁne
musical event by grouping multiple tokens. This grouping
greatly reduces the size of our sequence and boosts long-
range learning. This also reduces the training and inference
time for our model remarkably. We also exploit the feature
of each token having its independent feed-forward head for
prediction to make the model scalable for new token types
that can be introduced in our dictionary. This allows to add
any new token for this transformer very easily which can be
used for musical form, chord progression, etc. Additionally,
we created an entire new dataset consisting of multi-genre
compound word dictionary and trained our model with this
to provide it a more adaptive learning environment. The
compositions that were generated were highly rich in musi-
cal events and were of good quality.
Table 1. Quantitative evaluation results for Multi-Genre Transformer and Compound Word Transformer. Results for Compound Word
Transformer comes from the implementation in the paper (Hsiao et al., 2021).
MODEL
TRAINING TIME
GPU
INFERENCE TIME (/SONG)
AVG TOKENS (/SONG)
MULTI-GENRE TRANSFORMER
17 HRS
9.8GB
12.56 SEC
9190
COMPOUND TRANSFORMER
1.3 DAYS
9.5GB
19.8 SEC
9546

Multi-Genre Music Transformer - Composing Full Length Musical Piece
