Utilizing ASP for Generating and Visualizing
Argumentation Frameworks
G¨unther Charwat, Johannes Peter Wallner, and Stefan Woltran
Vienna University of Technology, Institute of Information Systems 184/2,
Favoritenstraße 9-11, 1040 Vienna, Austria

Abstract. Within the area of computational models of argumentation, the instan-
tiation-based approach is gaining more and more attention, not at least because
meaningful input for Dung’s abstract frameworks is provided in that way. In a
nutshell, the aim of instantiation-based argumentation is to form, from a given
knowledge base, a set of arguments and to identify the conﬂicts between them.
The resulting network is then evaluated by means of extension-based semantics
on an abstract level, i.e. on the resulting graph. While several systems are nowa-
days available for the latter step, the automation of the instantiation process itself
has received less attention. In this work, we provide a novel approach to construct
and visualize an argumentation framework from a given knowledge base. The
system we propose relies on Answer-Set Programming and follows a two-step
approach. A ﬁrst program yields the logic-based arguments as its answer-sets; a
second program is then used to specify the relations between arguments based on
the answer-sets of the ﬁrst program. As it turns out, this approach not only allows
for a ﬂexible and extensible tool for instantiation-based argumentation, but also
provides a new method for answer-set visualization in general.
1
Introduction
Instantiation-based argumentation [7] is a central paradigm in nonmonotonic reason-
ing since it gives a formal handle to separate the logical and non-classical contents of
reasoning in the presence of contradicting information. Hereby, one starts with a knowl-
edge base and constructs arguments from it. Arguments typically consist of two parts,
namely a support, which is grounded in the knowledge base and a claim derived from
it. In [4] the process is described with an underlying propositional knowledge base us-
ing minimal sets of consistent support classically entailing the claim. In a second step,
conﬂicts between these arguments have to be identiﬁed. The obtained arguments and
the relation between them yield a so-called argumentation framework [9]. This simple,
yet expressive formalism is basically a directed graph whereby the arguments are repre-
sented via vertices and the conﬂicts with directed edges. Argumentation frameworks are
then evaluated with one of the numerous semantics for abstract argumentation available,
resulting in potentially multiple acceptable sets of arguments [3].
Here we are only interested in the instantiation part, however, which received less
attention wrt. realized systems. Notable exceptions are the Carneades system, which
can construct arguments using heuristics [16] and the recent TOAST implementation
arXiv:1301.1388v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jan 2013

2
G. Charwat et al.
for the ASPIC+ framework [27]. The reason for the lack of implementations is po-
tentially twofold: First, due to the inherent high complexity of the problem; already
constructing a single argument is hard for the second level of the polynomial hierarchy
[23]. Secondly, standard instantiation schemes for propositional knowledge bases re-
sult in inﬁnite argumentation frameworks even for ﬁnite knowledge bases [1]. The ﬁrst
obstacle calls for highly expressive languages, making answer-set programming [6, 21,
22] (ASP, for short) a well suited candidate. For the second obstacle, we restrict our-
selves here to arguments that have their claims coming from an a priori speciﬁed set of
formulae.
To summarize, we aim here for a system which takes as input a knowledge base as
well as a set of potential claims and produces the instantiated argumentation framework,
such that the latter can be processed by other argumentation tools, e.g. ASPARTIX [11]
or CEGARTIX [10]. More speciﬁcally, our contributions are as follows:
– We provide ASP programs1 to encode the construction of arguments as well as
the construction of the conﬂicts. For the second task, the answer-sets of the ﬁrst
encoding are used as input. Thus we can make use of the high sophistication modern
ASP systems have reached [15, 20]. Moreover, since the argument construction and
conﬂict identiﬁcation are declaratively described via ASP code, the system is easily
adaptable to other notions of arguments or conﬂicts.
– We present a system that, on the one hand, takes care of passing the answer-sets
from one program to another. On the other hand, the system uses the answer-sets
of the two programs for visualization in form of a graph. In our case we obtain an
argumentation framework. Finally, this result can be exported and used by other
systems for abstract argumentation.
As a by-product, we observed that this method is by no means restricted to the
argumentation domain. Ultimately, it allows for a user-driven graph representation of
the collection of answer-sets of a given input program, thus acting as a tool for ASP
visualization in general. The most interesting feature of the tool is that the concrete
speciﬁcation for two answer-sets being in relation is given by an ASP program itself. In
recent years, ASP has beneﬁted from the rising number of development and visualiza-
tion tools, e.g. ASPViz [8], ASPIDE [14], Kara [19] and IDPDraw [29]. These tools so
far have focused on presentations of single answer-sets of the given program. However,
in certain applications it is not only the single answer-sets which are of interest, but the
relation between them.
While visualization is a rather new research branch in ASP, it has gained more at-
tention in the argumentation community, where dedicated visualization tools have been
proposed already in the late 90s (e.g. [2, 5, 11, 18, 24–26, 28], including Debategraph2
and Rationale3). Many of these support the argument construction by a user via different
means, such as automated reasoning, input masks and database querying. Compared to
these systems, our approach combines the computational power of high-sophisticated
ASP systems with visualization aspects. Moreover, thanks to the declarative nature of
1 http://dbai.tuwien.ac.at/proj/argumentation/vispartix/
2 http://debategraph.org
3 http://rationale.austhink.com/

Utilizing ASP for Generating and Visualizing Argumentation Frameworks
3
the ASP encodings specifying the instantiation step, we believe that the strength of our
approach lies in its ﬂexibility and its expandability to new argumentation formalisms.
This paper is structured as follows: We brieﬂy introduce argumentation and ASP in
Section 2. Then, in Section 3, we present ASP encodings for constructing an argumen-
tation framework. In Section 4 we outline a novel visualization tool which is used for
representing relations between answer-sets. A ﬁnal discussion is given in Section 5.
2
Preliminaries
We provide the necessary background from argumentation theory and ASP for this
work. In particular we will explain the argumentation process based on argumentation
frameworks [9] as well as brieﬂy recall the concepts for disjunctive logic programs.
2.1
Argumentation
In this section we introduce formal argumentation. We start with the underlying process
[7], which we will utilize in our context. The general process consists of three steps.
First, given a knowledge base, arguments and their relationships are instantiated. After
this instantiation the arguments are treated as abstract entities, without considering their
concrete content. Secondly conﬂicts are resolved using appropriate semantics on the
abstract instantiation and ﬁnally conclusions are drawn.
In this work the knowledge base K is a (potentially inconsistent) set of proposi-
tional logic formulae. We construct the formulae with the usual connectives ¬, ∨, ∧, →,
the negation, disjunction, conjunction and implication, respectively. Furthermore entail-
ment and logical equivalence of formulae is denoted by |= and ≡, respectively. We write
formulae with lowercase Greek letters α, β, γ, ....
Example 1. Consider the following simple and inconsistent example knowledge base:
K = {a, a →b, ¬b}
The instantiation step now constructs arguments and relations among them based on
the information available in K according to [4]. The abstract representation we utilize
for this purpose is the widely studied argumentation framework [9]. An argumentation
framework (AF) is a directed graph F = (Args, Att), with the vertices (Args) being ab-
stract arguments and the directed edges (Att) denote attacks between them to represent
conﬂicts.
The instantiation of an AF now consists of two parts, namely the argument con-
struction and the attack relation construction. An argument A = (S, C) consists of a
support for the argument and a claim. The support is a subset of the knowledge base K
and the claim is a single logical formula. The support must be a consistent and subset
minimal set of formulae, which entails the claim.
Here the arguments are pairs of support and claim to provide a formal basis for ar-
gument construction. When plugged in the argumentation framework we abstract from
this “inner” structure and collapse every pair of support and claim into one abstract
argument. This is the abstraction procedure of the overall process.

4
G. Charwat et al.
We note that argument construction here differs from the usual argument deﬁnition
in the literature. In particular the claim can be taken only from a pre-deﬁned set C.
Using a pre-deﬁned set of claims, we can restrict ourselves to reasonable claims, e.g.
not involving tautologies. In this way we prohibit the construction of inﬁnitely many
arguments that could otherwise result from inﬁnitely many syntactically different for-
mulae which are semantically equivalent. This restriction comes with a disadvantage
however, as the set of pre-deﬁned claims must be chosen with care, since inconsistent
conclusions might be drawn otherwise. Indeed, [17] identify conditions for rational and
consistent end results, which require the existence of speciﬁc arguments, which must
be included in C. On the other hand, this restriction is in line with the concept of cores
of argumentation frameworks [1], which try to preserve desired properties while using
only a subset of all possible arguments.
Example 2. Continuing Example 1, let the set of claims be C = K ∪{¬a, b, a ∧¬b}.
Then we can construct the following arguments:
a1 = ({a}, a)
a4 = ({¬b, a →b}, ¬a)
a2 = ({a →b}, a →b)
a5 = ({¬b}, ¬b)
a3 = ({a, a →b}, b)
a6 = ({a, ¬b}, a ∧¬b)
For the construction of the attack relation several options were studied in literature.
The basic idea for attacks between arguments underlying all of these options is that
some sort of inconsistency occurs between them. We take the attack deﬁnitions from
[17] and illustrate two types, defeat and directed defeat. An argument A = (S, C)
attacks an argument A′ = (S′ = {φ′
1, ..., φ′
m}, C′) using defeat if C |= ¬(φ′
1∧...∧φ′
m).
The former directly defeats the latter if C |= ¬φ′
i for one i, 1 ≤i ≤m.
Example 3. Continuing Example 2, the AF in Figure 1 illustrates the result using the
direct defeat on the arguments built from K and the claims C. Note that e.g. a3 and a5
are not mutually attacking each other, since the claim of a5 does not entail a negated
support formula of a3.
Fig. 1. Argumentation framework
a1
a4
a3
a6
a5
a2
This completes the ﬁrst step of the argumentation process, namely the AF con-
struction out of the knowledge base. For the conﬂict resolution a plethora of argu-
mentation framework semantics exist. A basic property for semantics is the conﬂict-
free property, which states that a set M of arguments in an AF F is conﬂict free if
there are no attacks between them in F. A set of arguments M is stable in an AF

Utilizing ASP for Generating and Visualizing Argumentation Frameworks
5
F = (Args, Att) if it is conﬂict free and all arguments outside are attacked from M,
i.e. ∀a ∈(Args \ M) ∃b ∈M with (b, a) ∈Att.
Example 4. If we take the argumentation framework from Example 3, then the stable
semantics selects

{a1, a5, a6}, {a1, a2, a3}, {a2, a4, a5}
	
as acceptable subsets of ar-
guments.
The last step of the argumentation process deals with drawing conclusions from the
sets of acceptable arguments. One can look at the content of the abstract arguments
which were accepted, e.g. one can derive the deductive closure of this content.
In general every step of this process is intractable. Hence we need sophisticated
systems for tackling these steps, which makes ASP a suitable choice for embedding the
process in. A more detailed computational complexity analysis can be found in [23].
2.2
Answer-Set Programming
In this section we recall the basics of disjunctive logic programs under the answer-sets
semantics [6, 22].
We ﬁx a countable set U of (domain) elements, also called constants. An atom is an
expression p(t1, . . . , tn), where p is a predicate of arity n ≥0 and each ti is either a
variable or an element from U. An atom is ground if it is free of variables. BU denotes
the set of all ground atoms over U.
A (disjunctive) rule r is of the form
a1 ∨· · · ∨an ←b1, . . . , bk, not bk+1, . . . , not bm
with n ≥0, m ≥k ≥0, n + m > 0, where a1, . . . , an, b1, . . . , bm are atoms, and
“not ” stands for default negation. The head of r is the set H(r) = {a1, . . . , an} and
the body of r is B(r) = {b1, . . . , bk, not bk+1, . . . , not bm}. Furthermore, B+(r) =
{b1, . . . , bk} and B−(r) = {bk+1, . . . , bm}. A rule r is a constraint if n = 0. A rule r
is safe if each variable in r occurs in B+(r). A rule r is ground if no variable occurs in
r. A fact is a ground rule without disjunction and empty body. A program is a ﬁnite set
of disjunctive rules.
For any program π, let Uπ be the set of all constants appearing in π. Gr(π) is the
set of rules rσ obtained by applying, to each rule r ∈π, all possible substitutions σ
from the variables in r to elements of Uπ. An interpretation I ⊆BU satisﬁes a ground
rule r iff H(r) ∩I ̸= ∅whenever B+(r) ⊆I and B−(r) ∩I = ∅. I satisﬁes a ground
program π, if each r ∈π is satisﬁed by I. A non-ground rule r (resp., a program π) is
satisﬁed by an interpretation I iff I satisﬁes all groundings of r (resp., Gr(π)). I ⊆BU
is an answer-set of π iff it is a subset-minimal set satisfying the Gelfond-Lifschitz reduct
πI = {H(r) ←B+(r) | I ∩B−(r) = ∅, r ∈Gr(π)}.
3
Instantiation-based Argumentation
In this section we provide our ASP encodings for the construction of arguments from a
knowledge-base K and a set C of claims. As input, each formula in K and C is given by
the unary predicate kb(·) and cl(·), respectively.

6
G. Charwat et al.
Example 5. The input, as given in Example 1 and 2, is speciﬁed by:
{kb(a). kb(imp(a, b)). kb(neg(b)).
cl(a). cl(imp(a, b)). cl(neg(b)). cl(neg(a)). cl(b). cl(and(a, neg(b))).}
First, we introduce the ASP encodings for checking whether a certain variable as-
signment is a model for a given formula (or not). Model checking plays a crucial role
for our instantiation-based approach. Then, we present encodings for the computation
of arguments. Finally, we provide ASP code for some types of attack relations. Note
that an argumentation framework is obtained by two separate ASP program calls where
the ﬁrst one takes as input K and C and returns a separate answer-set for each resulting
argument. The second program receives as input a “ﬂattened” version of all arguments
and computes the attacks between arguments based on different attack type encodings.
3.1
Model Checking
Propositional formulae provide the basis for the construction of arguments and their
attack relations. In fact, we can express most of the deﬁning properties of arguments
(such as entailment of the support to the claim) and attacks by means of propositional
formulae. In this section we provide an ASP encoding that allows us to check whether
a formula α is true under a given interpretation I, i.e. I is a model for α. First, the
formula is split into sub-formulae until we obtain the contained atoms or constants.
Due to brevity, the following encodings only exemplify this for the connectives ∧, ¬
and →. Note that ∨, ̸↔and ↔are supported as well.
πsubformula =

subformula(F ) ←subformula(and(F, ));
(1)
subformula(F ) ←subformula(and( , F ));
(2)
subformula(F ) ←subformula(neg(F ));
(3)
subformula(F ) ←subformula(imp(F, ));
(4)
subformula(F ) ←subformula(imp( , F )).
	
(5)
The atoms and constants of α are then obtained via the encoding πatom. Consider rule
(1) which denotes that a formula is not an atom in case it is of the form and(·, ·) 4.
πatom =

noatom(F ) ←subformula(F ; F 1; F 2), F := and(F 1, F 2);
(1)
noatom(F ) ←subformula(F ; F 1), F := neg(F 1);
(2)
noatom(F ) ←subformula(F ; F 1; F 2), F := imp(F 1, F 2);
(3)
atom(X) ←subformula(X), not noatom(X).
	
(4)
Now we compute whether the interpretation is a model by ﬁrst evaluating the atoms
and constants. In case an atom gets assigned true (false) we derive that the interpreta-
tion for this sub-formula is a model (not a model). Now, the connectives are evaluated
bottom-up based on the model information of the sub-formulae. In particular, this al-
lows to check whether I is a model for our original formula α, or not.
The encoding πismodel exempliﬁes this approach for some of the connectives. In the
subsequent sections we have to apply model checking several times within a single ASP
encoding. In order to avoid side effects of different checks, we introduce an additional
4 Note that the syntax of our encodings is speciﬁc to the grounder gringo [15].

Utilizing ASP for Generating and Visualizing Argumentation Frameworks
7
parameter, K, which serves as a key for identifying the origin of the interpretation that
is currently checked. Suppose, for example, that we want to check satisﬁability of two
different formulae. As the formulae may evaluate to true under different interpretations
we have to distinguish between the truth assignments.
πismodel =

ismodel(K, X) ←atom(X), true(K, X);
(1)
ismodel(K, F ) ←subformula(F ; F 1), F := neg(F 1),
nomodel(K, F 1);
(2)
ismodel(K, F ) ←subformula(F ), F := and(F 1, F 2),
ismodel(K, F 1; F 2);
(3)
ismodel(K, F ) ←subformula(F ), F := imp(F 1, F 2),
ismodel(K, F 1; F 2).
	
(4)
Due to brevity we omit the encoding πnomodel here. Analogous to πismodel it derives
the predicate nomodel(K, F) whenever an atom gets assigned false or a sub-formula
is false under the current interpretation. The complete program for checking whether a
formula evaluates to true under a given variable assignment consists of
πmodelcheck = πsubformula ∪πatom ∪πismodel ∪πnomodel
Example 6. Consider the formula a →b from K of Example 5, i.e. kb(imp(a, b)).
In order to check whether there exists a model we can make use of πmodelcheck in the
following way: Initially, we have to deﬁne an additional rule subformula(X) ←kb(X)
as πsubformula only considers formulae given by the predicate subformula(·). By adding
the program πsubformula ∪πatom the following answer-set is returned:
{kb(imp(a, b)). subformula(imp(a, b)). subformula(a). subformula(b).
noatom(imp(a, b)). atom(b). atom(a).}
Each atom now gets assigned true or false, representing an interpretation. We encode
this by the rule true(k, X) ∨false(k, X) ←atom(X). Note that the speciﬁcation of a
key (in this case k) is mandatory although πmodelcheck is not applied several times in this
example. By adding and running πismodel∪πnomodel four answer-sets are returned. Each
contains the predicates from the previously given answer-set as well as the truth assign-
ment for the atoms a and b and either ismodel(k, imp(a, b)) or nomodel(k, imp(a, b)).
The answer-set obtained by false(k, a) and true(k, b) contains (amongst others)
{false(k, a). true(k, b). ismodel(k, b). nomodel(k, a). ismodel(k, imp(a, b)).}
denoting that I(a) = false, I(b) = true is a model for a →b.
3.2
Forming Arguments
We now derive the arguments from a knowledge base K and a set C of claims. According
to [4], we have to check whether the support entails the claim and if the support is subset
minimal as well as consistent. In order to obtain arguments we ﬁrst guess exactly one
claim and a subset of formulae from K. This guess is encoded as follows:
πarg =

1{ sclaim(X) : cl(X) }1;
(1)
1{ fs(X) : kb(X) }.
	
(2)

8
G. Charwat et al.
The selected claim is denoted by sclaim(·). The predicate fs(·) is derived if the respec-
tive formula from K is contained in the support S of an argument A = (S, C).
Entailment: In order to be a valid argument, the support must entail the claim, i.e. S |=
C must hold. As S |= C, |= S →C must hold as well. Hence, ¬(S →C) ≡¬(¬S ∨
C) ≡S ∧¬C must be unsatisﬁable. Unsatisﬁability of the formula S ∧¬C can be
checked by making use of the saturation technique [12]: We ﬁrst assign true(entail, x)
or false(entail, x) to each atom x in the formula using a disjunctive rule. This al-
lows both true(entail, x) and false(entail, x) to be contained in the resulting answer-
set. Furthermore, all formulae in S and the negated claim C are conjunctively con-
nected. Hence, in case any of those formulae evaluates to false under a variable as-
signment (i.e. nomodel(entail, ·) is derived) we know that ¬(S →C) is not satis-
ﬁed which implies that S |= C evaluates to true under the given interpretation. In
this case we saturate, i.e. we derive true(entail, x) and false(entail, x) for any atom
x. On the other hand, if no formula in S and C derives entails claim the constraint
←not entails claim removes the answer-set. If this is the case, due to the deﬁnition
of stable model semantics in answer-set programming, no answer-set is returned. Only
in case there exists no model for ¬(S →C) all guesses are saturated and we obtain a
single answer-set representing a support S and claim C where S |= C holds.
In the following the program πentailment is given. Note that entail is simply used as
a key for identifying the variable assignment and model check.
πentailment =

true(entail, X) ∨false(entail, X) ←atom(X);
(1)
entails claim ←nomodel(entail, neg(X)), sclaim(X);
(2)
entails claim ←nomodel(entail, X), fs(X);
(3)
←not entails claim;
(4)
true(entail, X) ←entails claim, atom(X);
(5)
false(entail, X) ←entails claim, atom(X).
	
(6)
Subset minimality: The support S of an argument must be a subset minimal set of
formulae, i.e. there must not exist an S′ ⊂S s.t. S′ |= C. Here, we apply the concept
of a loop (see e.g. [13]). For a candidate support S we consider all S′ ⊂S where there
exists exactly one formula α ∈S but α ̸∈S′. In case any such S′ exists where S′ |= C
we know that S is not a support for C. Due to monotonicity of classical logic this is
sufﬁcient since if S′ ̸|= C then also for all S′′ ⊂S′ it holds that S′′ ̸|= C. First, we
deﬁne a total ordering over all formulae fs(·) in S:
π< =

lt(X, Y ) ←fs(X), fs(Y ), X < Y ;
(1)
nsucc(X, Z) ←lt(X, Y ), lt(Y, Z);
(2)
succ(X, Y ) ←lt(X, Y ), not nsucc(X, Y );
(3)
ninf(Y ) ←lt(X, Y );
(4)
inf(X) ←fs(X), not ninf(X);
(5)
nsup(X) ←lt(X, Y );
(6)
sup(X) ←fs(X), not nsup(X).
	
(7)
For any S′ we now assign true(m(K), x) or false(m(K), x) to all atoms x. m(K)
is used as key for identifying the truth assignment. K is the formula α where α ̸∈S′.

Utilizing ASP for Generating and Visualizing Argumentation Frameworks
9
The idea is now to “iterate” over the the ordering, beginning at the inﬁmum inf(·).
Based on the ordering, we now consider every formula from the support: In case the
formula is satisﬁed or corresponds to the removed formula α (i.e. the key K) we derive
model upto(m(α), ·). If we can derive hasmodel(m(α)) we know that the support
S′ = S \ α is satisﬁable and can therefore not be a valid support for our claim. On
the other hand, if any S′ is a valid support we can not derive hasmodel(m(α)) and the
answer-set is removed by the constraint ←not hasmodel(m(α)), fs(α).
πminimize =

true(m(K), X) ←not false(m(K), X), atom(X), fs(K);
(1)
false(m(K), X) ←not true(m(K), X), atom(X), fs(K);
(2)
model upto(m(K), X) ←inf(X), ismodel(m(K), X),
fs(X), X ̸= K;
(3)
model upto(m(K), K) ←inf(K), fs(K);
(4)
model upto(m(K), X) ←succ(Z, X), ismodel(m(K), X),
fs(X), model upto(m(K), Z), X ̸= K;
(5)
model upto(m(K), K) ←succ(Z, K), model upto(m(K), Z),
fs(K);
(6)
hasmodel(m(K)) ←sup(K), model upto(m(K), X),
ismodel(m(K), neg(Z)), sclaim(Z);
(7)
←not hasmodel(m(K)), fs(K).
	
(8)
Consistency: The support S must be a consistent set of formulae. In other words, there
exists a model for the conjunction of all formulae in S. The program πconsistent simply
consists of a guess which assigns truth values to all atoms and a constraint that removes
any unsatisﬁable support.
πconsistent =

1{ true(consistent, X), false(consistent, X) }1 ←atom(X).
(1)
←nomodel(consistent, X), fs(X). }.
	
(2)
The following program then gives all arguments that can be computed from a knowl-
edge base K and a set of claims C:
πarguments = πmodelcheck ∪πarg ∪πentailment ∪π< ∪πminimize ∪πconsistent
Each answer-set obtained by πarguments contains the predicate sclaim(·) and a set of
predicates fs(·), representing claim and support.
Example 7. Consider the input as given in Example 5. The program πarguments returns
the following answer-sets (we restrict ourselves to the relevant predicates):
a1 : {fs(a). sclaim(a).}
a∗
2 : {fs(imp(a, b)). sclaim(imp(a, b)).}
a3 : {fs(a). fs(imp(a, b)). sclaim(b).}
a4 : {fs(neg(b)). fs(imp(a, b)). sclaim(neg(a)).}
a5 : {fs(neg(b)). sclaim(neg(b)).}
a6 : {fs(a). fs(neg(b)). sclaim(and(a, neg(b))).}

10
G. Charwat et al.
Note that due to the deﬁnition of program πminimize and πconsistent several resulting
answer-sets may represent the same derived argument: This is the case for a∗
2 where
actually three models are derived by the program πconsistent. They only differ in the
respective truth assignments true(consistent, ·) and false(consistent, ·). We eliminate
duplicates in an additional post-processing step in order to remove redundant informa-
tion.
3.3
Identifying Conﬂicts between Arguments
We now want to compute attacks between arguments. Therefore we ﬁrst specify en-
codings that are used by every attack type (such as defeat and direct defeat). We then
present encodings for the computation of these attack types.
In order to reason over all arguments we ﬁrst have to “ﬂatten” the answer-sets ob-
tained by πarguments. We specify this by the predicates as(A, fs, ·) and as(A, claim, ·).
A is a numeric key identifying the argument.
Example 8. We illustrate this by the answer-sets a1, a2 and a3 from Example 7. This
input is given by the following facts:
{as(1, fs, a). as(1, sclaim, a). as(2, fs, imp(a, b)). as(2, sclaim, imp(a, b)). as(3, fs, a).
as(3, fs, imp(a, b)). as(3, sclaim, b).}
In order to identify conﬂicts between arguments we ﬁrst guess two arguments.
selected1(·) and selected2(·) contain the keys of the selected arguments.
πatt =

1{selected1(A) : as(A, , )}1.
(1)
1{selected2(A) : as(A, , )}1.
	
(2)
Furthermore, we construct one single support formula for each argument A by con-
junction of all formulae in as(A, fs, ·). As in the previous section we ﬁrst deﬁne an
ordering over all formulae that are contained in the support. The only difference is that
we add the argument’s key A to the predicates inf(A, ·), sup(A, ·) and succ(A, ·, ·). Due
to brevity, the corresponding program π<key is omitted. We can then construct the sup-
port formula by iterating over the ordering and connecting the formulae by conjunction.
Note that the last parameter of fs conj(A, ·, ·) is simply used as an identiﬁer for the cur-
rent position in the iteration. When the supremum is reached we derive support(A, ·)
for A containing the support formula.
πsupport =

fs conj(A, X, X) ←inf(A, X), sup(A, X);
(1)
fs conj(A, and(X, Y ), Y ) ←inf(A, X), succ(A, X, Y );
(2)
fs conj(A, and(O, N), N) ←succ(A, C, N), fs conj(A, O, C);
(3)
support(A, X) ←fs conj(A, X, C), sup(A, C).
	
(4)
For the computation of attacks we again apply the saturation technique. The pro-
gram πatt sat is used to saturate all attack computations. First, we derive all attack type
keys t from the truth assignments true(t, ·) and false(t, ·) of the applied attack type pro-
grams. Note that the corresponding assignments are deﬁned separately in each attack
program. In case attack is derived for all truth assignments in some attack program

Utilizing ASP for Generating and Visualizing Argumentation Frameworks
11
we saturate. Finally, the binary predicate attack(·, ·) is generated. It is used for the
representation of the attack relation between the two arguments.
πatt sat =

attacktype(T ) ←true(T, );
(1)
attacktype(T ) ←false(T, );
(2)
true(T, X) ←attack, atom(X), attacktype(T );
(3)
false(T, X) ←attack, atom(X), attacktype(T );
(4)
←not attack;
(5)
attack(X, Y ) ←selected1(X), selected2(Y ).
	
(6)
We now consider the attack types defeat and direct defeat. The basic idea is to deﬁne
a propositional formula that represents the attack condition. We then assign true(t, x)
or false(t, x) to any atom x using a disjunctive rule. In case every such interpretation
is a model for our attack formula we know that the formula is valid. Otherwise, if
any interpretation is not a model (i.e. attack is not derived) the resulting answer-set
is strictly smaller than those where the interpretation is a model. Such answer-sets are
removed by the constraint ←not attack. Note that this also works in case we consider
several attack types: If we derive attack for all interpretations of a single attack type
we saturate all interpretations of all attack types. As the predicate attack as well as all
assignments true(t, x) and false(t, x) are then contained in all answer-sets for the two
selected arguments we derive every attack relation.
The following program πdefeat exempliﬁes the above described approach. For two
arguments A = (S, C) and A′ = (S′ = {φ′
1, ..., φ′
m}, C′) we have that A defeats A′ if
C |= ¬(φ′
1∧...∧φ′
m). Here we make use of the support derived by π<key ∪πsupport. As
the support is deﬁned as a conjunction of formulae we can directly make use of claim
C and the negated support ¬S′.
πdefeat =

checkDefeat(imp(C, neg(S′))) ←selected1(X), selected2(Y ),
as(X, sclaim, C), support(Y, S′);
(1)
subformula(X) ←checkDefeat(X);
(2)
true(defeat, X) ∨false(defeat, X) ←atom(X);
(3)
attack ←ismodel(defeat, X), checkDefeat(X).
	
(4)
The second program we consider here is πddefeat. A directly defeats A′ if C |= ¬φ′
i
for a φ′
i ∈S′. Hence, we have to consider each formula in S′ separately. Therefore we
use a combination of attack type and φ′
i to identify the truth assignment.
πddefeat =

checkDirectdefeat(Φ, imp(C, neg(Φ))) ←selected1(X), selected2(Y ),
as(X, sclaim, C), as(Y, fs, Φ);
(1)
subformula(X) ←checkDirectdefeat( , X);
(2)
true(ddefeat(T ), X) ∨false(ddefeat(T ), X) ←atom(X),
checkDirectdefeat(T, );
(3)
attack ←ismodel(ddefeat(T ), X), checkDirectdefeat(T, X).
	
(4)
The program πattacks in combination with any attack type programs (such as πdefeat,
πddefeat, ...) computes the respective attack relations.
πattacks = πmodelcheck ∪πatt ∪πsupport ∪π<key ∪πatt sat

12
G. Charwat et al.
Example 9. Continuing our running example, we now consider the ﬂattened input as
exempliﬁed in Example 8 and the program πattacks ∪πddefeat. We obtain 9 answer-sets
that contain the attack information between arguments:
{attack(4, 1).}, {attack(6, 2).}, {attack(4, 3).}, {attack(6, 4).}, {attack(3, 5).},
{attack(3, 4).}, {attack(6, 3).}, {attack(4, 6).}, {attack(3, 6).}
The ﬁrst answer-set, for example, represents that argument a4 = ({¬b, a →b}, ¬a)
attacks (directly defeats) a1 = ({a}, a).
3.4
Overall Approach at a Glance
To sum it up, the overall process of our instantiation-based approach for generating
argumentation frameworks consists of the following steps:
1. A knowledge-base K and a set C of claims are used as input.
2. The encoding πarguments = πmodelcheck ∪πarg ∪πentailment ∪π< ∪πminimize ∪
πconsistent deﬁnes how arguments are derived from K and C: πmodelcheck is gen-
erally used for evaluating formulae under truth assignments. Within πarg, for each
argument A = (S, C) a claim C ∈C and a support S ⊆K is guessed. The encod-
ings πentailment, π< ∪πminimize and πconsistent guarantee that the support entails
the claim, the support is subset minimal and that S is a consistent set of formulae.
3. The resulting arguments are “ﬂattened” and used as input for πattacks.
4. The encoding πattacks = πmodelcheck∪πatt∪πsupport∪π<key ∪πatt sat is shared by
all attack types. πmodelcheck is again needed for model checking. πatt guesses two
arguments at once. πsupport ∪π<key constructs a single support formula for those
arguments by connecting the contained formulae by conjunction. πatt sat saturates
all attack computations.
5. Any attack encodings, such as πdefeat and πddefeat can be used in combination with
πattacks in order to compute the respective attack relations.
4
Visualization of Argumentation Frameworks
In order to visualize argumentation frameworks we make use of the purpose-built tool
ARVis5. ARVis is intended for the visualization of answer-sets and their relations by
means of a directed graph. Each node in the graph represents an answer-set and a di-
rected edge between two arguments represents a relation.
We now describe the process of generating and visualizing argumentation frame-
works by using the encodings πarguments and πattacks. ARVis provides a wizard that
handles the respective steps:
1. Obtain arguments: The program πarguments and a problem instance must be speci-
ﬁed within ARVis. ARVis computes the arguments by invoking an ASP solver.
2. Flatten arguments: The arguments obtained in the previous step are “ﬂattened”,
i.e. a single set of facts is generated in order to be able to reason over all obtained
arguments when computing the attacks.
5 http://dbai.tuwien.ac.at/proj/argumentation/vispartix/#ARVis

Utilizing ASP for Generating and Visualizing Argumentation Frameworks
13
3. Obtain attacks: The program πattacks and the attack type programs are now speci-
ﬁed. The relations between the arguments are computed.
4. Select attack predicate: In general, ARVis accepts any binary predicate that repre-
sents answer-set relations. We deﬁne attack/2 here.
5. Argumentation framework: We obtain a graph visualization consisting of argu-
ments (vertices) and attacks (edges).
6. Export: The obtained argumentation framework can be exported for further pro-
cessing.
Fig. 2. ARVis: Resulting argumentation framework
The argumentation framework resulting from our running example, as represented by
ARVis, is given in Figure 2. The attacks correspond to direct defeats between argu-
ments. Each argument in the graph is represented by its id. By selecting an argument
its claim and support are shown in the text ﬁeld on the right side. All encodings, ARVis
and detailed conﬁguration information is available at
http://dbai.tuwien.ac.at/proj/argumentation/vispartix
ARVis is a general-purpose tool that may also be used in many other areas of re-
search: Consider, for example, the Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP) where the ﬁrst
program computes cities and the second program outputs routes where every city is
visited exactly once. In fact, ARVis can be used for any problem where one is inter-
ested in the relation between answer-sets. It is only necessary to specify two answer-set
programs: One for generating answer-sets and a second one for computing relations
between those answer-sets.
Our approach is different from other available ASP visualization tools: ASPViz [8]
takes two answer-set programs as input, one for the problem encoding and one for
the visualization. The latter is used for visualization for each answer-set of the former

14
G. Charwat et al.
separately. It is realized in Java and works with pre-deﬁned predicates to extract the
visualization of answer-sets. IDPDraw [29] works in a similar fashion, which augments
the presentation by providing also time points to show the result in different evolution-
ary states. Kara [19] from the SeaLion development environment for ASP also provides
visualization of answer-sets using special predicates. ASPIDE [14] gives the user the
opportunity to visualize the dependency graph of the input program and thus allows for
another type of representation.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a novel ASP-based tool for constructing argumenta-
tion frameworks from a given knowledge base. We have provided here the concrete
ASP encodings used to obtain such frameworks when logic-based arguments cf. [4] are
employed. However, similar encodings for further approaches of argumentation are pos-
sible and subject of future work, as well as a performance evaluation of the presented
approach to check its scalability with large knowledge bases.
When designing our tool, ARVis, we tried to keep it as ﬂexible as possible such that
the concrete construction of the framework can be speciﬁed in the logic programs. As it
has turned out, ARVis is thus not only a tool for generating and visualizing argumenta-
tion frameworks but also for graphically representing relations between answer-sets in
a user-speciﬁed manner. Ongoing work thus focuses on application areas where it is the
relation between the answer-sets (rather than the single answer-sets) that can support
the designer of logic programs or where this relation is the relevant output of an ASP
encoding.
Acknowledgments We would like to thank Thomas Ambroz and Andreas Jusits for
implementing and adapting ARVis according to our requirements as well as Torsten
Schaub for providing hints how to process arbitrary formulae via ASP.
This work has been funded by the Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF)
through project ICT08-028, and by the Vienna University of Technology program “In-
novative Projects”.
