IMPROVING COORDINATION IN SMALL-SCALE MULTI-AGENT
DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING THROUGH
MEMORY-DRIVEN COMMUNICATION
Emanuele Pesce
WMG,University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL

Giovanni Montana
WMG,University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL

ABSTRACT
Deep reinforcement learning algorithms have recently been used to train multiple interacting agents
in a centralised manner whilst keeping their execution decentralised. When the agents can only
acquire partial observations and are faced with tasks requiring coordination and synchronisation
skills, inter-agent communication plays an essential role. In this work, we propose a framework for
multi-agent training using deep deterministic policy gradients that enables concurrent, end-to-end
learning of an explicit communication protocol through a memory device. During training, the
agents learn to perform read and write operations enabling them to infer a shared representation of
the world. We empirically demonstrate that concurrent learning of the communication device and
individual policies can improve inter-agent coordination and performance in small-scale systems.
Our experimental results show that the proposed method achieves superior performance in scenarios
with up to six agents. We illustrate how different communication patterns can emerge on six different
tasks of increasing complexity. Furthermore, we study the effects of corrupting the communication
channel, provide a visualisation of the time-varying memory content as the underlying task is being
solved and validate the building blocks of the proposed memory device through ablation studies.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) allows agents to learn how to map observations to actions through feedback reward
signals (Sutton and Barto, 1998). Recently, deep neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015) have had a
noticeable impact on RL (Li, 2017). They provide ﬂexible models for learning value functions and policies, allow to
overcome difﬁculties related to large state spaces, and eliminate the need for hand-crafted features and ad-hoc heuristics
(Cortes et al., 2002; Parker et al., 2003; Olfati-Saber et al., 2007). Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms,
which usually rely on deep neural networks to approximate functions, have been successfully employed in single-agent
systems, including video game playing (Mnih et al., 2015), robot locomotion (Lillicrap et al., 2015), object localisation
(Caicedo and Lazebnik, 2015) and data-center cooling (Evans and Gao, 2016).
Following the uptake of DRL in single-agent domains, there is now a need to develop improved learning algorithms for
multi-agent (MA) systems where additional challenges arise. Markov Decision Processes, upon which DRL methods
rely, assume that the reward distribution and dynamics are stationary (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2017). When multiple
learners interact with each other, this property is violated because the reward that an agent receives also depends
on other agents’ actions (Laurent et al., 2011). This issue, known as the moving-target problem (Tuyls and Weiss,
2012), removes convergence guarantees and introduces additional learning instabilities. Further difﬁculties arise from
environments characterized by partial observability (Singh et al., 1994; Chu and Ye, 2017; Peshkin et al., 2000) whereby
the agents do not have full access to the world state, and where coordination skills are essential.
An important challenge in multi-agent DRL is how to facilitate communication amongst interacting agents. Com-
munication is widely known to play a critical role in promoting coordination between humans (Számadó, 2010).
Humans have been proven to excel at communicating even in absence of a conventional code (De Ruiter et al., 2010).
arXiv:1901.03887v3  [cs.LG]  29 Oct 2019

When coordination is required and no common languages exist, simple communication protocols are likely to emerge
(Selten and Warglien, 2007). Human communication involves more than sending and receiving messages, it requires
specialized interactive intelligence where receivers have the ability to recognize intentions and senders can properly
design messages (Wharton, 2003). The emergence of communication has been widely investigated (Garrod et al., 2010;
Theisen et al., 2010), for example new signs and symbols can emerge when it comes to represent real concepts. Fusaroli
et al. (2012) demonstrated that language can be seen as a social coordination device learnt through reciprocal interaction
with the environment for optimizing coordinative dynamics. The relation between communication and coordination
has been widely discussed (Vorobeychik et al., 2017; Demichelis and Weibull, 2008; Miller and Moser, 2004; Kearns,
2012). Communication is an essential skill in many tasks: for instance, in critical situations, where is of fundamental
importance to properly manage critical and urgent situations, like emergency response organizations (Comfort, 2007).
In multiplayer videogames, it is often essential to reach a sufﬁciently high level of coordination required to succeed
(Chen, 2009).
Two-agents systems have often been studied when looking at the effects of communication on coordination. Galantucci
(2005) showed that humans can easily produce new protocols to overcame the lack of a common language, through
experiments in which pairs of participants playing video games were allowed to send messages through a medium
that prevented the use of standard symbols. In two-players games, like the Battle of the Sexes, improved coordination
resulted when allowing gamers to exchange messages (Cooper et al., 1989). Human conversations can be interpreted as
a bi-directional communication form, where the same entity can both send and receive messages (Lasswell, 1948). This
kind of communication can be efﬁciently explored in small-scale systems through coordination games (Cooper et al.,
1992) and often it is the key to achieve success in real world scenarios such as bargaining with incomplete information
(Brosig et al., 2003).
Analogously, the importance of communication has been recognised when designing artiﬁcial MA learning systems,
especially in tasks requiring synchronization (Scardovi and Sepulchre, 2008; Wen et al., 2012). For example, in
navigation tasks, agents can localise each other more easily through shared information (Fox et al., 2000). In group
strategy coordination, such as automating negotiations, communication is fundamental to improve the ﬁnal outcome
(Wunder et al., 2009; It¯o et al., 2011). A wide range of MA applications have beneﬁtted from inter-agent message
passing including distributed smart grid control (Pipattanasomporn et al., 2009), consensus in networks (You and Xie,
2011), multi-robot control (Ren and Sorensen, 2008), autonomous vehicle driving (Petrillo et al., 2018), elevators
control (Crites and Barto, 1998), soccer-playing robots (Stone and Veloso, 1998) and for language learning in two-agent
systems (Lazaridou et al., 2016).
Recently, Lowe et al. (2017) have proposed MADDPG (Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient). Their
approach extends the actor-critic algorithm (Degris et al., 2012) in which each agent has an actor to select actions and a
critic to evaluate them. MADDPG embraces the centralised learning and decentralised execution paradigm (CLDE)
(Foerster et al., 2016; Kraemer and Banerjee, 2016; Oliehoek and Vlassis, 2007). During centralised training, the
critics receive observations and actions from all the agents whilst the actors only see their local observations. On
the other hand, the execution only relies on actors. This approach has been designed to address the emergence of
environment non-stationarity (Tuyls and Weiss, 2012; Laurent et al., 2011) and has been shown to perform well in a
number of mixed competitive and cooperative environments. In MADDPG, the agents can only share each other’s
actions and observations during training through their critics, but do not have the means to develop an explicit form of
communication through their experiences. The input size of each critic increases linearly with the number of agents
(Lowe et al., 2017), which hinders its scalability (Jiang and Lu, 2018).
In this article, we consider tasks requiring strong coordination and synchronization skills. In order to thoroughly study
the effects of communication on these scenarios, we focus on small-scale systems. This allows us to design tasks with
an increasing level of complexity, and simpliﬁes the investigation of possible correlations between the level of messages
being exchanged and any environmental changes. We provide empirical evidences that the proposed method reaches
very good performance on a range of two-agent scenarios when a high level of cooperation is required. In addition, we
present experimental results for systems with up to six agents in the Supplementary Material (Section B.2 and B.3).
In the real world, there is range of applications involving the coordination of only a few actors, for example motor
interactions like sawing or cooperative lifting of heavy loads (Jarrassé et al., 2012).
In such cases, being able to communicate information beyond the private observations, and infer a shared representation
of the world through interactions, becomes essential. Ideally, an agent should be able to remember its current and past
experience generated when interacting with the environment, learn how to compactly represent these experiences in
an appropriate manner, and share this information for others to beneﬁt from. Analogously, an agent should be able to
learn how to decode the information generated by other agents and leverage it under every environmental state. The
above requirements are captured here by introducing a communication mechanism facilitating information sharing
within the CLDE paradigm. Speciﬁcally, we provide the agents with a shared communication device that can be used to
2

learn from their collective private observations and share relevant messages with others. Each agent also learns how to
decode the memory content in order to improve its own policy. Both the read and write operations are implemented
as parametrised, non-linear gating mechanisms that are learned concurrently with the individual policies. When the
underlying task to be solved demands for complex coordination skills, we demonstrate that our approach can achieve
higher performance compared to the MADDPG baseline in small-scale systems. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
being able to learn end-to-end a communication protocol jointly with the policies can also improve upon a meta-agent
approach whereby all the agents perfectly share all their observations and actions in both training and execution. We
investigate a potential interpretation of the communication patterns that have emerged when training two-agent systems
through time-varying low-dimensional projections and their visual assessment, and demonstrate how these patterns
correlate with the underlying tasks being learned.
This article is organised as follow. In Section 2 a general overview of related work is offered to characterize state-of-the-
art approaches for MARL with special focus on communication systems. Section 3 contains the formalization of the
problem setup, the details of the proposed method and the description of the learning process; all the experiments are
reported in Section 4 where results are presented in terms of numerical metrics to evaluate the performance achieved
on six different scenarios; an analysis of the communication channel is provided to support qualitative insights of the
exchanged messages. Conclusive comments are given in Section 5. In the Supplementary Material, Section A describes
details of MA-MADDPG, a comparative method, and Section B presents a range of additional experiments to further
investigate the effects of memory corruption; changes in performance when increasing the number of agents; an ablation
study to validate the components used in the proposed method; box plots with the main results, an assessment of the
robustness of the method when changing the random seeds; additional analyses of the communication channel.
2
Related Work
The problem of reinforcement learning in cooperative environments has been studied extensively (Littman, 1994;
Schmidhuber, 1996; Panait and Luke, 2005; Matignon et al., 2007). Early attempts exploited single-agent techniques
like Q-learning to train all agents independently (Tan, 1993), but suffered from the excessive size of the state space
resulting from having multiple agents. Subsequent improvements were obtained using variations of Q-learning (Ono and
Fukumoto, 1996; Guestrin et al., 2002) and distributed approaches (Lauer and Riedmiller, 2000). More recently, DRL
techniques like DQN (Mnih et al., 2013) have led to superior performance in single-agents settings by approximating
policies through deep neural networks. Tampuu et al. (2017) have demonstrated that an extension of the DQN is
able to train multiple agents independently to solve a popular two-agent system, the Pong game. Gupta et al. (2017)
have analyzed the performance of popular DRL algorithms, including DQN, DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015), TRPO
(Schulman et al., 2015) and actor-critic on different MA environments, and have introduced a curriculum learning
approach to increase scalability. Foerster et al. (2017) have suggested using a centralized critic for all agents that
marginalises out a single’s agent action while other agents’ actions are kept ﬁxed. Iqbal and Sha (2019) proposed
MAAC (Multi-Actor-Attention-Critic), a framework for learning decentralised policies with centralised critics, which
selects relevant information for each agent at every time-step through an attention mechanism. In more recent work, a
probabilistic recursive reasoning framework has been proposed to model behaviours in a two-agents context; each agent,
through variational Bayes methods, approximates the other agent policy to predict its strategy and then to improve its
own policy (Wen et al., 2019).
The role of communication in cooperative settings has also been explored, and different methods have been proposed
differing on how the communication channels have been formulated using DRL techniques. Many approaches rely
on implicit communication mechanisms whereby the weights of the neural networks used to implement policies or
action-value functions are shared across agents or modelled to allow inter-agent information ﬂow. For instance, in
CommNet (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016), the policies are implemented through subsets of units of a large feed-forward
neural network mapping the inputs of all agents to actions. At any given time step, the hidden states of each agent
are used as messages, averaged and sent as input for the next layer. Singh et al. (2019) proposed IC3NEt, a model
designed to improve CommNet, where the hidden states of the agents are also used as messages, but this time they
are averaged only after being weighted by a gating mechanism. In addition, in IC3Net, each agent is implemented
through an Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) in order to consider the history of
the seen observations. In BiCNet (Peng et al., 2017), the agents’ policies and value networks are connected through
bidirectional neural networks, and trained using an actor-critic approach. Jiang and Lu (2018) proposed an attention
mechanism that, when a need for communication emerges, selects which subsets of agents should communicate; the
hidden states of their policy networks are integrated through an LSTM to generate a message that is used as input for the
next layer of the policy network. Das et al. (2018) utilised a soft attention mechanism to allow the agents to select the
recipients of their messages. Each agent, along with the message, broadcasts a signature which can be used to encode
agent-speciﬁc information. Kong et al. (2017) introduce a master-slave architecture whereby a master agent provides
3

high-level instructions to organize the slave agents in an attempt to achieve ﬁne-grained optimality. Similarly, in Feudal
Multiagent Hierarchies (Ahilan and Dayan, 2019), an agent acts as “manager”and learns to communicate sub-goals to
multiple workers operating simultaneously. A different approach is instead provided by the Bayesian Action Decoder
(BAD) (Foerster et al., 2018), a technique for two-agent settings where an approximate Bayesian update is used to
produce public belief that directly conditions the actions of all agents.
In our work, we introduce a mechanism to generate explicit messages capturing relevant aspects of the world, which the
agents are able to collectively learn using their observations and interactions. The messages are then sent and received to
complement their private observations when making decisions. Some aspects of our approach are somewhat related to
DIAL (Differentiable Inter-Agent Learning) (Foerster et al., 2016) in that the communication is enabled by differentiable
channels allowing the gradient of the Q-function to bring the proper feedback in small-scale scenarios. Like DIAL, we
would like the agents to share explicit messages. However, whereas DIAL uses simple and pre-determined protocols,
our agents are given the ability to infer complex protocols from experience, without necessarily relying on pre-deﬁned
ones, and utilise those to learn better policies. Explicit messages are also used in SchedNet (Kim et al., 2019) to
investigate situations where the bandwidth is limited and only some of the agents are allowed to communicate. In
their approach, also focusing on small-case scenarios to better capture the scheduling constraints, the agents produce
messages by encoding their observations and a scheduler decides whether an agent is allowed to use a communication
channel. A limited bandwidth channel is also used in our work, but all the agents have full access to the channel.
3
Memory-driven MADDPG
3.1
Problem setup
We consider a system with N interacting agents, where N is typically small, and adopt a multi-agent extension of
partially observable Markov decision processes (Littman, 1994). This formulation assumes a set, S, containing all
the states characterising the environment; a sequence {A1, A2, . . . , AN} where each Ai is a set of possible actions
for the ith agent; a sequence {O1, O2, . . . , ON} where each Oi contains the observations available to the ith agent.
Each oi ∈Oi provides a partial characterisation of the current state and is private for that agent. Every action ai ∈Ai
is deterministically chosen accordingly to a policy function, µθi : Oi 7→Ai, parametrised by θi. The environment
generates a next state according to a transition function, T : S × A1 × A2 × · · · × AN, that considers the current state
and the N actions taken by the agents. The reward received by an agent, ri : S × A1 × A2 × · · · × AN 7→R is a
function of states and actions. Each agent learns a policy that maximises the expected discounted future rewards over
a period of T time steps, J(θi) = E[Ri], where Ri = PT
t=0 γtri(st
i, at
i) is the γ-discounted sum of future rewards.
During training, we would like an agent to learn by using not only its own observations, but through a collectively
learned representation of the world that accumulates through experiences coming from all the agents. At the same time,
each agent should develop the ability to interpret this shared knowledge in its own unique way as needed to optimise its
policy. Finally, the information sharing mechanism would need to be designed in such a way to be used in both training
and execution.
3.2
Memory-driven communication
We introduce a shared communication mechanism enabling agents to establish a communication protocol through a
memory device M of pre-determined capacity M (Figure 1). The device is designed to store a message m ∈RM
which progressively captures the collective knowledge of the agents as they interact. An agent’s policy becomes
µθi : Oi × M 7→Ai, i.e. it is dependent on the agent’s private observation as well as the collective memory. Before
taking an action, each agent accesses the memory device to initially retrieve and interpret the message left by others.
After reading the message, the agent performs a writing operation that updates the memory content. During training,
these operations are learned without any a priori constraint on the nature of the messages other than the device’s size,
M. During execution, the agents use the communication protocol that they have learned to read and write the memory
over an entire episode. We aim to build a model trainable end-to-end only through reward signals, and use neural
networks as function approximators for policies, and learnable gated functions as mechanisms to facilitate an agent’s
interactions with the memory. The chosen parametrisations of these operations are presented and discussed below.
Encoding operation.
Upon receiving its private observations, each agent maps them on to an embedding representing
the agent’s current vision of the state:
ei = ϕenc
θe
i (oi),
ei ∈RE
(1)
where ϕenc
θe
i
is a neural network parametrised by θe
i . The embedding ei plays a fundamental role in selecting a new
action and in the reading and writing phases.
4

Figure 1: The MD-MADDPG framework. During training and testing, each policy uses its observation and the content
of the shared memory to produce a new action and then update the shared channel. Critics are used during training only
and each one of them takes as input all the observations and actions.
Read operation.
After encoding the current information, the agent performs a read operation allowing to extract and
interpret relevant knowledge that has been previously captured through M. By interpreting this information content,
the agent has access to what other agents have learned. A context vector hi is generated to capture spatio-temporal
information previously encoded in ei through a linear mapping,
hi = Wh
i ei,
hi ∈RH, Wh
i ∈RH×E
where Wh
i represent the learnable weights of the linear projection. While ei is deﬁned as general observation encoder,
hi is speciﬁcally designed to extract features for the reading operation. The context vector hi can be interpreted as
an agent’s internal representation that uses the observation embedding ei to extract information to be utilized by the
gating mechanism only (Eq. 2); its output is then used to extract information from the memory. The main function of
the context vector is to facilitate the emergence of an internal representation speciﬁcally designed for interpreting the
memory content during the read phase. An ablation study aimed at investigating the added beneﬁts introduced by hi is
provided in the Supplementary Material (B.4). This study supports our intuition that the context vector is crucial for
the proper functioning of the entire framework on more complex environments. The agent observation embedding ei,
the reading context vector hi and the current memory m contain different types of information that are used jointly as
inputs to learn a gating mechanism,
ki = σ(Wk
i [ei, hi, m]),
ki ∈[0, 1]M, Wk
i ∈RM×(E+H+M)
(2)
where σ(·) is the sigmoid function and [ei, hi, m] means that the three vectors are concatenated. The values of ki are
used as weights to modulate the memory content and extract the information from it, i.e.
ri = m ⊙ki
(3)
where ⊙represents the Hadamard product. ki takes values in [0, 1] and its role is to potentially downgrade the
information stored in memory or even completely discard the current content. Learning agent-speciﬁc weights Wh
i and
Wk
i means that each agent is able to interpret m in its own unique way. As the reading operation strongly depends
on the current observation, the interpretation of m can change from time to time depending on what an agent sees
during an episode. Given that ri depends on m and ei (from oi in Eq. 1), we lump all the adjustable parameters into
θζ
i = {Wh
i , Wk
i } and write
ri = ζθζ
i (oi, m).
(4)
Write operation.
In the writing phase, an agent decides what information to share and how to properly update the
content of the memory whilst taking into account the other agents. The write operation is loosely inspired by the LSTM
5

(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) where the content of the memory is updated through gated functions regulating
what information is kept and what is discarded. Initially, the agent generates a candidate memory content, ci, which
depends on its own encoded observations and current shared memory through a non-linear mapping,
ci = tanh(Wc
i[ei, m])
ci ∈[−1, 1]M, Wc
i ∈RM×(E+M)
where Wc
i are weights to learn. An input gate, gi, contains the values used to regulate the content of this candidate
while a forget gate, fi, is used to decide what to keep and what to discard from the current m. These operations are
described as follows:
gi = σ(Wg
i [ei, m]),
gi ∈[0, 1]M, Wg
i ∈RM×(E+M)
fi = σ(Wf
i [ei, m]),
fi ∈[0, 1]M, Wf
i ∈RM×(E+M).
The ith agent then ﬁnally generates an updated message as a weighted linear combination of old and new messages, as
follows:
m′ = gi ⊙ci + fi ⊙m.
(5)
The update m′ is stored in memory M and made accessible to other agents. At each time step, agents sequentially read
and write the content of the memory using the above procedure. Since m′ depends on m and ei (derived from oi in Eq.
1) we collect all the parameters into θξ
i = {Wc
i, Wg
i , Wf
i } and write the writing operation as:
m′ = ξθξ
i (oi, m).
(6)
Action selector.
Upon completing both read and write operations, the agent is able to take an action, ai, which
depends on the current encoding of its observations, its own interpretation of the current memory content and its updated
version, that is
ai = ϕact
θa
i (ei, ri, m′)
(7)
where ϕact
θa
i is a neural network parametrised by θa
i . The resulting policy function can be written as a composition of
functions:
µθi(oi, m) = ϕact
θa
i (ϕenc
θe
i (oi), ζθζ
i (oi, m), ξθξ
i (oi, m))
(8)
in which θi = {θa
i , θe
i , θζ
i , θξ
i } contains all the relevant parameters.
Learning algorithm.
All the agent-speciﬁc policy parameters, i.e. θi, are learned end-to-end. We adopt an actor-critic
model within a CLDE framework (Foerster et al., 2016; Lowe et al., 2017). In the standard actor-critic model (Degris
et al., 2012), we have an actor to select the actions, and a critic, to evaluate the actor moves and provide feedback. In
DDPG (Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2015), neural networks are used to approximate both the actor, represented
by the policy function µωi, and its corresponding critic, represented by an action-value function Qµωi : Oi × Ai 7→R,
in order to maximize the objective function J(ωi) = E[Ri]. This is done by adjusting the parameters ωi in the direction
of the gradient of J(ωi) which can be written as:
∇ωiJ(ωi) = Es∼D

∇ωiµωi(oi)∇aiQµωi(oi, ai)|ai=µω(oi)

The actions a are produced by the actor µωi, are evaluated by the critic Qµi which minimises the following loss:
L(ωi) = Eoi,ai,r,o′
i∼D
h
(Qµωi(oi, ai) −y)2i
where o′
i is the next observation, D is an experience replay buffer which contains tuples (oi, o′
i, a, r), y = r +
γQµ′
ω(o′
i, a′
i) represent the target Q-value. Qµ′
ωi is a target network whose parameters are periodically updated with the
current parameters of Qµωi to make training more stable. L(ωi) minimises the expectation of the difference between
the current and the target action-state function.
In this formulation, as there is no interaction between agents, the policies are learned independently. We adopt the
CLDE paradigm by letting the critics Qµωi use the observations x = (o1, o2, . . . , oN) and the actions of all agents,
hence:
∇ωiJ(µωi) = Ex,a∼D
h
∇ωiµθi(oi)∇aiQµωi(x, a1, a2, . . . , aN)|ai=µωi(oi)
i
(9)
where D contains transitions in the form of (x, x′, a1, a2, . . . , aN, r1, . . . , rn) and x′ = (o′
1, o′
2, . . . , o′
N) are the next
observations of all agents. Accordingly, Qµωi is updated as
L(ωi) = Ex,a,r,x′∼D
h
(Qµωi(x, a1, a2, . . . , aN) −y)2i
,
y = ri + γQµ′
ωi(x′, a′
1, a′
2, . . . , a′
N)}
(10)
6

in which a′
1, a′
2, . . . , a′
N are the next actions of all agents. By minimising Eq. 10 the model attempts to improve the
estimate of the critic Qµωi which is used to improve the policy itselfs through Eq. 9. Since the input of the policy
described in Eq. 8 is (oi, m) the gradient of the resulting algorithm to maximize J(θi) = E[Ri] can be written as:
∇θiJ(µθi) = Ex,a,m∼D
h
∇θiµθi(oi, m)∇aiQµθi(x, a1, . . . , aN)|ai=µθi(oi,m)
i
where D is a replay buffer which contains transitions in the form of
(x, x′, a1, . . . , aN, m, r1, . . . , rn). The Qµθi function is updated according to Eq. 10. Algorithm 1 provides the
pseudo-code of the resulting algorithm, that we call MD-MADDPG (Memory-driven MADDPG).
3.3
MD-MADDPG decentralised execution
During execution, only the learned actors µθ1, µθ2, . . . , µθN are used to make decisions and select actions. An action
is taken in turn by a single agent. The current agent receives its private observations, oi, reads M to extract ri (Eq. 3),
generates the new version of m (Eq. 5), stores it into M and selects its action ai using µi. The policy of the next agent
is then driven by the updated memory.
Algorithm 1 MD-MADDPG algorithm
1: Inizialise actors (µθ1, . . . , µθN ) and critics networks (Qθ1, . . . , QθN )
2: Inizialise actor target networks (µ′
θ1, . . . , µ′
θN ) and critic target networks (Q′
θ1, . . . , Q′
θN )
3: Inizialise replay buffer D
4: for episode = 1 to E do
5:
Inizialise a random process N for exploration
6:
Inizialise memory device M
7:
for t = 1 to max episode length do
8:
for agent i = 1 to N do
9:
Receive observation oi and the message m ←M
10:
Set mi = m
11:
Generate observation encoding ei (Eq. 1)
12:
Generate read vector ri (Eq. 3)
13:
Generate new message m′ (Eq. 5)
14:
Generate new time dependant noise istance Nt
15:
Select action ai = ϕact
θi ([ei, ri, m′]) + Nt
16:
Store the new message in the memory device M ←m′
17:
end for
18:
Set x = (o1, . . . , oN) and Φ = (m1, . . . , mN)
19:
Execute actions a = (a1, . . . , aN), observe rewards r and next observations x′
20:
Store (x, x′, a, Φ, r) in replay buffer D
21:
end for
22:
for agent i = 1 to N do
23:
Sample a random minibatch Θ of B samples (x, x′, a, Φ, r) from D
24:
Set y = ri + γQµ′
θi(x′, a′
1, . . . , a′
N)|a′
k=µ′
θk (ok,mk)
25:
Update critic by minimizing:
26:
L(θi) = 1
B
X
(x,x′,a,Φ,r)∈Θ
(y −Qµθi(x, a1, . . . , aN))2
27:
Update actor according to the policy gradient:
∇θiJ ≈1
B
X
(x,x′,a,Φ,r)

∇θiµθi(oi, mi)∇aiQµθi (x, a1, . . . , ai, . . . aN)|ai=µθi (oi,mi)

28:
end for
29:
Update target networks:
θ
′
i = τθi + (1 −τ)θ
′
i
30: end for
7

4
Experimental Settings and Results
4.1
Environments
In this section, we present a battery of six two-dimensional navigation environments (Figure 2), with continuos space
and discrete time. We introduce tasks of increasing complexity, requiring progressively more elaborated coordination
skills: ﬁve environments are inspired by the Cooperative Navigation problem from the multi-agent particle environment
(Lowe et al., 2017; Mordatch and Abbeel, 2017) in addition to Waterworld from the SISL suite (Gupta et al., 2017). We
focus on two-agents systems to keep the settings sufﬁciently simple and attempt an initial analysis and interpretation of
emerging communication behaviours. A short description of the six environments is in order.
Cooperative Navigation (CN).
This environment consists of N agents and N corresponding landmarks. An agent’s
task is to occupy one of the landmarks whilst avoiding collisions with other agents. Every agent observes the distance
to all others agents and landmark positions.
Partial Observable Cooperative Navigation (PO CN).
This is based on Cooperative Navigation, i.e. the task and
action space are the same, but the agents now have a limited vision range and can only observe a portion of the
environment around them within a pre-deﬁned radius.
Synchronous Cooperative Navigation (Sync CN).
The agents need to occupy the landmarks exactly at the same
time in order to be positively rewarded. A landmark is declared as occupied when an agent is arbitrarily close to it.
Agents are penalised when the landmarks are not occupied at the same time.
Sequential Cooperative Navigation (Sequential CN).
This environments is similar to the previous one, but the
agents here need to occupy landmarks sequentially and avoid to reach them simultaneuosly in order to be positively
rewarded. Occupying the landmarks at the same time is penalised.
Swapping Cooperative Navigation (Swapping CN).
In this case the task is more complex as it consists of two
sub-tasks. Initially, the agents need to reach the landmarks and occupy them at same time. Then, they need to swap
their landmarks and repeat the same process.
Waterworld.
In this environment, two agents with limited range vision have to collaboratively capture food targets
whilst avoiding poison targets. A food target can be captured only if both agents reach it at the same time. Additional
details are reported in (Gupta et al., 2017).
4.2
Implementation Details
In all our experiments, we use a neural network with one layer (512 unites) for the encoding (Eq. 1), a neural network
with one layer (256 units) for the action selector (Eq. 7) and neural networks with three hidden layers (1024, 512, 256
units, respectively) for the critics. For MADDPG and MA-MADDPG the actors are implemented with neural networks
with 2 hidden layers (512, 256 units). The size of the m is ﬁxed to 200; this value that has been empirically found to
be optimal given the network architectures (Section B.7 provides a validation study on the choice of memory size).
Consequently, the size of hi and ei is set to 200. We use the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with a learning
rate of 10−3 for critic and 10−4 for policies. The reward discount factor is set to 0.95, the size of the replay buffer to 106
and the batch size to 1, 024. The number of time steps for episode is set to 1, 000 for Waterworld and 100 for the other
environments. We update network parameters after every 100 samples added to the replay buffer using soft updates
with τ = 0.01. We train all the models over 60, 000 episodes of 100 time-steps each on all the environments, except
for Waterworld for which we use 20, 000 episodes of 1, 000 time-steps each for training. The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process (Uhlenbeck and Ornstein, 1930) with θ = 0.15 and σ = 0.3 is a stochastic process which, over time, tends to
drift towards its mean. This is commonly employed within DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015) and in order to introduce
temporally correlated noise. Doing so it is possible to avoid the effects of averaging random decorrelated signals which
would lead a less effective exploration. Discrete actions are supported by the Gumbel-Softmax, a biased, low-variance
gradient estimator (Jang et al., 2016). This estimator is typically used within the back-propagation algorithm in the
presence of categorical variables. We use Python 3.5.4 (Van Rossum and Drake Jr, 1995) with PyTorch v0.3.0 (Paszke
et al., 2017) as software for automatic differentiable computing and machine learning framework. All the computations

8

(a) Cooperative Naviga-
tion
(b) Partial Observable CN
(c) Synchronous CN
(d) Sequential CN
(e) Swapping CN
(f) Waterworld
Figure 2: An illustration of our environments. Blue circles represent the agents; dashed lines indicate the range of
vision; green and red circles represent the food and poison targets, respectively, while black dots represent landmarks to
be reached.
4.3
Experimental results
In our experiments, we compared the proposed MD-MADDPG against four algorithms: MADDPG (Lowe et al.,
2017), Meta-agent MADDPG (MA-MADDPG), CommNet (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016) and MAAC (Iqbal and Sha, 2019).
MA-MADDPG is a variation of MADDPG in which the policy of an agent during both training and execution is
conditioned upon the observations of all the other agents in order to overcome difﬁculties due to partial observability.
These methods have been selected to provide fair comparisons since they offer different learning approaches in multi-
agent problems. MADDPG is what our method builds on so this comparison can quantify the improvements brought
by the proposed communication mechanism; MA-MADDPG offers an alternative information sharing mechanism;
CommNet implements an explicit form of communication; MAAC is a recent is a state-of-the-art method in which
critics select information to share through an attention mechanism. We analyse the performance of these competing
learning algorithms on all the six environments described in Section 4.1. In each case, after training, we evaluate
an algorithm’s performance by collecting samples from an additional 1, 000 episodes, which are then used to extract
different performance metrics: the reward quantiﬁes how well a task has been solved; the distance from landmarks
captures how closely an agent has reached the landmarks; the number of collisions counts how many times an agent
has failed to avoid collisions with others; sync occupations counts how many times the landmarks have been occupied
simultaneously and, analogously, not sync occupations counts how many times only one of the two landmarks has
been occupied. For Waterworld, we also count the number of food targets and number of poison targets. Since this
environment requires continuous actions, we cannot use MAAC as this method only operates on discrete action spaces.
In Table 1, for each metric, we report the sample average and standard deviation obtained by each algorithm on each
environment. A visualization of all results through boxplot can be found in Section B.5 in Supplementary Material.
Illustrative videos to show the performance of MD-MADDPG on the environments are publicly available 1.
All algorithms perform very similarly in the Cooperative Navigation and Partial Observable Navigation cases. This
result is expected because these environments involve relatively simple tasks that can be completed even without explicit
message-passing and information sharing functionalities. Despite communication not being essential, MD-MADDPG
reaches comparable performance to MADDPG and MA-MADDPG. In the Synchronous Cooperative Navigation case,
the ability of MA-MADDPG to overcome partial observability issues by sharing the observations across agents seem
to be crucial as the total rewards achieved by this algorithm are substantially higher than those obtained by both
1Supplementary illustrative videos: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9XWdpmsEy8
9

Environment
Metric
MADDPG
MA-MADDPG
CommNet
MAAC
MD-MADDPG
Reward
−2.30 ± 0.11
−2.29 ± 0.10
−2.7 ± 0.26
−4.72 ± 1.35
−2.27 ± 0.10
CN
Average distance
0.15 ± 0.051
0.14 ± 0.05
−0.35 ± 0.13
1.36 ± 0.67
0.13 ± 0.05
# collisions
0.11 ± 0.76
0.17 ± 0.90
0.19 ± 1.06
0.58 ± 1.42
0.12 ± 0.82
Reward
−2.62 ± 0.34
−2.67 ± 0.38
−2.78 ± 0.43
−3.17 ± 0.62
−2.68 ± 0.46
PO CN
Average distance
0.30 ± 0.17
0.33 ± 0.19
0.39 ± 0.21
1.26 ± 2.53
0.34 ± 0.22
# collisions
0.55 ± 1.64
0.14 ± 0.69
0.37 ± 1.48
0.58 ± 0.31
0.26 ± 1.06
Reward
75.83 ± 72.23
192.92 ± 29.78
188.02 ± 35.41
161.35 ± 80.03
92.90 ± 69.78
Sync CN
# sync occup.
26.71 ± 19.86
53.96 ± 20.16
3.62 ± 12.14
139.56 ± 63.55
31.6 ± 19.34
# not sync occup.
21.36 ± 16.60
41.75 ± 56.25
46.35 ± 29.47
44.84 ± 58.71
17.58 ± 12.00
Sequential CN
Reward
125.98 ± 33.4
117.52 ± 35.62
131.67 ± 19.48
90.11 ± 21.33
130.15 ± 35.19
Average distance
260.16 ± 14.41
114.7 ± 45.71
102.63 ± 34.96
101.11 ± 40.71
99.15 ± 50.59
Swapping CN
Reward
125.60 ± 50.13
86.99 ± 68.52
109.55 ± 56.64
75.71 ± 69.80
129.63 ± 47.26
Average distance
76.70 ± 30.24
132.77 ± 89.98
123.54 ± 84.9
152.7 ± 43.72
53.21 ± 40.80
Reward
262.29 ± 141.07
99.31 ± 118.31
139.29 ± 121.42
NA
503.96 ± 103.91
Waterworld
# food targets
13.91 ± 7.30
5.25 ± 6.07
10.2 ± 7.1
NA
26.25 ± 5.41
# poison targets
8.61 ± 3.32
5.34 ± 2.45
8.01 ± 5.22
NA
7.77 ± 2.95
Table 1: Comparison of MADDPG, MA-MADDPG, CommNet, MAAC and MD-MADDPG on six environments
ordered by increasing level of difﬁculty, from CN to Waterword. The sample mean and standard deviation for 1, 000
episodes are reported for each metric.
MADDPG and MD-MADDPG. In this case, whilst not achieving the highest reward, MD-MADDPG keeps the number
of unsynchronised occupations at the lowest level, and also performs better than MADDPG on all three metrics. It
would appear that in this case pulling all the private observations together is sufﬁcient for the agents to synchronize
their paths leading to the landmarks.
When moving on to more complex tasks requiring further coordination, the performances of the three algorithms
diverge further in favour of MD-MADDPG. The requirement for strong collaborative behaviour is more evident in
the Sequential Cooperative Navigation problem as the agents need to explicitly learn to take either shorter or longer
paths from their initial positions to the landmarks in order to occupy them in sequential order. Furthermore, according
to the results in Table 1, the average distance travelled by the agents trained with MD-MADDPG is less then the
half the distance travelled by agents trained with MADDPG, indicating that these agents were able to ﬁnd a better
strategy by developing an appropriate communication protocol. Similarly, in the Swapping Cooperative Navigation
scenario, MD-MADDPG achieves superior performance, and is again able to discover solutions involving the shortest f.
Waterworld is signiﬁcantly more challenging as it requires a sustained level of synchronization throughout the entire
episode and can be seen as a sequence of sub-tasks whereby each time the agents must reach a new food target whilst
avoiding poison targets. In Table 1, it can be noticed that MD-MADDPG signiﬁcantly outperforms both competitors in
this case. The importance of sharing observations with other agents can also be seen here as MA-MADDPG generates
good policies that avoid poison targets, yet in this case, the average reward is substantially lower than the one scored by
MD-MADDPG. Experimental settings so far have involved two agents. In addition, we have also investigated settings
with a higher number of agents, see Supplementary Material (Section B.2 for Cooperative Navigation and Section B.3
for Partial Observable Cooperative Navigation). These results show, that the prososed method can be successfully used
on larger systems without incurring any numerical complications or convergence difﬁculties. When comparing to other
algorithms, MD-MADDPG has resulted in superior performance performance are indeed achieved on Cooperative
Navigation with respect to the reward metric. On Partially Observable Cooperative Navigation, there is no deﬁnite
winner, nevertheless MD-MADDPG shows competitive performance, for example it outperforms all the baselines on
the 5 agents scenario.
In Supplementary Material in Section B.4, we provide an ablation study showing that the main components of MD-
MADDPG are needed for its correct behaviour. We investigate the effects of removing either one of the key components,
i.e. context vector, read and write modules. Removing the context vector reduces the quality of the performance
obtained on CN and on environments which require greater coordination efforts, like Sequential CN, Swapping CN
and Waterworld. On PO-CN no signiﬁcant differences in performance are reported, while on Synchronous CN sync
occupations worsen (of approximatively ﬁve times the amount) and sync occupations improve (of approximatively
twice the amount). This result is explained by the fact that in Sync CN, good strategies that do not involve explicit
communication can be learnt to achieve good performance on sync occupations. The best overall performance method on
this scenario is MA-MADDPG (see Table 1). This comparative method implements an implicit form of communication
that is equivalent to a simple information sharing which can be very effective to overcome the partial observability
10

issue which is the main challenge in Sync CN. We have observed that without the writing or reading components the
performance worsened on all the run experiments.
(a) Sequential CN
(b) Swapping CN
(c) Synchronous CN
(d) Waterworld
Figure 3: Visualisation of communications strategies learned by the agents in four different environments: the three
principal components provide orthogonal descriptors of the memory content written by the agents and are being plotted
as a function of time. Within each component, the highest values are in red, and the lowest values are in blue. The bar
at the bottom of each ﬁgure indicates which phase (or sub-task) was being executed within an episode; see Section 4.4
for further details. The memory usage patterns learned by the agents are correlated with the underlying phases and the
memory is no longer utilised once a task is about to be completed.
4.4
Communication analysis
In this section, we explore the dynamic patterns of communication activity that emerged in the environments presented
in the previous section, and look at how the agents use the shared memory throughout an episode while solving the
required task. For each environment, after training, we executed episodes with time horizon T and stored the write
vector m′ of each agent at every time step t. Exploring how m′ evolves within an episode can shed some light onto
11

the role of the memory device at each phase of the task. The analysis presented in this section focuses on the write
vector as we expect it to be stronger correlated with the environment dynamics than the other components. The
content of the writing vector corresponds to the content of the communication channel itself, and is expected to contain
information related to the task (e.g. changes in current environment, agent’s strategy or observed point of interests). A
communication analysis with respect to the read vector ri is presented in Supplementary Material (Section B.8). The
content of the reading vector is an implicit representation internal to the agent itself that serves to interpret the content
of the channel and at the same time to be utilised in the generation of m′. In order to produce meaningful visualisations,
we ﬁrst projected the dimensions of m′ onto the directions maximising the sample variance (i.e. the variance of the
observed m′ across simulated episodes) using a linear PCA.
Figure 3 shows the principal components (PCs) associated with the two agents over time for four of our six simulation
environments. Only the ﬁrst three PCs were retained as those were found to cumulatively explain over 80% of variance
in all cases. The values of each PC were standardised to lie in [0, 1] in order have them in the same in same range for
fair comparisons and are plotted on a color map: one is in red and zero in blue. The timeline at the bottom of each ﬁgure
indicates which speciﬁc phase of an episode is being executed at any given time point, and each consecutive phase
is coloured using a different shade of grey. For instance, in Sequential Cooperative Navigation, a single landmark is
reached and occupied in each phase. In Swapping Cooperative Navigation, during the ﬁrst phase the agents search and
ﬁnd the landmarks; in the second phase they swap targets, and in the third phase they complete the task by reaching the
landmarks again. In the Synchronous Cooperative Navigation the phase indicates if none of the landmarks is occupied
(light-grey), if just one is occupied (dark-grey) and if both are occupied (black). Usually, in the last phase, the agents
learn to stay close to their targets. This analysis pointed out that in the ﬁnal phases, when tasks are already completed
and there is no need of coordination, the PCs representing the communication activities assume lower (blue values),
while during previous phases, when tasks are still to be solved and cooperation is stronger required, they assume higher
values (red). This led us to interpret the higher values as being indicative of high memory usage, and lower values as
being associated to low activity. In most cases, high communication activity is maintained when the agents are actively
working and completing a task, while during the ﬁnal phases (where typically there is no exploration because the task is
considered completed) low activity levels are more predominant.
This analysis also highlights the fact that the communication channel is used differently in each environment. In some
cases, the levels of activity alternate between agents. For instance, in Sequential Cooperative Navigation (Figure 3a),
high levels of memory usage by one agent are associated with low ones by the other. A different behaviour is observed
for the other environments, indeed in Swapping Cooperative Navigation task where both agents produce either high
or low activation value, whereas in Synchronous Cooperative Navigation the memory activity is very intense before
the phase three, while agents are collaborating to complete the task. The dynamics characterizing the memory usage
also change based on the particular phase reached within an episode. For example, in Figure 3a, during the ﬁrst two
phases the agents typically show alternating activity levels whilst in the third phase both agents signiﬁcantly decrease
their memory activity as the task has already been solved and there are no more changes in the environment. Figure
3 provides some evidence that, in some cases, a peer-to-peer communication strategy is likely to emerge instead of
a master-slave one where one agent takes complete control of the shared channel. The scenario is signiﬁcantly more
complex in Waterworld where the changes in memory usage appear at a much higher frequency due to the presence of
very many sequential sub-tasks. Here, each light-grey phase indicates that a food target has been captured. Peaks of
memory activity seem to follow those events as the agents reassess their situation and require higher coordination to
jointly decide what the next target is going to be. In Supplementary Material (B.1) we provide further experimental
results showing the importance of the communication by corrupting the memory content at execution time, which
further corroborate the role of the exchanged messages in improving agents’ coordination.
5
Conclusions
In this work, we have introduced MD-MADDPG, a multi-agent reinforcement learning framework that uses a shared
memory device as an intra-agent communication channel to improve coordination skills. The memory content contains
a learned representation of the environment that is used to better inform the individual policies. The memory device is
learnable end-to-end without particular constraints other than its size, and each agent develops the ability to modify and
interpret it. We empirically demonstrated that this approach leads to better performance in small-scale (up to 6 agents in
our experiments) cooperative tasks where coordination and synchronization are crucial to a successful completion of
the task and where world visibility is very limited. Furthermore, we have visualised and analyzed the dynamics of the
communication patterns that have emerged in several environments. This exploration has indicated that, as expected,
the agents have learned different communication protocols depending upon the complexity of the task. In this study we
have mostly focused on two-agent systems to keep the settings sufﬁciently simple to understand the role of the memory.
Very competitive results have been obtained when more agents are used.
12

In future work, we plan on studying the role played by the sequential order in which the memory is updated, as the
number of agents grows. A possible approach may consist of deploying agent selection mechanisms, possibly based on
attention, so that only a relevant subset of agents can modify the memory at any given time, or impose master-slave
architectures. A possible solution would be to have an agent acting as “scheduler”that controls the access to the
memory, decides which information can be shared and provides scheduling for the writing accesses. Introducing such a
scheduling agent would allow to keep the current framework unaltered, e.g. the sequential access to the memory would
be retained. Although the scheduling agent would add an additional layer of complexity, this might reduce the number
of memory access required in larger scale systems and improve the overall scalability. In future work, we will also apply
MD-MADDPG on environments characterized by more structured and high-dimensional observations (e.g. pixel data)
where collectively learning to represent the environment through a shared memory should be particularly beneﬁcial.
