StyleM: Stylized Metrics for Image Captioning Built with Contrastive N-grams
Chengxi Li
University of Kentucky
329 Rose St, Lexington, KY 40508
Brent Harrison
University of Kentucky
329 Rose St, Lexington, KY 40508
Abstract
In this paper, we build two automatic evaluation met-
rics for evaluating the association between a machine-
generated caption and a ground truth stylized caption:
OnlyStyle and StyleCIDEr 1.
OnlyStyle can be used to
score any caption versus a given style. StyleCIDEr sup-
ports scoring the similarity of two compared captions with
respect to their styles.
We evaluate these two metrics
using three stylized captioning methods trained on the
PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS and FlickrStyle10K datasets:
UPDOWN, MULTI-UPDOWN, and SVinVL. We also per-
form a human study to explore how well each caption aligns
with human judgments in similar situations.
1. Introduction
While classic image captioning approaches show deep
understanding of image composition and language con-
struction, they often lack elements that make communi-
cation distinctly human. To address this issue, some re-
searchers have tried to add personality to image caption-
ing in order to generate stylized captions. With this new
type of task, researchers [6, 9, 12, 17, 25] often use auto-
matic NLP evaluation metrics, like BLEU [16], ROUGE-
L [14], CIDEr [14], and SPICE [1] for evaluating the accu-
racy of the generations and a trained classiﬁer for evaluat-
ing the style components’ contributions. However, a trained
classiﬁer for evaluation is constrained by its own accuracy
once the number of classes scales up. Changing datasets
will also require another benchmark model to be trained
and agreed upon by different researchers. If individual re-
searchers trained their own classiﬁers for evaluation, then it
is difﬁcult to achieve a fair comparison between techniques
as differences in training protocols could lead to differences
in performance that are difﬁcult to reproduce.
Automatic evaluation metrics such as BLEU, CIDEr are
based on measuring the alignment between generated cap-
1code will be available at https://github.com/***
Figure 1. An image generated caption for the personality ”Abra-
sive (Annoying, Irritating)”. The generated caption are measured
using CIDEr, StyleCIDEr, OnlyStyle scores. CIDEr fails to reﬂect
styles
tions and reference captions using n-grams. These metrics
are frequently used to evaluate language generation models
because they don’t require training, which makes them suit-
able for providing stable evaluations across different mod-
els.
Given that stylized captions must describe the image in
question as well as produce a sentence that aligns with a
given style, it may be difﬁcult for these types of metrics to
give an accurate measure of the quality of a stylized cap-
tioning system. If the CIDEr score, for example, is high for
a stylized image caption, a possible explanation is because
it can accurately recreate elements of a caption that describe
the image. In these instances, it may fail to encompass the
desired stylized elements of the caption. This can be seen
happening in Figure 1, where the CIDEr score is high due
to the 1-grams “i” and “boat” aligning with ground truth.
However, these two words could hardly reﬂect the desired
arXiv:2201.00975v1  [cs.CV]  4 Jan 2022

personality. Thus, the CIDEr-like scores may result in ac-
curate evaluations for stylized captioning models.
For a metric to accurately evaluate the quality of a styl-
ized image caption, it must be able to reason about how the
words in said caption contribute to its overall style. To do
that, we propose to build automatic evaluation metrics from
stylized captioning datasets and use them to measure how
words contribute to the overall style of automatically gener-
ated captions.
To do this, we must ﬁrst address the following questions:
1. Do we need a reference caption to measure a generated
caption’s ability to capture style? 2. Does the metric align
with human perceptions of a sentence’s style?
To address the ﬁrst question, we recognize that there are
beneﬁts to creating a metric that requires a reference cap-
tion. The presence of a reference caption would allow us to
directly compare if the generated stylized caption is simi-
lar to a known ground truth. There are situations, however,
where a ground truth is not easily obtainable. In these situa-
tions, one would prefer a metric that did not require a refer-
ence sentence. Considering this, we will design two metrics
that are both based on the n-gram methods described earlier.
The ﬁrst will evaluate how well a generated caption captures
a given style without the need for a reference sentence. We
will refer to this metric as OnlyStyle. The second metric
will be based on the popular CIDEr metric, but we will bias
its measures to place more emphasis on common stylized
words to better measure the quality of a stylized caption.
We will refer to this metric as StyleCIDEr.
For the second question, we do want our metrics align
human’s judgment. CIDEr [19] and Self-CIDEr [20] have
been demonstrated to match human preferences when com-
paring two captions. However, evaluating styles can be dif-
ﬁcult as people may have different thoughts on what consti-
tutes a particular style. For example, the data used to train
a stylized image captioning model may indicate that words
such as “I love” indicates a “Happy” style while a human
judge may disagree.
Thus, in this paper we choose to score stylized traits
based on the dataset used to train the captioning model.
While this is our primary evaluation, we do also perform
a human subjects evaluation to see if our metric aligns with
human preferences.
2. Related Work
Stylized Image Captioning Models Several researchers
have built stylized captioners [4, 6, 9, 25] using the
FlickrStyle10K dataset which includes Humorous and Ro-
mantic personalities. Some of these works use unpaired
datasets and LSTM [7] variants for caption models. Shus-
ter et al. [17] released the PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS
dataset containing 215 personalities in 2019.
They im-
proved on past approaches for stylized captioning by im-
proving input features and exploring various state-of-the-art
image captioning models [2,22]. Among them, the best per-
forming generative caption model is UPDOWN and the best
features for representing image input are generated using
ResNext [21]. Li et al. extended the UPDOWN model into
the Multi-UPDOWN model which incorporates both visual
and text information as inputs. Oscar [13] also uses fusion
over text and visual features in conjunction with a trans-
former model trained using contrastive loss. VinVL [23]
outperforms Oscar by utilizing better text features and has
since become the state-of-art for image captioning work.
In this paper, we will evaluate some of these frameworks
using our proposed metrics. Speciﬁcally, we evaluate UP-
DOWN, Multi-UPDOWN, and a VinVL model ﬁne-turned
on a stylized captioning dataset (we call this model SVinVL
for convenience).
This will enable us to demonstrate how our proposed
metric can be used to evaluate stylized captioning models.
Common Metrics Used in stylized Image Captioning In
general, there are two types of metrics used to evaluate styl-
ized image captioning models: trained models and auto-
matic NLP evaluation metrics.
There are many types of trained models that can be used
for stylized caption evaluation. These include text classi-
ﬁers trained to identify the style of a sentence, or a model
like BertScore [24], which uses a trained language model to
compare generated text against a reference sentence. One
of the main limitations of using a trained model as an eval-
uation metric is that it may require retraining to use on
a different dataset. Thus, metrics based on trained mod-
els may require signiﬁcant effort if used by different re-
searchers on different datasets or in different domains. We
would like to develop a general metric that performs con-
sistently once the dataset is ﬁxed. Thus, we feel that our
approach is more similar to automatic NLP evaluation met-
rics. Many automated NLP evaluation metrics rely on n-
gram matching precision or recall, and are not necessarily
designed with image captioning in mind. Examples of these
metrics include BLEU [16], METEOR [3] and ROUGE-
L [14]. SPICE [1] and CIDEr [19] are designed speciﬁ-
cally for evaluating image captioning. SPICE depends on
scene graph matching, which is heavily inﬂuenced by the
accuracy of the parsing results. CIDEr averages the cosine
similarities between two caption vectors across 1-4 grams,
where vectors are calculated using TF-IDF. Since CIDEr
is generally considered to be effective at sensing semantic
changes and representing a human’s preference [20], Wang
et al.
created Self-CIDEr [20] to measure the diversity
of caption generations by using CIDEr as a kernel func-
tion. While effective on general captioning tasks, CIDEr
can struggle to identify the stylized elements of a caption.
N-Gram Weighting Schemes Since our metrics are based
on n-gram methods, we will discuss several popular term

weighting schemes [11,15]. Term Frequency-Inverse Doc-
ument Frequency (TF-IDF) is effective at scoring salient n-
grams; however, due to the fact they punish stop words,
they could weight words such as “not” as 0 with the help
of inverse document frequency if “not” appears in every
style. To us, this is limiting since this ignores the term fre-
quency of “not” in different stylized corpora and weights it
the same in a ”Happy” style and an ”Angry” style. Delta
TF-IDF [15] uses the difference of TF-IDF scores between
a positive dataset and negative dataset. This may help to ex-
tract more stylized words than TF-IDF, but does not ﬁx any
of the underlying issues with TF-IDF. We will address this
by using the average difference of term frequency probabil-
ities between a positive corpus and negative corpus.
3. Method
In this paper we introduce two metrics for automatically
evaluating stylized image captions. To accomplish this,we
divide the task into three parts. First, for each style in a
dataset we calculate a contrastive n-gram (CNG) score for
each n-gram in the corpus, which gives a high score to n-
gram representative of the given style and a low score for
those that are not.
We use this n-gram score to represent the associations
between a given style and an n-gram. Secondly, we use
these calculated n-gram scores to build our ﬁrst metric,
which takes a caption and a style as input and outputs the a
score measuring how much this caption exhibits this style.
We refer to this metric as OnlyStyle. Thirdly, we construct a
second metric, StyleCIDEr, that measures whether the styl-
ized elements of a sentence align with a reference caption or
not. This metric uses CIDEr as a kernel function, but shifts
the n-gram vector space. We will talk about each of these
three concepts in more detail below.
3.1. Contrastive N-gram Score
We build our metric based on n-gram comparisons,
which means we will ﬁrst calculate a score for each n-gram
in a caption that measures how aligned it is with a given
style. Generally, we would like score an n-gram high if it
only appears in the dataset associated with current style and
if it appears frequently in this dataset. That is to say, if an
n-gram has high contrastive n-gram score on style p, we
would think this n-gram contains good characteristics for
this style. Suppose we have a n-gram t, n ∈{1, 2, 3, 4},
and we would like to calculate how close this t with a given
style p. We calculate the score sp,n for this n-gram t under
style p as follows:
fp,n = | {d ∈Dp : t ∈d} |
(1)
ECDF(fp,n) =
1
∥Fp,n∥
X
xi∈Fp,n
1xi<=fp,n
(2)
occur num = | {s ∈S : t ∈d, d ∈Ds} |
(3)
CNGp,n =
1
∥S∥
X
q∈S,q!=p
ECDF(fp,n) −ECDF(fq,i)
occur num
(4)
Equation 1 calculates the document frequency for t in Dp
where t is a n-gram term and Dp is the corpus that includes
all sentences related to the style p. We intend to compare
the t’s representations across different styles to see whether
t is salient in current style p. Since document frequency
like fp,n is heavily inﬂuenced by the number of documents
in Dp, we need to convert fp,n into probability. To do so,
we calculate the empirical distribution for all n-grams un-
der style p. With this, we can calculate fp,n’s probability in
Equation 2, where ECDF(fp,n) is the empirical distribu-
tion function which converts a document frequency fp,n to
a probability under empirical distribution. we call this the
ecdf score for short in the discussion below. Fp,n is a list
that contains all n-gram document frequencies under style
p.
To check how frequently t occurs in documents of differ-
ent styles, we calculate the number of stylized corpora Ds
where t has occurred (Equation 3). Here S is the style set,
which contains all styles. We use occur num from Equa-
tion 3 to penalize the score of t in Equation 4. If t has oc-
curred in multiple corpora, then it is not deemed signiﬁcant
enough to represent the current style. To see how much
better t aligns with style p than another style q, we ﬁnally
calculate the contrastive n-gram score for t under style p by
calculating the average difference between the ecdf score
under style p and all other styles q, where q is in the style
set S but q is not equal to p (Equation 4).
Bounds Analysis The best case scenario of CNGp,n score
for a n-gram t is when t only occurs in Dp but not in any
other Dq and occurs in every sentence d ∈Dp. That is to
say t is only associated with style p and is also associated
with every sentence in Dp. With this, we can calculate the
upper bound for CNGp,n, where CNGp,n = ∥S∥−1
∥S∥. The
worst case scenario is when t never occurs in Dp but occurs
in all other datasets Dq, q! = p and appears in every sen-
tence d ∈Dq. This results in the lower bound for CNGp,n,
where CNGp,n = −
1
∥S∥.
Notably, the stop words are
naturally de-emphasized by occur num and subtraction if
they are nearly evenly distributed between different styles
through Equation 4.

3.2. OnlyStyle
After we calculate the contrastive n-gram score for all
n-grams in the dataset for a given style p, we can calculate
how much a caption c aligns with a style p. Since this score
is designed to assess a single caption without any reference
caption, we call it the OnlyStyle score. Speciﬁcally, for any
caption c, we ﬁrst extract all the n-grams from it, where
n ∈{1, 2, 3, 4}. With these n-grams, we can compute the
OnlyStyle score as follows:
OnlyStyle(c, p) = 1
4
4
X
n=1
OnlyStylen(c, p)
(5)
OnlyStylen(c, p) =
1
∥M∥
X
i∈M
CNGi
p,n
(6)
In Equations 6, we calculate the average CNG score across
all n-grams from caption c, where CNGi
p,n is the CNG
score for the ith n-gram under style p and M is the set of
all the n-grams in caption c. We get the OnlyStyle score
using Equation 5 for c under style p by averaging over n of
OnlyStylen(c, p).
Bounds Analysis OnlyStyle displays the global view of a
sentence’s association with a style p by averaging across
different CNG scores, so the bounds stay the same as for
CNG. Speciﬁcally, suppose we could always get the high-
est CNGp,n for every n-gram in M, this will give us the
highest OnlyStyle score for c under p, which is ∥S∥−1
∥S∥. On
the contrary, if we always get the lowest CNGp,n for every
n-gram in M, this will result in the lowest OnlyStyle score,
which is −
1
∥S∥.
3.3. StyleCIDEr
While the ability to evaluate a caption without a refer-
ence sentence has its beneﬁts, the presence of a reference
sentence allows us to better evaluate the impact that indi-
vidual words have. This is especially useful for stylized im-
age captioning because individual words can have a large
impact on the style that a sentence exhibits. To that end, we
propose StyleCIDEr, a metric meant to evaluate how well
a generated caption aligns with a reference caption, which
emphasis placed on stylized words. This metric uses CIDEr
as a kernel function. To better understand this, we will ﬁrst
outline how to calculate CIDEr. Suppose that we have two
captions, ci, cj:
CIDEr(ci, cj) = 1
4
4
X
n=1
CIDErn(ci, cj)
(7)
CIDErn(ci, cj) =
gn(ci) · gn(cj)
∥gn(ci)∥· ∥gn(cj)∥
(8)
where gn(ci) is a vector where each element is formed by
a n-gram score calculated by TF-IDF. TF-IDF is good at
scoring salient n-grams for current captions, but it does not
necessarily focus on stylized words or n-grams. As a result,
we replace this TF-IDF score with our CNG score. This
means that each element in gn(ci) will be a score focusing
on a given style, like p. Then we calculate using Equations
7 and 8, and we can compare ci, cj based on their stylized
elements.
Bounds Analysis Since CIDEr score is bounded from (0,1),
StyleCIDEr has the same range. In the best case scenario,
when evaluating a caption that is the exact same as the ref-
erence caption, the StyleCIDEr would be 1. If there are
no overlapping n-grams between the generated caption and
the reference caption caption, the StyleCIDEr score would
be 0. To achieve a score of 1, StyleCIDEr does not require
every n-gram in the generated caption to be the same as in
the reference caption. As long as n-grams related to cur-
rent style overlap between the generated caption and the
reference caption, the StyleCIDEr score can be 1. Also,
if the generated caption and reference caption have several
overlapping n-grams but none of them are related to current
style, the StyleCIDEr can be 0.
4. Experiment
To verify our proposed metrics, we evaluate them on
two Datasets: PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS, which con-
tains 215 different styles, and FlickrStyle10K, which con-
tains 2 styles. In total, we perform three different evalu-
ations. First, we measured how well every ground truth
caption performs compared to its ground truth style us-
ing both OnlyStyle and StyleCIDEr. We compared these
values against a baseline in which ground truth captions
were paired with a random style, rather than their respec-
tive ground truth style. The second evaluation involves re-
evaluating popular frameworks for stylized image caption-
ing using our proposed metrics. Compare how our metrics
perform versus common NLP metrics such as BLEU and
CIDEr. Finally, we perform a human subjects evaluation
on OnlyStyle to verify that our metric aligns with human
perceptions of style.
4.1. Datasets
Since PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS and FlickrStyle10K
are frequently used in stylized image captioning work [4,
6,9,12,17,25], we decide to validate our proposed metrics
on these two datasets. The PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS
dataset was released in 2019 [17].
It contains ground
truth captions that were collected via human crowdsourc-
ing. During data collection, humans are required to cre-
ate engaging captions based on the image context and the
given personalities so that the caption accurately embodies
the given personality. Each data entry within this dataset is
represented as a triple containing an image, personality trait,
and caption.
The images are selected from YFCC100M

dataset [18]. In total, 241,858 captions are included in this
dataset. Each caption is associated with one of the 215 per-
sonality traits selected from a list of 638 traits [8]. Even
though the number of potential styles in the dataset makes
captions more diverse, some of the styles in this dataset
could be difﬁcult for a human to distinguish (e.g. “Happy”
versus “Cheerful”).
In this work, we use the accessible data from this dataset
which contains 186698 examples in the training set, 4993
examples in the validation set, and 9981 examples in the
test set. The PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS dataset is large,
which enables our contrastive n-gram metric to learn cur-
rent style characteristics in a broader range. This naturally
leads to the question of how our metric would perform with
signiﬁcantly fewer styles. To answer this question, we ex-
plore FlickerStyle10K.
FlickrStyle10K contains two styles: Humorous and Ro-
mantic. The ground truth stylized captions included in this
dataset are based on factual image captions (descriptions
without any style) that were modiﬁed so that they exhibit
the given style. Thus, humorous captions and romantic cap-
tions are often very similar when describing the image, but
different when using words that exhibit the desired style.
Since only 7000 images are publicly available, we will use
this FlickrStyle7K dataset in our experiment. When train-
ing a stylized captioning model, we use the protocol out-
lined in [9, 12, 25] did. This involves ﬁrst randomly select
6,000 images as the training data and using the remaining
1000 images as testing data. We further split 10% data from
the training set into a validation set.
4.2. Stylized Captioning
UPDOWN [17], Multi-UPDOWN [12] and Visual Lan-
guage Pretraining (VLP) on transformers [23] have shown
good performance captioning tasks (stylized or otherwise)
when evaluated using common automated metrics (BLEU,
CIDEr, etc.). As such, we evaluate these three types of mod-
els using our proposed metrics.
For the UPDOWN captioning model, we use the pa-
rameters outlined in [17]. We use pretrained ResNext spa-
tial (7*7*2048) features and mean-pooled features (2048),
along with style as one-hot vector as inputs to this net-
work. For the Multi-UPDOWN as captioning model, we
use the process outlined in [12] and use ResNext spatial
(7*7*2048) features and mean-pooled features (2048), 5
dense caption, along with style as a one-hot vector as inputs
into its network. For SVinVL as a captioning model, we
ﬁne-tune VinVL on the PERSONALITY-CAPTION dataset
by replacing object tags with 5 dense captions and styles
(in text form) to learn the connection between image cap-
tions with ResNext spatial features (7*7*2048), dense cap-
tions, and styles. For each caption model, we also train a
model with the same settings but without style inputs. So,
in total, we train 6 models for each dataset and they are
named: (1) UPDOWN; (2) UPDOWN NoStyle; (3) Multi-
UPDOWN; (4) Multi-UPDOWN NoStyle; (5) SVinVL; (6)
SVinVL NoStyle.
For (1)-(4), we use entropy as loss function and Adam
optimization with an initial learning rate of 5e-4. The learn-
ing rate decays every 5 epochs. For (5)-(6), we follow the
ﬁne-tuning steps of VinVL and use masked token loss and
AdamW optimaztion with an initial learning rate of 3e-5. A
linear scheduler is used for decaying the learning rate. In
total, we train 30 epochs when using the PERSONALITY-
CAPTIONS dataset [17] with a batch size of 128 and evalu-
ate the model every 3000 iterations. We train for 100 epochs
when using the FlickrStyle10K dataset [6] following the
process outlined in [12,13,17].
4.3. Evaluation
We will evaluate our proposed metric under three cases.
First, we directly evaluate the ground truth captions in the
dataset since each of them is associated with a style. Sec-
ond, we evaluate different caption models and compare
them with models that do not contain any style inputs.
Third, we perform a human study and ask them to evalu-
ate some generated captions from a model. We then com-
pare the human evaluation results with our proposed metric
results. More details are included below.
4.3.1
Evaluating Ground Truth Captions
Each ground truth caption included in each dataset is associ-
ated with a given style. Because of this, we expect our met-
ric could recognize if a caption was correctly paired with its
ground truth style as opposed to a randomly selected style.
Thus, we would expect to see the following behaviors:
OnlytStyle
OnlytStyle
OnlytStyle(s, p) > OnlytStyle
OnlytStyle
OnlytStyle(s, q)
(9)
StyleCIDEr
StyleCIDEr
StyleCIDEr(s, sp) > StyleCIDEr
StyleCIDEr
StyleCIDEr(s, sq)
(10)
Here, s is a caption from dataset and its gound truth style is
p. q is anther style and q! = p.
With the above assumptions, we calculate the OnlyStyle
score for each ground truth sentence for all styles in each
dataset. We also calculate the StyleCIDEr score for each
caption using either 1) all captions with the same style or 2)
all captions with a different style as reference sentences.
Then we calculate the number of sentences satisfying
equation 9 and 10 and average the results over all captions
in each dataset. The results are reported in Table 1.
4.3.2
Model Comparison
If a trained stylized image captioning model were given
only image features without any indication of what style

Dataset
OnlyStyle Score
StyleCIDEr Score
PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS
0.9775
0.9484
Flickr7k
0.9994
0.9032
Table 1. Evaluation of ground truth captions using OnlyStyle and StyleCIDEr following Equations 9 and 10
Model
BlEU1
BlEU4
CIDEr
StyleCIDEr
Onlystyle
UPDOWN
0.241
0.034
0.231
0.046
0.126
UPDOWN NoStyle
0.255
0.035
0.249
0.034
0.055
Multi-UPDOWN
0.251
0.035
0.275
0.048
0.094
Multi-UPDOWN NoStyle
0.252
0.037
0.261
0.026
0.049
SVinVL
0.232
0.027
0.248
0.048
0.129
SVinVL NoStyle
0.233
0.029
0.249
0.033
0.084
Table 2. Different Model Performance on FlickrStyle7K
should be generated, the model is likely to accurately de-
scribe the image, but have an unexpected style. In these
situations, we would expect that our metrics to score higher
on models that have this style knowledge provided in some
way.
To evaluate this, we use our metrics to evaluate the per-
formance of the stylized image captioners described previ-
ously with their NoStyle equivalents. For each model, we
report their respective CIDEr, BLEU1, and BLEU4 to show
the accuracy of the generated text. At the same time, we re-
port OnlyStyle score and StyleCIDEr score for each model
to show how well each generated caption aligns with its de-
sired style. The results for PESONALITY-CAPTIONS is in
Table 3 and the results for FlickrStyle7K is in Table 2.
4.4. Human Evaluation
To evaluate the consistency between human judgments
and our proposed metrics, we perform a human evaluation
by asking humans to rank some sample generations from
one of our models based on how well it represents a given
style. For this evaluation, we focus solely on OnlyStyle
since StyleCIDEr is based on the CIDEr metric, which has
already been shown to align with human judgment.
Human Study Setup For this experiment, we chose the
following six styles from the PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS
dataset: Abrasive (Annoying, Irritating), Angry, Curious,
Fearful, Gloomy, Happy. We chose these styles because
they closely resembled the six basic emotions cited in Psy-
chology literature [5], and we felt that this would make it
easier for users to identify them.
For each of these styles, we sample 3 captions gener-
ated by the Multi-UPDOWN model on test data.
After
approved by Institutional Review Boards, we then asked
crowdsourced users from Proliﬁc to rank three generated
sentences according to how well they are associated with a
given style. Users provided answers in the range of 1-3 with
1 indicating the worst association, and 3 indicating the best
association. Users were asked to perform this task 6 times,
once for each style in the evaluation. In total, we received
96 responses to this task.
Note that this study and all the materials associated with
it were reviewed and approved by our Institutional Review
Board to ensure that subjects were exposed to no more than
a minimal risk during their participation.
Consistency with Human Judgment We pick the most
common ranking of the three sentences for each style from
the 96 users as human’s judgment. We then compare these
rank scores with the OnlyStyle scores on the sample gen-
erations. We use Pearson and Spearman correlation coef-
ﬁcients to quantify the consistency between our proposed
OnlyStyle metric and human judgments. We report both
scores for the six styles we examined in Table 4.
5. Results and Discussion
5.1. Evaluating Ground Truth Captions
As we see in Table 1, all of the scores are above
90%.
This means in most cases, Equation 9 and Equa-
tion 10 are satisﬁed.
This matches our expectations,
which means that OnlyStyle can differentiate correct and
incorrect styles, and StyleCIDEr can measure the accu-
racy of stylized word generation.
However, we should
point out that all ratings did not achieve 100% perfor-
mance. This is because some sentences may not be rep-
resentative of the style that they are associated with in the
dataset. As an example, it is possible that some sentences
appear in “Happy” and also appear in “Cheerful”.
De-
spite this, some of these sentences might have a higher
score in “Cheerful” than “Happy”. So, when we evaluate
OnlyStyle(s, “Happy”) > OnlyStyle(s, “Cheerful”),

Model
BlEU1
BlEU4
CIDEr
StyleCIDEr
OnlyStyle
UPDOWN
0.424
0.075
0.177
0.108
0.02
UPDOWN NoStyle
0.287
0.024
0.082
0.029
0.002
Multi-UPDOWN
0.430
0.081
0.183
0.116
0.016
Multi-UPDOWN NoStyle
0.340
0.035
0.109
0.050
0.002
SVinVL
0.416
0.063
0.152
0.115
0.014
SVinVL NoStyle
0.367
0.041
0.111
0.026
0.001
Table 3. Model Performance on PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS
CorrCoef/Style
Abrasive (Annoying, Irritating)
Happy
Gloomy
Curious
Angry
Fearful
overall Pearson ρ
0.874
0.017
0.878
0.053
0.875
0.039
overall Spearman ρ
1.0
0.5
1.0
0.5
1.0
0.5
Table 4. Pearson and Spearman Correlation Between Human Judgment and OnlyStyle
Equation 9 is not satisﬁed. In addition, when we evaluate
StyleCIDEr(s, sHappy) > StyleCIDEr(s, sCheerful)),
it is not satisﬁed either.
With StyleCIDEr, it is also possible that the two captions
used for evaluation do not have overlapping words, regard-
less of if they are drawn from the same style or different
styles. In this situation, both the within-style StyleCIDEr
score and between-style StyleCIDEr score would be zero,
which violates Equation 10.
5.2. Model comparison
With Style Versus Without.
From Tables 2 and 3,
we can see that models with style modality as inputs have
higher OnlyStyle and StyleCIDEr scores across all caption-
ing models. This provides support to our claim that both
StyleCider and OnlyStyle can measure whether a model can
effectively generate output that aligns with a given style.
Style Metric vs Accuracy Metric.
From Table 2, we
can clearly see that when evaluated using only BLEU and
CIDEr, UPDOWN NoStyle and SVinVL NoStyle perform
better than UPDOWN and SVinVL. One reason for this may
be because the stylized captions in FlickrStyle7K are cre-
ated by modifying the factual captions. In this situation,
models without a style vector as an input would generate the
same output for both romantic and humorous styles, which
strongly resembles the original factual caption. These out-
puts would score highly when evaluated using CIDEr and
BLEU.
Models with style included as an input will produce dif-
ferent sentences to better exemplify the desired style. As
a result, these generated captions may have fewer overlap-
ping words than the reference sentence as they potentially
transfer stylized words from other examples, which in turn
results in lower BLEU and CIDEr scores. This shows that
we can not simply rely on these metrics in this situation.
Caption Model performance If we only look at mod-
els with style inputs, from Table 2, we can see that the
UPDOWN Model achieves the highest OnlyStyle score
for PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS and ranks second on
FlickrStyle7K, which means that the UPDOWN Model are
good at generating more stylized sentences. However, the
UPDOWN model has the worst score on StyleCIDEr. This
means that while the UPDOWN model can produce styl-
ized words that align with the desired style, they may not
accurately describe the image in question.
Multi-UPDOWN has the best StyleCIDEr score as well
as excellent performance on BLEU and CIDEr scores. This
is likely because it is directly trained address limitations
with UPDOWN where it would overly focus on build-
ing connections between styles and generated captions and
miss information in the visual space. The Multi-UPDOWN
model ranks second on PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS and
is the worst performing model on FlickrStyle7K on
OnlyStyle, which means that the gain in visual understand-
ing likely came at the expense of generating stylized output.
The SVinVL model has the worst accuracy per-
formance on both datasets.
Its StyleCIDEr rating
ranks as the best on FlickrStyle7K and the second on
PERSONALITY-CAPTION. Its OnlyStle rating ranks the
best on FlickrStyle7K and worst on PERSONALITY-
CAPTION. This means that the SVinVL Model tends to
connect style with caption generations on FlickrStyle7K
which has 2 styles, and struggles to make correct con-
nections on the PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS dataset where
size scales up.
5.3. Human Evaluation
In Table 4, we can see Pearson and Spearman correlation
coefﬁcients are very high with style Abrasive (Annoying,
Irritating), Gloomy and Angry, which indicates that rank-

Figure 2. The Contrastive 1-gram score for sample words under 6 styles; First column contains the sampled 6 styles; The 2-9 columns are
the Contrastive 1-gram scores for the corresponding sampled word.
ings determined using the OnlyStyle metric are consistent
with rankings derived based on human judgment. However,
Pearson and Spearman scores are low for Happy, Curious
and Fearful. Because of this ﬁnding, we decided to further
investigate this discrepancy.
Recall that for each style, we asked users to rank three
generated sentences.
By investigating how users ranked
these sentences, we hope to uncover the source of any rank-
ing discrepancy.
We found that for the “Happy” style,
people ranked the sentence “what a beautiful day” higher
than “i love rugby”, which means they think the ﬁrst sen-
tence is more associated with “Happy” than the latter one.
OnlyStyle scores these sentences in the opposite way. After
further investigation, we discovered that the phrase, “what a
beautiful day,” appears in multiple styles in the dataset (e.g.
“Warm”, “Cheerful”, and “Enthusiastic”) but only occurs in
“Happy” as a part of a larger sentence. The phrase, “i love
rugby,” only occurs in “Happy” as a complete sentence.
For “Curious”, people rank “i wonder what these peo-
ple are thinking about” higher than “i wonder how many
lamps there are” and OnlyStyle scores the opposite. The
ﬁrst sentence never appears in “Curious” and only appears
in “Freethinking” in the dataset. The second sentence only
appears in “Curious”.
For “Fearful”, people rank the caption, “i hope he doesn
t fall,” higher than the caption, “i hope that statue doesn
t fall”. The ﬁrst sentences appears in “Fearful” and also
appears in “Sympathetic” and “Gloomy” in the dataset. The
second sentence only appears in “Fearful”.
Even though people’s judgments are very reasonable,
OnlyStyle gives higher scores to phrases that appear fre-
quently in one speciﬁc style, with the assumption that those
are more indicative of a given style. To investigate a lit-
tle further, we calculate the OnlyStyle scores for these sen-
tences on all 215 styles in the PERSONALITY-CAPTIONS
dataset. We then calculate the retrieval ranks for “Happy”,
“Curious”, and “Fearful” for their respective sentences. We
found that for each of the disagreeing sentences, the correct
style was always in the top 10% of retrieved styles, indicat-
ing that these styles can be difﬁcult to distinguish from other
top styles. It also means that even though these sentences
are ranked differently by humans and the OnlyStyle metric,
they are all very close the given styles. Thus, it would be
hard for human to differentiate them and rank them as well.
Overall, we think all these disagreements could be resolved
with better datasets.
5.4. Additional Discussion
We mentioned previously that basing an evaluation met-
ric on TF-IDF can be problematic. Some words, such as
“not” or “happy” can appear across all the styles, which
would be scored as 0. We hypothesized that our use of a
contrastive n-gram score could address some of these is-
sues. We evaluated this by sampling several words includ-
ing“not” and “happy” under six styles and calculating their
contrastive 1-gram score (shown in Figure 2).
We can see that “not” generally scores very low due to its
occurrence in every style in the dataset; however, it scores
negatively in ”Happy” and ”Curious”, which we view as a
positive result. The 1-gram, ”happy,” scores negatively in
“Abrasive (Annoying, Irritating)” and “Fearful” and scores
highest in the style, ”Happy”. Figure 2 also shows CNG
deprecates word like “the” and doesn’t neglect noun’s con-
tribution to style, like “car”. These all shows that using the
contrastive n-gram score allows us to get a more nuanced
understanding of how n-grams contribute to different styles.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose two metrics for evaluating styl-
ized image captioning models: OnlyStyle and StyleCIDEr.
These metrics can be used to automatically measure the as-
sociation between a caption and a given style. We have
shown through a series of evaluations that these metrics
are effective at evaluating stylized image captions and align
with how humans perceive stylized sentences.
Despite the effectiveness of these metrics, they are still
based on evaluating n-grams. As such, they are subject to
the same limitations of similar methods (e.g. BLEU and
CIDEr). The primary limitation of these types of models
is that n-grams might fail to capture distant dependencies.
[10].

There are also potential ethical implications one must
consider with these approaches as well.
By understand-
ing how these metrics work, it is possible that an adversary
could use this knowledge to better their generation of mali-
cious captions that still perform well on these metrics. This
may enable them to generate undesirable content that still
scores well in practice.
Despite these limitations, we feel that these metrics will
be useful to researchers in helping them evaluate stylized
image captioning models where traditional NLP metrics
may not perform well.
