Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity
Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
SHOUGUO YANG∗, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and School
of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
CHAOPENG DONG∗, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and School
of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
YANG XIAO†, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and School of Cyber
Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
YIRAN CHENG, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
ZHIQIANG SHI†, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
ZHI LI, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and School of Cyber Security,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
LIMIN SUN, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and School of Cyber
Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
The widespread code reuse allows vulnerabilities to proliferate among a vast variety of firmware. There is an urgent need
to detect these vulnerable code effectively and efficiently. By measuring code similarities, AI-based binary code similarity
detection is applied to detecting vulnerable code at scale. Existing studies have proposed various function features to capture
the commonality for similarity detection. Nevertheless, the significant code syntactic variability induced by the diversity
of IoT hardware architectures diminishes the accuracy of binary code similarity detection. In our earlier study and the tool
Asteria, we adopted a Tree-LSTM network to summarize function semantics as function commonality, and the evaluation
∗First Author and Second Author contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.
Authors’ addresses: Shouguo Yang, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and School of Cyber

Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,

Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,

Beijing, China and School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; Zhi Li, Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from

© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
1049-331X/2023/5-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.
arXiv:2301.00511v2  [cs.SE]  22 May 2023

2
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
result indicates an advanced performance. However, it still has utility concerns due to excessive time costs and inadequate
precision while searching for large-scale firmware bugs.
To this end, we propose a novel deep learning enhancement architecture by incorporating domain knowledge-based
pre-filtration and re-ranking modules, and develop a prototype named Asteria-Pro based on Asteria. The pre-filtration
module eliminates dissimilar functions, thus reducing the subsequent deep learning model calculations. The re-ranking
module boosts the rankings of vulnerable functions among candidates generated by the deep learning model. Our evaluation
indicates that the pre-filtration module cuts the calculation time by 96.9%, and the re-ranking module improves MRR and
Recall by 23.71% and 36.4%, respectively. By incorporating these modules, Asteria-Pro outperforms existing state-of-the-art
approaches in the bug search task by a significant margin. Furthermore, our evaluation shows that embedding baseline
methods with pre-filtration and re-ranking modules significantly improves their precision. We conduct a large-scale real-world
firmware bug search, and Asteria-Pro manages to detect 1,482 vulnerable functions with a high precision 91.65%.
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy →Software security engineering.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Binary Code Similarity Detection, Pre-fitering, Re-ranking, Abstract Syntactic Tree, Graph
Neural Network
ACM Reference Format:
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun. 2023. Asteria-Pro: Enhancing
Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
1, 1 (May 2023), 39 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Code reuse is very popular in IoT firmware to facilitate its development [64]. Unfortunately, code reuse also
introduces vulnerabilities concealed in the original code into a variety of firmware [22]. The security and privacy
of our lives are seriously threatened by the widespread use of these firmware [65]. Even though the vulnerabilities
have been publicly disclosed, there are a large number of firmware versions that still contain them due to
delayed code upgrades or code compatibility issues [18]. Recurring vulnerabilities, often referred to as “N-day
vulnerabilities”, cannot be detected through symbol information such as function names because this type of
information is usually removed during firmware compilation. Additionally, the source code of firmware is typically
unavailable as IoT vendors only provide binary versions of their firmware.
To this end, binary code similarity detection (BCSD) is applied to quickly find homologous vulnerabilities
in a large amount of firmware [23]. The BCSD technique focuses on determining the similarity between two
binary code pieces. As for the vulnerability search, BCSD looks for other vulnerable functions that are similar to
one that is already known to be vulnerable. In addition to the vulnerability search, BCSD has been widely used
for other security applications such as code plagiarism detection [16, 48, 57], malware detection [41, 42], and
patch analysis [28, 34, 63]. Despite many existing research efforts, the diversity of IoT hardware architectures
and software platforms poses challenges to BCSD for IoT firmware. There are many different instruction set
architectures (ISA) for IoT firmware, such as ARM, PowerPC, X64, and X86. The instructions are different, and
the rules, such as the calling convention and the stack layout, also differ across different ISAs. It is non-trivial to
find homologous vulnerable functions across various architectures.
BCSD methods can be generally classified into two categories: i) dynamic analysis-based methods and ii)
static analysis-based methods. The methods based on dynamic analysis capture the runtime behavior as function
semantic features by running target functions, where the function features can be I/O pairs of function [55] or
system calls during program execution [29], etc. They are not scalable for large-scale firmware analysis since
running firmware requires specific devices and emulating firmware is also difficult [20, 35, 73]. The methods
based on static analysis mainly extract statistical features from assembly code. An intuitive way is to calculate
the edit distance between assembly code sequences [24]. They cannot be directly applied across architectures
since instruction sets are totally distinct. Architecture-independent statistical features of functions are proposed
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
3
for similarity detection [31]. These features are less affected across architectures such as the number of function
calls, strings, and constants. Furthermore, the control flow graph (CFG) at the assembly code level is utilized by
conducting a graph isomorphism comparison for improving the similarity detection [31, 33]. Based on statistical
features and CFG, Gemini [66] leverages the graph embedding network to encode functions as vectors for
similarity detection. With the application of deep learning models in programming language analysis, various
methods have recently appeared to employ such models to encode binary functions in different forms and
calculate function similarity based on function encoding [46, 50, 54, 62]. Static analysis-based methods are faster
and more scalable for large-scale firmware analysis but often produce false positives due to the lack of semantic
information. Since homologous vulnerable functions in different architectures usually have the same semantics, a
cross-architecture BCSD should be able to capture the semantic information about functions in a way that can be
scaled.
In our previous work Asteria [71], we first utilized the Tree-LSTM network to encode the AST in an effort
to capture its semantic representation. In particular, Tree-LSTM is trained using a siamese [37] architecture
to understand the semantic representation by feeding homologous and non-homologous function pairs into
the Tree-LSTM network. Consequently, the Tree-LSTM network learns function semantic representations to
distinguish between homologous and non-homologous functions. To further improve the accuracy, we also use
the call graph to calibrate the AST similarity. Precisely, we count callee functions of target functions in the call
graph to measure the difference in function calls. The final function similarity is determined by calibrating the
AST similarity with the disparity in function calls. In our previous evaluation, Asteria outperformed the available
state-of-the-art methods, Gemini and Diaphora, in terms of accuracy. The evaluation results demonstrate the
superiority of function semantic extraction by encoding AST with the Tree-LSTM model. However, encoding the
AST incurs a clear temporal cost for Asteria. According to our earlier research [71], the entire AST encoding
process takes about one second. When Asteria is applied to vulnerability detection, where there are numerous
functions to perform similarity calculations given a vulnerable function, the time cost becomes unacceptable. Since
the majority of candidate functions are non-homologous, there is room for enhancing the efficiency of Asteria. In
other words, non-homologous candidate functions differ from vulnerable functions in certain characteristics that
we can exploit to skip the majority of non-homologous functions more effectively. In addition, the evaluations do
not align with the approaches used in the majority of real-world vulnerability detection efforts [33, 45, 52, 66, 74],
including our prior study Asteria. Vulnerability detection involves retrieving homologous (vulnerable) functions
from a large pool of functions. Consequently, their performance in detecting vulnerabilities is insufficiently
described. It is necessary to evaluate the performance of Asteria on the vulnerability search task. Moreover,
according to the result in the real world vulnerability detection [71], Asteria suffers from high false positives,
which affects its effectiveness in reality.
There are two main challenges that hinder Asteria from being practical for large-scale vulnerability detection:
• Challenge 1 (C1). It’s challenging to filter out the majority of non-homologous functions before encoding
ASTs, while retaining the homologous ones, to speed up the vulnerability-detection process.
• Challenge 2 (C2). It’s challenging to distinguish similar but non-homologous functions. Despite Asteria’s
high precision in homologous and non-homologous classification, it still yields false positives when
distinguishing functions with similar ASTs.
We design Asteria-Pro by introducing domain knowledge as two answers, A1 and A2 to overcome these
two challenges. Our fundamental concept is that introducing inter-functional domain knowledge will helps
Asteria-Pro achieve greater precision combined the intra-functional semantic knowledge deep learning model
learned. Asteria-Pro consists of three modules: 1) domain knowledge-based (DK-based) pre-filtration, 2) deep
learning-based (DL-based) similarity detection, and 3) DK-based re-ranking, among them DL-based similarity
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

4
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
detection is basically based on Asteria. Domain knowledge is fully exploited for different purposes in DK-based pre-
filtration and re-ranking. In pre-filtration module, Asteria-Pro aims to skip as many as possible non-homologous
function by comparing lightweight robust features (A1). Meanwhile, filtration is required to retain all homologous
functions. To this end, we conducted a preliminary study into the filtering performance of several lightweight
function features. According to the findings of the study, we propose a novel algorithm that successfully employs
three distinct function features in the filter. In the re-ranking module, Asteria-Pro confirms the homology of
functions by comparing call relationships (A2), based on the assumption that functions designed for distinct
purposes have different call relationships.
Our evaluation indicates that Asteria-Pro significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in
terms of both accuracy and efficiency. Compared with Asteria, Asteria-Pro successfully cuts the detection
time of Asteria by 96.90% by incorporating DK-based pre-filtration module. In the vulnerability-search task,
Asteria-Pro has the shortest average search time than other baseline methods. By incorporating DK-based re-

respectively. We have also applied our enhancement framework to embed baseline methods, and the evaluation
results demonstrate a significant improvement in the precision of these methods. Asteria-Pro identifies 1,482
vulnerable functions with a high precision of 91.65% by conducting a large-scale real-world firmware vulnerability
detection utilizing 90 CVEs. Moreover, the detection results of CVE-2017-13001 demonstrate that Asteria-Pro
has an advanced capacity to detect inlined vulnerable code.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We conduct a preliminary study to demonstrate the effectiveness of various simple function features in
identifying non-homologous functions.
• To the best of our knowledge, it is the first work to propose incorporating domain knowledge before and after
deep learning models for vulnerability detection optimization. We implement the domain knowledge-based
pre-filtration and re-ranking algorithms and equip Asteria with them.
• The evaluation indicates the pre-filtration module significantly reduces the detection time, and re-ranking
module improves the detection precision by a fairly amount. The Asteria-Pro outperforms existing state-
of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and efficiency. In evaluation 8.5, we find that the performance
of distinct BCSD methods may vary widely in different usage scenarios.
• We demonstrate the utility of Asteria-Pro by conducting a large-scale, real-world firmware vulnerability
detection. Asteria-Pro manages to find 1,482 vulnerable functions with a high precision of 91.65%. We
analyze the vulnerability distribution in widely-used software from various IoT vendors to illustrate our
inspiring findings.
2
BACKGROUND
We first briefly describe the AST structure adopted in this work, followed by a demonstration of the AST holding
a more stable structure than CFG across architectures. Then we introduce the Tree-LSTM model utilized in AST
encoding. Finally, the broad problem definition for the application of BCSD to bug search is given.
2.1
Abstract Syntax Tree
2.1.1
AST Description. An AST is a tree representation of the abstract syntactic structure of code in the compila-
tion and decompilation processes. This work focuses on the ASTs extracted by decompiling binary functions.
Different subtrees in an AST correspond to different code scopes in the source code. Figure 1 shows a decompiled
AST corresponding to the source code of function histsizesetfn in zsh v5.6.2 on the left. The zsh is a popular
shell software designed for interactive use, and the function histsizesetfn sets the value of a parameter. The
lines connecting the source code and AST in Figure 1 show that a node in the AST corresponds to an expression
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
5
Table 1. Statements and Expressions in ASTs. We count the statements and expressions for nodes in ASTs after the decom-
pilation by IDA Pro and list the common statements and expressions. This table can be extended if new statements or
expressions are introduced.
Node Type
Label
Note
Statement
if
1
if statement
block
2
instructions executed sequentially
for
3
for loop statement
while
4
while loop statement
switch
5
switch statement
return
6
return statement
goto
7
unconditional jump
continue
8
continue statement in a loop
break
9
break statement in a loop
Expression
asgs
10∼17
assignments, including assignment, assignment after or, xor, and, add, sub,
mul, div
cmps
18∼23
comparisons including equal, not equal, greater than, less than, greater
than or equal to, and less than or equal to.
ariths
24∼34
arithmetic operations including or, xor, addition, subtraction, multipli-
cation, division, not, post-increase, post-decrease, pre-increase, and pre-
decrease
other
34∼43
others including indexing, variable, number, function call, string, asm, and
so on.
void
histsizesetfn(UNUSED(p), long v)
{
    if (v< 1)
histsiz = 1;
    else
 histsiz = v;
    resizehistents();
}
block
if
le
block
block
var num
asg
asg
var num var var
return
call
num
Fig. 1. Source code of function histsizesetfn and the corresponding decompiled AST of x86 architecture.
or a statement in the source code. A variable or a constant value is represented by a leaf node in AST. We group
nodes in an AST into two categories: i) statement nodes and ii) expression nodes according to their functionalities
shown in Table 1. Statement nodes control the function execution flow while expression nodes perform various
calculations. Statement nodes include if, for, while, return, break and so on. Expression nodes include common
arithmetic operations and bit operations.
2.1.2
AST Structure Superiority. Both CFG and AST are structural representations of a function. The CFG of a
function contains the jump relationships between basic blocks that contain straight-line code sequences [38].
Though CFG has been used for similarity measurement in BCSD [31], David et al. [24] demonstrated that CFG
structures differ significantly across different architectures. We observe that AST shows better architectural
stability across architectures compared with CFG. It is because AST is generated from the machine-independent
intermediate presentations, which are disassembled from assemble instructions during the decompilation pro-
cess [21]. Figure 2 depicts the evolution of ASTs and CFGs for the x86 and ARM architectures, respectively. For
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

6
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
block
if
le
block
block
var num
asg
asg
var num var var
return
call
num
block
if
gt
block
block
var num
asg
asg
var var var num
return
call
num
(a) AST for x86 platform
(b) AST for ARM platform
sub
esp, 0ch
mov
eax, [esp+0ch+arg_4]
test
eax, eax
jle
short loc_809F187
mov
ds:histsiz, eax
loc_809F187:
mov
ds:histsiz, 1
jmp
short loc_809F17E
loc_809F17E:
call
resizehistents
add
esp, 0ch
retn
LDR
R3, =histsiz
CMP
R1, #0
MOVLER2, #1
STRGT R1, [R3]
STRLE R2, [R3]
B
resizehistents
(c) CFG for x86 platform
(d) CFG for ARM platform
Fig. 2. ASTs and CFGs of the function histsizesetfn under different architectures.
the CFGs from x86 to ARM, we observe that the number of basic blocks changes from 4 to 1, and the number of
assembly instructions has changed a lot. However, the ASTs, which are based on a higher-level intermediate
representation, differ very slightly between x86 and ARM, with the differences highlighted by blue boxes. In
addition, AST maintains the semantics of functionality, making it an ideal structure for cross-platform similarity
detection.
2.2
Tree-LSTM Model
In natural language processing, Recursive Neural Networks (RNN) are widely applied and perform better than
Convolutional Neural Networks [72]. RNNs take sequences of arbitrary lengths as inputs considering that a
sentence can consist of any number of words. However, standard RNNs are not capable of handling long-term
dependencies due to the gradient vanishing and gradient exploding problems. As one of the variants of RNN, Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [39] has been proposed to solve such problems. LSTM introduces a gate mechanism
including the input, forget, and output gates. The gates control the information transfer to avoid the gradient
vanishing and exploding (calculation details in Section § 6.1). Nevertheless, LSTM can only process sequence
input but not structured input. Tree-LSTM is proposed to process tree-structured inputs [59]. The calculation by
Tree-LSTM model is from the bottom up. For each non-leaf node in the tree, all information from child nodes is
gathered and used for the calculation of the current node. In sentiment classification and semantic relatedness
tasks, Tree-LSTM performs better than a plain LSTM structure network. There are two types of Tree-LSTM
proposed in the work [60]: Child-Sum Tree-LSTM and Binary Tree-LSTM. Researchers have shown that Binary
Tree-LSTM performs better than Child-Sum Tree-LSTM [60]. Since the Child-Sum Tree-LSTM does not take into
account the order of child nodes, while the order of statements in AST reflects the function semantics, we use the
Binary Tree-LSTM for our AST encoding.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
7
2.3
Function Call Compilation Optimization
There are two main types of function call compilation optimization that can impact binary code similarity analysis:
function inline and intrinsic functions.
Function inline. Function inline is a compiler optimization technique where the code of a called function is
inserted directly into the calling function, rather than making a separate function call. This can improve program
performance by reducing the overhead of function calls and improving cache utilization. The decision to inline a
function is typically made by the compiler based on various factors such as function size, frequency of calls, and
available register space.
Intrinsic function. Intrinsic functions (also known as built-in functions) are special functions that are im-
plemented by the compiler itself and are mapped to a single instruction or a sequence of instructions in the
target architecture. These functions provide low-level access to the hardware and are used to implement various
low-level operations, such as arithmetic, bit manipulation, and memory access. Intrinsic functions are often used
in performance-critical code, where the use of low-level instructions can lead to significant speedups compared
to equivalent code written in a higher-level language.
3
PRELIMINARY STUDY
This study aims to assess and uncover accessible function features that are effective at identifying non-
homologous functions to guide our pre-filtration design. To evaluate the features, we prepare the code base and
incorporate a number of metrics (§ 3.1). We focus primarily on evaluating and comparing prevalent conventional
features present in existing remarkable works (§ 3.2).
3.1
Evaluation Benchmark
3.1.1
Dataset. To derive robust features, we compile a large collection of binaries from 184 open source software
(OSS), including widely used OpenSSL, FFmpeg, Binutils, etc. Since our tool aims to conduct similarity detection
across different architectures, we compile these open source software for four common architectures: X86, X64,
ARM, and PowerPC. In addition, we align the default compilation settings during compilation with real-world
usage. After compilation, numerous test binaries with “test” or “buildtest” as a prefix or suffix are generated to
test the software’s functionality. These test binaries are removed from the collection because 1) their functions
are simple and comprise only a few lines of code. 2) do not participate in the real execution of software function.
After removal, the binary collection retains 1,130 binaries, or 226 for each architecture.
We create a large dataset consisting of pairs of homologous and non-homologous functions based on their
function names. Function names are retained in the software after compilation, allowing us to construct the
dataset. To create homologous function pairs, we select binary functions with the same function names within
the same software. On the other hand, functions with different names were considered non-homologous. For
example, if function 𝐹is present in the source code, compilation would generate four versions of binary functions
for different instruction set architectures: 𝐹𝑥86, 𝐹𝑥64, 𝐹𝑎𝑟𝑚, and 𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑐. These variants of functions are considered
homologous to each other. We extract a total of 529,096 binary functions, comprising 132,274 unique functions
for each architecture. To avoid overfitting in final evaluation, we randomly selected 40,111 functions from each
architecture. Among them, we randomly chose 𝑛functions as source functions to evaluate the filtering capability
of diverse features. For each source function 𝐹𝐵𝑋, we constructed a pool of candidate functions consisting of 𝑀
randomly selected binary functions and three homologous functions of 𝐹𝐵
𝑋. As a result, each source function 𝐹𝐵
𝑋
forms three homologous pairs and 𝑀non-homologous pairs.
3.1.2
Metrics. True positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR) are utilized to evaluate the filtering capa-
bility of various features. TPR demonstrates the feature’s capacity to retain homologous functions, while FPR
demonstrates its capacity to exclude non-homologous functions. In the subsequent filtering phase, our goal is to
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

8
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
identify features that can filter out non-homologous functions as effectively as possible (low FPR) while maintaining
all homologous functions (very high TPR).
For a source function 𝐹𝐵
𝑋, all function pairs in candidate function pool are measured by various feature similarity
scores. The function pairs with similarity scores below a threshold value 𝑇are filtered. In the remaining function
pairs, the homologous function pairs are regarded as true positives 𝑇𝑃while the non-homologous function pairs
are regarded as false positives 𝐹𝑃. The following equations illustrate how we calculate these three metrics for
various features:
𝑇𝑃𝑅=
Í𝑛
𝑖=1𝑇𝑃𝑝
𝑖
3 × 𝑛
(1)
𝐹𝑃𝑅=
Í𝑛
𝑖=1 𝐹𝑃𝑖
𝑛× (𝑀× 4 −4)
(2)
3.2
Candidate Features Evaluation
We aim to identify the most efficient and effective filter features by evaluating existing features proposed in
previous studies and their variants. Based on the evaluation results, we select and improve candidate features to
meet the filter requirements, which is to remove as many non-homologous functions as possible while retaining
all homologous ones.
3.2.1
Feature Selection. We gather basic features from prior research [31, 66, 67, 71] and categorize them into
two groups: CFG-family features and AST-family features.
The CFG-family features include four types of numeric features: the number of instructions (No. Instruction),
arithmetic instructions (No. Arithmetic), call instructions (No. Callee), and logical instructions (No. Logic), along
with two constant features: string constants (String Constant) and numeric constants (Numeric Constant) [31].
We also introduce a newly proposed feature called the named callee list (NCL) to capture the text sequence
information of callee functions that retain their function names due to dynamic linking. In particular, NCL is
designed to be a list of callee functions that are either imported or exported functions. These functions retain
their original names as they are used as identifiers to reference the functions in other parts of the code.
Since AST is necessary for model encoding calculation (§ 6), we summarize three syntactic features as AST-
family features:
• No. AST Nodes: The number of AST nodes.
• AST Node Cluster: The number of different node types in the AST. For example, in Figure 1, the AST node
cluster is denoted as [𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘: 3,𝑖𝑓: 1,𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛: 1,𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙: 1,𝑛𝑢𝑚: 3,𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘: 2,𝑎𝑠𝑔: 2, 𝑣𝑎𝑟: 4,𝑙𝑒: 1].
• AST Fuzzy Hash: We first generate a node sequence by traversing the AST preorder. Then we apply the
fuzzy hash algorithm [44] to generate the fuzzy hash of the AST.
3.2.2
Feature Similarity Calculation. The format of features divides them into two types with distinct similarity
calculations: value type and sequence type. Value type features consist of No. Instruction, No. Arithmetic, No.
Logic, No. Callee, and No. AST nodes. Sequence type features consist of Numeric Constant, String Constant, AST
Node Cluster, AST Fuzzy Hash, and NCL. For value type features, we use the relative difference ratio (𝑅𝐷𝑅) as
shown below for similarity calculation:
𝑅𝐷𝑅(𝑉1,𝑉2) = 1 −𝑎𝑏𝑠(𝑉1 −𝑉2)
𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑉1,𝑉2)
(3)
where 𝑉1,𝑉2 are feature values. For each sequence-type feature, we first sort the feature’s items and then
concatenate them into a single sequence. Then, we employ the common sequence ratio (CSR) based on the longest
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FPR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TPR
No. Instructions(auc=0.862)
No. Arithmetic(auc=0.521)
No. Logic(auc=0.687)
No. Callee(auc=0.944)
Numeric Constant(auc=0.940)
No. AST Nodes(auc=0.956)
AST Node Cluster(auc=0.978)
AST Fuzzy Hash(auc=0.932)
String Constant(auc=0.773)
NCL(auc=0.963)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Similarity Threshold
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F-score
No. Instructions
No. Arithmetic
No. Logic
No. Callee
Numeric Constant
No. AST Nodes
AST Node Cluster
AST Fuzzy Hash
String Constant
NCL
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
NCL
No. Callee
No. AST Nodes
AST Node Cluster
AST Fuzzy Hash
No. Instructions
No. Arithmetic
No. Logic
String Constant
Numeric Constant
Time/10−7s
Fig. 3. ROC Curves for Features.
Fig. 4. 𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒of Features.
Fig. 5. Time Costs of Similarity Calcula-
tion for Different Features.
common sequence (LCS) as follows:
𝐶𝑆𝑅(𝑆1,𝑆2) = 2 × 𝐿𝐶𝑆(𝑆1,𝑆2)
𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑆1) + 𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑆2)
(4)
where 𝑆1,𝑆2 are feature sequences, and function 𝐿𝐶𝑆(·, ·) returns the length of the longest common sequence
between 𝑆1,𝑆2. The above two equations are used for similarity calculation of various features.
3.2.3
Evaluation Results. In the evaluation, the values for𝑛and 𝑀in § 3.1.2 are set to 1000 and 20, 000, respectively.
As depicted in Figure 3, TPRs and FPRs calculated for each feature under various thresholds are presented as
a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) [75] curve. Additionally, we compute the area under the ROC curve
(AUC), which reflects the feature’s ability to distinguish between homologous and non-homologous functions.
The AUC values of the features extracted from AST (i.e., No. AST Nodes, AST Node Cluster, and AST Fuzzy Hash)
are high, as presented in the Figure 3. However, when the TPR is high, they generate a high FPR. Figure 5 depicts
the time costs associated with similarity calculations for various features. Clearly, sequence type features require
more time than value type features. Nonetheless, their time consumption falls within an acceptable range of
magnitudes. At least 105 exact calculations can be completed every second.
We observe in Figure 3 that at high TPR (0.996), the No. Callee feature produces a relatively lower FPR (0.111).
Recalling the requirement of the filtering phase, we aim to select features with a low FPR at a very high TPR.
Features with high AUC do not necessarily meet our objective. For example, the feature AST Node Cluster has a
higher FPR (0.47) than the feature No. Callee (FPR = 0.111) under the same TPR (0.996), even though the feature
AST Node Cluster has a higher AUC (0.978) than the feature No. Callee (AUC = 0.944). In this regard, we propose
a new metric, 𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒, which indicates a high TPR and a lower FPR.
𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒=
1
1
𝑇𝑃𝑅+ 𝐹𝑃𝑅
(5)
Figure 4 plots the 𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒curves of various features at different similarity thresholds. The results indicate that the
"NCL" feature has the highest 𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒of 0.92 among all the candidate features. It achieves a high true positive rate
at a low false positive rate, with a relatively high AUC score of 0.963. The "No. Callee" feature performs slightly
worse, with an AUC score of 0.944 and an 𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒of 0.902. The "String Constant" feature shows a relatively high
𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒at a very low threshold (e.g., 0.01) since it decisively determines the homology of functions. In particular,
if two functions have the same strings, they are highly likely to be homologous. Although the 𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒does not
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

10
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
Prefiltration
Feature Extraction
Filtering
AST
Extraction
Target
Function
Candidate
Functions
Target
Function
Remainder
Functions
Candidate
Homologous
Functions
Similarity Calculation
TreeLSTM Encoding
Siamese Calculation
Homology
Confirmation
Re-ranking
Input
   DK-based Prefiltration
§
       DL-based Similarity Calculation
§
Homologous
Functions
     DK-based Re-ranking
§
Output
Fig. 6. Workflow of Asteria-Pro. DK stands for Domain Knowledge. DL stands for Deep Learning.
increase as the threshold increases, it is because some functions do not include string constants, which limits the
number of true positive pairs. Based on the filtering performance of the candidate features, we have decided to
use NCL along with No. Callee and String Constant for our prefiltering design.
4
METHODOLOGY OVERVIEW
Asteria-Pro consists of three primary modules: DK-based Prefiltration, DL-based Similarity Calculation,
and DK-based Re-ranking, as shown in Figure 6. Here, DK stands for Domain Knowledge, and DL stands for
Deep Learning. The DK-based prefiltration module utilizes syntactic features to filter out dissimilar functions
from the candidate functions in a lightweight and efficient manner (see § 5). The DL-based similarity calculation
module encodes ASTs into representation vectors using the Tree-LSTM model and determines the similarity
score between the target function and the remaining functions using a Siamese network (see § 6). The DK-based
re-ranking module reorders the candidate homologous functions produced by the DL-based similarity calculation
module using lightweight structural features, such as the function call relationship. By integrating these three
modules, Asteria-Pro efficiently and effectively detects homologous functions across architectures.
5
DK-BASED PREFILTRATION
At this stage, Asteria-Pro aims to incorporate an efficient and effective filter. To achieve this goal, we have
summarized the challenges associated with fully exploiting the NCL feature. Based on these challenges, we have
developed a novel algorithm that overcomes these obstacles and enables us to construct the filter.
5.1
Exploitation Challenges
We have manually examined the false-negative cases where homologous functions were filtered out by both
the NCL and No. of callee features. Through this examination, we have identified the challenges associated with
appropriately exploiting the NCL and No. of callee features to address these false-negative cases.
• Exploitation Challenge 1 (EC1). Decorated callee function name. A decorated callee function name is
the result of a function name being decorated by the compiler using various techniques [8]. One such
technique is name mangling, which is used by the C++ compiler to encode the function name with
additional information about its parameters and return type to facilitate function overloading. The name
of the function after decoration may differ from its original name in the source code and will be distinct
across different architectures, particularly X86 and X64, due to their differing return types.
• Exploitation Challenge 2 (EC2). In certain functions, commonly referred to as leaf nodes in a call graph,
there are no callee functions present. These functions are self-contained and do not call any other functions
within their code. As a result, the leaf nodes do not possess distinguishable NCL and No. of callee features.
• Exploitation Challenge 3 (EC3). Function calls in binary target functions might not always be consistent
with source code. Function calls may be added or deleted due to compiler optimization. The reasons for
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
11
the function call change are function inline, intrinsic function replacement, instruction replacement for
optimization, that behave differently in different architectures. These challenges are introduced in § 2.3.
To overcome exploitation challenges, we improve feature ECL and propose a novel algorithm UpRelation.
5.2
Definition of NCL
This section provides a formal definition of NCL to enhance clarity and precision. NCL is built upon the call
graph of the software. The call graph 𝐶𝐺can be defined by representing all functions as nodes and the call
relationships between them as edges: 𝐶𝐺= (V, E), where V = {𝑣|𝑣is a function} denotes the node collection
and E = {(𝑢, 𝑣)|𝑢calls 𝑣} denotes the edge collection. For any edge (𝑢, 𝑣) ∈E, we say that function 𝑣is a callee
function of function 𝑢. To facilitate linking, function names in the dynamic symbol table 𝐷𝑆𝑇(i.e., import and
export table) are preserved [36]. For instance, if a target function calls an external function such as ‘strcpy’, the
callee function name ‘strcpy’ remains in the import table, rather than being removed after binary stripping. The
NCL of a target function 𝑓is defined as 𝑁𝐶𝐿𝑓= {𝑣|𝑣∈V, 𝑣∈𝐷𝑆𝑇(𝑓, 𝑣) ∈E, }, where 𝑣is sorted by its call
instruction address.
To address EC1, we employ two strategies to recover the original function names. Firstly, for C++ decorated
names, we use the recovery tool cxxfilt [5] to recover the function names. Secondly, for other decorated functions,
we define heuristic rules to recover the function names. For example, we recover the function call to ’_gets’ by
replacing it with ’gets’, by removing the underscore at the beginning. In cases where a function calls the same
function multiple times, we keep multiple identical function names.
5.3
Filtration algorithm
To address the additional two challenges, we propose a callee similarity-based algorithm called UpRelation. This
algorithm leverages context information in the call graph to overcome challenges EC2 and EC3. Specifically, the
algorithm utilizes parent nodes of leaf nodes in the call graph to match similar leaf nodes and address challenge
EC2. In the algorithm, we adopt a drill-down strategy that combines three features: NCL, No. Callee, and String
Constants, based on their information content. The No. Callee of function 𝑓is denoted by 𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑓, and the set of
String Constants for function 𝑓is denoted by 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑓.
Given a vulnerable function 𝑓𝑣, Algorithm 1 aims to eliminate most non-homologous functions while retaining
the vulnerable candidate functions in a list (𝑉𝐹𝐿) from the target function list (𝑇𝐹𝐿). The code from lines 2 to 6
performs filtering when the feature 𝑁𝐶𝐿𝑓𝑣of 𝑓𝑣is not empty. Specifically, the algorithm calculates the callee
similarity ratio (𝐶𝑆𝑅) between 𝑁𝐶𝐿𝑓𝑣and 𝑁𝐶𝐿𝑓of all candidate functions in line 4. It then filters out functions
whose 𝐶𝑆𝑅is less than a threshold 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿. Similarly, when the number of callee functions (𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑣) of 𝑓𝑣is not
zero, the algorithm filters out functions by calculating the Relevance Distance Ratio (𝑅𝐷𝑅) score from line 7 to 11.
The most crucial portion of the algorithm is in lines 12 to 19, where it matches the leaf functions to address EC2.
All caller functions of 𝑓𝑣are first visited, and the algorithm employs 𝑈𝑝𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛to discover all functions that are
similar to the caller function 𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟in line 14. For each similar function 𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟′, the algorithm considers all its
callee functions as vulnerable candidate functions at line 16. Matching the same leaf functions by locating the
same caller functions introduces some extraneous (leaf) functions that share the same caller function but are not
the same as the leaf function. To remove these extraneous functions, the algorithm utilizes string similarity at
line 22. After filtering by callees and strings, the algorithm finally obtains the expected vulnerable candidate
function list 𝑉𝐹𝐿.
Leaf Node Calculation Illustration. When the Strings, No. Callee, and NCL are non-empty, the similarity
calculation in our algorithm is straightforward. The arduous aspect of the algorithm lies in managing leaf
functions that do not call other functions. To provide a clearer illustration, we have employed an example depicted
in Figure 7 to demonstrate why homologous functions of leaf function 𝐹𝑠are preserved after pre-filtration. In this
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

12
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
Algorithm 1: UpRelation
Input: Vulnerable Function 𝑓𝑣, Target Function List 𝑇𝐹𝐿, Thresholds 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿,𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑒,𝑇𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔
Output: Vulnerable Candidate Function List 𝑉𝐹𝐿
1 𝑉𝐹𝐿←𝑇𝐹𝐿;
2 if 𝑁𝐶𝐿𝑓𝑣is not null then
3
for 𝑓∈𝑇𝐹𝐿do
4
𝑠= CSR(𝑁𝐶𝐿𝑓𝑣, 𝑁𝐶𝐿𝑓);
5
if 𝑠< 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿then 𝑉𝐹𝐿.pop(𝑓);
6
end
7 else if 𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑣> 0 then
8
for 𝑓∈𝑇𝐹𝐿do
9
𝑠= RDR(𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑣, 𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑓);
10
if 𝑠< 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑒then 𝑉𝐹𝐿.pop(𝑓);
11
end
12 else
13
𝐹𝐿′ = ∅;
14
for 𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟∈GetCallers(fv) do
15
for 𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟′ ∈𝑈𝑝𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟,𝑉𝐹𝐿) do
16
𝐹𝐿′.add(GetCallees(𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟′));
17
end
18
end
19
𝑉𝐹𝐿= 𝐹𝐿′;
20 if 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑓𝑣is not null then
21
for 𝑓∈𝑉𝐹𝐿do
22
𝑠= CSR(𝑆𝑡𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑓𝑣, 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑓);
23
if 𝑠< 𝑇𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔then 𝑉𝐹𝐿.pop(𝑓);
24
end
25 else
26
return
27 end
28 𝑉𝐹𝐿;
example, we presume that leaf function 𝐹𝑠does not comprise any strings. The algorithm proceeds to lookup its
caller and collate its NCL as [𝐸𝑥., 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑐., 𝐼𝑚., 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑐.], where Ex. Func. is an abbreviation for ’Exported Function’,
and Im. Func. is an abbreviation for ’Imported Function’. Similarly, the algorithm collects the NCL of caller of 𝐹′
𝑠
and attempts to correlate between the two NCLs. We postulate that homologous functions from the same software
have equivalent callers, signifying that caller functions 𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟and 𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟′ invoke the same exported and imported
functions. Consequently, the NCL of two caller functions comprise the same elements [𝐸𝑥., 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑐., 𝐼𝑚., 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑐.].
Upon the successful correlation of the NCL of caller function 𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟′
𝑠, the algorithm preserves all its offspring
nodes, encompassing 𝐹′
𝑠, Im. Func., and Ex. Func., and eliminates all other functions. As a result, homologous
function 𝐹′
𝑠of 𝐹𝑠is conserved after pre-filteration.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
13
Ex.
Func.
Im.
Func.
UpRelation
Ex.
Func.
Im.
Func.
UpRelation
3
Matched
[Ex. Func., Im. Func.]
[Ex. Func., Im. Func.]
NCL:
No. Callee:
3
:NCL
:No. Callee
Fig. 7. The Leaf Function 𝐹′𝑠is Matched by Its Homologous Function 𝐹𝑠(rather than being filtered out). Ex. Func. is short
for ‘Exported Function’. Im. Func. is short for ‘Imported Function’.
𝑻𝒓𝒆𝒆-𝑳𝑺𝑻𝑴
𝑻𝒓𝒆𝒆-𝑳𝑺𝑻𝑴
𝒄𝒂𝒕
𝒔𝒐𝒇𝒕𝒎𝒂𝒙
AST Similarity
| −|
𝒗𝒂𝒍𝒖𝒆𝟏
𝒗𝒂𝒍𝒖𝒆𝟐
𝑒!
𝑒"
𝑒#
𝑐&'
𝑐&(
ℎ&'
ℎ&(
𝑐&
ℎ&
𝒉𝒓𝒐𝒐𝒕
Encoding Vector
Similarity Calculation
AST Encoding
Node Encoding
ℎ!"
ℎ!#
𝑐!"
𝑐!#
𝑒!
u!
𝑖!
𝑐!
ℎ!
𝑜!
𝑒!
𝑓+,
𝑓+-
U" U#
X
X
∑
X
+
+
+
+
+
𝜎
𝜎
𝜎
𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ
𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ
𝜎
𝜎
Siamese Network
⨀
Fig. 8. The Siamese Architecture and Tree-LSTM Encoding.
6
DL-BASED SIMILARITY CALCULATION
This module calculates the similarity between two function ASTs by encoding them into vectors and applying
the Siamese architecture to calculate similarity between encoded vectors. Figure 8 depicts the calculation flow.
6.1
Tree-LSTM Encoding
Given an AST, Tree-LSTM model encodes it into a representation vector. Tree-LSTM model is firstly proposed
to encode the tree representation of a sentence and summarize the semantic information in natural language
processing. Tree-LSTM model can preserve every property of the plain LSTM gating mechanisms while processing
tree-structured inputs. The main difference between the plain LSTM and the Tree-LSTM is the way to deal with
the outputs of predecessors. The plain LSTM utilizes the output of only one predecessor in the sequence input.
We utilize Tree-LSTM to integrate the outputs of all child nodes in the AST for calculation of the current node.
To facilitate the depiction of the Tree-LSTM encoding, we assume that node 𝑣𝑘has two child nodes 𝑣𝑙and 𝑣𝑟.
The Tree-LSTM encoding of node 𝑣𝑘takes three types of inputs: node embedding 𝑒𝑘of 𝑣𝑘, hidden states ℎ𝑘𝑙
and ℎ𝑘𝑟, and cell states 𝑐𝑘𝑙and 𝑐𝑘𝑟as illustrated in Figure 8. The node embedding 𝑒𝑘is generated by using the
pre-trained model CodeT5 to embed the node 𝑣𝑘to a high-dimensional representation vector. ℎ𝑘𝑙, ℎ𝑘𝑟, 𝑐𝑘𝑙, and
𝑐𝑘𝑟are outputs from the encoding of child nodes. During the node encoding in Tree-LSTM, there are three gates
and three states which are important in the calculation. The three gates are calculated for filtering information to
avoid gradient explosion and gradient vanishing [59]. They are input, output, and forget gates. There are two
forget gates 𝑓𝑘𝑙and 𝑓𝑘𝑟, filtering the cell states from the left child node and right child node separately. As shown
in Node Encoding in Figure 8, the forget gates are calculated by combining ℎ𝑘𝑙, ℎ𝑘𝑟, and 𝑒𝑘. Similar to the forget
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

14
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
gates, the input gate, and the output gate are also calculated by combining ℎ𝑘𝑙, ℎ𝑘𝑟, and 𝑒𝑘. The details of the
three types of gates are as follows:
𝑓𝑘𝑙= 𝜎(𝑊𝑓𝑒𝑘+ (𝑈𝑓
𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑘𝑙+ 𝑈𝑓
𝑙𝑟ℎ𝑘𝑟) + 𝑏𝑓)
(6)
𝑓𝑘𝑟= 𝜎(𝑊𝑓𝑒𝑘+ (𝑈𝑓
𝑟𝑙ℎ𝑘𝑙+ 𝑈𝑓
𝑟𝑟ℎ𝑘𝑟) + 𝑏𝑓)
(7)
𝑖𝑘= 𝜎(𝑊𝑖𝑒𝑘+ (𝑈𝑖
𝑙ℎ𝑘𝑙+ 𝑈𝑖
𝑟ℎ𝑘𝑟) + 𝑏𝑖)
(8)
𝑜𝑘= 𝜎(𝑊𝑜𝑒𝑘+ (𝑈𝑜
𝑙ℎ𝑘𝑙+ 𝑈𝑜
𝑟ℎ𝑘𝑟) + 𝑏𝑜)
(9)
where 𝑖𝑘and 𝑜𝑘denote the input gate and the output gate respectively, and the symbol 𝜎denotes the sigmoid
activation function. The weight matrix 𝑊, 𝑈, and bias 𝑏are different corresponding to different gates. After
the gates are calculated, there are three states 𝑢𝑘, 𝑐𝑘, and ℎ𝑘in Tree-LSTM to store the intermediate encodings
calculated based on inputsℎ𝑘𝑙,ℎ𝑘𝑟, and𝑒𝑘. The cached state𝑢𝑘combines the information from the node embedding
𝑒𝑘and the hidden states ℎ𝑘𝑙and ℎ𝑘𝑟(Equation 10). And note that 𝑢𝑘utilizes tanh as the activation function rather
than 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑for holding more information from the inputs. The cell state 𝑐𝑘combines the information from
the cached state 𝑢𝑘and the cell states 𝑐𝑘𝑙and 𝑐𝑘𝑟filtered by forget gates (Equation 11). The hidden state ℎ𝑘is
calculated by combining the information from cell state 𝑐𝑘and the output gate 𝑜𝑘(Equation 12). The three states
are computed as follows:
𝑢𝑘= 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑊𝑢𝑒𝑘+ (𝑈𝑢
𝑙ℎ𝑘𝑙+ 𝑈𝑢
𝑟ℎ𝑘𝑟) + 𝑏𝑢)
(10)
𝑐𝑘= 𝑖𝑘⊙𝑢𝑘+ (𝑐𝑘𝑙⊙𝑓𝑘𝑙+ 𝑐𝑘𝑟⊙𝑓𝑘𝑟)
(11)
ℎ𝑘= 𝑜𝑘⊙𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑐𝑘)
(12)
where the ⊙means Hadamard product [40]. After the hidden state and input state are calculated, the encoding
of the current node 𝑣𝑘is finished. The states 𝑐𝑘and ℎ𝑘will then be used for the encoding of 𝑣𝑘’s parent node.
During the AST encoding, Tree-LSTM encodes every node in the AST from bottom up as shown in Tree-LSTM
Encoding in Figure 8. After encoding all nodes in the AST, the hidden state of the root node is used as the
encoding of the AST.
6.2
Siamese Calculation
This step uses Siamese architecture that integrates two identical Tree-LSTM model to calculate similarity
between encoded vectors. The details of the Siamese architecture M(𝑇1,𝑇2) are shown in Figure 8. The Siamese
architecture consists of two identical Tree-LSTM networks that share the same parameters. In the process of
similarity calculation, the Siamese architecture first utilizes Tree-LSTM to encode ASTs into vectors. We design
the Siamese architecture with subtraction and multiplication operations to capture the relationship between the
two encoding vectors. After the operations, the two resulting vectors are concatenated into a larger vector. Then
the resulting vector goes through a layer of softmax function to generate a 2-dimensional vector. The calculation
is defined as:
M(𝑇1,𝑇2) = 𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝜎(𝑐𝑎𝑡(|N (𝑇1) −N (𝑇2)|, N (𝑇1) ⊙N (𝑇2)) ×𝑊)))
(13)
where 𝑊is a 2𝑛× 2 matrix, the ⊙represents Hadamard product [40], | · | denotes the operation of making
an absolute value, the function 𝑐𝑎𝑡(·) denotes the operation of concatenating vectors. The softmax function
normalizes the vector into a probability distribution. Since 𝑊is a 2𝑛× 2 weight matrix, the output of Siamese
architecture is a 2 × 1 vector. The format of output is [𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒,𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒], where the first value
represents the dissimilarity score and the second represents the similarity score. During the model training, the
input format of Siamese architecture is < 𝑇1,𝑇2,𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙>. In our work, the label vector [1, 0] means 𝑇1 and 𝑇2 are
from non-homologous function pairs and the vector [0, 1] means homologous. The resulting vector and the label
vector are used for model loss and gradient calculation. During model inference, the second value in the output
vector is taken as the similarity of the two ASTs, and the similarity of ASTs is used in re-ranking.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
15
Name Match
High Similarity
Search
...
...
Relational
Struct
Match
Fig. 9. The Re-ranking Motivation Example. In the rectangular box with dashed line are the top K candidate homologous
functions of 𝐹1 produced by the search (i.e., DL-based similarity detection). Solid line arrows indicate the function call
relationship (e.g., 𝐹1 calls 𝐶𝐹1
𝑛). The dotted line arrows indicate the callee function match in re-ranking.
7
DK-BASED RE-RANKING
This module seeks to confirm the homology of the top k candidate functions output by the Tree-LSTM network
by re-ranking them. In the prior phase, the Tree-LSTM network infers the semantic information from the AST,
which is an intra-functional feature. The knowledge gained from the AST is insufficient to establish the homology
of functions. In this phase, function call relationships are used as domain knowledge to compensate for the lack of
knowledge regarding the inter-functional features of the Tree-LSTM. To this end, we design an algorithm called
Relational Structure Match. In contrast to the callee application in the pre-filtering module, this module uses
more extensive information from callee relationships to show the degree of homology of candidate functions.
7.1
Motivated Example
Our algorithm is based on a conforming observation to an intuitive law: If a function 𝐹1 calls function 𝐶𝐹1, then
its homologous function 𝐹′
1 will also call the homologous function 𝐶𝐹′
1 of 𝐶𝐹1. As depicted in Figure 9, we have
𝐹1 calls 𝐶𝐹1, and 𝐹′
1 calls 𝐶𝐹′
1. Assume that the search process for 𝐹1 yields the top K functions containing the
target homologous function 𝐹′
1. We then employ the call relations of 𝐹1 and 𝐹′
1 to conduct precise callee function
matching for re-ranking. In particular, callee functions of 𝐹1 are divided into two categories, named callees 𝐶𝐹1
𝑛
and anonymous callees 𝐶𝐹1
𝑎. For named callees, their names are utilized to match callees of functions between the
source function 𝐹1 and the candidate top K functions. For anonymous callees, we employ DL-based similarity
detection to calculate the similarity between callees of functions between the source function 𝐹1 and the candidate
top K functions. Recalling the observation, the homologous function 𝐹′
1 of 𝐹1 holds the most matched callees.
After re-ranking the candidate functions based on the matched callees, 𝐹′
1 is re-ranked in the first place.
7.2
Relational Structure Match Algorithm
The algorithm aims to rescore each candidate function by leveraging the call relationship between the target
function and the candidate functions. The relational structure refers to the call relations between the target
function and all its callee functions, as illustrated in Section § 7.1. To match the relational structure, the algorithm
performs one of two distinct operations (𝑂1 and 𝑂2) based on whether the source function has callee functions or
not.
𝑂1: When the source function 𝐹1 has one or more callee functions, the algorithm extracts all callee functions of
𝐹1 to build a mixed callee function set (MCFS). (details are described below). Using MCFS, the algorithm
calculates similarities between the target function and the candidate functions, resulting in new match
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

16
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
scores. It re-ranks all candidate functions by combining the original Asteria scores (Equation 5) with
the newly calculated match scores. The details of MCFS and match score calculation are described in the
subsequent sections.
𝑂2: When the source function 𝐹1 has no callee functions, the algorithm removes all candidate functions that
have one or more callee functions. The remaining candidate functions are then re-ranked based on their
original Asteria scores.
7.2.1
Mixed Callee Function Set. The mixed callee function set (MCFS) of function 𝐹consists of two types of callee
functions: named callee functions and anonymous callee functions. Named callee functions refer to functions
whose names have been preserved. These functions are typically imported or exported functions, and their
function names are necessary for external linking purposes. On the other hand, anonymous callee functions are a
type of function for which the function name has been removed for security reasons. These functions are typically
anonymized to protect sensitive information. We denote the MCFS of function 𝐹as 𝐶𝑆𝐹= 𝐶𝐹
𝑛1, ...,𝐶𝐹
𝑛𝑗,𝐶𝐹
𝑎1, ...,𝐶𝐹
𝑎𝑗,
where 𝐶𝐹
𝑛𝑗represents a named callee function and 𝐶𝐹
𝑎𝑗represents an anonymous callee function. The set 𝐶𝑆𝐹
includes both types of callee functions for function 𝐹.
7.2.2
Match Score Calculation. The algorithm performs two types of matches to calculate the match score 𝑀for
each candidate function, utilizing the MCFSs of the target function 𝐹1 and all candidate functions.
Named Callee Match: For all named callees 𝐶𝐹1
𝑛𝑗in 𝐶𝑆𝐹1, the algorithm matches them with the named callees
of each candidate function based on function names. If a named callee 𝐶𝐹1
𝑛in 𝐹1 has the same function name as a
named callee 𝐶
𝐹′
1
𝑛in a candidate function 𝐹′
1, they are considered a match. The number of matched functions in
candidate function 𝐹𝑖is denoted as N𝐹𝑖
𝑛.
Anonymous Callee Match: For all anonymous callees 𝐶𝐹1
𝑎𝑖in 𝐶𝑆𝐹1, the algorithm utilizes DL-based similarity
detection to calculate similarity scores between all anonymous callees of the target function and the anonymous
callees of all candidate functions. For each anonymous callee 𝐶𝐹𝑖
𝑎𝑗in a candidate function 𝐹𝑖, the algorithm
calculates the maximum similarity score between 𝐶𝐹𝑖
𝑎𝑗and all anonymous callees of the target function. This
maximum similarity score is denoted as S𝐹𝑖
𝑎𝑗.
After matching all callee functions of the candidate functions, the match score 𝑀𝐹𝑖of candidate function 𝐹𝑖is
calculated as follows:
𝑀𝐹𝑖= N𝐹𝑖
𝑛+
∑︁
S𝐹𝑖
𝑎𝑗
(14)
where S𝐹𝑖
𝑎𝑗represents the similarity score between an anonymous callee 𝐶𝐹𝑖
𝑎𝑗in candidate function 𝐹𝑖and the
anonymous callees of the target function 𝐹𝑖. The sum is taken over all anonymous callees in 𝐶𝑆𝐹𝑖, the MCFS of
candidate function 𝐹𝑖.
7.2.3
Match Score-based Re-ranking. The re-ranking score of candidate function 𝐹𝑖is obtained by combining the
match score 𝑀𝐹𝑖and its DL-based similarity score M𝐹𝑖using Equation 15. The algorithm calculates a new score
𝑆𝑟𝑒−𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐹𝑖for each candidate function 𝐹𝑖as follows:
𝑆𝑟𝑒−𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘
𝐹𝑖
= 𝛼× MF⟩+ 𝛽× 𝑀𝐹𝑖
(15)
Here, 𝛼and 𝛽are weight coefficients that satisfy 𝛼+ 𝛽= 1. The new score 𝑆𝑟𝑒−𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐹𝑖combines the DL-based
similarity score M𝐹𝑖and the match score 𝑀𝐹𝑖, emphasizing their importance according to the weights. A higher
re-ranking score indicates a higher degree of homology.
After calculating the re-ranking scores for all candidate functions, the algorithm sorts them in descending
order based on their new scores 𝑆𝑟𝑒−𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘
𝐹𝑖
. This ranking allows for the identification of candidate functions with
higher homology, as those with higher scores are prioritized.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
17
8
EVALUATION
We aim to conduct a comprehensive practicality evaluation of various state-of-the-art function similarity detection
methods for bug search. To this end, we adopt 8 different metrics to depict the search capability of different
methods in a more comprehensive way. Furthermore, we construct a large evaluation dataset, in a way that is
closer to practical usage of bug search.
8.1
Research Questions
In the evaluation experiments, we aim to answer following research questions:
RQ1. How does Asteria-Pro compare to baseline methods in cross-architecture and cross-compiler function
similarity detection?
RQ2. What is the performance of Asteria-Pro, compared to baseline methods for bug search purpose?
RQ3. How much do DK-based filtration and DK-based re-ranking improves in accuracy and efficiency for
Asteria-Pro? How do their performance compare to other baseline methods when integrated together?
RQ4. How do different configurable parameters affect the accuracy and efficiency?
RQ5. How does Asteria-Pro perform in a real-world bug search?
8.2
Implementation Details
We utilize IDA Pro 7.5 [10] and its plugin Hexray Decompiler to decompile binary code and extract ASTs. The
current version of the Hexray Decompiler supports x86, x64, PowerPC (PPC), and ARM architectures. For the
encoding of leaf nodes in Formulas (6)-(11), we assign zero vectors to the state vectors ℎ𝑘𝑙, ℎ𝑘𝑟, 𝑐𝑘𝑙, and 𝑐𝑘𝑟. During
model training, we use the binary cross-entropy loss function (BCELoss) to measure the discrepancy between
the labels and the predictions. The AdaGrad optimizer is utilized for gradient computation and weight-matrix
updating after the losses are computed. Due to the dependency of Tree-LSTM computation steps on the AST shape,
parallel batch computation is not possible. Therefore, the batch size is always set to 1. The model is trained for 60

each with 16 cores, 128GB of RAM, and 4TB of storage. The Asteria-Pro code runs in a Python 3.6 environment.
We compile the source code in our dataset using the gcc v5.4.0 compiler and utilize buildroot-2018.11.1 [3]
for dataset construction. We use the binwalk tool [2] to unpack firmware and obtain the binaries for further
analysis. In the UpRelation algorithm of the filtering module, we set the threshold values 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿,𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑒,𝑇𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔
to 0.1, 0.8, and 0.8, respectively, based on their 𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒. The crucial threshold 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿is discussed in § 8.8.1. In
Equation 15, we set 𝛼= 0.1 and 𝛽= 0.9 to emphasize the role of callee function similarities in the re-ranking
process. The sensitivity analysis of these weights is presented in § 8.8.2.
8.3
Comprehensive Benchmark
To compare BCSD methods in a comprehensive way, we build an extensive benchmark based on multiple advanced
works [51, 62, 66]. The benchmark comprises of two datasets, two detection tasks, and five measure metrics.
8.3.1
Dataset. The functions not involved in the prefiltering test (see § 3) are divided into two datasets for model
training and testing and evaluation. The evaluation dataset consists of two sub-datasets, each of which is used
for a different detection task.
Model Dataset Construction. The model dataset is constructed for training and testing the Tree-LSTM
model. It consists of a total of 31,940 functions extracted from 1,944 distinct binaries. From these functions,
314,852 pairs of homologous functions and 314,852 pairs of non-homologous functions are created. To ensure a
fair evaluation of the model’s performance, the dataset is divided into a training set and a testing set using an 8:2
ratio. This means that 80% of the function pairs are used for training the model, while the remaining 20% are
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

18
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
used for testing and evaluating the model’s performance. The dataset construction allows the Tree-LSTM model
to learn and generalize from a diverse set of functions, including both homologous and non-homologous pairs.
By dividing the dataset into training and testing sets, the model’s performance can be assessed on unseen data to
measure its effectiveness in identifying homologous functions.
Evaluation Dataset Construction. The dataset construction process involves creating two sub-datasets:
the g-dataset and the v-dataset. These datasets are used for different evaluation tasks: classification test and
bug search test. The g-dataset is constructed for the classification test, which evaluates the model’s ability to
classify homologous and non-homologous function pairs. It consists of tuples in the form (𝐹, (𝐹ℎ, 𝐹𝑛)), where 𝐹
is the source function and (𝐹ℎ, 𝐹𝑛) represents a function set containing a homologous function 𝐹ℎand a non-
homologous function 𝐹𝑛. Each tuple in the g-dataset represents a pair of functions to be classified as homologous
or non-homologous. On the other hand, the v-dataset is constructed for the bug search test, which evaluates
the model’s ability to identify non-homologous functions among a larger set of candidates. The tuples in the
v-dataset are of the form (𝐹, (𝐹ℎ, 𝐹𝑛1, ..., 𝐹𝑛𝑖, ..., 𝐹𝑛10000)). Here, 𝐹ℎrepresents a homologous function, and 𝐹𝑛1 to
𝐹𝑛10000 represent non-homologous functions. In this case, the 𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡contains a larger number of non-homologous
functions to simulate the bug search scenario. For both datasets, the source function 𝐹is matched with all the
functions in the 𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡for evaluation. The g-dataset focuses on evaluating the model’s accuracy in classifying
homologous and non-homologous pairs, while the v-dataset assesses the model’s performance in identifying
non-homologous functions among a larger pool of candidates.
8.3.2
Metrics. We choose five distinct metrics for comprehensive evaluation from earlier works [54, 62, 71]. In
our evaluation, the similarity of a function pair is calculated as a score of 𝑟. Assuming the threshold is 𝛽, if the
similarity score 𝑟of a function pair is greater than or equal to 𝛽, the function pair is regarded as a positive result,
otherwise a negative result. For a homologous pair, if its similarity score 𝑟is greater than or equal to 𝛽, it is a
true positive (TP). If a similarity score of 𝑟is less than 𝛽, the calculation result is a false negative (FN). For a
non-homologous pair, if a similarity score 𝑟is greater than or equal to 𝛽, it is a false positive (FP). When the
similarity score 𝑟is less than 𝛽, it is a true negative (TN). These metrics are described as following:
• TPR. TPR is short for true positive rate. TPR shows the accuracy of homologous function detection at
threshold 𝛽. It is calculated as 𝑇𝑃𝑅=
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁.
• FPR. FPR is short for false positive rate. FPR shows the accuracy of non-homologous function detection at
threshold 𝛽. It is calculated as 𝐹𝑃𝑅=
𝐹𝑃
𝐹𝑃+𝑇𝑁.
• AUC. AUC is short for area under the curve, where the curve is termed Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) curve. The ROC curve illustrates the detection capacity of both homologous and non-homologous
functions as its discrimination threshold 𝛽is varied. AUC is a quantitative representation of ROC.
• MRR. MRR is short for mean reciprocal rank, which is a statistic measure for evaluating the results of
a sample of queries, ordered by probability of correctness. It is commonly used in retrieval experiments.
In our bug retrieval-manner evaluation, it is calculated as 𝑀𝑅𝑅=
1
|𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡|
Í
𝐹ℎ𝑖∈𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡
1
𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐹ℎ𝑖, where 𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐹ℎ𝑖
denotes the rank of function 𝐹ℎ𝑖in pairing candidate set 𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡, and |𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡| denotes the size of 𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡.

k results are regarded as homologous functions (positive). It is calculated as follows:
𝑔(𝑥) =
(
1
if 𝑥= 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒
0
if 𝑥= 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒

|𝐹|
∑︁
𝑔(𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑓𝑔𝑡
𝑖
≤𝑘)

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
19
8.3.3
Detection Tasks. The two function similarity detection tasks based on BCSD applications are as follows:
Task-C (Classification Task): This task focuses on evaluating the ability of methods to classify function pairs as
either homologous or non-homologous. It involves performing binary classification on the g-dataset, which
contains tuples of the form (𝐹, (𝐹ℎ, 𝐹𝑛)), where 𝐹ℎrepresents a homologous function and 𝐹𝑛represents a non-
homologous function. The task evaluates the performance using three metrics: TPR, FPR, and AUC of the ROC
curve. TPR and FPR are commonly used to measure the performance of binary classification models, while AUC
provides an overall measure of the model’s discriminative ability.
Task-V (Bug/Vulnerability Search Task): This task focuses on evaluating the ability of methods to identify
homologous functions from a large pool of candidate functions. It uses the v-dataset, which contains tuples
of the form (𝐹, (𝐹ℎ, 𝐹𝑛1, ..., 𝐹𝑛𝑖, ..., 𝐹𝑛10000)), where 𝐹ℎrepresents a homologous function and 𝐹𝑛𝑖represents non-
homologous functions. The task involves calculating function similarity between a source function 𝐹and all
functions in the 𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡. The functions in 𝑃𝑠𝑒𝑡can then be sorted based on similarity scores. The task evaluates the

cases where the correct homologous function is included in the top-1 and top-10 rankings, respectively.
These tasks provide a comprehensive evaluation of the methods’ performance in distinguishing between
homologous and non-homologous functions and identifying homologous functions from a large pool of candidates.
8.4
Baseline Methods.
We choose various representative cross-architectural BCSD works, that make use of AST or are built around deep
learning encoding. These BCSD works consist of Diaphora [7], Gemini [66], SAFE [52], and Trex [54]. Moreover,
we also use our previous conference work Asteria as one of baseline methods. We go over these works in more
details below.
Diaphora. Diaphora performs similarity detection also based on AST. Diaphora maps nodes in an AST to
primes and calculates the product of all prime numbers. Then it utilizes a difference function to calculate the
similarity between the prime products. We download the Diaphora source code from github [7], and extract
Diaphora’s core algorithm for AST similarity calculation for comparison. Noting that it would take a significant
amount of time (several minutes) to compute a pair of functions with extremely dissimilar ASTs, we add a filtering
computation before the prime difference. The filtering calculates the AST size difference and eliminates function
pairs with a significant size difference. We publish the improved Diaphora source code on our website [1].
Gemini. Gemini encodes ACFGs (attributed CFGs) into vectors with a graph embedding neural network. The
ACFG is a graph structure where each node is a vector corresponding to a basic block. We have obtained Gemini’s
source code and its training dataset. Notice that in [66] authors mentioned it can be retrained for a specific task,
such as the bug search. To obtain the best accuracy of Gemini, we first use the given training dataset to train the
model to achieve the best performance. Then we re-train the model with the part of our training dataset. Gemini
supports similarity detection on X86, MIPS, and ARM architectures.
SAFE. SAFE works directly on disassembled binary functions, does not require manual feature extraction, is
computationally more efficient than Gemini. In their vulnerability search task, SAFE outperforms Gemini in terms
of recall. SAFE supports three different instruction set architecture X64, X86, and ARM. We retrain SAFE based
on the official code [52] and use retrained model parameter for our test. In particular, we select all appropriate
function pairs from the training dataset, whose instruction set architectures are supported by SAFE. Then we
extract the function features for all function pairs selected and discard the function pairs whose features SAFE
cannot extract. After feature extraction, 27,580 function pairs of three distinct architecture combinations (i.e.,
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

20
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
FPR
TPR
X86-ARM
Asteria-Pro
Asteria
Gemini
SAFE
Diaphora
Trex
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
FPR
TPR
X86-X64
Asteria-Pro
Asteria
Gemini
SAFE
Diaphora
Trex
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
FPR
TPR
X86-PPC
Asteria-Pro
Asteria
Gemini
Diaphora
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
FPR
TPR
ARM-X64
Asteria-Pro
Asteria
Gemini
SAFE
Diaphora
Trex
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
FPR
TPR
ARM-PPC
Asteria-Pro
Asteria
Gemini
Diaphora
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
FPR
TPR
X64-PPC
Asteria-Pro
Asteria
Gemini
Diaphora
Fig. 10. ROC Curves on All Cross-architecture Combination Detection.
X86-X64, X86-ARM, and X64-ARM) are obtained for training. Next, We adopt the default model parameters (e.g.,
embedding size) and training setting (e.g. training epoches) to train SAFE.
Trex. Trex is based on pretrained model [54] of the state-of-the-art NLP technique, and micro-traces. It utilizes
a dynamic component to extract micro-traces and use them to pretrain a masked language model. Then it
integrates pretrained ML model into a similarity detection model along with the learned semantic knowledge
from micro-traces. It supports similarity detection of ARM, MIPS, X86, and X64.
8.5
Comparison of Similarity Detection Accuracy (RQ1)
In the evaluation of cross-architecture scenarios, the focus was on assessing the detection capability of different
approaches in two tasks separately, which is commonly encountered in vulnerability search scenarios. Additionally,
the evaluation also considered the performance in cross-compiler scenarios involving three different combinations
of compilers: gcc-clang, gcc-icc, and clang-icc.
8.5.1
Cross-Architecture Evaluation. In the evaluation of the two distinct tasks, it is important to note that the
baseline methods may not be capable of detecting function similarities for all four instruction set architectures.
As a result, the detection results for certain architecture combinations may be empty, indicating that the baseline
methods were unable to provide any meaningful results. For each task, the evaluation measured the performance
of various approaches in terms of the defined metrics. The specific outcomes and results of the evaluation for
each task were analyzed and discussed.
Comparison on task-C. In Task-C, all approaches were evaluated by conducting similarity detection on all
supported architectural combinations. The evaluation results were used to calculate the three metrics (TPR, FPR,
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
21
Table 2. AUCs in Task-C.
Methods
X86-ARM
X86-X64
X86-PPC
ARM-X64
ARM-PPC
X64-PPC
Average
Asteria-Pro
0.996
0.998
0.995
0.998
0.998
0.999
0.997
Asteria
0.995
0.998
0.998
0.995
0.998
0.999
0.997
Gemini
0.969
0.984
0.984
0.973
0.968
0.984
0.977
SAFE
0.851
0.867
-
0.872
-
-
0.863
Trex
0.794
0.891
-
0.861
-
-
0.849
Diaphora
0.389
0.461
0.397
0.388
0.455
0.400
0.415
and AUC) for each approach. These results are presented in Table 2 and visualized in Figure 10, where each
subplot represents the ROC curve for a specific architecture combination. The x-axis represents the FPR (False
Positive Rate), and the y-axis represents the TPR (True Positive Rate). By examining the ROC curves in Figure 10,
it can be observed that methods with performance curves closer to the upper-left corner generally exhibit
superior performance. In particular, the ROC curves of Asteria-Pro and Asteria are almost indistinguishable
across all architectural combinations, indicating that they possess equivalent classification performance in
Task-C. Furthermore, the AUC values presented in Table 2 provide a quantitative measure of the approaches’
ability to distinguish between homologous and non-homologous functions. It is noted that Asteria-Pro and
Asteria demonstrate nearly identical performance in this regard. However, the AUC values of Asteria-Pro
are consistently greater than those of the other baseline techniques for all architectural combinations. This
suggests that Asteria-Pro exhibits superior discriminative capability between homologous and non-homologous
functions in Task-C. These findings highlight the strong performance of Asteria-Pro in the classification task
and its ability to outperform the baseline methods in distinguishing between homologous and non-homologous
functions across various architecture combinations.
Table 3. MRR and Recall of Different Methods.
Metrics
Methods
X86-X64
X86-ARM
X86-PPC
X64-ARM
X64-PPC
ARM-PPC
Avg
Asteria-Pro
0.934
0.887
0.931
0.879
0.919
0.903
0.908
Asteria
0.776
0.724
0.731
0.708
0.713
0.750
0.734
Trex
0.414
0.206
-
0.309
-
-
0.310
Gemini
0.478
0.250
0.325
0.336
0.357
0.256
0.334
Safe
0.029
0.007
-
0.009
-
-
0.015
MRR
Diaphora
0.023
0.019
0.020
0.019
0.020
0.021
0.020
Asteria-Pro
0.917
0.868
0.912
0.879
0.899
0.903
0.896
Asteria
0.706
0.648
0.652
0.627
0.631
0.675
0.657
Trex
0.274
0.110
-
0.192
-
-
0.192
Gemini
0.405
0.180
0.242
0.261
0.279
0.229
0.266
Safe
0.004
0.002
-
0.002
-
-
0.003

Diaphora
0.021
0.016
0.017
0.016
0.017
0.018
0.018
Asteria-Pro
0.961
0.921
0.962
0.913
0.952
0.932
0.940
Asteria
0.902
0.867
0.882
0.857
0.866
0.890
0.877
Trex
0.710
0.452
-
0.575
-
-
0.579
Gemini
0.615
0.383
0.482
0.478
0.502
0.468
0.488
Safe
0.022
0.010
-
0.014
-
-
0.015

Diaphora
0.029
0.024
0.026
0.026
0.025
0.027
0.026

for different architectural combinations. These metrics evaluate the performance of the methods in the bug

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

22
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun

the first column represents the metrics, and the second column lists the names of the methods. The third through
eighth columns display the metric values for the different architectural combinations, while the last column
shows the mean value across all architectures. It can be observed that Asteria-Pro and Asteria consistently
outperform the baseline approaches by a significant margin across all architecture configurations. Asteria-Pro
achieves an impressive average MRR of 0.908, indicating a substantial improvement of up to 23.71% compared to
Asteria. Even after retraining, Safe demonstrates poor performance in properly recognizing small functions. In

0.65, respectively, which are 237% and 146% higher than the best result (0.26). Notably, Asteria-Pro shows a

Asteria continue to exhibit superior performance compared to the other methods. While other methods show a

results demonstrate that Asteria-Pro outperforms the baseline methods, including Asteria, in terms of MRR,

sequences more accurately. However, they still fall short compared to Asteria-Pro.
Indeed, the performance of BCSD approaches can vary significantly between different evaluation tasks, as
demonstrated by the differences in Task-V performance compared to the similar ROC curve performance in
Task-C. In the case of Gemini, despite having a high AUC score similar to Asteria, its MRR performance is
relatively poor compared to both Asteria and Asteria-Pro. This indicates that evaluating BCSD approaches
in a single experiment setting, such as Task-C, may not provide a comprehensive understanding of their real-
world applicability and behavior. Task-V, which focuses on bug (vulnerability) search, simulates the scenario of
identifying homologous functions from a pool of candidate functions. In this task, the ability to accurately rank
and identify homologous functions becomes crucial. While ROC curves and AUC scores provide information
about the ability to discriminate between homologous and non-homologous functions, they may not reflect the
performance in ranking and retrieving homologous functions accurately. Therefore, it is important to consider
multiple evaluation tasks, such as Task-C and Task-V, to assess the overall performance and effectiveness of
BCSD approaches. The results obtained from different tasks can provide a more comprehensive understanding of
the strengths and limitations of each method and their suitability for real-world applications.
False Positive Analysis. The false positive outcomes of Asteria-Pro can be attributed to two primary causes:
Cause 1: Similar Syntactic Structures of Proxy Functions - Proxy functions exhibit similar syntactic structures,
which can lead to similar semantics. This can make it challenging for Asteria-Pro to differentiate between proxy
functions since their semantics are alike. Figure 11 provides an illustration of two proxy functions that differ
only on line 9. Due to their similar semantics, it becomes difficult to confirm the actual callees, especially when
symbols are lacking or when indirect jump tables are involved.
Cause 2: Compiler-Specific Intrinsic Functions - Compilers for different architectures utilize various intrinsic
functions, which substitute libc function calls with optimized assembly instructions. For example, the gcc-X86
compiler may replace the memcpy function with several memory operation instructions that are specific to the
architecture. As a result, the memcpy function may be absent from the list of callee functions used by Asteria’s
filtering and re-ranking modules. This lack of complete callee function information can lead to a loss of precision
in the scoring calculation.
Both causes contribute to the false positive outcomes in Asteria-Pro, highlighting the challenges in accurately
detecting function similarity across different architectures and handling variations in compilers’ optimization
techniques. Addressing these causes and improving the precision of function similarity detection in such scenarios
is an ongoing area of research and development in the field of BCSD.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
23
1
CK_RV proxy_C_DigestInit(...){
2
/*
3
Variable Initialization.
4
*/
5
v5 = (Proxy *)self [1].
C_GetSlotInfo;
6
v7 = handle;
7
result =
map_session_to_real(v5
,&v7 ,&map ,V3);
8
if (! result)
9
result = map.funcs ->C_
DigestInit(v7 ,
mechanism);
10
return result;
11
}
1
CK_RV proxy_C_DigestKey(...){
2
/*
3
Variable Initialization.
4
*/
5
v5 = (Proxy *)self [1].
C_GetSlotInfo;
6
v7 = handle;
7
result =
map_session_to_real(v5
,&v7 ,&map ,V3);
8
if (! result)
9
result = map.funcs ->C_
DigestKey(v7 ,
mechanism);
10
return result;
11
}
Fig. 11. Two Proxy Functions with only distinctions highlighted in red
Table 4. Cross-compiler Evaluation Results.
Metrics
Methods
gcc-clang
gcc-icc
clang-icc
Avg.
MRR
Asteria-Pro
0.755
0.560
0.564
0.626
Asteria
0.624
0.319
0.328
0.424
Trex
0.148
0.063
0.093
0.101
Gemini
0.234
0.121
0.080
0.145
Safe
0.058
0.187
0.076
0.107
Diaphora
0.727
0.370
0.384
0.494

Asteria-Pro
0.694
0.479
0.486
0.553
Asteria
0.541
0.244
0.256
0.347
Trex
0.099
0.031
0.040
0.057
Gemini
0.164
0.079
0.048
0.097
Safe
0.027
0.152
0.031
0.070
Diaphora
0.662
0.312
0.330
0.435

Asteria-Pro
0.864
0.706
0.711
0.760
Asteria
0.783
0.466
0.469
0.573
Trex
0.257
0.124
0.075
0.152
Gemini
0.368
0.196
0.137
0.234
Safe
0.101
0.239
0.149
0.163
Diaphora
0.844
0.476
0.497
0.606
8.5.2
Cross-Comiler Evaluation. In the cross-compiler evaluation, we conducted experiments using three different
compilers: gcc, icc (Version 2021.1 Build 20201112_000000), and clang (10.0.0), all for the x86 architecture. The
evaluation results are presented in Table 4. We evaluated the performance of different methods using metrics
such as MRR and Recall in the three cross-compiler settings: gcc-clang, gcc-icc, and clang-icc. The average values
for all three settings are also provided in the last column of the table. Our new tool, Asteria-Pro, consistently
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

24
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
outperforms the baseline methods by significant margins across all three compiler combinations. Compared to
Asteria, Asteria-Pro achieves an average improvement of 47.6% in MRR and Recall, demonstrating its superior
performance. The improvements compared to other baseline tools such as Trex, Gemini, Safe, and Diaphora are
even more substantial, with average improvements of 596.6%, 331.7%, 485.0%, and 26.7%, respectively. It is worth
noting that Diaphora achieves surprisingly high precision in the gcc-clang setting, particularly compared to
the cross-architecture setting. This may be attributed to the fact that compilers gcc and clang employ similar
compilation optimization algorithms, resulting in similar assembly code and abstract syntax tree (AST) structures.
However, since Asteria is not trained on a cross-compiler dataset, it exhibits relatively lower precision compared
to Diaphora. Although the precision performances of the methods vary in different compiler combination settings,
a consistent trend can be observed. Specifically, higher precision is observed in the gcc-clang setting, while lower
precision is observed in the gcc-icc and clang-icc settings, except for Safe. This can be attributed to the fact that
the icc compiler employs more aggressive code optimizations, resulting in dissimilar assembly code compared
to the other compilers. Overall, the results of the cross-compiler evaluation demonstrate the effectiveness of
Asteria-Pro in detecting function similarity across different compilers and highlight its superior performance
compared to the baseline methods.
Answer to RQ1: Asteria-Pro demonstrates superior accuracy in both Task-C and Task-V. In Task-C,
dominant model in Asteria-Pro demonstrates the best classification performance by producing the
highest AUC (0.997). Regarding Task-V, Asteria-Pro outperforms other baseline methods by a large

baseline methods by a significant margin. All BCSD methods exhibit higher accuracy in the gcc-clang
pairing compared to the gcc-icc or clang-icc pairings, likely because the icc compiler tends to emit highly
optimized assembly code.
0
2
4
6
Asteria-Pro
Asteria
Trex
Gemini
Safe
Diaphora
Time/10−2s
(a) Average Feature Extraction Time for One Func-
tion
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Asteria-Pro
Asteria(/10)
Trex(/100)
Gemini
Safe
Diaphora(/10)
Time/s
Phase 1
Phase 2
(b) Average Time for One Search
Fig. 12. Performance Comparison of All Methods on Task-V
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
25
8.6
Performance Comparison (RQ2)
In this section, the detection time of function similarity for all baseline approaches and Asteria-Pro are measured.
Since the DK-based prefiltration and DK-based re-ranking modules are intended to enhance performance in
Task-V, we only count the timings in Task-V. In task-V, given a source function, methods extract the function
features of source and all candidate functions, which is referred to as phase 1. Next, the extracted function features
are subjected to feature encoding and encoding similarity computation to determine the final similarities, which
is referred to as phase 2.
As shown in Figure 12a, we calculate the average feature extraction time for each function. The x-axis depicts
extraction time, while the y-axis lists various extraction methods. During feature extraction for one single
function, Asteria-Pro, Asteria, and Diaphora all execute the same operation (i.e., AST extraction), resulting
in the same average extraction time. Since AST extraction requires binary disassembly and decompilation, it
requires the most time compared to other methods. Trex requires the least amount of time for feature extraction,
which is less than 0.001s per function, as code disassembly is the only time-consuming activity.
Figure 12b illustrates the average duration of a single search procedure for various methods. The phases 1 and
2 of a single search procedure are denoted by distinct signs. Due to its efficient filtering mechanism, Asteria-Pro
requires the least amount of time (58.593s) to complete a search. Due to its extensive pre-training model encoding
computation, Trex is the most time-consuming algorithm. Asteria-Pro cuts search time by 96.90%, or 1831.36
seconds, compared to Asteria (1889.96 seconds).
Answer to RQ2: Asteria-Pro costs the least average time to accomplish task-V. Compared with Asteria,
Asteria-Pro cuts search time by 96.90% by introducing the filtering module.
Table 5. Accuracy of Different Module Combination
Module Combination
MRR

Average Time(s)
Pre-filtering + Asteria
0.824
0.764
0.929
57.8
Asteria + Reranking
0.882
0.864
0.910
1889.8
8.7
Ablation Experiments (RQ3)
To demonstrate the progresses made by different modules of DK-based filtration and DK-based re-ranking, we
conduct ablation experiments by evaluating the different module combinations in Asteria-Pro. The module
combinations are Pre-filtering + Asteria and Asteria + Re-ranking. The two module combinations performs Task-V
and the results are shown in Table 5. For Asteria + Re-ranking, the top 20 similarity detection results are re-ranked
by the Re-ranking module.
8.7.1

non-homologous functions.
8.7.2
Re-ranking Improvement. Compared to Asteria, the integration of Re-ranking module improves MRR,

average additional 0.13s for re-ranking, which is negligible. Compared to Pre-filtering + Asteria, re-ranking module

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

26
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
Table 6. Integration of Pre-Filtration and Re-Ranking Modules with Alternative BCSD Techniques. We denote the integration
with BCSD method X as X-I.
Methods
Trex
Trex-I
Gemini
Gemini-I
Safe
Safe-I
Diaphora
Diaphora-I
Asteria
Asteria-Pro
MRR
0.310
0.547
0.334
0.775
0.015
0.533
0.020
0.772
0.734
0.908

0.192
0.377
0.266
0.722
0.003
0.484
0.018
0.711
0.657
0.896

0.579
0.881
0.488
0.865
0.015
0.603
0.027
0.878
0.877
0.940
8.7.3
Embedding Baseline Methods. We demonstrate the generalizability of innovative BCSD enhancement
framework, by integrating our two new components, pre-filtering and re-ranking, with other baseline BCSD
methods. Specifically, we apply all the baseline methods to compute the similarity scores between the remaining
functions and the source function after pre-filtering. Subsequently, we rank the remaining functions in descending
order based on their similarity scores and select the top 50 functions for re-ranking. The final similarity score is
obtained by combining the re-ranking score and the score generated by the baseline methods. Using the final
similarity score, we determine the rankings of the top 50 candidate functions and calculate three metrics, namely

the baseline methods, with the baseline method names listed in the first row and their corresponding integrated
versions in the next column, such as Trex-I for the integrated version of Trex. The second to fourth rows provide

The accuracy of the baseline methods is significantly improved by the addition of our two components, with
Diaphora-I in particular showing a substantial increase in MRR from 0.02 to 0.772. We manually analyzed the
outputs of Diaphora and Diaphora-I to understand the reason for the improved ranking of homologous functions.
We found that while Diaphora tends to assign high similarity scores to homologous functions, it also assigns high
scores to numerous non-homologous functions, which lowers the ranking of homologous functions. Specifically,
we found that the average score difference between the highest score (i.e., score of top 1) and the score assigned to
the homologous function is only 0.11. By incorporating reranking scores into the final scores, Diaphora-I places
a higher emphasis on homologous functions, resulting in improved ranking. If homologous functions are present
in the top 50 before re-ranking, they are mostly ranked at the top. Safe-I also shows improved accuracy, although
not as substantial as Diaphora-I, as Safe tends to rank homologous functions outside the top 50, reducing the
impact of reranking.
The enhancement framework also effectively enhances the accuracy of Asteria. Specifically, Asteria-Pro

baseline methods. The high accuracy of Asteria-Pro enables it to generate more reliable search results, which
can significantly reduce the efforts required for vulnerability confirmation when applied to bug search tasks.
Answer to RQ3: The filtering significantly cuts the calculation time by 96.94%, and increase precision

respectively, with negligible time costs. Our enhancement framework, which embeds the BCSD method
with pre-filtering and re-ranking modules, has demonstrated a significant improvement in the accuracy
of other baseline methods as well.
8.8
Configurable Parameter Sensitivity Analysis (RQ4)
Asteria-Pro has two sets of configurable parameters: the filtering threshold 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿in the pre-filtering algorithm,
and the weight values in Equation 15 for the final precision score. In our evaluation, we analyze the impact of
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
27
Table 7. Capacity to Filter of Various Filtering Thresholds.
𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿
# Filtered Function
Recall
0.1
9666.7
0.9813
0.2
9734.1
0.9808
0.3
9777.4
0.9791
0.4
9793.5
0.9773
0.5
9805.5
0.9737
these parameters on Asteria-Pro’s performance by testing different values of 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿for pre-filtering and varying
weight combinations for the final precision score.
8.8.1
Different Filtering Threshold. In Algorithm 1, the threshold 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿determines the number of functions that
are filtered out. We evaluate the efficacy of the filtering module by utilizing various 𝑇𝑁𝐶𝐿values, and the results
are presented in Table 7. The threshold values range from 0.1 to 0.5 in the first column, where a higher threshold
value suggests a more severe selection of the similarity function. The second column indicates the number of
functions omitted by the filter, while the third column displays the recall rate in the filteration results. As the
threshold value increases, the recall rate declines and the number of filtered-out functions grows. We use 0.1 as
our threshold value for two key reasons: a) the high recall rate of filtering results is advantageous for subsequent
homologous function detection, and b) there is no significant difference in the number of functions that are
filtered out.
Table 8. Accuracy of Asteria-Pro with Various Weight Combinations in Equation 15.
𝛼
𝛽
MRR

0.0
1.0
0.901
0.890
0.930
0.1
0.9
0.908
0.896
0.940
0.2
0.8
0.905
0.893
0.938
0.3
0.7
0.902
0.890
0.937
0.4
0.6
0.900
0.889
0.935
0.5
0.5
0.899
0.887
0.934
1.0
0.0
0.824
0.764
0.929
8.8.2
Weights in Re-ranking. We conducted a sensitivity analysis of different weight values in Equation 16.
The evaluation results are presented in Table 8. The first two columns display the combinations of two distinct
weights, 𝛼and 𝛽, from Equation 16. The last three columns give the values of various metrics, including MRR,

We did not test all weight combinations as the accuracy metrics consistently decreased with an increase in 𝛼.
As shown in the table, when 𝛼= 0.1 and 𝛽= 0.9, Asteria-Pro has the best accuracy. The last column sets 𝛽to
0.0, meaning the re-ranking score is not included in the final similarity calculation. Therefore, the results are
consistent with the combination "Pre-filtering + Asteria" in Section 8.7.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

28
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
Table 9. Vulnerability Dataset
Software
CVE #
Disclosure Years
Vulnerable Version Range
OpenSSL
22
2013∼2016
[1.0.0, 1.0.0s]
[1.0.1, 1.0.1t]
[1.0.2, 1.0.2h]
Busybox
10
2015∼2019
[0.38, 1.29.3]
Dnsmasq
14
20{15,17,20,21}
[2.42, 2.82], 2.86
Lighttpd
10
20{08,10,11,13,14,15,18}
[1.3.11, 1.4.49]
Tcpdump
36
2017
[3.5.1, 4.9.1]
Answer to RQ4: The pre-filtering module performs best with a filtering threshold value of 0.1. This
threshold allows Asteria-Pro to filter out 96.67% of non-homologous functions per search, while achiev-
ing a recall rate of 98.13%. Regarding the re-ranking score, we found that non-zero weight values have a
relatively small effect on the final accuracy of Asteria-Pro. However, incorporating the re-ranking score
significantly improves the precision of the tool.
8.9
Real World Bug Search (RQ5)
To assess the efficacy of Asteria-Pro, we conduct a massive real-world search for bugs. To accomplish this, we
obtain firmware and compile vulnerability functions to create a firmware dataset and a vulnerability dataset.
Utilizing vulnerability dataset, we then apply Asteria-Pro to detect vulnerable functions in the firmware dataset.
To confirm vulnerability in the resulting functions, we design a semi-automatic method for identifying vulnerable
functions. Through a comprehensive analysis of the results, we discover intriguing facts regarding vulnerabilities
existed in IoT firmware.
8.9.1
Dataset Construction. In contrast to our prior work, we expand both the vulnerability dataset and the
firmware dataset for a comprehensive vulnerability detection evaluation.
Vulnerability Dataset. The prior vulnerability dataset of 7 CVE functions is enlarged to 90, as shown in
Table 9. Vulnerability information is primarily gathered from the NVD website [11]. As shown in the first column,
the vulnerabilities are collected from widely used open-source software in IoT firmware, including OpenSSL,
Busybox, Dnsmasq, Lighttpd, and Tcpdump. In the second column, the number of software vulnerabilities is
listed. In the third column, the timeframe or specific years of the disclosure of the vulnerability are listed. The
final column describes the software version ranges affected by vulnerabilities. Note that the version ranges are
obtained by calculating the union of all versions mentioned in the vulnerability reports. As a result, Asteria-Pro
is expected to generate vulnerability detection results for all software versions falling within the specified ranges.
Firmware Dataset. We download as much of firmware from six popular IoT vendors as we could, consisting
of Netgear [12], Tp-Link [15], Hikvision [9], Cisco [4], Schneider [14], and Dajiang [6] as shown in first column of
Table 10. These firmware are utilized by routers, IP cameras, switches, and drones, all of which play essential parts
in our life. The second column shows the firmware numbers, which range from 7 to 548. The third and fourth
columns gives numbers of binaries and functions after unpacking firmware by using binwalk. Note that the binary
number is the number of software selected to be in the vulnerability dataset. The fifth column to ninth column
gives the five software numbers in all firmware vendors. OpenSSL and Busybox are widely integrated in these
IoT firmware as their numbers are close to those of the firmware. Through querying their official websites for
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
29
Table 10. Firmware Dataset and Its Software Statistics. # denotes number.
Firmware Dataset
Software Statistics
Vendor
Firmware #
Binary #
Function #
OpenSSL
Busybox
Dnsmasq
Lighttpd
Tcpdump
Netgear
548
984
2,627,143
349
512
85
14
24
TP-Link
95
177
427,795
66
90
11
3
7
Hikvision
90
92
279,299
55
35
0
0
2
Cisco
29
66
60,396
23
26
10
5
2
Schneider
10
20
31,228
7
9
2
2
0
Dajiang
7
16
57,275
7
7
1
0
1
All
779
1,355
3,483,136
507
679
109
24
36
device type information, we find that the majority of Hikvision vendor firmware is for IP cameras, whereas Cisco
vendor firmware is for routers. In particular, IP camera firmware incorporates less software than router firmware
because routers offer more functionality. For example, the firmware of the Cisco RV340 router includes OpenSSL,
Tcpdump, Busybox, and Dnsmasq, whereas the majority of IP camera firmware only include OpenSSL. Similarly,
the majority of the firmware of Netgear and Tp-Link consists of routers, while Schneider and Dajiang’firmware
include specialized devices such as Ethernet Radio and Stabilizers.
8.9.2
Large Scale Bug Search. Asteria-Pro is employed to identify vulnerable homologous functions among
3,483,136 firmware functions by referencing 90 functions from the vulnerability dataset. Specifically, in order
to expedite the detection process, vulnerability detection is restricted to the same software between firmware
dataset and vulnerability dataset. For instance, the vulnerable functions disclosed in OpenSSL are utilized to
detect vulnerable homologous functions in OpenSSL in the firmware dataset. For each software 𝑆, we first
extract features (i.e., ASTs and call graphs) of all functions in firmware dataset and vulnerable functions in
vulnerability dataset. For each vulnerability disclosed in 𝑆, the pre-filtration module uses the call graph to filter
out non-homologous functions, followed by the Tree-LSTM model encoding all remaining functions as vectors.
Asteria-Pro then computes the AST similarity between the vulnerable function vectors and the firmawre
function vector. Asteria-Pro computes reranking scores based on the top 20 of AST similarities based on
similarity scores, since the evaluation demonstrates a very high recall in the top 20. As a final step, Asteria-Pro
generates 20 candidate homologous functions for each 𝑆as a bug search result for each vulnerability. To further
refine the bug search results, we compute the average similarity score of homologous functions in Section 8.5 and
use it to eliminate non-vulnerable functions. In particular, the average similarity score of 0.89 is used to eliminate
3987 of 5604 results. We perform heuristic confirmation of vulnerability for the remaining 1617 results.
Vulnerability Confirmation Method. We devise a semi-automatic method for confirming the actual vulner-
able functions from the candidate homologous functions. The method makes use of the symbols and string literals
within the firmware binaries of the target. Specifically, we use unique regular expressions to match version
strings for each software and to extract function symbols from the software. The method is then comprised of
two distinct operations that correspond to two distinct vulnerable circumstances 𝑉𝐶1, 𝑉𝐶2.
• 𝑉𝐶1. In this circumstances, the target binary contains version string (e.g., “OpenSSL 1.0.0a”) and the symbol
of target function is not removed.
• 𝑉𝐶2. Target binary contains version strings whereas the symbol of vulnerable homologous function is
removed.
The versions of software listed in Table 9 are easy to extract using version strings [27]. The descriptions of the
two confirmation operations 𝐶𝑂1 and 𝐶𝑂2 are as follows:
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

30
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
Table 11. Numbers of Vulnerable Functions, Software, Firmware in Confirmation Results.
vendor
Vulnerable Function #
Vulnerable Software #
Vulnerable
Firmware #
OpenSSL
Busybox
Dnsmasq
Lighttpd
Tcpdump
All
OpenSSL
Busybox
Dnsmasq
Lighttpd
Tcpdump
All
Netgear
367
0
31
0
26
424
133
0
7
0
10
150
145 (26.46%)
TP-Link
394
9
0
2
5
410
36
3
0
2
5
46
36 (37.89%)
Hikvision
553
0
0
0
12
565
52
0
0
0
1
53
53 (58.89%)
Cisco
0
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2 (6.90%)
Schneider
10
0
0
0
0
10
1
0
0
0
0
1
1 (10.00%)
Dajiang
70
0
0
0
1
71
7
0
0
0
1
8
7 (100.00%)
Total
1,394
9
31
2
46
1,482
229
3
7
2
19
260
244 (31.32%)
CVE-2016-2180
CVE-2016-0797
CVE-2016-2105
CVE-2015-0286
CVE-2016-2176
CVE-2015-1788
CVE-2015-1790
CVE-2015-0287
CVE-2015-0289
CVE-2016-2160
1
50
100
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
52
52
52
52
47
52
52
52
52
32
117
27
27
18
27
16
16
16
14
12
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
30
30
30
35
30
29
29
25
15
29
Number
Dajiang
Hikvision
NETGEAR
Schneider
Tplink
Fig. 13. # of Vulnerable Functions Detected from Five Vendors
• 𝐶𝑂1. For 𝑉𝐶1, we confirm the vulnerable function based on the version and name of the target software.
In particular, a vulnerable function is confirmed when the following two conditions are met: 1) software
version is in vulnerable version range, 2) the vulnerable function name retains after elimination with
average similarity score.
• 𝐶𝑂2. For 𝑉𝐶2, if the software versions are in the range of vulnerable versions, we manually compare the
code between the CVE functions and remaining functions to confirm the vulnerability.
Results Analysis. In Table 11, we tally the number of vulnerable functions, software, and firmware upon
vulnerability confirmation. The first column contains the names of different vendors. The second through sixth
columns show the amount of vulnerable functions in various software, while the seventh column indicates the
total number of vulnerable functions across all vendors. The eighth through twelfth columns display the amount
of vulnerable software binaries in various software, while the thirteenth column provides the total number of
vulnerable software binaries. According to the seventh column of Table 10, there are a total of 1,482 vulnerable
functions. 1456 are confirmed by 𝐶𝑂1, whereas 26 are confirmed by 𝐶𝑂2. For a total of 1,456 𝐶𝑂1 vulnerable
functions, 1,377 vulnerable functions rank first and 79 vulnerable functions rank second. 𝐶𝑂2 is performed on
47 detection results, of which 26 are confirmed. the 21 unconfirmed detection results can be attributed to two
reasons. Firstly, 18 of them were due to the fact that the target binaries detected did not contain any of the target
vulnerable functions. For example, we were unable to detect the vulnerable function ‘EVP_EncryptUpdate’ of
CVE-2016-2106 from the ‘libssl.so’ library of OpenSSL since it exists in the ‘libcrypto.so’ library. Secondly, 3 of
the unconfirmed results were ranked in the top 20 but were subsequently filtered out by the similarity threshold
used in real world bug search setting. A large proportion of vulnerable functions are found in the OpenSSL
software used by the three vendors. The number of vulnerable software is consistent with this circumstance.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
31
1.0.0
1.0.0f
1.0.0g
1.0.1e
1.0.1i
1.0.1j
1.0.1m
1.0.1p
1.0.1q
1.0.1t
1.0.2c
1.0.2d
1.0.2h
CVE-2013-0166
CVE-2014-3508
CVE-2014-8275
CVE-2015-0286
CVE-2015-0287
CVE-2015-0288
CVE-2015-0289
CVE-2015-0292
CVE-2015-1788
CVE-2015-1790
CVE-2015-1793
CVE-2015-3195
CVE-2016-0797
CVE-2016-2105
CVE-2016-2106
CVE-2016-2176
CVE-2016-2180
CVE-2016-2182
CVE-2016-2160
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
8
4
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
8
4
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
8
4
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
8
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
4
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
4
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
4
2
2
1
1
0
4
5
0
0
0
0
8
4
2
2
1
1
0
4
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
4
2
2
1
1
0
4
5
0
0
0
0
8
0
2
2
1
1
2
4
5
92
0
0
0
2
0
2
2
1
1
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
40
60
80
(a) Netgear
1.0.0d
1.0.0e
1.0.0f
1.0.0g
1.0.1e
1.0.2d
CVE-2013-0166
CVE-2014-3508
CVE-2014-8275
CVE-2015-0286
CVE-2015-0287
CVE-2015-0288
CVE-2015-0289
CVE-2015-0292
CVE-2015-1788
CVE-2015-1790
CVE-2016-0797
CVE-2016-2105
CVE-2016-2176
CVE-2016-2180
CVE-2016-2182
CVE-2016-2160
0
0
0
0
29
0
1
1
3
1
29
0
1
1
3
1
29
0
1
1
3
1
29
0
0
0
3
0
22
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
1
1
3
1
9
0
1
1
3
1
29
0
0
0
0
0
29
0
0
0
0
0
29
0
0
0
0
0
29
1
0
0
0
0
29
1
0
0
0
0
29
1
0
0
0
0
29
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
29
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
(b) TP-Link
1.0.1e
1.0.1l
CVE-2013-0166
CVE-2014-3508
CVE-2014-8275
CVE-2015-0286
CVE-2015-0287
CVE-2015-0288
CVE-2015-0289
CVE-2015-0292
CVE-2015-1788
CVE-2015-1790
CVE-2016-0797
CVE-2016-2105
CVE-2016-2176
CVE-2016-2180
CVE-2016-2182
CVE-2016-2160
14
0
4
0
14
0
14
38
14
38
4
23
14
38
14
0
14
38
14
38
14
38
14
38
14
33
14
38
4
13
4
28
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
(c) Hikvision
Fig. 14. The Distribution of CVEs for Different OpenSSL Versions in vendors Netgear, TP-Link, Hikvision from left to right.
The final column shows the number of firmware containing at least one vulnerable function, together with its
proportion of total firmware. Every Dajiang firmware contains at least one CVE vulnerability because all OpenSSL
components used in firmware are vulnerable. In addition, Hikvision is detected to have a large proportion of
vulnerable firmware (58.89%). To inspect the CVE vulnerable function distribution, we plot the top 10 CVEs and
their distributions in five vendors except Cisco in Figure 13, since Cisco takes additional two CVEs.
• Top 10 CVE Analysis. Figure 13 demonstrates the top 10 CVE distribution in various vendors. The total
number of discovered CVE vulnerabilities decreases from left to right along the x-axis. Except for CVE-
2015-0287, all of the top 10 CVE vulnerabilities are discovered in every Dajiang firmware. This is because
Dajiang utilizes an outdated version of OpenSSL 1.0.1h that contains numerous vulnerable functions [13].
Although Hikvision firmware has the third largest number of firmware, it has the most vulnerable functions
in our experiment settings. The reason for this is that Hikvision firmware heavily uses OpenSSL-1.0.1e
(184) and OpenSSL-1.0.1l (401) versions, both of which contain a large number of vulnerabilities. Finding:
Since they typically adopt the same vulnerable software version, it is highly plausible that firmware from
the same vendor and released at the same period contains identical vulnerabilities. Security analysts can
quickly narrow down the vulnerability analysis based on the firmware release date.
• CVE and Version Analysis. Figure 14 depicts the distribution of vulnerable OpenSSL versions for various
CVEs from various vendors. where the x-axis represents the version and the y-axis represents the CVE ID
associated with the vulnerability. Each square in each subfigure indicates the number of OpenSSL versions
that are vulnerable and contain the corresponding CVE along the y-axis. The number is greater the lighter
the red colour. The left subfigure demonstrates that OpenSSL 1.0.2h is widely used by Netgear, resulting in
a significant number of CVE-2016-2180 vulnerabilities (92). Additionally, OpenSSL version 1.0.1e exposes
the majority of CVEs listed on the y-axis, which may increase the device’s attack surface. The TP-Link
firmware incorporates OpenSSL version 1.0.1e, resulting in brighter hues. Hikvision firmware utilizes
versions 1.0.1e and 1.0.1l, which are vulnerable to a number of CVEs. Comparing vulnerability distribution
in OpenSSL version 1.0.1e among different vendors reveals inconsistencies in the existence of vulnerabilities.
For instance, CVE-2016-2106 is present in OpenSSL 1.0.1e from Hikvision but not from Netgear and TP-Link.
Finding: Despite using the same version of software, various vendor firmware behaves differently in terms
of vulnerability since they can tailor the software to the device’s specific capabilities.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

32
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
• CVE-2016-2180 Analysis. The CVE-2016-2180, which is a remote Denial-of-Service flaw caused by received
forged time-stamp file, impacting OpenSSL 1.0.1 through 1.0.2h, exists in 207 firmware. NETGEAR is
responsible for 117 of these, as it deploys 92 OpenSSL 1.0.2h out of a total of 548 firmware. NETGEAR
incorporated an extra nine OpenSSL 1.0.2 series software and sixteen OpenSSL 1.0.1 series software. The
vulnerable version 1.0.2h was released in May 2016, and by comparing their timestamps, we determined
that OpenSSL 1.0.2h was integrated into firmware between 2016 and 2019. Finding: Even after their
vulnerabilities have been discovered, the vulnerable versions of software continue to be used for firmware
development.
Based on the confirmation results, Asteria-Pro manages to detect 1,482 vulnerable functions out of 1617 bug
search results, indicating that Asteria-Pro achieves a high vulnerability detection precision of 91.65% under our
experiment settings. By randomly selecting 1,000 of 5,604 bug search results, we manually validate the existence
of vulnerabilities in software binaries in order to calculate the recall. Among 1000 bug search results, 205 target
function are confirmed to be vulnerable by checking software versions and the vulnerable functions. Targeting
205 vulnerable functions, Asteria-Pro detects 53 of them, representing a recall rate of 25.85%.
Finding Inlined Vulnerable Code. During the analysis of mismatched cases, in which the target homologous
functions are not in the top ranking position, we observe that the top-ranked functions contain the same vulnerable
code. We use CVE-2017-13001 as an illustration of inlined vulnerable code detection. CVE-2017-13001 is a buffer
over-read vulnerability in the Tcpdump nfs_printfh function prior to version 4.9.2. After a confirmation operation
𝐶𝑂2, Asteria-Pro reports a single function, parsefh as being vulnerable. We manually compare the decompiled
code of the parsefh function to the source code of nfs_printfh in tcpdump version 4.9.1 (i.e., vulnerable version).
Figure 15 demonstrates that the source code of nfs_printfh (on the left) and the partial code of parsefh (on the
right) are consistent. We designate codes with apparently identical semantics with distinct backdrop hues. In
other words, during compilation, function nfs_printfh is inlined into function parsefh. As a result, the function
parsefh contains CVE-2017-13001 vulnerable code, and Asteria-Pro manages to identify the inlined vulnerable
code. Asteria-Pro has detected an additional eight instances of inlined vulnerable code out of 20 functions in
vulnerable circumstance 𝑉𝐶2.
The preceding analysis and conclusions are constrained by the dataset we constructed, which offers security
analysts some recommendations for the security analysis of firmware.
Answer to RQ5. We employ 90 CVE vulnerabilities to search for bugs in 3,483,136 real firmware functions.
Asteria-Pro detects 1,482 vulnerable functions with a high level of precision of 91.65%. In addition,
the capability of Asteria-Pro to identify inlined vulnerable code is stated and illustrated in detail. In
conclusion, Asteria-Pro generates bug search results with a high degree of confidence, thereby reducing
analysis labor by a substantial margin.
9
THREATS TO VALIDATION.
Threats to internal validity come from these aspects.
• We use vulnerable version ranges collected from the NVD website to aid vulnerability confirmation in a
real-world bug-search experiment. The vulnerable version ranges may be inaccurate, and vulnerabilities
may be missed or incorrectly stated. We will conduct additional verification of the susceptible version
ranges by confirming the existence of vulnerable code.
• We adopt IDA Pro to decompiling and generate ASTs from the functions in binaries. As pointed by study [47],
accurate decompiling and binary analysis is not easy. The errors in AST generation may affect the AST
similarity calculation and further affect the results.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
33
1
{
2
...
3
if (ndo ->ndo_uflag) {
4
u_int i;
5
char const *sep = "";
6
ND_PRINT((ndo, " fh["));
7
for (i=0; i<len; i++) {
8
ND_PRINT((ndo, "%s%x", sep, dp[i]));
9
sep = ":";
10
}
11
ND_PRINT ((ndo , "]"));
12
return;
13
}
14
Parse_fh((const u_char *)dp, len, &fsid, &ino,
15
NULL, &sfsname, 0);
16
if (sfsname) {
17
...
18
strncpy(temp, sfsname, stringlen);
19
temp[stringlen] = ’0’;
20
spacep = strchr(temp, ’ ’);
21
if (spacep)
22
*spacep = ’0’;
23
ND_PRINT((ndo, " fh %s/", temp));
24
} else {
25
ND_PRINT((ndo, " fh %d,%d",
26
fsid.Fsid_dev.Major, fsid.Fsid_dev.Minor));
27
}
28
if(fsid.Fsid_dev.Minor == 257)
29
ND_PRINT((ndo, "%s", fsid.Opaque_Handle));
30
else
31
ND_PRINT((ndo, "%ld", (long) ino));
32
}
(a) Source Code of Vulnerable Function.
1
{
2
...
3
if ( v8 )
4
{
5
printf(" fh[");
6
if ( v4 ){
7
for ( i = 0; i < v4; ++i ){
8
v11 = *( _DWORD *)&v3[4 * i];
9
printf("%s%x", v9, v11);
10
v9 = ":";
11
}
12
}
13
putchar (93);
14
return &v3[v5];
15
}else{
16
Parse_fh(v3, v4, v13, &v16, 0, &src, 0);
17
if ( src ){
18
strncpy(temp_5711, src, 0x40u);
19
byte_B9E04 = 0;
20
v12 = strchr(temp_5711, 32);
21
if ( v12 )
22
*v12 = 0;
23
printf(" fh %s/", temp_5711);
24
}else{
25
printf(" fh %d,%d/", v13[1], v13[0]);
26
}
27
if ( v13[0] == 257 )
28
printf("%s", v14);
29
else
30
printf("%ld", v16);
31
return &v3[v5];
32
}
(b) Part of Decompiled Code in Detected Function.
Fig. 15. Inlined Vulnerable Function in Detected Function. The semantics of the code with the same background color are
same.
Threats to external validity rise from following issue.
• In practice, firmware binaries may be compiled with distinct compiler (e.g., clang), compiler version, and
optimization level for special-purpose compilation. Different compilation configurations alter the AST
structures and call graphs, sometimes leading in lower scores for homologous functions.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

34
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
10
DISCUSSION
10.1
How does the re-ranking module solve the function inline issues?
Inlining functions is a common optimization technique used by compilers to improve the performance of code
execution. The decision of whether or not to inline a function is based on various factors, including the size of the
function, the frequency of function calls, and the complexity of the code. In general, inlining smaller functions
tends to be more beneficial than inlining larger functions.
When smaller functions being inlined, the re-ranking module in Asteria-Pro will be capable of handling inline
issues by considering both function similarities and the match of callee relational structures. Specifically, the
module matches all callee functions between the source function and target functions, which allows for high
similarity even if one callee function is inlined to the target function. This is because the target function can
still maintain a relatively high similarity with the source function even after incorporating inlined code, and
the un-inlined callee functions still contribute to the final similarity score. As a result, Asteria-Pro exhibits high
metric values (i.e., recall and MRR) in our evaluation based on the contribution of the target function code
and all its callee functions. Through manual analysis of search results in real-world bug detection, we have
also demonstrated that Asteria-Pro is capable of finding homologous vulnerable functions that contain inlined
function code.
10.2
What is the design difference between pre-filtering, re-ranking and SCA tools.
Some software composition analysis (SCA) tools have adopted similar feature when comparing to the pre-filtering
and re-ranking module of Asteria-Pro. For example, Modx [70] matches string literals and whole call graph
between two libraries, and LibDB [61] adopts string literals and exported function names to measure the similarity
of libraries. The usages of string literals and call graphs are quite straightforward.
However, we would like to highlight some conceptual-level differences between our approach and these prior
works. While the use of string literals and call graphs is indeed straightforward, it can be challenging to apply
them to function matching, particularly when functions lack string literals or are leaf nodes in call graphs.
Additionally, callee functions of a target function may not be exported functions, meaning that function names
are removed and cannot be used for matching.
To address these challenges, our approach differs from SCA methods in several key ways. Firstly, we utilize
the local context extracted from call graphs in both the pre-filtering and re-ranking modules to efficiently
remove non-homologous functions and confirm homologous ones. Secondly, we introduce an algorithm called
“UpRelation" to utilize caller relations from call graphs in pre-filtering. The algorithm leverages the genealogist of
parent nodes to identify potential homologous functions. It achieves this by matching the genealogist of parent
nodes and retaining the child nodes of the matched parent nodes. This approach is particularly useful when the
target function is a leaf node in the call graph and does not contain any string literals. Lastly, our re-ranking
module considers both structural and semantic similarities of functions, resulting in more accurate ranking of
homologous functions. Specifically, the re-ranking module uses Asteria to calculate similarities when callee
functions are not exported functions.
10.3
What will Asteria-Pro perform on cross-optimization settings?
Although we did not evaluate the performance of Asteria-Pro in cross-optimization settings, it is worth
discussing the potential impact of such settings on the performance of our method. Cross-optimization refers
to the situation where the training and testing sets are compiled with different optimization settings. This is a
common scenario in practice as different developers may use different optimization flags, or the same developer
may use different optimization levels for different releases. Previous studies have shown that cross-optimization
can significantly affect the accuracy of BCSD methods, as the semantic features extracted from the binary code
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
35
may change depending on the optimization settings. For instance, in a study by Liu et al. [46], the accuracy of a
state-of-the-art BCSD method dropped from 95.3% to 46.2% when tested in cross.
In the case of our method, Asteria-Pro, which is based on the Tree-LSTM architecture, the impact of cross-
optimization on its performance is likely to be substantial. This is because Tree-LSTM model is sensitive to
AST structure and summarizes semantics by identifying structure patterns. Therefore, if the source and target
functions are compiled with different optimization settings, the Tree-LSTM may not be capable to summarize the
expected semantic from substantial AST structure transformation and thus produce inaccurate results.
Moreover, training our model on cross-optimization settings would require significant computational re-
sources and time, which may not be feasible in practice. Therefore, we have not evaluated our method on
cross-optimization settings in this study. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that cross-optimization is an essential
consideration for evaluating Asteria-Pro’s generalizability, and we encourage future studies to investigate this
aspect further.
11
RELATED WORKS
11.1
Feature-based Methods
When considering the similarity of binary functions, the most intuitive way is to utilize the assembly code content
to calculate the edit distance for similarity detection between functions. Khoo et al. concatenated consecutive
mnemonics from assembly language into the N-grams for similarity calculation [43]. David et al. proposed
Trecelet, which concatenates the instructions from adjacent basic blocks in CFGs for similarity calculation [24].
Saebjornsen et al. proposed to normalize/abstract the operands in instructions, e.g., replacing registers such as eax
or ebx with string “reg”, and conduct edit distance calculation based on normalized instructions [56]. However,
binary code similarity detection methods based on disassembly text can not be applied to cross-architecture
detection since the instructions are typically different in different architectures. The works in [55], [19], [31], [67]
utilize cross-architecture statistical features for binary code similarity detection. Eschweiler et al. [31] defined
statistical features of functions such as the number of instructions, size of local variables. They utilized these
features to calculate and filter out candidate functions. Then they performed a more accurate but time-consuming
calculation with the graph isomorphism algorithm based on CFGs. Although this method takes a pre-filtering
mechanism, the graph isomorphism algorithm makes similarity calculation extremely slow. To improve the
computation efficiency, Feng et al. proposed Genius which utilizes machine learning techniques for function
encoding [33]. Genius uses the statistical features of the CFG proposed in [31] to compose the attributed CFG
(ACFG). Then it uses a clustering algorithm to calculate the center points of ACFGs and forms a codebook
with the center points. Finally, a new ACFG is encoded into a vector by computing the distance with ACFGs in
the codebook and the similarity between ACFGs is calculated based on the encoded vectors. But the codebook
calculation and ACFG encoding in Genius are still inefficient. Xu et al. proposed Gemini based on Genius to
encode ACFG with a graph embedding network [66] for improving the accuracy and efficiency. However, the
large variance of binary code across different architectures makes it difficult to find architecture-independent
features [26].
11.2
Semantic-based Methods
For more accurate detection, semantic-based features are proposed and applied for code similarity detection. The
semantic-based features model the code functionality, and are not influenced by different architectures. Khoo
et al. applied symbolic execution technique for detecting function similarity [49]. Specifically, they obtained
input and output pairs by executing basic blocks of a function. But the input and output pairs can not model the
functionality of the whole function accurately. Ming et al. leveraged the deep taint and automatic input generation
to find semantic differences in inter-procedural control flows for function similarity detection [53]. Feng et al.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

36
•
Shouguo Yang, Chaopeng Dong, Yang Xiao, Yiran Cheng, Zhiqiang Shi, Zhi Li, and Limin Sun
proposed to extract conditional formulas as higher-level semantic features from the raw binary code to conduct
the binary code similarity detection [32]. In their work, the binary code is lifted into a platform-independent
intermediate representation (IR), and the data-flow analysis is conducted to construct formulas from IR. Egele
et al. proposed the blanket execution, a novel dynamic equivalence testing primitive that achieves complete
coverage by overwriting the intended program logic to perform the function similarity detection [30]. These
semantic-based features capture semantic functionalities of a function to reduce the false positives. Pei et al.
proposes Trex [54], applying a transfer-learning-based framework to automate learning execution semantics
from functions’ micro-traces, which are forms of under-constrained dynamic traces. However, the methods above
depend heavily on emulation or symbolic execution, which are not suitable for program analysis in large-scale
IoT firmware since the emulation requires peripheral devices [20, 35, 73] and symbolic execution suffers from the
problems of path explosion.
11.3
AST in Source Code Analysis
Since the AST can be easily generated from source code, there has been research work proposed to detect source
code clone based on AST. Ira D. Baxter et al. proposed to hash ASTs of functions to buckets and compare the
ASTs in the same bucket [17] to find clones. Because the method proposed in [17] is similar to Diaphora which
hash ASTs, we only perform a comparative evaluation with Diaphora. In addition to the code clone detection,
AST is also used in vulnerability extrapolation from source code [68, 69]. In order to find vulnerable codes that
share a similar pattern, Fabian et al. [69] encoded AST into a vector and utilized the latent semantic analysis [25]
to decompose the vector to multiple structural pattern vectors and compute the similarity between these pattern
vectors. Yusuke Shido et al. proposed an automatic source code summary method with extended Tree-LSTM [58].
12
CONCLUSION
In this work, we present Asteria-Pro, a domain knowledge-enhanced BCSD tool designed to detect homolo-
gous vulnerable functions on a broad scale in efficient and accurate manner. Asteria-Pro introduces domain
knowledge before and after deep learning model-based function encoding to eliminate a large proportion of
non-homologous functions and score homologous functions higher, separately. The pre-filtering module makes
extensive use of function name information prior to function encoding to accelerate the function encoding. The
function call structure is utilized by the re-ranking module following function encoding to calibrate the encoding
similarity scores. Asteria-Pro is capable of finding homologous functions rapidly and precisely, according to
a comprehensive comparison with existing state-of-the-art research. Furthermore, Asteria-Pro manages to
find 1,482 vulnerable functions in the real-world firmware bug search experiment with high precision of 91.65%.
The search results for CVE-2017-13001 demonstrate Asteria-Pro successfully finds inlined vulnerable code.
Asteria-Pro can aid in detecting vulnerabilities from large-scale firmware binaries to mitigate the attach damage
on IoT devices.
13
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported in part by National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2022YFB3103904), the
Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDC02020100), Joint Fund
Cultivation Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U1636120), the Science and
Technology Project of State Grid Corporation of China (Grant No. 5700-202258499A-3-0-ZZ), and National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U1766215). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2023.

Asteria-Pro: Enhancing Deep-Learning Based Binary Code Similarity Detection by Incorporating Domain Knowledge
•
37
