Quantifying Morphological Computation based on an Information
Decomposition of the Sensorimotor Loop
Keyan Ghazi-Zahedi1, Johannes Rauh2
1Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Scienes, Inselstrasse 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
2 Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Welfengarten 1, 30167 Hannover, Germany

October 9, 2018
Abstract
The question how an agent is aﬀected by its embodiment
has attracted growing attention in recent years. A new
ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence has emerged, which is based
on the idea that intelligence cannot be understood with-
out taking into account embodiment. We believe that
a formal approach to quantifying the embodiment’s ef-
fect on the agent’s behaviour is beneﬁcial to the ﬁelds of
artiﬁcial life and artiﬁcial intelligence. The contribution
of an agent’s body and environment to its behaviour is
also known as morphological computation. Therefore, in
this work, we propose a quantiﬁcation of morphological
computation, which is based on an information decompo-
sition of the sensorimotor loop into shared, unique and
synergistic information. In numerical simulation based
on a formal representation of the sensorimotor loop, we
show that the unique information of the body and envi-
ronment is a good measure for morphological computa-
tion. The results are compared to our previously derived
quantiﬁcation of morphological computation.
1
Introduction
Morphological computation is discussed in various con-
texts, such as DNA computing and self-assembly (see
Pfeifer et al., 2007b; Hauser et al., 2012, for an overview).
In this publication, we are interested in quantifying mor-
phological computation of embodied agents which are
embedded in the sensorimotor loop. Morphological com-
putation, in this context, is described as the trade-oﬀ
between morphology and control (Pfeifer and Scheier,
1999), which means that a well-chosen morphology, if
exploited, substantially reduces the amount of required
control (Mont´ufar et al., 2014). Hereby, a morphology
refers to the agent’s body, explicitly including all its
physiological and physical properties (shape, sensors, ac-
tuators, friction, mass distribution, etc.) (Pfeifer, 2002).
The consensus is that morphological computation is the
contribution of the morphology and environment to the
behaviour, that cannot be assigned to a nervous system
or a controller. There are several examples from biol-
ogy, which demonstrate how the behaviour of an agent
relies on the interaction of the body and environment.
A nice example is given by Wootton (1992, see p. 188),
who describes how “active muscular forces cannot en-
tirely control the wing shape in ﬂight. They can only
interact dynamically with the aerodynamic and inertial
forces that the wings experience and with the wing’s own
elasticity; the instantaneous results of these interactions
are essentially determined by the architecture of the wing
itself [. . . ]”
One of the most cited example from the ﬁeld of embod-
ied artiﬁcial intelligence is the Passive Dynamic Walker
by McGeer (1990). In this example, a two-legged walk-
ing machine preforms a naturally appealing walking be-
haviour, as a result of a well-chosen morphology and en-
vironment, without any need of control. There is simply
no computation available and the walking behaviour is
the result of the gravity, the slope of the ground and
the speciﬁcs of the mechanical construction (weight and
length of the body parts, deviation of the joints, etc.).
If any parameter of the mechanics (morphology) or the
slope (environment) is changed, the walking behaviour
will not persist. In this context, we understand the ex-
ploitation of the body’s and environment’s physical prop-
erties as the embodiments eﬀect on a behaviour.
Theoretical work on describing morphological com-
putation in the context of embodied artiﬁcial intel-
ligence has been conducted by (Hauser et al., 2011;
F¨uchslin et al., 2012). In this publication, we study an
information-theoretic approach to quantifying morpho-
logical computation which is based on an information
1
arXiv:1503.05113v1  [cs.AI]  17 Mar 2015

decomposition of the sensorimotor loop.
This work is
based on two of our previous publications in which we
have investigated diﬀerent quantiﬁcations of morpholog-
ical computation (Zahedi and Ay, 2013) and derived a
general decomposition of a mutual information of three
random variables into unique, shared, and synergistic in-
formation (Bertschinger et al., 2014).
In our previous
work (Zahedi and Ay, 2013), we derived two concepts
which both match the general intuition about morpho-
logical computation, but showed diﬀerent results. In this
publication, we will apply the information decomposition
of Bertschinger et al. (2014) to the setting of Zahedi and
Ay (2013) with the goal to unify the two previously de-
rived concepts.
The paper is organised in the following way. The next
section discusses the sensorimotor loop and its represen-
tation as a causal graph. The third section describes the
bivariate information decomposition from Bertschinger
et al. (2014). Based on the information decomposition,
the fourth section introduces the unique information as
a measure for morphological computation in the sensori-
motor loop. The ﬁfth section presents numerical results,
which are then discussed in the ﬁnal section.
An ap-
pendix explains how we computed our measure of mor-
phological computation.
2
Sensorimotor Loop
Our information theoretic decomposition of the mutual
information requires a formal representation of the senso-
rimotor loop, which we will introduce in this section. In
our understanding, a cognitive system consists of a brain
or controller, which sends signals to the system’s actu-
ators, thereby aﬀecting the system’s environment. We
prefer the notion of the system’s Umwelt (von Uexkuell,
1934; Clark, 1996; Zahedi et al., 2010), which is the part
of the system’s environment that can be aﬀected by the
system, and which itself aﬀects the system. The state of
the actuators and the Umwelt are not directly accessible
to the cognitive system, but the loop is closed as informa-
tion about the Umwelt and the body is provided to the
controller through the sensors. In addition to this gen-
eral concept of the sensorimotor loop, which is widely
used in the embodied artiﬁcial intelligence community
(see e.g. Pfeifer et al., 2007a) we introduce the notion of
world and by that we mean the system’s morphology and
the system’s Umwelt. We can now distinguish between
the intrinsic and extrinsic perspective in this context.
The world is everything that is extrinsic from the per-
spective of the cognitive system, whereas the controller,
sensor and actuator signals are intrinsic to the system.
This is analogous to the agent-environment distinction in
the context of reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto,
1998), in which the environment is understood as every-
thing that cannot be controlled arbitrarily by the agent.
The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic is also
captured in the representation of the sensorimotor loop
as a causal or Bayesian graph (see Fig. 1). For simplic-
ity, we only discuss the sensorimotor loop for reactive sys-
tems. This is plausible, because behaviours which exploit
the embodiment are usually better described as reactive
and not as deliberative. The most prominent examples
are locomotion behaviours, e.g. human walking, swim-
ming, ﬂying, etc., which are all well-modelled as reactive
behaviours.
The random variables S, A, and W refer to sensor,
actuator, and world state, and the directed edges reﬂect
causal dependencies between the random variables (see
Klyubin et al., 2004; Ay and Polani, 2008; Zahedi et al.,
2010).
Everything that is extrinsic is captured in the
variable W, whereas S and A are intrinsic to the agent.
The random variables S and A are not to be mistaken
with the sensors and actuators. The variable S is the
output of the sensors, which is available to the controller
or brain, the action A is the input that the actuators
take. Consider an artiﬁcial robotic system as an exam-
ple. Then the sensor state S could be the pixel matrix
delivered by some camera sensor and the action A could
be a numerical value that is taken by some motor con-
troller to be converted in currents to drive a motor.
Throughout this work, we use capital letter (X, Y ,
. . . ) to denote random variables, non-capital letter (x,
y, . . . ) to denote a speciﬁc value that a random variable
can take, and calligraphic letters (X, Y, . . . ) to denote
the alphabet for the random variables. This means that
xt is the speciﬁc value that the random variable X can
take a time t ∈N, and it is from the set xt ∈X. Greek
letters refer to generative kernels, i.e. kernels which de-
scribe an actual underlying mechanism or a causal rela-
tion between two random variables.
We abbreviate the random variables for better compre-
hension in the remainder of this work, as the information
decomposition (see next sections) considers random vari-
ables of consecutive time indices. Therefore, we use the
following notation. Random variables without any time
index refer to time t and hyphened variables to time t+1.
The two variables W, W ′ refer to Wt and Wt+1.
Formally, the sensorimotor loop is given by the prob-
ability distribution p(w) and the kernels α(w′|w, a),
β(s|w), and π(a|a). To analyse the quality of our de-
rived quantiﬁcation, it is best to evaluate them in a fully
controllable setting. For this purpose, we chose the same
parameterisable binary model of the sensorimotor loop
that was used in our previous publication (Zahedi and
2

W
S
A
W'
S'
↵φ, ,!
β⇣
β⇣
⇡µ
Figure 1: A formal model of the sensorimotor loop.
Ay, 2013). It allows to control the causal dependencies
of S, A, and W individually, and thereby, enables an
evaluation of the information decomposition in the sen-
sorimotor loop and compare it with our previous results.
The model is shown in Figure 1 and given by the follow-
ing set of equations:
αφ,ψ,ω(w′|w, a) =
eφw′w+ψw′a+ωw′wa
P
w′′∈Ωeφw′′w+ψw′′a+w′′wa
(1)
βζ(s|w) =
eζsw
P
s′′∈Ωeζs′′w
(2)
πµ(a|s) =
eµas
P
a′∈Ωeµa′s
(3)
pτ(w) =
eτw
P
w′′∈Ωeτw′′ ,
(4)
where a, w, s, w′ ∈Ω= {±1} and φ, ψ, ω, ζ, µ, τ ≥0. As
in (Zahedi and Ay, 2013), the following two assumptions
are made without loss of generality. First, it is assumed
that all world states w ∈Ωoccur with equal probability,
i.e. p(w = 1) = p(w = −1) = 1/2. Second, we assume a
deterministic sensor, i.e. ζ ≫1 ⇒p(s|w) = δsw, which
means that the sensor is a copy of the world state. The
ﬁrst assumption does not violate the generality, because
it only assures that the world state itself does not already
encode some structure, which is propagated through the
sensorimotor loop. The second assumption does not vi-
olate the generality of the model, because in a reactive
system as in Figure 1, the sensor state S and A can be
reduced to a common state, with a new generative ker-
nel γ(a|w) = π(a|s) ◦β(s|w). Hence, keeping one of the
two kernels deterministic and varying the other in the
experiments below, does not reduce the validity of this
model. This leaves four open parameters ψ, φ, ω, and µ,
against which the morphological computation measure is
validated.
3
Information Decomposition
Next, we introduce the information decomposition that
underlies our measure of morphological computation. We
ﬁrst explain this information decomposition in a general
information theoretic setting and later explain how we
use it in the sensorimotor loop.
Consider three random variables X, Y, Z.
Suppose
that a system wants to predict the value of the ran-
dom variable X, but it can only access the informa-
tion in Y or Z. How is the information that Y and Z
carry about X distributed over Y and Z? In general,
there may be redundant or shared information (infor-
mation contained both Y and Z), but there may also
be unique information (information contained in only
one of Y or Z).
Finally, there is also the possibility
of synergystic or complementary information, i.e. infor-
mation that is only available when Y and Z are taken
together. The classical example for synergy is the XOR
function: If Y and Z are binary random variables and
if X = Y XOR Z, then neither Y nor Z contain any in-
formation about X (in fact, X is independent of Y and
X is independent of Z), but when Y and Z are taken
together, they completely determine X (in particular, X
is not independent from the pair (X, Y )).
The total information that (X, Y ) contains about X
can be quantiﬁed by the mutual information I(X
:
(Y, Z)).
However, there is no canonical way to sepa-
rate these diﬀerent kinds of informations. Mathemati-
cally, one would like to have four functions SI(X : Y ; Z)
(“shared information”), UI(X : Y \Z) (“unique informa-
tion of Y ”), UI(X : Z \ Y ) (“unique information of Z”),
CI(X : Y ; Z) (“complementary information”) that sat-
isfy
I(X : (Y, Z)) = SI(X : Y ; Z) + UI(X : Y \ Z)
+ UI(X : Z \ Y ) + CI(X : Y ; Z).
(5)
From the interpretation it is also natural to require
MI(X : Y ) = SI(X : Y ; Z) + UI(X : Y \ Z),
MI(X : Z) = SI(X : Y ; Z) + UI(X : Z \ Y ).
(6)
A set of three functions SI, UI, and CI that satisfy (5)
and (6) is called a bivariate information decomposition
by Bertschinger et al. (2014). It follows from the deﬁning
equations and the chain rule of mutual information that
an information decomposition always satisﬁes
MI(X : Y |Z) = UI(X : Y \ Z) + CI(X : Y ; Z).
(7)
Equations (5) and (6) do not specify the functions SI,
UI, and CI. Several diﬀerent candidates have been pro-
posed so far, for example by Williams and Beer (2010)
3

and Harder et al. (2013). We will use the decomposition
of Bertschinger et al. (2014) that is deﬁned as follows:
Let ∆be the set of all possible joint distributions of
X, Y , and Z. Fix an element P ∈∆(the “true” joint
distribution of X, Y , and Z). Deﬁne
∆P =
n
Q ∈∆:
Q(X = x, Y = y) = P(X = x, Y = y)
and Q(X = x, Z = z) = P(X = x, Z = z)
for all x ∈X, y ∈Y, z ∈Z
o
as the set of all joint distributions which have the same
marginal distributions on the pairs (X, Y ) and (X, Z).
Then
UI(X : Y \ Z) = min
Q∈∆P IQ(X : Y |Z),
SI(X : Y ; Z) = max
Q∈∆P CoIQ(X; Y ; Z),
CI(X : Y ; Z) = I(X : (Y, Z)) −min
Q∈∆P IQ(X : (Y, Z)),
where CoI denotes the co-information. Here, a subscript
Q in an information quantity means that the quantity is
computed with respect to Q as the joint distribution.
One idea behind these functions is the following: Sup-
pose that the joint distribution P of X, Y , and Z is not
known, but that just the marginal distributions of the
pairs (X, Y ) and (X, Z) are known.
This information
is suﬃcient to characterize the set ∆P , but we do not
know which element of ∆P is the true joint distribution.
One can argue that the UI and SI should be constant
on ∆P ; that is, shared information and unique informa-
tion should depend only on the interaction of X and Y
and the interaction on X and Z, but not on the way in
which the three variables interact.
The second property that characterizes the informa-
tion decomposition is that the set ∆P contains a distri-
bution Q such that CIQ(X : Y ; Z) = 0. In other words,
when only the marginal distributions of the pairs (X, Y )
and (X, Z) are known, then we cannot know whether
there is synergy or not. See (Bertschinger et al., 2014)
for a more detailed justiﬁcation and a proof how these
properties, determine the functions UI, SI, and CI.
In Bertschinger et al. (2014), the formulas for UI, CI,
and SI are derived from considerations about decision
problems in which the objective is to predict the out-
come of X.
Here, we want to apply the information
decomposition in another setting: We will set X = W ′,
Y = W, and Z = A.
In our setting, W and A not
only have information about W ′, but they actually con-
trol W ′. However, the situation is similar: In the sen-
sorimotor loop, we also expect to ﬁnd aspects of redun-
dant, unique, and complementary inﬂuence of W and A
on W ′. Formally, since everything is deﬁned probabilisti-
cally, we can still use the same functions UI, CI, and SI.
We believe that the arguments behind the deﬁnition of
UI, CI and SI remain valid in the setting of the senso-
rimotor loop where we need it. First, it is still plausible
that unique and redundant contributions should only de-
pend on the marginal distributions of the pairs (W, W ′)
and (A, W ′). Second, in order to decide whether W and
A act synergistically, it does not suﬃce to know only
these marginal distributions. Therefore, we believe that
the functions UI, CI, and SI have a meaningful inter-
pretation. In particular, we hope to be able to use the
information decomposition in order to measure morpho-
logical computation. This view is supported by our sim-
ulations below, which indicate that the functions UI,
CI and SI do indeed lead to a reasonable decomposi-
tion of I(W ′ : (A, W)) and that the unique information
UI(W : W ′\A) is a reasonable measure of morphological
computation, at least in our simple model of the senso-
rimotor loop.
The parameters of our model of the sensorimotor loop
(Eqs (1) to (4)) can also be interpreted in terms of an
information decomposition.
Intuitively, φ corresponds
to the unique inﬂuence of W on W ′, ψ corresponds to
the unique inﬂuence of A on W ′, and ω corresponds
to the complementary inﬂuence.
However, the role of
the additional parameters ζ, µ, τ is not so clear, and
it is not so easy to ﬁnd a correspondence of redun-
dant information.
The information decomposition has
the advantage, that its deﬁnition does not depend on a
parametrization. Observe that if the “synergistic param-
eter” ω = 0 vanishes, then it does not necessarily follow
that CI(W ′ : A; W) = 0 (see Fig. 2). However, we do ex-
pect the complementary information to be small in this
case.
4
Morphological computation
Morphological computation was described as the contri-
bution of the embodiment to a behaviour. In our previ-
ous work, we derived two concepts to quantify morpho-
logical computation, which are both based on the world
dynamics kernel α(w′|w, a).
The ﬁrst concept assumes that the current action
A has no inﬂuence on the next world state W ′, in
which case the kernel α(w′|w, a) reduces to ˆα(w′|w).
If
this
is
the
case,
we
would
say
that
the
sys-
tems shows maximal morphological computation, as
the behaviour is completely determined by the world.
To measure the amount of morphological computa-
4

tion present in a recorded behaviour, we calculated
how much the data diﬀered from the assumption by
calculating the weighted Kullback-Leibler divergence
P
w,a p(w, a)DKL(α(w′|w, a)∥ˆα(w′|w)), which is the con-
ditional mutual information I(W ′ : A|W). Because this
quantity is zero if we have maximal morphological com-
putation, we inverted and normalised in the following
way: 1 −I(W ′ : A|W)/ log2 |W|.
The second concept started with the complementary
assumption that the current world state W had no inﬂu-
ence on the next world state W ′, i.e., that the world dy-
namics kernel is given by ˜α(w′|a). Morphological compu-
tation was then quantiﬁed as the error from the assump-
tion, given by the weighted Kullback-Leibler divergence
P
w,a p(w, a)DKL(α(w′|w, a)∥˜α(w′|a)), which equals the
conditional mutual information I(W ′ : W|A).
Both concepts were analysed and quantiﬁcations were
derived, which didn’t require knowledge about the world,
but could be calculated from intrinsically available in-
formation only. At that time, we could not determine
which of the two concepts would capture morphological
computation best, although both concepts and their in-
trinsic adaptations lead to diﬀerent results in a speciﬁc
conﬁguration (ψ = φ ≈0).
Our intention in this publication is to answer this ques-
tion. For this purpose, we follow a diﬀerent approach
to quantify morphological computation, by starting with
the mutual information of I(W ′ : (W, A)) and decompose
it into the shared, unique and synergistic information, as
described in the previous section. Rewriting the Equa-
tion (5), by replacing X, Y, Z by W ′, W, A, we obtain the
following information decomposition:
I(W ′ : (W, A)) = SI(W ′ : W; A) + UI(W ′ : W \ A)
+ UI(W ′ : A \ W) + SY (W ′ : W; A)
(8)
As show in Equation (7), our previous concept two, the
conditional mutual information I(W ′ : W|A) is given by
the sum of the unique information UI(W ′ : W \ A) and
the synergistic information CI(W ′ : W; A):
I(W ′ : W|A) = UI(W ′ : W \ A) + CI(W ′ : W; A). (9)
The examples we have discussed in the introduction (in-
sect wing and Passive Dynamic Walker) suggest to use
the unique information UI(W ′ : W \A) to quantify mor-
phological computation, because it captures the infor-
mation that the current and next world state W, W ′
share uniquely.
The next section presents numerical
simulations to investigate how the conditional mutual
information I(W ′ : W|A) and the unique information
UI(W ′ : W \ W) compare with respect to quantifying
morphological computation.
5
Experiments
The experiments in this section are conducted on the
parameterised model of the sensorimotor loop that was
introduced in the second section (see Fig. 1 and Eq. (1)
to Eq. (4)). As stated earlier, we set τ = 0, which means
that the world state W is drawn with equal probability
(p(w = −1) = p(w = 1) = 1/2), and ζ such that the sen-
sor state S is a copy of the world state W. This leaves
four parameters for variation, namely the three world
dynamics kernel parameters φ, ψ, ω and the policy pa-
rameter µ. We decided to plot the information theoretic
quantities only for µ = 0 (see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3), i.e., for
the case, in which the action A is chosen independently
of the current sensor value S and with equal probabil-
ity. This allows us to investigate the eﬀect of the action
A on the next world state W ′, without any inﬂuence of
W on A. We also know from previous experiments (see
Zahedi and Ay, 2013), that the conditional mutual in-
formation I(W ′ : W|A) drops to zero for increasing µ.
As the conditional mutual information is the sum of the
unique and synergistic information, we know that both
quantities will also decrease with increasing µ. If A is de-
terministically dependent on W, it also follows that the
unique information UI(W ′ : A \ W) is zero, because A
and W are interchangeable. The only quantity that will
be larger than zero is the shared information, which, by
deﬁnition, is not of interest in the context of this work.
We decided to plot the information decomposition for
varying φ (parameter of unique inﬂuence of W on W ′)
and ψ (parameter of unique inﬂuence of A on W ′) for two
diﬀerent values of ω (parameter of synergistic inﬂuence
of W, A on W ′, see Eq. (1)). Figure 2 shows the results
for ω = 0, while Figure 3 shows the results for ω = 2.
We will ﬁrst discuss the results for ω = 0.0, as they are
best comparable with our previous results from (Zahedi
and Ay, 2013).
Vanishing synergistic parameter (ω = 0):
Fig-
ure 2A shows that synergistic information CI(W ′ : W; A)
is small and only present if ψ ≈φ (diagonal of the im-
age). This is in agreement with our intuition that ω is
the synergistic parameter.
The unique information of
the action A and the next world state W ′, denoted by
UI(W ′ : A \ W), is shown in Figure 2B. The plot re-
veals that the unique information of the current action
A and the next world state W ′ is only present, when-
ever ψ > φ, and it is large, whenever ψ is signiﬁcantly
larger than φ. Figure 2C shows analogous results for the
unique information UI(W ′ : W \ A). In this case, the
unique information is negligible, whenever φ ≲ψ and
grows whenever φ is signiﬁcantly larger then ψ. These
5

Figure 2: Information decomposition for µ = 0.0, ω = 0.0
two plots show that the deﬁnition of the unique informa-
tion, as proposed by Bertschinger et al. (2014), is able
to extract the unique inﬂuence in a setting in which two
random variables actually control a third random vari-
able. Fig. 2D shows the conditional mutual information
I(W ′ : W|A), which was the second concept of quan-
tifying morphological computation in our previous work
(Zahedi and Ay, 2013). As stated earlier, the conditional
mutual information is given by the sum of the unique
and synergistic information (Eq. (9)).
Hence, there is
almost no diﬀerence between Figure 2B and Figure 2D,
except on the diagonal, where the unique information
UI(W ′ : W \ A) drops faster to zero.
Positive synergistic parameter (ω = 2):
To study
the diﬀerence between the unique information UI(W ′ :
W \ A) and the conditional mutual information I(W ′ :
W|A), and hence, compare the new quantiﬁcation with
our former concept, we conducted the same experiments
with a value of ω = 2 (see Figures 3 and 4).
Fig-
ures 3A-C demonstrate how the information decompo-
sition can distinguish between the synergistic informa-
tion and the unique informations, which is exactly what
we need to quantify morphological computation.
The
unique information UI(W ′ : W \ A) captures only the
information that the current world state W and the next
world state W ′ share, and therefore, captures the com-
mon understanding of morphological computation in the
context of embodied artiﬁcial intelligence.
In the in-
Figure 3: Information decomposition for µ = 0.0, ω = 2.0
Figure 4: Diﬀerence between I(W ′ : W|A) and UI(W ′ :
W \ A) for ω = 2.
troduction, we presented two examples of morpholog-
ical computation, which described it as the contribu-
tion of the body and environment to a behaviour, that
cannot be assigned to any neural system or robot con-
troller. The unique information UI(W ′ : W \ A) Fig-
ure 3B captures this notion of morphological computa-
tion best, because it vanishes if the synergistic informa-
tion CI(W ′ : W; A) (see Fig. 3A) or the unique infor-
mation UI(W ′ : A \ W) (see Fig. 3C) increases. Given
Eq. (9), it is clear that the conditional mutual informa-
tion I(W ′ : W|A) is positive (see Fig. 3D) whenever the
unique information UI(W ′ : A \ W) or the synergistic
information CI(W ′ : W; A) is positive. This is problem-
atic for the following reason. Figure 3D show a positive
conditional mutual information I(W ′ : W|A) also for val-
ues of ψ > φ, which is counter-intuitive. Furthermore,
as Figure 4 shows (note that the φψ axes are rotated for
better visibility), the conditional mutual information is
indiﬀerent for a large range of |φ −ψ| < d. Additionally,
6

the conditional mutual information increases for vanish-
ing φ and ψ, which again is counter-intuitive, whereas
the unique information UI(W ′ : W \ A) (see right-hand
side of Fig. 4) nicely reﬂects our intuition. Therefore, we
conclude that the unique information UI(W ′ : W \ A)
is best suited to quantify morphological computation in
the context of embodied artiﬁcial intelligence.
6
Discussion
This work proposes a quantiﬁcation of morphological
computation based on an information decomposition in
the sensorimotor loop. In the introduction, morphologi-
cal computation was described as the contribution of an
agent’s body and agent’s Umwelt to its behaviour. Im-
portant to note is that both mentioned examples high-
lighted the contribution of the embodiment that resulted
solely from interactions of the body and environment and
that cannot be attributed to any type of control by the
agent. This is why we propose to use a decomposition
of the mutual information I(W ′ : (W, A)) into shared,
unique and synergistic information.
This allows us to
separate contributions of the embodiment from contri-
butions of the controller (via its actions A) and contri-
butions of both, controller and embodiment.
We showed that the information decomposition is re-
lated to our previous work in the following way.
The
sum of the unique information UI(W ′ : W \ A) and the
synergistic information CI(W ′ : W; A) is equivalent the
conditional mutual information I(W ′ : W|A), which is
one of the two earlier concepts for morphological com-
putation. This relation shows the diﬀerence of this work
compared to our former results.
We are now able to
quantify exactly how much of the next world state W ′
is determined by the current world state W, thereby ex-
cluding any inﬂuence of the action A.
Therefore, we
proposed UI(W ′ : W \ A) as a quantiﬁcation of morpho-
logical computation.
In two numerical simulations, we evaluated the decom-
position in a parametrised, binary model of the sensori-
motor loop. The world dynamics kernel α(w′|w, a) was
parametrised with three parameters, φ, ψ, and ω, which
roughly relate to the unique information UI(W ′ : W \A),
the unique information UI(W ′ : A \ W), and the syner-
gistic information CI(W ′ : W; A). For a ﬁxed value of
ω, the two parameters φ and φ were varied to evaluate
the information decomposition in the sensorimotor loop.
It was shown that for a vanishing synergistic parame-
ter ω = 0, synergistic information was present only for
φ ≈ψ. This explains why there is only a marginal diﬀer-
ence between UI(W ′ : W \ A) and I(W ′ : W|A) in this
setting. For a positive synergistic parameter ω = 2, we
saw that the synergistic information was positive for a
much larger domain, which led to a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between UI(W ′ : W \ A) and I(W ′ : W|A). In particu-
lar, the condition mutual information I(W ′ : W|A) was
positive for a larger range of parameter values ψ and φ.
There is a domain |φ −ψ| < d, for which the conditional
mutual information I(W ′ : W|A) is positive and indif-
ferent. One would expect to see a higher morphological
computation mostly when φ > ψ, despite the fact that
synergistic information is present. This shows that the
UI(W ′ : W \ A) is better suited to quantify morpholog-
ical computation.
In Zahedi and Ay (2013) it was proposed that a mea-
sure of morphological computation could be used as a
guiding principle in an open-ended self-organised learn-
ing setting.
For this to work, this measure should
only depend on information that is intrinsically avail-
able to the system.
Clearly, this is not the case for
UI(W ′ : W \ A).
Therefore, future work will include
derivations of the information decomposition, which only
include intrinsically available information. It would also
be interesting to investigate how much a formalisation of
the information decomposition can beneﬁt from a con-
sideration of the causal information ﬂow. The starting
point for our decomposition was the mutual information
I(W ′ : (W ′, A)), which is a correlational measure and
not a measure of causal dependence, as e.g. proposed by
Pearl (2000). In currently ongoing work, we are apply-
ing the quantiﬁcation to motion capturing data of real
robots.
7
