PBM: A NEW DATASET FOR BLOG MINING  
MEHWISH AZIZ 
FAST – National University of 
Computer & Emerging Sciences 
MUHAMMAD RAFI 
FAST – National University of 
Computer & Emerging Sciences  
 
ABSTRACT 
Text mining is becoming vital as Web 2.0 offers collaborative content creation 
and sharing. Now Researchers have growing interest in text mining methods for 
discovering knowledge. Text mining researchers come from variety of areas 
like: Natural Language Processing, Computational Linguistic, Machine 
Learning, and Statistics. A typical text mining application involves 
preprocessing of text, stemming and lemmatization, tagging and annotation, 
deriving knowledge patterns, evaluating and interpreting the results. There are 
numerous approaches for performing text mining tasks, like: clustering, 
categorization, sentimental analysis, and summarization. There is a growing 
need to standardize the evaluation of these tasks. One major component of 
establishing standardization is to provide standard datasets for these tasks. 
Although there are various standard datasets available for traditional text mining 
tasks, but there are very few and expensive datasets for blog-mining task.  
Blogs, a new genre in web 2.0 is a digital diary of web user, which has 
chronological entries and contains a lot of useful knowledge, thus offers a lot of 
challenges and opportunities for text mining. In this paper, we report a new 
indigenous dataset for Pakistani Political Blogosphere. The paper describes the 
process of data collection, organization, and standardization. We have used this 
dataset for carrying out various text mining tasks for blogosphere, like: blog-
search, political sentiments analysis and tracking, identification of influential 
blogger, and clustering of the blog-posts. We wish to offer this dataset free for 
others who aspire to pursue further in this domain. 
KEY WORDS 
Web 2.0, blogosphere, text mining, clustering, natural language processing 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The emergence of Web 2.0 raised standard associated with web 
applications. These standards are proposed to support variant services for 
information 
sharing, 
interoperability, 
collaboration, 
and 
user-centered 
applications. Web 2.0 web sites are capable of allowing users to interact and 
contribute in web sites’ content as user-generated content.  Web 2.0 sites offers 
the most adaptable internet knowledge creation processes, which triggers many 
internet virtual community based hosted services, social networking sites, wikis, 
and blogs etc. The main subject of this paper is Blogs. Blogs-online digital diary 
like application helps users to connect in the virtual community by creating, 
reviewing, commenting or tagging the user-generated content/ blog post. Blog 
post is simply a web page with updates in its contents and archives of previously 
created content linked with other blog posts of other users under the same 
category. This sharing of blogs by different users over the same categories fall 
under one big umbrella termed as Blogosphere—at times helping ‘awareness 
building social entities’ to bring important issues in the lime light. 
Blogosphere’s blogs differs from other collections of documents in internet on 
three levels: content, structure, and timeline. The Blogosphere is indeed a 
collection of all blogs, which is further sub-divided to different genres like 

 
sports, politics, media, and culture. The most popular among all these genres are 
media and politics. Media blogs are related to fashion, music, actors and movies. 
Political blogs are uncensored political bias over a political issue posted by an 
individual who may be an ordinary human or a news person or may be a 
political leader himself/herself. In comparison to media related blogs, influence 
of political blogs have strong implications when online community reviews 
them. Opinion by a journalist, analyst, politician or a common man may shift the 
thinking pattern of users three sixty degrees. Political blogs is one the most 
popular categories in blogosphere. It has generated a power of opinion that is 
experienced several times in different parts of the world. One of the most 
famous real-life examples is the US Presidential Election of 2004 and 2008. 
Prior to these elections, bloggers of political blogs created the opinion in blog 
posts. These opinions not only affected the online community but also the 
mainstream media. The mainstream media utilized the bloggers’ opinion to 
cover top dominant politicians in the Presidential Election. One famous case-
study of political blogosphere is [1], which reports this phenomenon. It also 
reports that there was a distinct difference in the blogging behavior of liberal 
and conservatives. The importance of political blogs, blogosphere and bloggers 
is realized since then. The dataset reported in this paper, comprises of a subset of 
political blogosphere of Pakistani politics. The geopolitical importance of 
Pakistan is now widely accepted and its role in war against terrorism is greatly 
acknowledged. This political blog-dataset has been utilized in our previous 
research on topics like: Blog Search [3], Blog-Similarity [4], finding influence 
bloggers [5], opinion mining and tracking. A dataset is essential to carry out 
research in the realm of blogosphere. The major contribution of this paper is 
collecting, processing, standardizing and publishing a dataset of political 
blogosphere of Pakistani Politics. The rest of the paper is organized as follow: in 
section 2, we discussed the similar work from other researchers; in section 3, 
dataset construction process; in section 4, discussion of the application we 
developed so far based on this dataset. In the last section, we report the 
conclusion and possible future work. 
 
 
2. RELATED WORK 
The collections of data for the sake of performing data/text mining 
experiments have a long history. In the area of text mining specifically for blog 
mining task the first attempt to form a collection of blog’s dataset was made by 
[2], this collection was used for TREC 2006 blog-track which was introduced 
very first time in TREC conference in the same year. The cost of the TREC 
Blog06 dataset was about £200 to £500 which was way beyond the purchasing 
power of the University in the Third World. The cost of the data collection was 
the major reason that very few Universities has actually participated in this 
Track of TREC 2006. The dataset reported in this paper, which in deed was a 
motivation to prepare a dataset which can be offered free to researchers. Blogs- 
weblog is an online user’s diary like application, where users keep their daily 
writing pertinent to any topic of his like/dislike. A special genre of blogs that 
comments on politics are termed as political blogs and a collection of all such 
political blogs comprises political blogosphere. The political blog-post usually 
has a clear-cut political bias. We have collected a subset of Pakistani Political 
blogosphere for the sake of building a dataset, where researchers can carry out 
research in the realm of political blog mining.  The research in political-
blogosphere started way back in 2004, during the US Presidential Election [1], 
the paper discusses the collection of blogs from liberal and conservative 
communities, their interaction and overlap on various topics. It also collected 
1000 blog-post of a single day, to capture and study the blog-rolls (cross link of 

 
bloggers).  The study was carried out on a very limited dataset but still very 
valuable. It has been proved in [6] that blogs are very proactive in changing 
thoughts, making readers on agreement or on disagreement on certain issues, 
disseminating and echoing ones voice related to any matter. This study also used 
1000 blog-posts from 33 of the world’s top blogs. Opinion mining from blogs is 
another area where few of the researchers have developed few datasets, example 
of such dataset is [7].  A dataset that has been very recently used for detecting 
gender of bloggers is reported in [8].  The very latest and freely available dataset 
is from [9] International AAAI Conference on Weblog and Social Media 
(ICWSM), which has been used on a wide Varity of mining tasks.  The dataset 
is provided by Spinn3r.com is a set of 44 million blog-posts made collected 
from August-October 2008. Our dataset is very different from this dataset, as 
our dataset contains only political blogs related to political issues of Pakistan. 
The ICWSM dataset covers a lot of big events occurred during the same 
duration like Olympics and US Presidential Nomination.  Our dataset is more 
rigorous and homogeneous as far as topic of the research is concerned. The 
collected dataset is very rich on NEWS reported event and issues erupted from 
the news as well as from personal reviews on these NEWS. We believe that this 
dataset offers a lot of opportunity for researchers from social science and 
computer science domains.  
 
 
3 DATASET CONSTRUCTION 
In this section, we describe the experience of generating the dataset and the 
prime features of the dataset that can be used by the researchers. Also, the 
discussion will lead further to constraints that are existent in the dataset with 
reference to the identified features. 
In order to help the researchers’ in understanding what are the possible 
ways this dataset can be used for research, we will explain the key areas that we 
find it useful for. And, which areas of research have we worked on by using this 
dataset. 
 
3.1 EXPERIENCE OF DATA GATHERING 
The collection of RSS Feeds by using RSS Feeder started from March 8th, 
2008 and continued till Sept 2nd, 2010 which brings about 14,115 blog posts and 
comments from referred blog sites. The collected blog posts are 9936 and 
comments collected over few blog sites are 4179. Covering all the blog posts in 
perspective of Pakistani Politics, we could not combine those blog sites which 
are originating for political discussion but with some other country’s 
perspectives. Therefore, the collected blog sites seem to be limited.  
The dataset is gathered by a pre-developed RSS Feeder [1] which allows to 
gather XML-Format RSS Feeds from any site. We selected only Pakistani 
Political blog sites. The top 5 most active sources used for blog posts collection 
is given in Tab.1 below. 
Tab.1 Top 5 blog sites used for collection of blog posts with reference to 
Pakistani political issues only  
Serial No. 
Blog Site 
Number of 
Blog Posts 
1 
http://newsrss.bbc.co.uk/rss/newsonline_world_edition/south_asia/rss.xml 
2290 
2 
http://feeds.feedburner.com/dawn/news/pakistan?format=xml 
1829 
3 
http://feeds2.feedburner.com/blogspot/tzao 
1351 
4 
http://feeds.feedburner.com/AwazApniBaatApni 
1035 
5 
http://feeds2.feedburner.com/pakspectator/rhqq?format=xml 
964 

 
3.2. FEATURES 
The dataset so far gathered is stored in an MS-Access Database with the 
database design that has two relational tables titled as Source Channels and RSS 
Feeds. These tables are automatically created as soon as RSS Feeder is installed. 
Amongst the two tables, Channels are storing the Channel ID, Title, and 
FeedURL for defining the profile of the Feed Channels used as a source of data 
gathering. The source channel status is covered by Frequency, Last Updated, 
and Next Update is updated in the database whenever the aggregator pushes a 
request and source response is pulled out. The FolderPath is maintaining the 
source collected posts final path. The number of posts from the source is 
referred from ItemCount and UnreadCount. The second table is titled as 
RSSFeeds, and its fields like Guid and ChannelID refers to the source feed 
links.XML holds the entire blog post which includes Title, Publication Date, 
Source Links as well. But this information is separately provided as Title and 
PubDate by the aggregator as well. Also, the XML field is stored as <item> only 
but it holds the entire blog posts in RSSFeeds Table. This XML-Format data 
shows that title and data of the blog post is in English using Roman words as 
well. The blog post (XML data) also show that all outlinks and inlinks are also 
specified within actual blog content. The blog posts collected are of variant 
length with variant number of outlinks and inlinks used. 
 
3.3 DATASET CONSTRAINTS 
The dataset so far collected has fewer numbers of comments as all the feed 
links used do not have a separate comment source channels dedicated. The 
collected blog posts are not completely separated as individual fields like author 
name, total count of comments for each blog post. Also, the blog posts linked 
over the same title from the same source channel are not linked with each other. 
 
3.4. DATASET ANALYSIS 
This dataset is analyzed in terms of collection pattern from different blogs 
and the way authors publish blogs. Over the years from 2006 till 2010, posts 
collection from selected blog sites is shown in Fig.1 given below: 
 
Fig.1 Year-wise posts coverage by bloggers over blog sites 

 
 
Fig.2 Blog Posts coverage on 
daily basis. Showing that 
bloggers don’t follow any 
specific days to blog. In fact 
on an average it has been 
found that bloggers mostly 
post blogs on mid-weeks that 
is by Wednesday. 
 
Fig.3 Each month’s first day 
has been noticed to be used by 
bloggers to post more blogs 
either to pre-view the previous 
month’s 
effects 
and 
their 
expected 
consequences 
in 
Pakistani politics. 
3.5 USAGE 
In blogs, each blog post hold individual’s perception over particular issues. 
These perceptions are generally entailing positive, negative or neutral opinion.  
This influences the reviewers that can be identified in comments added over the 
blog post. These opinions can be used very effectively to identify the sentiments 
of an online community. Bloggers and their reviewers normally post an opinion 
in a blog or a comment in either direct or comparative manner. From direct 
manner, opinion can be semantically classified as positive, negative or neutral. 
And in comparative opinion, semantics can be classified as either good or bad. 
This extraction and analysis of opinion can be termed as Sentiment Analysis and 
Opinion Mining. Thus, opinion mining can be performed using this dataset 
specific to Pakistani Politics. 
This dataset can also be used in blog search engines and blog ranking 
systems for Pakistani Political Blogs, as opinion retrieval and analysis plays a 
vital role to give results of a searched entity or judging relevancy of a blog post 
over many other blog posts on a particular topic. 
 
 
4. OUR APPLICATIONS 
We have used this dataset to test few criteria of semantic blog search. For 
this purpose, the dataset has been utilized to cluster the blogs into related 
categories based on semantic similarity measurement criteria. For clustering, 
initially we used an algorithm termed as BPSM [3] which utilized blog posts’ 
title and their content to measure the sentence-wise semantic similarity amongst 
blog posts of various blog sites. We have also utilized the same dataset on 
identifying influential bloggers in the Pakistani political blogosphere using the 
semantic influence measuring criteria like posts’ quality in terms of its length 
and number of outlinks along with the uniqueness of the posts’ content. The 

 
algorithm we built to get the results by using this dataset is termed as SIIB [4]. 
Another criterion in which this dataset has been used is to ranks and search for 
semantically relevant blogs of influential bloggers by using the influence flow 
i.e. inlinks and outlinks along with the semantics of the blog posts. 
To perform all the above tasks we have parsed XML blog posts content 
over part of this dataset collection (around 3778 from Nov 16th, 2009 till Feb 
12th, 2010). This parsed data is stored further in the database as a table titled as 
Parsed RSSFeeds. This table provides a refinement of the RSS Feeds XML data 
into certain data fields which were used for performing text mining based 
techniques for different problems. 
Few problems with the XML content identified involve data fields like; 
Bloggers, Comments Count, and Category. Blogger’s name is not always 
extracted from XML as few sites allow bloggers to remain anonymous for 
posting up the blog posts even – therefore, they have been assigned as 
anonymous in our used dataset. The data fields specified as Comments Count 
does not necessarily be updated by all the blog sites’ RSS. The Category data 
field is not always indicating the actual category as each blog site has put these 
categories on their own standards which is not a convention.  
 
 
5. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK  
The main contribution of this research is to bring into being a standard 
dataset in the realm of political blog mining. The dataset is specific to a single 
genre of blog and topic that is political blogosphere to the best of our knowledge 
this is very first attempt in this area. We have observed that this dataset has an 
immense density to be utilized for research purpose. Our applications based on 
this dataset is a proof of this, we have utilized this dataset into semantic search, 
sentiment analysis, finding influential blogger and semantic clustering of blog-
post.  We wish to offer this dataset for others to collaborate and research on 
further possibilities. In future work, we would like to pursue the questions like: 
whether an ordinary man’s political expression can be delve into main stream 
politics, and hence common man participation to politics is possible or not.
