page 1/36 
 Exploring Lexical, Syntactic, and Semantic Features for  
Chinese Textual Entailment in NTCIR RITE Evaluation Tasks 
Wei-Jie Huang† and Chao-Lin Liu‡ 
†‡ Department of Computer Science, National Chengchi University, Taiwan 
‡Graduate Institute of Linguistics, National Chengchi University, Taiwan 

Abstract 
We computed linguistic information at the lexical, syntactic, and semantic levels for Recog-
nizing Inference in Text (RITE) tasks for both traditional and simplified Chinese in NTCIR-9 
and NTCIR-10. Techniques for syntactic parsing, named-entity recognition, and near syn-
onym recognition were employed, and features like counts of common words, statement 
lengths, negation words, and antonyms were considered to judge the entailment relationships 
of two statements, while we explored both heuristics-based functions and machine-learning 
approaches. The reported systems showed robustness by simultaneously achieving second 
positions in the binary-classification subtasks for both simplified and traditional Chinese in 
NTCIR-10 RITE-2. We conducted more experiments with the test data of NTCIR-9 RITE, 
with good results. We also extended our work to search for better configurations of our clas-
sifiers and investigated contributions of individual features. This extended work showed in-
teresting results and should encourage further discussion. 
Keywords: Textual entailment recognition, Negation and antonyms, Near synonym recogni-
tion, Named-entity recognition, Dependency parsing, Trained heuristic functions, Sup-
port-vector machines, Linearly weighted models, Decision trees 
1 
Introduction1 
Recognizing textual entailment (RTE) (Dagan, Glickman, & Magnini 2006) has become a 
major research topic in natural language processing (NLP) in the past decade (Watanabe et al. 
2013). Given a pair of statements, text (T) and hypothesis (H), the most basic format of an 
RTE task is to determine whether H is true when T is true; namely, whether or not T entails H. 
A more challenging format is to determine whether T and H are contradictory statements 
(Dagan, Dolan, Magnini, & Roth 2009). More recently in PASCAL RTE-62, NTCIR-10 
RITE-23, and NTCIR-11 RITE-VAL4, researchers investigated and evaluated methods for 
                                                      
1  The pronunciations and translations of all Chinese strings mentioned in this paper are provided in the Ap‐
pendix. 
2  http://www.nist.gov/tac/2010/RTE/ 
3  http://www.cl.ecei.tohoku.ac.jp/rite2 
4  https://sites.google.com/site/ntcir11riteval/ 

 
 
page 2/36 
identifying statements in a collection, e.g., a corpus like Wikipedia, which are relevant to a 
given statement T, where relevancy includes both entailment, paraphrase, and contradiction.  
The RTE tasks are relevant and applicable to many NLP applications, including know-
ledge management (Tsujii 2012). If a statement entails another in a collection of statements, 
then one may not need to consider both statements to produce a concise summary of the col-
lection, so recognizing entailments is useful for automatic text summarization (Lloret, 
Ferrández, Muñoz, & Palomar 2008; Tatar, Mihis, Lupsa, & Tamaianu-Morita 2009). Similar 
reasons apply to how recognizing entailment can be applied to question answering systems 
(de Salvo Braz et al. 2005). When a question entails another, the recorded answer to the pre-
vious question may be useful for answering the new question. RTE can also be useful for 
judging the correctness of students’ descriptive answers in assessment tasks. It is rare for stu-
dents to respond to questions with statements that are exactly the same as the instructors’ 
standard answers. It is also not practical to expect instructors to list all possible ways which 
students may answer a question. In such cases, recognizing paraphrase relationships between 
students’ and instructors’ answers becomes instrumental (Nielsen, Ward, & Martin 2009). We 
have also applied RTE techniques to enable computers to take reading comprehension tests 
that are designed for middle school students (Huang, Lin, & Liu 2013). 
Dagan et al. (2009) provided an overview of the approaches for RTE. Treating RTE as a 
classification task is an obvious option, where different systems consider various factors to 
make the final decisions. Due to the availability of the training data in RTE activities, ma-
chine learning-based approaches are common. Researchers design methods to utilize different 
levels of linguistic, including syntactic and semantic, information provided in the given 
statement pairs to judge their relationships. Transformation-based methods offer interesting 
alternatives for the RTE tasks. If a statement can be transformed into another via either syn-
tactic rewriting (Bar-Haim et al. 2008; Stern at al. 2011; Shibata, Kurohashi, Kohama, & Ya-
mamoto 2013) or logical inference procedures (Chambers et al. 2007; Takesue & Ninomiya 
2013; Wang, Zhao, & Lu 2013; Watanabe, Mizuno, & Inui 2013), then the statements may be 
highly related. In addition to using the information conveyed by the given statements, exter-
nal information like common sense knowledge and ontology about problem domains can 
strengthen the basis on which entailment decisions are made (de Salvo Braz et al. 2005; Stern 
et al. 2010).  
The first corresponding event of PASCAL RTE for Japanese and Chinese took place in 
NTCIR-9, and was named RITE as the acronym for “Recognizing Inference in TExt” (Shima 
et al. 2012). NTCIR-10 continued to host RITE-2 for Japanese and Chinese, and had, respec-
tively, ten and nine teams participating in the traditional and simplified Chinese subtasks 
(Watamabe et al. 2013). All of these participants considered different combinations of linguis-
tic information as features to determine the entailment relationships of statement pairs. Most 
of them employed support vector machines as the classifiers.  

 
 
page 3/36 
There were different subtasks in NTCIR-9 RITE and NTCIR-10 RITE-2. The binary 
classification (BC) subtask required participants to judge whether or not T entails H. In this 
paper, we will focus only on the BC subtasks in the NTCIR RITE tasks, as we believe that the 
BC subtask is the most fundamental subtask of them all. 
In NTCIR-10 RITE-2, the best performing team in the BC subtask for traditional Chi-
nese (CT) adopted a voting mechanism (Shih et al. 2013). The best performing team in the 
BC subtask for simplified Chinese (CS) employed an alignment-based strategy (Wang, Zhao, 
& Lu 2013). We (Huang & Liu 2013) trained heuristic functions to achieve second best per-
formance in the BC subtasks for both CT and CS. The best team outperformed us in the BC 
subtask for CT by only 0.7% in the F1 measure. Chang et al. (2013) embraced decision trees 
as the classifier but did not achieve an impressive performance.  
For obvious reasons, all participating systems in NTCIR-10 RITE-2 used some forms of 
linguistic features to make decisions. As may be expected, different systems considered dif-
ferent sets of features and applied them in different ways. We computed lexical, syntactic, and 
semantics information about the statement pairs to judge their entailment relationships. The 
linguistic features were computed with public tools and machine-readable dictionaries, in-
cluding the Extended HowNet5 (Chen et al. 2010). Preprocessing steps for the statements in-
cluded conversion between simplified and traditional Chinese, Chinese segmentation, and 
converting formats of Chinese numbers. We employed such linguistic information as (1) 
words that were shared by both statements, (2) synonyms, antonyms, and negation words, (3) 
information about the named entities of the statement pairs, and (4) similarity between parse 
trees and dependency structures, etc. 
The performance of our approaches was sufficiently robust that we achieved the second 
best scores in both CT and CS subtasks. Since each participating team could submit running 
results of three different configurations, we actually experimented with our models that we 
built by training heuristic functions and support vector machines (SVMs). Our best results 
were achieved by the trained heuristic functions, achieving second position in the BC sub-
tasks for both CT and CS. Our SVM-based models achieved the third best score in the BC 
subtask for CT, but dropped to 12th position in BC subtask for CS. 
We have extended our work after participation in NTCIR-10 RITE-2. We ran grid 
searches of larger scales to find the best combinations of parameters and features for the clas-
sification models. In general, conducting the grid search helped us build better models. How-
ever, the experimental results also provide interesting and seemingly perplexing material for 
further discussion in the paper. We also tested our systems with the test data for the BC sub-
tasks of NTCIR-9 RITE, and found that we were able to achieve better performance than the 
best performer in NTCIR-9 RITE tasks. 
                                                      
5  http://ehownet.iis.sinica.edu.tw/ 

 
 
page 4/36 
We explain the preprocessing of the text material and extraction of their linguistic fea-
tures in Sect. 2, examine the constructions of the heuristics-based and machine learning-based 
classifiers in Sect. 3, present and discuss the experimental results in Sect. 4, review and deli-
berate on some additional observations in Sect. 5, and wrap up this paper in Sect. 6. 
2 
Major System Components 
In this section, we describe components of our running systems, including the preprocessing 
steps and the extraction of fundamental linguistic features. 
2.1 
Preprocessing 
In this subsection, we explain the preprocessing steps: traditional-to-simplified Chinese con-
version, numeric format conversion, and Chinese segmentation. 
2.1.1 Traditional-to-simplified Chinese conversion 
We relied on Stanford NLP tools6 to do Chinese segmentation and named-entity recognition. 
As those tools were designed to perform better for simplified Chinese we had to convert tra-
ditional Chinese into simplified Chinese. We converted words between their traditional and 
simplified forms of Chinese with an automatic procedure which relied on a tool in Microsoft 
Word. We did not design or invent a conversion dictionary of our own, and the quality of 
conversion depended solely on Microsoft Word. 
There are two major methods for converting between traditional and simplified Chinese 
text. The simpler option is just to do character-to-character conversion, e.g., changing “電腦
軟體的品質很重要”7 to “电脑软体的品质很重要”. A more sophisticated and better con-
version is to do word-to-word conversion, changing this sample statement to “计算机软件的
质量很重要”. This latter conversion includes the simplified Chinese words, i.e., “计算机”, 
“软件”, and “质量” that are used in the training of the Stanford tools, so is more likely to lead 
to better system performance. Microsoft Word offers the second type of conversion as much 
as it can, and we understand that Microsoft Word might not convert all traditional Chinese 
words perfectly to their simplified counterparts, e.g., the result of converting “工業技術水準” 
is “工业技术水准”. “工业技术水平” is a preferred conversion. However, Microsoft Word is 
a good and accessible current choice. 
2.1.2 Numeric format conversion 
There are multiple ways for people to write numbers in English text, e.g., sixteen vs. 16. In 
Chinese, there are at least three ways to write numbers in text, e.g., “3”, “三”, and “參” for 
                                                      
6  http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/index.shtml 
7  The pronunciations and translations of all Chinese strings mentioned in this paper are provided in the Ap‐
pendix. 

 
 
page 5/36 
the number “3”. There are also specific characters to express specific numbers, e.g., “廿” and 
“卅” for 20 and 30, respectively. In addition, there are simplified ways to express relatively 
small numbers, e.g., “三十二” for 32 but “十二” for 12. In the latter case, “一十二” is more 
formal but is rarely used. 
To streamline our handling of numbers in Chinese statements, we employed regular ex-
pressions to capture specific strings and convert them to Arabic numerals. The conversions 
need special care for some extraordinary instances. For instance, one may not want to convert 
“朝九晚五” to “朝9 晚5” or convert “舉一反三” to “舉1 反3”. 
2.1.3 Chinese string segmentation 
We employed the Stanford Word Segmenter8 (Chang, Galley, & Manning 2008) to segment 
Chinese character strings into word tokens. Unlike most alphabetical languages in which 
words are separated by spaces, Chinese text strings do not have delimiters between words. In 
fact, Chinese text did not use punctuation marks until modern times. In the field of natural 
language processing, converting a Chinese string into a sequence of Chinese words is called 
segmentation (or tokenization) of Chinese.  
A major challenge of Chinese segmentation is that different segmentations of a given 
Chinese string can represent very different meanings of the original string. We can segment 
the string “研究生命還有多少年” in two different ways: {“研究生命”, “還有”, “多少年”} 
or {“研究生”, “命”, “還有”, “多少年” }. Adopting the former segmentation, the translation 
of the original Chinese string is “how many more years can one do research”. Adopting the 
latter will lead to “how many more years can the graduate student survive”. To most native 
speakers of Chinese, the former segmentation is much more natural, but the latter is not un-
acceptable. In the 2012 Bakeoff for Chinese segmentation, the best performing system 
reached an F1 measure slightly shy of 95% (Duan, Sui, Tian, & Li 2012) 
2.2 
Lexical semantics 
2.2.1 Lexical resources and computation for Chinese synonyms 
The number of words shared by statement pairs is the most commonly used feature to judge 
entailment. Identifying words that are shared literally is a direct way to compute word over-
laps. Indeed, in previous RTE and RITE events, organizers provided baseline systems which 
calculated character overlaps to determine entailment (Bar-Haim et al. 2006; Shima et al. 
2011).  
In practice, people may express the same or very similar ideas with synonyms and near 
synonyms, so their identification is also very important. The following statements are very 
close in meaning though they do not use exactly the same words. 
                                                      
8  http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/segmenter.shtml 

 
 
page 6/36 
(1) Tamara is reluctant to raise this 
question. 
(2) Tamara hesitates to ask this question. 
Translating this pair into Chinese will also 
show the importance of identifying syn-
onyms. 
(3) Tamara 對於提出這一問題感到猶
豫 
(4) Tamara 對於詢問這一問題顯得遲
疑 
The literature has seen abundant ways 
to compute synonyms for English, particu-
larly those that computed the similarity be-
tween words based on WordNet9 (Buda-
nitsky & Hirst 2006). In contrast, we have yet to find a good way to compute synonyms for 
Chinese.  
To compute synonyms for a given word, we rely on both existing lexicons and compu-
ting methods. We acquired a dictionary for synonyms and antonyms10 from the Ministry of 
Education (MOE) of Taiwan. This MOE dictionary lists 16,005 synonyms and 8625 anto-
nyms. 
We could employ the extended HowNet11 (E-HowNet), which can be considered as an 
extended WordNet for Mandarin Chinese, to look up synonyms of Chinese words. E-HowNet 
contains 88,079 traditional Chinese words in the 2012 version, and can provide synonyms of 
Chinese words, so we could use the list of synonyms directly. We will find 38 synonymous 
words12 which carry the concept of “hesitate” in E-HowNet. In this particular case, we would 
be able to tell that “猶豫” in statement (3) and “遲疑” in statement (4) are synonymous with 
the list in E-HowNet. However, “提出” in statement (3) does not belong to the synonym list13 
of “詢問” in statement (4). “提出” is similar to “raise” in English. One can raise a question or 
a concern, so “raise” alone does not necessarily relate to asking questions.  
We could also use the definitions for words in E-HowNet to estimate the relatedness 
between two Chinese words by their taxonomical relations and semantic relations (Chuang, 
                                                      
9  http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
10  http://dict.revised.moe.edu.tw/ 
11  http://ehownet.iis.sinica.edu.tw/ 
12  三心二意,  心猿意馬,  彷徨,  投鼠忌器,  沈吟,  沉吟,  委決不下,  狐疑不決,  首鼠兩端,  動搖,  徘徊不前, 
逡巡,  游移,  猶猶豫豫,  猶疑,  猶疑不決,  猶豫,  猶豫不決,  搖擺不定,  當斷不斷,  滯足不前,  裹足,  裹足不
前,  跼躅,  踟,  踟躕,  踟躕不前,  踟躕不進,  遲疑,  遲疑不決,  舉棋不定,  舉棋未定,  瞻前顧後,  躊躇,  顧忌, 
躕,  觀望不前,  搖擺 
13  叩問,  打探,  打聽,  扣問,  咨,  咨詢,  查詢,  討教,  追問,  問,  問到,  問津,  問訊,  問起,  問話,  問道,  探問, 
探詢,  尋問,  提問,  敢問,  發問,  詰問,  詢,  詢問,  詢答,  徵詢,  請旨,  請教,  質詢,  諮諮,  詢諮,  諏訊 
Fig. 1 A definition tree for “冶金” (metallurgy) 

 
 
page 7/36 
Liu, & Chang 2012; Chen 2013; Huang & Liu 2013). In this work, we converted the defini-
tion of a word into a “definition tree”, e.g., Fig. 1, according to the taxonomy in E-HowNet. 
Each node represents a primitive unit, a function word, or a semantic role. Considering each 
internal node in a definition tree as a root, we built a collection of subtrees of the definition 
tree. In Fig. 1, there are 15 nodes. 
The DICE coefficient14 between the collections of subtrees of two definition trees is 
used to measure the degree of relatedness of two definitions. Given two collections, e.g., X 
and Y, the DICE coefficient is defined in Eq. (1), where |X| is the number of elements in X. 
|
|
|
|
2
)
,
(
Y
X
Y
X
Y
X
DICE



   
 
 
 
     (1) 
Due to the definition, a DICE coefficient must fall in the range of [0, 1]. Two definitions will 
be considered anonymous if their DICE coefficient is larger than a threshold, for which we 
chose to use 0.88 based on a small-scale experiment.  
Computing Chinese synonyms only with information in dictionaries is an imperfect me-
thod. Chinese text contains out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words a lot more frequently than Eng-
lish text. For these OOV words, dictionary-based methods cannot always help. 
2.2.2 Chinese antonyms and negation words 
We consider two ways to express opposite meanings. The first is antonyms, e.g., “good” vs. 
“bad”; and the second is through negation words, e.g., “good” and “not good”. 
We relied on the lists of antonyms provided by the MOE dictionary (cf. Sect. 2.2.1). 
Since there are only 8625 words in the antonym lists in the dictionary, we can handle only a 
very small number of antonyms at this moment.  
We created a list of negation words based on our own judgment. This list of negation 
words include “無” , “未”, “不”, “非”, and “沒有”. Note that we consider “無” , “未”, “不”, 
and “非” to be negation words only when they are individual words after segmentation. 
Hence, we will handle words like “並非” correctly. This list allows us to find that statements 
(5) and (6) (used in NTCIR-10 RITE-2) have opposite meanings.  
(5) 千禧年危機俗稱Ｙ２Ｋ危機或千禧蟲 
(6) 千禧年危機並非Ｙ２Ｋ危機或千禧蟲 
We could also handle other negation words like “無法”, “未能”, “不行”, and “不能”. 
However, this heuristic list is as yet unable to handle all possible Chinese negation words 
correctly. A more complex word like, “無可厚非”, would need special attention in our system. 
A direct application of our heuristic list will treat this word as two negations, but this word is 
not really related to negation. 
                                                      
14  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%B8rensen%E2%80%93Dice_coefficient 

 
 
page 8/36 
2.2.3 Named entity and verb recognition 
Among parts of speech in almost all languages, nouns and verbs are the essential parts for 
understanding the core meanings of sentences. Information about named entities such as per-
sons, locations, organizations, and time are crucial for inferring relationships between state-
ments. A software tool for named entity recognition (NER) not only annotates words in a 
sentence as nouns but also subcategorizes them as persons, locations, organization names and 
time specifications. Although current technologies for NER do not offer perfect performance, 
being able to carry out NER even partially paves a way to handle typical questions regarding 
the five Ws (What, When, Where, Why, Who). We employed S-MSRSeg, which is a tool for 
named entities recognition developed by Microsoft Research (Gao, Li, Wu, & Huang 2005).  
Verbs provide information about the actions or states that a given sentence describes. 
Recognizing verbs for a sentence pair is thus useful. We employed the Stanford parser (Levy 
& Manning 2003) to do the tagging of parts of speech. Although it is possible to consider 
sub-categorization of verbs, we did not do so in the current study.  
2.3 
Syntactic features 
We parsed the Chinese statements with the Stanford parser (Levy & Manning 2003) to obtain 
the parse trees and the part-of-speech (POS) tags for words. A parse tree of a sentence reveals 
important information about the meaning of the sentence. At this moment, we used the pars-
ing results to do two types of comparisons. The first was to compare the similarity between 
the parse trees of T and H with the same method (the DICE coefficient) that we used to com-
pare the definition trees of different senses as explained in Sect. 2.1.1. We also compared the 
collections of POS tags of two sentences, particularly the tags for verbs.  
Based on our experience, the Stanford parser works better for simplified Chinese than 
for traditional Chinese. Hence, we converted statements of traditional Chinese into simplified 
Chinese before the parsing step in our procedures (cf. Sect. 2.1.1). 
We noticed that the Stanford parser did not always produce the best or even correct parse 
trees for the given statements. The parser ranked candidate parse trees with probabilistic 
models, and produced the trees with leading scores. Although we could request more than one 
parse tree for a given statement, we chose to use only the top-ranked tree for computational 
efficiency of our systems. 
2.4 
Semantic features 
It is preferable to employ higher level information about statement pairs to judge their en-
tailment relationships. After considering information available at the lexical and syntactic le-
vels, semantic features immediately came to mind. However, there are multiple ways to de-
fine and represent sentential semantics. Frame semantics is a conceivable choice (Fillmore 

 
 
page 9/36 
1976; Burchardt, Pennacchiotti, Thater, & Pinkal 2009), for instance. In this work, we ex-
plored an application of dependency structures (Chang, Tseng, Jurafsky, & Manning 2009). 
Linguists consider the context of words a very important factor to define meaning. “You 
shall know a word by the company it keeps” (Firth 1957) or similar arguments (e.g., Firth 
1935; Harris 1954) are commonly cited in courses on linguistics. “One sense per discourse, 
one sense per collocation” (Yarowsky 1995) appears in the literature in computational lin-
guistics very frequently. For this reason, using vector space models to capture contextual in-
formation has become one of the standard approaches in both natural language processing and 
information retrieval. 
In our work, we explored an application of dependency structures to capturing the con-
textual information in a sentence. There are different ways to apply the dependency structures 
for inferring entailment relationships, and we note that Day et al. also employed the tree-edit 
distances of dependency structures in NTCIR-10 RITE-2 (Day et al. 2013).  
We illustrate our methods with a short English example, “We consider dependency 
structures for inferring textual entailment”, to make the example more easily understanda-
ble to non-Chinese speakers. We list the typed and collapsed dependencies of this statement 
below. A dependency relation is expressed in the format of relation-name(governor, depen-
dent), where both governor and dependent are words appended with their positions in the 
sentence. 
nsubj(consider-2, We-1) 
root(ROOT-0, consider-2) 
amod(structures-4, dependency-3) 
dobj(consider-2, structures-4) 
prepc_for(consider-2, inferring-6) 
amod(entailment-8, textual-7) 
dobj(inferring-6, entailment-8)  
We can ignore the root node and build a matrix to encode the direct relationships be-
tween words, as shown in Table 1. The column headings show the governors, and the row 
headings show the dependents. A cell will be 1 if there is a relationship from the dependent to 
Table 1 Matrix form for encoding dependency structures 
 
We
consider dependency
structures
inferring textual entailment
We 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
consider 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
dependency 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
structures 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
inferring 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
textual 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
entailment 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 

 
 
page 10/36 
the governor. Hence, ignoring the relation name, the cell (We, consider) is 1 because of 
nsub(consider-2, We-1). Notice that the matrix is not symmetric because of the functions of 
words in different relationships. 
The matrix, denoted by R, encodes the holistic relationships between words in a state-
ment, and can be considered a way to represent the context of words in a given statement. 
There are many similar applications of such matrices in computer science, e.g., for modeling 
connectivity between web pages (Page, Brin, Motwani, & Winograd 1998) and for modeling 
traffic networks (Liu & Pai 2006).  
As R encodes only the direct relationships between words, we can compute the powers 
of R to explore the indirect relationships between the words. For example, a “1” in the second 
power of R, R2, shows that there is a one-step indirect relationship between two words. If we 
compute the second power of the matrix in Table 1, we will find that the cell with “depen-
dency” as the row heading and with “consider” in the column heading is 1—suggesting the 
idea of “consider dependency” in the statement. When we compute higher powers of R, we 
will find fewer “1”s in the matrices because there are fewer word pairs with very remote in-
direct relationships.  
Based on such observations, we explored the possibility of encoding the sentential con-
text with the union of the powers of R for a statement. In the reported experiments in this pa-
per, we chose to compute the XR matrix, defined in Eq. (2), for a given statement. A cell in 
XR will be 1 if the cell at the corresponding positions in any of the first five powers of R is 1. 
5
4
3
2
R
R
R
R
R 
XR 





  
 
 
 
       (2) 
3 
Classification Methods 
Although machine learning-based algorithms are the most conceivable method for classifica-
tion problems including the recognition of textual entailment (Dagan, Dolan, Magnini, & 
Roth 2009), the size of training data available at NTCIR-10 RITE-2 was not large enough to 
make us feel comfortable to just take this intuitive avenue. Hence, in addition to applying 
support vector machines, we also tried to come up with our own parameterized heuristic 
functions to make classification decisions. The parameters would be tuned with the training 
data, so, technically, we can still consider our first approach as a machine-learning based me-
thod.  
3.1 
Trained heuristic functions 
We explain the individual factors that we considered in our heuristic function in the following 
section. 

 
 
page 25/36 
TC were better than the best performing team which actually participated in NTCIR-9 RITE. 
Moreover, the accuracy achieved by LM-12 was also slightly better than the best accuracy for 
SC in NTCIR-9 RITE. 
4.7 
Effects of syntactic and semantic information 
In order to study the effects of considering parse trees (F8 in Table 2) and the dependency 
structures (F16 in Table 2), we intentionally removed F8 and F16 from LM-5 and LM-6 in 
Table 14 and LM-11 and LM-12 in Table 15. We used LM-5A, LM-6A, LM-11A, and 
LM-12A to denote these new settings. Table 24 lists the MacroF1 and accuracy scores when 
we used LM-5A, LM-6A, LM-11A, and LM-12A with linearly weighted models to predict 
entailment. 
Although we hoped that considering higher level linguistic information could make a 
significant contribution to the scores, the data does not support our hypothesis decisively. 
Most of the time, considering F8 and F16 made the classification results only relatively and 
marginally better for simplified Chinese. The effects of considering F8 and F16 were quite 
arbitrary for test data of traditional Chinese, as indicated by the left side of Table 24. 
5 
Additional Discussions 
In this section, we discuss some issues that involve observations obtained in multiple experi-
ments. More specifically, we discuss the implication that was suggested by the experiments 
reported in Sect. 4. Although one might expect that some approaches should have achieved 
better performance than others, such expectations might not be realized in the current study. 
We investigate the issues and elaborate on possible reasons for the gap between the actual re-
sults and expected outcomes in this section.  
5.1 
Y-precision, Y-recall, N-precision, and N-recall 
Although we have focused mostly on the effects of using different methods and features on 
the achieved MacroF1 and accuracy scores, the values of the Y-precision, Y-recall, 
N-precision, and N-recall are informative for the design of algorithms. 
Table 24. Effects of considering syntactic and semantic information indecisive 
 
Traditional Chinese 
 
Simplified Chinese 
RITE.Test 
RITE-2.Test 
RITE.Test 
RITE-2.Test 
MacroF1 
Acc. 
MacroF1
Acc.
MacroF1
Acc. 
MacroF1 
Acc.
LM-5 
71.50 
71.89 
64.60 
64.81
LM-11 
71.58 
77.64 
62.16 
65.94
LM-5A 
71.70 
72.00 
64.51 
64.81
LM-11A
70.95 
77.15 
62.31 
65.81
LM-6 
72.48 
72.89 
64.10 
64.36
LM-12 
72.36 
78.13 
62.05 
65.81
LM-6A 
71.32 
71.67 
64.34 
64.70
LM-12A
69.25 
75.68 
62.03 
65.56

 
 
page 26/36 
It should be noted that, when handling the statement pairs of simplified Chinese, our 
methods had high values in Y-recall and N-precision and low values in N-recall in Sects. 4.4 
and 4.5. After using the training methods, our methods showed a tendency to grant entailed 
relationships to statement pairs. We suspect that this phenomenon may have resulted from the 
imbalanced portions of Y-pairs and N-pairs in the development set (cf. Table 3). 
5.2 
Performance of SVM-based systems 
Indeed, it is not surprising that the quality of training data influenced the performance of the 
trained models. The amount of data available for training may have also affected the perfor-
mances of teams which adopted supported vector machines (SVMs) as their classifiers. Table 
25 shows some statistics of the performance of all of the teams which participated in the BC 
subtask for both simplified and traditional Chinese in NTCIR-10 RITE-2. Since each team 
could submit up to three runs of their systems, a team would have as many results as the runs 
they submitted. The “MacroF1” and “Acc.” columns show the highest MacroF1 and accuracy 
achieved by the teams.  
Among the seven teams, only IASL (Shih, Liu, Lee, & Hsu 2013) did not use SVMs, 
and MIG (Huang & Liu 2013) used SVMs in one of their three runs. The other five teams 
used SVMs as their classifiers, and only CYUT (Wu, Yang, Chen, Chiu, & Yang 2013) 
achieved better performance in simplified Chinese than in traditional Chinese. Although 
MIG’s best performance in simplified Chinese is better than its best performance in tradition-
al Chinese, as shown in Table 25, MIG’s performance in simplified Chinese is actually poorer 
than its performance in traditional Chinese when MIG used an SVM-based classifier (cf. 
MIG-3 in Tables 5 and 6). 
5.3 
Effects of specific features on experiments with real test data 
Comparing the experimental results discussed in Sects. 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5, we found that, over-
all, using systematic ways to search for parameters and features offered us more chances to 
Table 25. Performance statistics of teams which participated in both SC 
and TC subtasks in NTCIR-10 RITE-2 
 
Simplified Chinese 
Traditional Chinese 
Teams 
Ranks 
MacroF1
Acc. 
Ranks 
MacroF1 
Acc. 
JUNLP 
24 
48.49 
48.66 
16 
48.72 
48.81 
IASL 
10,18 
60.45 
63.25 
1,14 
67.14 
67.76 
MIG 
2,6,12 
68.09 
68.50 
2,3,6 
67.07 
67.54 
CYUT 
3,7,9 
67.86 
68.12 
12,13,15
55.16 
55.16 
Yuntech 
14,15,16 
53.52 
59.54 
8,9,10 
62.31 
62.54 
IMTKU 
13,17,23 
54.28 
62.74 
4,7,17 
65.99 
66.29 
WHUTE 8,11 
61.65 
66.58 
5 
65.55 
66.29 

 
 
page 27/36 
achieve better performance than relying on results of intuitively selected experiments to build 
an inference system. 
We have also attempted to compare many experimental results that were influenced by 
whether or not we considered synonyms in computing word overlap in Sect. 4. The following 
statement pair of NTCIR-10 RITE-2 provides an example of the need to consider synonyms. 
One needs to recognize the synonymous relationship between “聽力” and “聽覺” to correctly 
handle this pair. 
(15) 噪聲對動物也有很大的影響，降低動物聽力 
(16) 噪聲對動物的聽覺有很大的影響 
Nevertheless, experimental results showed that considering synonyms only helped im-
prove our performance in the TC experiments in NTCIR-10 RITE-2. Similar results were not 
observed in other experiments that we reported in Sects. 4.4 and 4.6. This may have resulted 
because the test data did not include many instances that really needed synonyms to make 
correct judgments and may have also been caused by imperfect judgment of synonymous re-
lationships between Chinese words, which remains a very challenging problem for Chinese.  
The entailment relationships between a statement pair may hold for a wide variety of 
reasons and their combinations, and the organizers of evaluation tasks try to cover as many 
different types of entailment relationships as possible in the datasets (Dagan, Dolan, Magnini, 
& Roth 2009; Shima et al. 2012; Watanabe et al. 2013). As a consequence, the overall per-
formance might not be improved instantly due to the consideration of just one specific factor. 
Researchers have studied the correlation between datasets and performance of systems (Lin, 
Lee, Shih, & Hsu 2015). Hence, it may not be easy to single out and justify the extract con-
tribution of a specific feature with real test data.  
The same phenomenon occurred again when we tried to examine the effects of consi-
dering syntactic and semantic information to judge entailment relationships with experiments 
reported in Sect. 4.7. 
5.4 
World knowledge and subjective judgments 
In the real world, we may not be able to judge whether one statement entails another solely by 
linguistic information (Vanderwende, Menezes, & Snow 2006; Dagan, Dolan, Magnini, & 
Roth 2009). This is particularly true when world knowledge, connotation and subjective 
judgments are involved. Following are some statement pairs that were used in NTCIR-10 
RITE-2. 
Knowledge about the conversion between “米” (meter) and “釐米” (centimeter) is re-
quired to judge whether (17) entails (18). 
(17) 阿諾爾特大花草直徑能夠到達3 米 
(18) 阿諾爾特大花草直徑50～90 釐米 

 
 
page 28/36 
The standard answer to the statement pair (19) and (20) is yes, probably because the an-
notator believed that something that is “最高” (highest) must also be “高” (high). However, 
this may not be always true, just like the best performer in a contest might not really achieve 
very high scores.  
(19) 鹿茸滋補藥效最高 
(20) 鹿茸藥效高 
6 
Concluding Remarks 
The main goal of this paper is not to provide a comprehensive survey of studies on textual 
entailment. Rather, we provide empirical experience obtained from experiments with real test 
data in NTCIR-9 RITE and NTCIR-10 RITE-2. For additional survey articles that we have 
not discussed, readers might want to refer to (Androutsopoulos & Malakasiotis 2010) and 
(Watanabe el al. 2012).  
In this paper, we presented the linguistic features and the computational models which 
we used to achieve second positions in the BC subtask for both simplified and traditional 
Chinese in NTCIR-10 RITE-2. Significantly extended investigations were carried out, re-
ported, and analyzed to share our empirical experience in textual entailment based on the real 
data used in NTCIR-9 RITE and NTCIR-10 RITE-2. More experiments, including experi-
ments on English test data used in PASCAL RTE-1 and RTE-2, are available in (Huang 
2013).  
Based on the experience and discussions reported in this paper, we believe that more 
work on true natural language understanding is needed to achieve better performance in tex-
tual entailment recognition. For future work, we are exploring the possibility of applying 
techniques of textual entailment for answering questions in reading comprehension tests that 
are designed for language learners (Huang, Lin, & Liu 2013). When computers can do the 
reading comprehension tests reasonably well, they might also explain the answers to students 
and serve as a learning companion.
