Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
A Probabilistic Logic Programming
Event Calculus
Anastasios Skarlatidis1,2, Alexander Artikis1, Jason Filippou1,3 and Georgios Paliouras1
1Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece
2Department of Digital Systems, University of Piraeus, Greece
3University of Maryland, USA

submitted 06 April 2012; revised 10 November 2012; accepted 07 March 2013
Note: The paper has been accepted for publication in the Theory and Practice of
Logic Programming (TPLP) Journal.
Abstract
We present a system for recognising human activity given a symbolic representation of
video content. The input of our system is a set of time-stamped short-term activities
(STA) detected on video frames. The output is a set of recognised long-term activities
(LTA), which are pre-deﬁned temporal combinations of STA. The constraints on the STA
that, if satisﬁed, lead to the recognition of a LTA, have been expressed using a dialect
of the Event Calculus. In order to handle the uncertainty that naturally occurs in hu-
man activity recognition, we adapted this dialect to a state-of-the-art probabilistic logic
programming framework. We present a detailed evaluation and comparison of the crisp
and probabilistic approaches through experimentation on a benchmark dataset of human
surveillance videos.
KEYWORDS: Event Recognition, Event Pattern Matching, Event Calculus, ProbLog
1 Introduction
Systems for event recognition — ‘event pattern matching’, in the terminology of
(Luckham 2002) — accept as input streams of sensor data in order to identify
composite events of interest, that is, collections of events that satisfy some pattern.
Consider, for example, the recognition of attacks on nodes of a computer network
given the TCP/IP messages, the recognition of suspicious trader behaviour given
the transactions in a ﬁnancial market, the recognition of whale songs given a stream
of whale sounds, and the recognition of human activities given multimedia content
from surveillance cameras.
A common approach to event recognition separates low-level from high-level
recognition. In the case of human activity recognition, the output of the former
type of recognition is a set of activities taking place in a short period of time:
‘short-term activities’ (STA). The output of the latter type of recognition is a set
of ‘long-term activities’ (LTA), which are temporal combinations of STA. We focus
on high-level recognition.
arXiv:1204.1851v2  [cs.AI]  29 Apr 2013

2
A. Skarlatidis et al.
We deﬁne a set of LTA of interest, such as ‘ﬁghting’ and ‘meeting’, as temporal
combinations of STA such as ‘walking’, ‘running’, and ‘inactive’ (standing still)
using a logic programming (Prolog) implementation of the Event Calculus (EC)
(Kowalski and Sergot 1986). We employ EC to express the temporal constraints on
a set of STA that, if satisﬁed, lead to the recognition of a LTA.
In earlier work (Artikis, Sergot and Paliouras (2010)) we identiﬁed various types
of uncertainty that exist in activity recognition, such as erroneous STA detection.
To address this issue, we extend our work by presenting Prob-EC, an EC dialect
suitable for probabilistic activity recognition. Prob-EC operates on the state-of-
the-art probabilistic logic programming framework ProbLog (Kimmig et al. 2011).
Prob-EC, therefore, may operate in settings where STA occurrences are assigned a
conﬁdence value by the underlying low-level tracking system (such as, for example,
a probabilistic classiﬁer). We present extensive experimental evaluation of Prob-
EC on a benchmark activity recognition dataset. The evaluation demonstrates the
conditions in which Prob-EC outperforms our previous EC dialect — Crisp-EC.
Prob-EC is the ﬁrst EC dialect able to deal with uncertainty in the input STA.
Moreover, this is the ﬁrst approach that thoroughly evaluates EC in a probabilistic
framework. The full code of Prob-EC, along with the dataset on which experimen-
tation is performed, is available upon request.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In the following section we
set our work in context. In Section 3 we present Crisp-EC while in Sections 4 and 5
we describe, respectively, the dataset on which we perform activity recognition and
the corresponding knowledge base of LTA deﬁnitions. Section 6 brieﬂy introduces
ProbLog while Section 7 describes Prob-EC. Our experimental results, including the
comparison between Prob-EC and Crisp-EC, are presented in Section 8. Finally, in
Section 9 we summarise our observations and outline directions for further research.
2 Related Work
Numerous recognition systems have been proposed in the literature (Cugola and
Margara 2012). In this section we focus on long-term activity (LTA) recognition
systems that, similar to our approach, exhibit a formal, declarative semantics.
A fair amount of recognition systems is logic-based. Notable approaches include
the Chronicle Recognition System (Dousson and Maigat 2007) and the hierarchical
event representation of (Hakeem and Shah 2007). A recent review of logic-based
recognition systems may be found in (Artikis, Skarlatidis et al. (2012)). These
systems are common in that they employ logic-based methods for representation
and inference, but are unable to handle noise.
Shet et al. (2005; 2007) have presented a logic programming approach to activity
recognition which touches upon the issue of data coming from noisy sensors. In that
work, LTA concerning theft, entry violation, unattended packages, and so on, have
been deﬁned. Within their activity recognition system, Shet and colleagues have
incorporated mechanisms for reasoning over rules and facts that have an uncertainty
value attached. Uncertainty in rules corresponds to a measure of rule reliability. On
the other hand, uncertainty in facts represents the detection probabilities of the

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
3
short-term activities (STA). In the VidMAP system (Shet et al. 2005), a mid-level
module which generates Prolog facts automatically ﬁlters out data that a low-level
image processing module has misclassiﬁed (such as a tree mistaken for a human).
Shet and colleagues have noted of the ﬁltering carried out by this module that ‘...it
does so by observing whether or not the object has been persistently tracked’ (Shet
et al. 2005, p. 2). In (Shet et al. 2007), the authors use an algebraic data structure
known as a bilattice (Ginsberg 1990) to detect human entities based on uncertain
output of part-based detectors, such as head or leg detectors. The bilattice structure
associates every STA or LTA with two uncertainty values, one encoding available
information and the other encoding conﬁdence. The more conﬁdent information is
provided, the more probable the respective LTA becomes.
A ProbLog-based method for robotic action recognition is proposed in (Moldovan
et al. 2012). The method employs a relational extension of the aﬀordance models
(Gibson 1979) in order to represent multi-object interactions in a scene. Aﬀordances
can model the relations between objects, actions (that is, pre-programmed robotic
arm movements) and eﬀects of actions. In contrast to a standard propositional
Bayesian Network implementation of an aﬀordance model, the method can scale to
multiple object interactions in a scene without the need of retraining. However, the
proposed method does not include temporal representation and reasoning.
Probabilistic graphical models have been applied on a variety of activity recogni-
tion applications where uncertainty exists. Activity recognition requires processing
streams of timestamped STA and, therefore, numerous activity recognition methods
are based on sequential variants of probabilistic graphical models, such as Hidden
Markov Models (Rabiner and Juang 1986), Dynamic Bayesian Networks (Murphy
2002) and Conditional Random Fields (Laﬀerty et al. 2001). Compared to logic-
based methods, graphical models can naturally handle uncertainty but their propo-
sitional structure provides limited representation capabilities. To model LTA that
involve a large number of relations among STA, such as interactions between mul-
tiple persons and/or objects, the structure of the model may become prohibitively
large and complex. To overcome such limitations, these models have been extended
in order to support more complex relations. Examples of such extensions include
representing interactions involving multiple domain objects (Brand et al. 1997;
Gong and Xiang 2003; Wu et al. 2007; Vail et al. 2007), capturing long-term de-
pendencies between states (Hongeng and Nevatia 2003), as well as describing a hi-
erarchical composition of activities (Natarajan and Nevatia 2007; Liao et al. 2007).
However, the lack of a formal representation language makes the deﬁnition of com-
plex LTA complicated and the integration of domain background knowledge very
hard.
Markov Logic Networks (MLN) (Richardson and Domingos 2006) have also been
used for representing uncertainty in activity recognition. MLN employ ﬁrst-order
logic representation, where each formula may be associated with a weight, indicating
the conﬁdence we have on the formula. The knowledge base of weighted formulas is
translated into a Markov network where probabilistic inference is performed. The
approach of (Biswas et al. 2007), for example, uses MLN to recognise LTA given the
STA that have been observed by low-level classiﬁers. A more expressive approach

4
A. Skarlatidis et al.
that can represent persistent and concurrent LTA, as well as their starting and
ending time-points, is proposed in (Helaoui et al. 2011). The method in (Sadilek and
Kautz 2012) employs hybrid-MLN (Wang and Domingos 2008) in order to recognise
successful and failed interactions between multiple humans using noisy location
data. Similar to pure MLN-based methods, the knowledge base is composed by
LTA deﬁnitions. Furthermore, hybrid formulas aiming to remove the noise from the
location data are also included. Hybrid formulas are deﬁned as normal formulas, but
their weights are also associated with a real-valued function, such as the distance of
two persons. As a result, the conﬁdence of the formula is deﬁned by both its weight
and function. Although these methods incorporate ﬁrst-order logic representation,
the presented LTA deﬁnitions have a limited temporal representation.
A method that uses interval-based temporal relations is proposed in (Morariu
and Davis 2011). The aim of the method is to determine the most consistent se-
quence of LTA based on the observations of low-level classiﬁers. Similar to (Tran
and Davis 2008; Kembhavi et al. 2010), the method uses MLN to express LTA.
In contrast to (Tran and Davis 2008; Kembhavi et al. 2010), it employs temporal
relations based on Allen’s Interval Algebra (IA) (Allen 1983). In order to avoid the
combinatorial explosion of possible intervals that IA may produce, a bottom-up
process eliminates the unlikely LTA hypotheses. In (Brendel et al. 2011; Selman
et al. 2011) a probabilistic extension of Event Logic (Siskind 2001) is proposed in
order to perform interval-based activity recognition. Similar to MLN, the method
deﬁnes a probabilistic model from a set of domain-speciﬁc weighted LTA. How-
ever, the Event Logic representation avoids the enumeration of all possible interval
relations.
The main diﬀerence of our approach with respect to the aforementioned lines
of work concerns the fact that we use the Event Calculus (EC) for temporal rep-
resentation. EC has built-in rules for complex temporal representation, including
the formalisation of inertia, which help considerably the system designer in devel-
oping activity deﬁnitions. With the use of EC one may develop intuitive, succinct
activity deﬁnitions, facilitating the interaction between activity deﬁnition devel-
oper and domain expert, and allowing for code maintenance. Furthermore, being
logic programming-based, EC has direct routes to the ProbLog probabilistic logic
programming framework. To the best of our knowledge, the probabilistic EC di-
alect presented in this paper, Prob-EC, is the ﬁrst EC dialect able to deal with
uncertainty in STA detection.
A MLN-based approach that is complementary to our work is that of (Skarlatidis
et al. 2011), which introduces a probabilistic EC dialect based on MLN. This dialect
and Prob-EC tackle the problem of probabilistic inference from diﬀerent viewpoints.
Prob-EC handles noise in the input stream, represented as detection probabilities
of the STA. The MLN-based EC dialect, on the other hand, emphasises uncertainty
in activity deﬁnitions in the form of rule weights.
ProbLog and MLN are closely related. A notable diﬀerence between them is
that MLN, as an extension of ﬁrst-order logic, are not bound by the closed-world
assumption. There exists a body of work that investigates the connection between
the two frameworks. (Bruynooghe et al. 2010), for example, developed an extension

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
5
Predicate
Meaning
happensAt(E, T)
Event E is occurring at time T
initially(F = V )
The value of ﬂuent F is V at time 0
holdsAt(F = V, T)
The value of ﬂuent F is V at time T
initiatedAt(F = V, T)
At time T a period of time for which F = V is initiated
terminatedAt(F = V, T)
At time T a period of time for which F = V is terminated
Table 1: Main Predicates of Crisp-EC.
of ProbLog which is able to handle ﬁrst-order formulas with weighted constraints.
Fierens et. al (2011) converted probabilistic logic programs to ground MLN and
then used state-of-the-art MLN inference algorithms to perform inference on the
transformed programs.
3 The Event Calculus
Our LTA recognition system is based on a logic programming (Prolog) implemen-
tation of an EC dialect. EC, introduced by Kowalski and Sergot (1986), is a many-
sorted, ﬁrst-order predicate calculus for representing and reasoning about events
and their eﬀects. For the dialect presented here — Crisp-EC — the time model is
linear and includes integers. Where F is a ﬂuent — a property that is allowed to
have diﬀerent values at diﬀerent points in time — the term F = V denotes that
ﬂuent F has value V . Boolean ﬂuents are a special case in which the possible val-
ues are true and false. Informally, F = V holds at a particular time-point if F = V
has been initiated by an event at some earlier time-point, and not terminated by
another event in the meantime — law of inertia.
We represent STA as events and LTA as ﬂuents. In this way, we can express the
conditions in which the occurrence of a STA initiates or terminates a LTA.
An event description in Crisp-EC includes rules that deﬁne, among other things,
the event occurrences (with the use of the happensAt predicate), the eﬀects of events
(with the use of the initiatedAt and terminatedAt predicates), and the values of the
ﬂuents (with the use of the initially and holdsAt predicates). Table 1 summarises
the main predicates of Crisp-EC. Variables, starting with an upper-case letter,
are assumed to be universally quantiﬁed unless otherwise indicated. Predicates,
function symbols and constants start with a lower-case letter.
The domain-independent rules for holdsAt can be written in the following form:
holdsAt(F = V, T) ←
initially(F = V ),
not broken(F = V, 0, T)
(1)

6
A. Skarlatidis et al.
holdsAt(F = V, T) ←
initiatedAt(F = V, Ts),
Ts < T,
not broken(F = V, Ts, T)
(2)
broken(F = V, Ts, T) ←
terminatedAt(F = V, Tf),
Ts < Tf < T
(3)
broken(F = V1, Ts, T) ←
initiatedAt(F = V2, Tf),
V1 ̸= V2,
Ts < Tf < T
(4)
not represents ‘negation by failure’, which provides a form of default persistence —
inertia — of ﬂuents. According to rule (1), F = V holds at time-point T if F = V
held initially and has not been broken since. According to rule (2), F = V holds at
time-point T if the ﬂuent F has been initiated to value V at an earlier time Ts,
and has not been broken since. According to rule (3), a period of time for which
F = V holds is broken at Tf if F = V is terminated at Tf. Rule (4) dictates that if
F = V2 is initiated at Tf then eﬀectively F = V1 is terminated at Tf, for all other
possible values V1 of F. Rule (4) therefore ensures that a ﬂuent cannot have more
than one value at any time. We do not insist that a ﬂuent must have a value at
every time-point. In Crisp-EC there is a diﬀerence between initiating a Boolean
ﬂuent F = false and terminating F = true: the ﬁrst implies, but is not implied by,
the second.
According to rules (2)–(4), F = V does not hold at the time it was initiated, while
it holds at the time it was terminated.
The deﬁnitions of initiatedAt and terminatedAt are domain-speciﬁc. One common
form of rule for initiatedAt is the following:
initiatedAt(F = V, T) ←
happensAt(E, T),
Conditions[T]
(5)
where Conditions[T] is some set of further conditions referring to time-point T.
terminatedAt rules are handled similarly. Note that in this EC formulation,
initiatedAt(F = V,
T) does not necessarily imply that F ̸= V
at T. Similarly,
terminatedAt(F = V, T) does not necessarily imply that F = V at T. Suppose, for
example, that F = V is initiated at time-point 20 and terminated at time-point
30 and that there are no other time-points at which it is initiated or terminated.
Then F = V holds at all time-points T such that 20 < T ≤30. Suppose now that
F = V is initiated at time-points 10 and 20 and terminated at time-point 30 (and
at no other time-points). Then F = V holds at all T such that 10 < T ≤30. And
suppose ﬁnally that F = V is initiated at time-points 10 and 20 and terminated at
time-points 25 and 30 (and at no other time-points). In that case F = V holds at
all T such that 10 < T ≤25. In Section 5 we illustrate the use of initiatedAt and
terminatedAt rules for expressing LTA deﬁnitions.

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
7
4 Short-Term Activities
We use the ﬁrst dataset of the CAVIAR project1 to perform LTA recognition. This
dataset includes 28 surveillance videos of a public space. The videos are staged —
actors walk around, sit down, meet one another, leave objects behind, ﬁght, and
so on. Each video has been manually annotated by the CAVIAR team in order to
provide the ground truth for both STA and LTA. For this set of experiments, the
input to our recognition system is:
(i) The STA walking, running, active (non-abrupt body movement in the same
position) and inactive (standing still), together with their time-stamps, that
is, the video frame in which that STA took place. The original CAVIAR
dictionary does not include a STA for ‘abrupt motion’. Our preliminary ex-
periments with this dataset showed that the absence of such a STA compro-
mises the recognition accuracy of some LTA. ‘Abrupt motion’ is a form of
STA that is detected by some state-of-the-art detection systems, for example
(Kosmopoulos et al. 2008), but not by the CAVIAR systems. Accordingly,
we modiﬁed the CAVIAR dataset by introducing a STA for ‘abrupt motion’:
we manually edited the annotation of the CAVIAR videos by changing, when
necessary, the label of a STA to abrupt. The STA abrupt, walking, running,
active and inactive are mutually exclusive and represented by means of the
happensAt predicate. For example, happensAt(active(id6), 80) expresses that
id6 displayed ‘active’ bodily movement at time-point 80. STA are represented
as instantaneous events in EC in order to use the initiatedAt and terminatedAt
predicates to express the conditions in which these activities initiate and ter-
minate a LTA.
(ii) The coordinates of the tracked people and objects as pixel positions at each
time-point, as well as their orientation. The coordinates are represented with
the use of the holdsAt predicate. holdsAt(coord(id2) =(14, 55), 10600), for
example, expresses that the coordinates of id2 are (14, 55) at time-point
10600. Orientation is also encoded using the holdsAt predicate. For instance,
holdsAt(orientation(id2) = 120, 10600) expresses that, in the two-dimensional
projection of the video, the same person was forming a 120◦angle with the
x-axis at the same time-point. This type of information is necessary for com-
puting the distance between two entities as well as the direction to which a
person might be headed.
(iii) The ﬁrst and the last time a person or object is tracked (‘appears’ and ‘disap-
pears’). This type of input is represented using the happensAt predicate. For
example, happensAt(appear(id10), 300) expresses that id10 is ﬁrst tracked at
time-point 300.
Given such input, Crisp-EC recognises the following LTA: a person leaving an
object, people meeting, moving together, or ﬁghting. Long-term activities are repre-
sented as EC ﬂuents. For instance, holdsAt(moving(id1, id3) = true, 140) states that
id1 was moving together with id3 at time-point 140.
1 http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/CAVIAR/

8
A. Skarlatidis et al.
LTA recognition is based on a manually developed knowledge base of LTA def-
initions expressed in terms of initiatedAt and terminatedAt. In the next section, we
present example deﬁnition fragments of the LTA knowledge base. The complete
code is available upon request.
5 Long-Term Activity Deﬁnitions
The ‘leaving an object’ activity is deﬁned as follows:
initiatedAt(leaving object(P, Obj) = true, T) ←
happensAt(appear(Obj), T),
happensAt(inactive(Obj), T),
holdsAt(close(P, Obj, 30) = true, T),
holdsAt(person(P) = true, T)
(6)
terminatedAt(leaving object(P, Obj) = true, T) ←
happensAt(disappear(Obj), T)
(7)
In the CAVIAR videos an object carried by a person is not tracked — only the
person that carries it is tracked. The object will be tracked (‘appear’) if and
only if the person leaves it somewhere. Moreover, objects (as opposed to per-
sons) can only exhibit the inactive STA. Accordingly, rule (6) expresses the condi-
tions in which ‘leaving an object’ is recognised. The ﬂuent recording this activity,
leaving object(P, Obj), becomes true at time T if Obj ‘appears’ at T, its STA at T is
‘inactive’, and there is a person P ‘close’ to Obj at T. The close(ID1, ID2, Threshold)
ﬂuent expresses that the distance between ID1 and ID2 is at most Threshold pixels.
This ﬂuent is deﬁned as follows:
holdsAt(close(ID1, ID2, Threshold) = true, T) ←
holdsAt(distance(ID1, ID2) = Dist, T),
Dist < Threshold
(8)
The distance between two tracked objects/people is computed as the Euclidean
distance between their coordinates in the two-dimensional projection of the video
— recall that the coordinates of each tracked entity are given as input to our system.
The 30 pixel distance threshold in rule (6) was determined from an empirical
analysis of the CAVIAR dataset.
An object that is picked up by someone is no longer tracked (it ‘disappears’)
which in turn terminates leaving object — see rule (7).
In CAVIAR there is no explicit information that a tracked entity is a person or
an inanimate object. Therefore, in our activity deﬁnitions we try to deduce whether
a tracked entity is a person or an object given the detected STA. We deﬁned the
ﬂuent person(P) to have value true if P was active, walking, running or moved

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
9
abruptly at some time-point since P ‘appeared’.
initiatedAt(person(P) = true, T) ←
happensAt(active(P), T)
initiatedAt(person(P) = true, T) ←
happensAt(walking(P), T )
initiatedAt(person(P) = true, T) ←
happensAt(running(P), T)
initiatedAt(person(P) = true, T) ←
happensAt(abrupt(P), T)
terminatedAt(person(P) = true, T) ←
happensAt(disappear(P), T)
(9)
The value of person(P) is time-dependent because in CAVIAR the identiﬁer P of
a tracked entity that ‘disappears’ (is no longer tracked) at some point may be used
later to refer to another entity that ‘appears’ (becomes tracked), and that other
entity may not necessarily be a person. Note, ﬁnally, that rule (6) incorporates a
(reasonable) simplifying assumption, that a person entity will never exhibit ‘inac-
tive’ activity at the moment it ﬁrst ‘appears’ (is tracked). If an entity is ‘inactive’
at the moment it ‘appears’ it can be assumed to be an object, as in the ﬁrst two
conditions of rule (6).
In a similar way, we may express the deﬁnitions of other LTA. The use of EC,
in combination with the full power of logic programming, allows us to express
LTA deﬁnitions including complex temporal, spatial or other constraints. Below we
present fragments of the remaining LTA deﬁnitions.
meeting (of two persons P1 and P2) is recognised when two people ‘interact’: at
least one of them is active or inactive, the other is not running or moving abruptly,
and the distance between them is at most 25 pixels (all numeric constraints were
determined from an empirical analysis of the dataset). In CAVIAR, this interaction
phase can be seen as some form of greeting, such as a handshake. Rules (10) and
(11) show the conditions in which meeting is initiated:
initiatedAt(meeting(P1, P2) = true, T) ←
happensAt(inactive(P1), T),
holdsAt(close(P1, P2, 25) = true, T),
holdsAt(person(P1) = true, T),
holdsAt(person(P2) = true, T),
not happensAt(running(P2), T),
not happensAt(abrupt(P2), T),
not happensAt(active(P2), T)
(10)
initiatedAt(meeting(P1, P2) = true, T) ←
happensAt(active(P1), T),
holdsAt(close(P1, P2, 25) = true, T),
holdsAt(person(P2) = true, T),
not happensAt(running(P2), T),
not happensAt(abrupt(P2), T)
(11)

10
A. Skarlatidis et al.
meeting is terminated by a plethora of conditions, such as when one of the two
people involved in the LTA starts running or ‘disappears’.
In CAVIAR meeting may have multiple initiations: two people may be interacting
for several video frames. Similarly, meeting may have multiple terminations. This is
in contrast to leaving object where there is a single initiation and a single termina-
tion — for example, an object ‘appears’ once before it ‘disappears’. In general, there
is no ﬁxed relation between the number of initiations and terminations of a ﬂuent
— for example, a LTA may have multiple initiations and a single termination. In
Section 3 we described how Crisp-EC computes the time-points in which a ﬂuent
with one or more initiations and terminations holds.
The activity moving was deﬁned in order to recognise whether two people are
walking along together:
initiatedAt(moving(P1, P2) = true, T) ←
happensAt(walking(P1), T),
happensAt(walking(P2), T),
holdsAt(close(P1, P2, 34) = true, T),
holdsAt(orientation(P1) = Or1, T),
holdsAt(orientation(P1) = Or2, T),
|Or1 −Or2| < 45
(12)
In order to recognise moving, both people involved have to be walking while being
close to each other. In addition, they have to be facing towards, more or less, the
same direction (people walking in opposite directions are not assumed to be walking
along together). This is accomplished by constraining their orientations so that they
are, roughly, headed towards the same area while they are walking.
LTA — in contrast to STA — are not mutually exclusive. For example, meeting
may overlap with moving: two people interact and then start moving, that is,
they walk while being close to each other. In general, however, there is no ﬁxed
relationship between LTA.
moving is terminated when either person walks away from the other with respect
to the predeﬁned threshold of 34 pixels:
terminatedAt(moving(P1, P2) = true, T) ←
happensAt(walking(P1), T),
holdsAt(close(P1, P2, 34) = false, T)
(13)
Other termination conditions for moving include either person running away from
the other, as well as either person ‘disappearing’ from the scene.
The last deﬁnition concerns the ﬁghting activity:
initiatedAt(ﬁghting(P1, P2) = true, T) ←
happensAt(abrupt(P1), T),
holdsAt(close(P1, P2, 44) = true, T),
not happensAt(inactive(P2), T)
(14)
To recognise ﬁghting, we require that both people are suﬃciently close and at least
one of them moves abruptly, while the other one is not inactive, indicating that

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
11
he ought to be participating in the ﬁght somehow. ﬁghting ceases to be recognised
when either person involved in the activity starts walking away, running away, or
exits the scene.
6 A Probabilistic Logic Programming Framework
In earlier work (Artikis, Sergot and Paliouras (2010)) we identiﬁed various types of
uncertainty that exist in activity recognition, such as erroneous STA detection. To
address this issue, we ported our EC dialect into ProbLog (Kimmig et al. 2011), a
probabilistic extension of the logic programming language Prolog. ProbLog diﬀers
from Prolog in that it allows for probabilistic facts, which are facts of the form
pi :: fi where pi is a real number in the range [0, 1] and fi is a Prolog fact. If fi
is not ground, then the probability pi is applied to all possible groundings of fi.
Classic Prolog facts are silently given probability 1.
Probabilistic facts in a ProbLog program represent random variables. Further-
more, ProbLog makes an independence assumption on these variables. This means
that a rule which is deﬁned as a conjunction of n of these probabilistic facts has a
probability equal to the product of the probabilities of these facts. When a predi-
cate appears in the head of more than one rule then its probability is computed by
calculating the probability of the implicit disjunction created by the multiple rules.
For example, for a predicate p with two rules p ←l1 and p ←l2, l3, the probability
P(p) is computed as follows:
P(p) = P((p ←l1) ∨(p ←l2, l3)) =
= P(p ←l1) + P(p ←l2, l3) −P((p ←l1) ∧(p ←l2, l3)) =
= P(l1) + P(l2) × P(l3) −P(l1) × P(l2) × P(l3)
Given the independence assumption, any subprogram L has a probability equal
to:
P(L) = Q
fi∈L
pi · Q
fi /∈L
(1 −pi)
(15)
With the help of equation (15), one could compute the probability that a query q
holds in a ProbLog program — success probability — by summing the probabilities
of all subprograms that entail it:
Ps(q) = P
L|=q
P(L)
(16)
Computing the success probability through equation (16), however, is computation-
ally infeasible for large programs, since it involves summing through an exponential
number of summands (2|BL| diﬀerent subprograms, where BL is the Herbrand Base).
By combining equations (15) and (16) and eliminating redundant terms, we end up
with the following characterisation:
Ps(q) = P(
W
e∈Proofs(q)
V
fi∈e
fi )
(17)
That is, the task of computing the success probability of a query q is transformed
into the task of computing the probability of the Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF)

12
A. Skarlatidis et al.
formula of equation (17). Practically, equation (17) expresses that the success prob-
ability of query q is equal to the probability that at least one of its proofs is sampled.
This, unfortunately, is not a question of straightforwardly transforming the proba-
bility of the DNF to a sum of products. If we were to translate equation (17) to a
sum of products, we would assume that all diﬀerent proofs (conjunctions) are dis-
joint, meaning that they represent mutually exclusive possible worlds, which does
not hold in the general case. In order to make the proofs disjoint, one would have to
enhance every conjunction with negative literals, in order to exclude worlds whose
probability has already been computed in previous conjunctions of the DNF. This
problem is known as the disjoint-sum problem and is known to be #P-hard (Valiant
1979).
ProbLog’s approach consists of using Binary Decision Diagrams (BDDs) (Bryant
1986) to compactly represent the DNF of equation (17). A BDD is a binary decision
tree with redundant nodes removed and isomorphic subtrees merged. The BDD
nodes represent the probabilistic facts of the ProbLog program. Every node has a
‘positive’ and ‘negative’ outward edge, leading to either a child node or the special
‘true’ or ‘false’ terminal nodes. The positive outward edge of the BDD node is
labelled with the probability of the respective probabilistic fact and the negative
edge is labelled with the complement of that probability. Positive and negative edges
represent distinct decisions on inclusion of the relevant fact in the currently sampled
possible world; a positive edge signiﬁes that the fact represented by its parent node
is included in the sample with the labelled probability, whereas a negative edge
signiﬁes that the fact is not included in the sample with the complement of the
same probability. Therefore, by following a path from the root node to the ‘true’
terminal node, one could sample a conjunction of the DNF formula of equation (17).
The ‘negative’ outward edges oﬀer a compact representation of the negated literals
required to enhance the DNF formula in order to make it represent a disjunction
over disjoint conjunctions.
To summarise, ProbLog’s inference follows three general steps. The ﬁrst step is to
gather all proofs of the query q by scanning the Selective Linear Deﬁnite (SLD) tree
of proofs and represent them as the DNF formula of equation (17). Afterwards, with
the help of a built-in translation script, the DNF is translated to a BDD. Finally,
the probability of this BDD is computed recursively, starting from the root node
and assuming a probability of 1 for the ‘true’ terminal and 0 for the ‘false’ terminal.
With the help of BDDs, ProbLog inference is able to scale to queries containing
thousands of diﬀerent proofs (Kimmig et al. 2011). ProbLog’s eﬃciency was the
driving force behind our decision to use this framework for activity recognition
under uncertainty.
ProbLog has been fully integrated in the YAP Prolog system.2 Further details,
examples and code samples are available in (Kimmig et al. 2011) and on the ProbLog
website.3
2 http://www.dcc.fc.up.pt/~vsc/Yap/
3 http://dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/problog/

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
13
7 The Event Calculus in ProbLog
In this section we present the necessary transformations in order to make Crisp-
EC ProbLog-compatible — the result is Prob-EC. We also explain the inference
procedure of Prob-EC through two examples.
7.1 Transformation
To express our EC dialect in ProbLog we had to update our treatment of negation
in order to allow for probabilistic atoms. To compute the complement of the prob-
ability of a probabilistic fact, ProbLog provides the built-in predicate problog not.
For any probabilistic fact pi :: fi, we have that:
Ps(problog not(fi)) = 1 −Ps(fi) = 1 −pi
(18)
problog not can only be used on facts that are part of the knowledge base. For facts
that do not belong to the knowledge base, such as a STA that is not part of an
input stream, problog not fails silently and reports a probability of 0. Consequently,
translating not to problog not, where facts are used in our EC axioms, would lead to
undesirable behaviour. Consider, for example, rule (14) re-written by translating
not to problog not:
initiatedAt(ﬁghting(P1, P2) = true, T) ←
happensAt(abrupt(P1), T),
holdsAt(close(P1, P2, 44) = true, T),
problog not(happensAt(inactive(P2), T))
(14′)
Furthermore, assume that id1 and id2 start ﬁghting at some time-point t: they are
both moving abruptly and their distance is less than 44 pixel positions. In this case,
however, ﬁghting will not be initiated at t as the ﬁnal condition of rule (14′) will
not be satisﬁed: there are no inactive facts at t and therefore problog not will fail.
To overcome this issue, we deﬁned the following predicate:
negate1(Fact) ←not Fact
(19)
negate1(Fact) ←problog not(Fact)
(20)
With the use of negate1 we produce a probability of 1 whenever the negated STA is
not detected (see rule (19)), but also produce the complement of the probability of
the STA whenever it is detected (see rule (20)). Note that in the latter case, that
is, when a STA is detected with some probability, then ‘not STA’ fails.
Rule (14), for instance, can now be written as follows:
initiatedAt(ﬁghting(P1, P2) = true, T) ←
happensAt(abrupt(P1), T),
holdsAt(close(P1, P2, 44) = true, T),
negate1(happensAt(inactive(P2), T))
(14′′)
With
rule
(14′′)
we
are
able
to
produce
a
probability
of
1
whenever
happensAt(inactive(P2), T) is not part of our input, as well as produce the com-
plement of its probability whenever it is part of our input with a probability value

14
A. Skarlatidis et al.
attached. The only case when negate1 will produce a probability of 0 is when the
probability value of its argument is 1. This is the desired behaviour.
The built-in predicate problog neg is an extension of problog not applicable to both
probabilistic facts and derived atoms. For a derived atom r, we have:
Ps(problog neg(r)) = 1 −Ps(r)
(21)
Similarly to problog not, problog neg cannot be used on goals that are not inferable
from the knowledge base. Consider the following example:
holdsAt(F = V, T) ←
initiatedAt(F = V, Ts),
Ts < T,
problog neg(broken(F = V, Ts, T))
(2′)
This rule is produced by replacing not by problog neg in rule (2). Assume that F = V
has been initiated with some probability p at t−1 and not broken in the meantime.
In this case, holdsAt(F = V , t) cannot be proved because the last condition of rule
(2′) fails. To overcome this issue, we deﬁned the negate2 predicate:
negate2(Goal) ←not Goal
(22)
negate2(Goal) ←problog neg(Goal)
(23)
With the use of negate2 we produce a probability of 1 whenever the negated goal is
not inferable (see rule (22)), but also produce the complement of the probability of
the goal whenever it is inferable (see rule (23)). Rule (2), for instance, can now be
re-written as follows:
holdsAt(F = V, T) ←
initiatedAt(F = V, Ts),
Ts < T,
negate2(broken(F = V, Ts, T))
(2′′)
If F = V is not broken then the last condition of rule (2′′) will have probability 1
and, therefore, the probability that F = V will depend entirely on the probability
of its initiation conditions. If, however, F = V is broken with some probability p,
then the probability that F = V will be equal to the product of the probability of
its initiation conditions and 1−p. This is the desired behaviour.
7.2 Inference
To illustrate the inference procedure of Prob-EC we use two LTA from CAVIAR,
one with multiple initiations and terminations, and one with a single initiation and
a single termination.
7.2.1 Multiple Initiations and Terminations
Suppose that mike and sarah are engaging in a ‘moving’ activity for a number of
video frames — see Figure 1. The activity is ﬁrst initiated at frame number 1, when

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
15
 
 
1 
2 
21 
41 
sarah begins  
 
  
walking with                    
mike 
sarah walks with       
mike again 
sarah is active,         
mike continues      
walking 
sarah walks away      
from mike 
Moving Probability  
Moving       
initiated      
once 
Moving persists 
through inertia 
Moving repeatedly 
initiated 
Moving repeatedly 
terminated 
Video Frames 
0.8 
0.32 
Fig. 1: Example of LTA probability ﬂuctuation in the presence of multiple initiations
and terminations.
both mike and sarah start walking. At frame 2 sarah stops walking (walking is re-
quired by rule (12) to initiate moving). She instead displays active body movement.
Furthermore, mike continues walking but does not move far enough from her to ter-
minate moving. At frame 21 sarah resumes walking, once again initiating moving.
At frame 41 sarah continues walking, but mike is inactive and is left behind — sarah
and mike are no longer close enough to each other, which triggers the termination
condition (13) of moving (‘walk away’). For simplicity, let all information pertaining
to orientation and coordinates be crisp (probability of 1). Moreover, assume that
the STA walking, active and inactive have probabilities attached, as follows:
0.70 :: happensAt(walking(mike), 1)
0.46 :: happensAt(walking(sarah), 1)
0.73 :: happensAt(walking(mike), 2)
0.55 :: happensAt(active(sarah), 2)
. . .
0.69 :: happensAt(walking(mike), 21)
0.58 :: happensAt(walking(sarah), 21)
. . .
0.18 :: happensAt(inactive(mike), 41)
0.32 :: happensAt(walking(sarah), 41)
. . .
At frame 2, the query holdsAt(moving(mike, sarah) = true, 2) has a probability equal
to the probability of the initiation condition of frame 1, which, according to rule
(12), and given that all coordinate and orientation-related information are crisply
recognised, is the product of the probabilities that both mike and sarah are walking,
that is, 0.70×0.46=0.322. This is visualised at the far left of Figure 1, where the
LTA’s probability jumps from 0 to 0.322. From frame 2 to frame 20 no initiation or
termination conditions are ﬁred and the probability of moving remains unchanged.
This occurs due to the law of inertia and is depicted graphically by the horizontal

16
A. Skarlatidis et al.
holdsAt(moving(sarah,mike) = true, 22) 
initiatedAt(move = true, 1),    
negate2(broken(move = true, 1, 22)) 
initiatedAt(move = true, 21),   
negate2(broken(move = true, 1, 22)) 
negate2(broken(move = true, 1, 22)) 
problog_neg(broken     
(move = true, 1, 22)) 
not  broken                  
(move = true, 1, 22) 
fail 
succeed 
negate2(broken(move = true, 21, 22)) 
fail 
succeed 
problog_neg(broken       
(move = true, 21, 22)) 
not broken               
(move = true, 21, 22)
…  
Fig. 2: SLD tree for query holdsAt(moving(mike, sarah) = true, 22).
line between frames 2 and 20. At frame 21, sarah starts walking alongside mike
again. Consequently, at frame 22, the query holdsAt(moving(mike, sarah) = true, 22)
has two initiation conditions to consider, one ﬁred at frame 1 and one at frame
21. This occurs because rule (2′′) searches over all time-points between time-point
0 and the current time-point for initiation conditions, ﬁnding both the condition
ﬁred at frame 1 and the one ﬁred at frame 21.
As mentioned in the previous section, ProbLog computes the probability of a
query by ﬁrst scanning the entire SLD tree of the query. Figure 2 depicts a frag-
ment of the SLD tree for the query holdsAt(moving(mike, sarah) = true, 22). Then
ProbLog represents these proofs as a DNF formula. In our case, the DNF is the
following:
initiatedAt(moving(sarah, mike) = true, 1)
|
{z
}
init1
W
initiatedAt(moving(sarah, mike) = true, 21)
|
{z
}
init21
(24)
We have simpliﬁed the representation by omitting the two relevant ‘negate2’ clauses
since, as can be seen in Figure 2, they are both provable through negation as failure
and therefore have a probability of 1. This occurs because no termination conditions
for moving have been ﬁred between frames 1 and 22.
Up to frame 22, there exist two initiation conditions for the moving LTA, init1
and init21 (see formula (24)). In the general case, there may exist many more
initiation conditions in the interval between the start of the video and the exam-
ined video frame. In addition, for every initiation condition, rule (2′′) will check
whether the LTA has been terminated by examining the interval between the initi-
ation and the current video frame, repeating the process at the next video frame.
This leads to numerous redundant computations. We overcame this problem by
implementing an elementary caching technique according to which the probabil-
ity of holdsAt(F = V , T−1) is stored in memory and, therefore, holdsAt(F = V , T)
simply checks to see how the initiation or termination conditions (if any) ﬁred at
time-point T−1 aﬀect this probability. This technique operates under the assump-
tion that the activity recognition system receives the video frames in a temporally
sorted manner — this assumption holds in CAVIAR.

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
17
The next step of ProbLog inference involves translating the DNF into a BDD.
However, our example is simple enough to allow us to perform manual calculations,
as there exist only two proofs for holdsAt, which are easy to disjoin. The probability
of DNF formula (24) can be computed as the probability of a disjunction of two
elements, as explained in Section 6:
P(init1 ∨init21) = P(init1) + P(init21) −P(init1 ∧init21) =
= 0.70 × 0.46 + 0.69 × 0.58 −0.7 × 0.46 × 0.69 × 0.58 = 0.593
The probability that mike and sarah are moving at frame 22 has increased, owing
to the presence of the additional initiation condition of frame 21. This is one of
the characteristics of Prob-EC: the continuous presence of initiation conditions of
a particular LTA causes an increase of the probability of the LTA. This behaviour
is consistent with our intuition: given continuous indication that an activity has
(possibly) occurred, we are more inclined to agree that it has indeed taken place,
even if the conﬁdence of every individual indication is low. For this reason, from
frame 22 up to and including frame 41, the probability of moving increases, as
is visible in Figure 1. In this example, at frame 41 the activity’s probability has
escalated to around 0.8.
At frame 42, Prob-EC has to take into consideration the termination condition
that was ﬁred at frame 41. This termination condition, corresponding to rule (13),
is also probabilistic: it bears the probability that sarah walked away from mike,
which, according to rule (13) and the fact that close is crisply detected, is equal
to the probability of the walking STA itself, which is 0.32. Therefore, when esti-
mating the probability that, at frame 42, mike and sarah are still moving together,
we have to incorporate the probability of all possible worlds in which sarah did not,
in fact, walk away from mike. The probability of these worlds is computed by the
use of negate2 in rule (2′′) and is equal to 1−0.32=0.68. Consequently, the proba-
bility that mike and sarah are still moving together at frame 42 is 0.8×0.68=0.544.
Similarly to the steady probability increase given continuous initiation conditions,
when faced with subsequent termination conditions, the probability of the LTA will
steadily decrease. The slope of the descent (ascent) is deﬁned by the probability of
the termination (initiation) conditions involved. For this example, we assume that
sarah keeps walking away from mike until the end of the video, causing the LTA’s
probability to approximate 0, as shown at the far right of Figure 1.
Figure 3 shows the precise ProbLog output for our example. After an abrupt
jump from 0 to 0.322, the probability remains stable between frames 2 and 21,
indicating that for this period of time the LTA persists through the law of inertia.
Between frames 22 and 41, the LTA’s probability monotonically increases, reﬂecting
the repeated initiations of moving that occur during that time. After frame 41, it
decreases, reﬂecting the repeated termination conditions occurring at the same time
period. The dashed horizontal line at probability 0.5 represents the recognition
threshold that we use to discern between LTA positives that we consider to be
trustworthy enough — these are the LTA recognitions — and those that we do not.

18
A. Skarlatidis et al.
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1 
6 
11 
16 
21 
26 
31 
36 
41 
46 
51 
56 
Moving Probability 
Video Frames 
Probability 
Threshold 
Fig. 3: ProbLog output concerning holdsAt(moving(mike, sarah) = true, T) for various
video frames T.
The choice of a 0.5 threshold was made simply to provide a concrete illustration —
other thresholds could have alternatively been used in this example.
7.2.2 Single Initiation and Termination
In this section we illustrate the behaviour of Prob-EC in the case of ﬂuents with
a single initiation and a single termination. (Recall that there is no ﬁxed relation
between the number of initiations and terminations of a ﬂuent.) Assume that sarah
is walking while simultaneously carrying a suitcase for 10 video frames. At frame
11, she leaves the suitcase on the ﬂoor and walks away from it. This causes the
suitcase to ‘appear’ in the low-level tracking system, triggering the leaving object
initiation condition expressed by rule (6). Suppose that this initiation condition
has a probability of 0.6. At frame 20, sarah picks up the suitcase, causing it to
‘disappear’ and triggering termination condition expressed by rule (7). Suppose
that the termination condition also has a probability of 0.6. Figure 4 depicts the
probability ﬂuctuation of leaving object. As can be seen in this ﬁgure, in the absence
of any initiations after frame 11, the LTA persists entirely due to the law of inertia.
The probability of this LTA is equal to the probability of the single initiation
condition, that is, 0.6. Because this probability is above the chosen recognition
threshold — 0.5 in this example — all frames taking place until sarah picks up the
suitcase will be counted as recognitions. If the probability of the initiation condition
was below the threshold then leaving object would not have been recognised.
Note that we may transform a ﬂuent with a single initiation to a version of that
ﬂuent with multiple initiations — consider the following formalisation:
initiatedAt(leaving object mi(P, Obj) = true, T) ←
holdsAt(leaving object(P, Obj) = true, T)
(25)
leaving object mi may have multiple initiations — it is initiated as long as
leaving object holds. While this transformation would have been beneﬁcial for our
experiments in the CAVIAR dataset, since we would be able to augment the prob-

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
19
 
 
Video frames 
Leaving Object         
probability 
0 
11 
20 
12 
21 
0.6 
Fig. 4: Example of LTA probability ﬂuctuation in the presence of a single initiation
and a single termination.
ability of leaving object mi through multiple initiations and eventually surpass the
chosen recognition threshold, it introduces some subtle perils. Consider, for exam-
ple, a scenario in which a leaving object LTA is initiated with a small probability,
such as 0.1, indicating that the sensor’s conﬁdence about the STA appearing in rule
(6) is low. Prob-EC will then compute that leaving object holds with a probability
of 0.1 up until the video frame, if any, where the object in question is picked up.
These positives will be correctly discarded under most recognition thresholds given
their small probabilities. leaving object mi, however, will continue to augment its
probability, eventually surpassing the chosen threshold and thus producing a po-
tentially large number of False Positives (FP). While it is true that such situations
do not arise in CAVIAR, it is very likely that they take place in other activity
recognition applications.
leaving object has a single termination. In this example, the probability of the ter-
mination condition drops the probability of leaving object below the chosen thresh-
old of 0.5. In other examples, the absence of subsequent terminations may not
allow the probability of a LTA to drop below the chosen recognition threshold, thus
possibly resulting in false persistence.
8 Experimental Evaluation
8.1 CAVIAR without Artiﬁcial Noise
Our empirical analysis is based on the 28 surveillance videos of the CAVIAR dataset
which contain, in total, 26419 video frames. These frames have been manually
annotated by the CAVIAR team to provide the ground truth for STA and LTA (we
performed very minor editing of the annotation in order to introduce a STA for
abrupt motion). According to the manual annotation of the dataset, all STA are
associated with a probability of 1. Table 2 shows the recognition results in terms of
True Positives (TP), False Positives (FP), False Negatives (FN), Precision, Recall
and F-measure. These results have been produced by computing queries of the
form holdsAt(LTA = true, T). Given that STA have probability of 1, Prob-EC has
identical results to Crisp-EC.
Particularly notable in the results is the low Precision for the leaving object LTA,
owing to a substantial number of FP. This is due to the problematic annotation

20
A. Skarlatidis et al.
LTA
TP
FP
FN
Precision
Recall
F-measure
meeting
3099
1910
525
0.619
0.855
0.718
moving
4008
2162
2264
0.650
0.639
0.644
ﬁghting
531
97
729
0.421
0.845
0.562
leaving object
143
1539
55
0.085
0.722
0.152
Table 2: True Positives (TP), False Positives (FP), False Negatives (FN), Precision,
Recall and F-measure on CAVIAR without artiﬁcial noise.
of CAVIAR with respect to this LTA. For example, in video 14, the object that
is left at frame 946, triggering an initiation of leaving object, is picked up (‘dis-
appears’) at frame 1354. However, the relevant annotation mistakenly reports that
leaving object stops occurring at frame 996. We therefore end up with 358 FP which
could have been avoided with a more consistent annotation of this video. Similarly,
in the annotation of videos 17 and 18, a large number of annotated frames are
missing. Video 16 includes a particularly interesting case of leaving object. In this
video, a person leaves a bag next to a chair, exits the scene, re-enters after a cou-
ple of seconds and picks up the bag. When the person re-enters, he is assigned
a new identiﬁer (this is common in CAVIAR). Various complications arise due
to this. The original leaving object activity is not terminated by our rules when
the person in question ‘disappears’. This is deliberate on our part: we choose to
terminate leaving object when the object is picked up rather than when the per-
son that leaves it ‘disappears’ from the sensor’s point of view. We thus emphasize
on time-points in which a package might be unattended. The CAVIAR annota-
tion, however, views the leaving object LTA from a diﬀerent perspective and thus
assumes that the activity is terminated when the person ‘disappears’. This diﬀer-
ence in perspective leaves us with a substantial number of FP, one for each frame
that the person is not present in the scene. When the person re-enters the scene,
CAVIAR provides the person with a new identiﬁer and resumes the annotation
of leaving object with a <new person id, same object id> tuple. After a couple of
frames, the person (described by new person id) picks up the object, terminating
a leaving object(new person id, same object id) LTA occurrence which Crisp-EC
never initiated in the ﬁrst place. Thus, in addition to a substantial number of FP,
we also generate 55 FN (see Table 2) because Crisp-EC never recognises the new
leaving object activity.
8.2 CAVIAR with Artiﬁcial Noise
As mentioned above, according to the manual annotation of the CAVIAR dataset
all STA are associated with a probability of 1. In real-world activity recognition
applications it is unrealistic to assume that STA will be detected with certainty.

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
21
In order to experiment with a more realistic setting, we added artiﬁcial noise to
the dataset, in the form of probabilities attached to the input facts — STA and
related coordinate and orientation information. Our experimental procedure may
be summarised as follows.
• We inject noise into CAVIAR:
1. We add probabilities to STA. Toward this end, we use a Gamma dis-
tribution with a varying mean in order to represent diﬀerent levels of
noise.
2. In addition to STA, we add probabilities to their associated coordinate
and orientation ﬂuents. Although we use the same Gamma distribution
for this step, STA are not required to have the same probability as their
associated coordinate and orientation ﬂuents.
3. On top of the above, we introduce spurious STA, that is, STA that are
not part of the original CAVIAR dataset. We augment the frames in
which there is a walking STA with another walking STA and related co-
ordinate and orientation information about an entity that does not exist
in CAVIAR. We use a uniform distribution to choose the frames that
will be augmented with spurious facts. The probability of a spurious fact
at frame t is 1−p where p is the probability of some CAVIAR walking
STA at t (recall that p was computed by the Gamma distribution).
Thus we end up with three diﬀerent noisy versions of CAVIAR. To facilitate
the presentation that follows, we will call the three aforementioned approaches
to noise injection ‘smooth’, ‘intermediate’ and ‘strong’ noise.
• We feed these data to Prob-EC and ﬁlter its output — which is a series
of positives of the form Prob :: holdsAt(LTA = true, T) — to keep only the
positives with probability above a chosen threshold, indicating that we trust
these positives to be accurate.
• We ﬁlter each noisy version of the dataset by erasing the facts with probability
below the chosen threshold. We retain the facts with probability above the
threshold, removing their probability values. Thus we assume that such facts
have been tracked with certainty. For ‘smooth’ noise, this step means that we
remove a certain amount of the CAVIAR STA, while for ‘intermediate’ noise
we additionally remove coordinate and orientation ﬂuents. Furthermore, for
‘strong’ noise we keep a certain amount of spurious information.
• We give these ﬁltered versions of CAVIAR as input to Crisp-EC. With this
step we aim to estimate the impact of environmental noise on Crisp-EC, by
assuming that Crisp-EC can only reason on facts that have been tracked with
relative certainty, that is, facts with probability above the chosen threshold.
• We compare the performance of Crisp-EC and Prob-EC.
We repeated the above experimental procedure 16 times, once for each Gamma
distribution mean value between 0.5 and 8.0 inclusive, with a step of 0.5. Noise
is added randomly; for example, a STA that is erased from Crisp-EC’s input for
Gamma mean 6.0 might be present at the dataset produced for Gamma mean 6.5.

22
A. Skarlatidis et al.
0.0 0.5
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
7.5 8.0
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Gamma distribution mean
Walking STA Occurences
(a) (a) CAVIAR STA.
0.0 0.5
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
7.5 8.0
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Gamma distribution mean
Walking STA Occurences
(b) (b) Spurious STA.
Fig. 5: Occurrences of walking STA with probability above 0.5 per Gamma mean
value. Mean value 0.0 represents the CAVIAR dataset without artiﬁcial noise.
In our implementation, the higher the mean, the lower the probabilities attached
to the CAVIAR input facts and the higher the probability of the spurious facts,
indicating a higher amount of noise.
Figure 5(a) shows an aspect of noise injection. In this ﬁgure the number of oc-
currences of the walking STA with probability above the 0.5 threshold is plotted.
Note that the numbers of walking occurrences shown in this ﬁgure do not include
the spurious facts introduced in the ‘strong’ noise experiments. The amount of
walking occurrences drops exponentially as we increase the level of noise, that is,
the Gamma mean value. All other STA follow the same pattern. In the case of
‘intermediate noise’, the occurrences of coordinate and orientation ﬂuents also drop
exponentially.
Figure 5(b) shows the number of occurrences of the spurious walking STA — these
are introduced in the ‘strong’ noise experiments — with probability above the 0.5
threshold. The amount of spurious facts increases exponentially as we increase the
level of noise (Gamma mean value).
Noise injection may signiﬁcantly reduce recognition accuracy. The sections that
follow illustrate this. However, given that there are mistakes in the original dataset
(that is, CAVIAR without artiﬁcial noise), it may occur that a FP in the origi-
nal dataset becomes a True Negative (TN) in a noise-altered version of CAVIAR.

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
23
Similarly for FN. To demonstrate this with an example, assume that two people
are moving along together on a pavement. Suddenly they have to step aside to
allow a handicapped person full access to the pavement. This would ﬁre the ‘walk
away’ termination condition (see rule (13)) because the distance between the two
people would exceed the pre-speciﬁed threshold. This does not mean that the peo-
ple have stopped moving — they merely had to distance themselves momentarily.
Firing — erroneously — the ‘walk away’ termination condition creates FN for some
video frames. If, however, the walking STA gets a very low probability during the
frames at which the people make way to the handicapped person, moving will not
be terminated, which, in this special case, adds TP to the evaluation.
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Meeting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(a) (a)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(b) (b)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Fighting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(c) (c)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Leaving object
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(d) (d)
Fig. 6: Crisp-EC and Prob-EC F-measure per Gamma mean value under ‘smooth’
noise and a 0.5 threshold.
8.2.1 ‘Smooth’ Noise Experiments
Figure 6 compares the recognition accuracy of Crisp-EC and Prob-EC in terms of
F-measure under ‘smooth’ noise using a 0.5 threshold. In all experiments we plot
the F-measure per Gamma distribution mean averaged over 5 diﬀerent runs, that
is, each point in the diagram is the average of 5 diﬀerent F-measure values. The
vertical error bars display the standard deviations.
The recognition accuracy of Prob-EC is higher than that of Crisp-EC in meeting,
moving and ﬁghting. In meeting (see Figure 6(a)), the accuracy of Crisp-EC starts

24
A. Skarlatidis et al.
falling from Gamma mean 5.5 onwards, because the active and inactive STA tend
to be erased from its input, since they receive probability below 0.5 — the chosen
threshold in the experiments presented in Figure 6 — when we generate noise.
Prob-EC, on the other hand, is able to initiate meeting with a certain degree of
probability (recall that rules (10) and (11) express the conditions in which meeting
is initiated). After a number of frames, the repeated initiation of meeting leads
to a holdsAt probability of 0.5 or above, and thus Prob-EC eventually recognises
meeting (refer to Section 7.2.1 for a detailed explanation of this behaviour). Those
initiation conditions occur very frequently in CAVIAR. Therefore, meeting ends up
being recognised with a probability close to 1.
In the case of moving (see Figure 6(b)), it is the loss of multiple occurrences of
walking (due to ‘smooth’ noise) that causes Crisp-EC to suﬀer from numerous FN
(see rule (12) for the initiation condition of moving). Prob-EC, on the other hand,
uses repeated initiation to eventually surpass the 0.5 recognition threshold. The ac-
curacy of Crisp-EC in moving deteriorates earlier than that of meeting. This occurs
because the initiation condition of moving bears two probabilistic conjuncts in its
body, corresponding to two separate occurrences of the walking STA. Therefore, it
is aﬀected by noise twice. The initiation conditions of meeting may sometimes have
two probabilistic conjuncts, but usually they have just one — the negate1 conditions
are usually crisp.
Similar to moving and meeting, Prob-EC fares better than Crisp-EC in ﬁghting
(see Figure 6(c)). For high levels of noise, that is, high Gamma mean values, Crisp-
EC has trouble initiating ﬁghting (see rule (14)), whereas Prob-EC uses repeated
initiation to surpass the 0.5 recognition threshold. Prob-EC manages to surpass this
threshold despite the relatively short duration of ﬁghts, compared to other LTA.
leaving object is an interesting special case, owing to the fact that this LTA is
recognised through a single initiation (see Section 7.2.2). In the CAVIAR videos, a
person leaves an object after a few frames in which he is walking. In rare situations
it is possible that either Crisp-EC or Prob-EC miss the recognition of person due to
noise and, consequently, the recognition of leaving object. Such cases did not arise
in our ‘smooth’ noise experiments. In these experiments, Prob-EC and Crisp-EC
are equally accurate (see Figure 6(d)). When person is recognised by Crisp-EC, it
is recognised with a suﬃciently high probability by Prob-EC and vice versa.
LTA in CAVIAR are usually terminated when an entity ‘disappears’ or when
people walk away from each other. In the latter case, the probability of the LTA
termination depends solely on that of walking (see, for example, rule (13)). In
general, probabilistic terminations are similar to probabilistic initiations. When a
termination condition is repeatedly ﬁred with probabilities below 0.5 then Prob-EC
eventually stops recognising the LTA, whereas Crisp-EC does not, producing FP.

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
25
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Meeting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(a) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(b) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Fighting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(c) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Leaving object
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(d) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Meeting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(e) Threshold=0.7
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(f) Threshold=0.7
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Fighting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(g) Threshold=0.7
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Leaving object
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(h) Threshold=0.7
Fig. 7: Crisp-EC and Prob-EC F-measure per Gamma mean value under ‘smooth’
noise. In the ﬁrst four ﬁgures the threshold is 0.3 while in the last four ﬁgures the
threshold is 0.7.

26
A. Skarlatidis et al.
Figure 7 compares the recognition accuracy of Crisp-EC and Prob-EC using 0.3
and 0.7 thresholds. This ﬁgure shows that Prob-EC is only slightly aﬀected by the
threshold change. This is due to the fact that the probabilities of most positives in
Prob-EC are either very small (<0.3) or very high (>0.7). On the other hand, the
recognition accuracy of Crisp-EC is highly aﬀected by the choice of threshold: the
lower the threshold the better the accuracy of Crisp-EC. This is expected given the
nature of the ‘smooth’ noise experiments. As the threshold decreases, the input of
Crisp-EC gets closer to the original, artiﬁcial noise-free dataset.
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Meeting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(a) (a)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(b) (b)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Fighting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(c) (c)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Leaving object
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(d) (d)
Fig. 8: Crisp-EC and Prob-EC F-measure per Gamma mean value under ‘interme-
diate’ noise and a 0.5 threshold.
8.2.2 ‘Intermediate’ Noise Experiments
Figure 8 compares the recognition accuracy of Crisp-EC and Prob-EC under ‘in-
termediate’ noise using a 0.5 threshold. Overall, attaching probabilities to the co-
ordinates and orientation, in addition to STA, has reduced the accuracy of both
Crisp-EC and Prob-EC. Compared to ‘smooth’ noise, the diﬀerence between Prob-
EC and Crisp-EC in meeting is bigger (see Figure 8(a)). This occurs because, in
addition to losing the active and inactive STA due to noise, Crisp-EC now has
trouble proving that entities are close, because under ‘intermediate’ noise we also
remove coordinate-related information, required to compute the distance between
two entities. Thus, even in cases where the active or inactive STA are present and

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
27
indicate that the relevant frame might be an initiation condition for meeting, Crisp-
EC is unable to prove that the two entities are close enough to initiate the LTA.
Prob-EC, on the other hand, uses repeated initiation to eventually break the 0.5
barrier and produce recognitions.
Concerning moving (see Figure 8(b)), Crisp-EC suﬀers again from the loss of
the walking STA. Under ‘intermediate noise’, this conclusion is more striking: after
Gamma mean 2.5, Crisp-EC is unable to produce a single positive. This is because,
in addition to the walking STA and associated coordinate ﬂuents being erased from
Crisp-EC’s input, orientation ﬂuents are also candidates for removal. As a result,
even in cases where both entities potentially involved in a moving activity are
believed to be walking close to each other by the low-level tracking system, the
absence of orientation information leads to an inability to initiate moving.
What is perhaps more interesting is that Prob-EC performs as bad as Crisp-
EC in moving (see Figure 8(b)). This is because whenever faced with an initiation
condition for moving, Prob-EC has to calculate the probability of this initiation
condition as a product of 6 probabilities in total. (Recall from rule (8) that close
is deﬁned in terms of two coordinate input facts. It therefore contributes as the
product of 2 probabilities.) Consequently, Prob-EC has trouble surpassing the 0.5
recognition threshold we require to trust its positives. Even in cases of near-certainty
about some conditions of the input, ProbLog’s independence assumption leads to
very low probability values. Consider, for example, two entities, id1 and id2, whose
STA (in our case, walking) and associated information (coordinates, orientation)
are all tracked with a probability of 0.8. Whereas Crisp-EC will be able to initiate
moving, since all the facts will make their appearance in the input, Prob-EC will
produce an initiation condition probability of (0.8)6 =0.262. Consequently, we will
not trust the probability of the relevant holdsAt query. Furthermore, due to the fact
that each initiation condition has usually a very low probability, repeated initiation
does not overcome the 0.5 threshold.
With respect to ﬁghting (see Figure 8(c)), Prob-EC outperforms Crisp-EC for
certain Gamma mean values. For high Gamma mean values, Prob-EC and Crisp-
EC are equally inaccurate. In the case of ‘intermediate’ noise, there are at least
three probabilistic conjuncts per initiation condition. Due to the fact that ﬁghts
have a relatively short duration (much shorter than meeting, for example), there
are not enough initiations to raise Prob-EC’s probability above the 0.5 threshold
in high Gamma mean values.
Regarding leaving object (see Figure 8(d)), Crisp-EC seems to fair slightly bet-
ter than Prob-EC for low Gamma mean values. Under the ‘intermediate’ noise
assumption, Prob-EC has to consider more probabilistic conjuncts per initiation
condition, due to the presence of close. As a result, and given the single initia-
tion of leaving object, Prob-EC tends to produce probabilities below 0.5 for this
LTA, even in cases where the STA probabilities themselves might be above 0.5
and therefore suﬃcient to allow Crisp-EC to recognise leaving object. For higher
Gamma mean values, Prob-EC and Crisp-EC are equally inaccurate, because the
data required by Crisp-EC to initiate leaving object, whether it is the person ﬂuent,
the inactive STA or the coordinate ﬂuents of the entities involved, are missing.

28
A. Skarlatidis et al.
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Meeting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(a) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(b) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Fighting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(c) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Leaving object
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(d) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Meeting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(e) Threshold=0.7
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(f) Threshold=0.7
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Fighting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(g) Threshold=0.7
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Leaving object
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(h) Threshold=0.7
Fig. 9: Crisp-EC and Prob-EC F-measure per Gamma mean value under ‘interme-
diate’ noise. In the ﬁrst four ﬁgures the threshold is 0.3 while in the last four ﬁgures
the threshold is 0.7.

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
29
Figure 9 compares the recognition accuracy of Crisp-EC and Prob-EC using 0.3
and 0.7 thresholds. As in the case of the ‘smooth’ noise experiments, Crisp-EC is
aﬀected more than Prob-EC by the threshold change — the accuracy of Crisp-EC
improves as the threshold decreases (the lower the threshold, the closer the input
of Crisp-EC to the original, artiﬁcial noise-free dataset).
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Meeting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(a) (a)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(b) (b)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Fighting
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(c) (c)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Leaving object
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(d) (d)
Fig. 10: Crisp-EC and Prob-EC F-measure per Gamma mean value under ‘strong’
noise and a 0.5 threshold.
8.2.3 ‘Strong’ Noise Experiments
Figure 10 compares the recognition accuracy of Crisp-EC and Prob-EC under
‘strong’ noise using a 0.5 threshold. As can be seen from this ﬁgure, the recog-
nition accuracy under ‘strong’ noise is very similar to that of ‘intermediate’ noise
in the 0.5 threshold. For Prob-EC, we need a series of spurious information to
surpass the chosen threshold — the introduction of spurious STA in the ‘strong’
noise experiments is not that systematic and does not create problems to Prob-EC.
Crisp-EC is very slightly aﬀected by the introduction of spurious STA: it now has
a number of additional FP, mainly in the case of moving. Even a single initiation
condition ﬁred by a spurious walking STA and some other CAVIAR STA may be
enough in Crisp-EC to create a series of FP. However, in low Gamma values most
of the spurious STA have low probabilities — below the 0.5 threshold — and there-
fore are not part of the input of Crisp-EC. Furthermore, in high Gamma values the

30
A. Skarlatidis et al.
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(a) Threshold=0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
F-measure
Gamma Distribution Mean
Moving
Crisp-EC
Prob-EC
(b) Threshold=0.7
Fig. 11: Crisp-EC and Prob-EC F-measure per Gamma mean value under ‘strong’
noise in moving.
spurious STA cannot initiate a LTA because several of the CAVIAR STA tend to
be deleted from the input of Crisp-EC as they have low probabilities.
Figure 11 compares the accuracy of Crisp-EC and Prob-EC in moving using
thresholds of 0.3 and 0.7 (the diagrams for the remaining LTA are omitted as they
are similar to those concerning ‘intermediate’ noise). Crisp-EC, as in the previous
experimental settings, is more signiﬁcantly aﬀected than Prob-EC by the threshold
change. Unlike the last two experimental settings, reducing the threshold causes
problems to Crisp-EC with respect to moving. With a lower threshold, Crisp-EC
loses less CAVIAR STA, but at the same time keeps more spurious facts, creating
many more FP. Prob-EC, even in the low threshold of 0.3, is almost unaﬀected
by the spurious facts. In the 0.7 threshold Crisp-EC has a very small number of
spurious facts in its input and, therefore, its accuracy is not compromised by these
facts.
In addition to walking STA, we could have added other spurious facts such abrupt,
active, or inactive and repeated the experiments. The results would have been
similar to those presented above — for example, spurious abrupt STA would have
compromised the accuracy of Crisp-EC in ﬁghting, especially in low thresholds.
9 Summary and Future Work
We presented Prob-EC, an Event Calculus dialect for probabilistic reasoning. Prob-
EC is the ﬁrst Event Calculus dialect able to deal with uncertainty in the input STA.
Moreover, this is the ﬁrst approach that thoroughly evaluates the Event Calculus
in a probabilistic framework. Our experimental evaluation on a benchmark activity
recognition dataset showed that Prob-EC outperforms Crisp-EC when:
• a LTA has multiple initiations, and
• the LTA depends on a small number of probabilistic conjuncts.
When a LTA depends on a large number of probabilistic conjuncts, Prob-EC is
signiﬁcantly aﬀected and its performance is close to that of Crisp-EC. ProbLog
makes an independence assumption about input facts and thus the product of the

A Probabilistic Logic Programming Event Calculus
31
probabilities of many probabilistic conjuncts may be very small, even if the prob-
ability of each individual conjunct is high. The greater the number of probabilistic
conjuncts, the more initiations Prob-EC requires to surpass the chosen recognition
threshold.
Prob-EC is more resilient to spurious facts than Crisp-EC. Even a single such
fact may create a series of false positives (FP) in Crisp-EC, whereas this type of
noise must be much more systematic to aﬀect Prob-EC: to impinge the accuracy
of the latter we need a series of spurious facts in order to surpass the recognition
threshold.
In the case of a single initiation, there are situations in which Prob-EC may fare
signiﬁcantly better than Crisp-EC and vice versa, but these did not arise in our
experiments. In general, Prob-EC is expected to have similar performance to Crisp-
EC on LTA with a single initiation in the case of a small number of probabilistic
conjuncts, while Crisp-EC is likely to perform better in the case of a large number
of such conjuncts.
The experimental results concerning one or more terminations are similar to those
regarding one or more initiations. For example, Prob-EC outperforms Crisp-EC in
the case of LTA with multiple terminations that depend on a small number of prob-
abilistic conjuncts. The repeated terminations allow Prob-EC to stop recognising a
LTA when Crisp-EC continues the recognition producing FP.
There are several directions for further work. First, we intend to experiment with
additional types of noise and additional datasets. Second, we aim to incorporate
advanced caching techniques in Prob-EC, such as those presented in (Artikis, Sergot
and Paliouras (2012)), in order to make it suitable for run-time activity recognition.
Finally, we aim to address the issue of imprecise LTA deﬁnitions — we intend to
provide a uniﬁed framework that will be able to deal with both STA detection
probabilities and imperfect LTA deﬁnitions.
