Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 1 (1993) 1-15
Submitted 6/91; published 9/91
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems and Applications:
A Survey
Ferdinando Fioretto

Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
Enrico Pontelli

Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA
William Yeoh

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
Abstract
The ﬁeld of multi-agent system (MAS) is an active area of research within artiﬁcial intelligence,
with an increasingly important impact in industrial and other real-world applications. In a MAS,
autonomous agents interact to pursue personal interests and/or to achieve common objectives. Dis-
tributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs) have emerged as a prominent agent model to
govern the agents’ autonomous behavior, where both algorithms and communication models are
driven by the structure of the speciﬁc problem. During the last decade, several extensions to the
DCOP model have been proposed to enable support of MAS in complex, real-time, and uncertain
environments.
This survey provides an overview of the DCOP model, offering a classiﬁcation of its multiple
extensions and addressing both resolution methods and applications that ﬁnd a natural mapping
within each class of DCOPs. The proposed classiﬁcation suggests several future perspectives
for DCOP extensions, and identiﬁes challenges in the design of efﬁcient resolution algorithms,
possibly through the adaptation of strategies from different areas.
1. Introduction
An agent can be deﬁned as an entity (or computer program) that behaves autonomously within an
arbitrary system in the pursuit of some goals (Wooldridge, 2009). A multi-agent system (MAS) is
a system where multiple agents interact in the pursuit of such goals. Within a MAS, agents may
interact with each other directly, via communication acts, or indirectly, by acting on the shared en-
vironment. In addition, agents may decide to cooperate, to achieve a common goal, or to compete,
to serve their own interests at the expense of other agents. In particular, agents may form coopera-
tive teams, which can in turn compete against other teams of agents. Multi-agent systems play an
c⃝1993 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.
arXiv:1602.06347v4  [cs.AI]  11 Jan 2018

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
important role in distributed artiﬁcial intelligence, thanks to their ability to model a wide variety
of real-world scenarios, where information and control are decentralized and distributed among a
set of agents.
Figure 1 illustrates a MAS example. It represents a sensor network where a group of agents,
equipped with sensors, seeks to determine the position of some targets. Agents may interact with
each other and move away from the current position. The ﬁgure depicts the targets as star-shaped
objects. The dotted lines deﬁne an interaction graph and the directional arrows illustrate agents’
movements. In addition, various events that obstruct the sensors of an agent may dynamically
occur. For instance, the presence of an obstacle along the agent’s sensing range may be detected
after the agent’s movement.
Within a MAS, an agent is:
• Autonomous, as it operates without the direct intervention of humans or other entities and has
full control over its own actions and internal state (e.g., in the example, an agent can decide to
sense, to move, etc.);
• Interactant, in the sense that it interacts with other agents in order to achieve its objectives
(e.g., in the example, agents may exchange information concerning results of sensing activities);
• Reactive, as it responds to changes that occur in the environment and/or to the requests from
other agents (e.g., in the example, agents may react with a move action to the sudden appearance
of obstacles).
• Proactive, because of its goal-driven behavior, which allows the agent to take initiatives beyond
the reactions in response to its environment.
Agent architectures are the fundamental mechanisms un-
derlying the autonomous agent components, supporting their
behavior in real-world, dynamic, and uncertain environments.
Agent architectures based on decision theory, game theory,
and constraint programming have successfully been developed
and are popular in the Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent
Systems (AAMAS) community.
Decision theory (Raiffa, 1968) assumes that the agent’s ac-
tions and the environment are inherently uncertain and mod-
els such uncertainty explicitly.
Agents acting in complex
and dynamic environments are required to deal with various
sources of uncertainty. The Decentralized Partially Observ-
able Markov Decision Processes (Dec-POMDPs) framework
(Bernstein, Givan, Immerman, & Zilberstein, 2002) is one of
the most general multi-agent frameworks, focused on team co-
ordination in presence of uncertainty about agents’ actions and
a2
a1
a2
a4
? ?
Figure 1: Illustration of a multi-
agent system:
Sensors (agents)
seek to determine the position of
the targets.
observations. The ability to capture a wide range of complex scenarios makes Dec-POMDPs of
central interest within MAS research. However, the result of this generality is a high complexity for
generating optimal solutions. Dec-POMDPs are non-deterministic exponential (NEXP) complete
2

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
(Bernstein et al., 2002), even for two-agent problems, and scalability remains a critical challenge
(Amato, Chowdhary, Geramifard, Ure, & Kochenderfer, 2013).
Game theory (Binmore, 1992) studies interactions between self-interested agents, aiming at
maximizing the welfare of the participants. Some of the most compelling applications of game
theory to MAS have been in the area of auctions and negotiations (Kraus, 1997; Noriega & Sierra,
1999; Parsons & Wooldridge, 2002). These approaches model the trading process by which agents
can reach agreements on matters of common interest, using market oriented and cooperative mech-
anisms, such as reaching Nash equilibria. Typical resolution approaches aim at deriving a set of
equilibrium strategies for each agent, such that, when these strategies are employed, no agent can
proﬁt by unilaterally deviating from their strategies. A limitation of game theoretical-based ap-
proaches is the lack of an agent’s ability to reason upon a global objective, as the underlying model
relies on the interactions of self-interested agents.
Constraint programming (Rossi, Beek, & Walsh, 2006) aims at solving decision-making prob-
lems formulated as optimization problems of some real-world objective. Constraint programs use
the notion of constraints – i.e., relations among entities of the problems (variables) – in both prob-
lem modeling and problem solving. Constraint programming relies on inference techniques that
prevent the exploration of those parts of the solution search space whose assignments to variables
are inconsistent with the constraints and/or dominated with respect to the objective function. Dis-
tributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs) (Modi, Shen, Tambe, & Yokoo, 2005; Petcu
& Faltings, 2005b; Gershman, Meisels, & Zivan, 2009; Yeoh & Yokoo, 2012) are problems where
agents need to coordinate their value assignments, in a decentralized manner, to optimize their
objective functions. DCOPs focus on attaining a global optimum given the interaction graph of a
collection of agents. This approach can be effectively used to model a wide range of problems.
Problem solving and communication strategies are directly linked in DCOPs. This feature makes
the algorithmic components of a DCOP suitable for exploiting the structure of the interaction graph
of the agents to generate efﬁcient solutions.
The absence of a framework to model dynamic problems and uncertainty makes DCOPs un-
suitable at solving certain classes of multi-agent problems, such as those characterized by action
uncertainty and dynamic environments. However, since its original introduction, the DCOP model
has undergone a process of continuous evolution to capture diverse characteristics of agent behav-
ior and the environment in which they operate. Researchers have proposed a number of DCOP
frameworks that differ from each other in terms of expressiveness and classes of problem they can
target, extending the DCOP model to handle both dynamic and uncertain environments. However,
current research has not explored how the different DCOP frameworks relate to each other within
the general MAS context, which is critical to understand: (i) What resolution methods could be
borrowed from other MAS paradigms, and (ii) What applications can be most effectively mod-
eled within each framework. While there are important existing surveys for Distributed Constraint
Satisfaction (Yokoo & Hirayama, 2000) and Distributed Constraint Optimization (Meisels, 2008),
this survey aims to comprehensively analyze and categorize the different DCOP frameworks pro-
posed by the MAS community. We do so by presenting an extensive review of the DCOP model
and its extensions, the different resolution methods, as well as a number of applications modeled
3

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
List of key symbols
ai
Agent
π(·)
Projection operator
xi
Decision variable
pi(·)
Probability function
ri
Random variable
Lai
ai’s local variables
Di
Domain of xi
Nai
ai’s neighbors
Ωi
Event space of ri
Cai
ai’s children
fi
Cost function
PCi
ai’s pseudo-children
xi
Scope of fi
Pai
ai’s parent
m
Number of agents
PPai
ai’s pseudo-parents
n
Number of variables
α(fi)
Agents whose variables are in xi
q
Number of random variables
EC
Set of edges of the constraint graph
k
Number of cost functions
ET
Tree edges of the pseudo-tree
d
Size of the largest domain
EF
Set of edges of the factor graph
Fg
Global objective function
w∗
Induced width of the pseudo-tree
⃗F
Vector of objective functions
l
Size of the largest neighborhood
Fi
Objective function in ⃗F
z
Size of the largest local variable set
⃗F◦
Utopia point
s
Maximal sample size
⊥
Infeasible value
p
Size of the Pareto set
σ
Complete assignment
b
Size of the largest bin
σV
Partial assignment for the variables in V ⊆X
ℓ
Number of iterations of the algorithm
Σ
State space
Table 1: Commonly Used Symbols and Notations
within each particular DCOP extension. This analysis also provides opportunities to identify open
challenges and discuss future directions in the general DCOP research area.
This survey paper is organized as follows. The next section provides an overview on two rel-
evant constraint satisfaction models and their generalization to the distributed cases. Section 3
introduces DCOPs, overviews the representation and coordination models adopted during the res-
olution of DCOPs, and it proposes a classiﬁcation of the different variants of DCOPs based on the
characteristics of the agents and the environment. Section 4 presents the classical DCOP model as
well as two notable extensions: One characterized by asymmetric cost functions and another by
multi-objective optimization. Section 5 presents a DCOP model where the environment changes
over time. Section 6 discusses DCOP models in which agents act under uncertainty and may have
partial knowledge of the environment in which they act. Section 7 discusses DCOP models in
which agents are non-cooperative. For each of these models, the paper introduces their formal
deﬁnitions, discusses related concepts, and describes several resolution algorithms. A summary of
the various classes of problems discussed in this survey is given in Table 6. Section 8 describes
a number of applications that have been proposed in the DCOP literature. Section 9 provides a
critical review on the DCOP variants surveyed and focuses on their applicability in various set-
tings. Additionally, it describes some potential future directions for research. Finally, Section 10
provides concluding remarks. To facilitate the reading of this survey, Table 1 summarizes the most
commonly used symbols and notations.
4

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
2. Overview of (Distributed) Constraint Satisfaction and Optimization
This section provides an overview of several constraint satisfaction models, which form the foun-
dation of DCOPs. Figure 2 illustrates the relations among these models.
2.1 Constraint Satisfaction Problems
Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs) (Golomb & Baumert, 1965; Mackworth & Freuder, 1985;
Apt, 2003; Rossi et al., 2006) are decision problems that involve the assignment of values to vari-
ables, under a set of speciﬁed constraints on how variable values should be related to each other. A
number of problems can be formulated as CSPs, including resource allocation, vehicle routing, cir-
cuit diagnosis, scheduling, and bioinformatics. Over the years, CSPs have become the paradigm of
choice to address difﬁcult combinatorial problems, drawing and integrating insights from diverse
domains, including artiﬁcial intelligence and operations research (Rossi et al., 2006).
A CSP is a tuple ⟨X, D, C⟩, where:
• X={x1, . . . , xn} is a ﬁnite set of variables.
• D = {D1, . . . , Dn} is a set of ﬁnite domains for the variables in X, with Di being the set of
possible values for the variable xi.
• C is a ﬁnite set of constraints over subsets of X, where a constraint ci, deﬁned on the k variables
xi1, . . . , xik, is a relation ci ⊆"k
j=1 Dij, where {i1, . . . , ik} ⊆{1, . . . , n}. The set of variables
xi = {xi1, . . . , xik} is referred to as the scope of ci.1 ci is called a unary constraint if k = 1 and
a binary constraint if k = 2. For all other values of k, the constraint is called a k-ary constraint.2
A partial assignment is a value assignment for a proper subset of variables from X that is
consistent with their respective domains, i.e., it is a partial function σ : X →Sn
i=1 Di such that,
for each xj ∈X, if σ(xj) is deﬁned, then σ(xj) ∈Dj. An assignment is complete if it assigns
a value to each variable in X. The notation σ is used to denote a complete assignment, and, for a
set of variables V = {xi1, . . . , xih} ⊆X, σV = ⟨σ(xi1), . . . , σ(xih)⟩to denote the projection of
the values in σ associated to the variables in V, where i1 < · · · < ih. The goal in a CSP is to ﬁnd
a complete assignment σ such that, for each ci ∈C, σxi ∈ci, that is, a complete assignment that
satisﬁes all the problem constraints. Such a complete assignment is called a solution of the CSP.
2.2 Weighted Constraint Satisfaction Problems
A solution of a CSP must satisfy all of its constraints. In many practical cases, however, it is
desirable to consider complete assignments whose constraints can be violated according to a vio-
lation degree. The Weighted Constraint Satisfaction Problem (WCSP) (Shapiro & Haralick, 1981;
Larrosa, 2002) was introduced to capture this property. WCSPs are problems whose constraints
are considered as preferences that specify the extent of satisfaction (or violation) of the associated
constraint.
1. The presence of a ﬁxed ordering of variables is assumed.
2. A constraint with k = 3 is also called a ternary constraint and a constraint with k = n is also called a global
constraint.
5

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
CSP
COP
DisCSP
DCOP
Extends to
Extends to
(distributed)
(distributed)
Generalizes to
Generalizes to
Figure 2: DCOP Problems as a Generalization and Extension of Constraint Satisfaction Problems
A WCSP is a tuple ⟨X, D, F⟩, where X and D are the set of variables and their domains as
deﬁned in a CSP, and F is a set of weighted constraints. A weighted constraint fi ∈F is a function
fi : "xj∈xi Dj →R+ ∪{⊥}, where xi ⊆X is the scope of fi and ⊥is a special element used
to denote that a given combination of values for the variables in xi is not allowed, and it has the
property that a + ⊥= ⊥+ a = ⊥, for all a ∈R+. The cost of an assignment σ is the sum of the
evaluation of the constraints involving all the variables in σ. A solution is a complete assignment
with cost different from ⊥, and an optimal solution is a solution with minimal cost.
Thus, a WCSP is a generalization of a CSP which, in turn, can be seen as a WCSP whose
constraints use exclusively the costs 0 and ⊥. The terms WCSP and Constraint Optimization
Problem (COP) have been used interchangeably in the literature and the use of the latter term has
been widely adopted in the recent years.
2.3 Distributed Constraint Satisfaction Problems
When the elements of a CSP are distributed among a set of autonomous agents, the resulting model
is referred to as a Distributed Constraint Satisfaction Problem (DisCSP) (Yokoo, Durfee, Ishida, &
Kuwabara, 1998; Yokoo, 2001). A DisCSP is a tuple ⟨A, X, D, C, α⟩, where X, D, and C are the
set of variables, their domains, and the set of constraints, as deﬁned in a CSP; A = {a1, . . . , am}
is a ﬁnite set of autonomous agents; and α : X →A is a surjective function, from variables to
agents, which assigns the control of each variable x ∈X to an agent α(x). The goal in a DisCSP
is to ﬁnd a complete assignment that satisﬁes all the constraints of the problem.
DisCSPs can be seen as an extension of CSPs to the multi-agent case, where agents communi-
cate with each other to assign values to the variables they control so as to satisfy all the problem
constraints. For a survey on the topic, the interested reader is referred to (Rossi et al., 2006) (Chap-
ter 20).
6

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
ELEMENT
CHARACTERIZATION
AGENT(S)
BEHAVIOR
Deterministic
Stochastic
KNOWLEDGE
Total
Partial
TEAMWORK
Cooperative
Competitive
ENVIRONMENT
BEHAVIOR
Deterministic
Stochastic
EVOLUTION
Static
Dynamic
Table 2: DCOP Classiﬁcation Elements
2.4 Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems
Similar to the generalization of CSPs to COPs, the Distributed Constraint Optimization Problem
(DCOP) model (Modi et al., 2005; Petcu & Faltings, 2005b; Gershman et al., 2009; Yeoh &
Yokoo, 2012) emerges as a generalization of the DisCSP model, where constraints specify a degree
of preference over their violation, rather than a Boolean satisfaction metric. DCOPs can also
be viewed as an extension of the COP framework to the multi-agent case, where agents control
variables and constraints, and need to coordinate the value assignment for the variables they control
so as to optimize a global objective function. The DCOP framework is formally introduced in the
next section.
3. DCOP Classiﬁcation
The DCOP model has undergone a process of continuous evolution to capture diverse character-
istics of the agent behavior and the environment in which agents operate. This section proposes a
classiﬁcation of DCOP models from a multi-agent systems perspective. It accounts for the differ-
ent assumptions made about the behavior of the agents and their interactions with the environment.
The classiﬁcation is based on the following elements (summarized in Table 2):
• Agent Behavior: This parameter captures the stochastic nature of the effects of an action being
executed. These effects can be either deterministic or stochastic.
• Agent Knowledge: This parameter captures the knowledge of an agent about its own state and
the environment. It can be total or partial (i.e., incomplete).
• Agent Teamwork: This parameter characterizes the approach undertaken by (teams of) agents
to solve a distributed problem. It can be either a cooperative or a competitive resolution approach.
In the former class, all agents cooperate to achieve a common goal (i.e., they all optimize a global
objective function). In the latter class, each agent (or team of agents) seeks to achieve its own
individual goal (i.e., each agent optimizes its individual objective functions).
• Environment Behavior: This parameter captures the exogenous properties of the environment.
The response of the environment to the execution of an action can be either deterministic or
stochastic.
• Environment Evolution: This parameter captures whether the DCOP does not change over time
(static) or it changes over time (dynamic).
7

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
Environment
Evolution
Environment Behavior
DETERMINISTIC
STOCHASTIC
STATIC
Classical DCOP
Probabilistic DCOP
DYNAMIC
Dynamic DCOP
—
Table 3: DCOPs Models
Game Theory
Decision 
Theory
Constraint 
Programming
Classical DCOP
Asymmetric DCOP
Multi-Objective DCOP
Auction       Negotiation
MMDP
Dec-MDP
Dec-POMDP
Dynamic DCOP
Probabilistic DCOP
Dynamic
Asymmetric DCOP
Dynamic
Multi-Objective DCOP
Figure 3: DCOPs Within a MAS Perspective
Figure 3 illustrates a categorization of the DCOP models proposed to date from a MAS perspec-
tive. This survey focuses on the DCOP models proposed at the junction of constraint programming,
game theory, and decision theory. The classical DCOP model is directly inherited from constraint
programming as it extends the WCSP model to a distributed setting. It is characterized by a static
model, a deterministic environment and agent behavior, a total agent knowledge, and a cooperative
agent teamwork. Game theoretical concepts explored in the context of auctions and negotiations
have inﬂuenced the DCOP framework leading to the development of the Asymmetric DCOP and
the Multi-Objective DCOP. The DCOP framework has also borrowed fundamental decision theo-
retical concepts related to modeling uncertain and dynamic environments, resulting in models like
the Probabilistic DCOP and the Dynamic DCOP. Researchers from the DCOP community have
also designed solutions that inherit from all of the three communities.
The next sections describe the different DCOP frameworks, starting with classical DCOPs be-
fore proceeding to its various extensions. The survey focuses on a categorization based on three
dimensions: Agent knowledge, environment behavior, and environment evolution. It assumes a de-
terministic agent behavior, a fully cooperative agent teamwork, and a total agent knowledge (unless
otherwise speciﬁed), as they are, by far, common assumptions adopted by the DCOP community.
The DCOP models associated to this categorization are summarized in Table 3. The bottom-right
entry of the table is left empty, indicating a promising model with dynamic and uncertain environ-
ments that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been explored yet. There has been only a modest
amount of effort in modeling the different aspects of teamwork within the DCOP community. Sec-
tion 7 describes a formalism that has been adopted to model DCOPs with mixed cooperative and
competitive agents.
8

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
4. Classical DCOP
With respect to the proposed categorization, in the classical DCOP model (Modi et al., 2005; Petcu
& Faltings, 2005b; Gershman et al., 2009; Yeoh & Yokoo, 2012) the agents are fully cooperative
and have deterministic behavior and total knowledge. Additionally, the environment is static and
deterministic. This section reviews the formal deﬁnitions of classical DCOPs, presents some rele-
vant solving algorithms, and provides details of selected variants of classical DCOPs of particular
interest.
4.1 Deﬁnition
A classical DCOP is described by a tuple P = ⟨A, X, D, F, α⟩, where:
• A={a1, . . . , am} is a ﬁnite set of agents.
• X={x1, . . . , xn} is a ﬁnite set of variables, with n ≥m.
• D={D1, . . . , Dn} is a set of ﬁnite domains for the variables in X, with Di being the domain of
variable xi.
• F={f1, . . . , fk} is a ﬁnite set of cost functions, with fi : "xj∈xi Dj →R+∪{⊥}, where similar
to WCSPs, xi ⊆X is the set of variables relevant to fi, referred to as the scope of fi. The arity
of a cost function is the number of variables in its scope. Each cost function fi represents a factor
in a global objective function Fg(X) = Pk
i=1 fi(xi). In the DCOP literature, the cost functions
fi are also called constraints, utility functions, or reward functions.
• α : X →A is a total and onto function, from variables to agents, which assigns the control of
each variable x ∈X to an agent α(x).
With a slight abuse of notation, α(fi) will be used to denote the set of agents whose variables
are involved in the scope of fi, i.e., α(fi) = {α(x) | x ∈xi}. A partial assignment is a value
assignment for a proper subset of variables of X. An assignment is complete if it assigns a value to
each variable in X. For a given complete assignment σ, we say that a cost function fi is satisﬁed
by σ if fi(σxi) ̸= ⊥. A complete assignment is a solution of a DCOP if it satisﬁes all its cost
functions. The goal in a DCOP is to ﬁnd a solution that minimizes the total problem cost expressed
by its cost functions:3
σ∗:= argmin
σ∈Σ
Fg(σ) = argmin
σ∈Σ
X
fi∈F
fi(σxi),
(1)
where Σ is the state space, deﬁned as the set of all possible solutions.
Given an agent ai, Lai = {xj ∈X | α(xj) = ai} denotes the set of variables controlled by
agent ai, or its local variables, and Nai = {a′
i ∈A | ai ̸= a′
i, ∃fj ∈F, xr, xs ∈xj, α(xr) =
ai ∧α(xs)=a′
i} denotes the set of its neighboring agents. A cost function fi is said to be hard if
∀σ ∈Σ we have that fi(σxi) ∈{0, ⊥}. Otherwise, the cost function is said to be soft.
3. Alternatively, one can deﬁne a maximization problem by substituting the argmin operator in Equation 1 with
argmax. Typically, if the objective functions are referred to as utility functions or reward functions, then the DCOP
is a maximization problem. Conversely, if the objective functions are referred to as cost functions, then the DCOP
is a minimization problem.
9

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
Finding an optimal solution for a classical DCOP is known to be NP-hard (Modi et al., 2005).
4.2 DCOP: Representation and Coordination
Representation in DCOPs plays a fundamental role, both from an agent coordination perspective
and from an algorithmic perspective. This section discusses the most predominant representations
adopted in various DCOP algorithms. It starts by describing some widely adopted assumptions
regarding agent knowledge and coordination, which will apply throughout this document, unless
otherwise stated:
(i) A variable and its domain are known exclusively to the agent controlling it and its neighboring
agents.
(ii) Each agent knows the values of the cost function involving at least one of its local variables.
No other agent has knowledge about such cost function.
(iii) Each agent knows (and it may communicate with) exclusively its own neighboring agents.
4.2.1 CONSTRAINT GRAPH
Given a DCOP P, GP = (X, EC) is the constraint graph of P, where an undirected edge {x, y} ∈
EC exists if and only if there exists fj ∈F such that {x, y} ⊆xj. A constraint graph is a standard
way to visualize a DCOP instance. It underlines the agents’ locality of interactions and therefore it
is commonly adopted by DCOP resolution algorithms.
Given an ordering o on X, a variable xi is said to have a higher priority with respect to a variable
xj if xi appears before xj in o. Given a constraint graph GP and an ordering o on its nodes, the
induced graph G∗
P on o is the graph obtained by connecting nodes, processed in increasing order
of priority, to all their higher-priority neighbors. For a given node, the number of higher-priority
neighbors is referred to as its width. The induced width w∗
o of GP is the maximum width over all
the nodes of G∗
P on ordering o.
Figure 4(a) shows an example constraint graph of a DCOP with four agents a1 through a4, each
controlling one variable with domain {0,1}. There are two cost functions: a k-ary cost function
f123 with scope x123 = {x1, x2, x3} and represented by a clique among x1, x2, and x3; and a
binary cost function f24 with scope x24 = {x2, x4}.
4.2.2 PSEUDO-TREE
A number of DCOP algorithms require a partial ordering among the agents. In particular, when
such an order is derived from a depth-ﬁrst search (DFS) exploration, the resulting structure is
known as a (DFS) pseudo-tree. A pseudo-tree arrangement for a DCOP P is a subgraph TP =
⟨X, ET ⟩of GP such that TP is a spanning tree of GP – i.e., a connected subgraph of GP containing
all the nodes and being a rooted tree – with the following additional condition: for each x, y ∈X,
if {x, y} ⊆xi for some fi ∈F, then x, y appear in the same branch of TP (i.e., x is an ancestor
of y in TP or vice versa). Edges of GP that are in (respectively out of) ET are called tree edges
(respectively backedges). The tree edges connect parent-child nodes, while backedges connect
10

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
a4
a2
a1
a3
x1
x2
x3
x4
x1
x2
x3
x4
a3
a2
a4
a1
x1
x2
x4
f24
x3
f123
a4
a3
a2
a1
(a) Constraint Graph
(b) Pseudo-Tree
(c) Factor Graph
Figure 4: DCOP Representations
a node with its pseudo-parents and its pseudo-children. The separator of an agent ai is the set
containing all the ancestors of ai in the pseudo-tree (through tree edges or backedges) that are
connected to ai or to one of its descendants. The notation Cai, PCai, Pai, and PPai will be used
to indicate the set of children, pseudo-children, parent, and pseudo-parents of the agent ai.
Both constraint graph and pseudo-tree representations cannot deal explicitly with k-ary cost
functions (with k > 2). A typical artifact to deal with such cost functions in a pseudo-tree repre-
sentation is to introduce a virtual variable that monitors the value assignments for all the variables
in the scope of the cost function, and generates the cost values (Bowring, Tambe, & Yokoo, 2006)
– the role of the virtual variables can be delegated to one of the variables participating in the cost
function (Pecora, Modi, & Scerri, 2006; Matsui, Matsuo, Silaghi, Hirayama, & Yokoo, 2008).
Figure 4(b) shows one possible pseudo-tree of the example DCOP in Figure 4(a), where Ca1 =
{x2}, PCa1 ={x3}, Pa4 ={x2}, and PPa3 ={x1}. The solid lines are tree edges and dotted lines
are backedges.
4.2.3 FACTOR GRAPH
Another way to represent DCOPs is through a factor graph (Kschischang, Frey, & Loeliger, 2001).
A factor graph is a bipartite graph used to represent the factorization of a function. In particular,
given the global objective function Fg, the corresponding factor graph FP = ⟨X, F, EF ⟩is com-
posed of variable nodes xi ∈X, factor nodes fj ∈F, and edges EF such that there is an undirected
edge between factor node fj and variable node xi if xi ∈xj.
Factor graphs can handle k-ary cost functions explicitly. To do so, they use a similar method
as the one adopted within pseudo-trees with such cost functions: They delegate the control of a
factor node to one of the agents controlling a variable in the scope of the cost function. From an
algorithmic perspective, the algorithms designed over factor graphs can directly handle k-ary cost
functions, while algorithms designed over pseudo-trees require changes in the algorithm design so
to delegate the control of the k-ary cost functions to some particular entity.
11

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
Figure 4(c) shows the factor graph of the example DCOP in Figure 4(a), where each agent ai
controls its variable xi and, in addition, a3 controls the cost function f123 and a4 controls cost
function f24.
4.3 Algorithms
The ﬁeld of classical DCOPs is mature and a number of different resolution algorithms have been
proposed. DCOP algorithms can be classiﬁed as being either complete or incomplete, based on
whether they can guarantee the optimal solution or they trade optimality for shorter execution
times, producing near-optimal solutions. They can also be characterized based on their runtime
characteristics, their memory requirements, and their communication requirements (e.g., the num-
ber and size of messages that they send and whether they communicate with their neighboring
agents only or also to non-neighboring agents). Table 4 tabulates the properties of a number of key
DCOP algorithms that will be surveyed in Sections 4.3.4 and 4.3.5. An algorithm is said anytime
if it can return a valid solution even if the DCOP agents are interrupted at any time before the
algorithm terminates. Anytime algorithms are expected to seek for solutions of increasing quality
as they keep running (Zivan, Okamoto, & Peled, 2014).
All these algorithms were originally developed under the assumption that each agent controls
exactly one variable. The description of their properties will follow the same assumption. These
properties may change when generalizing the algorithms to allow for agents to control multiple
variables, but they will depend on how the algorithms are generalized. Throughout this document,
the following notation will be often adopted when discussing the complexity of the algorithms:
• n = |X| refers to the number of variables in the problem; in Table 4, n also refers to the number
of agents in the problem since each agent has exactly one variable;
• d = maxDi∈D |Di| refers to the size of the largest domain;
• w∗refers to the induced width of the pseudo-tree;
• l = maxai∈A |Nai| refers to the largest number of neighboring agents; and
• ℓrefers to the number of iterations in incomplete algorithms.
In addition, each of these classes can be categorized into several groups, depending on the
degree of locality exploited by the algorithms, the way local information is updated, and the type
of exploration process adopted. These different categories are described next.
4.3.1 PARTIAL CENTRALIZATION
In general, the DCOP solving process is decentralized, driving DCOP algorithms to follow the
agent knowledge and communication restrictions described in Section 4.2. However, some algo-
rithms explore methods to centralize the decisions to be taken by a group of agents, by delegating
them to one of the agents in the group. These algorithms explore the concept of partial central-
ization (Hirayama & Yokoo, 1997; Mailler & Lesser, 2004; Petcu, Faltings, & Mailler, 2007),
and thus they are classiﬁed as partially centralized algorithms. Typically, partial centralization
improves the algorithms’ performance allowing agents to coordinate their local assignments more
12

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
Algorithm
Quality Characteristics
Runtime Characteristics
Memory
Communication Characteristics
Optimal?
Error Bound?
Complexity
Anytime?
per Agent
# Messages
Message Size
Local Communication?
SyncBB
O(dn)
O(n)
O(dn)
O(n)
×
AFB
O(dn)
O(n)
O(dn)
O(n)
×
ADOPT
O(dn)
×
O(n+ld)
O(dn)
O(n)
ConcFB
O(dn)
O(n)
O(dn)
O(n)
×
DPOP
O(dw∗)
×
O(dw∗)
O(n)
O(dw∗)
OptAPO
O(dn)
×
O(ld)
O(dn)
O(d+n)
×
Max-Sum
×
×
O(ℓd l)
×
O(d l)
O(ℓnl)
O(d)
Region Optimal
×
O(ℓdw∗)
O(dw∗)
O(ℓn2)
O(dw∗)
×
MGM
×
×
O(ℓld)
O(l)
O(ℓnl)
O(1)
DSA
×
×
O(ℓld)
O(l)
O(ℓnl)
O(1)
DUCT
×
O(ℓld)
O(dw∗)
O(ℓn)
O(n)
D-Gibbs
×
O(ℓld)
O(l)
O(ℓnl)
O(1)
Table 4: Quality, Runtime, Memory, and Communication Characteristics of DCOP Algorithms
efﬁciently. However, such performance enhancement comes with a loss of information privacy, as
the centralizing agent needs to be granted access to the local subproblem of other agents in the
group (Greenstadt, Grosz, & Smith, 2007; Mailler & Lesser, 2004). In contrast, fully decentralized
algorithms inherently reduce the amount of information privacy at cost of a larger communication
effort.
4.3.2 SYNCHRONICITY
DCOP algorithms can enhance their effectiveness by exploiting distributed and parallel processing.
Based on the way the agents update their local information, DCOP algorithms are classiﬁed as
synchronous or asynchronous. Asynchronous algorithms allow agents to update the assignment
for their variables based solely on their local view of the problem, and thus independently from
the actual decisions of the other agents (Modi et al., 2005; Farinelli, Rogers, Petcu, & Jennings,
2008; Gershman et al., 2009). In contrast, synchronous algorithms constrain the agents decisions
to follow a particular order, typically enforced by the representation structure adopted (Mailler &
Lesser, 2004; Petcu & Faltings, 2005b; Pearce & Tambe, 2007).
Synchronous algorithms tend to delay the actions of some agents guaranteeing that their local
view of the problem is always consistent with that of the other agents. In contrast, asynchronous
algorithms tend to minimize the idle-time of the agents, which in turn can react quickly to each
message being processed; however, they provide no guarantee on the consistency of the state of
the local view of each agent. Such effect has been studied by Peri and Meisels (2013), concluding
that inconsistent agents’ views may cause a negative impact on network load and algorithm perfor-
mance, and that introducing some level of synchronization may be beneﬁcial for some algorithms,
enhancing their performance.
4.3.3 EXPLORATION PROCESS
The resolution process adopted by each algorithm can be classiﬁed in three categories (Yeoh, 2010):
13

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
Complete
Decentralized
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Search
Inference
Search
SyncBB
DPOP and
variants
AFB; ConcFB;
ADOPT and 
variants 
Partially 
Centralized
Inference
PC-DPOP
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Search
OptAPO
Incomplete
Decentralized
Synchronous
Search
DSA;  MGM
DUCT;
D-Gibbs
Sampling
Inference
Max-Sum and
variants
Region Optimal
(k-OPT, t-OPT)
Partially 
Centralized
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Search
DALO
Search
Figure 5: Classical DCOP Algorithm Taxonomy
• Search-based algorithms are based on the use of search techniques to explore the space of pos-
sible solutions. These algorithms are often derived from corresponding search techniques devel-
oped for centralized AI search problems, such as best-ﬁrst search and depth-ﬁrst search.
• Inference-based algorithms are derived from dynamic programming and belief propagation tech-
niques. These algorithms allow agents to exploit the structure of the constraint graph to aggregate
costs from their neighbors, effectively reducing the problem size at each step of the algorithm.
• Sampling-based algorithms are incomplete approaches that sample the search space to approxi-
mate a function (typically, a probability distribution) as a product of statistical inference.
Figure 5 illustrates a taxonomy of classical DCOP algorithms. The following subsections
summarize some representative complete and incomplete algorithms from each of the classes
introduced above. A detailed description of the DCOP algorithms is beyond the scope of this
manuscript. The interested reader is referred to the original articles that introduce each algorithm.
14

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
4.3.4 COMPLETE ALGORITHMS
Some of the algorithms described below were originally designed to solve the variant of DCOPs
that maximizes rewards, while others solve the variant that minimizes costs. However, the algo-
rithms that maximize rewards can be easily adapted to minimize costs. For consistency, this survey
describes the version of the algorithms that focus on minimization of costs. It also describes their
quality, runtime, memory, and communication characteristics as summarized in Table 4.
SyncBB (Hirayama & Yokoo, 1997).
Synchronous Branch-and-Bound (SyncBB) is a complete,
synchronous, search-based algorithm that can be considered as a distributed version of a branch-
and-bound algorithm. It uses a complete ordering of the agents to extend a Current Partial As-
signment (CPA) via a synchronous communication process. The CPA holds the assignments of
all the variables controlled by all the visited agents, and, in addition, functions as a mechanism to
propagate bound information. The algorithm prunes those parts of the search space whose solution
quality is sub-optimal, by exploiting the bounds that are updated at each step of the algorithm.
SyncBB agents perform O(dn) number of operations since the lowest priority agent needs to
enumerate through all possible value combinations for all variables. While, by default, it is not an
anytime algorithm, it can be easily extended to have an anytime property since it is a branch-and-
bound algorithm. The memory requirement per SyncBB agent is O(n) since the lowest priority
agent stores the value assignment of all problem variables. In terms of communication requirement,
SyncBB agents send O(dn) number of messages: The lowest priority agent enumerates through
all possible value combinations for all variables and sends a message for each combination. The
largest message, which contains the value assignment of all variables, is of size O(n). Finally, the
communication model of SyncBB depends on the given agent’s complete ordering. Thus, agents
may communicate with non-neighboring agents.
AFB (Gershman et al., 2009).
Asynchronous Forward Bounding (AFB) is a complete, asyn-
chronous, search-based algorithm. It can be considered as an asynchronous version of SyncBB.
In this algorithm, agents communicate their cost estimates, which in turn are used to compute
bounds and prune the search space. In AFB, agents extend a CPA sequentially, provided that the
lower bound on their costs does not exceed the global upper bound, that is, the cost of the best
solution found so far. Each agent performing an assignment (the “assigning” agent) triggers asyn-
chronous checks of bounds, by sending forward messages containing copies of the CPA to agents
that have not yet assigned their variables. The unassigned agents that receive a CPA estimate the
lower bound of the CPA given their local view of the constraint graph and send their estimates
back to the agent that originated the forward message. This assigning agent will receive these
estimates asynchronously and aggregate them into an updated lower bound. If the updated lower
bound exceeds the current upper bound, the agent initiates a backtracking phase.
The runtime, memory, and communication characteristics of AFB are identical to those of
SyncBB for the same reasons. However, while both AFB and SyncBB agents communicate with
non-neighboring agents, AFB agents broadcasts some of their messages while SyncBB agents do
not.
15

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
ADOPT (Modi et al., 2005).
Asynchronous Distributed OPTimization (ADOPT) is a complete,
asynchronous, search-based algorithm. It can be considered as a distributed version of a memory-
bounded best-ﬁrst search algorithm. It makes use of a DFS pseudo-tree ordering of the agents. The
algorithm relies on maintaining, in each agent, lower and upper bounds on the solution cost for the
subtree rooted at its node in the DFS tree. Agents explore partial assignments in best-ﬁrst order,
that is, in increasing lower bound order. They use COST messages (propagated upwards in the
DFS pseudo-tree) and THRESHOLD and VALUE messages (propagated downwards in the pseudo-
tree) to iteratively tighten the lower and upper bounds, until the lower bound of the minimum cost
solution is equal to its upper bound. ADOPT agents store lower bounds as thresholds, which can
be used to prune partial assignments that are provably sub-optimal.
Similar to SyncBB and AFB, ADOPT agents perform O(dn) number of operations since the
lowest priority agent needs to enumerate through all possible value combinations for all variables
when the pseudo-tree degenerates into a pseudo-chain. It is also not an anytime algorithm as it
is a best-ﬁrst search algorithm. The memory requirement per ADOPT agent is O(n + ld), where
O(n) is used to store a context, which is the value assignment of all higher-priority variables, and
O(ld) is used to store the lower and upper bounds for each domain value and variable belonging to
the agent’s child agents. Finally, ADOPT agents communicate exclusively with their neighboring
agents.
ADOPT has been extended in several ways. In particular, BnB-ADOPT (Yeoh, Felner, &
Koenig, 2010; Gutierrez & Meseguer, 2012b) uses a branch-and-bound method to reduce the
amount of computation performed during search, and ADOPT(k) combines both ADOPT and BnB-
ADOPT into an integrated algorithm (Gutierrez, Meseguer, & Yeoh, 2011). There are also exten-
sions that trade solution optimality for smaller runtimes (Yeoh, Sun, & Koenig, 2009a), extensions
that use more memory for smaller runtimes (Yeoh, Varakantham, & Koenig, 2009b), and extensions
that maintain soft arc-consistency (Bessiere, Gutierrez, & Meseguer, 2012; Bessiere, Brito, Gutier-
rez, & Meseguer, 2014; Gutierrez & Meseguer, 2012a; Gutierrez, Lee, Lei, Mak, & Meseguer,
2013).
Finally, the No-Commitment Branch and Bound (NCBB) algorithm (Chechetka & Sycara,
2006) can be considered as a variant of ADOPT and SyncBB. Similar to ADOPT, NCBB agents ex-
ploit the structure deﬁned by a pseudo-tree order to decompose the global objective function. This
allow the agents to search non-intersecting parts of the search space concurrently. Another main
feature of NCBB is the eager propagation of lower bounds on solution cost: An NCBB agent prop-
agates its lower bound every time it learns about its ancestors’ assignments. This feature provides
an efﬁcient pruning of the search space. The runtime, memory, and communication characteristics
of NCBB are the same as those of ADOPT except that NCBB is an anytime algorithm.
ConcFB (Netzer, Grubshtein, & Meisels, 2012).
Concurrent Forward Bounding (ConcFB) is a
complete, asynchronous, search-based algorithm that runs multiple parallel versions of AFB con-
currently. By running multiple concurrent search procedures, it is able to quickly ﬁnd a solution,
apply a forward bounding process to detect regions of the search space to prune, and to dynami-
cally create new search processes when detecting promising sub-spaces. Similar to AFB, it uses a
16

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
complete ordering of agents and variables instead of pseudo-trees. As such, it is able to simplify the
management of reordering heuristics, which can provide substantial speed up to the search process
(Zivan & Meisels, 2006).
The algorithm operates as follows: Each agent maintains a global upper bound, which is up-
dated during the search process. The highest-priority agent begins the process by generating a
number of different search processes (SP), one for each value of its variable. It then sends an
LB Request message to all unassigned agents. This LB Request message contains the current CPA
and triggers a calculation of the lower bounds of the receiving agents, which are sent back to the
sender agent via a LB Report message. If the sum of the aggregated costs and the current CPA
cost is no smaller than the current upper bound, the agent selects another value for its variable
and repeats the process. If the agent has exhausted all value assignments for its variable, then it
backtracks, sending the CPA to the last assigning agent. If the CPA cost is lower than the current
upper bound, then it forwards the CPA message to the next non-assigned agent. Upon receiving a
CPA message, the agent repeats the above process. When the lowest-priority agent ﬁnds a solution
resulting to a new upper bound, it broadcasts the upper bound via a UB message, which is stored
by each each agent.
Netzer et al. (2012) described a series of enhancements that can be used to speed up the
search process of ConcFB, including dynamic variable ordering and dynamic splitting. Despite
the process within a subproblem is carried out in a synchronous fashion, different subproblems
are explored independently. Thus, the agents act asynchronously and concurrently. The runtime,
memory, and communication characteristics of ConcFB are identical to those of AFB since it runs
multiple parallel versions of AFB concurrently.
DPOP (Petcu & Faltings, 2005b). Distributed Pseudo-tree Optimization Procedure (DPOP) is a
complete, synchronous, inference-based algorithm that makes use of a DFS pseudo-tree ordering
of the agents. It involves three phases. In the ﬁrst phase, the agents order themselves into a DFS
pseudo-tree. In the second phase, called the UTIL propagation phase, each agent, starting from the
leaves of the pseudo-tree, aggregates the costs in its subtree for each value combination of variables
in its separator. The aggregated costs are encoded in a UTIL message, which is propagated from
children to their parents, up to the root. In the third phase, called the VALUE propagation phase,
each agent, starting from the root of the pseudo-tree, selects the optimal value for its variable. The
optimal values are calculated based on the UTIL messages received from the agent’s children and
the VALUE message received from its parent. The VALUE messages contain the optimal values of
the agents and are propagated from parents to their children, down to the leaves of the pseudo-tree.
DPOP agents perform O(dw∗) number of operations. When an agent optimizes for each value
combination of variables in its separator, it takes O(dw∗) operations since there are w∗variables in
the separator set in the worst case. It is not an anytime algorithm as it terminates upon ﬁnding its
ﬁrst solution, which is an optimal solution. The memory requirement per DPOP agent is O(dw∗)
since it stores all value combinations of variables in its separator. In terms of communication re-
quirement, DPOP agents send O(n) messages in total; O(n) UTIL messages are propagated up
the pseudo-tree and O(n) VALUE messages are propagated down the pseudo-tree. The largest
17

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
message sent by an agent, which contains the aggregated costs in its subtree for each value combi-
nation of variables in its separator, is O(dw∗). Finally, DPOP agents only communicate with their
neighboring agents only.
DPOP has also been extended in several ways to enhance its performance and capabilities. O-
DPOP and MB-DPOP trade runtimes for smaller memory requirements (Petcu & Faltings, 2006,
2007a), A-DPOP trades solution optimality for smaller runtimes (Petcu & Faltings, 2005a), SS-
DPOP trades runtime for increased privacy (Greenstadt et al., 2007), PC-DPOP trades privacy for
smaller runtimes (Petcu et al., 2007), H-DPOP propagates hard constraints for smaller runtimes
(Kumar, Petcu, & Faltings, 2008), BrC-DPOP enforces branch consistency for smaller runtimes
(Fioretto, Le, Yeoh, Pontelli, & Son, 2014), and ASP-DPOP is a declarative version of DPOP that
uses Answer Set Programming (Le, Son, Pontelli, & Yeoh, 2015).
OptAPO (Mailler & Lesser, 2004). Optimal Asynchronous Partial Overlay (OptAPO) is a com-
plete, asynchronous, search-based algorithm. It trades agent privacy for smaller runtimes through
partial centralization. It employs a cooperative mediation schema, where agents can act as me-
diators and propose value assignments to other agents. In particular, the agents check if there is
a conﬂicting assignment with some neighboring agent. If a conﬂict is found, the agent with the
highest priority acts as a mediator. During mediation, OptAPO solves subproblems using a cen-
tralized branch-and-bound-based search, and when solutions of overlapping subproblems still have
conﬂicting assignments, the solving agents increase the degree of centralization to resolve them.
By sharing their knowledge with centralized entities, agents can improve their local decisions, re-
ducing the communication costs. For instance, the algorithm has been shown to be superior to
ADOPT on simple combinatorial problems (Mailler & Lesser, 2004). However, it is possible that
several mediators solve overlapping problems, duplicating efforts (Petcu et al., 2007), which can
be a bottleneck in dense problems.
OptAPO agents perform O(dn) number of operations, in the worst case, as a mediator agent
may solve the entire problem. Like ADOPT and DPOP, OptAPO is not an anytime algorithm. The
memory requirement per OptAPO agent is O(nd) since it needs to store all value combinations of
variables in its mediation group, which is of size O(n). In terms of communication requirement,
OptAPO agents send O(dn) messages in the worst case, though the number of messages decreases
with increasing partial centralization. The size of the messages is bounded by O(d + n), where
in the initialization phase of each mediation step, each agent sends its domain to its neighbors
and the list of variables that it seeks to mediate. Finally, OptAPO agents can communicate with
non-neighboring agents during the mediation phase.
The original version of OptAPO has been shown to be incomplete due to the asynchronicity of
the different mediators’ groups, which can lead to race conditions. Grinshpoun and Meisels (2008)
proposed a complete variant that remedies this issue.
4.3.5 INCOMPLETE ALGORITHMS
Max-Sum (Farinelli et al., 2008).
Max-Sum is an incomplete, synchronous, inference-based al-
gorithm based on belief propagation. It operates on factor graphs by performing a marginalization
18

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
process of the cost functions, and optimizing the costs for each given variable. This process is per-
formed by recursively propagating messages between variable nodes and factor nodes. The value
assignments take into account their impact on the marginalized cost function. Max-Sum is guar-
anteed to converge to an optimal solution in acyclic graphs, but convergence is not guaranteed on
cyclic graphs.
Max-Sum agents perform O(dl) number of operations in each iteration, where each agent needs
to optimize for all value combinations of neighboring variables. It is not an anytime algorithm. The
memory requirement per Max-Sum agent is O(dl) since it needs to store all value combinations of
neighboring variables. In terms of communication requirement, in the worst case, each Max-Sum
agent sends O(l) messages in each iteration, one to each of its neighbor. Thus, the total number
of messages sent across all agents is O(ℓnl). Each message is of size O(d) as it needs to contain
the current aggregated costs of all the agent’s variable’s values. Finally, the agents communicate
exclusively with their neighboring agents.
Max-Sum has been extended in several ways. Bounded Max-Sum bounds the quality of the
solutions found by removing a subset of edges from a cyclic DCOP graph to make it acyclic,
and running Max-Sum to solve the acyclic problem (Rogers, Farinelli, Stranders, & Jennings,
2011); Improved Bounded Max-Sum improves on the error bounds (Rollon & Larrosa, 2012); and
Max-Sum ADVP guarantees convergence in acyclic graphs through a two-phase value propagation
phase (Zivan & Peled, 2012; Chen, Deng, & Wu, 2017). Max-Sum and its extensions have been
successfully used to solve a number of large scale, complex MAS applications (see Section 8).
Region Optimal (Pearce & Tambe, 2007).
Region-optimal algorithms are incomplete, syn-
chronous, search-based algorithms that allow users to specify regions of the constraint graph and
solve the subproblem within each region optimally. Regions may be deﬁned to have a maximum
size of k agents (Pearce & Tambe, 2007), t hops from each agent (Kiekintveld, Yin, Kumar, &
Tambe, 2010), or a combination of both size and hops (Vinyals, Shieh, Cerquides, Rodriguez-
Aguilar, Yin, Tambe, & Bowring, 2011). The concept of k-optimality is deﬁned with respect to
the number of agents whose assignments conﬂict, whose set is denoted by c(σ, σ′), for two assign-
ments σ and σ′. The deviating cost of σ with respect to σ′, denoted by ∆(σ, σ′), is deﬁned as the
difference of the aggregated cost associated to the assignment σ (F(σ)) minus the cost associated
to σ′ (F(σ′)). An assignment σ is k-optimal if ∀σ′ ∈Σ, such that |c(σ, σ′)| ≤k, we have that
∆(σ, σ′) ≥0. In contrast, the concept of t-distance emphasizes the number of hops from a cen-
tral agent a of the region Ωt(a), that is the set of agents which are separated from a by at most t
hops. An assignment σ is t-distance optimal if, ∀σ′ ∈Σ, F(σ) ≥F(σ′) with c(σ, σ′) ⊆Ωt(a),
for any a ∈A. Therefore, the solutions found have theoretical error bounds that are a function
of k and/or t. Region-optimal algorithms adopt a partially-centralized resolution scheme in which
the subproblem within each region is solved optimally by a centralized authority (Tassa, Zivan, &
Grinshpoun, 2016). However, this scheme can be altered to use a distributed algorithm to solve
each subproblem.
Region-optimal agents perform O(dw∗) number of operations in each iteration, as each agent
runs DPOP to solve the problem within each region optimally. It is also an anytime algorithm as
19

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
solutions of improving quality are found until they are region-optimal. The memory requirement
per region-optimal agent is O(dw∗) since its region may have an induced width of w∗and it uses
DPOP to solve the problem within its region. In terms of communication requirement, each region-
optimal agent sends O(n) messages, one to each agent within its region. Thus, the total number
of messages sent across all agents is O(ℓn2). Each message is of size O(dw∗) as it uses DPOP.
Finally, the agents communicate to all agents within their region – either to a distance of ⌊k
2⌋or t
hops away. Thus, they may communicate with non-neighboring agents.
An asynchronous version of regional-optimal algorithms, called Distributed Asynchronous Lo-
cal Optimization (DALO), was proposed by Kiekintveld et al. (2010). The DALO simulator pro-
vides a mechanism to coordinate the decision of local groups of agents based on the concepts of
k-optimality and t-distance.
MGM (Maheswaran, Pearce, & Tambe, 2004a).
Maximum Gain Message (MGM) is an incom-
plete, synchronous, search-based algorithm that performs a distributed local search. Each agent
starts by assigning a random value to each of its variables. Then, it sends this information to all
its neighbors. Upon receiving the values of its neighbors, it calculates the maximum gain (i.e., the
maximum decrease in cost) if it changes its value and sends this information to all its neighbors.
Upon receiving the gains of its neighbors, the agent changes its value if its gain is the largest among
those of its neighbors. This process repeats until a termination condition is met. MGM provides
no quality guarantees on the returned solution.
MGM agents perform O(ld) number of operations in each iteration, as each agent needs to
compute the cost for each of its values by taking into account the values of all its neighbors. MGM
is anytime since agents only change their values when they have a non-negative gain. The memory
requirement per MGM agent is O(l). Each agent needs to store the values of all its neighboring
agents. In terms of communication requirement, each MGM agent sends O(l) messages, one to
each of its neighboring agents. Thus, the total number of messages sent across all agents is O(ℓnl).
Each message is of constant size O(1) as it contains either the agent’s current value or the agent’s
current gain. Finally, the agents communicate exclusively with their neighboring agents.
DSA (Zhang, Wang, Xing, & Wittenberg, 2005).
Distributed Stochastic Algorithm (DSA) is an
incomplete, synchronous, search-based algorithm that is similar to MGM, except that each agent
does not send its gains to its neighbors and it does not change its value to the value with the maxi-
mum gain. Instead, it decides stochastically if it takes on the value with the maximum gain or other
values with smaller gains. This stochasticity allows DSA to escape from local minima. Similar
to MGM, it repeats the process until a termination condition is met, and it cannot provide quality
guarantees on the returned solution. The runtime, memory, and communication characteristics of
DSA are identical to those of MGM since it is essentially a stochastic variant of MGM.
DUCT (Ottens, Dimitrakakis, & Faltings, 2017). The Distributed Upper Conﬁdence Tree (DUCT)
algorithm is an incomplete, synchronous, sampling-based algorithm that is inspired by Monte-
Carlo Tree Search and employs conﬁdence bounds to solve DCOPs. DUCT emulates a search
process analogous to that of ADOPT, where agents select the values to assign to their variables
according to the information encoded in their context messages (i.e., the assignments to all the
20

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
variables in the receiving variable’s separator). However, rather than systematically selecting the
next value to assign to their own variables, DUCT agents sample such values. To focus on promis-
ing assignments, DUCT constructs a conﬁdence bound B, such that cost associated to the best
value for any context is at least B, and hence agents sample the choice with the lowest bound. This
process is started by the root agent of the pseudo-tree: After sampling a value for its variable, it
communicates its assignment to its children in a context message. When an agent receives this mes-
sage, it repeats this process until the leaf agents are reached. When the leaf agents choose a value
assignment, they calculate the cost within their context and propagate this information up to the
tree in a cost message. This process continues for a given number of iterations or until convergence
is achieved, i.e., until the sampled values in two successive iterations do not change. Therefore,
DUCT is able to provide quality guarantees on the returned solution.
DUCT agents perform O(ld) number of operations in each iteration, as each agent needs to
compute the cost for each of its values by taking into account the values of all its neighbors. It is
an anytime algorithm; The quality guarantee improves with increasing number of iterations. The
memory requirement per DUCT agent is O(dn)4 since it needs to store the best cost for all possible
contexts. In terms of communication requirement, in each iteration, each DUCT agent sends one
message to its parent in the pseudo-tree and one message to each of its children in the pseudo-tree.
Thus, the total number of messages sent across all agents is O(ℓn). Each message is of size O(n);
context messages contain the value assignment for all higher priority agents. Finally, the agents
communicate exclusively with their neighboring agents.
D-Gibbs (Nguyen, Yeoh, & Lau, 2013). The Distributed Gibbs (D-Gibbs) algorithm is an incom-
plete, synchronous, sampling-based algorithm that extends the Gibbs sampling process (Geman
& Geman, 1984) by tailoring it to solve DCOPs in a decentralized manner. The Gibbs sampling
process is a centralized Markov Chain Monte-Carlo algorithm that can be used to approximate
joint probability distributions. By mapping DCOPs to maximum a-posteriori estimation problems,
probabilistic inference algorithms like Gibbs sampling can be used to solve DCOPs.
Like DUCT, it too operates on a pseudo-tree, and the agents sample sequentially from the
root of the pseudo-tree down to the leaves. Like DUCT, each agent also stores a context (i.e., the
current assignment to all the variables in its separator) and it samples based on this information.
Speciﬁcally, it computes the probability for each of its values given its context and chooses its
current value based on this probability distribution. After it chooses its value, it informs its lower
priority neighbors of its value, and its children agents start to sample. This process continues
until all the leaf agents sample. Cost information is propagated up the pseudo-tree. This process
continues for a ﬁxed number of iterations or until convergence. Like DUCT, D-Gibbs is also able
to provide quality guarantees on the returned solution.
The runtime characteristics of D-Gibbs are identical to that of DUCT and for the same reasons.
However, its memory requirements are smaller: The memory requirement per D-Gibbs agent is
O(l) since it needs to store the current values of all its neighbors. In terms of communication re-
4. It is actually O(dt), where t is the depth of the pseudo-tree. However, in the worst case, when the pseudo-tree
degenerates into a pseudo-chain, then t = n.
21

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
quirement, in each iteration, each D-Gibbs agent sends O(l) messages, one to each of its neighbors.
Thus, the total number of messages sent across all agents is O(ℓnl). Each message is of constant
size O(1) since they contain only the current value of the agent or partial cost of its solution.
Finally, the agents communicate exclusively with their neighboring agents.
A version of the algorithm that speeds up the agents’ sampling process with Graphical Process-
ing Units (GPUs) is described in (Fioretto, Yeoh, & Pontelli, 2016a).
4.4 Tradeoffs Between the Various DCOP Algorithms
The various DCOP algorithms discussed above provide a good coverage across various character-
istics that may be important in different applications. As such, how well suited an algorithm is for
an application depends on how well the algorithm’s characteristics match up to the application’s
characteristics. The next section discusses several suggestions for the types of algorithms that are
recommended based on the characteristics of the application at hand.
4.4.1 COMPLETE ALGORITHMS
When optimality is a requirement of the application, then one is limited to complete algorithms:
• If the agents in the application have large amounts of memory and it is faster to send few large
messages than many small messages, then inference-based algorithms (e.g., DPOP and its ex-
tensions) are preferred over search-based algorithms (e.g., SyncBB, AFB, ADOPT, ConcFB,
OptAPO). This is because, in general, search algorithms perform some amount of redundant
communication. Thus, for a given problem instance, the overall runtime of inference-based al-
gorithms tend to be smaller than the runtime of search-based ones.
• If the agents in the application have limited amounts of memory, then one has to use the search-
based algorithms (e.g., SyncBB, AFB, ADOPT, ConcFB, OptAPO), which have small memory
requirements. The exception is when the problem has a small induced width (e.g., the constraint
graph is acyclic), in which case inference-based algorithms (e.g., DPOP) are also preferred.
• If partial centralization is allowed by the application, then OptAPO is preferred as it has been
shown to outperform many of the other search algorithms (Mailler & Lesser, 2004).
• Otherwise, ConcFB is recommended as it has been shown to outperform AFB due to the
concurrent search (Netzer et al., 2012), and AFB has been shown to outperform ADOPT and
SyncBB (Gershman et al., 2009). The exception is if the application does not permit agents
to communicate directly to non-neighbors, in which case ConcFB, AFB, and SyncBB cannot
be used and one is restricted to use ADOPT or one of its variants. Note that many of the
variants (e.g., BnB-ADOPT, NCBB) have been shown to signiﬁcantly outperform ADOPT
while maintaining the same runtime, memory, and communication requirements (Chechetka
& Sycara, 2006; Yeoh et al., 2010).
4.4.2 INCOMPLETE ALGORITHMS
In terms of incomplete algorithms, the following recommendations are given:
22

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
• If the solution returned must have an accompanying quality guarantee, then, one can choose to
use Bounded Max-Sum, region-optimal algorithms, DUCT, or D-Gibbs. Bounded Max-Sum al-
lows users to choose the error bound as a function of the different subsets of edges that can be
removed from the graph to make it acyclic. Region-optimal algorithms allow users to parameter-
ize the error bound according to the size of the region k or the number of hops t that the solution
should be optimal for. Finally, DUCT and D-Gibbs allow users to parameterize the error bound
based on the number of sampling iterations to conduct. The error bounds for these two algo-
rithms are also probabilistic bounds (i.e., the likelihood that the quality of the solution is within
an error bound is a function of the number of iterations). Therefore, the choice of algorithm will
depend on the type of error bound one would like to impose on the solutions. One may also
choose to use a number of extensions of complete algorithms (e.g., Weighted (BnB-)ADOPT
and A-DPOP) that allow users to parameterize the error bound and affect the degree of speedup.
• If the solution quality guarantee is not required, then one can also use Max-Sum, MGM, or DSA.
Their performance depends on a number of factors: If the problem has large domain sizes, MGM
and DSA often outperform Max-Sum, since the memory and computational complexities of
Max-Sum grows exponentially with the domain size. However, if the problem has small induced
widths (for instance, when its constraint graph is acyclic), then Max-Sum is very efﬁcient. It
is even guaranteed to ﬁnd optimal solutions when the induced width is 1. In general, Max-Sum
tends to ﬁnd solutions of good quality especially when considering its recent improvements (e.g.,
(Zivan, Parash, Cohen, Peled, & Okamoto, 2017)).
• If the problem has hard constraints (i.e., certain value combinations are prohibited), then the sam-
pling algorithms (i.e., DUCT and D-Gibbs) are not recommended as they are not able to handle
such problems. They require the cost functions to be smooth, and exploit that characteristic to
explore the search space. Thus, one is restricted to search- or inference-based algorithms.
• In general, MGM and DSA are good robust benchmarks as they tend to ﬁnd reasonably high
quality solutions in practice. However, if speciﬁc problem characteristics are known, such as the
ones discussed above, then certain algorithms may be able to exploit them to ﬁnd better solutions.
4.5 Notable Variant: Asymmetric DCOPs
Asymmetric DCOPs (Grinshpoun, Grubshtein, Zivan, Netzer, & Meisels, 2013) are used to model
multi-agent problems where agents controlling variables in the scope of a cost function can incur
to different costs, given a ﬁxed join assignment. Such a problem cannot be naturally represented by
classical DCOPs, which require that all agents controlling variables participating in a cost function
incur to the same cost as each other.
4.5.1 DEFINITION
An Asymmetric DCOP is a tuple ⟨A, X, D, F, α⟩, where A, X, D, and α are as deﬁned in Deﬁ-
nition 4.1, and each cost function fi ∈F is deﬁned as: fi : "xj∈xi Dj × α(fi) →(R+ ∪{⊥}).
In other words, an Asymmetric DCOP is a DCOP where the cost that an agent incurs from a cost
function may differ from the cost that another agent incurs from the same cost function.
23

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
As costs for participating agents may differ from each other, the goal in Asymmetric DCOPs is
different from the goal in classical DCOPs. Given a cost function fj ∈F and complete assignment
σ, let fj(σ, ai) denote the cost incurred by agent ai from cost function fj with complete assignment
σ. Then, the goal in Asymmetric DCOPs is to ﬁnd the solution σ∗:
σ∗:= argmin
σ∈Σ
X
fj∈F
X
ai∈α(fj)
fj(σxj, ai)
(2)
As in classical DCOPs, solving Asymmetric DCOPs is NP-hard. In particular, it is possible
to reduce any Asymmetric DCOP to an equivalent classical DCOP by introducing a polynomial
number of variables and constraints, as described in the next section.
4.5.2 RELATION TO CLASSICAL DCOPS
One way to solve MAS problems with asymmetric costs via classical DCOPs is through the Private
Event As Variables (PEAV) model (Maheswaran et al., 2004a). It can capture asymmetric costs
by introducing, for each agent, as many “mirror” variables as the number of variables held by
neighboring agents. The consistency with the neighbors’ state variables is imposed by a set of
equality constraints. However, this formalism suffers from scalability problems, as it may result
in a signiﬁcant increase in the number of variables in a DCOP. In addition, Grinshpoun et al.
(2013) showed that most of the existing incomplete classical DCOP algorithms cannot be used to
effectively solve Asymmetric DCOPs, even when the problems are reformulated through the PEAV
model. They show that such algorithms are unable to distinguish between different solutions that
satisfy all hard constraints, resulting in a convergence to one of those solutions and the inability
to escape that local optimum. Therefore, it is important to design specialized algorithms to solve
Asymmetric DCOPs.
4.5.3 ALGORITHMS
The current research direction in the design of Asymmetric DCOP algorithms has focused on adapt-
ing existing classical DCOP algorithms to handle the asymmetric costs. Asymmetric DCOPs re-
quire that each agent, whose variables participate in a cost function, coordinate the aggregation of
their individual costs. To do so, two approaches have been identiﬁed (Brito, Meisels, Meseguer, &
Zivan, 2009):
• A two-phase strategy, where only one side of the constraint (i.e., the cost induced by one agent)
is considered in the ﬁrst phase. The other side(s) (i.e., the cost induced by the other agent(s)) is
considered in the second phase once a complete assignment is produced. As a result, the costs
of all agents are aggregated.
• A single-phase strategy, which requires a systematic check of each side of the constraint before
reaching a complete assignment. Checking each side of the constraint is often referred to as back
checking, a process that can be performed either synchronously or asynchronously.
COMPLETE ALGORITHMS
24

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
SyncABB-2ph (Grinshpoun et al., 2013). Synchronous Asymmetric Branch and Bound - 2-phase
(SyncABB-2ph) is a complete, synchronous, search-based algorithm that extends SyncBB with the
two-phase strategy. Phase 1 emulates SyncBB, where each agent considers the values of its cost
functions with higher-priority agents. Phase 2 starts once a complete assignment is found. During
this phase, each agent aggregates the sides of the cost functions that were not considered during
Phase 1 and veriﬁes that the known bound is not exceeded. If the bound is exceeded, Phase 2 ends
and the agents restart Phase 1 by backtracking and resuming the search from the lower priority
agent that exceeded the bound. The worst case runtime, memory, and communication requirements
of this algorithm are the same as those of SyncBB.
SyncABB-1ph (Grinshpoun et al., 2013; Levit, Grinshpoun, Meisels, & Bazzan, 2013).
Syn-
chronous Asymmetric Branch and Bound - 1-phase (SyncABB-1ph) is a complete, synchronous,
search-based algorithm that extends SyncBB with the one-phase strategy. Each agent, after having
extended the CPA, updates the bound with its local cost associated to the cost functions involving
its variables – as done in SyncBB. In addition, the CPA is sent back to the assigned agents to up-
date its bound via a sequence of back checking operations. The worst case runtime, memory, and
communication requirements of this algorithm are the same as those of SyncBB.
ATWB (Grinshpoun et al., 2013).
The Asymmetric Two-Way Bounding (ATWB) algorithm is a
complete, asynchronous, search-based algorithm that extends AFB to accommodate both forward
bounding and backward bounding. The forward bounding is performed analogously to AFB. The
backward bounding, instead, is achieved by sending copies of the CPA backward to the agents
whose assignments are included in the CPA. Similar to what is done in AFB, agents that receive a
copy of the CPA compute their estimates and send them forward to the assigning agent. The worst
case runtime, memory, and communication requirements of this algorithm are the same as those of
AFB.
INCOMPLETE ALGORITHMS
ACLS (Grinshpoun et al., 2013). Asymmetric Coordinated Local Search (ACLS) is an incomplete,
synchronous, search-based algorithm that extends DSA. After a random value initialization, each
agent exchanges its values with all its neighboring agents. At the end of this step, each agent
identiﬁes all possible improving assignments for its own variables, given the current neighbors
choices. Each agent then selects one such assignments, according to the distribution of gains
(i.e., reductions in costs) from each proposal assignment, and exchanges it with its neighbors.
When an agent receives a proposal assignment, it responds with the evaluation of its side of the
cost functions, resulting from its current assignment and the proposal assignments of the other
agents participating in the cost function. After receiving the evaluations from each of its neighbors,
each agent estimates the potential gain or loss derived from its assignment, and commits to a change
with a given probability, similar to agents in DSA, to escape from local minima. The worst case
runtime, memory, and communication requirements of this algorithm are the same as those of DSA.
MCS-MGM (Grinshpoun et al., 2013).
Minimal Constraint Sharing MGM (MCS-MGM) is an
incomplete, synchronous, search-based algorithm that extends MGM by considering each side of
25

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
the cost function. Like MGM, the agents operate in an iterative fashion, where they exchange
their current values at the start of each iteration. Afterwards, each agent sends the cost for its side
of each cost function to its neighboring agents that participate in the same cost function.5 Upon
receiving this information, each agent knows the total cost for each cost function – by adding
together the value of both sides of the cost function. Therefore, like in MGM, the agent can
calculate the maximum gain (i.e., maximum reduction in costs) if it changes its values, and will
send this information to all its neighbors. Upon receiving the gains of its neighbors, each agent
changes its value if its gain is the largest among its neighbors. The worst case runtime, memory,
and communication requirements of this algorithm are the same as those of MGM.
4.6 Notable Variant: Multi-Objective DCOPs
Multi-Objective Optimization (MOO) (Miettinen, 1999; Marler & Arora, 2004) aims at solv-
ing problems involving more than one objective function to be optimized simultaneously. In a
MOO problem, optimal decisions need to accommodate potentially conﬂicting objectives. Multi-
Objective DCOPs extend MOO problems and DCOPs (Delle Fave, Stranders, Rogers, & Jennings,
2011).
4.6.1 DEFINITION
A Multi-Objective DCOP (MO-DCOP) is a tuple ⟨A, X, D, ⃗F, α⟩, where A, X, D, and α are as
deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4.1, and ⃗F = [F1, . . . , Fh]T is a vector of multi-objective functions, where
each Fi is a set of cost functions fj as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4.1. For a complete assignment σ of
a MO-DCOP, let the cost for σ according to the ith multi-objective optimization function set Fi,
where 1 ≤i ≤h, be
Fi(σ) :=
X
fj∈Fi
fj(σxj)
(3)
The goal of a MO-DCOP is to ﬁnd a complete assignment σ∗such that:
σ∗:= argmin
σ∈Σ
⃗F(σ) = argmin
σ∈Σ
[F1(σ), . . . , Fh(σ)]T
(4)
where ⃗F(σ) is a cost vector for the MO-DCOP. A solution to a MO-DCOP involves the optimiza-
tion of a set of partially-ordered assignments. The above deﬁnition considers point-wise compar-
ison of vectors—i.e., ⃗F(σ) ≤⃗F(σ′) if Fi(σ) ≤Fi(σ′) for all 1 ≤i ≤h. Typically, there is no
single global solution where all the objectives are optimized at the same time. Thus, solutions of
a MO-DCOP are characterized by the concept of Pareto optimality, which can be deﬁned through
the concept of dominance:
Deﬁnition 1 (Dominance) A solution σ ∈Σ is dominated by a solution σ′ ∈Σ iff ⃗F(σ′) ≤⃗F(σ)
and Fi(σ′) < Fi(σ) for at least one Fi.
5. This is a version of the algorithm with a guarantee that it will converge to a local optima. In the original version
of the algorithm, which does not have such guarantee, each agent sends the cost only if its gain with the neighbor’s
new values is larger than the neighbor’s last known gain.
26

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
Deﬁnition 2 (Pareto Optimality) A solution σ′ ∈Σ is Pareto optimal iff it is not dominated by
any other solution.
Therefore, a solution is Pareto optimal iff there is no other solution that improves at least one
objective function without deteriorating the cost of another function. Another important concept is
the Pareto front:
Deﬁnition 3 (Pareto Front) The Pareto front is the set of all cost vectors of all Pareto optimal
solutions.
Solving a MO-DCOP is equivalent to ﬁnding the Pareto front. However, even for tree-structured
MO-DCOPs, the size of the Pareto front may be exponential in the number of variables.6 Thus,
multi-objective algorithms often provide solutions that may not be Pareto optimal but may satisfy
other criteria that are signiﬁcant for practical applications. A widely-adopted criterion is that of
weak Pareto optimality:
Deﬁnition 4 (Weak Pareto Optimality) A solution σ′ ∈Σ is weakly Pareto optimal iff there is
no other solution σ ∈Σ such that ⃗F(σ) < ⃗F(σ′).
In other words, a solution is weakly Pareto optimal if there is no other solution that improves all
of the objective functions simultaneously. An alternative approach to Pareto optimality is one that
uses the concept of utopia points:
Deﬁnition 5 (Utopia Point) A cost vector ⃗F◦= [F ◦
1 , . . . , F ◦
h]T is a utopia point iff F ◦
i
=
minσ∈Σ Fi(σ) for all 1 ≤i ≤h.
In other words, a utopia point is the vector of costs obtained by independently optimizing h DCOPs,
each associated to one objective of the multi-objective function vector. In general, ⃗F◦is unattain-
able. Therefore, different approaches focus on ﬁnding a compromise solution (Salukvad, 1971),
which is a Pareto optimal solution that is close to the utopia point. The concept of closeness is
dependent on the approach adopted.
Similar to their centralized counterpart, MO-DCOPs have been shown to be NP-hard (their
decision versions), and #P-hard (the related counting versions), and to have exponentially many
non-dominated points (Glaßer, Reitwießner, Schmitz, & Witek, 2010).
4.6.2 ALGORITHMS
This section categorizes the proposed MO-DCOP algorithms into two classes: complete and in-
complete algorithms, according to their ability to ﬁnd the complete set of Pareto optimal solutions
or only a subset of it.
COMPLETE ALGORITHMS
6. In the worst case, every possible solution is a Pareto optimal solution.
27

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
MO-SBB (Medi, Okimoto, & Inoue, 2014).
Multi-Objective Synchronous Branch and Bound
(MO-SBB) is a complete, synchronous, search-based algorithm that extends SyncBB. It uses an
analogous search strategy to that of the mono-objective SyncBB: After establishing a complete or-
dering, MO-SBB agents extend a CPA with their own value assignments and the current associated
cost vectors. Once a non-dominated solution is found, it is broadcasted to all agents, which add the
solution to a list of global bounds. Thus, agents maintains an approximation of the Pareto front,
which is used to bound the exploration, and extend the CPA only if the new partial assignment is
not dominated by solutions in the list of global bounds. When the algorithm terminates, it returns
the set of Pareto optimal solutions obtained by ﬁltering the list of global bounds by dominance.
The worst case runtime and communication requirements of this algorithm are the same as those of
SyncBB. In terms of memory requirement, each MO-SBB agent needs O(np) amount of memory,
where p is the size of the Pareto set.
Pseudo-tree Based Algorithm (Matsui, Silaghi, Hirayama, Yokoo, & Matsuo, 2012).
The pro-
posed algorithm is a complete, asynchronous, search-based algorithm that extends ADOPT. It intro-
duces the notion of boundaries on the vectors of multi-objective values, which extends the concept
of lower and upper bounds to vectors of values. The proposed approach starts with the assumption
that |F1| = · · · = |Fh| = k. Furthermore, the cost functions within each Fi are sorted according to
a predeﬁned ordering, and for each 1 ≤j ≤k, the scope of fi
j (i.e., the jth function in Fi) is the
same for each i (i.e., all functions in the same position in different Fi have the same scope). Thus,
without loss of generality, the notation xj will be used to refer to the scope of fi
j.
Given a complete assignment σ, for 1
≤
j
≤
k, let ⃗σj
=
[σ1
fj, . . . , σh
fj]
=
[f1
j (σxj), . . . , fh
j (σxj)] be the vector of cost values. The notion of non-dominance is applied
to these vectors, where a vector ⃗σj is non-dominated iff there is no other vector ⃗σ′
j such that
ub(σ′
j
s) ≤lb(σs
j) for all 1 ≤s ≤h and ub(σ′
j
s) < lb(σs
j) for at least one s. The algorithm uses the
notion of non-dominance for bounded vectors to retain exclusively non-dominated vectors.
The worst case runtime and communication requirements of this algorithm are the same as
those of ADOPT. In terms of memory requirement, each agent needs O(np) amount of memory.
However, notice that the number of combinations of cost vectors grows exponentially with the
number of tuples of cost values, in the worst case.
This algorithm has also been extended to
solve Asymmetric MO-DCOPs (Matsui, Silaghi, Hirayama, Yokoo, & Matsuo, 2014), which is an
extension of both Asymmetric DCOPs and MO-DCOPs.
INCOMPLETE ALGORITHMS
B-MOMS (Delle Fave et al., 2011). Bounded Multi-Objective Max-Sum (B-MOMS) is an incom-
plete, asynchronous, inference-based algorithm, and was the ﬁrst MO-DCOP algorithm introduced.
It extends Bounded Max-Sum to compute bound approximations for MO-DCOPs. It consists of
three phases. The Bounding Phase generates an acyclic subgraph of the multi-objective factor
graph, using a generalization of the maximum spanning tree problem to vector weights. During the
Max-sum Phase, the agents coordinate to ﬁnd the Pareto optimal set of solutions to the acyclic fac-
tor graph generated in the bounding phase. This is achieved by extending the addition and marginal
28

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
maximization operators adopted in Max-Sum to the case of multiple objectives. Finally, the Value
Propagation Phase allows agents to select a consistent variable assignment, as there may multiple
Pareto optimal solutions. The bounds provided by the algorithm are computed using the notion of
utopia points.
The worst case runtime requirement of this algorithm is the same as those of Max-Sum. In
terms of communication requirement, the number of messages sent is also like Max-Sum, but the
size of each message is now O(pdn). In terms of memory requirement, each B-MOMS agent needs
O(pdn) amount of memory to store and process the messages received.
DP-AOF (Okimoto, Clement, & Inoue, 2013).
Dynamic Programming based on Aggregate Ob-
jective Functions (DP-AOF) is an incomplete, synchronous, inference-based algorithm. It adapts
the AOF technique (Miettinen, 1999), designed to solve centralized multi-objective optimization
problems, to solve MO-DCOPs. Centralized AOF adopts a scalarization to convert a MOO prob-
lem into a single objective optimization. This is done by assigning weights (α1, . . . , αh) to each
of the cost functions in the objective vector [F1, . . . , Fh]T such that Ph
i=1 αi = 1 and αi > 0 for
all 1 ≤i ≤h. The resulting mono-objective function Ph
i=1 αi Fi can be solved using any mono-
objective optimization technique with guarantee to ﬁnd a Pareto optimal solution (Miettinen, 1999).
DP-AOF proceeds in two phases. First, it computes the utopia point ⃗F◦by solving as many
mono-objective DCOPs as the number of objective functions in the MO-DCOP. DP-AOF uses
DPOP to solve these mono-objective DCOPs. It then constructs a new problem building upon
the solutions obtained from the ﬁrst phase. Such a problem is used to assign weights to each
objective function of the MO-DCOP to construct the new mono-objective function in the same
way as centralized AOF, which then can be solved optimally. The worst case runtime, memory,
and communication requirements of this algorithm are the same as those of DPOP, except that the
number of operations and the number of messages are larger by a factor of h since it runs DPOP h
times to solve the h mono-objective DCOPs.
MO-DPOPLp (Okimoto, Schwind, Clement, & Inoue, 2014).
Multi-Objective Lp-norm based
Distributed Pseudo-tree Optimization Procedure (MO-DPOPLp) is an incomplete, synchronous,
inference-based algorithm. It adapts DPOP using a scalarization measure based on the Lp-norm
to ﬁnd a subset of the Pareto front of a MO-DCOP. Similar to DP-AOF, the algorithm proceeds in
two phases. Its ﬁrst phase is the same as the ﬁrst phase of DP-AOF: It solves h mono-objective
DCOPs using DPOP to ﬁnd the utopia point ⃗F◦. In the second phase, the agents coordinate to
ﬁnd a solution that minimizes the distance from ⃗F◦according to the Lp-norm. The algorithm is
guaranteed to ﬁnd a Pareto optimal solution only when the L1-norm (Manhattan norm) is adopted.
In this case, MO-DPOPL1 ﬁnds a Pareto optimal solution that minimizes the average cost values of
all objectives. The worst case runtime, memory, and communication requirements of this algorithm
are the same as those of DP-AOF.
DIPLS (Wack, Okimoto, Clement, & Inoue, 2014).
Distributed Iterated Pareto Local Search
(DIPLS) is an incomplete, synchronous, search-based algorithm. It extends the Pareto Local Search
(PLS) algorithm (Paquete, Chiarandini, & Sttzle, 2004), which is a hill climbing algorithm designed
to solve centralized multi-objective optimization problems, to solve MO-DCOPs. The idea behind
29

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
DIPLS is to evolve an initial solution toward the Pareto front. To do so, it starts from an initial
set of random assignments, and applies PLS iteratively to generate new non-dominated solutions.
DIPLS requires a total ordering of agents and elects one agent as the controller. At each iteration,
the controller ﬁlters the set of solutions by dominance and broadcasts them to the agents in the MO-
DCOP. Upon receiving a solution, an agent generates a list of neighboring solutions by modifying
the assignments of the variables that it controls, and sends them back to the controller. When the
controller receives the messages from all agents, it proceeds to ﬁlter (by dominance) the set of
solutions received, and if a new non-dominated solution is found, it repeats the process.
The worst case runtime of this algorithm is O(ℓkp) as the controller agent is required to check
the dominance of the newly generated solutions at each iteration. In terms of memory requirement,
DIPLS agents use O(np) space to store the Pareto front. Finally, in terms of communication
requirement, the controller agent broadcasts messages that contain the current Pareto front. Thus,
the message size is O(np).
5. Dynamic DCOPs
Within a real-world MAS application, agents often act in dynamic environments that evolve over
time. For instance, in a disaster management search and rescue scenario, new information (e.g., the
number of victims in particular locations or priorities on the buildings to evacuate) typically be-
comes available in an incremental manner. Thus, the information ﬂow modiﬁes the environment
over time. To cope with such a requirement, researchers have introduced the Dynamic DCOP (D-
DCOP) model, where cost functions can change during the problem solving process, agents may
fail, and new agents may be added to the DCOP being solved. With respect to the categoriza-
tion described in Section 3, in the D-DCOP model, the agents are fully cooperative and they have
deterministic behavior and total knowledge. On the other hand, the environment is dynamic and
deterministic.
5.1 Deﬁnition
The Dynamic DCOP (D-DCOP) model is deﬁned as a sequence of classical DCOPs: D1, . . . , DT ,
where each Dt = ⟨At, Xt, Dt, Ft, αt⟩is a DCOP representing the problem at time step t, for 1 ≤
t ≤T. The goal in a D-DCOP is to solve the DCOP at each time step optimally. By assumption,
the agents have total knowledge about their current environment (i.e., the current DCOP) but they
are unaware of changes to the problem in future time steps.
In a dynamic system, agents are required to adapt as fast as possible to environmental changes.
Stability (Dijkstra, 1974; Verfaillie & Jussien, 2005) is a core algorithmic concept in which an
algorithm seeks to minimize the number of steps that it requires to converge to a solution each time
the problem changes. In such a context, these converged solutions are also called stable solutions.
Self-stabilization is a related concept derived from the area of fault-tolerance:
Deﬁnition 6 (Self-stabilization) A system is self-stabilizing iff the following two properties hold:
30

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
(i) Convergence: The system reaches a stable solution in a ﬁnite number of steps, starting
from any given state. In the DCOP context, this property expresses the ability of the agents
to coordinate a joint assignment for their variables that optimizes the problem at time step
t + 1, starting from an assignment of the problem’s variables at time step t.
(ii) Closure: The system remains in a stable solution, provided that no changes in the envi-
ronment happens. In the DCOP context, this means that agents do not change the assignment
for their variables after converging to a solution.
Solving D-DCOPs is NP-hard, as it requires to solve each DCOP of the D-DCOP indepen-
dently.
5.2 Algorithms
In principle, one could use classical DCOP algorithms to solve the DCOP Dt at each time step
1 ≤t ≤T. However, the dynamic environment evolution encourages ﬁrm requirements on the
algorithm design in order for the agents to respond automatically and efﬁciently to environmental
changes over time. In particular, D-DCOP algorithms often follow the self-stabilizing property.
As in the previous sections, the algorithms are categorized as being either complete or incomplete,
according to their ability to determine the optimal solution at each time step.
5.2.1 COMPLETE ALGORITHMS
S-DPOP (Petcu & Faltings, 2005c).
Self-stabilizing DPOP (S-DPOP) is a synchronous,
inference-based algorithm that extends DPOP to handle dynamic environments. It is composed
of three self-stabilizing phases: (i) A self-stabilizing DFS pseudo-tree generation, whose goal is
to create and maintain a DFS pseudo-tree structure; (ii) A self-stabilizing algorithm for the UTIL
propagation phase; and (iii) A self-stabilizing algorithm for the VALUE propagation phase. These
procedures work as in DPOP and they are invoked whenever any change in the DCOP problem
sequence is revealed. Additionally, Petcu and Faltings (2005c) discuss self-stabilizing extensions
that can be used to provide guarantees about the way the system transitions from a valid state to
the next, after an environment change.
The worst case runtime, memory, and communication requirements of this algorithm to solve
the DCOP at each time step are the same as those of DPOP. Additionally, upon changes to the
problem, S-DPOP stabilizes after at most τ UTIL messages and k VALUE messages, where τ is
the depth of the pseudo-tree and k is the number of cost functions of the problem.
I-ADOPT and I-BnB-ADOPT (Yeoh, Varakantham, Sun, & Koenig, 2011).
Incremental Any-
space ADOPT (I-ADOPT) and Incremental Any-space BnB-ADOPT (I-BnB-ADOPT) are asyn-
chronous, search-based algorithms that extend ADOPT and BnB-ADOPT, respectively. In the
incremental any-space versions of the algorithms, each agent maintains bounds for multiple con-
texts; in contrast, agents in ADOPT and BnB-ADOPT maintain bounds for one context only. By
doing so, when solving the next DCOP in the sequence, agents may reuse the bounds information
computed in the previous DCOP. In particular, the algorithms identify affected agents, which are
31

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
agents that cannot reuse the information computed in the previous iterations, and they recompute
bounds exclusively for such agents.
The worst case runtime and communication requirements of this algorithm to solve the DCOP
at each time step are the same as those of ADOPT. However, since these algorithms have the any-
space property, their minimal memory requirements are the same as those of ADOPT but they can
use more memory, if available, to speed up the algorithms.
5.2.2 INCOMPLETE ALGORITHMS
SBDO (Billiau, Chang, & Ghose, 2012a). Support Based Distributed Optimization (SBDO) is an
asynchronous search-based algorithm that extends the Support Based Distributed Search algorithm
(Harvey, Chang, & Ghose, 2007) to the multi-agent case. It uses two types of messages: is-good
and no-good. Is-good messages contain an ordered partial assignment and are exchanged among
neighboring agents upon a change in their value assignments. Each agent, upon receiving a mes-
sage, decides what value to assign to its own variables, attempting to minimize their local costs,
and communicates such decisions to its neighboring agents via is-good messages. No-good mes-
sages are used in response to violations of hard constraints, or in response to obsolete assignments.
A no-good message is augmented with a justiﬁcation, that is, the set of hard constraints that are
violated, and are saved locally within each agent. This information is used to discard partial assign-
ments that are supersets of one of the known no-goods. The changes of the dynamic environment
are communicated via messages, which are sent from the environment to the agents. In particular,
changes in hard constraints require the update of all the justiﬁcations in all no-goods.
The worst case runtime, memory, and communication requirements of this algorithm are the
same as those of SyncBB each time the problem changes.
FMS (Ramchurn, Farinelli, Macarthur, & Jennings, 2010).
Fast Max-Sum (FMS) is an asyn-
chronous inference-based algorithm that extends Max-Sum to the Dynamic DCOP model. As in
Max-Sum, the algorithm operates on a factor graph. Solution stability is maintained by recomput-
ing only those factors that changed between the previous DCOP Dt−1 and the current DCOP Dt.
Ramchurn et al. (2010) exploit domain-speciﬁc properties in a task allocation problem to reduce
the number of states over which each factor has to compute its solution. In addition, FMS is able to
efﬁciently manage addition or removal of tasks (e.g., factors), by performing message propagation
exclusively on the factor graph regions that are affected by such topological changes. The worst
case runtime, memory, and communication requirements of this algorithm to solve the DCOP at
each time step are the same as those of Max-Sum.
FMS has been extended in several ways. Bounded Fast Max-Sum provides bounds on the solu-
tion found, as well as it guarantees self-stabilization (Macarthur, Farinelli, Ramchurn, & Jennings,
2010). Branch-and-Bound Fast Max-Sum (BnB-FMS) extends FMS providing online domain prun-
ing using a branch-and-bound technique (Macarthur, Farinelli, Ramchurn, & Jennings, 2011).
32

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
5.3 Notable Variants: D-DCOPs with Commitment Deadlines or Markovian Properties
We now describe several notable variants of D-DCOPs and their corresponding algorithms.
RS-DPOP (Petcu & Faltings, 2007b). In this proposed model, agents have commitment deadlines
and stability constraints. In other words, some of the variables may be unassigned at a given point
in time, while others must be assigned within a speciﬁc deadline. Commitment deadlines are either
hard or soft. Hard commitments model irreversible processes. When a hard committed variable is
assigned, its value cannot be changed. Soft commitments model contracts with penalties. If a soft
committed variable xt
i has been assigned at time step t, its value can be changed at time step t′ > t,
at the price of a cost penalty. These costs are modeled via stability constraints, which are deﬁned
as binary relations si : Di × Di →R+, representing the cost of changing the value of variable xi
from time step t to time step t + 1. Given the set of stability constraints S ⊆F, at each time step t,
the goal is to ﬁnd a solution σ∗
t :
σ∗
t := argmin
σ∈Σ

Fg(σ) +
X
sj∈S
sj(σ∗
t−1(xj), σ(xj))

.
The latter term accounts for the penalties associated to the value assignment updates for the soft
committed variables. RS-DPOP has the same order complexity as S-DPOP.
To solve this problem, Petcu and Faltings (2007b) extended S-DPOP to RS-DPOP.7 Like S-
DPOP, it is a synchronous, inference-based algorithm. Unlike S-DPOP, it’s UTIL and VALUE
propagation phases now take into account the commitment deadlines. The worst case runtime,
memory, and communication requirements of this algorithm to solve the DCOP at each time step
are the same as those of S-DPOP.
Distributed Q-learning and R-learning (Nguyen, Yeoh, Lau, Zilberstein, & Zhang, 2014).
In
this proposed model, called Markovian Dynamic DCOPs (MD-DCOPs), the DCOP in the next time
step Dt+1 depends on the solution (i.e., assignment of all variables) adopted by the agents for the
DCOP in the current time step Dt. However, the transition function between these two DCOPs are
not known to the agents and the agents must, thus, learn them. The Distributed Q-learning and R-
learning algorithms are synchronous reinforcement-learning-based algorithms that extend the cen-
tralized Q-learning (Abounadi, Bertsekas, & Borkar, 2001) and centralized R-learning (Schwartz,
1993; Mahadevan, 1996) algorithms. Each agent maintains Q-values and R-values for each σt−1, dt
i
pair, where σt−1 is the solution for the DCOP Dt−1 and dt
i is the value of its variables in the cost
function ft
i ∈Ft. These Q- and R-values represent the predicted cost the agent will incur if it as-
signs its variables values according to dt
i when σt−1 is the previous solution. The agents repeatedly
reﬁne these values at every time step and choose the values with the minimum Q- or R-value at
each time step.
The worst case runtime, communication, and memory requirements of these two algorithms to
solve the DCOP at each time step are the same as those of DPOP, as they use DPOP as a subroutine
7. The full name of the algorithm was not provided by Petcu and Faltings (2007b).
33

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
to update the Q- and R-values. The exception is that agents in the Distributed Q-learning algorithm
also broadcast their value assignments at each time step to all other agents. Thus, they send O(m2)
messages in each time step instead of the O(m) complexity of DPOP.8
A related model is the Proactive Dynamic DCOPs (PD-DCOPs) (Hoang, Fioretto, Hou, Yokoo,
Yeoh, & Zivan, 2016; Hoang, Hou, Fioretto, Yeoh, Zivan, & Yokoo, 2017), where the transition
functions between two subsequent DCOPs are known and can be exploited by the resolution pro-
cess. Additionally, another key difference between these two models is that the DCOP in the next
time step Dt+1 does not depend on the solution in the current time step, but instead depends on the
values of the random variables at the current time step. Researchers have introduced a number of
ofﬂine proactive and online reactive algorithms to solve this problem (Hoang et al., 2016, 2017).
6. Probabilistic DCOPs
The DCOP models discussed so far can model MAS problems in deterministic environments. How-
ever, many real-world applications are characterized by environments with a stochastic behavior.
In other words, there are exogenous events that can inﬂuence the outcome of an agent’s action. For
example, the weather conditions or the state of a malfunctioning device can affect the cost of an
agent’s action. To cope with such scenarios, researchers have introduced Probabilistic DCOP (P-
DCOP) models, where the uncertainty in the state of the environment is modeled through stochas-
ticity in the cost functions. With respect to the DCOP categorization described in Section 3, in the
P-DCOP model, the agents are fully cooperative and have a deterministic behavior. Additionally,
the environment is static and stochastic. While a large body of research has focused on problems
where agents have total knowledge, this section includes a discussion of a subclass of P-DCOPs
where the agents’ knowledge of the environment is limited, and the agents must balance the explo-
ration of the unknown environment and the exploitation of the known costs.
6.1 Deﬁnition
A common strategy to model uncertainty is to augment the outcome of the cost functions with
a stochastic character (Atlas & Decker, 2010; Stranders, Delle Fave, Rogers, & Jennings, 2011;
Nguyen, Yeoh, & Lau, 2012). Another method is to introduce additional random variables as input
to the cost functions, which simulate exogenous uncontrollable traits of the environment (L´eaut´e
& Faltings, 2009, 2011; Wang, Sycara, & Scerri, 2011). To cope with such a variety, this section
introduces the Probabilistic DCOP (P-DCOP) model, which generalizes the proposed models of
uncertainty. A P-DCOP is deﬁned by a tuple ⟨A, X, D, F, α, I, Ω, P, E, U⟩, where A and D are
as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4.1. In addition,
• X is a mixed set of decision variables and random variables.
• I = {r1, . . . , rq} ⊆X is a set of random variables modeling uncontrollable stochastic events,
such as weather or a malfunctioning device.
8. A single broadcast message is counted as m peer-to-peer messages, where m is the number of agents in the problem.
34

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
• F = {f1, . . . , fk} is the set of cost functions, each deﬁned over a mixed set of decision variables
and random variables, and such that each value combination of the decision variables on the cost
function results in a probability distribution. As a result, fi is itself a random variable, given the
local value assignment σxi\I and a realization for the random variables involved in fi.
• α : X \ I →A is a mapping from decision variables to agents. Notice that random variables are
not controlled by any agent, as their outcomes do not depend on the agents’ actions.
• Ω= {Ω1, . . . , Ωq} is the (possibly discrete) set of events for the random variables (e.g., the
different weather conditions or stress levels a device is subjected to) such that each random
variable ri ∈I takes values in Ωi. In other words, Ωi is the domain of random variable ri.
• P = {p1, . . . , pq} is a set of probability distributions for the random variables, such that pi :
Ωi →[0, 1] ⊆R assigns a probability value to an event for ri and
R
ω∈Ωi pi(ω) dω = 1 for each
random variable ri ∈I.
• E is an evaluator function from random variables to real values, that, given an assignment of
values to the decision variables, summarizes the distribution of the aggregated cost functions.
• U is a utility function that given a random variable returns an ordered set of different outcomes,
and it is based on the decision maker preferences. This function is needed when the cost functions
have uncertain outcomes and, thus, these distributions are not readily comparable.
The goal in a P-DCOP is to ﬁnd a solution σ∗, that is, an assignment of values to all the decision
variables, such that:
σ∗:= arg min/max
σ∈Σ
E

X
fi∈F
U
 fi(σxi\I)



(5)
where argmin or argmax are selected depending on the algorithm adopted, P is the operator that is
used to aggregate the values from the functions fi ∈F. Typically such an operator is a summation,
however, to handle continuous distributions, other operators have been proposed.
The probability distribution over the domain of random variables ri ∈I is called a belief. An
assignments of all random variables in I describes a (possible) scenario governed by the environ-
ment. As the random variables are not under the control of the agents, they act independently of
the decision variables. Speciﬁcally, their beliefs are drawn from probability distributions. Further-
more, they are assumed to be independent of each other and, thus, they model independent sources
of exogenous uncertainty.
The utility function U enables us to compare the uncertain cost outcomes of the cost functions.
In general, the utility function is non-decreasing, that is, the lower the cost, the higher the utility.
However, the utility function should be deﬁned for the speciﬁc application of interest. For example,
in farming, the utility increases with the amount of produce harvested. However, farmers may
prefer a smaller but highly certain amount of produce harvested over a larger but highly uncertain
and, thus, risky outcome.
The evaluation function E is used to summarize in one criterion the costs of a given assignment
that depends on the random variables. A possible evaluation function is the expectation function:
E[·] = E[·].
35

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
Let us now introduce some concepts that are commonly adopted in the study of P-DCOPs.
Deﬁnition 7 (Convolution) The convolution of the probability density function (PDF) f(x) and
g(x) of two independent random variables X and Y is the integral of the product of the two
functions after one is reversed and shifted:
h(z) = (f ∗g)(z) :=
Z ∞
−∞
f(τ) g(z −τ) dτ =
Z ∞
−∞
f(z −τ) g(τ) dτ
(6)
It produces a new PDF h(z) that deﬁnes the overlapping area between f(x) and g(y) as a function
of the quantity that one of the original functions is translated by. In other words, the convolution is
a method of determination of the sum of two random variables. The counterpart for the distribution
of the sum Z = X + Y of two independent discrete variables is:
P(Z = z) =
∞
X
k=−∞
P(X = k)P(Y = z −k).
(7)
In a P-DCOP, the value returned by a function fi, for an assignment on its scope xi, is a
random variable Vi (Vi ∼fi(xi)). Thus, the global value P
fi∈F Vi is also a random variable,
whose probability density function is the convolution of the PDFs of the individual Vi’s. Thus, the
concept of convolution of two PDFs in a P-DCOP is related to the summation of the utilities of two
cost functions in classical DCOPs.
A common concept in optimization with uncertainty is that of ranking a set of random vari-
ables {r1, r2, . . . } with Cumulative PDFs (CDFs) {F1(x), F2(x), . . . }. These distributions are
also commonly called lotteries, a concept related to that of stochastic dominance, which is a form
of stochastic ordering based on preference regarding outcomes. It refers to situations where a
probability distribution over possible outcomes can be ranked as superior to another.
The ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance refers to the situation when one lottery is unambiguously
better than another:
Deﬁnition 8 (First-Order Stochastic Dominance) Given two random variables ri and rj with
CDFs Fi(x) and Fj(x), respectively, Fi ﬁrst-order stochastically dominates Fj iff:
Fi(x) ≤Fj(x),
(8)
for all x with a strict inequality over some interval.
If Fi ﬁrst-order stochastically dominates Fj, then Fi necessarily has a strictly smaller expected
value: E[Fi(x)] < E[Fj(x)]. In other words, if Fi dominates Fj, then the decision maker prefers
Fi over Fj regardless of his utility function U is, as long as it is weakly increasing.
It is not always the case that one CDF will ﬁrst-order stochastically dominate another. In such
a case, one can use the second-order stochastic dominance to compare them. The latter refers to
the situation when one lottery is unambiguously less risky than another:
36

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
Deﬁnition 9 (Second-Order Stochastic Dominance) Given two random variables ri and rj with
CDFs Fi(x) and Fj(x), respectively, Fi second-order stochastically dominates Fj iff:
Z c
−∞
Fi(x) dx ≤
Z c
−∞
Fj(x) dx,
(9)
for all c with a strict inequality for some values of c.
If Fi second-order stochastically dominates Fj, then E[Fi(x)] ≤E[Fj(x)]. If Equation 9 holds for
all c ≥c′, for some sufﬁciently large c′, then E[Fi(x)] = E[Fj(x)]. In this case, as both lotteries
are equal in expectation, the decision maker prefers the lottery Fi, which has less variance and is,
thus, less risky.
Another common concept in P-DCOPs is that of regret. In decision theory, regret expresses the
negative emotion arising from learning that a different solution than the one adopted, would have
had a more favorable outcome. In P-DCOPs the regret of a given solution is typically deﬁned as
the difference between its associated cost and that of the theoretical optimal solution. The notion of
regret is especially useful in allowing agents to make robust decisions in settings where they have
limited information about the cost functions.
An important type of regret is the minimax regret. Minimax regret is a decision rule used to
minimize the possible loss for a worst case (i.e, maximum) regret. As opposed to the (expected)
regret, minimax regret is independent of the probabilities of the various outcomes. Thus, minimax
regret could be used when the probabilities of the outcomes are unknown or difﬁcult to estimate.
Solving P-DCOPs is PSPACE-hard, as in general, the process is required to remember a solu-
tion for each possible state associated to the uncertain random variables. The study of complexity
classes for P-DCOPs is largely unexplored. Thus, we foresee this as a potential direction for future
research, in which particular focus could be given in determining fragments of P-DCOPs charac-
terized by lower complexity than the one above.
6.2 Algorithms
Unlike for Classical DCOPs and Dynamic DCOPs, where the algorithms solve the same problem,
P-DCOP algorithms approach the problem uncertainty in different ways and, thus, solve different
variants of the problem. This is due to the greater modeling ﬂexibility offered by the P-DCOP
framework. As such, the proposed algorithms are often not directly comparable to one another. We
categorize P-DCOP algorithms into complete and incomplete algorithms, according to their ability
to guarantee to ﬁnd the optimal solutions or not, for a given evaluator and utility functions. Unless
otherwise speciﬁed the ordering operator in Equation 5 refers to the argmax operator.
6.2.1 COMPLETE ALGORITHMS
E[DPOP] (L´eaut´e & Faltings, 2011). E[DPOP] is a synchronous, sampling-based and inference-
based algorithm. It can be either complete or incomplete based on the E[DPOP] variant used, and
described below. E[DPOP] uses a collaborative sampling strategy, where all agents concerned with
37

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
a given random variable agree on a common sample set that will be used to estimate the PDF of that
random variable. Agents performing collaborative sampling independently propose sample sets for
the random variables inﬂuencing the variables they control, and elect one agent among themselves
as responsible for combining the proposed sample sets into one. The algorithm is deﬁned over
P-DCOPs with I ̸= ∅and deterministic cost function outcomes, that is, for each combination of
values for the variables in xi, fi(σxi\I) is a degenerate distribution (i.e., a distribution that results
in a single value) and the utility function U is the identity function. E is an arbitrary evaluator
function summing over all functions in F.
E[DPOP] builds on top of DPOP and proceeds in four phases: In Phase 1, the agents order
themselves into a pseudo-tree ignoring the random variables. In Phase 2, the agents bind random
variables to some decision variable. In Phases 3 and 4, the agents run the UTIL and VALUE propa-
gation phases like in DPOP except that random variables are sampled. Based on different strategies
adopted in binding the random variables in Phase 2, the algorithm has two variants (L´eaut´e & Falt-
ings, 2009). In Local-E[DPOP], a random variable ri ∈I is assigned to each decision variable
responsible for enforcing a constraint involving ri. In this approach, the agents do not collab-
orate by exchanging information about how their utilities depend on the random variables. In
contrast, Global-E[DPOP] assigns ri to the lowest common ancestor agent,9 which is responsible
for combining the proposed samples. While this additional information can produce higher-quality
solutions, both algorithms are generally incomplete. One exception is when the evaluation func-
tion E adopted is linear, as in the case of the expectation function, in which case the algorithms are
complete.
The worst case runtime, memory, and communication requirements of this algorithm are
the same as those of DPOP. The exception is the message size of Global-E[DPOP], which is
O(dw∗sq), where s is the largest sample set size; the UTIL messages have this size when the root
as well as all leaves of the pseudo-tree are constrained with all q random variables.
SD-DPOP (Nguyen et al., 2012).
Stochastic Dominance DPOP (SD-DPOP) operates on a P-
DCOP model where I = ∅, E is the second order stochastic dominance criteria, U is the identity
function, and Σ denotes the convolution of the distributions fi(σxi\I). It is a complete synchronous
inference-based algorithm that extends DPOP to solve P-DCOPs. Similar to DPOP, it has three
phases. In Phase 1, like DPOP, it constructs a pseudo-tree. In Phase 2, instead of summing up
costs, the agents convolve cost functions, and instead of propagating costs up the pseudo-tree, they
propagate convolved cost functions. In Phase 3, like DPOP, the agents choose values for their
variables. However, instead of choosing values that minimize the cost of their subtrees, the agents
choose their values according to the second-order stochastic dominance criteria.
Like DPOP, SD-DPOP requires a linear number of messages.
In addition, in SD-DPOP,
VALUE messages contain each Pareto optimal value of the sending agent, and UTIL messages
contain a representation of the cost function for each Pareto optimal solution and each combination
of values of the parent and pseudo-parents of the sending agents. Thus, for continuous PDFs that
9. The agent that is separated by the smallest number of tree edges from all variables constrained with the given random
variable.
38

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
could be represented by mean and variance, the message size is O(pdw∗), where p is the size of
the Pareto set. If the cost functions are represented by discretized bins, then the message size is
O(bpdw∗), where b is the maximum number of bins used to represent a cost function. The memory
requirement of each SD-DPOP agent is O(pdw∗) or O(bpdw∗), similarly as above, as they need to
store and process the messages received. The worst case runtime requirement and the number of
messages sent by SD-DPOP are the same as those of DPOP.
6.2.2 INCOMPLETE ALGORITHMS
DNEA (Atlas & Decker, 2010).
The P-DCOP model proposed by Atlas and Decker (2010) is
characterized by uncertainty exclusively at the level of the outcome of the cost functions, and not
due to random variables. Thus, I = ∅. In addition, the utility function U is the identity function,
while E is a given evaluator function (e.g., the expectation) for the functions fi ∈F. In this
settings, by employing the evaluation function, Atlas and Decker show that one can reduce the
uncertainty associated to each cost function to the deterministic case. Thus, one can solve the
proposed P-DCOP problems using classical DCOP approaches.
In particular, they propose the Distributed Neighbor Exchange Algorithm (DNEA), which is
an incomplete, synchronous, search-based algorithm that is similar to DSA. Each agent starts by
assigning a random value to each of its variables and sends this information to all its neighbors.
Upon receiving the values of its neighbors, it computes a cost vector containing the costs for each
possible combination of values for all its variables, under the assumption that its neighbors’ values
are those in the messages received. It then sends this cost vector to all its neighbors. Upon receiving
the cost vector of its neighbors, it computes the best value for each of its variables, assigns those
values to its variables probabilistically, and sends the assigned values to all its neighbors. This
process repeats until a termination condition is satisﬁed.
The runtime requirement of this algorithm is O(ℓ(ld + d2)). In terms of communication re-
quirement, the number of messages sent is O(ℓnl), and the size of each message is O(d). In terms
of memory requirement, each DNEA agent needs O(ld) amount of memory to store and process
the messages received.
U-GDL (Stranders et al., 2011).
The P-DCOP model proposed by Stranders et al. (2011) also
assumes that the cost functions are not dependent on random variables. Thus, I = ∅. Additionally,
they assume that E is the expectation of the convolution (Σ) of the distributions fi(σxi\I), and U is a
given risk function. Stranders et al. propose the Uncertain Generalized Distributive Law (U-GDL)
algorithm, which is an incomplete asynchronous inference-based algorithm similar to Max-Sum,
and operates on acyclic graphs. A cyclic constraint graph G is converted into an acyclic graph ˆG by
merging variables until the new resulting graph contains no cycles. Merging two variables creates a
new variable whose domain is the Cartesian product of the domain of the merged variables. U-DGL
extends the Generalized Distributive Law (GDL) algorithm (Aji & McEliece, 2000) by redeﬁning
39

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
the (min, +)10 algebra to the setting where costs are random variables rather than scalars. The +
operator is extended to perform convolution of two random variables. To cope with the potential
issue that not all PDFs are closed under convolution, Stranders et al. (2011) suggest to resort to
sampling methods to approximate such operations. The min operator is deﬁned to distribute over
convolution and to select the minimal elements from a set of random variables based on their
expected cost. In order to ﬁlter partial potential solutions that can never achieve global optimality,
the authors introduce a ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance condition, which is employed in the context
of the min operator. They also discuss necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for dominance, where
the former discards all dominated solutions, but it might also discard some non-dominated solution
– this is equivalent to using a classical DCOP algorithms to solve the P-DCOP model adopted in
their work. The latter preserves optimal solutions, but retains, in general, sub-optimal ones as well.
The runtime requirement of this algorithm is O(p ˆdl), where ˆd is the size of the largest domain
of the merged variables in ˆG. In terms of memory requirement, each U-GDL agent needs O(p ˆdl)
space to store all value combinations of neighboring variables for each solution in its current Pareto
frontier. In terms of communication requirement, the number of messages sent is O(δ( ˆG)), where
δ( ˆG) is the diameter of the resulting acyclic graph, and the size of each message is O(p ˆd) as agents
need to send the current aggregated costs of all the agent’s variable’s values for each solution in its
current Pareto frontier.
6.3 Notable Variant: P-DCOPs with Partial Agent Knowledge
This section describes a class of Probabilistic DCOPs where agents have partial knowledge about
the environment.
In other words, the cost functions are only partially known and, therefore,
agents may discover the unknown costs via exploration (Taylor, Jain, Tandon, Yokoo, & Tambe,
2011). The new model aims at capturing those domains where agents have an “explorative nature,”
i.e., one of the agents’ goals is to acquire knowledge about the environment in which they act.
Agents are concerned with a total, online, cost achievable in a limited time frame. In this context,
agents must balance the coordinated exploration of the unknown environment and the exploitation
of the known portion of the costs, in order to minimize the global utility. This model was originally
called Distributed Coordination of Exploration and Exploitation (DCEE) (Taylor, Jain, Jin, Yokoo,
& Tambe, 2010).
6.3.1 DEFINITION
The P-DCOP model for agents with partial knowledge is described by extending the P-DCOP
model introduced in Section 6.1, as follows: ⟨A, X, D, F, α, I, Ω, P, E, U, T⟩, where T > 0 is a
ﬁnite time horizon characterizing the time within which the agents can exploit the unknown cost
functions and explore the search space. The goal in such a P-DCOP problem is to ﬁnd a set of
complete assignments ⃗σ∗= [σ∗
1, . . . , σ∗
T ] that minimizes the utility of the cumulative cost within
10. U-GDL was originally deﬁned for maximization problems. Its presentation is adapted to minimization problems for
consistency of the DCOP models objective presented in this survey.
40

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
the ﬁnite time horizon T:
⃗σ∗:= arg min/max
σ1,...,σT
E


T
X
t=0
X
fi∈F
U
 fi(σt
xi\I)



(10)
where σt ∈Σ denotes a solution at time step t. In other words, agents have at most T time steps
to modify the value of their decision variables, and solve T P-DCOP problems by acquiring more
and more knowledge on the environment as the time unrolls.
6.3.2 ALGORITHMS
In a stochastic and unknown environment, the cost functions need to be learned online through
interactions between the agents and their environment. Thus, the algorithms presented in this
section are targeted to coordinate agents to solve a sequence of optimization problems in order
to simultaneously reduce uncertainty about the local cost functions (exploration) and optimize the
global objective (exploitation). In addition, the following algorithms are incomplete.
BE-Rebid (Taylor et al., 2010).
The Balanced Exploration Rebid (BE-Rebid) is a synchronous,
search-based algorithm that solves P-DCOPs with I = ∅, and U and E are the identity functions. It
extends MGM as it calculates and communicates its expected gain. The algorithm is introduced in
the context of a wireless sensor network problem, where agents can perform small movements in
order to enhance their communication capabilities, which are characterized by the distance between
pairs of agents. Each agent can perform three actions: stay in the current position, explore another
position, or backtrack to a previously explored position and halt movement. In each time step, BE-
Rebid computes the expected cost of executing the explore or backtrack actions, assuming complete
knowledge of the underlying distribution of the cost functions. Exploring is evaluated by using
order statistics and is based on the cost of the best value found during exploration. Backtracking to
a known position results in a cost associated to the backtracked state for the remainder of the time
steps (i.e., it stays in that state).
Following the region-optimal approaches presented in the context of classical DCOPs, Taylor
et al. (2011) propose a version of the algorithm, called BE-Rebid-2, that allows pairs of agents to
explore in a coordinated fashion. Interestingly, in such settings, the authors ﬁnd that increasing
coordination (measured by the number of agents that can execute a joint action) can decrease
solution quality. This phenomenon is referred to as team uncertainty penalty.
The worst case
runtime and communication requirements of this algorithm are the same as those of MGM.
Heist (Stranders, Tran-Thanh, Fave, Rogers, & Jennings, 2012).
Heist is a synchronous,
inference-based algorithm that solves P-DCOPs with I = ∅, E is the expectation function, and
U is the identity function. It aims at minimizing the expected utility of the cumulative cost func-
tion Fg, within the ﬁnite time horizon T. It does so by modifying a Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB)
approach (Vermorel & Mohri, 2005) to a distributed scenario. A MAB is a slot machine with
multiple arms, each of which yields a cost drawn from an unknown but ﬁxed probability distribu-
tion. It trades exploration and exploitation by pulling the arms in order to minimize the cumulative
41

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
cost over a ﬁnite horizon. To cope with the uncertain and stochastic nature of the cost functions,
Heist models each cost function as a MAB, such that the joined assignment of the variables in the
scope of the given cost function becomes an arm of that bandit. It seeks to minimize the expected
cumulative optimization cost received over a ﬁnite time horizon by repeatedly pulling the MAB
arms to select the joint action with the highest estimated Upper Conﬁdence Bound (UCB) (Auer,
Cesa-Bianchi, & Fischer, 2002) on the sum of the local gains received in a single time step. To
do so, it employs a belief propagation algorithm, known as Generalized Distributive Law (GDL)
(Aji & McEliece, 2000), in order to minimize the UCB in a decentralized fashion. Stranders et al.
(2012) show that Heist enables agents to balance between exploration and exploitation, and derive
optimal asymptotic bounds on the regret of the global cumulative cost attained.
The worst case runtime requirement of this algorithm is O(ℓTdl) as each agent computes the
maximum marginal UCB for its variable assignment for each time step before the horizon. In
terms of memory requirement, each Heist agent needs O(dl) space to store all value combinations
of neighboring variables. In terms of communication requirement, the number of messages sent
is O(ℓTl), one to each neighbor and time step in each iteration, and the size of each message is
O(Td) as it contains the aggregated costs of all the agent’s variable’s values for each time step.
ICG-Max-Sum (Wu & Jennings, 2014).
The Iterative Constraint Generation Max-Sum (ICG-
Max-Sum) algorithm is a synchronous, inference-based algorithm that solves P-DCOPs with I ̸= ∅,
E is the identity function, and U(fi(·)) is the maximal regret function. The algorithm aims at
minimizing the sum of maximal regrets for all the functions in F. Furthermore, the horizon is
T = 1. Thus, unlike the previous algorithms, IGC-Max-Sum does not attempt to learn the outcome
of the cost functions. Its objective is to ﬁnd robust solutions to the uncertain problem distributions;
it does so by ﬁnding the solution that minimizes the maximum regret. The algorithm extends the
Iterative Constraint Generation (ICG) method (Benders, 1962; Regan & Boutilier, 2010) to the
decentralized case by decomposing the overall problem into a master problem and a subproblem
that are iteratively solved until convergence. At each iteration, the resolutions of these problems
are attained by using Max-Sum. The master problem solves a relaxation of the minimax regret
goal, where only a subset of all possible joint beliefs is considered, attempting to minimize the
loss for the worst case derived from the considered joint belief. Once it generates a solution, the
subproblem ﬁnds the maximally violated constraint associated to such a solution. This is referred to
as the witness point, indicating that the current solution is not the best one in terms of the minimax
regret. This point is added to the set of joint beliefs considered by the master problem, and the
process is repeated until no new witness points can be found.
The worst case runtime requirement of this algorithm is O(ℓ|I|dl), which is dominated by the
master problem, whose computation is exponential in the number of variables in the scope of the
associated cost function for each belief and iteration of the algorithm. In terms of memory require-
ment, each ICG-Max-Sum agent needs O(|I|dl) space (dominated by the master problem again) to
store all value combinations of neighboring variables for each belief. In terms of communication
requirement, the number of messages sent is the same as that of Max-Sum since two parallel itera-
42

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
tions of Max-Sum is executed in each ICG-Max-Sum iteration. However, the size of each message
is O(|I|d) as it contains the aggregated cost of all the agent’s variable’s value for each belief.
A variation of this algorithm that aims at minimizing the expected regret, rather than minimiz-
ing the maximum regret, was introduced by Le, Fioretto, Yeoh, Son, and Pontelli (2016).
7. Quantiﬁed DCOPs
The various extensions of the DCOP model discussed so far differ from each other in terms of agent
behavior (deterministic vs. stochastic), agent knowledge (total vs. partial), environmental behavior
(deterministic vs. stochastic), and environment evolution (static vs. dynamic). However, in terms of
the agent teamwork, all of these models assume the agents are fully cooperative. Researchers have
introduced the Quantiﬁed DCOP (QDCOP) model (Matsui, Matsuo, Silaghi, Hirayama, Yokoo, &
Baba, 2010), which assumes a subset of agents to be adversarial, that is, the agents are partially
cooperative or competitive.
7.1 Deﬁnition
The Quantiﬁed DCOP (QDCOP) model (Matsui et al., 2010) adapts the Quantiﬁed Constraint
Satisfaction Problem (QCSP) (Benedetti, Lallouet, & Vautard, 2008) and Quantiﬁed Distributed
CSP (QDCSP) (Baba, Iwasaki, Yokoo, Silaghi, Hirayama, & Matsui, 2010; Baba, Joe, Iwasaki, &
Yokoo, 2011) models to DCOPs. In QCSPs and QDCSPs, all variables are associated to quantiﬁers
and the constraints should be satisﬁed independently of the value taken by universally quantiﬁed
variables. Analogously, in QDCOPs, existential (∃) and universal (∀) quantiﬁers are introduced to
differentiate the cooperative agents from the adversarial ones.
A QDCOP has the form Q(F) := q0x0 . . . qnxn.11 Q is a sequence of quantiﬁed variables,
where each qi ∈{∃, ∀} quantiﬁes the variable xi. The goal of a QDCOP is to ﬁnd a global optimal
solution of the corresponding DCOP. However, a universally quantiﬁed variable is not coordinated
nor assigned, as the result has to hold when it takes any value from its domain. In contrast, an ex-
istentially quantiﬁed variable takes exactly one value from its domain, as in (cooperative) DCOPs.
Thus, the optimal solution of a QDCOP may be different from that of the corresponding DCOP.
While a DCOP solution deﬁnes a single value, associated to its cost, a QDCOP deﬁnes upper
and lower bounds to the optimal solution. In particular, the best choice in a QDCOP deﬁnes the
smallest lower bound. In the worst case, the universally quantiﬁed variables can worsen the overall
objective as much as possible. Therefore, the worst case deﬁnes the smallest upper bound. While
ﬁnding an optimal solution for a DCOP is NP-hard, solving a QDCOP is, in general, P-SPACE-hard
(Benedetti et al., 2008; Lallouet, Lee, Mak, & Yip, 2015).
11. In the original proposal, the set F is separated in a set of constraints C, representing relationships among variables,
and a set of functions F, assigning values to each valid assignment.
43

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
7.2 Algorithms
QDCOPs impose a rigid order on the variables, which reﬂects the correct order of evaluation of the
quantiﬁers. Therefore, classical DCOP algorithms cannot be directly applied to solve QDCOPs.
Matsui et al. (2010) proposed several variations of ADOPT to solve QDCOPs, which are all based
on a DFS pseudo-tree ordering. To keep the ordering of the quantiﬁers unchanged, the pseudo-tree
can be reshaped by applying extra null edges for each pair of nodes, if necessary.
All the algorithms presented here are complete, and are based on the intuition that universally
quantiﬁed variables can be seen as adversarial virtual agents, whose goal is to minimize the overall
objective. Following this intuition and the pseudo-tree modiﬁcations discussed above, pseudo-tree-
based DCOP algorithms can be extended to solve QDCOP.
Min-max ADOPT (Matsui et al., 2010).
Min-max ADOPT is an asynchronous, search-based
algorithm that extends ADOPT to solve QDCOPs. It uses VALUE messages to communicate
values of the variables, and COST messages to announce their costs, similar to ADOPT. Each agent,
starting from the root of the pseudo-tree, assigns values to its variables and propagates them to its
neighboring agents with lower priority. Upon receiving VALUE messages from all higher-priority
neighbors, the agent updates its context and repeats the same process by choosing an assignment
that minimizes its local cost. In Min-max ADOPT, the existentially quantiﬁed variables are used to
compute the lower bound, while the universally quantiﬁed variables are used to compute the upper
bound. This process is executed until the root agent detects that the upper bound is equal to the
lower bound. This algorithm has a relatively simple structure and does not adopt any major pruning
strategy.
Alpha-beta ADOPT (Matsui et al., 2010). Alpha-beta ADOPT is an asynchronous, search-based
algorithm that extends Min-max ADOPT by adapting the alpha-beta search strategy, a common
pruning strategy adopted in game-tree search. This strategy employs two boundary parameters,
alpha and beta, representing the lower bound and the upper bound for each possible cost of an
assignment, respectively. Alpha represents the lower bound, controlled by the universally quan-
tiﬁed variables, while beta represents the upper bound, controlled by the existentially quantiﬁed
variables. Lower bound and upper bound can be modiﬁed exclusively by universally quantiﬁed
and existentially quantiﬁed variables, respectively. In Alpha-beta ADOPT, when an agent reports
the cost value of the current partial assignment, its parent reduces the alpha/beta threshold accord-
ingly. Thus, the new alpha/beta values are used to prune the search when an agent detects that
the current assignment cannot be better than any other solution already evaluated. Alpha and beta
values are obtained using a backtracking technique similar to how thresholds are obtained through
backtracking in the original ADOPT.
Bi-threshold ADOPT (Matsui et al., 2010). Bi-threshold ADOPT extends ADOPT by employing
two backtracking thresholds instead of one as in ADOPT. In ADOPT, each agent ai maintains the
threshold invariant lb∗
i ≤ti ≤ub∗
i , where lb∗
i and ub∗
i are the smallest lower and upper bounds,
respectively, of the agent over all of its values, and ti is the threshold of the agent. In contrast, in
Bi-threshold ADOPT, each agent maintains the threshold invariant lb∗
i ≤tα
i ≤tβ
i ≤ub∗
i , where tα
i
44

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
Group
Problem
Model
AK
EB
EE
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Disaster Evacuation
T
D
S/D
& COORDINATION
Coalition Formation
P
D
D
RADIO FREQUENCY ALLOCATION
Cooperative Channel Assignment
T
D
S/D
RECOMMENDATION SYSTEMS
Group Recommendation
T
D
S
SCHEDULING
Distributed Meeting Scheduling
T
D
S
Water Allocation Scheduling
T
D
S
Vessel Rotation Planning
T
D
S
Patient Scheduling
T
D
S/D
SENSOR NETWORK
Target Tracking
T
D/S
D
Robotic Network Optimization
P
D
D
Mobile Sensor Team
P
S
D
Sensor Sleep Scheduling
T
D
S
SERVICE-ORIENTED COMPUTING
Application Component Placement
T
D
S
Server Allocation
T
D
D
SMART GRID AND SMART BUILDINGS
Economic Dispatch
T
D/S
S/D
Power Supply Restoration
T
D
S
Microgrid Islanding
T
D
S
Prosumer Energy Trading
T
D/S
S
Smart Building Devices Scheduling
T
D/S
S/D
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Supply Chain Formation
T
D
S/D
TRAFFIC CONTROL
Trafﬁc Light Synchronization
T/P
S
D
Table 5: DCOP Applications. AK = Agent Knowledge, it can be [T]otal or [P]artial; EB = Envi-
ronment Behavior, it can be [D]eterministic or [S]tochastic; EE = Environment Evolution, it can be
[S]tatic or [D]ynamic
is a lower bound on the threshold, similar to alpha in Alpha-beta ADOPT, and tβ
i is an upper bound
on the threshold, similar to beta in Alpha-beta ADOPT.
8. DCOP Applications
DCOP models have been adopted to represent a wide range of MAS applications, thanks to their
ability to capture essential and fundamental MAS aspects as well as the support for the development
of general domain-independent algorithms. This section describes some of the most compelling
applications as well as a general overview of their corresponding DCOP models. A comprehensive
list of DCOP applications, categorized according to the DCOP classiﬁcation of Table 2, is given in
Table 5.
8.1 Disaster Management and Coordination Problems
Disaster management and coordination problems refer to how to efﬁciently and effectively respond
to an emergency. In these scenarios, low-powered mobile devices that require limited bandwidth
45

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
are often deployed and utilized to assist the disaster management process. Due to their decen-
tralized nature, the DCOP approach ﬁts naturally with this application. A description of several
problems within this application domain is presented next.
Disaster Evacuation Problems.
In a disaster scenario, moving evacuees to the closest refuge
shelter can quickly overwhelm shelter capacities. A number of researchers have proposed a DCOP
model for disaster evacuation, in which several groups of evacuees have to be led to available
shelters (Carpenter, Dugan, Kopena, Lass, Naik, Nguyen, Sultanik, Modi, & Regli, 2007; Kopena,
Sultanik, Lass, Nguyen, Dugan, Modi, & Regli, 2008; Lass, Kopena, Sultanik, Nguyen, Dugan,
Modi, & Regli, 2008a; Lass, Regli, Kaplan, Mitkus, & Sim, 2008b; Kinoshita, Iizuka, & Iizuka,
2013). Group leaders can communicate via mobile devices to monitor and coordinate actions.
Each group is represented by a DCOP agent managing variables that represent shelter allocations.
Thus, the domain of each variable corresponds to the available shelters. Group sizes and shelter
capacity, as well as additional group requirements (e.g., medical needs) and the distance of a group
to shelters, are encoded as cost functions. Solving the DCOP ensures an assignment of all groups
to shelters that minimizes overﬂow, such that groups receive the services they need and their travel
distances are minimal.
Coalition Formation with Spatial and Temporal Constraints Problems.
In a Coalition For-
mation with Spatial and Temporal Constraints (CFST) problem (Ramchurn et al., 2010; Steinbauer
& Kleiner, 2012; Pujol-Gonzalez, Cerquides, Farinelli, Meseguer, & Rodriguez-Aguilar, 2015),
ambulance and ﬁre brigade agents cooperate in order to react efﬁciently to an emergency scenario
so as to rescue victims and extinguish ﬁres located in different locations. Agents can travel from
one location to another in a given time. Each task (i.e., rescuing a victim, extinguishing a ﬁre)
has a deadline, representing the time until which the victim will survive, and a workload, denoting
the amount of time necessary to rescue the victim or put out the ﬁre. The locations of the victims
and the ﬁres may be unknown to the agents, and need to be discovered at runtime, which requires
agents to dynamically update the sequence of the tasks they will attempt, taking account of two
main constraints: (1) Spatial constraints, which model where an agent can travel and at what time;
and (2) Temporal constraints, which model task deadlines and completion times. Agents may also
form coalitions to execute a given task faster or if the requirements of a given task cannot be met
by a single agent. Hence, the agents’ arrival times at each task need to be coordinated in order to
form the desired coalition. The objective is to maximize the number of tasks to be completed.
A DCOP formalization for the CFST is described by Ramchurn et al. (2010), where ambu-
lances and ﬁre brigades are modeled as DCOP agents. Each agent controls a variable that encodes
the current task that the agent will attempt, and whose domain represents task locations. Unary
constraints restrict the set of reachable locations, according to distance from a destination and the
victim’s deadline. Agents’ coalitions are deﬁned as groups of agents traveling to the same location.
Each task is associated to a utility, which encodes the success for a coalition to complete such task.
The goal is to ﬁnd an assignment of agents to tasks that maximizes the overall utility.
A variant of the CFST problem, called the Law Enforcement Problem (LEP), was introduced
by Amador, Okamoto, and Zivan (2014). Similar to the CFST problem, in a LEP, police ofﬁcers
46

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
need to execute a number of tasks, and may form coalitions to improve their response quality.
Additionally, and differently from the CFST, new tasks can be revealed to the agents dynamically
over time. Agents can choose to interrupt their current task to perform a new revealed task at the
cost of a penalty that is proportional to the importance of the task being interrupted.
8.2 Radio Frequency Allocation Problems
The performance of a wireless local area network (WLAN) depends on the channel assignments
among neighboring access points (APs). Neighboring transmissions occurring in APs on the same
channel or adjacent channels degrade network performance due to transmission interference. In
dense urban areas, different APs may belong to different administrative domains, whose control is
delegated to different entities. Thus, a distributed approach to the channel assignment is necessary.
Cooperative Channel Assignment Problems.
In a cooperative channel assignment problem
(Hollos, Karl, & Wolisz, 2004; Monteiro, Pellenz, Penna, Enembreck, Souza, & Pujolle, 2012a;
Monteiro, Pujolle, Pellenz, Penna, Enembreck, & Demo Souza, 2012b), APs need to be conﬁg-
ured in order to reduce the overall interference between simultaneous transmissions on neighbor-
ing channels. Monteiro et al. (2012a, 2012b) proposed a DCOP-based approach for cooperative
channel assignment in WLANs where APs may belong to different administration entities. In the
proposed model, each AP is represented by a DCOP agent, which controls a decision variable
modeling a choice for the AP’s channels. The signal-to-interference-and-noise ratio perceived by
an AP or a client is modeled as a cost function, as the overall concurrent transmissions occurring in
the same channel and in partially overlapped adjacent channels. The goal is to ﬁnd an assignment
of channels to APs that minimizes the total interference experienced in the WLAN.
Xie, Howitt, and Raja (2007) and Mir, Merghem-Boulahia, and Ga¨ıti (2010) study dynamic
solutions to the problem of allocating and utilizing the wireless network’s available spectrum. In
such a problem, the agents operate in a dynamic radio frequency environment that is composed of
time-varying interference sources, which are periodically sampled and measured.
8.3 Recommendation Systems
Recommendation systems are tools that provide user-tailored information about items to users.
These systems provide information that is tailored to the characteristics and preferences of the
users.
Group Recommendation Problems. Like individual recommendations, group recommendations
need to take into account the preferences of all group members and formulate a recommendation
that suits the whole group. Lorenzi, dos Santos, Ferreira Jr, and Bazzan (2008) propose a DCOP-
based travel package recommendation system for groups of users. The users in the group share
a common goal (the travel package recommendation), and have individual preferences for each
travel service (hotel, ﬂight companies, tour operators, etc). In such a problem, the objective is to
ﬁnd a group recommendation that optimizes the users’ preferences. The proposed DCOP solution
is composed of two types of agents: user agents and recommender agents. Each user agent controls
47

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
a decision variable that models that user’s travel choices, while each recommender agent controls
a decision variable that models a travel service supplier’s recommendations. User travel prefer-
ences are modeled via unary constraints on the user agents’ decision variables. Binary constraints
between user agents in a group and their associated recommender agent ensure that each user’s
choice in the group is compatible to the recommendation of the recommender agent. The goal is to
ﬁnd the best recommendation for the entire group.
8.4 Scheduling Problems
Scheduling problems are an important class of problems that have been long studied in the area
of constraint programming and operations research (Gifﬂer & Thompson, 1960; Solomon, 1987;
Minton, Johnston, Philips, & Laird, 1992; Van Hentenryck & Michel, 2009). In such problems,
time schedules are to be associated to resource usage. The problem is made particularly difﬁcult
when the scheduling process needs to be coordinated in a distributed manner across several entities.
In such a context, many scheduling problems can be naturally mapped to DCOPs.
Distributed Meeting Scheduling Problems.
The distributed meeting scheduling problem cap-
tures generic scheduling problems where one wishes to schedule a set of events within a time range
(Jennings & Jackson, 1995; Garrido & Sycara, 1996). Each event is deﬁned by: (i) the resources
required for it to be completed, (ii) the time required for it to be completed, within which it holds
the required resources, and (iii) the cost of using such resources at a given time. A scheduling
conﬂict occurs if two events with at least one common resource are scheduled in overlapping time
slots. The goal is to maximize the utilities over all the resources, deﬁned as the net gain between
the opportunity beneﬁt and opportunity cost of scheduling various events.
Maheswaran, Tambe, Bowring, Pearce, and Varakantham (2004b) discuss three possible DCOP
formulations for this problem: Time slots as variables (TSAV), events as variables (EAV), and
private events as variables (PEAV). We describe the EAV formulation and refer the reader to the
original article for the other two formulations and additional details. In the EAV formulation, events
are considered as decision variables. Each variable can take on a value from the time slot range
that is sufﬁciently early to schedule the required resources for the required amount of time, or zero
to denote that an event is not scheduled. If a variable takes on a non-zero value, then all its required
resources cannot be assigned to any other overlapping event.
Water Allocation Scheduling Problems.
The management of water resources in large-scale
systems is often associated with multiple institutionally-independent decision makers, which may
represent different and conﬂicting interests, such as ﬂood prevention, hydropower production, and
water supply (Giuliani, Castelletti, Amigoni, & Cai, 2014). The aim of such problems is to ﬁnd an
efﬁcient use of water allocation and distribution according to the different users’ interests.
Giuliani et al. (2014) formalize a regulatory mechanism in water management as a DCOP.
The model involves several active human agents and passive ecological agents. Each agent is
associated with an objective function that it seeks to maximize. Active agents make decisions about
the amount of water to divert from the river or to be released from a dam in order to maximize
their corresponding objective functions. Passive agents, on the other hand, represent ecological
48

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
interests through their associated objective functions and do not make decisions. The agents model
different water supplies for cities and agricultural districts, hydropower productions, and ecological
preservation. The goal is to optimize the agents’ objective functions, satisfying hard (physical)
constraints and maximizing the soft (normative) constraints, which aim at protecting the interests
of the passive agents. A solution to such problem, which makes use of a multi-objective DCOP
formalization, is presented in (Amigoni, Castelletti, & Giuliani, 2015).
Vessel Rotation Planning Problem.
In a large port, vessels are scheduled to visit different
terminals for loading and unloading operations. The sequence of terminals visited by a vessel is
called the vessel rotation. Due to the different nature of the terminal visits (e.g., loading, unload-
ing containers, different inland shipping activities) there are often dependencies between activities
performed at the terminals. Additionally, vessel operators have their own preferences on when
to visit a particular terminal. The vessel rotation planning problem (VRPP) (Li, Negenborn, &
Lodewijks, 2016) describes the problem of assigning rotations to vessels, consisting of sequences
of visits to terminals and arrival and departure times of vessels to terminals in a port area, while
satisfying the terminals’ visits dependencies and taking into account operators’ preferences. Due
to the geographically distributed nature of the resources (vessels, terminals, loading facilities) and
the distributed coordination process undertaken by vessels operators, this problem ﬁts naturally in
the DCOP framework.
Li et al. (2016) proposed a DCOP model for the VRPP, where vessels and terminals are modeled
as DCOP agents. The problem’s variables are the time slot for which a vessel i is at terminal j (xij),
the arrival and departure times of vessel i at terminal j (aij and dij, respectively), and the number
of time steps a vessel i waits at terminal j (wij). A vessel agent i governs variables xij, aij, dij,
and wij, for each terminal j that it can visit, while a terminal agent controls auxiliary variables yij
for each vessel i that can visit j, which has the same value of xij and is used by terminal agents to
represent the terminal capacities. The problem constraints represent the preferences of vessels of
being at a given terminal in a given time, the penalty occurring for a waiting vessel, and the time
windows during which a vessel can visit a terminal.
Patient Scheduling Problems.
Medical appointments scheduling problems are related to meet-
ing scheduling problems, as they need to associate patients to resources (e.g., doctors, medical
machinery) and times, but they require different types of constraints. Patients may require several
services from different departments within the same hospital or in multiple hospitals. In general,
the objective is to minimize the patient treatment waiting time under limited resource conditions,
as well as to ensure efﬁcient resource usage, taking into account patient preferences.
Hannebauer and M¨uller (2001) formulate the problem of scheduling patients to diagnostic units
in an hospital as a DCOP, where appointments are modeled as variables, whose domains describe
times, durations, and locations. The constraints of the problem model the schedule feasibility, the
patient preferences over hospitalization times, the workplace constraints, which restricts the types
of appointment for a given workplace, and diagnostic unit constraints, which model resource usage.
Billiau, Chang, Ghose, and Miller (2012b, 2012c) propose a Dynamic DCOP model for a
radiotherapy patients scheduling problem. In this problem, each agent represents a patient, and it
49

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
controls variables that represent private information (e.g., type of tumor, number of radiation doses
per day, the use of chemotherapy) and public information (e.g., current schedule of the radiotherapy
machine). The constraints of the problem model the duration of each daily treatment, as well as
tumor-speciﬁc treatment restrictions. The problem objective considers patient waiting times to
receive their treatment, patient priorities (based on tumor aggressiveness), and patient preferences.
8.5 Sensor Network Problems
Sensor networks typically consist of a large number of inexpensive and autonomous sensor nodes,
constrained by a limited communication range and battery life. These networks have been de-
ployed for environmental sensing (temperature, humidity, etc.), military applications (e.g., bat-
tleﬁeld surveillance), and target tracking (Akyildiz, Su, Sankarasubramaniam, & Cayirci, 2002).
When deploying sensor networks, it may not be possible to pre-determine the position of each sen-
sor node. The distributed nature of the problem and the presence of several communication and
sensing constraints create a natural ﬁt for DCOPs to solve a wide range of related applications.
Target Tracking Problems. In a target tracking application (Zhang et al., 2005; Matsui & Mat-
suo, 2008; Jain, Taylor, Tambe, & Yokoo, 2009; Ota, Matsui, & Matsuo, 2009; Stranders, Farinelli,
Rogers, & Jennings, 2009; Semnani & Basir, 2013), a collection of small Doppler sensors are scat-
tered in an area to detect possible moving targets in the region. Each sensor is battery-powered, can
communicate with one another through radio communication, and can scan and detect an object
within a ﬁxed range. Communication incurs an energy cost. Thus, to save energy, a sensor may
turn itself off. Multiple sensors may be necessary to detect a single target with high accuracy. The
overall objective is to maximize the number of targets detected, as quickly as possible and, at the
same time, preserve energy so as to prolong the system’s lifetime
Zhang et al. (2005) models a simpliﬁed version of the above problem as a weighted graph
coloring problem, where the total weight of violated constraints needs to be minimized. A node
corresponds to a sensor, an edge between two nodes represents the constraint of a shared region
between agents, and the weight captures the importance of the common region. The size of the
common region reﬂects the amount of energy loss when two sensors scan the shared region at
the same time. Each color corresponds to a time slot in which a sector is scanned. A node must
have at least one color so that the corresponding sector is scanned at least once. This graph coloring
problem is mapped to a DCOP, where agents represent nodes, agent’s variables represent the agents
decision on their color, and cost functions represent the graph edges.
Semnani and Basir (2013) use a hierarchical DCOP approach to scale to larger problems. The
authors partition the original problem into n local regions, and use n DCOPs to solve the smaller
subproblems. Their solutions are then combined in a hierarchical approach, solved by a DCOP that
encompasses variables and constraints shared among the connected regions of the lower hierarchy
DCOPs.
Robotic Network Optimization Problems. The robotic network optimization problem describes
a sensor network problem where sensors are placed on top of robots that have limited movement
50

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
capability. In such a problem, robots can make small movements to optimize the wireless con-
nectivity with their neighbors, without affecting the network topology (Choxi & Modi, 2007; Jain
et al., 2009).
Jain et al. (2009) proposed a DCOP formulation where each robot is represented by an agent.
Each agent controls one variable describing the decision on the robots’ possible movements. Thus,
the variables’ domains consist of the valid positions the agent can move to. The cost functions of
the problem model the power loss (or gain, depending on the optimization criteria) of the wireless
link from a transmitter and a receiver robot, and depend on their positions. Radio communica-
tion in wireless sensor networks have a predictable signal strength loss that is roughly inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between transmitter and receiver. However, radio wave
interference is very difﬁcult to predict (Molisch, 2012). Thus, Jain et al. (2009) use a P-DCOP-
based approach with partial agent knowledge to capture the robot’s partial knowledge on its cost
functions, and to balance exploration of the unknown costs and exploitation of the known portion
of the costs.
Mobile Sensor Team Problem. The Mobile Sensor Team (MST) problem is similar to the target
tracking problem with the difference that agents are capable of moving autonomously within the
environment and that time is modeled explicitly as a discrete sequence of time steps. In an MST,
agents are placed on a grid. For an agent ai, cur posi denotes the agent’s current position; SRi
denotes the agent’s perception sensing range, which determines the coverage range within which
an agent can detect targets; MRi denotes the agent’s mobility range, which deﬁnes the maximum
distance that the agent can move within a single time step; and credi denotes the agent’s credibility,
which reﬂects the likelihood of the correctness of the detected targets. The targets are deﬁned
implicitly through an environmental requirement (ER) function, which deﬁnes, for each point in
the space, the minimum joint credibility value (the sum of the credibility variables) required for
that point to be sensed. In such a representation, targets are points p with ER(p) > 0. Given a set
of agents SRp whose sensing range covers a target p, the remaining coverage requirement of p is
the environmental requirement diminished by the joint credibility of the agents currently covering
p: Cur REQ(p) = max{0, ER(p) ⊖P
ai∈SRp credi}, where ⊖: R × R →R is an operator
that deﬁnes how the environmental requirement decreases by the joint credibility. The goal of the
agents is to ﬁnd positions that minimize the values of Cur REQ for all targets.
MST problems are modeled through a subclass of Dynamic DCOPs, named DCOP MST (Zi-
van, Glinton, & Sycara, 2009; Yedidsion, Zivan, & Farinelli, 2014; Yedidsion & Zivan, 2014).
Each agent ai controls one variable xi representing its position, and whose domain contains all lo-
cations within MRi of cur posi. Thus, the domains are updated each time the agent moves.12 The
constraint Cp of a target p involves exclusively those agents ai whose variable’s domain includes a
location within SRi of p. Thus, at each time step, both domains and constraints may change. As a
consequence, the constraint graph changes as well – the neighbors of each agent have to be updated
at each time step. Finally, in a DCOP MST two agents are neighbors if their sensing areas overlap.
12. An alternative representation is that of modeling the domain of each variable as the entire grid, and to constrain the
agent variable, at each agent move, in order to hide those points lying outside MRi.
51

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
Sensor Sleep Scheduling Problem.
Wireless sensor nodes are equipped with a radio, which
can be used to communicate with neighboring nodes, and a limited power source. These sensor
nodes are often deployed in inaccessible terrains, thus, replacing their power sources may not be
possible. The wireless sensor sleeping scheduling problem aims at switching on/off a particular
sensor node component (such as the sensor or the radio) for a certain period of time, so to ensure
power conservation, maximizing the lifetime of the sensor network.
Chachra and Marefat (2006) proposed a DCOP model for this problem, where each sensor is an
agent whose variables denote its status (on or off) for each time step. Hard constraints are employed
to enforced that if a sensor is on, then all its neighbors should be off, and that sensors cannot stay
on for two consecutive time steps. The overall objective is to minimize the delay induced in the
network.
A similar problem is solved by Stranders et al. (2009), where sensors are also able to harvest
energy from the environment (e.g. using a photo-voltaic cell or vibration-harvesting microgenera-
tors). In such a context, the goal is to ﬁnd a schedule that maximizes the probability of detecting
events while maintaining energy-neutral operations (that is, exhibit an indeﬁnite lifetime for each
of the agents).
8.6 Service-Oriented Computing Problems
The service-oriented computing paradigm is one that relies on sharing resources over a network,
focusing on maximizing the effectiveness of the shared resources, which are used by multiple
applications. Efﬁcient solutions with optimal use of resources are crucial in this paradigm and
have a wide industrial impact (Moreno-Vozmediano, Montero, & Llorente, 2013). The distributed
nature of the resources and the privacy concerns arising when different clouds are involved in the
deployment, makes DCOP appealing to solve a range of problems in this paradigm (Mejias & Roy,
2010).
Application Component Placement Problems.
An Application Component Placement (ACP)
problem is deﬁned over a network of servers offering storage devices with various capabilities, and
component-based application with requirements for processing, communication, and storage (Jin,
Cao, & Li, 2011; Li, Wang, Ding, & Li, 2014). The ACP problem is a problem of deciding which
server to assign to each application component. The component-based application is described by
a set of characteristics that establish their requirements in terms of hardware (e.g., CPU speed, stor-
age capacity) as well as constraints between components of the same application (e.g., minimum
bandwidth, secure communication channel requirement). When the APC involves deployment on
multiple clouds data privacy must be preserved. Additionally, in cloud environments computing
resources are shared by many applications and the infrastructure is dynamically changing, making
centralized solutions unfeasible.
Jin et al. (2011) proposed a DCOP model for the ACP problem where servers bid for a compo-
nent to host, with an emphasis that is proportional to the afﬁnity of the server characteristics and
the component hardware and software requirements. Each server is modeled by an agent, which
controls a decision variable representing the server bids. Thus, the domain of each variable is the
52

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
set of possible components that may be deployed on the server. Unary functions express utility
for each component. Hard constraints are employed to ensure that each component is deployed
exactly on a single server, and that two components are placed between servers satisfying the re-
quired communication bandwidth. The objective is to ﬁnd a feasible assignment of component to
servers that maximizes the utilities.
Server Allocation Problems.
Services-oriented middleware networks are composed of entities
connected within a physical network. These entities can both provide and require multiple ser-
vices. In turn, each service can be provided by multiple servers and can serve multiple clients. A
service request from a given client, takes into account various Quality of Service (QoS) parameters
(e.g., service response time, service completion time). When a client generates a service request,
it can be satisﬁed by any of the servers offering such requests. The server allocation problem is a
problem of selecting servers to allocate services, ensuring maximum social welfare, while meeting
the QoS requirements of all clients.
Choudhury, Dey, Dutta, and Choudhury (2014) presented a DCOP model for this problem
where agents correspond to network entities, variables correspond to services, and their values are
either 1, if the associated agent is willing to provide/forward the service, or 0, otherwise. Clients’
service requests are mapped to servers’ service offers, accounting for the delays that occur when
traversing between intermediate nodes using a routing multicast protocol (Yan, Lee, Shen, & Qiao,
2013). Moreover, in order to provide a service, all requested QoS requirements need to be satis-
ﬁed. The utility associated to each variable is the combination of the utility for such a node when
acting as a service consumer, a service provider, and a service forwarder, and depends on several
parameters, such as available GPU cycles, battery power, memory, and bandwidth. The problem
may change dynamically when a new request is made, or when a new service is offered or released,
and as such can be modeled as a Dynamic DCOP.
8.7 Smart Grid and Smart Homes Problems
The smart grid is a vision of the future electricity grid (also called power network) that uses data
analytics and decision making to improve the efﬁciency and reliability of energy production and
distribution. The development of smart grids poses several challenges: (i) How to deal with the
increasing power network utilization due to growth of loads, such as electric vehicles (EVs) and
heat pumps; (ii) How to efﬁciently integrate a diverse range of energy sources, including renewable
generators, into the power network; and (iii) How to deal with the uncertainty in the equipment as
well as in the participation of consumers through demand-side technologies. Due to the distributed
and dynamic nature of loads and generators participating in the power network, agent-based de-
centralized autonomous control of smaller distributed microgrids is a very compelling solution
(Davidson, Dolan, McArthur, & Ault, 2009; Ramchurn, Vytelingum, Rogers, & Jennings, 2012).
In particular, several agent-based decentralized optimization solutions have been explored to de-
liver this vision (Kumar, Faltings, & Petcu, 2009; Matsui & Matsuo, 2011; Miller, Ramchurn, &
Rogers, 2012; Jain, Ranade, Gupta, & Pontelli, 2012). The following is a list of the most prominent
DCOP approaches for smart grid and smart homes applications.
53

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
Economic Dispatch Problems. Economic Dispatch (ED) is the problem of coordinating the vari-
ous settings of the power generators in order to meet the power loads with the lowest cost possible,
while satisfying the physical power network constraints (Wood & Wollenberg, 2012). Researchers
have cast this problem as a DCOP (Miller et al., 2012; Jain et al., 2012; Gupta, Jain, Yeoh, Ranade,
& Pontelli, 2013a; Athanasiadis, Kockar, & McArthur, 2013), considering a network of nodes
(agents), each of which relays power to other nodes, but can also contain a combination of gen-
erators and loads. Generators are distributed across nodes, and are represented through variables
whose domain describe a certain set of discrete power outputs. The power lines connecting nodes
of the networks are also associated to DCOP variables, each of which has a thermal capacity de-
scribing the maximum power that it can safely carry. The DCOP objective function describes a
particular optimization criteria, such as minimizing the carbon emissions of generators within the
network, as well as the imposed load and network constraints. In particular, the constraints ensure
that the overall demand and supply are in balance and that the thermal capacity constraints of the
power lines are satisﬁed.
A version of the ED problem with a planning horizon has been proposed by Fioretto, Yeoh,
Pontelli, Ma, and Ranade (2017b). This formalization extends the ED model described above
by capturing the physical restrictions of transmission lines, power loads, and power generators
arising when deploying a sequence of solutions (set-points for generators and loads) over time. In
particular, it models the maximum incremental power that can be supplied or reduced in one time
step to each power generator, which depends on the mechanical characteristics of the generators.
This problem has been cast as a Dynamic DCOP, where, in addition to the variables and constraints
of the classic ED problem, a set of constraints is introduced between each two consecutive time
steps to limit the maximum variation of the generators’ output.
Power Supply Restoration Problems.
After (multiple) line failures, a power network must be
reconﬁgured to ensure restoration of power supply. A power network distribution is a network
of power lines connected by switching devices (SDs) and fed by circuit breakers (CBs). SDs are
analogous to sinks (transformer stations), while CBs are analogous to power sources. Both of these
devices can operate in two states: open or closed. Closed SDs consume some power and forward
the rest of it on other lines. Open SDs stop power ﬂow. CBs feed the network when they are closed.
The conﬁguration of the devices’ state is such that energy ﬂow traversing CBs takes the form of a
(feeder) tree, and that no SD is powered by more than a single power line. Flow conservation and
transmission line capacity constraints must be enforced. The power supply restoration problem is
the problem of ﬁnding a conﬁguration that ensures power restoration for the maximum number of
sinks affected by the line failures.
Researchers have proposed a DCOP formulation for this problem (Kumar et al., 2009; Agrawal,
Kumar, & Varakantham, 2015). In such a framework, each node of the distribution network is
controlled by an agent that owns all variables and constraints corresponding to that node. Two
DCOP variables are associated to each network node: A load variable and a direction variable.
Load variables model the amount of incoming ﬂow for sink nodes, and the number of sinks fed for
power source nodes. Direction variables model all the possibilities of feeding a node, as the set
54

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
of possible conﬁgurations in which its neighboring nodes can forward power to it. The acyclicity
of the power ﬂow and the ﬂow conservation are modeled as constraints. The former restricts the
power path to be a tree as well as deﬁnes the optimization criterion. The latter enforces Kirchhoff’s
law, that the amount of incoming power ﬂow to the node i must equal the sum of power consumed
at i and the amount of power forwarded to other nodes.
Microgrid Islanding Problems.
A microgrid islanding problem is the problem of creating is-
lands (i.e., clusters of generator units and loads able to operate without external energy supply) in
response to major power outages and blackouts. Gupta, Yeoh, Pontelli, Jain, and Ranade (2013b)
formalized this problem as a DCOP where agents represent nodes in the network and each agent
has its own power generation and power consumption capabilities. The variables of the DCOP
represent the amount of power that an agent generates and consumes, as well as transmission line
ﬂows and the switch status between network nodes. The ﬂow variables are constrained by their
maximum transmission line capacities, while switches are modeled as binary variables that can be
turned on or off. Flow conservation are modeled as constraints to enforce Kirchhoff’s law. The
goal is to ﬁnd a switching conﬁguration that minimizes the unserved load of the system.
Prosumer Energy Trading Problems.
In its more general form, a smart grid is populated by
prosumers capable of both generating and consuming resources. The prosumer energy trading
problem aims at setting market-based prices for prosumers to directly trade energy over the smart
grid, while taking account of the power network constraints. This problem has been cast as an
optimization problem, called the energy allocation problem, where, given a graph with nodes rep-
resenting prosumers and edges describing transmission lines connecting adjacent prosumers, the
goal is to ﬁnd an allocation that maximizes the beneﬁts of all the prosumers while satisfying the
capacity constraints of the power network.
Cerquides, Picard, and Rodr´ıguez-Aguilar (2015) proposed a DCOP formalization for this
problem, where each prosumer is modeled as an agent. Variables are associated with edges of
the energy trading network (i, j) and describe the number of units of energy that prosumer i sells
to/buys from prosumer j. Thus, two variables (i, j) and (j, i) are associated to each edge of the
network. For each prosumer, an energy balance constraint models the utility of a given instantiation
of its offers as the sum of the offers associated to the energy traded with each of its neighbor. Line
capacity and ﬂow conservation constraints ensure that the energy traded along the transmission
lines is within their maximum capacity and is consistent with Kirchhoff’s law.
Smart Building Devices Scheduling Problems.
A smart building is a residential or commercial
building that is partially automated through the introduction of smart devices (e.g., smart ther-
mostats, circulator heating, washing machines). Additionally, a range of smart plugs allow users to
control remotely the activity of the devices connected to them. Therefore, smart device scheduling
can be executed by householders without the control of a centralized authority. The distributed
nature of smart devices within a smart building, and of smart buildings within a neighborhood, as
well as data privacy concerns, make this domain suitable to DCOP solutions.
Within a smart building, the Smart Environment Conﬁguration Problem (SECP) proposed by
Rust, Picard, and Ramparany (2016) is the problem of coordinating several smart devices (light
55

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
bulbs, roller shutters, luminosity sensors, etc.) whose actions affect the building environment,
with the goal of reaching a desired goal state (e.g., a given luminosity level for a room). This
resource allocation problem is cast to a DCOP in which devices are described via DCOP agents,
each of which controls a single variable describing the devices’ action. The domain of the variables
model the possible device’s actions. Finally, the impact of the device’s action onto the building
environment is captured by a set of soft constraints. The goal is that of ﬁnding an assignment of
actions for the building’s devices that satisﬁes the given goals while minimizing some cost function
(e.g., the energy consumption of each device).
Within a smart city, the Smart Home Device Scheduling Problem (SHDS) proposed by Fioretto,
Yeoh, and Pontelli (2017a) is the problem of coordinating the schedule of several smart homes’ de-
vices so to minimize the aggregated energy peaks as well as to minimize the users’ energy bill cost,
when adopting a real-time energy price schema. In the SHDS problem, each smart home controls
a set of smart sensors and smart devices. Within each smart home, users establish scheduling rules
deﬁning goal states upon certain home’s properties (e.g., reaching a certain room temperature by a
given time of the day, or charging the battery of an electric vehicle of at least some amount during
the night). Each device’s action has an associated energy consumption and a cost (which depends
on the time of the day in which the action is executed and on its required power). Each user in
a smart home attempts to ﬁnd a schedule for its smart devices that satisﬁes its scheduling rules
while minimizing the energy cost. Additionally, multiple smart homes coordinate their devices’
schedules so to minimize the daily energy peak consumption. Fioretto et. al map the SHDS prob-
lem as a DCOP where each agent models a smart home. Agents control multiple variables, each
representing a smart device (a sensor or an actuator). Similar to the SECP problem, variables’
domains model the possible actions of a device, and constraints capture the actions’ costs, energy
consumption, and user preferences. Additionally, a set of hard constraints is used to model the
user’s temporal goals. A dataset for the SHDS problem has been recently released (Kluegel, Iqbal,
Fioretto, Yeoh, & Pontelli, 2017). Finally, Tabakhi, Le, Fioretto, and Yeoh (2017) investigate how
to elicit preferences associated to the users’ temporal goals in an extension of the SHDS problem.
8.8 Supply Chain Management Problems
The management of large businesses involves the management of the ﬂow of goods from suppliers
to customers. This ﬂow of goods is called a supply chain. Supply chains have to be carefully man-
aged to ensure that a sufﬁcient quantity of raw material is available at factories for production and
a sufﬁcient quantity of processed goods is available at stores for consumers to buy. Additionally,
since goods can be purchased from different producers and sold to different consumers, there is
also the need to consider how much to buy/sell the goods and who to buy/sell the goods to. In such
an environment, information, decision making and control are inherently decentralized.
Supply Chain Formation Problems.
A supply chain formation problem is the process of de-
termining the participants in a supply chain, who will exchange what, with whom, and the terms
of the exchange. Several DCOP-based approaches for this problem have been proposed in the
literature (Gaudreault, Frayret, & Pesant, 2009; Penya-Alba, Cerquides, Rodriguez-Aguilar, &
56

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
Vinyals, 2012; Penya-Alba, Vinyals, Cerquides, & Rodriguez-Aguilar, 2012; Winsper & Chli,
2013; Penya-Alba, Vinyals, Cerquides, & Rodriguez-Aguilar, 2014). They rely on the notion of
a Task Dependency Network (TDN), a graph-based representation to capture dependencies among
production processes, introduced by Walsh and Wellman (2000). A TDN is a bipartite directed
acyclic graph representing exchanges, where nodes in the graph correspond to producers and con-
sumers and edges in the graph correspond to feasible exchanges of goods between the producers
and consumers. A path from potential producers and consumers deﬁnes a feasible supply chain
conﬁguration and the goal is to ﬁnd the feasible conﬁguration that optimizes a particular cost func-
tion. A DCOP encoding for this problem models producers and consumers as agents, each of which
controls a variable describing the agent’s decision regarding whom to buy from/sell to as well as its
associated quantities and costs. Cost functions are associated with each edge of the TDN encoding
the willingness of the producer and consumer to trade with each other.
A dynamic version of the above formalization has been investigated by Chli and Winsper
(2015). This model allows for the entry and departure of producers and consumers as well as
changes in properties of the problem (e.g., prices of goods, production capacity of producers, and
consumption requirements of consumers).
8.9 Trafﬁc Flow Control Problems
A challenge for the increase of transportation demand is to enforce trafﬁc ﬂow control using the
existing infrastructure, such as trafﬁc lights, loop detectors, and cameras. Coordinating the actions
of these individual devices aims at smoothing the trafﬁc ﬂow at the network level. Such coordi-
nated actions often generates coherent trafﬁc control plans faster and more accurately compared to
those of a human trafﬁc operator (Van Katwijk, De Schutter, & Hellendoorn, 2009). Due to the
distributed nature of such devices, multi-agent solutions are particularly suitable for this class of
problems.
Trafﬁc Light Synchronization Problem. This problem is the problem of ﬁnding a synchroniza-
tion schema for the trafﬁc lights in adjacent intersections that creates green waves, which are waves
of vehicles that are traveling at a given speed and are able to cross multiple intersections without
stopping at red lights.
de Oliveira, Bazzan, and Lesser (2005) and Junges and Bazzan (2008) model this problem as a
DCOP, where agents represent trafﬁc lights, each controlling one variable that models the coordi-
nation direction for the associated trafﬁc signal. Thus, the domain of the variables is given by two
possible directions of coordination (north-south/south-north, east-west/west-east). Conﬂicts that
arise when two neighboring trafﬁc signals choose different directions are modeled as constraints.
Cost functions are deﬁned to model the number of incoming vehicles in a junction, and the costs
are inﬂuenced by whether two adjacent agents agree on a direction of coordination or not. The goal
is to minimize the global cost. Due to the dynamic nature of the problem, the proposed algorithms
fall under the umbrella of Dynamic DCOP algorithms.
Pham, Tawﬁk, and Taylor (2013) and Brys, Pham, and Taylor (2014) proposed a Probabilistic
DCOP-based approach with partial agent knowledge to solve the trafﬁc light synchronization prob-
57

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
lem in the context where agents have partial information about their cost functions. In particular,
the authors argue that trafﬁc patterns may vary during time and, thus, the agents should learn them
to update their cost functions. In this context, agents are given a limited amount of time to explore
different signal duration intervals, whose associated costs are learned by evaluating the average
travel time of the ﬁrst 100 cars traveling across the agent’s trafﬁc light.
9. Analyses and Perspectives on DCOPs
DCOPs have emerged as a popular formalism for distributed reasoning and coordination in multi-
agent systems. It provides an elegant modeling framework, which offers ﬂexibility in both the
agents’ reasoning and coordination strategies. Its ability to support the notions of preferences and
constraints makes it suitable to model a variety of multi-agent optimization problems. Preferences
are a central concept of decision making and arise in a multitude of contexts in multi-agent systems.
They are fundamental for the analysis of human choice behavior, and allow agents to express
their inclinations through speciﬁc actions and behaviors. Constraints have been long studied in
centralized systems (Rossi et al., 2006) and have been proved especially practical and efﬁcient for
modeling and solving resource allocation and scheduling problems. They are naturally handled
within DCOPs and offer a ﬂexible and effective mean to model a variety of complex problems.
In addition, DCOPs support several aspects that are crucial in multi-agent systems, such as agent
privacy, autonomy in reasoning, and cooperation.
The classical DCOP notion is unable to capture important aspects of the problem related with
the environment characteristics, such as partial observability, environment evolution, and uncer-
tainty. Therefore, several DCOP model extensions have been recently presented. Each DCOP
model imposes distinctive algorithmic requirements, which concern both the agent’s reasoning and
cooperation aspects. These requirements, in turn, are strictly related to the characteristics of the
problem domain. Due to the performance variability imposed by such requirements, an appropri-
ate selection of the DCOP model and algorithm is essential to obtain desirable performances in
realistic application domains.
9.1 Comparative Overview of DCOP Models
Classical DCOPs can be used to represent a wide range of MAS applications where agents in
a team need to work cooperatively to achieve a single goal in a static, deterministic, and fully
observable environment. Exploring the domain structural properties, as well as understanding the
requirements of the problem designer, is crucial to design and apply effective DCOP algorithms. A
discussion on how to choose an appropriate algorithm based on the characteristic of the application
at hand is provided in Section 4.4.
Asymmetric DCOPs are suitable when constrained agents incur different costs for a joint action,
which arise especially in scenarios where privacy is a particular concern, where agents cannot re-
veal to the other agents the costs associated to their putative actions. Examples of problems that can
be suitably modeled as Asymmetric DCOPs are resource allocation problems where agents incur in
58

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
distinct costs from using the same resource, and where their preferences and constraints regarding
usage time slots and durations are expected to be different. Asymmetric DCOPs are particularly
attractive to model those domains that can be represented as graphical games (Kearns, Littman, &
Singh, 2001), and where constraint reasoning could be actively used to exploit the problem struc-
ture. In a graphical game, the costs of each agent are affected exclusively by its neighboring agents.
It is important to note that, even though the Asymmetric DCOP model bears similarities with many
game-theoretic approaches, these two models are fundamentally different. While game-theoretic
agents are self-interested, and their non-cooperative actions lead to a desirable global target, Asym-
metric DCOP agents are cooperative and seek to minimize the global cost even at the expense of
larger local costs.
Multi-Objective DCOPs are tailored to represent those classes of distributed problems that can-
not be modeled with a single optimization function. The observations above on classical DCOPs
also hold for Multi-Objective DCOPs and, in addition, agents cooperate to optimize multiple ob-
jectives. Numerous MAS applications fall in the category of multi-objective optimization. One
example is that of disaster management and coordination problems, where agents coordinate to ef-
fectively respond to an emergency scenario (see Section 8.1). Due to memory requirements, which
are proportional to the number of objectives and the size of the Pareto set, incomplete strategies
seem particularly promising for this research area.
Dynamic DCOPs capture the dynamic behavior of the evolving environment in which agents
act. Dynamic environments play a fundamental role in real-wold MAS applications. Virtually all
complex MAS applications involve dynamic situations, which may restructure the network topol-
ogy due to agent movements, or bring additional information to the problem being solved. For
example, in a search and rescue operation during disaster management, as the environment evolves
over time, new information becomes available about civilians to be rescued and new agencies may
arrive at any time to help conduct rescue operations (see Section 8.1). In a smart grid domain,
real-time pricing is commonly enforced. Thus, agent preferences need to be adapted over time,
while energy costs are updated (see Section 8.7). Dynamic DCOPs are therefore a modern area
that presents an exciting ﬁeld for groundbreaking research.
Probabilistic DCOPs extend the classical DCOP model to include the capability of handling
uncertain events, allowing DCOP agents to handle a wider range of applications. In particular,
Probabilistic DCOPs are suitable to capture those applications characterized by a static environ-
ment evolution with exogenous uncertain events (e.g., when the actions of agents on the environ-
ment can have different outcomes, based on external, uncertain factors) and, yet, agents have total
knowledge of their own actions and of the observable environment and act in a fully cooperative
context. The domain of multi-agent task planning and scheduling encompasses diverse problems
that require complex models and robust solutions under uncertainty (see Section 8.4). The Prob-
abilistic DCOP model for agents with partial knowledge is suitable to model those applications
where agents have no prior knowledge of how the environment reacts to some of the actions. In
such a model, the agents are aware of their own actions, which are performed deterministically.
However, there is uncertainty in the cost associated to such actions, which is inﬂuenced by uncer-
tain events that can be discovered over time. Thus, a common approach in such cases is to resort
59

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
DCOP MODEL
COMPLEXITY
Classical
NP-hard
Asymmetric
NP-hard
Multi-objective
NP-hard
Dynamic
NP-hard
Probabilistic
PSPACE-hard
Quantiﬁed
PSPACE-hard
Table 6: Complexity of the DCOP Models
to sampling strategies, in order to obtain simple approximations of the probability distributions –
in the form of sample realizations of the probabilistic costs. Due to the uncertainty arising in such
problems, it is especially appealing to recur to solutions that adopt approaches to decision making
under uncertainty, such as minimax, maximin, and regret-based methods.
As outlined in Table 3, more research effort is needed to solve DCOP models in which agents
act in a combined uncertain and dynamic environment. This is by far the most realistic setting for
teams of agents acting within a MAS. More generally, a coordination strategy that can adapt to
the situation where the environment or network problem is evolving dynamically and rapidly and
where several scenarios require different approaches to coordination, has not yet been studied.
Finally, Quantiﬁed DCOPs model adversarial agents, which are common in many MAS appli-
cations. In a Quantiﬁed DCOP, universally quantiﬁed variables can be considered as the choice of
the nature of an adversary. Quantiﬁed DCOPs can thus formalize problems where a team of agents
seeks to limit the effect of the adversarial agents, as well as problems associated to planning under
uncertainty. Examples of relevant applications include distributed surveillance planning problems,
where sensors in a network need to coordinate their surveillance areas to detect intruders, whose
positions are unknown and who are trying to avoid detection. Thus, the sensors try to ﬁnd a robust
plan that can handle different intruding scenarios (see Section 8.5).
In terms of complexity, solving classical, Asymmetric, Multi-Objective, and Dynamic DCOPs
optimally is NP-hard. In contrast, the Probabilistic DCOP extension to include the capability of
handling uncertain events and the Quantiﬁed DCOP extension to model adversarial agents comes
at a cost of increasing complexity. Both Probabilistic DCOPs and Quantiﬁed DCOPs are PSPACE-
hard. Table 6 summarizes the complexity of the DCOP models discussed in this survey.
9.2 Algorithms and Theoretical Analysis
Despite the fact that classical DCOPs have reached a sufﬁcient level of maturity from the algorith-
mic perspective, most of the other proposed formalisms fall short on both algorithmic and theoreti-
cal foundations. The proposed algorithms mostly extend classical DCOP algorithms and, therefore,
they result in similar performance. Investigating strategies that are based on different backgrounds
could help propel the evolution of this area.
60

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
Inter-disciplinary Research: In particular, further investigations on relating DCOPs to the areas
of game theory and decision theory are necessary. Similar to the work of Chapman, Rogers, and
Jennings (2008), where the authors study relationship between DCOPs and potential games, an-
alyzing the relationship of DCOPs to auction mechanisms could shed light on how to effectively
address coordination and reasoning strategies in DCOP with partially cooperative agents. Another
direction is to relate DCOP with machine learning techniques. For instance, as outlined by Kumar
and Zilberstein (2011) and Ghosh, Kumar, and Varakantham (2015), one can use inference-based
algorithms, such as expectation-maximization, and convex optimization machinery to develop ef-
ﬁcient message-passing algorithms for solving large DCOPs. Additionally, merging insights from
decision theory, such as handling partial observability, with the inherent DCOP ability of naturally
exploiting problem structure could result in improved performance and/or reﬁned models (Nair,
Varakantham, Tambe, & Yokoo, 2005; Hoang et al., 2016, 2017).
Anytime Mechanisms: Due to the complexity of the DCOP models, the study of incomplete ap-
proaches to solve large DCOPs whose agents may act in a dynamic and/or uncertain environment
seems particularly suitable. Within the current incomplete methods proposed, a considerable ef-
fort has been employed in developing anytime algorithms (Zilberstein, 1996). In addition to the
anytime mechanism, which constrains the problem resolution within a particular time requirement,
any-space algorithms have been proposed to limit the amount of space needed to an agent during
problem resolution (Petcu & Faltings, 2007a; Yeoh et al., 2009b, 2011; Gutierrez et al., 2011). Sim-
ilar to these mechanisms, we see an urge for investigating algorithms that allow problem resolution
within any particular network load restriction. For instance, in a congested network agents might
need to exchange smaller messages, or to communicate less frequently and/or with a restricted
set of neighbors. Situations like these may arise in problems where a multitude of interconnected
systems share the same medium, and thus limited bandwidth and interference may cause unsuit-
able delays. This context may be exacerbated with the advent of concepts such as the Internet of
the Things, which expects to see million of connected devices, possibly sharing several mediums
(Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2010; Chen, 2012; Miorandi, Sicari, De Pellegrini, & Chlamtac, 2012).
Thus, orthogonal to the direction pursed by anytime and any-space algorithms, we envision the
development of any-communication procedures.
Coordination and Cooperation Study: Another open question is related to agent coordination. It
has been observed that simple coordination strategies give good results in extremes (high or low)
agent workload environments. However, at intermediate workload levels, such strategies lose their
effectiveness, and more complex coordination strategies are necessary (Lesser, Decker, Wagner,
Carver, Garvey, Horling, Neiman, Podorozhny, Prasad, Raja, et al., 2004; Zhang & Lesser, 2013).
For example, Zhang and Lesser (2013) study agent learning, where coordination is driven by a
dynamic decomposition of a DCOP, each solving smaller independent subproblems. Their pro-
posal effectively produced near-optimal agent policies for learning and signiﬁcantly reduced the
amount of communication. These empirical observations suggest the existence of phase transition
behaviors occurring at the level of agent coordination. A formal understanding of these phenom-
ena, which looks at the environment, agents’ local reasoning strategies, their assumptions on other
61

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
agents states, as well as team coordination, could help researchers to understand the inherent com-
plexity of coordination problems. Such a formal framework could be useful to build new and more
efﬁcient coordination strategies for a wide variety of multi-agent applications, perhaps resembling
the way studies of phase transitions of NP-hard problems (Monasson, Zecchina, Kirkpatrick, Sel-
man, & Troyansky, 1999) led to the understanding of problem complexity and creation of effective
heuristics and search strategies.
9.3 Evaluation Metrics and Benchmarks
DCOP Resolution Assumptions: Modeling many real-world problems as DCOPs often require
each agent to solve large complex subproblems, each requiring many variables and constraints. A
limitation of most DCOP algorithms is the assumption that each agent controls exactly one vari-
able, and that all constraints are binary. Such assumptions simplify the algorithm organization and
presentation. To operate under this assumption, reformulation techniques are commonly adopted
to transform a general DCOP into one where each agent controls exclusively one variable. There
are two commonly used reformulation techniques (Burke & Brown, 2006; Yokoo, 2001): (i) Com-
pilation (or complex variables) where each agent creates a new pseudo-variable whose domain
is the Cartesian product of the domains of all variables of the agent; and (ii) Decomposition (or
virtual agents) where each agent creates a pseudo-agent for each of its variables. While both tech-
niques are relatively simple, they can be inefﬁcient. In compilation, the memory requirement for
each agent grows exponentially with the number of variables that it controls. In decomposition,
the DCOP algorithms will treat two pseudo-agents as independent entities, resulting in unneces-
sary computation and communication costs. A more realistic view is to allow each agent to solve
its local subproblem (in a centralized fashion) since it is independent of the subproblems of other
agents. The agent’s subproblem resolution can then explore techniques from centralized reasoning,
such as constraint optimization problems, linear programming, and graphical models. One can
even exploit novel hardware platforms, such as Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) to parallelize
such solvers (Fioretto, Pontelli, Yeoh, & Dechter, 2017; Fioretto et al., 2016a; Bistaffa, Farinelli,
& Bombieri, 2014).
Researchers have proposed re-designed versions of existing algorithms to be able to handle
multi-variables agents problems (Davin & Modi, 2006; Khanna, Sattar, Hansen, & Stantic, 2009;
Portway & Durfee, 2010). Additionally, recently, Grinshpoun (2015) and Fioretto, Yeoh, and
Pontelli (2016b) have proposed general DCOP problem decompositions which are able to solve
problems where agents control multiple variables.
DCOP Modeling Language: Despite the wide applicability of the DCOP model, unfortunately,
there is no general language being used to formally specify a DCOP. While there are several DCOP
simulators that include implementations of various DCOP algorithms using a common language
speciﬁcation (Sultanik, Modi, & Regli, 2007; L´eaut´e, Ottens, & Szymanek, 2009; Wahbi, Ezza-
hir, Bessiere, & Bouyakhf, 2011), by and large, most stand-alone algorithms specify DCOPs in
an ad-hoc manner. As a result, it is often inconvenient to experimentally compare different algo-
rithms. More importantly, the great majority of such languages requires constraints values to be
62

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
speciﬁed explicitly. Such requirement makes unpractical to convert problems which are naturally
deﬁned as mathematical optimization problems (such as Mixed Integer Programs) into an explicit
form which speciﬁes the utilities for each value combination of the variables in the scope of the
problem constraints. The adoption of a common distributed constraint modeling language, which
allows one to express constraints as standard algebraic or logic expressions, may be beneﬁcial for
developing standard benchmarks. Additionally, it would provide a tool for researchers outside the
AI communities to model and test the applicability of new problems, extending the applicability of
DCOPs to new areas. For instance, within the constraint programming community, the adoption
of the MiniZinc language (Nethercote, Stuckey, Becket, Brand, Duck, & Tack, 2007) to model
CSPs and COPs has gained wide traction, and it is becoming a modeling choice even outside the
constraint programming community.
DCOP Simulators: DCOP simulators are multi-agent software tools that simulate the execution
of DCOP algorithms. They are a useful resource for DCOP researchers and practitioners for evalu-
ating different models and algorithms. There are several MAS simulators which have been adopted
by researchers to develop and compare DCOP algorithms:
• DisChoco (Wahbi et al., 2011) is a Java open-source framework for simulating DCOP algorithms
where agents are executed asynchronously (each in a separate execution thread) and communi-
cation is implemented via messages passing. The simulator includes some problem generators
and the possibility to take into account message loss, message corruption, and message delay. It
supports models in which agents control multiple variables and problems with n-ary constraints.
Additionally, it has the ability to be executed in a distributed environment.
• Frodo (L´eaut´e et al., 2009) is a Java open-source framework for DCOP which implements several
complete and incomplete classic DCOP algorithms, including DPOP and some of it variants,
Max-Sum, MGM, and DSA. It can be executed either in a synchronous or in an asynchronous
mode. It provides a Graphical User Interface to visualize the problem structure and algorithm
execution, and it includes some problem generators for benchmarking. It supports problems with
n-ary constraints and models in which agents need to control the assignment of several variables.
Finally, in addition to simulating DCOP algorithms in a centralized environment, it provides
support for executing agents in a distributed environment.
• AgentZero (Lutati, Gontmakher, Lando, Netzer, Meisels, & Grubshtein, 2014) is a Java open-
source framework for various MAS applications. It provides distributed runtime environment,
which can be used to simulate both synchronous and asynchronous algorithms. AgentZero of-
fers several high-level APIs which allow to easily handle complex tasks, such as the construction
of a pseudo-tree and the evaluation of assignments. Additionally, it provides some built-in per-
formance measures and visualization tools that can be especially useful to debug distributed
programs. It supports the notion of message delays, message corruptions, and message losses.
While it does not support models in which agents control multiple variables, it can deal with
n-ary constraints.
In addition to using DCOP simulators, researchers have developed and deployed DCOP al-
gorithms using general MAS platforms. In particular, the Java Agent DEvelopment Framework
63

FIORETTO, PONTELLI, & YEOH
PROPERTY
DISCHOCO
FRODO
AGENTZERO
JADE
Execution modes
Async
Sync/Async
Sync/Async
Synch/Async
Visualization
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Message support
Pointers
Pointers
Deep copy
FIPA messages
Message delays/corruptions/losses
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Multiple variables per agent support
Yes
Yes
No
N/A
N-ary constraints support
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Debugging Tools
No
No
Yes
No
Programming Language
Java
Java
Java
Java
Documentation
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Deployable
No
No
No
Yes
Table 7: Comparison of DCOP Simulators
(JADE) (Bellifemine, Caire, & Greenwood, 2007) is a multi-agent platform that is compliant with
the FIPA speciﬁcations.13 It includes a runtime environment in which the agents act, a set of
APIs to deﬁne the agents’ behaviors, and a suite of graphical tools that can be used to monitor the
agents’ activity. JADE agents’ messages are speciﬁed by the ACL language, deﬁned by the FIPA
international standard for agent interoperability. JADE allows the deployment of agents on several
environments, including mobile and wireless environments and fault-tolerant platforms.
Table 7 provides a summary of the simulators’ features and describes whether the simulator
execution mode supports synchronous or asynchronous algorithms; whether it provides visualiza-
tion tools; the type of implementation of messages passing simulation (i.e., using pointers, deep
copying the message structure into the receiving agent’s message queue, etc.); if the framework
provides support to simulate/handle message delays, message corruptions, and message losses; if
it supports DCOP models in which agents control multiple variables and n-ary constraints; if the
framework provides tools for debugging the algorithms; the programming language in which the
simulator is implemented; whether it provides documentation; and whether it provides support for
deployment. For a comprehensive review of multi-agent platforms, the interested reader is referred
to the survey by Kravari and Bassiliades (2015).
The development of DCOP simulators have provided researchers with useful tools to develop
new DCOP algorithms and to facilitate comparison of existing DCOP algorithms. However, all
the DCOP simulators described above focus on the classical DCOP model, while Dynamic and
Probabilistic DCOP simulators have received little attention. Thus, there is a need of develop-
ing high-ﬁdelity simulators for Dynamic DCOPs, which simulate how the environment can vary
over time, as well as for Probabilistic DCOPs, which simulate the stochastic nature of exogenous
events.
Evaluation and Metrics: Another open question in this research area concerns the deﬁnition of
a systematic process to evaluate and compare the DCOP algorithms. There are multiple metrics
13. http://www.fipa.org/
64

DCOP: MODEL AND APPLICATIONS SURVEY
that can be used to measure the runtime of an algorithm, such as the number of Non-Concurrent
Constraint Checks (NCCCs) (Meisels, Kaplansky, Razgon, & Zivan, 2002), the simulated runtime
(Sultanik, Lass, & Regli, 2008), and the number of cycles (Lynch, 1996). However, there is no
consensus on a standard metric. Such issues, combined with absence of a general DCOP language,
make it inconvenient to experimentally compare different algorithms. In addition, new proposed
algorithms are, in general, evaluated on arbitrary benchmarks, some inherited from the CSP litera-
ture, some other from approximations of real-world problems. To cope with these issues, it would
be useful to develop a benchmark repository, perhaps by taking inspiration from the efforts made
by the constraint programming community with CSPLib,14 a library of test problems for constraint
solvers, or by the planning community with their international planning competitions.15
10. Conclusions
DCOPs have emerged as a popular formalism for distributed reasoning and coordination in multi-
agent systems. Due to its limitation to support complex, real-time, and uncertain environment,
researchers have introduced several model extensions to handle dynamic and uncertain environ-
ments, as well as different levels of cooperation among the agents.
While DCOPs’ theoretical foundation and algorithmic frameworks have matured signiﬁcantly
over the past decade, their applicability to realistic domains is lagging behind. This survey aims at
linking the DCOP theoretical framework and solving strategies with a set of potential applications
where its applicability is having or may have a signiﬁcant impact.
This survey provided an analysis of the recent advances made by the AAMAS community
within the DCOP framework and propose a categorization based on agent characteristics, environ-
ment properties, and type of teamwork adopted. Within the proposed classiﬁcation, it (i) presented
a review of the characteristics of the different algorithmic solutions; (ii) discussed a number of ap-
plication domains that can be naturally modeled within each DCOP framework; and (iii) identiﬁed
some potential directions for future work with regards to agent coordination, algorithm scalability,
modeling languages, and evaluation criteria of DCOP models and algorithms.
