Simulating the gravity in S11 parameters and 
friis transmission equation  
Sunit Shantanu Digamber Fulari, Department of electronics and communication, Chandigarh 
University, Assistant professor, Govt college of Arts, Science and Commerce, Khandola, Marcela, 
Goa
Abstract: Antennas are taking design shapes by 
the orientation of its material and the final 
structural design they take. Irrespective of the 
shape, the function and efficiency they produce 
does not change and vary to much extent. We are 
trying to simulate a design of antenna which is 
using the artificial intelligence model to Specific 
absorption 
rate 
minimization. 
We 
have 
successfully used antenna magus and CST suite 
to produce our improved simulation results. 
Motion models such as optical flow is used to 
smartly detect communicating devices inorder to 
connect and link the devices. The algorithm used 
by us is closest neighbour algorithm which is 
connected with antenna to apply it in object 
detection of mobile devices and antennas. We are 
trying to have a six second break in which the 
antenna will operate at minimum frequency but 
at the same time operating in its functioning. 
After every six seconds the antenna will radiate 
its frequency of vibration to detect if there is any 
new object or mobile device in sight. 
1. Introduction: We are trying to simulate a 
differently shaped antenna design which will 
eliminate noise and maximize the power transmitted 
by the antenna. We want the antenna to function 
causing minimum radiation in the defined direction, 
it will function with a old closest neighbour 
algorithm. We have also tried to use travelling 
salesman problem in order to simulate our defined 
working of antenna system. We have tried to make 
the antenna function in every six seconds at 
maximum power while the rest of the time it will 
function will least power required for it to function 
at that frequency in order to sustain the working of 
the antenna system. 
2. Material used for experimentation: We have used 
a copper annealed with pure copper outer ring as a 
material. This is a very distinct design of the material 
which will produce some effects in every six 
seconds of its operation. We will try to define a 
circular design in circular form which will radiate 
energy in all directions though the shape of the 
antenna is immaterial to our functioning. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: 
 
Figure 2:Excitation 
Excitation signals of the given given antenna 
material is given by the above graph. 
 

Figure 3:Portability signal is given by the above 
graph. These graphs are very clear in our simplified 
design which justify the functioning of the waves in 
order to produce ripple kind of effect. The frequency 
does fluctuate very distinctly but then later on 
becomes to nullifiable value. We are trying to 
simulate these copper annealed malleable wires and 
structure in order to produce our antenna synthesis. 
Furthermore we have developed various other 
simulations which will be covered in the later part of 
the paper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4:Scattering diagram for various electrical impulses given as above diagram. 
S parameters are given as above. 
 
Figure 5:Reference impedance of s parameter is given as under. 
 
(4.5,13) 

Figure 6:Balance in our design is given as above. 
These simulations define some of the functioning of our antenna design which is highly malleable though its 
immaterial but has quite a proper significance. These parameters together define a very subjective antenna 
synthesis which is very important in our observation of study. 
Secondly We have also used FR4 lossy and PEC as the next material similar to design used in copper annealing. 
 
Figure 7:shows the s parameter of the design for increasing frequency. 
 
Figure 8: Giving the balance of the s parameters abtained as before. 
 
Figure 9:Loss in dielectrics is given as below. This is the loss in energy during electrification of the material. 
So the figure 8 and 9 gives us a steady balance and loss in dielectric which increases with increase in frequency. 

 
Figure 10 giving the power accepted in the material is power stimulated minus power outgoing. 
 
Figure 11: Iterations in the figure is given as above where the variations are predominantly defined. 
 
Figure 12 is the transmitted to the reflected wave energy in the wave. Which effectively shows the advantage of 
the material in its latency of operation. This device will be used in an interval of 6 seconds time break will 
degenerate the radiation to the minimum energy. This will inreturn produce our hypothesis and phenomenon of 
nearest neighbour algorithm in antenna array synthesis. Our proposed method involves 5G towers which have 
more than 15-20 kilometres of intersecting connectivity between towers and devices. Each tower in turn connects 
with each other by a tower of antenna which help in mobile communication. We have proposed a city connectivity 
transacting connection of antennas between ‘margao’, ‘ponda’ and ‘panaji’ connecting for 5G mobile 
communication using k nearest neighbour algorithm. There are spacing connecting between the towers shown in 
the below figure. 

max 
𝑡 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: The above is intersecting towers 
connecting between three cities in state of Goa. 
We will study the Friis transmission equation for 
clearity in our design of wave equations. We know 
the field is given by kq/r. The distance is very great 
that is R>>2D2 /λ. Which is in our case separated by 
30-40 kilometres apart. Power density is given by 
𝑃 
 
Received power Pr 
We obtain the transmitted power and 
gain of the antenna multiplied together. 
Pr = 𝑃𝑡𝐺𝑡𝑒𝑇𝐿 
This term being the loss efficiency of the 
transmission line . 𝑒𝑇𝐿. 
Power radiated is given by the above equation as the 
maximum power radiated by the antenna given in 
terms of isotropic radiator would emit when 
producing the peak power density in the observed 
direction of maximum power radiation 
𝑃𝑟 = 4𝛱𝑈𝑚𝑎𝑥. 
These friis transmission equation and power radiated 
play a significantly important role in our research 
paper. Power would be radiated every six seconds in 
𝑤 = 
𝑡 
 
 
4𝛱𝑅2 
𝑃𝑡 
𝐺𝑡 (𝜃𝑡 , 𝜑𝑡) 
3D dimension in all directions. So the antennas 
would operate in the given interval of 6 seconds and 
even operate in full functioning but there will not be 
much radiated energy wasted or sent to the 
𝑤 = 4𝛱𝑅 2 𝑒𝑡𝐷𝑡(𝜃𝑡, 𝜑𝑡) 
atmosphere 
causing 
radiation 
noise 
in 
the 
atmosphere. Friis transmission equation is a peculiar 
equation used in transmission involving 
et   and   Dt   being   the   radiation   efficiency   and 
directivity of the antenna system. 
Pr is the power at the receiving antenna given by 
AW. as below 
Pr = ArWt 
Radiation efficiency and polarization loss factor are 
added together. 
𝑃𝑟  = 𝑒𝑟  ⋅ 𝑃𝐿𝐹 ⋅ 𝐴𝑟𝑊𝑡  = 𝐴𝑟𝑊𝑡𝑒𝑟|𝜌̂∗ ⋅ 𝜌̂𝑟|2 
Impedance and polarization matched equation 
for transmitting and receiving antenna is given 
by. 
communication in terms of antenna towers and 
fundamentally any form of transmission lines. 
Optical flow equation is nothing but mathematically 
an equation of a line plotted in x and y coordinate. 
Results and Conclusion: We have established 
implementation of copper annealed and FR4 lossy 
material of antenna to be used in mobile 5G 
communication in an area of 30-40 interval of 
distance. We have successfully been able to 
formulate our hypotheses and proposed algorithm in 
establishing 
communication 
advantages. 
The 
proposed method proves to be quite effective in 5G 
communication in modern antennas which vary in 
designs. An efficiency percentage of 60-70 percent 
𝑃𝑟 
𝜆 
= ( 
𝑃𝑡 
4𝛱𝑅 
2 
) 𝐺𝑡(𝜃𝑡𝘍 𝜑𝑡)𝐺(𝜃 
 
𝑟𝘍 𝜑𝑟) 
was also observed in our method. 
 
 
References: 
The above equation is the famous friis 
transmission equation. Free-space loss 
factor being in first bracket. 
 
[1] Shaw, J.A., 2013. Radiometry and the Friis 
transmission equation. American journal of 
physics, 81(1), pp.33-37. 
[2] Franek, O., 2017. Phasor alternatives to 
Friis’ transmission equation. IEEE Antennas 

and Wireless Propagation Letters, 17(1), pp.90- 
93. 
[3] 
Cho, 
Y.H. 
and 
Byun, 
W.J., 
2019. 
Generalized Friis transmission equation for 
orbital 
angular 
momentum 
radios. 
IEEE 
Transactions   on   Antennas   and Propagation, 
67(4), pp.2423-2429. 
[4] Landon, D.G. and Furse, C., 2008, July. The 
MIMO transmission equation. In 2008 IEEE 
Antennas 
and 
Propagation 
Society 
International Symposium (pp. 1-4). IEEE. 
[5] Neitz, O., Mauermayer, R.A., Weitsch, Y. 
and Eibert, T.F., 2017. A propagating plane- 
wave-based near-field transmission equation 
for antenna gain determination from irregular 
measurement samples. IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas and Propagation, 65(8), pp.4230- 
4238. 
[6] Ali, M.F., Mukherjee, S. and Ray, S., 2009, 
November. SAR analysis in human head model 
exposed to mobile base-station antenna for 
GSM-900 
band. 
In 
2009 
Loughborough 
Antennas & Propagation Conference (pp. 289- 
292). IEEE. 
[7] Oraizi, H. and Hedayati, S., 2011. 
Miniaturized UWB monopole microstrip antenna 
design by the combination of Giusepe Peano 
and Sierpinski carpet fractals. IEEE antennas 
and wireless propagation letters, 10, pp.67-70. 
[8] Tran, N.A., Tran, H.N., Dang, M.C. and 
Fribourg-Blanc, E., 2010. Copper thin film for 
RFID    UHF    antenna    on    flexible substrate. 
Advances in Natural Sciences: Nanoscience 
and Nanotechnology, 1(2), p.025016. 
[9] Dwyer, T.J.J.R., Greig, J., Murphy, D., Perin, 
J., Pechacek, R. and Raleigh, M., 1984. On the 
feasibility of using an atmospheric discharge 
plasma as an RF antenna. IEEE Transactions 
on antennas and propagation, 32(2), pp.141- 
146. 
[10] Chen, Z. and Zhang, Y.P., 2013, 
December. FR4 PCB grid array antenna for 
millimeter-wave 5G mobile communications. 
In 2013 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave 
Workshop 
Series 
on 
RF 
and 
Wireless 
Technologies for Biomedical and Healthcare 
Applications (IMWS-BIO) (pp. 1-3). IEEE. 
[11] Hood, A.Z., Karacolak, T. and Topsakal, E., 
2008. A small antipodal Vivaldi antenna for 
ultrawide-band applications. IEEE Antennas 
and Wireless propagation letters, 7, pp.656- 
660. 
[12] Giddens, H., Paul, D.L., Hilton, G.S. and 
McGeehan, J.P., 2012, March. Influence of 
body proximity on the efficiency of a wearable 
textile patch antenna. In 2012 6th European 
Conference on Antennas and Propagation 
(EUCAP) (pp. 1353-1357). IEEE. 
[13] Shafique, K., Khawaja, B.A., Tarar, M.A., 
Khan, B.M., Mustaqim, M. and Raza, A., 2016. 
A wearable ultra-wideband antenna for wireless 
body area networks. Microwave and Optical 
Technology Letters, 58(7), pp.1710-1715. 
[14] Mustaqim, M., Khawaja, B.A., Chattha, 
H.T., Shafique, K., Zafar, M.J. and Jamil, M., 
2019. Ultra-wideband antenna for wearable 
Internet of Things devices and wireless body 
area network applications. International Journal 
of Numerical Modelling: Electronic Networks, 
Devices and Fields, 32(6), p.e2590. 
[15] Balanis, C.A., 2015. Antenna theory: 
analysis and design. John wiley & sons.
