Harnessing Natural Fluctuations: Analogue
Computer for Eﬃcient Socially Maximal Decision
Making
Song-Ju Kim1†, Makoto Naruse2 and Masashi Aono3,4
1 WPI Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA),
National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS),
1–1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305–0044, Japan
2 Photonic Network Research Institute,
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
4–2–1 Nukui-kita, Koganei, Tokyo 184–8795, Japan
3 Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology
2–12–1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152–8550, Japan
4 PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency
4–1–8 Honcho, Kawaguchi-shi, Saitama 332–0012, Japan

November 23, 2021
1
arXiv:1504.03451v1  [cs.AI]  14 Apr 2015

Abstract
Each individual handles many tasks of ﬁnding the most proﬁtable op-
tion from a set of options that stochastically provide rewards. Our society
comprises a collection of such individuals, and the society is expected to
maximise the total rewards, while the individuals compete for common re-
wards. Such collective decision making is formulated as the ‘competitive
multi-armed bandit problem (CBP)’, requiring a huge computational cost.
Herein, we demonstrate a prototype of an analog computer that eﬃciently
solves CBPs by exploiting the physical dynamics of numerous ﬂuids in cou-
pled cylinders. This device enables the maximisation of the total rewards for
the society without paying the conventionally required computational cost;
this is because the ﬂuids estimate the reward probabilities of the options for
the exploitation of past knowledge and generate random ﬂuctuations for the
exploration of new knowledge. Our results suggest that to optimise the social
rewards, the utilisation of ﬂuid-derived natural ﬂuctuations is more advanta-
geous than applying artiﬁcial external ﬂuctuations. Our analog computing
scheme is expected to trigger further studies for harnessing the huge compu-
tational power of natural phenomena for resolving a wide variety of complex
problems in modern information society.
Introduction
The beneﬁts to an organization (the whole) and those to its constituent members
(parts) sometimes conﬂict. For example, let us consider a situation wherein traf-
ﬁc congestion is caused by a driver making a selﬁsh decision to pursue his/her
individual beneﬁt to quickly arrive at a destination. In a situation wherein a car
bound from south to north approaches an intersection where preceding vehicles
are stalled while the signal is about to turn in red, the driver must refrain from
selﬁshly deciding to enter the intersection. Otherwise, the car would obstruct other
vehicles’ paths in the west and east directions, stalled in the intersection after the
signal turned red. Thus, the whole’s beneﬁt can be spoiled by that of a part.
The conﬂict between the whole’s beneﬁt and that of the parts frequently arises
in a wide variety of situations in modern society. Confrontations between commu-
nities and wars between nations can be seen as caused by collisions of global and
local interests. In realistic political judgment, many of these collisions are mod-
elled using a game-theoretic approach by appropriately setting up a payoﬀmatrix
[1]. In mobile communication, the channel assignment problem in cognitive ra-
dio communication can also be represented as a particular class of payoﬀmatrix.
Herein, we consider the competitive bandit problem (CBP), which a problem of
maximising total rewards through collective decision making and requires a huge
computational cost for an increase in problem size. We demonstrate a method for
2

exploiting the computational power of the physical dynamics of numerous ﬂuids
in coupled cylinders to eﬃciently solve the problem.
Consider two slot machines. Both machines have individual reward probabili-
ties PA and PB. At each trial, a player selects one of the machines and obtains some
reward, a coin for example, with the corresponding probability. The player wants
to maximise the total reward sum obtained after a particular number of selections.
However, it is assumed that the player does not know these probabilities. How can
the player gain maximal rewards? The multi-armed bandit problem (BP) involves
determining the optimal strategy for selecting the machine which yields maximum
rewards by referring to past experiences.
Figure 1: Competitive Bandit Problem (CBP). (a) segregation state. (b) collision
state. (c) Payoﬀmatrix for player 1 (player 2).
For simplicity, we consider here the minimum CBP, i.e. two players (1 and
2) and two machines (A and B), as shown in Fig. 1. It is supposed that a player
playing a machine can obtain some reward, a coin for example, with the probability
Pi. Figure 1(c) shows the payoﬀmatrix for players 1 and 2.
If a collision occurs, i.e. two players select the same machine, the reward is
evenly split between those players. We seek an algorithm that can obtain the max-
3

imum total rewards (scores) of all players. To acquire the maximum total rewards,
the algorithm must contain a mechanism that can avoid the ‘Nash equilibrium’
states, which are the natural consequence for a group of independent selﬁsh play-
ers, and can determine the ‘social maximum [2]’ states which can obtain maximum
total rewards. In our previous studies [7, 8, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16], we showed that our pro-
posed algorithm called ‘Tug-Of-War (TOW) dynamics’ is more eﬃcient than other
well-known algorithms such as the modiﬁed ϵ-greedy and softmax algorithms, and
is comparable to the ‘upper conﬁdence bound1-tuned (UCB1T) algorithm’, which
is known as the best among parameter-free algorithms [6]. Moreover, TOW dy-
namics eﬀectively adapts to a changing environment wherein the reward probabil-
ities dynamically switch. Algorithms for solving CBP are applicable to various
ﬁelds such as Monte Carlo tree search, which is used in algorithms for the ‘game
of GO’ [11, 12], cognitive radio [13, 14], and web advertising [15].
Herein, by applying TOW dynamics that exploit the volume conservation law,
we propose a physical device that eﬃciently computes the optimal machine assign-
ments of all players in a centralised control. The proposed device consists of two
kinds of ﬂuids in cylinders: one representing ‘decision making by a player’ and
the other representing the ‘interaction between players (collision avoider)’. We
call the physical device the ‘TOW bombe’ owing to its similarity to the ‘Turing
bombe’ invented by Alan Turing, the analog electric circuit used by the British
army for decoding the German army’s ‘enigma code’ of the during World War II
[16]. The assignment problem for M players and N machines can be automati-
cally solved simply by repeatedly operating (up-and-down operation of the ﬂuid
interface in a cylinder) M times at every iteration in the TOW bombe without cal-
culating the evaluation values of O(NM). This suggests that an analog computer is
more advantageous than a digital computer, if we appropriately use the natural phe-
nomena. Although the problems considered here are not really nondeterministic-
polynomial-time (NP) problems, we can show advantages of natural ﬂuctuations
generated in the device and suggest a possibility to extend the device to apply to
NP problems. Using the TOW bombe, we can automatically achieve the social
maximum assignments by entrusting the huge amount of computations for evalua-
tion values to the physical processes of ﬂuids.
Consider an incompressible ﬂuid in a cylinder, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Here,
Xk corresponds to the displacement of terminal k from an initial position, where
k ∈{A, B}. If Xk is greater than 0, we consider that the liquid selects machine k.
We used the following estimate Qk (k ∈{A, B}):
Qk(t) = Nk(t) −(1 + ω)Lk(t).
(1)
Here, Nk is the number of playing machine k until time t and Lk is the number of
4

Figure 2: (a) TOW dynamics. (b) The TOW bombe for three players and ﬁve
channels.
non-rewarded (i.e. failed) events in k until time t, where ω is a weighting parameter
(see Method).
The displacement XA (= −XB) is determined by the following diﬀerence equa-
tion:
XA(t)
=
QA(t) −QB(t) + δ.
(2)
Here, δ(t) is an arbitrary ﬂuctuation to which the liquid is subjected. Consequently
the TOW dynamics evolve according to a particularly simple rule: in addition to
the ﬂuctuation, if machine k is played at each time t, +1 and −ω are added to Xk(t−
1) when rewarded and non-rewarded, respectively (Fig. 2(a)). The authors have
shown that this simple dynamics gains more rewards (coins or packet transmissions
in cognitive radio) than those obtained by other popular algorithms for solving the
BP [7, 8, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16].
5

Many algorithms for the BP estimate the reward probability of each machine.
In most cases, this ‘estimate’ is updated only when the corresponding machine
is selected. In contrast, TOW dynamics uses a unique learning method which is
equivalent to that updating both estimates simultaneously owing to the volume
conservation law [5, 6]. TOW dynamics can imitate the system that determines its
next moves at time t + 1 in referring to the estimate of each machine, even if it was
not selected at time t, as if the two machines were simultaneously selected at time t.
This unique feature is one of the sources of the TOW’s high performance [16]. We
call this the ‘TOW principle’. This principle is also applicable to a more general
BP (see Method).
1
Results
The TOW bombe for three players (1, 2 and 3) and ﬁve machines (A, B,C, D and E)
is illustrated in Figure 2(b). Two kinds of incompressible ﬂuids (blue and yellow)
ﬁll coupled cylinders. The blue (bottom) ﬂuid handles a player’s decisions made,
while the yellow (upper) one handles interaction among players. Machine selection
of each player at each iteration is determined by the height of a red adjuster (a ﬂuid
interface level), and the highest machine is chosen. When the movements of blue
and yellow adjusters stabilise to reach equilibrium, the TOW principle in the blue
ﬂuid holds for each player. In other words, when one interface rises, the other
four interfaces fall, resulting in eﬃcient machine selections. Simultaneously, the
action-reaction law holds for the yellow ﬂuid (i.e. if the interface level of player 1
rises, the interface levels of players 2 and 3 fall), contributing collision avoidance,
and the TOW bombe can search for an overall optimisation solution accurately
and quickly. In normal use, however, blue and yellow adjusters must have ﬁxed
positions not to move.
The dynamics of the TOW bombe are expressed as follows:
Q(i,k)(t)
=
∆Q(i,k)(t) + Q(i,k)(t −1)
−
1
M −1
X
j,i
∆Q(j,k)(t),
(3)
X(i,k)(t)
=
Q(i,k)(t) −
1
N −1
X
l,k
Q(i,l)(t).
(4)
Here, X(i,k)(t) is the height of the interface of player i and machine k at iteration
step t. If machine k is chosen for player i at time t, ∆Q(i,k)(t) is +1 or −ω according
to the result (rewarded or not). Otherwise, it is 0.
6

In addition to the above-mentioned dynamics, some ﬂuctuations or external
oscillations are added to X(i,k). These added ﬂuctuations or oscillations are sensi-
tive to the TOW bombe’s performance, because ﬂuctuations represent exploration
patterns in the early stage.
Thus, the TOW bombe operates only by adding an operation which raises or
lowers the interface level (+1 or −ω) according to the result (success or failure of
coin gain) for each player (total M times) at each time. After these operations,
the interface levels move according to the volume conservation law, calculating
the next selection for each player. In each player’s selection, an eﬃcient search is
achieved as a result of the TOW principle, which can obtain a solution accurately
and quickly for trial-and-error tasks. Moreover, through the interaction among
players via yellow ﬂuid, the Nash equilibrium can be avoided, thereby achieving
the social maximum [2].
To show that the TOW bombe avoids the Nash equilibrium and regularly achieves
an overall optimisation, we consider a case wherein (PA, PB, PC, PD, PE) = (0.03,
0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.9) as a typical example. For simplicity, part of the payoﬀtensor
that has 125 (=53) elements is described as follows; only matrix elements for which
each player does not choose low-ranking A and B are shown (Table 5, 6 and 7). For
each matrix element, the reward probabilities are given in the order of players 1, 2
and 3.
Table 1: Payoﬀmatrix of the case where (PC, PD, PE)=(0.1, 0.2, 0.9), player 3
chooses C
player 2: C
player 2: D
player 2: E
player 1: C
1/30, 1/30, 1/30
0.05, 0.2, 0.05
0.05, 0.9, 0.05
player 1: D
0.2, 0.05, 0.05
0.1, 0.1, 0.1
0.2, 0.9, 0.1 SM
player 1: E
0.9, 0.05, 0.05
0.9, 0.2, 0.1 SM
0.45, 0.45, 0.1
Table 2: Payoﬀmatrix of the case where (PC, PD, PE)=(0.1, 0.2, 0.9), player 3
chooses D
player 2: C
player 2: D
player 2: E
player 1: C
0.05, 0.05, 0.2
0.1, 0.1, 0.1
0.1, 0.9, 0.2 SM
player 1: D
0.1, 0.1, 0.1
2/30, 2/30, 2/30
0.1, 0.9, 0.1
player 1: E
0.9, 0.1, 0.2 SM
0.9, 0.1, 0.1
0.45, 0.45, 0.2
7

Table 3: Payoﬀmatrix of the case where (PC, PD, PE)=(0.1, 0.2, 0.9), player 3
chooses E
player 2: C
player 2: D
player 2: E
player 1: C
0.05, 0.05, 0.9
0.1, 0.2, 0.9 SM
0.1, 0.45, 0.45
player 1: D
0.2, 0.1, 0.9 SM
0.1, 0.1, 0.9
0.2, 0.45, 0.45
player 1: E
0.45, 0.1, 0.45
0.45, 0.2, 0.45
0.3, 0.3, 0.3 NE
Social maximum (SM) is a state in which the maximum amount of total reward
is obtained by all the players. In this problem, the social maximum corresponds
to a segregation state in which the players choose the top three distinct machines
(C, D, E), respectively; there are six segregation states indicated by SM in the Ta-
bles. In contrast, the Nash equilibrium (NE) is a state in which all the players
choose machine E independent of others’ decisions; machine E gives the reward
with the highest probability, when each player behaves selﬁshly.
The performance of the TOW bombe was evaluated using a score: the num-
ber of rewards (coins) a player obtained in his/her 1, 000 plays. In cognitive radio
communication, the score corresponds to the number of packets that have success-
fully transmitted [13, 14]. Figure 3(a) shows the TOW bombe scores in the typical
example wherein (PA, PB, PC, PD, PE) = (0.03, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.9). Since 1, 000
samples were used, there are 1, 000 circles. Each circle indicates the score obtained
by player i (horizontal axis) and player j (vertical axis) for one sample. There are
six clusters in Figure 3(a) corresponding to the two-dimensional projections of the
six segregation states, implying the overall optimisation. The social maximum
points are given as follows: (the score of player 1, the score of player 2, the score
of player 3) = (100, 200, 900), (100, 900, 200), (200, 100, 900), (200, 900, 100),
(900, 100, 200) and (900, 200, 100). The TOW bombe did not reach the Nash
equilibrium state (300, 300, 300).
In our simulations, we used ‘adaptive’ weighting parameter ω, meaning that
the parameter is estimated by using its own variables (see Method). Owing to this
estimation cost, clusters of circles are not located exactly at the social maximum
points. If we set weighting parameter ω at 0.08, which are calculated as γ′=PB+PC
(see Method), those clusters are located exactly on the social maximum points (see
Figures in [17]).
Figure 3(b) shows TOW bombe performance, sample averages of the total
scores of all players up to 1, 000 plays, for three diﬀerent type of ﬂuctuation,
respectively. The black, red and blue lines denote the cases of internal random
ﬂuctuations, internal ﬁxed ﬂuctuations and external oscillations, respectively (see
8

Figure 3: (a) TOW bombe scores in the case wherein (PA, PB, PC, PD, PE) = (0.03,
0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.9). (b) Sample averages of total TOW bombe scores in the case
wherein (PA, PB, PC, PD, PE) = (0.03, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.9). (c) Sample averages of
mean distance between players’ scores in the case wherein (PA, PB, PC, PD, PE) =
(0.03, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.9).
Method).
The horizontal axis denotes the sample averages of maximum ﬂuc-
tuation. In the maximal case, the average total score has gained nearly 1, 200
(=100+200+900), which is the value of the social maximum, although there are
some gaps resulting from estimation costs.
Figure 3(c) also shows TOW bombe fairness, sample averages of the mean
distance between players’ scores, for three diﬀerent types of ﬂuctuation, respec-
tively. We can conﬁrm lower fairness in the cases of internal ﬁxed ﬂuctuations
(red line). Artiﬁcially created ﬂuctuations, such as internal ﬁxed ﬂuctuations, of-
ten show lower fairness because of the existence of biases (lack of uniformity or
randomness) in ﬂuctuations. Although the external oscillations (sine waves) have
higher fairness (blue line), controlling the blue and yellow adjusters appropriately
is diﬃcult. Moreover, the performances of these two types of ﬂuctuation rapidly
decrease as the magnitude of ﬂuctuations increases, as shown in Fig. 3(b).
We can conclude that only the internal random ﬂuctuations, which are supposed
to be generated automatically in the real TOW bombe, exhibit higher performance
9

and fairness. This conclusion is consistent even in cases where we set weighting
parameter ω at 0.08. This indicates the construction of a novel analog computing
scheme which exploits nature’s power in terms of automatic generation of random
ﬂuctuations, simultaneous computations using a conservation law and intrinsic ef-
ﬁciency.
2
Discussion
How can we harness nature’s power for computations such as automatic generation
of random ﬂuctuations, simultaneous computations using a conservation law and
intrinsic eﬃciency as well as the feasibility of massive computations?
Alan Turing mathematically clariﬁed a concept of ‘computation’ by proposing
his Turing machine, the most simple model of computation [18, 19]. A Turing
machine consists of a sequence of steps which can read and write a single symbol
on tape. These ‘discrete’ and ‘sequential’ steps are ‘simple’ for a human to under-
stand. Moreover, he found a ‘universal Turing machine’ that can simulate all other
computations. Owing to this machine, algorithms can be studied on their own,
without regard to the systems that are implementing them [20]. Human beings no
longer need to be concerned about underlying mechanisms. In other words, soft-
ware can be abstracted away from hardware. This property has brought substantial
development in digital computers. Simultaneously, however, these algorithms have
lost links to natural phenomena implementing them. He had exchanged natural
aﬃnity for artiﬁcial convenience.
Digital computers created a ‘monster’ called ‘exponential explosion’, wherein
computational cost grows exponentially as a function of problem size (NP prob-
lems). In our daily lives, we often encounter this type of problem, such as schedul-
ing, satisﬁability (SAT) and resource allocation problems. For a digital computer,
such problems become intractable as the problem size grows. In contrast, nature
always ‘computes’ inﬁnitely many computations at every moment [21]. However,
we do not know how to extract and harness this power of nature.
Herein, we demonstrate that an analog decision-making device, called the TOW
bombe, can be implemented physically by using two kinds of incompressible ﬂuid
in coupled cylinders and can eﬃciently achieve overall optimisation in the machine
assignment problem in CBP by exploiting nature’s power, including automatic gen-
eration of random ﬂuctuations, simultaneous computations using a conservation
law and intrinsic eﬃciency. The randomness of ﬂuctuations generated automati-
cally in the real TOW bombe might not be high, but there are ways to enhance
randomness. For example, turbulence occurs if we move an adjuster rapidly in an
up-and-down operation.
10

The TOW bombe enables us to solve the assignment problem for M players
and N machines by repeating M up-and-down operations of ﬂuid interface levels
in cylinders at each iteration; it does not require calculation for as many evalua-
tion values as are required when using a conventional digital computer, because it
entrusts the huge amount of computation to the physical processes of ﬂuids. This
suggests that there are advantages to analog computation even in today’s digital
age.
Although the payoﬀtensor has NM elements, the TOW bombe need not hold
NM evaluation values. If we ignore the diagonal elements, N evaluation values are
suﬃcient for each player’s estimation of which machine is the best. Therefore, us-
ing the TOW bombe, the CBP is reducible to an O(NM) problem when implement-
ing a collision-avoiding mechanism handled by yellow ﬂuid, although, in a strict
sense, the computational cost must include the cost for providing random ﬂuctu-
ations generated by the ﬂuids’ physical dynamics. In Fig. 3(b), we showed the
results of only three types of ﬂuctuation. TOW bombe performance with internal
M-random ﬂuctuations (see Method) was the same as that of the internal random
ﬂuctuations, although computations for generating the former type of ﬂuctuation
require a cost that exponentially grows as O(NM). This is because the exponential
type of ﬂuctuation is not eﬀective for O(NM) problems. Various random seed pat-
terns do not aﬀect enhancing the performance of O(NM) problems because of the
reducibility of CBP to three independent BPs.
However, this is not the cases if we focus on more complex problems, such
as the ‘Extended Prisoner’s Dilemma Game’ (see Supplementary Information); we
must prepare more than NM evaluation values, because a player’s reward is dras-
tically changed according to the selections of other players in this problem. There
are some cases that can be approximately solved by the TOW bombe even in this
type of complex problem. In these cases, the exponential type of ﬂuctuation can en-
hance the performance slightly. This fact may suggest that we ﬁnd the ﬁrst toehold
to harnessing nature’s power which is the feasibility of massive computations.
Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult to solve this type of complex problem using the
TOW bombe in general. To solve more complex problems, we must also extend the
TOW bombe. We have some ideas regarding TOW bombe extension using some
ﬂuid compressibility, local inﬂow and outﬂow, a reservoir for blue or yellow ﬂuid,
a time order of ﬂuctuations and quantum eﬀects such as non-locality and entangle-
ment. The TOW bombe can also be implemented on the basis of quantum physics.
In fact, the authors have exploited optical energy transfer dynamics between quan-
tum dots and single photons to design decision-making devices [22, 23, 24]. Our
method might be applicable to a class of problems derived from CBP and broader
varieties of game payoﬀtensors, implying that wider applications can be expected.
We will report these observations and results elsewhere in the future.
11

Methods
The weighting parameter ω
TOW dynamics involves the parameter ω which is sensitive to its performance.
From analytical calculations, it is known that the following ω0 is sub-optimal in
the BP (see Supplementary Information or [16]),
ω0
=
γ
2 −γ,
(5)
γ
=
PA + PB.
(6)
Here, it is assumed that PA is the largest reward probability and PB is the second
largest.
In the CBP cases (M-player and N-machine), the following ω0 is sub-optimal,
ω0
=
γ′
2 −γ′ ,
(7)
γ′
=
P(M) + P(M+1)
(8)
Here, P(M) is the top Mth reward probability.
Players must estimate ω0 using its variables, because information regarding
reward probabilities is not given to players. We call this an ‘adaptive’ weighting
parameter. There are many estimate methods, such as Bayesian inference, but we
simply use ‘direct substitution’ herein. Direct substitution uses R j(t)/N j(t) for P j,
where R j(t) is the number of reward gains from machine j through time t and N j(t)
is the number of plays of machine j through time t.
TOW dynamics for general BP
In this paper, we use TOW dynamics only for the Bernoulli type of BP in which
the reward r is 1 or 0. Another type of TOW dynamics can also be constructed for
general BP in which the reward r is a real value from an interval [0, R]. Here, R is
arbitrary positive value, and the reward r is selected according to given probability
distribution whose mean and variance are µ and σ2, respectively.
In this case, the following estimate Qk (k ∈{A, B}) is used insted of eq.(1):
Qk(t) = Σt
j=1rk(j) −γ∗Nk(t).
(9)
Here, Nk is the number of playing machine k until time t and rk( j) is the reward in
k at time j, where γ∗is the following parameter:
γ∗= µA + µB
2
.
(10)
If machine k is played at each time t, the reward rk(t) and −γ∗are added to Xk(t−1).
12

Generating methods of ﬂuctuation
1. Internal ﬁxed ﬂuctuations
First, we deﬁne ﬁxed moves Ok′ (k′ = 0, · · · , 4), as follows,
{O0, O1, O2, O3, O4} = {0, A, 0, −A, 0}
(11)
Here, A is an amplitude parameter. Note that P4
k′=0 Ok′ = 0.
To use the above move Ok recursively, we introduce a new variable num (num =
0, · · · , 4), as follows,
num = {t + (k −2)} mod 5
(12)
Here, t is a time. For each machine k (k = 1, · · · , 5), we use the following set of
ﬂuctuations, respectively,
osc(1,k)(t)
=
O0,
(13)
osc(2,k)(t)
=
O3,
(14)
osc(3,k)(t)
=
O1.
(15)
If num = 0.
osc(1,k)(t)
=
O1,
(16)
osc(2,k)(t)
=
O4,
(17)
osc(3,k)(t)
=
O3.
(18)
If num = 1.
osc(1,k)(t)
=
O2,
(19)
osc(2,k)(t)
=
O0,
(20)
osc(3,k)(t)
=
O4.
(21)
If num = 2.
osc(1,k)(t)
=
O3,
(22)
osc(2,k)(t)
=
O1,
(23)
osc(3,k)(t)
=
O2.
(24)
If num = 3.
13

osc(1,k)(t)
=
O4,
(25)
osc(2,k)(t)
=
O2,
(26)
osc(3,k)(t)
=
O0.
(27)
If num = 4.
It always holds that P3
i=1 osc(i,k)(t) = 0 and P5
k=1 osc(i,k)(t) = 0. These con-
ditions mean that added ﬂuctuations to X(i,k) can be cancelled in total. In other
words, the total volume of blue or yellow ﬂuid does not change. As a result, we
create artiﬁcial ‘internal’ ﬂuctuations.
2. Internal random ﬂuctuations
First, a matrix sheet of random ﬂuctuations (S heet(i,k)) is prepared. Here, i =
1, · · · , 3 and k = 1, · · · , 5.
1. r is a random value from [0, 1]. We call this ‘seed’.
2. There are NM (= 15) possibilities for a seed position. Choose the seed
position (i0, k0) randomly from i0 = 1, · · · , 3 and k0 = 1, · · · , 5 and place the
seed r at the point,
S heet(i0,k0) = r.
(28)
3. All elements of the k0th column other than (io, k0) are substituted with −0.5∗
r.
4. All elements of the i0-th row other than (io, k0) are substituted with −0.25∗r.
5. All remaining elements are substituted with r/8.0.
6. The matrix sheet is accumulated in a summation matrix S um(i,k).
7. Repeat from two to six for D times. Here, D is a parameter.
We used the following set of ﬂuctuations,
osc(i,k)(t) = A/D ∗S um(i,k).
(29)
Here, A is an amplitude parameter.
It always holds that P3
i=1 osc(i,k)(t) = 0 and P5
k=1 osc(i,k)(t) = 0, as well as
the internal ﬁxed ﬂuctuations. The total volume of blue or yellow ﬂuid does not
change. As a result, we create ‘internal’ random ﬂuctuations naturally. At every
time step, this procedure costs O(N · M) computations with a digital computer.
14

3. Internal M-random ﬂuctuations (exponential)
First, a matrix sheet of random ﬂuctuations (S heet(i,k)) is prepared. Here, i =
1, · · · , 3 and k = 1, · · · , 5.
1. For each player i, independent random value ri is generated from [0, 1]. We
call these ‘seeds’.
2. There are NM (= 125) possibilities for a seed position pattern. For each
player i, choose the seed position (i, k0(i)) randomly from k0(i) = 1, · · · , 5
and place the seed ri at the point,
S heet(i,k0(i)) = ri.
(30)
However, we choose k0(i)s to be distinct. Therefore, there are really N(N −
1)(N −2) (= 60) possibilities.
3. For each i, all elements of the k0(i)-th column other than (i, k0(i)) are substi-
tuted with −0.5 ∗ri.
4. All remaining elements of the 1th row are substituted with −0.50∗(r1−0.50∗
r2 −0.50 ∗r3).
5. All remaining elements of the 2 th row are substituted with −0.50 ∗(r2 −
0.50 ∗r1 −0.50 ∗r3).
6. All remaining elements of the 3 th row are substituted with −0.50 ∗(r3 −
0.50 ∗r1 −0.50 ∗r2).
7. The matrix sheet is accumulated in a summation matrix S um(i,k).
8. Repeat from two to seven for D times. Here, D is a parameter.
We used the following set of ﬂuctuations,
osc(i,k) = A/D ∗S um(i,k).
(31)
Here, A is an amplitude parameter.
It always holds that P3
i=1 osc(i,k)(t) = 0 and P5
k=1 osc(i,k)(t) = 0 as well as the
internal ﬁxed or random ﬂuctuations. The total volume of blue or yellow ﬂuid does
not change. As a result, we create ‘internal’ M-random ﬂuctuations naturally. At
every time step, this procedure costs exponential computations of O(NM) with a
digital computer.
15

4. External oscillations
Herein, we used completely synchronised oscillations osc(i,k)(t) added to every
player’s X(i,k),
osc(i,k)(t) = A sin(2πt/5 + 2π(k −1)/5).
(32)
Here, i = 1, · · ·, 3 and k = 1, · · ·, 5. A is an amplitude parameter. These oscillations
are externally provided by appropriately controlling the blue and yellow adjusters.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported in part by the Sekisui Chemical Grant Program for ‘Re-
search on Manufacturing Based on Innovations Inspired by Nature’. We are grate-
ful to Prof. Hirokazu Hori at Yamanashi University for useful argument about the
theory of the TOW bombe and its quantum extension.
Contributions
S.-J.K. and M.A. designed the research. S.-J.K. designed and simulated the TOW
Bombe. S.-J.K., M.A. and M.N. analysed the data. M.N advised quantum exten-
sion of the model. S.-J.K. and M.A wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the
manuscript.
Competing ﬁnancial interests
The authors declare that there is no conﬂicting ﬁnancial interest regarding the pub-
lication of this paper.
