International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
DOI : 10.5121/ijwmn.2013.5610                                                                                                                  125 
 
An ANN Based Call Handoff Management 
Scheme for Mobile Cellular Network 
 
P. P. Bhattacharya1,Ananya Sarkar2, IndranilSarkar3,Subhajit Chatterjee4 
 
1Department of ECE, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, Mody Institute of Technology & 
Science (Deemed University), Rajasthan, India 
2Department of ECE,College of Engineering and Management Kolaghat, 
West Bengal, India 
3Department of ECE,Sobhasaria Group of Institutions, Rajasthan, India 
4Deparment of ECE, Swami Vivekananda Institute of Science and Technology, Barruipur, West 
Bengal 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Handoff decisions are usually signal strength based because of simplicity and effectiveness. Apart from the 
conventional techniques, such as threshold and hysteresis based schemes, recently many artificial 
intelligent techniques such as Fuzzy Logic, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) etc. are also used for taking 
handoff decision. In this paper, an Artificial Neural Network based handoff algorithm is proposed and it’s 
performance is studied. We have used ANNhere for taking fast and accurate handoff decision. In our 
proposed handoff algorithm, Backpropagation Neural Network model is used.The advantages of 
Backpropagation method are its simplicity and reasonable speed. The algorithm is designed, tested and 
found to give optimum results. 
 
 
Keywords 
 
Handoff; Backpropagation; Artificial Neural Network; Received Signal Strengths; Traffic Intensities. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
In mobile cellular communication, maintaining continuous communication when the user 
migrates from one cell to another is done by changing the controlling base station – a process 
called call Handoff. Handoff involves measurement, decision and execution. In present 
generation mobile cellular systems, Mobile Station (MS) estimates the signal strengths from each 
base station and the value of the received signal level is generally affected by three parameters : 
path loss, shadow fading and small scale fading. Small scale fading has much shorter correlation 
distance and averaged out over the time scale under consideration [1] and also anti-multipath 
fading techniques are available now-a-days [2, 3]. Hence, in a system with anti-multipath 
technique the effect of small scale fading is not normally considered. But in the present work, 
multipath fading is considered for considering practical scenarios. 
 
In practice, the low speed mobiles may stop after the handoff execution resulting unnecessary 
handoff. Similarly, the high speed mobiles may move well into the next cell before the handoff 
execution resulting call termination. Moreover, the signal strength from base station decreases as 
exp (-γd) where d is the distance of the mobile station from base station and γ is the path loss 
exponent. In uniform propagation environment, γ can be taken as constant. But in real 
environment γ may have different values at different places varying from 2 to 6. So, an algorithm 
based on path loss exponent and user velocity is essential. 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
126 
 
 
As discussed above, handoff characteristics are user velocity dependent. The effect of mobile 
velocity on handoff performance has been studied by many workers [4,5,6]. Performance metrics 
such as probability of handoff, average number of handoff, call blocking probability and call 
completion probability change significantly as user velocity changes. The traffic density in an 
average urban area generally follows normal distribution [7]. In our country, the average speed in 
four metro cities e.g, Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata were found to be 30 Km/hr, 25 Km/hr, 
25 Km/hr and 22 Km/hr respectively [8]. Due to the sensitivity of handoff performance to path 
loss exponent, as discussed in the previous section, a variable hysteresis scheme is already 
proposed [9] where the hysteresis margin is determined as a function of path loss exponent.  
 
In our work, signal strength from the serving and target base stations and traffic intensities of the 
serving and target base stations are considered. A three layer ANN model [10] is chosen in the 
design. Signal strengths from the serving and target base stations are estimated using least square 
estimation method incorporating Rayleigh fading [11]. A Threshold and hysteresis margin based 
scheme is chosen where handoff decision is taken only when the signal strength from the current 
base falls below some threshold value and also the signal strength difference between the current 
and the serving base station is higher than the hysteresis margin so as to avoid ping – pong effect. 
In the proposed handoff scheme different signal strengths and traffic intensities are considered to 
find out the position of handoff. Simulation is carried out using C++ language. 
 
 
2. BACK PROPAGATION NEURAL NETWORK 
 
An ANN which is an information-processing paradigm is configured for a particular application 
through a learning process. In our proposed algorithm, Backpropagation Neural Network is used 
which is an iterative method that starts with the last layer and moves backward through the layers 
until the first layer is reached. In this method, the outputs and the errors in outputs are calculated 
and the weights on the output units are altered. Then the errors in the hidden nodes are calculated 
and the weights in the hidden nodes are altered. The Backpropagation algorithm changes the 
weights to minimize the errors. The Backpropagation (BP) structure shown in Fig.1 consists of 
three groups, or layers, of units: a layer of "input" units is connected to a layer of "hidden" units, 
which is connected to a layer of "output" units. The activity of the input units represents the raw 
information that is fed into the network. The activity of each hidden unit is determined by both 
the activities of the input units and the connectivity weights between the input and the hidden 
units. The behavior of the output units depends on the activity of the hidden units and the weights 
between the hidden and output units. 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
127 
 
 
Fig. 1 Backpropagation Neural Network 
 
The number of nodes used in the hidden layer is 20. This number is found after training the 
network and the errors were found to converge using the value [12]. The output node is a linearly 
weighted sum of the hidden unit outputs. The outputs decide whether the system needs a handoff 
or not. If output is -1, no handoff decision will be taken. If output is +1, then handoff decision 
will be taken. This simple type of network is interesting because the hidden units are free to 
construct their own representations of the input. The weights between the input and hidden units 
determine when each hidden unit is active, and so by modifying these weights, a hidden unit can 
choose what it represents. The advantages of back propagation method are its simplicity and 
reasonable speed. 
 
Selection of a good activation function is very important because it should be symmetric, and the 
neural network should be trained to a value that is lower than the limits of the function. One good 
selection for the activation function is the hyperbolic tangent, or F(y) = tanh(y), because it is 
completely symmetric, as shown in Fig 2.  
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Hyperbolic tangent function 
 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
128 
 
Another reason for chosing it is that it's easy to obtain its derivative and also the value of 
derivative can be expressed in terms of the output value (i.e., as opposed to the input value). In 
our work, this hyperbolic tangent function is chosen. 
3. PROPOSED HANDOFF ALGORITHM 
 
Two base stations are considered in our paper and the cell radius is assumed to be 500 meter. Fig 
3 is the flow chart illustrating the proposed handoff algorithm. Signal strengths of the serving and 
target base stations are monitored. When the received signal strength from the serving BS less 
than the threshold value and the received signal strength (RSS) from the serving BS is lower than 
the target BS by hysteresis margin, then a handoff is done to continue the call in progress. 
Otherwise no Handoff decision will be taken. Then Artificial Neural Network is used to take the 
handoff decision depending on both RSSs and TIs [1] of the serving and target BSs. If output of 
the neural network is +1 then handoff decision should be taken, where as for –1 no handoff will 
be taken. The threshold value and the hysteresis margin are chosen to be -85 dBm and -5 dBm 
respectively. 
 
The inputs to the neural network are listed below - 
 
1.  x1 is the signal strength of mobile received from the serving BS. 
2.  x2 is the signal strength of mobile received from the target BS.  
3.  x3 is the traffic intensity (TI) of the serving BS. 
4.  x4is the TI of the target BS.  
5.  x5 is the bias. 
 
The received signal strength (RSS) is considered as: 
 
Low (L):  RSS ≤ −85 dBm and High (H): RSS > −85 dBm. 
 
The Traffic Intensity is considered as follow: 
 
Low (L): TI < 0.66 Erlangs/Channel,  
Medium (M): 0.66 ≥ TI ≥ 0.76 Erlangs/ Channel,           
High (H): TI >0.76 Erlangs/Channel, 
 
 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
129 
 
 
 
Fig.3 Neural Network based Handoff Algorithm 
 
In this paper four different cases are considered as mentioned in Table 1, such as: 
 
  1) Both the RSSs from the serving and target BSs are low. 
  2) The RSS from the serving BS is low while the RSS of the target BS is high. 
  3) Both the RSSs from the serving and target BSs are high. 
  4) The RSS from the serving BS is high while the RSS from the target BS is low. 
 
In each case handoff decisions (HO: handoff or NOHO: no-handoff) will be taken depending on 
the different levels of traffic intensities. Let us consider thatRSS from the serving cell is low and 
the RSS of target cell is high and their traffic intensities are low and high respectively. It is 
observed that neural network decides not to initiate handoff, as it is desired.  
 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
130 
 
 
 
Table 1. Handoff decision 
 
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
 
The estimated signal strengths [5] from serving and target BS are shown in Fig.4. It is observed 
that received signal strengthsfluctuatein a random manner in a Rayleigh fading environment. For 
different values of hysteresis margin and threshold value, the possibilities of handoff against 
distance from serving base station are calculated for different traffic intensities (Fig.5, 6, 7). It is 
observed from the Fig.5,that for L/L or M/M or H/H or L/M  (Low :L, Medium :M, High :H) 
traffic intensity combinations the distance at which handoff decision is taken remain same. Again 
for H/L or H/M or M/L traffic intensity combinations the distance at which handoff decision is 
taken remain same as shown in Fig.6. While for L/H or M/H traffic intensity combinations no 
handoff will be initiated as shown in Fig.7. The results show quick response and minimum 
fluctuations in handoff decision. Moreover, average numbers of handoffs versus different 
hysteresis margins and threshold values are calculated for different sets of traffic intensities 
(Fig.8.). It is observed from the Fig.8.(a), that for L/L or M/M or H/H or L/M traffic intensity 
combinations the average numbers of handoffs is same for different hysteresis margins and 
different threshold values. Again for H/L or H/M or M/L traffic intensity combinations the 
average numbers of handoffs is same for different hysteresis margins and different threshold 
values as shown in Fig.8.(b). While for L/H or M/H traffic intensity combinations no handoff will 
be initiated as shown in Fig.8(c). Thus the algorithm works well under all possible situations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
131 
 
 
Hysteresis = -5 dBm and Threshold = - 85 dBm 
(Low: L, Medium: M, High: H) 
 
 
Fig.4 Received signal strengths ofserving and target base stations 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 For L/L or M/M or H/H or L/M   Traffic Intensities 
 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
132 
 
 
 
Fig. 6ForH/L or H/M or M/L Traffic Intensities 
 
Fig. 7For L/H or M/H Traffic Intensities 
 
 
 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
133 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Fig. 8 No of Handoff vs. different Hysteresis margin for different Threshold value (a) For L/L or M/M or 
H/H or L/M Traffic Intensities (b) For H/L or H/M Traffic Intensities (c) For L/H or M/H Traffic 
Intensities 
 
 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) Vol. 5, No. 6, December 2013 
134 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
 
A handoff algorithm using Artificial Neural Network is designed and the performance of the 
algorithm is studied in this paper. It is observed from the results that the handoff decisions are 
taken in appropriate positions and the numberof fluctuation are also low. Average number of 
handoffis also low which minimizes base station and mobile switching centre processor loading. 
The designed algorithm can be easily embedded and applied to practical mobile cellular 
networks.
