Analyzing Language Learned by an
Active Question Answering Agent
Christian Buck

Jannis Bulian

Massimiliano Ciaramita

Wojciech Gajewski

Andrea Gesmundo

Neil Houlsby

Wei Wang

Google
Abstract
We analyze the language learned by an agent trained with reinforcement learning
as a component of the ActiveQA system [Buck et al., 2017]. In ActiveQA, ques-
tion answering is framed as a reinforcement learning task in which an agent sits
between the user and a black box question-answering system. The agent learns to
reformulate the user’s questions to elicit the optimal answers. It probes the system
with many versions of a question that are generated via a sequence-to-sequence
question reformulation model, then aggregates the returned evidence to ﬁnd the
best answer. This process is an instance of machine-machine communication. The
question reformulation model must adapt its language to increase the quality of the
answers returned, matching the language of the question answering system. We
ﬁnd that the agent does not learn transformations that align with semantic intuitions
but discovers through learning classical information retrieval techniques such as
tf-idf re-weighting and stemming.
1
Introduction
Buck et al. [2017] propose a reinforcement learning framework for question answering, called
active question answering (ActiveQA), that aims to improve answering by systematically perturbing
input questions (cf. [Nogueira and Cho, 2017]). Figure 1 depicts the generic agent-environment
framework. The agent (AQA) interacts with the environment (E) in order to answer a question
(q0). The environment includes a question answering system (Q&A), and emits observations and
rewards. A state st at time t is the sequence of observations and previous actions generated starting
from q0: st = x0, u0, x1, . . . , ut−1, xt, where xi includes the question asked (qi), the corresponding
answer returned by the QA system (ai), and possibly additional information such as features or
auxiliary tasks. The agent includes an action scoring component (U), which produced and action
ut by deciding whether to submit a new question to the environment or to return a ﬁnal answer.
Formally, ut ∈Q ∪A, where Q is the set of all possible questions, and A is the set of all possible
answers. The agent relies on a question reformulation system (QR), that provides candidate follow
up questions, and on an answer ranking system (AR), which scores the answers contained in st. Each
answer returned is assigned a reward. The objective is to maximize the expected reward over a set of
questions.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1801.07537v1  [cs.CL]  23 Jan 2018

QR
U
AQA
E
xt
xt+1
rt
rt+1
q0
ut
AR
Q&A
Figure 1: An agent-environment framework for Active Question Answering.
Buck et al. [2017] present a simpliﬁed version of this system with three core components: a question
reformulator, an off-the-shelf black box QA system, and a candidate answer selection model. The
question reformulator is trained with policy gradient [Williams, 1992] to optimize the F1 score of the
answers returned by the QA system to the question reformulations in place of the original question.
The reformulator is implemented as a sequence-to-sequence model of the kind used for machine
translation [Sutskever et al., 2014, Bahdanau et al., 2014]. When generating question reformulations,
the action-space is equal to the size of the vocabulary, typically 16k sentence pieces.1 Due to this large
number of actions we warm start the reformulation policy with a monolingual sequence-to-sequence
model that performs generic paraphrasing. This model is trained using the zero-shot translation
technique [Johnson et al., 2016] on a large multilingual parallel corpus [Ziemski et al., 2016], followed
by regular supervised learning on a smaller monolingual corpus of questions [Fader et al., 2013].
The reformulation and selection models form a trainable agent that seeks the best answers from the
QA system. The reformulator proposes N versions qi of the input question q0 and passes them to the
environment, which provides N corresponding answers, ai. The selection model scores each triple
(q0, qi, ai) and returns the top-scoring candidate.2
Crucially, the agent may only query the environment with natural language questions. Thus, ActiveQA
involves a machine-machine communication process inspired by the human-machine communication
that takes place when users interact with digital services during information seeking tasks. For
example, while searching for information on a search engine users tend to adopt a keyword-like
‘queryese’ style of questioning. The AQA agent proves effective at reformulating questions on
SearchQA [Dunn et al., 2017], a large dataset of complex questions from the Jeopardy! game. For
this task BiDAF is chosen for the environment [Seo et al., 2017], a deep network built for QA which
has produced state-of-the-art results. Compared to a QA system that forms the environment using
only the original questions, AQA outperforms this baseline by a wide margin, 11.4% absolute F1,
thereby reducing the gap between machine (BiDAF) and human performance by 66%.
Here we perform a qualitative analysis of this communication process to better understand what kind
of language the agent has learned. We ﬁnd that while optimizing its reformulations to adapt to the
language of the QA system, AQA diverges from well structured language in favour of less ﬂuent, but
more effective, classic information retrieval (IR) query operations. These include term re-weighting
(tf-idf), expansion and morphological simpliﬁcation/stemming. We hypothesize that the explanation
of this behaviour is that current machine comprehension tasks primarily require ranking of short
textual snippets, thus incentivizing relevance more than deep language understanding.
2
Analysis of the Agent’s Language
We analyze input questions and reformulations on the 12k example development partition of the
SearchQA dataset. Our goal is to gain insights on how the agent’s language evolves during training
1https://github.com/google/sentencepiece
2For more details see [Buck et al., 2017].
2

Figure 2: Boxplot summaries of the statistics collected for all types of questions. Two-sample t-tests
performed on all pairs in each box conﬁrm that the differences in means are signiﬁcant p < 10−3.
via policy gradient. It is important to note that in the SearchQA dataset the original Jeopardy! clues
have been preprocessed by lower-casing and stop word removal. The resulting preprocessed clues
that form the sources (inputs) for the sequence-to-sequence reformulation model resemble more
keyword-based search queries than grammatical questions. For example, the clue Gandhi was deeply
inﬂuenced by this count who wrote "War and Peace" is simpliﬁed to gandhi deeply inﬂuenced count
wrote war peace.
2.1
The Language of SearchQA Questions
Figure 2 summarizes statistics of the questions and rewrites which may shed some light on how the
language changes. The (preprocessed) SearchQA questions contain 9.6 words on average. They
contain few repeated terms, computed as the mean term frequency (TF) per question. The average is
1.03, but for most of the queries TF is 1.0, i.e. no repetitions. We also compute the median document
frequency (DF) per query, where a document is the context from which the answer is selected.3 DF
gives a measure of how informative the question terms are.
2.2
The Language of the Base NMT Model
We ﬁrst consider the top hypothesis generated by the pre-trained NMT reformulation system, before
reinforcement learning (Base-NMT). This system is trained with full supervision, using a large multi-
lingual and a small monolingual dataset. The Base-NMT rewrites differ greatly from their sources.
They are shorter, 6.3 words on average, and have even fewer repeated terms (1.01). Interestingly,
these reformulations are mostly syntactically well-formed questions. For example, the clue above
becomes Who inﬂuenced count wrote war?.4 Base-NMT improves structural language quality by
properly reinserting dropped function words and wh-phrases. We also veriﬁed the increased ﬂuency
by using a large language model and found that the Base-NMT rewrites are 50% more likely than
the original questions. The bottom right hand plot in Figure 2 summarizes the language model
distributions (LM WordLogP). The plot shows the average per-token language model negative log
3We use the median instead of the mean to reduce the inﬂuence of frequent outliers, such as commas, on the
statistics. The mean DF is 460.
4More examples can be found in Appendix A.
3

probabilities; a lower score indicates greater ﬂuency. Although the distributions overlap to a great
extent due to the large variance across questions, the differences in means are signiﬁcant.
While more ﬂuent, the Base-NMT rewrites involve rarer terms, as indicated by the decrease in DF.
This is probably due to a domain mismatch between SearchQA and the NMT training corpus.
2.3
The Language of the AQA Agent
We next consider the top hypothesis generated by the AQA question reformulator (AQA-QR) after the
policy gradient training. The AQA-QR rewrites are those whose corresponding answers are evaluated
as AQA Top Hyp. in Buck et al. [2017]. Note, these single rewrites alone outperform the original
SearchQA queries by a small margin (+2% on test). We analyze the top hypothesis instead of the
ﬁnal output of the full AQA agent to avoid confounding effects from the answer selection step. These
rewrites look different from both the Base-NMT and the SearchQA ones. For the example above
AQA-QR’s top hypothesis is What is name gandhi gandhi inﬂuence wrote peace peace?. Surprisingly,
99.8% start with the preﬁx What is name. The second most frequent is What country is (81 times),
followed by What is is (70) and What state (14). This is puzzling as it happens only for 9 Base-NMT
rewrites, and never in the original SearchQA questions. We speculate it might be related to the fact
that virtually all answers involve names, of named entities (Micronesia) or generic concepts (pizza).
AQA-QR’s rewrites are visibly less ﬂuent than both the SearchQA and the Base-MT counterparts.
In terms of language model probability they are less likely than both SearchQA and Base-NMT.5
However, they have more repeated terms (1.2 average TF), are signiﬁcantly longer (11.9) than the
Base-NMT initialization and contain more informative context terms (lower DF) than SearchQA
questions.
Additionally, AQA-QR’s reformulations contain morphological variants in 12.5% of cases. The
number of questions that contain multiple tokens with the same stem doubles from SearchQA to
AQA-QR. Singular forms are preferred over plurals. Morphological simpliﬁcation is useful because
it increases the chance that a word variant in the question matches the context.
3
Conclusions: Rediscovering IR?
Recently, Lewis et al. [2017] trained chatbots that negotiate via language utterances in order to
complete a task. They report that the agent’s language diverges from human language if there is no
incentive for ﬂuency in the reward function. Our ﬁndings seem related. The fact that the questions
reformulated by AQA do not resemble natural language is not due to the keyword-like SearchQA
input questions, because Base-NMT is capable of producing ﬂuent questions from the same input.
AQA learns to re-weight terms by focusing on informative (lower DF) terms while increasing
term frequency (TF) via duplication. At the same time it learns to modify surface forms in ways
akin to stemming and morphological analysis. Some of the techniques seem to adapt also to the
speciﬁc properties of current deep QA architectures such as character-based modelling and attention.
Sometimes AQA learns to generate semantically nonsensical, novel, surface term variants; e.g., it
might transform the adjective dense to densey. The only justiﬁcation for this is that such forms can
be still exploited by the character-based BiDAF question encoder. Finally, repetitions can directly
increase the chances of alignment in the attention components.
We hypothesize that there is no incentive for the model to use human language due to the nature of the
task. AQA learns to ask BiDAF questions by optimizing a language that increases the likelihood of
BiDAF extracting the right answer. Jia and Liang [2017] argue that reading comprehension systems
are not capable of signiﬁcant language understanding and fail easily in adversarial settings. We suspect
that current machine comprehension tasks involve mostly simple pattern matching and relevance
modelling. As a consequence deep QA systems behave as sophisticated ranking systems trained to
sort snippets of text from the context. As such, they resemble document retrieval systems which
incentivizes the (re-)discovery of IR techniques that have been successful for decades [Baeza-Yates
and Ribeiro-Neto, 1999].
5To compute meaningful language model scores we remove the preﬁx “What is name” from all queries,
because it artiﬁcially inﬂates the ﬂuency measure, due to the high frequency unigrams and bigrams.
4
