Informal Data Transformation Considered Harmful
Eric Daimler, Ryan Wisnesky
Conexus AI
Image used under a creative commons license; original
available at http://xkcd.com/1838/.
1
Introduction
In this paper we take the common position (Wickham 2014)
that AI systems are limited more by the integrity of the
data they are learning from than the sophistication of their
algorithms, and we take the uncommon position that the
solution to achieving better data integrity in the enterprise
is not to clean and validate data ex-post-facto whenever
needed1, but rather to formally and automatically guaran-
tee that data integrity is preserved as it transformed (mi-
grated, integrated, composed, queried, viewed, etc) through-
Copyright c⃝2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1the so-called “data lake” approach to data management, which
can lead to data scientists spending 80% of their time cleaning
data (Wickham 2014)
out the enterprise, so that data and programs that depend
on that data need not constantly be re-validated for ev-
ery particular use. Computer scientists have been develop-
ing techniques for preserving data integrity during trans-
formation since the 1970s (Doan, Halevy, and Ives 2012);
however, we agree with the authors of (Breiner, Subrah-
manian, and Jones 2018) and others that these techniques
are insufﬁcient for the practice of AI and modern IT sys-
tems integration and we describe a modern mathematical
approach based on category theory (Barr and Wells 1990;
Awodey 2010), and the categorical query language CQL2,
that is sufﬁcient for today’s needs and also subsumes and
uniﬁes previous approaches.
1.1
Outline
To help motivate our approach, we next brieﬂy summarize
an application of CQL to a data science project undertaken
jointly with the Chemical Engineering department of Stan-
ford University (Brown, Spivak, and Wisnesky 2019). Then,
in Section 2 we review data integrity and in Section 3 we re-
view category theory. Finally, we describe the mathematics
of our approach in Section 4, and conclude in Section 5. We
present no new results, instead citing a line of work summa-
rized in (Schultz, Spivak, and Wisnesky 2017).
1.2
Motivating Case Study
In scientiﬁc practice, computer simulation is now a third pri-
mary tool, alongside theory and experiment. Within quan-
tum materials engineering, density functional theory (DFT)
calculations are invaluable for determining how electrons
behave in materials, but scientists typically do not share
these calculations because they cannot guarantee that others
will interpret them correctly, mitigating much of the value
of simulation to begin with; for example, ease of replica-
tion. Although there are many standardized formats for rep-
resenting chemical structures, there are no such standards
for more complicated entities such as the symmetry analysis
of a chemical structure, the pseudo-potentials used in DFT
calculation, density of states data resulting from a DFT cal-
culation, and the DFT calculation itself. Furthermore, many
questions of interest depend not on a single calculation, but
rather on ensembles of calculations, grouped in particular
2 http://categoricaldata.net
arXiv:2001.00338v1  [cs.DB]  2 Jan 2020

Figure 1: A Quantum Chemistry Schema
ways; for example, one is often interested in formation ener-
gies, i.e. a structure’s energy relative to some reference en-
ergy, which depends on some arbitrarily-chosen mapping of
its constituent elements to reference species, as well as the
calculations for those reference species.
The above descriptions represent a tiny fraction of the
complexity of the systems computational scientists grapple
with. In practice, scientists can only communicate structured
raw data in tiny fragments (e.g. speciﬁc chemical structures)
of the systems they try to model, which contain concepts at
higher levels of abstraction such as chemical species, reac-
tion mechanisms, and reaction networks, and the ability to
freely exchange structured data at the level of abstraction
which scientists actually work supports many scientiﬁc ac-
tivities such as machine learning applications which thrive
on large databases.
The basic idea of the CQL solution to the above prob-
lem, which applies in many domains besides chemistry, is to
design (or otherwise construct) a schema C with a rich set
of data integrity constraints that capture the properties that
should be preserved upon transformation, and then to verify
that any schema mappings out of C, for example by other
scientists, respect these constraints, a process expedited by
the CQL automated theorem prover, a technology we will
describe later. In this way, data cannot be exported onto
schemas that do not respect the intentions of the original
author. An example schema for DFT calculations (Brown,
Spivak, and Wisnesky 2019) is shown in Figure 1.
2
Data Integrity
By data integrity, we mean the conformance of a database to
a collection of data integrity constraints expressed in some
formal language, such as ﬁrst-order logic. When working
with structured data, constraints are often built in to database
schemas; for example, in SQL, a primary key constraint
(stating for example that if two people have the same so-
cial security numbers, they must be the same person) can
be given when deﬁning the columns of a table. Other exam-
ple constraints include range constraints (that for example
an age be > 21) and join decompositions (that for exam-
ple state that a table is the join of two other tables; such
denormalized data sets are common in data science, for per-
formance reasons). Another common constraint language is
RDF/OWL (Doan, Halevy, and Ives 2012).
Data integrity is one of the mathematically quantiﬁable
components of data quality, an informal and relative notion
which roughly means that a database is “ﬁt” for a particular
purpose, such as supporting a particular forecasting model or
building a particular data warehouse. For this reason, com-
puter scientists have long urged practitioners to, usually, use
data integrity constraints to formalize as much of the concept
of data quality as is possible in a given scenario, to provide
both conceptual clarity and possibly be used in implementa-
tion. However, unrestricted use of constraints quickly leads
to undecidable problems (Doan, Halevy, and Ives 2012), as
there is an innate trade-off between how expressive con-
straint languages are and how computationally difﬁcult it is
to reason about them. Hence, mainstream data transforma-
tion tools (“ETL” tools, such as Informatica PowerCenter
and IBM DataStage) either do not support expressive con-
straints, or only use them internally.
The failure of tooling described above is especially tragic
because there is such a signiﬁcant amount of theoretical
work on applying constraints to data transformation, integra-
tion, cleaning, schema mapping, and more (Doan, Halevy,
and Ives 2012). For example, it is possible to formally re-
late constraints to the random variables of statistical mod-
els and thereby demonstrate the absence of various statisti-
cal anomalies (Wickham 2014). It is doubly tragic because
many practitioners, who are often not trained in computer
science and many only be exposed to computer science
through data transformation, may never be exposed to the
idea that data quality can be formally and in many cases au-
tomatically enforced by using data integrity constraints.
In the enterprise, data quality degradation due to loss of
integrity during transformation is a systemic problem resis-
tant to current techniques, and as such we propose to tackle it
by building on top of a particular constraint language – cate-
gory theory – that has become a de-facto constraint language
for the practice of mathematics itself, in the sense that math-
ematicians use it to axiomatically deﬁne abstract structures
such as groups using exactly the same kinds of data integrity
constraints used in data management (Wells 1994)3.
3
Category Theory
Category theory (Barr and Wells 1990; Awodey 2010) is
the most recent branch of pure mathematics, originating in
1946 in algebraic topology. There are three main concepts
of study: categories, functors, and natural transformations.
A category C consists of a set, Ob(C), the elements of
which we call objects; a set Mor(C), the elements of which
3A mathematician would undoubtedly never refer to category
theory as a constraint language, however. Here we more precisely
are referring to categorical logic, such as that of topoi.

we call morphisms; functions domC, codC : Mor(C) →
Ob(C) called domain and co-domain; a function idC
:
Ob(C) →Mor(C); and a partial function ◦C : Mor(C) ×
Mor(C) →Mor(C) called composition such that (where we
omit the sub-scripted C):
dom(id(o)) = cod(id(o)) = o
cod(g) = dom(f) ⇒dom(f ◦g) = dom(g)
cod(g) = dom(f) ⇒cod(f ◦g) = cod(f)
id(dom(f)) ◦f = f = id(cod(f)) ◦f
( cod(g) = dom(f) ∧cod(h) = dom(g) ⇒
(f ◦g) ◦h = f ◦(g ◦h) )
Note that the objects and morphisms of every category form
a directed multi-graph. An example category is Set, the cat-
egory whose objects are sets and whose morphisms are func-
tions, with composition given by function application. An-
other example is Group, the category of groups and group
homomorphisms. Programming languages often form cate-
gories, with objects as types and morphisms as programs.
A functor F : C →D from category C to category D
consists of a function, (also written) F : Ob(C) →Ob(D);
and a function (also written) F : Mor(C) →Mor(D) that
preserves identities and composition:
domD(F(f)) = F(domC(f))
F(idC(o)) = idD(F(o))
codD(F(f)) = F(codC(f))
F(f ◦C g) = F(f) ◦D G(g)
An example functor is the free group functor free : Set →
Group that takes each set to the free group generated by it,
and each function to the associated unique group homomor-
phism. Another example functor is the forgetful group func-
tor forget : Group →Set that takes each group to its un-
derlying carrier set. These two functors are not inverses, but
are so called adjoints, a kind of generalization of the notion
of inverse from which category theory derives much of its
utility, but which we do not elaborate on here.
Finally, a natural transformation τ : F →G between
functors F, G : C →D consists of, for every object c ∈
Ob(C) a morphism τc ∈Mor(D) such that
domD(τc) = F(c)
codD(τc) = G(c)
τcodC(f) ◦D F(f) = G(f) ◦D τdom(f)
For every category C, there is a category SetC whose ob-
jects are functors C →Set and whose morphisms are natu-
ral transformations. SetC is a mathematical structure called
a topos which can interpret ﬁrst-order logic and set-theory,
a fact (Wells 1994) that we will make use of in the next sec-
tion. Another fact we will use in the next section is that, ig-
noring minor issues relating to self-reference, there is a cat-
egory whose objects are categories and whose morphisms
are functors (and so in particular, functors compose, as do
natural transformations).
4
Functorial Data Migration
In this section we present our approach to formally and au-
tomatically ensuring that data integrity is preserved during
transformation, comparing to previous approaches as we go
along. Our key idea (Schultz, Spivak, and Wisnesky 2017)
is that database schemas are categories, and from that idea,
an entire mathematical and algorithmic theory and practice
of data transformation emerges, subsuming most current ap-
proaches such as SQL by virtue of the fact that category the-
ory a kind of meta-theory for mathematics.
4.1
Algebraic Databases
To use our approach, we start by deﬁning a directed multi-
graph to represent each database schema we are interested
in. The nodes of this graph are names for either types or
database tables and the edges of this graph are names for
either attributes or foreign keys, . For example, if we are
interested in a database about employees and departments,
we may begin with the graph:
Emp
mgr

works
,
name
#
Dept
name
{
admin
l
String
For data integrity constraints, we use equational logic. Con-
tinuing with our example, we might have:
works(admin(d)) = d
which express that every administrator works in the depart-
ment he or she administers. The graph and equations to-
gether determine a category whose objects are nodes in the
graph and whose morphisms with domain n1 and co-domain
n2 are (possibly empty) paths n1 →n2 in the graph, where
we identify paths that are equivalent under the equations. In
this example, the induced category has inﬁnitely many mor-
phisms, because there are many paths through Emp via mgr.
Having observed that database schemas are categories, we
next observe that a database on schema C is a functor C →
Set. Such a functor may presented as a set of tables, where
we omit the inﬁnite String table that contains all strings:
Emp
mgr
works
name
101
103
q10
Al
102
102
x02
Bob
103
103
q10
Carl
Dept
admin
name
q10
102
CS
x02
101
Math
It is easy to see that these tables satisfy the data integrity
constraints. Indeed, when C is presented by generating mor-
phisms and equations, every functor C →Set will satisfy the
equations of C, a useful property of our formalism. We will
not illustrate natural transformations between two databases,
but they correspond precisely to their relational counter-
parts (Doan, Halevy, and Ives 2012).
It is important to note that although we are using tables in
the example above, our approach is not limited to relational

data; for example, we may just as easily use a representation
of databases as graphs, such as found in a triple store:
CS
q10
name
o
101
works
o
ﬁrst
/
mgr

Al
Math
x02
name
o
102
works
o
ﬁrst /
mgr
Q
Bob
103
works
U
mgr
Q
ﬁrst / Carl
4.2
Data Transformation
Given a functor F : C →D, we can convert a database J
on schema D to a database ∆F(J ) on schema C by compo-
sition pre-composition with F:
C
F
/
∆F(J ):C→Set := J ◦F
6
D
J
/ Set
The operation (in fact, functor) ∆F that takes databases
on schema D and converts them to schema C does not
(in general) admit an inverse, but it does (always) admit
two inverse-like operations, ΣF and ΠF , called the left and
right adjoints of ∆F , respectively, that convert databases on
schema C to schema D; i.e., they migrate data in the op-
posite direction as ∆F . The operations ∆F , ΣF , ΠF form a
core part of our approach are are used many times over in a
typical CQL program.
In our approach it is natural to call a functor F : C →D
a “schema mapping”, because functors are called maps be-
tween categories. However, in relational database theory,
there are not three data migration operations correspond-
ing to one schema mapping, there is only one, with a se-
mantics (called “chase semantics” (Doan, Halevy, and Ives
2012)) broadly similar to our ΣF . Our approach thus gen-
eralizes relational schema mappings (Doan, Halevy, and
Ives 2012). Additionally, pairs of schema mappings with
a common co-domain generalize SQL’s SELECT-FROM-
WHERE queries, but without issues relating to NULLs and
without the need to join columns that are connected by for-
eign keys. Finally, our approach generalizes (Schultz, Spi-
vak, and Wisnesky 2017) to encompass all of the classes of
data integrity constraints studied in database theory, such as
existential horn-clause logic (Doan, Halevy, and Ives 2012).
In short, there is little to be lost in moving to a category-
theoretic (“functorial”) approach to data migration from the
traditional, relational approach.
In fact, there is much to be gained as well: because func-
tors preserve equations, as discussed earlier, data migrations
in our approach also always preserve data integrity con-
straints, meaning that queries “cannot go wrong”. The price
to be paid for this compile-time assurance is that checking if
a functor F : C →D is actually functorial and not just an
assignment of objects to objects and arrows to arrows is an
undecidable problem. The reason is that, when C and D are
presented by generating morphisms and equations, we must
check, for each equation p = q in C, that F(p) = F(q) in
D, which is not decidable in general (Baader and Nipkow
1998). Hence, for our approach to be feasible in practice,
automated theorem proving techniques (Baader and Nipkow
1998) must be used, and their development is one of the
key contributions of the open-source CQL query language,
which implements the ∆, Σ, Π data migrations, and many
other constructions, in software.
5
Conclusion
In this paper we have presented a vision for a formally ver-
iﬁed data transformation infrastructure, based on the math-
ematics of category theory and the categorical query lan-
guage CQL, and described a motivating case study from
data science. Our approach to data migration and integration
extends existing approaches from relational database the-
ory, while providing an extended semantics that has already
proved indispensable in many projects, including (Wisnesky
et al. 2017),(Nolan et al. 2019), and (Brown, Spivak, and
Wisnesky 2019). Given that data quality is the primary ob-
stacle in unlocking the power of AI, by transitivity we ex-
pect our approach to data transformation to be fundamental
to unlocking the power of AI.
