Sensorimotor learning for artiﬁcial body perception
German Diez-Valencia, Takuya Ohashi, Pablo Lanillos*, Gordon Cheng
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany

Index Terms
Sensorimotor learning, Body perception, Hierarchical Bayesian estimation, Predictive coding, Deep learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial self-perception is the machine ability to perceive its own body, i.e., the mastery of modal and intermodal contin-
gencies of performing an action with a speciﬁc sensors/actuators body conﬁguration [1]. In other words, the spatio-temporal
patterns that relate its sensors (e.g. visual, proprioceptive, tactile, etc.), its actions and its body latent variables are responsible
of the distinction between its own body and the rest of the world. This paper describes some of the latest approaches for
modelling artiﬁcial body self-perception: from Bayesian estimation to deep learning. Results show the potential of these free-
model unsupervised or semi-supervised crossmodal/intermodal learning approaches. However, there are still challenges that
should be overcome before we achieve artiﬁcial multisensory body perception.
II. HIERARCHICAL BAYESIAN MODELS
A ﬁrst approach on self-perception was integrating multimodal tactile, proprioceptive and visual cues [1] by means of
Hierarchical Bayesian models and signal processing, extending [2] and [3] ideas. Results showed that the robot was able to
discern between inbody and outbody sources without using markers or simpliﬁed segmentation. Figure 1 shows the proto-object
saliency system [4] used as visual input and the computed probability of the image regions belonging to the robot arm. Body
perception was formalized as an inference problem while the robot was interacting with the world. In order to infer which
parts of the scene belong to the robot we integrated visual and accelerometers information. We deﬁned the visual receptive
ﬁeld as a grid where each node (i.e., the decimation of the pixel-wise image) should be decided whether it belongs to the body
or not. For that purpose, we adapted Bayesian inference grids to estimate the probability of being its body along the time. The
prediction step was computed by learning the pixel-wise velocity in four directions (i.e., up, down, left, right). Furthermore,
this method was successfully applied to simplify the problem of discovering objects by interaction [5].
Fig. 1. Self-detection combining visual attention and Bayesian ﬁltering [1]. (left) Saliency segmentation; (middle) inference of the body parts; and (right)
inbody vs outbody sources in the visual ﬁeld.
III. PREDICTIVE CODING MODELS
A biologically plausible body perception model based on predictive processing [6] was also proposed in [7]. Here, body
perception was transformed into approximating the latent space distribution q(µ) that deﬁnes the body schema to the real process
distribution with the sensory information (posterior) p(x|s). In this approach, the forward sensory model s = g(µ)+z for each
modality was learnt using Gaussian process regression. Sensory fusion was computed by means of inference approximation
of the body latent variables µ minimizing the free-energy bound [6]. Furthermore, with this model, the authors were able to
replicate the proprioceptive drift pattern of the rubber-hand illusion on a robot with visual, proprioceptive and tactile sensing
capabilities [8].
This work was supported by SELFCEPTION project (www.selfception.eu) European Union Horizon 2020 Programme (MSCA-IF-2016) under grant
agreement no. 741941. Workshop on Crossmodal Learning for Intelligent Robotics. IEEE Int. Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2018)
arXiv:1901.09792v1  [cs.RO]  15 Jan 2019

(a) Sensory data acquisition
(b) Rubber-hand illusion test
Fig. 2. Body learning and estimation through predictive coding. (a) Gathering proprioceptive (joint angles), visual robot (green) and other (red) end-effector
pixel coordinates and tactile sensory data from the robot (proximity values) for different arm conﬁgurations. Green circles represent the likelihood of being
touched. (b) Adaptation test where we change the visual location of the arm and we induce synchronous visuo-tactile perturbations.
IV. GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS (GANS)
In order to generalize the features used in the previous predictive coding approach, we investigated deep neural networks
architectures for learning the generative functions and the cross-modal relations. The advantage of using GANs as a model for
self-perception is that the discriminator is a potential self/other distinction mechanism learnt in a unsupervised manner.
A. Visual forward model learning
We analysed how the forward function that relates the joint angles (body) and the visual input can be learnt using GANs.
Visuomotor learning has been also approached with recurrent neural networks in [9]. Conversely, here we employ a Deep
Convolutional Generative Adversarial Network (DC-GAN) [10], [11]. This method literally generated the arm visual shape
depending on the joint angles. Figure 3(a) shows the network architecture and the robot used to extract the data.
(a) Robot and network architecture
(b) Training with synthetic generated data
(c) Generated arm visual appearance for four different joint angles conﬁguration
Fig. 3.
Forward visual-kinematic model learning using a DC-GAN. (a) Robot used and GAN architecture. (b) Example of training data generation with
synthetic backgrounds. (c) Generated image from different joint arm angles conﬁgurations and unlearned background type.

The great challenge was to generalize the reconstruction of the arm for any background without using segmentation. For
that purpose, several background images were synthetically generated and were overlaid by automated labelled masks (i.e.,
boolean mask of the arm in the visual ﬁeld) by means of background subtraction (Fig. 3(b)). An example of the results of the
generated arm given the a joint angle conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 3(c). The most right generated image shows difﬁculties
of the model to properly reconstruct the robot arm when the majority of it is outside the ﬁeld of view. Anyhow, the statistical
evaluation of the network, over all experiments, showed an accuracy of 84.4% when comparing the matching between the
original versus the generated image mask.
B. Cross-modal learning
We further analysed self-perception from the cross-modal point of view. Instead of generating the body visual appearance
from the joints angles, we extended the architecture to enable signal reconstruction from different sensor modalities using
denoising autoencoders [12] but without shared representation. We used the iCub simulator [13] to generate the following
visuo-tactile-proprioceptive data: the left arm joint angles, the activation of the skin sensors on the left hand and left forearm
and the 2D position of a red cube in the robot left eye image plane. The detection of the red cube was performed by colour
blob segmentation. The skin sensors delivered a ﬁxed length array with value 255 if there was contact or 0 otherwise. The
image size was ﬁxed to 640 × 480. We generated several left arm joints conﬁguration, where the forearm appeared in different
positions in the visual ﬁeld. The red cube trajectory was then computed to touch the forearm from the hand to the elbow. After
a phase of data synchronization a Wasserstein type GAN [14] was trained off-line. Figure 4 shows the experimental setup of
the simulation and the data reconstruction results. Convolution operators were able to extract the inherent structure of the skin
data but not reliable enough to provide accurate tactile reconstruction as those operators were thought for images only.
Fig. 4. Learning spatio-temporal multisensory patterns using denoising autoencoders. (left) simulator used to generate the data; (right) results: columns 1-5
original multimodal data, columns 6-10 reconstructed data.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented body learning and perception as one of the most representative and challenging cross-modal learning
applications. In particular, self-perception in robots has direct applications on adaptability, safety and human-robot interaction.
Through examples, we identiﬁed at least three important characteristics for modelling artiﬁcial body perception: (1) body
latent space estimation through noisy sensorimotor fusion; (2) cross-modal signal recovering from multimodal information;
and (3) unsupervised self-generated patterns classiﬁcation. Accordingly, we have shown different techniques for partially solving
the problem, such as hierarchical Bayesian models for self-detection on the visual ﬁeld [1], predictive processing with GP
regression for body estimation [7], and deep nets for learning the forward visual-kinematics or visuo-tactile-proprioception
relations. Further research will focus on developing a full cross-modal architecture able to properly tackle the nature of the
different modalities and allowing sensor relevance tuning.
