Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
SAMPLE EFFICIENT DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARN-
ING VIA UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION
Vincent Mai, Kaustubh Mani and Liam Paull ∗
Robotics and Embodied AI Lab
Mila - Quebec Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Universit´e de Montr´eal, Quebec, Canada

ABSTRACT
In model-free deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, using noisy value es-
timates to supervise policy evaluation and optimization is detrimental to the sam-
ple efﬁciency. As this noise is heteroscedastic, its effects can be mitigated using
uncertainty-based weights in the optimization process. Previous methods rely on
sampled ensembles, which do not capture all aspects of uncertainty. We provide
a systematic analysis of the sources of uncertainty in the noisy supervision that
occurs in RL, and introduce inverse-variance RL, a Bayesian framework which
combines probabilistic ensembles and Batch Inverse Variance weighting. We pro-
pose a method whereby two complementary uncertainty estimation methods ac-
count for both the Q-value and the environment stochasticity to better mitigate the
negative impacts of noisy supervision. Our results show signiﬁcant improvement
in terms of sample efﬁciency on discrete and continuous control tasks.
1
INTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods have proven to be powerful at solving sequential
decision-making tasks across domains (Silver et al., 2016; OpenAI et al., 2019). Combining the
ﬂexibility of the reinforcement learning framework with the representational power of deep neural
networks enables policy optimization in complex and high-dimensional environments with unknown
dynamics models to maximize the expected cumulative reward (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
An important limitation of DRL methods is their sample inefﬁciency: an enormous amount of data is
necessary and makes training expensive. This makes applying DRL in the real world challenging, for
example in robotics (S¨underhauf et al., 2018; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). In tasks like manipulation,
sample collection is a slow and costly process (Liu et al., 2021). It is even more expensive in risk-
averse applications like autonomous driving (Kothari et al., 2021).
Among the current state-of-the-art approaches to improve learning efﬁciency, a promising direction
is to exploit the prevalence of uncertainty in the underlying DRL algorithm. By adopting a Bayesian
framework, we can consider the sampled quantities in DRL as random variables and leverage infor-
mation about their distributions to improve the learning process (Osband et al., 2018). In this paper,
we consider the particular problem of unreliable supervision in the temporal difference update and
the policy optimization process. In DRL, value predictions are used to supervise the training: in tem-
poral difference-based algorithms, they are included in bootstrapped target values which are used as
labels; in actor-critic frameworks, the policy is trained to optimize them. That these value predic-
tions are noisy slows the learning and brings instability (Kumar et al., 2019; 2020). The amount of
noise in the supervision depends on the uncertainty of the value prediction, which evolves during
the training process and depends on the state (and action) evaluated. It is therefore heteroscedastic.
While there is an extensive body of literature focused on using the uncertainty of the value prediction
to guide the exploration/exploitation trade-off (Dearden et al., 1998; Strens, 2001; Osband et al.,
2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Osband et al., 2018; Fortunato et al., 2019; Osband
et al., 2019; Flennerhag et al., 2020; Clements et al., 2020; Jain et al., 2021; Aravindan & Lee, 2021),
there are very few works focused on leveraging it to mitigate the impact of unreliable supervision.
∗Canada CIFAR AI Chair
1
arXiv:2201.01666v3  [cs.LG]  3 May 2022

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017) considers the value function as a distribution to be learned
as such. It is orthogonal to our proposition: we consider the uncertainty of the labels used to learn
a scalar value function. In the ofﬂine RL setting, where the dataset is limited, uncertainty-weighted
actor-critic (UWAC) (Wu et al., 2021) uses inverse-variance weighting to discard out-of-distribution
state-action pairs using Monte Carlo dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) for uncertainty estimation.
Closer to our work, Lee et al. (2021) propose SUNRISE, in which each sample of the Bellman
backup in the TD update step is weighted to lower the importance of the targets which have a high
standard deviation. The weights w(s′, a′) are computed based on a sigmo¨ıd of the negative standard
deviation ˆQstd(s′, a′) scaled by a temperature hyperparameter T, and then offset such that they are
between 0.5 and 1: w(s, a) = σ(−ˆQstd(s′, a′) ∗T) + 0.5. The uncertainty of the target is estimated
by sampled ensembles. While SUNRISE proposes other contributions such as an exploration bonus,
the heuristic weighting scheme and the limitations of sampled ensembles in capturing the predictive
uncertainty leave space for improvement in the mitigation of the effects of unreliable supervision.
We propose inverse-variance reinforcement learning (IV-RL). IV-RL also uses weights to reduce the
importance of uncertain targets in training. It does so by addressing the problem from two view-
points. First, we use variance networks (Kendall & Gal, 2017), whose loss function for regression
is the negative log-likelihood instead of the L2 distance. For a given state-action pair (s, a), the
network learns the target’s noise, due for example to the stochasticity of the environment or the up-
date of the policy. It then naturally down-weights the highly noisy samples in the training process.
Second, we use variance ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) to estimate the uncertainty of
the target due to the prediction of Q(s′, a′) during the temporal-difference update. We merge the
predicted variances of several variance networks through a mixture of Gaussians, which has been
shown to be a reliable method to capture predictive uncertainty (Ovadia et al., 2019). We then use
Batch Inverse-Variance (BIV) (Mai et al., 2021), which has been shown to signiﬁcantly improve the
performance of supervised learning with neural networks in the case of heteroscedastic regression.
BIV is normalized, which makes it ideal to cope with different and time-varying scales of variance.
We show analytically that these two different variance predictions for the target are complementary
and their combination leads to consistent and signiﬁcant improvements in the sample efﬁciency and
overall performance of the learning process.
In summary, our contribution is threefold:
1. We present a systematic analysis of the sources of uncertainty in the supervision of model-
free DRL algorithms. We show that the variance of the supervision noise can be estimated
with two complementary methods: negative log-likelihood and variance ensembles.
2. We introduce IV-RL, a framework that accounts for the uncertainty of the supervisory sig-
nal by weighting the samples in a mini-batch during the agent’s training. IV-RL uses BIV,
a weighting scheme that is robust to poorly calibrated variance estimation.1
3. Our experiments show that IV-RL can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in sample efﬁciency
when applied to Deep Q-Networks (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2013) and Soft-Actor Critic (SAC)
(Haarnoja et al., 2018).
In section 2, we introduce BIV as a weighting scheme for heteroscedastic regression, and variance
ensembles as an uncertainty estimation method. We analyse the sources of uncertainty in the target
in section 3, where we also introduce our IV-RL framework. We ﬁnally present our experimental
results in section 4.
2
BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES
2.1
BATCH INVERSE-VARIANCE WEIGHTING
In supervised learning with deep neural networks, it is assumed that the training dataset consists of
inputs xk and labels yk. However, depending on the label generation process, the label may be noisy.
In regression, we can model the noise as a normal distribution around the true label: ˜yk = yk + δk
with δk ∼N(0, σ2
k). In some cases, the label generation process leads to different variances for the
label noises. When these variances can be estimated, each sample is a triplet
 xk, ˜yk, σ2
k

.
1The code for IV-RL is available at https://github.com/montrealrobotics/iv_rl.
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Batch Inverse-Variance (BIV) weighting (Mai et al., 2021) leverages the additional information σ2
k,
which is assumed to be provided, to learn faster and obtain better performance in the case of het-
eroscedastic noise on the labels. Applied to L2 loss, it optimizes the neural network parameters θ
using the following loss function for a mini-batch D of size K 2:
LBIV(D, θ) =
 K
X
k=0
1
σ2
k + ξ
!−1
K
X
k=0
(fθ(xk) −˜yk)2
σ2
k + ξ
(1)
This is a normalized weighted sum with weights wk = 1/(σ2
k + ξ). Normalizing in the mini-batch
enables control of the effective learning rate, especially in cases where the training data changes
over time, such as in DRL. By focusing on the relative scale of the variances instead of their absolute
value, it also provides robustness to poor scale-calibration of the variance estimates.
As explained in Mai et al. (2021), ξ is a hyperparameter that is important for the stability of the
optimization process. A higher ξ limits the highest weights, thus preventing very small variance
samples from dominating the loss function for a mini-batch. However, by controlling the discrimi-
nation between the samples, ξ is also key when the variance estimation is not completely trusted. It
provides control of the effective mini-batch size EBS, according to:
EBS =
PK
k wk
2
PK
k w2
k
=
PK
k
1
(σ2
k + ξ)
2
PK
k
1
(σ2
k + ξ)2
(2)
For example, imagine a mini-batch where most samples have very high variances, and only one has
a very low variance. If ξ = 0, this one low-variance sample is effectively the only one to count in
the mini-batch, and EBS tends towards 1. Increasing ξ would give more relative importance to the
other samples, thus increasing EBS. With a very high ξ compared to the variances, all weights are
equal, and EBS tends towards K; in this case, the BIV loss tends towards L2.
Tuning the ξ parameter
The simplest way to set ξ is to choose a constant value as an additional
hyperparameter. However, the best value is difﬁcult to evaluate a priori and can change when the
proﬁle of variances changes during a task, as is the case in DRL.
It is instead possible to numerically compute the value of ξ which ensures a minimal EBS for each
mini-batch. This method allows ξ to automatically adapt to the different scales of variance while
ensuring a minimal amount of information from the dataset is accounted for by the algorithm. The
minimal EBS is also a hyper-parameter, but it is easier to set and to transfer among environments,
as it is simply a fraction of the original batch size. As such, it can be set as a batch size ratio.
2.2
ESTIMATING THE UNCERTAINTY OF A NEURAL NETWORK PREDICTION
The predictive uncertainty of a neural network can be considered as the combination of aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainties (Kendall & Gal, 2017). Aleatoric uncertainty is irreducible and characterizes
the non-deterministic relationship between the input and the desired output. Epistemic uncertainty is
instead related to the trained model: it depends on the information available in the training data, the
model’s capacity to retain it, and the learning algorithm (H¨ullermeier & Waegeman, 2021). There is
currently no principled way to quantify the amount of task-related information present in the input,
the training data, or the model. The state of the art for predictive uncertainty estimation instead
relies on different sorts of proxies. These sometimes capture other elements, such as the noise of the
labels, which we can use to our advantage. We focus here on the relevant methods to our work.
2.2.1
SAMPLED ENSEMBLES
Several networks independently train an ensemble of size N that can be interpreted as a distribution
over predictions. The expected behaviour is that different networks will only make similar pre-
dictions if they were sufﬁciently trained for a given input. The sampled variance of the networks’
outputs is thus interpreted as epistemic uncertainty. It is possible to include a random Bernoulli mask
2We replaced ϵ in Mai et al. (2021) with ξ to avoid confusion with the reinforcement learning conventions.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
of probability p to each training sample, to ensure that each network undergoes different training.
This method, used by Clements et al. (2020) and Lee et al. (2021), has the same principle as single
network Monte-Carlo dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016). As the variance is sampled, the standard
deviation is usually on the same scale as the prediction.
When used at the very beginning of the training process, sampled ensembles present one particular
challenge: as the networks are initialized, they all predict small values. The initial variance, instead
of capturing the lack of knowledge, is then underestimated. To address this problem, Randomized
Prior Functions (RPFs) enforce a prior in the variance by pairing each network with a ﬁxed, untrained
network which adds its predictions to the output (Osband et al., 2019). RPFs ensure a high variance
at regions of the input space which are not well explored, and a lower variance when the trained
networks have learned to compensate for their respective prior and converge to the same output. The
scale of the prior is a hyper-parameter.3
2.2.2
VARIANCE NETWORKS
With variance networks, the uncertainty is predicted using loss attenuation (Nix & Weigend, 1994;
Kendall & Gal, 2017). A network outputs two values in its ﬁnal layer given an input x: the predicted
mean µ(x) and variance σ2(x). Over a minibatch D of size K, the network parameters θ are
optimized by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of a heteroscedastic Gaussian distribution:
LLA(D, θ) =
K
X
k=0
1
K
(µθ(xk) −y(xk))2
σ2
θ(xk)
+ ln σ2
θ(xk)
(3)
Variance networks naturally down-weight the labels with high variance in the optimization process.
The variance prediction is trained from the error between µθ(x) and y(x). Hence, noise on the labels
or changes in the regression task over time will also be captured by loss attenuation. As the variance
is predicted by a neural network, it may not be well-calibrated and may be overestimated (Kuleshov
et al., 2018; Levi et al., 2020; Bhatt et al., 2021). This can (1) give wrong variance estimates but
also (2) affect the learning process by ignoring a sample if the variance estimate is too high.
2.2.3
VARIANCE ENSEMBLES
Variance ensembles, or deep ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), are ensembles composed
of variance networks. The predictive variance is given by a Gaussian mixture over the variance
predictions of each network in the ensemble. This method, when trained, is able to capture uncer-
tainty more reliably than others (Ovadia et al., 2019), with N = 5 networks in the ensemble being
sufﬁcient. Similarly to sampled ensembles, variance ensembles suffer from underestimated early
epistemic variance estimation. However, compared to variance networks, they seem empirically
less prone to calibration issues (1) in the ﬁnal variance estimation because the mixture of Gaussians
dampens single very high variances, and (2) in the learning process because even if one network
does not learn correctly, the others will.
For better readability, we will use the terms var-network and var-ensemble in the rest of the paper.
2.3
UNCERTAINTY AND EXPLORATION IN DRL
While our work focuses on using uncertainty estimates to mitigate the impact of unreliable super-
vision, we can take advantage of the structure in place to better drive the exploration/exploitation
trade-off. In particular, we used BootstrapDQN (Osband et al., 2016) for exploration. In this method,
a single network is sampled from an ensemble at the beginning of each episode to select the action.
This method is improved with the previously described RPFs (Osband et al., 2018). In continuous
settings, we instead followed Lee et al. (2021) and added an Upper Conﬁdence Bound (UCB) explo-
ration bonus based on uncertainty prediction. As the variance in UCB is added to Q-values, it must
be calibrated: we evaluate it with sampled ensembles. Possible interactions between exploration
strategies and IV-RL are discussed in Appendix H.
3Using RPFs in the context of DRL can destabilize the exploration due to a signiﬁcant initial bias added to
the value of each state-action. It must be compensated for with uncertainty-aware exploration, such as Bootstrap
(Osband et al., 2016), where it leads to a signiﬁcant improvement in performance for exploration-based tasks.
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
3
INVERSE-VARIANCE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
3.1
TARGET UNCERTAINTY IN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Many model-free DRL algorithms use temporal difference updates. In methods such as DQN (Mnih
et al., 2013), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018), a neural network is
trained to predict the Q-value of a given state-action pair Qπ(s, a) 4 by minimizing the error between
the target T(s, a) and its prediction ˆQ(s, a). T(s, a) is computed according to Bellman’s equation:
T(s, a) = r + γ ¯Q(s′, a′)
(4)
s′ and r are sampled from the environment given (s, a), and a′ is sampled from the current policy
given s′.
¯Q(s′, a′) is predicted by a copy of the Q-network (called the target network) which is
updated less frequently to ensure training stability. The neural network’s parameters θ are optimized
using stochastic gradient descent to minimize the following L2 loss function:
Lθ =

T(s, a) −ˆQθ(s, a)


2
(5)
3.1.1
THE TARGET AS A RANDOM VARIABLE
The
target
T(s, a)
is
a
noisy
approximation
of
Qπ(s, a)
that
is
distributed
ac-
cording
to
its
distribution
pT (T|s, a).
The
generative
model
used
to
produce
samples
of
T(s, a)
is
shown
in
Figure
1,
and
has
the
following
components:
Figure 1: Bayesian net-
work
representing
the
target sampling process
1. if the reward r is stochastic, it is sampled from pR(r|s, a) 5;
2. if the environment dynamics are stochastic, the next state s′ is
sampled from pS′(s′|s, a);
3. if the policy is stochastic a′ is sampled from the policy π(a′|s′);
4. ¯Q is a prediction from a var-network p ¯
Q( ¯Q|s′, a′);
5. T is deterministically generated from r and ¯Q by equation (4).
As the variance of the noise of T(s, a) is not constant, training the Q-
network using Lθ as in equation (5) is regression on heteroscedastic
noisy labels.
3.1.2
VARIANCE OF THE TARGET
As seen in section 2.1, BIV can be used to reduce the impact of het-
eroscedastic noisy labels in regression, provided estimates of the label
variances. We thus aim to evaluate σ2
T (T|s, a) based on the sampling
process described in section 3.1.1. r and Q-value estimation are independent given s and a, hence:
σ2
T (T|s, a) = σ2
R (r|s, a) + γ2σ2
S′A′ ¯
Q
  ¯Q|s, a

(6)
where pS′A′ ¯
Q is the compound probability distribution based on components 2-4 in Figure 1:
pS′A′ ¯
Q( ¯Q|s, a) =
ZZ
p ¯
Q( ¯Q|s′, a′)pS′A′(s′, a′|s, a)da′ds′
(7)
where pS′A′(s′, a′|s, a) = pA′(a′|s′)pS′(s′|s, a). Using the law of total variance, the variance of ¯Q
is given by:
σ2
S′A′ ¯
Q
  ¯Q|s, a

= ES′A′
h
σ2
¯
Q
  ¯Q|s′, a′
|s, a
i
+ σ2
S′A′
 E ¯
Q
 ¯Q|s′, a′
|s, a

(8)
Plugging (8) into (6) gives:
σ2
T (T|s, a) = γ2 
ES′A′
h
σ2
¯
Q
  ¯Q|s′, a′
|s, a
i
|
{z
}
Predictive variance of Q-network
+ γ2  σ2
S′A′
 E ¯
Q
 ¯Q|s′, a′
|s, a

+ σ2
R(r|s, a)
|
{z
}
Policy and environment induced variance
(9)
4In this paper, we focus on Q-values, although the principle can also apply to state values.
5Stochastic reward can happen for example if the reward is corrupted or estimated (Romoff et al., 2018;
Campbell et al., 2015)
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
We can identify two distinct components in equation 9 that contribute to the overall variance of
the target. The ﬁrst is the (expectation of the) variance that is due to the uncertainty in the neural
network prediction of the value function, ES′A′[σ2
¯
Q
  ¯Q|s′, a′
]. The second is the uncertainty due to
the stochasticity of the environment and of the policy, σ2
R(r|s, a) + γ2σ2
S′A′
 E ¯
Q
 ¯Q|s′, a′
.
Uncertainty in neural network prediction
For a given policy π and a given s′, a′, the agent may
not have seen enough samples to have an accurate approximation of Qπ(s′, a′). This corresponds
to an epistemic source of uncertainty that should be captured by sampled ensembles. However, as
π is updated, the regression target, Qπ(s′, a′), is also changing. This can be interpreted as variabil-
ity in the underlying process which will be captured by var-networks. We can thus combine both
sampling-based and var-network methods and evaluate σ2
¯
Q
  ¯Q(s′, a′)

with var-ensembles.
We assume that the estimate of σ2
¯
Q( ¯Q|s′, a′) given a sampled (s′, a′) is unbiased and can therefore
use it to directly approximate the expectation ES′A′[σ2
¯
Q
  ¯Q|s′, a′
]. These values are used in the
BIV loss LBIV (equation 1) across a mini-batch sampled from the replay buffer. In this case, ξ is
used to control the trust in the variance estimation, as explained in section 2.1.
Stochastic environment and policy
The other potential source of variance in the target is the
result of the stochasticity of the environment encapsulated by pR (r|s, a) and pS′(s′|s, a) and of the
policy represented by π(a′|s′). Note that in model-free RL, we have no explicit representation of
pR (r|s, a) or pS′(s′|s, a), which are necessary to estimate this source of uncertainty.
Qπ(s, a) is deﬁned as the expected value of the return. As a result, even in the case where ¯Q(s′, a′)
= Qπ(s, a) in (4), there is still noise over the value of the target that is being used as the label due to
the stochasticity of the environment and policy that generate r, a′ and s′. Assuming a zero mean and
normally distributed noise, this underlying stochasticity of the generating process is well-captured
by a var-network with a loss attenuation using the negative log-likelihood formulation described in
equation (3).
3.1.3
LOSS FUNCTION FOR IV-RL
Based on the motivation above, we propose our IV-RL loss over minibatch D of size K as a linear
combination of LBIV and LLA, balanced by hyperparameter λ:
LIVRL(D, θ) = LBIV(D, θ) + λLLA(D, θ)
=
K
X
k=0




K
X
j=0
1
γ2σ2
¯
Q,j + ξ


−1 
µ ˆ
Qθ(sk, ak) −T(sk, ak)
2
γ2σ2
¯
Q,k + ξ
+ λ
K




µ ˆ
Qθ(sk, ak) −T(sk, ak)
2
σ2
ˆ
Qθ(sk, ak)
+ ln σ2
ˆ
Qθ(sk, ak)





(10)
The var-network with parameters θ predicts both µ ˆ
Qθ(sk, ak) and σ2
ˆ
Qθ(sk, ak) for each element
k of the mini-batch. σ2
¯
Q,k is instead provided by the target var-ensemble which predicts ¯Q(s′
k, a′
k)
when estimating the target T(sk, ak). In LBIV of equation (1), σ2
k is replaced by γ2σ2
¯
Q,k according to
equation (9). Empirically, the value of λ is usually optimal around 5 or 10. Its impact is studied more
in details in appendix C. High-variance samples generated from the target estimation will be down-
weighted in the BIV loss, while high-variance samples due to the stochasticity of the underlying
environment and policy will be down-weighted in the LA loss. In the remainder of the paper, we
show how this loss can be applied to different architectures and algorithms, and demonstrate that in
many cases it signiﬁcantly improves sample efﬁciency.
3.2
Q-VALUE UNCERTAINTY AND ACTOR-CRITIC STRUCTURES
In section 3.1, we discussed how the target’s uncertainty can be quantiﬁed and how the Bellman
update can then be interpreted as a heteroscedastic regression problem. This is applicable in most
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
model-free DRL algorithms, whether they are based on Q-learning or policy optimization. In the
special case of actor-critic algorithms, the state-values or Q-values predicted by the critic network
are also used to train the policy πφ’s parameters by gradient ascent optimization. An estimate of
their variance can also be used to improve the learning process.
The objective is to maximize the expected Q-value:
Es∼D,a∼πφ(s)[Q(s, a)]
(11)
where D is the state distribution over the probable agent trajectories. The expectation is computed
by sampling a mini-batch of size K from a replay buffer containing state-action pairs (sk, ak). The
Q-value is approximated by the critic as ˆQ(sk, ak). The actor’s parameters φ are then trained to
maximize the unweighted average:
1/K
K
X
k=0
ˆQ(sk, ak)
(12)
If we instead consider the critic’s estimation ˆQ(sk, ak) as a random variable sampled from
p ˆ
Q( ˆQ|s, a), with mean µ ˆ
Q(sk, ak) and variance σ2
ˆ
Q(sk, ak), we can instead infer the expected value
in equation (11) using Bayesian estimation (Murphy, 2012):
 K
X
k=0
1/σ2
ˆ
Q (sk, ak)
!−1
K
X
k=0
1
σ2
ˆ
Q(sk, ak)µ ˆ
Q(sk, ak)
(13)
The normalized inverse-variance weights are a direct ﬁt with the BIV loss in equation 1: we therefore
also use BIV to train the actor. As the target and the Q-networks have the same structure, σ2
ˆ
Q(sk, ak)
can be estimated using the same var-ensembles used in section 3.1.2.
3.3
ALGORITHMS
We have adapted IV-RL to DQN and SAC to produce IV-DQN and IV-SAC. Comprehensive pseudo-
code, as well as implementation details for each algorithm, can be found in appendix A.
4
RESULTS
We have tested IV-RL across a variety of different environments, using IV-DQN for discrete tasks
and IV-SAC for continuous tasks. To determine the effects of IV-RL, we compare its performance to
the original DQN and SAC, but also the ensemble-based baselines upon which IV-DQN and IV-SAC
were built: BootstrapDQN and EnsembleSAC. We also include SUNRISE (Lee et al., 2021).
All ensemble-based methods use an ensemble size of N = 5. Unless speciﬁed otherwise, each
result is the average of runs over 25 seeds: 5 for the environment × 5 for network initialization. The
hyperparameters are the result of a thorough ﬁne-tuning process explained in appendix B. As it uses
ensembles, IV-RL is computationally expensive: computation time is discussed in Appendix D.
4.1
IV-DQN
We tested IV-DQN on discrete control environments selected to present different characteristics.
From OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016), LunarLander is a sparse reward control environment
and MountainCar is a sparse reward exploration environment. From BSuite6 (Osband et al., 2020),
Cartpole-Noise is a dense reward control environment. The BootstrapDQN baseline follows Osband
et al. (2018) as explained in section 2.3. The reported SUNRISE results are obtained by applying the
SUNRISE weights to BootstrapDQN. The learning curves are shown in ﬁgure 2, where the results
are averaged on a 100 episode window.
IV-DQN signiﬁcantly outperforms BootstrapDQN and SunriseDQN on control-based environments.
However, in the exploration-based Mountain-Car where the challenge is to ﬁnd the state that pro-
duces some reward, there is very little additional information in every other state for IV-DQN to
improve over BootstrapDQN. All weighting schemes thus perform comparably.
6The results from BSuite are averaged over 20 runs with different environment and network seeds
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 2: Using IV-RL shows improved performance over baseline methods in Cartpole Noise and
LunarLander, and does not impact MountainCar.
Figure 3: Ablation study: depending on the environment, the BIV or the var-ensemble component
is the most important factor of improvement.
Table 1 shows the median number of episodes necessary to reach a given score for which the en-
vironment is considered as solved. IV-DQN shows a clear improvement over baselines in sample
efﬁciency in both control-based environments but fails to improve the exploration in Mountain Car.
Table 1:
25th - 50th - 75th percentiles of the number of episodes necessary for the return averaged
with a 100-episode window to reach the solved score on different environments. IV-DQN shows
signiﬁcant improvements in sample efﬁciency when the environment is not exploration-based.
LunarLander (200)
Cartpole-Noise (750)
MountainCar (-150)
DQN
296 - 316 - 349
171 - 193 - max
304 - 333 - 403
BootstrapDQN
287 - 305 - 317
160 - 174 - 196
134 - 149 - 206
SunriseDQN
291 - 309 - 368
155 - 165 - 175
152 - 197 - 257
IV-DQN (ours)
220 - 227 - 239
105 - 112 - 117
142 - 163 - 200
In Figure 3 we perform an ablation study for LunarLander and Cartpole-Noise. In L2 + VarEnsem-
bleDQN, the loss function LBIV in equation 10 is replaced by the L2 loss. In BIV + BootstrapDQN,
sampled ensembles are used instead of var-ensembles, and trained only with LBIV. More details
about these ablations are found in appendix A. In both cases, the use of BIV or var-ensembles
improves the performance, and their combination leads to the best sample efﬁciency. In Cartpole-
Noise, var-ensembles carry most of the improvement, maybe because the low amount of states
leads to low epistemic uncertainty. We also show that using one single var-network as opposed to
var-ensembles is sub-optimal. This is likely due to the unstable nature of the single uncertainty es-
timate, which affects the learning process. More details are shown in appendix E and G. The use of
var-ensembles stabilizes the variance estimation, as explained in section 2.2.3.
4.2
IV-SAC
IV-SAC was applied to different continuous control environments from OpenAI Gym (Brockman
et al., 2016) as implemented by MBBL (Wang et al., 2019). EnsembleSAC is a baseline using
ensembles with an UCB exploration bonus (Lee et al., 2021). Table 2 shows the average return
after 100k and 200k steps on 25 seeds. We note that the addition of an ensemble instead of a single
network, along with the uncertainty-based exploration bonus, already allows the performance to
increase compared to SAC. Except in Ant, the SUNRISE weights do not seem to lead to consistently
better results. In comparison, IV-SAC leads to signiﬁcant improvements in performance.
This improvement in performance after a ﬁxed amount of training steps can be explained by an
improved sample efﬁciency. This can be seen in ﬁgure 4. Even when IV-SAC’s return is not signiﬁ-
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Table 2: Performance at 100K and 200K time steps (100 and 200 episodes) for several robotics
environments in OpenAI Gym. The results show the mean and standard error over 25 runs.
Walker
HalfCheetah
Hopper
Ant
SlimHuman.
100k steps
SAC
-392 ± 187
3211 ± 136
322 ± 177
724 ± 29
815 ± 74
EnsembleSAC
-389 ± 209
3938 ± 112
1597 ± 152
852 ± 27
1043 ± 31
SunriseSAC
46 ± 213
3879 ± 204
1618 ± 195
834 ± 130
1077 ± 41
IV-SAC (ours)
857 ± 231
4260 ± 118
2237 ± 116
948 ± 46
1122 ± 34
200k steps
SAC
371 ± 189
3978 ± 148
1635 ± 162
985 ± 82
1020 ± 52
EnsembleSAC
1337 ± 278
4757 ± 92
2652 ± 91
981 ± 65
1294 ± 39
SunriseSAC
1423 ± 295
4785 ± 228
2572 ± 119
1462 ± 154
1383 ± 56
IV-SAC (ours)
3009 ± 193
5451 ± 151
2889 ± 50
1281 ± 101
2023 ± 114
Figure 4: IV-SAC learns faster and leads to signiﬁcantly better results than the baselines.
cantly better than the baselines at 200k steps, such as in Ant or Hopper, it clearly is learning faster,
which is also reﬂected by the scores at 100k steps.
Similarly to IV-DQN, we can separate the contribution from BIV and loss attenuation, as shown in
the two ﬁrst plots of ﬁgure 5. While both BIV and var-ensembles alone have a signiﬁcant impact
in Walker, it’s only their combination that brings the most improvement in HalfCheetah. Similarly
to the discrete control case, a simple var-network leads to a small improvement over SAC, which is
discussed in appendix G. We also show in ﬁgure 5 that the BIV weights provided with var-ensemble
variance estimations than the SUNRISE weights, or even the inverse variance weights of UWAC
(Wu et al., 2021). The normalization of BIV allows it to better cope with changes in the variance
predictions, as seem in appendices E and F.
Figure 5: Ablation Study: (ﬁrst two ﬁgures) Impact of using different uncertainty estimation meth-
ods (last two ﬁgures) Comparing different weighting schemes with var-ensembles.
5
CONCLUSION
We present Inverse Variance Reinforcement Learning (IV-RL), a framework for model-free deep
reinforcement learning which leverages uncertainty estimation to enhance sample efﬁciency and
performance. A thorough analysis of the sources of noise that contribute to errors in the target mo-
tivates the use of a combination of Batch Inverse Variance (BIV) weighting and variance ensembles
to estimate the variance of the target and down weight the uncertain samples in two complementary
ways. Our results show that these two components are beneﬁcial and that their combination signif-
icantly improves the state of the art in terms of learning efﬁciency, in particular for control tasks.
We applied IV-RL to DQN and SAC, but it can be adapted to any model-free algorithm. Model-
based, active or continuous learning could also beneﬁt from the underlying ideas presented in this
paper. We thus believe that IV-RL is a signiﬁcant step to enable the application of DRL to real-world
problems such as robotics, where sample efﬁciency is the main challenge.
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
ETHICS STATEMENT
In this work, we present a method to enhance the sample efﬁciency of deep reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms. As such, it is agnostic to the applications, and per se does not raise any particular
ethical issue. We however strongly encourage the user of our algorithm to ensure they have care-
fully thought about the ethical issues related to the particular ﬁeld of application, such as medicine,
robotics, communication, ﬁnance, etc.
As environmental sustainability can also be considered an ethical issue (Universit´e de Montr´eal,
2018), we publish the carbon footprint of our work.
Experiments were conducted using a private infrastructure, which has a carbon efﬁciency of 0.028
kgCO2eq/kWh. A cumulative of 12367 days, or 296808 hours, of computation was mainly per-
formed on the hardware of type RTX 8000 (TDP of 260W). We assume full power usage of the
GPUs, although this was not always the case.
Total emissions are estimated to be 2160.76 kgCO2eq of which 0 percents were directly offset. This
is equivalent to 8730 km driven by an average car, or 1.08 metric tons of burned coal.
Estimations were conducted using the MachineLearning Impact calculator presented in Lacoste et al.
(2019).
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
To allow reproducibility of our results, the code, as well as the hyperparameters used to produce each
result presented in this paper, are available at https://github.com/montrealrobotics/
iv_rl.
The environments and implementation we used (OpenAI Gym, BSuite, MBBL) are all publicly
accessible, although a Mujoco license is needed to run some of them.
