arXiv:1204.2712v1  [cs.AI]  12 Apr 2012
Learning to Rank Query Recommendations
by Semantic Similarity
Sumio Fujita
Yahoo! JAPAN Research
Midtown Tower, Akasaka
Tokyo 107-6211, Japan

Georges Dupret
Yahoo! Labs
701 First Avenue, Sunnyvale
CA, 94089-0703, USA

Ricardo Baeza-Yates
Yahoo! Research
Diagonal 177, 9th ﬂoor
Barcelona, Spain

ABSTRACT
The web logs of the interactions of people with a search
engine show that users often reformulate their queries. Ex-
amining these reformulations shows that recommendations
that precise the focus of a query are helpful, like those based
on expansions of the original queries. But it also shows that
queries that express some topical shift with respect to the
original query can help user access more rapidly the infor-
mation they need.
We propose a method to identify from search engine query
logs possible candidate queries that can be recommended to
focus or shift a topic. This method combines various click-
based, topic-based and session based ranking strategies and
uses supervised learning in order to maximize the seman-
tic similarity between the query and the recommendations,
while at the same time we diversify them.
We evaluate our method using the query/click logs of a
Japanese web search engine and we show that the combi-
nation of the three methods proposed is signiﬁcantly better
than any of them taken individually.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval-Search Process; H.3.5 [Information
Storage and Retrieval]: Online Information Services-Web
based services
General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation, Performance
Keywords
Web search, query logs, click logs, query recommendation.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Problem Statement
Information retrieval is often an interactive process where
a user successively reﬁnes his or her original search query,
switch focus and approach her/his goal in several steps.
Assisting users in this process makes it less cumbersome.
Query suggestions are particularly useful on mobile devices
and for Asian languages with complex character sets where
typing queries is particularly inconvenient and time consum-
ing.
Query recommendation engines should not limit them-
selves to proposing more focused queries, but should also
suggest queries that are a reasonable switch in focus. This
is conﬁrmed by examining search engine query log data.
For example, the most frequent queries after “toyota” are
“honda”, “nissan” and “lexus”, none of which are a direct
reﬁnement of the original query. As another example, the
most frequent query after “driver’s license renewal” is “slight
violence of traﬃc laws”, which may prevent drivers from re-
newing their driver’s license.
Search engines sometimes suggest queries with some ad-
ditional modiﬁers, focusing on a particular aspect of the
previous query.
According to Jansen et al. [13], queries
which initiated a new session are in 31% cases followed by
query reformulations of the type ‘specialization’ or ‘special-
ization with reformulation’. Such drill down operations are
not necessarily observed more frequently than topic shift-
ing. Topic shifting occurs especially when users engage in
complex tasks like researching for a new vehicle and com-
paring competing candidate models, or when they look for
information on how to renew a driver license including ancil-
lary tasks, like discovering oﬃce hours, ﬁnding the required
forms, the oﬃce address, etc. Boldi [5] pointed out that the
typically useful recommendations are either specializations
or topic shifting, which they refer to as “parallel moves”.
Unlike pre-retrieval query suggestions, which frequently
propose automatic query completion right in the query box,
query recommendation provides semantically related queries
and exclude trivially synonymous queries, since state-of-the-
art commercial search engines are good enough to cover mi-
nor spelling variations or even some miss-spellings. Never-
theless, diversifying query recommendations would help for
polysemic queries.
Methodology
Query recommendations are often based on clustering meth-
ods with the inconvenience that queries falling in the same
cluster are some time more ambiguous and less helpful than

the original query. Instead, we formulate in this work three
distinct methods of extracting query recommendations from
a search engine’s click-through logs. These methods induce
directed links between queries existing in the logs and hence
have the potential to overcome the limitations of the clus-
tering methods. The ﬁrst method is based on the position of
the clicked URLs in the search ranking of the original query
and its potential recommendations.
The second is based
on reformulations of the original query that can be easily
detected in the logs using the query surface forms. Users
reformulate queries for a variety of reasons: because the
original formulation is too ambiguous or carry other mean-
ings they did not intend, or because the results returned by
the engine are not adequate. The third method is also based
on query reformulations but it is based on co-occurrence re-
lations of the queries in the sessions. We show that each
method has its own advantages and drawbacks. The ﬁrst
method sometimes leads to recommendations that are more
diﬃcult to understand because it tends to include Web jar-
gon, but it is sometimes more useful than the simple refor-
mulation method because it leverages the topical knowledge
of other users. By construction, the second method rarely
drifts from the original search topic and tends to be lim-
ited to specializations of the original query.
This results
in safer recommendations with less coverage.
Variants of
this method are used by many commercial search engines
because it is safer and more predictable. The last method
is better suited for shifting topics because it provides more
diverse recommendations such as parallel move reformula-
tions [5]. On the other hand, trivial variants or completely
unrelated queries are not useful. Each method has distinct
capabilities and short-comings, and then it would be inter-
esting to develop a method that chooses the best candidates
and oﬀer to the user an improved set of recommendations.
This is the objective of this work.
Assumptions
Since most useful recommendations are either specializa-
tions or parallel moves, it is better to use distinct methods
to cover both types. It is also necessary to exclude trivial
synonyms and unrelated queries. We make the following as-
sumption: in the semantic hierarchy of information needs,
locating the original user query at the center, generalization
queries reside in the upper part of the hierarchy and spe-
cialization queries in the lower. The neighbouring queries
in the semantic hierarchy are generally useful. In order to
identify such queries, we combine the recommendation can-
didates from three methods and learn the ranking function
according to semantic similarities reﬂected in the topologi-
cal relations in the semantic hierarchy. We schematized the
relations in Figure 1, where too close queries are not useful
as recommendations. On the other hand, either specializa-
tions or parallel moves are useful to help the searcher with
drill down or shift operations respectively.
Contribution
The problem we address in this paper is how to combine
such candidate recommendations with diﬀerent characteris-
tics to diversify them. One possible solution is to infer the
intention of the user: does she/he intend to drill down into
the topic or will she/he quit the current sub topic and move
to the next sub topic? This would undoubtedly be a very
hard task. A priori, any query may be followed by the user
Figure 1: Schematic view of semantic relations of
related queries.
drilling down for more precise information or shifting the
intention. This depends among other things on the qual-
ity of the results the user ﬁnds on the result page.
User
decisions and consecutive search actions are not only query
dependent but also user and context dependent. Instead of
attempting to predict the user’s state of mind, we propose
to minimize the risk of dissatisfying the user by proposing
carefully various solutions. Expressed in the terms of our
prior assumption, we try to maximize the semantic simi-
larity between the original query and recommended queries
by combining diﬀerent types of recommendations, to make
them more diverse. We will not use lexical features such as
semantic categories of query terms, since such lexical knowl-
edge has a usually fairly limited coverage.
Organization
In Section 2, we present some related works that make use
of query and click logs.
We present the methods used to
extract the diﬀerent types of recommendations in Section 3.
We show empirically that the session based method is good
at identifying shifting queries whereas the other two meth-
ods favor focused faceted queries. We combine these three
methods to maximize the semantic similarity measure in
Section 4. We describe the supervised learning algorithm
we use in Section 5. In Section 6, we report the results of an
empirical study based on the click logs of a popular Japanese
search engine and Section 7 concludes the paper.
2.
RELATED WORK
Click Log Analysis
Click logs typically contain information such as the search
query string, time stamp, browser identiﬁer, clicked URLs,
and rank positions. Although correctly interpreting clicks is
not straightforward [14, 8], click information is often used
as an implicit feedback on URL relevance.
Beeferman and Berger studied Web search query logs and
clustered click-through data by iterating two steps: (a) com-
bining the two most similar queries and (b) combining the
two most similar URLs [4]. The generated clusters were used
to enhance query recommendations. Baeza-Yates et al. pro-
posed a query recommendation technique using query clus-
tering based on the similarity of clicked URLs [3]. Dupret
and Mendoza also addressed query recommendation using
click-through data but focused on document ranking [9].

Xue et al. [18] used click-through data to create metadata for
Web pages. They estimated document-to-document similar-
ities on the basis of co-clicked queries and query strings used
as metadata or tags. These estimates were then spread over
similar documents. Craswell and Szummer, who used click-
through data for image retrieval, experimented with back-
ward random walks [7]. Their method is based on query-to-
document transition probabilities on a click graph. Baeza-
Yates and Tiberi extracted semantic relations between queries
on the basis of set relations of clicked URLs [2].
Antonellis
et al. proposed the Simrank++ [1] method in which query
similarity is propagated through click bipartite graphs. They
used the query similarity measure to rewrite queries in order
to extend advertisement matching. Again, such a measure of
structural-context similarity might be adequate for the task
such as query rewrites for sponsored search where rewriting
to a practical synonymous query is eﬀective.
Term Expansion Based
Jones et al.
extracted query substitutions from the same
user sessions by identifying correlated term pairs and substi-
tuting phrases [15]. Jones’ work addressed query rewrites in
sponsored search contexts where the“precise rewriting”such
as“automobile insurance 7→automotive insurance”, is mostly
preferred. However, the current state of the art search en-
gines return very similar results to these two queries.
Query Session Based
Spink et al. surveyed information related to successive Web
searches [16] and found that the information involves changes
and shifts in search terms, search strategies, and relevance
judgments.
Jansen et al.
analyzed successive queries in
large Web search query logs [13], and He et al. tried to de-
tect session boundaries on the basis of search patterns and
time intervals in query logs [12]. Fonseca et al. extracted
query relations by using association rules from the same user
sessions [10].
Boldi et al.
analyzed search user sessions,
classiﬁed query reformulation types [5], and derived query-
ﬂow graphs for the extracted query recommendations. They
pointed out that the typically useful recommendations are
either specializations or parallel moves while trivial variants
or completely unrelated queries are not useful. Cao et al.
applied click-based clustering to session-based query sug-
gestions [6] and they claim that the context awareness helps
to better understand user’s search intent and to make more
meaningful suggestions. However, they do not evaluate well
if the context awareness really improves the suggestion util-
ity due to the lack of an adequate baseline.
3.
GENERATING CANDIDATES
In this work we focus on the generation of query rec-
ommendations through the use of inter-query relations in
Web search logs. As we have seen in the previous section,
log based query recommendation techniques fall into one of
three approaches, namely click-based, term expansion based
and session based. Each approach intends to capture pat-
terns of diﬀerent user activities from the query logs. Queries
are related by a co-click relation in view of users clicking on
the same URL in response to them.
Queries are also re-
lated to their possible expansion by adding facet modiﬁers,
i.e. co-topic relations. Finally, queries are related by their
co-occurrence in a user session.
The following three methods extract these three types of
inter-query relations representing user behaviors in the logs:
either a specialization/reﬁnement of the information need or
a parallel move from the original search intent. The methods
are simple although they are intended to extract candidates
thoroughly, so that they are adequately combined and re-
ranked by a supervised learning algorithm to maximize the
semantic similarity measure.
3.1
Best Rank Directed Co-Click Relations
This method compares the positions in the search results
of the documents clicked during a query session. If a query
q′ diﬀerent from query q better orders —according to a suit-
able measure—the clicked documents in a signiﬁcant number
of sessions of q, then q′ is a candidate query for recommen-
dation.
There is a fundamental basis for considering the
clicked document rankings rather than the simple similar-
ity of clicked page sets. Take for example the multi-faceted
query “curry,” The documents that a user selects can help
identify a posteriori his information need: if he or she is
interested in how to cook curry, he or she will select pages
related to cooking rather than those related to the origin of
“curry” in Indian culinary history. The assumption is that
savvier users with the same information need will probably
express the query less ambiguously and enter “curry recipe,”
for example, as the query. The hypothesis we wish to in-
vestigate here is whether documents clicked by a previous
user are ranked higher in the “curry recipe” results than in
the “curry” results. If they are, we can retrieve the “curry
recipe” query from the log and recommend it.
More formally, suppose that u is a clicked URL1 in the
results for query q. For each such clicked URL u, we assume
the existence of a set of queries for which URL u is ranked
higher in the results.
This set might be empty.
We hy-
pothesize that such queries are potential recommendations
for q.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the URL cover UCq of a query q as the
set of URLs clicked in response to query q, and the query
cover of URL u, QCu as the set of queries for which URL u
is clicked. We deﬁne ranku(q) as the rank position of URL
u for query q. The set of best rank co-click queries for query
q, BRCCQq, is as follows:
BRCCQq
≡
[
u∈UCq
arg min
q′∈QCu
ranku(q′) .
We estimate the strength of the relations between a query
and its candidate recommendations in accordance with the
following weighting scheme. We deﬁne cnt(u, q) as the num-
ber of clicks on u in response to query q, cnt(q) as the total
number of clicks in response to query q, cnt(u) as the total
number of clicks on u regardless of the query and Q as the
set of all queries. We deﬁne the probability PCC(q2|q1) as
follows:
PCC(q2|q1)
=
X
u∈UCq1
P(u|q1) · P(q2|u)
=
X
u∈UCq1
P(u|q1) · P(q2) · P(u|q2)
P(u)
1We use “document,”“page,” and “URL” interchangeably.

with
P(u)
=
cnt(u)
P
q∈Q cnt(q) ,
P(q)
=
cnt(q)
P
q′∈Q cnt(q′) , and
P(u|q)
=
cnt(u, q)
cnt(q)
.
This approach can be regarded as a special case of the
session-based recommendation proposed by Dupret and Men-
doza [9]. In this approach, each single click is considered to
be a single session. This is clearly distinct from the approach
used in query clustering methods because it explicitly uses
the positions of the documents in the results list.
3.2
Co-topic Relations
Commercial search engines commonly use expansions of
input query string in logs as recommendations.
Here, we
introduce a variation that takes advantage of a characteristic
of the Japanese language.
The agglutinant nature of the
Japanese language makes it comparatively easy to detect
topic-facet structure in queries. In practice, a facet directive
in Japanese is easily identiﬁed as a word that appears as the
last term of a signiﬁcant number of distinct queries. In our
experiments, if a word is the last of at least ﬁve distinct
query strings, it can be safely regarded as a facet word as
long as queries appearing fewer than ten times are eliminated
from the logs. Thus, from the topic-part-only query “curry”,
we may induce “curry recipe”, “curry restaurant”, and other
queries with diﬀerent directives.
We deﬁne a co-topic query as a query expanded by the
addition of a facet directive. As for co-click relations, we
deﬁne a weighting scheme that captures the strength of the
relation between the original query q1 and a co-topic rec-
ommendation q2 based on the following probability: we ﬁrst
deﬁne CT Qq1 as the set of co-topic queries formed over q1,
the similarity is expressed as:
PCT (q2|q1)
=
cnt(q2)
cnt(q1) + P
q2′ ∈CT Qq1 cnt(q2′) .
This relation normally represents a specialization of the
original concept by adding a facet directive which restric-
tively modiﬁes the original concept.
3.3
Co-Session Relations
This last method identiﬁes the query reformulations ob-
served a signiﬁcant number of times during the sessions of
users.
Co-session queries are queries submitted consecu-
tively from the same user in a time interval typically no
longer than 5 minutes. Co-session queries includes not only
the reformulation or rewriting of queries, such as in the co-
topic relation, but also queries that reﬂect a shift in informa-
tion needs. (A more complete nomenclature of the relations
extracted this way can be found in [5].)
We deﬁne the set CSQq1 as the set of queries sharing
a co-session relation with q1. The strength of a co-session
relation between q1 and q2 is estimated as a probability:
PCS(q2|q1)
=
cnt(q2, q1)
cnt(q1)
,
where cnt(q2, q1) denotes the count of the query q2 preceded
by the query q1 in the same user session.
This method is relatively robust to mistakes during the
segmentation of user activities in session: if q2 and q1 do
not belong to the same session, cnt(q2, q1) will be small,
leading to a relation with a low strength.
4.
QUERY SIMILARITY
It is not straightforward to assess the quality of query
recommendations. To evaluate the three methods presented
in the previous section, we use the semantic similarity of
the queries after they are mapped into a category hierar-
chy.
We adopt a similarity measure between query pairs
by Baeza-Yates and Tiberi [2] who evaluated semantic re-
lations between queries connected by an edge of their click
cover graph. For this purpose, they use the Open Directory
Project2, where queries are matched against the directory
content to ﬁnd the categories where they belong. We apply
the same methodology but using the Yahoo! JAPAN direc-
tory3 because it has a more complete coverage of Japanese
queries.
Baeza-Yates and Tiberi use the following similarity func-
tion on the categories matching two queries q and q′:
Simprefix(D, D′) = |P(D, D′)|/max{|D|, |D′|} ,
where P(D, D′) is the longest common preﬁx of the cate-
gory paths D and D′ where the queries q and q′ were found,
respectively. This is intuitively reasonable: consider for ex-
ample the query “Spain”. The query term is found in “Re-
gional / Countries / Spain” while “Barcelona” is found in
“Regional / Countries / Spain / Autonomous Communities
/ Catalonia / Cities / Barcelona,”. Then, the similarity is 3
7.
However, we needed to make some adjustment because in
the Yahoo! directory, a subcategory like “Spain” might ap-
pear below diverse top categories such as “Maps / By region
/ Countries”, “Arts / By region / Countries”, or “Recreation
/ Travel / By region / Countries”.
We therefore use the
following similarity function:
Simsubstring(D, D′)
=
C(D, D′)
max{|D|, |D′|} ,
where C(D, D′) is the number of common subparts of two
category paths that match the queries. The previous simi-
larity function measures the ratio of the hyper concepts that
the two categories share whereas this new function considers
the facet similarity of subcategories.
To associate Yahoo!
categories with each query, we
used the directory search application programming inter-
face (API), which returns a list of categorized sites retrieved
by “AND” boolean queries. This presumably favors co-topic
relations over co-click relations because registered sites re-
trieved by the expanded query q2 are also retrieved by orig-
inal query q1 due to the “AND” operation. As a categorized
site is retrieved, the procedure votes to its category. The
category with maximum number of votes is assigned to the
query. Inter query similarity depends on similarities of cat-
egory pairs, and the maximum similarity through category
pairs was selected as the ﬁnal score.
For query recommendation, queries that are virtually the
same are useless, so we excluded queries falling in the group
of trivial variants. Queries were grouped in accordance with
the clicked URL set UCq by an online single-pass clustering
2http://www.dmoz.org/
3http://dir.yahoo.co.jp/

using a vectorial representation of each URL set, where the
component is the click frequency of the URL in response to
the query.
5.
COMBINING RECOMMENDATIONS
Identifying the user intention from contextual information
is a very diﬃcult task and is not guaranteed to be eﬀec-
tive. Instead, we take a more conservative approach and we
combine the three methods described above. We attempt
to take advantage of each method strength but also hedge
against bad recommendations by providing some conserva-
tive specialization queries, some serendipitous queries and
by proposing some “topic shifting” queries. In other words,
we diversify the set of recommended queries.
We formulate the problem as a “learning to rank” task for
which we use the similarity measure deﬁned in Section 4.
We use gradient boosting decision trees (GBDT) described
in [11] because of the robustness to overﬁtting, the scalability
and the ability to handle highly non-linear problems of this
method.
Training Data
For training and test pairs, we calculated the similarity mea-
sure described in Section 4 as the target attribute.
For
this we cleaned the data and added random query pairs to
augment the number of negative examples and balance the
training set. The details are given in Section 6.
Feature Set
We deﬁned the quantities PCC(q2|q1),
PCT (q2|q1) and
PCS(q2|q1) in Section 3. On top of these features, we de-
ﬁned 24 features as described in Table 1. Facet extraction
features are extracted from the query logs. We adopted the
query textual features used in [5].
Cosine similarities are
computed based on the bag of character bigrams and on
chunks, i.e.
contiguous character strings split by a white
space. As result click features, we measure how the queries
are multi-faceted with respect to user behavior on the result
sets. Click entropy is used to reﬂect query ambiguity as in
Teevan et al. [17]. For query session co-occurrence we derive
features from pair of queries directly following one another
in a user session. LLR is adopted from Jones et al. [15].
We introduced this to identify signiﬁcant query pairs from
sessions. A high value means a strong dependency between
two adjacent queries in a session.
Learning Models
As mentioned above, we use gradient boosting decision
trees (GBDT [11]).
This is an additive regression model
over an ensemble of shallow regression trees.
It iteratively ﬁts an additive model:
Fm(x)
=
Fm−1(x) + βmTm(x; Θm) ,
where Tm(x; Θm) is a regression tree at iteration m,
weighted by parameter βm, with a ﬁnite number of pa-
rameter Θm, consisting of split regions and corresponding
weights, which are optimized such that a certain loss func-
tion is minimized as follows:
(βm, Θm)
=
argminβ,Θ
N
X
i=1
L(yi, Fm−1(x) + βTm(x; Θ)) .
Table 1: Features used for the supervised learning.
Facet extraction features
PCC(q2|q1)
co-click query probability
PCT (q2|q1)
co-topic query probability
PCS(q2|q1)
co-session query probability
Freq.q1
Click frequency of q1
Freq.q2
Click frequency of q2
Freq.topic
Total topic frequency of q1
Query textual features
Len.q1
Character length of q1
Len.q2
Character length of q2
CLen.q1
Chunk length of q1
CLen.q2
Chunk length of q2
delta.Len
Len.q2 −Len.q1
delta.Len.Rel
(Len.q2 −Len.q1)/Len.q1
delta.CLen
CLen.q2 −CLen.q1
delta.CLen.Rel
(CLen.q2 −CLen.q1)/CLen.q1
mb.Leven
Levenshtein distance of q1 and q2 by
multi-byte character basis
Leven
Levenshtein distance of q1 and q2 by
single-byte basis
CCos
Cosine similarities between bag of
chunk (keyword) representations of
q1 and q2
BCos
Cosine similarities between bag of
character bigrams representations of
q1 and q2
Result click features
Ent.q1
Search result click entropy of q1
Ent.q2
Search result click entropy of q2
delta.Ent
Ent.q1 −Ent.q2
Query session co-occurrence features
Next.Ent
Entropy of the query following q1
LLR
Log likelihood ratio of observing q2
after q1 in the same session
Target attribute feature
Sim
Category similarity between q1 and
q2
At iteration m, tree Tm(x; Θm) is induced to ﬁt the neg-
ative gradient by least squares:
ˆΘ
=
argminΘ,β
N
X
i=1
(−gm(xi) −βmTm(x; Θm))2 .
where −gm(xi) is the gradient over current prediction func-
tion:
−gm(xi)
=
−
∂L(yi, F(xi))
∂F(xi)

F (x)=Fm−1(x)
.
Each non-terminal node in the tree represents the condi-
tion of a split on a feature space and each terminal node
represents a region.
The improvement criterion to evalu-
ate splits of a current terminal region R into two subregions
(Rℓ, Rr) is as follows:
i2(Rℓ, Rr)
=
wℓwr
wℓ+ wr (yℓ−yr)2 ,
where yℓand yr are the mean response of left and right sub-
regions, respectively, and wℓand wr are the corresponding

sums of weights.
We evaluate the relative importance of
each feature by the normalized sum of i2(Rℓ, Rr) through
all the nodes corresponding to the feature.
6.
EXPERIMENTS
6.1
Evaluation Data
To evaluate our proposed combined method, we used a
sample of the query log of a Japanese commercial search
engine.
First, query-clicked URL pairs that appear only
once were removed. Second, identical query-URL pairs with
the same browser cookie (i.e., queries from the same client)
were counted only once to improve robustness against spam.
Third, we selected from the log the 4,544 queries that con-
tain one of the seven most frequent facet directives appearing
in Japanese web search. Table 2 shows the statistics of our
evaluation data. On the basis of these initial queries, we ex-
tracted 188,737 query pairs, among which, 70,041 pairs are
in a best rank co-click relation, 77,991 pairs in a co-topic
relation, and 66,612 pairs in a co-session relation.
From
them, we excluded pairs where either query failed to be as-
signed to any category.
At the end, we obtained 86,544
query URL pairs, which we split into two sets to carry out
a two fold cross validation. We supplemented training pairs
by 82,212 randomly combined pairs of queries and recom-
mended queries, which act as negative or counter-examples.
Notice that average semantic similarities between pairs are
high for co-click pairs.
Table 2: Statistics of Evaluation data. The number
of categorized pairs are between parentheses.
Data type
Numbers
Avg. sim.
Original queries
4,544 (–)
–
Co-click pairs
70,041 (25,114)
0.8075
Co-topic pairs
77,991 (28,454)
0.7954
Co-session pairs
66,612 (41,179)
0.6837
Combined pairs
188,737 (86,544)
0.7326
Random pairs
188,737 (82,212)
0.3215
6.2
Evaluation Measures
Given a ranked query list Q, the discounted cumulative
gain (DCG) at the rank threshold R is deﬁned as follows:
DCGR(Q)
=
g1 +
R
X
r=2
gr
log2 r ,
where gr is the score according to the judgement at the rank
r in Q.
We assigned ﬁve grades to the similarity of each query
pair, namely “perfect” (above 0.75), “excellent” (between
0.75 and 0.5), “good” (between 0.5 and 0.25), “fair” (below
0.25 but above 0.0), and “poor” (at 0) according to the value
range of similarities. We assign scores of 10, 7, 3, 0.5 and
0.0 to these ﬁve grade labels.
The ideal ranked query list I is obtained by ranking the
recommendations in decreasing order of their label values.
It is used to deﬁne the normalized DCG. In particular, we
use the normalized DCG at 5 (NDCG5), deﬁned as follows:
NDCG5(Q, I)
=
DCG5(Q)
DCG5(I) .
The average precision (AP) of a ranked list is deﬁned as
usual:
AP
=
Pk
j=1 P(j) ∗R(j)
Pk
j=1 R(j)
with P(j)
=
Pj
i=1 R(j)
j
where R(j) is the binary judgement of the relevance of jth
item in the list. We set this to 1 if the grade is “excellent” or
better and 0 otherwise. The mean average precision (MAP)
of a set of test queries is the mean AP through this set.
6.3
Ranking by a Single Method
Table 3 compares the NDCG5 and MAP values of the sin-
gle methods and machine learned combined methods. Also
included are the results of simply taking a linear combination
of the query scores of each method computed separately.
Co-click Relations
The BRCCQs typically represent a drill down from the origi-
nal query. It does not necessarily share any lexical part with
the original query but it shares at least a clicked document
with the original query. It often represents specializations
but sometimes parallel moves (“ipod” 7→“itune”) or gener-
alization (“ANA” 7→“airplane”).
Co-topic Relations
The CTQs also represent a drill down from the original
query. It necessarily shares some lexical part with the origi-
nal query but it does not necessarily share any clicked docu-
ment with it. As expected from higher evaluation measures,
they seem to be homogeneous because they share the left
substring. But the coverage is limited especially for longer
queries that are already speciﬁc enough. It provides conser-
vative recommendations but strictly limited to specialization
queries.
Co-session relations
The CSQs might represent a drill down from the original
query but it also include topic shifts. It does not necessarily
share any lexical part nor any clicked document with the
original query. As have been noted, parallel move queries
are characteristic of this method. For example, against the
original query “ANA”4, all of the top ﬁve recommendations
are either competing traﬃc companies such as “JAL”, “Sky-
mark” (the names of other airline companies), JR (railway
company), or travel agent companies such as “JTB” and
“HIS”. This is useful to a searcher who arranges a travel
plan. In the case of the query: “JR”, the names of three
out of six JR regional railway companies appear as well as
“ANA”.
6.4
Combined Ranking
We used half of the pairs for training and the rest of the
pairs for evaluation. For training, similarity measures are
used as the target function to learn. After convergence is
achieved, we use the model to rank the queries.
Because the combined ranking uses many more features
other than Pcc, Pct and Pcs, the ranking is very diﬀerent
from a simple mixture of three basic rankings.
4All Nippon Airways or ANA oﬀers domestic ﬂights in
Japan.

As shown in Table 3, the combined ranking learned by
GBDT achieves the best scores.
The improvements from
the single methods amount to between +1.8% and +4.1%
with NDCG5; all results being statistically signiﬁcant ac-
cording to a Wilcoxon test (p ≤0.01).
With MAP, the
conclusions are similar. In general, the combination of two
methods is better than any single method and combining the
three methods improves the performance further, especially
in terms of MAP.
A visual inspection of Fig. 2 where the precision-recall
curves are drawn conﬁrms these results. The combined rank-
ing outperforms any single methods over the whole recall
range. As seen in the graphs, the improvement is not triv-
ial whereas the diﬀerences between the three single methods
are small.
Table 3:
Recommendation ranking evaluated by
NDCG5 and MAP.
Ranking method
NDCG5
MAP
Pcc
0.9134
0.8570
Pct
0.9238
0.8602
Pcs
0.9036
0.8538
Pcc + Pct
0.9308
0.8716
Pcc + Pcs
0.9153
0.8622
Pct + Pcs
0.9202
0.8660
Pcc + Pct + Pcs
0.9271
0.8720
Combined by GBDT
0.9405
0.8978
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0.95
 1
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
Precision
Recall
Combined
Co−click
Co−topic
Co−session
Figure 2:
Precision-recall curves of co-click, co-
topic, co-session and combined ranking of recom-
mendations.
Finally, Table 4 shows the relative importance of the fea-
tures listed in Table 1. Although BCos – the cosine simi-
larity between the bag of character bigrams representations
of two queries – is the most important feature partially be-
cause of the evaluation bias mentioned in Section 4, other
nine features account for more than 10% of its importance.
We understand from this that the proposed feature set is
very eﬀective for this task. The BCos feature, as well as
other textual features, tends to promote queries sharing lex-
ical items with original, i.e. typically found in the CTQ sets.
On the other hand, the second more important features LLR
– the log likelihood ratio of observing q2 after q1 in the same
session – and Next.Ent – the next query entropy of q1 –
are related to CSQs. The Freq.∗features are related to the
popularity of the queries while the click entropy features
Ent.∗are related to the click variance. This conﬁrms our
initial hypothesis that the three diﬀerent methods of identi-
fying potential query recommendations are complementary
and combining them is beneﬁcial.
Table 4: Relative importance of features averaging
through two fold training sets.
Rank
Feature
Importance
1
BCos
100.00
2
LLR
68.72
3
Pcc(q2|q1)
51.36
4
Freq.q2
30.29
5
Freq.topic
27.80
6
Next.Ent
22.23
7
Freq.q1
19.46
8
mb.Leven
17.26
9
Ent.q1
17.25
10
Pcs(q2|q1)
11.91
11
Len.q2
9.65
12
Len.q1
7.76
13
Ent.q2
7.63
14
CLen.q1
6.31
15
Pct(q2|q1)
5.02
16
delta.Len.Rel
5.01
17
CCos
2.97
18
delta.Ent
2.62
19
delta.CLen
2.03
20
Leven
1.32
21
CLen.q2
1.30
7.
CONCLUSIONS
We use three methods of extracting recommendations
from search logs to improve the quality of the suggested
queries. The ﬁrst method exploits the clicked document po-
sition in the ranking and selects as candidate recommen-
dation queries existing in the logs that have a higher rank
for the clicked document. The second method is based on
the observation that users often reﬁne their query by adding
terms. The third method uses the query sequences in search
sessions and recommends some typical topic shifts from the
query.
We carried out experiments on a sample query log of a
commercial search engine in Japan to compare the three
methods. We observed that each method has its own ad-
vantages and drawbacks: the ﬁrst one, based on the posi-
tion of the clicked documents, is sometimes more diﬃcult to
understand at ﬁrst glance, but recommendations may turn
out to be more useful than those extracted from query refor-
mulations; the second tends to be limited to specializations
of the original query, which usually oﬀer safer recommenda-
tions but less coverage; the last one is good in the case of a
topic shift or mission change. The preliminary experiments
conducted on the Yahoo! directory revealed a good semantic
similarity between the extracted query pairs. By construc-
tion, the second method of adding a facet to a query (CTQ)
rarely drifts from the original search topic. On the other
hand, the ﬁrst method (BRCQQ) that consists in identifying
queries that would rank higher the clicked documents tend

to surface more speciﬁc, sometimes jargon like queries. This
occasionally leads to incomprehensible recommendations, at
least to our understanding (although they might make sense
for the users who issued them).
CTQ and variations on
this method are used by many commercial search engines
owing to its more conservative nature but BRCCQ might
be a more eﬀective way of recommending totally new, eye-
opening queries in a more exploratory fashion, despite the
risk of recommending over-speciﬁc or over-generic queries.
Queries extracted from user sessions (CSQ) provides more
diverse recommendations such as parallel move reformula-
tions or even topic changes if those happen frequently in
the logs (e.g. searching for an image after having looked for
some ﬁlm star).
In conclusion, each recommendation method has its own
merits and drawbacks, which is the reason why we combined
them. Adopting semantic similarities as the target attribute,
we learned to combine recommendations from the three dif-
ferent methods in a new ranking according to the similarity
to the original query. We showed that the resulting ranking
out-performs any of the individual rankings as well as their
linear combinations in terms of NDCG5 and MAP.
As the next step of this study, we will try to select rec-
ommendations so as to maximize the facet diversity. Conse-
quently, we need to evaluate the diversity in recommenda-
tion ranking. Evaluation of query recommendations is also
an important issue in this research area and relatively less
investigated than that of document search, as evaluating di-
versiﬁed results is problematic even for this case.
8.
