Identifying Diabetic Patients with High Risk of
Readmission
Bhuvan M S∗, Ankit Kumar†, Adil Zafar‡, Vinith Kishore∗

Abstract—Hospital readmissions are expensive and reﬂect
the inadequacies in healthcare system. In the United States
alone, treatment of readmitted diabetic patients exceeds 250
million dollars per year. Early identiﬁcation of patients facing
a high risk of readmission can enable healthcare providers to
to conduct additional investigations and possibly prevent future
readmissions. This not only improves the quality of care but also
reduces the medical expenses on readmission. Machine learning
methods have been leveraged on public health data to build a
system for identifying diabetic patients facing a high risk of future
readmission. Number of inpatient visits, discharge disposition
and admission type were identiﬁed as strong predictors of
readmission. Further, it was found that the number of laboratory
tests and discharge disposition together predict whether the
patient will be readmitted shortly after being discharged from
the hospital (i.e. <30 days) or after a longer period of time
(i.e. >30 days). These insights can help healthcare providers to
improve inpatient diabetic care. Finally, the cost analysis suggests
that $252.76 million can be saved across 98,053 diabetic patient
encounters by incorporating the proposed cost sensitive analysis
model.
Keywords—Medical Data Analysis, Machine Learning, Asso-
ciation Rule Mining, Feature Importance Mining, Cost-Sensitive
Analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A survey conducted by the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (AHRQ) found that in the year 2011 more than 3.3
million patients were readmitted in the United States within
30 days of being discharged [3]. The need for readmission
indicates that inadequate care was provided to the patient
at the time of ﬁrst admission. Inadequate care poses threat
to patients life and treatment of readmitted patients leads to
increased healthcare costs. Over 41 billion dollars were spent
on treatment on readmitted patients in 2011 [3]. Diabetes is
the seventh leading cause of death and affects about 23.6
million people in the United States. Hospital readmission being
a major concern in diabetes care, over 250 million dollars was
spent on treatment of readmitted diabetic patients in 2011 [3].
Patients facing a high risk of readmission need to be
identiﬁed at the time of being discharged from the hospital,
to facilitate improved treatment to reduce the chances of their
readmission. Readmission of patients within 30 days of being
discharged (short-term readmission) has been a widely used
metric for studying readmissions [3]. However, a signiﬁcant
number of diabetic patients are readmitted after 30 days
of being discharged (long-term readmission). As opposed to
previous work done in the domain we consider both short-
term and long-term readmission scenarios. In addition to an
effective prediciton model, identifying risk factors (features
in the medical record) correlating to readmission will help in
considering these factors with greater care and better docu-
mentation in future medical records, thereby developing more
efﬁcient medical protocols.
The core idea is to provide a comprehensive data solution
to readmission problem to facilitate implementation at the
healthcare institutions to embark a signiﬁcant improvement in
the in-patient diabetic care. This solution provides all round
information to the implementing healthcare institution along
with the cost analysis model.
Addressing these critical problems involves several data
challenges which are considered throughout the research. The
main contribution of this work are:
•
Prediction of diabetis patients with high risk of read-
mission, by modeling multivariate patient medical
records using machine learning classiﬁers. Incorpo-
rating a conservative prediction model to have higher
recall as suited to healthcare institutions.
•
Analysis of characteristics of Short-term (within 30
days) and Long-term (after 30 days) readmissions with
differeent classiﬁers.
•
Identifying the critical risk factors (features) using
ablation study.
•
Identifying the association across critical risk factors
using association rule mining.
•
Cost analysis to determine the effective cost saved by
implementing the work in real world.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents a brief overview of the past work. Section 3 describes
the dataset used and the proposed methodology covering all the
enumerated points mentioned above. Results and discussions
are presented in Section 4 with respected to each part, followed
by conclusion and future work in section 5.
II.
RELATED WORK
Numerous previous studies have analyzed the risk factors
that predict readmissions rates of diabetic patients [3], [7],
[8], [14], [16], [18]–[20], [22], [24], [25], out of which
signiﬁcant ones have been discussed here. [24] Found that
acute and chronic glycemic control inﬂuenced readmission
risk in a dataset of more than 29,000 patients over the age
of 65. [8] Analyzed the readmission risk for a dataset of
arXiv:1602.04257v1  [cs.AI]  12 Feb 2016

more than 52,000 patients in the Humedica network. [19]
Studied demographic and socioeconomic factors which inﬂu-
ence readmission rates. [25] Studied the impact of HbA1c on
readmissions. [17] have conducted analysis on predictability
of hospital readmissions in general without targetting any
speciﬁc disease. The dataset considered in this case, covers
demographic, clinical procedure-related and diagnostic-related
features along with drug information for patients above 65
years of age to predict the readmission within 30 days (short-
term readmission prediction). It contains comprehensive results
on feature reduction methods, but the performance of the pre-
diction models are modest. Cost analysis and grouped features
importance mining was not considered and the analysis was
not targeted towards speciﬁc disease like diabetis.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst one
analyzing diabetic patients faced with the risk of both short and
long term of readmission along with feature analysis and cost
analysis. We use a bigger and a more balanced dataset (i.e. data
across all age groups and across 130 hospitals) as compared to
previous works. Consequently, our results are more reﬂective
of the problem of readmissions among diabetic patients.
Previous works have not documented the performance of
different machine learning classiﬁers. Moreover, both short-
term and long-term readmission scenarios were not considered.
Though they solved a speciﬁc problem, they do not provide
a single comprehensive solution to readmission problem that
can readily be implemented.
In addition to addressing the above gaps in the research,
this work covers methods to identify the critical risk factors in
predicting the readmission rates. Knowledge of such factors is
likely to be useful in developing protocols for better inpatient
diabetes care. We hope that results presented in this work
will serve as a good baseline for any future work to compare
against.
III.
METHODOLOGY
A dataset containing medical records of 101765 diagnosed
with diabetes, collected over a period of 10 years (1999-2008)
from 130 hospitals in USA was used for all analysis presented
in this work [22], [25]. The medical record of each patient
included 50 potential risk factors and a label indicating whether
the patient was readmitted within 30 days, after 30 days or
was never readmitted. The distribution is as follows - 11% of
patients were readmitted within 30 days, 35% after 30 days
and 54% patients were never readmitted.
An overview of our method is provided in Figure 1. We
ﬁrst preprocess the data according to the method described in
section 3.A. Using this preprocessed data we build models for
predicting readmission rates (classiﬁcation, section 3.B) and
identifying groups of features that are important for predicting
readmission rates (feature analysis, section 3.C) which in turn
uncover the critical risk factors.
A.
Risk Factors
Prior to performing any analysis we processed the data
in the following way: The primary, secondary and tertiary
medical diagnoses were indicated by the ICD9 codes [26].
Each ICD9 indicates a unique diagnostic condition. The ICD9
Fig. 1: Overview of the methodology. The data was prepro-
cessed according to the method described in section 3.A. Using
the preprocessed data we built models for identifying high-risk
patients (classiﬁcation, section 3.B) and identifying groups of
features that were important for predicting readmission rates
(feature analysis, section 3.C).
TABLE I: The list of risk factors considered for predicting
readmission rates [25]
No.
Feature
No.
Feature
1
Race
12
Number of
Emergency
Visits (NE)
2
Gender
13
Number of
Inpatient
Visits (NI)
3
Age
14
Diagnosis 1
(Primary) (PD)
4
Admission
Type (AT)
15
Diagnosis 2
(Secondary) (SD)
5
Discharge
Disposition (DD)
16
Diagnosis 3
(Tertiary) (TD)
6
Admission
Source (AS)
17
Number of
Diagnoses (ND)
7
Time in
Hospital (Days)
18
Glucose
Serum Test (GST)
8
Number of
Lab Procedures
19
A1C Test Result
9
Number of
Procedures
20
Insulin
10
Number of
Medications
21
Change of
Medication
11
Number of
Outpatient Visits (NO)
22
Diabetic
Medication (DM)

codes took more than 1000 unique values. For many diagnostic
conditions (ICD9 codes) data were available for only a few
patients. Thus, determining the effect of each diagnostic con-
dition on the readmission rates was not feasible. Consequently,
we grouped ICD9 codes representing similar diagnoses into
a total of 10 groups [26]. If grouping was not done, each
of these ICD-9 codes would be present in smaller number of
samples. Hence, individually each of these ICD-9 codes would
not signiﬁcantly represent the data and might receive a lower
importance weight. Moreover, many of these codes are very
closely related hence they can be grouped meaningfully as
explained in [26]. Since each ICD-9 code indicates a single
medical complication, grouping all related complications (for
e.g. grouping all complications related to respiratory system
from codes 450-519) into one nominal feature value is le-
gitimate and meaningful to consider in a healthcare scenario.
This would be crucial to determine the effect of the diagnostic
condition on the readmission rate. The dataset also provided
details of the medication administered to each patient. We
found that the only medication that varied across the patients
was the delivery of insulin, while other medications remained
common among all the patients hence only insulin medication
was considered as a feature. For some factors such as weight,
payer code and medical specialty the data were missing for
97%, 40% and 49% of the patients respectively. Consequently,
we ignored these factors in our analysis. Future surveys and
data collections need to collect these information to help the
analysis. The race of the patient and the type of diagnoses
were missing for 2% and 1% of the patients considered in
the study. We removed such patients from the dataset. After
this data pre-processing we were left with 22 factors listed in
Table I. The detailed deﬁnitions of these factors can be found
in [25].
Some factors such as the type of diagnoses and admission
type took nominal values where as others such as number of
inpatient visits and time in hospital took numerical values.
While some algorithms for predicting risk of readmission rates
naturally deal with nominal and numerical data both (e.g.
random forests), other algorithms such as neural networks
cannot deal with nominal values. For algorithms that only
operate on numerical data, nominal values were converted into
binary features. For example, the factor ’Admission Type’ that
took one out nine distinct values was represented by a 9-D
binary vector. Each dimension was set to 1 or 0 depending on
the value that Admission type took.
B.
Classiﬁcation
Identiﬁcation of high-risk diabetic patients was posed as
the problem of classifying of whether a patient would be
readmitted within 30 days of being discharge or after 30
days of being discharged or never readmitted. Since, different
classiﬁcation algorithms are apt for different kinds of data
we experimented and compared results from ﬁve different
algorithms. Prior to training the classiﬁcation algorithms, we
randomly split our dataset into two distinct sets - the training
and the test set. The training and test set consisted of 75%
and 25% of the data. The parameters of each algorithm were
chosen based on the classiﬁcation performance evaluated by
ﬁve-fold-cross-validation on the training set. The performance
of all algorithms was evaluated on the test set.
A short description of all classiﬁcation algorithms consid-
ered in this work is provided below.
1) Naive Bayes: Naive Bayes algorithm [27] is a proba-
bilistic model for classiﬁcation. It assumes that given the class,
features are statistically independent of each other.
2) Bayesian Networks: Bayesian networks [4] estimate the
probability distribution of a class by modeling the relationship
between features by a acyclic undirected graph (in general
Bayes networks can be directed and cyclic, but for our exper-
iments we only considered acyclic and undirected models).
3) Random Forest: Random Forest is composed of a set
of decision trees. Each decision tree acts as a weak classiﬁer
and pooling the responses from multiple decision trees leads
to a strong classiﬁer (random forest [2]). Each decision tree
is trained independently and determines the class of an input
by evaluating a series of greedily learned binary questions.
The random forest consisting of 250 trees, each of depth of
utmost 5 nodes was used, as it was found to be optimal from
the experiment with varying number of trees and depth in the
forest.
4) Adaboost: Adaboost constructs a strong classiﬁer by
sequentially combining a set of weak classiﬁers [10]. At ﬁrst
iteration, a single classiﬁer is learnt to minimize the classi-
ﬁcation error. At each consequent iteration, a new classiﬁer
is learnt which seeks to minimize the error of the classiﬁer
composed of the set of classiﬁers learnt until the previous
iteration. In all our experiments, decision trees were used as
weak classiﬁers.
5) Neural Networks: Neural Networks [11] are one of the
powerful classiﬁers which has established state of art results in
like speech processing, computer vision [21] and a wide variety
of other tasks. We have used a MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP)
which is a feed-forward artiﬁcial neural network [12] model
that maps sets of input data onto a set of appropriate outputs. A
MLP consists of multiple layers of nodes in a directed graph,
with each layer fully connected to the next one. Except for
the input nodes, each node is a neuron (or processing element)
with a non-linear activation function. MLP is a modiﬁcation
of the standard linear perceptron and can distinguish data
that are not linearly separable. It is trained with one hidden
layer by minimizing the squared error plus a quadratic penalty
with the BFGS method [23]. We experimented with Neural
Networks with one hidden layer consisting of 2, 4 and 8
nodes and observed that there was very small increase in
the performance but was not signiﬁcant to consider. Hence
considering the training time of these neural networks we
decided to use Neural Network with one hidden layer of 2
nodes for further experiments. We used Weka 3.7 [13] for
training neural networks using MLP Classiﬁer [9].
C.
Feature Analysis
Various features in the medical records are analyzed to get
insights about their importance in predicting the readmission
status of a patient encounter instance. Following subsections
explain two methods of carrying the feature analysis to dis-
cover critical risk factors.

1) Ablation Study of Risk Factors: The importance of
individual risk factors can be judged by performing an ablation
study. An ablation study involves removing one factor at a time
and comparing the accuracy of predicting readmission with this
set of features with the accuracy obtained by considering all
the features. Intuitively, removal of more important features
should lead to larger decreases in accuracy. Ablation of risk
factors was performed to judge the importance of each of these
factors.
2) Associative Rule Mining (ARM): Along with the pre-
dictive modeling the main theme is to identify the risk factors
and help medical practitioners get more insights. One of the
objectives is to assist the practitioners and researchers in
getting more insights to understand why certain patients get
readmitted and factors leading to it, hence indirectly increasing
the efﬁciency of the diagnosis in order to prevent further
readmissions. Ablation study helps to understand the risk
factors, which is further supported by signiﬁcant association
rules.
Groups of consistently occurring factors that inﬂuence
readmission rates can be revealed by associative rule mining
(ARM; Apriori algorithm; [1]). ARM aims at identifying rules
of the form A =>B where A is a conjunction of an arbitrary
number of factors and B is a factor that is predicted to occur if
A is true. The tuple (A, B) forms a set of factors which com-
monly appear in the dataset. Discovering the groups of factors
that commonly occur among readmitted patients or patients
those are never readmitted can further our understanding about
causes of readmission. If for a patient factors A and B both
were present, we deemed that the patient followed the rule (A,
B). We determined such rules by mining the medical records of
all patients in our dataset. Next, we performed class sensitive
ARM where we took examples either from readmitted patients
or patients that were never readmitted. Then for each rule, we
determined the number of patients in the entire dataset that
followed this rule. Within this set, we computed the fraction of
patients which were readmitted <30 days and the fraction that
were readmitted at any time in the future. All the rules were
then sorted based on the fraction of patients which followed
the rule and were readmitted within 30 days. The rules with
the highest fraction of readmissions indicate the factors that
are strong predictors of risk of readmission. The rules with
lowest fraction of readmissions indicate the factors that are
strong predictors of low risk of readmission.
D. Evaluation Criteria
A system for predicting high-risk patients is only useful, if
a large fraction of patients at high-risk are correctly identiﬁed
(i.e. high recall) without raising a large number of false
alarms (i.e. high precision). Receiver Operating Characteristics
(ROC) is ubiquitously known as one of the best metrics to
evaluate classiﬁcation models. The research paper [5], clearly
proves that a deep connection exists between ROC space and
Precision-Recall (PR) space, such that a curve dominates in
ROC space if and only if it dominates in PR space. The
paper also states that, though ROC curves are commonly used
to present results for binary decision problems in machine
learning, when dealing with highly skewed datasets (like our
dataset), PR curves give a more informative picture of an algo-
rithms performance. Therefore, we chose to present PR curves.
Moreover PR curves provide sufﬁcient information to select
the appropriate threshold needed to tune for higher recall which
is necessary in a healthcare scenario (a conservative scenario).
All methods presented in this paper were evaluated based on
recall and precision. The deﬁnition of these evaluation metrics
is provided below:
•
Precision (P): is deﬁned as the fraction of ground truth
positives among all the examples that are predicted to
be positive.
Precision = TP/(TP + FP)
(1)
Where, TP, FP stand for True Positives and False
Positives respectively
•
Recall (R): is deﬁned as the fraction of ground truth
positives that are predicted to be positives.
Recall = TP/(TP + FN)
(2)
Where, FN denotes False Negatives.
•
Precision-Recall Curve [6]: The tradeoff between the
precision and recall can be studied by looking at the
plot of how precision changes as a function of recall.
This plot is known as the Precision-Recall (PR) curve.
The precision is plotted on the y-axis and recall on
x-axis. The area under precision recall curve is a
cost-effective metric for evaluation of classiﬁers. High
value of area under the PR curve indicates better per-
formance. Area under the PR curve is preferred way of
studying the performance of classiﬁers in skewed (i.e.
imbalance between positives and negatives) datasets
such as the one considered in this work [6].
E.
Cost Sensitive Analysis
The model needs to be tuned to maximize the cost saved
by the hospital by using the analysis model. This can be done
by selecting appropriate threshold for the machine learning
algorithms. Let α be the cost incurred per readmission, and β
be the cost per Special Diagnosis for Patients predicted as Yes
(<30 or >30 day Readmissions). Let the patient encounter
instances of the test set be deﬁned according to the below
cost matrix. Cost matrix is one in which cost or penalty of
classiﬁcation will be speciﬁed for each element as in the
confusion matrix.
CostMatrix =

TP
FN
FP
TN

(3)
Where TP, FP, FN and TN correspond to True Positives,
False Positives, False Negatives and True Negatives respec-
tively.
Without the prediction model: all the instances where
patients actually get readmitted (True Positives and False
Negatives) incur a cost of α, hence deﬁned by the below
matrix. cost matrix without prediction model.
WithoutPredictionModel(C) =

α
α
0
0

(4)

With the prediction model: considering that all patients
who are predicted to get readmitted (True Positives and False
Positives) would be examined with a special diagnosis which
would cost β, which in turn would prevent their readmission.
Hence by above consideration, we make a realistic hypothesis
that the special diagnosis provided for predicted instances
prevent their readmission (Here the prediction is helping to
determine whom to provide special diagnosis). The patient
encounters who are predicted to be readmitted but who do not
actually get readmitted, would also incur a cost of beta for spe-
cial diagnosis, which will just serve as preventive measure in
conservative hospital scenario. Cost of α would be incurred for
those patients who are predicted not to get readmitted but who
actually get readmitted. Those patients who where predicted
as not readmitted and those who actually don’t get readmitted
(True Negatives) anyway would not contribute to any cost, but
it may simply help the hospital for capacity planning. Hence
with the predictive model we would get the cost matrix C’
shown below. In our research special diagnosis is considered to
be ’One Extra Day’ during the initial admission during which
the doctor can conduct another diagnosis which might result
in the discovery of new complications in the patient. Hence
the cost of special diagnosis is considered to be cost per one
day of admission in the hospital.
WithPredictionModel(C′) =

β
α
β
0

(5)
The difference of cost matrix without and with prediction
model gives the saved cost matrix as shown below.
SavedCostMatrix(S) = C −C′ =

α −β
0
−β
0

(6)
The prediction model needs to be tuned to appropriate
thresholds to maximize this saved-cost matrix, hence maxi-
mizing the cost saved by the analysis model.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
This section contains results consolidated from carious
experiments as described in the section 3. The effectiveness
of various classiﬁers on predicting the readmission status have
been discussed in the section 4.A. The section 4.B describes
critical risk factors that have been identiﬁed by feature analysis
conducted by two methods namely, the ablation study and
Association Rule Mining. Finally, the results of cost effective
analysis have been discussed in section 4.C.
A.
Analysis of Classiﬁers
The distribution of patient encounters is skewed because;
most patients in the dataset were never readmitted (54%). Only
11% of patients were readmitted within 30 days(<30), while
the rest (35%) of them were readmitted after 30 days. But the
greater than 30 day readmission class (>30) is ambiguous as
it could mean 31 days or even a couple of years. In ﬁrst case,
by making an hypothesis that ’>30 day readmission’ instances
might have patterns similar to ’NO readmission’ instances,
we combined >30 and NO readmission instances and built
a binary classiﬁcation model to classify <30 versus (>30 &
NO),i.e., identifying high risk patients readmitted within 30
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
Precision-Recall Curve for <30 VS (>30 & NO) Readmissions
Adaboost-(AUC=0.167)
BayesNetwork-(AUC=0.208)
NaiveBayes-(AUC=0.214)
NeuralNetworks2-(AUC=0.233)
RandomForest-(AUC=0.242)
Fig. 2: Comparing the accuracy of different methods for iden-
tifying high-risk patients that are readmitted within 30 days of
being discharged. The dotted line shows the performance of a
classiﬁer at chance accuracy.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
Precision-Recall Curve for (<30 & >30) VS NO Readmissions
Adaboost-(AUC=0.569)
BayesNetwork-(AUC=0.637)
NaiveBayes-(AUC=0.630)
NeuralNetworks2-(AUC=0.654)
RandomForest-(AUC=0.650)
Fig. 3: Comparing the accuracy of different methods for
identifying high-risk patients that are readmitted in the future.
The dotted line shows the performance of a classiﬁer at chance
accuracy.
days of being discharged (Figure 2). In the second case, we
made a hypothesis readmission either after <30 and >30 days
might have similar patterns and combined <30 days and >30
days readmission instances and built a binary classiﬁcation
model to classify Readmission (<30 & >30) versus ’NO
readmission’, i.e., identifying high risk patients readmitted at
any time in the future (Figure 3). In this case, we can see that
distribution is almost evened for the two classes.
We experimented with both the cases. As we observe from
Table II, area under PR curves for best performing algorithm
in each case came out to be higher in the latter case i.e.,
while identifying high risk patients readmitted at any time in
the future. Therefore, the performance of identifying high-risk

TABLE II: Comparing the performance of different algorithms
for identifying high risk patients
Classiﬁer
Area Under Precision-Recall Curve
Class <30
Class <30 + Class >30
Naive Bayes
0.214
0.63
Bayes Network
0.208
0.637
Random Forest
0.242
0.65
Adaboost Trees
0.167
0.569
Neural Networks
0.233
0.654
readmitted patients within 30 days is lower than identifying
high-risk patients readmitted at any time in the future.
B.
Identifying the critical risk factors
Feature analysis described in the section 3.C leads to
the discovery of importance of risk factors estimated by two
methods presented in the following subsections.
1)
Using Ablation Study: Random Forests were most
accurate at identifying patients with high-risk of readmissions.
This suggested that random forests could be used to identify
the importance of each risk factor in identifying high-risk
patients. Such factors were identiﬁed using an ablation study
(section 3.C.1). The ablation study compares the performance
of classiﬁers ﬁrst by considering all the features, and then re-
moving one of these features. The difference in the accuracies
is used as the estimate of importance of the feature. Figure
4 shows the increase in out of bag errors (i.e. increase in
inaccuracy), for each factor. We observed that the number of
inpatient visits, discharge disposition and admission type are
most important for identifying high-risk patients.
Further, in order to gain additional insights into causes
of readmissions, we sought to analyze if there were any
differences between the factors that led to readmission within
30 days and after 30 days. For this we trained a random forest
for differentiating patients readmitted within 30 days from the
patients who were readmitted after 30 days. We then performed
an ablation study on identify the factors which were different
among short-term and long-term readmissions. The results of
our analysis are presented in Figure
5. We found that the
number of lab tests (i.e. laboratory procedures) is useful in
differentiating between short and long term readmissions. We
also found that patients who are discharged to home are more
likely to be readmitted within 30 days as opposed to being
readmitted after 30 days.
2) Association Rule Interpretation: Apriori algorithm re-
trieved several general and class association rules. These as-
sociation rules by themselves are a treasure which would help
doctors for improving efﬁciency of initial diagnosis. Prominent
Association Rules have been given in Table III with respective
support and conﬁdence. More of these rules have been put up
in appendix A. These rules can be interpreted by inference
logic from the Consequent (LHS) to Antecedent (RHS).
The rule 3 in Table
III, indicates that Caucasian female
patients who were primarily diagnosed with Caucasian female
patients who were primarily diagnosed with Dyspnea and
Respiratory abnormalities (ICD9-786.0), and had Hypertension
and Maligancy (ICD9-401.0) as secondary diagnosis, are less
probable (2.27%) to be readmitted within 30 days, as only 5
such patients out of 220 were readmitted within 30 days during
the survey. Similarly rule 6 indicates that, patients admitted
through emergency (admission source id=7), and discharged
or transferred to Skilled Nursing Facility (discharge disposition
id=3) are slightly more probable (15.19+36.97 = 52.16%) to
get readmitted within or after a month. Similarly, the rule 1
implies that a patient encounter who is diagnosed with Celluli-
tis/abscess, face (ICD-9: 682.0) and Diabetes mellitus without
mention of special complication (ICD-9: 250.0) as primary and
secondary diagnosis respectively has low possibility of getting
readmitted within 30 days (1.88%) and mostly would not get
readmitted at any time in future (71.83%).
When the prediction model predicts that this particular
patient will not get readmitted, as a medical practitioner, one
can use this matched rule to statistically understand that similar
patients (who had similar diagnosis) were not readmitted in the
past. It might help him to get him more insights and would
assist him in further diagnosis. He would understand that such
patients are less prone to risk. Such interpretations from all the
rules could be very useful for taking informed decisions and
gauging the risk factor. We observe that most of these rules can
only help to decide about the probability of patients not getting
readmitted within 30 days, due to the biased distribution of
dataset.
C.
Cost Analysis
The cost analysis has been done as explained in the section
3.E. The article [15] speciﬁes that cost of readmission of
Diabetes mellitus and its complications to be $251 million
for 23,700 total readmissions. Hence cost per readmission
α approximately equals to $10,591 ($250, 000, 000/23, 300).
In our research, special diagnosis is considered to be One
Extra Day of admission during which the doctor can conduct
another diagnosis which might result in the discovery of
new complications in the patient. Hence the cost of special
diagnosis is considered to be cost per one day of admission in
the hospital. From our dataset we ﬁnd that the average time
in hospital across diabetic patient encounters is 4.396 days.
Hence cost for one day admission is considered to be $2,409
($10591/4.396). Hence the value of α and β are $10,591 and
$2,409 respectively.
Hence the saved cost matrix would be:
SavedCostMatrix(S) =

α −β
0
−β
0

=

8182
0
−2409
0

(7)
Model with different machine learning algorithms were
tuned to maximize the cost saved by selecting appropriate
threshold. The cost saved by different models are given the
Table IV.
TABLE IV: Comparison of cost saved by different machine
learning models.
Algorithm
Cost Saved for
Test Set
(Million USD)
Cost Saved for
Total set
(Million USD)
Naive Bayes
58.726
249.783563
Bayes Network
58.808
250.1323396
Random Forest
59.425
252.7566705
Adaboost-Trees
58.298
247.9631195
Neural Network
58.963
250.7916123

Fig. 4: Analyzing the importance of individual risk factors for identifying high-risk patients. The importance of each risk factor
was estimated by computing the out of bag error (Section 3.C.1). Larger out of bag error indicates that the risk factor is more
important. The number of inpatient incidents, the discharge disposition and admission type are most important for identifying
high risk patients.
Fig. 5: Analyzing the importance of individual risk factors in differentiating risk factors inﬂuencing short-term and long-term
readmissions. The importance of each risk factor was estimated by computing the out of bag error (Section 3.C.1). Larger out
of bag error indicates that the risk factor is more important. The number of laboratory procedures and discharge disposition are
found to be most important for differentiating short-term readmissions from long-term readmissions.

We observe that the Random Forest model would save
maximum cost of $59.425 million for 23,053 diabetic patient
encounter instances of test set. We get $252.76 million by
extending this to total number of 98,053 diabetic patient
encounter instances.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work we presented a scheme to identify high-risk
patients and evaluated different machine-learning algorithms.
In contrast to previous work we considered both short-term
and long-term readmissions and focussed on speciﬁc disease
like diabetes. We found that random forests were optimal for
this task. The dataset of readmissions is often skewed and
consequently, the performance of identifying high-risk patients
is modest. We conducted some preliminary experiments to
modify the loss function of the classiﬁers to account for
the skewed nature of the dataset. Slight improvement in the
performance was observed comapared to previous works but
not signiﬁcant enough. Larger datasets containing medical
records of readmitted patients are likely to be helpful for
future research. Moreover, this work uncovers the features
that are critical in identifying high risk of readmission and
compares them in short-term and long-term analysis. In ad-
dition, statistically signiﬁcant associations taht exist among
these features are presented. TO complement the prediciton
and feature analysis model, a cost sensitive model has been
proposed.
From the cost analysis, we observe that a cost of $252.76
million can be saved for 98,053 instances of diabetic patient
encounters. Saving such huge amount cost is essential for
healthcare system. The model never suggests healthcare per-
sonnel to give less attention to those patients predicted not
to be readmitted, but prompts extra attention to those who
were predicted to get readmitted. In this sense, the designed
model is conservative in nature and is safe to use in healthcare
institutions as it enhances preventive strategy along with saving
cost associated with readmission. Moreover, those patients
who were predicted to be readmitted would receive special
diagnosis at an earlier stage which might save lot of lives.
Hence we believe that the model could be incorporated in
healthcare institutions to witness its effectiveness.
Our research considers the hypothesis that the special
diagnosis would prevent the actual readmission. We have
considered cost of special diagnosis to be cost per one day of
admission where doctor can run another diagnosis to discover
other possible complications. Though these hypotheses seem
legitimate they need to be tested by incorporating the research
model in real healthcare systems. Extensive study needs to
be done on the feature importance analysis which would help
the healthcare institutions to prioritize their healthcare data
documentation system. The cost saved by correctly predicting
the patients who do not get readmitted might save some cost
as it helps in optimal resource planning, but this cost needs to
statistically determined, and the model should also be tuned
by considering this cost into account.
Our research targets diabetic patients only. Such analysis
needs to be carried for other top health conditions like Heart
disease, Schizophrenia etc. In the future studies scheduled and
unscheduled readmissions needs to be considered [20]. Several
critical features in the medical records, like age were found
missing. Hence a superior data collection drive needs to done
for future research in this regard. Some features that needs to
collected would be age, date of admission (to ﬁnd the season of
the year), number of patients with same disease at the instance
of admission (to co-relate to epidemics), family history (to ﬁnd
hereditary information). The conversation between doctor and
patient could also be collected which might help to extract
essential features corresponding to patients will power and
attitude by text-mining techniques which in turn might improve
the intelligent models to identify patients with high risk of
readmission.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We extend our immense gratitude to Prof. Bhiksha Raj,
Prof. Rita Singh (Language Technology Institute, School of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University) and Pulkit
Agrawal (Dept. of Computer Science, University of California,
Berkley) for their keen guidance enabling the project. We
would like to thank M. Lichman [22] for making the dataset
available in the UCI machine learning library.
APPENDIX A
SIGNIFICANT ASSOCIATION RULES
This section contains Table
V presenting a selected list
of association rules. They can be interpreted as explained in
section 4.B.2. These rules can be used as suggestions by a
doctor. Tables VI and VII describe the ICD9 code mappings
for the ICD9 codes and the Id mappings for the Id’s used in
Table
III respectively. Complete mappings can be found in
[22].
