Master’s Thesis
Dynamical Audio-Visual Navigation:
Catching Unheard Moving Sound
Sources in Unmapped 3D Environments
Abdelrahman Younes
Examiner: Prof. Dr. Abhinav Valada
Advisers:
Dr. Tim Welschehold
Daniel Honerkamp
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg
Faculty of Engineering
Department of Computer Science
Robot Learning Lab
December 21st, 2021
arXiv:2201.04279v1  [cs.CV]  12 Jan 2022

Writing Period
25. 06. 2021 – 21. 12. 2021
Examiner
Prof. Dr. Abhinav Valada
Second Examiner
Prof. Dr. Joschka Boedcker
Advisers
Dr. Tim Welschehold, Daniel Honerkamp

Declaration
I hereby declare, that I am the sole author and composer of my thesis and that no
other sources or learning aids, other than those listed, have been used. Furthermore,
I declare that I have acknowledged the work of others by providing detailed references
of said work.
I hereby also declare, that my Thesis has not been prepared for another examination
or assignment, either wholly or excerpts thereof.
Place, Date
Signature
i

To the memory of my father,

Abstract
Recent work on audio-visual navigation targets a single static sound in noise-free
audio environments and struggles to generalize to unheard sounds. We introduce the
novel dynamic audio-visual navigation benchmark in which an embodied AI agent
must catch a moving sound source in an unmapped environment in the presence
of distractors and noisy sounds. We propose an end-to-end reinforcement learning
approach that relies on a multi-modal architecture that fuses the spatial audio-visual
information from a binaural audio signal and spatial occupancy maps to encode the
features needed to learn a robust navigation policy for our new complex task settings.
We demonstrate that our approach outperforms the current state-of-the-art with
better generalization to unheard sounds and better robustness to noisy scenarios on
the two challenging 3D scanned real-world datasets Replica and Matterport3D, for
the static and dynamic audio-visual navigation benchmarks. Our novel benchmark
will be made available at http://dav-nav.cs.uni-freiburg.de.
iii
