SEMANTIC MATCH: DEBUGGING FEATURE ATTRIBUTION
METHODS IN XAI FOR HEALTHCARE
Giovanni Cinà1,2,3

Tabea E. Röber4

Rob Goedhart4

¸S. ˙Ilker Birbil4

1 Department of Medical Informatics, Amsterdam University Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, NL
2 Institute for Logic, Language, and Computation, University of Amsterdam, NL
3 Pacmed, Amsterdam, NL
4 Business Analytics, Amsterdam Business School, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, NL
ABSTRACT
The recent spike in certiﬁed Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) tools for healthcare has renewed the debate
around adoption of this technology. One thread of such debate concerns Explainable AI (XAI) and its
promise to render AI devices more transparent and trustworthy. A few voices active in the medical AI
space have expressed concerns on the reliability of Explainable AI techniques and especially feature
attribution methods, questioning their use and inclusion in guidelines and standards. Despite valid
concerns, we argue that existing criticism on the viability of post-hoc local explainability methods
throws away the baby with the bathwater by generalizing a problem that is speciﬁc to image data.
We begin by characterizing the problem as a lack of semantic match between explanations and
human understanding. To understand when feature importance can be used reliably, we introduce a
distinction between feature importance of low- and high-level features. We argue that for data types
where low-level features come endowed with a clear semantics, such as tabular data like Electronic
Health Records (EHRs), semantic match can be obtained, and thus feature attribution methods can
still be employed in a meaningful and useful way. Finally, we sketch a procedure to test whether
semantic match has been achieved.
Keywords Explainable AI · Feature attribution · Medical AI
Introduction
Along with the blooming of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and the accompanying increase in model complexity, there
has been a surge of interest in explainable AI (XAI), namely AI that allows humans to understand its inner workings
[e.g., Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017, Linardatos et al., 2020, Gilpin et al., 2018, Biran and Cotton, 2017, Doran et al.,
2017]. This interest is particularly keen in safety-critical domains such as healthcare, where it is perceived that XAI can
engender trust, help monitoring bias, and facilitate AI development [e.g., Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017, Lipton, 2018].
XAI has already shown to improve clinicians’ ability to diagnose and assess prognoses of diseases as well as assist
with planning and resource allocation. For example, Letham et al. [2015] developed a stroke prediction model that
matches the performance of the most accurate Machine Learning (ML) algorithms, while remaining as interpretable as
conventional scoring methods used in clinical practice.
There is a wide variety of techniques for XAI, and many categorizations have been proposed in the literature. Techniques
can roughly be grouped into local vs. global, and model-speciﬁc vs. model-agnostic approaches. Local methods aim to
explain model outputs for individual samples, while global methods focus on making models more explainable at an
aggregate level. Model-speciﬁc methods are tailored to explain a speciﬁc type of model, while model-agnostic methods
arXiv:2301.02080v3  [cs.AI]  24 Feb 2023

Semantic match: Debugging feature attribution methods in XAI
can be applied to a range of different models. Many of the well-known techniques yield post-hoc explanations, meaning
that they generate explanations for already trained, so-called ‘black-box’, models. Alternatively, there exist approaches
that are considered inherently explainable, also known as white-box (or glass-box) models, such as decision trees and
linear regression models. A detailed taxonomy is beyond the scope of this paper; for an extensive overview we refer the
reader to Carvalho et al. [2019], Molnar [2022], and Ras et al. [2022].
A group of XAI techniques that has enjoyed substantial fame is the set of feature attribution methods, namely techniques
that assign to each feature a measure of how much it contributes to the calculation of the outcome according to the
model. Popular techniques produce such explanations in a local fashion, and among the most famous there are SHAP
Lundberg and Lee [2017], LIME Ribeiro et al. [2016], saliency maps Selvaraju et al. [2017], and integrated gradients
Sundararajan et al. [2017]. To give a sense of the success of these techniques, it sufﬁces to say that some of them are
now integrated as default explainability tools in widespread cloud machine learning services, while in areas such as
natural language processing, researchers are starting to use such methods as the gold standard against which they judge
the quality of other explanations Mohankumar et al. [2020].
Despite the enthusiasm and a growing community of researchers devoting energy to XAI, there is currently no consensus
on the reliability of XAI techniques, and several researchers have cast serious doubts on whether XAI solutions should
be incorporated into guidelines and standards, or even deployed at all [e.g., Lipton, 2018, McCoy et al., 2021, Ghassemi
et al., 2021, Neely et al., 2022].
Figure 1: An example of visual explanation by
heatmap for a medical image. Image courtesy
of [Rajpurkar et al., 2017].
Undoubtedly, there is an inherent tension between the desire for
machines performing better than humans, and the requirement for ma-
chines to provide human-understandable explanations. Together with
their super-human capacities –such as the ability to juggle dozens or
hundreds of factors– the sub-symbolic character of statistical learning
techniques contributes to rendering many ML models opaque to hu-
mans. Simply put: humans cannot ‘read off’ what a neural network
has learned just by looking at the matrix of weights.
The internal or ‘latent’ representation of a machine, namely the way
in which the machine encoded the patterns found in the data, is what
we would like to explain to the human, together with the way in which
this internal representation interacts with a single data point to gener-
ate an output. The solution presented by feature attribution methods
is also sub-symbolic, in the sense that an explanation also takes the
form of a vector or matrix of values, and here lies the source of the
problem. As different scholars pointed out Ghassemi et al. [2021],
Rudin [2019], the assignment of meaning to such explanations can
be tricky, sometimes lulling the humans into a false sense of under-
standing while the explanations are in fact ﬂawed or misleading. This
issue is particularly sensitive when such explainability techniques are
used in high-stakes environments such as healthcare.
Does this mean that feature attribution methods are altogether unre-
liable? In this article we argue that existing criticism on the viability
of post-hoc local explainability methods throws away the baby with
the bathwater by generalizing a problem that is speciﬁc to unstruc-
tured data such as images. We characterize the issue with feature
attribution methods as a lack of semantic match between explana-
tions and human understanding. To understand when semantic match
can be obtained reliably, we introduce a distinction between feature
importance of low- and high-level features. We argue that in the
case of data types for which low-level features come endowed with
clear semantics, such as tabular data like EHRs, semantic match is
enabled and thus feature attribution methods can still be employed in
a meaningful and useful way. As for high-level features, we present
a conceptual procedure to test whether semantic match is achieved,
paving the way for future operationalization of this test.
2

Semantic match: Debugging feature attribution methods in XAI
Figure 2: While the explanation of the ﬁrst classiﬁcation seems intuitive, this impression is put into question when
a similar explanation is offered for an absurd classiﬁcation. Figure reproduced from [Rudin 2019] with author’s
permission.
The criticism on local feature attribution methods
In this section we expand on the problem that feature attribution methods are confronted with. Applied to images,
explanations generated by feature attribution methods present themselves as heat maps or colored overlays, indicating
the contribution of speciﬁc pixels to the prediction of the model on the input at hand. Intuitively, highlighted regions
comprise pixels which were considered ‘important’ by the model (see Figure 1). Prima facie, one might be led to
believe that this allows humans to check that the model is paying attention to the right elements of the image, therefore
increasing our trust in the speciﬁc prediction and in the model more generally.
However, when a certain area of an image is highlighted we simply do not know if what we recognize, say the shape of
a kidney or the beak of a bird, is the same as what the AI recognizes. As several researchers have pointed out, what look
like plausible explanations at ﬁrst may turn out to be ungrounded or spurious explanations when subjected to closer
scrutiny. Figure 2 displays an example of this mishap: very similar explanations are offered for the prediction on two
very different classes, invalidating our intuition that the model has learned to recognize dogs by their facial features.
This opens the door for different kinds of biases, both on the side of the user, who can project their beliefs erroneously
onto the machine, and on the side of the XAI, which might provide feature attribution information that is inconsistent or
misleading.
The root of the problem, we maintain, lies in the inability of humans to attribute meaning to a sub-symbolic encoding of
information. What is needed is a systematic way to translate sub-symbolic representations to human-understandable
ones, in a way that respects how we assign meaning. This is represented schematically in Figure 3. We call such
a commuting diagram a semantic match. An ideal explanation would provide content of the bottom-left node and
a suitable translation in order to obtain a semantic match: the explanation of a certain sub-symbolic representation
encoded by the machine should have (i) a clearly deﬁned meaning and (ii) an unambiguous way to translate to human
terms with the same (or very similar) meaning. Semantic match, which is a crude simpliﬁcation of complex cognitive
and linguistic phenomena, offers a handy conceptual tool to debug explanations.
Indeed, just as we are unable to understand a latent representation, we are unable to relate to a heatmap unless it comes
paired with a well-deﬁned meaning assignment and translation, as illustrated in the diagram. Overlaying the heatmap to
an image encourages us to use our visual intuition as translation, but alas this last step is an ill-advised one, since it gives
us the illusion of a semantic match while in fact the explanations do not conform to expectations. Figure 4 exempliﬁes a
failed semantic match. In this scenario a heatmap is generated as an explanation for the behavior of the model on an
image. From the image, it may appear that the machine ‘recognizes’ a certain feature (a dog’s head), and therefore
classiﬁes the image as a speciﬁc class (‘dog’). However, another spurious input generates the same heatmap, and hence
the translation is invalid and unreliable. To replicate the uncanny observation of Figure 2, one can construct another
scenario where states of the world are pairs of input images and predictions. These are cases of semantic mismatch: the
states of the world in which the heatmap is produced do not correspond to the states where one would plausibly use the
concept of dog’s head to classify a dog image.
This criticism seems to undercut the utility of such local feature attribution methods: if they are potentially misleading
and bring no clear added value, should they be used at all?
3

Semantic match: Debugging feature attribution methods in XAI
Figure 3: The diagram representing a semantic match.
Figure 4: A scenario depicting a semantic mismatch. The
images eliciting a certain explanation do not comply with
our recollection of the explanation.
Distinguishing low- and high-level features
In order to understand the utility of such methods, one needs to step back and consider what are the characteristics
of the examples that give rise to the problem, and assess whether they generalize. Not unsurprisingly, most of the
debate revolves around images, given the astounding success of deep learning in the realm of computer vision. Images
are a prime example of what is sometimes called ‘unstructured data’, namely data that does not come equipped with
additional structure and is akin to raw sensory data. Note that this is a misnomer, since such data typically is endowed
with a rich structure (in the mathematical sense) deriving from the notion of distance deﬁned between pixels or between
parts of an ordered sequence. We will nonetheless adopt this terminology to facilitate readability, since it is ubiquitous.
One of the deﬁning characteristics of images -and unstructured data more generally- is that a single feature has no
intrinsic meaning: a certain color value of a pixel means nothing by itself. Only a pattern of values for a group of
features can be attributed meaning, e.g. a cloud of pixels with the shape and color of a dog’s head. In other words, we
recognize properties or entities in an image by matching activation patterns with our visual intuitions. Following a
widespread habit in the ML community, we will refer to patterns in groups of features as ‘high-level features’, while
single features, i.e. the entries of the vector representing an input, will be dubbed ‘low-level features’ by contrast.
With this terminology, we can succinctly state that in images only high-level features can be attributed meaning while
low-level features cannot.
On the contrary, in structured data each feature is usually conferred speciﬁc meaning; e.g. in EHR data a certain value
might contain the information pertaining to the blood pressure of a patient at a certain time. When such low-level
features are not deﬁned with a speciﬁc protocol - such as the ones for measurements of vital signs in clinical settings -
they refer to standard concepts in natural language. We can, therefore, easily interpret what these low-level features
mean regardless of the values of the other features. For instance, a value of 180 in the feature corresponding to systolic
blood pressure gives us a piece of information that we can understand and process, even without knowing other features
of a patient.
To be sure, there are also high-level features in the case of structured data. Continuing with the example of EHRs, a
high-level feature could be for example a phenotype which is not encoded explicitly as a feature but instead depends on
the combination of existing features, say glucose, BMI, and so on. Hence, the crucial difference between structured and
unstructured data is that the former has clear meaning for the low-level features, while on the high-level features the
two data types behave similarly.
We maintain that the usage of a post-hoc feature attribution method hinges on the application of the corresponding
semantic match diagram. Without a rigorously deﬁned meaning and translation, a heatmap remains a matrix of values
without rhyme or reason. We cannot extract information from such a matrix just as we cannot fathom what is encoded
in the latent space of a neural network by eyeballing the value of a point in said space. So far the attribution of meaning
to a heatmap-explanation has been carried out in an informal and intuitive way, which as previous scholars argued is
prone to error and a false source of conﬁdence.
4

Semantic match: Debugging feature attribution methods in XAI
Saving feature importance for low-level features
The distinction between low-and high-level features helps untangle the cases in which semantic match works out-of-the
box from those in which it fails. A post-hoc local feature attribution method can be used appropriately on low-level
features when they have a predeﬁned translation, as is the case for medical tabular data. For example, suppose a
risk prediction model is trained on EHR data. When a patient is presented to the model, the model might provide
a risk score associated with feature importance values for the patient’s lab values. Suppose systolic blood pressure
is marked as the most important factor increasing the risk of a speciﬁc patient. In this case, there is no ambiguity:
such level of importance is attributed to systolic blood pressure and nothing else, and any user with sufﬁcient training
knows what systolic blood pressure is. Note that this has nothing to do with how the importance is calculated (e.g. if
it takes into account feature interactions) or if it is a sensible level of importance; all we are stating is that the user
can unambiguously understand what the importance is attributed to. In other words, the importance is attributed to
something which semantically matches our concept of ‘systolic blood pressure’.
The user of such a model can then engage with the feature importance and assess whether it is sensible, while addressing
questions like “Is this level of risk reasonable given a high importance of systolic blood pressure?” Such a question
may be answered in the positive, if the clinician believes the value of systolic blood pressure is concerning, or in the
negative, if for example, the clinician knows that the value of systolic blood pressure is a byproduct of medications she
can control. An example of such an approach is displayed in Figure 5, where the top features contributing to clinical
risk are displayed along with a color code indicating if they are risk increasing or decreasing.
Crucially, semantic match allows the user of an explanation to engage with it, and to decide whether it is agreeable or not.
In contrast, when the same risk prediction is trained on image data, this reasoning falls apart. What feature attribution
can highlight are just high-level features, e.g. the portion of an image with a kidney shape. But lacking a semantic
match, clinicians cannot trust whether what they see in the image matches the machine’s internal representation.
Debugging feature importance for high-level features
Does this mean that we have to give up feature attribution for high-level features? In fact, what we need is a procedure
to test whether semantic match is present or if it is violated. In what follows we sketch such procedure at a conceptual
level.
Suppose a ML model f has been trained on labeled data of the shape (x, y), where x represent an input vector and y an
output. We denote a local feature attribution method with M and say that M(f, x, y) = e is the explanation furnished
by the model f on such pair of input and output. We are interested in testing whether we have semantic match with the
explanation e, or in other words, if what we ‘see’ in the explanation is indeed what the explanation is capturing.
At an intuitive level, what we want to ascertain is that an explanation matches our translation of it. This is encoded
in the commutation of the semantic diagram, namely that all the data points giving rise to a certain explanation are
also complying to our translation hypothesis, which we will indicate with θ, and vice versa. We are thus looking at
answering two questions:
• Is every input-output pair that generate an explanation similar to e also a case in which θ is the case?
• Is every input-output pair in which θ is satisﬁed going to generate an explanation that is similar to e?
To exemplify the procedure, suppose one has developed an algorithm to classify pictures of animals. Presented with
a picture classiﬁed as a dog and an explanation e, one formulates the translation hypothesis θ that the explanation
highlights the tail of the animal. To answer the aforementioned questions, one would need to take images that generate
explanations similar to e and check whether the explanations of those samples highlight tails. For the second question,
one would need to take images of animals with tails and consider how similar they are to e.
Note that in this procedure one may also select data points whose label is different from y. This may not be an issue,
since the high-level feature used for the prediction of x as y may in theory also be used on another data point and
another label (and hence be highlighted in the explanation). In the animal classiﬁcation example, one may collect
images of a panther in which a tail is displayed, and rule that the explanation correctly highlights a tail in those images.
What is interesting of this procedure is that it breaks down a theoretical issue in more concrete steps. A full formalization
of the procedure and the demonstration of its implementation in practice are left for future work.
5

Semantic match: Debugging feature attribution methods in XAI
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: (a) An example of the front-end of Pacmed Critical, a medical device currently used in the Amsterdam
University Medical Center for the prediction of adverse outcomes after ICU discharge. (b) A close-up of the right
side of the interface, displaying feature attribution for low-level features. Courtesy of Pacmed; for background on the
prediction model see Thoral et al. [2021], de Hond et al. [2022]. The displayed patient data is synthetic.
6

Semantic match: Debugging feature attribution methods in XAI
Discussion
In this article we have reviewed the reliability problem of feature attribution methods and have proposed to diagnose the
issue by means of the semantic match diagram. We have argued that without clear meaning and translation, semantic
match cannot be obtained for high-level feature importance. A corollary of this statement is that current methods for
feature attribution may not be appropriate for unstructured data unless semantic match is veriﬁed.
In contrast, structured data may still beneﬁt from feature attribution, since for this data type low-level features have
an in-built semantic match with human concepts. This allows humans to engage with explanations and exercise that
all-important oversight that is required to spot failure modes of ML applications. Recent fairness concerns in the
realms of human resources, healthcare, and law enforcement underscore the need for continued human control over
semi-automated decisions.
When it comes to the limit of this analysis, it is important to remark that, even in the presence of semantic match,
explanations can still fail to deliver on their promise. If an explanation is not faithful to the model, that is, it does not
consistently represent the machine’s behavior, the user may not leverage the explanation to agree or disagree with the
machine’s output; recent work on this point shows a concerning divergence in explanations Neely et al. [2022]. It
should also be added that not all data types neatly fall into the categories of structured and unstructured data. Textual
data, for example, contains both tokens that have intrinsic meaning and tokens that have only contextual meaning, and
therefore sits somewhat in the middle. Time series data is in a similar spot, exhibiting sequences whose single values
may have deﬁned meaning but whose evolution over time is harder to grasp. In these cases explanatory methods should
be employed with caution and awareness of potential semantic mismatch. In the same vein, it should be recognized
that, before the advent of neural networks that could process raw data, there was a long tradition of image processing
by hand-crafting meaningful image features (see for example Street et al. [1993]). In essence, such approaches built
features with an intrinsic semantic match by encoding expert knowledge with feature engineering, turning unstructured
data into structured one. These approaches may be rediscovered as ways to attribute meaning to explanations in
consultation with domain experts. Finally, semantic match is a user-dependent concept: while users with the relevant
background may correctly interpret an explanation, others may not, and in healthcare settings it is crucial to clearly
identify user groups and provide proper training.
Beside operationalizing the procedure we introduced in the previous section, future work aiming to obviate problems
deriving from failed semantic match could direct attention to generating explanations that comply with human categories
by design, possibly even with special categories employed by the targeted user. One direction of future research explores
the possibility to capture information on machine behavior in a symbolic manner by means of hybrid models Sarker et al.
[2021]. Another option might contemplate combining visual explanation with image segmentation, to ﬁx the semantics
of entities used in the explanation. Finally, more elaborate explanations may require access to ontologies regulating the
relationship between entities (as in e.g. Lecue and Wu [2018], Liartis et al. [2021]), which should themselves match
ontologies used – more or less implicitly – by humans.
When it comes to medical AI, we want clinicians to be able to interact with machines in a meaningful way, namely with
the right tools to adjudicate when the machine’s advice is worth following. Framing the problem in terms of semantic
match helps shedding light on the issue that explanations are still too ambiguous and too far from clinicians’ reasoning.
We should be building explanations in the clinician’s language, rather than asking clinicians to rely on intuition or to
learn to think like a computer scientist.
