Generalization in Deep Networks:
The Role of Distance from Initialization
Vaishnavh Nagarajan
Computer Science Department
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

J. Zico Kolter
Computer Science Department
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
Why does training deep neural networks using stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
result in a generalization error that does not worsen with the number of parameters
in the network? To answer this question, we advocate a notion of effective model
capacity that is dependent on a given random initialization of the network and
not just the training algorithm and the data distribution. We provide empirical
evidences that demonstrate that the model capacity of SGD-trained deep networks
is in fact restricted through implicit regularization of the ℓ2 distance from the
initialization. We also provide theoretical arguments that further highlight the need
for initialization-dependent notions of model capacity. We leave as open questions
how and why distance from initialization is regularized, and whether it is sufﬁcient
to explain generalization.
1
Introduction
Neyshabur et al. [2015b] and Zhang et al. [2017] proposed an important open question in deep
learning that has been actively studied over the last year. The question stems from the observation
that an overparametrized deep model that can be trained to ﬁt completely random labels, can also
be trained to ﬁt real-world data while achieving low test error. This contradicts the conventional
understanding in machine learning about the tradeoff between the expressivity of a model and its
ability to generalize.
In order to understand this phenomenon, it is now well-known that it is necessary to examine the
capacity of the model in conjunction with the training algorithm, namely stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). This can be studied from different perspectives, such as stability of the training algorithm
[Hardt et al., 2016] or through robustness of the solution found [Xu and Mannor, 2012, Keskar et al.,
2017, Dinh et al., 2017]. Another direction is to identify some kind of implicit regularization that is
performed by SGD [Neyshabur et al., 2017]: are the parameters recovered by SGD restricted in a
manner that can explain generalization? We study this question speciﬁcally highlighting the need
to examine the model capacity after ﬁxing the random initialization of the network (Section 3) as it
was ﬁrst done in the PAC-Bayesian bounds of Dziugaite and Roy [2017]. We ﬁrst provide empirical
arguments showing that the distance of the learned network from its initialization – a term that was
considered in Dziugaite and Roy [2017] – is implicitly regularized by SGD to a width-independent
value (Section 4). Then, in Sections 5 and 6, we provide theoretical arguments highlighting the role
of an initialization-dependent model capacity – such as the distance from initialization – in explaining
generalization.
NeurIPS 2017 Workshop on Deep Learning: Bridging Theory and Practice.
arXiv:1901.01672v2  [cs.LG]  13 Jan 2019

2
Notations
We consider a feed-forward network of d layers and H hidden units in each layer, that
maps from Rn.
We denote the parameters by W
=
{W1, W2, . . . , Wd} and B
=
{b1, b2, . . . , bd} so that the function computed by the network can be denoted as f(W,B)(x) =
Wdφ (Wd−1φ(. . . φ(W1x + b1) . . .) + bd−1) + bd for all x ∈Rn. Note that we will consider
only a single output network for the sake of our discussion, and thus Wd is only a column matrix
and bd is a scalar value. We will denote the output of the kth layer before applying the activation
function as f (k)
(W,B)(x) = Wkφ(f (k−1)
(W,B)(x)) + bk, with f (0)
(W,B)(x) = x.
Here, φ is the activation function, which we will assume to be ReLU. Furthermore, we will assume
that the weights are initialized as (Z, C) where Z is initialized according to Xavier initialization and
C = 0. We will focus on networks of depth greater than 2, which would mean that each parameter in
Z is drawn independently from N(0, Θ(1/
√
H)).
We will use ∥· ∥F to denote the Frobenius norm and ∥· ∥2 the spectral norm. For a vector, we will
use ∥· ∥to denote its ℓ2 norm. Furthermore, we will use the notation ∥(W, B) −(Z, C)∥F to denote
qPd
k=1 ∥Wk −Zk∥2
F + ∥bk −ck∥2. We use a tilde symbol over asymptotic notations like, ˜O and
˜Ω, to ignore logarithmic factors in the bounds.
3
Problem Formulation
We ﬁrst formally deﬁne a notion of effective model capacity based on which we will study implicit
regularization and generalization. Let D be a distribution over data in Rn × [0, 1]. Let L : Rn × R →
[0, 1] be a loss function. Given m datapoints, our goal is to explain why training a network of H
hidden units per layer using SGD to zero training loss, results in a generalization error dependent
only on m and independent of H. In order to do this, we argue (through empirical and theoretical
evidences) that the effective capacity of the model must be take into account not just the training
algorithm and the underlying distribution but also the given random initialization:
Deﬁnition 3.1. For a particular model (i.e., network architecture), we deﬁne the effective capac-
ity Hm,δ[D, (Z, C), A] of a (distribution, initialization, algorithm)-tuple to be a set of parameter
conﬁgurations such that with high probability 1 −δ over the draws of a dataset of m samples from
the distribution D, training the network initialized with (Z, C), to zero loss on these samples using
algorithm 1 A, obtains a parameter conﬁguration that lies in the set Hm,δ[D, (Z, C), A].
Note that this notion of effective capacity reﬂects the idea of Dziugaite and Roy [2017] who incorpo-
rated the initialization into their analysis by arguing that it will take into account the symmetries of
the network. On the other hand, this notion is more reﬁned than the one in Arpit et al. [2017] which is
independent of both the data distribution and the (random) initializations. Similarly, Neyshabur et al.
[2017] consider an indirect notion of effective capacity by evaluating a norm (such as the ℓ2 norm) for
each parameter conﬁguration and investigating whether the algorithm restricts itself to conﬁgurations
of low norm; however, these norms are calculated independent of the random initialization.
Our goal now is to identify as precise a characterization of Hm,δ[D, (Z, C), A] as possible, hopefully
one that has a learning-theoretic complexity independent of the network width H. This would then
allow one to derive H-independent generalization guarantees (see Lemma B.1). Effectively, instead
of seeking a ‘global’ quantity regularized across all initializations (such as the ℓ2 norm in Neyshabur
et al. [2017]), we seek one that is speciﬁc to the initialization.
The focus of our paper is arguably the simplest such quantity, one that was originally considered in
Dziugaite and Roy [2017]: the distance of the weights (W, B) from the initialization, ∥(W, B) −
(Z, C)∥F . Speciﬁcally, Dziugaite and Roy [2017] presented a PAC-Bayesian bound involving the
distance from initialization (rather than one involving the distance from origin) and showed that
SGD can be made to explicitly regularize such a bound in a way that a non-vacuous PAC-Bayesian
bound holds on the resulting network. We show that distance from initialization is in fact implicitly
1If A is stochastic, we could either incorporate it in the “high probability” component of the deﬁnition, or we
could “freeze” it by including it as an argument to H like the random initialization.
2

40
80
160
320
640 1280 2560 5120
Width
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Distance
Sample Size
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
32768
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of Noise
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Distance
Sample Size
1024
2048
4096
Figure 1: Experiments on a 5 layer neural network trained to minimize the cross-entropy loss on
the MNIST dataset until at least 99% of the data is classiﬁed by a margin of at least 10 i.e., the
output on the correct class is at least 10 larger than all the other classes. Left: Distance from
initialization is regularized to a H-independent value, and in fact, decreases with it. Right: Distance
from initialization grows with the proportion of noise in the labels.
regularized by SGD and we investigate it in much greater detail in terms of its dependence on the
parameter count and its ability to explain generalization.
4
Experiments
We conduct experiments on the CIFAR-10 & MNIST datasets, where we train networks of 4 hidden
layers with varying width H to minimize cross entropy loss and squared error loss. We study how
distance from initialization (which we will denote in short as r) varies with width H and training
set size m both for real data and partially/fully corrupted labels like in Zhang et al. [2017] and Arpit
et al. [2017]. We summarize our observations below and present more experiments and details in
Appendix D.
First, for both the real data and the corrupted data, the distance r mostly remains constant or even
decreases with width H when H is not too large (sometimes for very large H, r shows only a slight
increase that scales logarithmically with H). For reference, see Figure 1 (left) and sub-ﬁgure (c) in
Figures 2, 3, and 4.
Second, as we can see in Figures 1 (right), r increases with more noise in the labels, and this increase
is more pronounced when sample size m is larger. This demonstrates that larger distances need to be
traveled in order to achieve stronger levels of memorization. For further reference, see sub-ﬁgures (a)
and (b) in Figure 5 and the ﬁgures in Figure 5 and Figure 6 for additional reference).
Finally, we note that even though r is regularized to a width-independent value, it does grow with
the training set size m, typically at between the rates of m0.25 to m0.4 (when there is no noise in
the training data). For reference, see Figure 1 (left) and sub-ﬁgure (d) in Figures 2, 3, and 4. The
growth rate is more prominent for smaller H or when there is more noise in the labels (see sub-ﬁgures
(b) and (d) in Figure 5 and the ﬁgures in Figure 5 for additional reference).
5
Complexity of linear networks within ﬁxed distance from initialization
Is the distance regularization observed above sufﬁcient to explain generalization? While many
norm-based generalization bounds have already been derived for ReLU networks [Neyshabur et al.,
2015a, 2018] which can be potentially improved with this observation, it seems non-trivial to prove
an H-independent generalization bound with this observation alone. For example, it is easy to
incorporate this quantity (in place of distance from the origin) in PAC-Bayesian analysis such as
Neyshabur et al. [2018], as was already done in Dziugaite and Roy [2017]. While this would result in
bounds that are tighter by a factor of
√
H (because distance from origin grows as
√
H, as we will
discuss shortly in Section 6), the resulting bound still has dependence on the network width.
As a ﬁrst step to test the usefulness of the observed distance regularization, we consider a network
with all hidden units as simple linear units. If the Rademacher complexity of this space of networks
was not independent of width H, then there would be no hope in expecting the same space but with
3

non-linearities to have a width-independent complexity. Fortunately, we can show that this is not the
case for linear networks. Our proof is based on how a Xavier-initialized network has weight matrices
with width-independent spectral norms with high probability (see Corollary A.2.1). We defer the
proof for this to Appendix B (and present some additional results in Appendix C).
Theorem 5.1. For the network described in Section 2 but with linear activations, the Rademacher
complexity corresponding to the hypotheses that are at an ℓ2 distance of at most r satisﬁes:
Eξ
"
sup
(W,B):∥(Z,C)−(W,B)∥F ≤r
m
X
i=1
ξif(W,B)(xi)
#
= ˜O
dcd(r + 1)d maxi ∥xi∥
√m

,
where c = ˜Θ(1).
6
Why initialization-independent norms may not explain generalization
We now go back and look at some norms studied in Neyshabur et al. [2017] and evaluate why
they were unable to explain generalization. First, consider the product of ℓ2 norms proportional to
Qd
i=1 ∥Wk∥2
F , which they observe increases with the width H for large H. Unfortunately, this could
not explain why generalization error is width-independent because the best known bound on the
Rademacher complexity of the class of ℓ2-norm-bounded networks grows with the norm bound and
hence also grows with H [Neyshabur et al., 2015a]. Through the proposition below, we present a
more theoretically grounded perspective as to why this norm may not explain generalization:
Proposition 6.1. With high probability over the draws of the random initialization, even though
the untrained network provably has a H-independent generalization error ˜O (1/√m), its ℓ2 norm
Qd
k=1 ∥Zk∥2
F grows as ˜Ω(Hd−2).
The main takeaway from the above proposition is that a norm-based capacity measure for neural
networks may not be useful for explaining generalization if it is blind to the random initialization
and instead measures any kind of distance of the weights from the origin. This is because, for larger
H, most random initializations and the origin, all lie farther and farther away from each other.
Therefore, it may not be reasonable to expect that for these initializations, SGD goes all the way close
to the origin to ﬁnd solutions.
On the spectral norm: Neyshabur et al. [2017] also study a spectral norm proportional to
Hd−1 Qd
k=1 ∥Wk∥2. First we note that, like the ℓ2 norm above, even this grows with H as ˜Ω(Hd−1)
for the random initialization, because the spectral norm of the random matrices are ˜Θ(1). Neyshabur
et al. [2017] then ask whether the factor of Hd−1 is “necessary” in this measure or not (in Section 2.2
of their paper). Formally, we frame this question as: is it sufﬁcient if Qd
k=1 ∥Wk∥2 is regularized
to an H-independent value (as against ensuring the same for Hd−1 Qd
k=1 ∥Wk∥2) for guaranteeing
H-independent generalization?
Through our proposition below, we argue that a better question can be asked. In particular, we
show that if distance from initialization is regularized to a H-independent value, then so is the
term Qd
k=1 ∥Wk∥2. Therefore, H-independent spectral norms are less useful for the purpose of
explaining generalization; we would rather want to answer whether it is sufﬁcient if the distance norm
is regularized to an H-independent value to guarantee H-independent generalization. Effectively,
this would boil down to extending Theorem 5.1 to non-linear networks.
Proposition 6.2. Qd
k=1 ∥Wk∥2 ≤˜O

cd (1 + ∥(W, B) −(Z, C)∥F )d
for some c = ˜O(1).
7
Conclusion
To explain generalization in deep networks, we highlight the need to understand the effective capacity
of a model for a given random initialization of the network. Furthermore, our experiments suggest that
distance moved by the training algorithm from its random initialization has a key role to play in this
regard. This leads to multiple concrete open questions for future work. First, why is distance from the
initialization regularized by the training algorithm? Can we precisely bound this distance independent
of the number of hidden units, H? Next, is this observation alone sufﬁcient to explain generalization?
4

More concretely, can we prove an H-independent bound on the empirical Rademacher complexity (or
any other learning-theoretic complexity) for distance-regularized networks, like we could for linear
networks in Theorem 5.1? If that is not possible, can we identify a more precise characterization
of the effective capacity as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.1? That is, for a ﬁxed random initialization, do
the solutions obtained by the training algorithm on most training sets lie within a smaller subspace
inside a ball of H-independent radius around the random initialization?
