THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
1
IMKGA-SM: Interpretable Multimodal
Knowledge Graph Answer Prediction via
Sequence Modeling
Yilin Wen, Biao Luo, Senior Member, IEEE, and Yuqian Zhao
Abstract—Multimodal knowledge graph link prediction aims to improve the accuracy and efﬁciency of link prediction tasks for
multimodal data. However, for complex multimodal information and sparse training data, it is usually difﬁcult to achieve interpretability
and high accuracy simultaneously for most methods. To address this difﬁculty, a new model is developed in this paper, namely
Interpretable Multimodal Knowledge Graph Answer Prediction via Sequence Modeling (IMKGA-SM). First, a multi-modal ﬁne-grained
fusion method is proposed, and Vgg16 and Optical Character Recognition (OCR) techniques are adopted to effectively extract text
information from images and images. Then, the knowledge graph link prediction task is modelled as an ofﬂine reinforcement learning
Markov decision model, which is then abstracted into a uniﬁed sequence framework. An interactive perception-based reward
expectation mechanism and a special causal masking mechanism are designed, which “converts” the query into an inference path.
Then, an autoregressive dynamic gradient adjustment mechanism is proposed to alleviate the insufﬁcient problem of multimodal
optimization. Finally, two datasets are adopted for experiments, and the popular SOTA baselines are used for comparison. The results
show that the developed IMKGA-SM achieves much better performance than SOTA baselines on multimodal link prediction datasets of
different sizes.
Index Terms—Knowledge graph, link prediction, multimodal, interpretability, sequence modeling, reinforcement learning.
!
1
INTRODUCTION
T
HE knowledge graph is the technology and tool for
carrying and representing background knowledge. It
structures knowledge in the real world into entities and
relations in the form of graphs and organizes them into
networks. In a knowledge graph, knowledge data is rep-
resented in the form of triples (h, r, t). Among them, h is
the head entity, r is the relation connecting two entities, and
t is the tail entity. Knowledge graphs are used in various
artiﬁcial intelligence tasks in different domains [1], such
as named entity disambiguation [2] in natural language
processing [3], visual relation detection [4] or collaborative
ﬁltering [5]. However, it is well known that even state-of-
the-art knowledge graphs are often incomplete (i.e., lack
real facts or contain false facts). Therefore, machine learning
algorithms aimed at addressing this problem attempt to
infer missing triplets from observed connectivity patterns,
a task is known as link prediction [6]. For example, given a
head entity and a relation (h, r), predict a tail entity t.
In order to solve the problem of link prediction, exist-
ing problems can be divided into four categories: deduc-
tive logic and rules, reasoning based on graph structure,
knowledge graph embedded representation and deep neu-
ral network model. Rule-based reasoning methods, such as
AMIE [7], AnyBURL [8], transform natural language queries
into combinations of logical operators, express such queries
through combinations, and then implement in a speciﬁc
programming language to get the query. These methods are
•
Y.Wen, B.Luo and Y. Zhao are with the School of Automation, Central
South University, Changsha, China.

•
Corresponding Author: Biao Luo.
accurate and interpretable, but require experts to formulate
a large number of inference rules, and have poor generaliza-
tion ability for unknown rules. Reasoning based on graph
structure has two features: one is the path feature, and
the representative algorithm is PRA [9]. The path features
between nodes are extracted by graph traversal algorithm
or random walk method, and the node connections are
predicted by path features. Its characteristic is to provide
path interpretability while reasoning, and the problem is
that it is difﬁcult to solve the problem because the reasoning
nodes are not connected. The second is a graph-structure-
based approach that utilizes a message-passing mechanism
to extract the structural information of target entities and
provide subgraph interpretability, and the representative
algorithm is DeepPath [10]. However, because the knowl-
edge graph is usually very large, it is extremely compli-
cated to traverse all the subgraph structures in the graph.
The knowledge graph embedding representation method
is to embed the high-dimensional and discrete data of the
knowledge graph into a low-dimensional continuous vector
space by designing a certain scoring function, and then
representing the entities and relations as numerical vectors
to calculate. Its representative model is the TransE type, for
example, TransE [11], TransH [12], TransD [13], TransR [14].
The recent research is bilinear models, e.g., RESCAL [15],
DisMult [16], TuckER [17], and ComplEx [18]. Its method
is characterized by a shallow neural network, and the se-
mantic representation of the knowledge graph is realized
through a speciﬁc structure of the embedded space. The
deep neural network model, e.g., CoKE [19], ConvE [20],
is designed by designing entities and relations into query
pairs, matching query pairs with entities relations, and
arXiv:2301.02445v4  [cs.AI]  11 Jan 2023

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
2
Table 1
Summary of Existing Methods for Knowledge Graph Link Prediction
reasoning algorithm
logical rules
graph structure
knowledge graph embedding
deep neural network
reinforcement learning
interpretability
✓✓✓✓
✓✓
✓
-
✓✓✓✓
performance
✓
✓✓
✓✓✓✓
✓✓✓✓
✓✓
robustness
✓✓✓✓
✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓✓
scale
✓
✓
✓✓✓
✓✓
✓✓
expert experience
dependence
partial dependence
no dependence
no dependence
no dependence
obtaining inference similarity scores through deep neural
networks to make inference judgments. Both the knowledge
graph embedding model and the deep network model are
regarded as neural network models, and the same point
is that they both design a scoring function, and use the
gradient backpropagation method for training in a data-
driven manner. Its advantage is that its generalization per-
formance is relatively better, and it effectively alleviates
the problem of graph structure dimensionality disaster. Its
disadvantage is that it only sees the similarity between
input and output values, lacks interpretability, and performs
single-step reasoning. In summary, as shown in Table 1, it is
found that the methods based on logical deduction rules and
graph structure are all symbol-based methods, which have
better interpretability but poor generalization performance.
Otherwise, based on knowledge graph embedding and deep
neural network model, its generalization performance is
better, but it lacks interpretability. Therefore, studying how
to integrate symbolist and connectionist models is the key
to obtaining an interpretable knowledge graph reasoning
model.
With the development of deep learning, the model struc-
ture of knowledge reasoning methods is becoming more
and more complex. Because it is difﬁcult for users to have
an intuitive understanding of the parameters, structure and
characteristics in such models, and they also have less un-
derstanding of the decision-making process and reasoning
basis, it is difﬁcult for users to trust the prediction results
of the model. Therefore, in order to establish trust between
users and reasoning models and balance the contradiction
between model accuracy and interpretability, multi-hop rea-
soning methods are used to solve explainable knowledge
reasoning [21]. The rationale of the multi-hop reasoning
method is to imitate the multi-hop thinking of human
beings. A common approach is to apply reinforcement
learning frameworks to multi-hop reasoning in knowledge
graphs. Reinforcement learning is a model that has received
a lot of attention in the past ten years and has been widely
used in control [22], games [23], and robots [24]. It models a
learning process as a Markov process and trains the model
by maximizing long-term cumulative rewards through the
interaction between the agent and the environment. Mod-
elling the knowledge map as a reinforcement learning pro-
cess not only gets the result of reasoning, but also obtains
the path of reasoning, and explains the reasoning of the
knowledge graph through the reasoning path. The speciﬁc
fusion method is to regard the knowledge graph as an
environment, model the agent as a deep neural network,
combine the advantages and disadvantages of symbolism
and connectionism, and make the model have both the gen-
eralization performance and path interpretability of neural
networks. Methods based on reinforcement learning such as
DeepPath [10], MINERVA [25], DIVINE [26], and AttnPath
[27], however, generally have the shortcomings of slow
convergence and low accuracy, and most of them are inferior
to some traditional methods. The reason for this may due
to the sparse rewards of reinforcement learning. Moreover,
the sparse rewards, sparse data, and insufﬁcient exploration
of knowledge graphs make reinforcement learning more
difﬁcult and challenge in multimodal knowledge graph
reasoning tasks [28]. Therefore, it is meaningful and promis-
ing to improve the accuracy of reinforcement learning in
knowledge graph reasoning.
Recently, the cross-border application of Transformer
[29] has attracted wide attention, and it has made break-
throughs in image classiﬁcation [30], semantic segmenta-
tion [31], object detection [32] and other ﬁelds. Currently,
Transformer has been employed as a pre-training model
in ofﬂine reinforcement learning, e.g., Decision Transformer
[33], Trajectory Transformer [34], and Gato [35], etc. These
methods regard the data of reinforcement learning as a
string of unstructured sequence data and train with super-
vised or self-supervised learning methods. It avoids the un-
stable gradient signal in traditional reinforcement learning
and performs better in ofﬂine reinforcement learning. Deep
reinforcement learning is a sequential process, therefore,
the process of multi-hop reasoning is handled by state-
of-the-art reinforcement learning sequence models, which
may achieve better results than traditional reinforcement
learning.
For knowledge graph reasoning tasks that are complex
and have the concept of multimodal data, the core idea of
most existing knowledge graph reasoning algorithms is to
reason by integrating existing triple structure knowledge,
so knowledge of the entity is often ignored. However, in-
formation about entities themselves is usually beneﬁcial for
link prediction tasks, such as image and textual information.
As shown in Fig. 1, for example, when performing the
triple < shoes, style, ? > link prediction task, the answer
is predicted based on the triple < dress, style, sweet >
of the similar head entity image, and ﬁnally, answer ? is
sweet. It is worth noting that the text information in the
image also contains a lot of knowledge, especially when the
knowledge graph is applied to the e-commerce ﬁeld, the
text in the product image is often the brand information of
the product. Therefore, to address multimodal explainable
knowledge graph reasoning tasks with high efﬁciency and
high performance, a new sequential model IMKGA-SM
for reinforcement learning is developed, where a reward
mechanism is designed based on perceptual interaction and
ﬁne-grained multimodal information extraction.

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
3
Figure 1. When performing triple < shoes, style, ? > link prediction
tasks, the answer is predicted based on triples < dress, style, sweet >
which is similar to the head entity image, and ﬁnally it is concluded that
? is sweet.
2
RELATED WORKS
2.1
Single-modal Knowledge Graph Reasoning
Single-modal knowledge graph reasoning mainly revolves
around relational reasoning. The AMIE [7] and AMIE+ [36]
algorithms are derived from the early inductive logic pro-
gramming system [37], emphasizing automatic rule learning
methods. It has strong interpretability, however, all the
above methods require expert design rules. Graph structure-
based reasoning methods (e.g., path ranking algorithm [9])
are also used to tackle such problems, which is interpretable
but computationally intensive and time-consuming. The
embedding-based methods include TransE [11], ConvE [20],
RotatE [38], and TuckER [17]. Each of these models is simple
and the training speed is fast, but they are not interpretable.
Reasoning methods based on neural networks include neu-
ral tensor networks [39], R-GCN [40], implicit ReasoNet
[41], etc. They are able to learn to reason through implicit
processing, which results in poor interpretability and unsta-
ble performance. In addition, there are typical reinforcement
learning methods, e.g., DeepPath [10], MINERVA [25], RLH
[42], GussuianPath [43], etc, which have better interpretabil-
ity and inference performance than representation learning-
based methods, but the disadvantage is that the effect is
poor.
2.2
Multimodal Knowledge Graph Link Prediction
Compared with the single-modal knowledge graph link
prediction task, the main contribution of the multi-modal
knowledge graph link prediction task is to integrate multi-
modal data knowledge into the plain text knowledge graph.
In multimodal knowledge graph link prediction tasks, it
is very necessary to combine the textual semantics of en-
tities with multimodalities, such as semantics, vision, and
hearing. IKRL [44] is the ﬁrst knowledge representation
model that includes image information. For each entity, it
learns two different representations based on triple struc-
ture information and image information, respectively. DKRL
[45] is a knowledge representation for fused descriptions.
Similar to the IKRL model, the DKRL model also learns a
representation based on structural information and a rep-
resentation based on text descriptions for each entity. Based
on the single-modal knowledge graph link prediction model
TransE [11], an autoencoder is employed in TransAE [46] to
jointly encode visual information and text information to
obtain the vector representation of entities. RSME [47] is a
multimodal knowledge graph reasoning model based on the
traditional knowledge graph embedding model ComplEx
[18]. However, most of these multimodal approaches are
uninterpretable and with low accuracy.
2.3
Reinforcement Learning with Transformers
In [33], Decision Transformer is proposed by modelling
reinforcement learning tasks as a sequence framework trans-
former, based on which SQUIRE [48] is employed to han-
dle single-modal knowledge graph link prediction. How-
ever, these works are deﬁcient in generalization and the
reward information is underutilized. Based on Decision
Transformer [33], Trajectory Transformer [34] uses the beam
search for model-based planning, while generating new
trajectories is too complicated. Therefore, a simple ran-
dom masking mechanism is proposed in this paper, which
achieves the effect of data enhancement by randomly mask-
ing historical actions that have been generated in the past.
Recently, Deepmind proposed a general agent, i.e., Gato
[35], which made a further breakthrough in multimodal
tasks. It is promising and potential to extend this model to
multi-modal multi-hop reasoning.
3
METHODOLOGY
In this section, the overall framework of IMKGA-SM is
introduced, which treats the multi-hop reasoning problem
as a sequence-to-sequence task derived from regression
modelling trajectories and applies it to the task of multi-
modal link prediction. The hybrid transformer architecture
of IMKGA-SM mainly includes ﬁve stacked modules. (1)
The underlying multimodal feature extraction module, as
shown in Fig. 2, aims to obtain basic structural information,
image information, and text information in images from
databases and images, and combine the three as a state
feature. (2) The reinforcement learning sequence module,
as shown in the bottom part of Fig. 3. The knowledge graph
link prediction task is modelled as an ofﬂine reinforcement
learning problem, which is then abstracted into a sequen-
tial framework. (3) The upper multimodal encoder (fusion
encoder) module, as shown in Fig. 4, fuses the underlying
features, reward features based on perceptual interaction,
and action features through a self-attention mechanism. (4)
The Mask mechanism module, as shown in the upper part
of Fig. 3, includes three mechanisms to ensure the input and
output of the encoder and prevent overﬁtting. (5) The loss
function module, adopts an autoregressive self-adjusting
mechanism to maximize the multi-modal performance, as
shown in Fig. 5.
In the following subsections, each module of the
IMKGA-SM will be analyzed and discussed in details. The
multimodel feature extraction module and the reinforce-
ment learning sequence architecture are developed in Sub-
sections 3.1 and 3.2, respectively. The fusion encoder module
is proposed in Subsection 3.3. The mask and loss function
modules are designed in Subsection 3.4 and 3.5, respectively.

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
4
Figure 2. The multimodal feature extraction module.
Figure 3. Uniﬁed interpretable multimodal knowledge graph sequence
framework.
3.1
Multimodal Feature Extraction Module
In multimodal knowledge graph tasks with only single
image data, most of the existing methods only learn simple
image information. However, many visual scenes contain
text with key information, so understanding text in images
is crucial for downstream reasoning tasks, such as product
brand, price, and consumer population. To jointly learn
multimodal knowledge and inter-entity relations, knowl-
edge in a single modality is extracted and combined into
a multimodal transformer. In this paper, two modalities are
considered: visual and textual, where text is extracted from
image information. The multimodal part includes image
input, text input in the image and query input (i.e. head
entity, relation). Vgg16 pre-trained on ImageNet is used to
process the head entity image information of the image
input. Vgg16 consists of several vgg-blocks and three fully
connected layers, and the vector output by the last fully
connected layer is used as the image feature vector.
For image text input, OCR technology is used for image
text extraction [49]. Generally, OCR technology consists of
two steps. (1) Text detection: locate the position of the text in
the image. (2) Text recognition: identify the positioned text
area, and convert the text area in the image into character
information. In this paper, the CTPN method [50] is adopted
for text detection, and the CRNN method [51] is adopted
for text recognition. If the image information corresponding
to the head entity is missing, ∅is used instead. For the
Figure 4. The fusion encoder.
Figure 5. Autoregressive dynamic loss regulation.
query input part, the knowledge graphs corresponding to
head entities and relations are encoded to form a vector.
Eq. 1 models an original multimodal feature φ, which is
speciﬁcally manifested as the fusion of structural informa-
tion (h, r), image information and text information.
φ : G × G →G
(1)
Here hfig, hocr, h, r ∈G. Then, let ∗indicates a grouping
operation, h represents the structure embedding of the
head entity, hfig represents the image embedding of the
head entity, and hocr represents the text embedding of
the head entity after being extracted by the OCR method.
Thus, as formalized in Eq. 2, a characteristic entity ˜q of
φ(h, hfig, hocr) and r is written as :
˜q = φ (h, hfig, hocr) ∗r
(2)
Multimodal fusion is widely used in the ﬁelds of computer
vision [52] and natural language processing [53]. Since the
currently most popular transformer framework is adopted
as the core module of IMKGA-SM, according to the charac-
teristics of the transformer, the number of parameters in the
learning process largely determines the operation speed, so
it is very necessary to process the input features of the trans-
former. Therefore, the module of the multimodal feature is a
pre-train of the core transformer framework, which aims to
ﬁlter out irrelevant or redundant features from the original
data of features. Sepeciﬁcally, three self-attention blocks
are used to receive the outputs of the original multimodal
feature vector φ, and three autoencoders are used to transfer
them into a 14-dimensional vector in the end.
Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, the original multimodal feature φi
passes through a fully connected feed-forward network to
obtain different modal features µi, which consists of two
linear transformations and a ReLu activation function, via
Eq. 3.
µi = conv {ReLU [conv (φi)]} , i = 1, . . . , L
(3)

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
5
Then, as Eq. 4 shows, different modal features µi are passed
through a Softmax layer in order to compute the attention
of each modality ai.
ai = Softmax (µi) , i = 1, . . . , L
(4)
The sum of these attention weights ai multiplied by the
original multimodal feature embedding µi is called self-
attention Qs
φ, formalized in Eq. 5.
Qs
φ =
XL
i=1 aiµi
(5)
Therefore, Qs
h, Qs
hfig, Qs
hocr of h, hfig, hocr are obtained
respectively. Qs
φ is used as a query for the corresponding
feature to calculate the attention weights guided by Qs
φ
and put into the softmax layer. Finally, the weights are
multiplied by the original modal features φk to get the
ﬁltered vector. Then, the output of the attention block is
expressed as gφ via Eq. 6.
pk = W
ReLu
 WsQs
φ
 ◦ReLu (Wxφk)
 ,
sk = Softmax (pk) , k = 1, . . . , N,
gφ =
XN
k=1 skφk, φ ∈G
(6)
After feature gφ is obtained, it is input into the autoencoder
for dimensionality reduction. The ﬁnal feature hφ is shown
in Eq. 7, in which hfig is 8-dimensional, and hocr is 3-
dimensional.
hφ = σ (W · φ + b)
(7)
This part is used as the deﬁnition for the state s of reinforce-
ment learning, as shown in Fig. 3, which will be described
in detail below.
3.2
Reinforcement Learning Sequence Framework
In this subsection, an ofﬂine reinforcement learning frame-
work is developed for the knowledge graph link prediction
task. Then, speciﬁc Markov triples are designed, and a
reward expectation mechanism based on perceptual interac-
tion is proposed. Finally, the whole reinforcement learning
process is abstracted into a sequential framework, which is
the core module of IMKGA-SM.
3.2.1
Ofﬂine Reinforcement Learning Design
The knowledge graph link prediction problem is mod-
elled as a Markov decision process. Markov decision pro-
cess tuple consists of a state s ∈S, an action a ∈A,
a transition dynamic P (s′ |s, a), and a reward function
r′. sn, an, and r′
n are used to denote the state, action,
and reward at time step n, respectively. A trajectory con-
sists of a sequence of states, actions, and rewards: τ =
(s0, a0, r′
0, s1, a1, r′
1, . . . , sN, aN, r′
N). The purpose of rein-
forcement learning is to learn a policy that maximizes
the expected return E
hPN
n=1 r′
n
i
in the Markov decision
process. In this paper, the process of generating a path
for each triple link in the knowledge graph is regarded
as a reinforcement learning segment. Since the data in this
paper are ﬁxed datasets, new data is difﬁcult to be obtained
through environmental interaction, so it is regarded as an
ofﬂine reinforcement learning problem.
3.2.2
Track Representation
The inference accuracy of reinforcement learning-based in-
ference methods is usually much lower than that of tradi-
tional TransE-based methods. This is because the amount
of data for ofﬂine reinforcement learning is very limited,
and the rewards for the knowledge graph link prediction
problem are sparse, resulting in serious decision bias in
reinforcement learning. Therefore, they are not suitable for
direct transfer to the task of multimodal knowledge graph
link prediction. To address this problem, a new reinforce-
ment learning sequence framework with perceptual interac-
tion expected reward mechanism is proposed in this sub-
section. Different from traditional reinforcement learning,
the reward setting here is the expected reward in the future,
that is, the maximum reward value expected to be obtained
in the current state. There are two main differences: (1)
An expected reward mechanism is proposed to eliminate
the sparsity of rewards by incorporating the perceptual
similarity of knowledge graph entities. (2) The multi-modal
perception interface is introduced into the decision trans-
former framework for the ﬁrst time, making full use of
multi-modal features.
Through the previous pre-training process, the knowl-
edge graph link prediction process is transformed into a
Markov decision process. Its purpose is to ﬁnd a path to
the target entity, which means that the pathﬁnding process
makes multi-hop reasoning interpretable. Therefore, the
knowledge graph link prediction task is modelled as an
ofﬂine reinforcement learning task, which is then transferred
to a sequential framework for solving. Similar to ofﬂine
reinforcement learning, the Markov triplet < ˆR, S, A, Pr >
of IMKGA-SM is deﬁned as follows.
State sk: For the knowledge graph triple < h, r, t >
in the dataset, the state of IMKGA-SM is denoted as
s = (query, hfig, hocr) ∈S. Among them, S is the state
space, and query = (< bos >, h, r) is the query of triples,
representing the beginning, head entity, and relation, respec-
tively. hfig and hocr represent the image embedding of the
head entity and the text embedding in the image, which are
obtained by Eq. 7.
Action ak: The action space for a given sn is the set of
all entities, relations and < eos >. The purpose is to infer
the path from the head entity h, relation r to the tail entity
t by generating the action output, and ak is the k-th action
represented by the k-th token of the path generated by the
rule. Here, AnyBURL [8] is used as the rule-based method
to ﬁnd the path between h and t, r (h, t) →r1 (h, t1) ∧
r2 (t1, t2)∧. . .∧rn (tn, t), decomposing a single relation into
a combination of multiple relations and entities. If the model
makes an error during the prediction process, the inferred
entity or relationship does not conform to the corresponding
attribute. Then the rule path is modiﬁed to remember only
the last target entity. Taking three-hops as an example, A =
(0, ∅, t, 0, 0, 0, 0) is modiﬁed as a set of actions.
Transition Pr: The transition function Pr is set to
map the current state sn to the next state sn+1. For-
mally, Pr : S × A →S is deﬁned as Pr (sn, An) =
Pr (query, hfig, hocr, a0, . . . , an−1). When entering the next
state, the actions of the previous step are added to the
previous state as history to realize the state change. The

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
6
Mask mechanism I does the speciﬁc step. Therefore, unlike
the traditional Decision Transformer [33], the state transition
mechanism Pr (sn, An) is designed to let the model focus
on the state, actions and return-to-go of the previous steps,
thereby improving the policy.
Return-to-go ˆR: Since the purpose of knowledge graph
link prediction is to reason about the tail entity answer, it
is impossible to know whether the reasoning is success-
ful unless the last step of the reasoning path is reached.
Therefore, there is a phenomenon of sparse rewards in the
reinforcement learning sequence method when solving the
knowledge graph link prediction task. In order to solve
these problems, a reward expectation mechanism based on
perceptual similarity is designed to learn interactively by
taking the expected reward of the current state as input.
The deﬁnition of ˆR is the maximum reward expected in
the current state, so after making an action, the value of the
next ˆR will decrease (or increase) due to the reward from
the previous action, ˆRn = PT
n′=n r′
n. So ˆR changes with
state and action. After obtaining the initial triple query =
(< bos >, h, r) and obtaining the corresponding reasoning
path according to the rules, the return-to-go corresponding
to each step ˆRn is obtained. τ(h, r, t) is deﬁned as a set of
triples in the dataset, and ψ(< bos >, r1, t1, r2, . . . , rn, tn) is
the path obtained by the rule that satisﬁes τ. All dataset
entities and relations are stored in collections E and R.
Speciﬁcally, the generation steps of ˆR are as follows:
(1) At the initial value (n = 0), when no action is taken,
the maximum expected reward of the task ˆR0 is expected
to be able to reach the target entity, which is a ﬁxed value
deﬁned in Eq. 8.
ˆR0 = r′
good
(8)
(2) When n = 1, the ﬁrst action is < bos >, which
means the beginning. As Eq. 9 shows, the ﬁrst return-
to-go ˆR1 is deﬁned according to whether the correct tail
entity is ﬁnally successfully inferred. Here, r′
good represents
a positive constant and r′
bad represents a negative constant.
ˆR1 =
(
r′
good,
ψ (tn) = t,
r′
bad,
ψ (tn) ̸= t
(9)
(3) For each action with n > 1, return-to-go in n-th step
is deﬁned as Eq. 10, in which a base penalty r′
step (negative)
is generated since as few hops as possible are desired to
be used. When the current action an is the entity tn, an
additional reward r′
addn (positive) will be generated.
r′
n = r′
step + r′
addn, n > 1
(10)
(4) Deﬁne r′
addn as:
r′
addn =





ˆR1 × sim (ftn, ft)
an ∈E,
0,
an ∈R
1
2 ˆR1,
emtn = ∅|emt = ∅
(11)
Here sim(·) denotes the cosine similarity computed with
sim (u, v) =
uT v
∥u∥·∥v∥, ftn and ft are the image embedding
of the current and target entities, respectively. From Eq. 11,
it is noted that the more similar the generated entity action
is to the target entity, the greater the reward for that action
should be. If the current action is the relation r′
n, or the target
entity or the current recommendation entity has no image
information, the additional reward r′
addn is 0. If the entity
action an has no image information or the target entity
t has no image information, the similarity value takes an
intermediate value of 0.5.
(5) An additional penalty r′
bad will be imposed if the rec-
ommended action does not conform to the attribute (entity
or relation) that should be recommended. When performing
action an in the current state sn, Eq. 12 deﬁnes the next
Return-to-go input ˆRn as the previous step’s Return-to-go
ˆRn−1 minus the reward r′
n−1 caused by action an−1.
ˆRn =
( ˆRn−1 −r′
n−1 −r′
bad,
an−1 /∈E, an−1 /∈R
ˆRn−1 −r′
n−1,
others
(12)
(6) Repeated iteration until the end of the round, if it is
less than three hops, in order to ensure the same embedding
length, the last ˆR completion vector will be used to length
7. The trajectory τ is expressed in Eq. 13.
τ =

ˆR1, s1, a1, ˆR2, s2, a2, . . . , ˆRN,sN, aN

(13)
3.3
Fusion Encoder Architecture
Sequences of token embeddings from the three modes,
return-to-go, state, and action, are concatenated and fed to
the transformer. Different from the positional embedding
of the traditional transformer [29], a time step (return-to-
go, state) shares the same positional embedding and the
position of them are processed as a complete sequence.
Therefore, the process of positional embedding is expressed
as Eq. 14. Here XU
pc is the projected embedding vector,
C is the concat operation, Upos, represents the position
embedding corresponding to the embedding layer, and
U =
n
C

ˆR, s

, a
o
.
XC( ˆ
R,s)
τ
= XC( ˆ
R,s)
pc
+ C

ˆR, s

pos
Xa
τ = Xa
pc + apos
(14)
To avoid increased computational complexity due to long
concatenated sequences, Eq. 15 models ¯XC( ˆ
R,s)
τ
by adding
an embedding linear layer LN for each modality such that
the original input is projected to the embedding dimension,
followed by layer normalization Sigmoid.
¯XC( ˆ
R,s)
τ
= Sigmoid

LN

XC( ˆ
R,s)
pc

¯Xa
τ = Sigmoid
 LN
 Xa
pc

(15)
These tokens are processed by an encoder model that
predicts future action tokens via autoregressive modelling.
Since the multi-hop inference is a ﬁxed-length sequence, the
transformer’s encoder structure is selected, which consists
of L stacked blocks. As shown in Fig. 4, each block mainly
includes two types of sublayers: multi-head self-attention
MHA and fully-connected feed-forward network FFN.
The transformer model contains many parameters including
WV , WQ, WK matrices, and the values in each stack and
head are designed. As formalized in Eq. 16, multi-head
attention mechanism Attn is introduced to deﬁned headM ′
r
i
.
Here, r′ and a represent return-to-go and action features

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
7
in reinforcement learning sequence framework, q represents
knowledge graph query (< bos >, h, r >) feature, and I
and O represent the image and OCR features in multimodal
feature extraction module.
headMr =Attn
 xrW r
Q ,
h
xrW r
K, xqW q
K, xIW I
K, xoW o
K
i
,
h
xrW r
V , xqW q
V , xIW I
V , xoW o
V
i
(16)
The calculation method of headMq
i
, headMI
i
and headMo
i
is
similar to that of headMr
i
, where headMa
i
is redeﬁned via
Eq. 17.
headMa = Attn
 xaW a
Q, xaW a
K, xaW a
V

(17)
Hence, Eqs. 18 and 19 model the hidden state of the encoder
layer l.
¯XU
l = MHA

LN

¯XU
τ

+ XU
l−1
(18)
XU
l = FFN

LN

¯XU
l

+ ¯XU
l
(19)
Next, with the mask shown in Fig. 3, the encoder only
focus on previous labels a < k of the current return-to-
go, multimodal fusion input and output paths. The speciﬁc
details of the mask will be described in the next subsection.
3.4
Mask Mechanism Design
In the link prediction task of the recommendation sys-
tem, due to feature redundancy, lack of sufﬁcient train-
ing data and complex model design, the recommendation
system is extremely prone to the one-epoch phenomenon,
that is, the over-ﬁtting phenomenon. Therefore, three mask
mechanisms are designed to overcome the overﬁtting phe-
nomenon, and they are also used to solve the input and out-
put requirements of the reinforcement learning framework
established in Subsection 3.2.
Mask mechanism I: As shown in the shaded area in
Fig. 3, Mask mechanism I is used to ensure the input and
output of the transformer and realize the Markov decision
process. Through step-by-step prediction, the path is pre-
dicted sequentially to obtain the ﬁnal target entity. When
predicting the next action, the previous action history will
be added to the state to achieve state transition, that is,
the real result of the previous step will be used as input
to predict the output of the next path token. In this way, the
context information is effectively used by the model, thereby
ensuring the accuracy of the model, so that the ﬁnal result
will not have a large error due to a one-step error.
Mask mechanism II: As shown in the blue dots in Fig. 3,
Mask mechanism II is used to solve the problem of model
overﬁtting. After multimodal information dimensionality
reduction, data of training features is sparse, which easily
leads to fast immature convergence of the model, resulting
in overﬁtting. Therefore, it is necessary to perform data
dropout on this part of the embedded input. The double
data dropout mechanism is introduced for data enhance-
ment, which is conducive to retaining the original high-
quality samples as much as possible. Speciﬁcally, for a given
sequence, the data loss scheme is enabled with a certain
probability pk, and when applying the data loss scheme,
tokens in the sequence are randomly masked with a certain
probability pm.
Mask mechanism III: As shown in the red dot in Fig. 3,
the Mask mechanism III is used to make the model generate
more new trajectories by itself, which makes the trajectories
generated by the transformer in the past randomly masked
out for the next action prediction task such that the model
gradually learns from the self-generated trajectories. Mask
mechanism III is simple and easy to implement, and it does
not add any additional computational cost and parameters.
In the masking mechanism, as formalized in Eq. 20,
multiplying each token xi ∈x by the mask gets its au-
toregressive log maximum likelihood. Here η represents the
mask ratio.
log p (x) = log
n
Y
i=1
p

xi |[I [mj ≤η] · xj] i=1
j=0

, η ∈[0, 1]
(20)
Mask mechanism I adopts a complete mask, so η = 1.
Mask mechanism II and III are random masks, which are
randomly masked according to a certain probability value
mj.
3.5
Loss Function Design
The multimodal information of entities (features of images
and text features in images) is expected to enhance learning
through fusion. However, experiments have found that after
incorporating multiple modalities, the model will suffer
from a lack of optimization, which is caused by the dom-
inance of one mode in some scenarios. For example, image
information dominates when inferring relations is relevant
to tasks such as “colour, item type”. When reasoning about
relations is a relevant task like “brand”, textual information
in images dominates. Therefore, inspired by [54], a dynamic
gradient adjustment mechanism is introduced to train three
models separately, taking two modes and their concat as
three inputs. By monitoring the contribution of each mode
to the learning objective, each mode optimization is adap-
tively controlled, thereby alleviating the imbalance of mode
optimization.
Three transformer’s encoders, represented by Enc (·),
are accepted three modal features. When decoding ψk :=
(r1, t1, . . . , rnt, < eos >), Softmax is used in Eq. 21 to
calculate the distribution pχ
i , where χ ∈(fig, ocr), b is the
bias of the prediction model [55], and the addition of b/2 is
used as a bias compensation of single-modal prediction.
pχ
i =
|ψ|
Y
k=1
Soft max (MLP

Enc

ψχ
n

θχ, xχ
n + b
2

· W χ
n )))k
(21)
In the same way, the distribution of concat feature pconcat
i
is
shown in Eq. 22.
pconcat
i
=
|ψ|
Y
k=1
Softmax
 MLP
 Enc
  ψconcat
n
 θconcat ,
xconcat) ·W concat
n

k
(22)
As Eq. 23-25 shows, a cross-entropy loss is used, where ε
is a label smoothing hyperparameter ranging from 0 to 1 to

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
8
avoid overﬁtting. A single-modal image feature, a single-
modal OCR feature, and a multi-modal feature which is
deﬁned as the concat of both are fed respectively to compute
three different losses. At the same time, since the previously
designed mask mechanism shields some features, it is also
necessary to exclude the loss caused by the mask token.
Also, to prevent the model from giving higher scores to
shorter paths, the sum of log-likelihoods divided by the
length of the path is used.
Lfig = −
1
pfig
mask
 · N
N
X
i=1

ε log pfig
t
+
 1 −ε
N −1

log pfig
i

(23)
Locr = −
1
|pocr
mask| · N
N
X
i=1

ε log pocr
t
+
 1 −ε
N −1

log pocr
i

(24)
Lconcat = −
β
|pconcat
mask | · N
N
X
i=1

ε log pconcat
t
+
 1 −ε
N −1

log pconcat
i

(25)
Here β represents the weight value to encourage explo-
ration. If during the training process, Mask mechanism III is
activated, that is, the part of the input path is masked out,
it means that a new trajectory is generated, so the weight of
pconcat
t
should be increased.
To optimize the multimodal contribution imbalance
problem, the modal contribution difference ratio parameter
(ρfig
t
, ρocr
t
) is introduced in Eq. 26 to adaptively adjust the
gradient of each modality, where ρfig
t
is ρocr
t
. As shown in
Fig. 5, the coefﬁcient coeff u
n is integrated into the network
corresponding to the modal association via Eq. 27 based on
[54]. At the same time, Gaussian noise N is introduced to
enhance the generalization ability of the model.
ρocr
n
= Locr
Lfig
(26)
coeff u
n =
(
1 −tanh (α · relu (ρu
n)) ,
ρu
n > 1
1,
others
(27)
∇Wn+1
u =∇Wn
u × coeff u
n + N

0,
X
std (∇Wn
u)
+e−8
(28)
Here u ∈{fig, ocr}, and α is a hyperparameter that controls
the degree of modulation.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, experiments are implemented based on
two newly established datasets, and some state-of-the-art
(SOTA) baselines are used for comparison. The experiment
is mainly divided into four parts: link prediction main
experiment, ablation experiment, training set mask exper-
iment, and parameter interpretability analysis experiment.
4.1
Datasets
In this subsection, two newly established datasets, OpenBG-
IMG+ and OpenBG-Complete-IMG+, are introduced.
4.1.1
OpenBG-IMG+
A new dataset OpenBG-IMG+ is created, derived from a
part of the OpenBG-IMG dataset [56], which is a multimodal
dataset in the ﬁeld of e-commerce. This dataset is released
in the CCKS2022 Task Three competition. Since the data
set released by the competition has no correct answer, the
OpenBG-IMG valid set is used as the test set in this paper,
and the training set is divided into several parts as the
valid set. The used dataset contains 28,891 entities and
136 relations, where only some of the head entities have
image information, while none of the tail entities has image
information. Each image corresponds to only one entity, and
there is no duplication. Table 2 shows speciﬁc statistics.
4.1.2
OpenBG-Complete-IMG+
A new repository OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ is created based
on the already created database OpenBG-IMG+. Its training
set and valid set are obtained from OpenBG-IMG+ deleting
the triplet data with no image information in the head entity,
and the test set remains unchanged. Like OpenBG-IMG+,
the tail entities of all data do not contain image information,
but all head entities of the training set of OpenBG-Complete-
IMG+ contain image information. This new dataset contains
136 relations and 22297 entities. Table 2 shows speciﬁc
statistics.
4.2
Baselines
To study the performance of IMKGA-SM, three categories
of methods are used for comparison: (1) Translation-based
models, TransE [11], TransH [12], and TransD [13]. (2)
Nonlinear-based models, DistMult [16], ComplEx [18], and
TuckER [17]. (3) Multimodal knowledge graph linking
model, TransAE [46].
4.3
Evaluation Protocol
To further analyze the inﬂuence of image information, part
of the training data is masked, and IMKGA-SM is used for
experiments. According to inferences, the current dataset
OpenBG-IMG+ may contain enough structural information
for prediction, which interferes with the analysis of visual
information. In order to highlight the role of visual infor-
mation, a part of the training data is masked to create a
dataset. Similar to recent works [10] [25], as formalized in
Eq. 29 and Eq. 30, the mean reciprocal rank MRR and the

are used to evaluate inference performance.
MRR = 1
|Q|
|Q|
X
i=1
1
ranki
=
1
|Q|

1
rank1
+
1
rank2
+ . . .
+
1
rank|S|
!
(29)
Here Q is the set of test queries, |Q| represents the number
of queries, ranki is the link prediction rank of the i-th triple
[57]. The larger the MRR indicator, the better the prediction
effect.

1
|Q|
|Q|
X
i=1
I (ranki ⩽n)
(30)

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
9
Table 2
Statistics of The Experimental Datasets
Dataset
#Ent
#Rel
#Train
#Valid
#Test
#num of image
OpenBG-IMG+
28891
136
197269
10383
10930
14718
OpenBG-Complete-IMG+
22297
136
138479
7289
10930
14718
Table 3
Results of Knowledge Graph Link Prediction on OpenBG-IMG+ and OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ Datasets
OpenBG-IMG+
OpenBG-Complete-IMG+
Model
Interpretability
Multi-model
MRR

MRR

TransE [11]
No
No
0.50858
0.33769
0.64876
0.83037
0.39092
0.24419
0.50155
0.67520
TransH [12]
No
No
0.40132
0.15946
0.61454
0.81280
0.31544
0.10356
0.49533
0.68197
TransD [13]
No
No
0.39173
0.15416
0.59158
0.80850
0.30779
0.09954
0.47209
0.69075
DistMult [16]
No
No
0.14469
0.07529
0.17191
0.35123
0.13496
0.07474
0.16715
0.29560
ComplEx [18]
No
No
0.19756
0.12314
0.23568
0.38435
0.14017
0.08673
0.15361
0.31015
TransAE [46]
No
Yes
0.47107
0.33897
0.56376
0.75086
0.51174
0.38261
0.60054
0.77913
TuckER [17]
No
No
0.42024
0.31985
0.49613
0.60795
0.39482
0.29624
0.48215
0.57557
IMKGA-SM(No Img)
No
No
0.64224
0.53284
0.73595
0.83284
0.59361
0.48948
0.68069
0.78270
IMKGA-SM(MKG)
No
Yes
0.64652
0.53705
0.73998
0.83678
0.60110
0.49332
0.68893
0.79780
IMKGA-SM(RL)
Yes
No
0.64341
0.53312
0.73816
0.83678
0.59582
0.49222
0.68097
0.78948
IMKGA-SM(MKG+RL)
Yes
Yes
0.64860
0.53998
0.74089
0.83714
0.60177
0.49680
0.68692
0.79030
Improv.
-
-
17.76%
20.11%
17.72%
8.63%
9.01%
11.5%
8.64%
1.12%
Here I (·) is the indicator function, if the condition is true,
the function value is 1, otherwise, it is 0. The three indicators

that the top K(K = 1, 3, 10) entities with the highest score
in the link prediction contains the correct entity [11].
4.4
Implementation Details
Next, the experiments are mainly based on the knowledge
graph link prediction task. To augment the training data,
each original training set triplet is reversed to generate an
inverse triplet. The knowledge graph triplets in the test
dataset are sorted by all entities in descending order of
probability value, leaving the top ten predicted entities.
Models are trained using the Adam [58] optimizer and
analyzed for hyperparameters, eigenvectors.
4.5
Link Predict Results
Link prediction results are shown in Table 3 (all scores
are expressed as percentages), where the most competitive
baseline TransAE [46] results are underlined and the best
results are highlighted in bold. The following points are
observed.
Table 3 is studied for link prediction tasks. It is seen that
the accuracy performance of IMKGA-SM is better than all
other models, and IMKGA-SM uses multi-hop reasoning,
which is interpretable. It is shown that the model is proven
to be both interpretable and highly accurate, achieving
state-of-the-art performance. The introduction of a multi-
modal knowledge graph in the OpenBG-IMG+ dataset is
not obvious enough, so only the triplet data with image
information in the head entity is retained in the new dataset.
The results show that the improvement effect of IMKGA-SM
in OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ is generally better than that of
OpenBG-IMG+. This is speculated to be due to being over-
whelmed with the help of other multimodal information
when the dataset already has rich structural information.
To further analyze the inﬂuence of image information, a
new dataset OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ is created. All head
entities in the dataset have image information, and the
experiment is performed again.
4.6
Ablation Learning
In this section, ablation learning is divided into three parts:
the inﬂuence of multimodality, reward expectation, and
mask mechanism on the model, and perform speciﬁc data
analysis on the complete IMKGA-SM model.
4.6.1
IMKGA-SM (No Img) vs IMKGA-SM (MKG)
To further explore the role of image information, IMKGA-
SM (No image) and IMKGA-SM (MKG) are compared on
two datasets, and the link prediction experiment results are
shown in Table 3. Image embedding and ocr embedding are
added to IMKGA-SM (MKG), and a dynamic loss function
adjustment mechanism is adopted. The experiment found
that the improvement effect on OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ is
more stable than OpenBG-IMG+.
4.6.2
IMKGA-SM(No Img) vs IMKGA-SM(RL)
In order to verify the improvement of the model by the
introduction of reward expectation, IMKGA-SM (No image)
and IMKGA-SM (RL) are compared on two data sets, and
the link prediction experiment results are shown in the Ta-
ble 3. A reward expectation mechanism based on perceptual
interaction and a reward-related mask is added to IMKGA-
SM (RL). The experiment results show that after adding the
reward expectation mechanism ˆR, the model effect has been
improved, but the improvement is not as much as that of
MKG.
4.6.3
IMKGA-SM (MKG+RL)
IMKGA-SM (MKG+RL) adds a masking mechanism on the
basis of IMKGA-SM(MKG) and IMKGA-SM(RL) and ver-
iﬁed its effect on OpenBG-IMG+ and OpenBG-Complete-
IMG+ datasets, which are shown in Table 3. Compared

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
10
Table 4
Statistics of Datasets in Training Data Masking Experience
Dataset
#Ent
#Rel
#Train
#Valid
#Test
OpenBG-IMG+80%
27839
136
158527
8344
10930
OpenBG-IMG+70%
22297
136
138479
7289
10930
OpenBG-IMG+47%
21817
136
92648
4877
10930
OpenBG-IMG+35%
21469
136
68599
3611
10930
OpenBG-IMG+28%
21215
136
55397
2916
10930
Figure 6. Link prediction results (MRR) on OpenBG-Complete-IMG+x%.
with the multimodal knowledge graph linking baseline
TransAE [46], IMKGA-SM has a 17.67% improvement on
the OpenBG-IMG+ dataset and a 9.01% improvement on
the OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ dataset. Compared with the
nonlinear-based baseline DistMult [16], IMKGA-SM has a
50.39% improvement on the OpenBG-IMG+ dataset and
a 46.681% improvement on the OpenBG-Complete-IMG+
dataset.
4.7
Training Data Masking
To further explore the impact of image and structural in-
formation on the results, masking is performed on part of
the training data, and IMKGA-SM is used for experiments.
It is speculated that the current dataset OpenBG-IMG+
may contain enough structural information for prediction,
interfering with the analysis of visual information. In order
to highlight the role of visual information, a part of the
training data is masked out to create datasets by controlling
the frequency of a head entity with image information,
which is OpenBG-IMG+28%, OpenBG-IMG+35%, OpenBG-
IMG+47%,
OpenBG-IMG+70%,
OpenBG-IMG+80%
and
OpenBG-IMG+100%, respectively, and the dataset informa-
tion is shown in Table 4. Then, the link prediction exper-
iment is carried out again, and the results are shown in
Fig. 6,
7. It is seen that IMKGA-SM has shown obvious
advantages in data sets of different scales. The traditional
method has a signiﬁcant increase after adding structural
information, while IMKGA-SM is still relatively stable in
the improvement of the scale. IMKGA-SM not only has
comparable generalization ability to neural network models,
but also has stronger interpretability than other baseline
methods.

IMG+x%.
Figure 8. Link prediction results on OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ in different
N.
4.8
Parameter Interpretability
In this subsection, the parameter interpretability is divided
into three parts, mainly analyzing the impact of different
batch sizes, label smooth and modulation impact.
4.8.1
The Inﬂuence of Different Batch Sizes N
Fig. 8 investigates the effect of different batch sizes N.
The batch size is set to N ∈[16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]. It is
observed that as N increases, the performance of IMKGA-
SM rises ﬁrst and then declines steadily in most cases, pre-
sumably because undertraining and overﬁtting negatively
affect the model. The results show that an appropriate
training parameter size improves the effectiveness of the
inference model. From the experimental results, the optimal
parameter is N = 16.
4.8.2
The Inﬂuence of Different Labels Smooth ε
In this paper, the method of label smoothing is used in the
loss function, which is a regularization method to prevent
overﬁtting. By setting α = 0.5, the effect of the label smooth-
ing parameter ε is shown in Fig. 9. The batch size is set
to ε ∈[0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9]. It is observed
that with the decrease of ε, the performance of IMKGA-SM
rises ﬁrst and then declines steadily in most cases, which
is probably because MRR is the main evaluation indicator,

THIS WORK HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO THE IEEE FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. COPYRIGHT MAY BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT NOTICE, AFTER WHICH THIS VERSION MAY NO LONGER BE ACCESSIBLE
11
Figure 9. Link prediction results on OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ in different
ε.
Figure 10. Link prediction results on OpenBG-Complete-IMG+ in differ-
ent α.
and the shrinking of its proportion has a negative effect on
the ﬁnal result inﬂuences. The results show that the optimal
parameter is ε = 0.7.
4.8.3
The Inﬂuence of Different Modulation Impact α
With ε = 0.9, the effect of the modulation impact α on
IMKGA-SM is demonstrated in Fig. 10. From the results,
α = 0.6 is observed to be the optimal value on the data set.
5
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, how to effectively utilize multi-modal aux-
iliary features for multi-hop knowledge graph inference
is investigated, aiming to improve the accuracy of model
inference and achieve interpretability simultaneously. An
efﬁcient IMKGA-SM model is proposed, which outperforms
existing methods on the multimodal knowledge graph in-
ference task. In IMKGA-SM, structural features and multi-
modal data are ﬁrst extracted in-depth, and then a return-to-
go mechanism based on perceptual similarity is constructed
and applied to the large sequence framework. In addition,
three mask mechanisms are designed to alleviate the prob-
lem of data sparsity. Next, a multimodal autoregressive loss
function adjustment mechanism is introduced to take full
advantage of multimodality. Finally, experimental results
show that IMKGA-SM achieves higher effectiveness and
interpretable ability versus other trending rivals in knowl-
edge graph link prediction tasks. To conclude, IMKGA-SM
requires effective methods to minimize the negative impact
of sparse data. These tasks are left for future work.
