XUAT-Copilot: Multi-Agent Collaborative System for Automated
User Acceptance Testing with Large Language Model
Zhitao Wang∗, Wei Wang∗, Zirao Li, Long Wang, Can Yi, Xinjie Xu, Luyang Cao, Hanjing Su,
Shouzhi Chen, Jun Zhou

WeChat Pay, Tencent
Shenzhen, China
ABSTRACT
In past years, we have been dedicated to automating user acceptance
testing (UAT) process of WeChat Pay, one of the most influential
mobile payment applications in China. A system titled XUAT has
been developed for this purpose. However, there is still a human-
labor-intensive stage, i.e., test scripts generation, in the current
system. Therefore, in this paper, we concentrate on methods of
boosting the automation level of the current system, particularly
the stage of test scripts generation. With recent notable successes,
large language models (LLMs) demonstrate significant potential
in attaining human-like intelligence and there has been a growing
research area that employs LLMs as autonomous agents to obtain
human-like decision-making capabilities. Inspired by these works,
we propose an LLM-powered multi-agent collaborative system,
named XUAT-Copilot, for automated UAT. The proposed system
mainly consists of three LLM-based agents responsible for action
planning, state checking and parameter selecting, respectively, and
two additional modules for state sensing and case rewriting. The
agents interact with testing device, make human-like decision and
generate action command in a collaborative way. The proposed
multi-agent system achieves a close effectiveness to human testers
in our experimental studies and gains a significant improvement of

importantly, the proposed system has launched in the formal testing
environment of WeChat Pay mobile app, which saves a considerable
amount of manpower in the daily development work.
KEYWORDS
Automated UAT, AI Agents, Large Language Model
ACM Reference Format:
Zhitao Wang∗, Wei Wang∗, Zirao Li, Long Wang, Can Yi, Xinjie Xu, Luyang
Cao, Hanjing Su, Shouzhi Chen, Jun Zhou. 2023. XUAT-Copilot: Multi-Agent
Collaborative System for Automated User Acceptance Testing with Large
Language Model. In Proceedings of 2023 (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
User Acceptance Testing (UAT) is a critical phase in the software
development life cycle that involves assessing the functionality,
usability, and performance of a software application or system. The
main goal of UAT is to evaluate whether the developed software
meets the predefined requirements from the end-user’s perspective.
It validates that the software is fit for purpose and ready for de-
ployment in a real-world environment. However, traditional UAT
methodologies, which rely heavily on manual testing, are time-
consuming, resource-intensive, and susceptible to human errors. It
is thus non-trivial to explore the way of automating UAT to improve
efficiency, accuracy, and overall software quality.
WeChat Pay1, as one of the most influential mobile payment
applications in China, has become an integral part of daily life
for billions of users. Ensuring the seamless functionality, usability,
and compatibility of the application is of paramount importance
for maintaining customer satisfaction and trust. Therefore, in past
years, we have been dedicated to the development of an effec-
tive, comprehensive and low-cost UAT system, named XUAT. The
workflow of the XUAT system is illustrated in Fig.1. At the ini-
tial stage, business requirements are represented as use case flow
charts, which are intended to ensure the completeness, accuracy
and conformity of the requirements. Given the flow charts, the
system enumerates all possible flows and transfers each flow as
one specific test case in semi-structured natural language. At the
following stage, these test cases are distributed to a number of
human testers, who are responsible for implementing test scripts
consisting of a series of Android Debug Bridge (ADB) commands
to simulate end-users’ actions expected in the test cases on the App
(in this paper, we only focus on testing on Android system). In this
process, human testers often make trial and errors on test devices
to guarantee the script can be executed in expectation of the test
case accurately. The final scripts submitted by testers (also called
"persistent test scripts") will be automatically ran in routine by the
system in the future and reports are recorded in the system. Based
on the test reports, a group of acceptance engineers are asked to
validate the results of test cases against the expectations of the
requirements, and document any defects, issues or improvements.
Apparently, current version of XUAT is still a semi-automated
system, which is particularly labor-intensive at the stage of test
script implementation. Understanding contents of test cases and
making trial and error are inevitable in this human-engaged pro-
cess. This motivates us to seek for more automated and efficiency
approaches of implementing test scripts.
*These authors contributed equally to this work
1https://pay.weixin.qq.com/index.php/public/wechatpay_en
arXiv:2401.02705v2  [cs.AI]  10 Jan 2024

Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
Zhitao Wang et al.
System Use Case
Flow Chart
Business
Requirements
Test Cases
Enumerate
Test Devices
In Dev.
XUAT-Copilot System
: automated system behavior
: human behavior
Test Reports
Collaborative-Agent
Groups
Distribute
Extract
Interactive
Run
Persistent Test
Scripts
Generate
Test Devices
In Prod.
Record
Routinized
Run
System Use Case
Flow Chart
Business
Requirements
Test Cases
Enumerate
XUAT System
Test Reports
Human
Testers
Distribute
Extract
Persistent Test
Scripts
Test Devices
In Prod.
Record
Routinized
Run
Implement
Test Devices
In Dev.
Test Scripts
In Dev.
Submit
Trial
Return Results
Revise
Figure 1: The overview of XUAT system and XUAT-Copilot system
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) like Chat-
GPT, have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in not just linguis-
tic tasks, but also various general tasks especially embodied agents
planning, where LLMs are applied for making goal-driven deci-
sions in interactive and embodied environments [13, 16, 31, 32].
Test script generation in XUAT is also a task-oriented, interactive
and embodied scenario, where end-users are expected to be repre-
sented by autonomous agents who automatically interact with the
app through ADB commands to achieve the goal defined in the test
case step-by-step. Inspired by the previous work, we are interested
to investigate the potential of employing LLM powered agents to
automate the test script generation process in the XUAT system.
Despite of the power of LLMs, this work still faces a set of unique
challenges:
• Highly condensed expression. Each step of test cases is ex-
pressed in a highly brief way but often implies a series of actions.
For example, the step of "Submitting Personal Information" ex-
pects a long action-sequence: clicking name input box, entering
text of name, clicking ID input box, entering ID number, etc.
• Context sensitive actions. Similar or even same contents
ask for different actions at different graphical user interface
(GUI) pages or with different expectations. For example, the
step of "Confirming the Information" indicates a single action of
clicking the confirmation button on some feedback pages, but
multiple actions of scrolling the screen, selecting the checkbox
and clicking the confirmation button on some agreement pages.
• Many test parameters. In the WeChat Pay app, around 80 per-
cent of actions belong to the type of "submitting information",
which indicates hundreds of test parameters are maintained. In
current system, a list of all test parameters is provided and hu-
man testers need to select appropriate parameters. This brings
difficulties for LLM to recognize required parameters without
experience of human testers.
• Step-by-step correctness. Different from random test meth-
ods, UAT needs to strictly follow the provided test case such
that the final goal can be achieved. If one step is wrong, the
whole test case will not be passed. Therefore, it is crucial for
agents to self-check step-by-step correctness of the test case.
In this paper, we attempt to resolve above challenges and propose
XUAT-Copilot, an LLM-powered multi-agent collaborative system
for automating UAT. Fig 2 illustrates the proposed multi-agent col-
laborative system, which mainly consists of three LLM-based agents
responsible for action planning, state checking and parameter se-
lecting, respectively, and two additional modules for state sensing
and case rewriting. Specifically, Rewriting Module is applied to
make the contents of test cases more understandable by the agents.
On the other hand, Perception Module is utilized to provide pre-
cise and concise GUI information for the agents due to context
sensitivity of this scenario. The three agents are associated in a col-
laborative way. Given the rewritten current step instruction of the
test case, Operation Agent is responsible for planning expected
user actions and generating corresponding action commands. If
the commands require parameters, Parameter Selection Agent is
asked by the operation agent for choosing appropriate parameters
from hundreds of candidates. With returned parameters, the opera-
tion agent regenerates action commands and submits to execute
them on testing devices simulating the expected user actions. Since
each step may involve a series of user actions, Inspection Agent
is devised to verify whether the state achieves the expectation of
current step. Generally, if the APP navigates to the GUI page where
actions of next step to be performed, it satisfies expectation of cur-
rent step. Therefore, the inspection agent makes a decision based
on both GUI information after actions and contents of next step.

XUAT-Copilot: Multi-Agent Collaborative System for Automated User Acceptance Testing with Large Language Model
Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
Based on the above collaborative multi-agent architecture, the
proposed system achieves a close effectiveness to human testers in
our experimental studies. Compared with single-agent architecture,
our multi-agent architecture gains a significant improvement of

XUAT-Copilot system has launched in the formal testing environ-
ment of WeChat Pay mobile app, which saves a considerable amount
of manpower in the daily development work.
The contributions of this paper could be concluded as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to employ LLMs
for UAT. We demonstrate the possibility and feasibility of LLMs
to automate the test script generation in the UAT process.
• We propose a novel multi-agent collaborative approach to UAT
system that harnesses the power of pre-trained LLMs for both
high-level human language instruction and low-level command
planning and develop a range of innovative approaches aimed
at enhancing the understanding and planning capabilities of
LLMs in the context of the UAT scenario.
• The proposed system has been applied to real research and de-
velopment environment of WeChat Pay, a mobile payment app
with a billion-level user base, with a significant improvement
on testing efficiency.
2
BACKGROUND
2.1
Automated UAT and XUAT System
UAT stands for User Acceptance Testing. It is a phase in the soft-
ware development process where the end users or clients test the
software to ensure it meets their requirements and expectations.
The main goal of UAT is to validate that the software is functioning
as intended and is ready for deployment in a real-world environ-
ment. Automated UAT aims to reduce the manual effort required to
execute test cases, increase the efficiency and accuracy of the test-
ing process, and shorten the overall testing cycle. It allows for faster
feedback, easier identification of defects, and improved consistency
in testing compared to manual UAT.
XUAT system is an instantiation of automated UAT on the WeChat
Pay mobile app. As shown in Fig. 1, if business requirements are
represented in predefined semi-structure, the XUAT system could
automatically generate the test cases. However, the stage of trans-
ferring test cases to executable scripts requires intensive human
participation. Human testers initially write the script, i.e., a series
of ADB commands, and make a run trial on the development test
devices to check whether the script simulates the expected actions
and achieve the goal of the given test case. If there are some errors,
testers need to make some revisions and a trial again, until return re-
sults satisfy the expectations. The final scripts submitted by testers
are called as "persistent test scripts", since these scripts would be
run in routine by the system and test reports are recorded automat-
ically. In order to improve the system’s automation level, in this
paper, we focus on the most labor-intensive stage, i.e., test script
implementation (generation), and apply large language models to
make this stage automated.
It should be noted that our work on automated UAT is very dif-
ferent from existing works on automated graphical user interface
(GUI) testing [14, 17, 18, 24]. First, the two testing processes have
different purposes. Automated GUI testing is focused on testing
the graphical user interface of an application, while automated
UAT aims to validate the overall functionality and usability of the
application from an end-user perspective. Second, the two testing
processes have distinct paradigms. Automated GUI testing is often
defined as a black-box task, thus methods on this task pay much
attention to exploration of all UI events under a high degree of
freedom. In contrast, automate UAT is a kind of white-box task,
where testing behaviors are strictly constrained by well-predefined
test cases such that the specific function points can be tested. Last,
the two testing processes concentrate on different testing metrics.
Previous works on automated GUI testing evaluate the performance
by activity coverage, while UAT performance, in this paper, is eval-
uated by pass rates of test cases.
2.2
Large Language Models
Large Language Models (LLMs) are the latest breakthroughs in
natural language processing. LLMs acquire the ability to achieve
general-purpose language understanding and generation by train-
ing on massive amounts of data to learn billions of parameters. As
autoregressive models, the training of LLMs is taking an input text
and repeatedly predicting the next token or word. Most popular
LLMs are based on the transformer architecture [37].
At the beginning of the emergence of LLMs, fine tuning was
the only way make a LLM could be adapt to specific tasks. Recent
LLMs, such as GPT-3 [2], GPT-4 [23], LLaMA [35, 36] and PaLM
[1, 5], however, can achieve similar task-specific results without
requiring additional training through prompt-engineering. Prompt
engineering is the process of formulating a piece of text, which
often describes the task and can be understood by LLMs. Prompt
engineering is enabled by in-context learning [8], defined as a
model’s ability to temporarily learn from prompts, which is an
emergent ability of LLMs [42]. Based on the remarkable general
intelligence of LLMs, the application of in-context learning ability
has shifted to zero-shot learning, where LLMs make predictions by
directly describing the desired output. On the other hand, few-shot
learning is utilized to augment the context with a few examples of
desired inputs and outputs, which enables LLMs to recognize the
input prompt syntax and patterns of the output. Instead of few-shot
learning, which easily reaches to token limitation of LLMs, we apply
zero-shot paradigm for the agents, which has shown satisfactory
performance in the UAT scenario.
Chain-of-thought (CoT) [43] prompting is a technique that al-
lows LLM to solve a problem as a series of intermediate steps. CoT
prompting improves reasoning ability by inducing the model to
answer a multi-step problem with steps of reasoning that mimic a
train of thought. Several follow-up works have been extended to
more sophisticated reasoning architecture beyond simple prompt-
ing. For example, Selection-Inference [6] divides the reasoning pro-
cess into two steps of “selection” and “inference”. Tree-of-Thought
[46] generalizes over CoT prompting and encourages exploration
over thoughts in a tree structure. In contrast, ReAct [47] integrates
model actions and corresponding observations into a coherent
stream of inputs for the model to reason more accurately and tackle
tasks beyond reasoning. UAT is also a kind of interactive decision
making, therefore, in this paper, we employ a prompting schema
similar to the ReACT with more complex structure using personas

Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
Zhitao Wang et al.
Inputs
Operation Agent
Inspection Agent
Raw Test Case
Parameter List
Finish or Not
Action: Operation with Parameter
Raw UI
Hierarchy
UI After Action
Perception Module
Rewriting Module
UI Before Action
Next Step
Parameter Selection Agent
Current Step
Inferred Operation
Selected Parameter
Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework
Interactive Testing
Environment
1
2
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
• click()
• scroll()
• input_text()
……
Skill
Library
Figure 2: The proposed multi-agent collaborative framework
and a more comprehensive CoT prompting. Additionally, in order
to reduce hallucinations and inefficient planning, we apply self-
reflection mechanism [30], which prompts agents to self-reflect
on task feedback and maintain reflective information in memory
buffer to induce better decision-making in subsequent trials.
2.3
Autonomous Agent and LLM-Based Agent
An early definition of autonomous agent is a system situated within
and a part of an environment that senses that environment and acts
on it, over time, in pursuit of its own agenda and so as to effect what
it senses in the future [10]. Characteristics of ideal autonomous
agents include: (a) Autonomy: They can operate independently,
without human intervention, and make decisions based on their
own internal logic; (b) Perception: They can perceive their environ-
ment, using sensors, cameras, or other input devices, and process
the data; (c) Action: They can take actions in the physical or digital
world, using actuators, motors, or other output devices, to achieve
their goals; (d) Learning: They can learn from experience, adapt
to changing circumstances, and improve their performance over
time; (e) Communication: They can communicate with other agents,
humans, or systems, using various protocols and interfaces. There-
fore, invention of autonomous agents has long been recognized as
a promising approach to achieving artificial general intelligence
(AGI).
In previous studies, autonomous agents are assumed to act based
on policy functions, and learned in isolated and restricted envi-
ronments [11, 15, 21, 28]. The survey [39] has pointed out that
such assumptions significantly differ from the human learning
process, since individuals can learn from a much wider variety
of environments. Due to these gaps, the agents learned from the
previous studies are usually far from replicating human-level deci-
sion processes, especially in unconstrained, open-domain settings.
As mentioned above, with notable successes, LLMs has demon-
strated potential in achieving human-like intelligence and leads to
a trending research area that employs LLMs to build autonomous
agents to obtain human-like decision-making capabilities. In a very
short time, researchers have developed numerous agents [7, 22, 25–
27, 29, 38, 40, 45]. The key idea is equipping agents with crucial
human capabilities like memory and planning by prompting, tuning
or augmenting LLMs to complete various tasks. The initial inspi-
ration of this paper comes from a group of LLM-based embodied
agents [13, 16, 31, 32], which are able to make goal-driven decisions
and execute corresponding actions in interactive and embodied
environments.
A very recent series of research focus on developing LLM-powered
multi-agent system. Most common interaction schema in these
works is ordered cooperation [4, 12, 33, 44]. Different agents par-
ticipate the task in an ordered sequence, i.e., agent of current step
receives the output from previous agent and generate its own output
for next agent. Another schema is disordered cooperation, where
agents cooperates with each other in a complex way instead of
a simple pipeline and the cooperation structure may vary from
to different tasks [20, 41]. In contrast to cooperation, some works
design an adversarial interaction schema, which put agents in ad-
versarial relationship and push the agents to make advancements
themselves [3, 9]. In this paper, we employ disordered coopera-
tion schema and carefully devise the interaction structure for the
proposed multi-agent system.
3
XUAT-COPILOT
3.1
Problem Statement
As shown in Fig. 2, the system receives two types of inputs and
interacts with test environment through a predefined skill library.
They are defined as follows:
• Test Case (𝐶): Test case is an ordered sequence of instructions
defined as 𝐶= [𝑐1, ...,𝑐𝑛], where 𝑛is total steps of the test case
𝐶. Each piece of text instruction 𝑐𝑖describes the expected goal
implying user actions at 𝑖th step of the test case.
• Parameter List (𝑃): Parameter list is associated with a specific
test case denoted as 𝑃= {(𝑝1, 𝑣1), ..., (𝑝𝑚, 𝑣𝑚)}, where (𝑝𝑖, 𝑣𝑖)
denotes each possible test parameters and their corresponding
values in the test case 𝑆and 𝑚is the number of all parameters.

XUAT-Copilot: Multi-Agent Collaborative System for Automated User Acceptance Testing with Large Language Model
Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
Bilateral Filter
BRG2HSV
Binarize
Dilate
Find Contours
Mask
Feature Extraction
(VGG16)
Multi-Stage
Output
Detection Model: SegLink++
Conv Backbone
Recognition Model: ConvNeXts
Q
K
V
Multi-Head Attn
1*3 Conv
Norm & MLP
… 1*N Conv
N * ConvTansformer Block
+
Preprocess
Original Bounds
Detected Bounds (ROIs)
Recognized Text in ROIs
ROI1: “《某”
ROI2: “某银⾏储蓄卡协议》”
ROI3: “《某”
ROI4: “某银⾏信⽤卡协议》”
某某
某某
某
某
某
某
某
某
某
某
某
某
某
某
Figure 3: Image Processing Pipeline For Widgets With Hyperlink
• Environment (𝐸): Environment in this scenario is a (virtual)
mobile device, which is represented as 𝐸. The system needs to
continuously interactive with the environment 𝐸to execute
actions as well as update the state of agents.
• Skill Library (𝐹): Skill library represents possible agents’ inter-
active actions with the test environment, which are expected
users’ operations on the APP. We define a set of functions,
which wrap ADB commands and simulate users’ actions in
the environment, as the skill library: 𝐹= {𝑓𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑘, 𝑓𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑙, ...}.
The details of skill library will be introduced at the following
subsection.
Based on the above definitions, the problem that the proposed
XUAT-Copilot aims to solve is: given a raw test case 𝐶associated
with an associated parameter list 𝑃, an interactive test environment
𝐸and a predefined skill library 𝐹, the goal of the proposed system
is generate a sequence of actions 𝐴= [𝐴1, ...,𝐴𝑛] by continuously
interacting with the environment 𝐸. Since there may be a series of
actions for each step of the test case, the generated 𝐴𝑖at 𝑖th step
is still a sequence of actions 𝐴𝑖=
h
𝑎1
𝑖...,𝑎𝑙
𝑖
i
=
h
𝑓1
𝑖(𝑝1
𝑖), ..., 𝑓𝑙
𝑖(𝑝𝑙
𝑖)
i
,
where each operation 𝑎𝑗
𝑖can be specified as a call of skill function
𝑓𝑗
𝑖∈𝐹associated with a required parameter 𝑝𝑗
𝑖∈𝑃.
3.2
Perception Module
Similar to the use of sensors in the field of robotics to observe
the state of the agents in the environment, we define a perception
module to collect and represent the testing state interactively. In
this scenario, the state of the agents in the environment is the GUI
page where the current step is located in the APP. Therefore, the
function of the perception module is to collect information from
the current GUI page and represent it in a certain form. Generally,
there are two ways to represent App GUI:
• GUI View Hierarchy: A view hierarchy file presenting objects
of current GUI page in XML format.
• GUI Image: A screenshot image of current GUI page.
In this paper, we use information of both view hierarchy and screen-
shot image for state perception.
The structured text representation of view hierarchy naturally
suits LLM Agents. Models such as GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 can under-
stand view hierarchy very well in the setting of in-context learn-
ing. The view hierarchy file includes the widget information (co-
ordinates, ID, widget type, text description, etc.), and the layout
information on the current GUI page. The state extractor could
easily obtain the view hierarchy file of current GUI page through
“uiautomator dump” of the Android Debug Bridge (ADB) command
[2]. However, the raw view hierarchy has too many tokens eas-
ily reaching to the limitation of LLMs. Additionally, redundant
information can interfere with LLM’s decision-making and re-
duce accuracy. We define filtering rules in the state extractor to
extract concise and informative representation. For each widget
node, six attributes, i.e., class, resource-id, content-desc, text,
clickable, scrollable, bounds are extracted. class denotes the
widget type, resource-id is the ID of the widget, content-desc
and text are text description of the widget, and bounds represents
the coordinates of the widget. Only widget nodes with non-empty
text or content-desc attribute are kept. Meanwhile, resource-id
is mocked if the original one is empty since it is very important for
LLMs to locate the widget. After filtering, the state is represented as
a set of widget node information: 𝑠= {𝑤1, ...,𝑤𝑘}, where a widget
node 𝑤𝑖is a string with following structure:

Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
Zhitao Wang et al.
Raw Contents
Rewritten Contents
Template
System requests User to [PHRASE1], and System validates the result
feedback from User is [PHRASE2].
[PHRASE2’]
Example 1
System requests User to select a bank for card-less binding, and System
validates the result feedback from User is selecting bank.
Select ${bank_name}
Example 2
System requests User to set payment password, and System validates
the result feedback from User is submitting payment password.
Submit payment password (Use numeric keyboard)
Table 1: Templates and Examples of Test Case Before and After Rewriting
"<node class=, resource-id=, clickable=, scrollable= ,
content-desc=, text=, bounds= node/>".
There is a special kind of clickable widgets containing a piece of
hyperlinked text and valid operation for these widgets is clicking
the hyperlinked text. For example, in Fig.3, there are two widgets
with hyperlinked text and their original bounds defined in the view
hierarchy are two rectangle areas containing the whole paragraphs
with the hyperlinked text. Given this information, LLMs would
infer to click the center point based on common sense, but the oper-
ation would not be executed successfully since the hyperlinked text
are not located at the center of the widget. Therefore, in addition
to view hierarchy, we make use of screen images of GUI pages to
extract correct clickable bounds of these special widgets. The idea
is illustrated as Fig.3. Hyperlinked text always has a unified and
unique color different from that of normal text. Based on this prior
knowledge, a preprocessing is designed to extract coarse-grained
regions of the hyperlinked text. The raw image is firstly filtered and
transferred from RGB color space to HSV color space that allows for
easy manipulation of hue, saturation, and value, making it suitable
for color selection in various applications. Afterwards, the image
is binarized by computing the differences between HSV values the
image and those of target color and then dilated to get rectangle-
like bright regions of the hyperlinked text. Subsequently, rectangle
contours are detected in the processed image and used to mask
areas without hyperlink in the raw image. Given the masked image,
a detection model and a recognition model are used to find the
exact bounds, i.e., regions of interest (ROIs), of the hyperlinked text,
and recognize the text in each ROI, respectively. As for detection, a
pretrained SegLink++ [34] model is employed. SegLink++ adopts
a bottom-up approach, first detecting the attraction-repulsion re-
lationships between text blocks and text lines, then clustering the
text blocks into lines, and finally outputting the coordinates of the
bounding boxes of the text lines. Based on the detected bounding
boxes, a ConvNeXts [19] model is adopted for text recognition. The
architecture of ConvNeXts consists of a convolutional backbone
and a series of ConvTransformer Blocks. If a widget has more than
one detected bounding boxes after image processing, the coordinate
of the bounding box with the largest width are used as the new
"bounds" attribute of the widget. The recognized text is also used
to update the "content-desc" and "text" attributes of the widget.
3.3
Rewriting Module
As defined above, a raw test case is an ordered sequence of in-
structions 𝐶= [𝑐1, ...,𝑐𝑛]. As shown in Table 1, each instruction
𝑐𝑖is a piece of text with a fixed template. This kind of expression
limits "natural" degree of the instructions. According to the above
example, both [PHRASE1] and [PHRASE2] seem to describe the
expected users’ actions, this may make LLMs confused. In essence,
[PHRASE1] in the template is designed for expressing the "process",
while [PHRASE2] is supposed to emphasis the "result" of the actions.
It is observed that [PHRASE1] often has a very similar description
to the title of the current UI page. In other words, [PHRASE1] can be
regarded as context information while [PHRASE2] can be regarded
as actual user actions expected by the test case. Therefore, rewrit-
ing module extracts reformulate the instruction with the following
process:
• Extracting [PHRASE1] and [PHRASE2] based on regular ex-
pression matching.
• Rewriting [PHRASE2] as [PHRASE2’] with a series of rules
based on the information of original [PHRASE1] and [PHRASE2].
• Use the rewritten [PHRASE2’] as the input instruction for the
agents.
Due to the page limitation, the details of rewriting rules would
not be discussed in this paper. Two typical examples of rewriting
are given in Table 1. The first example involves a specific parameter,
thus the rewriting uses a special mark to label the expression of the
parameter. For the second example, a rule of information supple-
mentary is utilized. In the WeChat Pay APP, the numeric keyboard
pop-up on the screen is the only acceptable way for inputting the
payment password. But LLMs may not know this piece of specific
knowledge, thus the rewriting rule makes it more clear avoiding
LLMs responds with an illegal command.
3.4
Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework
The motivation behind the multi-agent framework is the limited
capability of a single LLM-based agent on this task. First, inputs
of the task, e.g., filtered hierarchy file or parameter list, are long
text, which occupy the working memory of the single agent in
a large extent. This may easily lead the agent to forgetting, hal-
lucinating and inefficient planning due to the token limitation of
LLMs. Additionally, compared with other random-based black-box
testing, UAT on WeChat Pay requires for more complex and accu-
rate actions, e.g., selecting a given bank card or inputting a given
ID number at correct input widget. Therefore, in order to reduce
the complexity of the task and the length of the inputs given to
the agents, we decompose the task as three sub-tasks, i.e., action
generation, parameter selection and state inspection, and carefully
devise the corresponding agents. Specifically, Operation Agent
is responsible for planning expected user actions and generating
corresponding action commands. Parameter Selection Agent has
obligation of choosing appropriate parameters from hundreds of
candidates. Inspection Agent is proposed to verify whether the
state achieves the goal of current step.

XUAT-Copilot: Multi-Agent Collaborative System for Automated User Acceptance Testing with Large Language Model
Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
Algorithm 1: Multi-Agent Instruct2Act
Given :Instruction sequence of a test case 𝐶= [𝑐1, ...,𝑐𝑛],
parameter list 𝑃, language descriptions 𝐷𝐹of skill
library 𝐹, test environment 𝐸, a backbone large
language model 𝜋.
Output:Action sequence 𝐴=

𝑓1
1 (𝑝1
1), ..., 𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖), ...

.
1 Initialize action sequence: 𝐴←[] ;
2 for 𝑖= 1, ...,𝑛do
3
Initialize action count within step: 𝑡←1;
4
Initialize step goal accomplishment flag: 𝑔←0;
5
Initialize system memory: 𝑀←∅;
6
Initialize action sequence: 𝐴𝑖←[] ;
7
Observe state 𝑠𝑡
𝑖from environment 𝐸;
8
while 𝑔≠1 do
9
𝑓𝑡
𝑖←𝜋(𝑀, 𝐷𝐹,𝑐𝑖,𝑠𝑡
𝑖, 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑝), 𝑓𝑡
𝑖∈𝐹;
10
𝑝𝑡
𝑖←𝜋(𝑃,𝑐𝑖, 𝑓𝑡
𝑖, 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎), 𝑝𝑡
𝑖∈𝑃;
11
Execute action 𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖) in environment 𝐸;
12
Initialize invalid history: 𝐻←[] ;
13
while 𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖) is invalid do
14
𝐻←𝐻.append(𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖));
15
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡′𝑜𝑝←𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑝∪𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑓∪𝐻;
16
𝑓𝑡
𝑖←𝜋(𝑀, 𝐷𝐹,𝑐𝑖,𝑠𝑡
𝑖, 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡′𝑜𝑝), 𝑓𝑡
𝑖∈𝐹;
17
𝑝𝑡
𝑖←𝜋(𝑃,𝑐𝑖, 𝑓𝑡
𝑖, 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎), 𝑝𝑡
𝑖∈𝑃;
18
Execute action 𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖) in environment 𝐸;
19
end
20
𝐴𝑖←𝐴𝑖.append(𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖));
21
𝑡←𝑡+ 1;
22
Observe state 𝑠𝑡
𝑖from environment 𝐸;
23
𝑔←𝜋(𝐴𝑖,𝑐𝑖+1,𝑠𝑡
𝑖, 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑝);
24
𝑀←𝜋(𝑀, 𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖),𝑠𝑡
𝑖,𝑔, 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑠𝑢𝑚);
25
end
26
𝐴←𝐴.append(𝐴𝑖);
27 end
28 return 𝐴
3.4.1
Multi-Agent Instruct2Act Algorithm. The detailed collabora-
tive mechanism of the proposed multi-agent system is summarized
as Alg.1. Apart from the above-mentioned definitions, the backbone
LLM that the three agents are founded on is denoted as 𝜋. At the
beginning of each step, the algorithm initializes the system memory
𝑀and the corresponding action sequence of this step 𝐴𝑖as empty
and sets the step goal as unaccomplished state. Afterwards, the
algorithm continuously generates actions for the current step until
the goal is accomplished. At each iteration of action generation,
the operation agent, which is designed by prompting the backbone
LLM 𝜋with 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑝, firstly generates a skill(operation) function
𝑓𝑡
𝑖given the memory 𝑀, the descriptions of the skill library 𝐷𝐹,
the instruction of the current step 𝑐𝑖, and the state 𝑠𝑡
𝑖. Based on 𝑐𝑖
and the generated 𝑓𝑡
𝑖, the parameter selection agent is activated by
prompting 𝜋with 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎and select an appropriate parameter
for 𝑓𝑡
𝑖from the parameter list 𝑃. A complete action is the inferred op-
eration function associated with the selected parameter, i.e., 𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖).
However, actions generated by LLM may not always be valid in the
test environment, e.g., non-predefined functions. Therefore, a self-
reflection mechanism is introduced to make the operation agent
correct itself based on the reflection prompt 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑓and the
invalid history until a valid action 𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖) is generated. Afterwards,
the action sequence of the current step 𝐴𝑖is appended with 𝑓𝑡
𝑖(𝑝𝑡
𝑖),
and a new state 𝑠𝑡
𝑖is captured. Given the updated 𝐴𝑖, 𝑠𝑡
𝑖and the in-
struction of next step 𝑐𝑖+1, the inspection agent makes a judgement
on whether the step goal is accomplished by prompting 𝜋with
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑝. Subsequently, the operation agent updates the mem-
ory 𝑀by summarizing the conversation with 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑠𝑢𝑚. If the
step goal is accomplished, the algorithm will start a new iteration
for action generation of next step. It is worth mentioning that, in
spite of using different prompts, summarization and self-reflection
are still the behavior of the operation agent, since they continuously
maintain and use the common memory 𝑀in one conversational
session. Therefore, the operation agent is the core controller of the
system. After goals of all steps are accomplished, the algorithm will
return a full sequence of all recorded actions as the final output.
3.4.2
Skill Library. A skill is defined as a high-level operation
function wrapping ADB commands to simulate users’ actions on
the APP. Natural language descriptions are carefully prompted to
make these skills more understandable for the agent. Skill func-
tions and their descriptions are defined as Table 2. As for click,
input_text, swipe_selector, the operation agent needs to iden-
tify the resource id of the target widget, which is an argument for
these skill functions. When using input functions, i.e., input_text
and input_by_numeric_keyboard, the operation agent asks the
parameter selection agent for test parameters as inputs of the two
functions. We use the following template to embed the information
of skill library into the prompts of the operation agent:
"Exclusively use commands listed below, e.g. command_name.
Commands:
[NAME]: [DESCRIPTION], args: ([ARGUMENT]: [TYPE], ...);
......
[NAME]: [DESCRIPTION], args: ([ARGUMENT]: [TYPE], ...)."
3.4.3
Prompt Structure. We use a shared prompt structure for con-
sistency, yet with agent-specific content. The prompt is composed
of the following key components:
• Profiling: indicates a specific role of the agent.
• Task: describes detailed task of the agent including require-
ments and constraints.
• Capability: represents the agent’s available skills or prior
knowledge.
• Instruction: is rewritten instruction of a specific test case
step.
• Observation: denotes observed state (GUI information) in
the environment.
• Context: includes all useful context information, e.g., past
dialog or information from other agents.
• Response Format: defines a specific JSON template of the
agent response, which has the following elements:
– Reasoning: asks for a detailed reasoning process of the
inferred answer.

Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
Zhitao Wang et al.
Skill Functions
Descriptions
click(rid: str)
Click a UI element specified by the resource id (rid) of view hierarchy
input_text(rid: str, text: str)
Input the content string into a text box specified by the resource id of view hierarchy
input_by_numeric_keyboard(digits: str)
Use the numeric keyboard to enter the digits
press_adb_back_key()
Press back key on Android device, this is different from clicking back button on screen
scroll(direction: str)
Scroll on screen
swipe_selector(rid: str, direction: str)
Swipe a selector specified by specified by the resource id of view hierarchy
Table 2: Skill Library
– Plan: (optional) requires for detailed action plan, which
is only used for the operation agent.
– Answer: specifies the structure and elements of the an-
swer. This varies among agents.
For each agent, profiling, task, capability and response format
are fixed all the time, while instruction, observation and context
are dynamically collected.
3.4.4
Operation Agent. As the core of the system, operation agent
is responsible for planning expected user actions and generating
corresponding action functions. The contents of “Capability" com-
ponent are skill functions and corresponding descriptions. “Instruc-
tion" is the rewritten text of current step, and “Observation" is the
text representation of current GUI page. “Context" component of
operation agent is relatively complex, including:
• Working Memory: past dialog and executed actions from
previous rounds.
• Invalid Actions: (optional) invalid actions and correspond-
ing results at the current step.
• Reflection: (optional) prompts the agent to review invalid
actions and provide self reflection.
The expected response is an action through a calling of a specific
skill function, thus “Answer" of operation agent requires for skill
function name, corresponding arguments and natural language
description of this action.
3.4.5
Parameter Selection Agent. Parameter selection agent is re-
sponsible for choosing appropriate parameters from hundreds of
candidates. “Capability" of parameter selection agent is the param-
eter list. Since parameter selection agent only need to interact with
operation agent, “Observation" is empty and “Context" is informa-
tion of inferred skill function from operation agent. Only when
inferred skills are inputting functions, parameter selection agent
is activated. “Answer" of parameter selection agent specifies the
structure should be the name of the selected parameter.
3.4.6
Inspection Agent. Inspection agent aims at verifying whether
the state achieves the goal of current step. Different from operation
agent, “Instruction" and “Observation" of inspection agent are the
content of next step and the information of GUI page after actions,
respectively. “Context" of inspection agent is the sequence of per-
formed actions of previous steps, Since the expected answer of
inspection agent is binary, i.e., goal-accomplished or not, “Answer"
of inspection agent is either "yes" or "no".
Number of Test Cases
Average Steps
Average Actions
450
7
15
Table 3: Statistics of Emperimental Data
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Evaluation Settings
Experimental Data. The objective of the proposed model is
to generate correct scripts of test cases in the UAT system. Test
cases without bugs or other system problems are sampled from the
system as evaluation data. This means that all the experimental
cases have passed the UAT with human implemented scripts. The
statistics of the experimental data is summarized in Table 3.

i.e., the ratio of successfully passed cases among all test cases:

Í𝑁
𝑘=1 1[𝐶𝑘is passed]
𝑁
where 𝐶𝑘is 𝑘th test case in the experimental dataset. 1(𝐶𝑘) is an
indicator function returning 1 if the whole test case 𝐶𝑘is passed
and 0 otherwise.

ratio of successfully completed steps on all test cases:

Í𝑁
𝑘=1
Í𝐿𝑘
𝑗=1 1[𝑐𝑘
𝑗is passed]
Í𝑁
𝑘=1 𝐿𝑘
where 𝑁is the total number of test cases, 𝐿𝑘represents the length
(number of steps) of 𝑘th test case and 𝑐𝑘
𝑗denotes 𝑗th step of 𝑘th
test case. Similarly, 1(𝑐𝑘
𝑗) is 1 if 𝑐𝑘
𝑗is passed and 0 otherwise.
Compared Methods. In the literature, there is few research
works or public methods for automated UAT, particularly for the
stage of test script generation. Therefore, in this paper, we compare
the proposed method with its variants.
• Single Agent: this is a variant that only one agent is used and it
should fulfill all sub-tasks when generation actions. The prompt
consists of all agents’ prompts from XUAT-Copilot.
• Without Reflection: this is a variant that reflection part is
removed from the prompt of operation agent.
4.2
Evaluation Performance
The evaluation performance is listed in Table 4. Compared with the
single agent version, XUAT-Copilot gains significant improvements

XUAT-Copilot: Multi-Agent Collaborative System for Automated User Acceptance Testing with Large Language Model
Conference acronym ’XX, 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
Methods

Single Agent
22.65%
25.25%
Without Reflection
81.96%
89.39%
XUAT-Copilot
88.55%
93.03%
Table 4: Evaluation Performance
on both metrics. This demonstrates the superiority of the proposed
multi-agent framework based on LLM. As mentioned above, single
agent cannot handle multiple tasks in the UAT processes simultane-
ously, and long prompts may easily lead to forgetting, hallucinating
and inefficient planning. Additionally, the experimental results
prove the importance of reflections in prompts. When the reflection
is removed, the evaluation performance decreases.
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the possibility and feasibility of LLMs
to automate the test script generation in the UAT process. A multi-
agent system XUAT-Copilot is proposed for this purpose. Three
agents in the proposed system handle different tasks for test script
generation and collaborate with each other. The superiority of the
proposed system is demonstrated by the experiments. The system
has launched the formal testing environment of WeChat Pay APP
to improve the efficiency of test script generation. As for future
work, we plan to further improve the generalization ability of the
system by removing some rule-based parts and introducing more
LLM agents for more specific tasks.
