arXiv:1501.05426v1  [cs.SI]  22 Jan 2015
Classiﬁcation of message spreading in a
heterogeneous social network
Siwar Jendoubi1,2 ⋆, Arnaud Martin2,
Ludovic Liétard2, and Boutheina Ben Yaghlane1
1 LARODEC, University of Tunis, Avenue de la liberté, 2000 Le Bardo, Tunisie
2 IRISA, University of Rennes 1, Rue E. Branly, 22300 Lannion, France

Abstract. Nowadays, social networks such as Twitter, Facebook and
LinkedIn become increasingly popular. In fact, they introduced new
habits, new ways of communication and they collect every day several
information that have diﬀerent sources. Most existing research works fo-
cus on the analysis of homogeneous social networks, i.e. we have a single
type of node and link in the network. However, in the real world, social
networks oﬀer several types of nodes and links. Hence, with a view to
preserve as much information as possible, it is important to consider so-
cial networks as heterogeneous and uncertain. The goal of our paper is to
classify the social message based on its spreading in the network and the
theory of belief functions. The proposed classiﬁer interprets the spread
of messages on the network, crossed paths and types of links. We tested
our classiﬁer on a real word network that we collected from Twitter, and
our experiments show the performance of our belief classiﬁer.
Keywords: Information propagation, heterogeneous social network,
classiﬁcation, evidence theory
1
Introduction
Nowadays, social networks such as Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn become in-
creasingly popular. In fact, they introduced new habits and new ways of com-
munication. Besides, one of the distinguishing features of on-line social networks
is the information spreading through social links. This is due to the “word-
of mouth” exchanges, i.e. user-to-user exchanges, which makes the information
more accessible and it spreads and reaches a large scale in few minutes. The
volume and the dynamic of the exchange has attracted the attention of re-
search communities. This research is motivated by the fact that the study of the
diﬀusion of information is useful for understanding the dynamic behind social
networks and the evolution of human relationships. Thus, they have focused on
⋆These research works and innovation are carried out within the framework of the
device MOBIDOC ﬁnanced by the European Union under the PASRI program and
administrated by the ANPR.

2
Siwar Jendoubi et al.
the processing of such data to extract high quality information, this informa-
tion may be an important event, it can also be useful for optimizing business
performance, or even for preventing terrorist attacks, etc.
The processing of a social network, always, starts by studying its structural
properties, in fact the simple visualization of the network cannot give us a clear
analysis about it. In the literature, we found a lot of structural properties mea-
sures like the degree, the betweenness, the closeness, the eigenvector centrality,
etc. Quantifying structural properties and interpreting them will be essential to
characterize the behavior of social actors, their position in the network, their
interactions and how do they diﬀuse the information. Hence, the analysis of
the network structural properties is an essential step when we study and model
information propagation.
In our work we are interested in the classiﬁcation of the spreading of the
information in a heterogeneous social network. We assume that each type of
content has some speciﬁc behavior when it propagates in the network. Hence,
we propose a new algorithm of information propagation in a heterogeneous social
network that takes into account the behavior of the content to be propagated.
Therefore, we introduce an evidential algorithm to classify the propagation of
the information through the network.
In the next section, we outline the literature review of the information prop-
agation in social networks, the social message classiﬁcation and the theory of
belief functions. In section three, we introduce our algorithm of information
propagation in a heterogeneous social network. In section four, we present our
classiﬁcation algorithm. Finally, we present our experiments in the ﬁfth section.
2
Literature review
2.1
Information propagation in social networks
Information dissemination is a wide research domain that attracted the attention
of researchers from various ﬁeld such as physics and biology. We ﬁnd the fam-
ily of epidemiological models that are used to understand how diseases spread
through populations. The simplest version is SI (Suspected-Infected), in this
model, an individual is suspected if he has not the disease yet but he can catch
it and become infected. This model was extended and many other version ap-
peared to model speciﬁc diseases. Hence, we ﬁnd SIS model (Suspected-Infected-
Suspected), SIR model (Suspected-Infected-Recovered), SIRS model (Suspected-
Infected-Recovered-Suspected), etc. The reader can refer to [1,17] for further de-
tails.
Computer scientists are generally interested in studying information propa-
gation in on-line social networks. Mainly, their goal is to develop a model that
simulates the diﬀusion process. Basic models are Linear Threshold Model (LTM)
[7] and Independent Cascade Model
(ICM) [6]. They assume the existence of a
structure of a directed graph where each node can be activated or not knowing
that you can not inactivate already activated nodes. The ICM model requires

Classiﬁcation of message spreading in a heterogeneous social network
3
a probability distribution which must be associated with each link and LTM
requires a degree of inﬂuence that must be set on each link and a threshold of
inﬂuence for each node [12]. These two models were reused and improved in a
lot of works like [5,18].
In this paper, we focus on information propagation in a heterogeneous social
network, i.e. on which we ﬁnd several types of links and/or nodes. In fact, in real
word social networks we ﬁnd many types of objects (users, groups, applications,
etc) that are connected via many types of social links (friendship, membership,
colleague, etc). Information dissemination in homogeneous social networks has
been widely studied and the reader can refer to [8] for a recent survey. Now, re-
search works start focusing on the processing of heterogeneous social networks.
We ﬁnd the work of [19] that simulates the propagation of the information in het-
erogeneous social networks based on the conﬁguration model approach. In [13],
authors propose to consider the behavior of individuals to model the inﬂuence
propagation, their model is based on a heterogeneous social network.
2.2
Social message classiﬁcation
Social message classiﬁcation approaches, presented in the literature, are generally
based on the content of the information and text mining techniques. They search
to classify the user generated content to positive or negative about a some speciﬁc
product. This task is so called sentiment classiﬁcation and it is used to mine
opinions. It starts by an item and/or feature extraction step, then it compares
the extracted items and/or features to an existing corpus, ﬁnally comes the
sentiment classiﬁcation that can be based on items, features or both of them
[14]. We ﬁnd the work of [15] in which the author used a random sample of 3516
tweets to classify the feelings of consumers with respect to well-known brands.
He classiﬁed the opinions (tweets) into positive and negative to see what is the
most dominant opinion. In [10], a detailed case study that applies text mining
to analyze unstructured textual content published on Twitter and Facebook and
that talks about three chains of pizza. The reader can refer to the work of [16]
for a recent study of the state of the art of social networks data mining.
2.3
Theory of belief functions
Upper and Lower probabilities [4] was the ﬁrst ancestor of the theory of belief
functions. Then comes the Mathematical theory of evidence [20] which deﬁnes
the basic framework of information management and processing in the evidence
theory, often called Shafer model. The main purpose of the theory of belief
functions is to achieve more reliable, precise and coherent information. Here
we present a short introduction of this theory, for more details the reader can
refer to [20].
Let Ω= {ω1, ω2, . . . , ωn} be a set of all possible decisions that can be made
in a particular problem, it is called frame of discernment. The basic belief as-
signment (BBA), mΩ, represents the agent belief on Ω, and it must respect
P
A⊆ΩmΩ(A) = 1. In the case where we have mΩ(A) > 0, A is called focal set

4
Siwar Jendoubi et al.
Algorithm 1 Information propagation algorithm
Inputs:
– N: number of iteration
– S: source of the message
– Str: propagation strategy
– Network: the heterogeneous social network
Output:
– PrNet: propagation network
Algorithm:
1. ReadyNodes.add(S);
2. For i = 1 to N do
(a) for j = 1 to ReadyNodes.size() do
i. Node ←ReadyNodes.get(j);
ii. if(Node.propagate()=True)
foreach LinkType do
x ←Node.outdegree() ∗Node.propagationTendancy()
∗Str.LinkTypeProportion();
R←(Node.randomSelection(x, LinkT ype));
(b) Pr.reﬁne(R);
(c) R1.addAll(R);
(d) ReadyNodes.addAll(R1);
(e) R1.clear;
of mΩ. The basic belief assignment can be converted into other functions deﬁned
from 2Ωto [0, 1]. This theory presents a rich framework for information fusion
and combining pieces of information (evidence). We ﬁnd the Dempster’s rule [4],
the conjunctive and disjunctive combination rule [21], etc.
3
Propagation algorithm in a heterogeneous social
network
In this section we introduce an algorithm of information propagation in a het-
erogeneous social network. This new algorithm takes four diﬀerent inputs which
are the number of iterations (stopping condition), the source of the message, the
propagation strategy and the heterogeneous social network. As output, we have
the propagation network that preserves the traversed paths. Algorithm 1 shows
outlines of our propagation process. It starts by the source node. First, we verify
if the current node is ready (wants) to propagate the message. Then, for each
type of link in the network we compute the number of neighbors that will receive
the message.
We assume that each type of message has some special characteristics of
propagation in the network that is related to the types of links, so we deﬁne a
propagation strategy for each type of message. Moreover, we consider the ten-
dency of a particular node to propagate the message as a propagation parameter.
Indeed, this parameter models the fact that a node can choose to distribute the
message to a subset of its contacts (that he selects) or to retain it. The novelty

Classiﬁcation of message spreading in a heterogeneous social network
5
of this algorithm is that we consider the type of the message while propagating
it. Moreover our algorithm works with heterogeneous social networks where we
have diﬀerent types of links.
4
Classiﬁcation of information propagation
The main purpose of this paper is to classify the spreading of the information
through the network in order to characterize its content. In this section, we
introduce our classiﬁcation process that is composed of two steps; parameter
learning step and the classiﬁcation step. As mentioned in the algorithm 2, to
learn the parameters of the model we need a set of propagation networks. First
of all, we compute the number of nodes that have received the message via
each type of link. We do this computation for each propagation level, i.e. we
call propagation level the number of links between the source of the message
and the target node. Second, we calculate the accrued eﬀective by summing
the eﬀective of each level with the eﬀective of the one before, this computation
is done in order to preserve the propagation history at each propagation level.
After that we transform the eﬀective set of each level to a probability distribution
deﬁned on types of links, this transformation is done for two reasons; the ﬁrst
one, we need a probability distribution for the probabilistic classiﬁer and the
second one, it is an essential step to get the basic belief assignment distribution.
Finally we transform each probability distribution to a BBA distribution using
the consonant transformation [2,3].
Algorithm 2 Parameter learning algorithm
Input:
– PrNetSet: a set of propagation networks
Output:
– ProbaSet: a set of probabilities distributions (a probability distribution by prop-
agation level).
– BbaSet: a set of BBA distributions (a BBA distribution by propagation level).
Algorithm:
//eﬀective computation
Foreach PrNet in PrNetSet do
1. Foreach Level in PrNet do
(a) Foreach TypeLink do
N (TypeLink, Level) ←N (TypeLink, Level)
+ComputeNodes(T ypeLink);
//Accrued eﬀective calculation
For Level= 2 to NbrLevels do
1. Foreach TypeLink do
(a) N (TypeLink, Level) ←N (TypeLink, Level)
+N (TypeLink, Level −1);
//ProbaSet and BbaSet computation
ProbaSet←ProbabilitiesCalculation(N);
BbaSet←ConsonantTransformation(ProbaSet);

6
Siwar Jendoubi et al.
Once model’s parameters are learned, we can use it to classify new coming
message (propagation network of the message) as shown in algorithm 3. Our
classiﬁcation algorithm starts by applying the same parameter learning process
(algorithm 2) on the propagation network to be classiﬁed. Then for each level in
the network we compute the distance between its probability distribution and
the probability distribution of each propagation strategy, then we choose the
class of the nearest propagation strategy (with the shortest distance) to be the
class of the message in the current level. The same process is done with BBA
distributions as mentioned in the algorithm.
Algorithm 3 Classiﬁcation algorithm
Input:
– ProbaSets: a set of probabilities distributions for each strategy of propagation.
– BbaSets: a set of BBA distributions for each strategy of propagation.
– PrNet: The propagation network to be classiﬁed
Output:
– In order to see the impact of the level of propagation on the classiﬁcation results,
in our output we have a class by level.
Algorithm:
1. (ProbaPr, BbaPr) ←ParameterLearning (PrNet);
2. For i = 1 to NbrStrategies do
(a) Foreach Level do
i. ProbaDist(i, Level) ←Distance (ProbaPr, ProbaSets (i));
ii. BbaDist(i, Level) ←Distance (BbaPr, BbaSets (i));
3. Foreach Level do
(a) ProbaClasses(Level) ←StrategyMinDistance (ProbaDist (:, Level));
(b) BbaClasses(Level) ←StrategyMinDistance (BbaDist (:, Level));
5
Experiments and results
In this section, we present some experiments to show the power of the proposed
evidential classiﬁcation algorithm.
5.1
Data description
We used NodeXL V 1.0.1.245 [9] to collect social network data from Twitter. We
collected the network shown in ﬁgure 1. It is a directed network in which nodes
are Twitter users. Table 1 shows the characteristics of our network data.
As mentioned above, we need a heterogeneous social network to test proposed
algorithms. Therefore, we used the structure of the network collected from Twit-
ter and we generated, randomly, the types of links. We assume four types of link
in the network which are “Professional”, “Familial”, “Friendly” and “Undeﬁned”.
Then we obtained a heterogeneous social network that is used as input for our
propagation algorithm.

Classiﬁcation of message spreading in a heterogeneous social network
7
Table 1: Data characteristics
Vertices Edges
Geodesics
distance
Betweenness Closeness Eigenvector
97
350
6
184.99
0.004
0.01
Fig. 1: Network visualization
5.2
Experiment conﬁguration
In the following experiments, we deﬁned three diﬀerent propagation strategies
for three types of messages which are: “Spam”, “Professional” and “Familial”.
Each strategy is deﬁned as the proportion of the nodes that will receive the
message from each type of links. Hence, we have to deﬁne four proportions for
each propagation strategy. To be as near as possible to the reality, we added a
noise rate to the strategy. We note that the noise value can be added or removed
from the proportions of kind of messages. We used the euclidean distance for the
probabilistic classiﬁer:
dE (Pr1, Pr2) =
v
u
u
t
card
X
i=1
(Pr1 (i) −Pr2 (i))2
(1)
and the Jousselme distance [11] for the evidential one:
dJ (m1, m2) =
r
1
2 (m1 −m2)T D
= (m1 −m2)
(2)
such that D
= is an 2n × 2n matrix and D (A, B) = |A∩B|
A∪B . We ﬁxed the number
of levels in the network to three (three iterations in the propagation algorithm).
Then we run the proposed propagation algorithm to create a training set for

8
Siwar Jendoubi et al.
each propagation strategy, we ﬁxed the size of the strategy training set to 100
propagation networks. Also, we created a testing set of size 100.
5.3
Results and discussion
In this section we present our results and a comparison between the proba-
bilistic and the evidential classiﬁer. To obtain accurate results we turned the
experimental process ten times and we take the mean of the percentage of cor-
rectly classiﬁed (PCC) propagation networks. Figure 2 shows the impact of the
propagation level on the PCC of the probabilistic results (ﬁgure 2a) and the ev-
idential results (ﬁgure 2b). Figures 2a and 2b illustrate that the PCC increases
when the propagation level increases and we observe this fact starting from the
noise level 20%. In ﬁgure 2a we observe that the curve of the second level coin-
cides with the curve of third level and practically there is no improvement in the
PCC. However, in ﬁgure 2b (evidential results), we note that the PCC increases
with the propagation level, this fact is observed starting from the noise rate 20%.
Hence, we have the PCC of the third level greater than the PCC of the ﬁrst and
the second levels, and the PCC of the second level is higher than the PCC of
the ﬁrst one. Therefore, more the message propagates in the network, more we
can characterize it.
(a) Probabilistic results
(b) Evidential results
Fig. 2: The impact of the propagation level on the PCC
In ﬁgure 3, we compare the probabilistic and the evidential results of the
third propagation level. We note that without noise (0%) the probabilistic PCC
is about 96% (with a 95% conﬁdence interval of ±1.27) and the evidential PCC
is equal to 93% (with a 95% conﬁdence interval of ±1.60), but in real world
social networks the absence of the noise is an ideal fact and cannot be realistic.
When the noise rate increases, the curve shows that the percentage of correctly
classiﬁed propagation networks (messages) decreases. However, we see that the
evidential (Belief) PCC starts to be greater than the probabilistic (Proba) one.
We observe this fact from the noise rate 20% where we have an evidential PCC

Classiﬁcation of message spreading in a heterogeneous social network
9
equals to 70.7% (±4.33) and a probabilistic PCC equals to 65.8% (±4.18). Thus,
we can conclude that the evidential classiﬁer is more robust against the noise
and gives better classiﬁcation rates than the probabilistic classiﬁer.
Fig. 3: Comparison between probabilistic results and evidential results (level
three)
6
Conclusion
To conclude, we presented a state of the art of the information propagation, clas-
siﬁcation of social messages and the evidence theory. Then, we proposed an algo-
rithm of information propagation in a heterogeneous social network. Thereafter
we introduced a new evidential classiﬁcation approach that classiﬁes message
propagation in a heterogeneous social network. Finally, we presented some ex-
periments and we noticed the performance of the evidential classiﬁer against the
probabilistic one in noisy cases. Moreover, we observed that when the propaga-
tion level increases, the message class becomes more accurate and more realistic.
For future works, we will compare our propagation algorithm with previ-
ous algorithms. Also, we will search to improve it by the management of the
uncertainty and the imprecision related to types of relationships between social
actors. Our next goal is therefore to deﬁne a message propagation algorithm that
takes into account the uncertainty of the types of relationships that is deﬁned
on the links, also we will search to consider the heterogeneity of nodes in the
network. Second, we will run our classiﬁcation algorithm with a more complex
heterogeneous social network in order to prove its applicability.
