Questioning the AI: Informing Design Practices for
Explainable AI User Experiences
Q. Vera Liao
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

Daniel Gruen
IBM Research
Cambridge, MA, USA

Sarah Miller
IBM Research
Cambridge, MA, USA

ABSTRACT
A surge of interest in explainable AI (XAI) has led to a vast
collection of algorithmic work on the topic. While many rec-
ognize the necessity to incorporate explainability features in
AI systems, how to address real-world user needs for under-
standing AI remains an open question. By interviewing 20
UX and design practitioners working on various AI products,
we seek to identify gaps between the current XAI algorithmic
work and practices to create explainable AI products. To do
so, we develop an algorithm-informed XAI question bank in
which user needs for explainability are represented as proto-
typical questions users might ask about the AI, and use it as
a study probe. Our work contributes insights into the design
space of XAI, informs efforts to support design practices in
this space, and identiﬁes opportunities for future XAI work.
We also provide an extended XAI question bank and discuss
how it can be used for creating user-centered XAI.
Author Keywords
Explainable AI; human-AI interaction; User experience
INTRODUCTION
The rapidly growing adoption of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI),
and Machine Learning (ML) technologies using opaque deep
neural networks in particular, has spurred great academic and
public interest in explainability to make AI algorithms un-
derstandable by people. This issue appears in popular press,
industry practices [2, 10], regulations [24], as well as hundreds
of recent papers published in AI and related disciplines. These
XAI works often express an algorithm-centric view, relying
on “researchers’ intuition of what constitutes a ‘good’ expla-
nation” [63]. This is problematic because AI explanations
are often demanded by lay users, who may not have deep
technical understanding of AI, but hold preconception of what
constitutes useful explanations for decisions made in a familiar
domain. As an example, one of the most popular approaches
to explain a prediction made by a ML classiﬁer, as dozens
of XAI algorithms strive to do [40], is by listing the features
with the highest weights contributing to a model’s prediction.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission

CHI ’20, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA.
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376590
For example, a model predicting a patient having the ﬂu may
explain by saying “the symptoms of sneeze and headache are
contributing to this prediction” [74]. However, it is question-
able whether such an explanation satisﬁes a doctor’s needs
to understand the AI, or adds signiﬁcant value to a clinical
decision-support tool.
To close the gap between XAI algorithms and user needs for
effective transparency, the HCI community has called for in-
terdisciplinary collaboration [4] and user-centered approaches
to explainability [92]. This emerging area of work tends to
either build on frameworks of human explanations from social
science, or empirically study how explanation features impact
user interaction with AI. In this paper, we take a complemen-
tary approach by investigating challenges faced by industry
practitioners to create explainable AI products, with the goal
of identifying gaps between the algorithmic work of XAI and
what is needed to address real-world user needs.
Recently, an increasing number of open-source toolkits (e.g. [1,
2, 3, 10]) are making XAI techniques, which produce various
forms of explanation for “black-box” ML models, accessible
to practitioners. However, little is known about how to put
these techniques from research literature into practice. As
we will show, it is challenging work to bridge user needs and
technical capabilities to create effective explainabilty features
in AI products. This kind of work often falls to those with
a bridging role in product teams–the design and user experi-
ence (UX) practitioners, whose job involves identifying user
needs, communicating with developers and stakeholders, and
creating design solutions based on demands and constraints
on both sides. We study, therefore, how AI explainability is
approached by design and UX practitioners, explore together
with them how XAI techniques can be applied in various prod-
ucts, and identify opportunities to better support their work and
thus the creation of user-centered explainable AI applications.
Given the early status of XAI in industry practices, we an-
ticipate a lack of established means to uncover user needs
or a shared technical understanding. Therefore, we develop
a novel probe to ground our investigation, namely an XAI
algorithm informed question bank. As an explanation can be
seen as an answer to a question [63], we represent user needs
for explainability in terms of the questions a user might ask
about the AI. Drawn on relevant ML literature and prior work
on question-driven explanations in various domains, we create
a list of prototypical user questions that can be addressed by
current XAI algorithms. These questions thus represent the
arXiv:2001.02478v3  [cs.HC]  3 Sep 2021

current availability of algorithmic methods for AI explainabil-
ity, allowing us to explore how they can be applied in various
AI products, and identify their limitations for addressing real-
world user needs. Our contributions are threefold:
• We provide insights into how user needs for different types
of explainability are presented in various AI products. We
suggest how these user needs should be understood, pri-
oritized and addressed. We also identify opportunities for
future XAI work to better satisfy these user needs.
• We summarize current challenges faced by design practition-
ers to create explainable AI products, including variability
of user needs for explainability, discrepancies between al-
gorithmic explanations and human explanations and a lack
of support for design practices.
• We present an extended XAI question bank (Figure 1) by
combining algorithm-informed questions and user questions
identiﬁed in the study. We discuss how it can be used as
guidance and tool to support the needs speciﬁcation work
to create user-centered XAI applications.
BACKGROUND
Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI)
Although XAI ﬁrst appeared in expert systems almost four
decades ago [22, 87], it is gaining widespread visibility as
a ﬁeld focusing on ML interpretability [19]. The term ex-
plainability is used by the research community with varying
scope. In much of the ML literature, XAI aims to make the
reasons behind a ML model’s decisions comprehensible to
humans [40, 59, 74]. In a broader view, explainability en-
compasses everything that makes ML models transparent and
understandable, also including information about the data,
performance, etc. [10, 45]. Our view aligns with the latter.
Recent papers surveyed this rapidly growing ﬁeld and iden-
tiﬁed its key research threads [5, 19, 34, 40, 64, 73]. We
will discuss taxonomies of XAI techniques in the next section.
Another core thread is the evaluation of explanations, which
answers whether an explanation is good enough, and how to
compare different explanations. These questions are not only
critical for choosing appropriate XAI techniques, but also un-
derlie the development of intelligent systems that optimize
the choice of explanation, such as interactive or personalized
explanations [4, 81, 94]. Toward this goal, many sought to
deﬁne the desiderata of XAI [19, 40, 45, 77], including ﬁ-
delity, completeness, robustness, etc. Despite the conceptual
discussions, there are few established means of quantifying
explainability. Partly, the reason is that the effectiveness of an
explanation is relative to the recipient, and on a philosophical
ground, the question asked [17]. So the same explanation may
be seen as more or less comprehensible to different users, or
even to the same user engaged in a different understanding.
Many therefore advocate that the evaluation of XAI needs to
involve real users within the targeted application [30, 44].
Given its recipient-dependent nature, it is clear that work on
XAI must take a human-centered approach. By conducting
a literature review in social science on how humans give and
receive explanations, Miller identiﬁed a list of human-friendly
characteristics of explanation that are not given sufﬁcient atten-
tion in the algorithmic work of XAI, including contrastiveness
(to a counterfactual case), selectivity, social process, focusing
on the abnormal, etc. Wang et al. [92] proposed a conceptual
framework to connect XAI techniques and cognitive patterns
in human-decision making to guide the design of XAI systems.
With a fundamental interest in creating user-centered tech-
nologies, the HCI community is seeing burgeoning efforts
around designing and studying user interactions with explain-
able AI [14, 18, 21, 29, 45, 49, 54, 71]. As a literature analysis
performed by Abdul et al. [4] shows, before this wave of work
on ML systems, the HCI community have studied explainable
systems in various contexts, most notably context-aware appli-
cations [12, 56, 57], recommender systems [42], debugging
tools [53] and algorithmic transparency [28, 80]. Speciﬁc to
XAI, recent studies largely focused on empirically understand-
ing the effect of explanation features on users’ interaction with
and perception of ML systems, usually through controlled lab
or ﬁeld experiments. Notably, although explanations were
found to improve user understanding of the AI systems, con-
clusions about its beneﬁts for user trust and acceptance were
mixed [21, 49, 54, 70], suggesting potential gaps between
algorithmic explanations and end user needs.
Our work shares the goal of bridging between the algorithm-
centric XAI and user-centered explanations. In contrast to
prior work centered around end users, we focus on the people
that engage in this bridging work, namely UX and design prac-
titioners. By studying their current practices, we explore the
largely undeﬁned design space of XAI and identify challenges
for creating explainable AI products.
Supporting AI practitioners
We join a growing group of scholars studying the work of
industry practitioners who create AI products [7, 15, 45, 46,
67, 78]. By better supporting their work, we can ameliorate
downstream usability, ethical and societal problems associated
with AI. For example, Boukhelifa et al. [15] interviewed 12
data scientists to understand their coping strategies around un-
certainty in data science work, and proposed a process model
for uncertainty-aware data analytics. Holstein et al. inter-
viewed 35 ML practitioners to conduct the ﬁrst investigation
of commercial product teams’ challenges for developing fairer
ML systems, and identiﬁed the disconnect between their needs
and the solutions proposed in the fair ML research literature.
Most studies of AI practitioners focused on data scientists.
As creating explainable AI products requires a user-centered
approach, design practitioners should also perform an indis-
pensable role. Despite a growing body of HCI work on AI
technologies, there is a lack of design guidelines for AI sys-
tems. One notable exception is a recent paper by Amershi
et al. [7], which synthesized a set of 18 usability guidelines
for AI systems. Several of these guidelines (e.g., make clear
what the system can do, how well it can do, why it did what
it did) are relevant to explainability, but they do not provide
actionable guidance on how to actualize these capabilities.
Meanwhile, recent papers explored design methods support-
ing the creation of explainable AI systems. Wolf [96] proposed
a scenario-based approach to identify user needs for explain-
ability (“what people might need to understand about AI sys-
tems”) early on in system development. Eiband et al. [31]

proposed a stage-based participatory design process, which
guides product-speciﬁc needs speciﬁcation–what to explain,
followed by iterative design of solutions–how to explain.
Our work is motivated by a similar pragmatic goal of support-
ing design practices of XAI. More speciﬁcally, in the face of
increasingly available XAI techniques, we are interested in
the design work that connects user needs and these technical
capabilities. In particular, we probe the challenges to identify
the suitability of XAI techniques. A recent stream of guidance
in the public domain (e.g. [1, 2, 10]) on how to select among
XAI algorithms suggest their suitability can be difﬁcult to de-
termine. More problematically, these guidelines are targeting
data scientists, using criteria grounded in the development pro-
cess (e.g., explaining data or features, pre- or post-training).
They do not directly address end user needs for understanding
AI, nor support the navigation of the design space of XAI.
Question-driven explanations
Outside the ML ﬁeld, many explored the space of user needs
for explanation using a question-driven framework. Funda-
mentally, an explanation is “an answer to a (why-) ques-
tion [63].” These questions are also user and context depen-
dent, described as “triggers” by Hoffman et al. [44] repre-
senting “tacitly an expression of a need for a certain kind of
explanation...to satisfy certain user purposes of user goals. ”
In the early generation of AI work, question-driven frame-
works were used to generate explanations for knowledge-based
systems [20, 38, 88]. AQUA [72] is a reasoning model that
uses questions to generate explanations and identify knowl-
edge gaps for learning. AQUA was built upon a taxonomy of
questions, including anomaly detection questions, hypothesis
veriﬁcation questions, etc. Silveira et al. provided a taxon-
omy of user questions about software to drive the design of
help systems [82]. Building on it, Glass et al. [35] investigated
users’ explanation requirements in using an adaptive agent and
showed that user needs for different types of explanation vary.
In context-aware computing, Lim and Dey [56] developed
a taxonomy of user needs for intelligibility by crowdsourc-
ing user questions in scenarios of context-aware applications.
These questions were coded into intelligibility types, including
input, output, conceptual model (why, how, why not, what else,
what if) and non-functional types (certainty, control). This
taxonomy enabled a toolkit that supports the generation of
explanations for context-aware applications [57].
Inspired by the prior work, we use an XAI question bank,
containing prototypical questions that users may ask for under-
standing AI systems, as a study probe representing user needs
for AI explanability. Instead of using question taxonomies
that are not speciﬁc to ML, we start by performing a literature
review to arrive at a taxonomy of existing XAI techniques,
and use it to guide the creation of user questions. Thereby we
constrain the probe to reﬂect the current availability of XAI
techniques to understand how user needs for such explainabil-
ity are presented in real-world AI products.
XAI QUESTION BANK
We now describe how we developed the XAI question bank
by ﬁrst identifying a list of explanation methods supported by
current XAI algorithms, for which we focus on those gener-
ating post-hoc explanations for opaque ML models [9, 40].
For the scope of this paper, we will leave out the technical
details of the algorithms but provide references for interested
readers. There have been many efforts to create taxonomies
of XAI methods [5, 9, 19, 34, 40, 64, 65, 73, 79]. Commonly,
they differentiate between an explanation method–a pattern
or mechanism to explain ML models–and speciﬁc XAI algo-
rithms. One type of explanation method can be generated
by multiple algorithms, which may vary in performance or
applicability to speciﬁc ML models. Common dimensions
to categorize explanation methods include: 1) The scope of
the explanation, i.e. whether to support understanding the
entire model (global) versus a single prediction (local); 2) The
complexity of the model to be explained; 3) The dependency
on the model used, i.e., whether the technique applies to any
ML model or to only one type [5]; and 4) The stage of model
development to apply the explanation [19].
Except for the ﬁrst one, these dimensions are data scientist
centric as they are concerned with the characteristics of the
underlying model. For our purpose of mapping user questions,
we seek a taxonomy that lists the forms of explanation as pre-
sented to users. For example, we disregard the complexity of
the model or the explanation’s applicability to speciﬁc models,
but instead differentiate between methods that describe the
model logic as rules, decision trees or feature importance.
Also, to identify user questions an explanation addresses, we
believe it is sufﬁcient to stay at the general mechanism, and
ignore the speciﬁcity of the presentation such as textual or by
visualization [74]. Guided by these principles, we found the
taxonomy of explanators in Guidotti et al. [40] closest to our
purpose. Using it as a starting point, we consulted other survey
papers and iteratively consolidated a taxonomy of explanation
methods. In addition to the three categories in [40]–methods
that explain the entire model (global), an individual outcome
(local), and inspect how the output changes with instance
changes (inspect counterfactual), we added example based ex-
planations [45, 65], since they represent a distinct mechanism
to explain. Finally, we arrived at the taxonomy presented in
the second column of Table 1.
To map the explanation methods to user questions they can
answer, we consulted prior work that provided taxonomies
of questions for explanations [56, 57, 72, 82]. The closest to
our purpose is the intelligibility types by Lim et al. [56, 57],
developed by eliciting user questions in scenarios of context-
aware computing. In particular, the intelligibility types of How
(system logic), Why (a prediction), Why not, What if are di-
rectly applicable to ML systems. By mapping these questions
to explanation methods listed in Table 1, we identiﬁed two
additional types of question that can be addressed by existing
XAI techniques: 1) How to be that: what are the changes
required, often implying minimum changes, for an instance to
get a different target prediction; 2) How to still be this: what
are the permitted changes, often implying maximum changes,
for an instance to still get the same prediction. We note that
the questions of What if, How to be... are considered counter-
factual questions and best answered by inspection or example
based explanations, which allow users to understand the deci-

Category of
Methods
Explanation Method
Deﬁnition
Algorithm
Examples
Question Type
Explain the
model
Global feature importance
Describe the weights of features used by the model (includ-
ing visualization that shows the weights of features)
[41, 60, 69,
90]
How
(Global)
Decision tree approximation
Approximate the model to an interpretable decision-tree
[11, 47, 52]
How, Why, Why not, What if
Rule extraction
Approximate the model to a set of rules, e.g., if-then rules
[26, 93, 102]
How, Why, Why not, What if
Explain a
prediction
Local feature importance
and saliency method
Show how features of the instance contribute to the model’s
prediction (including causes in parts of an image or text)
[61, 74, 83,
85, 101]
Why
(Local)
Local rules or trees
Describe the rules or a decision-tree path that the instance
ﬁts to guarantee the prediction
[39, 75, 99]
Why, How to still be this
Inspect coun-
terfactual
Feature inﬂuence or
relevance method
Show how the prediction changes corresponding to changes
of a feature (often in a visualization format)
[8, 33, 36,
51]
What if, How to be that, How
to still be this
Contrastive or counterfactual
features
Describe the feature(s) that will change the prediction if
perturbed, absent or present
[27, 91, 100]
Why, Why not, How to be
that
Example
based
Prototypical or
representative examples
Provide example(s) similar to the instance and with the same
record as the prediction
[13, 48, 50]
Why, How to still be this
Counterfactual example
Provide example(s) with small differences from the instance
but with a different record from the prediction
[37, 55, 66]
Why, Why not, How to be
that
Table 1. Taxonomy of XAI methods mapping to user question types. Questions in bold are the primary ones that the XAI method addresses. Questions
in regular font are ones that only a subset of cases the XAI method can address. For example, while a global decision tree approximation can potentially
answer Why, Why not, and What if questions for individual instances [58], the approximation may not cover certain instances.
sion boundaries of a ML model. Table 1 was reviewed by 4
additional experts working in the ﬁeld of XAI.
Taking a broad view on explainability, we also consider de-
scriptive information that could make a ML model more trans-
parent. We added three more types based on [45, 56, 57]–
questions regarding model Input (training data), Output, and
Performance. In the rest of the paper, we refer these 9 types of
questions as 9 explainability needs categories as they represent
categories of prototypical questions users may ask to under-
stand AI. For each category, we created a leading question
(e.g.,“Why is this instance given this prediction” for the Why
category1), and supplemented 2-3 additional example ques-
tions, inquiring about features and examples whenever applies.
The list of questions developed in this step are shown in Fig-
ure 1 without an asterisk. We do not claim the exhaustiveness
of this list, but deem it to be sufﬁcient as a study probe.
STUDY DESIGN
We conducted semi-structured interviews with 20 UX and de-
sign practitioners recruited from multiple product lines at IBM.
All but two (I-6 and I-20) informants worked on different prod-
ucts without shared AI models. Three informants were design
team leads overseeing multiple products. The AI products
included mature commercial platforms, systems in the testing
phase, and internal platforms used by IBM employees. 50%
of informants were female. All but two were based in the
United States, in 7 different locations. Table 2 summarizes the
primary areas of the products and informants’ job titles. Our
samples focused on AI systems that support utility tasks such
as analytics and decision-support, as explainability is critical
for high-stakes tasks where people would want to understand
the AI’s decisions [19, 30]. Informants were recruited from
internal chat groups relevant to design and UX of AI products.
The recruiting criteria indicated that one should have worked
on the design of an AI product and had a good understanding
1We instructed that ‘prediction’ is used to refer the AI output for an instance. In the
context of a product, it can mean a score/ recommendation/ classiﬁcation/ answer, etc.
Technology area
Job title
Informant
IDs
Business decision
support
HCI researcher, Designer,
Designer, Data scientist,
User researcher
I-4, I-5, I-12,
I-17, I-19
Medical analytic or
decision support
Product lead, Design
researcher, Design
researcher, Designer, Design
researcher
I-1, I-6, I-7, I-
11, I-20
AI model training or
customization tools
Designer, Project manager,
Designer
I-10, I-14, I-
15
Human resource support
Designer
I-3
Enterprise social
User researcher
I-9
Natural resource analytic
UX researcher
I-2
Customer care chatbot
UX researcher
I-13
Multiple areas
Design team leads
I-8, I-16, I-18
Table 2. Informants information
of its users, and mentioned that the interview would focus on
user needs around understanding the AI.
We noticed that the current status of explainability in commer-
cial AI products vary–about two thirds of the products (68.8%)
have descriptive explanations about the data or algorithm, only
a subset (37.5%) provide explanations for individual decisions,
and certain products (e.g., chatbot) have neither. To explore
the design space of XAI, we were interested in user needs for
explainability uncovered by the design practitioners instead of
the current system capabilities. The XAI question bank was
able to scaffold the discussions, both to enumerate on the ex-
plainability needs categories, and to ground the discussion on
user questions instead of venturing into the technical details.
Using MURAL–a visual collaboration tool, we created a card
for each question category listed in Figure 1, with the leading
and example questions (without an asterisk). Informant went
through each card and discussed whether they encountered
these questions from users; If not, we asked whether they saw
the questions would apply and in what situations. After pilot
testing, for efﬁciency, we combined the Why and Why not into
one card to represent user needs to understand a prediction;
and What if, How to be that, How to still be this into one card to

represent user needs to understand counterfactual cases. Thus
there were 6 cards plus a blank card if one wanted to create
an additional category. If time permitted, we asked informants
to sort the cards according to their priority to address, and
elicited the reasons for the ordering.
Interviews lasted 45-60 minutes, conducted remotely using a
video conferencing system and MURAL. We started by asking
informants to pick an AI product they worked on and had
good knowledge of the users, in which they saw user needs for
understanding the AI. We asked them to describe the system
and the AI components. They could either use screen sharing
or send screenshots to show us the system. We then asked
whether the users had needs to understand the AI, and probed
on why, when and where they had such needs (or lack thereof),
and how the needs could be addressed, currently or specula-
tively. We then asked informants to reﬂect on what questions
users would ask about the AI and listed as many as they could.
User questions were also added to MURAL by the researchers
if they appeared in other parts of the discussion. Thereby, we
gathered user questions in a bottom-up fashion that allowed us
to identify gaps in the algorithm-informed XAI question bank.
It also prepared informants to move to discussions around the
question cards. We closed the interview by asking informants
to reﬂect on common challenges to build explainability fea-
tures in AI products, and what kind of support they wished to
have. For the three informants on lead roles, we focused on
discussing the general status of explainability in AI products.
Analysis
Around 1000 minutes of interviews were recorded and tran-
scribed, from which we extracted 607 passages broadly rele-
vant to explainability. We performed open coding and axial
coding on these passages as informed by Grounded Theory
research [25]. The iterative coding was conducted by one re-
searcher, with frequent discussions with the other researchers.
We returned to the passages, interview video and the AI prod-
ucts repeatedly as necessary. The iterative coding process
resulted in a set of 24 axial codes. We combined them into se-
lective codes to be discussed as the main themes in the results
section, where the axial codes are presented in bold.
Two additional sets of code were applied: 1)We identiﬁed
170 user questions appeared in the question-listing activity
and the rest of the interviews. 2)We coded these questions
and other passages, wherever applied, with the explainability
needs category. The intersection of the two sets of code was
124 covered questions, as covered by the categories of the
question bank, and the remaining 46 uncovered questions.
To perform gap analysis on the XAI question bank, we fol-
lowed two steps. For the covered questions in each needs
category, we identiﬁed new forms of questions that were not
covered by the original example questions, as shown with as-
terisks in Figure 1. By forms, we grouped together questions
with the same intent but phrased differently. For example,
“how was the data created”, and “where did the data come
from” were both regarding the source of the training data, and
covered by an original question in the Input category, while
“what is the sample size” would be regarding a different char-
acteristic of the input. In the second step, we examined the
46 uncovered questions. We ﬁrst excluded 22 questions not
generalizable to AI products, such as “what is the summary
of the article?”. We then iteratively grouped and coded the
intent of the remaining 24 questions and identiﬁed 5 additional
forms of question in the Others category in Figure 1. Insights
from the analysis will be discussed the results section.
RESULTS
The results are divided into two parts. We start by discussing
the general themes emerged in the interviews around the de-
sign work to create explainable AI products, which highlight
some of the gaps between the algorithmic perspective of XAI
and the practices to address user needs to understand AI. We
then discuss how each category of user needs for explainabil-
ity is presented in real-world AI products and based on that,
reﬂect on the opportunities and limitations of XAI work.
From XAI algorithms to design practices
The diverse motivations for and utility of explainability
The historical context for the surge of XAI can be attributed
to a fear of lacking understanding and control on increasingly
complex ML models. Explanation is often embraced as a cure
for “black box” models to gain user trust and adoption. So a
common pursuit is to produce interpretable, often simpliﬁed,
descriptions of model logic to make an opaque ML model
seen as transparent. This is a necessary effort, but insufﬁcient
to deliver a satisfying user experience if we ignore users’
motivation for explanations. As I-8 put: “Explainability isn’t
just telling me how you get there, but also, can you expand on
what you just told me...explanation has its own utility”.
We identiﬁed several utility goals driving user demands for
explanations of AI. In the context of AI-assisted decision-
making, explanations are most frequently sought to gain fur-
ther insights or evidence, as users are not satisﬁed by merely
seeing a recommendation or score given by the AI. There
are several ways people use these insights. When seeing dis-
agreeable, unexpected or unfamiliar output, explanations are
critical for people to assess the AI’s judgment to make an in-
formed decision. Even when users’ decision aligns with the
AI’s, explanations could help enhance decision conﬁdence
or generate hypothesis about the causality for follow-up ac-
tions, as illustrated by I-5’s comment, who worked on a tool
supporting supply chain management: “users need to know
why the system is saying this will be late because the reason is
going to determine what their next action is...If it’s because of
a weather event, so no matter what you do you’re not going to
improve this number, versus something small,if you just make
a quick call, you can get that number down.” In some cases,
users also deem explanations of the AI’s decision as potential
mitigation of their own decision biases.
To appropriately evaluate the capability of the AI system
is identiﬁed as the second theme of motivation, both to de-
termine the overall system adoption (e.g., evaluating data
quality, transferability to a new context, whether the model
logic aligns with domain knowledge), and at the operational
level to beware of the system’s limitations. I-6 commented
on why explanations matter for users of a medical imaging
system: “There is a calibration of trust, whether people will
use it over time. But also saying hey, we know this fails in this

iData
• What kind of data was the system trained on?
• What is the source of the training data?
• How were the labels/ground-truth produced?
• What is the sample size of the training data?
• What dataset(s) is the system NOT using?
• What are the potential limitations/biases of the data?
• What is the size, proportion, or distribution of the 
training data with given feature(s)/feature-value(s)?
iOutput
• What kind of output does the system give? 
• What does the system output mean?
• What is the scope of the system’s capability? Can it 
do…?
• How is the output used for other system 
component(s) ?
• How should I best utilize the output of the system?
• How should the output fit in my workflow?
iPerformance
iHow 
(global model-wide 
explanation)
iWhy
iWhy not
iWhat If
iHow to be that 
(a different prediction)
iHow to still be 
this 
(the current prediction)
• How accurate/precise/reliable are the predictions?
• How often does the system make mistakes?
• In what situations is the system likely to be correct/
incorrect?
• What are the limitations of the system?
• What kind of mistakes is the system likely to make?
• Is the system’s performance good enough for…?
• How does the system make predictions?
• What features does the system consider?
• Is [feature X] used or not used for the 
predictions?
• What is the system’s overall logic?
• How does it weigh different features?
• What kind of rules does it follow?
• How does [feature X] impact its predictions?
• What are the top rules/features that determine 
its predictions?
• What kind of algorithm is used?
• How were the parameters set?
• Why/how is this instance given this prediction?
• What feature(s) of this instance determine the system’s prediction 
of it?
• Why are [instance A and B] given the same prediction?
• Why is this instance NOT predicted to be [a different outcome 
Q]?
• Why is this instance predicted [P instead of a different outcome Q]?
• Why are [instance A and B] given different predictions?
• What would the system predict if this instance changes to…?
• What would the system predict if a given feature changes to…?
• What would the system predict for [a different instance]?
• How should this instance change to get a different prediction Q?
• What is the minimum change required for this instance to get a 
different prediction Q?
• How should a given feature change for this instance to get a different 
prediction Q? 
• What kind of instance is predicted of [a different outcome Q]?
• What is the scope of change permitted for this instance to still 
get the same prediction?
• What is the range of value permitted for a given feature for this 
prediction to stay the same?
• What is the necessary feature(s)/feature-value(s) present or absent to 
guarantee this prediction?
• What kind of instance gets the same prediction?
• How/why will the system change/adapt/improve/drift over time? 
(change)
• Can I, and if so, how do I, improve the system? (improvement)
• Why is the system using or not using a given algorithm/feature/rule/
dataset? (follow-up)
• What does [a machine learning terminology] mean? 
(terminological)
• What are the results of other people using the system? (social)
iOthers
XAI Question Bank
Figure 1. XAI Question Bank, with leading questions in bold, and new questions identiﬁed from the interviews with * (updated September 2021)
way.” We note that appropriating trust should be distinguished
from enhancing trust. Though from a product team’s perspec-
tive, the concern is often on users’ under-trusting of the AI
system and explanations are sought to improve adoption.
The third theme of motivation for explainability is to adapt
usage or interaction behaviors to better utilize the AI. I-7
described users’ desire to understand how the AI extracted
information from clinic notes so they could adapt their notes-
taking practices. I-17 mentioned users of a sales inventory
management tool would want to focus on cases where the AI
prediction was likely to err. I-13 commented that explanation
could suggest to chatbot users what kind of things they could
ask. Furthermore, explanations could also convince users to
invest in the system “if they know how the system will im-
prove”(I-11) (e.g., access to personal information, feedback).
Several informants working on AI systems supporting ana-
lysts’ work or model training tools considered explanations
as an integral part of a “feedback loop” (I-11) to improve AI
performance. Such needs are not only seen in debugging
tools [45], but also in cases where the user could manipulate
the data or correct the instance: “[Explaining] why it thinks
we are where we are and the opportunity to say, ‘no, I need
you to just understand that we’re in Phase 2”’ (I-5).
Last but not least, informants reﬂected on their ethical respon-
sibilities to provide explanations:“ What are we responsible
for as creators of tools... whether it’s out of the kindness of our
hearts or whether it’s because there’s a true risk to others or
society... We have to provide that level of explainability”(I-8).
While some of these motivations have been discussed con-
ceptually in prior work [5, 9, 19, 30, 40], our study provides
concrete examples in real-world AI products. It is worth noting
that the motivation for explainability is grounded in users’ sys-
tem goals such as improving decision-making, so explanation
is not merely to provide transparency but support downstream
user actions such as adapting interactions or acting on the
decisions. Unpacking the motivation and downstream user
actions should ultimately guide the selection of explanation
methods. For example, if the goal is to gain further insights,
example-based explanations could be more useful than feature-
based explanations that describe the algorithm’s logic, as I-2
described: “[Users of natural resource analytic tools] already
rely a lot on the analogy... [Similar examples] are very good
to their study, e.g. give clues on which year this was formed.”
Moreover, unpacking the motivation may help foresee the
limitations of algorithmic explanations and ﬁll the gaps in de-
signing user experiences. For example, if the motivation is to
mitigate biases, then users may desire to see “both positive and
negative evidence” (I-1). If it is to support adaption of interac-
tion, the system could supplement information of “this is what
other people do” (I-13). Some informants criticized designing
for the mental model of AI as a decision-maker explaining
its rationale, and argued to focus on what utility explanations
could provide to support users’ end goals. As I-1, who worked
on a clinical decision-support tool, put:“[explanations by sys-
tem rationale] are essentially ‘this is how I do it, take it or
leave it’. But doctors don’t like this approach...Thinking that
[AI is] giving treatment recommendations is the wrong place

to start, because doctors know how to do it. It’s everything
that happens around that decision they need help with... more
discussions about the output, rather than how you get there.”
In quest for human-like explanations
Explanation is an integral part of human communication, and
invites preconception of what constitutes effective and natural
ways to explain. Informants were constantly dealing with
discrepancies between algorithmic and human explanations.
Some of the discrepancies are inherent to the mechanisms of
AI algorithms, such as using features or learned patterns that
are not aligned with how people make decisions. Others are in
the forms constrained by technical capabilities and foreign to
human interactions. For example: “People have this unspoken
norm, I trust you and if you are not sure you would let me
know. But nobody goes around saying how conﬁdent they
are in the thing that they’re saying. It may be implied in the
language they’re using. So a system has high precision but
67% conﬁdence...it is a stupid and hard to use metric ” (I-5).
Several informants attempted to mimic how people, espe-
cially domain experts, explain in their design work. By
aligning with how humans explain, it aligns user perception of
the AI with existing mental model of decision-making in the
domain, suggested by prior work as critical to build trust [84].
This is best exempliﬁed by I-1’s work in designing expla-
nations for a clinical-decision support system that performs
information extraction from medical literature: “We mirror
the way a doctor would do. So if a doctor was asked, how
would you go and ﬁnd the evidence? ... You went to PubMed
you found a paper, the paper matches my patient... you’re
showing me the statements in the paper [on whether] it was a
good or bad idea, and putting all that together...So when you
manage to reﬂect with AI literally how the doctor thinks about
the problem, the black box kind of disappears.”
We identiﬁed several themes on the desirable properties of hu-
man explanation that echoed Miller’s arguments on informing
XAI with how humans explain [63]. First, explanations are
selected, often focusing on one or two causes from a some-
times inﬁnite number of causes [63]. Informants discussed the
importance of selectivity as “a balance of providing enough
information that is trustworthy and compelling without over-
whelming the user” (I-11) and acknowledging that “AI will
have a degree of [randomness] and may not be 100% ex-
plainable” (I-8). Second, explanations are social, as part of
a conversation and presented based on the recipient’s current
beliefs [63]. This social aspect is not only seen in tailoring
explanations “for people with different backgrounds” (I-4),
but also in accommodating the evolving needs for explanation
as one builds understanding and trust during the interaction
process, “once we trust it, it’s about going deeper into it, the
kind of questions goes from broad to ultra-speciﬁc ” (I-8).
The selective and social nature of explanation has made many
to argue that XAI has to be interactive or even conversa-
tional [62, 63, 94], tailoring explanation to different ques-
tions asked by different users, who would also ask follow-up
questions to keep closing the gap of understanding, a process
known as grounding in human communication [23]. Following
prior work [56, 57, 72, 94], we postulate that a question-driven
framework provides a viable path to interactive explanations.
XAI: challenges and needs in design practices
It is challenging work to create design solutions that bridge
user needs for explainability and technical capabilities. The
satisfaction of user needs is frequently hampered by the cur-
rent availability of XAI techniques, which we will discuss
in detail in the next section. Informants also had to work with
other product goals that are at odds with explainability,
such as protecting proprietary data, avoiding legal or market-
ing concerns from exposing the AI algorithm. Sometimes,
explainability presents challenges to other aspects of user
experience –“any opportunities we have to give them more ex-
plainability comes at the cost of the seamless integration. And
[doctors] are just so clear that not breaking their workﬂow
is the most important factor to their happiness”(I-6). Or, it
might expose corner cases or rationales that some individu-
als found “wrong” (I-2), “over-simpliﬁed” (I-9), or “outdated”
(I-5), resulting in unnecessary user aversion and making the
product “victim of trying to be too transparent” (I-2).
In addition, unlike XAI algorithmic work’s focus on one or
a class of AI algorithm, creating explainable AI products re-
quires a holistic approach that links multiple algorithms or
system components to accommodate users’ goal of better un-
derstanding and interacting with the system, as described by
I-4: “There is the traditional what we think about XAI, explain-
ing what the model is doing. But there is this huge wrapper or
the situation around it that people are really uncertain... what
do I need to do with this output, how do I incorporate it into
other processes, other tools? So it is thinking about it as part
of complex systems rather than one model and one output.”
In short, inherent tension often exits between explainability
and other system and business goals. Design practitioners are
eager to advocate for explainability, but the realization requires
teamwork with data scientists, developers and other stakehold-
ers. Their advocacy is often hindered by skill gaps to engage
themselves and the team in “ﬁnding the right pairing to put the
ideas of what’s right for the user together with what’s doable
given the tools or the algorithms”(I-8), and the cost of time
and resource that a product team is reluctant to invest with
a release schedule. These challenges can potentially be over-
come by having resources that help sensitizing designers to
the design opportunities in algorithmic explanations [97] and
enable conversations with the rest of the team, as expressed
by many informants. We summarize informants’ desirable
support for XAI design in two areas:
1. Guidance for explainability needs speciﬁcation, for which
we saw requests for both: 1) general principles of what types
of explainability should be provided, as heuristic guidelines
that a product can be developed or evaluated with; 2) guid-
ance to identify product, user, and context speciﬁc needs to
help the product team prioritize the effort.
2. Guidance for creating explainability solutions to address
user needs, paired with example artifacts (e.g., UI elements,
design patterns), to support the exploration of tangible solu-
tions and communication with developers and stakeholders.
The two areas correspond to the what to explain and how to
explain stages in Eiband et al.’s design process for transparent

interfaces [31]. We argue that the question bank could poten-
tially support needs speciﬁcation work, as it essentially lays
out the space of users’ prototypical questions to understand
AI systems. The above requests suggest the needs to further
understand the key factors that may lead to variability of user
questions, and how these questions should be appropriately
answered. We work towards these goals in the next section.
Understanding user needs for explainability
We use the explainability needs category codes to guide our
analysis on each category. We focus on two questions: 1)
The variability of explainability needs, i.e., what factors make
a category of user questions more or less likely to be asked.
2) The potential gaps between algorithmic explanations and
user needs, by examining passages coded as design challenge,
and the additional questions identiﬁed in the gap analysis
(Figure 1). To help answer the former, we ﬁrst discuss key
factors that may lead to the variability of explainability needs,
which we identiﬁed by coding informants’ reasons to include,
exclude or prioritize a needs category.
• Motivation for explainability:The diverse motivations dis-
cussed in the last section for demanding explainability could
lead to wanting different kinds of explanation.
• Usage point: Informants mentioned common points during
the usage of AI systems where certain type of explianabiltiy
was of particular interest, including on-boarding, reliance
or delegation to AI, encountering abnormal results, system
breakdown, and seeing changes in the system.
• Algorithm or data type: Different algorithms invoke dif-
ferent questions. For lay users, it might be more relevant
to consider the type of data the AI is used with rather than
speciﬁc algorithms, e.g., tabular data, text, images or video.
• Decision context: We identiﬁed codes describing the na-
ture of the decision context that led to prominent needs for
certain type of explainability, including outcome criticality,
time-sensitivity, and decision complexity.
• User type: Codes describing the characteristics of users
include AI knowledge, domain knowledge, attitude towards
AI, roles or responsibilities.
In prior work, the variability of user needs for explaianability
has been discussed regarding the roles of the users [9, 10, 43,
79, 95], e.g., regulators, model developers, decision-makers,
consumers. The diverse criteria used by our informants sug-
gest many other factors to consider for the suitability of XAI
techniques. This paper does not conclude on how these factors
vary user needs. Rather, they should be seen as sensitizing
concepts by Bowen’s [16] and Ribes’s [76] deﬁnitions–“tell
where to look but not what to see.” The sheer number of
these factors highlight the challenge to pre-deﬁne users’ ex-
plainability needs, vindicating the recent effort [31, 96] to
provide structured guidance to support empirically identifying
application-speciﬁc user needs. Below we present informants’
discussions on each category of explainability needs and high-
light how these factors heighten the needs (in italic).
Input/data
Understanding training data for the AI model was most fre-
quently seen to serve the motivation to appropriately evaluate
AI capabilities for use. It was considered a prominent need
during the on-boarding stage, and by both the decision-makers
and people in quality-control roles. Explanations of data were
also important in cases where the users could directly manipu-
late the data to either adapt the usage to better utilize the AI
or to improve the AI performance.
Additional questions identiﬁed from the gap analysis indicate
a desire to gauge the AI’s limitations by inquiring about the
sample size, potential biases, sampling of critical sub-groups,
missing data, etc. Additional codes include to understand
the system’s compliance with regulations regarding data sam-
pling, and transferability of the AI model: “Not necessarily
source, but more conceptual like...[are we] making the solu-
tions based on what occurred yesterday” (I-4). These patterns
imply that users demand comprehensive transparency of
training data, especially the limitations.
Output
While understanding the output is often an neglected aspect in
algorithmic work of XAI, we saw frequent questions on it, in-
dicating users’ desire to understand the value of the AI system
to appropriately evaluate the capability and to better utilize
the AI, often in the on-boarding stage or dealing with complex
decisions. Explaining output and explaining input/data were
considered as “static explanations” that more likely come up
in the early stage of system usage, instead of frequent “day-to-
day, or transaction-to-transaction interactions” (I-8).
The most frequently asked questions were not regarding de-
scriptive information of the algorithmic output, but at a high
level, inquiring how to best utilize the output. We also iden-
tiﬁed two additional questions–“the scope of the capability”,
and “how the output impacts other system components.” To
address such user needs requires contextualizing explaining
the system’s output in downstream system tasks and the
users’ overall workﬂow.
Performance
To our surprise, the performance category was repeatedly
ranked at the bottom, especially for users without AI back-
ground and in decision contexts considered less critical. There
was a common hesitation among informants to present ML
performance metrics such as accuracy, not only because a
numerical value could be hard to interpret by lay users, but
also there may be discrepancy between performances on the
test data and the actual data, creating different “experienced
accuracy” [98] that might deter users. Some also believed that
small differences in these metrics would not change how users
interact: “Technically that’s great, but, it’s still not a hundred...
there’s always going to be work that the users have to do to
verify or double check” (I-4).
As many informants pointed out, and suggested by the addi-
tional questions, the goal of explaining performance should
be to help users understand the limitations of the AI, and
make it actionable as to answer “Is the performance good
enough for....” There are constraints of technical capabilities.
For example, conﬁdence scores were repeatedly dismissed
as not providing enough actionability –“[users] struggle to
really understand, does it mean it’s going to do what I want
it to do, or, can I trust it? ” (I-15). Regarding the additional

question on “What kind of mistake”, informants mentioned the
precision-recall trade-off is a deliberately decided limitation
that should be explained as it might change users’ course of
actions [49] :“It’s use case dependent... for the [doctors] if
they miss a tumor, that’s a life changing. So they have a very
high tolerance for false positives ”(I-7).
How–global model
Informants recognized the importance of providing global
explanations on how the AI made decisions, both to help users
appropriately evaluate the system capabilities, and build a
mental model to better interact with or improve the system.
Such needs were prominent in cases where users were in a
quality-control role, or in a position able to adjust the model or
the data-collection process: “The company really care about
which of these attributes are the most important... then they
will forward the manufacturer to include those in the data”
(I-17). Informants also agreed that users with AI or analytic
background were more likely to seek global explanations.
As Table 1 shows, to answer the How question, XAI algo-
rithms commonly employ ranked features, decision trees or
rules. However, some informants were referring to high-level
descriptions, such as “I would just say keywords matching,
it is intuitive, and it’s been around” (I-3). Some were also
concerned about ﬁtting a complete How explanation into the
users’ workﬂow: “I can’t imagine [doctors are] going into
their workﬂow and be like, I’m so busy, let me read more about
this AI. But, they would probably want some kind of conﬁr-
mation about how it makes decisions” (I-11). So the design
challenge is to identify the appropriate level of details to
explain the model globally. This challenge is reﬂected in
the question bank as well. While most XAI methods focus
on answering “What is the overall logic”, we discovered that
many questions were simply asking about the top features or
whether certain feature was used, meanwhile a small set of
questions by users with AI background were regarding the
technical details of the model.
Why, Why not–local prediction
Understanding a particular decision was often ranked at the
top, and in user questions mentioned in all products. These
questions were naturally raised after a surprising or abnormal
event: “For everyday interactions, most likely it’s how did the
system give me this answer? Not just any answer, but all of a
sudden, here’s this thing that I’m [not expecting] seeing” (I-8).
This pattern is pointed out by Miller [63] as the contrastive na-
ture of human explanations, which are often implying Why not
the expected event. We observed a shared struggle with avail-
able technical solutions answering Why but not Why not.
Several informants working on text-based ML commented
on the inadequacy of the common approach by highlighting
keywords that contribute to the prediction:“even though we
explained conceptually how it’s working, it wouldn’t be able
to explain that error. So it would actually be counter-intuitive
why it should make that error” (I-4). I-17 discussed the limi-
tation of a state-of-the-art explanation algorithm, LIME [77],
which generates feature importance for “black-box” ML mod-
els. She found the static explanation to be unsatisfying: “LIME
would say ‘it is boot cut which is why [it’s not going to sell]’,
but would it be different if it was a skinny cut?”
Many current XAI algorithms focus on the Why question. We
note that a challenge for algorithmic explanations is that the
contrastive outcome is often not explicitly available to the
model. These observations again suggest the beneﬁt of inter-
active explanations, allowing users to explicitly reference the
contrastive outcome and asking follow-up What if questions.
What if, How to be–inspecting counterfactual
This category of explainability needs was not ranked high, and
informants mentioned only 3 related user questions. Currently,
these kinds of explanation are not widely adopted in commer-
cial AI products. As prior work suggested, awareness of new
types of explainability could change user demand [56]. In fact,
informants recognized its potential utility as system features
to test different scenarios for users to gain further insights
for the decision, and to understand the boundary of system
capabilities to enable adapting interaction behaviors. Infor-
mants also identiﬁed that such features align with how data
scientists currently debug to improve ML models. For example,
I-4 was excited to consider how What if explanations might
support supply chain managers make decisions–“you can run
different scenarios... the system can make an initial recommen-
dation and then they can tweak it to see, the impact on the cost
after that.” I-13 speculated that How to be that explanations
(how the chatbot would understand differently) could help
chatbot users better phrase their queries. I-15 working on a
tool for customizing entity recognition models commented
that seeing how instance changes impact the output could help
users debug the training data.
As seen in Table 1, there is a growing collection of XAI tech-
niques addressing the counterfactual questions. However, cur-
rently the feature inﬂuence methods are mostly used in data
science tools [45]. Contrastive feature and example based
methods are relatively new areas of XAI work [27, 91, 100].
Our results suggest their potentials as utility features in a broad
spectrum of AI products. Future work should explore these
potentials and sensitize practitioners to these possibilities.
Additional explainability needs
We also identiﬁed a set of questions that were not covered
by the algorithm-informed needs categories. They point to
additional areas of interest that users have for understanding
AI. A critical area is to understand the changes and adap-
tion of AI, both in explaining changes in the system, and how
users can change the system. Other areas are follow-up ques-
tions by further inquiring why a certain feature or data is used,
and terminological questions such as “what do you mean
by...”, both of which may naturally emerge in an interactive
explanation paradigm. Lastly, some users might be interested
in knowing other people’s experience with the system, sug-
gesting a new mechanism for an AI system to provide social
explanations with regard to other users’ outcomes and actions.
DISCUSSION
With widespread calls for transparent and responsible AI, in-
dustry practitioners are eager to take up the ideas and solutions
from the XAI literature. However, despite recent effort toward
a scientiﬁc understanding of human-AI interaction [29, 68,
103], XAI research still struggles with a lack of understanding
of real-world user needs for AI transparency, and by far little

consideration of what practitioners need to create explainable
AI products. Our study suggests the following directions both
for algorithmic work to close the gaps addressing user needs,
and design support to reduce technical and practical barriers
to create user-friendly XAI products.
• XAI research should direct its attention to techniques that
address user needs, and we suggest a question-driven frame-
work to embody these needs. Our results point to a few
common questions and their desired answers that future
work of XAI should explore, for example, How question
answered by multi-level details describing the algorithm,
Why not question referencing an expected alternative out-
come, and How/Why will the system change. Considering
the coverage of user questions, especially common and new
questions identiﬁed, could help the community move toward
more human-centric effort. The question bank presented in
this paper is just a starting point. Future work could con-
tinue building the repository by directly eliciting questions
from end users of different types of AI systems [56].
• Practitioners struggle with the gaps between algorithmic
output and creating human-consumable explanations. To
close the gap requires inter-disciplinary work that studies
how humans explain, and formalizes the patterns in algo-
rithmic forms. Such a practice has already been engaged
in interactive ML [6, 86] and "socially guided machine
learning" [89]. Prior work repeatedly pointed out that a
prerequisite for explanations to be truly human-like is to be
interactive [62, 63, 94], because explanation is a ground-
ing process where people incrementally close the belief
gaps. Indeed, our study found that some user questions are
closely connected with or followed by other questions. Fu-
ture work could explore interaction protocols, for example
through statistical modeling of how humans ask different
explanation-seeking questions [62], to drive the ﬂow of
interactive or conversational explanations.
• Our study revealed the variability of user questions and its
complex mechanisms, highlighting the challenge to identify
product-speciﬁc user needs. While prior work attempted at
top-down descriptions of needs of users in different roles [9,
10, 43, 79, 95], it may not be sufﬁcient for design work that
has to consider speciﬁc actions, usage points, models, etc.
Recent HCI work on XAI encourages empirically identi-
fying user needs with structured procedures [31, 96]. We
suggest several ways the XAI question bank can be used for
needs speciﬁcation. First as heuristic guidance, a product
team could enumerate on whether each question category
has been addressed and which should be prioritized. Sec-
ond, it can be used in user research to scaffold the elicitation
of user needs. For example, card-sorting exercises of the
questions can be performed with users (adaptation may be
required for speciﬁc AI applications). We invite practition-
ers to use, revise and expand the XAI question bank.
• The technical barriers for designers and practitioners in
general to navigate the space of XAI remains a primary
challenge for product teams to optimize XAI user experi-
ences. To support design work for ML, Yang suggested
research opportunities to “sensitize designers to the breadth
of ML capabilities” [97]. Informants also expressed strong
desire for support of technical discussions with data scien-
tists and stakeholders, as mitigating the friction is critical for
the success of their advocacy for explainability. An oppor-
tunity for sensitizing support is to create concrete mapping
between user questions and algorithmic capabilities, serving
as a shared cognitive artifact between the designers and data
scientists. One example, perhaps over-simpliﬁed, is the tax-
onomy of XAI methods we presented in Table 1. We may
envision a question-driven design process: by user research,
a design practitioner identiﬁes the primary type of user
question as what to explain (e.g. How to be that), and also
the requirements to address the question as How to explain.
Table 1 then suggests candidate explanation method(s) to an-
swer the question (e.g. contrastive features). Together with
a data scientist, the team ﬁnd the most suitable solution to
implement from the list of suggested algorithms, then work
toward closing the gaps between the algorithmic output and
user requirements to answer the question. By suggesting
conceptually this question-driven design process, we invite
the research community to develop more ﬁne-grained frame-
works of XAI features (e.g., considering UI patterns) that
connect user questions and technical capabilities.
Limitations
First of all, the user questions were explored through design
practitioners instead of end users, so we cannot claim this is a
complete analysis of user needs for explainability. The results
only reﬂect design practitioners’ views. Future work could
study other roles involved in AI product development (e.g.,
data scientists) to better understand the challenges to create
XAI products. Our product samples focus on ones supporting
high-stakes tasks, where needs for explainability might have
been greater, and the current status of XAI more advanced.
We do not claim the completeness of the XAI methods dis-
cussed, especially as this is a fast advancing research ﬁeld.
Practitioners’ increasing accessibility to XAI techniques may
also change the demands and concerns expressed in the study.
Finally, our informants worked for the same organization. Al-
though this is not uncommon for studies of practitioners [7,
32, 67] and we recruited informants from diverse product lines
and locations, we acknowledge that design practices may be
different in other companies or organizations.
CONCLUSION
Although the research ﬁeld of XAI is experiencing exponen-
tial growth, there is little shared practices of designing user-
friendly explainable AI applications. We take the position
that the suitability of explanations is question dependent and
requires an understanding of user questions for a speciﬁc AI
application. We develop an XAI question bank to bridge the
spaces of user needs for AI explainability and technical capa-
bilities provided by XAI work. Using it as a study probe, we
explored together with industry design practitioners the oppor-
tunities and challenges in putting XAI techniques into practice.
We illustrated the great variability of user questions that may
subject to many motivational, contextual and individual factors.
We also identiﬁed gaps between current algorithmic solutions
of XAI and what’s needed to deliver satisfying user experi-
ences, in the types of user questions to address and how they
are addressed. We join many others in this ﬁeld advocating

a user-centered approach to XAI [4, 30, 63, 92]. Our work
suggests opportunities for the HCI and AI communities, as
well as industry practitioners and academics, to work together
to advance the ﬁeld of XAI through translational work and
shared knowledge repository that maps between user needs
for explainability and XAI technical solutions.
