Playing games against nature:
optimal policies for renewable resource allocation
Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University

Jon Conrad
Department of Applied Economics
Cornell University

Carla Gomes, Bart Selman
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a class of Markov de-
cision processes that arise as a natural model for
many renewable resource allocation problems.
Upon extending results from the inventory con-
trol literature, we prove that they admit a closed
form solution and we show how to exploit this
structure to speed up its computation.
We consider the application of the proposed
framework to several problems arising in very
different domains, and as part of the ongoing ef-
fort in the emerging ﬁeld of Computational Sus-
tainability we discuss in detail its application to
the Northern Paciﬁc Halibut marine ﬁshery. Our
approach is applied to a model based on real
world data, obtaining a policy with a guaranteed
lower bound on the utility function that is struc-
turally very different from the one currently em-
ployed.
1
Introduction
The problem of devising policies to optimally allocate re-
sources over time is a fundamental decision theoretic prob-
lem with applications arising in many different ﬁelds. In
fact, such decisions may involve a variety of different re-
sources such as time, energy, natural and ﬁnancial re-
sources, in allocation problems arising in domains as di-
verse as natural resources management, crowdsourcing,
supply chain management, QoS and routing in networks,
vaccine distribution and pollution management.
A particularly interesting class of such problems involves
policies for the allocation of renewable resources. A key
and unique aspect of such a resource type is the fact that, by
deﬁnition, its stock is constantly replenished by an intrinsic
growth process. The most common example are perhaps
living resources, such as ﬁsh populations or forests, that in-
crease constantly by natural growth and reproduction, but
less conventional resources such as users in a social com-
munity or in a crowdsourcing project share the same intrin-
sic growth feature due to social interactions.
A common feature of the growth processes presented is that
they are density dependent, in the sense that the growth
rate depends on the amount of resource available. This fact
creates a challenging management problem when the aim
of the intervention is to optimally use the resource, for in-
stance by harvesting a ﬁsh population or by requiring some
effort from a crowdsourcing community, especially when
economic aspects are factored in. We face a similar chal-
lenge in vaccine distribution problems, where the growth
rate of infections is again density dependent and the objec-
tive is to reduce its spreading.
This study, in particular, has been motivated by the alarm-
ing consideration that many natural resources are endan-
gered due to over-exploitation and generally poorly man-
aged. For instance, the Food and Agricultural Organization
estimates in their most recent report that 7% of marine ﬁsh
stocks are already depleted, 1% are recovering from deple-
tion, 52% are fully exploited and 17% are overexploited
([1]).
One of the most fundamental aspects of the problem seems
to be the lack of an effective way to handle the uncertainty
affecting the complex dynamics involved. While in most of
the works in the literature [6, 7] these growth processes are
modeled with deterministic ﬁrst-order difference or differ-
ential equations, this approach often represents an oversim-
pliﬁcation. In fact their intrinsic growth is often affected
by many variables and unpredictable factors. For example,
in the case of animal populations such as ﬁsheries, both
weather and climate conditions are known to affect both
the growth and the mortality in the population. Other vari-
able ecological factors such as the availability of food or
the interaction with other species also inﬂuence their nat-
ural dynamics to the point that it is very difﬁcult even to
obtain reliable mathematical models to describe their dy-
namics.
On the other hand, stochastic differential equations can eas-
ily incorporate these variable factors and therefore repre-
sent a more robust description. However, obtaining a prob-

abilistic description of such systems is far from easy. In
fact, even if in principle uncertainty could be reduced by
collecting and analyzing more data, it is generally believed
that complex and stochastic systems, such a marine en-
vironments, could never become predictable (to the point
that the authors of [13] believe that “predictability of any-
thing as complex as marine ecosystem will forever remain
a chimera”).
Moreover, there are situations of “radical uncertainty” ([8])
or ambiguity where a stochastic description is not feasible
because the probabilities are not quantiﬁable. For instance,
many fundamental environmental issues that we are fac-
ing, such as those surrounding the climate change debate,
involve ambiguity in the sense of scientiﬁc controversies or
irreducible beliefs that cannot be resolved.
In the context of stochastic optimization, there are two
main ways to deal with uncertainty. The ﬁrst one involves
a risk management approach, where it is assumed that the
probabilities of the stochastic events are known a priori or
are learned from experience through statistical data analy-
sis. Within this framework, decisions are taken according
to stochastic control methods. Using tools such as risk-
sensitive Markov decision processes ([12, 15]), it is also
possible to encode into the problem the attitude towards
risk of the decision maker by using an appropriate utility
function. In particular the degree of risk aversion can be
controlled by sufﬁciently penalizing undesirable outcomes
with the utility function. When a ﬁne grained stochastic de-
scription is not available, worst-case game theoretic frame-
works, that are inherently risk averse, play a fundamen-
tal role because it is often crucial to devise policies that
avoid catastrophic depletion. This type of approach, where
the problem of data uncertainty is addressed by guarantee-
ing the optimality of the solution for the worst realizations
of the parameters, is also known in the literature as robust
optimization ([3, 5]), and has been successfully applied to
uncertain linear, conic quadratic and semideﬁnite program-
ming.
In this paper, we present a class of Markov decision pro-
cesses that arise as a natural model for many resource man-
agement problems. Instead of formulating the optimiza-
tion problem in a traditional form as a maximization of an
expected utility, we tackle the management problems in a
game theoretic framework, where the optimization problem
is equivalent to a dynamic game against nature. This for-
mulation is a particular type of Markov game [14] (some-
times called a stochastic game [16]) where there are only
two agents (the manager and nature) and they have diamet-
rically opposed goals.
As mentioned before, although this formulation is more
conservative, it also eliminates the very difﬁcult task of es-
timating the probabilities of the stochastic events affecting
the system. In a context where the emphasis in the litera-
ture has traditionally been on the study of expected utilities,
this approach represents a new perspective. Moreover, the
policies thus obtained provide a lower bound on the utility
that can be guaranteed to be achieved, no matter the out-
comes of the stochastic events. For this class of problems,
we are able to completely characterize the optimal policy
with a theoretical analysis that extends results from the in-
ventory control literature, obtaining a closed form solution
for the optimal policy.
As part of the new exciting research area of Computational
Sustainability ([10]), where techniques from computer sci-
ence and related ﬁelds are applied to solve the pressing sus-
tainability challenges of our time, we present an application
of the proposed framework to the Northern Paciﬁc Halibut
ﬁshery, one of the largest and most lucrative ﬁsheries of the
Northwestern coast. In particular, our method suggests the
use of a cyclic scheme that involves periodic closures of the
ﬁshery, a policy that is structurally different from the one
usually employed, that instead tries to maintain the stock
at a given size with appropriate yearly harvests. However,
this framework is interesting in its own right and, as brieﬂy
mentioned before, it applies to a variety of other problems
that share a similar mathematical structure and that arise
in very different domains. For example, we can apply our
framework to pollution problems, where a stock of pollu-
tants is evolving over time due to human action, and the
objective is to minimize the total costs deriving from the
presence of a certain stock of pollutants and the costs in-
curred with cleanups, but also to crowdsourcing and other
problems.
2
MDP Formulation
In this section, we will formulate the optimization problem
as discrete time, continuous space Markov decision pro-
cess. Whenever possible, we will use a notation consistent
with the one used in [4]. Even if we will consider only a
ﬁnite horizon problem, the results can be extended to the
inﬁnite horizon case with limiting arguments. To make the
description concrete, the model will be mostly described
having a natural resource management problem in mind.
We consider a dynamical system evolving over time ac-
cording to
xn+1 = f(xn −hn, wn),
(1)
where xn ∈R denotes the stock of a renewable resource
at time n. By using a discrete time model we implicitly as-
sume that replacement or birth processes occur in regular,
well deﬁned “breeding seasons”, where f(·) is a reproduc-
tion function that maps the stock level at the end of one
season to the new stock level level at the beginning of the
next season. The control or decision variable at year n is
the harvest level hn (occurring between two consecutive
breeding seasons), that must satisfy 0 ≤hn ≤xn.
As mentioned in the introduction, the function f(·) cap-

tures the intrinsic replenishment ability of renewable re-
sources, that in many practical applications (such as ﬁsh-
eries or forestry) is density dependent: growth rate is high
when the habitat is underutilized but it decreases when
the stock is larger and intraspeciﬁc competition intensiﬁes.
Speciﬁc properties of reproduction functions f(·) will be
discussed in detail later, but we will always assume that
there is a ﬁnite maximum stock level denoted by m.
To compensate for the higher level description of the com-
plex biological process we are modeling, we introduce un-
certainty into the model through wn, a random variable that
might capture, for example, the temperature of the water,
an uncontrollable factor that inﬂuences the growth of the
resource. Given the worst case framework we are consider-
ing, we will never make assumptions on the probability dis-
tribution of wn but only on its support (or, in other words,
on the possible outcomes). In fact in an adversarial setting
it is sufﬁcient to consider all possible scenarios, each one
corresponding to an action that nature can take against the
policy maker, without assigning them a weight in a proba-
bilistic sense.
Given the presence of stochasticity, it is convenient to con-
sider closed loop optimization approaches, where decisions
are made in stages and the manager is allowed to gather in-
formation about the system between stages. In particular,
we assume that the state of the system xn ∈R is com-
pletely observable. For example, in the context of ﬁsheries
this means that we assume to know exactly the level of the
stock xn when the harvest level hn is to be chosen. In
this context, a policy is a sequence of rules used to select
at each period a harvest level for each possible stock size.
In particular, an admissible policy π = {µ1, . . . , µN} is a
sequence of functions, each one mapping stocks sizes x to
harvests h, so that for all x and for all i
0 ≤µi(x) ≤x.
(2)
2.1
Resource Economics
We now consider the economic aspects of the model. We
suppose that the revenue obtained from a harvest h is pro-
portional to h through a ﬁxed price p, and that harvesting
is costly. In particular we assume that there is
• a ﬁxed set-up cost K each time a harvest is undertaken
• a marginal harvest cost g(x) per unit harvested when
the stock size is x
It follows that the utility derived from a harvest h from an
initial stock x is
ph −
Z x
x−h
g(y)dy −K ≜R(x) −R(x −h) −K,
(3)
where
R(x) = px −
Z x
0
g(y)dy.
We assume that the marginal harvesting cost g(x) increases
as the stock size x decreases. We include time preference
into the model by considering a ﬁxed discount factor α =
1/(1 + δ) ( 0 ≤α ≤1), where δ > 0 is a discount rate.
For any given horizon length N, we consider the problem
of ﬁnding an admissible policy π = {µi}i∈[1,N] that maxi-
mizes
Cπ
N(x) =
min
w1, . . . , wN
wi ∈W(xi)
N
X
n=1
αn(R(xn) −R(xn −hn) −Kδ0(hn))
where xn is subject to (1) and hn = µn(xn), with initial
condition x1 = x and
δ0(x) =
 1
if x > 0,
0
otherwise.
This is a Max-Min formulation of the optimization prob-
lem, where the goal is to optimize the utility in a worst-case
scenario. As opposed to the maximization of an expected
utility ([17, 18]), this formulation is inherently risk averse.
An advantage of this formulation is that there is no need to
characterize the probability distribution of the random vari-
ables wk explicitly, but only to determine their support. In
fact, one should consider all the possible scenarios, without
worrying about the probabilities of their occurrence.
3
Main Results
3.1
Minimax Dynamic Programming
A policy π is called an optimal N-period policy if Cπ
N(x)
attains its supremum over all admissible policies at π for
all x. We call
CN(x) = sup
π∈Π
Cπ
N(x),
the optimal value function, where Π represents the set of
all admissible policies.
As a consequence of the principle of optimality([4]), the
dynamic programming equation for this problem reads:
C0(x)
=
0,
Cn(x)
=
max
0≤hn≤x min
wn∈W R(xn) −R(xn −hn)
−Kδ0(hn) + αCn−1(f(x −hn, wn))
for all n > 0. The latter equation can be rewritten in terms
of the remaining stock z = x −hn (the post decision state)
as
Cn(x) = α max
0≤z≤x

R(x) −R(z) −Kδ0(x −z) + min
wn∈W Cn−1(f(z, wn))

.
(4)

This formulation of the problem is effectively analogous
to a game against nature in the context of a two-person
zero-sum game. The objective is in fact devising the value
of z that maximizes the utility, but assuming that nature
is actively playing against the manager with the opposite
intention.
It can be shown (see [4]) that Cn(x), the revenue function
associated with an optimal policy, is the (unique) solution
to equation (4). From equation (4) we see that an optimal
policy, when there are n periods left and the stock level is
x, undertakes a harvest if and only if there exists 0 ≤z ≤x
such that
R(x) −R(z) −K + α min
wn∈W Cn−1(f(z, wn)) >
α min
wn∈W Cn−1(f(x, wn)).
In fact, an action should be taken if and only if its asso-
ciated beneﬁts are sufﬁcient to compensate the ﬁxed cost
incurred. By deﬁning
Pn(x) = −R(x) + α min
wn∈W Cn−1(f(x, wn)),
(5)
we have that an optimal policy, when there are n periods
left and the stock level is x, undertakes a harvest if and
only if there exists 0 ≤z ≤x such that
Pn(z) −K > Pn(x).
(6)
To examine this kind of relationship it is useful to introduce
the notion of K-concavity, a natural extension of the K-
convexity property originally introduced by Scarf in [19]
to study inventory control problems.
3.2
Preliminaries on K-concavity
A function β(·) is K-concave if given three points x < y <
z, β(y) exceeds the secant approximation to β(y) obtained
using the points β(x) −K and β(z). Therefore for K = 0
no slack is allowed and one recovers the standard deﬁnition
of concavity. Formally
Deﬁnition 1. A real valued function β(·) is K-concave if
for all x, y, x < y, and for all b > 0
β(x) −β(y) −(x −y)β(y + b) −β(y)
b
≤K.
(7)
We state some useful results concerning K-concavity:
Lemma 1. The following properties hold:
• A concave function is 0-concave and hence K-
concave for all K ≥0 .
• If β1(q) and β2(q) are respectively K1-concave and
K2-concave for constants K1 ≥0 and K2 ≥0,
then aβ1(q)+bβ2(q) is (aK1 +bK2)-concave for any
scalars a > 0 and b > 0.
• If
β(·)
is
nondecreasing
and
concave
on
I
and ψ(·) is nondecreasing and K-concave on
[infx∈I β(x), supx∈I β(x)]
then
the
composition
ψ ◦β is K-concave on I.
• Let β1(x), . . . , βN(x) be a family of functions such
that βi(x) is Ki-concave. Then γ(x) = mini βi(x) is
(maxi Ki)-concave.
• If β(·) is a continuous, K-concave function on the in-
terval [0, m], then there exists scalars 0 ≤S ≤s ≤m
such that
– β(S) ≥β(q) for all q ∈[0, m].
– Either s = m and β(S) −K ≤β(m) or s < m
and β(S)−K = β(s) ≥β(q) for all q ∈[s, m).
– β(·) is a decreasing function on [s, m].
– For all x ≤y ≤s, β(x) −K ≤β(y).
The proof is not reported here for space reasons, but can
be found in [9]. Similar results for K-convex functions are
proved in [4].
In the following section we will prove by induction the K-
concavity of the functions Pn(x), n = 1, . . . , N. This will
allow us to characterize the structure of the optimal policy
by using the last assertion of Lemma 1.
3.3
On the Optimality of (S −s) policies
Suppose that we can prove that Pn(x) is continuous and
strictly K-concave. Then by Lemma 1 there exists Sn, sn
with the properties proved in the last point of the Lemma.
It is easy to see that condition (6) is satisﬁed only if x > s,
in which case the optimal value of the remaining stock
z would be precisely Sn. In conclusion, if we can prove
the continuity and K-concavity of the functions Pn(x),
n = 1, . . . , N, then following feedback control law, known
as a nonstationary (S −s) policy, is optimal:
At period n, a harvest is undertaken if and only if the
current stock level is greater than sn; in that case the stock
is harvested down to Sn.
This policy is known in the inventory control literature as a
nonstationary (S−s) policy 1, because the levels Sn and sn
are time dependent. Since it is assumed that the marginal
harvest cost g(x) is a non increasing function, we deﬁne x0
to be the zero proﬁt level such that g(x0) = p. If g(x) < p
for all x, we deﬁne x0 = 0. As a consequence for all
x > x0 we have that R′(x) ≥0 so that R (deﬁned in
equation (3)) is non decreasing. Moreover if the marginal
harvest cost g(x) is a non increasing function, then R is
convex.
1For the sake of consistency, we call sn the threshold value
that governs the decision, even if in our case Sn ≤sn.

We also need to make an assumption on the concavity of
R(·). In particular the marginal cost function g is allowed
to decrease but not by too much. Let m be an upper bound
on the possible values of x and G(x) =
R x
0 g(t)dt, then we
need
τ = G(m) −mg(m) < K
1 −α
α

,
(8)
a condition that implies the τ-concavity of R.
The main result is the following theorem, where we show
that if some assumptions are satisﬁed, the optimal policy is
of (S −s) type. The key point of this inductive proof is
to show that the K-concavity property is preserved by the
Dynamic Programming operator.
Theorem 1. For any setup cost K > 0 and any positive
integer N, if f(·, w) is nondecreasing and concave for any
w and if g is non increasing and satisﬁes condition (8),
then the functions Pn(x) deﬁned as in (5) are continuous
and K-concave for all n = 1, . . . , N. Hence there exists a
non-stationary (S −s) policy that is optimal. The result-
ing optimal present value functions Cn(x) are continuous,
nondecreasing and K-concave for all n = 1, . . . , N.
Proof. From equation (8) we know that there exists a num-
ber k such that
(K + τ)α < k < K.
(9)
The proof is by induction on N. The base case N = 0
is trivial because C0(x) = 0 for all x, and therefore it
is continuous, nondecreasing and k-concave.
Now we
assume that Cn(x) is continuous, nondecreasing and k-
concave, and we show that Pn+1(x) is continuous and K-
concave, and that Cn+1(x) is continuous, nondecreasing
and k-concave.
Since f(·, w) is nondecreasing and concave for all w,
Cn(f(z, wn)) is K-concave by Lemma (1). By Lemma
1
min
wn∈W Cn−1(f(z, wn))
is also K-concave.
Again using Lemma 1, if −R(x)
is concave, then by equation (5) Pn+1(x) is K-concave.
The continuity of Pn+1(x) is implied by the continuity of
Cn(x) and R(x).
Given that Pn+1(x) is K-concave and continuous, the op-
timal action is to harvest down to Sn+1 if and only if the
current stock level is greater than sn+1, so we have
Cn+1(x) =

α(Pn+1(x) + R(x))
if x ≤sn+1,
α(Pn+1(Sn+1) + R(x) −K)
if x > sn+1.
(10)
The continuity of Cn+1(x) descends from the continu-
ity of Pn+1(x) and because by deﬁnition Pn+1(sn+1) +
R(sn+1) = Pn+1(Sn+1) + R(sn+1) −K. To show it is
nondecreasing, consider the case 0 ≤x1 < x2 ≤sn+1:
Cn+1(x2) −Cn+1(x1) =
α

min
wn∈W Cn(f(x2, wn)) −min
wn∈W Cn(f(x1, wn))

.
If for all x2 > x1 ≥0,
min
wn∈W (x2) f(x2, wn) ≥
min
wn∈W (x1) f(x1, wn),
then Cn+1(x2) −Cn+1(x1) ≥0 because Cn(x) is nonde-
creasing. For the case sn+1 < x1 < x2 and sn+1 ≥x0:
Cn+1(x2) −Cn+1(x1) = α(R(x2) −R(x1)) ≥0,
because R is nondecreasing on that interval. It must be the
case that Sn+1 > x0 because harvesting below x0 is not
proﬁtable and reduces the marginal growth of the stock, so
given that sn+1 ≥Sn+1 ≥x0 we conclude that Cn+1(x)
is nondecreasing. It remains to show that Cn+1(x) is k-
concave, and by equation (9) it is sufﬁcient to show that it
is (K + τ)α-concave. To show that deﬁnition (7) holds for
Cn+1(x), we consider several cases.
When x < y ≤sn+1 , according to equation (10) we have
that Cn+1(x) = α(Pn+1(x) + R(x)) and therefore equa-
tion (7) holds by Lemma 1 because Pn+1 is K-concave and
R(·) is τ-concave. Similarly when sn+1 < x < y, equa-
tion (7) holds because R(·) is τ-concave.
When x ≤sn+1 < y equation (7) reads
Cn+1(x) −Cn+1(y) −(x −y)Cn+1(y + b) −Cn+1(y)
b
≤
α

K + R(x) −R(y) −(x −y)R(y + b) −R(y)
b

≤
α(K + τ).
because Pn+1(x) ≤Pn+1(Sn+1) and R(·) is τ-concave.
4
Consistency and Complexity
Even if Theorem 1 completely describes the structure of the
optimal policy, in general there is no closed form solution
for the values of Sn and sn, that need to be computed nu-
merically. In order to use the standard dynamic program-
ming approach, the state, control and disturbance spaces
must be discretized, for instance using an evenly spaced
grid. Since we are assuming that those spaces are bounded,
we obtain in this way discretized sets with a ﬁnite number
of elements. We can then write DP like equations for those
points, using an interpolation of the value function for the
points that are not on the grid. The equations can be then
solved recursively, obtaining the semi-optimal action to be
taken for each point of the grid, that can then be extended
by interpolation to obtain an approximate solution to the
original problem.

As with all discretization schemes, we need to discuss the
consistency of the method. In particular, we would like
(uniform) convergence to the solution of the original prob-
lem in the limit as the discretization becomes ﬁner. It is
well known that in general this property does not hold.
However in this case Theorem 1 guarantees the continuity
of Cn, that in turn implies the consistency of the method,
even if the policy itself is not continuous as a function of
the state([4]). Intuitively, discrepancies are possible only
around the threshold sn, so that they tend to disappear as
the discretization becomes ﬁner.
The standard dynamic programming algorithm involves
O(|X||W||U||T|) arithmetic operations, where |X| is the
number of discretized states, |W| the number of possible
outcomes of the (discretized) uncontrollable events, |U| the
maximum number of possible discretized actions that can
be taken in any given state and T is the length of the time
horizon. However, the priori knowledge of the structure of
the optimal policy can be used to speed up the computa-
tion. In fact it is sufﬁcient to ﬁnd s (for example by bisec-
tion) and compute the optimal control associated with any
state larger than s to completely characterize the policy for
a given time step. The complexity of this latter algorithm
is O(|W||U||T| log |X|).
5
Case Study: the Paciﬁc Halibut
As part of the ongoing effort in the emerging ﬁeld of Com-
putational Sustainability, we consider an application of our
framework to the Paciﬁc Halibut ﬁshery.
The commercial exploitation of the Paciﬁc halibut on the
Northwestern coastline of North America dates back to the
late 1800s, and it is today one of the region’s largest and
most proﬁtable ﬁsheries.The ﬁshery developed so quickly
that by the early 20th century it was starting to exhibit
signs of overﬁshing. After the publication of scientiﬁc re-
ports which demonstrated conclusively a sharp decline of
the stocks, governments of the U.S. and Canada signed a
treaty creating the International Paciﬁc Halibut Commis-
sion (IPHC) to rationally manage the resource. The IPHC
commission controls the amount of ﬁsh caught annually by
deciding each year’s total allowable catch (TAC), that is
precisely the decision variable hn of our optimization prob-
lem.
5.1
Management Problem Formulation
To develop a bioeconomic model of the ﬁshery, we have
extracted data 2 from the IPHC annual reports on estimated
biomass xt, harvest ht and effort Et (measured in thou-
sands of skate soaks) for Area 3A (one of the major regula-
tory areas in which waters are divided) for a 33 years period
from 1975 to 2007. To model the population dynamics, we
2Data is available from the authors upon request.
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
0
50
100
150
200
Year
Effort H1000 sk. soaksL , Stock H10^6 poundsL
est. effort
hist. effort
est. stock
hist. stock
Figure 1: Fitted models (11) and (13) compared to histori-
cal data (in bold).
consider the Beverton-Holt model that uses the following
reproduction function
xn+1 = f(sn) = (1 −m)sn +
r0sn
1 + sn/M ,
(11)
where sn = xn−hn is the stock remaining after ﬁshing (es-
capement) in year n. This model can be considered as a dis-
cretization of the continuous-time logistic equation. Here,
parameter m represents a natural mortality coefﬁcient, r0
can be interpreted as a reproduction rate and M(r0−m)/m
is the carrying capacity of the environment. The (a priori)
mortality coefﬁcient we use is m = 0.15, that is the current
working value used by the IPHC. The values of r0 and M
are estimated by ordinary least square ﬁtting to the histor-
ical data. Estimated values thus obtained are reported in
table 1, while the ﬁtted curve is shown in ﬁgure 1.
Parameter
Value
q
9.07979 10−7
b
2.55465
p
4, 300, 000$ / (106 pounds)
K
5, 000, 000$
c
200, 000$ / 1000 skate soaks
δ
0.05
m
0.15
M
196.3923 106 pounds
r0
0.543365
Table 1: Base case parameter set.
Following [18], we suppose that the system is affected by
stochasticity in the form of seasonal shocks wn that inﬂu-
ence only the new recruitment part
xn+1 = f(sn, wn) = (1 −m)sn + wn
r0sn
1 + sn/M . (12)

Instead of assuming an a priori probability distribution for
wn or trying to learn one from data (that in our case would
not be feasible given current scarce data availability), we
will make use of the framework developed in the previous
sections. In particular we will (a priori) assume that wn are
random variables all having the same ﬁnite support that we
will learn from data, but we will not make any assumption
on the actual weight distribution. With our data, we obtain
that wn ∈[1 −0.11, 1 + 0.06] = Iw.
For the economic part of the model, we start by modeling
the relationship between a harvest ht that brings the popu-
lation level from xt to xt −ht and the effort Et needed to
accomplish this result. We will a priori assume that there is
a marginal effort involved, so that
Et =
Z xt
xt−ht
1
qyb dy
(13)
for some q and b. This is inspired by the fact that less ef-
fort is required when the stock is abundant, and can also
be interpreted as an integral of inﬁnitesimal Cobb-Douglas
production functions (a standard economic model for pro-
ductivity) where b and g are the corresponding elasticities.
Estimated values obtained by least squares ﬁtting are re-
ported in table 1, while the resulting curve is compared with
historical data in ﬁgure 1.
Costs involved in the Halibut ﬁshery are divided into two
categories: ﬁxed costs and variable costs. Fixed costs in-
clude costs that are independent of the number and the du-
ration of the trips a vessel makes (therefore generically in-
dependent from the effort Et). For example, vessel repairs
costs, license and insurance fees, mooring and dockage fees
are typically considered ﬁxed costs. We will denote with
K the sum of all the ﬁxed costs, that will be incurred if and
only if a harvest is undertaken.
Variable costs include all the expenses that are dependent
on the effort level. Variable costs typically include fuel,
maintenance, crew wages, gear repair and replacement. We
assume that the total variable costs are proportional to the
effort Et (measured in skate soaks) according to a constant
c. Parameter c is set to 200, 000$ for 1000 skate soaks
(200$/skate) as estimated in [2]. Following the analysis of
the historical variable and ﬁxed costs for the halibut ﬁshery
carried on in [11], we assume K = 5, 000, 000$ for area
3A. The unit price p for the halibut is set to 4, 300, 000$/
106 pounds, as in [2].
If we further assume a ﬁxed discount rate δ = 0.05, we
obtain a formulation of management problem for the Hal-
ibut ﬁshery in Area 3A that ﬁts into the framework de-
scribed in the previous section.
In particular, the prob-
lem for an N years horizon is that of ﬁnding an admis-
sible policy π = {µi}i∈[1,N] that maximizes the revenue
Cπ
N(x) where xn is subject to (12), hn = µn(xn) and
R(x) = px −c
R x
0
1
qyb dy.
5.2
Optimal Policy
By using the dynamic programming approach on the prob-
lem discretized with a step size of 0.25 × 106 pounds,
we compute the optimal policy for a management hori-
zon of N = 33 years, that is the length of our original
time series. As predicted by Theorem 1, the optimal policy
π∗= {µ1, . . . , µN} for the model we constructed for area
3A is a non stationary (S −s) policy. In ﬁgure 2(a) we plot
the function µ1(·) to be used in the ﬁrst year (the values of
S1 and s1 are 133 and 176.75 respectively). In words, the
optimal policy dictates that at period n a harvest is to be
undertaken if and only if the current stock level is greater
than sn; in that case the stock is harvested down to Sn.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
stock (106 pounds)
stock (106 pounds)
Optimal policy and escapement
 
 
S
s
harvest
escapement
(a) Optimal rule for selecting harvests in the ﬁrst year.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
time (years)
stock (106 pounds)
Optimal state and control trajectories
 
 
stock
harvest
(b) Stock trajectory and corresponding optimal harvests.
Figure 2: The optimal policy.
The trajectory of the system when it is managed using the
optimal policy is shown in ﬁgure 2, together with the corre-
sponding optimal harvests. As we can see, the optimal pol-
icy is pulsing, in the sense that it involves periodic closures
of the ﬁshery, when no harvest should be undertaken so that

the ﬁsh stock has time to recover. Of course, this kind of
policy could be acceptable in practice only in combination
with some rotation scheme among the different Areas, so
that a constant yearly production can be sustained.
This scheme is very different from the Constant Propor-
tional Policy (CPP) that has been traditionally used to man-
age the Halibut ﬁshery. In fact a CPP works by choosing
the yearly TAC as a ﬁxed fraction of the current stock level
xt, and is aimed at maintaining the exploited stock size
(the escapement) at a given ﬁxed level. This policy can
be seen as a simpliﬁed version of an (S −s) policy where
the two levels do not depend on the stage n and coincide,
thus deﬁning the target stock size.
To see the advantage of the optimal (S −s) policy, we
compare it with the historical harvest proportions and with
a CPP policy that uses the historical average harvest rate
a = 0.1277. Table 2 summarizes the discounted revenues
corresponding to an initial stock size x1 = 90.989 million
pounds, that is the estimated stock size in 1975.
Policy
Disc. revenue ($)
Loss ($)
Optimal S −s
9.05141 × 108
−
Historical rates
7.06866 × 108
1.98275 × 108
Average CPP
6.51849 × 108
2.53292 × 108
Rolling Horizon
8.73605 × 108
3.1536 × 107
Table 2: Policy Comparison
Compared to the historical policy or the CPP policy, rev-
enues for the optimal (S −s) policy are about 35% higher,
as reported in table 2. Notice that the comparison is done
assuming a worst case realization of the stochasticity, or in
other words that the nature is actively playing against the
manager.
Notice that the large harvest prescribed by the optimal
(S −s) policy in the last year is an artifact of the ﬁnite
horizon effect, caused by the fact that there is no reason
not to exhaust the resource at the end of the management
horizon (as long as it is proﬁtable to harvest it). However
it does not affect the comparison signiﬁcantly due to the
discount rate. In fact the (discounted) revenue for the en-
tire last large harvest only accounts for less than 8% of the
total revenue. This is conﬁrmed by looking at the results
obtained with a rolling horizon strategy that always picks
the optimal action with a 33-years long management hori-
zon in mind. As shown in ﬁgure 3, this (suboptimal) strat-
egy is not affected by the ﬁnite horizon effect. The rolling
horizon strategy still involves periodic closures of the ﬁsh-
ery and signiﬁcantly outperforms the historical policies, as
reported in table 2.
To further clarify that the pulsing nature of the optimal har-
vests is not an artifact of the ﬁnite horizon, it is also in-
teresting to notice that the theoretical results on the opti-
mality of (S −s) policies and the corresponding pulsing
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
time (years)
stock (106 pounds)
Optimal state and control trajectories with rolling horizon
 
 
stock
harvest
Figure 3: Harvests and stock trajectory with the rolling
horizon strategy.
harvests can be carried over to the inﬁnite horizon case via
limiting arguments. The high level argument is that the op-
timal value function Cn(x) converges uniformly to C(x)
as n →∞, while Pn(x) converges uniformly to a function
P(x) as n →∞. Given that by Theorem 1 Pn(x) is contin-
uous and K-concave for all n, we have that P(x) must be
also continuous and K-concave. Using an argument simi-
lar to the one developed in section 3.3 and by using Lemma
1, one can show that there exists S and s such that the opti-
mal stationary policy for the inﬁnite horizon problem is an
(S −s) policy.
6
Conclusions
In this paper, we have analyzed the optimality of (S−s) po-
lices for a fairly general class of stochastic discrete-time re-
source allocation problems. When a non stationary (S −s)
policy is used, a harvest is undertaken at period n if and
only if the current stock level is greater than sn; in that case
the stock is harvested down to Sn. The framework devel-
oped is quite general and can be applied to problems arising
in very different domains, such as natural resource man-
agement, crowdsourcing, pollution management. When as-
sumptions of Theorem 1 are met, we have shown that there
exists a non stationary (S −s) policy that maximizes the
utility in a worst case scenario.
A fundamental advantage of the game theoretic approach
is that it completely avoids the problem of evaluating the
probability distributions of the random variables describ-
ing the uncertainty affecting those systems, a task that is
difﬁcult or even impossible to accomplish in many practi-
cal circumstances. Given the consensus reached by the sci-
entiﬁc community on the importance of understanding the
role of uncertainty when dealing with renewable resources,
we believe that worst-case scenario frameworks such as the

one described here provide new insights and will become
increasingly important.
To contribute to the effort of the Computational Sustain-
ability community in tackling the fundamental sustainabil-
ity challenges of our time, we consider an application of
our model to a marine natural resource. This type of natu-
ral resources are in fact widely believed to be endangered
due to over exploitation and generally poorly managed. Us-
ing Gulf of Alaska Paciﬁc halibut data from the Interna-
tional Paciﬁc halibut Commission (IPHC) annual reports,
we formulated a real world case study problem that ﬁts into
our framework. In particular, our approach deﬁnes a policy
with a guaranteed lower bound on the utility function that is
structurally very different from the one currently employed.
As a future direction, we plan to study the effects of par-
tial observability on the optimal policies by moving into a
POMDP framework. Moreover, we aim at extending the
results presented here to the multidimensional case by ex-
tending the theory on the so-called (σ, S) policies from the
inventory control literature.
7
