Identification of arabic word from bilingual text using 
character features
Case of structural features 
Sofiene Haboubi, Samia Maddouri, Hamid Amiri 
System and Signal Processing Laboratory 
National Engineering School of Tunis (ENIT) 
 BP 37, Belvedere 1002, Tunis, Tunisia. 

 
 
 
Abstract— The identification of the language of the script is an 
important stage in the process of recognition of the writing. 
There are several works in this research area, which treat various 
languages. Most of the used methods are global or statistical. In 
this present paper, we study the possibility of using the features 
of scripts to identify the language. The identification of the 
language of the script by characteristics returns the identification 
in the case of multilingual documents less difficult. We present by 
this work, a study on the possibility of using the structural 
features to identify the Arabic language from an Arabic / Latin 
text. 
Language identification, structural features, Arabic script, 
Latin script. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The feature extraction is an important step in the process of 
recognition of handwritten Arabic script. It can generate the 
primitive descriptive image. The choice of these primitives is 
crucial for recognition. A compromise must be respected 
during feature extraction: The feature extractor is to provide 
primitive uniform for different types of writing, accurately 
reflecting all the information necessary to the process of 
recognition. It should also be little greedy execution time in 
memory [3]. Various types of methods of feature extraction are 
known in literature [5]. They are based on three main 
descriptions: the projection of the image [6,13], skeletonization 
[10, 15] and function contours [14, 17, 18, 20, 21].  
The projection method is the simplest and least expensive 
for small images but it is very sensitive to tilt and it does not 
accurately describe the image. 
The skeletonization is used mainly in order to segment 
graphemes in writing uniform. The challenge of segmentation 
of cursive reduces the effectiveness of this description. 
The outline, which describes the overall picture, can be 
easily detected. Subsequent treatments can generate different 
types of global or analytic description from the outline. This 
type of description is used in our approach. 
The handwriting recognition is a task complicated by the 
diversity of styles of writing, first and richness of words in 
different types of information on the other. This is especially 
true as the Arabic words consist of whole areas. 
II. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ARABIC SCRIPT 
We have found it useful to recall briefly the essential 
characteristics of handwritten Arabic script. This presentation 
is based on a literature review that we find in [1, 2], ... The 
Arabic alphabet has 28 letters have different shapes. These 
forms vary according to their positions in the word, their 
widths, number and position of the diacritical dots and hamza 
presence of diacritics. 
• 
Cursivity: The Arabic script is cursive, i.e. the letters 
are connected. This property is encountered in both 
printed and handwritten forms. 
• 
Character position: The shapes of Arabic letters 
depending on their position in the word initial position, 
medial, final or isolated, which increases the total 
number of forms of different characters over 100. 
• 
Character Width: Unlike printed Latin characters, 
hunting Arabic characters printed and handwritten 
result is variable although they have neither upper nor 
lower case. 
• 
Diacritics: More than half of Arab characters have 
diacritical points in their forms. These points are the 
number one, two or three and can be top or bottom of 
bodies of characters with the same form. 
• 
The character hamza: Some letters have a zigzag form 
known as "Hamza". This form is considered a vowel in 
the Arabic alphabet. 
• 
Vowels in Arabic script: Arabic vowels are placed 
above or below the body of characters. They are seven 
in number 

III. 
EXTRACTION STRUCTURAL CHARACTERISTICS 
The extraction of structural features is based on three steps: 
pre-treatment, the determination of the baseline, and the 
detection of primitives. 
The words to be recognized are extracted from their 
contexts check or postal letters. A stage analysis, segmentation 
and filtering of documents is required. This task is not part of 
our work. The words are supposed to be taken out of context 
without noise. Since our method of feature extraction is based 
mainly on the outline, the preprocessing step we have 
introduced in our system is the expansion in order to obtain a 
closed contour with the least points of intersections. Since the 
elimination of the slope may introduce additional distortions 
we have tried to avoid this step. It is for this reason that 
techniques of preprocessing, avoiding the inclination correction 
has emerged [4, 7, 18, 19].  
A. Determination of baselines  
From the word we can extract two baselines. A upper and 
lower baseline. These two baselines divide the word into three 
regions. The poles "H" and diacritical dots high "P" which are 
regions above the upper baseline. The jambs "J" and diacritical 
dots lower "Q" correspond to regions below the lower baseline. 
The body of the word is the region between the two baselines. 
In general, the loops are in the middle. Figure 1 illustrates this 
subdivision. 
 
Figure 1.  Improving the baselines by the method. 
B. Extraction of the poles and jambs 
A pole is all forms with a maximum above the upper 
baseline. Similarly, jambs and all maxima below the lower 
baseline. The distance between these extrema and the baseline 
is determined empirically. It corresponds to: 
MargeH = 2(lower baseline – upper baseline) for the poles  
MargeJ  = (lower baseline – upper baseline) for the jambs. 
 
C. Detection of diacritical dots 
The diacritical points are extracted from the contour. 
Browsing through it, we can detect those that are closed. From 
these closed contours, we choose those with a number of 
contour points below a certain threshold. This threshold is 
derived from a statistical study to recognize the words taken 
from their context (checks, letters, mailing ...). It is estimated in 
our case the recognition of literal amounts to 60 pixels. 
D. Determination of loops from the contour 
A closed contour length below 60 pixels corresponds to a 
loop if some contour points are between the two baselines. The 
problems encountered during the extraction of loops are: 
• 
Some diacritical dots can be confused with the loops if 
they are intersecting with the baselines. 
• 
Some loops may be longer than 60 pixels and can not 
be taken into account. 
After a first selection step loops, a second step of verifying 
their inclusion in another closed loop is completed. This 
method involves: 
• 
Looking for word parts that can include the loop.  
• 
Stain the relevant section blank, if the contour points 
disappear when the latter is included in the word color 
and is part of the list of loops. 
E. Detection of PAWS  
Given the variability of the shape of characters according to 
their position, an Arabic word can be composed by more than 
one party called for PAW "Pieces of Arabic Word." Detection 
of PAWS is useful information both in the recognition step in 
the step of determining the position of structural features in the 
word. 
F. Position detection primitives (letters)  
The shape of an Arabic character depends on its position in 
the word. A character can have four different positions which 
depend on its position in the word. We can have single 
characters at the beginning, middle or end of a word. This 
position is detected during the primary feature extraction. 
Indeed, the extracted areas are defined by local minima. These 
minimums are from the vertical projection and contour. The 
number of black pixels is calculated in the vicinity of 
boundaries demarcated areas and between the two baselines 
above and below. If this number is greater than 0 at the left 
boundary and equal to 0 on the right, the position is the top 
"D", etc ... Figure 2 shows the various positions found in the 
Arabic script. 
 
Nb PAW 
PAW1
PAW2 
PAW3 PAW4 
4 
HI 
HD HM BJF 
HI 
PD BPF
Figure 2.  Structural features for Arabic handwritten word. 
IV. 
DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN SCRIPTS 
The recognition of the language of the document is 
regarded as a preprocessing step; this step has become difficult 
in the case of handwritten document. In this work we present a 
case of discrimination between Arabic script and Latin script 
by the structural method. 

The preliminary study carried out, shows that the majority 
of the methods of differentiation treat only the printed text 
documents. Among the latter, the method suggested by [9], 
develops a strategy of discrimination between Arabic and Latin 
scripts. This approach is based on Template-Matching, which 
makes it possible to decide the identified language or the 
rejection. In [16], the authors uses a Multi-Classes supervised 
for classification and the Gabor filter to identify the Latin 
writing. The type of document used is printed with Latin 
writings and mixed. Two methods are proposed by [8], with 
two approaches: Statistical and spectral by Gabor filter. This 
work is tested on Kannada and Latin scripts. The system of 
identification, proposed by [11], relates to Latin and not-Latin 
languages in printed documents. This method is based on the 
application of Gabor filter. As well as the author classifiers for 
the identification of the languages other than Latin. With 
statistical methods and on printed documents, [22] has 
interested by identification of Arabic, Chinese, Latin, 
Devanagari, and Bangla languages. The identification of the 
type of scripts (printed or handwritten) is treated by [12], on 
Korean language. This approach is based on an analysis of 
related components and contours. A spectral method is 
presented in [23]. This method is to classes the script for 
Chinese, Japanese, Korean or Latin language by Gabor filter. 
The Arabic script is cursive and present various diacritic. 
An Arab word is a sequence of named entirely disjoined related 
entities. Contrary to the Latin script, the Arab characters are 
written from right to left, and do not comprise capital letters. 
The characters form varies according to their position in the 
word: initial, median, final and isolated. In the case of 
handwritten, the characters, Arabic or Latin, can vary in their 
static and dynamic properties. The static variations relate to the 
size and the form, while the dynamic variations relate to the 
number of diacritic segments and their order. 
Considering the visual difference between Arabic script and 
Latin script, we have chosen to study the possibility of 
discrimination between them based on the general structure of 
each, and the number of occurrences of the structural features 
mentioned above. 
A.  Structural features of Arabic and Latin scripts 
The Arabic alphabet has 28 letters have different shapes. 
These forms vary according to their positions in the word, their 
widths, number and position of the diacritical points. The Latin 
alphabet contains 26 letters also have different shapes. These 
forms vary according to their statements lowercase or 
uppercase the presence of accents in the character, items, and 
other forms that vary by language. These factors increase the 
total number of different types of characters to more than 100 
for each of the scripts (Arabic and Latin). Figure 3 shows an 
example of different forms for Arabic letter and a Latin letter. 
A first step is to see the structural aspect of each script of 
Arabic and Latin. We note though, that the general shape of the 
Arabic script is totally different from the Latin script, which is 
reflected in Table 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of different forms for Arabic letter and Latin letter 
Table 1 presents each structural feature used with their 
many appearances in letters, taking into account the different 
forms of each letter. 
TABLE I.  
PRESENCE OF STRUCTURAL FEATURES IN ARABIC AND LATIN 
SCRIPTS. 
 
Arabic 
120 forms 
Latin 
103 forms 
H: ascender 
29 
29 
B: loop 
22 
34 
P: upper diacritic dots 
30 
28 
J: descender 
28 
12 
Q: lower diacritic dots 
11 
0 
 
The previous table shows that there is a difference between 
Arabic script and Latin script under these structural features. 
Latin script is characterized by: 
• 
Many interesting number of loops. 
• 
The interesting number of upper diacritics dots. 
• 
The lack of lower diacritic dots. 
• 
The small number of the descenders. 
The Arabic script is characterized by: 
• 
The average number of loops. 
• 
The interesting number of upper diacritics dots. 
• 
The interesting number of lower diacritic dots. 
• 
The interesting number of the descenders. 
B.  Performance of the method 
This evaluation is performed on the set_a of IFN / ENIT 
database described in [24]. An estimate rate of the extraction 
compared to manual removal of files deducted .tru whose 
content is automatically generated from the printed script for 
each image of set_a, and manually verified by the crew of 
LSTS - ENIT. We present in Table 2 the first stage of 
evaluation. It is to count the number of each feature: Hampe 
(H), Jamb (J), Upper (P) and Lower (Q) diacritic dots, Loop 
(B), Start (D), Middle (M), End (F) and Isolated (I) 
 
 

TABLE II.  
EVALUATION RESULTS OF STRUCTURAL PRIMITIVE METHOD 
ON SET_A OF IFN / ENIT DATABASE. 
 
Feature 
Total  
Set_a 
Correctly 
extracted 
Error 
 rate 
H 
16440 
10852 
33,99 % 
J 
12632 
8352 
33,88 % 
P 
12444 
10165 
18,31 % 
Q 
7514 
5957 
20,72 % 
B 
13149 
9021 
31,39 % 
nbPAWs 
28312 
1566 
5.53% 
 
We note that the error rates are the highest for the poles and 
jambs. Given that these characteristics depend strongly on the 
quality of the baseline, a normalization step of words in order 
to eliminate the inclination and uniform size can improve the 
rate of extraction of these features. The best extraction rate 
obtained is that of PAWS despite confusion between this 
characteristic and diacritical dots may occur in the case of 
connection between diacritical points. To better understand the 
problem of error types, we conducted a second type of 
evaluation by analyzing the features extracted using their 
positions in the PAW. 
In the second type of evaluation, we note first that all the 
characteristics Jamb is associated with the isolated position and 
end. The second point shows that the error rate is the highest in 
the extraction of Poles in the middle of PAW. The error rate for 
the other characteristics is more important when these 
characteristics are isolated. These two points are also mostly of 
poor extraction of the baseline. Indeed, in the handwriting, a 
pole is not in general long enough. Also seat-term impulses 
directly on the height of the shaft relative to the baseline above. 
For isolated letters, the baseline is not always correctly 
extracted, which explains the rate obtained. 
C.  Evaluation 
The recognition of the language of the document is 
regarded as a preprocessing step, this step has become difficult 
in the case of handwritten document. We begin by 
discriminating between an Arabic text and a Latin text (Figure 
4) printed by the structural method. Considering the visual 
difference between writing Arabic and Latin script, we have 
chosen to discriminate between them based on the general 
structure of each, and the number of occurrences of the 
structural characteristics mentioned above. Indeed, in analyzing 
a text in Arabic and Latin text we can distinguish a difference 
in the cursivity, the number of presence of diacritical dots and 
leg in the Arabic script. To printed Latin script, it is composed 
mainly of isolated letters. 
The first step in the process regardless of the Arabic script 
from a text document is extracted lines and PAWS. The 
extraction of lines is done by determining the upper and lower 
limit using the horizontal projection. For each line, there are the 
PAWS using the method of vertical projection. Each PAW will 
be awarded by a system for extracting structural features. 
Extraction of structural features for text, is performed by 
the method mentioned previously by introducing text PAWs 
successively. In figure 4, we present the results of structural 
characteristics for an Arabic text and a Latin text have the same 
number of rows and same size character fetches. The results in 
the figure show the average after analysis of a set of multiple 
images. Depending on the specific results, the distinction 
between Arab and Latin entries is possible using the structural 
method. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 4.  Example of Arabic text (a) and Latin text (b) printed to 
discriminate. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
H
B
P
J
D
M
F
I
Nb
PAW
Arab
Latin
 
Figure 5.  Results of the evaluation step of structural primitives. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
According to the study, the distinction between Arabic and 
Latin is possible, using the structural features. The results in 
Figure 5, show the different numbers of occurrence of each 

feature used for Arabic and Latin. These tests are performed on 
multiple images, and each document has the same impact. So, 
as there is a difference between Arab and Latin structures 
visually, the use of structural features shows that difference. 
Using a classifier is recommended in cases of discrimination, 
but since the distinction is fully visible, we have no interest to 
do so. Currently, tests are performed on documents written in 
Arabic or Latin. We expect shortly to continue to discriminate 
in the case of mixed paper (Arabic and Latin at the same 
document) and add other features that may improve the 
identification of language in critical cases, such as the presence 
of a Latin word in an Arabic text.
