MPRE: Multi-perspective Patient Representation
Extractor for Disease Prediction
Ziyue Yu1, Jiayi Wang1, Wuman Luo1, 2∗, Rita Tse1, 2 and Giovanni Pau3, 4
1Faculty of Applied Sciences, Macao Polytechnic University, China
2Engineering Research Centre of Applied Technology on Machine Translation and
Artificial Intelligence of Ministry of Education, Macao Polytechnic University, China
3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Italy
4Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA

Abstract—Patient representation learning based on electronic
health records (EHR) is a critical task for disease prediction.
This task aims to effectively extract useful information on
dynamic features. Although various existing works have achieved
remarkable progress, the model performance can be further
improved by fully extracting the trends, variations, and the cor-
relation between the trends and variations in dynamic features.
In addition, sparse visit records limit the performance of deep
learning models. To address these issues, we propose the Multi-
perspective Patient Representation Extractor (MPRE) for disease
prediction. Specifically, we propose Frequency Transformation
Module (FTM) to extract the trend and variation information
of dynamic features in the time-frequency domain, which can
enhance the feature representation. In the 2D Multi-Extraction
Network (2D MEN), we form the 2D temporal tensor based
on trend and variation. Then, the correlations between trend
and variation are captured by the proposed dilated operation.
Moreover, we propose the First-Order Difference Attention
Mechanism (FODAM) to calculate the contributions of differ-
ences in adjacent variations to the disease diagnosis adaptively.
To evaluate the performance of MPRE and baseline methods, we
conduct extensive experiments on two real-world public datasets.
The experiment results show that MPRE outperforms state-of-
the-art baseline methods in terms of AUROC and AUPRC.
Index Terms—Disease Prediction, Patient Representation, Visit
Records
I. INTRODUCTION
Patient representation aims at how to detect and represent
useful information about each patient related to a medical di-
agnosis. Nowadays, patient representation based on electronic
health records (EHR) [1], [2] is becoming increasingly impor-
tant for disease prediction [3]. Typically, EHR of a patient is
a list of temporally ordered visit data. Each visit consists of
three parts, i.e., static features (e.g., demographic information),
dynamic features (e.g., medical lab test information), and
diagnostic results [4], [5]. Static features are recorded only
once at the patient’s initial hospital visit, while dynamic
features are updated at every subsequent visit. In this paper,
we focus on how to effectively learn patient representation for
disease prediction based on EHR.
So far, various patient representation methods based on EHR
have been proposed for disease prediction. Most of them are
∗denotes the corresponding author
hybrids or variants of convolutional neural networks (CNN),
recurrent neural networks (RNN), and attention mechanisms.
Specifically, one-dimensional (1D) CNN [6] [7] with different
kernel sizes can extract the adjacent variations in visit records.
Temporal convolutional network (TCN) [8] used 1D kernels
to capture contextual information between visit records by
crossing different time steps. To model visit records from
multiple time scales, AdaCare was proposed to capture the
long-term trend and short-term variation of biomarkers at
different visit records. SAnD [9] adopted the Transformer-
based framework with the masked self-attention mechanism
for incorporating the information in time order. StageNet [10]
proposed the stage-aware Long Short-term Memory (LSTM)
to identify the stages (e.g., deterioration and recovery stages)
of disease progression. These works have greatly improved
the performance of patient representation, and have made
considerable achievements in disease prediction.
However, these methods still have much room for im-
provement in fully detecting the useful information hidden
in dynamic features such as long-term and short-term trends,
variations, and correlations between trends and variations [11],
[12]. Usually, an upward trend in creatinine level indicates
the patient is at risk for kidney disease [13]. The abnormal
increase in bicarbonate levels indicates that the patient may
have metabolic alkalosis [14]. In addition, capturing the cor-
relations between trends and variations of dynamic features is
an important reference in medical diagnosis. For example, the
positive correlation between the trend and variation in blood
albumin levels indicates an upward trend with a gradual in-
creasing pattern of variation, which causes acute inflammation
to patients [15].
Detecting hidden useful information of dynamic features
is challenging due to data sparsity [16]. According to the
statistics of modern popular EHR datasets [17]–[19], the
average patient visit is only 10, the intervals between visits
are irregular, and the average interval between two contiguous
visits is as large as 2.5 months. As a result, the sparsity of
patient visits limits the ability of the deep learning models to
detect the hidden useful information of dynamic features.
To address the above issues, in this paper, we propose
a framework called Multi-perspective Patient Representation
arXiv:2401.00756v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2024

Extractor (MPRE) for disease prediction based on EHR. The
goal is to effectively detect the useful information (e.g.,
long-term and short-term trends, variations, and correlations
between trends and variations) of dynamic features for pa-
tient representation. Specifically, we adopt symlets wavelet
decomposition in Frequency Transformation Module (FTM) to
capture the trend and variation information of dynamic features
in the time-frequency domain. The reasons [20], [21] why
we use wavelet decomposition to detect trend and variation
are: 1) it has the multi-scale analysis capability, which can
obtain the representation of the visit records based on differ-
ent time-frequency domains, 2) it possesses the property of
time-frequency localization, which can effectively capture the
rapid changes of dynamic features and the moment of peak
appearance, and 3) dynamic features exhibit poor Cyclicality
due to data sparsity, which makes traditional time series de-
composition methods (e.g., seasonal and trend decomposition
using loess) inapplicable.
Besides, we design a 2D Multi-Extraction Network (2D
MEN) to transform the 1D trend and variation information into
the 2D temporal tensor. The goal is to capture the correlations
between trends and variations. In addition, we propose the
First-Order Difference Attention Mechanism (FODAM) to
adaptively calculate the contribution of differences in adjacent
variations of dynamic features. As pointed out in the American
Diabetes Association [22], it is necessary to leverage the
differences between adjacent variations in disease diagnosis.
For instance, alternating positive and negative fluctuations in
blood glucose levels often indicate abnormal insulin secretion.
Additionally, differences in adjacent variations may have vary-
ing impacts on disease diagnosis [23].
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are listed
as follows:
1) We propose MPRE to enhance the learning of patient
representation for disease prediction based on EHR.
MPRE consists of three major modules, namely FTM,
2D MEN, and FODAM.
2) We propose FTM to extract the trend and variation
from dynamic features. FTM can transform dynamic
features into time-frequency domains to obtain more
hidden information.
3) We propose 2D MEN to capture the correlation between
the trend and variation. We propose FODAM to adap-
tively calculate the contribution of the differences in
dynamic features’ variations to disease diagnosis.
4) We implement the MPRE using the two real-world
public datasets, namely “SCRIPT CarpeDiem Dataset”
and “Health Facts Database” [17], [18]. To evaluate the
performance of the MPRE, we select the area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) and
precision-recall curve (AUPRC) as evaluation metrics.
The experiment results show that the MPRE outperforms
state-of-the-art baseline methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we review related works for the disease prediction
task. The methods of MPRE will be given in Section III.
Section IV discusses the experiments of MPRE and baseline
methods. We summarize this paper in Section V.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section, we review the major works in disease pre-
diction tasks from two perspectives, namely variation pattern
detection methods and time-aware methods.
Variation Pattern Detection Methods. Typically, 1D CNN-
based methods used different kernel sizes to extract the local
variation between the patients’ visit records [6], [7], [24], [25].
Choi et al. proposed a reverse temporal attention mechanism
with the RNN model called RETAIN to analyze the importance
of visit records [26]. It can identify important clinical features
and give higher attention weights to recent visit records. Ma
et al. used bidirectional RNN with three attention mechanisms
named Dipole to model visit records [27]. They believed that
all historical visit records needed to be considered. Song et
al. proposed a Transformer-based [28] model with a masked
self-attention mechanism called SAnD. This work can aggre-
gate the patients’ information based on visit records in time
order [9].
Time-aware Methods. Another perspective on the disease
prediction task is the time-aware method. The temporal con-
volutional network (TCN) is the improved model based on 1D
CNN. It proposed causal and dilation convolution to consider
the temporal information between the adjacent patient visit
records [8], [29]–[32]. Ma et al. proposed a multiple-scale
dilation convolutional module called AdaCare to extract the
different time scale information [33]. For the variants of RNN,
T-LSTM was proposed to consider the patient information
decreases with increasing time intervals [34]. It adopted the
time-aware mechanism for extracting the variations of dy-
namic features. More recently, Gao et al. proposed StageNet to
extract the stage of the disease progression [10]. This method
adopted stage-aware long short-term memory to decide the
time period with health status progression. ConCare adopted
the time-aware attention mechanism and time information
decay function to improve the model performance [35].
These works have achieved remarkable results in disease
prediction, but we can further improve the performance of
the model by fully capturing the trends, variations, and the
correlation between trends and variations. In addition, sparse
visit records and irregular visit intervals limit the performance
of deep learning models.
III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we first give the problem formulation of
the disease prediction task. Then, we describe the overview
of MPRE. After that, we introduce the major modules from
the proposed MPRE in detail. Finally, we introduce the loss
function and optimizer.
A. Problem Formulation
For temporal patient’s visit records V , suppose that each
patient has t = (1, 2, . . . , T) visits with |c| dynamic features
(e.g., hemoglobin, creatinine). V can be represented as follow:

Fig. 1.
The overview of MPRE. Specifically, we adopt # as a specific dynamic feature across all visit records, and ∗means the one specific dynamic
feature. FTM is used to capture trend and variation information from the dynamic features separately. 2D MEN reshapes the trend and variation as the 2D
temporal tensor and further captures the adjacent, short, and long-term correlation between the trend and variation. Fusion is used to embed all dynamic feature
representations based on the outputs from 2D MEN. FODAM adaptively computes the contribution of variation differences. Static features are embedded by
the linear layer. Finally, the prediction module aggregates the output of fusion, the result of FODAM, and the embedded static features to perform disease
prediction.
V =





v11
v12
. . .
v1,c
v21
v22
. . .
v2,c
...
...
vt1
vt2
. . .
vt,c




∈Rt×c,
(1)
we denote s ∈Rs as the vector of static features (e.g., gender,
ethnicity).
In this paper, our predictive objective is presented as the
multi-class disease prediction task. Specifically, given V and
s, each patient has a corresponding label y ∈Rd(d =
0, 1, ..., D), where d means the number of types of the same
disease, we aim to predict whether the patient will have the
disease y in the future. We formulate the objective as a
prediction function ˆy = F(V, s; Θ), where Θ means the model
parameters and ˆy is the predicted result.
B. Framework Overview
Figure 1 shows the overview of MPRE. Initially, each
dynamic feature is individually inputted into the FTM to
obtain the corresponding time-frequency domain information
(i.e., trend and variation information). Subsequently, the trend
and variation are reshaped to form a 2D temporal tensor
and use the proposed 2D MEN to capture the correlation
between the trend and variation. In addition, 2D MEN can
also extract the adjacent, short and long-term correlation to
maintain the dependencies of trends and variations. We use
the proposed FODAM to identify the contributions of the
difference of adjacent variations for disease diagnosis. We
adopt the linear layer to embed the static features. Fusion is
used to concatenate the output of each 2D MEN and feed the
concatenated result through the embedding layer. Finally, the
embedded static features, the output of Fusion, and the results
of FODAM are inputted into the prediction module to perform
the disease prediction.
C. Frequency Transformation Module
In this paper, we adopt symlets wavelet to decompose each
dynamic feature separately. The decomposed result reflects
the time and frequency information of dynamic features. The
low-frequency components can be obtained by low pass filter,
and used to indicate the trend information. And the high-
frequency components are obtained by high pass filter, which
can be utilized to express the variation information. The
filtered results enhance the representation of dynamic features.
In addition, we adopt the symmetric mode to avoid boundary
effects and to reduce the artifacts at the boundary [36]. The
equations of FTM can be represented as follows:
x = Column(V )
(2)
E∗=
T
X
n=1
xn · 1
√
2 · ϕn
(3)
R∗=
T
X
n=0
xn · 1
√
2 · ψn
(4)
where Column(·) is used to extract each column of V , i.e., the
value vector x ∈Rt for a specific dynamic feature across all

visit records. E = [E1, E2, . . . , Ec] ∈Rc×m means the trend
information. We adopt E∗∈Rm as the trend information of
one specific dynamic feature. R = [R1, R2, . . . , Rc] ∈Rc×m
is the variation information. And R∗∈Rm denotes the
variation information of one specific dynamic feature. ϕn and
ψn denote the low pass and high pass filter, respectively. In
the symlets wavelet function, the length and coefficients of the
filter depend on the selected type of symlets.
D. 2D Multi-Extraction Network
In 2D MEN, we aim to capture the correlation between
the trend and variation. In this module, we first reshape the
trend and variation information obtained from the FTM to
form the 2D temporal tensor. The process of this operation
can be represented as follows:
D = Reshape(E∗; R∗)
(5)
where Reshape(·) represents the dimension transformation
operation. After that, we apply the proposed 2D MEN on
2D tensor D ∈R2×m. The idea of 2D MEN is inspired
by the work of Yu et al. and Ma et al [37], [38]. These
two works showed that local information can be captured in
images and 1D temporal data by using dilated convolution. But
different from these works, we achieve the dilated convolution
with different trend and variation spans. Moreover, our dilated
convolution is adapted to the 2D temporal tensor. Specifically,
a standard CNN (i.e., dilation rate is 0) can capture adjacent
correlations. A dilation rate of 1 captures short-term correla-
tions, while a dilation rate greater than 2 extracts long-term
correlations. In this paper, we adopt different dilation rates for
each dynamic feature to obtain adjacent, short and long-term
correlations simultaneously. Mathematically, the equation of
the proposed dilated operation is shown as follows:
ap,q =
2
X
k=1
L
X
l=1
dp,q+bl · Gk,l
(6)
where d is the value from 2D tensor D. ap,q is the out-
put of dilated operation. b denotes the dilation rate. Gk,l
means the kernel. k and l is the length. Based on the dif-
ferent dilation rates, we can obtain three feature maps, i.e.,
Aadj ∈Rqa, Ash ∈Rqs, Along ∈Rql, which represent the
adjacent, short and long-term correlation between the trend
and variation, respectively.
The final step of 2D MEN is to concatenate the adjacent,
short and long-term correlations to form the better dynamic
features representation:
Af = Concat(Aadj; Ash; Along)
(7)
where Concat(·) represents the concatenation operation. Af ∈
R2×(qa+qs+ql) represents the output of 2D MEN module.
We adopt [A1
f, ..., Ac
f] as the representation of all dynamic
features.
E. First-Order Difference Attention Mechanism
Based on the extracted variations from FTM, we propose
FODAM to adaptively compute the contributions of differ-
ences in adjacent variations to the disease progression. The
FODAM can be represented as follows:
α = softmax((R∗
2:m −R∗
1:m−1)(R∗
2:m −R∗
1:m−1)T
√
dim
)
(8)
hvar = α ⊙[R∗
2:m −R∗
1:m−1]
(9)
where α ∈Rm−1 denotes the attention weight of first-
order differences. R∗
2:m
= [R∗
2, R∗
3, . . . , R∗
m], R∗
1:m−1
=
[R∗
1, R∗
2, . . . , R∗
m−1], R∗= [R∗
1, R∗
2, . . . , R∗
m]. dim represents
the dimension of R∗. We adopt the
√
dim to avoid very small
gradients in the training process [39]. hvar ∈Rm−1 is the
representation of first-order variation difference. ⊙means the
Hadamard product.
F. Prediction Module
The aim of the prediction module is to use the representation
of static, dynamic features, and first-order variation differences
to perform disease prediction. We first embed the static fea-
tures based on the following equation:
hst = Wss + bs
(10)
where hst ∈Rd is the representation of static features. Ws ∈
Rd×s is learnable parameter, and bs ∈Rd is the bias.
Then, we do the fusion to embed all dynamic feature
representations based on the 2D MEN.
hcon = Concat(A1
f; ...; Ac
f)
(11)
hdy = Wdhcon + bd
(12)
where hcon ∈R2×((qa+qs+ql)∗c) means concatenating the
results of each 2D MEN. hdy ∈R(qa+qs+ql)∗c denotes the
representation of dynamic features. Wd ∈R2 means learnable
parameter, and bd ∈R2 is the bias.
Finally, the disease prediction result can be generated using
the following equations:
ˆy = Softmax(Wy1hst + Wy2hdy + Wy3hvar + by)
(13)
where wy1
∈
Rd×d, wy2
∈
Rd×((qa+qs+ql)∗c), wy3
∈
Rd×(m−1) are the learnable parameters, and by ∈Rd is the
bias.
G. Loss Function and Optimizer
In this paper, our loss function is cross entropy. This loss
function is formalized as:
L = −1
N
N
X
i=1
D
X
j=1
yi,j log(pi,j)
(14)
where N is the number of patients. yi,j means whether patient
i belongs to label j, i.e, yi,j = 1 or 0. pi,j denotes the

TABLE I
ICD-9 CODE FOR CIRCULATORY DISEASE
ICD-9 Code
Label
393 - 398
chronic rheumatic heart disease
401 - 405
hypertensive disease
410 - 414
ischemic heart disease
415 - 417
diseases of pulmonary circulation
420 - 429
other forms of heart disease
430 - 438
cerebrovascular disease
440 - 449
diseases of arteries, arterioles, and capillaries
451 - 459
diseases of veins and lymphatics
prediction probability of the model for patient i belonging to
the label j.
We adopt adaptive moment estimation (Adam) as the opti-
mizer in the training process of MPRE. Adam is an optimiza-
tion algorithm that utilizes first-order gradients to optimize the
stochastic objective function [40].
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we empirically study the performance of the
MPRE. First, we describe the two real-world public datasets.
Second, we introduce the baseline methods. Then, we describe
the evaluation metrics of experiments. After that, we give
the experiment environment. Finally, we discuss the results
of the experiments (i.e., performance analysis, ablation study,
analysis of symlets, and case study).
A. Dataset
SCRIPT CarpeDiem Dataset [17]: The dataset includes
12,495 visit records from 585 patients between June 2018
to March 2022. We used this dataset for respiratory disease
prediction. Specifically, 190 patients had COVID-19, 50 had
respiratory viral pneumonia, 252 had bacterial pneumonia, and
93 had respiratory failure.
Health Facts Database [18]: The database contains 101,767
visit records for 71,518 patients between 1999 and 2008. In
this paper, we predict whether diabetic patients will suffer
from circulatory disease in the future. Therefore, the 30,389
visit records for 26,807 patients are selected to form the
dataset. We define the labels based on the World Health
Organization’s ICD-9 codes categories for circulatory diseases
(i.e., Table I) [41], [42]. Specifically, 181 patients had chronic
rheumatic heart disease, 1469 had hypertensive disease, 9526
had ischemic heart disease, 504 had diseases of pulmonary
circulation, 8558 had other forms of heart disease, 4157
had cerebrovascular disease, 1248 had diseases of arteries,
arterioles, and capillaries, 1164 had diseases of veins and
lymphatics.
B. Baselines
We compare the proposed MPRE with the following base-
line models.
• GRU [43] is the standard model for time series data. The
embedded patients’ features are inputted into the GRU
for disease prediction.
• TCN [30] used the 1D convolutional layer to capture
long-term dependencies in time series and also improved
the performance of the model by residual structure and
dilated convolution.
• RETAIN [26] proposed the attention-based RNN network
for learning the weight of visit. This model focused on
the recent patient’s visit record.
• T-LSTM [34] improved the LSTM model by adopting the
time-aware mechanism. This model learned the subspace
of cell memory to avoid time decay, and it can be used
for irregular time intervals.
• Dipole [27] designed bidirectional RNN with the atten-
tion mechanism to analyze the patients’ visit records. It
can use the attention weight to compare the importance
of each visit.
• SAnD [9] introduced a Transformer-based model that
utilized masked self-attention to effectively model clinical
time series data. This approach allowed for the integration
of information from multiple visit records.
• AdaCare [37] adopted the 1D dilated convolution network
to capture the different variations of biomarkers at differ-
ent scales and followed by the GRU model for disease
prediction.
• StageNet [10] used the stage-aware long short-term mem-
ory to extract the progression of health status and utilized
the convolutional layer to capture the underlying progres-
sion patterns.
• ConCare [35] embedded each feature separately and
adopted the time-aware attention mechanism and infor-
mation decay function for disease prediction.
C. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the disease prediction task, we adopt the area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC)
and precision-recall curve (AUPRC) as evaluation metrics to
compare the performance of the proposed MPRE and baseline
methods. Note that AUPRC is the primary evaluation metric
for the imbalanced dataset [44].
D. Experiment Environment
We implement MPRE and baseline methods with Python
3.8 and PyTorch framework1. The experiments are conducted
on the machine equipped with Nvidia GPU RTX A6000. We
report the optimized parameters as follows. The learning rate
is set to 10−4, and the batch size is 64. We adopt Tanh as
the activation function. In MPRE, the symlets-18 wavelet is
applied to the SCRIPT CarpeDiem Dataset, while the symlets-
14 wavelet is utilized for the Health Facts Database. For 2D
MEN, the kernel size is set to 1. To extract the adjacent
correlation, we are not using the dilated rate. To extract the
short-term correlation, the dilated rate is set to 1. To extract
1https://pytorch.org/

TABLE II
AVERAGE PERFORMANCES OF PROPOSED MPRE AND BASELINE METHODS
Model
SCRIPT CarpeDiem Dataset
Health Facts Database
AUROC
AUPRC
AUROC
AUPRC
GRU [43]
0.7528
0.6405
0.7377
0.6234
TCN [30]
0.8009
0.6751
0.7209
0.6325
RETAIN [26]
0.7612
0.6524
0.7431
0.6190
T-LSTM [34]
0.7338
0.6274
0.7014
0.5978
Dipole [27]
0.8324
0.7428
0.7398
0.6284
SAnD [9]
0.7482
0.6316
0.7263
0.6271
AdaCare [37]
0.7641
0.6449
0.7106
0.6092
StageNet [10]
0.8183
0.7232
0.7326
0.6297
ConCare [35]
0.8425
0.7531
0.7573
0.6507
Ours
0.8948
0.8270
0.8675
0.7209
Fig. 2. The performance of ablation studies in terms of AUROC and AUPRC. (a) shows the average performance on SCRIPT CarpeDiem Dataset. (b) presents
the average performance on Health Facts Database.
the long-term correlation, the dilated rate is set to 3. For
the sake of fairness, we implement all baselines on the same
platform and parameters. We adopt the 10-fold cross-validation
and report the average performance of MPRE and baseline
methods.
E. Performance Analysis
The average performances of MPRE and nine baseline
methods in terms of AUROC and AUPRC are shown in
Table II. We can see that our proposed MPRE outperforms all
baseline methods, achieving AUROC of 0.8948 and AUPRC of
0.8270 on the SCRIPT CarpeDiem Dataset, as well as AUROC
of 0.8675 and AUPRC of 0.7209 on the Health Facts Database.
In SCRIPT CarpeDiem Dataset, we find that ConCare
achieves better performance than other baseline methods,
i.e., AUROC of 0.8425 and AUPRC of 0.7531. This is
because ConCare embedded the features separately, which
better learned the information of each feature. In addition,

ConCare adopted the time decay function to better learn
the patients’ disease progression. Compared with ConCare,
MPRE improves AUROC by 5.84% and 8.94% by AUPRC.
In addition, we observe that T-LSTM achieves worse results.
One possible explanation for this result is that the patient infor-
mation does not exhibit a monotonic decrease with increasing
time intervals.
In Health Facts Database, we observe that ConCare also
achieves the highest AUROC among all the baseline methods,
with AUROC of 0.7573, AUPRC of 0.6507. Compared with
ConCare, MPRE improves AUROC by 12.70%, and a 9.74%
improvement in AUPRC. Besides, we find that the T-LSTM
model still has the worst performance among the baseline
methods.
We give an explanation for why the MPRE is capable
of achieving superior performance by highlighting three key
factors. First, FTM transforms the dynamic feature information
of limited visit records into the time-frequency domain to
enhance the feature representations. Second, the 2D MEN
is capable of capturing the correlation between trends and
variations simultaneously. Finally, the FODAM is used to
adaptively identify the contribution of differences in variations
to the disease diagnosis.
F. Ablation Study
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed framework,
we conduct ablation studies on MPRE. Table III displays the
configuration for the ablation studies, where a “✓” signifies
the inclusion of the corresponding module in the experiments
and a “×” indicates its exclusion. The first three columns list
the modules used in the MPRE, while the last two columns
display the trend and variation obtained from the FTM.
• A1 solely employs FTM to extract trend information in
the experiment, aiming to evaluate the performance of the
model using only trend information.
• A2 exclusively utilizes FTM to obtain variation for dis-
ease prediction, aiming to present the model’s perfor-
mance using only variations.
• A3 employs FTM to obtain variation and FODAM to
calculate the contributions of differences in adjacent
variation to disease diagnosis, aiming to assess the im-
portance of utilizing variation and differences.
• A4 utilizes trend and variation from FTM, aiming to
explore the importance of simultaneously using trend and
variation information
• A5 adopts trend and variation information from FTM
and incorporates FODAM, aiming to evaluate the model’s
performance when exploiting trends, variations, and dif-
ferences simultaneously.
• A6 employs 2D MEN and FTM from MPRE, aiming
to investigate the importance of capturing correlations
between trend and variation information.
• A7 is the complete MPRE.
The results of our ablation studies are presented in Figure 2.
We can observe that the utilization of variation information
(A2) yields superior model performance as compared to solely
TABLE III
CONFIGURATIONS FOR ABLATION STUDIES
Configurations
FTM
2D MEN
FODAM
Trend
Variation
A1
✓
×
×
✓
×
A2
✓
×
×
×
✓
A3
✓
×
✓
×
✓
A4
✓
×
×
✓
✓
A5
✓
×
✓
✓
✓
A6
✓
✓
×
✓
✓
A7
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
utilizing trend information (A1). Compared to relying solely
on variation information (A2), the utilization of variation
information and differences (A3) can further improve the
model performance. Compared to A1, A2, and A3, we find
that the model’s performance improves when both trend and
variation information is used (A4). Our empirical findings
suggest that the performance of the model can be further
improved by employing FODAM in conjunction with the A4-
based configurations, which we refer to as the configurations
of A5. In A6, we adopt the 2D MEN to extract the correlation
between the trend and variation information. In other words,
we capture the trend information with significant variations.
Therefore, in comparison to A1, A2, and A4, we observe
a significant improvement in the model performance with
the implementation of the A6 configuration. A7 means the
complete MPRE, which is superior to the experimental results
of A1 to A6. Based on the results of these ablation studies,
we can conclude that the design of the proposed MPRE is
reasonable and effective in capturing the critical features for
disease prediction.
G. Analysis of Symlets
We conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of
various types of symlets, which differ in the number of
vanishing moments they possess. A larger value of vanishing
moments means that the wavelet function is able to eliminate
higher-order polynomial signals, thus improving the smooth-
ness and compression ratio of the signal. In this paper, we
try 19 candidate vanishing moments values, i.e., symlets-2 to
symlets-20. In all datasets, we implement our method under
these 19 candidate vanishing moments and report the average
performance in terms of AUPRC and AUROC.
In Figure 3, we show the performance of different types
of symlets on the SCRIPT CarpeDiem dataset. We find that
the optimal vanishing moment value of symlets is 18. While
the symlets-16 and symlets-18 have the same AUROC values,
symlets-18 outperforms symlets-16 in terms of AUPRC, with
values of 0.8270 and 0.8238, respectively. The performance
of Health Facts Database is also shown in Figure 3. We can
observe that the optimal vanishing moment value is 14. Based
on the results from the two datasets, we can conclude that
both excessively high or low values of vanishing moments
are not desirable. Excessively high vanishing moments may

Fig. 3. The performance of symlets with different vanishing moments in terms of AUPRC and AUROC.
TABLE IV
TOP 5 CORRELATIONS BETWEEN TREND AND VARIATION IN DYNAMIC FEATURES AMONG FOUR RESPIRATORY DISEASES
Types of Respiratory Disease
Top 5 Correlations between the Trend and Variation
Bacterial Pneumonia
diastolic blood pressure (0.85)
hemoglobin (0.83)
mean arterial pressure (0.81)
systolic blood pressure (0.81)
heart rate (0.81)
Respiratory Viral Pneumonia
Platelets (0.80)
blood pressure (0.73)
diastolic blood pressure (0.73)
respiratory rate (0.73)
heart rate (0.73)
COVID-19
lymphocytes (0.87)
peep changes (0.74)
fio2 (0.72)
peep (0.70)
respiratory rate changes (0.68)
Respiratory Failure
bicarbonate (0.79)
heart rate (0.59)
urine output (0.58)
platelets (0.55)
diastolic blood pressure (0.54)
lead to insufficient capture of details and subtle variations,
while excessively low vanishing moments may add redundant
information.
H. Case Study
In this paper, we adopt the 2D MEN to capture the correla-
tion between the trend and variation. To quantitatively support
the existence of the correlation between the trend and varia-
tion, we conduct experiments to compute the Pearson correla-
tion. We randomly select four patients from the SCRIPT Car-
peDiem Dataset as examples. The selected patients are from
four different types of respiratory disease, respectively, i.e.,
bacterial pneumonia, respiratory viral pneumonia, COVID-19,
and respiratory failure. Table IV shows the Top 5 correlations
between the trend and variation of each type of respiratory
disease. The larger the value, the stronger the correlation.
We can observe that the strongest correlations between trends
and variations in bacterial pneumonia were diastolic blood
pressure, hemoglobin, mean arterial pressure, systolic blood
pressure, and heart rate. As for respiratory viral pneumonia,

Fig. 4. The attention scores for differences of adjacent variation in two dynamic features, i.e., systolic blood pressure and neutrophils.
the most prominent correlations are found in platelets, blood
pressure, diastolic blood pressure, respiratory rate, and heart
rate. In COVID-19, lymphocytes, peep changes, fio2, peep,
and respiratory rate changes display the strongest correlations
between the trend and variation. Finally, in the case of respi-
ratory failure, the strongest correlations are bicarbonate, heart
rate, urine output, platelets, and diastolic blood pressure. By
capturing the correlation between the trend and variation, our
model provides correct predictions for all these four patients.
We also randomly select two dynamic features from the
SCRIPT CarpeDiem Dataset and show their results from
FODAM (i.e., the attention scores on differences of adja-
cent variations). Based on Figure 4, we can observe that
the attention scores reach their pinnacle when the patient
undergoes the initial substantial rise or fall in contiguous
fluctuations (i.e., 0.161 for the primary notable increase in
systolic blood pressure and 0.065 for the primary notable
decrease in neutrophils). This indicates that this is an important
shift in patient health status. For the subsequent significant
increase or decrease, the attention scores exhibit a decline
and are lower than the attention scores of slight rise or fall
(i.e., the score of 0.037 and 0.027 for slight improvement
and the second significant improvement in systolic blood
pressure, respectively. The score of 0.048 and 0.041 for a slight
decrease and the second significant decrease in neutrophils,
respectively). This result suggests that physicians should pay
attention to early changes in the patient’s health status, which
aligns with the clinical diagnosis guidance [45]–[47].
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose Multi-perspective Patient Rep-
resentation Extractor called MPRE for disease prediction.
Specifically, the proposed FTM obtains trend and variation
information from dynamic features. FTM can enhance the
dynamic feature representations by time-frequency transfor-
mation, which addresses the challenge of data sparsity. Then,
the proposed 2D MEN is utilized to capture the adjacent, short
and long-term correlation between the trend and variation. In
addition, we propose FODAM to compute the contributions
of differences in dynamic feature variations to disease di-
agnosis. We evaluate the MPRE and state-of-the-art baseline
methods on two real-world public datasets, namely ”SCRIPT
CarpeDiem Dataset” and ”Health Facts Database”. The exper-
iment results show that our MPRE method outperforms the
baseline methods.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGE
This work was supported in part by the Macao Polytechnic
University – Research on Representation Learning in Decision
Support for Medical Diagnosis (RP/FCA-11/2022).
