SKIN-COLOR BASED VIDEOS CATEGORIZATION 
 
Rehanullah Khan 1, Asad Maqsood 1, Zeeshan Khan 2 , Muhammad Ishaq 3, Arsalan Arif 1 
 
1  Sarhad University of Science and Information Technology, Peshawar, Pakistan 
2  RWTH Aachen, The Chair of Human Language Technology and Pattern Recognition 
3  UET Mardan, Peshawar, Pakistan 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
On dedicated websites, people can upload videos and share it 
with the rest of the world.  Currently these videos are cat- 
egorized manually by the help of the user community.  In 
this paper, we propose a combination of color spaces with 
the Bayesian network approach for robust detection of skin 
color followed by an automated video categorization. Exper- 
imental results show that our method can achieve satisfactory 
performance for categorizing videos based on skin color. 
Keywords: video categorization, skin detection in videos, 
color spaces 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Locating and tracking patches of skin-colored pixels through 
an image is a tool used in many face recognition and gesture 
tracking systems [13][8]. Skin information contributes much 
to object recognition [18].  One of the usage of skin color 
based tracking, locating and categorization could be blocking 
unwanted video contents on World Wide Web. On dedicated 
websites, people can upload videos and share it with the rest 
of the world. There are uploaded adult videos, which may not 
be allowed by the service providers. Therefore, how to effec- 
tively categorize and block such videos has been arousing a 
serious concern for the service providers. 
The mostly used approach to contents blocking on the In- 
ternet is based on contextual keyword pattern matching tech- 
nology that categorizes URLs by means of checking contexts 
of web pages or video names and then traps the websites 
[11][15].  This does not hold true for websites which allow 
uploading videos like Google Videos and YouTube, because 
the videos uploaded have different names from the contents 
they contain. Due to no automated process, the Google and 
YouTube rely on user’s community. Therefore, an automated 
method to detect and categorize videos based on skin color 
will help the service providers and can provide control over 
the videos contents. 
According to Smeulders et. al [14] color has been an ac- 
tive area of research in image retrieval, more than in any other 
branch of computer vision. The interest in color may be as- 
cribed to the superior discriminating potentiality of a three 
dimensional domain compared to the single dimensional do- 
main of gray-level images [14]. 
The goal of our system is to categorize videos based on 
skin color. Depending on the percentage of skin in videos, the 
videos are flagged as Large-Skin-Videos (LSKIN), Partial- 
Skin-Videos (PSKIN) and No-Skin-Videos (NSKIN). The set 
of videos used in our experiments consists of 30 videos, col- 
lected and provided by video service provider.  The service 
provider defines successful categorization as a true positive 
rate of above 70% because this would decrease the amount of 
manual work dramatically. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sec- 
tion 2 explains the previous work. Section 3 discusses color 
spaces used and the algorithm.  Section 4 discusses experi- 
mental results and Section 5 concludes this paper. 
 
2.  PREVIOUS WORK 
 
Singh et al.   [13] discusses in detail different color spaces 
and skin detection.  In their work, three color spaces; RGB, 
YCbCr and HSI are of main concern.  They have compared 
the algorithms based on these color spaces and have combined 
them for face detection. The algorithm fails when sufficient 
non face skin is visible in the images.  In [16], color spaces 
and their output results for skin detection are discussed. Fur- 
thermore, they state that excluding color luminance from the 
classification process cannot help achieving better discrimi- 
nation of skin and non skin. 
In [19] and [20], image filters based on skin information 
are described. The first step in their approach is skin detec- 
tion. Maximum entropy modeling is used to model the distri- 
bution of skinness from the input image. A first order model 
is built that introduces constraints on color gradients of neigh- 
boring pixels. The output of skin detection is a gray scale skin 
map with the gray levels being proportional to the skin prob- 
abilities.  There are false alarms when the background color 
matches human skin color.  According to [3], a single color 
space may limit the performance of the skin color filter and 
that better performance can be achieved using two or more 
color spaces. 
Jae et al.   [10] discusses elliptical boundary model for 
skin color detection.   To devise the appropriate model for 

skin detection, they investigate the characteristics of skin and 
non-skin distributions in terms of chrominance histograms. 
They don’t take the advantage of combining different color 
spaces.  In [17], a method to detect body parts in images is 
presented.  The algorithm is composed of content-based and 
image-based classification approaches. In the content-based 
approach, color filtering and texture analysis is used to detect 
the skin region in an image and its classification depends on 
the presence of large skin bulks. In the image-based approach, 
the color histogram and coherence vectors are extracted to 
represent the color and spatial information of the image. 
According to [11] and [12], the selection of color space 
influences the quality of skin color modeling. The pixels be- 
longing to skin region exhibit similar Cb and Cr chromatic 
characteristics, therefore, the skin color model based on Cb 
and Cr values can provide good coverage of all human races. 
Accordingly, despite their different appearances, these color 
types belong to the same small cluster in Cb-Cr plane. The ap- 
parent difference in skin colors perceived by viewers mainly 
comes from the darkness or fairness of the skin.  These fea- 
tures are reflected on the difference in the brightness of the 
color, which is governed by Y component rather than Cb and 
Cr components.  It provides an effective separation into lu- 
minance and chrominance channel and generates a compact 
skin chroma distribution. Yang et al. [18] have introduced a 
new Gamma Correction method to weaken the effects of illu- 
mination on images and a new RGB nonlinear transformation 
to describe the skin and non-skin distributions.  Khan et al. 
[9][4][6] use face detection for adapting to the changing il- 
lumination circumstances for skin detection in videos.  The 
authors in [5] introduce the usage of Decision Trees for pixel 
based skin detection and classification. Skin detection based 
on global seeds is introduced in [7]. 
 
 
3.  SKIN COLOR MODELING 
 
Color is a low level feature, which makes it computationally 
inexpensive and therefore suitable for real-time object charac- 
terization, detection and localization [11]. The main goal of 
skin color detection or classification for skin contents filtering 
is to build a decision rule that will discriminate between skin 
and non-skin pixels. Identifying skin colored pixels involves 
finding the range of values for which most skin pixels would 
fall in a given color space. This may be as simple as explic- 
itly classifying a pixel as a skin pixel if Red, Green and Blue 
color channels have specific value range distribution.  Other 
techniques use Neural Networks and Bayesian methods [11]. 
 
 
3.1.  RGB Color Space 
 
In the RGB color space, each color appears in its primary 
spectral component of Red, Green and Blue.  Images repre- 
sented in the RGB space consist of three component images, 
one for each primary color.  When fed into an RGB moni- 
tor, these images combine on the phosphor screen to produce 
a composite color image.  The RGB color space is one of 
the most widely used color spaces for storing and processing 
digital image [16].  However, the RGB color space alone is 
not reliable for identifying skin colored pixels since it repre- 
sents not only color but also luminance [16]. Skin luminance 
may vary within and across persons due to ambient lighting, 
therefore, it is not suitable for segmenting skin and non-skin 
regions. Chromatic colors are more reliable and are obtained 
by eliminating luminance through nonlinear transformations 
[16]. 
 
 
3.2.  YCbCr 
 
YCbCr is an encoded nonlinear RGB signal, commonly used 
by European Television Studios and for image compression 
work [16]. Color is represented by luma which is luminance 
and computed from nonlinear RGB constructed as a weighted 
sum of the RGB values and two color difference values Cb 
and Cr that are formed by subtracting luma from RGB Red 
and Blue components. The transformation simplicity and ex- 
plicit separation of luminance and chrominance components 
make this color space attractive for skin color modeling [16]. 
 
 
3.3.  Skin Detection 
 
For skin-color modeling, we construct a Bayesian network in 
the YCbCr and RGB color spaces.  A Bayesian network is 
constructed from pixel triplet of the training skin colors. 
A Bayesian network is also called a belief network and 
a directed acyclic graphical model. It is a representation for 
random variables and conditional independences within these 
random variables.   The conditional independences are rep- 
resented by Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). More formally, 
a Bayesian network B  =< N, A, θ  > for skin color pixel 
(triplet) is a DAG < N, A > with a conditional probability 
distribution for every node (collectively θ for all nodes).  A 
node n N in the graph G represents some random variable, 
and each edge or each arc a A between nodes shows a prob- 
abilistic dependency.  For learning Bayesian networks from 
specific datasets, data attributes are represented by nodes [1]. 
In a Bayesian network, the learner does not distinguish 
the skin and non-skin class variables from the attribute vari- 
ables in data. As such, a network (or a set of networks) are 
created for skin color pixels that “best describes” the proba- 
bility distribution of the training data. The problem of learn- 
ing a Bayesian network can be stated as:  Given a training 
set D  = {u1 , ..., uN  } of instances of U , find a network B 
that best matches D.   Heuristic search techniques are used 
to find the best candidate in the space of possible networks. 
The search process relies on a scoring function that assesses 
the merits of each candidate network [2]. If we assume that 
for training, a Bayesian network B  encodes a distribution 
PB (A1 , ..., An ) from the training dataset with C classes, then 

 
 
 
 
 
for testing, a classifier based on B  returns the label c that 
maximizes the posterior probability PB (c|a1 , ..., an ).   The 
network B can also be used to find out updated knowledge 
of the state of a subset of variables when other variables (the 
evidence variables) are observed. 
 
 
3.4.  Color-Space Intersection 
 
The proposed skin categorization system starts with skin de- 
tection in videos based on the RGB color space. The detected 
skin pixels are passed to the YCbCr Bayesian detector.  If 
the YCbCr skin detector confirms the pixels as skin pixels; 
the pixels are flagged as skin pixels. Depending on scenario 
and skin detected per frame, the video is flagged as LSKIN, 
PSKIN and NSKIN. Based on experiments, we set three rules 
for videos categorization: If the percentage of skin is greater 
than 15%, the video is flagged as LSKIN. If the skin percent- 
age is greater than 3% and less than 15%, the video is flagged 
as PSKIN and NSKIN if less than 3%. 
 
 
4.  RESULTS 
 
To evaluate the skin detection algorithm, we use a set of 30 
challenging videos.   Figure 1 shows example frames from 
these video sequences. The sequences span a wide range of 
environmental conditions.  People of different ethnicity and 
various skin tones are represented.  Sequences also contain 
scenes with multiple people and/or multiple visible body parts 
and scenes shot both indoors and outdoors, with moving cam- 
era. The lighting varies from natural light to directional stage 
lighting.  Sequences contain shadows and minor occlusions. 
Videos in which background color matches the skin color are 
also present in the test set. Collected sequences vary in length 
from 100 frames to 1300 frames.  These videos are divided 
into three categories depending on the amount of skin in video 
and serve as ground truth for the algorithm. Eleven videos are 
labeled as LSKIN, nine videos are labeled as PSKIN and ten 
10 are labeled as NSKIN. 
On the testing set, the algorithm correctly identified 28 out 
of 30 videos as shown in table 1. Figure 2(a) shows an exam- 
ple skin detection on a single frame from Video 1. Figure 2(a) 
shows skin detection in the YCbCr color space. Figure 2(b) 
indicates the peaks related to the correct identification of skin 
in the entire Video 1. Figure 3 shows an example frame and 
skin detection in the RGB color space. This example frame 
is extracted from Video 2 which is correctly categorized as 
LSKIN based on skin presence. 
The algorithm incorrectly reported two videos, Video 12 
and Video 24 as LSKIN. The reason being the skin colored 
objects (false skin colors) present in these videos.  Figure 4 
is an example frame from Video 12 which is categorized as 
 
 
Fig. 1. Examples frames from video sequences used for ex- 
perimentation. 
 
 
(a)  Skin detection in the YCbCr color space (Video 1). Black shows skin. 
 
 
(b)  Skin graph showing peaks for Video 1 regarding cor- 
rect identification of skin. 
 
Fig. 2. Skin detection scenario. 

 
Table  1.   Result of videos categorization.   Bold indicates 
wrong classification by the algorithm. 
 
Video# 
Ground Truth 
Skin % 
Result 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
18.20 
16.05 
15.90 
30.05 
20.50 
19.76 
21.61 
26.10 
17.03 
20.30 
25.80 
16.59 
08.14 
07.65 
06.90 
11.15 
10.87 
09.91 
08.79 
07.69 
01.15 
00.91 
02.10 
19.12 
01.17 
02.01 
01.08 
01.00 
01.22 
02.50 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
LSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
PSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
LSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
NSKIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSKIN but incorrectly reported as LSKIN. Figure 4(a) shows 
clothes and pig detected as skin.  The female in Video 12 is 
wearing pink clothes that match the skin color.  Figure 4(b) 
shows peaks related to the incorrect detection of clothes as 
skin for Video 12. 
 
 
Figure 5 is an example frame from Video 24, which is 
also reported as LSKIN. Figure 5 shows that desert sand is de- 
tected as skin.  When there is a sufficient match between the 
color of skin and the color of non-skin objects, the algorithm 
incorrectly reports it as skin.  In such situation, color based 
skin categorization can be misleading. Texture analysis, use 
of semantics, and object recognition could help to distinguish 
skin colored background information from human skin color. 
 
 
Fig. 3.   Skin detection in the RGB color space on a single 
frame from Video 2. Black shows skin. 
 
 
(a)  Skin detection example on a frame from Video 12. Black shows skin. 
 
 
(b)  Skin Peaks related to the incorrect skin detection in 
Video 12. 
 
Fig. 4. Skin detection problems. 
 
 
5.  CONCLUSION 
 
In this paper, we have developed an approach for categoriza- 
tion of videos based on skin color. We have tested our algo- 
rithm on 30 test sequences and achieved a true positive rate of 
over 90 %. In the next step, our goal is acquiring larger col- 
lections of videos in order to verify and improve the results. 

 
 
Fig. 5.  Skin detection problems. Example frame from Video 
24. Sand wrongly detected as skin. Black shows skin. 
 
 
6.  REFERENCES 
 
[1] Jie Cheng and Russell Greiner.   Comparing bayesian 
network classifiers. In Proceedings  of the Fifteenth 
Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli- 
gence, pages 101–110, San Francisco, CA, 1999. Mor- 
gan Kaufmann. 
 
[2] Nir Friedman,  Dan Geiger,  and Moises Goldszmidt. 
Bayesian network classifiers.   Mach. Learn., 29:131– 
163, November 1997. 
 
[3] Moheb R. Girgis, Tarek M. Mahmoud, and Tarek Abd- 
El-Hafeez.  An approach to image extraction and accu- 
rate skin detection from web pages.  In Proceedings of 
World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technol- 
ogy, pages 367–375, 2007. 
 
[4] Rehanullah  Khan,   A.  Hanbury,   and  J.  Sto¨ ttinger. 
Weighted skin color segmentation and detection using 
graph cuts. In Proceedings of the 15th Computer Vision 
Winter Workshop, pages 60–68, February 2010. 
 
[5] Rehanullah Khan,  Allan Hanbury,  and  Julian Stoet- 
tinger.  Skin detection: A random forest approach.  In 
ICIP, pages 4613 – 4616, 2010. 
 
[6] Rehanullah Khan, Allan Hanbury, and Julian Sto¨ ttinger. 
Augmentation of skin segmentation.   In International 
Conference on Image Processing, Computer Vision, and 
Pattern Recognition, pages 473–479, 2010. 
 
[7] Rehanullah Khan, Allan Hanbury, and Julian Sto¨ ttinger. 
Universal seed skin segmentation. In International Sym- 
posium on Visual Computing, pages 75–84, 2010. 
 
[8] Rehanullah Khan, Allan Hanbury, Julian Stttinger, and 
Abdul Bais.   Color based skin classification.  Pattern 
Recognition Letters, 33(2):157 – 163, 2012. 
 
[9] Rehanullah Khan, Julian Sto¨ ttinger, and Martin Kampel. 
An adaptive multiple model approach for fast content- 
based skin detection in on-line videos.  In ACM MM, 
AREA workshop, pages 89–96, 2008. 
 
[10] Jae Young Lee and Suk Yoo.   An elliptical boundary 
model for skin color detection. In ISST, pages 579–584, 
2002. 
 
[11] Jiann-Shu Lee, Yung-Ming Kuo, Pau-Choo Chung, and 
E-Liang Chen.  Naked image detection based on adap- 
tive and extensible skin color model.  PR, 40(8):2261– 
2270, 2007. 
 
[12] Yung ming kuo, jiann-shu lee, and pau-choo chung. The 
naked image detection based on automatic white bal- 
ance method. In 2006 ICS International Computer Con- 
ference, pages 990–994, 2007. 
 
[13] Sanjay Kr. Singh, D. S. Chauhan, Mayank Vatsa, and 
Richa Singh.  A robust skin color based face detection 
algorithm.  Tamkang Journal of Science and Engineer- 
ing, 6(4):227–234, 2003. 
 
[14] Arnold W.M. Smeulders, Marcel Worring, Simone San- 
tini, Amarnath Gupta, and Ramesh Jain. Content-based 
image retrieval at the end of the early years. IEEE Trans- 
actions on Pattern  Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
22(12):1349–1380, 2000. 
 
[15] Julian Sto¨ ttinger, Allan Hanbury, Christian Liensberger, 
and Rehanullah Khan.  Skin paths for contextual flag- 
ging adult videos. In International Symposium on Visual 
Computing, pages 303–314, 2009. 
 
[16] Vladimir Vezhnevets,  Vassili Sazonov,  and Alla An- 
dreev. A survey on pixel-based skin color detection tech- 
niques. In GraphiCon, pages 85–92, 2003. 
 
[17] Shilin Wang, Hong Hui1, Sheng hong Li, Hao Zhang, 
Yong yu Shi, and Wen tao Qu. Exploring content-based 
and image-based features for nude image detection. In 
Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery, pages 324– 
328, 2005. 
 
[18] Jinfeng Yang, Zhouyu Fu, Tieniu Tan, and Weiming Hu. 
Skin color detection using multiple cues. In Proceedings 
of the 17th International Conference on Pattern Recog- 
nition, pages 632–635, 2004. 
 
[19] Huicheng Zheng, Mohamed Daoudi, and Bruno Jedy- 
nak.  Adult image detection using statistical model and 
neural network. Electronic Letters on Computer Vision 
and Image Analysis, 4(2):1–14, 2003. 
 
[20] Huicheng Zheng, Mohamed Daoudi, and Bruno Jedy- 
nak. Blocking adult images based on statistical skin de- 
tection. ELCVIA, 4(2):1–14, 2004.
