Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Collective Classiﬁcation of Textual Documents by Guided
Self-Organization in T-Cell Cross-regulation Dynamics
Alaa Abi-Haidar · Luis M. Rocha
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract We present and study an agent-based model of T-
Cell cross-regulation in the adaptive immune system, which
we apply to binary classiﬁcation. Our method expands an
existing analytical model of T-cell cross-regulation [28] that
was used to study the self-organizing dynamics of a single
population of T-Cells in interaction with an idealized anti-
gen presenting cell capable of presenting a single antigen.
With agent-based modeling we are able to study the self-
organizing dynamics of multiple populations of distinct T-
cells which interact via antigen presenting cells that present
hundreds of distinct antigens. Moreover, we show that such
self-organizing dynamics can be guided to produce an ef-
fective binary classiﬁcation of antigens, which is competi-
tive with existing machine learning methods when applied
to biomedical text classiﬁcation.
More speciﬁcally, here we test our model on a dataset
of publicly available full-text biomedical articles provided
by the BioCreative challenge [34]. We study the robustness
of our model’s parameter conﬁgurations, and show that it
leads to encouraging results comparable to state-of-the-art
classiﬁers. Our results help us understand both T-cell cross-
regulation as a general principle of guided self-organization,
as well as its applicability to document classiﬁcation. There-
fore, we show that our bio-inspired algorithm is a promising
novel method for biomedical article classiﬁcation and for bi-
nary document classiﬁcation in general.
Keywords Artiﬁcial Immune Systems · Biomedical Doc-
ument Classiﬁcation · Data Mining · Machine Learning ·
Bio-inspired Computing · Complex Adaptive systems ·
Guided Self-Organization
Alaa Abi-Haidar · Luis M. Rocha
School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University, Blooming-
ton IN 47401, USA
FLAD Computational Biology Collaboratorium, Instituto Gulbenkian
de Ciˆencia, Portugal

1 Background
At least since the beginning of systematic genomic studies,
there has been a tremendous growth of scientiﬁc publica-
tions in the life sciences [20]. Pubmed (http://pubmed.gov)
now contains a growing collection of more than 19 mil-
lion biomedical articles. Manually classifying these articles
as relevant or irrelevant to a given topic of interest is very
time consuming and inefﬁcient for curation of new pub-
lished articles [22]. Literature (or text) mining offers solu-
tions for automatic biomedical document classiﬁcation and
information extraction from huge collections of text, as well
as the linking of numerous biomedical databases and knowl-
edge resources [22,11]. Because it is very important to val-
idate and assess the quality of proposed solutions, various
community-wide competitions and challenges have been or-
ganized so that automatic systems can be evaluated against
human annotated data sets (e.g. TREC Genomics [12]). One
such effort is the BioCreative challenge, which aims to as-
sess biomedical literature mining in real-world scenarios [16,
27,34]. Machine learning has offered a plethora of solutions
to this problem [22,25], however, even the most sophisti-
cated of solutions often overﬁt to the training data and do
not perform as well on real-world scenarios such as that
provided by BioCreative [33,37]. One of the challenges of
biomedical article classiﬁcation in real-world scenarios is
the presence of highly unbalanced classes; typically, there
are many more irrelevant than relevant documents, without
prior knowledge of class proportions. This was the case of
the article classiﬁcation data set in the Biocreative BC2.5
challenge [34]. While participating teams (including our own
team [37]) did not enter bio-inspired solutions, the unbal-
anced nature of classes and the presence of conceptual drift,
which we showed to occur between training to test data sets
[33,37], may be a good scenario to test classiﬁers inspired
by the vertebrate immune system—which must operate un-
arXiv:1102.1027v1  [cs.IR]  4 Feb 2011

2
der class-imbalance with permanent drift in the populations
of pathogens encountered. Therefore, here we explore the
feasibility of using T-Cell cross-regulation dynamics to clas-
sify biomedical articles using the real-world scenario pro-
vided by the Biocreative 2.5. data set.
The immune system (IS) is a complex biological sys-
tem made of millions of cells all interacting to distinguish
between self and nonself substances, to ultimately attack
the latter [5]1. In analogy, relevant biomedical articles for a
given concept need to be distinguished from irrelevant ones.
To perform such a topical classiﬁcation, we can use the oc-
currence and co-occurrence of thousands of words in a doc-
ument. In this sense, words can be seen as interacting in a
text in such a way as to allow us to distinguish between rel-
evant and irrelevant documents—in analogy with the inter-
actions among T-cells and antigens that lead to self/nonself
discrimination in the immune system, as we describe below.
Our approach is based on the idea that the immune sys-
tem is a distributed collection of molecular constituents with
no central controller [6]. Therefore, immune classiﬁcation
needs to result from a collective classiﬁcation process, de-
ﬁned as the ability of decentralized systems of many com-
ponents to classify situations that require global informa-
tion or coordinated action [21]. Nature is full of examples
of collective classiﬁcation: the dynamics of stomata cells on
leaf surfaces are known to be statistically indistinguishable
from the dynamics of automata that are capable of perform-
ing nontrivial classiﬁcation [13], biochemical intracellular
signal transduction networks are capable of emergent clas-
siﬁcation [31], quorum sensing in bacteria [23] and social
insects [17], etc. We can also study collective classiﬁcation
in general models of complex systems such as Cellular Au-
tomata, namely by identifying regular patterns in the dynam-
ics that store, transmit and process information [4,15,18].
Here, instead of looking at general models of complex sys-
tems, we focus on a speciﬁc immunological model of T-Cell
cross-regulation dynamics [28]. We are are interested in ex-
ploring the collective dynamics of this model to: (1) build a
novel bio-inspired machine learning solution for document
classiﬁcation, and (2) understand how well collections of
T-Cells engaged in cross-regulation perform as a classiﬁer.
The ﬁrst goal entails a bio-inspired approach to computa-
tional intelligence, and the second a computational biology
experiment, but both are based on artiﬁcial life principles.
It should be noticed that recent work in artiﬁcial immune
systems (AIS) [26] has lead to a few immune-inspired so-
lutions to document classiﬁcation in general [7], however,
none to our knowledge has been applied to biomedical arti-
1 We use the terminology of self/nonself discrimination, though
perhaps a more accurate description is classiﬁcation of harmless vs.
harmful substances; harmless can also include antigens from bacteria
that are necessary for vertebrate bodies, and harmful can also include
body’s own tumor cells.
cle classiﬁcation nor does any employ T-cell cross-regulation
dynamics. There are several reasons why T-Cell cross-regulation
is appealing to explore for classiﬁcation tasks. Dasgupta and
Nino [32] concluded that negative selection algorithms suf-
fer from scalability (for binary representation) and dimen-
sionality issues (for real-valued representation), while al-
gorithms inspired by clonal selection and artiﬁcial immune
networks have been shown to be equivalent or very similar to
evolutionary algorithms, with antibody somatic hypermuta-
tion instead of genetic variation [10]. As we show below, our
novel model for text classiﬁcation, in addition to promise in
imbalanced and dynamic scenarios, is scalable and capable
of dealing with large numbers of textual features.
We have already proposed an agent-based model of T-
cell cross-regulation for spam detection [29,30]. Our dis-
tributed model extends the original analytical model of T-
Cell cross-regulation dynamics [28] to be able to deal with
many multiple features simultaneously, and therefore ren-
der the model applicable to real-world applications. Our re-
sults on spam-detection were comparable to state-of-art text
classiﬁers [29,30]. However, our initial agent-based imple-
mentation of cross-regulation dynamics did not explore im-
portant parameter conﬁgurations such as the death rate of
T-cells or the best training strategies. It also lacked an ex-
tensive parameter search for optimized performance. Here,
we address some of these issues on full-text biomedical data
from BioCreative [34].
First, we study the effect of cell death on the dynamics
of T-cell cross-regulation and its importance for improving
classiﬁcation performance. We also study the effect of train-
ing exclusively on relevant or positive documents. This is
relevant to understand immune classiﬁcation dynamics, be-
cause in the process of T-Cell maturation, to prevent autoim-
munity, T-Cells are checked exclusively against self epitopes—
eliminating T-Cells that bind to self. In the context of ma-
chine learning, this is similar to what is known as positive
unlabeled (PU) training, which we test here against training
on both relevant (positive) and irrelevant (negative) docu-
ments. Next, we study the importance of the original tempo-
ral sequence of bio-medical articles. Text mining classiﬁers
do not typically depend on the sequence of documents they
are trained with, but our model of T-cell cross-regulation
dynamics does. Therefore, we are interested in ascertaining
if the sequence-dependence of ensuing collective dynamics
can be used to track the natural change in real-world textual
corpora, i.e. concept drift [14]. Finally, we also study the
effect of biases in the initial T-cell population. This more
extensive study allows us to better understand the behavior
of T-cell cross-regulation dynamics and establish its capabil-
ity to classify sequential data. It also leads to a competitive,
novel bio-inspired text classiﬁcation algorithm.
In the next section we give an introduction to the verte-
brate immune system. In section 3, we discuss the existing

3
analytical model of T-cell cross-regulation. In section 4, we
present our agent-based model of T-Cell cross-regulation for
binary classiﬁcation, here applied to document classiﬁca-
tion. In section 5, we describe the biomedical data provided
by Biocreative and the feature selection method. In section
6, we study the robustness of our model on various parame-
ter ranges and experimental setups. Finally, in section 7, we
compare our model with state-of-art classiﬁers.
2 The Immune System as Inspiration
The vertebrate adaptive immune system2 (IS) is a complex
network of cells that distinguishes between self and non-
self substances or antigens—usually fragments of proteins
that can be recognized by the immune system. When non-
self antigens are discovered, an immune response to elimi-
nate them is set in motion. Recognizing self antigens, which
obviously should not lead to an (auto)immune response to
eliminate them, is resolved by negative selection of T-cells
which takes place in the thymus, and removes T-Cells that
strongly bind to self antigens—after positive selection of T-
Cells that are capable of binding with the major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) [3]. It is in the thymus that T-
cells develop and mature; only T-cells that have failed to
bind to self antigens are released (as mature naive T-cells),
while the rest of the T-cells is culled. Mature T-cells are al-
lowed out of the thymus to detect nonself antigens. They do
this by binding to antigen presenting cells (typically B-cells,
macrophages and dendritic cells) that collect and present
antigens via MHC after breaking them by lysosome. The
speciﬁc T-cells that are able to bind to the presented antigens
then stimulate B-cells that start a cascade of events leading
to antibody production and the destruction of the pathogens
or tumors linked to the antigens. However, it is possible that
T-cells and B-cells, which are also trained in the thymus and
bone marrow, mature before being exposed to all self anti-
gens. Even more problematic is the somatic hypermutation
that ensues in lymph nodes after the activation of B-cells
through a process known as “clonal selection” [1]. At this
stage, it is possible to generate many mutated B-Cell clones
that could bind to self antigens. Either situation can cause
auto-immunity by generating T-cells capable of attacking
self antigens. One way to deal with this problem is by a pro-
cess called costimulation which involves the co-veriﬁcation
of self antigens by both T-cells and B-cells before the anti-
gen is identiﬁed as associated with a nonself pathogen to
be attacked. To further insure that the T-cells do not attack
self, another type of T-cells known as regulatory T-cells, are
formed in the thymus where they mature to avoid recogniz-
ing self antigens. These regulatory T-cells have the responsi-
2 A good, though already a bit dated, overview of the vertebrate im-
mune system for the artiﬁcial life community is Hofmeyer’s [5].
Fig. 1 CRM interactions that deﬁne the dynamics of APC and E and
R T-cells. The model assumes that APC can only form conjugates with
a maximum of two T-cells. Adapted from [28].
bility of preventing autoimmunity by down-regulating other
T-cells that might bind and kill self antigens. Our model is
based on this process of T-Cell cross-regulation.
Artiﬁcial Immune Systems (AIS) are artiﬁcial life tools,
inspired by theories and components of the immune sys-
tem, and applied towards solving computational problems,
such as categorization, optimization and decision making
[8]. Common AIS techniques are based on speciﬁc theoreti-
cal models explaining the behavior of the IS such as: Nega-
tive Selection, Clonal Selection, Immune Networks and Den-
dritic Cells [26]. AIS fall in categories: (1) mathematical and
computational models to understand IS behavior and (2) en-
gineering of adaptive machine learning algorithms. While
our approach ﬁts more immediately under the second cat-
egory, our goal is also to use our classiﬁer to test the pre-
vailing model of T-cell cross-regulation and therefore also
contribute to the ﬁrst category of the study of AIS.
3 The Cross-Regulation Model
The T-cell Cross-Regulation Model (CRM) [28] is a dynam-
ical system that aims to distinguish between self and nonself
protein fragments (antigens) using only four possible inter-
action rules amongst three cell-types: Effector T-cells (E),
Regulatory T-cells (R) and Antigen Presenting Cells (APC).
As their name suggests, APC present antigens for the other
two cell-types, E and R, to recognize and bind to them. Ef-
fector T-cells (E) proliferate upon binding to APC, unless
adjacent to regulatory T-cells (R), which regulate E by in-

4
hibiting their proliferation. For simplicity, proliferation of
cells is limited to duplication in quantity in contrast to hav-
ing a proliferation rate. T-cells that do not bind to APC die
off with a certain death rate. The dynamics of the CRM de-
pend on four interaction rules deﬁned by the following reac-
tions (illustrated in Fig. 1):
E−→
dE {} and R−→
dR{}
(1)
A+R →A+R
(2)
A+E →A+2E
(3)
A+E +R →A+E +2R
(4)
Reaction (1) deﬁnes E and R apoptosis with the correspond-
ing death rates dE and dR. The last three proliferation reac-
tions deﬁne the maintenance of R (2), the duplication of E
(3), and the maintenance of E and duplication of R (4).
Carneiro et al [28] developed the analytical CRM to study
the dynamics of a single population of T-cells (with effec-
tor and regulatory elements) that interacts with APC that
present a single antigen. In [29,30], we extended the origi-
nal CRM model to be able to deal with multiple populations
of antigens and T-Cells using agent-based modeling. More
recently, Sepulveda [35, pp 111-113] extended the origi-
nal CRM to study analytically multiple populations of T-
cells that recognize antigens presented by APC capable of
presenting at most two distinct antigens. In our model, ex-
plained in detail in the next section, APC are capable of pre-
senting hundreds of antigens to be recognized by T-cells of
hundreds of different populations, using the same four inter-
action rules of the CRM.
4 The Agent-Based Cross-Regulation Model
In order to adapt the CRM to an Agent-Based Cross-Regulation
Model (ABCRM) for text classiﬁcation, one has to think of
documents as analogous to the organic substances that upon
entering the body are broken into constituent fragments. These
fragments, known as epitopes, are presented on the surface
of Antigen Presenting Cells (APC) as antigens. In the cur-
rent application of the ABCRM, antigens are textual features
(e.g. words, bigrams, titles, numbers) extracted from articles
and presented by artiﬁcial APC such that they can be recog-
nized by a number of artiﬁcial Effector T-cells (E) and arti-
ﬁcial Regulatory T-cells (R). Individual E and R have recep-
tors for a single, speciﬁc (textual) feature: they are monospe-
ciﬁc. E proliferate3 upon binding to antigens presented by
APC unless suppressed by R; R suppress E when binding in
adjacent locations on APC. Individual APC present various
3 The simpliﬁcation of proliferation to mere duplication adopted in
the canonical CRM model is maintained in our agent-based model to
minimize the number of parameters (excluding proliferation rates) and
the parameter search space
document features: they are polyspeciﬁc. Each APC is pro-
duced when documents enter the artiﬁcial cellular dynam-
ics, by breaking the former into constituent textual features.
Therefore we can say that APC are representative of speciﬁc
documents whereas E and R are representative of speciﬁc
features.
In the natural immune system, millions of novel T-cells
are randomly generated in the thymus every day to attempt
to predict future antigens. In our algorithm, in contrast, we
generate T-cells only for features (words) occurring in the
relevant document corpus. This is reasonable because the
space of meaningful words in a language is largely ﬁxed and
much smaller than the space of possible polypeptide epi-
topes in biology. More speciﬁcally, a document d contains
a set of features Fd; an artiﬁcial APC Ad that represents d,
presents a subset of antigens/features Ad ⊆Fd to artiﬁcial E
and R T-cells. Ef and Rf bind to a speciﬁc feature f on any
APC that presents it; if f ∈Ad, then any available Ef or Rf
in the cellular dynamics may bind stochastically to Ad4, as
illustrated in ﬁgure 2.
In biology, antigen recognition is a more complex pro-
cess than mere polypeptide sequence matching, but for sim-
plicity we limit our feature recognition to string matching.
APC are organized as a list of pairs of “slots” of (textual)
features, where T-cells, speciﬁc for those features, can bind.
We use this antigen/feature presentation scheme of pairs of
“slots” to simplify our algorithm. In future work we will
study alternative feature presentation scenarios. An APC is
modeled as a list of “slots” of pairs of features: Ad = s1 ···snS,
where sd = ⟨f,g⟩, f,g ∈Ad, and nS = nA×|Ad|
2
. f and g are
sampled (without repetition) from Ad and randomly distributed
exactly nA times over the list of slots that makes up the APC.
Features are treated as bag of words–i.e. the sequence of
words in the document is not maintained [25]. Once T-cells
bind to an APC, every pair of T-cells that binds to the same
slot sd duplicates according to reaction rules (2-4).
In summary, each T-cell population is speciﬁc to and
can bind to only one feature presented by any APC. Im-
plementing the algorithm as an Agent-based model (ABM)
allows us to deal with the recognition and co-recognition
(co-occurrence in the same document) of many features si-
multaneously, rather than a single one as the original CRM
does.
The ABCRM uses incremental learning to ﬁrst train on
N labeled documents (relevant and irrelevant), which are or-
dered sequentially (typically by time signature) and then test
on M unlabeled documents that follow in time order. Fig. 4
illustrates this stream of labeled documents (blue for rele-
vant and red for irrelevant) followed by unlabeled grayed
documents. The sequence in which documents are received
affects the artiﬁcial cellular dynamics, as incoming APC
4 Every Ef or Rf has equal probability of binding to the APC that
presents feature f

5
Fig. 2 To illustrate the difference between the CRM and the ABCRM,
the top part of the ﬁgure represents a single APC of the CRM which
can bind to a maximum of two T-Cells. The lower part represents the
APC for a document d in the ABCRM, which contains many pairs of
antigen/feature “slots” where pairs of T-cells can bind. In this exam-
ple, the ﬁrst pair of slots of the APC Ad presents the features fi and
f j; a regulatory T-cell Ri and an effector T-cell Ej bind to these slots,
which will therefore interact according to reaction (4)—Ri inhibits Ej
and in turn proliferates by doubling. The next pair of slots leads to the
interaction of regulatory T-cells Ri,Rk that duplicate via reaction (2)...
and T-cells face a T-cell dynamics that depends on the spe-
ciﬁc documents previously encountered. Therefore, we use
publication-time as the default ordering for incoming docu-
ments, and study if there is an advantage to preserving the
original temporal sequence of articles (see section 6.3).
Carneiro et al [28] show that both E and R T-cells co-
exist in healthy individuals assuming enough APC exist. R
T-cells require adequate amounts of E T-cells to prolifer-
ate, but not too many that can out-compete R for the spe-
ciﬁc features presented by APC. “Healthy” T-cell dynamics
is identiﬁed by observing the co-existence of both E and R
T-cells with R ≥E. “Unhealthy” T-cell dynamics is identi-
ﬁed by observing E ≫R, and should result when encoun-
tering many irrelevant features in a document—in analogy
with encountering many nonself antigens.
In other words, features associated with relevant docu-
ments should have more R T-cell representatives than E ones
in the artiﬁcial cellular dynamics. In contrast, features asso-
ciated with irrelevant documents should have many more E
than R T-cells. Therefore, when a document d contains fea-
tures Fd that bind mostly to E rather than R cells, we can
classify it as irrelevant—and relevant in the opposite situa-
tion (see Fig. 3).
The ABCRM is controlled by 6 parameters:
• E0 is the initial number of Effector T-cells generated for
all new features
• R−
0 is the initial number of Regulatory T-cells gener-
ated for all new features in irrelevant and unlabeled (test)
documents
• R+
0 is the initial number of Regulatory T-cells generated
for all new features in relevant documents
• dE is the death rate for Effector T-cells that do not bind
to APC
• dR is the death rate for Regulatory T-cells that do not
bind to APC
• nA is the number of total slots in which each feature f is
presented on APC
When (textual) features are encountered for the ﬁrst time,
a ﬁxed initial number of E0 effector T-Cells and R0 regu-
latory T-Cells is generated for every new feature f. These
initial values of T-cells vary for relevant and irrelevant doc-
uments in training and in test stages. More Regulatory (R+
0 )
than Effector T-cells are generated for features that occur
for the ﬁrst time in documents that are labeled relevant in
the training stage (R+
0 > E0), while fewer Regulatory (R−
0 )
than Effector T-cells are generated in the case of irrelevant
documents (R−
0 < E0) (see Fig. 4). Features appearing in un-
labeled documents for the ﬁrst time during the test stage are
treated as features from irrelevant documents, assuming that
new features are irrelevant (nonself) until neutralized by the
collective dynamics given their co-occurrence with relevant
ones.
Naturally, relevant features will occur in irrelevant doc-
uments and vice versa. However, the assumption is that rel-
evant features tend to co-occur more frequently with other
relevant features in relevant documents and similarly for ir-
relevant features. Therefore, the proliferation dynamics de-
ﬁned by the 4 reactions and guided by co-binding to APC
slots is expected to correct the erroneous initial bias as we
will show in section 6.4. But this self-correction has not been
proven in our previous works [38,36], and it is one of the is-
sues we test in the present work.
Fig. 3
A document is classiﬁed according to the E-to-R ratios for

relevant given its features that tend to have higher ratios of R.

6
               
 
            
 
 
                                           
                                              
Doc d 
Cellular Interaction Dynamics 
Classification 
Cell Death  
Initial Bias 
Sequence/time 
Fig. 4 A stream of ordered labeled documents (blue for relevant and
red for irrelevant) followed by ordered unlabeled grayed documents
is introduced. Each document d is represented by a polyspeciﬁc APC
Ad that arbitrarily presents the antigens/features f of d. APC are then
dropped in the pool of T-Cell populations representing previously en-
countered features/antigens, which follow the cellular interaction dy-
namics deﬁned by the four interaction rules(see eq (2-4)). Finally, doc-
ument d is classiﬁed as relevant if the majority of its features f have
more Rf than Ef , and irrelevant otherwise.
Finally, to classify a document d, we observe the cellular
interaction dynamics that results after its respective APC Ad
is left to interact with the various T-Cell populations. More
speciﬁcally, each document is classiﬁed based on the E-to-R
ratios of all its features f ∈Ad; this process is illustrated in
Fig. 3. A detailed pseudocode of the algorithm follows:
ABCRM Algorithm:
Input: Stream of labeled and unlabeled documents
Output: Labels for unlabeled documents
foreach document d do
Generate a list of pair slots Ad presenting each
f ∈Ad at nA randomly distributed slots.
Let C contain Ef and Rf T-cells for all features f
in the cellular dynamics.
foreach f ∈Ad representing document d do
if Ef /∈C and R f /∈C then
Ef = E0 (i.e. generate E0 Effector T-cells
for f)
if d is labeled relevant then
Rf = R+
0 (i.e. generate R+
0 Regulatory
T-cells for f)
end
else
Rf = R−
0 (i.e. generate R−
0 Regulatory
T-cells for f)
end
Update C with Ef and Rf
Let all Ef , Rf bind speciﬁcally to
matching f on Ad:
end
end
foreach pair of adjacent (f,g) on Ad do
Apply the following interaction rules and
update total number of E, R T-cells:
(Rf ,Rg) →Rf +Rg
(Ef ,Eg) →2.Ef +2.Eg
(Ef ,Rg) →Ef +2.Rg
end
foreach Rf ,Ef ∈C that do not bind to Ad do
Cull Ef and Rf according to death rates dE
and dR
end
if d is unlabeled then
Let R(d) = ∑f∈Ad(
Rf
q
R2
f +E2
f
) and
E(d) = ∑f∈Ad(
Ef
q
R2
f +E2
f
)
if R(d) ≥E(d) then
Classify d as relevant
end
else
Classify d as irrelevant.
end
end
end

7
           BC 2.5 TRAINING                     BC 2.5 TESTING 
Optimization 
Dataset 
Fig. 5
Numbers of relevant (P) and irrelevant (N) documents in the
training (T) and test (V) data sets of the Biocreative 2.5 challenge. In
the optimization and robustness analysis stage, we use a balanced set
of 60 PT (blue) and 60 NT (red) randomly selected articles from the
training data set and we call this subset the optimization dataset. In
the test stage we use the unbalanced validation set containing 63 PV
(black) and 532 NV (black) documents. Notice that the validation data
was provided to the participants in the classiﬁcation task of Biocreative
2.5 unlabeled, therefore participants had no prior knowledge of class
proportions.
5 Data and Feature Selection
The BioCreative (BC) challenge aims to assess the quality
of biomedical literature mining algorithms such as article
classiﬁers. The article classiﬁcation task of Biocreative 2.5
[34] was based on a training data set (T) comprised of 61
full-text articles relevant (PT) to the topic of protein-protein
interaction (PPI) and 558 irrelevant ones (NT). The realistic
imbalance between the relevant and irrelevant instances is
very challenging for common machine learning techniques,
since there are few instances of the topical category of in-
terest to generalize from. Because we cannot predict how
imbalanced the validation set will be, we ﬁrst search for op-
timal ABCRM parameters on a smaller sample of the train-
ing that is balanced in the numbers of relevant and irrele-
vant documents. The optimal parameters are not only useful
for ﬁne-tuning our algorithm for the best classiﬁcation per-
formance but also for studying the robustness and behavior
of T-cell dynamics under several experimental setups as we
will show in section 6. For this purpose, we chose the ﬁrst
60 relevant and sampled 60 irrelevant articles that were pub-
lished around the same date (uniform distribution between
Jan and Dec 2008), and we called this subset the optimiza-
tion dataset as illustrated in ﬁgure 5. For ﬁnal validation we
used the entire Biocreative 2.5 test data set (V) consisting
of 63 full-text articles relevant to PPI (PV) and 532 irrele-
vant ones (NV) as also shown in ﬁgure 5. Furthermore, we
compared our optimized algorithm with a Naive Bayes (NB)
[24] and a support vector machine (SVM) classiﬁer [9].
We pre-processed all articles by ﬁltering out common
words5 and porter stemming [2] the remaining words which
5 The list of common (stop) words includes 33 of the most common
English words from which we manually excluded the word “with”, as
we know it to be of importance to PPI
are all the potential features. We then ranked words/features
f extracted from training articles (T)6 according to two scores:
the ﬁrst one is the average TF.IDF7 [25], and the second one
is the separation score S(f) = |pP(f) −pN(f)| where pP
(pN) is the probability of a feature occurring in a relevant
(irrelevant) document of the training set T [33,37]. The two
scoring and feature selection methods are useful for topi-
cal categorization but can be replaced by other methods to
suit various applications that are beyond the focus of this
manuscript. The ﬁnal rank R(f) for every feature f is given
by the product of the ranks obtained from both scores; we
used only the top 650 ranked features according to R(f).
These top 650 features were shown to be adequate for the
classiﬁcation of the same data set using a linear classiﬁer
[37]. Moreover, a ﬁxed number of features renders the al-
gorithm more scalable for larger data sets with many more
features, unlike the one used for this experiment. For exam-
ple, features such as “interact”, “lysat” and “transfect” were
ranked above others for their high ranks according to both
scores as shown in ﬁgure 6. See [37] for more details about
the feature extraction procedure.
Fig. 6 We choose the top 650 ranked features according to the rank
product R(f) = TF.IDF(f) × S(f). The y-axis represents
1
R(f) and the x-
axis represents the index of R(f) for the sorted features. Features ranked
below the 650th feature have a similar score
1
R(f) < 0.00001
6 Parameter Search and Robustness
We performed an exhaustive parameter search by training
the ABCRM on 60 balanced full-text articles (30 PT and 30
NT from BC2.5 training) and testing it on the remaining 60
6 For feature extraction we used both the training data of Biocreative
2.5 and Biocreative 2 as described in [37]; all classiﬁers used the exact
same feature set.
7 TF.IDF is a common text weighting measure to evaluate the impor-
tance of a feature/word in a document in a corpus. TF stands for term
frequency in a document and IDF for inverse document frequency in
the corpus.

8
Parameter
Range
Step
E0
[1,7]
1
R−
0
[3,12]
1
R+
0
[3,12]
1
dE
[0.0,0.4]
0.1
dR
[0.0,0.4]
0.1
nA
[2,22]
2
Table 1 Parameter ranges used for optimizing the ABCRM
balanced ones (also 30 PT and 30 NT from BC2.5 Train-
ing) as illustrated in ﬁgure 58. Each run corresponds to a
unique conﬁguration of the 6 parameters of the ABCRM.
The explored parameter ranges are listed in table 1 and they
result in a total of 192500 unique parameter conﬁgurations
for each experiment. Finally, the parameter conﬁgurations
were sorted with respect to the resulting F-score measure of
performance9, which is a good measure between precision
and recall when applied to balanced data [19].
We compiled the performance of the ABCRM on the
entire parameter search space for four distinct experiments:
(1) the effect of cell death, (2) using both training sets in
contrast to using only the positive set, (3) the importance
of the sequential order of articles, and (4) the automatic
correction of the initial bias.
In all four experiments, we choose the 50 conﬁgura-
tions with highest F-score measure to study the ABCRM
performance, because we are interested in identifying the
experimental setups that lead to higher robustness to pa-
rameter changes. We compare experimental outcomes with
the paired student t-test; the null hypothesis is that the two
samples are drawn from the same distribution. A p-value
< 0.01 rejects the null hypothesis, establishing a statistical
distinction between the data drawn from two experimental
setups—in our case, the data from each experiment are the
top 50 F-score values obtained. The ﬁrst two experiments
were initially tested [36] to choose the best experimental set
up and compare it with two aditional experiments [38] that
are discussed in this paper.
6.1 Cell Death
The ﬁrst experiment aims to study the effect of cell death
on immune memory and classiﬁcation performance. In this
experiment we compare the top 50 parameter conﬁgurations
according to F-score obtained using cell death (exp 1.1) to
8 Notice that this parameter search on the provided labeled training
data uses only the information available to the teams participating in
Biocreative 2.5 challenge, and none of the test data whose labels were
revealed post-challenge.
9 F-score = 2.Precision.Recall
Precision+Recall where Precision =
TP
TP+FP and Recall =
TP
TP+FN . True Positives (TP) and False Positives (FP) are the classiﬁer’s
correct and incorrect predictions for relevant documents, while True
Negatives (TN) and False Negatives (FN) are the correct and incorrect
predictions for irrelevant documents.
Exp.
F-Score
E0
R+
0
R−
0
dR
dE
nA
1.1
0.85
2
11
10
0.3
0.2
18
1.2
0.83
1
4
7
0.0
0.0
18
2.1
0.85
1
12
8
0.1
0.0
8
2.2
0.75
2
12
6
0.0
0.0
18
Table 2 Performance and parameters of top classiﬁers in experiment
1 regarding cell death and experiment 2 regarding training data.
those with no cell death (exp 1.2)—while training on both
self and nonself documents. We observe a notable differ-
ence in classiﬁcation performance that we validate statisti-
cally (according to the criteria above) to show that using cell
death improves the performance (see Fig. 8)—regardless of
whether the algorithm is trained on just relevant or on both
relevant and irrelevant documents (see below). Therefore we
conclude that cell death, which helps in the forgetting of
useless features and focuses on more recent and frequent
ones, improves classiﬁcation performance, which suggests
that it is important for immune memory in the T-Cell cross-
regulation model.
6.2 Training on Self and Nonself
The second experiment is conducted to show if we can rely
solely on the positive set for classiﬁcation, or if the perfor-
mance can be improved by training on both positive and neg-
ative sets. We compare the top 50 parameter conﬁgurations
according to F-score obtained using training on positive only
or PU learning (experiments 2.1 and 2.2), to the previous
experiments (1.1 and 1.2). This way we compare training
on positive documents only, with and without cell death.
The results show that using both training sets always (sig-
niﬁcantly) improves the robustness of classiﬁcation perfor-
mance (see Fig. 8). Although the top performance obtained
for 1.1 (training on both classes with cell death) and 2.1
(training on positive documents with ceall death) is equiva-
lent with F-Score=0.85 (see table 2), the robustness as mea-
sured by the performance of the top 50 parameter sets is
signiﬁcantly lower for experiment 2.1 (see ﬁgure 8).
6.3 Sequence Order
The third experiment aims to establish how much the se-
quence order of processing documents impacts performance.
In particular, we test if preserving the original temporal or-
der of biomedical documents results in better performance,
as this would indicate that the ABCRM can use its sequence-
dependent dynamics to track the natural concept or topical
drift and thus improve classiﬁcation. Therefore, we com-
pared the performance of the ABCRM when tested on a se-

9
Fig. 7 The ﬁrst two experiments result in four experimental setups:
1.1) training on both sets with cell death (red), 2.1) PU learning with
cell death (green), 1.2) training on both sets with no cell death (blue)
and 2.2) PU learning with no cell death (yellow) are clearly distin-
guishable for the top 50 conﬁgurations of each experiment on the plot
on the left. On the right, the horizontal lines represent the mean, the
boxes represent 95%CI, and the whiskers represent standard deviation
of F-scores from the top 50 parameter conﬁgurations
Exp.
F-Score
E0
R+
0
R−
0
dR
dE
nA
1.1 = 3.1 = 4.1
0.85
2
11
10
0.3
0.2
18
3.2
0.85
2
7
6
0.0
0.0
20
4.2
0.86
3
8
7
0.2
0.1
14
Table 3 Performance and parameters of top classiﬁers in experiments
1.1=3.1=4.1, 3.2 and 4.2.
quence of biomedical articles ordered by the original pub-
lication, against randomly shufﬂing the articles. We tested
four distinct experimental setups in order to fully explore
the inﬂuence of document order:
1. Ordered training set ⇒ordered test set
2. Ordered training set ⇒shufﬂed test set
3. Shufﬂed training set ⇒shufﬂed test set
4. Shufﬂed training set ⇒ordered test set
In the case of shufﬂed sets, we produced 8 runs with
distinct random document orderings; in those cases, perfor-
mance is represented by central tendency.
The results of this experiment are summarized in ﬁgure
8. The robustness of performance of the ﬁrst experimental
setup (preserving temporal order of articles) is signiﬁcantly
above the other setups. Using the paired student t-test as de-
scribed above, we conclude that the ABCRM is sensitive
to article order—i.e. if the articles are shufﬂed, the perfor-
mance is worse. While the performance of the best classiﬁer
obtained via experimental setup 3.2 is equivalent to the best
one obtained for experimental setup 1.1 (F-Score = 0.85, see
table 3 and ﬁgure 8), that setup is very sensitive to parameter
changes and the performance quickly and signiﬁcantly de-
creases for subsequent best classiﬁers (see ﬁgure 8). Indeed,
Fig. 8 The second two experiments result in 5 experimental outcomes.
To the left we show the top 50 parameter conﬁgurations ranked in terms
of F-score for experimental setups 1.1=3.1=4.1 (red circles), 3.2 (blue
pluses), 3.3 (blue crosses), 3.4 (blue diamonds), and 4.2 (green trian-
gles). To the right we show the mean (line), 95%CI (boxes), and stan-
dard deviation (whiskers) of F-scores for the top 50 parameter conﬁg-
urations.
the performance of the top 50 classiﬁers for experimental se-
tups 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 is statistically indistinguishable from
each other, but is signiﬁcantly lower than the performance of
the top 50 classiﬁers for experimental setup 1.1. This means
that there is indeed a conceptual drift in the Biocreative 2.5
article data stream, and the ABCRM can track it better (and
in a more robust manner) when publication date is used as
the sequence for processing articles than when the temporal
order of articles is shufﬂed. This also suggests that the pro-
cess of T-Cell cross-regulation in the IS, as modeled here,
can track changing nonself pathogens.
It should be noted that in this experiment, the partition-
ing of training and test data was done according to the time-
stamp of documents. Therefore, the documents in the test set
were published after all documents in the training set. There-
fore, even in the shufﬂed training and test sets (experimental
setup 3.3), there is some preservation of temporal order. In
future work we will explore experimental setups where the
training and test sets are drawn from the same time-stamp
distribution to better understand the effects of concept drift
and how well our model can track it.
6.4 Initial Bias
In the fourth experiment we test the effect of the initial
biases introduced when features are ﬁrst encountered. The
initial biases of regulatory T-cells injected in the dynam-
ics for a new feature f, depend on whether the ﬁrst docu-
ment d where the feature is encountered is labeled irrele-

10
vant/unknown (R−
0 ) or relevant (R+
0 ). Since features will oc-
cur in both relevant and irrelevant articles, this initial bias
for a feature could be detrimental, as a feature most asso-
ciated with one class could be ﬁrst encountered on a docu-
ment of the opposite class. Therefore, it is important to test
if the dynamics of the four reactions and APC feature co-
presentation that deﬁne the ABCRM can self-correct such
erroneous biases. To perform this test, we altered the ABCRM
algorithm such that T-cells are incremented appropriately
every time a feature occurs in a document, and not just the
ﬁrst time the feature occurs (as the canonical algorithm does).
Speciﬁcally, every time a feature f occurs in a document d,
we increment E f = E f + E0 and R f = R f + R+
0 if d is la-
beled relevant and R f = R f +R−
0 if d is labeled irrelevant or
unlabeled. We label this experimental set up 4.2, which was
conducted with cell death and training on both positive and
negative documents.
The results of this experiment are also summarized in
ﬁgure 8. The performance of top classiﬁers obtained for ex-
perimental setups 4.1 (same as 1.1 and 3.1 that are trained
on both training sets using cell death) and 4.2 (incremen-
tal experimental setup) is shown in table 3. While the best
overall classiﬁer is obtained with experimental setup 4.2, the
performance of both setups is statistically indistinguishable.
Indeed, using the paired student t-test as described above,
we cannot reject the null hypothesis claiming that both dis-
tributions of F-scores were drawn from a similar distribu-
tion. Therefore, we conclude that this modiﬁcation does not
improve the performance of the ABCRM on the Biocreative
data set, thus showing that the initial bias can be corrected by
the ABCRM collective dynamics and does not require incre-
menting T-cells for all new features. Because features most
associated with a given class tend to co-occur in text with
other features most associated with the same class, they will
also tend to be co-presented in APC and thus the relevant
T-cells will proliferate with similar rates. Therefore, the dy-
namics of the ABCRM can self-correct initial erroneous bi-
ases from the natural textual co-occurrence of features. This
shows that T-Cell cross-regulation as modeled here can self-
correct initial antigen misclassiﬁcation by the IS, assuming
that antigens from one class (self/nonself) tend to co-occur
with antigens from the same class.
7 Validation and Conclusions
To test the ABCRM on the full, unbalanced test set of the
Biocreative challenge (see ﬁgure 5), thus establishing its merit
as a bio-inspired biomedical literature mining classiﬁer, we
adopted the best parameter conﬁguration from the canonical
ABCRM (experimental setup 1.1=3.1=4.1, see table 3) ob-
tained from the parameter search described above. We com-
pared the ABCRM classiﬁer with the multinomial Naive
Bayes (NB) with boolean attributes, one of the top Naive
Bayes implementations for spam detection [24], and the pub-
licly available SVMlight implementation of SVM applied to
normalized feature counts [9]. The SVMlight was used with
its default parameter settings [9]. All classiﬁers were tested
on the same features obtained from the same data.
ABCRM
NB
SVM
Mean
StDev.
Med.
Precision
0.22
0.14
0.24
0.38
Recall
0.65
0.71
0.94
0.68
F-score
0.33
0.24
0.36
0.39
0.14
0.38
Accuracy
0.71
0.52
0.74
0.67
0.30
0.84
AUC
0.34
0.19
0.46
0.43
0.17
0.44
MCC
0.24
0.13
0.31
0.31
0.19
0.33
Table 4
F-Score, Accuracy, AUC and MCC performance of various
classiﬁers when training on the balanced training set of articles and
testing on the full unbalanced Biocreative 2.5 test set. Also shown is the
central tendency and variation of all systems submitted to Biocreative
2.5.
Since the F-score and Accuracy are not very reliable
for evaluating unbalanced classiﬁcation [19], we also use
the Area Under the interpolated precision and recall Curve
(AUC) and Matthew’s Correlation Coefﬁcient (MCC). The
results are listed in table 4, which also includes the cen-
tral tendency of the results of all systems submitted by all
Biocreative 2.5 participating teams [34,37]. It should be noted
that the ABCRM, NB, and SVM classiﬁers we tested here,
used only single-word features because we wish to estab-
lish the feasibility of the method. In contrast, most classi-
ﬁers submitted to the Biocreative 2.5 challenge (including
another method from our group which was one of the top-
performing classiﬁers [37]) used more sophisticated features
such as bigrams and problem-speciﬁc entities. Therefore, it
is not surprising that these methods as tested here performed
under the mean of the challenge. Our goal was to establish
the ABCRM as a new bio-inspired text classiﬁer to be fur-
ther improved in the future with more sophisticated features.
When we compare its performance to NB and SVM on the
exact same single-word features, the results are encourag-
ing. Indeed, based on the given measures, while the SVM
out-performed the ABCRM, the latter out-performed NB.
Therefore, the dynamics of T-Cell cross-regulation lead to a
competitive collective classiﬁcation of biomedical articles,
which we intend to develop further.
In future work we will pursue additional experiments
to study concept drift, namely by investigating the ability
to simultaneously train and classify documents. Given the
sequence-dependent dynamics entailed by our model, there
is no reason to present all test data to the cellular interaction
dynamics, only after processing all training data. The model
affords various possible schedules of document processing
that mix training and test data which could lead to better per-
formance. Indeed, the immune system is constantly exposed

11
to self antigens (training data), and even pathogens that may
be stored in long lived plasma cells and memory B-cells.
In conclusion, we observed that our method uses cell
death to enhance immune memory and forget older features
while focusing on more recent and frequent ones. We proved
that our algorithm is capable of classiﬁcation when trained
on relevant features only, however the performance can be
improved when trained on both classes. We also observed
that algorithm adapts to the initial bias of T-cell populations
generated for new features, and it performs best when tested
on a sequence of articles ordered by publication date—showing
that it can track concept drift in the biomedical literature.
These properties of our model also show that T-Cell cross
regulation is capable of efﬁcient collective classiﬁcation of
nonself antigens and suggest that T-Cell cross-regulation can
naturally respond to drift in the pathogen population. There-
fore T-Cell cross-regulation deﬁned by the 4 reaction rules
and co-presentation of features in APC can be seen as an ef-
fective general principle of collective classiﬁcation available
to populations of cells. Clearly, there is still much to do to
improve the model. For biomedical literature mining appli-
cations, we need to test it with more sophisticated features
(as top classiﬁers in the ﬁeld do). For our goal of under-
standing T-Cell cross-regulation in the IS, we need to un-
derstand better how memory is sustained in the collective
cellular dynamics; for instance, how to sustain regulatory T-
Cells, which keep memory of self, in the dynamics even in
the presence of very unbalanced scenarios where there are
many more self or nonself instances.
Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by a grant from
the FLAD Computational Biology Collaboratorium at the Instituto Gul-
benkian de Ciencia in Portugal. We also thank the ICARIS2010 com-
mittee board for encouraging this work. We acknowledge the compu-
tational resources provided by Indiana University used to conduct the
simulations we report.
