Controllable Guarantees for Fair Outcomes via
Contrastive Information Estimation
Umang Gupta1, Aaron M Ferber2, Bistra Dilkina2, Greg Ver Steeg1
1 Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
2 University of Southern California

Abstract
Controlling bias in training datasets is vital for ensuring equal
treatment, or parity, between different groups in downstream
applications. A naive solution is to transform the data so that
it is statistically independent of group membership, but this
may throw away too much information when a reasonable
compromise between fairness and accuracy is desired. An-
other common approach is to limit the ability of a particular
adversary who seeks to maximize parity. Unfortunately, rep-
resentations produced by adversarial approaches may still re-
tain biases as their efﬁcacy is tied to the complexity of the
adversary used during training. To this end, we theoretically
establish that by limiting the mutual information between rep-
resentations and protected attributes, we can assuredly con-
trol the parity of any downstream classiﬁer. We demonstrate
an effective method for controlling parity through mutual in-
formation based on contrastive information estimators and
show that they outperform approaches that rely on varia-
tional bounds based on complex generative models. We test
our approach on UCI Adult and Heritage Health datasets
and demonstrate that our approach provides more informa-
tive representations across a range of desired parity thresholds
while providing strong theoretical guarantees on the parity of
any downstream algorithm.
1
Introduction
Decisions based on biased data can promote biased out-
comes. Learning algorithms often exploit and exaggerate bi-
ases present in the training dataset. One way to prevent al-
gorithms from reproducing bias in the data is to pre-process
the data so that information about protected attributes is re-
moved (Song et al. 2019; Madras et al. 2018; McNamara,
Ong, and Williamson 2017). Ideally, users of this trans-
formed data can focus on maximizing performance for their
tasks using any available method without the risk of produc-
ing unfair outcomes (Cisse and Koyejo 2019). The strongest
requirement for fair representations is to be statistically in-
dependent of sensitive attributes, but this may lead to large
drops in predictive performance as sensitive attributes are
often correlated with the target. Therefore, it is desirable
to produce representations that can trade-off some measure
of fairness (e.g., statistical parity in this work) with util-
ity (Menon and Williamson 2018; Dutta et al. 2019).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Representative Methods
Adversarial
Controllable
Guarantee
Parity
Song et al. (2019)
Weak1
Heuristic
Moyer et al. (2018)
Strong
No2
Madras et al. (2018)
None
Heuristic
Roy and Boddeti (2019)
None
No
Ours
Strong
Provable
Table 1: Fair representation learning methods
Many recent approaches for learning fair representations
leverage adversarial learning to remove unwanted biases
from the data by limiting the ability of an adversary to re-
construct sensitive attributes from the representation during
training (Jaiswal et al. 2020; Roy and Boddeti 2019; Song
et al. 2019; Madras et al. 2018; Edwards and Storkey 2016).
While adversarial methods have been shown to be useful
in learning fair representations, they are often limited by
the adversary’s model capacity. A more powerful adversary
than the one used during training may reveal hidden biases
that are present in the representations (Xu et al. 2020). As
a result, a model trained to control fairness against one ad-
versary has no guarantee to control fairness against an ar-
bitrary adversary. Other methods for learning fair represen-
tations focus on inducing statistical independence (Moyer
et al. 2018; Louizos et al. 2016). While fairness guarantees
of these methods are agnostic to the downstream algorithms,
including adversarial attempts to exploit bias, they are inefﬁ-
cient at trading-off between fairness and informativeness in
the representation, which is often desirable for fairness ap-
plications. Some methods rely on complex generative mod-
eling of data to discover representations that are invariant to
the protected attributes while preserving as much informa-
tion as possible about the data. However, the quality of the
generative model is a performance bottleneck. We summa-
rize some of these approaches and their properties in Table 1.
1Song et al. (2019) minimize two different bounds on I(z:c)
— one is a very loose upper bound, and another uses adversarial
learning. So the adversarial guarantee is unclear or, at best weaker.
2Moyer et al. (2018) designed their method for enforcing inde-
pendence; however, we consider a modiﬁcation of their method for
controlling parity, based on our Thm. 2.
arXiv:2101.04108v3  [cs.LG]  3 Jun 2021

In this paper, we focus on a widely used fairness mea-
sure known as statistical parity, though other measures may
be more appropriate for speciﬁc problems. The difference in
outcomes for two groups, or parity, is often used to quan-
tify the fairness of a decision procedure. It has also been
shown to best capture people’s perception of fairness (Sri-
vastava, Heidari, and Krause 2019). One of the main objec-
tives of fair representation learning is to limit the parity of
any possible downstream decision algorithm. To this end,
we relate the parity of any possible decision algorithm to an
algorithm-agnostic measure of dependence. We show that
we can provably control the parity of any possible decision
algorithm that acts only on these representations by limit-
ing mutual information between the representations and the
sensitive attributes.
Estimating and bounding mutual information from data
is a challenging and active ﬁeld of research (Poole et al.
2019). We propose practical ways to limit the mutual infor-
mation via contrastive estimates of conditional mutual infor-
mation, thereby bypassing the need to use complex genera-
tive models that require explicit assumptions about the input
distribution. Contrastive information measures have demon-
strated state-of-the-art performance on many representation
learning tasks (Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Veliˇckovi´c et al.
2019; Mikolov et al. 2013) but not for fair representation
learning. We evaluate our approach on two fairness bench-
mark datasets — UCI Adult and Heritage Health dataset and
show that representations provided by our method preserve
more information at the desired fairness threshold compared
to other adversarial as well as non-adversarial baselines.
Our main contributions are — a) We theoretically show
that mutual information between the representations and the
sensitive attributes bounds the statistical parity of any deci-
sion algorithm; b) We propose practical ways to limit mutual
information leveraging contrastive information estimators to
efﬁciently trade-off predictability and accuracy.
2
Mutual Information Bounds Parity
We consider a dataset of triplets D = {xi, yi, ci}N
i=1, where
xi, yi, ci are iid samples from data distribution p(x, y, c). c
are the sensitive or protected attributes, y is the label, x are
features of the sample which may include sensitive attributes
and ˆy denotes predicted label, according to some algorithm.
We may also interpret ˆy as the outcome of some decision
procedure. We use bold letters to denote the random vari-
able, and the regular font represents corresponding samples.
In this work, we consider stochastic representations of data
i.e., z(x) ∼q(z|x = x). We learn d-dimensional represen-
tations z of input x, such that any classiﬁer trained on only z
is guaranteed to be fair, i.e., it has parity within some δ′. In
this work, we focus on statistical parity, a popular measure
of group fairness, and it is deﬁned as:
Deﬁnition 1. Statistical Parity: (Dwork et al. 2012) It is
the absolute difference between the selection rates of two
groups. Mathematically,
∆DP(A, c) = |P(ˆy = 1|c = 1) −P(ˆy = 1|c = 0)|
where ˆy denotes decisions produced by some decision algo-
rithm A. When there are more than two groups, we deﬁne
statistical parity to be the maximum parity between any two
groups (as implemented in Bird et al. (2020)).
Statistical parity is an algorithm dependent measure of fair-
ness, whereas we require our representations to be fair for
any downstream decision algorithm. Bearing this in mind,
we show that mutual information between the representa-
tions and the protected attributes, denoted as I(z:c), can be
used to limit the statistical parity via the following result.
Theorem 2. For some z, c ∼p(z, c), z ∈Rd, c ∈{0, 1},
and any decision algorithm A that acts on z, we have
I(z:c) ≥g (π, ∆DP (A, c))
where π = P(c = 1) and g is a strictly increasing non-
negative convex function in ∆DP (A, c).
We defer the proof of the above statement, the expression
of g, and generalization of the theorem for multinomial c to
Appendix A.1. We also visualize the bound on parity from
Thm. 2 in Appendix A.1.
We know that if I(z:c) = 0, then ∆DP(A, c) = 0,
and by Thm. 2, g (π, ∆DP(A, c)) will also be 0. I(z:c) up-
per bounds the function g. And since, g is strictly increas-
ing convex function in ∆DP(A, c), ∆DP(A, c) will also be
bounded. As a result, if z is a representation with bounded
mutual information with c, then any algorithm relying only
on z to make a decision will also have bounded parity. Intu-
itively by reducing I(z:c), we can decrease ∆DP too.
We remark that I(z:c) has been used as a proxy objective
to control statistical parity previously (Edwards and Storkey
2016; Song et al. 2019; Moyer et al. 2018). It is often justi-
ﬁed via the data processing inequality and the intuition that
both statistical parity and mutual information are measures
of dependence. However, using the data processing inequal-
ity, we can only guarantee that if we limit information about
c in z, then no subsequent operations on z can increase in-
formation about c, i.e., I(ˆy:c) ≤I(z:c), but this fact alone
implies nothing about statistical parity. Our result (Thm. 2)
demonstrates that limiting I(z:c) will monotonically limit
statistical parity, which had not been theoretically demon-
strated until now.
3
Practical Objectives for Controlling Parity
Equipped with an algorithm agnostic upper bound to par-
ity, we now discuss practical objectives for learning fair rep-
resentations. Along with limiting parity, we also want the
latent representation to be highly predictive (informative)
about the label, which is often realized by maximizing mu-
tual information between y and z, i.e., I(y:z) implicitly (Ed-
wards and Storkey 2016; Madras et al. 2018; Jaiswal et al.
2020) or explicitly (Moyer et al. 2018).
O1: max
q
I(y:z) s.t. I(z:c) ≤δ
or, max
q
I(y:z) −βI(z:c)
(1)
where, z, x ∼q(z|x)p(x) and β > 0 is a hyperparameter.

z
c
y
Figure 1: Venn diagram to show interference between I(y:z)
and I(z:c). See Sec. 3.1 for details.
3.1
Interference Between I(y:z) and I(z:c)
While I(y:z) has been commonly proposed as a criterion
to enforce the desiderata of representations being informa-
tive about labels, we argue that when the data is biased, i.e.,
I(y:c) > 0, maximizing I(y:z) is in direct contradiction
with minimizing I(z:c). To illustrate this point, we refer to
the information Venn diagram in Fig. 1. The goal of fair rep-
resentation learning is to move the circle representing infor-
mation about the representation, z, to have high overlap with
y and low overlap with c. However, there is a conﬂict in the
gray region where we cannot increase overlap with y with-
out also increasing overlap with c. In our experiments, we
observe that this conﬂict hurts the model performance and
makes it hard to achieve lower parity values at a reasonable
accuracy (Fig. 5b). However, this conﬂict is not necessary.
Since fair learning aims to capture information about y that
is not related to the protected attribute c, we want to maxi-
mize the overlap between z and the region of y that excludes
c. This quantity is precisely the conditional mutual infor-
mation, I(y:z|c), which we propose to maximize instead of
I(y:z). This leads us to the following objective:
O2: max
q
I(y:z|c) s.t. I(z:c) ≤δ
or, max
q
I(y:z|c) −βI(z:c)
(2)
where, z, x ∼q(z|x)p(x) and β > 0 is a hyperparame-
ter. Concurrent to this work, Rodr´ıguez-G´alvez, Thobaben,
and Skoglund (2020) have also proposed similar conditional
mutual information term for retaining information about la-
bels in the representation. Eq. 2 deﬁnes our approach, but
the information-theoretic terms that appear are challenging
to estimate directly. In the next sections, we derive practical
variational bounds for these terms.
Before proceeding, we brieﬂy discuss an ambiguity in the
information-theoretic argument above. The triple overlap re-
gion of the information Venn diagram, sometimes called
the “interaction information”, can be negative (Williams and
Beer 2010). This corresponds to the case that z and c have
synergistic information about y. That is, their combination
allows us to predict y, even though individually they may
not be predictive at all. The classic example of a synergistic
interaction is the binary XOR relationship among three vari-
ables (example given in Appendix B). In that case, no vari-
able can predict any other, but knowing any two variables
perfectly predicts the third. If synergies are present, we may
be able to attain a large value of I(y:z|c) while I(y:z) = 0.
In other words, maximizing I(y:z|c) may include synergis-
tic information, even if it hurts the ability to predict y from z
alone. While maximizing I(y:z) will not include synergistic
information, it will prefer large positive interaction informa-
tion. Positive interaction information can be interpreted as
increasing the redundant information shared among z, y, c,
even though this conﬂicts with our goal of excluding infor-
mation about protected attributes. Different choices of ob-
jective will alter the prioritization of various multivariate in-
formation terms, but ultimately our choice is justiﬁed by the
empirical performance shown in Sec. 4.
3.2
Lower Bound for I(y:z) and I(y:z|c)
Fact 3. For any distribution r(a|b) and a, b ∼p(a, b),
H(a|b) = −Ea,b log r(a|b) −KL (p(a|b) ∥r(a|b))
and therefore,
H(a|b) ≤−Ea,b log r(a|b)
and equality holds when r(a|b) = p(a|b)
By a direct application of above identity, we have:
I(y:z) = H(y) −H(y|z)
≥H(y) + max
r
Ey,z log r(y|z)
(3)
and similarly,
I(y:z|c) ≥H(y|c) + max
r
Ey,z,c log r(y|z, c)
(4)
H(y) and H(y|c) are properties of data and, therefore,
constant from the optimization perspective. When y is a
one-dimensional variable denoting the target class, this is
equivalent to minimizing cross-entropy. To this end, we will
parametrize the variational distribution r using a neural net-
work with parameters ψ, but other models can also be used.
3.3
Upper Bound for I(z:c)
Our technique for upper-bounding I(z:c) is similar to
Moyer et al. (2018) and makes use of the following observa-
tions:
I(z:c) = I(z:c|x) + I(z:x) −I(z:x|c)
(5)
I(z:c|x) = 0, as z is a function of x and some independent
noise. As a result, we have I(z:c) = I(z:x)−I(x:z|c). The
ﬁrst term is the information bottleneck term (Alemi et al.
2017) and limits the information about x in z, and we will
bound it by specifying a prior over z. Second term tries to
preserve information about x but not in c and we will lower
bound it via contrastive estimation.
Upper Bound for I(z:x) by Specifying a Prior:
In order
to upper-bound I(z:x), we use the following observation:
Fact 4. For any a, b ∼p(a, b) and distribution q(a)
I(a; b) = Ea,b log p(a|b)
q(a)
−KL (p(a) ∥q(a))
and therefore,
I(a:b) ≤Ea,b log p(a|b)
q(a)
= EbKL (p(a|b) ∥q(a))
(6)
and equality holds when p(a) = q(a).

Therefore, we have
I(z:x) ≤ExKL (q(z|x; φ) ∥p(z))
(7)
where p(z) is any distribution. This is similar to the rate term
in the VAE or information bottleneck approach (Alemi et al.
2017; Higgins et al. 2017). Motivated by this similitude, we
let p(z) be standard normal distribution and q(z|x; φ) be a
diagonal gaussian distribution whose mean and variance are
parametrized as µ(x) = fµ(x; φ), Σ(x) = fΣ(x; φ). Other
parameterizations like normalizing ﬂows (Rezende and Mo-
hamed 2015) or echo noise (Brekelmans et al. 2019) can be
used too.
Lower Bound for I(x:z|c) via Contrastive Estimation:
We propose to lower bound I(x:z|c) via contrastive estima-
tion of mutual information, and we use the following propo-
sition to derive our estimator.
Proposition 5. (Poole et al. 2019) For any u, v, w
∼
p(u, v, w), ˜u ∼p(u|w), and function f, we have
I(u:v|w) ≥Eu,v,w log
ef(u,v,w)
1
M
PM
j=1 ef(˜uj,v,w)
(8)
where, u, ˜u ∈U, v ∈V, w ∈W, f : U × V × W →R and
M is the number of samples from p(u|w).
The proof is similar to the non-conditional version (Poole
et al. 2019), but for completeness, we present the proof in
the Appendix A.2. As a direct application of this result, we
can lower-bound and maximize I(z:x|c). However, there is
a caveat that we need to sample from P(z|c). Sampling from
this conditional distribution in the general case can be hard,
but it can be easily accomplished for our problem. Often for
fairness applications, c is a discrete random variable with
low cardinality; in fact, it is often a binary random variable.
Therefore, we can consider {zj : (zj, cj = i)} to be the sam-
ples from p(z|c = i). In our experiments, we parametrize
f(z, x, c) as a bilinear function (similar to Oord, Li, and
Vinyals (2018)).
3.4
Overall Variational Objective
Using Eq. 5, we can write our objective, i.e., Eq. 2 in terms
of three information theoretic quantities as:
max
q
I(y:z|c)
|
{z
}
Eq. 4
−β

I(z:x)
| {z }
Eq. 7
−I(z:x|c)
|
{z
}
Eq. 8

The ﬁrst term is lower-bounded using Eq. 4 and it is the same
as the cross-entropy loss. Second term is upper bounded us-
ing Eq. 7. For this, we set p(z) to be standard normal distri-
bution and q(z|x) is a normal distribution whose parameters
are generated by a neural network. The KL divergence term
in Eq. 7 can then be expressed in the closed form. Finally, the
last term is lower-bounded using the contrastive conditional
mutual information estimator from Proposition 5 (Eq. 8). We
call our objective Fair Contrastive Representation Learner
(FCRL).
Objective 1 can be similarly computed and optimized us-
ing Eqs. 3, 7, and 8. We provide comprehensive details to
compute the proposed variational objective in Appendix C.1.
Even though objective 1 & 2 require a single parameter
β to be varied, we found in our experiments that it is nec-
essary to use different multipliers for I(x:z|c) and I(z:x)
to effectively tradeoff fairness and accuracy. Therefore, we
introduce another parameter λ. The I(z:c) term in both the
objectives then becomes I(z:x) −λI(x:z|c). We found that
λ = 2 performs better empirically and so we set λ = 2,
unless speciﬁed otherwise.
3.5
Other Bounds for I(z:c) and Their Caveats
One may observe that I(z:c) could also be upper-bounded as
a direct consequence of Eq. 7. This is possible, however up-
per bounding I(z:c) simply by introducing a prior marginal
p(z) as in Eq. 6 is not tractable, as that would require com-
puting p(z|c) (Song et al. 2019). Therefore, it is necessary
to decompose I(z:c) as the difference of two information-
theoretic quantities (Eq. 5).
Another way to bound I(x:z|c) is to use the lower bound
from Eq. 4 which leads to a conditional reconstruction term.
I(x:z|c) ≥H(x|c) + max
θ
Ex,z,c log q(x|z, c; θ)
(9)
where q(x|z, c; θ) is some distribution parametrized by θ.
H(x|c) is a constant. The last term can be seen as recon-
structing x from c and its latent representation z and is simi-
lar to the distortion term in VAE, albeit with conditioning on
c (Moyer et al. 2018). While this is a tractable bound, it in-
volves training a conditional decoder, which may be hard for
certain domains and almost always requires either complex
models or the restrictive assumption that feature dimensions
are independent given z. It also requires explicitly stating
the distribution of x, which is bypassed using contrastive
estimation. In our experiments, we found that this approx-
imation is limiting (Fig. 5a); therefore, we propose using a
decoder-free variational approximation via contrastive esti-
mation of mutual information.
Remarks on Adversarial Approach:
One may also use
Eq. 3 to approximate I(z:c), which leads to a common
technique to bound I(z:c) via adversarial learning. This
is a lower bound to I(z:c), but since we want to mini-
mize I(z:c), it should ideally be upper bounded. However,
Eq. 3 is often used and leads to adversarial min-max ap-
proaches (Madras et al. 2018; Edwards and Storkey 2016;
Song et al. 2019), where maximization is over parameters of
the classiﬁer r(c|z) and minimization is over q(z|x). Other
than the difﬁculty of optimization, we can see that adversar-
ial approaches have a fundamental problem: they minimize
a lower bound at each iteration. The gap between mutual in-
formation and its lower bound can be arbitrarily bad if the set
of adversarial classiﬁers is restricted, as it must be in prac-
tice. Moreover, rather than using exact maximization, most
of the methods approximate it using one or a few steps of
SGD. This also puts into question one of the common ap-
proaches for evaluating invariant representations by predict-
ing c from z. Indeed, in our experiments, we ﬁnd that this
evaluation can be misleading and may pass unfair represen-
tations as fair.

4
Experiments
We validate our approach on two datasets — UCI Adult
(Dua and Graff 2017) and Heritage Health3 Dataset. UCI
Adult is 1994 census data with 30K samples in the train set
and 15K samples in the test set. The target task is to pre-
dict whether the income exceeds $50K, and the protected
attribute is considered gender (which is binary in this case).
We use the same preprocessing as Moyer et al. (2018). Her-
itage Health dataset is data of around 51K patients (40K in
the train set and 11K in the test set), and the task is to predict
the Charleson Index, which is an indicator of 10-year sur-
vival of a patient. We consider age as the protected attribute,
which has 9 possible values. We use the same preprocessing
as Song et al. (2019).
A fair representation learning algorithm aims to produce
representations such that any downstream decision algo-
rithm that uses these representations will produce fairer re-
sults. Therefore, similar to Madras et al. (2018), we train the
representation learning algorithm on training data and evalu-
ate the representations by training classiﬁers for downstream
prediction tasks. Since our purpose is to assess the represen-
tations, we report average accuracy (as an indicator of most
likely performance) and maximum parity (as an indicator of
worst-case bias) computed over 5 runs of the decision al-
gorithm with random seeds. Unlike Madras et al. (2018),
we also allow for preprocessing to be done on representa-
tions. Preprocessing steps like min-max or standard scaling
are common and often precede training of classiﬁers in a
regular machine learning pipeline. The held-out test set is
used to evaluate representations on downstream tasks only;
we use the training set for all the other steps.
We compare with a number of recent approaches, in-
cluding information-theoretic and adversarial methods from
the recent literature. MIFR (Song et al. 2019) is a recent
approach demonstrating competitive performance. MIFR
combines information-theoretic and adversarial methods
and generalizes several previous fair representation learn-
ing approaches (Louizos et al. 2016; Edwards and Storkey
2016; Madras et al. 2018; Zemel et al. 2013). A re-
lated approach, CVIB (Moyer et al. 2018), is based solely
on information-theoretic optimization without adversarial
training. We also compare with recent state-of-the-art adver-
sarial methods. In particular, we compare with Adversarial
Forgetting (Jaiswal et al. 2020), which is the state-of-the-
art adversarial method for learning invariant representations.
Roy and Boddeti (2019) (MaxEnt-ARL) proposes a theoret-
ically superior min-max objective by proposing to train the
encoder to maximize the entropy of sensitive attributes. In
contrast, traditional adversarial approaches try to minimize
the likelihood of the discriminator. Finally, we compare with
LAFTR (Madras et al. 2018), which minimizes a more di-
rected adversarial approximation to parity and has been de-
signed bearing in mind parity-accuracy trade-offs. However,
LAFTR is only applicable when c is a binary variable. As a
baseline, we also train a one hidden layer MLP predictor di-
rectly on the data without regards to fairness (Unfair MLP).
We visualize the trade-offs between fairness and task per-
3https://www.kaggle.com/c/hhp
formance by plotting parity vs. accuracy curves for each
representation learning algorithm. We vary each method’s
inherent hyperparameters over the ranges speciﬁed in the
original works to get different points on this curve. For a
fair comparison, we set d = 8 for all the methods and
use model components like encoder, decoder, etc., of the
same complexity. We provide a detailed list of the hyper-
parameter grids, network architectures, and other training
setups for all the methods in Appendix C. The code to re-
produce all the experiments is available at https://github.
com/umgupta/fairness-via-contrastive-estimation. We give
a quantitative summary of performance across the entire
spectrum of trade-offs by reporting the area over the Parity-
Accuracy curve. This section uses a 1-hidden-layer MLP
with ReLU non-linearity and 50 neurons in the hidden layer
as the decision algorithm and representations are prepro-
cessed by standard scaling. Results with other decision al-
gorithms, i.e., Random Forest, SVM, 2-hidden-layer MLP,
and logistic regression, are shown in the Appendix D.
Improved Accuracy Versus Parity Trade-offs:
For dif-
ferent fair representation learners, we compare accuracy ver-
sus parity achieved for a speciﬁc downstream classiﬁer. The
goal is to push the frontier of achievable trade-offs as far to
the bottom-right as possible, i.e., to achieve the best possi-
ble accuracy while maintaining a low parity. From a visual
inspection of Fig. 2, we can see that our approach preserves
more information about label y, across a range of fairness
thresholds for both UCI Adult and Heritage Health datasets.
We observed improved trade-offs for our method even when
different downstream classiﬁers are used (results are shown
in Appendix D), matching expectations since our method
gives theoretical bounds on parity that hold regardless of the
classiﬁer used. In contrast, methods that use adversaries in
training see increases in parity when a more powerful clas-
siﬁer is used for downstream classiﬁcation.
Metric Quantifying Performance Across Trade-offs:
Fair representation learning approaches often provide a sin-
gle number to quantify fairness by predicting c from z at a
single accuracy level or only qualitatively demonstrate re-
sults by showing the parity-accuracy curve. We report the
normalized area over the parity-accuracy curve in Table 2 (1
being the maximum value) to enable quantitative compari-
son. It is the normalized hypervolume of the feasible parity-
accuracy region, and an efﬁcient fair representation learning
method should maximize it. We provide more intuition and
details to compute this metric in Appendix F.
Method
UCI Adult
Heritage Health
FCRL (Ours)
0.307
0.319
CVIB
0.182
0.191
MIFR
0.251
0.202
MaxEnt-ARL
0.144
0
LAFTR
0.155
N/A
Adversarial Forgetting
0.087
0.156
Table 2: Area Over Parity-Accuracy Curve (Higher is better)

0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
Accuracy (mean over 5 runs)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
∆DP (max over 5 runs)
Accuracy vs. ∆DP (UCI Adult)
Adversarial Forgetting
FCRL (Ours)
CVIB
MIFR
MaxEnt-ARL
LAFTR
Unfair MLP
0.675
0.700
0.725
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
Accuracy (mean over 5 runs)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
∆DP (max over 5 runs)
Accuracy vs. ∆DP (Heritage Health)
Adversarial Forgetting
FCRL (Ours)
CVIB
MIFR
MaxEnt-ARL
Unfair MLP
Figure 2: Parity vs. Accuracy trade-off for UCI Adult and Heritage Health dataset using a 1-hidden-layer MLP. Lower ∆DP is
better, and higher accuracy is better. We use representations generated by varying each method’s inherent loss hyperparameters
to get different points. See Table 2 for quantitative results. Results with other decision algorithms are shown in Appendix D.
10−2
10−1
100
β
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
Accuracy (mean over 5 runs)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
∆DP (max over 5 runs)
Accuracy
∆DP
Figure 3: Parity and Accuracy variation with β for UCI Adult
dataset. Our method can explore feasible regions of parity
and accuracy by varying only a single parameter β.
Controlling Parity:
Our approach has a single intuitive
hyperparameter β, which can be used to control I(z:c) di-
rectly and, therefore, via Thm. 2, to monotonically control
parity (see Fig. 3). For the UCI Adult dataset, MIFR (Song
et al. 2019) is competitive with our approach near low parity;
however, it fails to achieve higher accuracy at higher demo-
graphic parity. This is because MIFR proposed to use I(z:x)
as an upper bound to I(z:c), which is very loose, and this pe-
nalizes information about x as well, which is not desirable.
CVIB (Moyer et al. 2018) is able to consistently trade-off
accuracy while using a reconstruction based bound. But it
maximizes I(y:z) which conﬂicts with desired minimiza-
tion of I(z:c) (see Sec. 3.1).
Fine-tuning the Parity:
To achieve different points on
parity-accuracy trade-off, one must train models with dif-
ferent loss hyperparameters (β in our case). To a practi-
tioner, parity-accuracy curves are essential, as it helps in de-
ciding which representations should be used to satisfy the
desired fairness constraints. The additional computational
cost of training models, as well as the introduction of ad-
ditional hyperparameters for fair learning pose signiﬁcant
hindrances towards the adoption of fair models (Sylvester
and Raff 2018).
Recently, Gao and Chaudhari (2020) showed that it is
possible to explore different equilibrium points on the rate-
distortion curve with iso-accuracy constraints by adjusting
the loss coefﬁcients according to some dynamical process
and ﬁnetuning the model parameters. Similarly, we show
that we can ﬁnetune a trained model to produce different
points on the parity-accuracy curve. Since our loss func-
tion has a single coefﬁcient (β), we do not need to derive
the dynamical process. We can simply vary β by sufﬁciently
small steps and explore the parity-accuracy trade-off by ﬁne-
tuning the trained model. We can see that our method per-
forms equally well when ﬁnetuning compared to training
from scratch (See Fig. 4), reducing the computational cost
drastically. We expect that the reduced computational cost
of achieving the parity-accuracy curve and introduction of
only a single intuitive hyperparameter along with improved
parity-accuracy trade-off should reduce resistance towards
the adoption of fair models.
Uncovering Hidden Bias:
In our experiments, we ﬁnd
that adversarial approaches that use deterministic represen-
tations (e.g., Roy and Boddeti (2019); Jaiswal et al. (2020))
are particularly susceptible to hidden bias, which can be re-
vealed by slightly modiﬁed classiﬁers that consistently re-
sult in large parity values. Roy and Boddeti (2019) demon-

0.80
0.81
0.82
0.83
0.84
Accuracy (mean over 5 runs)
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
∆DP (max over 5 runs)
Training by Finetuning
Training from Scratch
Starting Point
Figure 4: Exploring parity-accuracy trade-off for UCI Adult
dataset by varying β and ﬁne-tuning the model for 20
epochs. When training from scratch, we need to train for
6000 epochs to generate 30 points (200 epochs each). How-
ever, with ﬁne-tuning we can get the same result with only
780 epochs (200 + 29 × 20).
strated that the representations produced were fair w.r.t to c
by showing that an MLP trained to predict c from z performs
poorly. This evaluation approach of predicting c from z is
often used to demonstrate fairness or invariance of the rep-
resentation w.r.t to c (Moyer et al. 2018; Jaiswal et al. 2020;
Xie et al. 2017). However, we emphasize that due to Eq. 3,
this is only a lower bound on I(z:c) and, therefore, any
claims relying solely on this metric are weak. Further, we
found that these methods do not remove information about
sensitive attributes and, at best, obfuscate it such that an ad-
versary cannot easily recover the protected attribute during
training. We found that even if a classiﬁer trained directly on
z cannot predict c, after preprocessing z by standard scaling,
it becomes very easy to predict the sensitive attribute even
with a model of similar or lower complexity as the origi-
nal adversary used during the training. As a result, some of
these approaches could not achieve low parities and even ex-
hibited higher parity than the baseline Unfair MLP trained
without fairness constraints (see Fig. 2). We investigate this
further in the Appendix E.
Ablation Study of Information-Theoretic Methods
Next, we will show that our proposed objective of maximiz-
ing I(y:z|c) is more efﬁcient at exploring parity-accuracy
trade-offs compared to maximizing I(y:z) (i.e., objective 1
vs. 2). We also compare the effect of optimizing the recon-
struction based information bound (Eq. 9) with our proposed
contrastive information estimator (Eq. 8).
Maximizing I(y:z|c) vs. I(y:z):
We see in Fig. 5b that
when maximizing I(y:z), we can still reduce the parity, but
this comes at the cost of predictive performance. When us-
ing I(y:z|c), we see that the parity sharply drops with only a
slight drop in the accuracy, and we see much better trade-offs
between predictability and fairness. By conditioning mutual
information on c, we see that z can easily retain informa-
tion about y without conﬂicting with I(z:c) objective as ex-
plained in Sec. 3.1.
Reconstruction vs. Contrastive Estimation:
Fig. 5a
compares optimizing reconstruction and contrastive esti-
mation based bounds for I(x:z|c). Reconstruction based
bounds on information rely on explicitly modeling the data
distribution through a decoder, q(x|z, c), that reconstructs
the data. For these methods to be effective, they must give
reasonable reconstructions and therefore preserve most of
the information in the data. We see in the results that pre-
serving information leads to high accuracy but also high par-
ity. Contrastive estimation is better at achieving lower par-
ity than reconstruction based bounds because it can directly
model high-level features that are predictive and fair without
requiring a model to reconstruct data.
5
Related Work
As machine learning becomes more enmeshed in everyday
life, a vibrant ﬁeld of fair machine learning research has
emerged to question potential risks (Mehrabi et al. 2019).
Different applications may prescribe different notions of
fairness, and these notions may even conﬂict with each
other (Kleinberg, Mullainathan, and Raghavan 2017). In this
work, we focus on fairness between groups concerning de-
cisions that may be cast as classiﬁcation problems. In par-
ticular, our work is focused on controlling statistical parity
or disparate impact, which was proposed in Dwork et al.
(2012) and is widely adopted in the literature (Edwards and
Storkey 2016; McNamara, Ong, and Williamson 2017). Sta-
tistical parity is preferred as a fairness measure when the
goal is to ensure equal selections from different groups.
One such example is the US government’s Uniform Guide-
lines on Employee Selection Procedure (United States Equal
Opportunity Employment Commission 1978) adoption of
80% rule to ensure fairness in selection procedures. Statis-
tical parity as a fairness measure also captures a lay per-
son’s perception of fairness (Srivastava, Heidari, and Krause
2019). Incorporating other popular notions of group fair-
ness like Equalized-Opportunity and Equalized-Odds (Hardt
et al. 2016), and notions of individual fairness (e.g., Shariﬁ-
Malvajerdi, Kearns, and Roth (2019)) in our approach is left
as future work.
Fair classiﬁcation methods are often categorized based
on which stage of the machine learning pipeline they tar-
get. Post-processing methods work by modifying the trained
classiﬁer (e.g., Hardt et al. (2016)), in-processing methods
work by regularizing the classiﬁer during training to ensure
fairness (e.g., Zafar et al. (2017)), and pre-processing meth-
ods transform the original dataset to reduce bias present in
the data. Pre-processing methods are beneﬁcial when the
onus of fairness is on a third party or the data controller, and
the end-user may be oblivious to fairness constraints (McNa-
mara, Ong, and Williamson 2017; Cisse and Koyejo 2019).
Our work also belongs to this category, and we speciﬁcally
focus on controlling parity.
While post-processing and in-processing methods have
to ensure fairness for a speciﬁc classiﬁer, pre-processing

0.78
0.79
0.80
0.81
0.82
0.83
0.84
Accuracy
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
∆DP
Contrastive Bound
Reconstruction based Bound
(a)
0.78
0.79
0.80
0.81
0.82
0.83
0.84
Accuracy
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
∆DP
I(y:z|c)
I(y:z)
(b)
Figure 5: Ablation studies on UCI Adult dataset: Reconstruction (Eq. 9) and Contrastive (Eq. 8) mutual information estimation
bounds are compared in Fig. a. Fig. b compares Objective 2 and Objective 1. λ was set to 1 for these experiments.
methods must ensure fairness with respect to any down-
stream classiﬁcation algorithm. Many pre-processing meth-
ods have discussed the desiderata of ensuring strong guar-
antees on fairness so that any downstream classiﬁer may be
used freely (McNamara, Ong, and Williamson 2017; Song
et al. 2019; Edwards and Storkey 2016; Madras et al. 2018).
However, their operationalization often leads to an approach
that may not ensure guarantees (due to limits of adver-
sarial methods, for instance). Our approach to these prob-
lems bounds parity in terms of mutual information, and then
we optimize tight upper bounds on this information. Other
works have explored information-theoretic objectives for
learning invariant representations (Moyer et al. 2018) and
fair representations (Song et al. 2019). Dutta et al. (2019)
use tools from information theory to analyze the trade-off
between fairness and accuracy. He, Burghardt, and Lerman
(2020) minimize correlation between the sensitive attributes
and the representations to achieve fairness. Correlation is a
linear measure of dependence. Therefore, their method pro-
vides no guarantees when the downstream classiﬁer is non-
linear. In contrast, our approach controls mutual information
between the sensitive attribute and the representation, a more
robust measure of dependence.
Contrastive learning and its variants have shown promis-
ing results for learning representations for many applica-
tions, e.g., images and speech (Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018),
text (Mikolov et al. 2013) and graphs (Veliˇckovi´c et al.
2019). We are the ﬁrst to explore its application for learn-
ing fair representations. Contrastive learning has been most
actively explored in self-supervised learning, where the in-
formation to optimize is chosen by hand to be similar to
some target task (Chen et al. 2020; Oord, Li, and Vinyals
2018), while in our work, we demonstrated a natural con-
nection between parity and mutual information. Other vari-
ational bounds on information (Poole et al. 2019) and esti-
mators like MINE (Belghazi et al. 2018) and NWJ (Nguyen,
Wainwright, and Jordan 2010) could also be leveraged for
parity control using our results.
6
Conclusion
As the negative repercussions of biased data become in-
creasingly apparent, governments and other organizations
will require tools capable of controlling this bias. In many
cases, compromises between fairness and task objectives
will be desired and sometimes even legally enshrined in
terms of required bounds on fairness measures like statis-
tical parity. Many methods do not provide a way to control
parity, and even if they do, often, it is only in a heuristic way.
Adversarial classiﬁers are popular for checking bounds on
parity, but these methods are not guaranteed against the pos-
sibility of a more powerful classiﬁer either intentionally or
accidentally exploiting bias still hidden in the data. By prov-
ing a one-to-one relationship between information-theoretic
quantities and statistical parity of arbitrary classiﬁers, we
can ﬁnally see how varying a single hyper-parameter con-
trolling information can explore the entire fairness versus
accuracy spectrum. This information-theoretic characteriza-
tion is algorithm-independent so that our control of parity
can be guaranteed regardless of downstream applications.
