1
Associated Spatio-Temporal Capsule Network for
Gait Recognition
Aite Zhao, Junyu Dong, Jianbo Li, Lin Qi, and Huiyu Zhou
Abstract—It is a challenging task to identify a person based
on her/his gait patterns. State-of-the-art approaches rely on the
analysis of temporal or spatial characteristics of gait, and gait
recognition is usually performed on single modality data (such
as images, skeleton joint coordinates, or force signals). Evidence
has shown that using multi-modality data is more conducive
to gait research. Therefore, we here establish an automated
learning system, with an associated spatio-temporal capsule
network (ASTCapsNet) trained on multi-sensor datasets, to
analyze multimodal information for gait recognition. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrst design a low-level feature extractor and a high-level
feature extractor for spatio-temporal feature extraction of gait
with a novel recurrent memory unit and a relationship layer.
Subsequently, a Bayesian model is employed for the decision-
making of class labels. Extensive experiments on several public
datasets (normal and abnormal gait) validate the effectiveness
of the proposed ASTCapsNet, compared against several state-of-
the-art methods.
Index Terms—Gait recognition, associated capsules, spatio-
temporal, capsule network, multi-sensor.
I. INTRODUCTION
N
OWADAYS, there are a number of technologies for
identifying a person, and one of them is face recognition,
which has been applied in a wide range of applications [1],
[2]. Additionally, ﬁngerprint recognition, palmprint and action
recognition have attracted large attention from the research
community [3]–[5]. Gait recognition is a biometric technology
that recognizes people at a longer distance by acquiring
walking data [6], [7], which aims to analyze the overall human
activity rather than part of the human body, and gait is not
easily imitated and hence more reliable for the recognition
task.
Human beings have a unique visual system, which can
directly identify people based on human gait beyond a cer-
tain distance. The input data of a gait recognition model is
generally a sequence of walking videos or images, and its
data collection is similar to face recognition, which is nonin-
vasive. However, due to a large amount of data from image
sequences, the computational complexity of gait recognition
is relatively high, and the processing is not straightforward. A
gait recognition system extracts key features from the images
Aite Zhao and Jianbo Li are with College of Computer Science and

Junyu Dong and Lin Qi are with College of Information Science and En-

Huiyu Zhou is with School of Informatics, University of Leicester, United

(Corresponding author: Jianbo Li.)
of the joint movement of a walking person. So far, there is no
commercialized gait-based identity authentication system.
In previous research, many types of sensors have been used
for gait data collection and recognition - image, depth and
inertial sensors, which acquire RGB images/videos, motion
distance and acceleration/orientation. Among them, captured
images have the advantages of convenience, non-contact, and
easy understanding. Besides, skeleton data well preserve the
integrity of gait movement whilst minimizing the interference
of color and shape of the human body in the image. Some
existing work can directly extract 3D skeleton nodes from the
images of the human body and this character makes up for
the shortcomings of 2D RGB images [8], [9].
On the one hand, traditional gait recognition algorithms
have been well studied including Hough transform, contour
extraction, and three-dimensional wavelet moments. Model-
based algorithms are well investigated in multiple data sources.
Besides, deep learning methods, such as convolutional neural
networks (CNN) and restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM)
have been employed and achieved promising results in gait
recognition or other relevant ﬁelds [10]–[12]. Moreover, there
are several studies on image segmentation and image classiﬁ-
cation, which can be applied to the ﬁeld of gait recognition to
solve the problem of multimodal gait data classiﬁcation [13],
[14]. However, these approaches are not designed to deal with
sequential data.
On the other hand, although some feature extraction algo-
rithms take temporal changes into account, they lack the anal-
ysis of spatial information. These methods use the relationship
between time series to represent the dynamics in the gait cycle,
but do not analyze each frame in detail. Speciﬁcally, there
are several state-of-the-art methods for sequential information
acquisition [8], [15]–[19], such as original, bi-directional, and
attention-based LSTM. However, these methods come from
the standard LSTM in order to enhance its performance, but
the spatial mapping of the input data has not been fully
addressed.
Apart from temporal and spatial characteristics, we also
consider the structural relationship between the various parts of
the human body when analyzing gait, such as the relationship
between feet and legs, head and body, and limbs and trunk.
Unlike CNN, capsule network (CapsNet) [20] does not bypass
the position of the entity (body parts) within the region
(human body). For low-level capsules (body parts), location
information is “place-coded” whereas capsule is active. Using
an iterative routing process, each active capsule will choose a
capsule in the layer to be its parent in the tree. For the task
of gait recognition, this iterative process will be solving the
arXiv:2101.02458v1  [cs.CV]  7 Jan 2021

2
problem of locating the body parts.
In order to extract temporal, spatial, and structural fea-
tures from multimodal data, we design a capsule network to
synchronously analyze gait patterns and changes. It mainly
includes two tasks, feature extraction and classiﬁcation. We
extract and classify features, and evaluate the effectiveness of
feature extraction in classiﬁcation. Inspired by the learning
process of CapsNet [20] and the gated recurrent unit (GRU)
[15], an associated spatio-temporal capsule network (ASTCap-
sNet) is here proposed for gait recognition, including three
modules: a low-level feature extractor, a high-level feature
extractor, and a decision-making layer.
The low-level feature extractor aims to extract spatio-
temporal features of the input data, including a novel ex-
pandable memory module and a convolution layer; the high-
level feature extractor mainly performs matrix operation on
the feature map in the form of capsules, including the primary
capsule layer, the relationship layer and the digital capsule
layer with the dynamic routing algorithm.
In the decision-making layer, we design four softmax clas-
siﬁers to analyze the output of all layers, and the parameters
of each layer of the network are optimised until the redeﬁned
joint loss converges to the minimum. Moreover, the standard
Bayesian model is employed to ﬁt the results of the classiﬁers
and regain as a new feature input. Furthermore, we also
propose a relationship layer between the capsules to calculate
the relative relationship between the local features of gait.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• An associated spatio-temporal capsule network (AST-
CapsNet) is proposed for spatio-temporal and structural
feature extraction and classiﬁcation using multimodal gait
data.
• Two feature extractors are designed for low- and high-
level gait feature analysis and extraction. The low-level
feature extractor contains a novel memory module and a
convolution layer to extract spatio-temporal features. In
the high-level feature extractor, we propose a relationship
layer to calculate the relationship matrix between two
capsules to ensure the structural integrity of the input.
• We develop a recurrent memory unit to enable the model
to converge faster than the original GRU unit.
• The decision-making layer is used to construct the evalu-
ation mechanism of ASTCapsNet, through four softmax
classiﬁers and a Bayesian model to select optimal fea-
tures.
• Compared against the other state-of-the-art technologies,
the proposed method achieves superior results on ﬁve
challenging datasets, including both normal and abnormal
gait data, for multimodal gait recognition.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
existing studies on gait recognition. Section III introduces the
proposed ASTCapsNet model, and Section IV shows experi-
mental results. We discuss the performance of ASTCapsNet,
and point out its weaknesses in Section V. We conclude the
whole paper in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Signiﬁcant efforts have been made to progress the state-of-
the-art of gait recognition. From handcrafted feature recog-
nition to model-based recognition, gait recognition methods
have undergone signiﬁcant progress. It must be pointed out
that gait data collection process has become diverse.
A. Multi-Sensor Based Methods
There are several ways to obtain gait data collected by
sensors. The types and output of the sensors are different and
can be roughly classiﬁed into the following types: cameras,
infrared, depth, force sensors, accelerators and gyroscopes.
Camera acquisition is convenient and non-invasive, which
can capture people’s gait form at a certain distance. Chattopad-
hyay et al. combined front and back view features from RGB-
D images. The data acquisition was conducted at the airport
security checkpoint with two depth cameras installed on top
of the metal detector door outside the yellow line [21]. Xue
et al. used an infrared thermal imaging camera to collect gait
images to establish an infrared thermal gait database, which
can detect the human body and remove noise from complex
background [22].
There is also the use of gyroscopes and accelerators to
develop wearable measurement modules for measuring inertial
signals generated while walking and to assess gait, as a
basis for new hemiplegia diagnostic techniques using wearable
devices [23].
Besides, some studies were based on foot force datasets.
Force sensors were installed on the sole to capture the foot
movement data of a patient in order to monitor the progress
of neurodegenerative diseases [19].
B. Hand-crafted Features Based Approaches
Based on the above-mentioned data sources, early gait
recognition techniques often use traditional computer vision
methods for image understanding and produce hand-crafted
features from raw data. Gianaria et al. [24] deﬁned a dataset
of physical and behavioral features to identify relevant param-
eters for gait description. Andersson et al. [25] acquired gait
attributes in each gait cycle, such as leg angle, step length,
stride length, and anthropometric attributes such as mean and
standard deviation.
However, these features are in a low-dimensional space and
are mainly based on human experience. Therefore, it is difﬁcult
to obtain descriptive features in a high-dimensional space.
C. Model-Based Approaches
With remarkable advantages that deep learning plays in var-
ious ﬁelds, gait recognition technologies have also employed
deep learning algorithms to model the dynamic changes of
gait. When observing human walking, people can describe
the structure of the human body and detect motion patterns
of human limbs. The structure of the human body can be
interpreted based on their prior knowledge. Model-based gait
recognition methods play an active role in recent development.

3
Feng et al. proposed a new feature learning method to
learn temporal information in a gait sequence for cross-view
gait recognition. Heat maps extracted by a CNN-based pose
estimation method were used to describe the gait information
in every frame, and the standard LSTM was adopted to model
a gait sequence [26].
Wu et al. utilized deep CNNs for human identiﬁcation
via similarity learning, which can recognize the most dis-
criminative changes of gait patterns [10]. In order to extract
gait spatio-temporal features, CNN and LSTM have also
been simultaneously applied to establishing models for gait
recognition [27]. Although these methods explain gait patterns
well, the characteristics of gait are not only the stacking of
features, but also include structural and positional information,
such as the positional relationship between arms and legs, and
so on.
The activities of the neurons within CapsNet represent the
various properties of a particular entity that is present in the
data. These properties can include many different types of
instantiation parameters such as pose, deformation, velocity,
and texture, which can improve gait recognition. Even though
Capsule Network has been applied [28], [29], gait recognition
is seldomly involved.
In this paper, we propose an associated spatio-temporal
capsule network (ASTCapsNet) to process the input gait data
and learn more powerful multi-level structured representations
at each class of the streaming gait data. The newly proposed
low- and high-level feature extractors enhance the capability
of our framework for gait recognition in different gait streams.
Moreover, we introduce softmax classiﬁers and the Bayesian
model to evaluate the importance of the features generated by
each module, which increases the accuracy of classiﬁcation.
Furthermore, we extensively evaluate the proposed gait recog-
nition framework over ﬁve datasets, including the KinectU-
NITO, SDUgait, CASIA-A datasets for people identiﬁcation,
and NDDs, PD datasets for disease diagnosis.
III. ASSOCIATED SPATIO-TEMPORAL CAPSULE NETWORK
We introduce the proposed architecture, associated spatio-
temporal capsule network (ASTCapsNet), for gait recognition
in this section. The overall schema of this method is illustrated
in Fig. 1. Here, we take the input gait images as an example to
illustrate that other sensor data also follows this step. Firstly,
the image is fed into the memory module and the convolution
layer at the same time, and the generated spatio-temporal
features are used as the input of softmax 1 and 2. Then, after
the high-level feature extractor receives the low-level spatio-
temporal features, the capsule layer and the relationship layer
are used to extract the high-level structure and relationship
features as the input of softmax 3 and 4, and the decision-
making module utilizes the fused feature for the ﬁnal decision.
In the proposed network, the inputs of ASTCapsNet are con-
tinuous sensor output data at each time step including images,
force-sensitive data, 3d skeleton joint data, and time series.
The structure of the gated recurrent unit (GRU) is performed
in the time-domain to model the gait dynamics over data
frames. To effectively extract high-level features from low-
level features and determine the relationship between them,
a dynamic routing algorithm is used for weighing operations.
To better deal with different levels of feature extracted by the
network, a Bayesian modeling mechanism is also introduced
to process the output of each layer for our network.
On the one hand, for extracting spatial information from
gait, CNN (convolutional neural network) is one of the most
popular methods which can implement feature extraction by
accumulating adjustments layer by layer. However, in this
process, there is an important information loss - the relative
position and relationship between features [20]. Precisely it
is since the pooling operation in CNN can only provide
rough position information, allowing the model to ignore
small spatial changes, and cannot accurately learn the position
correlation of different objects, and to this end, the capsule
network (CapsNet) emerged.
On the other hand, for capturing the temporal information,
gated recurrent unit (GRU) is a recurrent neural network that
can be expanded into several cells (a chainlike model), which
can extract information at each time step, and the connection
between hidden units is iterative.
A. Low-Level Feature Extractor
Capsule network (CapsNet) [20] has veriﬁed their superior
strength in extracting a spatial feature from different data
types [28]. Inspired by the success of these approaches in the
analysis of different data, we use a convolutional mechanism
and capsule structure in CapsNet to extract spatial features.
Besides, by adopting the advantages of processing temporal
sequential data of GRU, we design a temporal mask added
in each layer to represent the unique spatial and temporal
features. Speciﬁcally, a hierarchical architecture with a spatio-
temporal feature extraction layer is utilized in our model to
learn a comprehensive representation.
To introduce the ASTCapsNet recurrent neural networks,
we begin with the deﬁnition of several notations. Suppose we
are given an input sequence D = {xi ∈RN, i = 1, 2, ..., M},
where M is the sample number and N is the feature dimension
in each sample, with corresponding class label sequences L =
{yi ∈R1, i = 1, 2, ..., M}. For the task of gait recognition, our
aim is to address three problems: (1) Successfully obtaining
spatio-temporal feature. (2) Acquiring high-level features, and
(3) seeking the ﬁnal class label.
1) Convolution Layer: The ﬁrst building block of our
network model is the convolution layer. The purpose of this
layer is to use several sliding convolution kernels with a step
size of 1 to ﬁlter the input data and extract multiple feature
maps.
Firstly, we utilize L2 normalization to scale the original
input D = {xi ∈RN, i = 1, 2, ..., M} to [0,1] with the output
of D′. And then, we feed D′ = {x′
i ∈RN, i = 1, 2, ..., M}
into memory and convolution modules, respectively. For the
pre-processing of D′, we reshape each training sample in a
format of K×T = N, where K and T are the numbers of rows
and columns of each sample so that convolution operation can
be carried out in the form of matrix no matter what the data
type is. The sizes of the convolutional kernels must be smaller

4
Fig. 1: The structure of ASTCapsNet. It is divided into three modules: A low-level feature extractor for spatio-temporal feature
modeling, including a memory module and a convolution layer; a high-level feature extractor for learning structural and
relationship features, including a primary capsule layer, a relationship layer, and a digit capsule layer; and a decision-making
layer for classiﬁcation, including four softmax classiﬁers and a Bayesian model. Four softmax classiﬁers behind the ﬁrst two
modules are utilized to evaluate the system performance. The Bayesian model utilizes the outputs of the previous two feature
extractors to determine the ﬁnal class labels.
than K and T respectively. The feature map is demonstrated
as follows:
hl
W,b(x′) = f(W T x′) = f
 M
X
i=1
Wi
l−1 ∗x′
i
(l−1) + bl−1
!
.
(1)
The ∗operation above is essentially a process in which the
convolution kernel (here the shared weight is the convolution
kernel) Wi performs convolution operations on all the related
feature maps at the (l −1)th layer, then sums them up and
adds a bias parameter b to obtain the ﬁnal excitation value
hl
W,b(x′) at layer l by taking sigmoid.
2) The Proposed Recurrent Memory Unit: We feed the
original data into a two-layer memory module to extract
temporal information and obtain the corresponding feature
matrix. A variant of long short-term memory (LSTM), called
the gated recurrent unit (GRU), is proposed to learn long-term
dependency information from the input dynamic data, merging
the input and forgot gates into an update gate and fusing node
and hidden states in each node of the original LSTM, which
was ﬁrst proposed in [30]. We improve the performance of the
original GRU cell by adding a temporary path and modifying
the state settings. Fig. 2 shows the internal structure of the
proposed recurrent memory unit and illustrates the cooperation
of all the gates.
Because of slow convergence of the original GRU in gait
data classiﬁcation, we improve the gating structure in its inter-
nal deployment nodes by adding a new path and a temporary
state to extract representative features. The improved GRU cell
is shown in Fig.2. The new cell of GRU is illustrated in Eqs.
Fig. 2: The proposed recurrent memory unit. The internal
structure and operations are shown in this ﬁgure, and ctemp
is the new added path in the original GRU cell.
(2)-(7)
zt = σ(Wz · [Ot−1, x′
t]),
(2)
rt = σ(Wr · [Ot−1, x′
t]),
(3)
˜ht = tanh(W · [rt ⊙Ot−1, x′
t]),
(4)
where x′
t and Ot−1 are the input and previous hidden states
respectively in each memory unit, σ and tanh are the logistic
functions. zt indicates the output of update gate to the network
at time step t ∈{1, 2, 3..., T}, rt denotes the reset gate. The
update gate zt determines whether or not the hidden state is
to be updated with a new hidden state ˜h. The reset gate rt
decides whether or not the previous hidden state is ignored.
ctemp = tanh(Wctemp · [Ot−1, x′
t]),
(5)

5
ct = (1 −zt) ⊙˜ht + zt ⊙Ot−1,
(6)
Ot = ct ⊙σ(ctemp),
(7)
where ctemp represents the temporary state to select the
information of x′
t and Ot−1 while ct denotes the ﬁnal state
of the original GRU. It means that we take the advantage
of the information selector to extract feature from ct. Ot
indicates actual activation of the proposed node at time step
t ∈{1, 2, 3..., T}. Experiments show that it can converge
faster than the original GRU.
Once having obtained the temporal information from the
improved GRU, we use a stacking method to mask the output
of each convolution layer with temporal features, forming a
three-dimensional cube containing both temporal and spatial
features. The representation is shown as follows:
gst(x) = tile(Ot) + hl
W,b(x′),
(8)
where gst(x) is the function to obtain spatio-temporal fea-
tures, tile(Ot) is the function to copy the input into multi-
dimensional data, which is consistent with the output of
hl
W,b(x′), and then add it to hl
W,b(x′) to form a tensor g. We
use a 3D convolutional kernels/capsules with a step size of 1
to get the output of the primary capsule layer g′ = Wconvg.
B. High-Level Feature Extractor
After having extracted temporal and spatial features (low-
level features), we use capsules to process these features
to obtain structural and relationship information (high-level
features) of gaits, proposed to solve the problem of information
loss on CNN. Different capsules represent different target
positions, revealing the relative relationship between different
spatial and temporal feature points. Then, according to the
relationship between capsules, more important features are
selected, and higher-level features are extracted by a dynamic
routing algorithm.
In CapsNet, detailed posture information (such as exact
locations, rotation, thickness, tilt and size of objects) will
be saved in the network before we can restore it. Slight
changes in the input will bring small changes to the output,
and information will be saved. This allows CapsNet to use
a simple and uniﬁed architecture for different visual tasks.
Therefore, we design a capsule layer as the ﬁrst layer in the
high-level feature extractor.
1) Capsule Layer: The calculation process of the primary
capsule layer is a stack of 8 parallel convolutional layers, each
of which has a 3D convolutional kernel/capsule with a step size
of 1.
The operation of this layer is similar to the convolution
that is divided into different capsules. Since the output of the
capsule is a vector, a powerful dynamic routing mechanism
can be used to ensure that the output is sent to the appropriate
parent in the previous layer. Therefore, the structure and
direction of the feature are better reﬂected.
The input vector of the primary capsule layer is equivalent
to the scalar input of traditional neural network neurons, and
the calculation of the vector is equivalent to the mode of
propagation and connection between the primary capsule and
digit capsule.
The calculation of input vectors can be divided into two
stages, i.e. linear combination and dynamic routing. The
linear combination process can be expressed by the following
formula:
ˆg′j|i = Wijg′
i,
(9)
where ˆg′j|i is a linear combination of g′
i, which can be seen as
the output of the ﬁrst layer of neurons in the fully-connected
network to a certain neuron in the next layer with different
strength connections. ˆg′j|i represents the output vector of
the ﬁrst capsule of the previous layer and the corresponding
weight vector (Wij represents the vector rather than the
element). ˆg′j|i can also be understood as the strength of
connecting to jth Capsule of the next layer when the former
layer is the Capsule i.
After determining ˆg′j|i, we need to use the dynamic routing
algorithm to allocate the second stage to calculate the output
sj:
sj =
X
i
cij ˆg′j|i,
(10)
The parameter cij can be updated iteratively. The input sj
of the next capsule can be obtained by Routing, and then
squashing non-linear function can activate the input sj.
By adding the routing mechanism to the capsule, a set of
coupling coefﬁcients cij can be found, which are updated and
determined iteratively by dynamic routing process:
cij =
exp(bij)
P
k exp(bik).
(11)
which makes the prediction vector ˆg′j|i consistent with the
output vector. bij depends on the location and type of two
capsules, and cij can be iteratively updated with the consis-
tency of the measurement.
The dissemination and distribution of the whole hierarchy
can be divided into two parts. The ﬁrst part is the linear
combination between g′
i and ˆg′j|i in the following ﬁgure, and
the second part is the routing process between ˆg′j|i and sj.
The information transmission and calculation between the two
capsule layers are shown in Fig.3.
Assuming there are two capsule units (g′
i) in the primary
capsule layer, and four capsules are passed from this level to
the next level vj. g′
1 and g′
2 are the tensors obtained from the
spatio-temporal feature extraction layer, i.e. capsule units con-
taining a group of neurons, which are multiplied by different
weights Wij to form ˆg′j|i, respectively. The predictive vector
is then multiplied by the corresponding coupling coefﬁcient
cij and passed to a speciﬁc digit capsule unit. The input sj
of different capsule units is the weighted sum of all possible
incoming prediction tensors. Then we collect different input
tensors sj. By putting the input tensors into the squashing
non-linear function, we have the output tensors vj of the latter
capsule unit. We use the product of the output vector vj and the
corresponding prediction vector ˆg′j|i to update the coupling
coefﬁcient cij. Such an iterative update does not need to apply
back-propagation.

6
Fig. 3: The propagation process between the two capsule layers. There are three steps in this process: 3D convolution (ˆg′j|i),
dynamic routing (sj), and squashing (vj).
The activation of neurons in a capsule indicates the prop-
erties of speciﬁc entities in data. These properties include
different parameters, such as gait data position, size, direction,
deformation, speed, reﬂectivity, color, and texture. The length
of the input and output tensors represents the probability of
the occurrence of a feature, so its value must be between 0
and 1.
In order to achieve this compression and implement the
activation function at the capsule level, a non-linear function
called “squashing” ensures that the length of short tensors can
be reduced to almost zero, while the length of long tensors
can be reduced to near but no more than 1. The following is
the expression of the non-linear function:
vj =
||sj||2
1 + ||sj||2
sj
||sj||,
(12)
where vj is the output vector of capsule j, sj is the weighted
sum of all the tensors of the capsule output from the previous
layer to capsule j of the current layer, and sj is the input
vector of capsule j. The non-linear function can be divided
into two parts. The ﬁrst part
||sj||2
1+||sj||2 is the scalar of the input
vector sj, and the second part
sj
||sj|| is the unit vector of the
input vector sj. The non-linear function not only retains the
direction of the input vector but also compresses the length of
the input vector into the interval [0,1]. The non-linear function
can be regarded as compression and reallocation of the length
of the vector, so it can also be regarded as a way of activating
the output vector after the input vector.
Obtaining the output high-level feature of the digit capsule
layer, we use the softmax function for classiﬁcation. In order
to comprehensively consider the effectiveness of feature ex-
traction of the whole network, we classify the output features
of each level and construct a Bayesian model to determine the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation results using those predictions.
2) Relationship Layer: In terms of the primary capsule
layer, all the capsules are independent of each other. The
extracted features can not only represent the local features
(arms, legs, or head) of gait, but also interpret the relationship
between local and global features (the whole body). However,
the relationship between capsules has been neglected, so we
design a capsule relationship layer to preserve the relation-
ship between capsules, that is, the relationship between local
features.
In order to preserve the relative position, direction, and
state between local features, we use the transfer matrix of
the former capsule and the latter capsule to represent their
relationship and send them to the softmax classiﬁer. The
speciﬁc calculation is as follows:
Ri = g′
i ∗(g′
i+1)−1,
i < 32.
(13)
Assuming Ri is the relationship matrix of the capsules in
the primary capsule layer. g′
i and g′
i+1 are adjacent capsules.
We use the inverse of (g′
i+1) to ﬁnd the transfer matrix Ri.
C. Decision-Making Layer
According to the output of different feature extraction lay-
ers, we add four classiﬁers to evaluate the features of the four
layers and output speciﬁc class labels. For the classiﬁcation
of the extracted features, the Bayesian model is built for
the output of the four classiﬁers to select more accurate
classiﬁcation results.
1) Classiﬁcation Layers:
Firstly, we embed a softmax
multi-classiﬁer on the GRU feature extractor to evaluate
whether or not temporal features are beneﬁcial to classiﬁca-
tion. Furthermore, to make spatial and temporal features more
distinct and easy to classify, we add two fully-connected layers
to the convolutional layer, followed by a softmax function to
classify the result, and integrate the feature cubes to obtain
high-level information.
2) Bayesian Modeling Process: After classiﬁcation, we
have four label vectors. We merge these four results into a label
matrix, regard the four label values predicted as features, and
use the Bayesian model to maximize the posterior probability
of class estimation. Assuming that there are n classes, using
c1, c2, and cn to denote, X = x1, x2, ..., xn represents each
sample in a training batch with a certain label ci, i ∈[1, n].
max P(ci|X) = max P(X|ci)P(ci)
P(X)
.
(14)
Because P(X) is constant for all the classes, the pro-
cess of maximizing a posteriori probability P(ci|X) can be

7
transformed into maximizing probability P(X|ci)P(ci). It is
usually assumed that the attributes are independent of each
other, and prior probability P(x1|ci), P(x2|ci), ..., P(xn|ci)
can be obtained from the training dataset. According to this
method, the probability P(X|ci)P(ci) that X belongs to each
category of ci can be calculated for a sample X of an unknown
category, and then the category with the greatest probability
can be selected as its class label.
D. Loss Function
Combining standard categorical cross-entropy loss of the
ﬁrst three outputs of ASTCapsNet, and the margin loss ldc of
the last output of the digit capsule layer, the ﬁnal joint loss
function is formed as:
ldc = Tcmax(0, m+ −||vc||)2 + λ(1 −Tc)max(0, ||vc|| −m−)2,
(15)
where c is the class label of a sample, Tc is the indicate
function (1 if c exists, else 0), m−is the top margin of ||vc||,
m+ is the bottom margin of ||vc||.
L(y, y′) = ltp + lst + lpc + ldc
= −
X
j
y′
tpj log(
eytpj
Pn
i=1 eytpi ) −
X
j
y′
stj log(
eystj
Pn
i=1 eysti )
−
X
j
y′
pcj log(
eypcj
Pn
i=1 eypci ) +
X
c
ldc,
(16)
where ltp and lst represent the classiﬁcation loss of temporal
and spatio-temporal data, lpc denotes the classiﬁcation loss in
the primary capsule layer. ldc is the margin loss in the digit
capsule layer. L(y, y′) is the joint loss of the four classiﬁcation
results. In the optimization process, we use Adam optimizer
to consider the ﬁrst and second moments of the gradients in
order to reduce the loss quickly. y′
tpj, y′
stj, y′
pcj denote the jth
true label of a training batch while ytpj, ystj, ypcj represents
the predicted label.
IV. EXPERIMENT
The experiment was conducted on ﬁve different datasets,
and the results of the experiment were evaluated against
several state-of-the-art methods. The following is a list of all
the comparison methods:
Classiﬁers:
• DT (decision tree) refers to a decision support tool
using a tree-like model of decisions and their possible
consequences.
• GBDT (gradient boosting decision tree) is an iterative
decision tree algorithm, which is composed of multiple
decision trees. The results of all the trees are accumulated
to determine the ﬁnal label.
• LR (logistic regression) is a kind of nonlinear regression
models and a machine learning method for probability
estimation.
• RF (random forest) is a classiﬁer with multiple decision
trees.
• KNN (k-nearest neighbor) is a classiﬁer that ﬁnds k
nearest instance and votes to determine the class name
of the new instances.
Deep Models:
• GRU (gated recurrent unit) is a gating mechanism in
recurrent neural networks, which has fewer parameters
than LSTM.
• LSTM (long-short term memory) is a model with expand-
able nodes that are suitable for temporal data.
• BiLSTM (bidirectional long-short term memory) is com-
posed of a forward LSTM and a backward LSTM.
• CapsNet (capsule network) is a deep neural network for
dynamic analysis of data structure and spatial informa-
tion.
• Attention LSTM is an LSTM model with an attention
mechanism.
• CNN (convolutional neural network) is a network for
learning spatial features.
Additionally, we also use several gait recognition methods
from the literature because they use the dataset mentioned in
this paper.
Other Studies:
• TL-LSTM [18] is a two-layer LSTM for gait recognition.
• HCF+SVM [31] is a method using hand-crafted features
and SVM for classiﬁcation.
• GCP [32] is a gait cycle partitioning method.
• WT+GA [33] is the combination of wavelet transform
and a genetic algorithm.
• DT+RF [34] is the combination of distance transform and
random forests.
• SD [35] (static and dynamic feature extraction method) is
a human walking model including the static and dynamic
gait features.
• FLM [36] (frame-level matching) is a frame-level match-
ing method for gait recognition.
• RBF [37] (radial basis function) is a neural network for
gait analysis and recognition.
• DCLSTM [19] (dual-channel LSTM) is a temporal LSTM
model for multimodal gait recognition.
• Q-BTDNN [38] (Q-backpropagated time-delay neural
network) is presented to identify the gait disturbances in
Parkinson’s disease.
• 2D-CNN+LSTM [39] is the combination of 2D-CNN and
LSTM for gait spatio-temporal information extraction.
• SFM [16] (state-frequency memory) is a recurrent net-
work that allows separating dynamic patterns across
different frequency components and their impacts on
modeling the temporal contexts of the sequences.
• CapProNet [29] (capsule projection network) can learn an
orthogonal projection matrix for each capsule subspace to
classify different objects.
A. Experimental Setup
First, we introduce the datasets used in our experiments and
then describe the training details.

8
(a) UNITO
(b) CASIA-A
(c) SDUgait
(d) NDDs
(e) PD
Fig. 4: The training accuracy of the original CapsNet and ASTCapsNet on the ﬁve datasets.
(a) UNITO
(b) CASIA-A
(c) SDUgait
(d) NDDs
(e) PD
Fig. 5: ROC curves of ASTCapsNet on the ﬁve datasets. The legend shows the AUC values of different classes in the dataset,
and there are too many classes of UNITO, CASIA-A, and SDUgait datasets to be fully represented by the legend, so we only
give average AUC values. Each line represents the AUC value of the corresponding class. ASTCapsNet has a high recognition
rate of each class and the curve is concentrated in the upper left corner. Besides, the micro-average AUC values are compared,
which shows the strong learning ability of ASTCapsNet.
1) Datasets: We perform experiments on three gait datasets
(normal people), including CASIA Gait dataset [40], UNITO
dataset [24], and SDUgait dataset [41], and also verify their
extensibility on two gait datasets (neurodegenerative patients)
- NDDs dataset [42] and PD dataset [43]. These datasets are
collected using different sensors, such as cameras, infrared
sensors, and force sensors. The data types include human
skeletons, gait contour maps, and so on. We will introduce
these datasets in detail.
UNITO Dataset: This includes skeleton data of 20 subjects,
acquired with Kinect For Windows SDK 1.x. The subjects
were asked to walk naturally along a corridor, towards the
camera (FRONT view) and away from the camera (REAR
view), for 10 times, with a total of 20 gait sequences for each
subject (10 FRONT and 10 REAR). The order of the 20 joints
is the same as the Kinect Skeleton Map. For each joint, 3D
coordinates of subjects are recorded.
CASIA Gait Dataset: In this dataset, we choose Dataset
A (former NLPR Gait Dataset), which includes 20 persons.
Each person has 12 preprocessed gait contour sequences, 4
sequences for each of the three directions, i.e. parallel, 45
degrees, and 90 degrees to the image plane. The length of
the sequences is not identical for the variation of the walker’s
speed, but it must range from 37 to 127.
SDUgait dataset: The dataset includes 52 subjects, 28
males and 24 females with an average age of 22. Each subject
has 20 sequences with at least 6 ﬁxed walking directions and 2
arbitrary directions, and a total of 1040 sequences; The dataset
is based on the second-generation Kinect (Kinect V2). The
Kinect V2 does not only have a broader view angle but also
can produce higher-resolution of depth images with 25 body
joints.
NDDs dataset: The dataset contains the gait signals of 48
patients with NDDs (ALS, HD, and PD) and 16 healthy con-
trols (CO). Participants were walking at their usual pace along
a 77-m-long hallway for 5 minutes including the recorded
signal of stride, swing, and stand times for each leg and double
support signals for both legs. An expert physician labeled
patients’ states from 0 to 13 (0 equal to the most severe state
and 13 for a healthy one). To measure time intervals, a 12-bit
onboard analog-to-digital converter samples the output of foot
switches at 300 Hz [44].
PD Dataset: In this study, we have utilized gait signals
from PhysioNet. The dataset consists of three PD gait sub-
datasets, which are contributed by three researchers (Ga [45],
Ju [46] and Si [47]). We only select the subset of Ga [45] as
an example of PD severity classiﬁcation.
The dataset includes gait information from 93 patients with
the idiopathic PD and 73 healthy controls (average age 66.3,
55% male). Every participant was asked to walk at their usual,
self-selected pace for about two minutes while wearing a
pair of shoes with 8 force sensors located under each foot.
The sensors measure vertical ground reaction force (VGRF, in
Newton) as a function of time at 100 samples per second. The
dataset also contains the speciﬁc situation of each participant
including gender, age, height, weight, and severity level of PD.

9
The PD severity level is graded according to two scales (H&Y,
UPDRS).
2) Training Details: We employ different training settings
on these datasets. For the UNITO Dataset, we use 5*5 and 3*3
convolutional kernels in the convolutional layer and primary
capsule layer, 7-time steps in LSTM with the batch size of 128,
and input dimension of 9 (63D, 21 joints, 3D coordinates), the
dropout in LSTM is set to 0.5 to avoid over-ﬁtting.
For CASIA Gait Dataset, we apply all of three directions
of the gait contour images and convert the image into text
sequences. After resizing the original image to 50 by 50 pixels,
the gait data is fed into ASTCapsNet with 9*9 convolutional
kernels in the convolutional layer and the primary capsule
layer. The time step and input vector are set to 50 and 50
to match the image size. The learning rate is 0.001 in LSTM
and other components. The input and time steps in LSTM are
50 and 50 respectively.
For the SDUgait dataset, we only use the skeleton data of the
gait, which includes the 3D positions of 21 joints. Differently,
the time step in LSTM is set to 7, and the input is 9D (63D,
3*21), that is, the dimension of the input in LSTM is 63. 5*5
and 3*3 convolutional kernels can be used in the convolutional
layer and the primary capsule layer respectively.
For the NDDs dataset, the input matrix of a training sample
is 12*10 that the input is 12D and the time step is 10. The
size of the convolutional kernels is set to 5*5 based on the
scale of the input data. The hidden output of LSTM is 128D
to represent the temporal feature of the gait.
For the PD Dataset, the size of a training sample is 19*100,
which indicates that the input is 19D and the time step is 100.
The size of the convolutional kernels is set to 9*9 based on
the scale of the input data. The hidden output of LSTM is
128D to represent the temporal feature of gait.
The parameters of other layers are set according to different
datasets and ﬁne-tuned to achieve good performance. The
model is implemented with Tensorﬂow.
B. Experiments on Normal Gait Datasets
In this subsection, we evaluate the ASTCapsNet model on
normal gait datasets for identity recognition: UNITO, CASIA
and SDUgait datasets.
TABLE I: Results on the UNITO skeleton dataset.
Classiﬁers
Acc
Deep Models
Acc
Others
Acc
DT
87.29%
GRU
97.95%
TL-LSTM [18]
97.33%
GBDT
90.82%
LSTM
95.44%
HCF+SVM [31]
97.00%
LR
67.51%
BiLSTM
96.45%
SFM [16]
96.97%
RF
96.47%
CapsNet
97.33%
CapProNet [29]
98.69%
KNN
90.00%
Attention LSTM
97.92%
CNN
95.84%
ASTCapsNet
99.65%
1) Experiments on the UNITO Skeleton Dataset: This ex-
periment aims to verify that our proposed model can perform
well in the three-dimensional skeletal dataset, which outper-
forms the other methods on this dataset.
Firstly, in this dataset, we have 20 subjects for classiﬁcation,
and use 80% of the data for training and 20% for testing. The
performance of the proposed model is shown in Fig. 6. It is
obvious that the gait recognition rate of the model is higher
Fig. 6: The confusion matrix of classiﬁcation results on the
UNITO Skeleton Dataset.
than 99.0% for each of 20 subjects, and we ﬁnally achieve the
test result of 99.65%.
Furthermore, we compare our model with several advanced
algorithms for this dataset in recent years, which are demon-
strated in Table I. In the light of the results of ﬁve tradi-
tional classiﬁers, i.e., decision tree (DT), gradient boosting
decision tree (GBDT), logic regression (LR), random forest
(RF), k-nearest neighbor (KNN), and temporal models, i.e.,
gated recurrent unit (GRU), long-short term memory (LSTM),
attention LSTM and bi-directional long short-term memory
(BiLSTM), we can see that the average result of the temporal
model is higher than that of the traditional classiﬁers, and the
performance of RF and attention LSTM is the best among the
models.
For other studies, Gianaria et al., [31] uses handcrafted
features as input to the SVM classiﬁer and achieves the result
of 97%, which needs to calculate the relative distance between
joints (FoRD) and the sway of joints (FoS). Li et al., [18]
apply a two-layer LSTM in this dataset and obtain the result
of 97.33% which considers the temporal changes of gait. The
performance of SFM [16] exceeds LSTM and BiLSTM, indi-
cating the advantages of using state-frequency components.
Although the original CapProNet [29] can perform better
than these methods by applying capsule subspace, our model
achieves the highest accuracy among them.
Additionally, we also show the training accuracy of the
original CapsNet and ASTCapsNet in Fig.4(a). We can see
that ASTCapsNet converges faster than the original CapsNet,
and the ﬁnal training accuracy is closer to 100%. Fig.5(a)
shows the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) for
the evaluation of the proposed model. The curve is close to
the upper left corner, and the average area under curve (AUC)
value approaches to 1, indicating ASTCapsNet achieves satis-

10
factory performance.
TABLE II: Results on the CASIA gait dataset.
Classiﬁers
Acc
Deep Models
Acc
Others
Acc
DT
67.78%
GRU
96.97%
GCP [32]
92.50%
GBDT
70.65%
LSTM
96.73%
WT+GA [33]
97.32%
LR
86.49%
BiLSTM
97.03%
DT+RF [34]
99.60%
RF
73.32%
CapsNet
93.91%
SFM [16]
97.51%
KNN
70.71%
Attention LSTM
96.79%
CapProNet [29]
95.49%
CNN
90.83%
ASTCapsNet
99.69%
2) Experiments on the CASIA Gait Dataset: This experi-
ment aims to verify that our proposed model can perform well
in the 2D silhouette image dataset, which also outperforms the
other methods for this dataset.
In this dataset that includes 20 subjects for identiﬁcation,
we use 80% of the data for training and 20% for testing. The
performance of the proposed model is shown in Fig. 7. The
correct number and accuracy of the samples on the diagonal
line show that the model can accurately determine the identity
via gait.
Beyond that, we also compare the experimental results in
the past ﬁve years, and the model presented in this paper
also stands out, which are illustrated in Table II. Because
of the temporality of the gait data, the temporal model is
more suitable for learning, which achieves better results. Hong
et al., [32] use a gait cycle partitioning method for gait
representation. Distance transform and random forest are also
compared for this task [34]. [33] propose to use wavelet
transform and a genetic algorithm for identiﬁcation, and the
result is also shown in Table II. In general, the temporal models
are better than the other models, where capsule networks, i.e.,
CapsNet and CapProNet can effectively analyze the structural
and spatial information of gait.
Fig. 7: The confusion matrix of classiﬁcation results on the
CASIA-A Gait Dataset.
Fig.4(b) shows the training accuracy of the original CapsNet
and ASTCapsNet on the CASIA-A Dataset. After the 5th
training iteration, ASTCapsNet achieves higher accuracy than
the original CapsNet and quickly converges to nearly 100%.
The average AUC value of the CASIA-A dataset is 98.4%,
the true positive rate (TPR) approaches 1 when the false
positive rate (FPR) is 0.3, which veriﬁes the effectiveness of
the ASTCapsNet (Fig. 5(b)).
Fig. 8: The confusion matrix of the classiﬁcation results on the
SDUGait Dataset. Since the recognition results of 52 subjects
cannot be completely shown due to the page size, we select
the subjects labeled 1-10 to show the recognition results which
is 99.13%.
TABLE III: Results on the SDUGait gait dataset.
Classiﬁers
Acc
Deep Models
Acc
Others
Acc
DT
80.33%
GRU
95.30%
SD [35]
94.23%
GBDT
85.02%
LSTM
94.80%
FLM [36]
98.08%
LR
63.08%
BiLSTM
96.38%
SFM [16]
95.02%
RF
94.26%
CapsNet
97.00%
CapProNet [29]
97.64%
KNN
85.28%
Attention LSTM
96.33%
CNN
92.85%
ASTCapsNet
99.13%
3) Experiments on the SDUGait Dataset: This experiment
aims to verify that our proposed model can perform well in the
3D skeletal dataset, which also outperforms the other methods
applied to this dataset.
Firstly, in this dataset that contains 52 subjects for classi-
ﬁcation, we use 80% of the data for training and 20% for
testing. The performance of the proposed model is shown
in Fig. 8. There are so many categories that the recognition
results of each category are not shown and the outline of the
color confusion matrix is displayed. We can also see that the
recognition error rate of the model for different gaits is very
small.
Moreover, we compare this result with some advanced
algorithms for this dataset, which are shown in Table III.
The average result of the temporal model is much higher than
that of the traditional classiﬁer, and RF and BiLSTM perform
the best. Wang et al., [35] obtains the classiﬁcation result of
94.23% on this dataset by using the static and dynamic feature

11
extraction methods, being view-invariant for gait recognition.
Although we only use the 3D coordinates of the skeletal joints
in the SDUGait dataset, the proposed model can also well
learn the gait patterns. Besides, Choi et al., [36] propose a
robust frame-level matching method for gait recognition that
minimizes the inﬂuence of noisy patterns as well as secures
the frame-level discriminative power and achieves accuracy of
98.08%, little lower than ASTCapsNet. The SFM [16] here
does not show outstanding advantages due to the sparsity of
gait data and unobvious frequency variation. The result of
CapProNet [29] is still slightly higher than that of CapsNet.
Furthermore, we also show the training accuracy of the
original CapsNet and ASTCapsNet in Fig. 4(c). The curves
of the training accuracy on this dataset are similar. In the 20th
training iteration, ASTCapsNet begins to be slightly higher
than CapsNet until the end of the training, indicating the
stability of the model. Fig. 5(c) shows the ROC curve of
the proposed ASTCapsNet. We can see that except for one
subject with a high detection error rate, the AUC of the other
subjects is more than 97%, reﬂecting the high performance of
the model.
C. Experiments on Abnormal Gait Datasets
In this subsection, we evaluate the ASTCapsNet model
on the abnormal gait datasets for disease classiﬁcation and
diagnosis: NDDs and PD datasets.
Fig. 9: The confusion matrix of classiﬁcation results on the
NDDs Dataset.
TABLE IV: Results on the NDDs dataset.
Classiﬁers
Acc
Deep Models
Acc
Others
Acc
DT
49.34%
GRU
92.76%
RBF [37]
93.75%
GBDT
67.11%
LSTM
92.11%
DCLSTM [19]
95.67%
LR
51.32%
BiLSTM
93.82%
SFM [16]
93.59%
RF
65.13%
CapsNet
88.86%
CapProNet [29]
92.11%
KNN
73.03%
Attention LSTM
93.41%
CNN
85.58%
ASTCapsNet
95.78%
1) Experiments on the NDDs Dataset: In this Dataset, our
model is used to identify 3 diseases and 1 healthy control
group (ALS, HD, PD, and CO). The performance is explained
in Fig. 9. CO and ALS obtain the result of 100% while two
samples of PD are misclassiﬁed into ALS.
Moreover, there are several comparative experiments im-
plemented on this dataset, as illustrated in Table IV. The ﬁve
classiﬁers can not provide a good reference because of the
small amount of data, and the time series model can capture
the dynamic changes of the gait data by more than 90%.
It can be seen that the effect of CapsNet on this dataset is
under 90%, showing a slightly weaker classiﬁcation ability
than CapProNet [29]. The effect of the two-channel LSTM
using two different sensor data is only inferior to that of
ASTCapsNet.
Apart from this observation, we also show the training ac-
curacy of the original CapsNet and ASTCapsNet in Fig. 4(d).
The proposed model is approximately 10% higher than the
original CapsNet because the temporal LSTM and Bayesian
model are added to compensate for the loss of the features
caused by CapsNet. Moreover, the small amount of data does
not allow the original CapsNet to learn well. As shown in Fig.
5(d), the ROC curves of CO tend to be 1, while the curves of
ALS, PD, and HD slightly deviate, indicating that the model
is more sensitive to the classiﬁcation of CO due to the big
difference between healthy people and patients.
Fig. 10: The confusion matrix of classiﬁcation results on the
PD Dataset.
TABLE V: Results on the PD dataset.
Classiﬁers
Acc
Deep Models
Acc
Others
Acc
DT
77.90%
GRU
94.89%
Q-BTDNN [38]
93.10%
GBDT
84.48%
LSTM
93.95%
2D-CNN+LSTM [39]
96.00%
LR
57.23%
BiLSTM
94.78%
SFM [16]
93.63%
RF
91.84%
CapsNet
95.30%
CapProNet [29]
96.58%
KNN
92.02%
Attention LSTM
93.53%
CNN
89.76%
ASTCapsNet
97.31%
2) Experiments on the PD Dataset: In the PD Dataset, we
only use the Ga [45] subset as an example to classify the
severity of Parkinson’s disease based on the gait performance.
There are three categories of severity according to the criteria
of H & Y scale (2=Bilateral involvement without impairment
of balance, 2.5=Mild bilateral disease with recovery on the
pull test, 3=Mild to moderate bilateral disease; some postural
instability; physically independent), and the four categories are
compared with the healthy control group.

12
After training ASTCapsNet, the performance is shown in
Fig. 10. The model is 100% for healthy people and 82% for
patients with severity 3. We witness that the model does not
distinctly extract patient features for severity 3, which leads
to misclassiﬁcation.
Compared with other experiments on this dataset, our pro-
posed model achieves higher classiﬁcation accuracy. The de-
tails are illustrated in Table V. The results of RF and KNN are
better, and GRU also shows advantages in temporal models.
Q-BTDNN (Q-backpropagated time-delay neural network) is
designed for severity classiﬁcation which can diagnose the
gait disturbances in Parkinson’s disease. Another study [39]
uses both 2D-CNN and LSTM to obtain a promising result of
96.00%, while CapProNet [29] performs better. ASTCapsNet
still outperforms the original CapsNet and CapProNet [29].
Additionally, we also show the training accuracy of the
original CapsNet and ASTCapsNet in Fig. 4(e). We can see
that after the 125th training iteration, ASTCapsNet begins to
achieve slightly higher training accuracy than CapsNet until
the end of the iteration. The AUC value of the four-class
classiﬁcation for Parkinson’s disease is 97.5%, a high level
of recognition (5(e)). The AUC value of severity 3 is low,
which means that the boundary between severity 3 and other
severity degrees is not clear, and the difference is minor.
D. Performance of the Whole Model
In this section, we evaluate and compare the performance
of the whole model and its internal components to verify the
model’s ability to extract and classify features.
1) Performance of Split Components: First, we provide
the recognition results of each module in Table VI. The
performance of six individual components is demonstrated on
the ﬁve datasets respectively. As shown in Fig. 1, the low-
level feature extractor includes the memory and convolution
modules for spatio-temporal feature extraction. The high-level
feature extractor includes the capsule and capsule relationship
layers for relationship and structure feature extraction. “No
relationship layer” is the output of ASTCapsNet after we
have removed the relationship layer, and “no memory module”
is the output of ASTCapsNet after removing the memory
module. “Bayesian” model is the original Bayesian model,
and “Bayesian model (last layer)” is the total output of
ASTCapsNet.
It can be seen that the average output of the high-level
feature extractor is better than that of the low-level feature
extractor on these ﬁve datasets, which reﬂects the superiority
of the module integration scheme. The performance of the
“no relationship layer” and the “no memory module” is
similar, depending on the ﬁtting degree of the model and
data. However, the data does not conform to the Gaussian
distribution, leading to the poor outcome of using the Bayesian
model directly, and the output of the softmax layer conforms
to the Gaussian distribution so that the Bayesian model can
be placed in the last layer to retain higher accuracy. Brieﬂy, in
the comparison of all the individual modules, the high-level
feature extractor makes the most, followed by the memory
module, and then the relationship layer.
2) Separability of the Extracted Features: We discuss the
separability of the features extracted by ASTCapsNet, and take
the outputs of softmax 2 and softmax 4 in the low- and
high-level feature extractors as an example. All the features
are processed by t-SNE (t-distributed stochastic neighbor
embedding) for dimensionality reduction. As shown in Fig.
11, the ﬁrst row represents the performance of the low-level
extractor on the ﬁve datasets after dimensionality reduction,
and the second row represents the performance of the high-
level extractor after dimensionality reduction. We can clearly
observe that the high-level features are more discriminative
than the low-level features, and can represent the critical
information of each class. The overlapping probability of low-
level features is slightly larger than that of the high-level
features. The high-level features have clear boundaries with
the other classes after dimensionality reduction and have a
high degree of aggregation with the samples in the same class,
demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed method.
V. DISCUSSION
As shown in the experiment, ASTCapsNet can effectively
learn the human gait pattern including healthy people and
NDDs patients. By experimenting on ﬁve gait datasets, the
highest accuracy of our model are 99.65%, 99.69%, 99.13%,
95.78%, 97.31% respectively, superior to the other gait recog-
nition methods on the classiﬁcation of these datasets. To
evaluate the performance of each component in ASTCapsNet,
we compare the classiﬁcation results of each softmax layer
with the output of the Bayesian model, shown in Table VII. We
can ﬁnd that the performance of softmax 4 surpasses the other
layers because this layer contains rich features calculated from
the previous layers. Softmax 3 also performs well, reﬂecting
the validity of the relationship layer. Furthermore, the model
parameters have been found to affect the performance of
classiﬁcation, and the optimal setting is reported in Section
IV.
In the ﬁeld of gait recognition, there is still a lack of public
datasets that have both large view variations and diversity of
data. This factor affects the possibility to train a uniﬁed and
reliable model for practical scenarios in medical diagnosis. For
example, if the data of one modality is missing in the training,
the ﬁnal classiﬁcation system may not be able to effectively
handle this modality in testing. Moreover, it is expensive
to obtain the labeled gait sequences. In this section, we
summarize several possible ways to improve the practicality
and effectiveness of our proposed model as follows.
A. Cross-view gait recognition. In our ASTCapsNet,
we only recognize the gait from different sources, without
considering the relationship between multi-modal gait data.
[48] and [49] have undertaken research and discussion on
cross-view and multi-modal gait recognition. We will use
canonical correlation analysis (CCA), kernel CCA (KCCA),
and other data fusion methods to analyze the correlation
between different sensors or views.
B. Unsupervised or Semi-Supervised Learning. The
model discussed in this paper only refers to the encoder, which
does not have the function of generating new samples and

13
TABLE VI: Performance of individual components in ASTCapsNet.
Dataset
Low-Level
High-Level
No Relationship
No Memory
Bayesian Model
Bayesian Model
Feature Extractor
Feature Extractor
Layer
Module
(Raw Data)
(Last Layer)
UNITO
95.87%
99.56%
97.41%
97.10%
77.54%
99.65%
CASIA-A
97.32%
99.23%
97.62%
95.73%
73.29%
99.69%
SDUgait
95.33%
98.56%
96.50%
97.94%
78.56%
99.13%
NDDs
93.64%
95.33%
94.14%
90.39%
60.85%
95.78%
PD
94.37%
96.38%
95.72%
95.87%
69.78%
97.31%
(a) Low-Level Features
(UNITO)
(b) Low-Level Features
(CASIA-A)
(c) Low-Level Features
(SDUgait)
(d) Low-Level Features
(NDDs)
(e) Low-Level Features
(PD)
(f) High-Level Features
(UNITO)
(g) High-Level Features
(CASIA-A)
(h) High-Level Features
(SDUgait)
(i) High-Level Features
(NDDs)
(j) High-Level Features
(PD)
Fig. 11: Dimensionality reduction comparison between the extracted features and original data using t-SNE.
TABLE VII: Performance of different layers in ASTCapsNet.
Dataset
Softmax 1
Softmax 2
Softmax 3
Softmax 4
Total
UNITO
95.99%
95.87%
99.12%
99.56%
99.65%
CASIA Gait
96.65%
97.32%
98.22%
99.23%
99.69%
SDUgait
95.30%
95.33%
98.77%
98.56%
99.13%
NDDs
93.86%
93.64%
94.98%
95.33%
95.78%
PD
94.02%
94.37%
96.43%
96.38%
97.31%
cannot deal with unlabeled gait data. How to utilize unla-
beled samples for unsupervised or semi-supervised learning
is still an open problem in this study. [48] reports multi-task
generative adversarial networks (MGANs) for learning view-
speciﬁc feature representations, which provides a possible way
to utilize unlabeled data in our model. We will explore to
enhance our method by exploiting unlabeled information in
future work.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed an end-to-end learning
model, ASTCapsNet, for gait recognition in multimodal gait
sequences. The convolutional layer and a novel recurrent
memory unit were introduced to model the dynamics and
dependency in the spatio-temporal dimension for low-level
feature extraction. Furthermore, a relationship layer was de-
signed for high-level feature extraction, calculated between
different capsules. Finally, a Bayesian model was also pro-
posed for ASTCapsNet, with which our network can assess
the quality of the features extracted from each layer using
softmax. Our proposed method yields superior performance
on the benchmark datasets for handling the gait recognition
problem. This network will be extended to address the task
of multi-view gait detection and recognition for intelligently
streaming scalable video sequences, which requires analyzing
gait changes in the video sequences and predicts the class of
each person in real-time.
