Abstract— Deep learning as represented by the artificial deep 
neural networks (DNNs) has achieved great success recently in 
many important areas that deal with text, images, videos, graphs, 
and so on. However, the black-box nature of DNNs has become 
one of the primary obstacles for their wide adoption in mission-
critical applications such as medical diagnosis and therapy. 
Because of the huge potentials of deep learning, increasing the 
interpretability of deep neural networks has recently attracted 
much research attention. In this paper, we propose a simple but 
comprehensive taxonomy for interpretability, systematically 
review recent studies in improving interpretability of neural 
networks, describe applications of interpretability in medicine, 
and discuss possible future research directions of interpretability, 
such as in relation to fuzzy logic and brain science.   
Index 
Terms—Deep 
learning, 
neural 
networks, 
interpretability, survey. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
eep learning [71] has become the mainstream approach in 
many important domains targeting common objects such 
as text [40], images [182], videos [132], and graphs [88]. 
However, deep learning works as a black box model in the 
sense that, although deep learning performs quite well in 
practice, it is difficult to explain its underlying mechanism and 
behaviors. Questions are often asked such as how deep 
learning makes such a prediction, why some features are 
favored over others by a model, and what changes are needed 
to improve model performance, etc. Unfortunately, only 
modest success has been made to answer these questions.  
Interpretability of deep neural networks is essential to many 
fields, and to healthcare [67], [68], [174] in particular for the 
following reasons. First, model robustness is a vital issue in 
medical applications. Recent studies suggest that model 
interpretability and robustness are closely connected [131]. On 
the one hand, the improvements in model robustness prompt 
model interpretability. For example, a deep model trained via 
adversarial training, a training method that augments training 
data with adversarial examples, shows better interpretability 
(with more accurate saliency maps) than the same model 
trained without adversarial examples [131]. On the other hand, 
when we understand a model deeply, we can thoroughly 
examine its weaknesses because the interpretability can help 
identify potential vulnerabilities of a complicated model, 
thereby improving its accuracy and reliability. Also, 
interpretability plays an important role in ethic use of deep 
learning techniques [57]. To build patients’ trust in deep 
learning, interpretability is needed to hold a deep learning 
system accountable [57]. If a model builder can explain why a 
model makes a particular decision under certain conditions, 
users would know whether such a model contributes to an 
adverse event or not. It is then possible to establish standards 
and protocols to use the deep learning system optimally. 
However, the lack of interpretability has become a main 
barrier of deep learning in its wide acceptance in mission-
critical applications. For example, regulations were proposed 
by European Union in 2016 that individuals affected by 
algorithms have the right to obtain an explanation [61]. 
Despite great research efforts made on interpretability of deep 
learning and availability of several reviews on this topic, we 
believe that an up-to-date review is still needed, especially 
considering the rapid development of this area. The review of 
Q. Zhang and S. C. Zhu [202] is mainly on the visual 
interpretability. The representative publications from their 
review fall under the feature analysis, saliency, and proxy 
taxonomy in our review. The review of S. Chakraborty et al. 
[28] took opinions of [112] on levels of interpretability, and 
accordingly structured their review to provide in-depth 
perspectives but with limited scope. For example, only 49 
references are cited there. The review of M. Du et al. [43] has 
a similar weakness, only covering 40 papers which are divided 
into post-hoc and ad-hoc explanations, as well as global and 
local interpretations. Their taxonomy is coarse-grained and 
neglects a number of important publications, such as 
publications on explaining-by-text, explaining-by-case, etc. In 
contrast, our review is much detailed and comprehensive, with 
the latest results included. While publications in L. H. Gilpin 
et al. [58] are classified into understanding the workflow of a 
neural network, understanding the representation of a neural 
network, and explanation producing, we cover all these 
aspects and also discuss the studies on how to protype an 
interpretable neural network. Reviews by R. Guidotti et al. [65] 
and A. Adadi and M. Berrada [2] cover existing black-box 
machine learning models instead of focusing on neural 
networks. As a result, several hallmark papers on explaining 
neural networks are missing in their survey, such as the 
interpretation from the perspective of mathematics and physics.  
A. B. Arrieta et al. [10] provides an extensive review on 
explainable AI (XAI), where concepts and taxonomies are 
clarified, and challenges are identified. While that review 
covers interpretability of AI/ML in general, our review is 
specific to deep neural networks and offers unique 
perspectives and insights. Specifically, our review is novel in 
the following senses: 1) We treat post-hoc and ad-hoc 
interpretability separately， because the former explains the 
existing models, while the latter constructs interpretable ones; 
2) we include widely-studied generative models, advanced 
  On Interpretability of Artificial Neural Networks: 
A Survey 
Feng-Lei Fan, Student Member, IEEE, Jinjun Xiong, Senior Member, IEEE, Mengzhou Li, Student Member, IEEE, 
and Ge Wang, Fellow, IEEE 
D 
This work was supported in part by the Rensselaer-IBM AI Research
Collaboration Program (http://airc.rpi.edu), part of the IBM AI Horizons 
Network (http://ibm.biz/AIHorizons)  

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Troy, NY, USA. Asterisk indicates the corresponding author. 
Jinjun Xiong is with IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown 

mathematical/physical methods that summarize advances in 
deep learning theory, and the applications of interpretability in 
medicine; 3) important methods are illustrated with 
customized examples and publicly available codes through 
GitHub; and 4) interpretability research is a rapidly evolving 
field, and many research articles are published every year. 
Hence, our review should be a valuable and up-to-date 
addition to the literature. 
Before we start our survey, let us first state three essential 
questions regarding interpretability: What does interpretability 
mean? Why is interpretability difficult? And how to build a 
good interpretation method? The first question has been well 
addressed in [112], and we include their statements here for 
completeness. The second question was partially touched in 
[112], [146], and we incorporate those comments and 
complement them with our own views. We provide our own 
perspectives on the third question. 
A. What Does Interpretability Mean? 
Although the word “interpretability” is frequently used, people 
do not reach a consensus on the exact meanings of 
interpretability, which partially accounts for why current 
interpretation methods are so diverse. For example, some 
researchers explore post-hoc explanations for models, while 
some focus on the interplay mechanism between machineries 
of a model. Generally speaking, interpretability refers to the 
extent of human’s ability to understand and reason a model. 
Based on the categorization of [112], we summarize the 
implications of interpretability in different levels.    
 Simulatability is considered as the understanding over the 
entire model. In a good sense, we can understand the 
mechanism of a model at the top level in a unified theoretical 
framework, one example is what was reported in [140]: a class 
of radial basis function (RBF) networks can be expressed by a 
solution to the interpolation problem with a regularization 
term, 
where 
a RBF 
network is 
an artificial 
neural 
network with RBFs as activation 
functions. 
In 
view 
of 
simulatability, the simpler the model is, the higher 
simulatability the model has. For example, a linear classifier 
or 
regressor 
is 
totally 
understandable. 
To 
enhance 
simulatability, we can change some facilities of models or use 
crafted regularization terms.  
 Decomposability is to understand a model in terms of its 
components such as neurons, layers, blocks, and so on. Such a 
modularized analysis is quite popular in engineering fields. 
For instance, the inner working of a complicated system is 
factorized as a combination of functionalized modules. A 
myriad of engineering examples such as software development 
and optical system design have justified that a modularized 
analysis is effective. In machine learning, a decision tree is a 
kind of modularized methods, where each node has an explicit 
utility to judge if a discriminative condition is satisfied or not, 
each branch delivers an output of a judgement, and each leaf 
node represents the final decision after computing all 
attributes. Modularizing a neural network is advantageous to 
the optimization of the network design since we know the role 
of each and every component of the entire model.  
 Algorithmic Transparency is to understand the training 
process and dynamics of a model. The landscape of the 
objective function of a neural network is highly non-convex. 
The fact that deep models do not have a unique solution hurts 
the model transparency. Nevertheless, it is intriguing that 
current stochastic gradient descent (SGD)-based learning 
algorithms still perform efficiently and effectively. If we can 
understand why learning algorithms work, deep learning 
research and applications will be accelerated.  
B. Why Is Interpretability Difficult? 
After we learn the meanings of interpretability, a question is 
what obstructs practitioners to obtain interpretability. This 
question was partially addressed in [146] in terms of 
commercial barrier and data wildness. Here, we complement 
their opinion with additional aspects on human limitation and 
algorithmic complexity. We believe that the hurdles to 
interpretable neural networks come from the following four 
aspects.  
 Human Limitation: Expertise is often insufficient in many 
applications. Nowadays, deep learning has been extensively 
used in tackling intricate problems, which even professionals 
are unable to comprehend adequately. What’s worse is that 
these problems are not uncommon. For example, in a recent 
study [46], we proposed to use an artificial neural network to 
predict pseudo-random events Specifically, we fed 100,000 
binary sequential digits into the network to predict the  
100,001th digit in the sequence. In our prediction, the highly 
sophisticated hidden relationship was learned to beat a purely 
random guess with a 3σ  precision. Furthermore, it was 
conjectured that high sensitivity and efficiency of neural 
networks may help discriminate the fundamental differences 
between pseudo-randomness and real quantum randomness. In 
this case, it is no wonder that interpretability for neural 
networks will be missing, because even most talented 
physicists know little about the essence of this problem, let 
alone fully understand predictions of the neural network.  
 Commercial Barrier: In the commercial world, there are 
strong motives for corporations to hide their models. First and 
foremost, companies profit from black-box models. It is not a 
common practice that a company makes capital out of totally 
transparent models [146]. Second, model opacity helps protect 
hard work from being reverse engineered. An effective black 
box is ideal in the sense that customers being served can 
obtain satisfactory results while competitors are not able to 
steal their intellectual properties easily [146]. Third, 
prototyping an interpretable model may cost too much in 
terms of financial, computational, and other resources. 
Existing open-sourced superior models are accessible to easily 
construct a well-performed algorithm for a specific task. 
However, generating reliable and consistent understanding to 
the behavior of the resultant model demands much more 
endeavors. 
 Data Wildness: On the one hand, although it is a big data era, 
high quality data are often not accessible in many domains. 
For example, in the project of predicting electricity grid failure 
[146], the data base involves text documents, accounting data 
about electricity dating back to 1890s, and data from new 

manhole inspections. Highly heterogenous and inconsistent 
data hamper not only the accuracy of deep learning models but 
also the construction of interpretability. On the other hand, 
real-world data have the character of high dimensionality, 
which suppresses reasoning. For example, given an MNIST 
image classification problem, the input image is of size 
28 × 28 = 784. Hence the deep learning model tackling this 
problem has to learn an effective mapping of 784 variables to 
one of ten digits. If we consider the ImageNet dataset, the 
number of input variables goes up to 512 × 512 × 3 = 768432.  
 Algorithmic Complexity: Deep learning is a kind of large-
scale, highly nonlinear algorithms. Convolution, pooling, 
nonlinear activation, shortcuts, and so on contribute to 
variability of neural networks. The number of trainable 
parameters of a deep model can be on the order of hundreds 
million or even more. Despite that nonlinearity may not 
necessarily result in opacity (for example, a decision tree 
model is not linear but interpretable), deep learning’s series of 
nonlinear operations indeed prevent us from understanding its 
inner working. In addition, recursiveness is another source of 
difficulty. A typical example is the chaos behavior resultant 
from nonlinear recursiveness. It is well-known that even a 
simple recursive mathematical model can lead to intractable 
dynamics [107]. In [175], it was proved that there are chaotic 
behaviors such as bifurcations even in simple neural networks. 
In chaotic systems, tiny changes of initial inputs may lead to 
huge outcome differences, adding to the complexity of 
interpretation methods. 
C. How to Build a Good Interpretation Method? 
The third major issue is the criteria for assessing quality of a 
proposed interpretability method. Because existing evaluation 
methods are still premature, we propose five general and well-
defined rules-of-thumb: exactness, consistency, completeness, 
universality, and reward. Our rules-of-thumb are fine-grained 
and focus on the characteristics of interpretation methods, 
compared to that described in [42]: application-grounded, 
human-grounded, and function-grounded.    
 Exactness: Exactness means how accurate an interpretation 
method is. Is it just limited to a qualitive description or with a 
quantitative analysis? Generally, quantitative interpretation 
methods are more desirable than qualitative counterparts.  
 Consistency: Consistency suggests that there is not any 
contradiction in an explanation. For multiple similar samples, 
a fair interpretation should produce consistent answers. In 
addition, an interpretation method should conform to the 
predictions of the authentic model. For example, the proxy-
based methods are evaluated based on how closely they 
replicate the original golden model. 
 Completeness: Mathematically, a neural network is to learn a 
mapping that best fits data. A good interpretation method 
should show effectiveness in support of the maximal number 
of data instances and data types.  
 Universality: With the rapid development of deep learning, 
the deep learning armory has been substantially enriched. 
Such diverse deep learning models play important roles in a 
wide spectrum of applications. A driving question is whether 
we can develop a universal interpreter that deciphers as many 
models as possible so as to save labor and time. But this is 
technically challenging due to the high variability among 
models.  
 Reward: What are gains from the improved understanding of 
neural networks? In addition to the trust from practitioners and 
users, fruits of interpretability can be insights into network 
design, training, etc. Due to its black-box nature, using neural 
networks is largely a trial-and-error process with sometimes 
contradictive intuitions. A thorough understanding of deep 
learning will be instrumental to the research and applications 
of neural networks. 
Briefly, our contributions in this review are three-folds: 1) We 
propose a comprehensive taxonomy for interpretability of 
neural networks and describe key methods with our insights; 2) 
we systematically illustrate interpretability methods as 
educational aids, as shown in Figures 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 16, 17; 
and 3) we shed light on future directions of interpretability 
research in terms of the convergence of neural networks and 
rule systems, the synergy between neural networks and brain 
science, and interpretability in medicine. 
II. A SURVEY ON INTERPRETATION METHODS 
In this section, we first present our taxonomy and then review 
interpretability results under each category of our taxonomy. 
We enter the search terms “Deep Learning Interpretability”, 
“Neural Network Interpretability”, “Explainable Neural 
Network”, and “Explainable Deep Learning” into the Web of 
Science on Sep 22, 2020, with the time range from 2000 to 
2019. The number of articles with respect to years is plotted in 
Figure 1, which clearly shows an exponential trend in this 
field. With the survey, our motive is to cover as many 
important papers as possible, and therefore we do not limit 
ourselves within Web of Science. We also search related 
articles using Google Scholar, PubMed, IEEE Xplore, and so 
on.  
 
Figure 1. Exponential growth of the number of articles on interpretability.   
A. Taxonomy Definition 
As shown in Figure 2, our taxonomy is based on our surveyed 
papers and existing taxonomies. We first classify the surveyed 

papers into post-hoc interpretability analysis and ad-hoc 
interpretable modeling. Post-hoc interpretability analysis 
explains existing models and can be further classified into 
feature analysis, model inspection, saliency, proxy, advanced 
mathematical/physical 
analysis, 
explaining-by-case, 
and 
explaining-by-text, 
respectively. 
Ad-hoc 
interpretable 
modeling builds interpretable models and can be further 
categorized into interpretable representation and model 
renovation. In our proposed taxonomy, the class “advanced 
mathematical/physical 
analysis” 
is 
novel, 
but 
it 
is 
unfortunately missing in the previous reviews. We argue that 
this class is rather essential, because the incorporation of 
math/physics is critical in placing deep learning on a solid 
foundation for interpretability. In the following, we clarify the 
taxonomy definition and its illustration. We would like to 
underscore that one method may fall into different classes, 
depending on how one views it.  
  
Figure 2. Taxonomy used for this interpretability review.  
 Post-hoc Interpretability Analysis 
Post-hoc interpretability is conducted after a model is well 
learned. A main advantage of post-hoc methods is that one 
does not need to compromise interpretability with the 
predictive performance since prediction and interpretation are 
two separate processes without mutual interference. However, 
a post-hoc interpretation is usually not completely faithful to 
the original model. If an interpretation is 100% accurate 
compared to the original model, it becomes the original model. 
Therefore, any interpretation method in this category is more 
or less inaccurate. What is worse is that we often do not know 
the nuance [146]. Such a nuance makes it hard for 
practitioners to have a full trust to an interpretation method, 
because the correctness of the interpretation method is not 
guaranteed. 
Feature analysis techniques are centered in comparing, 
analyzing, and visualizing features of neurons and layers. 
Through feature analysis, sensitive features and ways to 
process them are identified such that the rationale of the model 
can be explained to some extent.  
Feature analysis techniques can be applied to any neural 
networks and provide qualitative insights on what kinds of 
features are learned by a network. However, these techniques 
lack an in-depth, rigorous, and unified understanding, and 
therefore cannot be used to revise a model towards a higher 
interpretability.  
Model inspection methods use external algorithms to delve 
into neural networks by systematically extracting important 
structural and parametric information on inner working 
mechanisms of neural networks.  
Methods in this class are more technically accountable than 
those in feature analysis because analytical tools such as 
statistics are directly involved in the performance analysis. 
Therefore, the information gained by a model inspection 
method is more trustworthy and rewarding. In an exemplary 
study [184], finding important data routing paths is used as a 
way to understand the model. With such data routing paths, 
the model can be faithfully compressed to a compact one. In 
other words, interpretability improves the trustworthiness of 
model compression. 
Saliency methods identify which attributes of input data are 
most relevant to a prediction or a latent representation of a 
model. In this category, human inspection is involved to 
decide if a saliency map is plausible. A saliency map is useful. 
For example, if a polar bear always appears in a picture 
coupled with snow or ice, the model may have misused the 
information of snow or ice to detect the polar bear rather than 
real features of polar bears for detection. With a saliency map, 
this issue can be found and hence avoided. 
Saliency methods are popular in interpretability research, 
however, extensive random tests reported that some saliency 
methods can be model independent and data independent [3], 
i.e., saliency maps offered by some methods can be highly 
similar to results produced with edge detectors. This is 
problematic because it means that those saliency methods fail 
to find the true attributes of the input that account for the 
prediction of the model. Consequently, a model-relevant and 
data-relevant saliency method should be developed in these 
cases.   
Proxy methods construct a simpler and more interpretable 
proxy that closely resembles a trained, large, complex, and 
black-box deep learning model. Proxy methods can be either 
local in a partial space or global in a whole solution space. The 
exemplary proxy models include decision trees, rule systems, 
and so on. The weakness of proxy methods is the extra cost 
needed to construct a proxy model.  
Advanced mathematical/physical analysis methods put a 
neural network into a theoretical mathematics/physics 
framework, in which the mechanism of a neural network is 
understood with advanced mathematics/physics tools. This 
class covers theoretical advances of deep learning including 
non-convex 
optimization, 
representational 
power, 
and 
generalization ability. 
A concern in this class is that, to establish a reasonable 
interpretation, unrealistic assumptions are sometimes made to 
facilitate a theoretical analysis, which may compromise the 
practical validity of the explanation. 
Explaining-by-case methods are along the line of case-based 
reasoning [90]. People favor examples. One may not be 

engaged by boring statistic numbers of a product but could be 
amazed while listening to other users’ experience of using 
such a product. This philosophy wins the heart of many 
practitioners and intrigues the case-based interpretation for 
deep 
learning. 
Explaining-by-case 
methods 
provide 
representative examples that capture the essence of a model. 
Methods in this class are interesting and inspiring. However, 
this practice is more like a sanity check instead of a general 
interpretation because not much information regarding the 
inner working of a neural network is understood from selected 
query cases.  
Explaining-by-text methods generate text descriptions in 
image-language 
joint 
tasks 
that 
are 
conducive 
to 
understanding the behavior of a model. This class can also 
include methods that generate symbols for explanation. 
Methods in this class are particularly useful in image-language 
joint tasks such as generating a diagnostic report from an X-
ray radiograph. However, explaining-by-text is not a general 
technique for any deep learning model because it can only 
work when a language module exists in a model. 
 Ad-hoc Interpretable Modeling 
Ad-hoc interpretable modeling eliminates the biases from the 
post-hoc interpretability analysis. Although it is generally 
believed that there is a trade-off between interpretability and 
model expressibility [123], it is still possible to find a model 
that is both powerful and interpretable. One notable example 
is the work reported in [30], where an interpretable two-layer 
additive risk model has won the first place in FICO 
Recognition Contest.  
Interpretable representation methods employ regularization 
techniques to steer the optimization of a neural network 
towards a more interpretable representation. Properties such as 
decomposability, sparsity, and monotonicity can enhance 
interpretability. As a result, regularized features become a way 
to allow more interpretable models. Correspondingly, the loss 
function must contain a regularization term for the purpose of 
interpretability, which restricts the original model to perform 
its full learning task. 
Model renovation methods seek interpretability by the means 
of designing and deploying more interpretable machineries 
into a network. Those machineries include a neuron with 
purposely designed activation function, an inserted layer with 
a special functionality, a modularized architecture, and so on. 
The future direction is to use more and more explainable 
components that can at the same time achieve similar state-of-
the-art performance for diverse tasks. 
B. Post-hoc Interpretability Analysis 
 Feature Analysis 
Inverting-based methods [41], [117], [164], [201] crack the 
representation of a neural network by inverting feature maps 
into a synthesized image. For example, A. Mahendran and A. 
Vedaldi [117] assumed that a representation of a neural 
network Ω0  for an input image 𝑥0  was modeled as Ω0 =
Ω(𝑥0), where Ω is the neural network mapping, usually not 
invertible. Then, the inverting problem was formulated as 
finding an image 𝑥∗ whose neural network representation best 
matches Ω0 , i.e., arg min 
𝑥
  ||Ω(𝑥) −Ω0||
2 + 𝜆𝑅(𝑥),  where 
𝑅(𝑥) is a regularization term representing prior knowledge 
about the input image. The goal is to reveal the lost 
information by comparing differences between the inverted 
image and the original one. A. Dosovitskiy et al. [41] directly 
trained a new network with features generated by the model of 
interest as the input and images as the label, to invert features 
of intermediate layers to images. It was found that contours 
and colors could still be reconstructed even from deeper layer 
features. M. D. Zeiler et al. [201] designed a deconvolution 
network consisting of unpooling, rectification, deconvolution 
operations, to pair with the original convolutional network so 
that features could be inverted without training. In the 
deconvolution network, an unpooling layer is realized by 
using locations of maxima; rectification is realized by setting 
negative values to zero; and deconvolution layers use 
transposed filters.  
Activation maximization methods [45], [128], [129], [169] 
devote to synthesizing images that maximize the output of a 
neural network or neurons of interest. The resulting images are 
referred as “deep dreams” as these can be regarded as dream 
images of a neural network or a neuron.  
In [16], [85], [108], [197], [211], it was pointed out that 
information about a deep model could be extracted from each 
neuron. J. Yosinski et al. [197] straightforwardly inspected the 
activation values of neurons in each layer with respect to 
different images or videos. They found that live activation 
values that change for different inputs are helpful to 
understand how a model work. Y. Li et al. [108] contrasted 
features generated by different initializations to investigate if a 
neural network learns a similar representation when randomly 
initialized. The receptive field (RF) is a spatial extent over 
which a neuron connects with an input volume [111]. To 
investigate the size and shape of RF of a given input for a 
neuron, B. Zhou et al. [211] presented a network dissection 
method that first selected K images with high activation values 
for neurons of interest and then constructed 5,000 occluded 
images for each of K images, and then fed them into a neural 
network to observe the changes in activation values for a 
given unit. A large discrepancy signals an important patch. 
Finally, the occluded images that have large discrepancy were 
re-centered and averaged to generate an RF. This network 
dissection method has been scaled to generative networks 
[17]. In addition, D. Bau et al. [16] scaled up a low-resolution 
activation map of a given layer to the same size as the input, 
thresholded the map into a binary activation map, and then 
computed the overlapping area between the binary activation 
map and the ground-truth binary segmentation map as an 
interpretability measure. A. Karpathy et al. [85] defined the 
gate in LSTM [73] to be either left or right saturated 
depending on its activation value being either less than 0.1 or 
more than 0.9. In this regard, neurons that are often right 
saturated are interesting because this means that these neurons 
can remember their values over a long period. Q. Zhang et al. 
[203] dissected feature relations in a network with the premise 
that the feature map of a filter in each layer can be activated 
by part patterns in the earlier layer. They mined part patterns 

layer by layer, discovered activation peaks of part patterns 
from the feature map of each layer, and constructed an 
explanatory graph to describe the relations of hierarchical 
features, with each node representing a part pattern and the 
edge between neighboring layers representing a co-activation 
relation.  
 Model Inspection 
The empirical influence function is to measure the dependence 
of an estimator on a sample [99]. P. W. Koh and P. Liang [89] 
applied the concept of the influence function to address the 
following question: Given a prediction for one sample, do 
other samples in the dataset have positive effects or negative 
effects on that prediction? This analysis could also help 
identify mis-annotated labels and outliers existing in the data. 
As Figure 3 shows, given a LeNet-5 like network, two harmful 
images for a given image are identified by the influence 
function.  
 
Figure 3. Based on the influence function, two harmful images that have the 
same label as the test image are identified.  
A. Bansal et al. [12], H. Lakkaraju et al. [97], and Q. Zhang et 
al. [204] worked on the detection of failures or biases in a 
neural network. For example, A. Bansal et al. [12] developed 
a model-agnostic algorithm to identify which instances a 
neural network is likely to fail to provide any prediction for. In 
such a scenario, the model would instead give a warning like 
“Do not trust these predictions” as an alert. Specifically, they 
annotated all failed images with a collection of binary 
attributes and clustered these images in the attribute space. As 
a result, each cluster indicates a failure mode. To recognize 
those mislabeled instances with high predictive scores in the 
dataset efficiently, H. Lakkaraju et al. [97] introduced two 
basic speculations: The first is that mislabeling an instance 
with high confidence is due to the systematic biases instead of 
random perturbation, while the second is that each failed 
example is representative and informative enough. Then, they 
clustered the images into several groups and designed a multi-
armed bandit search strategy by taking each group as a bandit 
that plans which group should be queried and sampled in each 
step. To discover representation biases, Q. Zhang et al. [204] 
utilized ground-truth relationships among attributes according 
to human’s common knowledge (fire-hot vs ice-cold) to 
examine if a mined attribute relationship by a neural network 
well fits the ground truth.  
Y. Wang et al. [184] demystified a network by identifying 
critical data routes. Specifically, a gate control binary vector 
𝝀𝑘∈{0,1}𝑛𝑘, where 𝑛𝑘 is the number of neurons in the 𝑘𝑡ℎ 
layer, was multiplied to the output of the 𝑘𝑡ℎ layer, and the 
problem of finding control gate values is formulated as 
searching 𝝀𝟏, … , 𝝀𝐾: 
arg min 
𝝀1,…,𝝀𝐾
  𝑑(𝑓𝜃(𝑥), 𝑓𝜃(𝑥; 𝝀1, … , 𝝀𝐾)) + 𝛾∑||𝝀𝑘||1
𝑘
, 
where 𝑓𝜃 is the mapping represented by a neural network 
parameterized by 𝜃,  𝑓𝜃(𝑥; 𝝀1, … , 𝝀𝐾)  is the mapping when 
control gates 𝝀𝟏, … , 𝝀𝐾 are enforced, 𝑑(⋅,⋅)  is a distance 
measure, 𝛾 is a constant controlling the trade-off between the 
loss and regularization, and || ⋅||1 is the 𝑙1 norm such that 𝝀𝑘 
is sparse. The learned control gates could expose the important 
data processing paths of a model. B. Kim et al. [86] developed 
the concept activated vector (CAV) that can quantitively 
measure the sensitivity of the concept C with respect to any 
layer of a model. First, a binary linear classifier ℎ was trained 
to distinguish between layer activations stimulated by two sets 
of samples: {𝑓𝑙(𝑥): 𝑥∈𝑃𝐶} and {𝑓𝑙(𝑥): 𝑥∉𝑃𝐶}, where 𝑓𝑙(𝑥) is 
the layer activation at the 𝑙𝑡ℎ layer, and 𝑃𝐶 denotes data 
embodying the concept C.  Then, the CAV was defined as the 
normal unit vector 𝒗𝐶
𝑙 to a hyperplane of the linear classifier 
that separated samples with and without the defined concept. 
Finally, 𝒗𝐶
𝑙  was used to calculate the sensitivity for a concept 
C in the 𝑙𝑡ℎ layer as the directional derivatives:  
S𝐶,𝑘,𝑙 = lim
ϵ→0
ℎ𝑙,𝑘(𝑓𝑙(𝑥)+𝜖𝒗𝐶
𝑙)−ℎ𝑙,𝑘(𝑓𝑙(𝑥))
𝜖
= ∇ℎ𝑙,𝑘(𝑓𝑙(𝑥))𝒗𝐶
𝑙,  
where ℎ𝑙,𝑘 denotes the logits of the trained binary linear 
classifier for the output class k. J. You et al. [196] mapped a 
neural network into a relational graph, and then studied the 
relationship between the graph structures of neural networks 
and their predictive performance through massive experiments 
(transcribed a graph into a network and implemented the 
network on a dataset). They discovered that the predictive 
performance of a network was correlated with two graph 
measures: the clustering coefficient and the average path 
length. 
 Saliency 
There is a plethora of methods to obtain a saliency map. 
Partial dependence plot (PDP) and individual condition 
expectation (ICE) [53], [59], [74] are model-agnostic 
statistical tools to visualize the dependence between the 
responsible variables and the predictive variables. To compute 
the PDP, suppose there are 𝑝 input dimensions and let 𝑆, 𝐶⊆
{1,2, . . 𝑝} be two complementary sets, where 𝑆 is the set one 
will fix, and  𝐶  is the set one will change. Then the PDP for 
𝒙𝑆 is defined by 𝑓𝑆= ∫𝑓(𝒙𝑆, 𝒙𝐶)𝑑𝒙𝐶, where 𝑓 is the model. 
Compared with PDP, the definition of ICE is straightforward. 
The ICE curve at 𝒙𝑆 is obtained by fixing 𝒙𝐶 and varying 𝒙𝑆. 
Figure 4 shows a simple example on how to compute PDP and 
ICE, respectively. 
A simple approach is to study the change of prediction after 
removing one feature, also known as leave-one-out attribution 
[4], [83], [105], [143], [212]. For example, A. Kádár et al. [83] 
utilized this idea to define an omission score: 1 −
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑒(𝒉(𝑆), 𝒉(𝑆\𝑖)) , where 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑒(⋅,⋅)  is the cosine 
distance,  𝒉 is the representation for a sentence, 𝑆 is the full 
sentence, and 𝑆\𝑖 is the sentence without the 𝑖𝑡ℎ word, and 
analyzed the importance of each word. P. Adler et al. [4] 
proposed to measure an indirect influence for correlated inputs. 
For example, in a house loan decision system, race should not 

be a factor for decision-making. However, solely removing the 
race factor is not sufficient to rule out the effect of race 
because some remaining factors such as “zipcode” are highly 
concerned with race.  
 
Figure 4. Toy examples illustrating the definitions of PDP and ICE, 
respectively. On the left, to measure the impact of the brand on the price with 
the PDP method, we fix the brand and compute the average of prices as other 
factors change, obtaining that the PDP of “Huawei” is 2500 and the PDP of 
“Apple” is 4000. On the right, ICE scores regarding brands “Huawei”, “Vivo” 
and “Apple” are computed by varying brands and fixing other factors. 
Furthermore, Shapley value from cooperative game theory 
was used in [6], [27], [39], [113], [115]. Mathematically, 
Shapley value of a set function  𝑓̂ with respect to the feature 𝑖 
is defined as 
 Shapley𝑖(𝑓̂ ) = ∑
(𝑁−|𝑆|−1)!|𝑆|!
𝑁!
(𝑓̂ (𝑆∪{𝑖}) −𝑓̂ (𝑆))
𝑆⊆𝑃\{𝑖}
, 
where | ⋅| is the size of a set,  𝑃 is a total player set of 𝑁 
players, and the set function 𝑓̂ maps each subset 𝑆⊆𝑃 to a 
real number. Furthermore, the definition of Shapley value can 
be twisted to the neural network function 𝑓 by replacing the 
features in the input that are not in 𝑆 with the zero value. 
Motivated by reducing the prohibitive computational cost 
incurred by combinatorial explosion, M. Ancona et al. [6] 
proposed a novel and polynomial-time approximation for 
Shapley values, which basically computed the expectation of a 
random coalition rather than enumerated each and every 
coalition. Figure 5 shows a simple example of how Shapley 
values can be computed for a fully connected layer network 
trained on California Housing dataset which includes eight 
attributes such as house age and room number as the inputs 
and the house price as the label. 
 
Figure 5. Positive Shapley value indicates a positive impact on the model 
output, and vice versa. Shapley value analysis shows that the model is biased 
because the house age has the positive Shapley value on the house price, 
which goes against with our real experience.  
Instead of removing one or more features, researchers also 
resort to gradients. K. Simonyan et al. [157], D. Smilkov et al. 
[161], M. Sundararajan et al. [168] and S. Singla et al. [160] 
utilized the idea of gradients to probe the saliency of an input. 
K. Simonyan et al. [157] calculated the first-order Taylor 
expansion of the class score with respect to image pixels, by 
which the first-order coefficients produce a saliency map for a 
class. D. Smilkov et al. [161] demonstrated that gradients as a 
saliency map show a correlation between attributes and labels, 
however, typically gradients are rather noisy. To remove noise, 
they proposed “SmoothGrad” that adds noise into the input 
image multiple times and averages the resultant gradient 
maps:  𝑀𝑐
̂(𝑥) =
1
𝑁∑
𝑀𝑐
(𝑛)(𝑥+ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2))
𝑁
𝑛=1
, where 𝑀𝑐
(𝑛) is a 
gradient map for a class c, and 𝑁(0, 𝜎2) is the Gaussian noise 
with 𝜎 as the standard variance. Basically, 𝑀𝑐
̂(𝑥)  is a 
smoothened version of a salient map. M. Sundararajan et al. 
[168] set two fundamental requirements for saliency methods: 
(sensitivity) if only one feature is different between the input 
and the baseline, and the outputs of the input and the baseline 
are different, then this very feature should be credited by a 
non-zero 
attribution; 
(implementation 
invariance) 
the 
attributions for the same feature in two functionally equivalent 
networks should be identical. Noticing that earlier gradient-
based saliency methods fail the above two requirements, they 
put forth integrated gradients, which is formulated as (𝑥𝑖−
𝑥𝑖
′) ∫
𝜕𝐹(𝒙′+𝛼(𝒙−𝒙′))
𝜕𝑥𝑖
1
0
𝑑𝛼, where 𝐹(⋅)  is a neural network 
mapping, 𝒙= (𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝑁)  is 
an 
input, 
and 𝒙′ =
(𝑥1
′, 𝑥2
′, … , 𝑥𝑁
′ ) is the baseline satisfying 
𝜕
𝜕𝒙𝐹(𝒙)|𝒙=𝒙′ = 0. In 
practice, the integral can be transformed into a discrete 
summation 
(𝑥𝑖−𝑥𝑖
′)
𝑀
× ∑
𝜕𝐹(𝒙′+𝑚
𝑀(𝒙−𝒙′))
𝜕𝑥𝑖
𝑀
𝑚=1
 , where 𝑀 is the 
number of steps in the approximation of the integral. S. Singla 
et al. [160] proposed to use second-order approximations of a 
Taylor expansion to produce a saliency map so as to consider 
feature dependencies.  
S. Bach et al. [11] proposed layer-wise relevance propagation 
(LRP) to compute the relevance of one attribute to a prediction 
by assuming that a model representation 𝑓(𝒙)  can be 
expressed as the sum of pixel-wise relevance 𝑅𝑝
𝑙, where 𝒙 is 
an input image, 𝑙 is the index of the layer, and 𝑝 is the index of 
the pixel of 𝒙. Thus,  𝑓(𝒙) = ∑𝑅𝑝
𝐿
𝑝
,  where 𝐿 is the final layer 
and 𝑅𝑝
𝐿=
𝑤𝑝𝑥𝑝𝐿−1
∑𝑤𝑝𝑥𝑝𝐿−1
𝑝
𝑓(𝒙) , where 𝑤𝑝 is the weight between 
pixel p of the (𝐿−1)𝑡ℎlayer and the final layer. Given a feed-
forward neural network, the pixel-wise relevance score 𝑅𝑝
1 of 
an input is derived by calculating 𝑅𝑝
𝑙= ∑
𝑧𝑝𝑗
∑
𝑧𝑝′𝑗 
𝑝′
𝑗
𝑅𝑗
𝑙+1 
backwards with 𝑧𝑝𝑗= 𝑥𝑝
𝑙𝑤𝑝𝑗
(𝑙,𝑙+1), where  𝑤𝑝𝑗
(𝑙,𝑙+1) is the weight 
between the pixel 𝑝 of layer 𝑙 and the pixel 𝑗 of the (𝑙+
1)𝑡ℎlayer. Furthermore, L. Arras et al. [9] extended LRP to 
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for sentiment analysis. G. 
Montavon et al. [125] employed the whole first-order term of 
deep Taylor decomposition to produce a saliency map instead 
of just gradients. Suppose  𝒙̂ is a well-chosen root for the 
function by a model  𝑓(𝒙): 𝑓(𝒙̂ ) = 0, because 𝑓(𝒙) can be 
decomposed 
as 𝑓(𝒙) = 𝑓(𝒙̂) + (
𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝒙|𝒙=𝒙̂)
𝑇
⋅(𝒙−𝒙̂) + 𝜖=
0 + ∑
𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝑥𝑖|𝒙=𝒙̂(𝑥𝑖−𝑥̂𝑖)
𝑖
+ 𝜖, where 𝜖 is high-order terms, the 
pixel relevance for the pixel 𝑖 is expressed as 𝑅𝑖=

𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝑥𝑖|𝒙=𝒙̂(𝑥𝑖−𝑥̂𝑖).  Inspired by the fact that even though a 
neuron is not fired, it is still likely to reveal useful information, 
A. Shrikumar et al. [156] proposed DeepLIFT to compute the 
difference between the activation of each neuron and its 
reference, where the reference is the activation of that neuron 
when the network is provided a reference input, and then 
backpropagate the difference to the image space layer by layer 
as LRP does. C. Singh et al. [159] introduced contextual 
decomposition whose layer propagation formula is 𝛽𝑖=
𝑾𝛽𝑖−1 +
|𝑾𝛽𝑖−1|
|𝑾𝛽𝑖−1 |+|𝑾𝛾𝑖−1| ⋅𝑏
 and 
𝛾𝑖= 𝑾𝛾𝑖−1 +
|𝑾𝛾𝑖−1|
|𝑾𝛽𝑖−1 |+|𝑾𝛾𝑖−1| ⋅𝑏, where 𝑾 is the weight matrix between the 
𝑖𝑡ℎ and (𝑖−1)𝑡ℎ layers and 𝑏 is the bias vector. The 
restricting condition is 𝑔𝑖(𝑥) = 𝛽𝑖(𝑥) + 𝛾𝑖(𝑥), where 𝑔𝑖(𝑥) is 
the output of 𝑖𝑡ℎ layer.  𝛽𝑖(𝑥) is considered as the contextual 
contribution of the input and 𝛾𝑖(𝑥) implies contribution of the 
input to 𝑔𝑖(𝑥) that is not included in 𝛽𝑖(𝑥). 
Figure 6 showcases the evaluation of raw gradients, 
SmoothGrad, IntegratedGrad, and Deep Taylor methods with 
a LeNet-5-like network. Among them, IntegratedGrad and 
Deep Taylor methods perform superbly on five digits. 
Mutual-information measure to quantify the association 
between inputs and latent representations of a deep model can 
also similarly work as the saliency [63], [149], [194]. In 
addition, there are other methods to obtain saliency maps as 
well. A. S. Ross et al. [145] defined a new loss term 
∑(𝑨𝑖
𝜕
𝜕𝒙𝑖∑
log(𝑦̂𝑘)
𝐾
𝑘=1
)
2
𝑖
 for training, where 𝑖 is an index of a 
pixel, 𝑨𝑖 is the binary mask to be optimized, 𝑦̂𝑘 is the 𝑘𝑡ℎ digit 
of the label, and 𝐾 is the number of class. This loss is to 
penalize the sharpness of gradients towards a clearer 
interpretation boundary. R. C. Fong and A. Vedaldi [52] 
explored to learn the smallest region to delete, which is to find 
the optimal 𝒎∗: 
𝒎∗ = arg min 
𝑚∈[0,1]𝑛  𝜆||𝟏−𝒎||1 + 𝑓𝑐(𝑥0; 𝒎),   
where 𝒎 is the soft mask, 𝑓𝑐(𝑥0; 𝒎) represents the loss of the 
network for an image 𝑥0 with the soft mask, and 𝑛 is the 
number of pixels. T. Lei et al. [102] utilized a generator to 
specify segments of an original text as so-called rationales, 
which fulfill two conditions: 1) rationales should be sufficient 
as a replacement for the initial text; 2) rationales should be 
short and coherent. Deriving rationales is actually equivalent 
to deriving a binary mask, which can be regarded as a saliency 
map. Based on the above two constraints, the penalty term for 
a mask is formulated as:  
Ω(z) = λ1||𝒛||1 + 𝜆2 ∑|𝑧𝑡−𝑧𝑡−1|
𝑡
, 
where 𝒛= [𝑧1, 𝑧2, … ] is a mask, the first term penalizes the 
number of rationales, and the second term is for smoothness.   
The class activation map method (CAM [210]) and its variant 
[151] utilized global average pooling before a fully connected 
layer to derive the discriminative area. Specifically, let 
𝑓𝑘(𝑥, 𝑦) represent the 𝑘𝑡ℎ feature map, for a given class 𝑐, the 
input to the softmax layer is ∑𝑤𝑘
𝑐∑
𝑓𝑘(𝑥, 𝑦)
𝑥,𝑦
,
𝑘
where 𝑤𝑘
𝑐 is 
the weight vector connecting the 𝑘𝑡ℎ feature map and the class 
𝑐. The discriminative area is obtained as ∑𝑤𝑘
𝑐𝑓𝑘(𝑥, 𝑦)
𝑘
, which 
directly implies the importance of the pixel at (𝑥, 𝑦) for class 
𝑐. What’s more, some weakly supervised learning methods 
such as M. Oquab et al. [135] can obtain discriminative areas 
as well. Specifically, they trained a network only with object 
labels, however, when they rescaled the feature maps 
produced by the max-pooling layer, it was surprisingly found 
that these feature maps were consistent with the locations of 
objects in the input. 
 
Figure 6. Interpreting a LeNet-5-like network by raw gradient, SmoothGrad, 
Integrated Gradient, and Deep Taylor methods, respectively. It is seen that 
Integrated Gradient and Deep Taylor methods have sharper and less noisy 
saliency map. 
 Proxy  
There are about three ways to prototype a proxy. The first one 
is direct extraction. The gist of direct extraction is to construct 
a new interpretable model such as a decision tree [92], [192] 
or a rule-based system directly from the trained model. As far 
as the rule extraction is concerned, both decompositional [152] 
and pedagogical methods [147], [173] can be used. 
Pedagogical approaches extract rules that enjoy a similar 
input-output relationship with that of a neural network. These 
rules do not correspond to the weights and structure of the 
network. For example, the Validity Interval Analysis (VIA) 
[118] extracts rules in the following form: 
      IF (input ∈ a hypercube), THEN class is 𝐶𝑗. 
R. Setiono and H. Liu [152] clustered hidden unit activation 
values based on the proximity of activation values. Then, the 
activation values of each cluster were denoted by their average 
activation values, at the same time kept the accuracy of the 
neural network as intact as possible. Next, the input data with 
the same average hidden unit activation value were clustered 
together to obtain a complete set of rules. In Figure 7, we 
illustrate obtained rules from a one-hidden-layer network 
using R. Setiono and H. Liu’s method over the Iris dataset.  In 
a neural network for a binary classification problem, the 

decision boundaries divide the input space into two parts, 
corresponding to two classes respectively. The explanation 
system HYPINV developed in E. W. Saad et al. [147] 
computes for each and every decision boundary hyperplane a 
tangent vector. The sign of an inner product between an input 
instance and a tangent vector will imply the position of the 
input instance relative to the decision boundary. Based on 
such a fact, a rule system can be established. 
 
Figure 7. Rule extraction process as proposed by R. Setiono and H. Liu [152].  
(a) A one-hidden-layer network with three hidden neurons is constructed to 
classify the Iris dataset. (b) Rules are extracted via discretizing activation 
values of hidden units and clustering of inputs, where Petal length and Petal 
width are dominating attributes for classification of Iris samples. The 
extracted rules have the same classification performance as that of the original 
neural network.  
Lastly, some specialized networks such as ANFIS [80] and 
RBF networks [126], straightforwardly correspond to fuzzy 
logic systems. For example, an RBF network is equivalent to a 
Takagi-Sugeno rule system [172] that comprises rules such as 
“if 𝑥∈set 𝐴 and 𝑦∈set 𝐵, then 𝑧= 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦)” [136]. Fuzzy 
logic interpretation in [48] considers each neuron/filter in a 
network as a generalized fuzzy logic gate. In this view, a 
neural network is nothing but a deep fuzzy logic system. 
Specifically, they analyzed a new type of neural networks, 
called quadratic networks, in which all the neurons are 
quadratic neurons that replace the inner product with the 
quadratic operation [47]. Their interpretation generalized 
fuzzy logic gates implemented by quadratic neurons, and then 
computed the entropy based on spectral information of fuzzy 
operations in a network. It was suggested that such an entropy 
could have deep connections with properties of minima and 
the complexity of neural networks. 
The second one is called knowledge distillation [23] as Figure 
8 shows. Although knowledge distillation techniques are 
mostly used for model compression, their principles can also 
be used for interpretability. The motif of knowledge 
distillation is that cumbersome models can generate relatively 
accurate predictions, assigning probabilities to all the possible 
classes, known as soft labels, that are more informative than 
one-hot labels. For example, a horse is more likely to be 
classified as a dog instead of a mountain. But with one-hot 
labeling, both the dog class and mountain class have zero 
probability. It was shown in [23] that, by the means of 
matching the logits of the original model, the generalization 
ability of the original cumbersome model could be transferred 
into a simpler model. Along this direction, an interpretable 
proxy model such as a decision tree [38], [186], a decision set 
[98], a global additive model [171], and a simpler network [75] 
were developed. For example, S. Tan et al. [171] used soft 
labels to train a global additive model in the form ℎ0 +
∑ℎ𝑖(𝑥𝑖)
𝑖
+ ∑
ℎ𝑖𝑗(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗)
𝑖≠𝑗
+ ∑
∑
ℎ𝑖𝑗𝑘(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗, 𝑥𝑘)
𝑗≠𝑘
𝑖≠𝑗
+ ⋯, 
where {ℎ𝑖}𝑖≥1 could work as a feature saliency directly. 
 
Figure 8. Knowledge distillation is to construct an interpretable proxy by the 
soft labels from the original complex models.  
The last one is to provide a local explainer as a proxy. Local 
explainer methods locally mimic the predictive behaviors of 
neural networks. The basic rationale is that when a neural 
network is inspected globally, it looks complex. However, if 
we tackle it locally, the picture becomes clearer.  
One typical local explainer is Local Interpretable Model-
agnostic Explanation (LIME) [141], which synthesizes a 
number of neighbor instances by randomly setting elements of 
that sample to zero and computing the corresponding 
outcomes. Then, a linear regressor is used to fit synthesized 
instances, where the coefficients of the linear model signify 
the contributions of features. As Figure 9 shows, the LIME 
method is applied to a breast cancer classification model to 
identify which attributes are contributing forces for the 
model’s benign or malignant prediction. 
 
Figure 9. A breast cancer classification task model dissected by LIME. In this 
case, the sample is classified as benign where worst concave point, mean 
concave point and so on are contributing forces, while the worst perimeter is 
the contributing force to drive the model to predict “malignant”. 
Y. Zhang et al. [207] pointed out the lack of robustness in the 
LIME explanation, which originates from sampling variance, 
sensitivity to the choice of parameters, and variation across 
different data points. Anchor [142] is an improved extension 
of LIME, which is to find the most important segments of an 
input such that the variability of the rest segments does not 
matter. Mathematically, Anchor searches a set: 𝐴= {𝑧|𝑓(𝑧) =
𝑓(𝑥), 𝑧∈𝑥}, where 𝑓(⋅) is a black-box model, 𝑥 is the input, 
and 𝑧 is the part of 𝑥. Another proposal LOcal Rule-based 
Explanation (LORE) was from [64]. The LORE takes 
advantage of the genetic algorithm to generate the balanced 
neighbors instead of random neighbors, thereby yielding high-
quality training data that alleviates sampling variance of LIME.  

 Advanced Mathematical/Physical Analysis  
Y. Lu et al. [114] showed that many residual networks can be 
explained as discretized numerical solutions of ordinary 
differential equations, i.e., the inner-working of a residual 
block in ResNet [69] can be modeled as 𝑢𝑛+1 = 𝑢𝑛+ 𝑓(𝑢𝑛), 
where 𝑢𝑛 is the output of the 𝑛𝑡ℎ block, and 𝑓(𝑢𝑛) is the block 
operation. It was noticed that 𝑢𝑛+1 = 𝑢𝑛+ 𝑓(𝑢𝑛) is a one-step 
finite difference approximation of an ordinary differential 
equation 
𝑑𝑢
𝑑𝑡= 𝑓(𝑢). This idea inspired the invention of ODE-
Net [32]. As Figure 10 shows, the starting point and the 
dynamics are tuned by an ODE-Net to fit a spiral. 
 
Figure 10. ODE-Net optimizes the start point and the dynamics to fit the spiral 
shape. 
N. Lei et al. [101] constructed an elegant connection between 
the Wasserstein generative adversarial network (WGAN [8]) 
and optimal transportation theory. They concluded that with 
low dimensionality hypothesis and the intentionally designed 
distance function, a generator and a discriminator can exactly 
represent each other in a closed form. Therefore, the 
competition between a discriminator and a generator in 
WGAN in the training is unnecessary.  
 
Figure 11: An application of information bottleneck theory to compare mutual 
information between symmetric layers in an autoencoder.  
In [154], it was proposed that the learning of a neural network 
is to extract the most relevant information in the input random 
variable 𝑋 that pertains to an output random variable 𝑌. 
Naively, for a feedforward neural network, the following 
inequality of mutual information holds: 
𝐼(𝑌; 𝑋) ≥𝐼(𝑌; ℎ𝑗) ≥𝐼(𝑌; ℎ𝑖) ≥𝐼(𝑌; 𝑌̂), 
where 𝐼(⋅;⋅) denotes mutual information,  ℎ𝑖, ℎ𝑗 are outputs of 
hidden layers (𝑖> 𝑗 means that the 𝑖𝑡ℎ layer is deeper), and  𝑌̂ 
is a final prediction. Furthermore, S. Yu and J. C. Principe 
[198] employed an information bottleneck theory to gauge the 
mutual information states of symmetric layers in a stacked 
autoencoder as shown in Figure 11: 
𝐼(𝑋; 𝑋′) ≥𝐼(𝑇1; 𝑇1
′) ≥⋯≥𝐼(𝑇𝐾; 𝑇𝐾
′ ). 
However, it is tricky to estimate the mutual information since 
the probabilistic distribution of data is usually unknown as a 
priori. 
S. Kolouri et al. [91] built an integral geometric explanation 
for neural networks with a generalized Radon transform. Let 𝑋 
be a random variable for the input, which conforms to the 
distribution 𝑝𝑋, then we can derive a probability distribution 
function for the output of a neural network 𝑓𝜃(𝑋) parametrized 
with 𝜃: 𝑝𝑓𝜃(𝑧) = ∫𝑝𝑋(𝑥)𝛿(𝑧−𝑓𝜃(𝑥))
X
𝑑𝑥, which is the 
generalized Radon transform, and the hypersurface is 
𝐻(𝑡, 𝜃) = {𝑥∈𝑋|𝑓𝜃(𝑥) = 𝑡}. In this regard, the transform by 
a neural network is characterized by the twisted hypersurfaces. 
H. Huang [77] used the mean-field theory to characterize the 
mechanism of dimensionality reduction by a deep network 
that assumes weights in each layer and input data following a 
Gaussian distribution. In his study, the self-covariance matrix 
of the output of the 𝑙𝑡ℎ layer was computed as 𝐶𝑙, then the 
intrinsic dimensionality was defined as 𝐷=
(∑
𝜆𝑖
𝑁
𝑖=1
)
2
∑
𝜆𝑖
2
𝑁
𝑖=1
, where 
𝜆𝑖 is the eigenvalue of 𝐶𝑙, and 𝑁 is the number of eigenvalues. 
The quantity 𝐷/𝑁 was investigated across layers to analyze 
how compact representation are learned across layers. J. C. Ye 
et al. [193] utilized a framelet theory and low-rank Hankel 
matrix to represent signals in terms of their local and non-local 
bases, corresponding to convolution and generalized pooling 
operations. However, in their study the network structure was 
simplified in concatenating two ReLU units into a linear unit 
such that the nonlinearity from ReLU units could be 
circumvented. As far as advanced physic models are 
concerned, P. Mehta and D. C. Schwab [121] built an exact 
mapping from the Kadanoff variational renormalized group 
[82] to the restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) [148]. This 
mapping is independent of forms of the energy functions and 
can be scaled to any RBM. 
Theoretical 
neural 
network 
studies 
are 
essential 
to 
interpretability as well. Currently, theoretical foundations of 
deep learning are primarily from three perspectives: 
representation, optimization, and generalization.  
Representation: Let us include two examples here. The first 
example is to explain why deep networks is superior to 
shallow ones. Recognizing success of deep networks, L. 
Szymanski and B. McCane [170], D. Rolnick and M. Tegmark 
[144], N. Cohen et al. [37], H. N. Mhaskar and T. Poggio 
[124], R. Eldan and O. Shamir [44], and S. Liang and R. 
Srikant [109] justified that a deep network is more expressive 
than a shallow one. The basic idea is to construct a special 
class of functions that can be efficiently represented by a deep 
network but hard to be approximated by a shallow one. The 
second example is to understand utilities of shortcut 
connections of deep networks. A. Veit et al. [178] showed that 
residual connections can render a neural network to manifest 
an ensemble-like behavior. Along this direction, it was 

reported in [110] that with shortcuts, a network can be super 
slim to allow for universal approximation.  
Optimization: Generally, optimizing a deep network is a NP-
hard non-convex problem. The pervasive existence of saddle 
points [56] leads to that even finding a local minimum is also 
NP-hard [5]. Of particular interest to us is why an over-
parametrized network can still be optimized well because a 
deep network is a kind of over-parametrized networks. The 
character of an over-parameterized network is that the number 
of parameters in a network exceeds the number of data 
instances. M. Soltanolkotabi et al. [163] showed that when 
data are Gaussian distributed and activation functions of 
neurons are quadratic, the landscape of an over-parameterized 
one-hidden-layer network allows global optimum to be 
searched efficiently. Q. Nguyen and M. Hein [130] 
demonstrated that with respect to linearly separable data, 
under assumptions on the rank of weight matrices of a 
feedforward neural network, every critical point of a loss 
function is a global minimum. Furthermore, A. Jacot et al. 
[78] showed that when the number of neurons in each layer of 
a neural network goes infinitely large, the training only 
renders small changes for the network function. As a result, 
the training of the network turns into the kernel ridge 
regression. 
Generalization: 
Conventional 
generalization 
theory 
is 
incompetent to explain why a deep network can generalize 
well despite that the number of parameters of a deep network 
is many more than the number of samples. Recently proposed 
generalization bounds [127] that rely on the norm of weight 
matrices partially solved this problem. However, these bounds 
have an abnormal dependence on data that more data lead to a 
larger generalization bound, which apparently contradicts the 
common sense. We prospect that more efforts are needed to 
resolve the generalization puzzle satisfactorily [18], [122].  
 Explaining-by-Case  
Basically, case-based explanations present a case that is 
believed by a neural network to be most similar to the query 
case needing an explanation. Finding a similar case for 
explanation and selecting a representative case from data as 
the prototype [19] are basically the same thing and just use 
different metrics for similarity. While prototype selection is to 
find a minimal subset of instances that can represent the whole 
dataset, case-based explanations use the similarity metric 
based on the closeness of representations of a neural network, 
thereby exposing the hidden representation information of the 
neural network. In this light, case-based explanations are also 
related to deep metric learning [150].  
As shown in Figure 12, E. Wallace et al. [181] employed the 
k-nearest neighbor algorithm to obtain the most similar cases 
for the query case in the feature space and then computed the 
percentage of the nearest neighbors belonging to the expected 
class as a measure for interpretability, suggesting how much a 
prediction is supported by data. C. Chen et al. [31] constructed 
a model that could dissect images by finding prototypical parts. 
Specifically, the pipeline of the model splits into multiple 
channels after convolutional layers, in which the function of 
each channel is expected to learn a prototypical part of the 
input such as the head or body of a bird. The decision for an 
input image is made based on the similarity of features of 
channels.  
 
Figure 12. Explaining-by-case presents the nearest neighbors in response to a 
query.  
S. Wachter et al. [180] offered a novel case-based explanation 
method by providing a counterfactual case, which is an 
imaginary case that is close to the query but has a different 
output from that of the query. Counterfactual explanation 
provides the so-called “closest possible case” or the smallest 
change to yield a different outcome. For example, 
counterfactual explanations may produce the following 
statement: “If you have a good striker, your team would have 
won this soccer game.” Coincidently, techniques to generate a 
counterfactual explanation have been developed for the 
purpose of “adversarial perturbation”, i.e., structural attack 
[191]. Essentially, finding a closest possible case 𝑥′ to the 
input 𝑥 is equivalent to finding the smallest perturbation to 𝑥 
such that the classification result changes. For example, the 
following optimization can be built: 
arg min 
       𝑥′
  𝜆(𝑓(𝑥′) −𝑦′)2 + 𝑑(𝑥, 𝑥′),   
where 𝜆 is a constant, 𝑦′  is a different label, and 𝑑(⋅,⋅) is 
chosen to be the Manhattan distance in hope that the input be 
minimally perturbed. Y. Goyal et al. [62] explored an 
alternative way to derive a counterfactual visual explanation. 
Given an image 𝐼 with a label 𝑐, since the counterfactual 
visual explanation represents the change for the input that can 
force the model to yield a different prediction class 𝑐′, they 
selected an image 𝐼′ with a label 𝑐′ and managed to recognize 
the spatial region in 𝐼 and 𝐼′ such that the replacement of the 
recognized region would alter the model prediction from 𝑐 to 
𝑐′.  
 Explaining-by-Text  
Neural image captioning uses a neural network to produce a 
natural language description for an image. Despite that neural 
image captioning is initially not for network interpretability, 
descriptive language about images can tell the information 
about how a neural network analyzes an image. One 
representative method is from [84] that combines a 
convolutional neural network and a bidirectional recurrent 
neural network to obtain a bimodal embedding. Due to the 
hypothesis that the two embeddings representing similar 
semantics across two modalities should share the nearby 
locations of two spaces, the objective function is defined as  

𝑆𝐼𝑇= ∑max
𝑖∈𝑔𝐼𝑣𝑖
𝑇𝑠𝑡
𝑡∈𝑔𝑇
, 
where 𝑣𝑖 is the 𝑖𝑡ℎ image fragment in the set 𝑔𝐼, and 𝑠𝑡 is the 
𝑡𝑡ℎ word in a sentence 𝑔𝑇. Another representative method is 
the attention mechanism [137], [179], [189], [190], where 
deep features are to align the corresponding text descriptions 
by a recursive neural network such as LSTM [73]. An 
explanation for deep features is provided by the corresponding 
words in the text and attention maps, which reflect which parts 
of an image attract the attention of the neural network.  
As shown in Figure 13, in the 𝑘𝑡ℎ attention module that takes 
𝑦0, 𝑦1, … , 𝑦𝑛 as input, suppose its output is 𝑡𝑘= ∑𝑦𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖
𝑖
. 
𝑠𝑘0, 𝑠𝑘1, … , 𝑠𝑘𝑛 together form an attention map for 𝑡𝑘 with 
respect to the associated word. However, S. Jain and B. C. 
Wallace [79] argued that an attention map is not qualified to 
work as an explanation because they observed that the 
attention map was not correlated with other importance 
measures of features such as gradient-based measures, and the 
change of attention weights yielded no changes in prediction. 
  
Figure 13. Image captioning with attention modules provides an explanation 
to the features mined by a deep convolutional network.  
C. Ad-hoc Interpretable Modeling 
 Interpretable Representation  
Traditionally, regularization techniques for deep learning are 
primarily designed to avoid overfitting. However, it is also 
feasible to devise regularization techniques to enhance an 
interpretable representation in terms of decomposability [33], 
[165], [182], [205], monotonicity [195], non-negativity [34], 
sparsity [167], human-in-the-loop prior [96], and so on.  
For example, X. Chen et al. [33] invented InfoGAN which is a 
simple but effective way to learn 
an interpretable 
representation. Traditionally, a generative adversarial network 
(GAN) [60] imposes no restrictions on how a generator 
utilizes the noise. In contrast, InfoGAN maximizes the mutual 
information between the latent codes and observations, forcing 
each dimension of noise to encode a semantic concept. 
Particularly, the latent codes are made of discrete categorical 
codes and continuous style codes. As shown in Figure 14, two 
style codes control the localized part and the digit rotation 
respectively.  
Incorporating monotonicity constraints [195] is also useful to 
enhance interpretability. A monotonical relationship means 
when the value of a specified attribute increases, the predictive 
value of a model either increases or decreases. Such a 
simplicity promotes interpretability as well. J. Chorowski and 
J. M. Zurada [34] imposed non-negativity to weights of neural 
networks and argued that it could improve interpretability 
because it eliminated the cancellation and aliasing effects 
among neurons. A. Subramanian et al. [167] employed a k-
sparse autoencoder for word embedding to promote sparsity in 
the embedding and claimed that this enhanced interpretability 
because a sparse embedding reduced the overlap between 
words. I. Lage et al. [96] proposed a novel human-in-the-loop 
evaluation in selecting a model. Specifically, a diverse set of 
models were trained and sent to users for evaluation. Users 
were asked to predict what the label of a data point would be 
assigned by a model 𝑀. The shorter the response time was, the 
better a user understanded the model. Then, the model with 
the lowest response time was chosen. 
 
Figure 14. In an InfoGAN, two latent codes control the localized parts and 
rotation parts respectively.  
 Model Renovation  
L. Chu et al. [35] proposed to use piecewise linear functions 
as activations for a neural network (PLNN), thereby the 
decision boundaries of PLNN could be explicitly defined and 
further a closed-form solution could be derived for predictions 
of a network. As Figure 15 shown, F. Fan et al. [49] proposed 
Soft-Autoencoder (Soft-AE) by 
using adaptable soft-
thresholding units in encoding layers and linear units in 
decoding layers. Consequently, Soft-AE can be interpreted as 
a learned cascaded wavelet adaptation system.  
 
Figure 15. Soft-autoencoder with soft-thresholding functions as activation 
functions in the encoding layers and the linear function as activations in the 
decoding layers, thereby admitting a direct correspondence to the wavelet 
adaptation system.  

L. Fan [50] explained a neural network as a generalized 
Hamming network, whose neurons compute the generalized 
Hamming distance: ℎ(𝒙, 𝒘) = ∑
𝑤𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
+ ∑
𝑥𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
−2𝒙⋅𝒘 for 
an input 𝒙= (𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝐿) and a weight vector 𝒘= (𝑤1, … , 𝑤𝐿). 
The bias term in each neuron is specified as 𝑏=
−
1
2 (∑
𝑤𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
+ ∑
𝑥𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
) so that each neuron is a generalized 
Hamming neuron. In this regard, the function of the batch 
normalization is demystified as making the bias suitable for 
computation of the generalized Hamming distance. C. C. J. 
Kuo et al. [95] proposed a transparent design for constructing 
a feedforward convolutional network without the need of 
backpropagation. Specifically, filters in convolutional layers 
were built by selecting principal components of PCA for 
outputs of earlier pooling layers. A fully connected layer was 
constructed by treating it as a linear-squared regressor. 
D. A. Melis and T. Jaakkola [123] claimed that a neural 
network model 𝑓 is interpretable if it has the form that 𝑓(𝑥) =
𝑔(𝜃1(𝑥)ℎ1(𝑥), … , 𝜃𝑘(𝑥)ℎ𝑘(𝑥))
, 
where 
ℎ𝑖(𝑥)
 is 
the 
prototypical concept from the input 𝑥 and 𝜃𝑖(𝑥)  is the 
relevance associated with that concept, 𝑔 is monotonic and 
completely additively separable. Such a model can learn 
interpretable basis concepts and facilitate saliency analysis. 
Similarly, J. Vaughan et al. [177] designed a network structure 
to compatibly learn the function formulated as 𝑓(𝑥) = 𝜇+
𝛾1ℎ1(𝛽1
𝑇𝑥) + 𝛾2ℎ2(𝛽2
𝑇𝑥) + ⋯+ 𝛾𝐾ℎ𝐾(𝛽𝐾
𝑇𝑥), where 𝛽𝑘 is the 
projection, ℎ𝑘(⋅) represents the nonlinear transformation, 𝜇 is 
the bias, and 𝛾𝑘 is the weighting factor. Such a model is more 
interpretable than a general network, because the function of 
this model has simpler partial derivatives that can simplify 
saliency analysis, statistical analysis, and so on.  
C. Li et al. [104] proposed deep supervision by using prior 
hierarchical tasks on features of intermediate layers. 
Specifically, we have a dataset {(𝑥, 𝑦1, … , 𝑦𝑚)}, where labels 
𝑦1, … , 𝑦𝑚 are hierarchical that 𝑦𝑗, 𝑗< 𝑖 is a strict necessary 
condition for the existence of 𝑦𝑖, 𝑖> 1.  Such a scheme 
introduces a modularized idea that through supervision of a 
specific task for an intermediate layer, the learning of that 
layer is steered towards the pre-specified task, thereby gaining 
interpretability.  
T. Wang [183] proposed to use an interpretable and insertable 
substitute on a subset of data which the complex black-box 
model overkills. In their work, a rule set was built as an 
interpretable model to make a decision on the input data first. 
Those inputs which a rule set was handicapped to classify 
were passed into the black-box model for decision making. 
The logic of this hybrid predictive system is that an 
interpretable model for regular cases without compromising 
accuracy, a complex black-box model for complicated cases.  
C. Jiang et al. [81] proposed finite automata-recurrent neural 
network (FA-RNN) that can be directly transformed into the 
regular expressions such that a good interpretability is 
extracted. The roadmap is that the constructed FA-RNN can 
be approximated into finite automata, and further transformed 
into regular expressions because finite automata and a regular 
expression are mutually convertible. In analogy, a regular 
expression can also be decoded into an FA-RNN as an 
initialization. FA-RNN is a good example to manifest the 
synergy between a rule system and a neural network. 
III. INTERPRETABILITY IN MEDICINE  
These days, reports are often seen in the news that deep 
learning-based algorithms outperform experts or classic 
algorithms in the field of medicine [153].  Indeed, given an 
adequate computational power and well-curated datasets, a 
properly designed model can deliver competitive performance 
in most well-defined pattern recognition tasks. However, due 
to the high stakes of medicine-concerned applications, it is not 
sufficient to have a deep learning model that produces correct 
answers without an explanation. In this section, we focus on 
several 
exemplary 
papers 
concerning 
applications 
of 
interpretability methods in medicine, and we organize the 
articles of relevance in accordance with the aforementioned 
taxonomy.  
 Post-hoc Interpretability Analysis  
Feature analysis 
P. Van Molle et al. [176] visualized convolutional neural 
networks 
to 
assist 
decision-making 
for 
skin 
lesion 
classification. In their work, feature activations generated from 
the last two convolutional layers were rescaled to the size of 
an input image as the activation maps. Where a map has high 
activations were inspected. The activation strengths across 
different border types, skin colors, skin types, etc. were 
compared. The activation map exposed a risk that some 
unexpected regions had uncommonly high activations.  
D. Bychkov et al. [24] utilized a model that combines a VGG-
16 network [158] and an LSTM network [73] to predict five-
year survival of colorectal cancer based on digitized tumor 
tissue samples. In their work, an RGB pathological image was 
split into many tiles. A VGG-16 network extracted a high-
dimensional feature vector from each tile, which was then fed 
into an LSTM network to predict five-year survival. They 
used t-SNE [116] to map features learned by VGG-16 into a 
two-dimensional space for visualization and found that 
different classes of features of VGG-16 were well separated. 
Saliency 
I. Sturm et al. [166] applied a deep network with LRP [11] for 
the single-trial EEG [22] classification. The network entails 
two linear mean pooling layers before being activated or 
normalized. The feature importance score is assigned by LRP 
(S. Bach et al., 2015).  
J. R. Zech et al. [200] developed a deep learning model for 
chest radiography to classify patients into having pneumonia 
or not. Through interpretability analysis by CAM [210], they 
reported the risk that a deep learning model could make an 
incorrect decision by capturing features irrelevant to diseases, 
such as metal tokens.  
O. Oktay et al. [134] combined attention gates with the 
decoder part of U-Net to cope with interpatient variation in 
organs’ shapes and sizes. The proposed model can improve 
model sensitivity and accuracy by inhibiting representations of 

irrelevant regions. Aided by attention gates, they found that 
the model gradually shifted its attention to regions of interest.  
D. Ardila et al. [7] proposed a deep learning algorithm that 
considers a patient’s current and previous CT volumes to 
predict the risk of lung cancer. They used the integrated 
gradient method [168] to derive saliency maps and invited 
experienced radiologists to examine the fidelity of these maps. 
It turned out that in all cases, the readers strongly agreed that 
the model indeed focused on the nodules. 
H. Lee et al. [100] reported an attention-assisted deep learning 
system for detection and classification of acute intracranial 
haemorrhage, where an attention map identified a region 
relevant to the disease. They evaluated the localization 
accuracy of the attention maps by computing the proportion of 
bleeding points overlapping with the attention maps. Overall, 
it was found that 78.1% bleeding points were detected in the 
attention maps.  
W. Caicedo-Torres and J. Gutierrez [25] proposed a multi-
scale deep convolutional neural network for the mortality 
prediction based on the measurement of 22 different items in 
ICU such as the sodium index, urine output, etc. In their work, 
three 
temporal 
scales 
were 
represented 
by 
stacking 
convolutional kernels of dimensions 3 × 1, 6 × 1, and 12 × 1. 
The saliency map by DeepLIFT [156] was utilized for 
interpretability. 
H. Guo et al. [66] introduced an effective dual-stream network 
that conjugates extracted features from ResNet [69] and 
clinical prior knowledge to predict the mortality risk of 
patients based on low-dose CT images. To further testify the 
effectiveness of the proposed model, they utilized t-SNE [116] 
to reduce the dimensionality of feature maps of malignant and 
benign samples and found that malignant and benign features 
were well separated. Also, they applied CAM [210] to reveal 
that the deceased subjects correctly classified by the model 
were prone to have strong activations. 
Proxy 
Z. Che et al. (2016) applied knowledge distillation into a deep 
model to learn a gradient boosting tree [106] (GBT), that 
provides not only robust prediction performance but also a 
good interpretability in the context of electronic health record 
prediction. Specifically, they trained three deep models 
respectively, and then used predictions of deep models as 
labels to train a GBT model. Experiments on a Pediatric ICU 
dataset were reported that the GBT model maintained the 
prediction performance of deep models in terms of mortality 
and ventilator-free days.  
S. Pereira et al. [138] combined global and local interpretation 
efforts for brain tumor segmentation and penumbra estimation 
in stroke lesions, where the global interpretability was derived 
from mutual information to sense the dependence between an 
input sample and the prediction, while the local interpretability 
was cast by a variant of LIME [141].  
Explaining-by-Case 
N. C. F. Codella et al. [36] employed saliency and explaining-
by-case methods to explain a dermoscopic image analysis 
network which was jointly trained by disease labels with a 
triple-let loss. Specifically, the interpretability was gained by 
the discovered neighbors and localized regions that were most 
relevant to the distance from queries and neighbors.  
Explaining-by-Text 
Z. Zhang et al. [208] proposed an all-in-one network that read 
pathology bladder cancer images, generated diagnostic reports, 
retrieved images according to symptomatic descriptions, and 
visualized attention maps. They designed an auxiliary 
attention sharpening module to improve the discriminability of 
attention maps. Pathologists’ feedbacks suggested that the 
explanatory maps tended to highlight regions that concern 
with carcinoma-informative regions.  
 Ad-hoc Interpretable Modeling  
Interpretable Representation 
X. Fang and P. Yan [51] devised the Pyramid Input Pyramid 
Output Feature Abstraction Network (PIPO-FAN) with 
multiple arms for multi-organ segmentation. Each of the arm 
handles the information on one scale. The total loss is obtained 
by adding the segmentation loss to each of these arms such 
that segmentation-wise features are generated in each arm. 
Visualization analysis suggested that features from different 
arms have hierarchical semantical meanings, i.e., some are 
blurry but contain global class-wise information, while the 
others contain local boundary information. As shown in Figure 
16, the segmentation loss creates semantically meaningful 
features, where low-scale arms produce more details and high-
scale arms find global morphologies. 
 
Figure 16. Visualization of feature maps of different arms in PIPO-FAN, 
where low-scale sub-networks produce local structural details and high-scale 
sub-networks target global morphological information. 
Model Renovation 
W. Gale et al. [55] combined a DenseNet (G. Huang et al., 
2017) model with an LSTM model [73] for detection of hip 
features from pelvic X-ray radiographs. A radiologist hand-
labelled standard descriptive terms to construct a semantic 
dataset for these radiographs. Their model consistently 
generated informative sentences favored by doctors over 
saliency maps. Also, they demonstrated that the combination 
of visualization and text interpretation give an interpretation 
superior to either of them alone. 

C. Biffi et al. [20] employed a variational autoencoder [87] 
(VAE)-based model for classification of cardiac diseases as 
well as structurally remodeling based on cardiovascular 
images. In their scheme, registered left ventricular (LV) 
segmentations at end-diastolic (ED) and end-systolic (ES) 
phases were encoded in a low-dimensional latent space by 
VAE. The learned latent low dimensional manifold was 
connected to a multilayer perceptron (MLP) for disease 
classification. The interpretation was given by an activation 
maximization technique. The “deep dream” of MLP was 
derived and inverted to the image space for visualization. 
S. Shen et al. [155] built an interpretable deep hierarchical 
semantic convolutional neural network (HSCNN) to predict 
the malignancy of pulmonary nodules in CT images. HSCNN 
consists of three modules: a general feature learning module, a 
low-level task module that predicts semantic characteristics 
such as sphericity, margin, subtlety, and so on, and a high-
level task module absorbs information from both general 
features and low-level task predictions to produce an overall 
lung nodule malignancy. Due to the semantic meaning 
contained in the low-level task, HSCNN has boosted 
interpretability. 
Z. Zhang et al. [209] developed a deep convolutional network 
to automate the whole-slide reading of pathology images for 
tumors and the diagnosis process of pathologists. Specially, 
the network can generate a clinical pathology report along 
with attention-assisted features. 
Y. Lei et al. [103] observed that CAM [210] and Grad-CAM 
[151] are for interpreting localization tasks and tend to ignore 
fine-grained structures. Consequently, they proposed a shape-
and-margin-aware soft activation map (SAM) that could probe 
subtle but critical features in a lung nodule classification task. 
The comprehensive experimental comparisons showed that 
compared to CAM and Grad-CAM, SAM can reveal relatively 
discrete and irregular features around nodules. 
IV. PERSPECTIVE 
In this section, we suggest a few directions, in hope to advance 
the understanding and practice of artificial neural networks. 
 Synergy of Fuzzy Logic and Deep Learning  
Fuzzy logic [199] was a buzz phrase in the last nighties. It 
extends the Boolean logic from 0-1 judgement to imprecise 
inference with fuzziness in the interval [0, 1]. Fuzzy theory 
can be divided into two branches: fuzzy set theory and fuzzy 
logic theory. The latter, with an emphasis on “IF-THEN” rules, 
has demonstrated effectiveness in dealing with a plethora of 
complicated 
system 
modeling 
and 
control 
problems. 
Nevertheless, a fuzzy rule-based system is restricted by the 
acquisition of a large number of fuzzy rules, a process that is 
tedious and computationally expensive. While a neural 
network is a data-driven method that extracts knowledge from 
data through training, with the knowledge represented by 
neurons in a distributed manner. However, a neural network 
falls short of delivering a satisfactory result in the context of 
small data and suffers from the lack of interpretability. In 
contrast, a fuzzy logic system employs experts’ knowledge 
and represents a system in the form of IF-THEN rules. 
Although a fuzzy logic system merits interpretability and 
accountability, it is incompetent in efficient and effective 
knowledge acquisition. It seems that a neural network and a 
fuzzy logic system are complementary to each other. 
Therefore, it is instrumental to combine the best of two worlds 
towards an enhanced interpretability. In fact, this roadmap is 
not totally new. There have been several combinations along 
this direction: ANFIS model [80], generic fuzzy perceptron 
[126], RBF networks [21], and so on. 
One suggestion is to build a deep RBF network. Given the 
input vector 𝒙= [𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝑛], an RBF network is expressed 
as 𝑓(𝒙) = ∑𝑤𝑖𝜙𝑖(𝒙−𝒄𝑖)
𝑛
𝑖
, where 𝜙𝑖(𝒙−𝒄𝑖)  is usually 
selected as exp (−
||𝒙−𝒄𝑖||^2  
2𝜎2
), where 𝒄𝑖 is the cluster center of 
the 𝑖𝑡ℎ neuron. It was proved the functional equivalence 
between an RBF network and a fuzzy inference system under 
mild conditions [21]. Also, an RBF network is shown to be a 
universal approximator [136]. Hence, an RBF network is a 
potentially sound vehicle that can encode fuzzy rules into its 
adaptive representation without loss of accuracy. Reciprocally, 
rule generation and fuzzy rule representation in an adaptable 
RBF network are more straightforward compared to a 
multilayer perceptron. Although current RBF networks are of 
one-hidden-layer structures, it is feasible to develop deep RBF 
networks, which can be viewed as a deep fuzzy rule system. A 
greedy layer-wise training algorithm was developed in [71], 
which successfully solved the training problem for deep 
networks. It is possible to translate such success into the 
training of deep RBF networks. Then, the correspondence 
between a deep RBF network and a deep fuzzy logic system 
will be applied to obtain a deep fuzzy rule system. We believe 
that efforts should be made to synergize fuzzy logic and deep 
learning techniques aided by big data along this direction.  
 Convergence of Neuroscience and Deep Learning   
Up to date, truly intelligent systems are still only human. The 
artificial neural networks in their earlier forms were clearly 
inspired by biological neural networks [120]. However 
subsequent developments of neural networks were, to a much 
less degree, pushed by neurological and biological insights. As 
far as interpretability is concerned, since biological and 
artificial neural networks are deeply connected, advances in 
neuroscience should be relevant and even instrumental to the 
development and interpretation of deep learning techniques. 
We believe that the neuroscience promises a bright future of 
deep learning interpretability in the following aspects. 
Cost function. The effective use of cost functions is a key 
driving force for the development of deep networks in the past 
years; for example, the adversarial loss used in GANs [60]. In 
previous sections, we have highlighted cases which 
demonstrate that an appropriate cost function will enable a 
model to learn an interpretable representation, such as enhance 
feature disentanglement. Along this direction, a myriad of cost 
functions can be built to reflect biologically plausible 
rationales. Indeed, our brain can be modeled as an 
optimization machine [119], which has a powerful credit 
assignment mechanism to form a cost function.  

Optimization algorithm. Despite the huge success achieved by 
backpropagation, it is far from ideal in the view of 
neuroscience. Truly in many senses, backpropagation fails to 
manifest the true behaviors of how a human neural system 
tunes the synapses of a neuron. For example, in a biological 
neural system, synapses are updated in a local manner [94] 
and only depend on the activities of presynaptic and 
postsynaptic neurons. However, connections in deep networks 
are tuned through non-local backpropagation. Figure 17 shows 
a bio-plausible learning algorithm for a two-layer network on 
CIFAR-100 [93]. Additionally, a neuromodulator is missing in 
deep networks in contrast to the inner-working of a human 
brain, where the state of one neuron can exhibit different 
input-output patterns controlled by a global neuromodulator 
like dopamine, serotonin, and so on [162]. Neuromodulators 
are believed to be critical due to their ability to selectively 
control on and off states of one neuron which is equivalently 
switching the involved cost function [13].  
 
Figure 17. Visualization of weights of a network learned by a bio-plausible 
algorithm, where prototypes of training image are captured [94]. 
Considering that there are quite few studies discussing the 
interpretability 
of 
training 
algorithms, 
powerful 
and 
interpretable training algorithms will be highly desirable. Just 
like for classic optimization methods, we wish that future non-
convex optimization algorithms will have some kinds of 
uniqueness, stability, and continuous dependency on data, etc.  
Bio-Plausible Architectural Design. In the past decades, 
neural networks were designed in diverse architectures from 
simple feedforward networks to deep convolutional networks 
and other highly sophisticated networks. The structure 
determines functionality, i.e., a specific network architecture 
regulates the information flow with distinct characteristics. 
Therefore, specialized architectures are useful as effective 
solutions for intended problems. Currently, the structural 
differences between deep learning and biological systems are 
eminent. A typical network is used and tuned for most tasks 
based on big data, while a biological system learns from a 
small number of data and generalizes very well. Clearly, a 
huge amount of knowledge needs to be learned from 
biological neural networks so that a more desirable and 
explainable neural network architectures can be designed.  
 Interpretability in Medicine   
A majority of interpretability research efforts in medicine are 
only for classification tasks, but radiological practices cover a 
large variety of tasks such as image segmentation, registration, 
reconstruction, and so on. Clearly, interpretability is also 
closely relevant to these areas, and therefore it is in need to 
promote interpretability research in these domains. On the one 
hand, more efforts should be made to extend the existing 
interpretation methods to other tasks that have not been 
explored. On the other hand, practitioners can design task-
specific interpretation methods with their expertise and 
insights. For example, in image segmentation, explaining why 
a voxel receives a class label in image segmentation is much 
harder than explaining which area in the input image is 
responsible for a prediction in image classification. Similarly, 
for image reconstruction, interpretability could be quite 
complicated. In this regard, our recently proposed ACID 
framework allows a synergistic integration of data-driven 
priors and compressed sensing (CS)-modeled priors, enforcing 
both of which iteratively via physics-based analytic mapping 
[188]. By doing so, modern CS and state-of-the-art deep 
networks are united to overcome the vulnerabilities of existing 
deep reconstruction networks, at the same time transferring the 
interpretability of the model-based methods to the hybrid deep 
neural networks. 
In addition to the above referenced publications, gaining 
interpretability ultimately also relies on medical doctors, who 
have invaluable professional training despite some biases and 
errors. As a result, active collaboration among medical doctors, 
technical experts, and theoretical researchers to design 
effective, efficient, and reproducible ways to assess and apply 
interpretability methods will be an important avenue for future 
development of deep learning methods. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, we have reviewed key ideas, implications, 
limitations of existing interpretability studies, and illustrated 
some typical interpretation methods through examples. In 
doing so, we have depicted a holistic landscape of 
interpretability research using the proposed taxonomy and 
introduced applications of interpretability in medicine 
particularly. Figures 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 16, 17 are visualization 
results from our own implementation of chosen interpretation 
methods. We have open-sourced relevant codes in the GitHub 
(https://github.com/FengleiFan/IndependentEvaluation). There 
is no doubt that a unified and accountable interpretation 
framework is critical to elevate interpretability research into a 
new phase. In the future, more efforts are needed to reveal the 
essence of deep learning. Because this field is still highly 
interdisciplinary and rapidly evolving, there are great 
opportunities ahead that will be both academically and 
practically rewarding. 
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors are grateful for Dr. Hongming Shan’s suggestions 
(Fudan University) and anonymous reviewers’ advice.
