Retouchdown: Adding Touchdown to StreetLearn as a Shareable Resource for
Language Grounding Tasks in Street View
Harsh Mehta
Google Research

Yoav Artzi
Cornell University

Jason Baldridge
Google Research

Eugene Ie
Google Research

Piotr Mirowski
Deepmind

Abstract
The Touchdown dataset (Chen et al., 2019) provides in-
structions by human annotators for navigation through New
York City streets and for resolving spatial descriptions at a
given location. To enable the wider research community to
work effectively with the Touchdown tasks, we are publicly
releasing the 29k raw Street View panoramas needed for
Touchdown. We follow the process used for the StreetLearn
data release (Mirowski et al., 2019) to check panoramas for
personally identiﬁable information and blur them as nec-
essary. These have been added to the StreetLearn dataset
and can be obtained via the same process as used previ-
ously for StreetLearn. We also provide a reference imple-
mentation for both of the Touchdown tasks: vision and lan-
guage navigation (VLN) and spatial description resolution
(SDR). We compare our model results to those given in Chen
et al. (2019) and show that the panoramas we have added
to StreetLearn fully support both Touchdown tasks and can
be used effectively for further research and comparison.
1. Introduction
Following natural language navigation instructions in vi-
sual environments requires addressing multiple challenges
in dynamic, continuously changing environments, includ-
ing language understanding, object recognition, grounding
and spatial reasoning. Until recently, the most commonly
studied domains were map-based (Thompson et al., 1993)
or game-like (Macmahon et al., 2006; Misra et al., 2017,
2018; Hermann et al., 2017; Hill et al., 2017). These en-
vironments enabled substantial progress, but the complex-
ity and diversity of the visual input they provide is limited.
This greatly simpliﬁes both the language and vision chal-
lenges. To address this, recent tasks based on simulated
environments include photo-realistic visual input, such as
Room-to-Room (R2R; Anderson et al., 2018), Talk-the-
Walk (de Vries et al., 2018) and Touchdown (Chen et al.,
2019), all of which rely on panorama photos.
A major challenge of creating simulations that use real-
world photographs is they at times capture bystanders and
their property. This raises privacy concerns and requires
additional care to check for and ensure personally iden-
tiﬁable information (PII) is removed from research re-
sources that are made publicly available. Existing resources
adopt different strategies to address this. The Matterport3D
dataset (Chang et al., 2017), which underlies the R2R task,
is focused on real-estate data that is curated to exclude PII.
This approach is limited to environments of a speciﬁc type:
houses that are for sale. Academic resources that focus on
urban street scenes opted to manually collect panoramas
from scratch and scrub them for PII (de Vries et al., 2018;
Weiss et al., 2019). This is laborious and costly—especially
the ﬁrst stage of collecting the panoramas. As a result, such
resources cover relatively small areas.
Google Street View has world-wide scale coverage of
street scenes.
Each panorama in Street View has gone
through a process to protect the privacy of bystanders and
their property. Individuals can also request speciﬁc panora-
mas to be removed. As such, it is a resource with the poten-
tial to transform the research community’s ability to study
problems such as street scene understanding and navigation.
Touchdown relies on 29,641 panoramas from Street View;
however, because raw images cannot be distributed accord-
ing to the Street View terms-of-service,1 these are not pro-
vided with the Touchdown data. Instead, only image fea-
ture vectors are available for direct download with the data,
and access to the raw panoramas is subject to availability
through APIs governed by Street View’s terms of service.
1https://www.google.com/help/terms_maps/
1
arXiv:2001.03671v1  [cs.CV]  10 Jan 2020

Research can be done within a company and shared via
publication without releasing data; for example, Cirik et al.
(2018) discussed models for instruction-conditioned navi-
gation in Street View. However, the full impact of the data
and research about it can be better realized by making at
least some portion of such resources available to the broader
research community. In this context, StreetLearn (Mirowski
et al., 2018, 2019) stands out as a publicly available resource
of Street View data that has been approved for dissemina-
tion and use for academic research.2 StreetLearn contains
114k panoramas from New York City and Pittsburgh that
have been manually checked for PII, ensuring, for example,
that faces and license plates are blurred. The dataset can
be easily accessed. Researchers interested in working with
the data simply ﬁll a form stating their goals and commit to
update the data periodically with newer versions as they are
released. This process balances the ability of researchers to
use the data with preserving the privacy and rights of indi-
viduals impacted by the data. For example, periodic updates
allow Google to respond to user takedown requests.
To increase the accessibility of Touchdown and provid-
ing an example of how important data can be responsibly re-
leased, we integrate the Touchdown task and its correspond-
ing Street View data into an updated version of StreetLearn.
This paper reconciles Touchdown’s mode of dissemination
with StreetLearn’s, which was designed to adhere to the
rights of Google and individuals while also simplifying ac-
cess for researchers and improving reproducibility. We also
provide open source implementations of both the vision-
and-language navigation and spatial description resolution
tasks, which we show to have a consistent performance with
the results in the original Touchdown paper. We hope that
this release of data and code will enable the entire research
community to make further progress on these problems and
to consider new questions and tasks enabled by this limited
but signiﬁcant slice of Street View data.
2. Process
Touchdown includes tasks for natural language naviga-
tion and spatial reasoning in realistic urban environments.
Touchdown uses Street View panoramas of New York City
to deﬁne a large-scale navigation environment. It includes
9,326 human-written instructions and 27,575 spatial de-
scription resolution tasks. Touchdown’s instructions were
written by people and emphasize attributes of the visual en-
vironment as navigational cues. This makes Touchdown
a valuable resource for research on following natural lan-
guage instructions in visual environments. This contrasts
with the template-based navigation instructions used by
Hermann et al. (2020), which were generated by Google
Maps API and used with StreetLearn panoramas.
2http://streetlearn.cc
Figure 1. The overlap between the StreetLearn (blue) and Touch-
down (red) panoramas in Manhattan. There are 710 panoramas
(out of 29k) that share the same ID in both datasets (in black).
Unfortunately, the development and release of Touch-
down introduced several challenges that complicate work-
ing with the data. Even though Touchdown itself does not
contain Street View data, it references speciﬁc Street View
panoramas and depends on access to them via the Street
View API. This requires any researcher that wishes to work
on the data to download large amounts of data using the
API, which is inconvenient, error-prone and not aligned
with the current Google Maps terms-of-service. Also, the
panoramas available through the API periodically change,
potentially making parts of the data unavailable. This means
there is no hope for consistent versioning (which hurts re-
producibility) regarding panorama availability because the
data collected by each researcher is dependent on the par-
ticular time they access it. Finally, individual researchers or
research groups cannot themselves comply with takedown
requests—a responsibility that should stay with Google.
Therefore, long term storage must be kept within Google,
with researchers periodically refreshing the data.
To address these challenges, we collect, check and re-
lease the Touchdown panoramas as part of an update to
the 114k existing StreetLearn panoramas, which cover re-
gions of New York City and Pittsburgh. As shown in Figure
1, StreetLearn encompasses the entire region of New York
City contained in Touchdown; however, the StreetLearn
panoramas themselves are not sufﬁcient for supporting the
Touchdown tasks themselves. This is for several reasons.
• The granularity of the panorama spacing is different.
Figure 1 shows that most of the panoramas are differ-
ent. Touchdown has roughly 25% of the panos but cov-
ers half of Manhattan compared to StreetLearn.
• The language instructions refer to transient objects
such as cars, bicycles, and couches, as illustrated in
2

Figure 2. One of the panoramas taken from the dataset which shows transient objects being referenced in the navigation text. “Stop here,
and turn left. You will now be walking down a narrow lane with parked cars on both sides. There should be a payphone on your right and
a ﬁre hydrant (behind silver poles) on your left. Walk down this lane, and on your left you will soon see a shop with gray columns between
the windows and a blue sign with yellow trim.”
Figures 2 and 3. A panorama from a different time pe-
riod will not contain these objects, so the instructions
are not stable across time periods.
• Spatial description resolution requires coverage of
multiple points-of-view for those speciﬁc panoramas.
Figure 3 shows an example SDR description and the
corresponding views from which it can be answered.
In all, the Touchdown tasks encompass 29,641 panora-
mas. All of these went through extensive manual review by
annotators to check for personally identiﬁable information
(PII), such as faces and license plates. Regions containing
PII were marked as bounding boxes by annotators, and we
blurred all of these regions for the ﬁnal images.
3. Experiments
We re-implement the best-reported models on the nav-
igation and spatial description resolution tasks from Chen
et al. (2019) to compare performance with our data release
to the original Touchdown paper. The key difference be-
tween the two settings is that our released panoramas con-
tain additional blurred patches (Section 2). Another minor
difference is that we use a word-piece tokenizer (Devlin
et al., 2019) instead of a full-word tokenizer.
Spatial Description Resolution.
SDR results are given in
Table 1. Following Chen et al. (2019), we report mean dis-
tance error and accuracy with different thresholds (40px,
80px, and 120px), which measures the proportion of evalua-
tion items where the pixel chosen by the model is within the
speciﬁed pixel distance. Our Retouchdown reimplementa-
tion of LINGUNET obtains better performance on the ac-
curacy measures, but worse performance on mean distance
error. To check whether this is a consequence of the blur-
ring, we ran our model with features retrieved from original
panoramas and obtained similar results as those listed in Ta-
ble 1. Given this, the performance difference between our
model and the original paper are likely not due to the addi-
tional blurring. As such, the Touchdown panoramas avail-
able through StreetLearn can be reliably used as direct re-
placement for those used in Chen et al. (2019).
Vision-and-Language Navigation.
We use the following
metrics to evaluate VLN performance:
• Task Completion (TC): the accuracy of navigating to
the correct location. The correct location is deﬁned
as the exact goal panorama or one of its neighboring
panoramas. This is the equivalent of the success rate
metric (SR) used commonly in VLN for R2R.
• Shortest-path distance (SPD): the mean of the dis-
tances over all executions of the agent’s ﬁnal panorama
position and the goal panorama.
• Success weighted by Edit Distance (SED): normalized
graph edit distance between the agent path and true
path, with points only awarded for successful paths.
• Normalized Dynamic Time Warping (nDTW): a mini-
mized cumulative distance between the agent path and
true path, normalized by path length.
• Success weighted Dynamic Time Warping (SDTW):
nDTW, with points awarded only for successful paths.
TC, SPD, and SED are deﬁned in Chen et al. (2019) and
nDTW and SDTW are deﬁned in Ilharco et al. (2019).
VLN results are given in Table 2. Our Retouchdown
reimplementation of the RCONCAT model improves over
the results given in Chen et al. (2019) for all metrics. We
also establish benchmark scores for nDTW and SDTW. As
with SDR, the panoramas now available via StreetLearn
3

Panorama before the main SDR panorama.
Main SDR Panorama.
Panorama after the main SDR panorama.
Figure 3. Actual example taken from the dataset with multiple SDR panorama viewpoints for the same instruction: Two parked bicycles,
and a discarded couch, all on the left. Walk just past this couch, and stop before you pass another parked bicycle. This bike will be white
and red, with a white seat. Touchdown is sitting on top of the bike seat.
4

Method

Dist ↓
Development
Chen et al. (2019)
24.81
32.83
36.44
729
Retouch-LINGUNET
29.79
35.28
38.14
800
Test
Chen et al. (2019)
26.11
34.59
37.81
708
Retouch-LINGUNET
30.32
36.73
39.27
793
Table 1. SDR development and test results using the LINGUNET architecture, which Chen et al. (2019) reported as the best performing
system.
Method
TC ↑
SPD ↓
SED ↑
nDTW ↑
SDTW ↑
Development
Chen et al. (2019)
9.8
19.1
0.094
Retouch-RCONCAT
13.4
17.1
0.124
4.9
1.3
Test
Chen et al. (2019)
10.7
19.5
0.104
Retouch-RCONCAT
12.8
17.1
0.131
5.0
1.4
Table 2. Navigation development and test results. We use the RCONCAT architecture, which Chen et al. (2019) reported as the best
performing.
thus do not remove information critical for the VLN task. In
our implementation, we use imitation learning on top of a
scalable framework based on the Actor-Learner architecture
(Lansing et al., 2019), instead of supervised learning using
Hogwild! (Recht et al., 2011). These differences likely ex-
plain the observed differences with the original results.
Compared to interior navigation in the Room-to-Room
(R2R) task, the Touchdown task is much harder: e.g. the
current state-of-the-art success rate (equivalent to TC) for
R2R on the validation unseen dataset is 55% (Zhu et al.,
2019). The same holds for DTW measures: Ilharco et al.
(2019) report a success rate of 44% and corresponding
SDTW of 38.3% for a ﬁdelity-oriented version of the Re-
inforced Cross-modal Matching agent (Wang et al., 2019).
The TC of 12.8% and SDTW of 1.4% obtained by Retouch-
RCONCAT amply demonstrates the challenge of the outdoor
navigation problem deﬁned by Touchdown.
The greater
diversity of the visual environments and the far greater
degrees-of-freedom for navigation thus provide plenty of
headroom for future research.
4. Conclusion
The research community is interested in using large-
scale resources such as Street View for work on computer
vision and navigation.
In order to comply with Street
View’s terms-of-service (which allow for only limited use
of its data and APIs) and with its data restrictions, we
have enriched StreetLearn with panoramas from the Touch-
down study. That dataset is periodically updated to comply
with Google Street View takedown requests to respect in-
dividuals’ privacy preferences. We encourage the research
community to use only vetted and approved resources like
StreetLearn, including our new release of the Touchdown
panoramas, for their Street View oriented work.
The addition of Touchdown to StreetLearn (a.k.a. Re-
touchdown) boosts the total panorama count for the
StreetLearn dataset3 from 114k to 144k. Furthermore, it
contains multiple panoramas from the same neighborhoods,
which supports work on learning to navigate in a region and
testing in that same region using panoramas from a differ-
ent time. Our code for training and evaluating vision-and-
language navigation agents and spatial description resolu-
tion models are publicly available as part of the VALAN
framework (Lansing et al., 2019).4
