346 
MARGARITIS & THRUN 
UAI2001 
A Bayesian Multiresolution Independence Test 
for Continuous Variables 
Dimitris Margaritis 
Computer Science Dept. 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
Dirnitris.MargaritisCcs.cmu.edu 
Abstract 
In this paper we present a method of comput­
ing the posterior probability of conditional 
independence of two or more continuous vari­
ables from data, examined at several reso­
lutions. Our approach is motivated by the 
observation that the appearance of continu­
ous data varies widely at various resolutions, 
producing very different independence esti­
mates between the variables involved. There­
fore, it is difficult to ascertain independence 
without examining discretized data at sev­
eral carefully selected resolutions. 
In our 
paper, we accomplish this using the exact 
computation of the posterior probability of 
independence, calculated analytically given 
a resolution. At each examined resolution 
and boundary placement, we assume a multi­
nomial distribution with Dirichlet priors for 
the discretized table parameters, and com­
pute the posterior using Bayesian integra­
tion. Across resolutions, we use a search pro­
cedure to approximate the Bayesian integral 
of probability over an exponential number of 
possible boundary placements. Our method 
generalizes to an arbitrary number variables 
in a straightforward manner. The test is 
suitable for Bayesian network learning algo­
rithms that use independence tests to infer 
the network structure, in domains that con­
tain any mix of continuous, ordinal discrete, 
and categorical variables. 
1 
Introduction and Motivation 
Knowledge about the independencies that exist in a 
domain is a very useful piece of information that a 
research scientist can-and must-elicit early on dur­
ing her investigation. Conditional independence state-
Sebastian Thrun 
Computer Science Dept. 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
Sebastian.ThrunOcs.cmu.edu 
ments concerning observed quantities in the domain 
can greatly aid in the task of understanding the in­
teractions among the domain variables. Imagine for 
example a medical researcher, attempting to causally 
model a set of disease and symptom indicators in 
an effort to find ways of treating or preventing them 
from occurring in the future. Such conditional inde­
pendence statements can lend her significant insights 
to the cause-effect relationships that may be present. 
Similarly, a solid state physicist attempting to model 
the interaction among tens of variables representing 
proportions of substances involved in a new manufac­
turing process. Knowledge of conditional independen­
cies can help her focus her attention to only the rele­
vant ones during the different stages of the manufac­
turing process. 
More than simply aiding in focusing attention, there 
exist a number of algorithms today that can induce 
the causal structure of a domain given a set of con­
ditional independence statements, under assumptions 
[10, 8]. One principled method for representing such 
causal structures are Bayesian Networks (BNs) [8], 
one of the prevalent tools for representing and reason­
ing about uncertainty. A BN consists of two parts: 
( 1) a directed graphical description of the relation­
ships among the variables in the domain, and (2) a 
quantitative description of the nature of interactions 
between each variable and its parents in the graph. 
In this paper we focus on an integral component of 
the first part, namely developing a probabilistic con­
ditional independence test for use in causal structure 
discovery. There exist several approaches for causal 
discovery in domains with categorical variables [10, 8]. 
However there are few for continuous or hybrid do­
mains [2, 6]. Most of the latter approaches belong to 
the score-maximization family of algorithms for struc­
ture induction, which does not give any guarantees for 
producing a correct causal description of the domain. 
In contrast, the constraint-based family [10, 5] employs 
conditional independence tests, and has guarantees of 
inducing the correct causal structure (under a.<;sump-

--; 
UAI2001 
MARGARITIS & THRUN 
347 
tions, most notably the one assuming that all variables 
are visible). However, to date there is no general ap­
proach to constraint-based structure induction for con­
tinuous or hybrid domains, mainly due to the difficulty 
of the general case. Our approach attempts to remedy 
that, by developing a statistical independence test for 
continuous variables that places no constraints on the 
probability distribution of the continuous variables of 
the domain. In this paper we propose an algorithm 
which works by eliciting information from continuous 
data at several resolutions and combining it into a sin­
gle probabilistic measure of conditional independence. 
For this purpose, the examination of many resolutions 
is necessary. An example that helps explain why that 
is the case is shown in figure 1. Two scatterplots are 
shown, together with their corresponding discretiza­
tions at 3 x 4 resolution. The histograms for the two 
data. sets appear similar even though the independence 
of the axes variables is not. The data on the left show 
a strong dependence between X and Y while the data 
on the right plot are independent by construction. In 
this case, finer resolution histograms have to be ex­
amined in order to determine that dependence. This 
observation is formalized in section 2 below. 
At the top level, our approach is formulated as a 
Bayesian model selection problem, assigning the class 
of independent distributions a prior probability. This 
formulation sidesteps the fact that the class of inde­
pendent distributions lies on a zero-support subman­
ifold in the domain of distribution functions. This is 
one of the key advantages of the Bayesian approach 
that our method relies on. 
In the next section we present out approach in detail. 
Our discussion assumes that all variables are continu­
ous. Application to domains that contain ordinal dis­
crete and categorical variables as well as continuous 
is straightforward and is only briefly described in sec­
tion 5. 
2 
Method description 
As we mentioned above, our method tests for indepen­
dence at many resolutions. It does so by discretizing 
the multidimensional space of the variables involved 
in the test at several resolutions. In this section we 
present our approach in two stages. In order to ex­
plain our method more effectively, we first describe 
the simple case for testing conditional independence 
at a single, fixed resolution. 
2.1 
Single resolution, fixed grid test 
In this section we are given a I x J table of counts 
that represent the discretized scatterplot of variables 
. A/
 
, .. " 
_ _:-:; ;. ,; 
Figure 1: Two very different data sets have very simi­
lar 3 x 4 histograms. Left: Data strongly dependent. 
Right: Data independent by construction. 
X and Y, and we develop an exact test of indepen­
dence. Such a test has the potential of being used in 
situations where data are sparse. It can also be used 
at fine resolutions, a task that will be necessary in the 
multi-resolution test, described later in section 2.2. We 
first present the case of an unconditional test of inde­
pendence (X _l Y) and propose an extension of the 
method to a conditional test (X _l Y I C) for a given 
resolution I X J X cl X c2 X ... X qq near the end 
of this section. 
We 
assume 
that 
the 
counts 
of 
the 
table, 
c1, ... , CK, K 
::: 
I J, follow a multinomial distri­
bution. The choice of a multinomial is in a sense the 
most "unbiased" one because it does not make any 
implicit assumptions about any interaction between 
adjacent cells (which is sometimes called "smooth­
ing"). We denote the resolution as R = I x J, the 
set of grid boundaries along the axes as B R, and 
the probability of each cell as Pk, k = 1, 2, . .. , K 
(for brevity, in the following we denote such a set of 
numbers as Pl···K). The probability of the data set 
D (the data likelihood) is the likelihood of the cell 
counts, namely 
Pr(D I Pl···K· BR, R) 
where N = ID I is the size of our data set. ( For brevity, 
in the remainder of this section, we omit BR and R 
from all probability terms that appear, but assume 

348 
MARGARITIS & THRUN 
UAI2001 
that they implicitly condition all of them.) Since the 
parameters Pk are unknown, we adopt a Bayesian ap­
proach: we use a prior distribution Pr(p1 .. K) over 
them. 
Given such a distribution the data likeli­
hood is the average over all possible parameter values, 
weighted by their probability: 
Pr(D) = j Pr(D I Pl-··K)Pr(pl K)dPl--·K· 
(2) 
The most commonly used prior distribution for multi­
nomial parameters is the Dirichlet: 
K 
"Y•-1 
Pr(Pt···K) = r(i) II Pk
( ) , 
k=l r Iß< 
where 1 = L,{:'=t'Yk and f(x) is the gamma function.1 
The positive numbers /l ·K of this distribution are its 
hyperparameters.2 When /k = 1 for all k, the Dirichlet 
distribution is uniform. 
The choice of a Dirichlet prior has certain computa­
tional advantages. Since it is conjugate prior to the 
multinomial, the posterior distribution of the parame­
ters is also Dirichlet (albeit with different parameters). 
This enables us to compute the integral (2) analyti­
cally: 
K 
Pr(D) = 
f(l) 
II r(lk + Ck). 
(3) 
r(l + N) k=l 
r(,") 
To test independence, we assume that our data have 
been produced by one of two classes of models, one 
representing independence and one that does not. The 
former one contains I+ J parameters for the marginal 
probabilities of the rows and columns of the I x J 
table. We call this model class Mx, and denote its 
prior probability as Pr( Mz) = p. The fully depen­
dent model class, denoted M..,z, has prior probability 
Pr(M..,z) = 1- p. The posterior probability of inde­
pendence, Pr(Mx I D), is 
p (M I D)= Pr(D I Mx)Pr(Mz) 
r 
I 
Pr(D) 
by Bayes' theorem. Since 
Pr(D) = Pr(D I Mz)Pr(Mx)+Pr(D I M..,z)Pr(M..,z) 
we get 
Pr(Mx I D) = 1 I [1 + (1- p) Pr(D I M..,z)] (4) 
p 
Pr(D I Mz) 
1The gamma function is defined 
as 
f(x) 
== 
fo+ao e-'tx-1dt. For the case where xis a non-negative 
integer, f(x + 1) = x!. 
2The hyperparameters can be thought of as "virtual 
samples." 
At resolution R, the term Pr(D I M ..,z) of the fully 
dependent model that contains I J parameters is given 
by (3), i.e. 
K 
Pr(D I M..,z) 
r(r) 
II r(l" + c") (5) 
r(l + N) [<=t 
r(l") 
= 
i(cK,/K)· 
For the independent model we assume two multinomial 
distributions, one each along the X and Y axes, that 
contain J and I parameters, respectively. These cor­
respond to the marginal probabilities along the axes. 
We denote the marginal count at column j as Ctj and 
at row i asCi+· The marginal probabilities (which are 
unknown) are denoted as q1 . 
1 with prior a Dirichlet 
with hyperparameters a1 .. 
J and r1 .. J with hyperpa­
rameters f31 .. J. The probability of cell (i,j) under Mx 
is q;ri. The data likelihood is computed in a manner 
analogous to Eq. (3): 
Pr(D J Mz) 
( r(a) IT r(a; + c;+)) 
f(a + N) i=l 
f(a;) 
x ( r(f3) IT r(f3j + c+i)) 
r(f3 + N) j==l 
r (f3i) 
= 
T(ci+, ai)T(c+J, f3J) 
(6) 
again with a = L, a; and f3 = L, {3j. Given Eq. ( 4), (5) 
and (6), we arrive at our final formula of the posterior 
probability of independence at resolution R: 
Pr(Mz I D)= 1 /[1 + 
(l- p)T(cK,/K) ] . 
pT( CJ+, Ct[ )T(CtJ, f3J) 
(7) 
Eq. (7) refers to a fixed grid at resolution I x J, not 
necessarily regular, with a given boundary set B 1 x J. 
In the next section, we will examine our data set at 
multiple resolutions. Intuitively speaking, we do not 
wish to use very fine ones due to data sparsity. This is­
sue is automatically addressed by the above approach: 
for the choice of a; = {3j = /k = 1 (corresponding to 
a uniform Dirichlet prior), as I and J go to infinity, 
Pr(Mz I D, BJxJ, I x J) goes to unity. This can be 
seen as the effect of the hyperparameters, which rep­
resent "virtual samples." As the resolution increases 
the table becomes increasingly sparse and the actual 
counts tend to either 0 or 1. The effect of virtual sam­
ples then becomes apparent, making the table appear 
uniform by overwhelming the effect of the actual data. 
This is obviously an artificial phenomenon caused by 
our choice of prior, but it is useful in giving us an in­
dication of when the resolution is disproportionately 
large to support our estimation. It also automatically 
adjusts for overly complex discretizations: in the fol-

UAI2001 
MARGARITIS & THRUN 
349 
lowing section this effect is used to stop the coarse-to­
fine discretization that is part of our proposed algo­
rithm of estimating the probability of independence at 
multiple resolutions. 
We note that the above test applies to categorical 
variables only. Random rearrangement of the rows 
and/or columns of the table will not affect the joint or 
the marginal counts and thus not affect Pr( Mz I D). 
However the resulting table counts appear more ran­
dom, since the cell positions have been randomly 
changed, including the points that are contained in 
each of them. A more powerful test that takes into ac­
count the ordering and relative position of the points 
is the one described in the next section. This involves 
"sweeping" the discretization boundaries across the 
XY plane (and the subspace of the variables of the 
conditioning set), and computing a Bayesian average 
of the results. 
Lastly, we briefly address conditional independence: a 
conditional test (X j_ Y I C) at a fixed resolution 
J X J X C1 X C2 X 
• 
• • X Cjq is simply the product 
of probabilities of independence of X and Y for each 
I x J "slice" from (1,1, .
.
.
 ,1) to (C1,C2, ... ,qq). 
This is necessary because a conditional independence 
statement is equivalent to independence for all values 
of the conditioning set. 
In the next section we describe a test that takes into 
account multiple resolutions. 
2.2 
Multi-resolution test 
As we mentioned in the introduction, to estimate the 
posterior probability of independence we need to ex­
amine our data set at multiple resolutions. In this 
section we employ a Bayesian approach and average 
over the possible choices, weighed by their posterior: 
Pr(Mz I D) = LR Pr(R I D) J Pr(Mz I BR, R, D) 
Pr(BR I R, D)dBR 
The sum goes over all resolutions I X J (for the un­
conditional test case). 
For each such resolution R, 
the integral runs over all possible sets of discretization 
grid boundaries BR· The case of conditional test is 
handled analogously. The Bayesian approach, besides 
making the smallest number of unwarranted decisions, 
also possesses certain other advantages in our case; 
most notably it minimizes the possibility of spurious 
(in)dependencies that may occur due to an unfortu­
nate choice of boundary placement. 
To compute the inner integral we should ideally aver­
age over all possible histogram boundary placements 
along the X and Y axes. Lacking any other informa­
tion, we assume a uniform prior distribution Pr(BR I 
R) over grid boundary placement. Although theoreti­
cally the Bayesian integral runs over an infinity of pos­
sible such placements, given our data set we need only 
compute a finite number of them since many produce 
the same 2D histogram for our data. More specifically, 
we need only attempt boundary placements at each of 
the (N- 1) midpoints between successive data points 
along the X andY axes, resulting in (N -1)2 possible 
positions for each XY boundary pair. An appropriate 
posterior Pr(BR / R, D) for each such placement is 
one that uses the fraction of the 2D area between the 
two successive points along X and Y relative to the 
span of the entire set of data points in the XY plane. 
We now address the sum over all possible resolutions 
R. The number of such resolutions is countably infi­
nite. However, the following crucial observation about 
the structure of the space of resolutions facilitates our 
computation: 
Observation: If X and Y are indepen­
dent at resolution 2M x 2M, they are inde­
pendent at resolution M x M. In other words, 
Pr[ixy(M) I ixy(2M)] = 1 for all M, where 
ixy (M) denotes the statement that X andY 
are independent at resolution M x M. 
It is straightforward to prove the validity of the 
above-it can be demonstrated by using a 2M x 2M 
grid where each cell's probability is the product of the 
corresponding marginal cells, and by combining adja­
cent cells in 2 x 2 groups. A similar statement can 
be made for an I x J table. For simplicity, during 
the remainder of this section we shall assume square 
tables. 
By definition, X and Y are independent if and only 
if they are independent at all resolutions. However, 
given the above observation, we have 
Pr[ ixy(M) 1\ ixy(2M)) 
Pr[ ixy (M) I ixy (2M)] Pr[ ixy (2M)] 
Pr[ ixy(2M)] 
This implies that in order to ascertain independence, 
we do not need to sum over all resolutions; instead, 
we should examine our data set at a resolution as fine 
as possible. Unfortunately, because our data set size 
is finite, we can only obtain histograms of up to a fi­
nite resolution. Estimating the posterior probability of 
independence at a fine, limiting resolution is therefore 
an important part of our algorithm, which is presented 
below. 
Our method begins with a coarse 2 x 2 grid and succes­
sively refines it by adding carefully selected boundaries 
along the axes. At each step, the set of boundaries 

350 
MARGARITIS & THRUN 
UAI2001 
To compute Pr(Mz I D): 
1. 
Bsave f- 0 
2. 
Pmax f- 0 
3. 
t f- 1 
4. 
do 
5. 
B f- B•ave 
6. 
9max f- 0 
7. 
for x = { midpoints along X axis } 
8. 
for y = { midpoints along Y axis } 
9. 
B' f- B U {(x, y)} 
10. 
w' f- Pr(B' I R) 
11. 
p(x, y) f- [1- Pr(Mz I B', R, D)] x w' 
12. 
if p(x, y) > 9max then 
13. 
9max f- p(x, y) 
14. 
Bsave f- B' 
15. 
p(t) f- Lx,yP(x,y) 
16. 
if p(t) > Pmax 
17. 
Pmax f- p(t) 
18. 
t f- t + 1 
19. 
while the standard deviation of p(t) is large 
20. 
return 1 - Pmax 
Figure 2: Algorithm for computing the posterior prob­
ability of independence using an irregular multiresolu­
tion grid. 
we admit-either an XY pair or a set containing one 
boundary for each variable in the conditioning set-is 
the one that increases the probability of dependence 
the most. From each new, (possibly) irregular grid, we 
compute its posterior probability of dependence using 
Bayesian averaging over the possible single-boundary 
choices (using Eq. (7) for each resulting grid) and we 
either iterate or stop. Pseudocode of our procedure is 
shown in figure 2. Its typical use in situations where 
a binary dependent/independent decision is required 
would be to compare its output Pr(Mz I D) to the 
prior probability of independence r and decide "inde­
pendent" if and only if Pr(Mz I D) > p. 
To see why our algorithm attempts to maximize the 
posterior probability of dependence we need to exam­
ine another implication of the above observation: 
Pr[ixy(M)] 
Pr[ ixy(M) .1\ ixy (2M)] 
+ 
Pr[ ixy ( M) .1\ -.ixy(2M)) 
Pr[ ixy (M) I ixy (2M) 1 Pr[ ixy (2M)] 
+ 
Pr[ ixy (M) I -.ixy (2M) ] Pr[ -.ixy (2M) ] 
Pr[ ixy (2M)] 
+ 
Pr[ ixy (M) I -.ixy (2M)] Pr[ -.ixy (2M)] 
> 
Pr[ ixy (2M) 1 
This implies that the probability of independence de­
creases or remains the same as we examine our data set 
at increasingly fine resolutions, or, equivalently, that 
the dependence probability is non-decreasing. Equal­
ity occurs in the case of independence at all resolu­
tions. 
The above statement is also intuitively true: 
imagine for example the two limiting cases: a single 
cell, and the case where resolution tends to infinity at 
an ideal scenario where we have an infinite data set 
at our disposal. In the first case, the posterior inde­
pendence probability is 1 irrespective of the data set. 
In the second, unless the data set is truly independent 
at every resolution, any discrepancies of the posterior 
probability of each cell from the product of the corre­
sponding marginals will eventually emerge as we refine 
our discretization, causing the posterior independence 
probability to decline. 
Combining the above observation with the previous 
one concerning the need to examine our data at as 
fine resolution as possible, we see that we need to maxi­
mize the posterior of dependence in an effort to discern 
dependence, as we progressively increase the effective 
resolution during a run of our algorithm. 
One con­
cern however is that our data may appear increasingly 
artificially dependent at finer resolutions, a statement 
that might be unwarranted by our (sparse) data. The 
solution to this comes from our choice of a Dirichlet 
parameter prior (a; = /3j = /k = 1), which returns a 
high value of posterior independence at very high res­
olutions where there are very few data points and a 
large number of empty cells (see discussion in previ­
ous section). This corresponds well with our intuition, 
and lends itself to the estimation of the finest resolu­
tion to use: it is the one that returns a minimum for 
the posterior probability of independence. That pos­
terior, under our choice Dirichlet prior, is "U-shaped," 
starting at 1 at resolution 1 x 1, decreasing and then 
tending to 1 again at high resolutions. 
The above statement about the non-increasing proba­
bility of independence as we add boundaries refers to 
XY boundaries only. Unfortunately it is not the case 
for adding boundaries along the conditioning set vari­
able axes. It is not difficult to construct artificial ex­
amples where that may be demonstrated. Due to lack 
of space, we do not present such examples here. But 
the net effect is that increasing the number of condi­
tioning values can increase or decrease the probability 
of independence, as judged by the resulting multidi­
mensional histogram. Investigating the behavior with 
respect to conditioning is one of the future research 
directions we intend to follow. 
An example run of our algorithm on two data sets, 
one independent by construction and one where X and 
Y exhibit a highly nonlinear dependency is shown in 

UA12001 
MARGARITIS & THRUN 
351 
" 
.: •' ±:· .·:. :, 
. ' 
. 
·. 
'·' 
"' 
10 
15 
· ·: 
:: .
.
 '. ' 
f.<: .. :, 
: : •
•
 -:-.""i .... ..:° ' 
.,. 
. 
, . 
" t: ... 
I ·· 
Figure 3: An example run of our algorithm on two 
data sets, the same ones as in figure 4. Left: Data in­
dependent. Right: Data nonlinearly dependent. Top 
scatterplots: The actual data set, together with the 
grid that is output from our algorithm, drawn at the 
point of minimum independence. Bottom plots: The 
probability of independence as boundaries are added 
to the grid. The dashed horizontal line represents our 
prior r = 0.5. 
figure 3. In figure 3, bottom, we plot the evolution 
of p(t) as the XY is discretized at successively finer 
resolutions. Both plots demonstrate how the poste­
rior probability of independence tends to unity as the 
grid becomes more complex. The plot on the right is 
not strictly "U-shaped" due to the fact that subdivi­
sion steps do not exactly double the resolution.The top 
plots show the grid that produces the discretization of 
maximum dependence, i.e. Pr(Mx I D) = 1 - Pmax· 
Note that the set of independent points contains only 
four cells. Our algorithm returns posterior probability 
of independence 1 - Pmax = 0.88 for the independent 
data set and 0.29 for the dependent one. 
The algorithm of figure 2 essentially computes an ap­
proximation of the complete Bayesian integral over all 
possible grid boundaries at the resolution correspond­
ing to the minimum probability of independence sup­
ported by our data set. At this limiting resolution 
M* x M*, we treat the grid boundaries in a Bayesian 
fashion: ideally we should go over all possible M* x M* 
grids whose boundaries lie on each possible pair of mid­
points between successive data points along the axes. 
However, the number of such irregular M* x M* grids 
( N _ 1 )2 
is very large, namely 
M* _ 1 
a number expo-
nential in the number of data points. Our approach ap­
proximates this computation by maximizing over the 
first M* - 1 boundaries and averaging over the M* -th 
one. This results in a polynomial-time approximation 
of the Bayesian sum. 
In summary, the justification of our algorithm is as 
follows: as we established by the structure of the res­
olution space, one needs to minimize posterior inde­
pendence across resolutions, while approximating the 
average over an exponential sum over possible bound­
aries at each such resolution. Our algorithm accom­
plishes both goals simultaneously by maximizing de­
pendence instead of minimizing independence across 
resolutions by employing an incremental maximum­
value approximation to the evaluation of successive 
Bayesian integrals over multiple resolutions. In do­
ing so, it reduces an exponential computation to a 
polynomial-order one. 
3 
Experimental results 
In this section we compare our approach with exist­
ing ones in use routinely by statisticians. Perhaps the 
most frequently used method for non-parametric inde­
pendence testing is rank correlation, either Spearman's 
rank order correlation coefficient rs and Kendall's tau 
(r) [9]. The two measures are related, and result in 
essentially the same test in most cases. Here we will 
compare our test with Spearman's coefficient as it is 
the most expressive of the two. We will use some ex­
amples from the Boston housing data set, which is 
contained in the UC Irvine data set repository [7]. 
In figure 4, we see two variables that appear depen­
dent, the average number of rooms per house and 
its median value. The dependence between them is 
deemed very weak by rank correlation (its correlation 
coefficient is only 0.08), while our algorithm returns 
0.99 as the posterior probability of dependence. We 
see the evolution of that probability for the first few 
steps in the bottom plot of figure 4. These variables 
were found dependent in the original study. 
Some other examples of dependent (figure 5, rank 
correlation is -0.02 while our algorithm returns 0.98) 
and approximately independent pairs of variables (fig­
ure 6, rank correlation 0.01, posterior dependence 0.32, 
both indicating independence) demonstrate how our 
approach works as expected in practice, and better 
than existing established techniques. 
4 
Related Work 
The most well-known independence test is perhaps 
the chi-square (x2) test. It operates on categorical 
data, and assumes there are enough counts in each 
bin such that the counts are approximately normally 
distributed. Addressing the independence in 2 x 2 con-

352 
MARGARITIS & THRUN 
UAI2001 
50 
.. 
"' 
ŏ35 
;; 
< 
13) 
• 
Z" 
l 
Ŏ ... 
. 
15 
10 
5 ' 
0 
flo 
\1, 0 
0 
"i);· 
0 
0 
 
-
· 
0 
0 
0¯ 
® 
It> 
00 
J30Q<&X,9 0 
0 
q, 
0 
o o0 o 
18 
w 
o 
o 
0 
0 o or6 o 
8 
o 
o Oo 
Cia 
00 
• 
A ..... nutrlbltoii'OOI'N 
oo 
0 
0 0 
0 Q 
Figure 4: Two dependent variables from the Boston 
housing data set, the average number of rooms per 
dwelling and and the median value of owner-occupied 
homes, in thousands of dollars. Spearman's rank cor­
relation is very small (0.081) due to the fact that it is 
a two-dimensional distribution. In the bottom we plot 
the posterior independence probability during a run 
of our algorithm. The resulting posterior dependence 
probability is 0.99. 
Figure 5: Percent lower status of population vs. pro­
portion of houses built before 1940. Rank correlation 
indicates independence with a value of -0.02, while our 
method suggests strong dependence (0.98). 
.". 
•• 
·"' 
•• 
•• 
•• 
., ' 
00 C:OCDIDO 
a 
0 
0 
0 
DII>O 
a cao asouo 
000 0ļ oct/JioC!IfiJ 
O 
e 
o 
& 
ÞWooe o 
o 
­ 
0 0 0 0 0 g 00 0 
o 'bo'"'o/o o oo 
em 
=clo 
o 
o 
0 
0 
0 
oo o<b a o<o 
CD 0 
•a a acr:n 
00 
oōĻŌ go o 0 
rPo 
a 
<ii'aoo .§lao 
Figure 6: On the X axis, the average number of rooms. 
On the Y axis, an air-pollution indicator. The vari­
ables are deemed independent both by Spearman's 
rank correlation coefficient (0.01) and our method 
(0.32). 
tingency tables, Fisher proposed an exact test in 1934 
(see [1] for one description). The difference between 
ours and Fisher's exact test is that the latter one is not 
Bayesian, and it computes a power value rather than 
the posterior probability. Bayesian approaches to con­
tingency table independence also exist: the 2 x 2 case 
is addressed in Jeffreys' classic text [4], and in general 
more recently (e. g. [3]), although not in exactly the 
same way as ours. However the greatest difference that 
makes our method unique is that it applies to continu­
ous variables, taking advantage of the ordering of the 
values. 
The most well-known statistical non-parametric tests 
of independence for ordinal variables are Spearman's 
rank correlation and Kendall's tau. The former is the 
linear correlation of the relative ranks of the points 
along the X and Y axes, while the latter reduces 
ranks to binary or ternary variables (larger, equal, or 
smaller). Both tests can handle clear monotonic trends 
but fail to capture complex interactions between X 
and Y. Most notably, as demonstrated in section 3, 
they also fail to capture joint probability functions of 
dependent variables that are two dimensional. 
As far as parametric approaches are concerned, there 
are a multitude of such approaches as they are the 
norm in practice. There are two main issues with all 
these approaches: first, they assume a certain family of 
distributions, which may fail in cases where the under­
lying data distribution does not fit well. Second, the 

UAI2001 
MARGARITIS & THRUN 
353 
question of proper bias and its tradeoff with variance 
(the issue of model complexity) needs to be adequately 
addressed. This problem also occurs in our approach, 
and is solved though our choice of parameter prior. 
5 
Conclusion and Future Research 
In this paper we presented a probabilistic test of condi­
tional independence between two continuous variables. 
For this we proposed the posterior probability of in­
dependence given the data, taking into account his­
tograms representing disĺretizations at several differ­
ent resolutions. 
We show that this is necessary by 
observing that the range of values that this quantity 
may take across different resolutions may vary sub­
stantially. 
We developed a Bayesian approach, inte­
grating over all possible boundary placements on the 
plane, and incorporating evidence from different reso­
lutions. By taking advantage of certain structure that 
exists in the space of discretizations, we were able to 
approximate this quantity, reducing the time that is 
required to estimate it from exponential in the size of 
the data set, to polynomial. 
An issue that merits further attention is the case of 
the conditional test. 
Our proposed extension to the 
unconditional test may not work in all cases, because 
the observation of section 2.2 does not extent to the 
conditioning set variables, as is explained later in that 
section (it may work as an approximation). Therefore 
a more general algorithm is needed for arbitrarily dis­
tributed data. We plan to work on this issue in the 
near future. 
Our solution may benefit the generation of Bayesian 
networks in domains that contain any number of con­
tinuous, ordinal discrete and/or categorical attributes. 
In such domains, our test may be applied in a straight­
forward fashion, due to the fact that we employ dis­
cretization. 
One additional benefit that may emerge 
from such an approach is the representation of the con­
ditional probability distributions of a BN, if our test 
is being used for such a purpose. This is another topic 
of further research. 
Another interesting direction of research is the devel­
opment of quad-tree like discretization rather than 
axis-parallel boundaries that span the range of the 
variables involved. 
One can envision, for example, a 
discretization that detects ranges in the plane where 
the variables are locally approximately independent. 
Such a range may indicate the presence of another 
quantity, explaining the local independence. This may 
be used to generate new, possibly meaningful features 
by combining existing ones in the domain. 
Finally, accelerating the asymptotic running time of 
our algorithm is important. Even though our method 
is polynomial in time, the exponent is the number of 
variables involved in the conditional test. 
This may 
be prohibitively expensive for large conditioning sets 
and/or data sets. 
A faster algorithm is required for 
those situations.
