An attempt to generate new bridge types from latent space of generative 
adversarial network 
Hongjun Zhang 
Wanshi Antecedence Digital Intelligence Traffic Technology Co., Ltd, Nanjing, 210016, China 

Abstract：Try to generate new bridge types using generative artificial intelligence technology. 
Symmetric structured image dataset of three-span beam bridge, arch bridge, cable-stayed bridge and 
suspension bridge are used . Based on Python programming language, TensorFlow and Keras deep learning 
platform framework , as well as Wasserstein loss function and Lipschitz constraints, generative 
adversarial network is constructed and trained. From the obtained low dimensional bridge-type latent 
space sampling, new bridge types with asymmetric structures can be generated. Generative adversarial 
network can create new bridge types by organically combining different structural components on the 
basis of human original bridge types. It has a certain degree of human original ability. Generative 
artificial intelligence technology can open up imagination space and inspire humanity.  
Keywords: generative artificial intelligence; bridge-type innovation; generative adversarial 
network; latent space; deep learning 
 
0 
Introduction 
Bridge designers cannot draw wild and imaginative patterns like artists. Bridge design must first 
meet the structural force requirements. Unreasonable structural design will greatly increase the cost 
of bridge construction, while mechanically infeasible solutions cannot be implemented. Although bridge 
type innovation is strictly constrained by structural mechanics, it is not entirely impossible today 
because the history of large-scale bridge construction by humans is only over 100 years, and there 
is still much unknown space to explore in the field of bridges. In the past decade, the progress of 
generative artificial intelligence technology has been astonishing, providing new means for bridge 
innovation. 
The author's previous paper
 [1] used Variational Autoencoder (VAE) to generate several technically 
feasible new combination bridge types, but they were only a simple superposition of two bridge types 
in the dataset, and the innovative ideas were too single. This is because the variational autoencoder 
distributes samples with the same label in the same region, and there are overlapping areas between 
different regions. In order to meet the minimum binary cross entropy requirement between the input 
samples and the generated images, the sampling at the overlapping area always has features of different 
peripheral bridge types. This feature allows it to generate composite bridge types, but also limits 
its ability to freely create. (Note: Variational autoencoder does not lack originality. The reason 
why it can only be simply superposition here is related to the pre-conditions such as the dataset and 
model parameters.) 
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have achieved great success in fields such as computer 
vision and natural language processing. They do not require pixel to pixel matching between input 
samples and generated images, but rather determine whether the visual statistical features of the 
images match. This makes them more creative than variational autoencoders. This article adopts 
generative adversarial network and attempts bridge innovation again based on the same dataset as 
before
 
[1]
（
open 
source 
address 
of 
this 
article's 
dataset 
and 
source 
code: 
https://github.com/QQ583304953/Bridge-GAN）. 
1 
Introduction to generative adversarial network 
1.1 Overview 
Generative artificial intelligence technology can be roughly divided into six categories: 

Variational Autoencoders, Generative Adversarial Networks, Autoregressive Models and Transformers, 
Normalizing Flow Models, Energy Based Models and Diffusion Models, Multimodal Models
[2]. Many categories 
do not have absolute boundaries and often merge and permeate with each other. The timeline for the 
development of contemporary generative artificial intelligence is shown in the following figure 
(Figure 1): 
 
Fig.1 The timeline for the development of generative artificial intelligence 
Data source：https://github.com/davidADSP/Generative_Deep_Learning_2nd_Edition/tree/main/docs/timeline.png 
1.2 Generative adversarial network 
Generative adversarial networks can replace variational autoencoders to learn the latent space 
of images. They can make the generated images almost indistinguishable from the training images 
statistically, thus generating realistic new images. 
It includes a discriminator and a generator 
[3]. The function of the discriminator is to distinguish 
whether the input images are from the dataset (real) or the generator composite (fake) by learning 
the features of the input images (from the dataset and the generator composite). The function of the 
generator is to decode a random vector (points in the latent space) into a composite image with 
dataset features through learning under the guidance of the discriminator. Two networks are trained 

alternately, and their abilities are synchronously improved until the generated images by the 
generator can be astonishingly realistic, making it difficult for the discriminator to distinguish 
them. Please refer to the following figure (Figure 2) for details: 
 
Fig.2 Architecture diagram of generative adversarial network 
1.3 WGAN-GP 
At the beginning of this practice, I attempted to use the standard GAN architecture, but 
encountered the problem of mode collapse. The generator could only output one type of bridge (such 
as V-shaped pier rigid frame beam bridge), so I switched to the WGAN-GP architecture
 [4]. 
(1) The WGAN-GP architecture uses the Wasserstein loss function instead of binary cross entropy. 
The Wasserstein loss function
[5] is -1/n*∑(y*p). 
In the formula: n is the number of samples; The value of label y is 1 (real, or artificially set as 
real), -1 (fake); P is the output value of the discriminator (real scalar). 
The loss during training the discriminator is -1/n * ∑ {D (x) - D [G (z)]}. 
The loss during training the generator is -1/n * ∑ {D [G (z)]}. 
In the formula: D (x) is the output value of the discriminator for real image; Z is the latent space 
sampling point; G (z) is the output value of the generator (image); D [G (z)] is the output value of 
the discriminator for generating image. 
In order to minimize the loss, the gradient descent algorithm forces the discriminator to adjust 
the weight parameters to achieve the following results: D (x) as large as possible and D [G (z)] as 
small as possible. Similarly, the result of generator optimization is to maximize D [G (z)] as much 
as possible. 
From a mathematical perspective, the Wasserstein loss function here has neither upper nor lower 
bounds, and there is no minimum value for the loss (while the binary cross entropy loss of GAN has a 
minimum value). 
The influence of the Wasserstein loss function can be understood through imagination: ① During 

discriminator training, a counterfeiter (generator) imitates the artworks of a famous artist, and the 
discriminator compares and evaluates the counterfeits with the real artworks, striving to improve 
identification skills, scoring the real works as positive and the fake works as negative, and 
polarizing the scores as much as possible. ② During generator training, in order to get the 
discriminator to give the highest possible positive score, counterfeiters must do their best to 
improve their imitation skills. It can be seen that logically WGAN and GAN are basically the same. 
In an ideal state, when the game reaches equilibrium: the discriminator is difficult to distinguish 
between real and fake, D (x) is approximately equal to D [G (z)], and the discriminator's loss 
approaches zero from a large negative value; The generator's ability has also improved to an excellent 
state, and the generator loss is approaching zero. 
(2) During the training process, for the input images of real and fake categories, it is required 
that the discriminator score is polarized, and the discriminator's output can be any value (- ∞,+∞). 
Under the influence of gradient descent algorithm, the gradient of the discriminator function (the 
discriminator is assumed to be a higher-dimensional function y=f(x) that maps an image as a scalar) 
becomes very steep, thus achieving the goal of minimal loss (negative value). But the steep gradient 
leads to poor model stability. 
Therefore, it is necessary to apply constraints to make the discriminator function a K-Lipschitz 
function. The method is to add a gradient penalty
[6] to the loss function of the discriminator, which 
will impose a penalty when the gradient norm of the discriminator function deviates from the K value. 
At the end of the training, the gradient of the discriminator function will approach the set K value 
(K value is taken as 1 here). 
Calculation example: If the gradient of the discriminator function is [3,4], the gradient penalty 
is [sqrt (3 ^ 2+4 ^ 2) -1] ^ 2=16, the relative coefficient is 10, and the discriminator Wasserstein 
loss is -260, then the total discriminator loss is=Wasserstein loss+relative coefficient * gradient 
penalty term=-260+10 * 16=-100. 
2 
An attempt to generate new bridge types from latent space of generative adversarial 
network 
2.1 Dataset 
Using the dataset from the author's previous paper 
[1], which includes two subcategories for each 
type of bridge (namely equal cross-section beam bridge, V-shaped pier rigid frame beam bridge, top-
bearing arch bridge, bottom-bearing arch bridge, harp cable-stayed bridge, fan cable-stayed bridge, 
vertical_sling suspension  bridge, and diagonal_sling suspension  bridge), and all are three spans 
(beam bridge is 80+140+80m, while other bridge types are 67+166+67m), and are structurally 
symmetrical. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3 Grayscale image of each bridge facade 
Each sub bridge type obtained 1200 different images, resulting in a total of 9600 images in the 
entire dataset. 
2.2 Construction of generative adversarial network 
Based on the Python3.8 programming language, TensorFlow2.6, and Keras2.6 deep learning platform 
framework, construct and train generative adversarial network. After testing, the 2-dimensional 
latent space can achieve relatively ideal results. 
（1）Architecture of the critic (discriminator)： 
It receives input images from the dataset and synthesized by the generator, learning to 

correctly distinguish between the two. 
First, create an input layer for the image, then passed to six Conv2D layers in sequence 
(activation function LeakyReLU), and finally flatten and connect it to the Dense layer (linear 
transformation). The output result is the scoring scalar value. The model summary is shown in the 
table below: 
Tab.1 model summary of critic 
Layer (type) 
Output Shape 
Param # 
input_1 (InputLayer) 
[(None, 128, 512, 1)] 
0 
conv2d (Conv2D) 
(None, 64, 256, 64) 
1088 
leaky_re_lu (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 64, 256, 64) 
0 
dropout (Dropout) 
(None, 64, 256, 64) 
0 
conv2d_1 (Conv2D) 
(None, 32, 128, 128) 
131200 
leaky_re_lu_1 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 32, 128, 128) 
0 
dropout_1 (Dropout) 
(None, 32, 128, 128) 
0 
conv2d_2 (Conv2D) 
(None, 16, 64, 128) 
262272 
leaky_re_lu_2 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 16, 64, 128) 
0 
dropout_2 (Dropout) 
(None, 16, 64, 128) 
0 
conv2d_3 (Conv2D) 
(None, 8, 32, 128) 
262272 
leaky_re_lu_3 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 8, 32, 128) 
0 
dropout_3 (Dropout) 
(None, 8, 32, 128) 
0 
conv2d_4 (Conv2D) 
(None, 4, 16, 128) 
262272 
leaky_re_lu_4 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 4, 16, 128) 
0 
dropout_4 (Dropout) 
(None, 4, 16, 128) 
0 
conv2d_5 (Conv2D) 
(None, 2, 8, 128) 
262272 
leaky_re_lu_5 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 2, 8, 128) 
0 
dropout_5 (Dropout) 
(None, 2, 8, 128) 
0 
flatten (Flatten) 
(None, 2048) 
0 
dense (Dense) 
(None, 1) 
2049 
Total params: 1,183,425 
Trainable params: 1,183,425 
Non-trainable params: 0 
（2）Architecture of the generator： 
It decodes latent space vectors into composite images with dataset features. 
First, create a coordinate point input layer and a Dense layer, and then pass them to six 
Conv2D Transfer layers in sequence (the first five layers have the activation function LeakyReLU, 
and the last layer has the activation function tanh). The output result is the composite image 
corresponding to the coordinate point. The model summary is shown in the table below: 
Tab.2 model summary of generator 
Layer (type) 
Output Shape 
Param # 
input_2 (InputLayer) 
[(None, 2)] 
0 
dense_1 (Dense) 
(None, 2048) 
6144 
reshape (Reshape) 
(None, 2, 8, 128) 
0 
conv2d_transpose (Conv2DTran 
(None, 4, 16, 128) 
262272 
batch_normalization (BatchNo 
(None, 4, 16, 128) 
512 
leaky_re_lu_6 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 4, 16, 128) 
0 
dropout_6 (Dropout) 
(None, 4, 16, 128) 
0 
conv2d_transpose_1 (Conv2DTr 
(None, 8, 32, 128) 
262272 

batch_normalization_1 (Batch 
(None, 8, 32, 128) 
512 
leaky_re_lu_7 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 8, 32, 128) 
0 
dropout_7 (Dropout) 
(None, 8, 32, 128) 
0 
conv2d_transpose_2 (Conv2DTr 
(None, 16, 64, 128) 
262272 
batch_normalization_2 (Batch 
(None, 16, 64, 128) 
512 
leaky_re_lu_8 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 16, 64, 128) 
0 
dropout_8 (Dropout) 
(None, 16, 64, 128) 
0 
conv2d_transpose_3 (Conv2DTr 
(None, 32, 128, 128) 
262272 
batch_normalization_3 (Batch 
(None, 32, 128, 128) 
512 
leaky_re_lu_9 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 32, 128, 128) 
0 
dropout_9 (Dropout) 
(None, 32, 128, 128) 
0 
conv2d_transpose_4 (Conv2DTr 
(None, 64, 256, 64) 
131136 
batch_normalization_4 (Batch 
(None, 64, 256, 64) 
256 
leaky_re_lu_10 (LeakyReLU) 
(None, 64, 256, 64) 
0 
dropout_10 (Dropout) 
(None, 64, 256, 64) 
0 
conv2d_transpose_5 (Conv2DTr 
(None, 128, 512, 1) 
1025 
Total params: 1,189,697 
Trainable params: 1,188,545 
Non-trainable params: 1,152 
（3）Model subclassing of Keras to construct WGAN-GP 
Just rewrite the __init__(), compile(), metrics(), and train step() methods of the Model class. 
The other methods inherit. 
Import network architecture components and parameters in the __init__() method, provide 
optimizer and on-screen loss averaging algorithm in the compile() method, and reset the on-screen 
loss value every epoch in the metrics () method. 
The train_step () method: first set the gradient tape, in the gradient tape, utilize the model 
call () method to get its output, and then calculate the loss; Then calculate the gradient and use 
the optimizer set by the compile() method to update the weights; Finally, the losses are averaged 
and then displayed by the fit() method. 
Add gradient in the class_ The penaly() method calculates the gradient penalty term (which can 
also be imported into the class using custom layers). 
In the model class, add the gradient_penalty() method (it can also be imported into the model 
class using a custom layer method). 
2.3 Training 
At the beginning, the critic counts various features of the real image, forcing the generator to 
generate fake images with some of these features. These fake images sometimes only combine some of 
the features in the feature set, and this moment the generated images will often appear strong 
creative. 
In order to avoid confusion between fake and real images, the critic further learn and master 
the matching relationship between different features of real images. Therefore, the generator is 
further improved to make the composition of fake images almost the same as that of real images, and 
this moment the generated images will appear mediocre. 
So, a moderate model capacity and training epochs can strike a balance between image quality and 
creativity. 
Because there are too many hyperparameters to adjust and hardware constraints (I only have an 
NVIDIA GTX 1650 graphics card with 4G video memory), it is not possible to fully optimize it. Thus, 
I  can only test parameters while sampling, and generate bridge images from multiple saved 
generator models. 
2.4 Exploring new bridge types through latent space sampling 

Samples are taken from the latent spaces of multiple generator models according to the set 
dense spatial grid. Fifty points are taken from each dimension, with a coordinate range of [-
10,+10]. Each latent space samples 2500 images (to the 2th power of 50). 
Based on the thinking of engineering structure, five technically feasible new bridge types are 
obtained through manual screening, which were completely different from the dataset (Figure 4). 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.4 Five new bridge types with feasible technology 
The new bridge types here refer to a model that has never appeared in the dataset, but is 
created by neural network based on algorithms, which represents the model's innovative ability. 
Some bridge types, such as cable-stayed bridge with single pylon, are very common in reality. 
The combination of V-shaped pier rigid structure with suspension bridge with single pylon or 
cable-stayed bridge with single pylon has not been practiced by any engineer to my knowledge. 
2.5 Result analysis 
The bridge types of the dataset are all symmetric structures, while generative adversarial network 
can generate asymmetric bridge types, which are not simply superposition, but organic combinations 
of different structural components. It can be considered that it has similar original human creativity. 
(Note: The original ability of human bridge design is to combine basic structural components such as 
beams, columns, cables, and arches according to mechanical principles to form sturdy structures.) 
2.6 Areas for improvement 
(1) After generating tens of thousands of bridge types images through sampling, manual screening 
based on engineering structural thinking is required. Can program algorithms be used to determine the 
feasibility of structural mechanics, thus replacing manual image screening?  
Even in the discriminator of generative adversarial network, structural mechanics programming 
algorithm is added to determine whether the structure is valid, so that the latent space of the 
generator only generates bridge structures that are valid. 

(2) There are only eight types of sub bridge types in this dataset, which seriously restricts the 
innovative ability of generative adversarial network. If we collect all the existing human bridge 
types, even using three-dimensional bridge types, we believe that low dimensional latent space will 
generate more new bridge types. 
Unfortunately, as an ordinary bridge designer and amateur AI enthusiast, I do not have the 
resources to conduct in-depth research on the above two points. 
3 
Conclusion 
(1) Generative adversarial network is more creative than variational autoencoder. It can 
organically combine different structural components on the basis of human original bridge types, 
creating new bridge types. It has a certain degree of human original ability, which can open up 
imagination space and provide inspiration to humans. 
(2) At present, generative artificial intelligence cannot replace the work of human structural 
engineers, but can only serve as a virtual assistant. After all, structural design is a highly 
advanced intellectual behavior, and even humans need years of rigorous training to become qualified 
structural engineers. 
Human beings are actually biological robots nurtured by the natural environment. Since nature can 
generate intelligent humans, as long as its principles are found, humans can also imitate nature and 
create artificial intelligence. The pursuit of artificial intelligence is to make machines think and 
act like humans, completely replacing human engineers in the field of engineering. Through continuous 
research, it is expected that in the near future, "Strong AI" will be achieved. Machines will think 
and reason like humans, have independent consciousness, and through learning knowledge and engineering 
practice, can also become qualified engineers for engineering design and construction. 
(3) The results of this exploration can be replicated in other design industries, such as 
industrial design, architectural design, landscape design, etc.
