1
Fast Deep Learning for Automatic Modulation
Classiﬁcation
Sharan Ramjee, Student Member, IEEE, Shengtai Ju, Student Member, IEEE,
Diyu Yang, Student Member, IEEE, Xiaoyu Liu, Student Member, IEEE,
Aly El Gamal, Member, IEEE and Yonina C. Eldar, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract
In this work, we investigate the feasibility and effectiveness of employing deep learning algorithms for automatic
recognition of the modulation type of received wireless communication signals from subsampled data. Recent work considered
a GNU radio-based data set that mimics the imperfections in a real wireless channel and uses 10 different modulation types.
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture was then developed and shown to achieve performance that exceeds
that of expert-based approaches. Here, we continue this line of work and investigate deep neural network architectures that
deliver high classiﬁcation accuracy. We identify three architectures - namely, a Convolutional Long Short-term Deep Neural
Network (CLDNN), a Long Short-Term Memory neural network (LSTM), and a deep Residual Network (ResNet) - that
lead to typical classiﬁcation accuracy values around 90% at high SNR. We then study algorithms to reduce the training time
by minimizing the size of the training data set, while incurring a minimal loss in classiﬁcation accuracy. To this end, we
demonstrate the performance of Principal Component Analysis in signiﬁcantly reducing the training time, while maintaining
good performance at low SNR. We also investigate subsampling techniques that further reduce the training time, and pave the
way for online classiﬁcation at high SNR. Finally, we identify representative SNR values for training each of the candidate
architectures, and consequently, realize drastic reductions of the training time, with negligible loss in classiﬁcation accuracy.
I. INTRODUCTION
Automatic modulation classiﬁcation plays an important role in modern wireless communication. It ﬁnds applications
in various commercial and military areas. For example, Software Deﬁned Radios (SDR) use blind recognition of the
modulation type to quickly adapt to various communication systems, without requiring control overhead. In military
settings, friendly signals should be securely received, while hostile signals need to be efﬁciently recognized typically
without prior information. Under such conditions, advanced real-time signal processing and blind modulation recognition
techniques are required. Modulation recognition may also prove to be an essential capability for identifying the source(s)
of received wireless signals, which can enable various intelligent decisions for a context-aware autonomous wireless
communication system.
This work is supported in part by DARPA and AFRL under grant no. 108818, and was presented in part at the Asilomar Conference on Signals,
Systems and Computers [1].
S. Ramjee, S. Ju, D. Yang, X. Liu and A. El Gamal are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West

arXiv:1901.05850v1  [eess.SP]  16 Jan 2019

A typical modulation classiﬁer consists of two steps: signal preprocessing and classiﬁcation algorithms. Preprocessing
tasks may include noise reduction and estimation of signal parameters such as carrier frequency and signal power. In the
second step, three popular categories of modulation recognition algorithms are conventionally selected: likelihood-based
(LB) [2]–[7], feature-based (FB) [8]–[13] or using an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) [14]–[18]. The ﬁrst compares the
likelihood ratio of each possible hypothesis against a threshold, which is derived from the probability density function of
the observed wave. Multiple likelihood ratio test (LRT) algorithms have been proposed: Average LRT [19], Generalized
LRT [20], Hybrid LRT [7] and quasi-hybrid LRT [2]. In the FB approach, several features are selected and observed for
the decision. Both LB and FB methods require precise estimates in the ﬁrst step and have only been derived to distinguish
between few modulation types [4], [19], [21], [22]. ANN structures such as multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) have been
widely used as modulation type classiﬁers [14]. Unlike LB and FB techniques, where the decision threshold is chosen
manually, the threshold in ANN could be determined adaptively and automatically. Traditional MLP has performed well on
modulation types such as AM, FM, ASK, and FSK. Recent work has shown that deep neural networks with cutting-edge
structures could greatly improve the classiﬁcation process (see e.g., [23] and [24]).
Deep neural networks have played a signiﬁcant role in the research domain of video, speech and image processing in the
past few years. The recent success of deep learning algorithms is associated with applications that suffer from inaccuracies
in existing mathematical models and enjoy the availability of large data sets. Recently, the idea of deep learning has
been introduced for modulation classiﬁcation using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for distinguishing between
10 different modulation types [23]. Simulation results show that a CNN not only demonstrates better accuracy results, but
also provides more ﬂexibility in detecting various modulation types compared to current expert-based approaches. Residual
Networks (ResNet) [24] and Densely Connected Networks (DenseNet) [25] were recently introduced to strengthen feature
propagation in the deep neural network by creating shortcut paths between different layers in the network. By adding
the bypass connections, an identity mapping is created, allowing the deep network to learn simple functions. A ResNet
architecture was shown to be successful for distinguishing between 24 different modulation types in [26]. DenseNet
performed well for image recognition, but has not been used in the area of modulation recognition. A Convolutional Long
Short-term Deep Neural Network (CLDNN) has been recently introduced in [27], combining the architectures of CNN
and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) into a deep neural network by taking advantage of the complementarity of CNNs,
LSTMs, and conventional deep neural network architectures. The LSTM unit is a memory unit of a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN). RNNs are neural networks with memory that are suitable for learning sequence tasks such as speech
recognition and handwritten recognition. LSTM optimizes the gradient vanishing problem in RNNs by using a forget gate
in its memory cell, which enables the learning of long-term dependencies. The authors in [28] added LSTM units into the
neural network model and presented high classiﬁcation accuracy for a wide range of modulation formats. In this work, we
present ﬁve different architectures that deliver higher classiﬁcation accuracy than the CNN introduced in [23]. We design
our own CNN, DenseNet, and CLDNN architectures for the modulation recognition task, as well as derive optimized
versions of the ResNet architecture of [26] and the LSTM architecture of [28], by tuning the number of residual stacks
for ResNet and the hyperparameters for LSTM.
One major challenge facing machine learning algorithms based on deep neural network architectures is the long training
time. For example, for the problem at hand, even the simple CNN architecture in [23] would take approximately 40 minutes

to train using three Nvidia Tesla P100 GPU chips. This creates a serious obstacle towards the feasibility of applying such
algorithms in real-time, where online training is needed to adapt the network architecture to changing environmental
conditions. In particular, applying deep learning to the autonomous wireless communication systems anticipated in next-
generation networks require signiﬁcant reductions in the training time compare to the state of the art methods. In such
systems, it is likely that training of the machine learning algorithms will be frequently needed to accommodate new
environmental conditions. Hence, the issue of reducing the training time becomes essential for the success of these
algorithms.
The objective of this work is two-fold: identifying deep neural network architectures suitable for the modulation
classiﬁcation task, and suggesting methods for reducing their training time. First, we study different deep neural network
architectures for the task of modulation classiﬁcation, based on the data set provided in [29]. Inspired by recent studies,
we explore ﬁve different architectures that deliver higher classiﬁcation accuracy than the CNN architecture of [23], and
build insights for their optimal designs as well as identify candidate architectures that deliver high classiﬁcation accuracy
for a wide range of SNR values. In particular, we ﬁnd the CLDNN developed in this work and an optimized variant of the
ResNet of [26] to deliver superior performance at low SNR. We also show that ResNet and an optimized variant of the
LSTM architecture of [28] perform best at high SNR. We then explore various methods for reducing the training time by
minimizing the size of the training set, while preserving relevant information to the classiﬁcation task. These methods are
based on dimensionality reduction and sub-Nyquist techniques (see [30] for a review), as well as ﬁnding representative
SNR values that are ideal for training. We derive insights for the impact and optimal designs of each of these methods.
Our results conﬁrm the possibility of reducing the training time by as much as 20 times, while incurring a minimal losses
in classiﬁcation accuracy (as low as 2%).
For the CLDNN, ResNet and LSTM architectures that are identiﬁed to perform best over different SNR ranges within the
range from -20 dB to 18 dB, the training time drops linearly with the dimensionality reduction factor or the subsampling
rate, as well as when reducing the number of example vectors in the training data sets through SNR selection. We ﬁnd that
reducing the input vector dimensions through Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is more effective than subsampling
at low SNR, and the opposite holds at high SNR. In particular, we develop a subsampling method based on eliminating
samples that have low magnitude values and show that this method leads to little degradation in classiﬁcation accuracy
at high SNR. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of choosing representative training SNR values, and show that for
the considered range of 20 SNR values from -20 dB to 18 dB, choosing a pair of SNR values can lead to benign accuracy
degradation (less than 2% for LSTM) with a 10 fold reduction in training time. The results suggest that a combination of
two or more of these methods could be very powerful. For example, using uniform subsampling with a factor of 2, with
training SNR values of 18 dB and 0 dB for the proposed LSTM architecture may lead to negligible accuracy degradation
with a 20 fold reduction in training time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst describe the considered data set and programming environment in
Section II, and investigate deep neural network architectures and their classiﬁcation performance in Section III. We then
consider the problem of minimizing the training time for three candidate architectures, while incurring minimal loss in
accuracy. We start this study by investigating different methods to compress the input data through dimensionality reduction
and subsampling in Section IV. We then explore in Section V the existence of representative SNR values, that could be

used exclusively for training, while maintaining accurate classiﬁcation over the whole tested SNR range. In Section VI,
we discuss insights obtained from the presented results. We ﬁnally conclude this work in Section VII.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this work, we consider the classiﬁcation of the modulation type of received wireless signals, using deep neural network
classiﬁers that adaptively incorporate features extracted from a training data set. A general expression for the received
baseband complex envelope is
r (t) = s(t; ui) + n (t) ,
(1)
where
s(t; ui) = aiej2π△ftejθPK
k=1ejφks(i)
k g(t −(k −1)T −εT), 0 ≤t ≤KT
(2)
is the noise-free baseband complex envelope of the received signal, and n(t) is the instantaneous channel noise at time
t. In (2), ai is the unknown signal amplitude, ∆f is the carrier frequency offset, θ is the time-invariant carrier phase
introduced by the propagation delay, φk is the phase jitter, {s(i)
k , 1 ≤k ≤K} denotes K complex symbols taken from the
ith modulation format, T represents the symbol period, ε is the normalized epoch for time offset between the transmitter
and signal receiver, g(t)
=
Ppulse(t) ⊗h(t) is the composite effect of the residual channel with h(t) denoting the
channel impulse response and ⊗denoting mathematical convolution, and Ppulse(t) is the transmit pulse shape. Here,
ui = {ai, ∆f, θ, ε, g(t), {φk}K
k=1, {s(i)
k }K
k=1} is the multidimensional vector that includes the deterministic unknown
signal or channel parameters for the ith modulation type. The goal is to recognize the modulation type i from the
received signal r(t). To this end, we use various machine learning classiﬁers based on deep neural network architectures,
where a training data set is ﬁrst processed to set the network parameters, and then the classiﬁcation accuracy is computed
over the classiﬁcation output for a testing data set (see [31] for more details).
We use the RadioML2016.10b data set generated in [23] as the input data of our research. Details about the generation
of this data set can be found in [29]. Fig. 1 shows a high-level framework of the data generation. For digital modulations,
the entire Gutenberg works of Shakespeare in ASCII is used, with whitening randomizers applied to ensure equiprobable
symbols and bits. For analog modulations, a continuous voice signal is used as input data, which consists primarily of
acoustic voice speech with some interludes and off times. Ten widely used modulations are chosen: eight digital and
two analog modulations. These consist of BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK, QAM16, QAM64, BFSK, CPFSK, and PAM4 for digital
modulations, and WB-FM, and AM-DSB for analog modulations. The data set is split equally among all considered
modulation types. For the channel model, physical environmental noises like thermal noise and multipath fading were
simulated. The models for generating random channel and device imperfections include sample rate offset model, noise
model, center frequency offset model and fading model. When packaging data, the output stream of each simulation is
randomly segmented into vectors as the original data set with a sample rate of 1M sample per second. Similar to the
way that an acoustic signal is windowed in voice recognition tasks, a sliding window extracts 128 samples with a shift
of 64 samples, which forms the data set we are using. 160,000 samples generated using the GNU-radio library developed
in [29] are segmented into training and testing data sets through 128-samples rectangular windowing processing, which is
similar to the windowed continuous acoustic voice signal used in voice recognition tasks. The training examples - each

Fig. 1: A frame of data generation.
consisting of 128 samples - are fed into the neural network in 2×128 vectors with real and imaginary parts separated in
complex time samples, except for the pure LSTM architecture, which is fed samples in polar form (amplitude and phase).
The labels in input data include the SNR ground truth and the modulation type. The SNR of the samples is uniformly
distributed from -20dB to +18dB, with a step size of 2 dB, i.e., the data set is equally split among all SNR dB values in
{−20, −18, −16, · · · , 18}. Finally, the classiﬁcation accuracy is measured as the percentage of correctly classiﬁed samples
over the testing data set.
For all our experiments, we used Keras with TensorFlow as a backend1. We used a GPU server equipped with 3 Tesla
P100 GPUs with 16 GB memory. The Adam optimizer was used for all architectures, and the loss function was the
categorical cross entropy function. We also used ReLu activation functions for all layers, except the last dense layer, where
we used Softmax activation functions. For all architectures except the LSTM, we used a batch size of 1024, and a learning
rate of 0.001. For the LSTM architecture, we used a batch size of 400, and a learning rate of 0.0018.
III. DEEP NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURES
We investigated the performance of ﬁve different types of neural network architectures on the considered problem of
modulation classiﬁcation: Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Densely Connected Convolutional Network (DenseNet),
Convolutional Long Short-term Memory Deep Neural Network (CLDNN), Long Short-term Memory Network (LSTM),
and Deep Residual Network (ResNet).
A. CNN and DenseNet Architectures
We start with a convolutional neural network architecture similar to the CNN2 network proposed in [23], which achieves
an accuracy of 75% at high SNR. We experiment with different network depths and ﬁlter settings. The best accuracy we
achieved at high SNR was approximately 83.8%, using a CNN architecture with four convolutional layers, as shown in
Fig. 2. The ﬁrst parameter below each convolutional layer in the ﬁgure represents the number of ﬁlters in that layer, while
the second and third numbers show the size of each ﬁlter. For the two dense layers, there are 128 and 11 neurons, in
order of their depth in the network. We note that the improved performance is due to the extra two convolutional layers,
compared to CNN2.
We next investigate the effect of shortcut connections by introducing a DenseNet architecture shown in Fig. 3. The
architecture of DenseNet is similar to that of a CNN, except for the shortcut connections between non-consecutive layers.
This architecture achieves an improved classiﬁcation accuracy of 86.6% at high SNR.
1Code is available at: https://github.com/dl4amc/source

Fig. 2: CNN architecture.
Fig. 3: DenseNet architecture.
B. CLDNN Architecture
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) have been proved to provide a powerful tool for time domain data processing tasks
due to their ability to connect previous state information to the present task. Inspired by [27], we propose a CLDNN
architecture by adding an LSTM layer into the CNN architecture. The detailed architecture considered for CLDNN is
shown in Fig. 4. The extra LSTM layer is placed between the CNN layers and the dense layers. In our experiments, an
LSTM layer with 50 cells provided the best accuracy. This architecture results in a classiﬁcation accuracy of 88.5% at
higher SNR values (above 2 dB). The RNN structure is suited for modulation classiﬁcation, because it can extract temporal
relationships from the input waveform.
Fig. 4: CLDNN architecture.
Fig. 5: LSTM architecture.

C. LSTM Architecture
In [32], the authors proposed a modulation classiﬁcation model based on a pure LSTM architecture. The design of this
network is based on similar intuition as our CLDNN, namely that LSTM is efﬁcient in learning long-term dependencies in
time series data processing tasks. However, unlike CLDNN, LSTM does not have convolutional layers. This architecture
receives the input samples in polar form, instead of the rectangular form used for all other considered architectures.
The polar form representation is obtained by computing the amplitude and phase of the input I/Q sample at each sampling
time step. It then uses two LSTM layers, each with 128 cells, to extract the temporal dependencies of the amplitude and
phase characteristics of different modulation schemes. It uses a dense layer with Softmax activation function as the last
hidden layer to project the output of the second LSTM layer into the ﬁnal probability output space P(Classes).
We ﬁne tuned the hyperparameters of the LSTM network in [32] and found out that it achieves a classiﬁcation accuracy
of 92% at high SNR. The great performance of the LSTM network further demonstrates that RNNs provide a good choice
for the task of modulation classiﬁcation in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy, due to their ability to extracting long-term
temporal relationships in time series data, which could be useful for identifying patterns of symbol-to-symbol transitions.
However, RNNs suffer from several issues when it comes to online learning. First, the training time for RNNs is much
slower than the training time of Feed-forward Neural Networks (FNNs). The training time for the LSTM network is
222 seconds per epoch using all 3 GPUs, about 4 times longer than the training time of the CNN network with four
convolutional layers. The reason is two-fold: First, the computational complexity of the optimization process of RNNs
is much greater than that of traditional FNNs. RNNs perform one full optimization step (a forward propagation and a
backpropagation) for each time step of each batch, while FNNs only perform one full optimization step per batch. Second,
the computations of FNNs can usually be easily parallelized, while it is harder to do so for computations of RNNs, since
each time domain step of RNN computation depends on previous steps. Such long training time becomes a bottleneck
in online training, where data comes in real time and the training process needs to be done fast. Second, the temporal
relationships that RNNs attempt to extract are likely to break down either when the sampling rate of the arriving signals
is not ﬁxed, or when a dimensionality reduction or subsampling process is necessary for achieving faster learning. This
is demonstrated in more details in Section IV, where we see that the classiﬁcation accuracy for both CLDNN and LSTM
networks drops rapidly at high SNR when performing subsampling or dimensionality reduction. In these cases, the ResNet
architecture presented below performs best.
D. ResNet Architecture
As neural networks grow deeper, their learning performance has been challenged with problems like vanishing or
exploding gradient and overﬁtting, and therefore both training and testing accuracy for a deep neural network start to
degrade after the network reaches a certain depth. The degradation of testing accuracy results from the overﬁtting issue,
due to the extra complexity in a deep neural network, and the degradation of training accuracy is due to the problem of
vanishing/exploding gradient that makes the optimizer less viable to converge to a sufﬁciently good local minimum of the
cost function.
The Deep residual Network (ResNet) architecture was introduced in ImageNet and COCO 2015 competitions [24]. It
resolves accuracy degradation issues in deeper neural networks and has been shown to be a robust choice for a wide range

Layer
Output dimensions
Input
2x128
Residual Stack
32x64
Residual Stack
32x32
Residual Stack
32x16
FC/ReLU
128
FC/ReLU
128
FC/Softmax
10
TABLE I: ResNet Architecture.
of machine learning tasks. Inspired by the ResNet architecture in [26], we design a similar ResNet, but with three residual
stacks instead of six, as we found that choice to lead to increasing the classiﬁcation accuracy. The overall architecture is
shown in Table I. In our network, three residual stacks are followed by three fully connected layers, where each residual
stack consists of one convolutional layer, two residual units, and one max-pooling layer. For each residual unit, a shortcut
connection is created by adding the input of the residual unit with the output of the second convolutional layer of the
residual unit. Each convolutional layer in the residual unit uses a ﬁlter size of 1x5 and is followed by a batch normalization
layer to prevent overﬁtting. The detailed structures of residual units and residual stacks are shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7,
respectively. Compared to the DenseNet architecture in Section III-A, the proposed ResNet has reduced complexity in each
layer. Therefore, ResNet is able to go deeper without experiencing accuracy degradation issues. The ResNet architecture
delivers a classiﬁcation accuracy of 92% at high SNR with a fast training speed of 58 seconds per epoch.
We show the overall accuracy versus SNR results for all models in Fig. 8. We identify three architectures that deliver
good performance: CLDNN, LSTM, and ResNet. At high SNR, both LSTM and ResNet achieve similar classiﬁcation
accuracies of 92%, which is the best result among all models. At low SNR, CLDNN, and ResNet deliver the best results.
Fig. 6: Residual unit architecture.
Fig. 7: Residual stack architecture.

Fig. 8: Accuracy vs SNR all models.
IV. DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION AND SUBSAMPLING
In this section, we present various attempts to minimize the training time, by reducing the dimensionality of each
vector sample input to the deep neural network classiﬁer. Based on the results in Section III, we consider the CLDNN,
ResNet and LSTM architectures described in Sections III-B, III-D and III-C, respectively. For each considered method
for minimizing the training time, we report the results obtained by reducing the number of input vector dimensions by
factors of 2k, 1 ≤k ≤5. Recall that each training example input vector has originally 256 dimensions, with each of the
128 complex time samples occupying 2 dimensions. It is important to note from the frequency domain representation of
the input waveform depicted in Fig. 9 that the sampling rate of the input waveform is around 6 times the Nyquist rate,
and hence, the reduction goes to sub-Nyquist levels only for factors of 8, 16 and 32.
A. Principal Component Analysis
Our ﬁrst attempt is to use PCA [33] to reduce the number of dimensions occupied by each of the input vectors. We
perform PCA using all training input vectors, corresponding to the 10 modulation types. We ﬁnd the basis of the reduced
dimensional subspace based on the training data, and then project each of the test vectors on that same subspace. The
results obtained by applying PCA to the input of the CLDNN, ResNet and LSTM architectures are given in Figs. 10, 11
and 12, respectively. We ﬁrst notice that for all considered architectures, the training time drops in a linear fashion

Fig. 9: One-sided normalized FFT for a BPSK signal. A value of 0.5 on the horizontal axis corresponds to the Nyquist
rate (Bandwidth is half the sampling rate). Most of the signal energy is within a band of around
1
12 of the sampling rate.
with the reduction of dimensions. For example, reducing the dimensions by a factor of 2 leads approximately to halving
the training time. We further make the following observations from the results:
1) The performance of LSTM drops signiﬁcantly when reducing the input dimensions. We believe that this is due to
loss of temporal correlations that are strongly relevant to the classiﬁcation task.
2) The ResNet architecture is the most robust to dimensionality reduction using PCA, especially when reducing the
dimensions by a factor of 8, which delivers an accuracy of approximately 70% at 2 dB.
3) Interestingly, the accuracy curves are not necessarily monotonic with the SNR when reducing the input dimensions
through PCA. This is most pronounced when reducing the dimensions by a factor of 8 for the input of the CLDNN
architecture. The accuracy, in this case, drops signiﬁcantly for SNR values higher than 0 dB.
4) It is not necessarily the case that the accuracy drops when reducing the input dimensions. We observe that we
obtain almost identical results for all three architectures when reducing the input dimensions by factors of 2 and 4.
We believe that this phenomenon occurs because even though dimensionality reduction may lead to losing relevant

Fig. 10: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using a CLDNN with different dimensionality reduction factors using PCA.
information needed for classiﬁcation, it can also reduce overﬁtting by getting rid of task-irrelevant information.
B. Uniform Subsampling
Our second attempt is to use uniform subsampling [30] to accomplish the same task of dimensionality reduction as a
means of reducing the training time of the candidate architectures. We sample the input vector at regular intervals and train
the architectures based on the subsampled vector. The results obtained by uniform subsampling of the input of the CLDNN,
ResNet and LSTM architectures are given in Figs. 13, 14 and 15, respectively. We notice that, like the results observed
for the PCA experiments, the training time drops linearly with a drop in the number of dimensions of the input vector.
For the best-considered architectures at high SNR - namely, LSTM and ResNet - we observe that uniform subsampling
delivers superior performance to that of PCA. On the contrary, for the CLDNN and ResNet architectures that perform
best at low SNR, PCA delivers better performance than uniform subsampling. As we will see in the rest of this section,
this observation holds when comparing any of the subsampling methods considered in this work with PCA. This attests
to the excellent ability of PCA to combat high levels of random noise, while it also highlights its pitfalls at high
SNR, due to possibly losing structural information that is preserved with subsampling techniques. We further make the
following observations from the uniform subsampling results:
1) The performance of ResNet and LSTM increase when using half the samples at high SNR. For LSTM, the
classiﬁcation accuracy is higher with a quarter of the samples than that when using all the samples at high SNR.

Fig. 11: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using a ResNet with different dimensionality reduction factors using PCA.
We believe that this is an effect of the oversampling of the training input (see Fig. 9).
2) The CLDNN architecture beneﬁts from oversampling the input to obtain a high classiﬁcation accuracy. This is
evident in its performance when using half the samples, as a rapid drop in classiﬁcation accuracy is observed. On
the contrary, for ResNet and LSTM, the performance actually increases at high SNR as a result of the reduction in
overﬁtting that is a side effect of training input oversampling.
3) The performance when using half the samples by ResNet and LSTM is higher than that when using all the samples
only at high SNR values (2 dB to 10 dB), whereas it is lower at low SNR values (-20 dB to 0 dB). This suggests that
even the ResNet and LSTM architectures can signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from oversampling at low SNR. This advantage
of oversampling at low SNR holds for all dimensionality reduction and subsampling techniques considered in this
work.
C. Random Subsampling
Our third attempt to reduce the number of dimensions of the input vector is to use random subsampling [30]. Unlike
uniform subsampling, where the input vector is sampled at uniform intervals, random subsampling attempts to sample the
input vector at random intervals in time and train the architectures based on the subsampled vector. An important detail
to note here is that the order in which the samples appear is maintained, which means that if two samples are collected
at time t and time t + t1, where t1 > 0, then the sample collected at t + t1 must come after the sample collected at

Fig. 12: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using an LSTM with different dimensionality reduction factors using PCA.
time t in the resulting subsampled vector. Further, the randomization is performed only once to select a set of indices to
subsample at, and then all training and testing vectors are subsampled at the same indices. The results obtained by random
subsampling of the input of the CLDNN, ResNet and LSTM architectures are given in Figs. 16, 17 and 18, respectively.
We note that the results are based on one random choice for the indices, as we obtained very similar results when trying
multiple other choices.
We observe that the uniformly sampled training data set leads to higher classiﬁcation accuracy than the randomly
sampled training data set when the resulting sampling rate is close to Nyquist (1/8 subsampling) or above (1/4 and 1/2
subsampling). However, random subsampling actually leads to higher classiﬁcation accuracies for sampling rates
well below the Nyquist rate (1/16 and 1/32 subsampling). This is consistent with the intuition in [30], where typically
sub-Nyquist strategies that are effectively non-uniform are superior.
D. Magnitude Rank Subsampling
Inspired by the sub-Nyquist rate sampling techniques discussed in
[30], we present our fourth and ﬁnal attempt to
perform dimensionality reduction of the input vectors as a means of reducing the training time. We use a magnitude-
based subsampling, where ﬁrst the real and imaginary parts of the samples are used to calculate the magnitudes of the
samples. The samples corresponding to each vector are then ranked in the descending order of their magnitudes with rank
1 belonging to the sample with the largest magnitude. The top samples with the highest magnitudes are collected based

Fig. 13: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using a CLDNN with different degrees of Uniform Subsampling.
on the subsampling rate and are rearranged back in the sequence that they were present in as observed in the original
data set, which is similar to the maintenance of the order in which the samples appear as seen in the case of random
subsampling. The results obtained by the described magnitude rank subsampling of the input of the CLDNN, ResNet and
LSTM architectures are given in Figs. 19, 20 and 21, respectively. We observe the following:
1) At a sampling rate close to the Nyquist rate (1/8 subsampling) and above (1/4 and 1/2 subsampling), magnitude rank
subsampling performs worse than uniform subsampling and better than random subsampling in terms of classiﬁcation
accuracies for all three considered architectures.
2) Magnitude rank subsampling performs signiﬁcantly better than both uniform and random subsampling when
operating well below Nyquist rates (1/16 and 1/32 subsampling), with the exception of the LSTM architecture.
Again, this is consistent with the intuition discussed in [30] for sub-Nyquist sampling.
3) The relatively poor performance of magnitude rank subsampling with the LSTM architecture compared to the other
two architectures can be attributed to the loss of temporal correlations that are strongly relevant to the classiﬁcation
task, which could have relied on samples with lower magnitudes.
4) The degradation in accuracy due to lowering the sampling rate seems to be closer to linear than PCA and uniform
and random subsampling. In particular, this degradation is considerably mild at high SNR.

Fig. 14: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using a ResNet with different degrees of Uniform Subsampling.
E. Discussion: Training Time Reduction
The objective of the dimensionality reduction and subsampling techniques is to achieve a reduction in the training times
of the architectures, in order to facilitate online training. The following are the trends observed in the training times of
the three networks:
1) In all considered cases of dimensionality reduction and subsampling, a linear drop in training time is observed
with a drop in the number of dimensions of the input vector. More precisely, the ratio of the training time per
epoch before the application of PCA or subsampling, to the training time per epoch of after PCA or subsampling,
is approximately the same as the ratio of dimensions of the input vector before dimensionality reduction, to the
dimensions of the input vector after dimensionality reduction.
2) The above-mentioned training time ratio is slightly higher for the CLDNN and the ResNet architectures when the
ratio of the number of dimensions before and after PCA or subsampling is close to or higher than the Nyquist rate,
i.e., at 1/8, 1/4, and 1/2 reduction in dimensions. For the CLDNN, the training time ratios are approximately 0.131,
0.28, and 0.57, respectively, whereas for the ResNet, the training time ratios are 0.129, 0.27, and 0.51, respectively.
3) The second observation above is not applicable to the LSTM architecture, even for the 1/2 dimensionality reduction
and subsampling rate. We believe that this is because the input layer of the LSTM consists of a higher proportion of
the overall number of neurons in the architecture, compared to input layers of the CLDNN and ResNet architectures.

Fig. 15: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using an LSTM with different degrees of Uniform Subsampling.
V. SNR SELECTION
In this section, we consider training the CLDNN, ResNet and LSTM architectures identiﬁed in Section III using only
the data sets corresponding to one or two representative SNR values, instead of all available 20 SNR values. As a result,
the training time is signiﬁcantly reduced. We further show how certain choices for these training SNR values result in
negligible losses in the classiﬁcation accuracy.
A. Single SNR Selection
We ﬁrst consider training each architecture with a data set collected at a single SNR value. For the CLDNN architecture,
the result of classiﬁcation accuracy versus different training SNR values is shown in Fig. 22. Training only with 10 dB
data gave the best performance. The training time was reduced to 3 seconds per epoch compared to 58 seconds per epoch
before. We also note that training with a single SNR in the intermediate range between -8 dB and 0 dB produced high
classiﬁcation accuracy for the testing data sets at corresponding intermediate SNR values.
Fig. 23 shows the ResNet performance for training with individual SNR data. Training with high SNR data produced
better overall accuracy and the 8 dB training data set led to the highest overall classiﬁcation accuracy. Training time was
reduced to only 2 seconds per epoch using all 3 GPUs compared to 38 seconds per epoch using all 3 GPUs.
Fig. 24 shows the model performance of LSTM for individual SNR training. Training with 4 dB only led to the highest
overall accuracy. Training time reduced to 12 seconds per epoch compared to 222 seconds per epoch using all 3 GPUs.

Fig. 16: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using a CLDNN with different degrees of Random Subsampling.
Based on results for all three considered networks, we note that training with high SNR data produces the highest
average testing accuracy over all considered SNR values; in particular, it results in signiﬁcantly higher accuracy for high
SNR testing data. Training with very low SNR data (below -10 dB) does not seem beneﬁcial at all. However, training at
low SNR values in the range between -10 dB and 0 dB produces the highest accuracy values on testing data in the same
SNR range, but not for higher SNR testing data.
B. Uniform Random Selection
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of choosing representative SNR training values, we next experiment with randomly
selecting a training data set, that is equally split among all the 20 SNR values. We select the training data set by combining
equi-sized sets, that are randomly selected from each of the 20 SNR values. Figs. 25, 26, and 27 show the classiﬁcation
accuracies for various training data sizes for CLDNN, ResNet, and LSTM, respectively. Note that in the original setup,
we used 50% of the data set for training. The percentages of data showed on the plots correspond to percentages of the
entire data set.
We also compare the obtained results for each of the three architectures with those obtained by training using the training
data set at the single SNR value that gives the highest average classiﬁcation accuracy (identiﬁed in Section V-A). Since
we have a total of 20 SNR data sets, training using a single SNR corresponds to using only 50%
20 = 2.5% of the whole
data set for training. We note that using the representative SNR for training always gives higher classiﬁcation accuracy at

Fig. 17: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using a ResNet with different degrees of Random Subsampling.
high testing SNR values for all three architecture, than using a uniform data set with the bigger size of 50%
16 = 3.125%
of the whole data set. A similar phenomenon occurs when testing at low SNR values, and choosing a representative low
SNR value for training, which indicates that if we have a good estimate of the range of SNR values, at which the
classiﬁer would operate, then speeding up the training time using only the training set at representative SNR values
is better than uniformly sampling the training set across all SNR values. However, if such an estimate is absent,
then the uniform selection is preferred, as it delivers better performance when there is a signiﬁcant mismatch between the
trained and testing SNR values, as can be seen in Figs. 25, 26, and 27 at low SNR values.
We found all three networks to retain relatively high accuracy (above 70% at high SNR) as long as the training data size
is at least 3.125% of the entire data set size. Further, the CLDNN and LSTM architectures - that capture long-term
dependencies - are resilient to more aggressive reductions in the training data set size. Finally, it is worth noting
that we found the training time to drop in a linear fashion with the reduction in the size of the training data set.
C. Pairs of SNR Selection
We notice from the results in Section V-A that there are roughly two SNR ranges, according to the optimal training
SNR value; the range of high SNR values, and the range of mildly low SNR values. Based on this observation, we use
the data sets corresponding to a pair of SNR values in this section, and investigate the existence of a pair that gives a high
classiﬁcation accuracy over a wide range of SNR values.

Fig. 18: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using an LSTM with different degrees of Random Subsampling.
Fig. 28 shows the SNR pair selection results for ResNet. We can see from the plot that using 18 dB and 0 dB for
training produced the best overall accuracy. Training with the two highest SNR data, 18 dB and 16 dB, gave high accuracy
only for high SNR testing data. The combination of 16 dB and 8 dB was also tested because of their high individual SNR
selection performance. Training with only low SNR data yielded an accuracy of only around 10%. This means that the
training data contains too much noise and our model was not able to identify the patterns for each modulation scheme.
Training with -20 dB and 0 dB resulted in high accuracy only around 0 dB, which suggested that the model only relies on
the 0 dB training data. It is interesting to note that one pair of SNR values leads to achieving the highest classiﬁcation
accuracy - among all tested pair choices - for a wide range of SNR values from -6 dB to 18 dB.
Fig. 29 shows the result for SNR pair selection for CLDNN. Training with 10 dB and 8 dB gave us the highest accuracy
for high SNR testing. These two speciﬁc SNR values were selected because of their high individual SNR selection
performance. Training only with the two lowest SNR data yielded low accuracy, similar to the results for the ResNet.
Training with 18 dB and 0 dB resulted in better accuracy for low SNR values between -6 dB and 0 dB, compared to
training with a pair of high SNR data. The model trained using -20 dB and 0 dB was able to retain an accuracy above 60%
even for high SNR testing, different from the results for the ResNet, which poses the question of whether long-term
dependencies - captured by the LSTM layer - could enable distilling useful information from low SNR data sets.
However, the accuracy curve still contains a decaying shape.
Fig. 30 shows the results of the SNR pair selection for the LSTM architecture. High testing accuracy around high SNR

Fig. 19: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using a CLDNN with different degrees of Magnitude Rank Subsampling.
occurred for two pairs of high SNR training data, 18 dB + 16 dB and 12 dB + 4 dB. 12 dB and 4 dB were selected for
their strong individual SNR selection performance. Interestingly, the loss in accuracy for high SNR testing is less than
2% for LSTM, while the training time reduced to 23 seconds per epoch compared to 222 seconds per epoch in
the original setup. Training with 18 dB and 0 dB still gave us higher accuracy in the 0 dB to -6 dB range compared to
other pairs of training data. Training with -20 dB and 0 dB produced high accuracy at 0 dB, but the accuracy decayed for
higher SNR’s. Overall, training with 18 dB and 0 dB yielded the highest average accuracy across all tested SNR values,
which is consistent with the insight that training with a representative SNR value from each range yields the best results.
Training with a pair of high SNR data produces high accuracy for high SNR testing only. Training with -20 dB and 0 dB
created an accuracy spike around 0 dB, but then a decaying curve for higher SNR values. By training with 18 dB and 0
dB, we could get similar performance compared to training with 50% of the data across the range of tested SNR values,
while reducing the training time by approximately 90%.
VI. DISCUSSION
A. Which Algorithm to Choose
In Section III, we presented ﬁve different deep neural networks; all of them deliver higher classiﬁcation accuracy than
the CNN of [23]. Our results suggest the use of the presented CLDNN and ResNet architectures at low SNR and the LSTM
and ResNet at high SNR. In Section IV, we studied the problem of reducing the input dimensions for faster training. Our

Fig. 20: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using a ResNet with different degrees of Magnitude Rank Subsampling.
results suggest the use of PCA to reduce the input dimensions at low SNR, and subsampling techniques at high SNR. In
particular, selecting the samples with the largest magnitude values leads to the highest classiﬁcation accuracy at high SNR.
It is worth noting here that it is straightforward to implement this magnitude rank subsampling for online training, by
dynamically adjusting a threshold, and ignoring arriving samples whose magnitude values are below the threshold. Further,
the problem of deriving an online version of PCA has been considered in the literature (see e.g., [34]). In Section V,
we investigated the selection of representative SNR training values, while still testing the trained networks on the whole
considered SNR range. The results support the effectiveness of training by SNR selection compared to a randomly selected
training data set of the same size. For the considered range of SNR values from -20 dB to 18 dB, we found that choosing
a pair of SNR values for training lead to superior classiﬁcation accuracies over a wide range of testing SNR values.
B. Rectangular or Polar Form Representation
We observe from the investigation in this work that we obtain better performance when the complex samples are
represented in rectangular form, when input to all studied networks, except the pure LSTM, in which the input samples
are better represented in polar form. We also observe that LSTM is particularly good - compared to other architectures -
at distinguishing between different QAM constellations (see [1] and [32] for more details). The underlying reason is that
these modulation types rely on small variations in amplitude and phase, and hence, using input data represented in polar
form and an LSTM classiﬁer that can identify repeating patterns of changes could deliver high classiﬁcation accuracy for

Fig. 21: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. SNR using an LSTM with different degrees of Magnitude Rank Subsampling.
these modulation types. This sheds light on the sensitivity of neural network classiﬁers to the input representation. We plan
to investigate for future work, whether one could alleviate the impact of this sensitivity by processing the data through
two parallel architectures, and then adding one or more dense layers to learn which representation would lead to better
classiﬁcation performance for the task at hand.
C. Long-term Dependencies and Skip Connections
Other than CNN, all the other neural networks presented in this work are obtained through modiﬁcations by either
capturing long-term dependencies through LSTM layers , as in the CLDNN and pure LSTM architectures, or by adding
shortcut connections between non-consecutive layers to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem and add ﬂexibility to the
architecture (see e.g., [31]), as in the DenseNet and ResNet architectures. We believe that capturing long-term dependencies
is useful for the considered modulation recognition task because it helps identify repeating patterns of symbol-to-symbol
transitions; such patterns could be used as a signature for the modulation type. Further, adding shortcut connections is also
useful, because of the relatively large number of considered modulation types, and the varying nature of distinguishing
between different pairs. While deeper networks could be useful for drawing distinct features between similar modulation
types, this may cause overﬁtting for simpler tasks, which require shallower architectures that are obtained by activating
the shortcut connections.

Fig. 22: Single SNR Selection Result of CLDNN.
Fig. 23: Single SNR Selection Result of ResNet.
D. Why Dimensionality Reduction leads to Fast Deep Learning
Recent theoretical attempts to explain deep learning have found it particularly plausible to hypothesize that most of
the training time is spent compressing the input data (see e.g., [35]). We believe that this could be a key reason leading
to our presented results in Section IV and Section V, particularly the minimal loss in accuracy that we found even with
aggressive subsampling rates for the magnitude rank subsampling studied in Section IV-D. For future work, we also plan
to investigate using the hidden layer representation of autoencoders (see e.g., [31, Chapter 14]) for input data compression.

Fig. 24: Single SNR Selection Result of LSTM.
E. Future Work: Denoising Autoencoders?
We observe a strong similarity between the wireless communication problem, where uncertainty is introduced by unknown
channel impairments, and the recently studied problem of defending neural networks against adversarial perturbations (see
e.g., [36]). For example, an l2 bounded attack would correspond to channel noise with power equivalent to the l2 bound.
For the latter problem, it was found recently that the use of denoising autoencoders is particularly effective [37]. We plan
to investigate using these autoencoder architectures for the considered problem. In particular, we expect them to allow us
to obtain better classiﬁcation accuracy at low SNR values, even when we the training data set only includes samples taken
at high SNR values.
F. Minimalist Training Setup
In Section IV and Section V, we demonstrated the possibility of signiﬁcantly reducing the training time (by almost
20 times) while incurring minimal loss in accuracy (could be as low as 2% at high SNR), through various ideas for
minimizing the size of the training data set while preserving relevant information needed for learning. We believe that this
opens the door for a line of research that aims at deploying deep learning algorithms for real-time autonomous wireless
communications. For future work, we are interested in testing combinations of the presented ideas. For example, combining
SNR selection using denoising autoencoder and combining sub-Nyquist sampling techniques with using the hidden layer
representation of deep autoencoders for dimensionality reduction. Based on the initial results presented in this work, we
foresee great potential in such methods for making it feasible to train deep neural networks online for tasks essential to
next-generation wireless communication systems.
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this work, we presented fast deep learning algorithms for distinguishing between 10 different modulation types, with
high classiﬁcation accuracy over a wide range of SNR values. We identiﬁed CLDNN and ResNet deep neural network

Fig. 25: Classiﬁcation accuracy vs. training data size using a CLDNN.
architectures that perform best at low SNR, and LSTM and ResNet architectures that perform best at high SNR. Further,
our results suggest the use of PCA to reduce input dimensions for faster training at low SNR, and subsampling based on
sample magnitude values at high SNR. We ﬁnally identiﬁed representative training SNR values, and found that training
with data sets corresponding to only two SNR values - one at high SNR and another at low SNR - in the range from
-20 to 18 dB lead to achieving high classiﬁcation accuracies over a wide portion of that range. For future work, our
plan is to investigate the optimal combination of the presented algorithms, as well as new methods like using denoising
autoencoders.
