FEATURE ARTICLE: GENERATIVE AI FOR THE INTERNET OF
THINGS
The Internet of Things in the Era of Generative
AI: Vision and Challenges
Xin Wang
and Zhongwei Wan
, The Ohio State University, USA, OH 43210
Arvin Hekmati
and Mingyu Zong
, University of Southern California, USA, CA 90089
Samiul Alam
and Mi Zhang
, The Ohio State University, USA, OH 43210
Bhaskar Krishnamachari
, University of Southern California, USA, CA 90089
Abstract—Advancements in generative AI hold immense promise to push the
Internet of Things (IoT) to the next level. In this article, we share our vision on the
IoT in the era of generative AI. We discuss some of the most important
applications of generative AI in IoT-related domains. We also identify some of the
most critical challenges and discuss current gaps as well as promising
opportunities on enabling generative AI for the IoT. We hope this article can
inspire new research on the IoT in the era of generative AI.
Keywords: IoT, Generative AI, Edge
Computing, AI Agents.
INTRODUCTION
T
oday,
Internet
of
Things
(IoT)
such
as
smartphones, wearables, smart speakers, and
household robots have already become an inte-
grated part of our daily lives. These devices can sense,
communicate, and are empowered by modern artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques.
Advancements in Generative AI1 have enabled a
new wave of AI revolution. Generative AI refers to AI
models that can generate new content in the form of
text, images, videos, codes, and many more. While
Generative AI is not new, it is only until recently that
large-scale generative models exemplified by Large
Language Models (LLMs) (e.g., GPT, LLaMA, and
Gemini)2 and Multimodal Generative Models (e.g.,
GPT-4V, DALL-E, and Stable Diffusion)3 have made
the breakthrough. Such breakthrough comes from their
significantly large model sizes while being pre-trained
1089-7801 © 2024 IEEE
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MIC.2024.3443169
Generative AI
IoT Devices
Applications
Challenges
Opportunities
FIGURE 1. IoT in the era of Generative AI.
on massive amounts of data. These characteristics
enable Generative AI to generate high-quality data,
tackle complex tasks with human-level performance,
and exhibit superior generalization ability on new tasks,
all of which were not attainable before.
The implications of the advancements of Gener-
ative AI for IoT are profound. The distinctive capa-
bilitie of Generative AI bring pivotal benefits across
the entire IoT pipeline, encompassing data generation,
data processing, interfacing with IoT devices, and IoT
system development and evaluation. These benefits
position Generative AI as having substantial potential
to revolutionize a wide range of IoT applications such
as mobile networks, autonomous driving, metaverse,
robotics, healthcare, and cybersecurity. At the same
time, turning these applications into reality is, however,
not trivial. Innovative techniques are needed to address
August
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
IEEE Internet Computing Magazine
1
arXiv:2401.01923v4  [cs.DC]  9 Dec 2024

GENERATIVE AI FOR INTERNET OF THINGS
some of the most formidable challenges so as to
realize the full potential of Generative AI for IoT.
In this article, we provide our vision and insights
on the applications, challenges, and opportunities of
what Generative AI brings to IoT (Figure 1). We start
by explaining how Generative AI could benefit some of
the most important IoT applications. Next, we discuss
some of the most critical challenges that serve as
impediments to enabling Generative AI for IoT, and
share our views on the gaps as well as promising
opportunities to address those challenges. We hope
this article can act as a catalyst to inspire new research
on IoT in the era of Generative AI.
APPLICATIONS OF GENERATIVE AI
IN IOT-RELATED DOMAINS
Leveraging its distinctive capabilities, Generative AI
holds the potential to revolutionize numerous critical
IoT applications. In this section, we delve into a number
of application domains (Figure 2) where Generative AI
has already left its mark and others where its potential
is just beginning to be recognized.
Mobile Networks
Generative AI has the considerable potential to revolu-
tionize the design and operation of mobile networks4.
For instance, Generative AI can generate simulations
based on historical mobile network data to help net-
work operators foresee potential bottlenecks and ad-
just resources dynamically. Moreover, Generative AI
can create highly efficient codecs, resulting in smaller
sizes of data to be exchanged between nodes to
increase communication efficiency in mobile networks.
Autonomous Vehicles
The transformational journey of the automobile indus-
try towards autonomous vehicles has been deeply
influenced by Generative AI as well5. For example,
AI agents empowered by LLMs like Grok can be
integrated into vehicle systems such as Tesla Model-
3 to enhance user interfaces and improve communi-
cation between the vehicle and its occupants, making
interactions more responsive and user-friendly. Mean-
while, multimodal generative models are crucial for
the development of the advanced driver-assistance
systems (ADAS) in autonomous vehicles. ADAS will
provide highly accurate prediction of traffic conditions,
pedestrian behavior, and potential hazards, allowing for
safer and more reliable vehicle automation. Further-
more, by generating realistic driving scenarios during
FIGURE 2. Representative application domains of Generative
AI for IoT.
the testing phase, multimodal generative models will
enable manufacturers to refine vehicle responses un-
der various conditions, which significantly accelerates
the safe deployment of autonomous vehicles.
Metaverse
Generative AI can significantly enhance the Meta-
verse by leveraging its ability to visualize and simu-
late based on multimodal sensor data, generating a
vivid and immersive virtual realm6. Moreover, utilizing
generative models to adeptly handle data from various
sensors and human inputs can construct dynamic,
responsive environments that closely mimic the real
world or create entirely new, fantastical settings. For
instance, multimodal generative models such as GPT-
4V are capable of generating simulations based on
user interactions and environmental changes captured
through IoT devices such as smart glasses and head-
mounted devices, enabling real-time adjustments and
enhancements to the virtual landscape. This capability
allows for a seamless and adaptive user experience to
make the Metaverse not just a static backdrop but a
living, evolving entity.
Robotics
In the rapidly evolving field of robotics, the integration
of Generative AI has emerged as a cornerstone, sig-
nificantly enhancing the capabilities and intelligence of
robotic systems7. For example, LLMs can be utilized to
enhance the interaction capabilities of robots, enabling
them to understand dialogues from users and gener-
ate human-friendly responses in real-time. Additionally,
multimodal generative models which can effectively
process and integrate visual and auditory information,
2
August 2024

GENERATIVE AI FOR INTERNET OF THINGS
Challenges and Opportunities of Enabling Generative AI for IoT
      Deploy Large-Scale
Generative Models under
Limited Memory Budget
C2
        Generate Contents with
Low Latency under Limited
Compute Resources
C3
       Model
Adaptation and
Personalization
C4
         Privacy
and Security
Threats
C6
  Lack of
Development Tools
and Benchmarks
C7
O2: Model Compression
Intermediate Results Reduction
Runtime Memory Optimization
O3: Optimization at Runtime
Workload Partitioning
Efficient Communication
PEFT
MEFT
DEFT
  O5: Efficient Fine-
Tuning 
Federated Learning
Trusted Execution Environment
Development Tools
Benchmarks
O8: IoT-oriented Development
Tools and Benchmarks
O7: Federated Learning and
Trusted Execution Environment
Quantization
Parameter Pruning
Low-rank Approximation
Knowledge Distillation
O4: Edge-Cloud
Collaboration
       Lack of
Generative Models
for IoT Data
C1
     Lack of
Generative AI Agents
for IoT Devices
C5
O1: Build Generative
Models for IoT Data
O6: Design Generative AI
Agents for IoT Devices
FIGURE 3. Challenges and opportunities of enabling Generative AI for IoT.
are crucial for robots to better understand their physical
environment and context, allowing robots to adapt to
new situations with greater autonomy. In doing so,
these powerful generative models help robots learn
from their surroundings and make informed decisions,
paving the way for more adaptive and intelligent robotic
systems in various settings.
Health Care
The healthcare sector, empowered by IoT devices, is
experiencing a transformative paradigm shift with the
integration of Generative AI to revolutionize patient
care8. For example, LLMs can be used to automati-
cally process and understand medical literature, and
draft patient reports and personalized treatment plans
based on patient history. Meanwhile, multimodal gen-
erative models are instrumental in analyzing diverse
data modalities collected from IoT devices such as
electrocardiogram (ECG), blood pressure monitor, and
pulse oximeter; they are also capable of translating
those raw sensor data into human-understandable
reports9. These models altogether can integrate text
data from electronic health records, numerical data
from monitors, and visual data from scans to provide
a comprehensive understanding of a patient’s health.
This integration allows for delivering more accurate
diagnoses, preventive care, and tailored treatment
regimens, thereby significantly enhancing patient out-
comes and operational efficiencies in medical facilities.
Cybersecurity
IoT devices are particularly vulnerable to cyber-attacks
due to their widespread deployment and the often
minimal built-in security features. Generative AI can
be employed to enhance security measures and ad-
dress their security challenge10. For instance, LLMs
can analyze and generate security protocols by learn-
ing from vast databases of cybersecurity incidents
and responses. Similarly, multimodal generative mod-
els can integrate and analyze data from multiple
sources including network traffic, user behavior, and
anomaly detection systems, can predict potential se-
curity breaches before they occur. These generative
models are trained to identify patterns indicative of
cyber threats, enabling proactive security measures
and automatic updates to defense strategies, thus
protecting the IoT devices against a wide range of
cyber threats.
CHALLENGES AND
OPPORTUNITIES OF ENABLING
GENERATIVE AI FOR IOT
Turning these applications into reality is, however, not
trivial. We have identified five challenges that act as
key barriers to realizing Generative AI for IoT. In this
section, we describe these challenges, and share our
perspectives on promising opportunities to address
these challenges (Figure 3).
Challenges
C1: Lack of Generative Models for IoT Data. Gen-
erative models today are predominantly developed
using a few data modalities, including text, images,
and videos. However, as summarized in Table 1, IoT-
related applications encompass a much wider range of
data modalities, including network traffic data, home-
deployed sensor data such as temperature and humid-
ity, as well as healthcare data collected from mobile
and wearable devices such as heart rate, steps taken,
and calories burned. Therefore, building generative
models based on IoT-related data modalities is much
needed, yet it remains a very challenging task.
C2: Deploy Large-Scale Generative Models under
Limited Memory Budget. Generative models in gen-
eral contain billions of parameters. Such large model
August 2024
3

GENERATIVE AI FOR INTERNET OF THINGS
TABLE 1. Representative use cases and data modalities in different IoT application domains.
IoT Application Domain
Representative Use Cases
Data Modalities
Mobile Networks
Network Optimization, Fault Detection
Network Traffic, Network Logs, Multimedia Data
Autonomous Vehicles
Navigation, Adversarial Testing
Lidar, Radar, Point Cloud, GPS Coordinates, Control Signal
Metaverse
Virtual Meetings, Virtual Tourism
Gestures, Voices, Facial Expressions, Eye-Tracking Data
Robotics
Path Planning, Human-Robot Interaction
Images, Audios, Paths, Control Signal, Error Logs
Health Care
Disease Diagnosis, Report Generation
ECG, Blood Pressure, Steps Taken, Calories Burned, Food Intake
Cybersecurity
Incident Response, Malware Detection
Authentication Data, Attack Vectors, Breach Reports
sizes directly translate to their significant demands for
memory resources11. For example, LLaMA-7B requires
about 14GB memory for storing its 7 billion parameters
in half-precision floating-point format (FP16). However,
IoT devices are known to be memory-constrained. This
discrepancy between intensive memory requirements
of generative models and limited memory budgets of
IoT devices poses a considerable challenge on the
deployment of large-scale generative models on IoT
devices.
C3: Generate Contents with Low Latency un-
der Limited Compute Resources. Many applica-
tions of Generative AI in IoT-related domains such
as autonomous driving, Metaverse, and robotics are
latency-sensitive. Generative models often involve
computation-intensive operations during content gen-
eration. However, IoT devices are limited in their on-
board compute resources, making it challenging to
generate contents while meeting application-specific
latency requirements. For example, Mixture of Experts
(MoE) based LLM ST-l128 requires six seconds to
generate only one token on Raspberry Pi 4B12, which
is too slow for latency-sensitive applications.
C4: Model Adaptation and Personalization. As
the environments in which IoT devices are deployed
evolve, the newly collected data may deviate from prior
distributions. Consequently, the post-deployment pre-
trained generative models often necessitate fine-tuning
on the devices to effectively adapt to this new data.
Moreover, pre-trained generative models also need to
adapt to the local data on the device for personalization
to enhance user experience.
C5: Lack of Generative AI Agents for IoT Devices.
One of the killer applications of Generative AI is AI
agents, which are autonomous programs capable of
generating new content, making decisions, and per-
forming tasks based on their learned knowledge and
user requests. Currently, most AI agents are designed
for cloud platforms and operate as cloud services.
However, due to the privacy concerns associated with
personal data collected by IoT devices, along with the
high latency of delivering cloud-based services13, there
is a strong need to develop IoT-based AI agents that
can process personal data locally on the devices and
deliver a wide range of IoT-oriented services promptly,
which is not a trivial task due to the diverse and
dynamic nature of IoT ecosystems.
C6: Privacy and Security Threats. Data collected
by IoT devices such as personal instructions, di-
alogues, photos and videos often contain privacy-
sensitive information that need to be securely stored
and processed10. Dealing with privacy and security
threats is challenging in the context of generative
models. For example, during retrieval-augmented gen-
eration (RAG), the query sentences are frequently sent
over the network to a remote vector database to find
similar samples for augmentation. While being trans-
mitted through the network, the query is vulnerable to
leakages or attacks, presenting challenges for protect-
ing the privacy and securing the generative models.
C7: Lack of Development Tools and Benchmarks.
The implementation of Generative AI for IoT appli-
cations presents a wide range of challenges due to
the unique characteristics of IoT devices and their
deployment environments. To facilitate implementation
and widespread adoption of these applications, devel-
opment tools are essential. However, existing generic
development tools such as PyTorch and TensorFlow
are not designed for IoT-oriented scenarios; develop-
ment tools designed for mobile and edge devices such
as PyTorch Mobile and TFLite do not provide dedicated
supports for large generative models. Moreover, the
advancement of a field cannot be realized without
established benchmarks. Unfortunately, there are still
no benchmarks that are specifically designed for Gen-
erative AI for IoT-oriented applications.
Opportunities
O1: Build Generative Models for IoT Data (Address
C1). The lack of generative models for IoT data hinders
the development of generative AI-assisted IoT applica-
tions. Therefore, there is a significant opportunity for re-
searchers and practitioners to develop new generative
4
August 2024

GENERATIVE AI FOR INTERNET OF THINGS
models for analyzing or generating various IoT data.
One promising approach to building generative models
for IoT data is through multimodal LLMs. For instance,
MEIT9 is a multimodal LLM designed to understand
and analyze raw ECG sensor data, and generate
the analysis reports using human-understandable lan-
guage. Specifically, MEIT transforms raw ECG sensor
data into tokens and stores them alongside text tokens
for report generation. By fine-tuning the MEIT model
with a small set of ECG sensor data, it has demon-
strated superior performance in generating expert-level
ECG reports for heart disease diagnosis.
O2: Model Compression (Address C2, C3). To ad-
dress the challenges of model deployment and con-
tent generation under limited memory and compute
resources on IoT devices, one effective approach is
to compress the generative models14 before deploy-
ment. Conventional compression techniques designed
for models that are much smaller than LLMs require
retraining after compression. In contrast, many com-
pression techniques for generative models are post-
training-based, which avoid retraining after compres-
sion given that retraining generative models is expen-
sive. In general, compression techniques for generative
models fall into four categories: quantization, param-
eter pruning, low-rank approximation, and knowledge
distillation. Quantization compresses the model by re-
ducing the precision of the weights and/or activations.
Nevertheless, even with the most advanced quantiza-
tion technique, the highest model compression ratio
is limited by the smallest bit width. Parameter prun-
ing compresses the model by eliminating redundant
model parameters. Pruning methods can be classified
into structured pruning and unstructured pruning. Un-
structured pruning has much more pruning flexibility
and thus enjoys a lower accuracy drop compared to
structured pruning. However, unstructured pruning in-
curs irregular sparsification, which makes the resulting
pruned models difficult to be deployed on IoT devices
due to lack of hardware support. Low-rank approxi-
mation compresses the model by approximating the
weight matrix using the product of two or more smaller
low-ranking ones with lower dimensions. Knowledge
distillation (KD) transfers knowledge from a larger
model (the teacher) to a smaller one (the student). Un-
like the other three compression strategies, it requires
training or fine-tuning for knowledge transfer, making
it more expensive to apply. Lastly, it is worthwhile to
note that these four categories of model compression
methods are orthogonal to each other, allowing for
their combinations to further compress the models.
Existing methods are able to compress LLMs by up
to 80% with minimum accuracy degradation, enabling
the deployment of generative models such as LLaMA-
7B on IoT devices. As an example, the quantized 4-bit
LLaMA-7B can already be deployed in smartphones
while only consuming 4GB memory.
O3: Optimization at Runtime (Address C2). Model
compression reduces the memory and compute re-
source demands of generative models before they are
deployed on IoT devices. When performing inference
at runtime, intermediate results such as activation out-
puts and Key-Value (KV) cache have to be computed
and stored for further processing. These intermediate
results consume a significant amount of computation
and memory resources at runtime. Optimizing the run-
time memory of KV cache is a unique challenge that
conventional ML models do not have. Thus, techniques
that reduce the intermediate results such as evicting
unnecessary items from the cache or compressing the
cache contents are fruitful optimization opportunities.
Another strategy for runtime optimization is allo-
cating certain model parameters, intermediate results,
and computational tasks at different memory hierarchy.
Given the limited onboard GPU memory inside IoT de-
vices, leveraging the larger capacity of CPU RAM and
disk storage is a promising opportunity. This approach
allows for the storage of larger intermediate results
and part of model parameters outside GPU memory to
enable the execution of LLMs on resource-constrained
IoT devices. At the same time, a primary challenge
of this strategy is the slow data transfer rate between
different memory units. Innovative techniques that can
reduce the frequency of data transfers or pipeline data
transfer with other operations will have great promise
to address this challenge.
O4: Edge-Cloud Collaboration (Address C2). Given
the limited memory and compute resources, some IoT
devices may not be able to even run the models that
are already compressed. In such cases, it is necessary
to offload the execution of part or even the whole model
to nearby resourceful edge servers or the cloud15.
The key to such edge-cloud collaboration is the
design of effective workload partitioning and efficient
communication techniques. Workload partitioning is
not trivial since IoT devices, edge servers, and cloud
have very different compute, memory, and energy re-
sources, and the available network bandwidths can be
dynamic. Due to the NP-Hard nature of the workload
partitioning problem, manually identifying the best-
performing partition can be practically infeasible, es-
pecially for billion-parameter generative models where
the number of potential choices of partition points can
be extremely large. One promising opportunity lies at
August 2024
5

GENERATIVE AI FOR INTERNET OF THINGS
designing a highly-efficient search-based strategy to
automatically search for and identify the partition points
that optimize the overall performance.
Communication between IoT devices and edge
servers or the cloud is often conducted through wire-
less channel in which bandwidth can become the bot-
tleneck. To ensure a timely exchange of migrated work-
loads while minimizing bandwidth usage and power
consumption caused by wireless transmission, efficient
communication is essential. At the same time, due to
their large model sizes and the potential large amount
of data they need to generate, generative models incur
a significant burden on communication. In such cases,
we envision that efficient communication techniques
are highly demanded. For example, instead of directly
transmitting the model or data, techniques that com-
press the model, embedding vectors, as well as raw
data will become extremely useful.
O5: Efficient Fine-Tuning (Address C4). The needs
for model adaptation and personalization underscore
the importance of developing highly efficient on-device
fine-tuning techniques for resource-constrained IoT de-
vices. At a high level, efficient fine-tuning techniques
fall into three categories: parameter-efficient fine-
tuning (PEFT), memory-efficient fine-tuning (MEFT),
and data-efficient fine-tuning (DEFT). PEFT reduces
the computational cost of fine-tuning by selecting only
a subset of model parameters for tuning. Among PEFT,
low-rank adaptation (LoRA) is one of the most widely
used methods. Instead of fine-tuning the full parame-
ters of generative models, LoRA freezes the weights
and injects trainable rank decomposition matrices into
the model. Through fine-tuning these small matrices,
the model is able to achieve comparable performance
as full-parameter fine-tuning. Although PEFT is able
to reduce the computational cost of the fine-tuning
process, it can still incur large memory usage. Mo-
tivated by this limitation, MEFT focuses on reducing
fine-tuning memory footprints by conducting model
quantization before fine-tuning, utilizing optimizers that
require less memory, or combining the gradient cal-
culation and model parameter updating together. Dif-
ferent from PEFT and MEFT, DEFT achieves efficient
fine-tuning from a data-centric perspective. By using
a small fraction of the data, DEFT can achieve com-
parable performance to that obtained from fine-tuning
with the entire dataset. Another benefit of DEFT is
that it can be combined with PEFT or MEFT to further
enhance the fine-tuning efficiency. At the same time,
most of the existing DEFT methods heavily rely on
manual selection of the small set of data for fine-tuning,
which can be difficult to accomplish without domain
knowledge. Therefore, an automated data selection
scheme would benefit more on applying DEFT for
specific IoT application domains. Existing efforts on
efficient fine-tuning for IoT devices are able to fine-
tune OPT-1.3B using approximately 4GB and 6.5GB
of memory on the OPPO Reno6 smartphone16. How-
ever, most generative models, especially LLMs, contain
much more parameters than 1.3 billion. Fine-tuning
large-scale generative models for IoT devices is still
a challenging task but full of opportunities.
O6: Design Generative AI Agents for IoT Devices
(Address C5). The privacy and latency issues of
cloud-based AI agents motivate the design of IoT-
based AI agents. One fundamental capability of AI
agents is task planning, which involves breaking down
complex tasks into a sequence of simpler steps that
could be automatically accomplished. However, de-
signing AI agents that can perform effective task plan-
ning can be challenging given the resource constraints
of IoT devices as well as diversified IoT-related tasks
including sensing, user interactions, data management
and processing, information retrieval, control and ac-
tivation. In such cases, we envision that opportuni-
ties lie at developing techniques that allow agents to
make highly effective plans for diversified IoT-related
tasks and transform the agent’s plans into low-level
instructions compatible with various IoT devices, and
scheduling onboard resources to ensure the execution
of plans in an efficient manner.
O7: Federated Learning and Trusted Execution
Environment (Address C6). As a privacy-preserving
machine learning paradigm, federated learning (FL)
emerges as a solution that can improve the quality of
the generative models through the personal data while
mitigating privacy risks by keeping the data inside the
IoT devices17. While FL has been intensively studied
in recent years, most of the proposed techniques
have been developed for models with much smaller
scales. The emergence of billion-parameter generative
models precludes their complete storage within IoT
devices due to resource limitations, presenting new
challenges in designing FL frameworks that were not
previously encountered. To address this challenge, we
envision that the opportunities lie in exploring partial
training (PT)-based approaches where each IoT device
trains a smaller sub-model extracted from the large
generative model hosted on the cloud server, and
this server model is updated by aggregating those
trained sub-models. For example, Alam et al. intro-
duces FedRolex18, which extracts sub-models from the
large server model via a rolling window. Such rolling
mechanism results in more stable convergence and
6
August 2024

GENERATIVE AI FOR INTERNET OF THINGS
ensures that the global model is updated uniformly with
superior model quality.
Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) has become
a standard technology to enhance the security of IoT
devices. TEE provides a secure area within a proces-
sor, ensuring that the data and operations executed
within its confines are protected from external threats.
In the context of generative AI, TEE can be leveraged
in many innovative ways. For example, to secure the
user input to the generative models, one can perform
tokenization or embedding extraction of the input inside
TEE. This ensures the user input is safeguarded from
attacks on local devices before being sent to the
generative models for inference.
O8: IoT-oriented Development Tools and Bench-
marks (Address C7). New development tools that
support generative models on mobile and edge de-
vices such as llama.cpp and MLC LLM have recently
been developed. However, these newly developed
tools are still in their infancy. We envision that further
refinement on better supporting IoT-related tasks such
as runtime resource management, workload offload-
ing, privacy and security enhancement, as well as
efficient fine-tuning is much needed and hence holds
great promise.
Lastly,
although
benchmarks
such
as
MMLU,
GSM8K, and MMMU are becoming standards to eval-
uate the performance of generative models for diverse
tasks, there is still no benchmark that is specifically
designed for generative AI for IoT-related applications.
As the development of generative AI for IoT-related
applications is advancing rapidly, we envision that a
comprehensive and dedicated benchmark that covers
a wide range of IoT-oriented data modalities, tasks,
platforms, and evaluation metrics such as latency,
memory footprint, and energy consumption will be-
come critical and beneficial to the IoT community.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Generative AI has shown immense promise in advanc-
ing the capabilities of IoT. In this article, we high-
lighted the key benefits and elaborated on important
IoT applications empowered by Generative AI. We
also presented the key challenges and opportunities
to enable Generative AI for IoT. We hope this article
can spark further research in this exciting field.
Acknowledgement
This material is based in part upon work supported
by National Science Foundation under award NeTS-
2312675 and Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency under contract number HR001120C0160. Any
views, opinions, and/or findings expressed are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as rep-
resenting the official views or policies of the funding
agency or the US government.
