Abstract 
Significant work has been placed in the 
Q&A NLP space to build models that are 
more robust to adversarial attacks. Two key 
areas of focus are in generating adversarial 
data for the purposes of training against 
these situations or modifying existing 
architectures to build robustness within. 
This paper introduces an approach that 
joins these two ideas together to train a 
critic model for use in an almost 
reinforcement learning framework. Using 
the Adversarial SQuAD “Add One Sent” 
dataset we show that there are some 
promising signs for this method in 
protecting against Adversarial attacks. 
1 
Introduction 
Within Reinforcement Learning, Actor-Critic 
frameworks are commonly used to inform one 
model, the actor, if their decision was a positive or 
negative one based on the second model’s 
assessment 
(the 
critic). 
This 
two 
model 
relationship is generally used in the training loop in 
situations where a wrong decision is costly and 
there is limited or no training data for each 
situation. These ideas are also popular in GANs for 
data generation. 
In the case of adversarial attacks, the intention is 
to trick the actor into making a wrong decision. To 
offset this, a critic model can help by checking if 
each decision that would be made is a good or a 
bad one and inform the actor so the decision can be 
modified if needed. 
In this paper we test the Actor-Critic approach 
out of the box but identify some limitations when 
including it in one training loop. We then 
recommend an alternative that shows some 
promise by using a separately trained critic in the 
actor’s training loop for guidance.  
In addition to using an Actor-Critic framework 
to we took to automatically generate adversarial 
data. This was required to properly teach the critic 
network how to discriminate between good and 
bad. We borrow ideas of permuting the input data 
from Adversarial Examples for Evaluating 
Reading Comprehension Systems (AEERCS) (Jia 
and Liang, 2017) to generate this data.  
For all parts of this paper we focused on keeping 
the actor model as similar to the baseline version 
as possible and looked to either change the training 
data, the training loop, or the inference decisions. 
This allows us to make a strong comparison to the 
baseline model provided.  
2 
Generating Adversarial Data 
To generate adversarial data that could fool our 
actor model, we tested two approaches. In all cases 
we would only modify the “passage” not the 
“question”.  
Our first approach involved permuting the input 
embedding by masking or zeroing out values at 
random to generate a negative sample. The 
randomness here was tested at different levels of 
replacement/dropout 
probability 
and 
tested 
between only masking non-stop words or all 
words.  
Our second approach borrows from Adversarial 
Example Generation with Syntactically Controlled 
Paraphrase Network (AEGSCPN) (Iyyer et al., 
2018) and AEERCS (Jia and Liang, 2017). The 
authors here modify the input text data based either 
on the parse tree to create syntactically accurate 
examples or on the part of speech in the case of the 
2017 paper. Both of these approaches showed that 
this adversary dataset would trick high performing 
Q&A models.  
Actor-Critic Network for Q&A in an Adversarial Environment 
 
Bejan Sadeghian, University of Texas at Austin 

 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
1 https://github.com/gregdurrett/nlp-qa-finalproj#training-and-evaluation 
 
Ultimately we chose to pursue the second 
approach but with ideas borrowed from the first for 
computational 
reasons. 
Instead 
of 
basing 
replacement on the back calculated parse tree, we 
chose to replace words in a negative sample at 
random. In this case, replacements in the passage 
were taken from the question. The intent here was 
to train the model to not be fooled by “similar 
enough words to the question” which we know 
self-attention models can tend to do.  
The actor model used the question and passage 
from the publically available SQuAD dataset for 
training. However this was not the case for the 
critic model. Because the critic was trained to 
identify anomalies in the passage text. It used the 
text preceding the golden passage span as its query 
and either the golden passage span or the negative 
generated passage span. Figure 1 shows an 
example of this, notice the difference in the 
positive and negative sample’s span after the first 
[SEP]. The positive instance is the golden span, the 
negative instance is a random mixture of the 
question and golden. The goal here was to identify 
adversarial spans within the passage text.  
 One important item to note here, this generated 
adversarial data is only ever seen by our critic 
model. The critic never sees or tries to infer from 
the question so there was no risk of leaking 
information from the question into the answer 
during its training. And since the training data for 
this model never gets exposed to the actor’s there 
was no risk of information leakage there as well. 
Examples of this data are shown in Table 1. 
3 
Model Architectures 
Different methods were tested during this research 
to identify an effective actor-critic network. A key 
consideration here was to maintain a non-
computationally expensive approach since we 
were using two different embeddings for each and 
translation between the two was costly.  
3.1 
Actor Model 
The Actor model architecture, an Encoder network 
for predicting start and end positions of each 
answer, was left mostly untouched in our 
experiments. This model was provided by the 
UTCS department as a baseline to compare 
against1. This was done to focus improvements of 
the critic model and the actor-critic network as 
opposed to making improvements on the actor 
model itself. While the architecture remained the 
same, we did apply small modifications around this 
model for either adjusting the loss during training 
or changing its decision during inference. 
3.2 
Critic Model 
Our experiments involved training a critic model 
both alongside the actor as well as separately. In a 
true 
Actor-Critic 
framework 
losses 
are 
communicated to the actor from the critic. We did 
not deviate from this framework. 
3.2.1 Encoder-Decoder with Attention 
The first architecture tested for our critic network 
was an Encoder-Decoder LSTM network with 
Attention (Loung et al., 2015). This architecture 
has historically proven to be effective in sequence 
to sequence translation.  
Our goal with this architecture was to have the 
query text (text preceding the golden span) be the 
input of the encoder and the passage span be the 
input of the decoder (along with the hidden state 
from the encoder). Having the decoder’s output 
attend to the encoder’s output allowed for a 
relationship representation between the query and 
passage span text. These outputs were then passed 
into a dense network where a prediction would be 
made as to if the query text and the passage span 
were associated or not.  
3.2.2 BERT with a Dense Classification Head 
The second architecture we tested used the pre-
trained BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019) with a 
 
Figure 1: Critic Training Data w/ positive and 
negative observations 
Question 
what is the grotto at notre dame ? 
 
Golden Passage Span 
a marian place of prayer 
 
Generated Negative Passage Span 
a is the place at prayer dame 
Table 1:  Adversarial Example (50% replacement) 

3 
 
 
custom three layer dense network as it’s 
classification head. BERT has proven to be one of 
the most performant models for many NLP tasks. 
This is particularly true for text sequence based 
classification which is our use case.  
Because BERT was pre-trained, to modify it 
slightly we unfroze it’s parameters for a single 
epoch in the middle of training. This allowed for 
some fine tuning at a very low learning rate. This 
was only done after a few epochs to allow the dense 
network to first form so proper gradients could be 
used.    
3.3 
Actor – Critic Framework 
Figure 2 depicts how the actor and critic models 
worked together. Originally we had begun by 
training both networks simultaneously; however, 
due to different rates of learning and poor 
predictions by the critic early on we chose to 
separate the two.  
This meant we trained the critic first in its own 
training loop then used the pre-trained model in the 
actor’s training loop to correct the actor’s 
predictions. This was done by attaching the critic 
model to the actor’s forward method and adding 
the loss from the critic’s prediction along with the 
actor’s prediction loss.  
To describe the order of operations fully. We 
first trained a critic network to predict if a span was 
abnormal/adversarial 
based 
on 
that 
span’s 
preceding text. Once we had that model trained and 
frozen, we then trained the actor to predict the start 
and end positions of the span in the passage based 
on the question presented. Before committing to 
that answer we would let the critic assign a 
probability that the proposed span (slicing the 
passage according to the start/end positions) and 
the preceding passage text were abnormal or not. If 
the probability was less than our threshold it would 
indicate that the two texts were not associated and 
the critic would therefore reject the actor’s original 
proposal. The ‘argmax’ across the actor’s output 
out then be taken again with the exclusions 
removed and we would allow those proposed 
indices be the actor’s prediction. 
The loss function during training of the actor 
averaged the Cross Entropy loss (for start and end 
positions) and the Binary Cross Entropy loss (the 
critic’s Boolean prediction) together in equal parts. 
This incentivized the actor to more strongly weigh 
the observations that the critic was not very 
confident on (if it was much lower than “1”) and 
place less weight on the ones the critic was very 
confident in. Because we continued to include the 
loss of the start and end positions the actor would 
always update towards predicting the correct start 
and end positions. 
4 
Results and Discussion 
There are two sets of results to share from our 
experiment. The first is specific to the performance 
of the critic model when trained separately. The 
second is on the ultimate goal which is to identify 
and correctly change decisions when an adversarial 
passage fools the actor model.  
Figure 2: Actor-Critic Network Diagram 

4 
 
 
4.1 
Establishing a Baseline 
In order to establish a baseline to compare against, 
we first trained the baseline (Actor) model with no 
modification or critic on the SQuAD dataset. We 
were able to match similar performance numbers 
to its reference point2. These parameters were then 
frozen for all testing going forward.  
4.2 
Critic Classification Results 
We then tested both the BERT and Encoder-
Decoder network’s performance on the Sequence 
classification problem to identify adversarial text 
in our passage. Performance of is shown in Table 
2. Overall, the BERT model performed best. 
The two probability values in the results are 
from different levels of replacement probability 
when forming the adversarial data (larger number 
means greater probability of using the question 
text).  
 
Model 
Replacement 
Probability 
Accuracy 
Encoder-
Decoder 
75 
56.5% 
90 
59.3% 
BERT 
75 
61.1% 
90 
65.3% 
Table 2:  Critic Performance. 
Our next task was to select a threshold for our 
critic to override the actor’s decision. Because 
anomaly detection needs to be wary of the high 
cost of making a false positive (i.e. identifying an 
anomaly when it is not one) we set the threshold to 
flag an anomaly very low at p=0.3. Figure 3 shows 
why this threshold was selected. 
 
 
4.3 
Adversarial Q&A Results 
The ultimate goal of our work was to improve 
Q&A performance from our baseline using an 
Actor-Critic framework. Table 3 shows the results 
from our various experiments.  
Results were mixed, while F1 scores tended to 
be equal to or higher with a critic in place, Exact 
match (EM) scores were lower than baseline in all 
cases. This suggests that while the critic may reject 
a starting or ending position correctly in some 
cases, the actor would still not correctly predict an 
accurate start and end position as its second guess. 
 
Model 
F1 Score 
EM Score 
Baseline (No Critic) 
47.98 
38.11 
Encoder - Decoder 
47.70 
37.33 
BERT 
49.02 
38.05 
 
 
 
Non-Adversarial 
Baseline 
60.57 
48.56 
Table 3:  Q&A Results. 
An 
example 
from 
question 
ID 
571c7abfdd7acb1400e4c0bb-high-conf-turk3 
shows this behavior. For this question, “What did 
Philo incorrectly assume that the air became?” the 
actor’s original prediction would have answered 
“farnsworth incorrectly assumed that the air 
became something” based on the adversarial 
sentence “Farnsworth incorrectly assumed that 
the air became something else.” In this case, the 
critic correctly flagged the original predicted span 
as adversarial and rejected the actor’s initial 
answer. However the actor’s second best guess was 
not correct either, “surmised that parts of the air in 
the vessel were converted into the classical 
element”. Despite this miss it is a promising sign 
that the adversarial span was correctly flagged and 
the next best answer was closer to the real answer 
“fire” (the next word after “classical element”). 
5 
Areas of Further Study 
There are a few areas of improvement we could see 
being done on this research. The first is related to 
the use of the critic model’s information. The 
second is related to how a rejection is handled. 
Third would be to look at the actor itself. And 
finally, improvements could be made on how 
adversarial data was generated. We will explore all 
three in more detail. 
Figure 3: Probability Group Membership by Class 

5 
 
 
5.1 
Critic Model’s Information 
One of the largest barriers we faced when making 
a classification model based on text is the fact that 
the input data varied in length with each 
observation. To get around this issue we simply 
used the pooling layer from the transformer model 
or in the case of the Encoder-Decoder averaged 
along the sentence dimension before inputting into 
the dense network. In both cases a lot of 
information is lost and this could be highly 
detrimental to the performance of the model. 
The best alternative we can think of to get 
around this varying length problem while also 
maintaining most of the available information is to 
pad to a longer length than we would expect an 
input sentence to reach. Padding of course has its 
own issues, especially with the Encoder-Decoder 
network, but there is the potential for using 
padding with a 1D convolution network so all of 
the padding does not group at one side.  
In addition, we mostly ignored the information 
coming from the transformer’s hidden layers in our 
experiment. There is the potential to combine or 
replace the pooling layer’s information with 
information from the hidden layers. Avoiding or 
supplementing the pooling layer’s compression 
could prove fruitful. 
5.2 
Rejection Method 
In our experiment, we allowed the critic to accept 
or reject the actor’s decision on where each 
start/end index was. This rejection was a very basic 
decision to remove the specific index from being 
an option when calculating the “next best” start and 
end indices.  
One alternative we thought to test was to remove 
all indices between the start and end positions 
proposed by the actor. This makes sense logical 
sense because if the critic is rejecting a start/end 
index based on the span between, we may want to 
reject the entire span from candidacy.  
In addition to our rejection method, the fact that 
we only reject once is a limitation of our 
experiment and only fits when there is one 
adversarial span present. In the real world case we 
would not want to limit the number of rejections by 
a preselected value. 
5.3 
Actor Model 
Throughout our experimentation we did not 
modify the actor architecture. This was by design 
so we could compare the effectiveness of the 
Actor-Critic network itself. However, to achieve a 
more performant pair of models one would 
reasonably want to look at how to improve both the 
critic and the actor.  
One popular idea would be to plug BERT or 
another transformer in as the actor model here. 
Given the fact that transformers are very applicable 
to the Q&A problem it would make sense to apply 
this model type. The added benefit here is if both 
models are using the same architecture, or at least 
the same mapped embedding then token to ID 
translation would be much faster. In our case we 
modified the data generator to provide the raw 
token for each passage so that our critic model 
could encode the tokens as well. Originally the data 
generator only provided encoded tokens for the 
actor model.  
5.4 
Adversarial Data Generation 
Our adversarial data generation was predominantly 
modeled on the prior knowledge that Q&A models 
are easily fooled by unrelated sentences in the 
passage that were closely matched to the question. 
For that reason we chose to replace at random parts 
of the golden span with the question to generate a 
negative span. This randomization was done after 
testing a few ideas like replacing only non-stop 
words but it was not pursued heavily. 
As a follow up, we would like to explore the 
impact of more intelligently generating adversarial 
data using parts of speech. In particular, replacing 
nouns with other noun and verbs with other verbs. 
These replacements do not necessarily need to be 
sourced from the question but could be sourced 
from more general dictionaries too (e.g. replace 
“super” in “super bowl” with “mega”).  This is an 
entire body of work which we reference in the 
related materials but could be the key to improving 
the critic’s accuracy in identifying adversaries.  
6 
Conclusion 
Our experiment shows us that actor-critic networks 
could be used similarly to how they are used in 
Reinforcing Learning. In fact, these models can 
work together not only during training, which is 
more common in RL, but also during inference to 
“catch” an error. Ideally the critic is used primarily 
during training to build a robust actor because of 
computational limits during inference (e.g. driving 
a car doesn’t given enough time for both an actor 
and a critic to make decisions). But having a 

6 
 
 
second filter to “second guess” the actor is not a 
bad thing.  
While our model results show a slight 
improvement for the F1 score over baseline, the 
EM results showed lower performance across the 
board. We propose multiple improvement ideas to 
consider as well as the active research being done 
to build more robust models.  
7
