arXiv:1802.06888v1  [cs.AI]  5 Jan 2018
Superrational types
Fernando A. Tohm´e 1,2 and Ignacio D. Viglizzo2,3
1Departmento de Econom´ıa, Universidad Nacional del Sur
(UNS), Bah´ıa Blanca, Argentina
2Instituto de Matem´atica de Bah´ıa Blanca (INMABB),
Universidad Nacional del Sur-CONICET, Bah´ıa Blanca,
Argentina
3Departmento de Matem´atica, Universidad Nacional del Sur
(UNS), Bah´ıa Blanca, Argentina
September 3, 2021
Abstract
We present a formal analysis of Douglas Hofstadter’s concept of
superrationality. We start by deﬁning superrationally justiﬁable ac-
tions, and study them in symmetric games. We then model the beliefs
of the players, in a way that leads them to diﬀerent choices than the
usual assumption of rationality by restricting the range of conceivable
choices. These beliefs are captured in the formal notion of type drawn
from epistemic game theory. The theory of coalgebras is used to frame
type spaces and to account for the existence of some of them. We ﬁnd
conditions that guarantee superrational outcomes.
1
Introduction
Game Theory has, traditionally assumed that agents make decisions accord-
ing to the criterion of full rationality [7]. In contrast to the case of bounded
rationality ([24], [21]), agents choose the best actions to achieve their goals
without limitations to their ability to do so. The research on behavioral fac-
tors in decision-making, initiated by Kahneman and Tversky ([13]) lead to a
dearth of results under weaker rationality assumptions. On the other hand,
1

the interest in overcoming “undesirable” results such as ineﬃcient equilibria
in social dilemmas lead to alternative concepts, diverging from the rationality
assumption [12], [19]. One of the most intriguing of these notions is Douglas
Hofstadter’s superrationality [10]:
Any number of ideal rational thinkers faced with the same sit-
uation and undergoing the same throes of reasoning agony will
necessarily come up with the identical answer eventually, so long
as reasoning alone is the ultimate justiﬁcation for their conclu-
sion.
In a game context, the conditions for “being in the same situation” trans-
lates in the implicit requirements that the players can choose from the same
pool of actions, and furthermore, that these actions have the same conse-
quences for all the players (otherwise, no common election may be conceived).
Then, in such a game, the deﬁnition of superrationality leads in the ﬁrst place
to the choice of a proﬁle of identical strategies. Furthermore, among all these
proﬁles, since the agents intend to maximize their payoﬀs, they will choose
the one that yields the highest payoﬀ, the same for all of them. See [11] for
Hofstadter’s extensive discussion on the social and political implications of
superrationality as well as on how it works in diﬀerent contexts.
To model superrational behavior without resorting to arbitrary constrains
and to justify internal reasoning processes that can lead the agents to take
it, we need to include their beliefs. This puts the problem in the frame of
epistemic game theory. In this ﬁeld the concept of type of an agent plays
a fundamental role, capturing the structure of beliefs and knowledge that,
jointly with their preferences, lead to the agent’s decision.
The goal of this paper is thus to explore formalizations of superrationality,
taking into account explicitly the types of the players. Since beliefs can be
modeled in diﬀerent ways, we adopt alternative characterizations of the types
of the agents, and show that they can support superrationality.
The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces the notions of
superrationally justiﬁable actions and superrational proﬁles and compares
the latter to Nash equilibria. Superrational proﬁles are deﬁned based purely
on the payoﬀmatrix of a game. For the players to converge on a superra-
tional proﬁle, a unique superrationally justiﬁable action must be present in
the game. In symmetric games the existence of superrationally justiﬁable
actions can be asserted. The example of the Prisoner’s dilemma shows that
sometimes the concept of superrationality can lead to better outcomes for the
players. All of the results can be extended to mixed strategies. In Section
3 we start analyzing epistemic conditions that could lead the players to aim
2

for the superrational outcomes, both in pure and mixed strategies, modeling
the types of the players. For this we use measure theory to represent the
beliefs of the players, and draw from the theory of coalgebra to establish the
existence of some of the required type spaces. We compare the epistemic con-
ditions with those posed by Aumann and Brandenburger for reaching Nash
equilibria. In Section 4 we move on to strategic belief models, where the
beliefs of the players are represented by sets of possible states of the world.
Section 5 is dedicated to include the case in which each player draws her type
from a diﬀerent type space. An equivalence relation still allows to give an
interpretation of superrationality in this context. Finally, we present some
conclusions.
2
Superrational proﬁles
To get to a deﬁnition of superrationality based purely on the payoﬀmatrix
of a game, let us introduce some preliminary deﬁnitions:
Deﬁnition
2.1. Let
G
=
⟨I, {Ai}i∈I, {πi}i∈I⟩
be
a
game,
where
I = {1, . . . , n} is a set of players and Ai, i ∈I is a ﬁnite set of actions for
each player. An action proﬁle, a = (a1, . . . , an) is an element of A = Q
i∈I Ai.
In turn, πi : A →R is player i’s payoﬀ.
To even consider superrationality in a game, all the players must have
the same set of actions available, so we restrict ourselves to games in which
this is the case. An action of a player is superrationally justiﬁable if under
the assumption that all the players will coincide in their choices, the payoﬀ
is maximized.
Deﬁnition 2.2. In a game G in which for every i, j ∈I, Ai = Aj, an action
a∗∈Ai is superrationally justiﬁable, iﬀfor every i ∈I and every a ∈Ai,
πi(a∗, . . . , a∗) ≥πi(a, . . . , a).
It follows from the deﬁnition that the superrationally justiﬁable actions
are the same for all the players. Assuming that all players choose the same
superrationally justiﬁable action, we obtain a proﬁle in the ‘diagonal’ of G,
denoted by ΓG ⊆A, of the proﬁles of the form (a, . . . , a). A new solution
concept can be thus deﬁned:
Deﬁnition 2.3. A proﬁle a∗∈ΓG is superrational, indicated a∗∈SRG ⊆A
iﬀπi(a∗) ≥πi(a) for every i ∈I and every a ∈ΓG.
Since superrational outcomes are compared to Nash equilibria, let us
recall the deﬁnition of this solution concept:
3

Deﬁnition 2.4. An action proﬁle a∗= (a∗
1, . . . , a∗
n) in a game G is a Nash
equilibrium, a∗∈NEG, if and only if for every i and every alternative ai ∈Ai
πi(a∗
1, . . . , a∗
i , . . . a∗
n) ≥πi(a∗
1, . . . , ai, . . . a∗
n)
Notice that, according to Nash’s theorem [17], a Nash equilibrium always
exist in ∆A1 ×. . . ×∆An, where ∆Ai is the class of probability distributions
over Ai (mixed strategies). The payoﬀs in the game in which these strategies
are used obtain by ﬁnding the expected values of the payoﬀs deﬁned on A.
That is, if σ = (σ1, . . . , σn) ∈∆A1 × . . . × ∆An, the expected payoﬀof i is
Eπi(σ) = P
(a1,...,an)∈A (πi(a1, . . . , an) Qn
k=1 σk(ak)).
If a superrational proﬁle a ∈SRG is reached, each of its actions are
superrationally justiﬁed, but the converse is not true.
Example 2.5. Consider the following game:
a
b
c
a
(2, 3)
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
b
(0, 0)
(2, 3)
(0, 0)
c
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
(2, 2)
Both a and b are superrationally justiﬁable actions and a = (a, a) and
b = (b, b) are both superrational proﬁles and Nash equilibria. On the other
hand, (c, c) is a Nash equilibrium but not superrational. Neither (a, b) nor
(b, a) belong to SRG, even though their individual actions are superrationally
justiﬁable.
⊣
Superrationally justiﬁable actions are not always available, and even if
they are, they would not be chosen by any agent interested in maximizing
her payoﬀs:
Example 2.6. Consider the Battle of the Sexes ([14]), in which each player
can choose either Box or Ballet. It is apparent that none of the actions is
superrationally justiﬁable.
Box
Ballet
Box
(2, 1)
(0, 0)
Ballet
(0, 0)
(1, 2)
Thus SR is empty for this game.
⊣
Example 2.7. In contrast, in the following game, SR = {(b, b)}, but clearly
the proﬁle (b, a) is better for both players:
4

a
b
a
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
b
(2, 2)
(1, 1)
⊣
In non-symmetric games, even if actions for diﬀerent players have the
same name, the preferences over the consequences they yield may diﬀer wildly
from one player to another. Therefore, it makes sense to further restrict the
class of games under consideration to symmetric games. As a bonus, we get
that for this class of games, superrationally justiﬁable actions always exist.
Deﬁnition 2.8. ([25]) A game G in which for every i, j ∈I, Ai = Aj is
symmetric if the payoﬀfunction π : A →Rn is invariant under permutations;
this is, for any permutation τ (that is, a bijection τ : I →I) and every action
proﬁle (a1, . . . , an) we have that for all i ∈I,
πi(a1, . . . , an) = πτ −1(i)(aτ(1), . . . , aτ(n)).
(1)
Notice that the games in Examples 2.5, 2.6, and 2.7 are not symmetric.
Lemma 2.9. In a symmetric game, if all players play the same action, they
all get the same payoﬀ.
Proof. If all players play the same action, say a1, then for any i, j ∈I, let τ
be a permutation such that τ −1(i) = j. Then
πi(a1, . . . , a1) = πj(a1, . . . , a1).
As a consequence of Lemma 2.9, since the set of actions is ﬁnite, we get
that:
Proposition 2.10. In any symmetric game there exist superrational proﬁles.
Proof. Since by Lemma 2.9, in all the proﬁles in ΓG, all the players get an
identical payoﬀ, an action that maximizes the payoﬀfor one of them gives
also the maximum for all of them.
The following examples of symmetric games show that the notions of
Nash equilibria and superrational proﬁles are diﬀerent, and it is not clear
that one is better than the other:
Example 2.11. Consider the symmetric game given by the payoﬀmatrix:
5

a
b
a
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
b
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
Here SR = {(a, a), (b, b)}, while NE = {(a, b), (b, a)} so the Nash equilibria
are all outside the diagonal Γ.
⊣
Example 2.12. In the famous Prisoner’s Dilemma, however, we have that
SR = {(C, C)} and NE = {(D, D)} (where C and D are, respectively “Co-
operate” and “Defect”) so both are in the diagonal, but they are diﬀerent.
C
D
C
(3, 3)
(0, 5)
D
(5, 0)
(1, 1)
In this case, the superrational outcome is better for both players than
the Nash equilibrium, while in the previous one, the opposite is true. Anal-
ogously, in the closely related and well known Traveler’s Dilemma [2], the
superrational outcome is much better for both players than the Nash equi-
librium.
⊣
We now study the notion of superrational proﬁles in mixed strategies.
Let Γ∆
G ⊆∆A1 × . . . × ∆An be the set
Γ∆
G = {σ = (σ1, . . . , σn) : σi = σj for every i, j ∈I}
Deﬁnition 2.13. Given a game G, a superrational proﬁle of mixed strategies
is a proﬁle σ∗= (σ∗, . . . , σ∗) ∈Γ∆
G, denoted σ∗∈SR∆
G, if and only if for
every σ ∈Γ∆
G and i ∈I, Eπi(σ∗) ≥Eπi(σ). The mixed strategy σ∗is then
a superrationally justiﬁable mixed strategy.
Example 2.14. The Chicken Game ([20]) involves another conﬂicting situ-
ation among two parties. Call the actions S and Y (for “go straight” and
“yield”, respectively) with payoﬀs:
S
Y
S
(−10, −10)
(1, −1)
Y
(−1, 1)
(0, 0)
The superrational solution, in pure strategies is SR = {(Y, Y )}, in which
both players think that the other will choose the same action as they do, and
consequently, they are better oﬀyielding.
Let us call p ∈[0, 1] the probability of choosing S while Y has a probabil-
ity 1 −p. Then Γ∆= {(p, p) : p ∈[0, 1]}. The superrational mixed strategy
obtains by maximizing Eπi(p, p) for each i = 1, 2. We have that:
6

Eπ1(p, p) = Eπ2(p, p) = −10p2 + 1(p −p2) + (−1)(p −p2) = −10p2.
This means that the expected payoﬀs are maximized at p = 0, i.e. SR∆=
{(0, 0)}, which can be identiﬁed with the pure superrational strategy proﬁle
(Y, Y ).
⊣
The previous example might suggest that, as with Nash equilibria, pure
strategy superrational outcomes support also superrationality in mixed strat-
egy. Such parsimonious behavior is not ensured, as shown in Hofstadter’s
Platonia Dilemma [10]:
Example 2.15. Consider a situation in which n individuals are asked either
to send or not a letter to an umpire. Only if a single letter is sent, a prize of
$1,000,000 is awarded to the sender and 0 to the other participants. If either
no letter has been sent or more than one has been received by the umpire,
each player gets nothing.
This situation can be analyzed as a n-player game G in which each Ai =
{S, D} where these actions are send (S) or do not send (D) a letter. The
payoﬀis 1,000,000 for the sender of the letter if a single player chooses S,
and 0 otherwise.
The Nash equilibria in the game are the a ∈Qn
i=1 Ai such that |{i :
ai = S}| ≥1. That is, each equilibrium obtains if and only if one or more
players submit a letter. The mixed strategies Nash equilibria are all those
in ∆({S, D})n such that at least for one i, σi(S) = 1, that is, at least one of
the players chooses S with certainty.
Superrationality in pure strategies obtains in any proﬁle in the diagonal,
in particular when each agent chooses not to send a letter and obtains a 0
payoﬀ, or all of them send the letter, i.e. SRG = {(S, . . . , S), (D, . . ., D)}. A
superrational agent who ponders mixed strategies instead, looks for all the
proﬁles (p∗
1, . . . , p∗
n) such that for each i, p∗
i = δ∗where δ∗∈[0, 1] maximizes
Eπi(δ, . . . , δ) = 1,000,000 δ(1 −δ)n−1
The ﬁrst order condition yields
(1 −δ)n−1 −(n −1)δ(1 −δ)n−2 = 0
assuming that (1 −δ)n−2 ̸= 0 (i.e. δ ̸= 1) we get:
1 −δ −(n −1)δ = 0
That is, δ∗= 1
n. The expected payoﬀis then strictly positive, unlike the
ones corresponding to the pure strategy superrational proﬁles. Thus, the
latter cannot be seen as superrational mixed strategy solutions.
⊣
7

Since pure superrational proﬁles may not correspond to mixed superra-
tional ones, we have to establish the existence of the latter ones indepen-
dently:
Proposition 2.16. In any symmetric game, there exist at least one super-
rational proﬁle of mixed strategies.
Proof. First of all, for every pair of players i, j ∈I, and every mixed strategies
proﬁle σ ∈Γ∆
G, say σ = (σ, . . . , σ), Eπi(σ) = Eπj(σ). To see this, take
any permutation τ such that τ(i) = j. Then the products Qn
i=1 σ(ai) and
Qn
i=1 σ(aτ(i)) are equal, being just rearrangements one of the other. Then,
by the symmetry of the game we have:
Eπi(σ) =
X
(a1,...,an)∈A
 
πi(a1, . . . , an)
n
Y
k=1
σ(ak)
!
=
=
X
(a1,...,an)∈A
 
πj(aτ(1), . . . , aτ(n))
n
Y
k=1
σ(aτ(k))
!
= Eπj(σ).
To show the existence of a mixed strategies superrational proﬁle, it will
suﬃce to prove the existence of a maximum for one of the players.
Since each Ai is a ﬁnite set, ∆Ai is a compact subset of Rk, where k is
the number of elements in Ai. The set Γ∆
G is a closed subset of the compact
∆A1 × . . . × ∆An, and therefore compact.
Since Eπi restricted to Γ∆
G is
a continuous function from a compact set to R, it reaches its maximum
value, so any of the points where it does is a superrational proﬁle of mixed
strategies.
Example 2.17. In Example 2.11 the mixed superrational proﬁle is (σ∗, σ∗),
where σ∗is the probability distribution that assigns probability 1
2 to playing
each of the actions. The pure strategy superrational proﬁles are not mixed
strategy superrational proﬁles.
Notice that (σ∗, σ∗) is also the only non
degenerate mixed Nash equilibrium of the game.
⊣
It could be speculated that resorting to superrationality in mixed strate-
gies may be useful for analyzing non-symmetric games. Of course this is not
possible if Ai ̸= Aj for any pair i, j ∈I, since then a distribution σi ∈∆Ai
cannot be compared with a σj ∈∆Aj because their domains are diﬀerent.
The following example shows that even if the strategy sets of the players
are all the same, superrationality cannot be applied if the underlying game
G is not symmetric:
8

Example 2.18. The Battle of the Sexes of Example 2.6 is a non-symmetric
game with two pure Nash equilibria (Box,Box) and (Ballet, Ballet) as well
as a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium (σ∗
1, σ∗
2) where σ∗
1(Box) =
2
3, and
σ∗
2(Box) = 1
3.
There is no superrational solution in pure or mixed strategies since both
SRG and SR∆
G are empty. To see the latter case, consider proﬁles (p, p) ∈
Γ∆
G, in which p is the probability of Box. A superrational solution involves
maximizing both Eπ1(p, p) and Eπ2(p, p). We have that Eπ1(p, p) = 2p2 +
1(1−2p+p2)= 1−2p+3p2, which yields a maximum p∗
1 = 1
3, while Eπ2(p, p) =
1p2 + 2(1 −2p + p2)= 2 −4p + 3p2 which yields p∗
2 = 2
3. Since p∗
1 ̸= p∗
2, no
superrationality obtains.
⊣
3
Superrational types
The deﬁnition of superrationality is not explicit about one of its fundamental
components, the willingness of players to choose a superrational proﬁle of ac-
tions. That is, superrationality assumes that the players “have reasons” for
choosing a superrational proﬁle. One of those reasons involves the concep-
tion the players have of the decision problem they face. Since only a limited
view of the problem can justify in general choosing superrationally justiﬁable
actions, we want to include in our models the beliefs that can lead a player
to have such an viewpoint. Thus, the analysis falls straight in the realm
of epistemic game theory [5]. One of the main approaches in this area was
introduced by John C. Harsany, who presented the notion of type to derive a
game with complete information from one with incomplete information [8].
In informal terms this concept amounts to summarize all the information and
beliefs possessed by a player. Once the types of the players are determined,
the game becomes one of complete information in the sense that there is
no external information relevant to the decisions they make. Since beliefs
are customarily represented by probability distributions and conditionals on
them, Harsanyi named the players of such a game ‘Bayesian’. Each player’s
beliefs have to take into account what the other players’ beliefs may be, so
one gets an inﬁnite regression of beliefs about beliefs about beliefs... As a
way out of this hurdle, Harsanyi proposed that “certain attributes” of the
players, or the players themselves are “drawn at random from certain hypo-
thetical populations containing a mixture of individuals of diﬀerent “types”,
characterized by diﬀerent attribute vectors”[8].
While in Harsanyi’s formulation the focus is on a few quantiﬁable at-
tributes, later research, starting with [3] focused on building a space of types
in which all possible beliefs are accounted for. A quite general frame for
9

such constructions is the theory of coalgebras1 on measurable spaces [16].
For a game with n players we consider coalgebras in the category Measn
where Meas is the category of measurable spaces and measurable functions
between them. Let ∆be now the functor that sends a measurable space X
to the space of all probability distributions deﬁnable on X. To make ∆X
into a measurable space, we endow it with the σ-algebra of subsets gener-
ated by the family of sets {µ ∈∆X : µ(E) ≥p} for all p ∈[0, 1] and E
measurable in X. For a measurable function f : X →Y , µ ∈∆X and E a
measurable subset of Y , (∆f)(µ)(E) = µ(f −1(E)). Using this notation, if we
denote with ρi the projection of a product measurable space X1 × . . . × Xn
into Xi, then the marginal of a measure µ ∈∆(X1 × . . . × Xn) over Xi is
MargXiµ = (∆ρi)µ = µ ◦ρ−1
i . Given a point x in a measurable space X, the
Dirac measure δx is the measure that gives 1 when applied to any measurable
set containing x and 0 to the rest.
Let Ti be a measurable space for each i ∈I and let T−i be the product
Q
j̸=i Tj for j, i ∈{1, 2, . . . n}. If Ki is a set of things about which player i is
uncertain, then we can use the functor F : Measn →Measn deﬁned by
F(T1, . . . , Tn) = (∆(K1 × T−1), . . . , ∆(Kn × T−n))
so that a coalgebra for F is an n-tuple of measurable spaces (T1, . . . , Tn) and
an n-tuple of functions (f1, . . . , fn) such that fi : Ti →∆(Ki × T−i). The
idea behind this setting is each space Ti is the space of types for player i. For
each type t in Ti, fi(t) is a probability distribution describing the beliefs held
by player i if she is of type t, about their uncertainties in Ki and the types
of the other players, represented by T−i.
(T1,
f1

. . .
, Tn)
fn

(∆(K1 × T−1),
. . .
, ∆(Kn × T−n))
We consider a symmetric game in which the uncertainties of the players
are the actions of the other players, thus we have Ki = A−i. By Proposition
2.10, there exists at least one superrational proﬁle and therefore, at least one
superrationally justiﬁable action. Notice that now all the uncertainty sets
are isomorphic. In order to have the condition of believing the other players
1The theory of coalgebras uses the language of category theory.
A coalgebra for a
functor F in a category C is an object X of the category together with a morphism from
X to F(X). This quite simple deﬁnition covers a wide number of systems in which an
observable behavior is a key feature. For a general introduction to this aspect of the theory
of coalgebras, see [23].
10

are of the same type we need the pool of available types to be the same for
all players. We appeal to the existence of a universal type space T, that is,
a type space in which all possible types can be found [15], [16], and assume
that Ti = T for all i ∈I. Universal type spaces have the property that they
are isomorphic to the space into which they map, so in this case, we have
that Ti is isomorphic to ∆(A−i × T−i). Let ρj and ρ′
j be the projections from
A−i × T−i to Aj and Tj, respectively, so ∆ρj(fi(t)) represents the beliefs of
player i about the possible actions of player j, while ∆ρ′
j(fi(t)) represents
the beliefs about player j’s type.
Ti
fi

∆Aj
∆(A−i × T−i)
∆ρj
o
∆ρ′
j
/ ∆Tj
Deﬁnition 3.1. A superrational type is an element t ∈Ti such that:
• for all j ̸= i, ∆ρ′
j(fi(t)) = δt
• there exists a superrationally justiﬁable action a ∈Ai such that for all
j ∈I \ {i}, ∆ρj(fi(t)) = δa.
The ﬁrst condition expresses, through the use of the Dirac measure, that
if player i is of type t, then she is certain that all the other players are also of
type t. Similarly, the second condition expresses the certainty that the other
players will all play the same superrationally justiﬁable action a.
The superrationally justiﬁable action a ∈Ai exists by Proposition 2.10,
so a type of this kind is possible, and therefore it exists in the corresponding
universal type space.
Even if a player’s type is superrational, the player may choose a diﬀerent
action than the one associated to her type. That means that a player with
a superrational type may play a non-superrationally justiﬁable action, as
highlighted in the Prisoner’s Dilemma of Example 2.12. To ﬁnd conditions
on the players that will lead to superrational proﬁles, we look at the strate-
gies available to the players. In the bayesian setting the following concept
associates an action to each possible type of a player:
Deﬁnition 3.2. [9] A bayesian strategy for player i is a function βi from Ti
to Ai.
The conception the player has of the decision problem she faces deter-
mines the choice of the bayesian strategy. When the determination of the
11

bayesian strategy is guided just by the goal of maximizing the payoﬀfunc-
tions, we say the players are rational. Yet, if we want to model superra-
tionality, we must fashion the way the player conceives of the problem, that
is, that she restricts her available options according to her beliefs.
Deﬁnition 3.3. A superrational bayesian strategy for player i is a function
βi : Ti →Ai, such that for each superrational type t in Ti, if ∆ρj(fi(t)) = δa,
then βi(t) = a.
Theorem 3.4. In a game in which a single superrationally justiﬁable action a
exists, if each player has superrational type and uses a superrational bayesian
strategy, then the superrational proﬁle a = (a, . . . , a) obtains.
Proof. If each player has a superrational type, and is using a superrational
bayesian strategy, then they all must be playing the same action a which is
the only superrationally justiﬁable one.
Example 3.5. The uniqueness condition is necessary in the previous theo-
rem. If more than one action is superrationally justiﬁable, the coordination
problem of choosing which one to play arises. In the following symmetric
version of the game of Example 2.5, both players could have superrational
types and superrational bayesian strategies and still play diﬀerent actions,
and therefore obtaining a suboptimal payoﬀ.
a
b
c
a
(3, 3)
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
b
(0, 0)
(3, 3)
(0, 0)
c
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
(2, 2)
On the other hand, in Example 2.12, if the second player is of superra-
tional type, she would choose action C, disregarding the possibility of getting
a better payoﬀby choosing D.
⊣
Theorem 3.7 gives suﬃcient conditions for a superrational outcome in a
game. While seemingly stringent, they can be compared to the epistemic
conditions required to ensure a Nash equilibrium. In [1], Aumann and Bran-
denburger give conditions, further elaborated in [18], that amount to saying
that for a Nash equilibrium to be reached, all the players need to know the
actions of the others and assume that they are rational as well, meaning that
their actions are the best possible responses to their beliefs. This can be
expressed, in the case of pure strategy Nash equilibria, that the conditions
for reaching a proﬁle a∗= (a∗
1, . . . , a∗
n) ∈NEG are that there exist a proﬁle
of types (t1, . . . , tn) and a proﬁle of bayesian strategies (β1, . . . , βn) such that
12

for every i, and for all j ̸= i, ∆ρj(fi(ti)) = δa∗
j and βi(ti) = a∗
i , where a∗
i is
the best response to a∗
−i.
The situation is pretty much the same if we consider mixed strategies in
symmetric games. Now we have to replace the sets of pure strategies Ai by
their corresponding sets of mixed strategies ∆Ai. Let γj be the projection
from (Q
k̸=i ∆Ak) × T−i to ∆Aj. In this setting, by Proposition 2.16, there
exist at least one superrationally justiﬁable mixed strategy σ∗. The exis-
tence of the universal type space establishes that there is a type t such that
∆γj(fi(t)) = δσ∗.
Deﬁnition 3.6. A superrational bayesian mixed strategy for player i is a
function αi : Ti →∆Ai, such that for each superrational type t in Ti, if
∆γj(fi(t)) = δσ, then αi(t) = σ.
Having deﬁned superrational bayesian mixed strategies, we can now claim
a result like Theorem 3.7 for mixed strategies:
Theorem 3.7. In a game in which a single superrationally justiﬁable mixed
strategy σ exists, if each player i has superrational type ti and uses a
superrational bayesian mixed strategy αi, then the superrational proﬁle
σ = (σ, . . . , σ) obtains.
4
Superrationality in strategic belief models
The previous analysis adapted Harsanyi’s framework, in which players are
uncertain about the ﬁnal payoﬀs of their actions to the case in which the
uncertainty is on the actions to be carried out by the other players. In [4],
Brandenburger addresses this strategic uncertainty deﬁning the notion of an
S-based (interactive) possibility structure, extended jointly with Keisler in
[6] to deﬁne strategic belief models. We adapt that deﬁnition here for the
case of n players and in the general framework of coalgebras.
Let T1, . . . , Tn be the sets of types from which each of the players are
chosen, and consider for each i ∈I the set of all nonempty subsets of U−i =
Q
j̸=i(Aj × Tj). We call this set N(U−i).
We consider the category Setn which has n-tuples of sets as objects and
n-tuples of functions in Set, acting componentwise, as morphisms. In this
category, we use the functor that sends an n-tuple of sets (T1, . . . , Tn) to
the n-tuple (N(U−1), . . . , N(U−n)). A coalgebra for this functor is an n-tuple
of sets (T1, . . . , Tn) together with an n-tuple of functions (f1, . . . , fn) with
fi : Ti →N(U−i) for all i = 1, . . . , n.
A ﬁnal coalgebra for this functor does not exist (unless each Ai is a
singleton or empty, in which case it is trivial), and this is the main result
13

in [4]. We can still investigate how to characterize superrational types in
this context. The situation changes if one replaces the functor N by Nω that
assigns to each set the set of all its ﬁnite nonempty subsets [26]. This would
amount to the reasonable assumption that the agents can only entertain ﬁnite
sets of beliefs.
Thus we are considering coalgebras for the functor:
F ′(T1, . . . , Tn) = (Nω(U−1), . . . , Nω(U−n)).
We call a pair (ai, ti) ∈Ai × Ti the state of the player i and an n-tuple
((a1, t1), . . . , (an, tn)) a state of the world. A state of the world can be re-
garded as a state of player i together with an element of U−i.
Following the lines of the analysis of superrationality from the previous
section, we may consider symmetric games in which all the players draw their
type from the same set T = Ti. Then for each t ∈T, fi(t) is a nonempty
ﬁnite subset of U−i. We call these BK types (Brandenburger-Keisler types)
to distinguish them from the models of types considered before.
Deﬁnition 4.1. A BK superrational type is an element t ∈T such that fi(t)
is a singleton set {((a, t), . . . , (a, t))} where a is superrationally justiﬁable.
Furthermore, player i is in a superrational state if her state is the pair (a, t).
Thus a player having a BK superrational type regards as the only possible
state for the other players one in which they all have the same type as her,
while being in a superrational state reﬂects her conception of the options
available in the decision problem she faces. It follows immediately from the
deﬁnitions that:
Theorem 4.2. In a symmetric game if each player is in a superrational state
and there is a single superrationally justiﬁable action a, then a superrational
proﬁle obtains.
We can extend this result to mixed strategies by considering the functor
F ′′(T1, . . . , Tn) = (Nω(
Y
j̸=1
(∆Aj × Tj)), . . . , Nω(
Y
j̸=n
(∆Aj × Tj))).
Here the beliefs of each type ti ∈Ti are represented by a ﬁnite set of partial
states of the world in which the strategies contemplated are, instead of actions
as in F ′, mixed strategies.
Now
to
each
BK
superrational
type
t
corresponds
a
singleton
{((σ, t), . . . , (σ, t))}, where σ is a superrationally justiﬁable mixed strategy.
A result similar to Theorem 4.2 can also be proved. Notice that this re-
sult can be applied to justify the mixed strategy superrational outcome in
Example 2.15.
14

5
Players with dissimilar type spaces
An interesting problem we have only skirted so far is that to deﬁne Hofs-
tadter’s superrationality we need means to establish if the type of two players
is in some way the “same”. In a certain sense we abused of the symmetry of
the game by imposing it on the type spaces of the players. We want now to
be able to talk about superrationality even if the type spaces of the players
are diﬀerent. One way of doing this is to use a binary relation R which should
hold when two types in diﬀerent type spaces have the same beliefs and they
choose the same action. We work now with BK type spaces where the idea
may be more clearly seen, so we have functions fi : Ti →Nω(U−i).
Deﬁnition 5.1. An identiﬁcation relation between type spaces T1, . . . , Tn is
an equivalence relation R on the set S
i∈I Ti such that for all i, j ∈I if tiRtj,
then there exists a permutation τ : I →I such that τ(i) = j and for all
¯u = ((a1, u1), . . . , (ai−1, ui−1), (ai+1, ui+1), . . . , (an, un)) ∈fi(ti), there exists
¯v = ((b1, v1), . . . , (bj−1, vj−1), (bj+1, vj+1), . . . , (bn, vn)) ∈fj(tj) such that for
all k ∈I \ {i}, ak = bτ(k) and ukRvτ(k).
This is to say that two types ti and tj are related by R when each of the
elements in the set fi(ti) ⊆U−i can be matched through a permutation with
one element of fj(tj) ⊆U−j. This matching between elements in U−i and
U−j is such that for each k ̸= i, the action that a player of type ti believes
that player k will take is the same as the one that a player of type tj thinks
player τ(k) will choose, while the corresponding types are themselves related
by R.
In this new context we need to revise the deﬁnition of superrational state
of an agent i:
Deﬁnition 5.2. The state of an agent i is a superrational state, denoted
(a, ti) ∈SRi iﬀti is a BK superrational type such that fi(ti) is a singleton
{((a, t1), . . . , (a, ti−1), (a, ti+1), . . . , (a, tn))}, where a is superrationally justi-
ﬁable and there exists an identiﬁcation relation R such that tjRti for all
j ̸= i.
This means that i believes that all other players will choose the same
superrationally justiﬁable action a and that their types are related to her
own, while she herself will play action a.
Then even with diﬀerent type
spaces for diﬀerent players, we have a result like the one in Theorem 4.2:
Theorem 5.3. In a symmetric game if each player i’s state is in SRi, and
there is a single superrationaly justiﬁable action, a superrational proﬁle ob-
tains.
15

Example 5.4. Consider again the Prisoner’s Dilemma from example 2.12,
which is symmetric. Assume that the possible types of players 1 and 2 are
given by T1 = {r, s, t} and T2 = {u, w}. On the other hand, suppose that:
f1(r) = {(C, u)} f1(s) = {(D, w)} f1(t) = {(D, u)}
and
f2(u) = {(C, r)} f2(w) = {(D, s)}
It is easy to check that the equivalence relation R generated by
{(r, u), (s, w)} is an identiﬁcation relation.
Then (C, r) and (D, s) are in
SR1, and (C, u) and (D, w) are states in SR2. But only in the states (C, r)
and (C, u) the action taken is superrationally justiﬁable. Then according to
Theorem 5.3, the superrational proﬁle (C, C) obtains.
⊣
6
Conclusions
In this paper we assessed the reach and the limits of Hofstadter’s concept of
superrationality. While the notion is quite intuitive, its formalization requires
to distinguish between superrationally justiﬁable actions and proﬁles, the
latter constituted by the former. But this distinction poses the questions
of when do superrational proﬁles exist and what ensures that such a proﬁle
will consist of the same superrationally justiﬁable actions chosen by all the
players.
We have shown that the existence of superrational proﬁles for symmetric
games, both for proﬁles of pure or mixed strategies. This makes superra-
tionality a notion with a limited range of applicability, unlike Nash equilib-
rium. On the other hand, both solution concepts suﬀer of undeterminacy in
the case that more than one superrationally justiﬁable action or more than
equilibrium exist, respectively.
Another question that haunted the concept of superrationality is why
players would reach it in the presence of incentives to deviate, making this
solution much less relevant than Nash equilibrium. The answer we found is
twofold. First we discussed the types of the players, reﬂecting their beliefs
about the other players, and then their conception of the decision problem.
Both aspects are necessary to explain why a player may choose superrational
actions. Unlike rationality, the notion of superrationality not only amounts
to maximize a payoﬀ, but adds the constraint of assuming that all the players
will identify with each other and therefore play the same action.
16

There is certain evidence that in an experimental context, players behave
more superrationally than rationally [22]. This indicates that the notion of
superrationality is worthy of consideration.
A feature of this analysis is that it works only for symmetric games. While
this requirement of symmetry can in the end be lifted for type spaces, it is
still binding for action sets. Further work involves to extend the notion of
superrationality to games with more general notions of symmetry as those
explored in [25].
