Adaptive Discounting of Training Time Attacks
Ridhima Bector
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Abhay Aradhya
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Chai Quek
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Zinovi Rabinovich
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

ABSTRACT
Among the most insidious attacks on Reinforcement Learning (RL)
solutions are training-time attacks (TTAs) that create loopholes
and backdoors in the learned behaviour. Not limited to a simple
disruption, constructive TTAs (C-TTAs) are now available, where
the attacker forces a specific, target behaviour upon a training RL
agent (victim). However, even state-of-the-art C-TTAs focus on
target behaviours that could be naturally adopted by the victim if
not for a particular feature of the environment dynamics, which C-
TTAs exploit. In this work, we show that a C-TTA is possible even
when the target behaviour is un-adoptable due to both environment
dynamics as well as non-optimality with respect to the victim’s
objective(s). To find efficient attacks in this context, we develop a
specialised flavour of the DDPG algorithm, which we term 𝛾DDPG,
that learns this stronger version of C-TTA. 𝛾DDPG dynamically
alters the attack policy planning horizon based on the victim’s
current behaviour. This improves effort distribution throughout the
attack timeline and reduces the effect of uncertainty the attacker
has about the victim. To demonstrate the features of our method
and better relate the results to prior research, we borrow a 3D grid
domain from a state-of-the-art C-TTA for our experiments. Code is
available at "bit.ly/github-rb-gDDPG".
KEYWORDS
Dynamic Discount, Adaptive Discount, Constructive Training-Time
Attacks, Environment Poisoning, Reinforcement Learning
1
INTRODUCTION
Success of RL stands threatened by a wide variety of attacks [6,
7, 15], most insidious of which are training-time attacks (TTAs)
that “pre-program” back-doors and behavioural triggers into an
RL strategy [1, 23, 37, 43, 48, 49]. In TTAs, the attacker learns to
optimally modify/poison a victim RL agent’s internal aspects (i.e.,
sensor(s), processor(s), memory) and/or external influences (i.e., en-
vironment) while the victim agent trains to learn its task. The level
of information access assumed by the adversary categorises a TTA
as white-box or black-box. White-box attacks [36, 43, 52] assume
access to one or more internal aspects of a victim, while black-box
attacks [23, 48, 49] focus on external influences, addressing more re-
alistic settings. This paper aims to develop and study a constructive
environment-poisoning black-box TTA which modifies/poisons the
dynamics of the victim agent’s environment without accessing any
, , , . © 2024 This paper is published under the CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.
internal mechanism of the victim. Like prior works on constructive
environment-poisoning black-box TTAs [48, 49], the adversary in
this research is an RL agent which learns the optimal TTA to be
applied on the victim RL agent. However, unlike the prior works
that enforce un-adoptable but optimal target behaviour on the vic-
tim agent and train the attack by infusing all attack objectives into
the reward of the optimisation problem; our attack enforces a non-
optimal target behaviour which is learned by distributing the attack
objectives into the reward and the reward discounting factor of the
attacker’s optimisation problem.
In detail, we seek a constructive attack, i.e., the objective is to
push the victim to acquire an attacker-desired target-behaviour.
A target-behaviour can be any behaviour that the victim agent
will not learn by itself in the original/default environment. The
un-adoptability of this target behaviour in the original environ-
ment can be due to environment dynamics, non-optimality with
respect to victim’s objectives, or both. Prior works focus on fea-
sibility and hence experimented with target behaviours that are
optimal (discrete environments) [48, 49] or nearly optimal (continu-
ous environments) [48] with respect to the victim’s objective(s), but
un-adoptable due to environment dynamics. This work develops
and studies attacks wherein the target behaviour is un-adoptable
in the original environment due to both, environment dynamics
as well as non-optimality with respect to the victim’s objective.
In addition to pushing the victim agent towards this non-optimal
target behaviour, the attack must also preserve the environment
as much as possible or, equivalently, reduce the effort expended to
modify it. Attack actions are thus constrained by the magnitude of
change a single attack action is permitted to make, as well as by
treating environment modification effort as a second objective in
the attacker’s optimisation problem. The attacker, therefore, faces
a multi-objective problem of finding an attack strategy that: a) gen-
erates the target behaviour in the victim with high accuracy, and b)
has low-effort environment modifications.
Now, commonly, an RL agent’s objectives are represented by a re-
ward signal and the agent strives to find a behaviour/policy which,
when executed in the given environment, maximises the produced
cumulative reward. Likewise, in the attack domain, the attacker’s
reward typically inculcates both attack objectives: the accuracy
with which the victim adopts the target behaviour, and the effort
applied by the attacker, in terms of environment modifications, to
achieve this accuracy. This can be done either by having several
reward terms, allowing for prioritisation (through weights) of the
attacker’s objectives; or, by measuring the discrepancy between
arXiv:2401.02652v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2024

combined behaviour-environment pairs, as done in [48, 49]. More
specifically, these works utilise the Kullback Leibler Divergence
Rate (KLR) to provide a unified estimate of effort and effectiveness
of an attack by measuring the discrepancy between the combination
of the victim’s current behaviour with the poisoned environment
and the combination of the target behaviour with the default envi-
ronment. However, both the aforementioned approaches have their
shortcomings. Due to high symmetry, the KLR-based approach can-
not properly distinguish between a high-accuracy, medium-effort
behaviour-environment pair and a medium-accuracy, low-effort
pair; while, weighted multiple terms of reward cannot address the
fact that some behaviour-environment discrepancies cancel each
other and, are thus, irrelevant.
In this paper, we propose an alternative route. We avoid packing
both attack effort and effectiveness into a single element of the
attacker’s problem. Rather, we use both the reward and the reward
discounting factor to encode and prioritise these objectives. We
propose a modification of DDPG [21] called 𝛾DDPG that supports
dual-priority dual-objective optimisation with the aid of a dynamic
discount function. Herein, the discount function, 𝛾adapts in re-
sponse to the current level of effort exerted by the attacker (and
the current level of attack accuracy achieved with that effort) to
create a bounded search space that bounds the lower priority ob-
jective (attacker effort), and enables the attacker to optimise the
higher-priority objective (attack accuracy) within this bounded
space. Furthermore, given that large discount factors lead to unre-
liable optimisation in uncertain environments [18], the bounded
search space (created by the bounded discount function) in this
work improves the optimisation capability of 𝛾DDPG by reducing
the effect of uncertainty in the given black-box environment.
2
RELATED WORK
This section positions this paper in terms of the proposed methodol-
ogy and the overall framework through comparison with literature
on non-constant discounts and adversarial RL respectively.
2.1
Non-Constant Discounts
Humans, as well as animals, tend to subjugate impulsive behaviours
when the behaviours’ absence increases the probability of a larger
reward in the future [29, 30]. In an attempt to explore reward opti-
misation with respect to flexible time horizons several works adapt
the discount during training. [9, 12] gradually increase the discount
factor over time and experimentally demonstrate the higher effi-
ciency and better performance of this approach. [53] increases the
discount of states with high return estimates based on the intuition
that the expected return of states on or near the optimal trajectory,
increases during training. [18] strives to prevent reward overesti-
mation in uncertain environments via advantage-based discount
adaptation in policy gradient algorithms. This work computes two
value functions using a small and a large discount respectively,
and iteratively increases the small discount or decreases the large
discount if it results in a lower advantage value than the other.
[46, 50] introduce optimal value functions using state-dependent
discounts in model-based and model-free settings. The latter proves
convergence to this optimal function and experimentally demon-
strates the better performance of state-dependent discounts opti-
mised via an evolutionary algorithm, compared to constant dis-
counts. [41] first trains a set of low-level agents that use different
constant discounts and then trains a high-level meta agent that
learns to choose between the different low-level agent policies de-
pending on the current state. [47] proposes a unified specification
of episodic and non-episodic tasks using transition-based discounts
and [40] uses transition-based discounts in model-free algorithms
to achieve faster convergence and learn risk-averse policies. The
former is achieved via the inculcation of pessimism into the learn-
ing algorithm by increasing the discount of transitions that result
in negative reward; while the latter is achieved by decreasing the
discount for the preferred risk-averse trajectory. [10] improves the
accuracy of value estimation by utilising the probabilities of the
current policy as the discount factor.
In Multi-Objective MDPs (MO-MDPs) either the weight of each
objective/reward is known or found via hyperparameter tuning and
the MO-MDP is solved via transformation into a single-objective
MDP or these weights are unknown and each objective is optimised
separately to be either combined at the decision-making stage or
be chosen by the user [38]. [11] falls under the former scenario and
extends state-dependent discounts to multi-objective MDPs such
that different objectives have different time scales. This work com-
putes the expected return using a separate but constant discount
for each objective in order to preserve the temporal scale of each
objective. The 𝑛𝑡ℎstep target Q-value inside the TD(𝜆) update is
discounted using a single variable discount which takes the value
of the higher priority objective’s discount as long as the reward
corresponding to that objective is non-zero. This work, on one
hand, requires specification of several hyperparameters in terms of
weights as well as discounts of the different objectives, and on the
other hand, works with a set of constant discounts.
This research introduces a novel dual-priority dual-objective
MDP framework that neither needs weights and discounts to be
known/estimated nor requires separate optimisation of each objec-
tive. In this framework, the higher priority (primary) objective is
taken as the RL agent’s reward while the lower priority (secondary)
objective is used to condition the discount function. The discount
adapts to the current state and modifies the algorithm’s search
space so as to optimise the primary objective while keeping the
secondary objective bounded.
2.2
Adversarial Reinforcement Learning
In a typical adversarial RL study, an adversarial system is con-
structed that encompasses the RL agent, its environment, and its
task. In these systems, the RL agent is regarded as the victim, its
RL environment, the victim environment, and the task, the victim
task. In addition to the victim, the system includes an adversary,
tasked with attacking the victim agent. Since the attacker’s task is
no easier than the victim’s, machine learning solutions (and RL, in
particular) are generally deployed on the attacker’s side as well. All
attack solutions are commonly classified by 4 features: the intent
of attack (Destructive vs. constructive), the mode of attack (Reward
vs. Observation vs. Environment), the level of access (White-box vs.

Black-box) to the victim’s inner workings granted to the attacker,
and the stage of attack (Training vs. Testing).
Attack Intent (Destructive vs. Constructive): Destructive
attacks [14, 19, 51] degrade the victim RL agent’s policy such that
the policy performs poorly with respect to the victim’s task. The
victim, therefore, becomes incapable of solving its task. On the
other hand, constructive attacks [36, 48, 49] force the victim RL
agent to learn a target policy that the victim will not learn by itself
in the absence of the attack. The victim, therefore, becomes capable
of carrying out the attacker desired task (target task). Given the
higher level of complexity associated with constructive RL attacks,
they form the subject of the current research investigation.
Attack Mode (Reward vs. Observation vs. Environment):
In reward [1, 37, 52] and observation [13, 23, 43, 51] poisoning,
the attacker generally possesses the ability to interfere with the
victim’s gratification and sensory circuitry and thereby modifies
the victim’s rewards and observations, respectively. In order to
efficiently poison the rewards and/or observations of a victim, the
attacker requires intrinsic information regarding the victim in the
form of its learning algorithm, policy function, and/or preferences.
However, such detailed victim-specific knowledge is impractical
and often impossible to acquire in the real world. Environment
poisoning [36, 48, 49] mode of attack, on the other hand, does away
with most of these requirements by directing the attack at the
dynamics of the victim environment and is thus the chosen mode
of attack in this research.
Attack Access (White- vs. Black-box): The level of infor-
mation access granted to the adversary categorises an adversary
system as white-box or black-box. White-box systems [24, 36, 42]
allow the attacker access to one or more internal aspects of a victim
and support all three modes of attack (reward, observation, and
environment poisoning). In contrast, black-box systems [23, 48, 49]
focus only on the more realistic, external influences (e.g., via envi-
ronment poisoning). We follow suit and adopt a black-box attack.
Attack Stage (Training vs. Testing): An RL agent has two
broad stages of operation corresponding to the training and test-
ing/deployment phases of an RL algorithm. These two stages lead to
two very different kinds of RL attacks, categorized as training-time
(e.g., [3, 36, 48, 49]) and test-time (e.g., [14, 22, 24, 42]) attacks re-
spectively. Training-time attacks take place when the victim agent
is in the process of learning the optimal policy ( w.r.t. the victim’s ob-
jectives). Consequently, during a training-time attack, the victim’s
policy undergoes periodic updates. In contrast, test-time attacks
take place after the victim RL agent has finished training. Therefore,
during a test-time attack, the victim’s policy remains fixed. This
research studies training-time attacks as they are potentially more
malicious, given their capability of permeating loopholes and be-
havioural triggers into the RL agent’s "apparently" optimal strategy.
These behavioural triggers can then be used during deployment to
make the victim RL agent carry out the target behaviour.
The state-of-the-art constructive, environment-poisoning, black-
box TTAs; TEPA [49] and DBB-EPA [48] follow a bi-level hierarchi-
cal framework (Figure 1), wherein the attacker as well as the victim
is an independent reinforcement-learning agent with its individual
learning algorithm and policy. Within this framework, in order to
learn a given task, the victim trains to maximise its cumulative
discounted rewards by interacting with the victim environment,
unaware of the attacker. The attacker, on the other hand, observes
these interactions of the victim with its environment and takes an
action to modify the victim environment. The goal of the attacker
is to sequentially and minimally modify the victim’s environment
dynamics to drive the victim to adopt the attacker-desired target
behaviour. Therefore, the overall system is formed by two nested
closed-loop processes, wherein the attacker, as well as the victim,
is modelled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP).
Victim MDP: The victim’s MDP can be denoted by the tuple
< 𝑆,𝐴,𝑇𝑢𝑖, 𝑅𝑣,𝑞0,𝛾𝑣> where 𝑆= 𝑠1,𝑠2, ..., and 𝐴= 𝑎1,𝑎2, ... are
the victim’s states and actions respectively; 𝑅𝑣: 𝑆× 𝐴× 𝑆→R is
the reward function which encodes the victim’s task; 𝛾𝑣∈(0, 1) is
the discount factor, 𝑞0(𝑆) is the distribution over initial states; and,
𝑇𝑢𝑖: 𝑆×𝐴×𝑆→[0, 1] is the probabilistic transition function, where
𝑢𝑖denotes the environment parameterisation that has resulted
from the first 𝑖interventions on the environment, by the attacker.
In particular, 𝑇𝑢0 refers to the original, unaltered dynamics of the
victim environment. The objective of the victim is to find an optimal
policy within the experienced environment.
Attacker MDP: The attacker’s Markov process can be repre-
sented by the tuple < 𝑋,𝑈, 𝐹, 𝑅,𝜏∗,𝛾>, where: 𝑋is the attacker’s
state space;𝑈is the attacker’s action space, i.e., the set of all permis-
sible changes that can be applied to the victim environment dynam-
ics. Aggregate attack notation is common, i.e., when action 𝑢𝑖is
applied on the environment with dynamics𝑇𝑢𝑖−1, it results in an en-
vironment with dynamics𝑇𝑢𝑖. Thus, environment changes by attack
actions 𝑢0,𝑢1, ...,𝑢𝑖accumulate to create𝑇𝑢𝑖. 𝐹: 𝑋×𝑈×𝑋→[0, 1]
is the stochastic transition function that describes the response
of the victim to environmental experiences, i.e., how the victim’s
behaviour changes in response to changes in the environment dy-
namics; 𝑅: 𝑋× 𝑈× 𝑋→R is the attacker’s reward function that
encapsulates the attacker’s objectives and 𝛾: 𝑋→[0.0, 1.0] is the
discount function. The attacker seeks the most efficient way to push
the victim to converge to the target policy 𝜏∗.
3
METHODOLOGY : 𝛾-VARIANT DDPG
The current research adopts the system architecture developed by
the state-of-the-art constructive, environment-poisoning, black-
box TTAs [48, 49] but modifies the attacker MDP to incorporate a
novel state-space, a single-objective reward function and an adap-
tive/dynamic discount function. Like prior works, the attacker’s
Markov process is represented by the tuple < 𝑋,𝑈, 𝐹, 𝑅,𝜏∗,𝛾>.
However, unlike prior works: 𝑋= [𝑇𝑢𝑖−1,𝜙𝑢𝑖−1] is the attacker’s
state space comprising the victim environment dynamics,𝑇𝑢𝑖−1 and
the victim’s behaviour, 𝜙𝑢𝑖−1 that emerged in response to those
dynamics; 𝑅: 𝑋× 𝑈× 𝑋→R is the attacker’s reward function
that describes attack effectiveness, i.e., how close the victim’s be-
haviour is to the target (attacker-desired ideal) behaviour 𝜏∗; and
𝛾: 𝑋→[𝛾𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥] is the adaptive/dynamic discount function
that tunes the importance of long-term rewards based on the cur-
rent attacker state 𝑥𝑢𝑖−1. The attacker seeks to optimise its expected
total discounted reward, wherein the combination of 𝑅and 𝛾sim-
ulate dual optimisation of (maximum) attack effectiveness with
(minimum) effort, by a policy of the form 𝜎: 𝑋→𝑈, 𝜎(𝑢𝑖|𝑥𝑖−1).

Figure 1: Bi-Level Attack Framework
Algorithm 1 𝜸DDPG Algorithm
1: Randomly initialise critic 𝑄(𝑥,𝑢|𝜃𝑄) and actor 𝜎(𝑥|𝜃𝜎) net-
works with weights 𝜃𝑄and 𝜃𝜎
2: Initialise target networks 𝑄′ and 𝜎′ with weights 𝜃𝑄′ ←
𝜃𝑄,𝜃𝜎′ ←𝜃𝜎
3: Initialise replay buffer 𝑅
4: for episode = 1, 𝑀𝑎do
5:
Initialise a random process 𝜒for action exploration
6:
Receive initial observation state 𝑥0
7:
for t = 1, 𝑇𝑎do
8:
Select action𝑢𝑡= 𝜎(𝑥𝑡−1|𝜃𝜎)+𝜒𝑡according to the current
policy and exploration noise
9:
Execute action 𝑢𝑡to poison environment 𝑇𝑢𝑡−1
10:
Observe reward 𝑟𝑡
11:
𝑥𝑡←[𝑇𝑢𝑡, Auto_Encoder( Algorithm 2 (𝑇𝑢𝑡) )]
12:
Compute 𝜸𝒕using Equation 7
13:
Store transition (𝒙𝒕−1, 𝒖𝒕, 𝒓𝒕, 𝒙𝒕,𝜸𝒕) in 𝑹
14:
Sample a random minibatch of 𝑵transitions
(𝒙𝒊−1, 𝒖𝒊, 𝒓𝒊, 𝒙𝒊,𝜸𝒊) from 𝑹
15:
Set 𝒚𝒊= 𝒓𝒊+ 𝜸𝒊𝑸′(𝒙𝒊, 𝝈′(𝒙𝒊|𝜽𝝈′)|𝜽𝑸′)
16:
Update critic 𝜎by minimising the loss: 𝐿=
1
𝑁
Í
𝑖(𝑦𝑖−
𝑄(𝑥𝑖−1,𝑢𝑖|𝜃𝑄))2
17:
Update the actor policy 𝑄
18:
Update the target networks 𝑄′ and 𝜎′
19:
end for
20: end for
3.1
State Space
𝛾DDPG (Algorithm 1), a dual-priority dual-objective RL algorithm,
is developed to enable the attacker to learn attack strategies that
can push the victim RL agent towards target behaviours that are
non-optimal with respect to the victim’s learning objectives. Every
action 𝑢𝑖of the attack is conditioned on the current victim be-
haviour 𝜙𝑢𝑖−1 and the current victim environment dynamics 𝑇𝑢𝑖−1.
We assume that this attack conditioning occurs in a black-box set-
ting, i.e., without any access to the victim’s inner mechanisms or
representations, during both, the attacker’s training and testing.
Thus, the victim’s behaviour can only be approximated through
across-policy behaviour traces that the attacker observes while the
victim trains. In general, the victim would update its policy with a
non-trivial frequency. This frequency can be so high that each state-
action pair of its behaviour trace would originate from a slightly
Algorithm 2 𝝉Computation Algorithm
1: Receive victim environment with dynamics 𝑇𝑢𝑖
2: if i == 1 then
3:
Initialise victim’s Q table
4: else
5:
Use victim’s Q table from 𝑇𝑢𝑖−1
6: end if
7: Initialise 𝜏𝑢𝑖with the no-action symbol for each state
8: Initialise state
9: for episode = 1, 𝑀𝑣do
10:
while done != True do
11:
action = Softmax_Action(Q)
12:
next_state, reward, done = Env-𝑇𝑢𝑖(action)
13:
𝜏𝑢𝑖(state) ←action
14:
Q ←TD_Update(Q)
15:
state ←next_state
16:
end while
17: end for
different policy. In our experiments, we assume as much. Now, to
approximate the victim’s policy we would need traces of multiple
epochs of the victim’s training process. But conditioning an attack
on such a large volume of data is impractical. Instead, we preprocess
these traces by storing the last observed victim action correspond-
ing to each observed victim state and assign a "no-action" symbol
to unvisited states [2]. This behaviour information will hereafter
be denoted as 𝜏𝑢𝑖−1 = {𝑠1,𝑎1;𝑠2,𝑎2; ...;𝑠𝑁,𝑎𝑁}∀𝑠𝑛∈𝑆, where 𝑎𝑛
is the latest action taken by the victim in state 𝑛or the no-action
symbol in case state 𝑠𝑛was never visited by the victim, and 𝑁is
the total number of states in the victim environment.
As 𝜏𝑢𝑖−1 contains the latest action / no-action symbol correspond-
ing to all states; 𝜏𝑢𝑖−1’s size can explode in high-dimensional envi-
ronments. To combat this issue, this paper learns a low-dimensional
latent space, Φ of victim behaviours using an auto-encoder model
(Eq 1). The model consists of an encoder 𝑞𝑒that takes the victim’s
𝜏𝑢𝑖−1 as input and outputs the corresponding latent behaviour 𝜙𝑢𝑖−1;
and a decoder 𝑞𝑑that takes two inputs, the latent behaviour 𝜙𝑢𝑖−1
and a victim environment state 𝑠𝑛, and outputs the probability with
which the victim will take each available action in the given state 𝑠𝑛.
Finally, 𝜙𝑢𝑖−1 and the current environment dynamics 𝑇𝑢𝑖−1 together
constitute the current state of the attacker (Eq 2).
𝜙𝑢𝑖−1 = 𝑞𝑒(𝜏𝑢𝑖−1)
𝑎= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑞𝑑(𝜙𝑢𝑖−1,𝑠𝑛))
(1)
Attacker State = 𝑥𝑖−1 = [𝑇𝑢𝑖−1,𝜙𝑢𝑖−1]
(2)
3.2
Adaptive Discount Function
As suggested in the attacker-MDP, this work seeks to balance attack
effectiveness and effort. However, unlike prior works, where the bal-
ance was achieved through reward elements’ merge, we distribute
the responsibility between distinct MDP components. Herein, the
reward function encapsulates the higher-priority objective (attack
accuracy) while the dynamic discount manages both the higher

and lower priority objectives (attack accuracy and effort). We im-
plement this architecture in our 𝛾DDPG algorithm (Algorithm 1),
appropriately subverting the original DDPG [21] in lines 12-15.
By optimising attack accuracy within effort+accuracy-bounded
search space, 𝛾DDPG becomes capable of prioritising attack accu-
racy over attacker effort. At each attack timestep,𝛾DDPG’s adaptive
discount factor creates a bounded effort+accuracy search space sim-
ilar to the trust regions created by adaptive step sizes [39]; and the
attacker looks for the highest accuracy state within this space. This
bounded search space is created by adapting the attacker MDP’s
discount factor (𝛾) conditioned on the current attacker effort and
attack accuracy. The adaptive discount factor modifies 𝛾DDPG’s
Bellman update to alter the level of importance that the algorithm
accords to long-term rewards. Given that smaller discounts bias
an RL algorithm’s precedence to short-term rewards, a decrease in
discount results in tightening of the search space of the attacker
around the current state, while an increase in discount widens the
search space of the attacker around the current state.
The adaptive discount; which is a function of the effort exe-
cuted by the attacker on the victim environment and the accuracy
with which the victim adopts the target behaviour; can be mod-
elled in different ways. As mentioned in Section 1, prior works
[35, 49] utilise negative KLR between the vanilla-current (current
environment * current behaviour) and perfect (original environ-
ment * target behaviour) MDPs as the attacker reward because
reducing this KLR pushes the current MDP towards the perfect

formulation (distance/divergence between vanilla-current and per-
fect MDPs) to construct dynamic discounts conditioned on both,
attack accuracy and attacker effort and proposes a new formulation
(distance/divergence between target-current and perfect MDPs) to
construct dynamic discounts conditioned only on attacker effort.
The target-current MDP models the current environment dynamics
coupled with the victim’s target behaviour as a stochastic Markov
process, thereby computing target-behaviour conditioned effort
associated with the current state. The vanilla-current 𝑃𝑣𝑢𝑖, target-
current 𝑃𝑢𝑖and perfect 𝑃∗𝑢0 MDPs are defined in Equations 4, 5, and
6 where 𝑗denotes victim-level time step, just as 𝑖denotes attacker-
level time step. This study employs the partial target behaviour
design of [49] to construct the attacker-desired target policy 𝜏∗:
𝜏∗
𝑢𝑖(𝑠) =
(
𝑎∗𝑛
𝑠𝑛∈𝑆∗
𝜏𝑢𝑖(𝑠𝑛)
𝑠𝑛∉𝑆∗
(3)
Here 𝑆∗is the target state set, 𝑎∗𝑛is the target action for target
state 𝑠𝑛, and 𝜏𝑢𝑖(𝑠) is the latest behaviour of the victim observed
in the environment with transition dynamics 𝑇𝑢𝑖. As the attacker
cannot access the victims’ policy in the given black-box setting, it
approximates the victim policy 𝜋𝑢𝑖, using the last ℎactions taken
by the victim in each state. The target policy distribution 𝜋∗𝑢𝑖is then
constructed by taking a copy of 𝜋𝑢𝑖and modifying it by assigning
probability 1.0 to all target actions (and 0.0 to non-target actions)
w.r.t. each target state.
Vanilla-Current MDP = 𝑃𝑣
𝑢𝑖(𝑠𝑗+1,𝑎𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗,𝑎𝑗)
= 𝑇𝑢𝑖(𝑠𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗,𝑎𝑗) 𝜋𝑢𝑖(𝑎𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗+1)
(4)
Target-Current MDP = 𝑃𝑢𝑖(𝑠𝑗+1,𝑎𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗,𝑎𝑗)
= 𝑇𝑢𝑖(𝑠𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗,𝑎𝑗) 𝜋∗
𝑢𝑖(𝑎𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗+1)
(5)
Perfect MDP = 𝑃∗
𝑢0 (𝑠𝑗+1,𝑎𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗,𝑎𝑗)
= 𝑇𝑢0 (𝑠𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗,𝑎𝑗) 𝜋∗
𝑢𝑖(𝑎𝑗+1|𝑠𝑗+1)
(6)
Like prior works, we can use KLR to compute the divergence
between these MDPs. KLR computes this divergence by calculating
the divergence between probability distributions of different tra-
jectories in the two given Markov processes. However, KLR does
not take the underlying metric space into account. This work hy-
pothesises that a measure that computes the distance between the
𝑘𝑡ℎstep probability distributions of two Markov processes while
respecting the underlying geometry of the metric space provides a
better estimate of the difference between the two given Markov pro-
cesses as compared to KLR. To test this hypothesis we use Wasser-
stein distance to compute the distance between the vanilla-current
and perfect MDPs (termed WD) as well as target-current and per-
fect MDPs (termed TargetWD). Wasserstein distance possesses an
additional property of being insensitive to small changes in the
probability distributions. This property is advantageous in the cur-
rent uncertain black-box setting where 𝜏𝑢𝑖being an approximate
representation of the actual policy of the victim can be noisy in
nature. Let 𝑝𝑘𝑣
𝑢𝑖and 𝑝𝑘∗
𝑢0 be the 𝑘𝑡ℎstep probability distributions of
the vanilla-current and perfect processes respectively. The Wasser-
stein 1-distance between these distributions termed WD is defined
below. Here, 𝛽is a transport plan, 𝑑(𝑥,𝑦) is the distance between 𝑥
and 𝑦, and 𝑝𝑘𝑣
𝑢𝑖and 𝑝𝑘∗
𝑢0 are written as 𝑝𝑘𝑣and 𝑝𝑘∗respectively.
𝜸∝WD(𝑝𝑘𝑣, 𝑝𝑘∗) :=
 
inf
𝛽∈B(𝑝𝑘𝑣,𝑝𝑘∗)
IE(𝑥,𝑦)∼𝛽𝑑(𝑥,𝑦) d𝛽(𝑥,𝑦)
!
(7)
In order to better understand the individual contributions of
the Wasserstein metric (in comparison to KLR) and target-current

fort) and reducing uncertainty, this paper experiments with four
adaptive/dynamic discount functions. These four adaptive discount
functions must undergo normalisation as the range of KL diver-
gence [20] and Wasserstein distance [45] is [0, ∞]. Details regarding
this normalisation are presented in Appendix 7.2.
• WD - WD(Vanilla-Current MDP, Perfect MDP)
• KLR - KLR(Vanilla-Current MDP, Perfect MDP)
• TargetWD - WD(Target-Current MDP, Perfect MDP)
• TargetKLR - KLR(Target-Current MDP, Perfect MDP)
4
EXPERIMENTS
Following a series of prior works[35, 48, 49], we experiment with at-
tacks on a navigational agent (victim) whose objective is to find the
shortest path to the goal state. The victim’s navigation environment
can be discrete or continuous. The target behaviour is an alternate
path to the goal state and is distinct from the path that the victim
would learn in the absence of the attack. The current research aims
to build an attacker that learns a high-accuracy, low-effort strategy
to modify the stochastic dynamics of a discrete environment in
order to push a training victim agent to learn a non-optimal target

(d) Legend

graphs in Test-Time plots (i-l) represent attacks on victims initialised with random numbers using different seeds.
behaviour. This target behaviour must be un-adoptable in the de-
fault environment due to both, environment dynamics as well as
non-optimality with respect to victim’s objective. In the following
experiments, a path that is three times the length of the optimal
path (shortest path under the original dynamics) is chosen as the
non-optimal target behaviour. This paper conducts 4 experimen-
tal studies. Study-1 is designed to demonstrate the capability of
the discount factor to function as a means of bounding the lower-

uncertainty so as to aid in the optimisation of the primary objec-

out by training and testing 𝛾DDPG with different fixed-discounts
(Appendix 8). Herein, fixed-discount 0.90 is shown to achieve the

the best fixed-discount w.r.t. the current setting. However, finding
the best fixed-discount requires a grid-search and fixed-discounts
cannot be used in settings where the victim task or victim envi-
ronment changes with time, in a manner that the optimal discount
factor of the attacker undergoes adaptation. These problems as-
sociated with fixed-discounts are solved with adaptive/dynamic
discounts proposed in Section 3. Study-2 and Study-3 compare
effort+accuracy-based and effort-based dynamic discounts with the
best fixed-discount (0.90) while Study-4 compares the core contri-
bution of this work i.e. 𝛾DDPG with best dynamic discounts with
the state-of-the-art baseline, TEPA [49]. Due to space constraints,
studies 1 and 3 are moved to Appendix 8.
Victim Environment & Task: In order to better align our
contribution with prior works, we utilise the 3D Grid World [35]
to test and establish the quality of the proposed methodology. This
environment simulates an uneven terrain on a 2𝐷grid of cells. The
unevenness corresponds to the 3𝑟𝑑dimension of the grid and is
due to the elevation/altitude associated with each grid cell. The
relative elevation between two cells affects the transition probability
between them. A change in this relative elevation thus changes
how the environment responds to a navigating agent’s actions. The
navigating agent’s task is to find the optimal path from the start
cell to the goal cell and its state is its position inside the grid world.
At each time step, the agent observes its state and takes one step in
any of the four cardinal directions (N,S,E,W). The agent receives a
reward of -1 for every action it takes until it reaches the goal state.

A given agent training episode terminates once the agent reaches
the goal state or maximum time has elapsed. This pushes the agent
to find a shortest path to the goal cell. This environment also allows
the presence of an additional agent, the elevation expert who can
view the altitude of each grid cell and take a constrained action to
modify it. The elevation expert’s state space comprises of the grid
cells’ altitudes along with the navigational agent’s behaviour, while
its action space is a vector [𝑥1, . . . ,𝑥𝑀] ∈[−1.0, 1.0]𝑀, where 𝑀is
the total number of cells in the grid. In this work, the victim is a
navigating agent while the attacker is the elevation expert.
Performance Metrics: The performance of the attacker is mea-

with which the victim (unknowingly) adopts the target behaviour;
the cumulative changes brought about in the victim environment

measures the level of adoption of the target behaviour by the victim
in the given environment. Given that 𝜋𝑢𝑖is victim’s probabilistic
policy in the environment with dynamics 𝑇𝑢𝑖, 𝑆∗is the set of target
states, let 𝑁∗be the number of target states, 𝑎∗𝑛be the target action
in target state 𝑠𝑛, and 𝑓𝑎(𝑠, 𝜋𝑢𝑖) is an indicator function, triggered
when the given policy assigns highest probability to the target
action in a given state.
𝑓𝑎(𝑠𝑛, 𝜋𝑢𝑖) =
(
1
𝜋𝑢𝑖(𝑎∗𝑛|𝑠𝑛) > 𝜋𝑢𝑖(𝑎𝑛|𝑠𝑛) ∀𝑎𝑛
0
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
(8)

1
𝑁∗
∑︁
𝑠𝑛∈𝑆∗
𝑓𝑎(𝑠𝑛, 𝜋𝑢𝑖)
(9)

the target behaviour and is computed as the probability assigned
to the target path by the victim agent.

1
𝑁∗
∑︁
𝑠𝑛∈𝑆∗
𝜋𝑢𝑖(𝑎∗
𝑛|𝑠𝑛))
(10)

environment. Let ℎ1𝑢𝑖, . . . ,ℎ𝑀
𝑢𝑖be the altitudes of the 𝑀grid cells in
victim environment with dynamics 𝑇𝑢𝑖.

𝑀
𝑀
∑︁
𝑚=1
| ℎ𝑚
𝑢𝑖−ℎ𝑚
𝑢𝑖−1 |
(11)

attacker observes the victim as it trains in the attacked/poisoned/modified
victim environment.
Graphs: The 𝛾-variant of DDPG, that we introduce in this work,
allows sophisticated use of dynamic discounting. We contribute
several dynamic discounting factors to boost an environment poi-
soning attack. To further underline their impact, we use the tuned
performance of the SotA algorithm, TEPA. The training-time statis-
tics of the various models are demonstrated via KDEs (histograms
smoothed using kernel density estimation) as well as line graphs
that depict these statistics across training time. KDEs represent the
overall frequency of the mean value of each metric during the com-
plete training period. For line graphs, we show a sliding-window
maximum of metric means. Metric mean is computed for every
attacker training episode, and the sliding window has a length of
75 such episodes. The attacker training episode is a 15-step sequen-
tial attack on a randomly initialised victim wherein attack step 0
corresponds to the original environment with default dynamics,
and the episode ends when the victim has adopted the target be-

KDE and line graph represents four training runs with different
seeds, except for Study-4, wherein a single training run is presented
due to exorbitant runtime requirements of the baseline model. We

to standardise all KDE graphs to "further right is better" and line
graphs to "higher is better".
The test-time performance graphs showcase the performance of
the best attack strategy found by each attack model. The best attack
strategy is the attack strategy that acquires the highest mean attack

the attack. The use of dynamic discounting in 𝛾DDPG allows us
to tradeoff between them, and we plot them to show a complete
performance picture. The proficiency of each attack strategy is visu-
alised by plotting the four performance metrics across each 15-step
sequential attack carried out using the given strategy (plots i-l in

timescale to observe how the accuracies change (and thereby under-

to each attack action and hence are measured along the attacker
timescale. Due to this difference, accuracy plots begin from attack
step 0 while effort and time plots begin from attack step 1.
It is important that during attack training, the victim agent is
(re)initialised using a single random pattern. On the other hand,
during the test-time evaluation of the attack strategy, multiple vic-
tim initialisation patterns are used. Test-time evaluation, therefore,
challenges the generalisability of the best training-stage attack
strategies to differently initialised victim agents.
Baseline: Out of the two state-of-the-art constructive, environment-
poisoning, black-box TTAs: TEPA [49] and DBB-EPA [48]; the for-
mer is chosen as the baseline for this research as like the current
research, TEPA [49] develops attacks on known victim environ-
ments while DBB-EPA [48] develops attacks on unknown victim
environments. TEPA is an auto-encoder-based model that is shown
capable of pushing a victim agent in white-box and proxy-black-box
adversarial settings to adopt a target behaviour that is optimal with
respect to the victim’s objective, but un-adoptable with respect to
the original environment dynamics.
Results: Our results show that effort+accuracy-based dynamic
discount computed using Wasserstein distance finds strategies that
maximise accuracy (higher-priority objective) and minimise effort

seen in Study 2 (Figure 2) which compares KLR and WD adaptive
discounts with the best fixed-discount (0.90) found via grid-search.
Even though, the training-time statistics (plots a-c, e-h) of the 0.90

the dynamic discounts; during test-time (plots i-l), the general-
isability of WD dynamic discount surpasses both KLR and best

Furthermore, our results show that when TEPA, a SoTA baseline,
is trained to enforce non-optimal target behaviour on a victim,it
gets stuck in a local optima, unable to exit it even after ∼20k training
episodes. This can be seen, e.g., in Figure 3 that compares the best-
performing effort+accuracy- and effort-based dynamic discounts,
i.e. WD (Study 2) and TargetKLR (Study 3 in Appendix 8), with
TEPA, highlighting the overall contribution of this work. Herein,

addition, the test-time plots (i-l) show that the best attack strategy
found by TEPA performs worse than both WD and TargetKLR

5
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper introduces a novel category of training-time environment-
poisoning attacks wherein the attacker pushes the victim towards a
non-optimal target behaviour. This target behaviour is un-adoptable
in the original environment due to both, environment dynamics as
well as non-optimality with respect to the victim’s objectives. In
order to make an attacker capable of carrying out such attacks, we
introduce a novel reinforcement-learning algorithm titled 𝛾DDPG
that utilises an adaptive Bellman discount function to support dual-
priority dual-objective optimisation in a partially observable setting.
This dynamic discount bounds 𝛾DDPG’s search space conditioned
on the accumulated modifications executed on the victim environ-
ment until the current attack step (and the difference between the
current and target victim behaviour). The bounded search space, on
one hand, bounds the lower priority objective (minimise Attacker
Effort) and on the other hand, reduces uncertainty associated with
the partially-observable environment and thereby aids in optimi-
sation of the primary objective (maximise Attack Accuracy). The
experiments conducted in this study show that Wasserstein dis-
tance based dynamic discount (WD) that respects the underlying
geometry of the metric space and is insensitive to small differ-
ences in the probability distributions generalises better than the
best fixed-discount found using a grid search (0.90) as well as the
state-of-the-art baseline (TEPA). In fact, due to WD’s exceptional
generalisability to differently initialised victim agents, WD outper-
forms the best fixed-discount and TEPA attack models w.r.t. all four
performance metrics.
In this work, however, the attacker approximates the victim’s
policy using the last action taken by the victim in each environment
state. This mechanism can only be used for victim environments
with discrete state spaces. Similarly, the current formulation of the
dynamic discounts supports MDPs based on environments with
discrete state and action spaces. Therefore, our next step entails ex-
tension of the proposed methodology to continuous environments.
Furthermore, the proposed algorithm supports only dual-priority
dual-objective optimisation. Future work constitutes expanding the
developed methodology to multi-objective optimisation with more
than 2 objectives and priority levels.
