arXiv:1005.5448v1  [cs.AI]  29 May 2010
FAILOVER IN CELLULAR AUTOMATA
SHAILESH KUMAR∗
SHRISHA RAO†
November 5, 2018
Abstract
A cellular automata (CA) conﬁguration is constructed that exhibits
emergent failover. The conﬁguration is based on standard Game of Life
rules. Gliders and glider-guns form the core messaging structure in the
conﬁguration. The blinker is represented as the basic computational unit,
and it is shown how it can be recreated in case of a failure.
Stateless
failover using primary-backup mechanism is demonstrated. The details
of the CA components used in the conﬁguration and its working are de-
scribed, and a simulation of the complete conﬁguration is also presented.
Keywords: failover; cellular automata; Game of Life; emergence
1
Introduction
Cellular automata (CA) have been widely used to model complex systems.
CA succinctly model the self-organizing and emergent properties of complex
systems. Together with their parallelized structure, Cellular automata make
one of most suitable models for complex systems.
Simple CA constructions
often yield collective complex behaviors [17].
In addition to modeling complex systems, CA themselves can be considered
as computational units. Such consideration comes under the category of non-
standard models of computation and is called Collision Based Computing [11].
Various logic functions such as NOT, AND and OR have been constructed in
the “Game of Life” CA. The Game of Life (GOL) [2] is a popular CA which
has yielded many complicated patterns based on its simple set of rules. Many
complex patterns arise out of some of the basic patterns that occur in the
GOL. We use some of the basic patterns such as gliders, blinkers (oscillators),
still-life (invariants) and glider-guns [2] that occur in the GOL to set up our
conﬁguration. Various circuits can be built up based on the logical functions
that forms one of the techniques to demonstrate universal computation [11].
Universal Turing machines have also been simulated in many diﬀerent CAs [4, 5]
and in particular the GOL also. Gliders and glider-guns form the key patterns

1

that are used in the universal Turing machine in the GOL. From the computing
perspective of our construction we represent a blinker as our basic computational
unit. It can be viewed as two-bit counter and we show how its computation can
continue in case of failure.
In this paper, we present a basic model for failover as a complex system
behavior. Failover is a widely used distributed-system concept used to make
systems highly available. Many diﬀerent techniques of achieving failover have
been discussed [14, 6]. Failover is one of the techniques to make a system fault
tolerant, which is a system that continues to operate even in case of certain
faults. Failover techniques involve the use of redundant components [7, 13]. We
achieve failover in CA by making use of redundant CA components. We use
the primary-backup approach [1, 3] to implement failover. In this approach,
a standby module takes over the active module when there is a failure in the
active module. Usually the active module is called the primary and the standby
is called the backup. This ensures that the system as a whole is available even
if there are failures in some of its components. The primary and the backup
exchange messages between them which are usually called the heartbeat (which
may colloquially be described as “I’m alive”) messages. Initially the primary
system is in the active state and performs the required tasks. It also sends the
heartbeat message to the backup system. The backup is usually in a passive
state and is not involved in the actual work. If the primary module fails then the
backup does not receive any heartbeat messages from the primary, and moves
from its standby state and takes over the work.
Failover is mainly of two types:
• Stateless failover: In this type of failover, the backup does not have any
state information of the primary and in case of failure, it restarts the
computation as if newly started.
• Stateful failover: In this type of failover, the backup maintains the state
information of the primary and in case of a failure, it resumes from this
state.
Our discussion in this paper restricts to stateless failover. Also, we assume
the failure of complete component or module rather than failure of individual
cells. Our model is based on fail-stop in which the system as a whole comes to a
halt in case of failures. We also assume the presence of a global synchronization
clock.
Section 2 gives a brief description of related work. In Section 3, we present
the model for a failover in CA. Section 3.1 describes the diﬀerent components
used in our construction for the failover conﬁguration. Section 4 gives the details
of the failover construction and the simulation setup and working. We ﬁnally
provide the conclusion in Section 5. The appendix section gives a description
about CA and the basic GOL components used.
2

2
Related Work
Reliable computation with cellular automata involving probabilistic fault
models have been studied in one-dimensional cellular automata [9]. Self-repairing
constructions are used to deal with these faults. Synchronous systems, which
require the existence of a fault-free global synchronization clock, are assumed.
Asynchronous extensions of reliable computation have been done on two-dimensional
cellular automata that perform computation with a probability of meeting re-
liability requirements [16]. Transient models of fault tolerance in CA at high
rates have been studied and fault rate bounds have also been derived for these
models [12].
Evolutionary algorithms have been applied to cellular automata to determine
the complex global behavior they exhibit or to solve a particular problem. Var-
ious computational tasks such as density, synchronization, and random number
generation have been demonstrated on non-uniform Cellular Automata employ-
ing genetic algorithms. In non-uniform CA, the interaction rules vary in diﬀerent
sections of the cellular space whereas in uniform CA there are uniform common
rules for the complete cellular space.
Fault-tolerant behavior under random
faults have been studied in the non-uniform CA using evolutionary algorithms
to perform computational tasks such as the density task and synchronization
task [15].
3
CA Model for Failover
In this section, we describe our model for failover in CA (see Figure 1). We
use some of the basic GOL patterns mentioned in the appendix and also some
additional patterns. These form the building blocks for our failover conﬁgura-
tion. To construct the failover conﬁguration we need:
• Primary Module
• Backup Module
• Communication Mechanism
• Trigger for the Failover
In our conﬁguration, the CA grid is divided into two logical sections. One of
them forms the primary module and the other the backup module. These two
sections are made up of similar components but they diﬀer in their arrangement.
The glider guns and the gliders together form the communication mechanism
between the primary and the backup. The gliders also act as the trigger for the
backup module in case of the failure of the primary.
Each section has a pair of glider guns and a blinker. The blinker in the
primary is called the active blinker and in the backup is called a passive blinker.
One of the glider guns is called the internal glider gun and the other the external
3

Figure 1: CA model for Failover
glider gun.
The external glider gun of the primary communicates with the
internal glider gun of the backup and vice versa. These essentially form the
communication and trigger mechanism for the system. The speciﬁc details of
each component are mentioned in the following subsection.
3.1
CA components in the model
Active Blinker: The blinker associated with the primary module is called
the active blinker. It is a conﬁguration where the cells oscillate between two
diﬀerent states.
(a) State A
(b) State B
Figure 2: Blinker
4

Passive Blinker: It is a speciﬁc still-life conﬁguration that transforms into
a blinker when collided with by a glider. One of the passive blinkers we use is
as shown in Figure 3(a).
(a) Passive Blinker
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3: Collision of Passive Blinker with Glider
Glider Reﬂector: This conﬁguration changes the angle of a glider by 90◦.
This conﬁguration is also called as the boat. It destroys itself after the glider
has been reﬂected and so is a one-time reﬂector. The working is as shown in
Figure 4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4: Glider reﬂected by 90◦
5

P-92 Glider Gun [8]: It is similar to the Gosper Gun (appendix) except
that it emits a glider every 92 generations.
Figure 5: Period-92 Glider Gun
Collision between Gliders: When two gliders collide with each other at
a speciﬁc angle, they annihilate. The working is as shown in Figure 6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6: Annihilating Gliders
4
Simulation and Analysis
A complete setup for the conﬁguration is as shown in Figure 8. The di-
mensions of the grid are 420×200. The conﬁguration is shown as a pair of two
ﬁgures, one representing the left part and the other right part, but the complete
conﬁguration is to be interpreted as a concatenation of right part to left part as
shown in Figure 7.
The grid is divided into two logical sections, namely, the primary and the
backup. The primary contains a set of two P-92 glider guns 207 cells apart
horizontally and 60 cells apart vertically. One of them acts as an external glider
gun that emits gliders towards the backup and other an internal glider gun that
emits gliders inside the logical section in the module. The horizontal distance
is measured from the rightmost active cell of the internal glider gun to the
leftmost active cell of the external glider gun. Similarly, the vertical distance is
6

Figure 7: Conﬁguration Figures Interpretation Helper
the distance from the topmost active cell of internal glider gun to the bottom-
most active cell of the external glider gun. The glider reﬂector is placed at a
location such that gliders of the internal glider gun may collide with it and get
reﬂected by 90◦. In addition to these, the primary also has a trigger glider. It
is also placed such that it collides with reﬂector. A passive blinker is placed
at a location such that it is at an angle suitable to be transformed into an
active blinker when collided with by the reﬂected glider. The backup contains
similar components as that of the primary but they are slightly diﬀerent in their
structures. The backup contains a set of two P-92 glider guns but these are 39
cells apart horizontally. In case of backup, the internal glider gun is translated
one cell up compared to the external glider gun. It also contains a glider reﬂector
and passive blinker placed at locations to get a similar eﬀect as that mentioned
for the primary. One important diﬀerence is that there is no input trigger glider
in the backup.
Table 1: Interaction between diﬀerent CA components
Component
Collides with Component
Result
Glider from Backup’s
Glider from Primary’s
Annihilation
Internal Glider Gun
External Glider Gun
Glider from Backup’s
–
Collision with
Internal Glider Gun
Passive Blinker and
transformation into
Active Blinker
Input Glider
Passive Blinker
Transformation into
Active Blinker
Glider
Boat
Change the direction
of glider by 90◦
7

(a)
(b)
Figure 8: Failover Conﬁguration
8

The simulation has controls such as KillPrimary, ResetBackup, Init that
aid in simulating the diﬀerent conditions of the system.
• Init: This action sets the cells of the primary and backup sections to be
in their initial conﬁgurations.
• KillPrimary: This action clears all the cells in the primary section of
the grid. This action is used to bring down the primary module, i.e., to
simulate a failure in the primary.
• ResetBackup: This action restores the cells of the backup to its standby
state. The standby state is exactly same as that of the initial backup’s
state.
The system initially is brought up in a start state conﬁguration. In this state,
both blinkers are passive. When the system is started, the input trigger glider in
the primary collides with glider-reﬂector and changes its direction by 90◦. Now
it collides with the passive blinker in the primary and transforms it into an active
one. Meanwhile the communication mechanism of the gliders is also triggered
to start. The glider from the primary’s external glider gun is the heartbeat
message sent to the backup and vice versa. The gliders from the external gun
move to the backup section and collide with the gliders of the internal glider
gun of the backup. As long as the gliders collide and annihilate, the backup may
be said to infer that the primary is alive. There is a similar heartbeat message
coming from the external glider gun which collides with primary’s glider gun,
so that the primary infers that backup is alive.
PrimaryDown: This condition is simulated by invoking the KillPrimary
action.
The cells of the primary section are cleared oﬀ.
This is similar to
bringing down the primary module. The conﬁguration is as shown in Figure 9.
In this case, there is no glider emitted from the external gun of the primary.
Therefore the passive blinker in the backup module is triggered by its internal
glider gun and becomes active.
Now, the backup becomes the primary and
continues functioning. The conﬁguration is as shown in Figure 10.
9

ResetBackup: The backup is reset by invoking the ResetBackup action.
The cells of the current backup section are set to the standby state. This action
is invoked after primary has gone down and when the backup module has become
the current primary.
When the failed primary module is brought back, it comes up in its start
state which has a passive blinker. Now, this acts as a backup and continues the
exchange of messages through the glider guns. The conﬁguration is as shown in
Figure 11.
In the failover conﬁguration discussed here, in case of a primary failure, the
backup waits until all the messages (gliders) that have been sent by the primary
before it went down are received. The maximum time for the backup to come
into action would be the (number of gliders present in the communication path
times 92 generations) + number of generations required for the internal glider
to collide with the passive blinker.
When the backup is reset, it is necessary that it is synchronized with the
primary’s external glider gun. If the glider guns are not synchronized, the gliders
may not collide at the appropriate angles and therefore may not annihilate. The
backup needs to be reset at any (N × 92)th (where N = 1, 2, 3, . . .) generation
for the communication mechanism to resume properly.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we have shown that the real world distributed-system concept
of failover can be modeled using cellular automata. We focused on stateless
failover and constructed a cellular automata conﬁguration that demonstrates
failover using the standard game-of-life rules. The period-92 glider guns were
used as the basic communication and trigger mechanism between the primary
and backup. We represent blinkers as our basic computational units and show
how the backup’s passive blinker transforms into an active on failure of the pri-
mary module. We also showed that the backup, when reset, comes back as a
hot standby and whole switching process of primary-backup can continue indef-
initely as long as there is a single (primary) failure and the backup can be reset.
A possible extension of this model would be to demonstrate a stateful failover
in which case the primary and the backup would maintain state information
and in case of a failure the backup takes over from where the primary module
left oﬀbefore going down. This construction can also ﬁnd its use as a reusable
component in larger complex conﬁgurations.
