Using machine learning to make constraint
solver implementation decisions
Lars Kotthoff, Ian Gent, and Ian Miguel

University of St Andrews
Abstract. Programs to solve so-called constraint problems are complex
pieces of software which require many design decisions to be made more
or less arbitrarily by the implementer. These decisions aﬀect the perfor-
mance of the ﬁnished solver signiﬁcantly [13]. Once a design decision has
been made, it cannot easily be reversed, although a diﬀerent decision
may be more appropriate for a particular problem.
We investigate using machine learning to make these decisions automat-
ically depending on the problem to solve with the alldiﬀerent constraint
as an example. Our system is capable of making non-trivial, multi-level
decisions that improve over always making a default choice.
1
Introduction
Constraints are a natural, powerful means of representing and reasoning about
combinatorial problems that impact all of our lives. Constraint solving is applied
successfully in a wide variety of disciplines such as aviation, industrial design,
banking, combinatorics and the chemical and steel industries, to name but a few
examples.
A constraint satisfaction problem (CSP [3]) is a set of decision variables,
each with an associated domain of potential values, and a set of constraints. An
assignment maps a variable to a value from its domain. Each constraint speci-
ﬁes allowed combinations of assignments of values to a subset of the variables.
A solution to a CSP is an assignment to all the variables that satisﬁes all the
constraints. Solutions are typically found for CSPs through systematic search
of possible assignments to variables. During search, constraint propagation algo-
rithms are used. These propagators make inferences, usually recorded as domain
reductions, based on the domains of the variables constrained and the assign-
ments that satisfy the constraints. If at any point these inferences result in any
variable having an empty domain then search backtracks and a new branch is
considered.
When implementing constraint solvers and modelling constraint problems,
many design decision have to be made – for example how much propagation
to do, what data structures to use to enable the solver to backtrack and when
and how often to check if a constraint is satisﬁed and which values could be
removed. These decisions have so far been made mostly manually. Making the
“right” decision often depends on the experience of the person making it.
arXiv:1005.3502v1  [cs.AI]  19 May 2010

We approach this problem using machine learning. Given a particular prob-
lem, we want to decide automatically which design decisions to make. This im-
proves over the current state of the art in two ways. First, we do not require
humans to more or less arbitrarily decide on something they may not have any
experience with. Second, we can change design decisions for particular problems.
We demonstrate that we can approach machine learning as a “black box” and
use generic techniques to increase the performance of the learned classiﬁers. The
result is a system which is able to dynamically decide which implementation
to use by looking at an unknown problem. The decision made is in general
better than simply relying on a default choice and enables us to solve constraint
problems faster.
2
Background
We are addressing an instance of the Algorithm Selection Problem [21], which,
given variable performance among a set of algorithms, is to choose the best
candidate for a particular problem instance. Machine learning is an established
method of addressing this problem [14, 16]. Particularly relevant to our work
are the machine learning approaches that have been taken to conﬁgure, to select
among, and to tune the parameters of solvers in the related ﬁelds of mathematical
programming, propositional satisﬁability (SAT), and constraints.
Multi-tac [18] conﬁgures a constraint solver for a particular instance distri-
bution. It makes informed choices about aspects of the solver such as the search
heuristic and the level of constraint propagation. The Adaptive Constraint En-
gine [4] learns search heuristics from training instances. SATenstein [12] conﬁg-
ures stochastic local search solvers for solving SAT problems.
An algorithm portfolio consists of a collection of algorithms, which can be
selected and applied in parallel to an instance, or in some (possibly truncated) se-
quence. This approach has recently been used with great success in SATzilla [23]
and CP Hydra [19]. In earlier work Borrett et al [2] employed a sequential portfo-
lio of constraint solvers. Guerri and Milano [9] use a decision-tree based technique
to select among a portfolio of constraint- and integer-programming based solu-
tion methods for the bid evaluation problem. Similarly, Gent et al [5] investigate
decision trees to choose whether to use lazy constraint learning [7] or not.
Rather than select among a number of algorithms, it is also possible to learn
parameter settings for a particular algorithm. Hutter et al [11] apply this method
to local search. Ansotegui et al [1] employ a genetic algorithm to tune the pa-
rameters of both local and systematic SAT solvers.
The alldiﬀerent constraint requires all variables which it is imposed on to be
pairwise alldiﬀerent. For example alldiﬀ(x1, x2, x3) enforces x1 ̸= x2, x1 ̸= x3
and x2 ̸= x3.
There are many diﬀerent ways to implement the alldiﬀerent constraint. The
na¨ıve version decomposes the constraint and enforces disequality on each pair
of variables. More sophisticated versions (e.g. [20]) consider the constraint as a
whole and are able to do more propagation. For example an alldiﬀerent constraint

which involves four variables with the same three possible values each cannot
be satisﬁed, but this knowledge cannot be derived when just considering the
decomposition into pairs of variables.
Even when the high-level decision of how much propagation to do has been
made, a low-level decision has to be made on how to implement the constraint.
For an in-depth survey of the decisions involved, see [8].
We make both decisions and therefore combine the selection of an algorithm
(the na¨ıve implementation or the more sophisticated one) and the tuning of
algorithm parameters (which one of the more sophisticated implementations to
use).
3
The benchmark instances and solvers
We evaluated the performance of the diﬀerent versions of the alldiﬀerent con-
straint on two diﬀerent sets of problem instances. The ﬁrst one was used for
learning classiﬁers, the second one only for the evaluation of the learned classi-
ﬁers.
The set we used for machine learning consisted of 277 benchmark instances
from 14 diﬀerent problem classes. It has been chosen to include as many in-
stances as possible whatever our expectation of which version of the alldiﬀerent
constraint will perform best.
The set to evaluate the learned classiﬁers consisted of 1036 instances from 2
diﬀerent problem classes that were not present in the set we used for machine
learning. We chose this set for evaluation because the low number of diﬀerent
problem classes makes it unsuitable for training.
Our sources are Lecoutre’s XCSP repository [15] and our own stock of CSP
instances. The reference constraint solver used is Minion [6] version 0.9 and
its default implementation of the alldiﬀerent constraint gacalldiff. The ex-
periments were run with binaries compiled with g++ version 4.4.3 and Boost
version 1.40.0 on machines with 8 core Intel E5430 2.66GHz, 8GB RAM running
CentOS with Linux kernel 2.6.18-164.6.1.el5 64Bit.
We imposed a time limit of 3600 seconds for each instance. The total number
of instances that no solver could solve solve because of a time out was 66 for the
ﬁrst set and 26 for the second set. We took the median CPU time of 3 runs for
each problem instance.
Adapting the implementation decision to the problem instead of always
choosing a standard implementation has the potential of achieving speedups
of up to 2 on the ﬁrst set of benchmark instances and speedups of up to 1.2 on
the second set. A speedup of 2 means that the fastest version of alldiﬀerent is
twice as fast as the default version.
We ran the problems with 9 diﬀerent versions of the alldiﬀerent constraint –
the na¨ıve version which is equivalent to the binary decomposition and 8 diﬀerent
implementations of the more sophisticated version which does more propagation
(see [8]). The amount of search done by the 8 versions which implement the more
sophisticated algorithm was the same.

The instances, the binaries to run them, and everything else required to
reproduce our results are available from the primary author on request.
4
Instance attributes and their measurement
We measured 37 attributes of the problem instances. They describe a wide range
of features such as constraint and variable statistics and a number of attributes
based on the primal graph. The primal graph g = ⟨V, E⟩has a vertex for every
CSP variable, and two vertices are connected by an edge iﬀthe two variables
are in the scope of a constraint together.
Edge density The number of edges in g divided by the number of pairs of
distinct vertices.
Clustering coeﬃcient For a vertex v, the set of neighbours of v is n(v). The
edge density among the vertices n(v) is calculated. The clustering coeﬃcient
is the mean average of this local edge density for all v. It is intended to be
a measure of the local cliqueness of the graph. This attribute has been used
with machine learning for a model selection problem in constraint program-
ming [9].
Normalised degree The normalised degree of a vertex is its degree divided
by |V |. The minimum, maximum, mean and median normalised degree are
used.
Normalised standard deviation of degree The standard deviation of ver-
tex degree is normalised by dividing by |V |.
Width of ordering Each of our benchmark instances has an associated vari-
able ordering. The width of a vertex v in an ordered graph is its number
of parents (i.e. neighbours that precede v in the ordering). The width of
the ordering is the maximum width over all vertices [3]. The width of the
ordering normalised by the number of vertices was used.
Width of graph The width of a graph is the minimum width over all possible
orderings. This can be calculated in polynomial time [3], and is related to
some tractability results. The width of the graph normalised by the number
of vertices was used.
Variable domains The quartiles and the mean value over the domains of all
variables.
Constraint arity The quartiles and the mean of the arity of all constraints
(the number of variables constrained by it), normalised by the number of
constraints.
Multiple shared variables The proportion of pairs of constraints that share
more than one variable.
Normalised mean constraints per variable For each variable, we count the
number of constraints on the variable. The mean average is taken, and this
is normalised by dividing by the number of constraints.
Ratio of auxiliary variables to other variables Auxiliary variables are in-
troduced by decomposition of expressions in order to be able to express them
in the language of the solver. We use the ratio of auxiliary variables to other
variables.

Tightness The tightness of a constraint is the proportion of disallowed tuples.
The tightness is estimated by sampling 1000 random tuples (that are valid
w.r.t. variable domains) and testing if the tuple satisﬁes the constraint. The
tightness quartiles and the mean tightness over all constraints is used.
Proportion of symmetric variables In many CSPs, the variables form equiv-
alence classes where the number and type of constraints a variable is in are
the same. For example in the CSP x1 × x2 = x3, x4 × x5 = x6, x1, x2, x4, x5
are all indistinguishable, as are x3 and x6. The ﬁrst stage of the algorithm
used by Nauty [17] detects this property. Given a partition of n variables
generated by this algorithm, we transform this into a number between 0 and
1 by taking the proportion of all pairs of variables which are in the same
part of the partition.
Alldiﬀerent statistics The size of the union of all variables in an alldiﬀerent
constraint divided by the number of variables. This is a measure of how
many assignments to all variables that satisfy the constraint there are. We
used the quartiles and the mean over all alldiﬀerent constraints.
In creating this set of attributes, we intended to cover a wide range of possi-
ble factors that aﬀect the performance of diﬀerent alldiﬀerent implementations.
Wherever possible, we normalised attributes that would be speciﬁc to problem
instances of a particular size. This is based on the intuition that similar instances
of diﬀerent sizes are likely to behave similarly. Computing the features took 27
seconds per instance on average.
5
Learning a problem classiﬁer
Before we used machine learning on the set of training instances, we annotated
each problem instance with the alldiﬀerent implementation that had the best
performance on it according to the following criteria. If the na¨ıve alldiﬀerent
implementation took less CPU time than all the other ones, it was chosen, else
the implementation which had the best performance in terms of search nodes
per second was chosen. As all implementations except the na¨ıve one explore the
same search space, nodes per second is a more reliable measure of performance
than only CPU time. If no solver was able to solve the instance, we assigned a
“don’t know” annotation.
We used the WEKA [10] machine learning software through the R inter-
face to learn classiﬁers. We used almost all of the WEKA classiﬁers that were
applicable to our problem – algorithms which generate decision rules, decision
trees, Bayesian classiﬁers, nearest neighbour and neural networks. Our selection
is broad and includes all major machine learning methodologies. The speciﬁc
classiﬁers we used are BayesNet, BFTree, ConjunctiveRule, DecisionTable,
FT, HyperPipes, IBk, J48, J48graft, JRip, LADTree, MultilayerPerceptron,
NBTree, OneR, PART, RandomForest, RandomTree, REPTree and ZeroR, all of
which are described in [22].
The problem of classifying problem instances here is diﬀerent to normal ma-
chine learning classiﬁcation problems. We do not particularly care about classi-

fying as many instances as possible correctly; we rather care that the instances
that are important to us are classiﬁed correctly. The higher the potential gain
is for an instance, the more important it is to us. If, for example, the diﬀerence
between making the right and the wrong decision means a diﬀerence in CPU
time of 1%, we do not care whether the instance is classiﬁed correctly or not.
If the diﬀerence is several orders of magnitude on the other hand, we really do
want this instance to be classiﬁed correctly.
Based on this observation, we decided to measure the performance of the
learned classiﬁers not in terms of the usual machine learning performance mea-
sures, but in terms of misclassiﬁcation penalty. The misclassiﬁcation penalty is
the additional CPU time we require to solve a problem instance when choosing
to solve it with a solver that is not the fastest one. If the selected solver was not
able to solve the problem, we assumed the timeout of 3600 seconds minus the
CPU time the fastest solver took to be the misclassiﬁcation penalty. This only
gives the lower bound, but the correct value cannot be estimated easily.
We furthermore decided to assign the maximum misclassiﬁcation penalty
(or the maximum possible gain) as a cost to each instance as follows. To bias
the WEKA classiﬁers towards the instances we care about most, we used the
common technique of duplicating instances [22]. Each instance appeared in the
new data set 1 + ⌈log2(cost)⌉times. The particular formula to determine how
often each instance occurs was chosen empirically such that instances with a low
cost are not disregarded completely, but instances with a high cost are much
more important. Each instance will be in the data set used for training the
machine learning classiﬁers at least once and at most 13 times for a theoretic
maximum cost of 3600.
To achieve multi-level classiﬁcation, each individual classiﬁer below consists
of a combination of classiﬁers. First we make the decision whether to use the
alldiﬀerent version equivalent to the binary decomposition or the other one, then,
based on the previous decision, we decide which speciﬁc version of the alldiﬀerent
constraint to use.
Table 1 shows the total misclassiﬁcation penalty for all classiﬁers with and
without instance duplication on the ﬁrst data set. It clearly shows that our
cost model improves the performance signiﬁcantly in terms of misclassiﬁcation
penalty for almost all classiﬁers.
For each classiﬁer, we did stratiﬁed n-fold cross-validation – the original
data set is split into n parts of roughly equal size. Each of the n partitions is
in turn used for testing. The remaining n −1 partitions are used for training.
In the end, every instance will have been used for both training and testing
in diﬀerent runs [22]. Stratiﬁed cross-validation ensures that the ratio of the
diﬀerent classiﬁcation categories in each subset is roughly equal to the ratio in
the whole set. If, for example, about 50% of all problem instances in the whole
data are solved fastest with the na¨ıve implementation, it will be about 50% of
the instances in each subset as well.
There are several problems we faced when generating the classiﬁers. First,
we do not know which one of the machine learning algorithms was suited best

misclass. penalty [s]
classiﬁer
all equal
cost model
BayesNet
1494
3.9
BFTree
8.4
1.1
ConjunctiveRule
2300
1433
DecisionTable
249
1.6
FT
248
1.2
HyperPipes
867
867
IBk
109
109
J48
8.2
1.2
J48graft
8.2
1.2
JRip
283
1.3
misclass. penalty [s]
classiﬁer
all equal
cost model
LADTree
8.4
6.5
MultilayerPerceptron
249
8.5
NBTree
9
1.3
OneR
69.5
409
PART
5.9
1
RandomForest
41.9
0.9
RandomTree
1
1
REPTree
1099
10.8
ZeroR
2304
2304
Table 1. Misclassiﬁcation penalty for all classiﬁers with and without instances dupli-
cated according to their cost in the training data set. All numbers are rounded.
for our classiﬁcation problem; indeed we do not know whether the features of
the problem instances we measured are able to capture the factors which aﬀect
the performance of each individual implementation at all. Second, the learned
classiﬁers could be overﬁtted. We could evaluate the performance of each clas-
siﬁer on the second set of problem instances and compare it to the performance
during machine learning to assess whether it might be overﬁtted. Even if we
were able to reliably detect overﬁtting this way, it is not obvious how we would
change or retrain the classiﬁer to remove the overﬁtting. Instead, we decided
to use all classiﬁers – for each machine learning algorithm the n diﬀerent clas-
siﬁers created during the n-fold cross-validation and the classiﬁers created by
each diﬀerent machine learning algorithm.
We decided to use three-fold cross-validation as an acceptable compromise
between trying to avoid overﬁtting and time required to compute and run the
classiﬁers. We combine the decisions of the individual classiﬁers by majority vote
(bagging and boosting).
Table 2 shows the overall performance of our meta-classiﬁer compared to the
best and worst individual classiﬁer for each set and several other hypothetical
classiﬁers. Our meta-classiﬁer outperforms a classiﬁer which always makes the
default decision even on the second set of problem instances. This set is an
extreme case because just making the default choice is almost always the best
choice – the misclassiﬁcation penalty for the default choice classiﬁer is extremely
low given the large number of instances. Even though there is only very little
room for improvement, we achieve some of it.
It also shows that the classiﬁers we have learned on a data set that contains
problem instances from many problem classes can be applied to a diﬀerent data
set with instances from diﬀerent problem classes and still achieve a performance
improvement. Based on this observation, we suggest that our meta-classiﬁer is
generally applicable.
Another observation we made is that the performance of the meta-classiﬁer
does not suﬀer even if a large number of the classiﬁers that it combines perform
badly individually. This suggests that the classiﬁers complement each other –

misclassiﬁcation penalty [s]
instance set 1
instance set 2
classiﬁer
all features
cheap features
all features
cheap features
oracle
0
0
0
0
anti-oracle
19993
19993
47144
47144
default decision
2304
2304
223
223
random decision
5550
5550
564
564
best classiﬁer on set 1
0.998
0.994
131
220.3
worst classiﬁer on set 1
2304
2304
223
223
best classiﬁer on set 2
0.998
61.66
131
186
worst classiﬁer on set 2
1.34
1.44
621
610
meta-classiﬁer
1.16
0.996
220
222.95
Table 2. Summary of classiﬁer performance on both sets of benchmarks in terms of
total misclassiﬁcation penalty in seconds. We ﬁrst evaluated the performance using the
full set of features described in Section 4, then using only the cheap features. The oracle
classiﬁer always makes the right decision, the anti-oracle always the wrong decision.
The “default decision” classiﬁer always makes the same decision and the “random
decision” one chooses one of the possibilities at random. Three-fold cross-validation
was used. All numbers are rounded.
the set of instances that each one misclassiﬁes are diﬀerent for each classiﬁer.
Note also that the classiﬁer which performs best on one set of instances is not
necessarily the best performer on the other set of instances. The same observation
can be made for the classiﬁer with the worst performance on one of the instance
sets. This means that we cannot simply choose “the best” classiﬁer or discard
“the worst” for a given set of training instances.
The time required to compute the features was 27 seconds per instance on
average, and it took 0.2 seconds per instance on average to run the classiﬁers
and combine their decisions. If we take this time into account, our system is
slower than just using the default implementation. This is mostly because of the
cost of computing all the features required to make the decision. We do however
learn good classiﬁers in the sense that the decision they make is better than just
using the standard implementation.
For the alldiﬀerent constraint, there is little room for improvement to start
with. We therefore need to focus on making a decision as quickly as possible. Most
of the time required to make the decision is spent computing the features that
the classiﬁers need. We removed the most expensive features – all the properties
of the primal graph described in Section 4 apart from edge density.
The results for the reduced set of features are shown in Table 2 as well.
The performance is not signiﬁcantly worse and even better on the ﬁrst set of
instances, but the time required to compute all the features is only about 3
second per instance. On the ﬁrst set of benchmarks, we solve each instance on
average 8 seconds faster using our system (misclassiﬁcation penalty of default
decision minus that of our system divided by the number of instances in the set).
We are therefore left with a performance improvement of an average of 5 seconds
per instance. On the second set, we cannot reasonably expect a performance

improvement – the perfect oracle classiﬁer only achieves about 0.2 seconds per
instance on average.
6
Conclusions and future work
We have applied machine learning to a complex decision problem in constraint
programming. To facilitate this, we evaluated the performance of constraint
solvers representing all the decisions on two large sets of problem instances. We
have demonstrated that training a set of classiﬁers without intrinsic knowledge
about each individual one and combining their decisions can improve perfor-
mance signiﬁcantly over always making a default decision. In particular, our
combined classiﬁer is almost as good as the best classiﬁer in the set and much
better than the worst classiﬁer.
We have conclusively shown that we can improve signiﬁcantly on default
decisions suggested in the state-of-the-art literature using a relatively simple
and generic procedure. We provide strong evidence for the general applicability
of a set of classiﬁers learned on a training set to sets of new, unknown instances.
We identiﬁed several problems with using machine learning to make constraint
programming decisions and successfully solved them.
Our system achieves performance improvements even taking the time it takes
to compute the features and run the learned classiﬁers into account. For atypical
sets of benchmarks, where always making the default decision is the right choice
in almost all of the cases, we are not able to compensate for this overhead, but
we are conﬁdent that we can achieve a real speedup on average.
We have identiﬁed two major directions for future research. First, it would
be beneﬁcial to analyse the individual machine learning algorithms and evaluate
their suitability for our decision problem. This would enable us to make a more
informed decision about which ones to use for our purposes and may suggest
opportunities for improving them.
Second, selecting which features of problem instances to compute is a non-
trivial choice because of the diﬀerent cost and beneﬁt associated with each one.
The classiﬁers we learned on the reduced set of features did not seem to suﬀer
signiﬁcantly in terms of performance. Being able to assess the beneﬁt of each
individual feature towards a classiﬁer and contrast that to the cost of computing
it would enable us to make decisions of equal quality cheaper.
