Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from
Fixed Number of Experiments
AmirEmad Ghassami

Department of ECE, Coordinated Science Laboratory,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Saber Salehkaleybar

Coordinated Science Laboratory,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Negar Kiyavash

Department of ECE and ISE, Coordinated Science Laboratory,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Abstract
We study the problem of causal structure learn-
ing over a set of random variables when the ex-
perimenter is allowed to perform at most M ex-
periments in a non-adaptive manner. We con-
sider the optimal learning strategy in terms of
minimizing the portions of the structure that re-
mains unknown given the limited number of ex-
periments in both Bayesian and minimax setting.
We characterize the theoretical optimal solution
and propose an algorithm, which designs the ex-
periments efﬁciently in terms of time complex-
ity. We show that for bounded degree graphs, in
the minimax case and in the Bayesian case with
uniform priors, our proposed algorithm is a ρ-
approximation algorithm, where ρ is independent
of the order of the underlying graph. Simulations
on both synthetic and real data show that the per-
formance of our algorithm is very close to the
optimal solution.
1. Introduction
Causal structures are commonly represented by directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs), where the vertices of the graph are
random variables and a directed edge from X to Y indi-
cates that variable X is a direct cause of variable Y (Pearl,
2009; Spirtes et al., 2000; Greenland et al., 1999). Given
a set of variables, there are two main approaches for un-
covering the causal relationships among them. First to per-
form conditional independence tests on the set of variables
based on observational measurements (Mooij et al., 2016).
The second involves intervening on some of variables to re-
cover their causal effect on the rest of the variables. Unlike
observational only tests, sufﬁcient experiments involving
interventions can uniquely identify the underlying causal
graph completely.
In the study of intervention-based inference approach, of-
ten a setup in which the experimenter performs M experi-
ments on the set of variables is considered. In each experi-
ment a set of at most k variables are intervened on. In this
setting, two natural questions arise:
1. What is the smallest required number of experiments
in order to learn all the causal relations?
2. For a ﬁxed number of experiments, what portion of
the causal relationships can be learned?
The ﬁrst problem has been addressed in the literature under
different assumptions (see the Related Work subsection).
To the best of our knowledge, the second question has not
been studied in the literature, and it is this question that we
address herein. Speciﬁcally, we consider a setup with M
experiments, each containing exactly one intervention. The
reason we consider single-intervention experiments is that
in many applications, such as some experiments in biology,
simultaneous intervention in multiple variables may not be
feasible. For the underlying structure on the variables, we
assume that the number of cycles of length three in the
structure is negligible compared to the order of the graph.
Structures satisfying this assumption arise in many appli-
cations. For instance, causal structure in gene regulatory
network (GRN) for some bacteria such as the Escherichia
arXiv:1702.08567v1  [cs.LG]  27 Feb 2017

Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from Fixed Number of Experiments
Figure 1. GRN for E-coli bacteria.
coli (E-coli) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae)
has a tree like structure (see Figure 1), and hence, satisﬁes
our assumption (Cerulo et al., 2010).
Contributions. Unlike most of the previous work, we uti-
lize a hybrid inference scheme instead of an adaptive ap-
proach (Subsection 2.1). In this approach, ﬁrst an obser-
vational test, such as the IC algorithm (Pearl, 2009), is per-
formed on the set of variables. This test reveals the skeleton
as well as the orientation of some of the edges of the causal
graph. Next, based on the result of the initial test, the com-
plete set of M experiments is designed in a non-adaptive
manner. Having the complete set of experiments, enables
the experimenter to perform the interventional experiments
in parallel. The formal description of the problem of inter-
est is provided in Subsection 2.2. We study the problem of
structure learning for both Bayesian and minimax settings.
In Section 3, we present the optimal solution for both set-
tings. This solution is optimal in the sense of recovering
the structure that minimizes the loss for a given number
of interventional experiments. Finding this optimal solu-
tion is in general computationally intense. In Section 4,
we propose ProBal algorithm, which ﬁnds the set of ex-
periments in a computationally efﬁcient manner. We show
that for bounded degree graphs, in the minimax setting and
in the Bayesian settings with uniform prior, our proposed
algorithm is a ρ-approximation algorithm, where ρ is inde-
pendent of the order of the underlying graph. In Section 5,
using synthetic and real data, we show that the performance
of ProBal is very close to the optimal solution.
Related Work.
The best known algorithms for general
purely observational recovery approaches are IC (Pearl,
1991) and PC (Spirtes & Glymour, 1991). Such purely
observational approaches reconstruct the causal graph up
to Markov equivalence classes, and hence, the direction of
some of the edges may remain unresolved. Of course under
some conditions, full causal structure learning using merely
observational data is feasible (Shimizu et al., 2006; Hoyer
et al., 2009; Peters & B¨uhlmann, 2012).
There is a large body of research on learning causal
structures using interventional data (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes
et al., 2000; Woodward, 2005; Eberhardt, 2007; Hauser &
B¨uhlmann, 2014; Cooper & Yoo, 1999; He & Geng, 2008).
Speciﬁcally, Pearl (Pearl, 2009), considers the SEM model
and deﬁnes so-called do-intervention to infer the causal
relations among a set of variables.
A similar approach
for representing interventions is adopted in (Spirtes et al.,
2000), but it allows interventions to have non-degenerate
distributions. Woodward (Woodward, 2005) proposed an-
other type of intervention which unlike Pearl’s, does not de-
pend on a speciﬁed model of the causal relations among the
random variables. Peters et al. introduced invariant causal
prediction (Peters et al., 2016), which is a causal discovery
method that uses different experimental settings to predict
the set of ancestors of a variable. In that work, data comes
from different unknown experimental settings (which could
results from interventions). See (Meinshausen et al., 2016)
for some validations of this method.
Regarding the ﬁrst question discussed earlier, (Eberhardt
et al., 2005) consider the complete graph as the underly-
ing causal structure to obtain the worst case bounds on the
number of required experiments. In that work, both cases
of experiments containing bounded and unbounded number
of interventions are studied. In (Eberhardt, 2007; Hyttinen
et al., 2013), it has been shown that there is a connection be-
tween the problem of ﬁnding a separating system in a graph
and designing a proper set of experiments for causal infer-
ence, and hence, results from combinatorics help in ﬁnding
the fundamental bounds. In (Hauser & B¨uhlmann, 2014),
two algorithms that minimize the number of experiments in
the worst case are developed. The proposed algorithms are
adaptive and in the one with polynomial complexity, the
size of experiments can be as large as half the order of the
graph, which may not be practical in many real-life appli-
cations. In (Shanmugam et al., 2015), the authors present
information-theoretic lower bounds on the number of re-
quired experiments for both deterministic and randomized
adaptive approaches. They also proposed an adaptive algo-
rithm that allows to learn chordal graphs completely.
2. Model Description
2.1. Preliminaries
In this subsection we introduce some deﬁnitions and con-
cepts that we require later.
Deﬁnition 1. Consider a directed graph D = (V, E) with
vertex set V and set of directed edges E. D is a DAG if it
is a ﬁnite graph with no directed cycles.

Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from Fixed Number of Experiments
Deﬁnition 2. A DAG D is called causal if its vertices rep-
resent random variables V = {X1, ..., Xn} and a directed
edges (Xi, Xj) indicates that variable Xi is a direct cause
of variable Xj.
We consider a structural equation model (Pearl, 2009),
which is a collection of n equations Xi = fi(PAXi, Ni),
i = 1, ..., n, where PAXi denotes the parents of Xi in D,
and Ni’s are jointly independent noise variables. We as-
sume here that in our network, all variables are observable.
Also, throughout the rest of the paper, we assume the faith-
fulness assumption on the probability distribution.
Deﬁnition 3. Two causal DAGs D1 and D2 over V are
Markov equivalent if every distribution that is compati-
ble with one of the graphs is also compatible with the
other. The set of all graphs over V is partitioned into a set
of mutually exclusive and exhaustive Markov equivalence
classes, which are the set of equivalence classes induced
by the Markov equivalence relation (Koller & Friedman,
2009).
Deﬁnition 4. A v-structure is a structure containing two
converging directed edges whose tails are not connected by
an edge. v-structures are also known as immorality and a
graph with no immorality is called a moral graph.
Using purely observational data (referred to which as the
null experiment by (Eberhardt et al., 2005)), one can uti-
lize a “complete” conditional independence based algo-
rithm to learn the causal structure as much as possible.
By complete we mean that the algorithm is capable of dis-
tinguishing all the orientations up to the Markov equiva-
lence class. Such an algorithm includes performing a con-
ditional independence test followed by applying the Meek
rules (Pearl, 2009). On the other hand, interventions can
enable us to differentiate among the different causal struc-
tures inside a Markov equivalence class. Deﬁne an inter-
vention I on variable X ∈V (D) as removing the inﬂu-
ence of all the variables on X and randomizing the value
of this variable. We denote this intervention by I = X. An
inference algorithm consists of a set of M experiments1
Etotal = {E1, E2, ..., EM}, where each experiment con-
tains k interventions, i.e., Ei = {I(i)
1 , I(i)
2 , ..., I(i)
k } for
1 ≤i ≤M. As shown in (Eberhardt, 2007), observing the
result of the null experiment, one can ﬁnd the orientation
of the edge between any two variables Xi and Xj, if there
exists Ek ∈Etotal such that (Xi ∈Ek , Xj /∈Ek) or (Xj ∈
Ek , Xi /∈Ek).
An inference algorithm may be (1) adaptive, in which case
the experiments are performed sequentially and the infor-
mation obtained from the previous experiments is used to
1Note that in most of the other work in this area, each inter-
vention is what we refer to as experiment here and hence, each
intervention can contain as many as n variable randomization.
𝐺2
𝐺1
𝐺3
𝐺4
𝐺5
𝐺6
Figure 2. Example of a DAG, in which the procedure results in six
disjoint chordal moral graphs.
design the next one; (2) passive, in which all the experi-
ments are designed beforehand; (3) hybrid, in which the ex-
perimenter ﬁrst performs a pure observational study to ob-
tain the skeleton and some of the orientations in the causal
DAG, and then designs the rest of the experiments in a pas-
sive manner. The third approach is referred to as the pas-
sive setup by (Shanmugam et al., 2015), while (Eberhardt
et al., 2005) use the term passive for a setting in which the
interventions are selected without performing the null ex-
periment.
2.2. Problem Deﬁnition
Since in many practical applications, it is resource-
intensive to perform the experiments sequentially, we will
investigate the hybrid approach for the design of experi-
ments. A nice feature of the hybrid approach is that it al-
lows us to parallelize the performance of the experiments.
For example, in the study of GRNs introduced in Section
1, the GRN of all E-coli cells are the same and experiments
can be performed on different cells simultaneously.
Deﬁnition 5. A chord of a cycle is an edge not in the cycle
whose endpoints are in the cycle. A hole in a graph is a cy-
cle of length at least 4 having no chord. A graph is chordal
if it has no hole.
Let Z be the set of edges whose orientations are identiﬁed
after the obseravtional test. Consider the moral graph D\Z.
As noted in (Shanmugam et al., 2015), D\Z consists of a
set of disjoint chordal moral graphs {G1, G2, ..., GK} (see
Figure 2 as an example). To learn the structure, it sufﬁces
to learn {G1, G2, ..., GK}. We focus on one such graph,
say G. Hence, in the remainder of the paper, G is assumed
to be a moral chordal DAG.
Deﬁnition 6. Let S be the set of all edges in a chordal
graph which do not belong to any triangle. We refer to a
connected component of G\S of order larger than one as
“cyst”.
Assumption 1. We assume that the number of triangles,
compared to the order of the chordal graph is negligible.
Formally, we assume that the proportion of the number of
triangles to the order of G goes to zero as n = |V (G)|

Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from Fixed Number of Experiments
𝐶1
𝐶2
𝐶3
𝐶4
Figure 3. Example of a cyst in which intervening on all vertices is
necessary. In this ﬁgure, the edges in component C2 will not be
identiﬁed unless we intervene on the top vertex.
tends to inﬁnity.
Assumption 1 implies that both the number of cysts and
their orders are negligible.
As mentioned in Section 1,
structures with this property occur frequently in genomic
and other applications.
As mentioned earlier, in some scenarios the experimenter
may be restricted to perform a limited number of experi-
ments. Hence, we focus on the following problem: If the
experimenter is allowed to perform M experiments, each
of size k = 1. What portion of the graph could be recon-
structed on average and in the worst case?
We shall distribute our total budget of M experiments over
the components {G1, G2, ..., GK} proportionally to their
size. Thus, we assume that we are capable of performing
m experiments E = {E1, E2, ..., Em} ⊆Etotal on compo-
nent G.
Consider the graph obtained by contracting all the vertices
of a cyst into a single vertex. Clearly, this merging graph
would be a tree, and hence, we work on a moral tree struc-
ture after the contractions. If we are required to intervene
on a vertex in the resulting tree that corresponds to a cyst,
we will intervene on all the vertices of that cyst. This is
in some cases necessary as shown in Figure 3. Note that
after intervening in all the nodes of a cyst, we recover all
the orientations inside the cyst. We emphasize that some
edge orientations remain unidentiﬁed in the cysts that we
have not intervened on; however, due to Assumption 1, the
number of such edges will not scale with n. Also, due to
Assumption 1, we can count intervening on a contracted
cyst as one intervention without impacting the scaling re-
sults.
Deﬁnition 7. Root variable is a variable for which the
number of edges entering that variable is zero.
Lemma 1. A moral chordal graph G has only one root
unless they all belong to the same cyst.
Proof. It sufﬁces to prove that we cannot have two roots in
two separate cysts. We prove this by contradiction. Sup-
pose roots r1 and r2 exist in two separate cysts. Since the
component is assumed to be connected, there exists a ver-
tex v where a directed path from r1 to v meets a directed
path from r2 in v. Let the parents of v on these paths be p1
and p2, respectively. If p1 and p2 are not adjacent, we will
have a v-structure on the set {p1, v, p2} which is a contra-
diction. Otherwise, p1 and p2 are adjacent and {p1, v, p2}
are in a cyst. Without loss of generality, assume p1 is a
parent of p2. Let p3 be the parent of p2 on the path from
r2. In this case, we will have the same argument for the
set {p1, p2, p3}, and we either have a v-structure, or p3 is
also in the cyst containing v. Continuing this argument, we
either have a v-structure or r1 and r2 are in the same cyst
as v, which is a contradiction.
Lemma 2. In a moral chordal graph, randomizing the root
sufﬁces to fully learn the orientations of all the edges not
belonging to any cysts.
Proof. Let r be the root vertex. Consider an edge e =
(u, v). Since e does not belong to any directed cycle, and
there is a directed path from r to u and also a directed path
from r to v, e should be directed from u to v, otherwise it
contradicts Lemma 1.
Therefore, in the sequel, we focus on a moral tree structure
and from Lemma 2, we know that randomizing the root
variable will give us all the orientations.
We model this problem as follows. Let P = {P θ : θ ∈Θ}
be the set of probability distributions over the location of
the root of the tree. We assume that the probability distri-
butions of interest are all positive.
The following remark is a consequence of Lemma 2.
Remark 1. For each location of the root, only one moral
tree is consistent with the skeleton of the tree. Therefore, P
is the set of probably distributions over the realizations of
the moral tree.
Deﬁne U(E) as the set of edges whose orientation is not
found after performing the experiment set E. For the given
skeleton obtained from the observational test, let Tv be the
moral tree of order n with vertex v as its root. We deﬁne the
loss of an experiment set E on Tv as l(E, Tv) = |U(E)|, and
the average loss of the experiment set under distribution P θ
as
Lθ(E) =
X
v
P θ(v)l(E, Tv).
The problem of ﬁnding the best experiment set for the worst
case, could be stated as the following minimax problem:
min
E
max
θ
Lθ(E),
s.t. |E| = m,
|Ei| = 1 ∀i : 1 ≤i ≤m
(1)

Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from Fixed Number of Experiments
In some real life applications, the experimenter may have
prior knowledge about the possible location of the root in
the tree. That is, the probability distribution P θ ∈P over
the location of the root in the tree is known. In such a
setting, we can investigate the following Bayesian version
of the problem:
min
E
Lθ(E),
s.t. |E| = m,
|Ei| = 1 ∀i : 1 ≤i ≤m
(2)
3. Optimal Solution
Consider a moral tree T of order n. In this structure, every
non-root vertex has incoming degree d−(v) = 1, the root
vertex, r has incoming degree d−(r) = 0, and recall that
intervening on the root identiﬁes the whole tree.
Assume the experiment set E = {{I(1)
1 }, ..., {I(m)
1
}} was
performed on the moral tree T. Let I = {I(1)
1 , ..., I(m)
1
} be
the set of variables on which we intervened. In this case,
the subgraph T\I will be a forest containing J components
{C1, ..., CJ}.
Lemma 3. Performing experiment set E, on Tv rooted at
v,
l(E, Tv) =

0
v ∈I,
|Cj| −|Bj|
v ∈Cj,
where Cj ∈{C1, ..., CJ}, and Bj = Cj ∩N(I), where,
N(I) denotes the set of neighbors of variables in I.
Proof. After performing a single intervention I = X, the
orientation of all the edges entering the descendants of X
and the edges entering X itself will be recovered. Thus
l(X, Tv) = |NDv(X)| −1{X̸=v}. As a result, intervening
on variables in I, if v ∈I, since |NDv(v)| = 0 the loss
would be equal to zero; otherwise, if v ∈Cj we will have:
l(E, Tv) = | T
X∈I NDv(X)| −| T
X∈I NDv(X) ∩N(I)|
= |Cj| −|Bj|.
Theorem 1. The average loss could be bounded as follows
J
X
j=1
P θ(Cj)|Cj|−m ≤Lθ(E) ≤
J
X
j=1
P θ(Cj)|Cj|−1, (3)
Proof. Using Lemma 3, we have
Lθ(E) =
X
v
P θ(v)l(E, Tv)
=
X
v∈I
P θ(v) × 0 +
J
X
j=1
X
v∈Cj
P θ(v)(|Cj| −|Bj|)
=
J
X
j=1
(|Cj| −|Bj|)
X
v∈Cj
P θ(v)
=
J
X
j=1
P θ(Cj)|Cj| −
J
X
j=1
P θ(Cj)|Bj|.
Note that for all j, 1 ≤|Bj| ≤m, and the result is imme-
diate.
Since we have assumed that m ≪n, in the sequel we will
focus on minimizing
ˆLθ(E) =
J
X
j=1
P θ(Cj)|Cj|.
Corollary 1. In the special case of uniform P θ, the func-
tion ˆL could be obtained as ˆLθ(E) = 1
n
PJ
j=1 |Cj|2.
Bayesian Setting. In the Bayesian setting, we seek the set
of experiments that minimizes ˆLθ. This can be done by
checking all
  n
m

possible vertex sets of size m. This brute-
force solution is computationally intensive. In Section 4 we
will introduce an efﬁcient approximation algorithm instead.
Minimax Setting.
As mentioned in Section 2, in the
minimax setting we are interested in ﬁnding optimal E in
minE maxθ ˆLθ(E). Note that the loss is maximized if all
the probability mass of root is put on the largest compo-
nent. That is
min
E
max
θ
ˆLθ(E) = min
E
max
θ
J
X
j=1
P θ(Cj)|Cj|
≤min
E
max
j
|Cj|.
(4)
Therefore, it sufﬁces to choose a variable set I
=
{X1, ..., Xm}, which minimizes maxj |Cj|.
We can again use a brute-force solution which suffers
from the same computational complexity issues as in the
Bayesian case. We will propose an approximation algo-
rithm for the minimax approach in Section 4.
4. Efﬁcient Learning Algorithm
In this section, we propose an algorithm for ﬁnding exper-
iment sets efﬁciently for both Bayesian and minimax set-
tings. First, we deﬁne the concept of a separator vertex,
which plays a key role in the proposed algorithm. We shall
see that in our method, we require the prior on the loca-
tion of the root variable. Using separators, we propose the
probability balancer (ProBal) algorithm, which allows for
experiment design. The main idea is to iteratively decom-
pose the tree into two subtrees, referred to as segments,
sharing a separator vertex. In Subsection 4.2, we consider
the minimax extension in which no prior is not available to
the experimenter.
Deﬁnition 8. Let lobes of a vertex v in a tree be the remain-
ing components in the graph after removing v. A vertex v
in a tree T is a separator if the probability of the root being
in each of its lobes is less than 1/2.
Proposition 1. There exists a separator vertex in any tree.

Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from Fixed Number of Experiments
Proof. Consider any arbitrary vertex v1 in the tree. If all its
lobes have probability less than 1/2, then it is a separator;
otherwise, only one of its lobes, say lobe b, has probabil-
ity larger than or equal to 1/2. Consider v2, which is the
neighbor of v1 in b. Since the probabilities should add up
to 1, the lobe connected to v2 through v1 should have prob-
ability less than 1/2 and hence we continue with checking
the probability of the other lobes of v2. This process will
result in ﬁnding a separator because there are no cycles in
a tree and we have assumed that the tree is ﬁnite.
Proposition 2. The lobes of a separator vertex can be par-
titioned into two wings such that the probability of the root
being in each of them is less than 2/3.
Proof. Suppose v
is a separator vertex with lobes
b1, · · · , bl sorted in ascending order of their probabili-
ties P θ(bi) = pi.
We also add lobe b0 with p0 = 0.
Let j be the largest index such that Pj
i=0 pi ≤2/3.
If j = l, any arbitrary partitioning of the lobes is ac-
ceptable.
Assume j < l.
If Pl
i=j+1 pi ≤2/3, then
{{b0, · · · , bj}, {bj+1, · · · , bl}} is the desired partitioning.
Otherwise, we have Pj+1
i=0 pi > 2/3 and Pl
i=j+1 pi >
2/3, which implies that pj+1 > 1/3 and since v is a sepa-
rator, pj+1 < 1/2. Therefore, P θ({b0, · · · bl}\{bj+1}) <
2/3, and {{bj+1}, {{b0, · · · bl}\{bj+1}}} is the desired
partitioning.
ProBal algorithm searches for m variables in a given tree T
in an iterative manner. It starts with the original tree as the
initial segment and in each round it breaks it into smaller
segments in the following manner. Let G be the set contain-
ing all the segments. At each round the algorithm picks the
segment Gm with largest P θ(G) in the set G, and ﬁnds the
most suitable separator (described below) and adds it to the
intervention set I (if it is not already in I). This is done us-
ing the function FindSep. Then using the function Div, the
algorithm divides Gm into two new segments G1 and G2,
and replaces Gm with {G1, G2} in the set G unless they
have a star structure with the used separator as the center
vertex. The reason that we ignore the star structures is that
since the center is already chosen to be intervened on, the
orientation of all the edges of the structure are discovered
and there is no need for further interventions on the other
variables in the star. The process of choosing separators
continues until m variables are collected or all the graph
is resolved. The set I will be returned as the set of inter-
vention variables. The functions FindSep(·) and Div(·) are
described below.
• In the function FindSep(·), ﬁrst we normalize the val-
ues of probability in the input segment to obtain distri-
bution P θ. For any variable X ∈Gm, we compute the
probability of root being in the lobes of X, and par-
tition the lobes into two wings W ∗
1 (X) and W ∗
2 (X)
such that the probability of the root being in the wings
Algorithm 1 ProBal Algorithm
Input: T, m.
I = ∅, G = {T}.
while |I| < m and G ̸= ∅do
Gm = arg maxG∈G P θ(G).
X∗= FindSep(Gm).
I = I ∪X∗.
(G1, G2) = Div(Gm, X∗).
Gnew = {G1, G2}.
For i ∈{1, 2}, if Gi is a star graph with center vertex
X∗, or if V (Gi) ⊆I, remove Gi from Gnew.
G = G\Gm.
G = G ∪Gnew.
end while
Output: I.
is as balanced as possible. Deﬁne the unbalancedness
of X as s(X) := |P θ(W ∗
1 (X)) −1/2P θ(W ∗
1 (X) ∪
W ∗
2 (X))|.
The function returns variables X∗with
minimum s(X).
• The
function
Div(·)
outputs
segments
G1
=
Gm\W ∗
2 (X∗) and G2 = Gm\W ∗
1 (X∗). In both seg-
ments, it sets the probability of X∗to zero.
Lemma 4. (a) A leaf will not be chosen as the separator
more than once.
(b) If the chosen separator X∗in Gm is not a leaf,
and the segments G1
and G2
are produced,
then
max{|V (G1)|, |V (G2)|} < |V (Gm)|.
Proof. (a) Suppose a leaf variable X is chosen as the sep-
arator in one of the rounds of the algorithm. Consequently,
its probability will be set to zero in the segment contain-
ing it. Since X is a leaf, one of its wings will be empty,
and hence after normalization of the probability in function
FindSep(·), the wings of X will have probabilities 0 and 1,
while any other variable X′ in the segment with non-zero
probability, will have wings that are balancing the measure
1 −P θ(X′) (Note that all the variables in this segment
cannot have zero probability, because the distribution is as-
sumed to be positive and also all the other variables could
not have been picked as separators before, otherwise the al-
gorithm would not have kept this segment). Therefore, the
function FindSep(·) will not choose X.
(b) Since X∗is not a leaf, |V (W ∗
2 (X∗))| ̸= 0, and since
|V (G1)| = |V (Gm)|−|V (W ∗
2 (X∗))|, we have |V (G1)| <
|V (Gm)|. Similarly |V (G2)| < |V (Gm)|.
Theorem 2. ProBal algorithm runs in time O(n3).
Proof. One can ﬁnd the probability of each lobe of a ver-
tex in linear time by running Depth-ﬁrst search (DFS) al-
gorithm. Therefore, FindSep(·) runs in time O(n2). Ad-
ditionally, Div(·) runs in o(n2). From Lemma 4, ProBal
algorithm will end in at most n rounds. Thus, the time
complexity of the algorithm is O(n3).

Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from Fixed Number of Experiments
4.1. Analysis
In this subsection we ﬁnd bounds on the performance of
ProBal algorithm. We will show that in the case of a uni-
form prior, the proposed algorithm is a ρ-approximation al-
gorithm, where ρ is independent of the order of the graph.
Theorem 3. After running ProBal algorithm for r rounds
and obtaining the experiment set E, the loss ˆLθ(E) is upper
bounded as
ˆLθ(E) ≤(2
3)⌊log2(r+1)⌋n.
Proof. First we claim that with r = 2k −1, the set G de-
ﬁned in the algorithm which contain at most 2k segments,
has the property maxG∈G P θ(G) ≤( 2
3)k. We use induc-
tion to prove this claim. The base of the induction is clear
from Proposition 2 and the fact that we set the probability
of the separator itself to zero in function Div(·). For the in-
duction step we need to show that after r = 2k+1−1 rounds
maxG∈G P θ(G) ≤( 2
3)k+1. By the induction hypothesis
with r = 2k −1 rounds maxG∈G P θ(G) ≤( 2
3)k. Now, af-
ter the extra 2k rounds, if a different segment were divided
in each of those rounds, by Proposition 2, the desired result
could be concluded. Otherwise, at least one of the seg-
ments, say G′, was not divided while there exists another
segment, say G′′, which was divided more than once. This
implies that in the second dividing of G′′, at least one of its
sub-segments, say G′′
1, obtained from the ﬁrst division, had
a larger probability than P θ(G′). But by Proposition 2, we
have P θ(G′′
1) ≤2
3( 2
3)k. Therefore, P θ(G′) ≤( 2
3)k+1.
Each component Cj belongs to a segment G ∈G. Hence,
by the claim above, for all j, P θ(Cj) ≤( 2
3)k.
This
concludes ˆLθ(E)
=
PJ
j=1 P θ(Cj)|Cj|
≤
( 2
3)kn
≤
( 2
3)⌊log2(r+1)⌋n.
In the following we prove that in the case of uniform prior
on bounded-degree graphs, ProBal is a ρ-approximation al-
gorithm, where ρ is independent of the order of the graph.
To this end, we ﬁrst obtain a lower bound on the loss of the
optimum algorithm introduced in Section 3.
Lemma 5. Consider tree T of order n with maximum de-
gree ∆(T) and uniform probability distribution over the
location of the root of the tree. Then for any experiment set
E, we have
(n−m)2
n(∆(T )m−1) ≤ˆLθ(E).
Proof. For J components, from Corollary 1, the loss
function may be lower bounded as follows ˆLθ(E)
=
1
n
PJ
j=1 |Cj|2 ≥1
nJ( n−m
J
)2. Since the tree is connected,
the maximum number of components created by an exper-
iments set of size m is ∆(T)m −1, which implies the re-
sult.
Theorem 4. Consider tree T of order n with maximum
degree ∆(T). In the case of uniform prior distribution, if
m ≤ϵn, ProBal is a ρ-approximation algorithm, where
ρ =
3
2 (m∧r)log2 2
3 (∆(T )m−1)
(1−ϵ)2
, where m ∧r := min{r, m}.
ρ is constant in n, polynomial of degree less than 0.42 in
m, and linear on ∆(T).
Proof. Proof is immediate from Theorem 3 and Lemma 5.
4.2. Minimax Setting
As shown in (4) in the minimax setting, we need to mini-
mize the size if the largest component generated from the
set of intervention variables. If in ProBal, instead of bal-
ancing the probability of existence of the root variable in
wings, we chose the separators to balance the number of
vertices in the wings, then regardless of the probability dis-
tribution P θ, it would guarantee that in each round of the
algorithm, the largest segment Gm would be divided into
two segments, where each of these segments would con-
tain at most 2
3|V (Gm)| + 1 vertices. Therefore, at most the
orientation of 2
3|V (Gm)| of the edges in Gm may not be
found. This is equivalent to running ProBal algorithm on a
uniform distribution P θ.
Theorem 5. Consider tree T of order n with maximum
degree ∆(T). Let ˆLW (E) be the minimax loss of the exper-
iment set E.
(a) After running ProBal for r rounds and obtaining the
experiment set E, the loss ˆLW (E) is upper bounded as fol-
lows: ˆLW (E) ≤( 2
3)⌊log2(r+1)⌋n.
(b) For any experiment set E, we have
n−m
∆(T )m−1 ≤ˆLW (E).
(c) If m ≤ϵn, ProBal is a ρ-approximation algorithm,
where ρ =
3
2 (m∧r)log2 2
3 (∆(T )m−1)
1−ϵ
.
Proof. Since the performance of ProBal for the minimax
case is the same as the Bayesian case with uniform distri-
bution, the proof of part (a) follows from Theorem 3. For
part (b), since the tree is connected, the maximum number
of components created by an experiments set of size m is
∆(T)m −1, and we can minimize the order of the largest,
by making the orders equal. That is, the order of the largest
component is at least
n−m
∆(T )m−1. The proof of part (c) is
immediate from parts (a) and (b).
5. Experimental Results
In this section we evaluate the performance of our proposed
algorithm on both synthetic and real data.
5.1. Synthetic Data
We generated 1000 instances of trees based on Barab´asi-
Albert (BA) model (Barab´asi & Albert, 1999; Barab´asi,
2016), and bounded degree (BD) model created according
to Galton-Watson branching process (Barab´asi, 2016). For
both models we considered uniform and degree based dis-
tributions for the location of the root of the tree. In the

Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from Fixed Number of Experiments
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
5
10
15
20
Opt. Solution
ProBal
Upper Bound
15
20
25
30
35
40
n
0
5
10
15
20
Opt. Solution
ProBal
Upper Bound
15
20
25
30
35
40
n
0
5
10
15
20
Opt. Solution
ProBal
Upper Bound
15
20
25
30
35
40
n
0
5
10
15
20
Average Loss
Opt. Solution
ProBal
Upper Bound
1
2
3
4
5
m
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Average Loss
Opt. Solution
ProBal
Upper Bound
1
2
3
4
5
m
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Opt. Solution
ProBal
Upper Bound
1
2
3
4
5
m
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Opt. Solution
ProBal
Upper Bound
1
2
3
4
5
m
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Opt. Solution
ProBal
Upper Bound
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 4. The average loss of ProBal and the optimal solution with respect to the order of the tree (ﬁrst row), and with respect to the
number of the interventions (second row). In the ﬁrst two columns, P θ is uniform, while the degree based distribution is used in the
simulations for the second two columns. The tree in parts (a), (c), (e) and (g) are created based on Barab´asi-Albert model model and the
bounded degree model is used in the rest.
degree based distribution, the probability of vertex v being
the root is proportional to its degree.
Figure 4 depicts the loss of ProBal as well as the loss for
the optimal solution with respect to the order of the tree
and the number of the interventions. As shown in this ﬁg-
ure, in all cases, the performance of ProBal algorithm is
very close to the optimal solution. There are worst case
scenarios where special graphs with speciﬁcally designed
distributions can reach the upper-bounds, but as seen in
Figure 4, for many distributions, ProBal algorithm works
much better than what is predicted by our theoretic upper
bound.
5.2. Real Data
We examined the performance of ProBal on real data. The
graph that we work on is the GRN of E-coli bacteria which
we sourced from the RegulonDB database (Salgado et al.,
2006). In GRN, the transcription factors are the main play-
ers to activate genes. The interactions between transcrip-
tion factors and regulated genes in a species genome can
be presented by a directed graph. In this graph, links are
drawn whenever a transcription factor regulates a gene’s
expression. Moreover, some of vertices have both func-
tions, i.e., are both transcription factor and regulated gene.
Figure 5 depicts the normalized average loss of ProBal with
respect to the total budget for the number of interventions.
As seen in this ﬁgure, seven interventions are enough to
reconstruct more than 95 percent of the network.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
M
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Normalized Average Loss
ProBal
Figure 5. The normalized average loss of ProBal with respect to
the total budget for the number of interventions.
6. Conclusion
We studied the problem of experiment design for causal
inference when only a limited number of experiments are
available. In our model, each experiment consists of in-
tervening on a single vertex, which makes the model suit-
able for applications in which intervening on several vari-
ables simultaneously is not feasible. Also, in our model,
experiments are designed merely based on the result of an
initial purely observational test, which enables the experi-
menter to perform the interventional tests in parallel. We
assumed that the underlying structure on the variables con-
tains negligible number of triangles compared to the size
of the graph. This assumption is satisﬁed in many appli-
cations such as the structure of GRN for some bacteria.

Optimal Experiment Design for Causal Discovery from Fixed Number of Experiments
We addressed the following question: “How much of the
causal structure can be learned when only a limited num-
ber of experiments are available?” We characterized the
optimal solution to this problem and then proposed an al-
gorithm, which designs the experiments in a time efﬁcient
manner. We showed that for bounded degree graphs, in
both the minimax setting and the Bayesian settings with
uniform prior, our proposed algorithm is a ρ-approximation
algorithm, where ρ is independent of the order of the un-
derlying graph. We examined our proposed algorithm on
synthetic as well as real datasets. The results show that the
performance of our proposed algorithm is very close to the
optimal theoretical solution. One direction of future work
is to extend this experiment design problem to even more
general causal structures.
