CHARACTERIZING SATELLITE GEOMETRY VIA ACCELERATED
3D GAUSSIAN SPLATTING
A PREPRINT
V. Minh Nguyen
NEural TransmissionS (NETS) Lab
Florida Institute of Technology

Emma Sandidge
NEural TransmissionS (NETS) Lab
Florida Institute of Technology

Trupti Mahendrakar
Autonomy Lab
Florida Institute of Technology

Ryan T. White
NEural TransmissionS (NETS) Lab
Florida Institute of Technology

ABSTRACT
The accelerating deployment of spacecraft in orbit have generated interest in on-orbit servicing (OOS),
inspection of spacecraft, and active debris removal (ADR). Such missions require precise rendezvous
and proximity operations in the vicinity of non-cooperative, possible unknown, resident space objects.
Safety concerns with manned missions and lag times with ground-based control necessitate complete
autonomy. This requires robust characterization of the target’s geometry. In this article, we present an
approach for mapping geometries of satellites on orbit based on 3D Gaussian Splatting that can run
on computing resources available on current spaceflight hardware. We demonstrate model training
and 3D rendering performance on a hardware-in-the-loop satellite mock-up under several realistic
lighting and motion conditions. Our model is shown to be capable of training on-board and rendering
higher quality novel views of an unknown satellite nearly 2 orders of magnitude faster than previous
NeRF-based algorithms. Such on-board capabilities are critical to enable downstream machine
intelligence tasks necessary for autonomous guidance, navigation, and control tasks.
1
Introduction
The recent reduction in the costs of launching spacecraft has led to an acceleration in the deployment of large satellite
constellations and human spaceflight exploration missions. However, retired satellites and collisions of space objects in
orbit have resulted in an exponential rise in untracked space debris. This poses collision risks to new launches, which
could spread thousands of new pieces of debris, causing catastrophic cascading failures.
Numerous efforts in the field of robotic active debris removal (ADR) and on-orbit servicing (OOS) have been conducted
around known cooperative and non-cooperative spacecraft. In 1997, ETS-VII [1] by NASDA (now JAXA) made
a groundbreaking leap by demonstrating the first ever autonomous docking with a target (cooperative) spacecraft.
Following that other technology development missions were conducted around cooperative spacecraft such as NASA,
DARPA, AFRL’s DART, XSS-10 [2], XSS-11 [3], ANGELS [4], MiTEX and Orbital Express. In 2020 and 2021,
Northrup Grumman conducted the first ever commercial OOS operations with its MEV-1 [5] and MEV-2 [6, 7] satellites
to take over station keeping of IS-901 and IS-10-02 respectively. In 2022 as part of demonstrating autonomous capture of
uncontrolled object, Astroscale’s ELSA-d mission’s servicer demonstrated autonomous rendezvous with the client prior
to pausing the mission due to failed thrusters [8]. All these missions were conducted around known and/or cooperative
target objects. However, in reality the RSOs have unknown structure, mass, geometry and attitude. Performing OOS
around unknown non-cooperative spacecraft remains an unresolved challenge.
To perform OOS and ADR around these unknown RSOs, it is essential to autonomously characterize the geometry,
identify points for capture, plan and execute safe approach paths, capture the target, and stabilize its attitude. Distributed
arXiv:2401.02588v1  [cs.CV]  5 Jan 2024

Characterizing Satellite Geometry via Accelerated 3D Gaussian Splatting
A PREPRINT
Satellite Systems (DSS), groups of small, cooperative satellites each equipped with a system for relative navigation, a
robust propulsion system, and a flexible capture mechanism, offer a scalable solution for OOS and ADR tasks involving
large non-cooperative targets as the swarm can distribute the forces and moments required to detumble the RSO. A
concept of the DSS is illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Concept for DSS-based target object characterization, trajectory planning, approach and detumbling [9]
Working together, these satellite swarms will map the target’s geometry (the focus of this article), assess its motion and
structural condition, pinpoint possible capture points and collision risks, devise safe approach routes to these points, and
collectively plan and carry out maneuvers to stabilize the target’s spin. The complexity of these operations, especially
the skills needed for mapping the geometry accurately necessitates the application of machine learning technologies.
This is crucial to replicate the inherent abilities of humans in these tasks.
The complexity of this approach necessitates complete autonomy during the rendezvous and proximity operation (RPO)
phases. Although previous research has shown the integration of AI-based machine vision for navigation [10] and
artificial potential field for guidance [11, 12] as a feasible method for autonomous rendezvous with these unknown
RSOs this approach required multiple observers along with multiple chasers in the system. Although theoretically
feasible, it is impractical for real-world application, leading to a need for more streamlined and effective solutions in
autonomous space servicing missions.
It is much preferred to deploy a single observer that will inspect and fully characterize the geometry and components
of the non-cooperative RSO, and then guide the chasers, but this requires full characterization of the geometry and
components (e.g., satellites and antennas) of the RSO that can be done using on-board spaceflight hardware. While
multi-observer swarms can characterize 3D geometry by triangulating points several observers can view, this is more
challenging for a single observer.
This article aims to tackle the first of these two problems: characterizing the geometry of the RSO at low computational
cost. This is key in developing enabling software for autonomous RPO with a single observer. 3D Gaussian Splatting
[13] will be deployed to characterize the geometry of a target RSO and generate novel viewing angles of it to build a
full 3D understanding of the RSO.
The primary contributions of this article include:
• An effective low-compute 3D Gaussian Splatting model optimized for 3D reconstruction of an unknown RSO
capable of deployment on spaceflight hardware.
• Hardware-in-the-loop experiments demonstrating 3D rendering performance under realistic lighting and
motion conditions.
• A comparison of NeRF, D-NeRF, Instant NeRF, 3D Gaussian Splatting, and 4D Gaussian Splatting algorithms
in terms of 3D rendering quality, runtimes, and computational costs.
2
Related Work
2.1
Computer Vision for On-Orbit Operations
Traditional computer vision techniques are widely familiar in the field of guidance, navigation and controls and act as the
first step to navigation. However, traditional techniques are limited to the presence of known/cooperative features which
2

Characterizing Satellite Geometry via Accelerated 3D Gaussian Splatting
A PREPRINT
is not the case for unknown satellites. In recent years, neural network-based computer vision techniques have shown
highly promising results for performing in non-cooperative environments and are actively being used for autonomous
navigation in robotics and the automobile industry, for example. Extensive research is being performed to identify and
track [14] components of non-cooperative known spacecraft [15] and unknown spacecraft [10, 16, 17, 18], such as solar
panels, antennas, body and thrusters. Knowing the presence of components and its relative positions could assist with
autonomously rendezvousing to the RSO as shown in [19, 12]. However, as described earlier, being able to characterize
the RSO with a single observer reduces the risk of collision while improving reliability in the navigation model.
Research derived from the spacecraft pose estimation challenge based on datasets [20, 21] show that the pose of a
known non-cooperative spacecraft can be reliably estimated using a monocular camera [22, 23, 24, 25]. However, these
techniques fail for an unknown spacecraft.
Photogrammetry techniques based on neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [26] and generative radiance fields (GRAFs) [27]
have gained significant popularity to perform 3D reconstruction of an object based on images. In [28], NeRF and GRAF
generated 3D models of SMOS and a CubeSat and showed that NeRF achieved better performance than GRAF. In [29],
the authors further investigated NeRF along with instant NeRF [30] and dynamic NeRF [31] on hardware-in-the-loop
(HIL) images of a satellite mockup. It was concluded that instant NeRF, which is capable of running on hardware
with spaceflight heritage [32] is preferred for its fast computational time and relatively good performance. In [33], the
author takes a unique approach to identify pose of an unknown spacecraft by fitting superquadrics in the mask of a
single satellite image. Though this approach effectively identifies high-level details such as solar panels, it lacks smaller
crucial details such as apogee kick motors (if present), smaller cylindrical rods or check if a component is still intact
that may be a potential docking feature as described in [12].
2.2
3D Rendering
Characterizing the 3D geometry of an unknown RSO with a single data feed is a challenging task. Until recently,
there were few prospects to perform this task with high visual quality. However, recent work in the computer vision
community discussed below has made this more feasible.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [26] use a fully-connected neural network to learn a radiance field that can render
synthetic views of 3D scenes. NeRFs map spatial locations and viewing angles represented as 5D coordinates
(x, y, z, θ, ϕ) to opacity and view-dependent color at all locations in space. The neural network estimates the opacities
and colors, and rays are traced through them to compute the pixel colors of an observer’s 2D viewframe of a 3D scene,
an approach called volumetric rendering.
The NeRF process is differentiable end-to-end, so these models can be trained with standard gradient-based methods.
NeRF is effective at generating high-quality views of 3D scenes, but has slow training and rendering times. It also only
considers static scenes, which limits the possibility of movement in the scene.
Accelerating NeRF. Instant NeRF [30] accelerates NeRF training. It learns a multi-resolution set of feature vectors
called neural graphics primitives that encode input scenes more efficiently. This enables Instant NeRF to produce
similar results for NeRF with a much smaller neural network that trains with a far smaller computational footprint, but
the rendering costs are similar to NeRF.
3D Gaussian Splatting [13] is a recent method that learns a Gaussian point-based representation of a 3D scene
slightly faster than Instant NeRF but renders 1080p (1920 × 1080 resolution) 2D views of the scene at just 5% of
the computational cost. This method uses images of the 3D scene calibrated by Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [34].
SfM computes sparse cloud of points identified in 3D based on multiple images, where 3D Gaussian random variables
are initialized before being trained to represent the 3D scene. Replacing NeRF representation with a point-based
representation reduces training times since there is no huge neural network to optimize. In addition, the point-based
scene representation avoids NeRF’s reliance on a full volumetric representation of the scene. Hence, 3D Splatting
avoids NeRF’s expensive sampling of points on the paths traced by each ray and passing them through a large neural
network.
The 3D Gaussian representation instead uses “splats” or layers of simple textures (“image primitives”) to be mixed by
the Gaussian densities at different locations in space. Novel views are rendered using separate tiles of the whole screen.
GPU-accelerated sorting algorithms allow extremely fast mixing for generating tiles by only considering splats that will
be visible.
Dynamic Scenes. Dynamic NeRF (D-NeRF) [31] reconstructs and render novel images of objects under rigid and
non-rigid motions from a single camera moving around the scene. It considers time as an additional input and splits
the learning process of the fully connected network into two parts: one encodes the scene into a canonical space and
one maps this canonical representation into the deformed scene at a particular time. The canonical network is trained
3

Characterizing Satellite Geometry via Accelerated 3D Gaussian Splatting
A PREPRINT
to take in 3D coordinates and the viewing directions to yield a radiance field. Then, the deformation network outputs
the displacement that takes the point to its position in the canonical space. D-NeRF can render dynamic scenes and
retains high-quality image details. While D-NeRF performs better with dynamic scenes, it still faces slow training and
rendering difficulties.
4D Gaussian Splatting [35] propose a representation that uses the 3D Gaussian Splatting point-based representation and
4D neural voxels. Similar to D-NeRF, the framework is split into a 3D scene representation and a deformation field
parts. However, the two pieces are time-dependent 3D Gaussian representations that can be rendered using a differential
splatting process. 4D Gaussian Splatting is reported to produce high-quality dynamic scenes with the faster training and
rendering than D-NeRF.
3
Methods
This section discusses the implementations of 3D rendering, as well as the experimental setup, datasets, and performance
metrics, used in this work.
3.1
3D Gaussian Splatting
3D Gaussian Splatting has three parts: (1) Structure-from-Motion (SfM) learns using 2D ground truth images to
calibrate the camera views of a 3D scene by learning a common point cloud representation, (2) the SfM point cloud is
repurposed to initialize a 3D Gaussian point-based representation of the 3D scene, and (3) uses splatting techniques to
render novel 2D views of the scene. We discuss these three steps in details below.
Camera Calibration with SfM. SfM reconstructs the 3D structure of the target. This involves estimating camera
parameters and creating a three-dimensional point cloud for the target. We use COLMAP [34] to perform the spare
reconstruction of the data images. It first performs a feature detection and extraction from the presented images and
then COLMAP extracts points of interest and certain features from the images that will be used in the SfM algorithm.
Then, a geometric verification is performed to ensure that the images see the same scene are overlapping. Since the first
matching portion does this visually, it is necessary to mathematically verify that the matched features will map to the
same point in the scene. We implement COLMAP with the standard pinhole camera model.
COLMAP cycles through the data given and estimates camera parameters and poses for the images. The triangulation
process can extend the set of scene points which increases coverage. A new point can be triangulated once there is
another image of the scene from a different viewing angle. This can provide more correspondences between the 2D
images and 3D reconstruction. It produces a point cloud as a byproduct.
3D Gaussian Point-based Representation. 3D Gaussisan Splatting repurposes the SfM point cloud to initialize the
means of a set of 3D Gaussian random variables. Each Gaussian can be defined by its mean p ∈R3 and covariance
matrix Σ ∈R3×3, with probability density
f(x) =
1
(2π)
k
2 p
|Σ|
e−1
2 (x−p)T Σ−1(x−p)
(1)
The means are initialized to the positions of the SfM points and covariances initialized to isotropic covariances (diagonal
matrices) based on the 3 nearest SfM-point neighbors. In addition, each Gaussian is equipped with a multiplier
α ∈[0, 1] representing the opacity for capturing radiated light and spherical harmonics coefficients representing the
viewing-angle-dependent color of each Gaussisan. This set of Gaussians with their means, covariances, opacities, and
spherical harmonic coefficients are optimized to learn a full representation of the 3D scene using only a discrete set of
points.
3D Gaussian Splatting-based Rendering. Splatting uses graphics primitives (e.g., textures) that extend outward from
individual points to ellipsoids. The 3D Gaussian densities within these ellipsoids allow Gaussian mixing with the α
opacities (known as α-blending in the computer graphics community). Then, 2D views can be generated with these
more complex image primitives rather than simply color and opacity in NeRF’s full volumetric rendering.
The spatial extent of the splats allows point-based rendering to render equivalent or higher quality filled-in geometry
without volumetric ray tracing. 3D Gaussian Splatting uses a tile-based rasterizer that pre-sorts the Gaussian splats
using GPU radix search for the entire image. This allows fast tile-based α-blending without per-pixel rendering of
points. This procedure generates the required 2D views.
Optimizing the 3D Representation. After SfM, the entire 3D Gaussian Splatting process, both training the representa-
tion and 3D rendering, is differentiable end-to-end. This enables backpropagation and gradient-based optimization.
The sparse point-based rendering faces some additional challenges in terms of how many points to use, so the method
4

Characterizing Satellite Geometry via Accelerated 3D Gaussian Splatting
A PREPRINT
additionally has a stage where it creates or destroys Gaussians during optimization process of the Gaussian means,
covariances, and associated opacities and spherical harmonic coefficients. The Gaussian covariance matrices cannot
be treated as unconstrained parameters, as this would violate the definition of covariance, and hence the technique
constrains the covariances to ensure the level sets of the probability densities shown in (1) remain ellipsoids.
The loss function used for optimizing the scene representation and renders is as follows.
(1 −λ)L1 + λLD-SSIM.
(2)
Minimizing the first term minimizes the pixel difference between between 2D renders and ground truth images from the
same viewing positions and angles. Minimizing the second term aims to increase SSIM between the images. We adopt
the authors’ use of λ = 0.2.
3.2
Experiment Setup
HIL data was captured on the ORION testbed [36] at the Autonomy Lab at Florida Tech. The test bed consists of a
planar, Cartesian Maneuver kinematics simulator shown in Figure 2 with a workspace of 5.5m x 3.5m. The simulator is
equipped with a 2 DOF motion table that can translate at a maximum speed of 0.25 m/s with a maximum acceleration
of 1 m/s2. The simulator is equipped with two custom designed pan-tilt mechanisms of which both of them are capable
of rotating infinitely in the azimuth direction (yawing), and rotate in elevation by ±90◦. In addition, one of the pan-tilt
mechanisms (target object) can translate in the x and y axes. The target and the chaser spacecraft can be interchanged as
needed. The target mock-up satellite used for this work has typical components found on a satellite such as, rectangular
solar arrays, a distinct body, thruster nozzles and a parabolic antenna.
Figure 2: ORION Testbed at Florida Tech
To limit external lighting conditions, the doors, walls and floor of the testbed are painted with low reflectivity black
paint and the windows are closed with black-out blind and also covered with black-out stage curtains. The lighting
conditions for the experiments are simulated by a Hilio D12 LED panel with a color temperature of 5600 K (daylight
balanced) rated for 350 W of power with adjustable intensity. The maximum intensity of the panel is equivalent to a
2000 W incandescent lamp. The intensity of the lamp was set to 10% or 100% in the scenarios described in the next
section.
3.3
Datasets
Four HIL datasets [29] were captured for training and evaluating the 3D rendering models. In all cases, images were
captured using an iPhone 13 from viewing angles 360◦around the satellite with the lamp pointing directly at the
5

Characterizing Satellite Geometry via Accelerated 3D Gaussian Splatting
A PREPRINT
mock-up. The camera aperture was positioned at a height of 3 feet 8 inches from the ground. Each image and video is
scaled to resolution 640-by-480.
The four cases differ in terms of the lighting, motion conditions, and backdrop of the images. They were captured as
follows:
Case 1. Images of the target RSO are taken at 10◦increments around a circle of radius of 2.5 m (simulating an R-bar
maneuver around a stationary satellite) with 10% lighting intensity. Viewing angles are at a 10◦increments
rotating about the vertical axis.
Case 2. Images of the target RSO are taken at 10◦increments around a circle of radius of 2.5 m (simulating an R-bar
maneuver around a stationary satellite) with 100% lighting intensity. Viewing angles are at a 10◦increments
rotating about the vertical axis.
Case 3. Videos of the RSO are captured as it yaws at 10/s with the chaser positioned 5 ft away (simulating V-bar station
keeping around a spinning RSO) with 10% lighting intensity. Viewing angles are at a 5◦increments rotating
about the vertical axis.
Case 4. Videos of the RSO are captured as it yaws at 10/s with the chaser positioned 5 ft away (simulating V-bar station
keeping around a spinning RSO) with 100% lighting intensity. Viewing angles are at a 5◦increments rotating
about the vertical axis.
In cases 3-4, we placed a green screen behind the satellite mock-up. Using chroma key compositing, we then post-
processed the images by replacing all green pixels with black. The results before and after pre-processing can be seen
in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Satellite mock-up with green screen (left) and after chroma key compsiting post-processing (right).
We display images from each of the four cases in Figure 4.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Figure 4: Ground truth images of the satellite mock-up
3.4
Performance Evaluation for 3D Rendering
We measure the performance of the 3D rendering models trained herein in terms of both rending quality and computa-
tional requirements. In this subsection, we describe the metrics used.
The quality of the renders generated by of each model trained in this work is evaluated by qualitative comparisons of
individual renders as well as standard metrics for generative modeling, including Structural Similarity Index (SSIM)
6

Characterizing Satellite Geometry via Accelerated 3D Gaussian Splatting
A PREPRINT
[37], Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR), and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [38] evaluated on
images of the satellite mock-up not used during training.
SSIM measures the difference between the original picture and the reconstructed image that accounts for changes such
as luminance or contrast. High SSIM values indicate high performance. PSNR measures the quality of rendered images
at the pixel level. High PSNR indicates good performance. LPIPS is a more advanced metric that aims to capture
human-perceived similarity of images. It feeds both a real and a synthetic image patch to a VGG network [39] trained
to classify the ImageNet dataset [40], extracts the hidden representations of each patch within different layers of VGG,
and computes a distance between them. This distance is fed to a model to mimic human preferences, yielding the LPIPS
score. Lower LPIPS scores indicate the synthetic images are more similar to real images.
In addition, methods are evaluated in terms of computational requirements during both training and inference (i.e.,
3D rendering). For training, we compare VRAM usage and training time. For inference (i.e. rendering), we compare
VRAM usage and framerate (frames per second - FPS). VRAM usage is measured with nvidia-smi pmon monitoring
utility every 1 second, using the highest number logged, when all data and the current model are fully loaded in GPU.
For FPS measurement. Due to extra time taken for data and model copy from CPU to GPU, first couple of rendering
runs will be slower until data are fully cached. Hence, we measured FPS by looping render task on the test set for 10-20
iterations, then take the average of the median 5 runs.
4
Results
In this section, we present 3D rendering results and performance by 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) on all test datasets
and compared with several competing methods, including NeRF [26], D-NeRF [31], Instant NeRF [30], and 4D
Gaussian Splatting (4DGS) [35].
The new results differ from our previous work [29] because that paper limited its quantitative analysis to images in the
training set while novel renders were analyzed qualitatively.
Table 1: Quality of 3D Renders by Models and different Test Cases
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Method
SSIM↑
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
SSIM↑
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
SSIM↑
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
SSIM↑
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
NeRF
0.3891
16.81
0.5503
0.4520
16.52
0.5008
0.9332
28.24
0.0763
0.6438
19.54
0.3207
D-NeRF
0.3783
16.76
0.5418
0.0337
9.22
0.5877
0.8156
16.66
0.1853
0.6184
19.61
0.3282
Instant NeRF
0.5149
16.47
0.4374
0.4729
14.71
0.4440
0.8571
17.55
0.1277
0.8569
19.99
0.1056
3DGS
0.9223
25.70
0.0814
0.6803
16.78
0.2949
0.8756
26.53
0.1040
0.9213
25.52
0.0796
4DGS
0.5192
16.78
0.4310
0.4877
13.17
0.5193
0.4358
15.07
0.1454
0.7619
17.16
0.1890
At a first glance, a previously discussed trend (in [29] reappeared in our new result regardless of the slight differences in
methodology: Dynamic Scene (D-NeRF, 4DGS) reconstruction methods took longer to train (Table 2) and consistently
perform worse (Table 1) than their static counterparts (NeRF, Instant Nerf, 3DGS). In addition, training VRAM usage
metrics shows these dynamic scene models also consume more resources. As such, our previous conclusion still stands:
static scene reconstruction methods are better for 3D reconstruction of satellites.
The extreme lighting case with background noise (Case 2) still poses some difficulties for all models [29], with all
metrics being consistently worse than the same case with lower lighting (Case 1). Interestingly, when removing the
background in post-processing (Case 3 and Case 4), increased light exposure does not negatively impact the performance
of Instant NeRF or 3DGS. Even with 4DGS, the performance degradation is not as severe as typical NeRF-based
models. This shows that Gaussian Splatting-based models (and Instant NeRF) are the best models to reconstruct models
under extreme lighting conditions in space.
Next, we focus on computing and memory requirements of the five algorithms trained on the four test cases. All are
compared using a single NVIDIA RTX 3080 Ti. Training times and rendering times will be higher on spaceflight
hardware, but it is feasible for some of the methods using, e.g., an NVIDIA Jetson.
7

Characterizing Satellite Geometry via Accelerated 3D Gaussian Splatting
A PREPRINT
Table 2: Model Training Computational Requirements
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Method
VRAM (MB)↓
Training time↓
VRAM (MB)↓
Training time↓
VRAM (MB)↓
Training time↓
VRAM (MB)↓
Training time↓
NeRF
3833
54m24s
3845
55m47s
4195
1h18m21s
3952
1h15m24s
D-NeRF
4586
1h37m17s
4598
1h39m32s
4948
2h14m56s
4634
2h05m24s
Instant NeRF
1664
5m18s
1684
5m7s
1934
6m11s
1702
6m15s
3DGS
1485
5m42s
1668
7m4s
1875
6m59s
1792
6m32s
4DGS
2224
57m32s
4089
1h5m51s
5385
44m34s
5022
1h56m00s
Training time and resource consumption is shown in Table 2. All NeRF-based models stay consistent across all lighting
cases, which is due to the neural network used for the models are the same for each method, and most of the differences
are due to different amount of training/testing data for each cases being cached on GPU. On the other hand, Gaussian
Splatting-based methods have different resource usage pattern across all cases. Since during training, 3D/4D Gaussians
are being continuously added and removed from random initialization [13, 35], the model size will be vastly different
depends on their local optimized states and the amount of Gaussians/complexity of the scenes.
Instant NeRF and 3DGS training resource consumption and training time are the best across all compared methods.
However, regarding quality of 3D model reconstruction (see Table 1) in cases with background noise (Case 1 and 2),
3DGS performs exceptionally better, while in the background removed cases (Case 3 and 4), both methods perform
similarly. Original implementation of NeRF on average takes 10 times longer to train, while only performs marginally
better than the previously mentioned methods in Case 3.
Table 3: Model Inference: Computational Requirements and Rendering Framerates
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Method
VRAM (MB)↓
FPS↑
VRAM (MB)↓
FPS↑
VRAM (MB)↓
FPS↑
VRAM (MB)↓
FPS↑
NeRF
9143
0.27
11307
0.31
11323
0.14
11323
0.07
D-NeRF
9171
0.19
11331
0.20
11347
0.08
11349
0.05
Instant NeRF
1375
0.67
1407
0.85
1829
0.59
1827
0.23
3DGS
1615
45.84
1129
215.12
2807
108.78
1955
42.04
4DGS
1351
23.23
1389
28.93
1681
121.85
2687
8.23
While Instant NeRF trains with impressively low resource consumption and renders 3-5 times faster than NeRF and
D-NeRF, it is still vastly slower than Gaussian Splatting-based rendering. This shows benefits of the Gaussian Splatting
rasterization method, with 3DGS reaching 45.84 FPS, nearly two orders of magnitude faster than even Instant NeRF.
Combining performance metrics with training time and memory usage, fast rasterization and rendering speed, we
conclude that 3DGS is the best model to characterize the geometry of the RSO, especially when considering the
computing limitations of spacecraft hardware.
Qualitative comparison of novel view synthesis between models is shown in Figure 5. Both NeRF and 3DGS can
render accurate views of the satellite. In the samples presented, NeRF-rendered images have lots of blur, artifacts,
and boundaries of objects that “melt into” on another. Although 4DS failed in the render shown for Case 1, Gaussian
Splatting-based renders have less blurring and artifacts, produce sharper reflections, and preserve finer details on
satellite surfaces.
Similar to the quantitative results above, dynamic scene reconstruction methods perform poorly under extreme lighting:
in particular, D-NeRF and 4DGS in Case 2. Renders that are fully black (Case 2 for D-NeRF and Case 3 for 4DGS) are
not missing or failed renders. They are real renders, but they exhibit extreme occlusion artifacts that cover the entire
view supplied to the model. Note the darkened extemities of the solar pannels in the Case 4 render by 4DGS for a less
extreme example. Additionally, 4DGS fails to reconstruct a reliable representation of the satellite model in all cases.
5
Conclusions
This work demonstrates 3D Gaussian Splatting models can be trained to learn expressive 3D scene representations
of unknown, non-cooperative satellites on orbit and generate high-quality 2D renders from novel views. Unlike prior
work, it can be done on the limited compute capacity of current spaceflight hardware.
The demonstrates effective capabilities for on-board characterization of RSO geometries. This can serve as an important
enabler wider on-board characterization of spacecraft on orbit, including component recognition and inspection, pose
8

Characterizing Satellite Geometry via Accelerated 3D Gaussian Splatting
A PREPRINT
Ground Truth
NeRF
D-NeRF
Instant NeRF
3DGS
4DGS
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Figure 5: Comparison of different test cases and SfM methods.
estimation, kinematics characterization, and other inspection tasks. These enable downstream autonomous GNC and
RPO to support OOS and ADR missions.
