xx, 1–11
DOI: xxxxxxx/xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xx xxxx
Generalized Similarity U:
A Non-parametric Test of Association Based on Similarity
Changshuai Wei∗
Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of North Texas Health Science Center,
Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA

and
Qing Lu∗
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA

Summary:
Motivation: Second generation sequencing technologies are being increasingly used for genetic association studies, where
the main research interest is to identify sets of genetic variants that contribute to various phenotype. The phenotype can
be univariate disease status, multivariate responses and even high-dimensional outcomes. Considering the genotype and
phenotype as two complex objects, this also poses a general statistical problem of testing association between complex
objects.
Results: We here proposed a similarity-based test, generalized similarity U (GSU), that can test the association between
complex objects. We ﬁrst studied the theoretical properties of the test in a general setting and then focused on the application
of the test to sequencing association studies. Based on theoretical analysis, we proposed to use Laplacian kernel based
similarity for GSU to boost power and enhance robustness. Through simulation, we found that GSU did have advantages
over existing methods in terms of power and robustness. We further performed a whole genome sequencing (WGS) scan
for Alzherimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) data, identifying three genes, APOE, APOC1 and TOMM40,
associated with imaging phenotype.
Availability: We developed a C++ package for analysis of whole genome sequencing data using GSU. The source codes can
be downloaded at https://github.com/changshuaiwei/gsu.

Key words:
Weighted U Statistic; Sequencing Study; Non-parametric Statistics.
1. Introduction
The ongoing sequencing studies allowed researchers to com-
prehensively investigate the role of a deep catalog of human
genome variations in complex diseases(Cirulli and Goldstein,
2010). Although these studies hold great promise for uncover-
ing novel disease-associated variants, the massive sequencing
data bring tremendous computational and statistical chal-
lenges to data analysis. Sequencing data is characterized with
high-dimensionality and sparsity, where a large portion of
genetic variants are rare variants with minor allele frequency
(MAF) smaller than 5%. Even with a large eﬀect size, a rare
variant is hard to detect because of its low MAF. Moreover,
the massive number of rare variants raises computational
burden and multiple comparison issue.
The common strategy is to perform a joint association test,
namely, testing the joint eﬀect of a set of single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) on a genomic region, a functional unit (e.g.,
a gene) or a functional pathway. By combining multiple SNVs,
the association information is aggregated and and the number
of tests is greatly reduced. Among these approaches, methods
based on variance component score tests (VCscore) are widely
used (Lin, 1997; Wu et al., 2011). The methods considered the
eﬀects of the multiple variants as a random eﬀect, and then
test the eﬀect by testing the variance component under the
framework of the linear mixed model or the generalized linear
mixed model.
There are also increasing interests in studying shared ge-
netic contribution to multivariate phenotype. The multivari-
ate phenotype can be multiple measurements evaluating dif-
ferent aspects of a disease, which better reﬂect the underlying
biological mechanism of the disease. It can also be multiple
disease phenotypes that used for studying co-morbid genes or
pleiotropic gene(Dick and Agrawal, 2008). A few methods can
test the association of SNV-set with multivariate phenotype,
yet, most of the current methods can not handle multivariate
phenotype when the outcome variables are of diﬀerent types
(e.g., some variables are binary while others are continuous).
Besides conventional multivariate phenotype, modern data
arXiv:1801.01220v1  [stat.ME]  4 Jan 2018

2
types, such as shapes, images and trees, are emerging in
biomedical researches. These complex objects are diﬃcult to
be integrated in traditional statistical frameworks, whose pri-
mary interests are variables in vector spaces(e.g. continuous,
ordinal and categorical variables). Yet, it is relatively easy
to deﬁne distance metric or similarity metric for complex
objects. As a consequence, many distance and similarity based
methods have been proposed for modern data analysis.
In this paper, we present a similarity-based test using U
statistic, referred to as the Generalized Similarity U test
(GSU). GSU can be used to test the association of high-
dimensional and sparse predictors with univariate, multivari-
ate or complex-object responses from sequencing association
studies or other association studies. We ﬁrst studied the
theoretical properties of GSU in a general setting in Section
2, where we investigated the ﬁnite-sample properties and
asymptotic properties of the test. In section 3, we then focused
on the applications of GSU to genetic sequencing studies.
Extensive simulation studies were conducted to evaluated the
performance of GSU in section 4, followed by a whole genome
sequencing data application in section 5.
2. Generalized Similarity U
2.1 General Setting and Rational
We start with a formal set-up. Let (Ω, A, P) and (Ψ, G, d) be
a probability space and a metric space respectively. Consider
random elements Y and G taking values on metric space
(ΨY , GY , dY ) and (ΨG, GG, dG) with distribution PY
and
PG respectively. Here, the random elements can be random
variables (e.g., Ψ = R), random vectors (e.g., Ψ = Rp),
random matrix (e.g., Ψ = Rp×p), random graph (e.g., trees),
or random objects (e.g., shapes).
Let y and g denote the realization of the random response
element Y and random predictor element G. Given a sample
of data {(yi, gi)}1⩽i⩽n, we are interested in testing the asso-
ciation of response Y and predictor G. Since Y and G may
not live in a natural vector space, it is not straight forward
to construct a regression model, such as E(Y |G) = f(G).
However, it is easier to construct similarity measurement for
pairs {(yi, yj)}i̸=j and {(gi, gj)}i̸=j with the distance metrics
dY and dG. Intuitively, if Y and G are associated, then high
similarity between gi and gj should lead to high similarity
between yi and yj.
The similarity measurement can be deﬁned by a real-valued
function quantifying the similarity between two elements. For
example, we can deﬁne the similarity between yi and yj as
h(yi, yj) = e−dY (yi,yj), so that the closer yi and yj are in the
metric space, the more similar yi and yj are. Other possible
transformations from distance to similarity include inverse
transformation h(yi, yj) = (dY (yi, yj) + ε)−1 (for some ε > 0)
and thresholding transformation h(yi, yj) = 1{dY (yi,yj)<ε} (
for some ε > 0). Loosely speaking, any monotonically non-
increasing function can be used to transform distance to
similarity.
Here, we list some examples of similarity measurements.
Example 1 (vector similarity): Let yi, yj ∈Rp. We can
use Gaussian kernel (h(yi, yj) = exp(−||yi −yj||2
2)) or cross-
product kernel (h(yi, yj) =< yi, yj >) to measure similarity.
Here, < yi, yj > can be considered as a transformation from
Euclidean distance || · ||2
2, using the fact that < yi, yj >=
−1/2(||yi −yj||2
2 −||yi||2
2 −||yj||2
2).
Example 2 (graph similarity): Let y = (V, E) be a graph
with adjacency matrix A, where V is the set of vertices and
E is the set of edges. For any two graphs yi and yj, we can
construct a product graph yi ⊗yj, with adjacency matrix
Ai ⊗Aj. The similarity between the two graphs can be cal-
culated using random walk on the product graph, h(yi, yj) =
P
k wkqT
⊗W k
⊗p⊗(Vishwanathan et al., 2010), where k is the
length of the random walk, wk is the weight for size-k random
walk, p⊗is the initial probability for vertices on yi ⊗yj, W⊗
is the transition probability obtained from Ai ⊗Aj, and q⊗is
the stopping probability for vertices on yi⊗yj. Beside random
walk, graph similarity can also be calculated using graphlet
and subtree pattern.
Example 3 (image similarity): Image similarity can be cal-
culated from local features and global features of the images
by using traditional computer vision techniques such as scale
invariant feature transformation (SIFT) and histogram of
gradients (HOG). Both SIFT and HOG are human designed
feature extraction. With large data sets, we can use modern
machine learning methods, such as deep neural network (Le-
Cun et al., 2015), to automatize the feature extraction, and
construct more meaningful image similarity from high level
representation of image.
2.2 A Motivating Model
Given the predictor elements and the response elements for
the subjects i and j ,we denote their response similarity Si,j
by,
Si,j = h(yi, yj),
and denote their predictor similarity Ki,j by,Ki,j = f(gi, gj).
The similarity measurements h(· , · ) : ΨY × ΨY →R and
f(· , · ) : ΨG × ΨG
→R can be of a general form as
long as they satisfy the ﬁnite second moment condition, i.e.,
E(h2(Y1, Y2)) < ∞and E(f 2(G1, G2)) < ∞, where Y1 and
Y2 (G1 and G2) are independent identical copy of Y (G). We
center the response similarity ˜Si,j = ˜h(yi, yj) by,
˜h(yi, yj) =h(yi, yj) −E(h(yi, Yj))
−E(h(Yi, yj)) + E(h(Yi, Yj)),
(1)
and center the predictor similarity, ˜Ki,j = ˜f(gi, gj), in the
same manner. Based on the deﬁnition of the centered similar-
ity, we can show that E( ˜f(Gi, Gj)) = 0 and E(˜h(Yi, Yj)) = 0
(Supplementary Appendix S1).
We can investigate the relationship of the two similarities
using a similarity regression model (Elston et al., 2000; Tzeng
et al., 2009),
E( ˜Sr| ˜Kr) = b ˜Kr, ∀r ∈{(i, j), i < j}.
Since the similarities have been centered, the regression has
zero intercept. The association can then be evaluated by
testing null hypothesis b = 0, where b can be estimated by,
ˆb = P
i<j ˜Ki,j ˜Si,j/P
i<j( ˜Ki,j)2. By the form of ˆb, testing
b = 0 is equivalent to testing the numerator Ub = 0, where
Ub = P
i<j ˜Ki,j ˜Si,j. As we shall see soon, Ub is in the same
form as the generalized similarity U.

Generalized Similarity U
3
2.3 Weighted U Statistic
The generalized similarity U (GSU) is deﬁned as the sum-
mation of the centered response similarities weighted by the
centered predictor similarities,
U =
1
n(n −1)
X
i̸=j
˜Ki,j ˜Si,j,
(2)
where
˜Ki,j is considered as the weight function and ˜Si,j
is considered as the U kernel. In our deﬁnition of GSU,
the role of response similarity and predictor similarity are
interchangeable. In other words, we can also treat ˜Si,j as the
weight function and ˜Ki,j as the U kernel.
Under the null hypothesis, when the predictor element G
is independent of response element Y (i.e., Y
⊥⊥G), we
have E(U) =
1
n(n−1)
P
i̸=j E( ˜f(Gi, Gj))E(˜h(Yi, Yj)) = 0.
Under alternative hypothesis, when Y is associated with G,
we expect that the response similarity is concordant with
the predictor similarity. In other words, the positive response
similarities are weighted heavier and the negative response
similarities are weighted lighter, leading to a positive value
of U statistic. A statistical test can be formed to test the
association, and p-value can be calculated by P(U > Uobs)
under null hypothesis, where Uobs is the observed value of U.
Deﬁne a population parameter µU as
µU = E( ˜f(G1, G2)˜h(Y1, Y2)).
It is easy to show that GSU is an unbiased estimator of
µU, i.e., E(U) = µU. In addition, knowing that µU
=
E( ˜f(G1, G2)˜h(Y1, Y2)) −E( ˜f(G1, G2))E(˜h(Y1, Y2)), we can
consider µU as a population covariance. In this sense, a
scale invariant “correlation”, Uγ, can be calculated, Uγ =
P
i̸=j ˜Ki,j ˜Si,j/(P
i̸=j( ˜Ki,j)2 P
i̸=j( ˜Si,j)2)1/2, as an indicator
of strength of association.
2.4 Strongly Positive Deﬁnite Similarity
We have already shown that Y
⊥⊥G ⇒µU = 0, which
ensures the correct type I error. It is of interest now whether
µU = 0 ⇒Y ⊥⊥G, so that we can control type II error
(i.e., improve power) and reject null hypothesis whenever
Y ̸⊥⊥G. The establishment of µU = 0 ⇒Y ⊥⊥G needs
additional assumptions on the similarity measurements and
metric spaces. For the completeness, we ﬁrst introduce several
preliminaries.
Deﬁne a “kernel” as a real symmetric function h : Ψ×Ψ →
R. A kernel is called positive deﬁnite if Pn
i,j cicjh(yi, yj) ⩾0,
∀ci, cj ∈R and ∀yi, yj ∈Ψ. A kernel is called negative
deﬁnite if Pn
i,j cicjh(yi, yj) ⩽0, ∀ci, cj ∈R, yi, yj ∈Ψ and
P
i ci = 0.
A positive deﬁnite kernel is called strictly positive deﬁnite
when the equality Pn
i,j cicjh(yi, yj) = 0 implies ci = 0 ∀i.
The kernel function here can be used to deﬁne similarity
measurement. To consider µU = 0 ⇒Y ⊥⊥G, however, we
need the kernel function to exhibit a property of “strong” pos-
itive deﬁniteness in the integral form. Using similar notions
of Rachev et al. (2013), we deﬁne a strongly positive deﬁnite
kernel as follows.
Deﬁnition 1: Let Q be a ﬁnite positive measure on
(Ψ, G, d) and q be a function integrable with respect to Q.
We say h is strongly positive deﬁnite if it is positive deﬁnite
and the equality
´
Ψ
´
Ψ h(x, y)q(x)q(y)dQ(x)dQ(y) = 0 implies
q = 0 a.e. ∀Q.
Let ϑ be a ﬁnite signed measure dominated by Q s.t.
dϑ = qdQ. For strongly positive deﬁnite kernel h, the equality
´
Ψ
´
Ψ h(x, y)dϑ(x)dϑ(y) = 0 implies ϑ = 0 ∀ϑ. Now let
ϑ = PGY −PGPY be a measure on ΨG × ΨY , we can show
(in Supplementary Appendix S1) that
µU =
ˆ ˆ
f(g1, g2)h(y1, y2)dϑ(g1, y1)dϑ(g2, y2)
If the tensor product kernel (f ⊗h)
 (g1, y1), (g2, y2)

=
f(g1, g2)h(y1, y2) is strongly positive deﬁnite, then µU = 0
implies ϑ = 0 (i.e., µU = 0 ⇒Y ⊥⊥G). In fact, we can show
µU = 0 ⇒Y ⊥⊥G as long as f and g are both strongly
positive deﬁnite.
Theorem 2: Assume both f(·, ·) and h(·, ·) are strongly
positive
deﬁnite.
Let
˜h(Y1, Y2)
and
˜f(G1, G2)
be
the
centered
similarities
as
deﬁned
in
(1).
Deﬁne
µU
=
E( ˜f(Gi, Gj)˜h(Yi, Yj)). Then, µU = 0 ⇔Y ⊥⊥G.
The proof is given in Appendix A by employing mea-
sures embedding into the reproducing kernel Hilbert space.
Many popular kernels such as radial basis kernel h(y1, y2) =
exp(−||y1 −y2||q) (0 < q < 2) are strongly positive deﬁnite
kernel on Rp (Sriperumbudur et al., 2010). However, the
cross product kernel h(y1, y2) =< yi, yj > is not strongly
positive deﬁnite on Rp, by observing that
´ ´
< y1, y2 >
dϑ(y1)dϑ(y2) = 0 ⇔
´
ydϑ(y) = 0 ⇏ϑ = 0.
2.5 Asymptotic Test
For high dimensional data, it is computationally expensive
to calculate p-values P(U > Uobs) using permutation. Here,
we derive the asymptotic distribution of GSU under null
hypothesis.
By considering the predictor similarity as the weight
function
and
the
response
similarity
as
the
U
kernel,
GSU is a weighted U statistic (Lindsay et al., 2008; Wei
et al., 2016). More speciﬁcally, because its kernel satisﬁed
V ar(E(˜h(Y1, Y2)|Y2)) = 0 (Supplementary Appendix S1),
GSU is a degenerated weighted U statistic. To derive the lim-
iting distribution of GSU, we can decompose the centered re-
sponse similarity by, ˜h(y1, y2) = P∞
s=1 λsφs(y1)φs(y2), where
{λs} and {φs(· )} are eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the
U kennel ˜h(· , · ), and all the eigenfunctions are orthogonal,
i.e.,
´
φs(y1)φs′(y1)dF(y1) equals 0 if s ̸= s′ and equals 1 if
s = s′. Similarly, we can decompose the centered predictor
similarity by, ˜f(Gi, Gj) = P∞
t=1 ηtϕt(g1)ϕt(g2). We can then
rewrite the GSU as,
U
=
1
n −1
∞
X
t=1
∞
X
s=1
 
1
√n
n
X
i=1
η⋆
t (Gi)φ⋆
s(Yi)
!2
−
1
n −1
∞
X
t=1
∞
X
s=1
1
n
n
X
i=1
(η⋆
t (Gi)φ⋆
s(Yi))2 ,
where ϕ⋆
t (Gi) = η0.5
t
ϕt(Gi) and φ⋆
s(Yi) = λ0.5
s φs(Yi). Using
the form above, we can show that the limiting distribution of
GSU is a weighted sum of independent chi-square random
variables. This is the result of theorem 3 below, which is
proved in Appendix B.
Theorem 3: Assume E(h(Y, Y )) < ∞, E(f(G, G)) <

4
∞,
and
Y
⊥⊥
G.
Let
˜h(Y1, Y2)
and
˜f(G1, G2)
be
the
centered
similarities
as
deﬁned
in
(1).
Deﬁne
U
as U
=
1
n(n−1)
P
i̸=j ˜f(Gi, Gj)˜h(Yi, Yj). Then, nU
D
−→
P∞
t=1 ηt
P∞
s=1 λs(χ2
st −1), where {χ2
st} are independent chi-
square random variables with 1 degree of freedom.
Using
the
similar
techniques,
we
can
show
that
a
weighted
V
statistic
in
the
following
form,
V
=
1
n2
P
i,j ˜f(Gi, Gj)˜h(Yi, Yj), also converges to a weighted sum
of chi-squared variables, i.e., nV
D
−→P∞
t=1 ηt
P∞
s=1 λsχ2
st.
2.6 Power and Sample Size
In this subsection, we derive the asymptotic distribution of
GSU under the alternative hypothesis, and provide asymp-
totic power and sample size calculations for association anal-
ysis.
Denote ζ1 = V ar( ˜f(G1, G2)˜h(Y1, Y2)|(G2, Y2)). Assume
under the alternative hypothesis that µU > 0 and ζ1 >
0. Using the Hoeﬀding projection, we can show that GSU
asymptotically follows a normal distribution, with mean µU
and variance 4ζ1/n. This is the result of Theorem 4, which is
proved in Supplementary Appendix S4.
Theorem 4: Let ˜h(Y1, Y2) and
˜f(G1, G2) be the cen-
tered similarities as deﬁned in (1). Suppose Y is asso-
ciated with G, and the following conditions are satisﬁed:
E( ˜f(G1, G2)˜h(Y1, Y2)) = µU > 0, V ar( ˜f(G1, G2)˜h(Y1, Y2)) =
ζ0 < ∞, and V ar( ˜f(G1, G2)˜h(Y1, Y2)|(G2, Y2)) = ζ1 > 0.
Deﬁne U as U
=
1
n(n−1)
P
i̸=j ˜f(Gi, Gj)˜h(Yi, Yj). Then,
√n(U −µU)
D
−→N(0, 4ζ1).
The power of GSU at the signiﬁcance level α can be
calculated by, P{nU
>
q1−α}
=
Φ(
nµU −q1−α
2√nζ1
), where
q1−α is the 1 −α quantile for P∞
t=1 ηt
P∞
s=1 λs(χ2
st −1)
and Φ(· ) is the CDF of a standard normal distribu-
tion. The sample size required to achieve power β can
be calculated by solving Φ(
nµU −q1−α
2√nζ1
)
⩾
β. By denot-
ing Zβ
as the β
quantile for a standard normal dis-
tribution,
the
required
sample
size
is
given
by,
n
=
minn∈N
n
n : n ⩾(Zβ
√ζ1 + (Z2
βζ1 + µUq1−α)1/2)2/µ2
U
o
.
3. Generalized Similarity U for Sequencing
Association
3.1 Settings for Sequencing Data Analysis
In a sequencing association study, the response element is
called phenotype and the predictor element is called genotype.
Common forms of phenotype and genotype are scalars or
vectors. Suppose that n subjects are sequenced in a study,
where we are interested in testing the association of L phe-
notypic variables (yi,l, 1 ⩽i ⩽n, 1 ⩽l ⩽L) with M genetic
variants (gi,m, 1 ⩽i ⩽n, 1 ⩽m ⩽M). For each subject i,
we observe a phenotype vector yi ( yi = (yi,1, yi,2, · · · , yi,L)
) and a genotype vector gi ( gi = (gi,1, gi,2, · · · , gi,M)). In
the special case when L = 1 (or M = 1), it is simpliﬁed
to a univariate analysis (or a single-locus analysis). When
L > 1 (or M > 1), it extends to a multivariate analysis (or
a multi-locus analysis). Here, we allow multiple phenotypes
to be of diﬀerent types (e.g., continuous or categorical), and
do not assume any distribution of phenotypes. The number
of genetic variants M and the number of phenotypes L can
be larger than the sample size. For example, the genetic
data can be sequencing data (high dimensional genotype) and
the phenotype data can be imaging data (high dimensional
phenotype).
3.2 Similarity Measurement
The choices for the phenotype similarity h(· , · ) and the
genetic similarity f(· , · ) are ﬂexible. According to diﬀerent
types of genetic variants and the purpose of the analysis,
we can choose diﬀerent types of phenotype similarities and
genetic similarities.
For phenotype similarity, one popular approach is to use a
cross product kernel, i.e., h(yi, yj) =< yi, yj > (Tzeng et al.,
2009). Yet, as discussed in previous theoretical analysis, cross
product kernel may not ﬁt for robust association analysis.
Here, we propose a similarity measurement for both categor-
ical and continuous phenotype using radial basis kernel with
L1 norm (Laplacian Kernel),
SLK
i,j = exp(−
L
X
l=1
ωl|yi,l −yj,l|),
where ωl represents the weight for the l-th phenotypes given
based on prior knowledge. If there is no prior knowledge, we
can use an equal weight, ωl = 1/L. The Laplacian Kernel
(LK) based phenotype similarity can be modiﬁed to take
the correlation among the phenotypes into account, SLK
i,j
=
exp
 −1
LdT
ijΓdij

, where dij
=
(|yi1 −yj1|0.5, · · · , |yiL −
yjL|0.5)T . Γ can be chosen to reﬂect the correlations among
the phenotypes. For example, we can deﬁne Γ as, Γ =
( 1
n
Pn
i=1 yiyT
i )−0.5.
For the categorical SNVs data, the popular way of measur-
ing genetic similarity is to use IBS function or the weighted
IBS function(Lynch and Ritland, 1999). Assuming the genetic
variants (gi,m, 1 ⩽i ⩽n, 1 ⩽m ⩽M) are coded as 0, 1
and 2 for AA, Aa and aa respectively, the IBS-based genetic
similarity is deﬁned as, KIBS
i,j
=
1
2M
PM
m=1 2 −|gi,m −gj,m|.
Alternatively, the weighted-IBS (wIBS) genetic similarity can
be deﬁned to emphasize the eﬀects of rare variants, KwIBS
i,j
=
PM
m=1 wm(2 −|gi,m −gj,m|)/(2Υ), where wm represents the
weight for the m-th SNV in the SNV-set, and Υ is a scaling
constant, deﬁned as Υ = PM
m=1 wm. wm is usually deﬁned as
a function of minor allele frequency (MAF, denoted as γm).
For example, the weight wm can be calculated using inverse
variance, i.e., wm = 1/
p
γm(1 −γm). However, IBS-based
similarity can not be used for other genetic data, such as copy
number variation (count) or expression data (continuous).
Here, we propose a uniﬁed LK-based genetic similarity by
generalizing wIBS,
KLK
i,j
= exp
 −
M
X
m=1
wm|gi,m −gj,m|
Υ

,
where gi,m can be categorical, count or continuous variables,
and wm can be calculated as function of variance σ2
m of gm,
i.e., wm = 1/σm.
Thus, we deﬁned a uniﬁed measurement for genetic similar-
ity and phenotype similarity with Laplacian kernel exp(−|·−·
|). Since laplacian kernel is strongly positive deﬁnite, we know

Generalized Similarity U
5
that (from Theorem 2) the corresponding GSU has the prop-
erty µU = 0 ⇔G ⊥⊥Y , so that it can control type II error for
detection of any types of association. Since Laplacian kernel
is bounded similarity measurement, i.e., 0 ⩽h(·, ·) ⩽1 and
0 ⩽f(·, ·) ⩽1, we know the regularity conditions in Theorem
3 is satisﬁed and the asymptotic test for corresponding GSU
is robust against distribution assumptions (for large sample
size).
3.3 Computation and Covariates Adjustment
Let S = {Si,j}n×n and K = {Ki,j}n×n be the matrix form of
the phenotype similarity and genetic similarity, the centered
similarity matrices ˜S and ˜K can be obtained by, ˜S = (I −
J)S(I −J), and ˜K = (I −J)K(I −J), where I is an n-by-n
identity matrix, and J is an n-by-n matrix where all elements
are 1/n (Supplementary Appendix S5). Then GSU can be
expressed as, U =
1
n(n−1)
P
i̸=j ˜Ki,j ˜Si,j. In this form, U can
be viewed as a sum of the element-wise product of the two
matrices, ˜K0 and ˜S0, which are obtained by assigning 0 to the
diagonal elements of matrices ˜K and ˜S.
To allow for covariates adjustment, we can perform two
sided projection on the zero-diagonal centered similarity
matrices, ˜K0 and ˜S0. Suppose that there are P covariates
that need to be adjusted. Let X = {xi,p}n×P represents
the covariate matrix, we can calculate the covariate cen-
tered similarity matrices by (Supplementary Appendix S6),
ˆS = (I −X(XT X)−1XT ) ˜S0(I −X(XT X)−1XT ), and ˆK =
(I −X(XT X)−1XT ) ˜K0(I −X(XT X)−1XT ). The covariate
adjusted GSU can be expressed as,
ˆU = 1
n2
X
i,j
ˆKi,j ˆSi,j.
We include the diagonal terms in the covariate-adjusted sim-
ilarities because they also contain the similarity information
after the adjustment. In fact, the covariate-adjusted GSU is
a weighted V statistic, and its asymptotic distribution can
be attained similarly as weighted U statistic. We use matrix
eigen-decomposition to approximate the eigen-values in func-
tion decomposition. Let {ˆλs} and {ˆηt} be the eigen-values for
matrices ˆK and ˆS respectively, the limiting distribution of U
is given by (Supplementary Appendix S7),
n ˆU ∼
1
n(n −P −1)
n
X
t=1
ˆηt
n
X
s=1
ˆλsχ2
st,
where
{χ2
st}
are
independent
chi-square
random
vari-
ables
with
1
degree
of
freedom.
The
p-value
can
be
calculated by using the Davies’ method (Davies, 1980),
the
Liu’s
method(Liu
et
al.,
2009)
or
the
Kuonen’s
method(Kuonen, 1999). To facilitate the high dimensional
data analysis, we developed a C++ package based on GSU
(https://github.com/changshuaiwei/gsu).
4. Simulation study
4.1 Simulation method
To mimic real genetic structure, we used genetic data from
the 1000 Genome Project(Abecasis et al., 2010). Based on
the genetic data, we then simulated phenotype values. In
particular, we used a 1Mb region of the genome (Chromosome
17: 7344328-8344327) from the 1000 Genome Project. For
each simulation replicate, we randomly chose a 30kb segment
from the 1Mb region and formed a SNV-set for the analysis, in
which only rare variants (i.e., MAF < 0.05) are used except
otherwise speciﬁed. From the SNV-set, we set a proportion of
the SNVs as causal. A number of individuals were randomly
chosen from the total 1092 individuals as the simulation
sample to study the performance of the methods. We set
sample size n = 50 by default.
To investigate the robustness against diﬀerent phenotype
distributions, we simulated four types of phenotypes:
(1) A binary-distributed phenotype (denoted as B), by
logit(P(Yi = 1)) = µi + GT
i β,
(2) A Poisson-distributed phenotype (denoted as P), by Yi ∼
Pois(ai), log(ai) = µi + GT
i β,
(3) A Gaussian-distributed phenotype (denoted as G), by
Yi = µi + GT
i β + εi, εi ∼N(0, σ2),
(4) And a Cauchy-distributed phenotype (denoted as C), by
Yi ∼cauchy(ai, b), ai = µi + GT
i β,
Here, Yi and Gi were the phenotype value and the geno-
type vector (coded as 0, 1, and 2) for the i-th individual,
respectively. We set µi = 0 except otherwise speciﬁed. β were
the eﬀects of the SNVs, which were sampled from a uniform
distribution with a mean of µβ and a variance of σ2
β.
Three sets of simulations were performed. In simulation I,
we considered a single phenotype; in simulation II, we consid-
ered multivariate phenotype; in simulation III, we considered
multivariate phenotype under the inﬂuence of confounding
eﬀects. Details of simulation settings are in Supplementary
Appendix S8.
We evaluated the performance of GSU by comparing it with
variance component score (VCscore) test under univariate
or multivariate linear mixed model (Wu et al., 2011; Maity
et al., 2012). For each simulation, we created 1000 simulation
replicates to evaluate type I error and power. Type I error
rates and powers are calculated using percentage of p-values
smaller than a given threshold (e.g., 0.05) under null models
and alternative models respectively.
4.2 Result for Simulation I
The type I error rates and powers are summarized in Table
1. GSU had a well-controlled type I error (around 0.05) for
all 4 phenotypes, while VCscore had an inﬂated type I error
rates (0.113) for Cauchy-distributed phenotype and over-
conservative type I error rates (0.005) for Binary-distributed
phenotype.
For the disease model where half of the causal SNVs were
deleterious (Table 1), GSU had slightly lower power than VC-
score for Gaussian-distributed (0.258 v.s. 0.345) and Poisson-
distributed phenotype (0.506 v.s. 0.651), but had signiﬁcantly
higher power than VCscore for Cauchy-distributed (0.503 v.s.
0.21) and Binary-distributed phenotype(0.402 v.s. 0.083). The
same comparison was observed for the second disease model
in which a majority of the SNVs were deleterious.
We performed additional simulations by including both
common and rare variants (Supplementary Table S4). Under
this setting, the power of VCscore increased signiﬁcantly for
Binary phenotype (0.764), though still lower than that of GSU
(0.807). GSU attained higher power than VCscore for Poisson

6
(0.813 v.s. 0.795) and Cauchy (0.885 v.s. 0.573) phenotype.
Nevertheless, GSU was still less powerful than VCscore for
Gaussian phenotype (0.853 v.s. 0.878).
Table 1
Type I errors and Powers for the univariate analysis
Modela
Method
Distributionb
B
C
G
P
Null
Vcscore
0.005
0.113
0.019
0.047
GSU
0.044
0.051
0.047
0.058
Alt1
Vcscore
0.083
0.21
0.345
0.651
GSU
0.402
0.503
0.258
0.506
Alt2
Vcscore
0.023
0.434
0.747
0.942
GSU
0.458
0.753
0.628
0.864
aAlt1 represents settings of µβ = 0 and σ2
β > 0; Alt2 represents
settings of µβ > 0 and σ2
β > 0.
bB, C, G, P represent Binary-distributed, Cauchy-distributed,
Gaussian-distributed, and Poisson-distributed phenotypes, re-
spectively.
Table 2
Type I errors and Powers for the multivariate analysis
Model
Method
Distributiona
BPP
CGG
BBG
BCG
Null
Vcscore
0.054
0.194
0.049
0.179
GSU
0.051
0.043
0.049
0.055
Alt
Vcscore
0.939
0.273
0.478
0.309
GSU
0.84
0.664
0.716
0.684
aB, C, G, P represent Binary-distributed, Cauchy-distributed,
Gaussian-distributed, and Poisson-distributed phenotypes, re-
spectively.
Table 3
Type I errors at diﬀerent signiﬁcance levels
Level
Method
Distributiona
BPP
CGG
BBG
BCG
1 × 10−2
Vcscore
0.017
0.133
0.013
0.138
GSU
0.013
0.015
0.011
0.015
5 × 10−3
Vcscore
0.011
0.120
0.0078
0.124
GSU
0.0074
0.0091
0.0059
0.0093
aB, C, G, P represent Binary-distributed, Cauchy-distributed,
Gaussian-distributed, and Poisson-distributed phenotypes, re-
spectively.
4.3 Result for Simulation II
The type I error rates and powers for the multivariate analysis
are summarized in Table 2. Similar to the results of the
univariate analysis, GSU can correctly control type I error
at the level of 0.05 (Table 2), while VCscore had inﬂated
type I error when the phenotype contained variables with
heavy tailed distribution (e.g., CGG and BCG). GSU attained
higher power than VCscore for BBG, CGG and BCG pheno-
types, and similar power as VCscore for BPP phenotype.
We examined the type I error rates at more stringent
signiﬁcance levels (Table 3) by simulating 1 million replicates.
In general, GSU can control the type I error better than
VCscore. For example, at 5 × 10−3 and for BPP phenotype,
GSU had type I error near 5 × 10−3 (i.e., 7.4 × 10−3), while,
VCscore had type I error much higher than 5 × 10−3 (i.e.,
1.1 × 10−2). While simulation demonstrated robustness of
GSU over VCscore on controlling type I error, we observe
GSU has slightly inﬂated type I errors at 5 × 10−3 level.
We suspect this is because of the small sample size. We
therefore conducted another set of simulation with sample
size of 200, and the results showed type I errors of GSU are
better controlled for stringent signiﬁcant levels under larger
sample size (Supplementary Table S5).
To separate inﬂuences of diﬀerent distributions, we also
compared GSU and VCscore when phenotype have the same
distributions (i.e., BBB, CCC, GGG, PPP). The results
(Supplementary Table S6) are similar to those for univariate
phenotype. In general, GSU can control type I errors better
than VCscore. GSU had slightly lower power than VCscore
for GGG phenotype (0.882 v.s. 0.958) and PPP phenotype
(0.862 v.s. 0.966), but attained signiﬁcantly higher power for
BBB phenotype (0.862 v.s. 0.26) and CCC phenotype (0.724
v.s. 0.284). We further increased the dimension of phenotype
to 10 for each type, and the comparisons showed that GSU
have better control of type I error and attain higher power for
most cases (Supplementary Figure S1).
Table 4
Type I errors for multivariate analysis with moderate
confounding eﬀects
Adja
Method
Distributionb
BPP
CGG
BBG
BCG
Yes
Vcscore
0.322
0.174
0.054
0.184
GSU
0.061
0.056
0.056
0.057
No
Vcscore
0.408
0.171
0.217
0.183
GSU
0.135
0.113
0.147
0.115
aAdj represents whether covariate adjustments are performed.
bB, C, G, P represent Binary-distributed, Cauchy-distributed,
Gaussian-distributed, and Poisson-distributed phenotypes, re-
spectively.
4.4 Result for Simulation III
We summarized the type I errors in Table 4. Without co-
variates adjustment, both methods had inﬂated type I errors.
With covariates adjustment, GSU showed robustness against
confounding eﬀects for all 4 multivariate phenotypes, with
type I errors ranging from 0.056 to 0.061. VCscore can control
type I error for BBG phenotype (0.054), but had inﬂated
type I errors, ranging from 0.174 to 0.322, for the other 3
multivariate phenotypes.
In Figure 1, we generated the power curves by plotting the

Generalized Similarity U
7
powers of the two methods against diﬀerent sample sizes (50
to 200). GSU has higher power than VCscore for diﬀerent
sample sizes and multivariate phenotypes, except for BPP
phenotype. The “higher power” of VCscore for BPP pheno-
type is due to the fact that VCscore has inﬂated type I error
(i.e., 0.322, as shown in Table 4).
5. Real Data Application
We analyzed the whole genome sequencing data (WGS) from
Alzherimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) using
the GSU C++ package. ADNI is a large scale longitudinal
study that collects and utilize various predictors of Alzher-
imer’s Disease, including 3D brain imaging, cognitive mea-
surements and genetic data. The sample with WGS data
contains 808 individuals, with 280 Normal Controls (NC),
234 Early Mild Cognitive Impaired patients (EMCI), 246
Late Cognitive Impaired patients (LMCI), and 48 Alzheimer’s
Disease patients (AD) at study baseline.
Whole genome sequencing was performed on autosomal
chromosomes for each subject. To form SNV-set, we group
the genetic variants based on the gene range list from GRch37
assembly, where we only used the non-overlapping genes. For
genetic variants outside of gene ranges, we group them by
evenly spacing the remaining genome with windows of 50kb.
After completing quality control(e.g., delete variants with
high missing rate) and grouping process, about 21 millions
genetic variants remained for analysis, forming 61683 SNV-
sets.
We were interested in testing the association of the SNV-
sets with brain imaging summary matrices considered im-
portant to cognitive impairment. In particular, we used 6
variables: 18F-ﬂuoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG), Hippocampus,
Entorhinal, 8F-ﬂorbetapir (AV45), Fusiform, and Ventricles
measurements at base-line, as multivariate phenotype. The
phenotype similarity is calculated using weighted Laplacian
kernel, SLK
i,j
= exp(−PL
l=1 ωl|yi,l −yj,l|). We “ﬁshed” the
weight ωl from the case control status. In particular, we
regressed the case control status on the scaled multivariate
phenotype and obtained regression coeﬃcient βl for l-th vari-
able, where we assigned ωl = |βl| (Table S7).
In order to adjust the potential confounding eﬀects, we in-
cluded age, gender, race and top 20 genome principle compo-
nents as covariates in the analysis. Two sets of whole genome
association analysis were performed. For the ﬁrst scan, we
include both common and rare variants, while for the second
scan we only include rare variants. The QQ plots (Figure S2
and Figure S3) showed no systematical bias after adjusting
covariates. We listed the top 5 SNV-sets for each scan in Table
5. When both common and rare variants were considered,
4 SNV-sets (i.e., APOE, Ch19-45389309-45439308, APOC1,
TOMM40) pasted the Bonferroni threshold, among which the
genes APOE and TOMM40 has been reported in previous
studies. As a comparison, we also performed the analysis using
VCscore (Supplementary Table S10). VCscore attained sim-
ilar results for the top association ﬁndings, though with less
signiﬁcant p-values (e.g., p-value =1.98 × 10−26 for APOE).
When only rare variants are considered, no SNV-set past
the Bonferroni threshold. Interestingly, the gene APOC1 was
listed as one of the top 5 associated genes from both anal-
yses. Further investigation will be needed to study its role
in AD. More detailed results are in Table S8 and S9. We
further calculated the p-value of the top SNV-sets using AD
case-control status instead of multivariate phenotype with 6
intermediate measurements. The univariate analysis attained
less signiﬁcant result (Table S11). For example, the p-value
of APOE is 3.44 × 10−8 from analysis using AD case control
status, less signiﬁcant than 2.77 × 10−48 from analysis using
brain imaging matrices.
Table 5
Top SNV-sets in the multivariate analysis of whole genome
sequencing data in ADNI study
SNV-seta
Chr
Sizeb
p-value
Common and Rare Variants
APOE
19
17
2.77 × 10−48
Ch19-45389309-45439308
19
162
1.64 × 10−37
APOC1
19
37
3.38 × 10−31
TOMM40
19
126
9.28 × 10−19
RHPN2
19
758
2.54 × 10−06
Rare Variants
Ch1-107013494-107063493
1
240
1.96 × 10−06
APOC1
19
26
6.28 × 10−06
Ch17-40300052-40350051
17
64
2.51 × 10−05
Ch4-189560456-189610455
4
314
3.14 × 10−05
LOC101927616
12
107
3.16 × 10−05
aSNV-set is named either using gene name, or with the format
of “chromosome - starting position - ending position”, where the
position is referred to GRch37 assembly.
bNumber of SNV in the SNV-set
6. Discussion
Many genetic studies collect multiple secondary phenotypes,
or use intermediate biomarkers, to study complex diseases. By
considering multiple phenotypes that measure the diﬀerent
aspects of underlying diseases, the power of the association
analysis can potentially be improved (Zhang et al., 2010;
Maity et al., 2012). Several methods were recently developed
to detect the joint eﬀect of genetic variants on multivariate
phenotype(Tao et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015). Most were
built on parametric framework that poses certain assumptions
on phenotype distribution. In this paper, we proposed a non-
parametric test, GSU, based on similarity measurement. Sim-
ulation study showed that our methods can can control type I
error for multiple diﬀerent phenotypes and moderate level of
confounding eﬀects. In most cases, GSU also attained higher
power than the parametric method. Although the simulation
results depend on the simulation settings, and should always
be interpreted in the context of the simulation setting, we
believe the results reﬂect the advantage of GSU in a broader
sense, because 1) the genetic data used in the simulation
comes from the 1000 Genome Project, which reﬂects the LD
pattern and the allele frequency distribution in the general

8
Figure 1.
Power comparison for the multivariate analysis after adjusting for confounding eﬀects
population; and 2) we simulated a wide range of disease
models, including univariate phenotype and multivariate phe-
notype with diﬀerent distributions, to mimic real disease
scenarios.
The test statistics in VCscore is a quadratic form, T =
ˆY T K ˆY , where ˆY is the standardized residual under null,
and K is the genetic similarity matrix. If we rewrite T
as T
= P
i,j Ki,j( ˆYi ˆYj), VCscore is actually a weighted
V statistic with cross product kernel ˆSi,j = ˆYi ˆYj. In this
respect, VCscore can be considered as a special case of
GSU. Nonetheless, there are several key diﬀerences: 1) GSU
allows general forms of similarity and thus can be used for
association analysis of elements in general metric space; 2)
For multivariate association analysis, GSU with LK based
similarity has the ability to detect any types of association
(strongly positive deﬁnite similarity) and its asymptotic test
is robust against distribution assumptions (bounded similar-
ity); 3) For covariates adjustment, GSU used a centralized
similarity ˜S0 and then perform two sided projection, i.e.,
ˆS
= (I −X(XT X)−1XT ) ˜S0(I −X(XT X)−1XT ), while,
VCscore performed two sided projection on original simi-
larity (S = Y Y T ), i.e., ˆS = (I −X(XT X)−1XT )S(I −
X(XT X)−1XT ); 4) Asymptotic distribution of GSU is in the
form of P∞
t=1 ηt
P∞
s=1 λsχ2
st, where distribution of VCscore is
in the form of P
s λsχ2
s; 5) For multivariate phenotype with
L variables, the dimension for similarity matrix is n × n in
GSU and nL × nL in VCscore.
In simulation studies, we observed higher power of GSU
over VCscore. This is mainly due to the fact that GSU is
equipped with strongly positive deﬁnite kernel which can
detect any type of association while the cross product kernel
in VCscore does not have this property. We performed another
set of simulations by generating dependence structure via
rotation operator (Supplementary Appendix S9). In partic-
ular, we ﬁrst generate two i.i.d. multimodal continuously
distributed variables and then rotate the vector with angle
θ ∈(0, π/4) (Figure S4). The data generated thus does not
have ﬁrst order dependence structure (correlation) nor second
order dependence structure. The result (Figure S5) showed
that GSU ( with LK-based similarity) had power of 1 for
large enough sample size, while VCscore (with cross product
kernel) can not detect any association regardless of diﬀerent
sample sizes. Though the“toy” simulation may not represent
common scenarios in genetic association studies, it empirically
explains the reason why GSU attained higher power than
VCscore. To further investigate the inﬂuence of diﬀerent
kernels, we performed simulations using 5 diﬀerent kernels
for GSU, including 3 strongly positive deﬁnite kernels. The
result shows that GSU with strongly positive deﬁnite kernels
have higher powers for the most of the time, among which
GSU with LK kernel have highest power (Supplementary
Figure S6). In general, we recommend to use LK kernel for
GSU. Nevertheless, its performance may not guaranteed to
be optimal. In this case, we can perform kernel selection, for
example, by using the procedure proposed by Wu et al. (2013).
Besides the choice of kernel, diﬀerent choices of weights can
also inﬂuence the power of GSU for multivariate phenotype. In
principle, we should use weights that represent their relative
importance with respect to the underlying ”true phenotype”.
For example, in real data analysis, we obtained the weights
based on their contributions to the AD disease status. Here
in this paper, we only considered the joint eﬀect of SNV-sets.
If gene environment interaction eﬀects are to be considered,
we can calculate a composite similarity using both the ge-
netic information and environmental information (Wei et al.,
2016; Tong et al., 2016), and then construct GSU with the
composite similarity and the phenotype similarity.
The asymptotic test for GSU (with LK-based similarity)
is shown to be robust to distribution assumption. This is
because the Laplacian kernel is bounded between 0 and 1,
and the resulting similarities h(·, ·) and f(·, ·) thus satisfy the
regularity condition of asymptotic test, i.e., E(h(Y, Y )) < ∞
and E(f(G, G)) < ∞. However, cross-product kernel does
not have this property. As a result, we observed that in
simulation studies GSU had more robust type I errors than
VCscore. Nevertheless, we still observed slightly inﬂated type
I error with stringent signiﬁcant level (e.g., 5 × 10−3) when
n = 50. This is because the asymptotic null distribution
can not approximate the actually null distribution well when
sample size is small compared with when sample size is
large (Supplementary Figure S7). One way to improve the
robustness for small sample size is to take an rank transfor-

Generalized Similarity U
9
mation for each variable (i.e., ri,j = (rank(yi,j) −0.5)/n)
before calculating the similarity. We performed additional
simulation for GSU with rank transformation for n = 50
using same setting as simulation II. The results showed that
GSU with rank transformation (GSU-rk) can control type I
error well even with more stringent signiﬁcant level for small
sample size (Supplementary Table S12). Nevertheless, rank
transformation can cause loss of information, which might
lead to lower power.
In simulations, we observe that VCscore, although de-
signed for Gaussian distributed phenotype, appears to be
able to control type I error appropriately and attain slightly
higher power for Poisson phenotype. This may be due to
that Poisson distribution can be reasonably approximated by
Gaussian distribution when its mean is moderate to large. We
performed additional simulation using heavily right skewed
Poisson distribution, and the results showed VCscore had
lower power for one simulation and inﬂated type I errors for
another simulation (Supplementary Table S13). We can use
rank transformation to improve the robustness of VCscore
(Wei et al., 2016). We performed additional simulation to
compare GSU-rk to VCscore test with rank transformation
(VCscore-rk). The result (Supplementary Table S14) showed
that VCscore-rk can control Type I errors under various
setting. However, VCscore-rk still had lower powers than
GSU-rk for most cases.
For the analysis of multivariate phenotype, the diﬀerence
on the dimension of similarity matrix for GSU and VCscore
inﬂuenced the computation eﬃciency especially when the
number of variables in multivariate phenotype increases. The
key reason is the cost of the eigen decomposition. For analysis
of L-variable multivariate phenotype in a sample of size n,
GSU needs to decompose a n × n matrix, while VCscore
needs to decompose a Ln × Ln matrix. The time used for
matrix decomposition are O(n3) for GSU and O(L3n3) for
VCscore. For example, in real data application when L = 6,
the average time to analyze one SNV set is 36.75 seconds
for VCscore and 1.3 seconds for GSU. For high-dimensional
setting (e.g., L >> n), VCscore is computationally infeasible.
An additional simulation shows that GSU is well behaved
when the dimension of phenotype increase to 100 (Supple-
mentary Figure S8). Nevertheless, noises in high dimensional
phenotype or genotype may reduce the power of GSU. In
this case, dimension reduction techniques, such as variable
selection and principle component analysis, can be used to
increase power.
The covariate adjustment proposed in the paper is a
heuristic approach for adjusting confounding eﬀect. Accurate
adjustment of confounding eﬀects requires additional assump-
tions on the distributions and the functional forms between
responses and covariates. In the paper, we showed GSU works
well when the confounding eﬀects are moderate. Nonetheless,
the heuristic covariate adjustment in GSU should always be
used with caution. If there is a strong confounding eﬀect, the
heuristic approach might not control type I error very well.
For this paper, covariate adjustment is not the primary focus,
and the issue will be investigated in future studies.
Besides confounding eﬀects, the correlation among vari-
ables in multivariate phenotype may also inﬂuence the perfor-
mance of association testing. This is particularly important
for regression based methods, since it handles multivariate
phenotype by stretching the phenotype matrix to a long
phenotype vector. Without considering correlations among
variables in phenotype, the test will lead to inﬂated type I
error. Nevertheless, GSU don’t have this issue, since its sim-
ilarity matrix is calculated on subject level and its inference
only assume independence between subjects. We performed
additional simulations by introducing additional correlation
in the multivariate phenotype (Supplementary Table S15).
The results showed that, in general, GSU can control type I
error and attain higher power than VCscore (Supplementary
Figure S9).
In recent years, U-statistic-based methods became popular
in genetic data analysis, and have shown their robustness and
ﬂexibility for analyzing genetic data(Schaid et al., 2005; Li
et al., 2011; Wei and Lu, 2015; Wei et al., 2016). GSU is
a general framework of association analysis and is based on
similarity measurements and U statistics. In this paper, we
have focused on the association analysis between multivariate
phenotype and categorical sequencing data (i.e, SNV data).
GSU can easily be applied to analyze other types of genetic
data, such as count data (CNV data) and continuous data
(expression data) with uniﬁed LK-based similarity (Section
3.2). With appropriate similarity measurement (Section 2.1),
GSU can also be used for association testing of modern data
types, such as imaging, curves and trees.
