arXiv:2201.02792v1  [cs.CL]  8 Jan 2022
Deﬁning maximum acceptable latency of AI-enhanced CAI tools
Claudio Fantinuoli1,2, Maddalena Montecchio1
1 Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz
2 KUDO
1
Abstract
Recent years have seen an increasing num-
ber of studies around the design of computer-
assisted interpreting tools with integrated auto-
matic speech processing and their use by trainees
and professional interpreters.
This paper dis-
cusses the role of system latency of such tools
and presents the results of an experiment de-
signed to investigate the maximum system la-
tency that is cognitively acceptable for inter-
preters working in the simultaneous modality.
The results show that interpreters can cope with
a system latency of 3 seconds without any major
impact in the rendition of the original text, both
in terms of accuracy and ﬂuency. This value is
above the typical latency of available AI-based
CAI tools and paves the way to experiment with
larger context-based language models and higher
latencies.
2
Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) has been
regarded as a technology “with considerable po-
tential for changing the way interpreting is prac-
ticed” [23].
In particular, ASR has been pro-
posed as a means to overcome the shortcomings
in current implementations of computer-assisted
interpreting (CAI) tools, such as the inherent
diﬃculty to manually lookup terms while inter-
preting. By integrating AI-based features in the
interpreter workstation, such as the real-time au-
tomatic suggestion of numbers and other prob-
lem triggers [13], and by integrating advance-
ments in extractive and predictive algorithms
based on machine learning [28], the cognitive
load required by the use of CAI tools may be
reduced, oﬀering new opportunities for inter-
preters to improve their performance. First em-
pirical research seems to point in this direction
[8, 14].
AI-enhanced CAI tools are generally based on
the concatenation of several modules that may
comprise a speech-to-text transcription engine,
a parsing module to identify the units of inter-
est, for example numbers, terminology or proper
names, and a visualisation component for the
human-machine interaction. Other implementa-
tions may adopt an end-to-end approach, mak-
ing the cascading architecture obsolete.
Such
tools can be deployed on the edge, running com-
pletely on the user’s device, or on the web,
hosted on servers and accessed through a Web
Browser. Generally speaking, CAI tools present
suggestions with a certain amount of delay with
respect to the original speech.
This delay is
due to the architectural design of the tool and
its components, for example the ASR latency or
the computation time needed to inference a lan-
1

guage model, but also to the intrinsic nature of
the task, which may require a certain amount of
linguistic context in order to make an informed
decision on what to show to the ﬁnal user. In
a time-sensitive activity such as simultaneous
interpreting, system latency may require inter-
preters to adopt new interpreting strategies to
successfully integrate the suggestions into their
rendition. If latency, however, exceeds a certain
threshold, interpreters may not be able to in-
tegrate the suggestions, or may do this at the
expenses of ﬂuency, cohesion, or even accuracy.
In this case, the use of such high-latency tool
would become detrimental for the user-machine
interaction, for the interpreter’s cognitive load,
and ﬁnally for the quality of the rendition.
Not much is known about this maximum ac-
ceptable latency threshold, i.e.
the maximum
ear-voice-span (EVS) that interpreters can cope
with in order to successfully integrate external
suggestions without impacting the overall inter-
preting performance. Not only this value may
vary among subjects, but it may also be diﬀerent
from the one reported in experimental analysis
of interpretation performed without the use of a
CAI tool.
Our hypothesis is that displaying suggestions
within the average EVS reported in literature
should not negatively impact the interpreter ren-
dition, even when this is ‘forced’ upon the inter-
preter by the latency with which the tool gen-
erates such suggestions. To our knowledge this
is the ﬁrst study that tries to empirically an-
swer this question. On the one hand, knowledge
about this threshold is crucial to understand if
current AI-based CAI implementations can al-
ready meet interpreters expectations or if ma-
jor eﬀorts should be placed in further reducing
system latency. On the other hand, an accept-
able higher latency could allow the integration
of more time-demanding NLP features, such as
the automatic prediction of diﬃcult parts of the
speech [eg. 28].
The reminder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 3 introduces the related work in
the area of CAI tools and the empirical experi-
ments conducted on them so far. Section 4 de-
scribes the data and the methodology adopted in
this experiment. Section 5 introduces the evalu-
ation framework. Section 6 presents the results.
Finally, section 7 discusses the conclusion and
the outlook.
3
Related work
Recent years have seen an increasing number of
studies around the design of AI-based computer-
assisted interpreting tools and their use by
trainees and professional interpreters.
Computer-assisted interpreting tools are dig-
ital devices designed to support the interpreter
in diﬀerent steps of their work, from preparation
to the very act of interpreting. They have been
proposed by several researchers in the past 20
years or so [29, 24, 27], but it is only recently
that there has been a surge in interest among
the community’s members.
Thanks to new advances in artiﬁcial intelli-
gence, ASR has reached a quality level that
makes it suitable for integration into support-
ive technologies. By automating and extending
the query system of CAI tools, this integration
may solve the shortcomings of traditional tools
[eg. 12, 11, 18] and extend the features avail-
able in an interpreters’ workstation, for example
automatically suggesting translations of speciﬁc
terms as well as transcribing numbers and proper
names in real-time.
Over the years, a handful of empirical studies
2

have been carried out to test the feasibility of the
human-machine interaction in the simultaneous
modality. They have focused in particular on the
eﬀectiveness of ASR-support during the interpre-
tation of numbers [9, 8, 14], one of the problem
triggers of simultaneous interpreting identiﬁed in
literature [4, 15, 17, 26].
In order to measure
the impact on the quality of the rendition, these
studies have used either mock-up systems with
a very short latency [9, 6] or real-life tools with
a reported latency of under 2 seconds [8, 14].
From an interpreter perspective, the system
latency impacts the ear-voice span (EVS) of in-
terpreters since it forces the interpreter to wait
a certain amount of time before being able to
integrate the suggestions into their rendition.
The EVS is the amount of time that separates
the words uttered by the speaker in the source
speech and the equivalent rendition in the target
speech uttered by the interpreter [23]. Research
in this ﬁeld has a “long-standing tradition” [7]
and EVS is considered an essential variable that
can potentially impact interpreters’ performance
[2, 16, 17, 20] such that it continues to be an ob-
ject for analysis and assessment.
Previous research has found that the vari-
able limits of interpreters’ EVS are generally at-
tributable to two main factors: input-related fac-
tors, which might also enable interpreters to con-
sciously regulate their lag, and personal factors,
e.g. short term memory-related factors, that in-
ﬂuence the maximum capacity of the memory
[26, 1, 19].
Interpreters are free to regulate -
at least to a certain degree - their EVS depend-
ing on the features of the speech segment they
are translating, increasing or decreasing it con-
sciously as a strategy [1, 10].
Measuring EVS is not immediate and easy,
due to the fact that grammar, word order and
syntactic structure might be diﬀerent in the two
languages [26]. Average EVS reported in litera-
ture is between 2 and 3 seconds [2, 19, 20], with
a peak of 10 seconds [22]; if measured in words,
a mean ranging from 5 to 10 words has been re-
ported [25] .
4
Data and methodology
4.1
Dataset
For this experiment we used numbers as unit of
interest to be suggested by the system, as this is
a problem trigger that has been largely studied
so far in empirical experiments related to CAI
tools. We choose and edited therefore a speech
particularly dense with numbers.
The speech
had a duration of 7 minutes and 15 seconds and
did not pose any particular diﬃculties in terms
of terminology.
The speech was delivered in English by a non-
native speaker and participants were asked to
translate it simultaneously into their native lan-
guage (Italian).
The average speech pace was
105.5 words per minute, which corresponds to
an ideal speech rate for the simultaneous inter-
pretation of improvised speeches and which is
close to the ideal read-aloud speech rate of 100
words per minute.
The speech had 25 stimuli
(numbers); 10 of them were accompanied by a
referent.
The speech was prerecorded and a video sim-
ulating an ASR system was edited ad-hoc by the
authors of the experiment in order to retain full
control over the variable ‘latency’. In the video
the transcription of the numbers (without the
relevant referent) was shown on screen after a
variable delay compared to the moment the par-
ticipants received the acoustic signal in the head-
set. The acoustic numerical input was removed
from the recorded speech and replaced with a
3

neutral acoustic signal (/beep/). This choice was
made in order to force the participants to use the
visualization of the numbers on screen, thus re-
lying exclusively on the ASR simulation. Every
visual input (number) was displayed based on a
preset latency, which gradually increased during
the course of the speech. Numbers were shown
in isolation with no embedded transcription of
the speech. The text was divided into ﬁve diﬀer-
ent sections. In every section the visualization
of the stimulus occurred with a diﬀerent latency
– in the ﬁrst section, the numbers appeared on
the screen 1 second after the acoustic signal, in
the second section after 2 seconds, and so forth.
During their performance, participants received
the visual numerical input on a maxi screen sit-
uated inside the classroom or on the monitors
inside the booths.
4.2
Participants
A total of eight participants took part in this
study.
All participants were students.
They
were Italian native speakers with German and
English in their language combination enrolled
in their ﬁnal year of a Master in Conference In-
terpreting program and had at least 1 year expe-
rience in simultaneous interpretation. The par-
ticipants did not have past experience of inter-
preting with CAI tools or ASR-enhanced CAI
tools. This condition is in line with experimen-
tal setups adopted in similar studies [eg. 8, 14].
Some weeks before the experiment, the par-
ticipants were provided with three short videos
containing a simulation of the ASR system in or-
der to be minimally exposed to the experimental
format. These videos were edited along the lines
of the video used for the actual experiment, but
all numerical visual inputs were displayed with
the exact same latency, in contrast with the vari-
able latency with which the numerical visual in-
puts were displayed in the experiment. The goal
was to help the participants to get accustomed
to the experiment format, i.e., the way numbers
were transcribed, their font size, the color and
the way the order of magnitude was shown [14].
5
Evaluation
framework
and
procedure
The analysis of the collected data has been per-
formed on two diﬀerent levels, namely on a
stimuli-based and on a segment-based level.
The aim of the stimuli-based evaluation is to
assess the accuracy level achieved by the inter-
preters in rendering the units of interest in the
target language, depending on the variable la-
tency of the mockup system. Within this level
of assessment, the accurate rendition of the units
of interest is evaluated considering the follow-
ing components: the numerical information com-
prising its order of magnitude, and, if present,
the relevant referent. A number of parameters
were collected for the evaluation: presence of the
number in the rendition, accuracy of the number,
presence of the referent, accuracy of the referent,
pronunciation disﬂuency. Numbers and referents
that were approximated, generalized or omitted
were considered to be errors. Moreover, lexical,
syntactic, phonological or articulation mistakes
were also classiﬁed as errors.
The segment-based evaluation
assesses the
quality of the entire segments in which the num-
bers are embedded. This evaluation focuses on
two diﬀerent parameters. The ﬁrst is the accu-
racy of the target segment, measured in terms
of the following linguistic aspects: faithfulness,
grammatical correctness, completeness, logical
cohesion, consistency, plausibility.
The second
4

parameter is the listener’s perception in terms
of delivery ﬂow.
This evaluation level focuses
on the following paralinguistic aspects: percep-
tion of the interpreters’ voice and rhythm, elo-
quence, presentation, prosody and communica-
tive eﬀectiveness. The segment-based evaluation
has been performed using a Likert scale (1 to 5)
by three diﬀerent evaluators.
There are three major limitations in this
study that could be addressed in future research.
Firstly, the level of interpretation proﬁciency of
the participants selected for this experiment is
biased towards the lower end. It is reasonable
to assume that a randomized sample in terms
of proﬁciency, for example including also profes-
sional interpreters, may increase the maximum
acceptable latency measured in the experiment.
Secondly, the experiment focused only on a sin-
gle language pair.
Because of intrinsic varia-
tions among languages, EVS and diﬀerent strate-
gies adopted by interpreters on the basis of the
language combination may inﬂuence the thresh-
old under scrutiny. Finally, variations in speech
complexity, for example in terms of syntactic
structures, delivery speed etc.
have not been
taken into consideration in our study. However,
they may have a considerable impact on inter-
preters cognitive load and consequently on their
ability to successfully integrate suggestions and
may require a dynamic adaptation of latency ac-
cording to this variable.
6
Results
6.1
Stimuli-based evaluation
As introduced in the previous section,
the
stimuli-based evaluation focuses on the stimuli
(numbers) and their referents and not on the
whole sentence in which they are embedded.
1
2
3
4
5
94
96
98
Figure 1: Accuracy of number rendition
No number and no referent has been omitted
at any latency by any of the candidates.
The
precision, however, varies according to the la-
tency. Figure 1 presents the accuracy of the ren-
dition of the numbers displayed by the ASR sim-
ulation system. The best results were achieved
with the ﬁrst three latencies: 97.14% at 1 and
2 seconds and 98.85% at 3 seconds. The better
score at 3 seconds may be explained with the in-
terpreters acclimatisation to the dynamic of the
experiment, thus enabling them to adapt their
interpreting approach after having generated a
learning eﬀect [21]. The worst results were ob-
served when the latency increased above 3 sec-
onds, and in particular 93.14% at 4 and 94.86%
at 5 seconds.
In Figure 5 the accuracy of the referents of
the displayed numbers is presented. The high-
est score was reached with a latency of 3 sec-
onds (100%). The accuracy decreases with the
two higher latencies: 94.28% at 4 seconds and
85.71% at ﬁve seconds.
The number of pronunciation
disﬂuencies
5

1
2
3
4
5
85
90
95
100
Figure 2: Accuracy of reference rendition
(Figure 3) reached a pick with a latency of 4
seconds (25.71% of pronounced numbers present
a disﬂuency). With lower latencies the number
of disﬂuencies is low: 2.85% of numbers were dis-
ﬂuent at 1 second and 5.71% at 2 and 3 seconds.
6.2
Segment-based evaluation
The segment-based evaluation aims at extend-
ing the assessment of the quality of the rendition
from the unit of interest to the entire segment in
which this unit appears. The segment-level ac-
curacy was higher with a latency of 1 and 2 sec-
onds. In particular, the best score was reached
with 2 seconds. As in the stimuli-based evalua-
tion, this leads us to conclude that the partici-
pants, although able to successfully integrate the
accurate interpretation of the numbers displayed
in their own EVS, needed a settling period in or-
der to gain familiarity with the speech and the
experimental format.
A minimal decline in segment-level accuracy
was observed from latency 3 onward, while with
1
2
3
4
5
5
10
15
20
25
Figure 3: Disﬂuency in number rendition
1
2
3
4
5
4
4.2
4.4
Figure 4: Accuracy at segment level
6

5 seconds latency the accuracy degrades quite
considerably. It can be assumed that with this
high latency, participants experienced diﬃcul-
ties in allocating the correct amount of cogni-
tive resources, since they were required to focus
on several tasks – on the screen with the num-
ber displayed with a speciﬁc delay, on retaining
the information they had just heard in working
memory and on processing the new segments of
the speech that continued to be uttered by the
speaker [eg. 17].
The ﬂuency of the delivery was evaluated high
in the latency range from 1 to 3 seconds. Par-
alinguistic aspects, e.g., the voice and the ﬂu-
ency of the rendition have been rated more agree-
able in the ﬁrst three sections. With 4 seconds,
the delivery ﬂow deteriorated signiﬁcantly, and
it reached its lowest score in the 5 seconds la-
tency section. It is plausible to assume that not
only the increasing cognitive load triggered by
a longer EVS also had signiﬁcant repercussions
on the manner in which the interpreters deliv-
ered the target speech, as it adversely aﬀected
paralinguistic aspects, such as the rhythm, the
intonation, the voice and the appearance [eg. 5,
3].
7
Conclusions and outlook
In this paper we presented the results of an em-
pirical experiment aimed at measuring the max-
imum acceptable latency of an automatic sug-
gestion feature for simultaneous interpretation.
The results seem to suggest that interpreters
are able to integrate suggestions by ad-hoc ex-
tending their ear-voice-span to 2 seconds without
compromising the quality of their rendition and
to 3 seconds without any major disruption. A
further extension of the system latency seems to
1
2
3
4
5
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
Figure 5: Fluency at segment level
induce a consistent reduction of precision in the
use of such suggestions and in the emergence of
information losses in the overall rendition. This
is in line with our original hypothesis that the
system latency should not exceed the average
interpreter’s EVS. Within the latency thresh-
old outlined in the experiment, next generation
AI-enhanced CAI tools could be able to accom-
modate more complex and context-based NLP-
features without a signiﬁcant risk of impairing
the usability of the tool.
