A case study of Generative AI in MSX Sales Copilot: Improving seller
productivity with a real-time question-answering system for content
recommendation
Manpreet Singh 1 Ravdeep Pasricha 1 Nitish Singh 1 Ravi Prasad Kondapalli 1 Manoj R 1 Kiran R 1
Laurent Bou´e 1
Abstract
In this paper, we design a real-time question-answering system specifically targeted for helping sellers get relevant
material/documentation they can share live with their customers or refer to during a call. Taking the Seismic
content repository as a relatively large scale example of a diverse dataset of sales material, we demonstrate how
LLM embeddings of sellers’ queries can be matched with the relevant content. We achieve this by engineering
prompts in an elaborate fashion that makes use of the rich set of meta-features available for documents and sellers.
Using a bi-encoder with cross-encoder re-ranker architecture, we show how the solution returns the most relevant
content recommendations in just a few seconds even for large datasets. Our recommender system is deployed as
an AML endpoint for real-time inferencing and has been integrated into a Copilot interface that is now deployed
in the production version of the Dynamics CRM, known as MSX, used daily by Microsoft sellers.
Keywords: Copilot, Semantic search, Prompt engineering, Question-Answering, Cross-encoder
1. Introduction
Generative AI has caught the imagination of the world since
ChatGPT was released by Open AI towards the end of
2022. Leading this trend, Microsoft has announced var-
ious Copilot initiatives with the first one being the GitHub
Copilot in June 2022 to assist users of Visual Studio in
code auto-completion. Subsequently, Microsoft 365 Copi-
lot was announced in March 2023 to convert user input
into content in M365 apps, such as Word, Excel, Power-
Point, Outlook, Teams. Around the same time, Microsoft
announced the Dynamics 365 Copilot as the world’s first
Copilot in both Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
and Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) applications bring-
ing next-generation AI to every line of business. The Mi-
1Microsoft, CX Data Cloud + AI. Correspondence to:

crosoft Sales Experience team has internally customized
the Dynamics 365 Copilot for its CRM system, popularly
known as MSX and released MSX Copilot in July 2023 to
select sellers.
The goal of the MSX Copilot is to improve seller produc-
tivity and it went live with few skills in July 2023. A skill
is a subject area or knowledge or task awareness for the
MSX Sales Copilot. The objective of these skills is to assist
the sellers prepare for a meeting with a customer more effi-
ciently. For example, a seller should be able to ask questions
to the Copilot chatbot in natural language about any of the
topics covered by the skills and get relevant answers to their
questions.
We have built and deployed the first machine learning based
skill for MSX Copilot called “MSX Content Recommender”
which is the topic of this paper. Given a seller’s query, the
purpose of this skill is to return relevant technical documen-
tation drawn from the Seismic content repository [1].
1
arXiv:2401.04732v1  [cs.IR]  4 Jan 2024

2. Related work
With the democratization of transformer models [2] like
BERT [3], RoBERTa [4], Sentence-Bert [5] and, more
recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT
[6], most issues involving Natural Language Process-
ing/Understanding have been approached via the angle of
text embeddings.
In this work we focus on semantic search which consists
of finding relevant documents from an input query which
is not based on keyword matching but rather on contex-
tual understanding. Because of these recent advancements
in LLMs many search and chatbot applications are moving
from lexical-based search to semantic search.
Unlike classical semantic search problems where one trans-
forms both the user query and the content of the documents
into embeddings, we are instead considering the situation
where one only has access to meta-feature data about the
documents but not their actual content.
Our strategy consists in transforming the metadata about the
documents into an English-formed sentence as explained in
Section 3. This way, we lift ourselves back to the level of
asymmetric semantic search. On one side, we have short
user queries and on the other side we have longer textual
description of the documents based on their metadata. In
this context, we employ a 2-stage LLM-based architecture
to solve the search problem as explained in Section 4. Next,
we provide performance evaluation both in terms of latency
as well as (human) domain experts relevancy estimation in
Section 5. Finally, we conclude with a description of how
our system has been integrated as a Copilot skill currently
live in the Microsoft Sales Experience (MSX) platform in
Section 6.
3. Metadata prompt engineering
As mentioned in the previous section, we are considering
the situation where we do not have access to the content of
the documents but only to their metadata.
In a manner similar to tabular datasets, documents are
characterized by a set of features F = {f1, · · · , fn} and
any specific document ck takes on specific feature val-
ues F(ck) = {f1(ck), · · · , fn(ck)}.
As an example, one may think of a categorical feature fi =
format that characterizes the format of a document. Its
possible values for a specific document ck may be fi(ck) ∈
{PDF, URL, . . . } depending on the document. One may
also have numerical features fi such that fi(ck) ∈R. For
example, fi ≡number of views so that fi(ck) counts
how many times document ck has been viewed in the past.
In this case, we introduce a user-defined function g that
maps numerical features into different categories depending
on the numerical value fi(ck) and on the statistics of fi.
This way, applying g to fi(ck) transforms the numerical fea-
tures into finite sets of categories. A specific implementation
of g will be discussed in Section 5.3.
If we define the function g to be the identity for categori-
cal features, we can absorb both categorical and numerical
features under the same notation so that g ◦fi(ck) always
corresponds to a string value associated with feature fi re-
gardless of whether fi is a categorical or numerical feature.
Given a document ck, we concatenate each one its fea-
tures fi with and their string-valued representations g ◦
fi(ck) so that ck is now translated into a “prompt” defined
as
Prompt(ck) :=
n
M
i=1

fi ⊕
h
g ◦fi(ck)
i
(1)
where ⊕stands for string concatenation. In practice we
have considered n ≈20 features. An ablation study of
including or not including numerical features with a specific
implementation of g is presented in Section 5
Since all documents and their metadata are available of-
fline, we can apply our prompt engineering function defined
in Eq. (1) to all documents and obtain a set of prompts
P = {Prompt(c1), · · · , Prompt(cn)}
(2)
In other words, we have created a new representation of all
the documents in the corpus C as a set of textual features P.
4. Architecture of the LLM-based
recommender model
Given a corpus of content C = {c1, · · · , cn} (where each ci
is a document) and a query q entered into the Copilot in-
terface, the goal of the model is to respond with a list of
relevant documents drawn from C.
Classically, one of the most popular metric to evaluate the
relevance of recommender models is the so-called Normal-
ized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG). Unfortunately
this requires to have labeled data for the ground truth rele-
vance score of the search results. Those are not available in
our case and we discuss in the conclusion our future plans
in this regard. Instead we propose to follow a completely
unsupervised approach that relies on pre-trained publicly
available LLM models. We define a 2-stage system
1. the first stage is responsible for quickly retrieving
a short list of documents that are potentially good
matches to the user query. This is implemented via
a bi-encoder model (see Section 4.1).
2. the second stage is responsible for re-ranking the short
list produced in the first stage to have more relevant

Figure 1. Illustration of the overall 2-stage architecture described in Section 4.
documents appearing first. This is implemented via a
cross-encoder model (see Section 4.2).
As mentioned in the previous section, the problem we tackle
in this work is that of asymmetric semantic search where
a short query is used to match against longer text. This
context of asymmetric question-answering was previously
shown to be well-suited for pre-trained publicly available
sentence transformers [7, 5, 8] which are trained on MS
MARCO dataset [9].
4.1. Bi-encoder document retrieval
We apply the DistillBERT [10] (pre-trained on
MSMarco dataset) to all prompts in P and cache the re-
sulting set of embeddings [8]. Note that this operation
may be done completely offline. At this stage, the prompt
embeddings are computed independently from the query
embeddings. This allows for quick retrieval of the top can-
didates but neglects any kind of cross-interaction between
the document prompts P and the search query q. At time
of inference (i.e. when a user is invoking a search query),
we pass the query q into the same model to get the query’s
embedding representation. Then we use cosine similarity be-
tween the pre-computed prompt embeddings and this input
query embedding to get the top-K documents
{ccand1, · · · , ccandK} ⊂C
that are most closely related to the query as shown in Fig. 2.
Those candidates represent only a small subset of the origi-
nal corpus C of possible documents.
Figure 2. Illustration of the bi-encoder retrieval phase where the
embeddings of the metadata prompts P, pre-computed offline, are
compared to the input query q via cosine similarity. Note how
the two branches operate independently of each other and only
connect after the MSMarco DistillBERT embeddings.
4.2. Cross-encoder re-ranking
Once the top-K documents have been shortlisted by the
bi-encoder document retrieval phase, we now create pairs
of the input query with the metadata prompts corresponding
to the candidate documents
h q, Prompt(ccand1)

, · · · ,
 q, Prompt(ccandK)
i
Those pairs are then passed together as a unit to the cross-
encoder MSMarco MiniLM model which returns a simi-
larity score for each one of the K pairs as shown in Fig. 3.

Finally, the top-5 ranked documents are returned to the user.
Internally the cross-encoder model uses an attention mech-
anism between input and prompt to achieve better perfor-
mance than the retrieval step. However this performance
comes at a cost of higher run times [5]. Furthermore, the
model cannot be run offline (as we had done previously for
the bi-encoder document retrieval phase) since the query q
cannot be known in advance.
To strike a balance between getting accurate documents
and low latency, we experimented with different number
of top-K candidates shortlisted during the retrieval phase.
We observed that having many candidates K ≳200 had
higher latency and that, on the other end, having few candi-
dates K ≲20 would provide too small a dataset to provide
relevant documents. We found that K = 100 was the best
option for re-ranking in a reasonable time while providing
relevant documents.
Latency-wise, the main hyper-parameter of the cross-
encoder model we have tuned for performance is the batch
size b which encodes how many samples to load at infer-
ence time 1. We explore the impact of this parameter in
detail in Section 5.1.
Figure 3. Illustration of re-ranking phase using CrossEncoder
where pair of input query text and prompt text are passed to
MSMarco MiniLM model which produces a score based on sim-
ilarity between the pair.
In summary, the overall 2-stage architecture is illustrated
in Fig.1. Note that such architectures have recently gained
more interest due to their ability to combine fast retrieval
with powerful and accurate re-rankers [11, 12, 5].
1Note that this batch size is at inference time which is slightly
unusual in the context of traditional ML models but makes sense
in the context of pre-trained LLM inference. It simply refers to the
number of candidates from the top-K returned by the retriever can
be loaded simultaneously into the cross encoder.
5. Performance evaluation
To test the performance of the recommender model, we
created 31 queries in collaboration with domain experts
from the Seismic catalog [1]. These evaluation queries are
used both for latency and quality evaluation.
5.1. Inference latency
Figure 4. Median latency in milliseconds of different machines on
the evaluation queries w.r.t. to batch size b. The latency times
represent the overall latency which includes the time taken by bi-
encoder to encode the user query to get the embeddings, computing
cosine similarity against pre-computed document embeddings,
shortlisting the top-100 candidate documents, passing them on to
the cross-encoder to re-rank and finally return top-5 documents as
described in Section 4 and Fig.1 (Results for Standard F4s V2 are
omitted for the sake of clarity but the actual numbers are reported
in Table 1.)
As we need to respond to user queries in real-time, we
present in this section a study of the inference latency of the
model described in Section 4. Mostly we focus on the im-
pact of the batch size b in the context of the time-consuming
cross-encoder phase of the model. For the purpose of this ex-
periment we used three different types of Virtual Machines
on Azure:
• Standard F4s v2 - 4 Cores, 8 GB RAM, 32 GB disk
• Standard DS4 v2 - 8 Cores, 28 GB RAM, 56 GB disk
• Standard NV12s v3 - 12 Cores, 112 GB RAM, 336 GB
disk, 1 Nvidia Tesla M60 8 GB vRAM
We show in Fig. 4 the median latency over the evaluation
queries for different values of b. In addition, Table 1 shows
average latency with standard deviation over the evaluation
queries with different values of the batch size b. We notice
that:

b = 1
b = 2
b = 4
b = 8
b = 16
b = 32
b = 64
Standard F4s v2
4.17 ± 1.41
4.89 ± 2.08
5.85 ± 2.72
7.14 ± 3.36
8.03 ± 3.32
8.84 ± 3.73
10.22 ± 4.16
Standard DS4 v2
1.53 ± 0.41
1.49 ± 0.54
1.58 ± 0.68
1.81 ± 0.75
1.96 ± 0.71
2.11 ± 0.73
2.34 ± 0.81
Standard NV12s v3
0.64 ± 0.07
0.54 ± 0.13
0.55 ± 0.18
0.60 ± 0.19
0.66 ± 0.20
0.74 ± 0.21
0.83 ± 0.25
Table 1. Average inference latency with standard deviation as captured on different machines and for different values of the batch size b.
(Times are in seconds)
• For CPU machines, as we use the machine with more
available cores the overall latency is reduced. However,
as expected using a machine with single GPU performs
significantly faster than the CPU machines we tested.
• As the batch size increases, the overall inference time
also increases as shown in Fig. 4 (which shows the
median value) and Table 1.
As mentioned previously, our model is expected to return
responses to a query in real time. So saving a few hundred
milliseconds in latency is crucial. This experiment shows
that b can have a significant impact on the latency. In con-
clusion, it is best to choose b = 2 or b = 4 for the VMs
available to us.
5.2. Human annotators for quantitative relevancy
evaluation
We passed the evaluation queries to our recommender model
and presented the top-5 results for each query to four hu-
man annotators who were asked to rate the quality of the
responses on a scale from 0 to 5.
Given a query q, a score of 0 indicates that none of the
responses are relevant whereas a score of 5 indicates that
all 5 responses are relevant to the query. Clearly any score
in between quantifies the proportion of responses that are
deemed relevant by the human annotators. This process
of human verification and assessment of the quality of the
model yields 4 independent scores ranging from 0 to 5 for
all queries. We present a summarized analysis in Table 2.
This shows that most queries were judged as “relevant”. In
fact, the annotators also pointed out that those few queries
that fell under the category of “not relevant” were either too
verbose or too generic so that no correct documents could
be picked out from the catalog anyway.
We also considered the average score of each human an-
notator which ranged from 2.74 to 3.26 to verify that no
annotators were overly positive or negative in their evalua-
tion thereby confirming that the results did not suffer from
bias.
5.3. Ablation study
Architecture
In this section, we demonstrate by example
that the 2-stage architecture, although more complex and
Bucket
Score
Number
Range
of Queries
Relevant
[3.5 −5]
15/31
Somewhat relevant
[2 −3.5)
9/31
Not relevant
[0 −2)
7/31
Table 2. The average scores of the human annotators are bucketed
into 3 different classes depending on their numerical values. Most
of the queries which fell into the relevant bucket were short queries
specifying what kind of documents or products they were looking
for. The queries which fell into Not relevant bucket were verbose
and generic in nature. The human annotators also noticed that in
some cases even if query was overly verbose but if it had the right
keywords our model was able to return some relevant contents.
costly than a simple 1-stage (i.e. retiever only without cross-
encoder), returns noticeably more relevant documents.
For example, consider the query
What are contents available for
Dynamics 365?
Give a PDF format
document.
The retriever returns only 2 PDF documents in its
top-5 similarity items. Although the query specifically asks
for PDF documents, the remaining documents are in OFT
and PPTX formats. On the other hand, if we allow the
retriever to return more K = 100 documents, we are bound
to increase the recall rate of PDF documents although all
except 2 would still fall outside of the top-5. This is where
the second stage cross-encoder acts as a re-ranker that
tightly couples the query with those K = 100 documents
so that more attention can be given to the PDF aspect of
the query. In fact, the cross-encoder successfully re-orders
the K = 100 candidates so that all top-5 documents are in
the correct format.
In order to confirm and make a more quantitative compari-
son between the full 2-stage system (bi-encoder document
retrieval + cross-encoder re-ranking) and a simple 1-stage
system (composed of the bi-encoder only), we have sub-
mitted 10 of the evaluation queries for human expert verifi-
cation on the quality of the top-5 results returned by both
architectures. Unsurprisingly, this has revealed that 90%
of the queries received more (or at least equally) relevant
recommendations using the full 2-stage architecture.

Numerical features prompt engineering
A large fraction
of the metadata associated with the documents comes in the
form of numerical features.
As explained in Section 3, those features can also be inte-
grated into the prompt representation of the documents by
introducing a function g that converts numerical values into
different categories.
Given a numerical feature fi and its value fi(ck) ∈R for
document ck, we defined the mapping function g as
g ◦fi(ck) =









high
if fi(ck) > p85
medium
if p65 < fi(ck) < p85
low
if fi(ck) < p65
zero
if fi(ck) = 0
where pr stands for the rth percentile of fi as estimated over
all the documents in C.
Similarly to the PDF example in the paragraph above, our
human annotators confirmed that incorporating those numer-
ical features did have a significant impact on the relevance
of the results. For example, the results returned in response
to a query specifically asking for documents with a “high”
number of views will often miss that detail in the top-5 re-
sults of the retrieval phase but correct itself thanks to the
second stage cross-encoder re-ranker.
6. Integration into Copilot
Our model has been successfully integrated into the MSX
Sales Copilot. It is being refreshed on a weekly basis to
accommodate changes/latest updates in meta-properties of
the documents.
6.1. Technical details
Our recommendation model is one of the few skills that
has been integrated into MSX Copilot by using Semantic
Kernel [13]. Semantic Kernel is an open source SDK used
to integrate LLMs (or AI services) into applications. When
a query is typed in the Copilot chat window, the planner in
Semantic Kernel is invoked. Planners are used to generate
plans and invoke the respective skills based on the context
of the query. Skills (like our recommendation models) are
used to perform certain specific functions. Based on the
query and its context, the planner may decide to invoke our
recommendation skill. This skill then makes an API call to
our model which is deployed on Azure Machine Learning
(AML) endpoint. Once the AML endpoint is called, our
recommendation model processes that query as described
in Section 4 and returns the top-5 most relevant documents
to the chat window as illustrated in the following section.
This entire process takes a few seconds with the majority of
it spent by the planner only.
6.2. How it looks
A snapshot of the actual User Interface in MSX is shown
in Fig. 5. In blue, we see the query from the seller. This
along with business rules are sent to our model. The purple
outlined box is the response with top-5 documents returned
by our model. Each of these has a link to the document
which the seller can use to open it and share with the end
customer using livesend links.
Figure 5. Example of the current UI integration of our model into
the production MSX Copilot.
7. Conclusion
The recommender model presented here is the first to be
integrated as a skill into the production MSX Copilot. The
initial feedback from the sellers is encouraging in the first
two months since launch. Compared to their previous expe-
rience where sellers had to rely on a sub-optimal filter-based
search system hosted externally on the Seismic website
(as opposed to directly embedded into the MSX interface),
this new real-time question-answering recommender sys-
tem is seen as a tremendous improvement by the sellers’

community as they have reported in satisfaction surveys.
For example, when asked: “Is the content recommendation
skill relevant to the seller’s daily tasks?”, the received score
was 4 out of 5. Similarly, when asked to rate the relevancy of
the recommended documents, sellers gave it a rating of 3.7
out of 5. Moving forward, we are continuously gathering
their feedback for further improvement of the model such
as integrating more context based on the seller, opportunity
etc... From a technical perspective, the model innovated
compared to classical semantic search in the sense that we
do not use the content of the documents to recommend but
only their metadata.
Our choice of ≈20 features (see Section 3) is limited by
the available meta-features available for documents from
the Seismic catalog C itself. Generalizing to other corpus of
content, it is possible that more features would be available
which would presumably help increase the relevance of
the recommendations. Nonetheless, there are other factors
that may limit the number of features one may consider.
From an engineering perspective the model needs to operate
close to real-time with strict latency requirements. Adding
more features would translate into longer response times
and a quality/quantity trade-off on the number of features
would need to be found. Additionally, from a modelling
perspective, the MS Marco LLM we used in the current
version of the model has a context length of 512 tokens.
With 20 features, this gives each feature about 25 tokens
from which a good English description of the feature has
to be generated. Adding more features would reduce the
average number of available tokens per feature highlighting
the need for another kind of trade-off here as well.
As programmatic access to the actual content of the Seismic
documents themselves is not currently available, we limited
the current version of the model to be based on meta-features
about the documents only. For other corpus where such
access is available, introducing content as a new feature
set will raise new and challenging questions. For example,
the documents in the Seismic catalog are cluttered across
multiple formats (PowerPoint presentations, PDFs, Word
documents...) and one will have to consolidate together
multi-modal features (text, images, audio recordings...) into
unified embeddings. We reserve this for a future version of
the model once programmatic access to the content of the
documents is resolved.
Ultimately, our intentions are to build a content recommen-
dation search and question-answering system that sellers
can fully leverage even in customized contexts. For exam-
ple, we are exploring how to make the recommendations
specific to the opportunities that sellers are invested in. Sales
opportunities are a crucial component in nurturing early cus-
tomers and more customization in this area is of potential
high impact. Additionally, we intend to incorporate the ac-
tual text/images of the documents into the embeddings as
well as enrich the query-side prompts with more features
specific to the seller asking a question. Finally, we wish to
collect more user feedback as a way of proxied labeled data
so we can start incorporating more supervision via metrics
such as normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG)
into the model.
8. Acknowledgements
We thank our colleagues in CX Data for their feedback and
support. In particular, we thank the CX Data ML Review
board (Vijay Agneeswaran, Daniel Yehdego, Ivan Barrien-
tos) for reviewing the model and giving us useful inputs. We
thank the product managers from SPS Team (Binh “Binnie”
Tran, Manish Prabhakar) who helped us with their domain
knowledge on the Seismic platform and the content space.
We thank the Copilot engineering team, especially Yash Pal,
for providing support in deploying this model to MSX Copi-
lot platform.
