1
Multi-agent Motion Planning for Dense and
Dynamic Environments
via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Samaneh Hosseini Semnani, Hugh Liu, Michael Everett, Anton de Ruiter, Jonathan P. How
Abstract—This paper introduces a hybrid algorithm of deep
reinforcement learning (RL) and Force-based motion planning
(FMP) to solve distributed motion planning problem in dense and
dynamic environments. Individually, RL and FMP algorithms
each have their own limitations. FMP is not able to produce
time-optimal paths and existing RL solutions are not able to
produce collision-free paths in dense environments. Therefore, we
ﬁrst tried improving the performance of recent RL approaches
by introducing a new reward function that not only eliminates
the requirement of a pre supervised learning (SL) step but also
decreases the chance of collision in crowded environments. That
improved things, but there were still a lot of failure cases. So,
we developed a hybrid approach to leverage the simpler FMP
approach in stuck, simple and high-risk cases, and continue using
RL for normal cases in which FMP can’t produce optimal path.
Also, we extend GA3C-CADRL algorithm to 3D environment.
Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm outperforms
both deep RL and FMP algorithms and produces up to 50% more
successful scenarios than deep RL and up to 75% less extra time
to reach goal than FMP.
Index Terms—Motion planning, distributed algorithms, colli-
sion avoidance, deep learning, reinforcement learning, trajectory
optimization, hybrid control.
I. INTRODUCTION
M
ULTI-AGENT motion planning has recently attracted
much interest in the research community and has many
applications including robot navigation among pedestrians,
self-driving cars, and drone shows. This problem concerns
ﬁnding trajectories connecting each agent’s initial location to
its goal location. Each agent has a ﬁxed ﬁnal position that
cannot be exchanged with another agent [1]. In addition, the
motion planning algorithm should be able to satisfy constraints
such as the maximum/preferred velocity of the agents and the
minimum required separation distance between them. These
constraints are dependent on the agents dynamic limitations
and may vary from one application to another. In this problem
This work was supported by the Ontario Centers of Excellence, grant
number 27481.
S. Hosseini Semnani is with the Faculty of Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology,Isfahan 15848-
11888, Iran, and was with Aerospace Engineering Department, Ryerson

H. Liu is with the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, University

M. Everett is with the Aerospace Controls Laboratory, Massachusetts

A. de Ruiter is with the Aerospace Engineering Department, Ryerson

J. P. How is with the Aerospace Controls Laboratory, Massachusetts

agents make decisions in a dynamic environment with a
(possibly varying) number of other agents, whose policies and
intents are unknown.
Existing work on multi-agent motion planning problem
can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories, centralized [2],
[3], [4], [5] and decentralized approaches [6], [7], [8], [9],
[10], [11]. Centralized methods formulate the motion planning
problem as an optimization problem in which information
about position, velocity and goal location of all agents are
available and the goal is to guide all agents toward their desired
locations avoiding collision with each other and minimizing
objectives such as energy or time. Yuin et al. in [2] present
a centralized algorithm based on linear programming (LP) to
minimize last agent’s arrival time, the maximum (single-agent)
traveled distance, the total arrival time, and the total distance.
Tang et al. in [3] decompose the problem into two phases:
the motion planning step and the trajectory generation step.
In the ﬁrst step, a geometric algorithm ﬁnds piecewise linear
trajectories for each robot. These trajectories are then reﬁned
in the second step into higher-order piecewise polynomials.
Augugliaro et al. in [4] cast the path planning problem into a
non-convex optimization problem and use sequential convex
programming to solve the problem. Centralized approaches
suffer from issues in the scalability with the number of agents.
The computational complexity of solving a large optimization
problem is inevitable even if the problem is decomposed
into several steps. In addition, for large-scale (many-agent)
problems, it is often hard to establish a reliable communication
network between all the agents and the central node.
In contrast to centralized approaches, decentralized algo-
rithms are properly scalable as they distribute the computa-
tional effort over multiple agents. They are also very robust
to disturbance as they do real-time calculations. Optimal
reciprocal collision avoidance (ORCA) [6] is one of the
most commonly used algorithms in this category. In this
algorithm, each agent, having the perfect knowledge about
its neighbors’ shape, position, and velocity, solves a local
optimization problem to calculate a velocity that keeps it
safe over the next time horizon. Original ORCA was able
to work with holonomic robots only. Later, various variants
of this algorithm proposed to work with the kinematics of
non-holonomic robots [12], [8]. Although ORCA guarantees
collision-free navigation, its emergent behaviour is sensitive
to hyper-parameter values. Zhou et al. in [11] introduced a
method that lets each agent move just inside its calculated
Voronoi cell and continues updating Voronoi cells until all
arXiv:2001.06627v1  [cs.LG]  18 Jan 2020

2
agents reach their goal positions. This algorithm eliminates
the requirement of neighbors’ velocity information in ORCA.
However, it still imposes high computational complexity of
Voronoi cells calculation at each iteration over the agents
and does not optimize the agents motions in terms of time,
distance traveled or energy. Hosseini et al. in [10] present
FMP algorithm in which each agent, at each iteration, selects
its next velocity by calculating the summation of some forces
based on the ﬂocking algorithm that guides the agent toward
its goal location while avoiding collision with others. FMP
is very fast and has low computational complexity overhead
over the agents. Also, each agent in FMP only needs to
know the relative position of its neighbors. However, like all
decentralized algorithms, it will not produce a jointly time
optimal trajectory because it is a decentralized algorithm in
which none of the agents have a general view of the problem.
There are a number of recent studies looking to learning-
based approaches for multi-agent motion planning problem.
Learning-based techniques ofﬂoad the expensive real-time
motion planning computations to an off-line training procedure
in which a policy function that implicitly encodes cooperative
behavior among agents is learned [13], [14], [15], [16], [17],
[18]. The learned policy will be used by each agent later
in real-time to select the best action at each time. Among
learning based methods, RL approaches got the most interest
as they do not require large training data sets, instead, they
try to optimize the learned policy based on rewards they get
by performing each action. Long et al. in [16] present an end-
to-end agent-free approach based on deep RL. They feed the
raw Lidar sensor data to a trained network and receive each
agents’ steering command. However, in practice, it is useful to
extract agent-level information from multiple sensors data to
have more precise decisions. For example, if the Lidar sensor
data show the presence of an object in the surrounding area,
an agent reaction may differ if the object is another agent or
if it is just an obstacle [14]. GA3C-CADRL [14] is another
recent RL-based algorithm that has shown good performance
in solving the path planning problem. However, RL approach
presented in GA3C-CADRL is hard to train as its reward is
sparse. Sparse reward in long-range navigation over complex
maps is a challenge in many navigation problems using RL
[19], [20]. A bad reward function may lead to local minima
or may lead an agent to wander around forever. To overcome
this issue in long-range navigation tasks [20] presents a hybrid
approach that combines sampling based path planning with
RL. [14], [15] adds a separate pre-step supervised learning(SL)
phase to the RL approach to teach agents how to reach their
goal location without caring about colliding with other agents.
Later they will learn how to avoid collision in RL phase.
The main problem of this approach is its requirement of large
training data sets which is not always easily available.
This research ﬁrst presents a new goal-distance based proxy
reward for the GA3C-CADRL algorithm to solve the multi-
agent motion planning problem. This function not only elimi-
nates the requirement of the pre-step SL phase but also reduces
the number of collisions by introducing a more conservative
strategy. The goal-distance based proxy reward had been
shown to signiﬁcantly improve RL performance for single
agent problem aiming to ﬁnd the shortest path toward the
goal location [21]. The new reward function, in a multi-
agent problem, not only attracts agents toward their goals
but also prevents some collisions and converts some others to
stuck and, as a result, increases the percentage of successful
scenarios. Second, we present a hybrid control framework of
combining deep RL and FMP algorithm called DRL-FMP
in which, in normal scenarios, each agent selects its next
action based on the learned policy by the presented extension
of GA3C-CADRL (using the proposed new reward function)
and switches to FMP algorithm in simple, stuck or high-risk
scenarios. This work also extends GA3C-CADRL to solve 3D
multi-agent planning problem. Simulation results are presented
demonstrate the beneﬁts of our hybrid control framework.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Collision Avoidance with Deep RL (GA3C-CADRL)
The multi-agent collision avoidance problem can be for-
mulated as a sequential decision-making problem in an RL
framework [22], [15], [14]. Let st, ut, ˜sj,t denote an agent’s
state, action and the state of another agent (j) at time t. The
state vector has two parts, the observable, so
t and unobservable,
sh
t
parts, such that st
=

so
t, sh
t

. The observable piece
consists of the agent’s position p, velocity v and radius r,
and is the part of the state that is visible by neighbouring
agents. Therefore, each agent has local information about its
neighbours. Other information, that is the goal position pg,
preferred speed vpref and orientation ψ for 2D environment
and ψ, φ for 3D environment, are hidden from other agents and
make up the unobservable part of the state. The action has two
parts, speed vt and heading angle ψt for 2D environment and
ψt, φt for 3D environment. The objective for each agent i is to
minimize the expected time to reach goal E [tg], while avoiding
collision with its neighbouring agents (Ni), by developing a
policy π :
 st, {˜so
j,t}

7→ut
∀j ∈Ni, satisfying
argmin
π(s,{˜so
j })
E

tg|s0, {˜so
j,0}, π

∀j ∈Ni
(1)
s.t. ∥pt −˜pj,t∥2 ≥r + ˜rj
∀t, ∀j ∈Ni
(2)
ptg = pg
(3)
pj,t = pj,t−1+∆t·π
 sj,t−1, {˜so
k,t−1}

∀t, ∀j, ∀k ∈Nj (4)
where (2) is the collision avoidance constraint, ∆t is
the time step, (3) is the goal constraint, (4) is the agents’
kinematics, and the expectation in (1) is with respect to the
other agent’s unobservable states (intents) and policy. This
simpliﬁed model of the agent is used to achieve faster com-
putations. Higher-order models can be accommodated with
minimum modiﬁcation in what follows. An RL framework
can be applied to generate a policy based on an agent’s
joint conﬁguration with its neighbours, sjn = [s,˜so]. This
RL framework applies a reward function, Rcol
 sjn, u

, to
penalize the agent in case of collision, and reward in case
of reaching its goal. Two different types of RL algorithms are
used in this RL framework, value-based [22], [15] and policy-
based [14] learning. Value-based algorithm assumes that other
agents continue their current velocities until next step, ∆t, to

3
be able to extract policy from the value function, V

sjn
t

.
This makes selecting the value of ∆t very critical in this
approach. To avoid that, the GA3C-CADRL algorithm [14]
applies GA3C [23], a recent version of A3C algorithm [24],
to approximate both value and policy at the same time. A3C
is an actor-critic algorithm with two, value and policy, losses
V alue Loss : fv =

Rt −V

sjn
t
2
(5)
Policy Loss : fπ = logπ

ut|sjn
t
 
Rt −V

sjn
t

+ β · H

π

sjn
t

(6)
where γ
is discount factor, Rt
=
Pk−1
i=0 γirt+i +
γkV

sjn
t+k

is a discounted reward estimate, β is a tunable
constant parameter and H is the entropy function. Equation
(5) is used for training the value function to match with
Rt. Equation (6), in its ﬁrst term, penalizes actions with
high probability that leads to lower rewarded estimate than
what was predicted by value function. The second term uses
the entropy as a means of encouraging exploration. If the
policy outputs actions with relatively similar probabilities,
then the entropy will be high, but if the policy suggests a
single action with a large probability then the entropy will be
low. In A3C multiple threads of an agent interact with their
own copy of the environment at the same time as the other
threads are interacting with their environments. At the end of
each round, each thread updates global network parameters
using the calculated gradients by its loss terms. GA3C is an
extension of A3C that uses queues for training and prediction
purposes, to efﬁciently use the GPU and as a result, learns
faster. Our work builds on open-source cadrl-ros package [25]
that implements GA3C-CADRL algorithm [14].
B. Force-based Motion Planning (FMP)
The Force-based motion planning algorithm [10] is an
extension of the Flocking algorithm [26], [27] that is designed
to work as a motion planning algorithm. To reach this point,
FMP changes the three main forces of the Flocking algorithm:
gradient-based, velocity consensus and navigational feedback.
The gradient-based term is changed such that it has only
repulsive force instead of the original attractive/repulsive force
of the Flocking algorithm. The Velocity consensus term is
omitted because FMP does not need to keep the agent’s
velocity close to their neighbors. Finally, the navigational term
of FMP changed to attract each agent to its own speciﬁc target
position. In FMP, each agent repeats calculating and applying
a control input function
ui =
 0
if vT
i ui > 0 and ∥vi∥≥Vmax
ui = f R
i + f γ
i
otherwise
(7)
where f R
i
and f γ
i are the repulsive and navigational forces
respectively. vi is velocity of agent i and Vmax is the maximum
allowed velocity of that agent. Equation (7) is applied, until
all the agents reach their goal locations or the algorithm
time outs. FMP has a version for obstacle avoidance and the
mathematical analysis presented in [10] shows if the initial
position of the agent is large enough then the algorithm is
always able to keep a required distance between the agents
and the algorithm is proved to be live-lock free. Although
FMP is real-time, distributed, fast and scalable, it is not able
to provide a time optimal path. Therefore, in this research, we
focus on a modiﬁed version of GA3C-CADRL as the basic
algorithm to provide closer to optimal paths and switch to
FMP in case of stuck scenarios and some other situations that
are described in Section III-C.
III. APPROACH
A. GA3C-CADRL-NSL
GA3C-CADRL outperforms the previous versions of the
CADRL algorithm as the number of agents in the environment
grows, however it still suffers from two main drawbacks. First,
it requires a pre-step SL training. Second, its performance in
dense problems drops greatly. This section presents an exten-
sion of GA3C-CADRL, called GA3C-CADRL-NSL (GA3C-
CADRL-No Supervised Learning), that uses a new reward
function. This new function ﬁrst eliminates the requirement
of pre-step SL training. Second as it is more conservative, the
number of successful scenarios increase. Pre-step SL requires
gathering a large set of training data which is not always easy.
The reward function used in GA3C-CADRL is given by
Rcol
 sjn
=







1
if p = pg
−0.25
if dmin < 0
−0.1 + 0.05 · d min
if 0 < dmin < 0.2
0
otherwise
(8)
where dmin is the distance to the closest other agent. This
reward function has two parts: goal-reward and collision-
punishment. Goal-reward only gives reward 1 to the agent
when it reaches its goal location, before then, the agent won’t
get any positive reward. This is the reason that GA3C-CADRL
requires an initial SL step. Because non-initialized agents
wander randomly and probably won’t ever reach their goal
to get any posetive reward. Therefore, GA3C-CADRL applies
SL to teach agents on how to reach their goals, then applies
RL to teach them how to avoid collision. GA3C-CADRL-NSL
changes the goal reward to attract agents toward their goal
location inside RL which eliminates the requirement of SL.
GA3C-CADRL-NSL’s reward function is given by
R
 sjn
= Rc + Rg
(9)
Rc =



−1
if dmin < 0
10.dmin −1
if 0 < dmin < 0.1
0
otherwise
(10)
Rg =
 1
if p = pg
∝
 goalt−1
dist −goalt
dist

otherwise
(11)
where goalt
dist is the Euclidean distance between agent and
its goal at time t , Rc is collision punishment and Rg is the goal
reward. ∝is a constant that is set to 0.08 in the both 2D and 3D
training procedures. Rg gives a small positive/negative reward
to the agent by coming closer/further to its goal respectively.
This prevents agents from wandering randomly and guide them
toward their goal. The new reward function also provides more
conservative behavior by changing collision punishment to
give the maximum penalty, -1, in case of collision and linearly
decreasing that punishment until dmin = 0.1.

4
2 agents 
4 agents 
8 agents 
10 agents 
Fig. 1: Multi-stage training used for training GA3C-CADRL-
NSL algorithm and its comparison with training from scratch.
Rolling reward is the average reward over last 1000 episodes.
B. Training the Policy
GA3C-CADRL-NSL generates random scenarios to learn
an optimal policy. All scenarios include random agents’ initial
and goal locations. Each agent’s radius and preferred velocity
selected randomly from a uniform distribution in the following
ranges: r ∈[0.2, 0.8]m and vpref ∈[0.5, 2.0]m/s. Many
different curriculum training paradigms used in the literature.
For example, [14] starts training with SL, then runs two RL
phases: one with 2-4 agents in the environment and next with
4-10 agents. [16] uses a two-stage training process, the ﬁrst
stage has 20 agents placed randomly in a simple environment
without any obstacle. The second stage continues training with
58 agents placed in a richer and more complex environment
including obstacles. In this paper we propose a four-stage
training process, which accelerates the policy to converge to a
satisfying solution, and gets higher rewards than the policy
trained from scratch with the same number of epoch (as
shown in Fig. 1). As the focus of this research is teaching
the agents to move in dense environments, we keep the size
of the environment ﬁxed (8 × 8 in 2D and 8 × 8 × 4 in
3D) and increase the number of agents in several stages to
make denser and harder problems to solve. The work begins
the training phase with 2 agents (no need for SL) so that
the policy learns both collision avoidance and goal reaching
ideas at the same time for reasonably simple examples. Upon
convergence, the second RL phase begins for 4 agents starting
from the saved trained policy from the previous RL stage. This
work continues for 8 and 10 agents in the next stages. Fig.
1 compares the rolling rewards over episode for multi-stage
training and training from scratch and shows how multi-stage
training can achieve a better reward in a shorter time. Multi-
stage training is repeated with three random seeds and the
mean value with shading +/- sigma is reported in Fig. 1.
C. DRL-FMP Hybrid Control Framework
Although GA3C-CADRL-NSL provides better performance
than GA3C-CADRL, as represented in Section IV, however,
it still suffers from many stuck scenarios, especially in denser
environments. The new reward function in GA3C-CADRL-
NSL results in more conservative behavior among agents by
increasing the collision penalty to -1. This behavior converts
most of the GA3C-CADRL’s collision scenarios to stuck
scenarios. On the other hand, it is proven that the FMP
GA3C-CADRL-NSL 
learned policy
Stuck scenario
Simple scenario
High-risk scenario
Unknown 
dynamic 
obstacle
FMP algorithm
Normal scenario
neighbours info + ego agent info: 
e.g. goal location, pref speed 
Hybrid DRL_FMP control output
Determine scenario’s type
neighbours info + ego agent info: 
e.g. goal location, pref speed 
Fig. 2: DRL-FMP Hybrid Control Framework.
algorithm is live-lock free and it has shown good performance
in avoiding stuck situations [10]. Therefore, to solve stuck
scenarios we propose to switch to the FMP algorithm in
the case of stuck scenarios and then switch back to GA3C-
CADRL-NSL. The idea of switching to FMP is motivated by
solving stuck situations but expanded to two other scenarios:
Simple and High-risk.
Simple scenarios are those in which the agent has no
neighboring agent. Using GA3C-CADRL and its new version
GA3C-CADRL-NSL in simple scenarios, the agent wanders
around its initial location instead of directly moving toward its
goal. The reason is that in the training phase, there was always
more than one agent in the neighborhood of each learning
agent, so it never learned how to handle an observation
with no neighboring agents. To solve this issue, for simple
scenarios we switch to FMP which guides the agent directly
toward its goal location by calculating the summation of
force vectors (only navigational feedback force, no collision
avoidance force).
High-risk scenarios are those in which the agent is too close
to the surrounding agent or obstacle and the risk of collision
using learned policy is too high. This situation happens for ex-
ample when the agent should avoid a dynamic obstacle/agent
whose dynamics are far from what the agent has learned
to deal with in the training stage or a static obstacle/agent
whose shape/radius is far from the what was seen before in
the training stage. On the other hand, FMP is able to avoid
surrounding agents/obstacles even it is very close to them.
Actually, in FMP, repulsive forces become effective when the
agent is in very close proximity of other agents or obstacles.
Therefore, to avoid collision in high-risk situations we propose
to switch to FMP when the agent is very close to collide.
Figure 2 represents the DRL-FMP Hybrid Control Framework
described above. As shown in this ﬁgure, each agent decides to
use FMP or its GA3C-CADRL-NSL learned policy based on
its situation (Algorithm 1). If it has no neighbours (simple
scenario), was too close to others (high-risk scenario) or
was in stuck (stuck scenario), it uses FMP to calculate its
next action, otherwise (normal scenario) the agent selects
its next action using the learned policy in GA3C-CADRL-
NSL. The parameters used in Algorithm 1 are set as follows
rF MP =
3q
3v2
pref/2ρ, ρ = 7.5 · 106 and cstuck = 20. The
value of rF MP is selected based on the value is selected in [10]
for radius in which FMP algorithm start applying repulsive
forces between the agents. This radius is very small and show
the case that agents are very close to collide to each other.
dmin, |Ni| and #(time−steps−stay −on−same−place)

5
can be calculated by each agent locally as each agent has so
t
information of its neighbors.
Algorithm 1 DRL-FMP Hybrid Controller
1: Input: other agent’s state, so
t and goal position, Pg
2: Output: agents speed and change in heading angle(s): ut
3: if dmin < rF MP or |Ni| = 0 or
4:
#(time −steps −stay −on −same −place) > cstuck
then
▷high-risk, simple, stuck scenarios resp.
5:
ut ←πF MP
6: else
7:
ut ←πGA3C−CADRL−NSL
8: return ut
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The GA3C-CADRL-NSL algorithm was implemented in
Python using TensorFlow [28]. We executed our implemen-
tation on a laptop running Windows 10, with an Intel Core
i7-7700HQ 2.8GHz CPU, NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1050 GPU
and 16 GB RAM. The step-size ∆t was set to 0.2s for training
and 0.1s for testing just to get more granularity. We found
dt = 0.1 in training made each episode take so long, and
very little changes from step to step. The on-line execution
of the learned policy runs in real-time and takes on average
0.4-0.5 ms. In total, the RL converges in about 35 hours
(1.8 · 106 episodes) for the 2D environment and 53 hours
(5 · 106 episodes) for the 3D environment. We compare the
results of DRL-FMP Hybrid algorithm with GA3C-CADRL-
NSL, GA3C-CADRL [14] and FMP algorithms. All these
algorithms are implemented in Python. We also compared the
results with Optimal reciprocal collision avoidance (ORCA)
[6] algorithm to show the advantage of proposed method over
the established baseline in this ﬁeld. Our implementation of
ORCA builds on open-source ORCA implementation [29].
To evaluate the performance of the algorithms over dense
problems we keep the environment size ﬁxed (8×8(m) in 2D
and 8 × 8 × 4(m) in 3D) and increase the number of agents
to make denser and harder problems. For each density, 50
test cases are generated with random initial and ﬁnal position,
radius, and preferred velocity. All the algorithms are evaluated
over the same test cases and the average results are reported.
The algorithms are compared over the following parameters:
percentage of successful scenarios, percentage of cases with
collision, percentage of cases where an agent gets stuck and
does not reach its goal and average extra time to reach the goal
(beyond a straight path at vpref) for successful scenarios, te.
These parameters provide a measurement of efﬁciency and
optimality.
Fig 3a compares ﬁve algorithms over the percentage of
successful scenarios on different density problems in the 2D
environment. As represented in this ﬁgure, all the algorithms
work ﬁne for low-density problems, but their performance
decreases in denser problems. As expected, DRL-FMP Hybrid
algorithm is able to improve the percentage of successful
scenarios by up to 50%. Table I shows the reason for failure
(collision/stuck) for each algorithm. as represented in this
Figure, the failures in GA3C-CADRL are mostly due to the
collision while in GA3C-CADRL-NSL are mostly due to
Workspace density [#agents/64 m2]
% success
(a)
Workspace density [#agents/64 m2]
Extra time to reach goal (s)
(b)
GA3C-CADRL-NSL
GA3C-CADRL
DRL-FMP Hybrid
FMP
ORCA
Fig. 3: Comparison of percentage of successful scenarios (a),
and average extra time to reach goal (b), over different density
problems in the 2D environment.
stuck. It is because the reward function in GA3C-CADRL-
NSL is more conservative and considers a higher penalty for
collision and as a result, most of the collisions are converted
to stuck. Then most of the stuck scenarios are solved in DRL-
FMP Hybrid algorithm by switching to FMP.
Fig 3b compares ﬁve algorithms over average extra time
to reach goal over different density problems in the 2D
environment. As represented in this Figure FMP has the worst
performance and all the others are very close to each other.
It is what was expected as FMP is a distributed algorithm in
which none of the agents have a general view of the problem
and is not able to provide an optimal path.
We expand GA3C-CADRL-NSL and DRL-FMP Hybrid
algorithms to the 3D environment. The output command is
ut = [vt, θt, ϕt] (speed, change in heading angle (polar θt and
azimuthal ϕt)) in this environment which is discretized into
43 actions instead of 11 actions originally deﬁned for 2D in
GA3C-CADRL. The environment size is ﬁxed to 8×8×4(m)
and the number of agents increased from 2 to 16. GA3C-
CADRL-NSL trained using multi-stage training with 2-4-8-10-
16 agents and the results converged after 5 million episodes.
After stage 1 (converges in 1 ·106 episodes), they average
1.35 reward per episode. When RL phase 2 begins, the rolling
reward drops to 0.7 initially since the domain becomes much
harder, and then increases until converging at 1.3 (after a total
of 1.5 ·106 episodes). Similar behavior repeats for 8, 10 and 16
agents. Finally, 16 agents converge to an average of 1.17 per
episode. We experience higher rewards in 3D in comparison to
the same number of agents in 2D because the environment is
4 times larger and as a result, the density is lower. Evaluation
results conﬁrm the results reported for the 2D environment
and are represented in Table II. DRL-FMP Hybrid algorithm
provides the highest percentage of successful scenarios and
the lowest average extra time to reach the goal.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This work presented GA3C-CADRL-NSL and its combi-
nation with FMP that is called DRL-FMP Hybrid algorithm
to solve a distributed motion planning problem in dynamic,
dense and crowded environments. GA3C-CADRL-NSL im-
proves the performance of recent GA3C-CADRL algorithm
by introducing a new reward function that not only eliminates
the requirement of a pre supervised learning step but also
decreases the chance of collision in crowded environments.

6
TABLE I: Comparison of percentage of failures (collisions or
stuck) over different density problems in 2D environment
Test case setup
% failure (% collisions / % stuck)
#ags.
Size(m)
DRL-FMP Hyb.
GA3C-CADRL-NSL
GA3C-CADRL
FMP
2
8 × 8
0 (0/ 0)
2 (0/ 2)
0 (0/ 0)
0 (0/ 0)
3
8 × 8
0 (0/ 0)
0 (0/ 0)
0 (0/ 0)
0 (0/ 0)
4
8 × 8
0 (0/ 0)
0 (0/ 0)
0 (0/ 0)
2 (0/ 2)
5
8 × 8
0 (0/ 0)
2 (0/ 2)
6 (4/ 2)
0 (0/ 0)
6
8 × 8
0 (0/ 0)
4 (0/ 4)
6 (4/ 2)
0 (0/ 0)
7
8 × 8
0 (0/ 0)
6 (0/ 6)
8 (6/ 2)
4 (2/ 2)
8
8 × 8
0 (0/ 0)
4 (0/ 4)
20 (20/0)
8 (6/ 2)
9
8 × 8
2 (2/ 0)
10 (0/10)
12 (12/0)
6 (4/ 2)
10
8 × 8
2 (2/ 0)
22 (0/22)
40 (30/10)
4 (4/ 0)
12
8 × 8
12 (8/ 4)
46 (2/44)
56 (46/10)
18 (12/6)
14
8 × 8
28 (22/6)
60 (2/58)
74 (56/18)
36 (22/14)
16
8 × 8
38 (24/14)
84 (4/80)
82 (74/8)
46 (18/28)
TABLE II: Comparison of % successful scenarios and avg.
extra time to goal over different density problems in 3D
Test case setup
DRL-FMP Hyb.
GA3C-CADRL-NSL
FMP
#ags.
Size(m)
% success Avg te(s) % success Avg te(s) % success Avg te(s)
2
8 × 8 × 4
100
1.77
100
1.77
100
0.85
3
8 × 8 × 4
100
1.07
100
1.18
100
0.92
4
8 × 8 × 4
100
0.56
100
0.52
100
1.04
5
8 × 8 × 4
100
0.45
100
0.44
100
0.96
6
8 × 8 × 4
100
0.46
100
0.47
100
1.19
7
8 × 8 × 4
100
0.56
100
0.61
100
1.42
8
8 × 8 × 4
100
0.51
100
0.53
98
1.47
9
8 × 8 × 4
100
0.54
98
0.60
100
1.60
10
8 × 8 × 4
100
0.64
98
0.70
98
1.77
16
8 × 8 × 4
100
0.77
84
0.89
98
2.38
The new reward function is more conservative and as a result,
converts many collision scenarios to the stuck situation. Then
DRL-FMP Hybrid algorithm solves most of the stuck scenar-
ios by switching to FMP. Switching to FMP is not limited
to the stuck situation. It also includes high-risk and simple
scenarios. Both 2D and 3D simulation results show DRL-
FMP Hybrid algorithm outperforms both GA3C-CADRL and
FMP algorithms in terms of percentage of successful scenarios
and time-optimality of the produced path. For future work, we
are looking to implement this algorithm on real robots. Also,
we are looking to expand the proposed algorithm to generate
continuous output instead of current discrete ones to increase
the ﬂexibility of agents movements. Expanding this algorithm
to take into account agents with more complicated kinematic
constraints can be considered as another future work for this
research.
