Oﬄine Reinforcement Learning for Traﬃc Signal
Control
Mayuresh Kunjir
Qatar Computing Research Institute
Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Doha, Qatar

&
Sanjay Chawla
Qatar Computing Research Institute
Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Doha, Qatar

Abstract
Traﬃc signal control is an important problem in urban mobility with a
signiﬁcant potential of economic and environmental impact. While there
is a growing interest in Reinforcement Learning (RL) for traﬃc signal
control, the work so far has focussed on learning through simulations which
could lead to inaccuracies due to simplifying assumptions. Instead, real
experience data on traﬃc is available and could be exploited at minimal
costs. Recent progress in oﬄine or batch RL has enabled just that. Model-
based oﬄine RL methods, in particular, have been shown to generalize
from the experience data much better than others.
We build a model-based learning framework which infers a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) from a dataset collected using a cyclic traﬃc
signal control policy that is both commonplace and easy to gather. The
MDP is built with pessimistic costs to manage out-of-distribution scenarios
using an adaptive shaping of rewards which is shown to provide better
regularization compared to the prior related work in addition to being
PAC-optimal. Our model is evaluated on a complex signalized roundabout
showing that it is possible to build highly performant traﬃc control policies
in a data eﬃcient manner.
1
Introduction
Road traﬃc signal control has attracted substantial interest as an application of
reinforcement learning (RL) [53, 56]. However most published work in the area
1
arXiv:2201.02381v3  [cs.AI]  11 Dec 2022

Figure 1: A-DAC, our model-based oﬄine RL approach for traﬃc control
achieves the best performance out-of-the-box compared to three model-free
(DQN [30], BCQ [14], and TD3+BC [11]) , one model-based RL (MBRL [57]),
and our predecessor (DAC [44]) RL, predecessor of A-DAC. The dataset is
collected by a behavioral policy that cycles through each traﬃc signal change
action. DQN is greedy and prone to exploration errors. BCQ, TD3+BC and
MBRL fail to generalize despite their built-in pessimism. DAC is sensitive to its
hyperparameters and needs multiple online evaluations. An Online RL baseline
is included for comparison which is matched or bettered by our approach in a
fraction of time.
is unlikely to be applied in practice as trial and error methods for interacting
with the environment are not feasible in the real world. Similarly trying to
infer an RL policy using a simulator does not take advantage of the fact that
real experience data about traﬃc is available from transportation management
operators.
A more appropriate and realistic set up is to use oﬄine RL training to learn
from static experience data [24]. A typical data set will consist of a set of tuples
of the form {si, ai, ri, si+1}, i.e., when the system was in state si, action ai was
taken, which resulted in a reward ri and the system then transitioned into a
new state si+1. From the experience data the objective is to learn a policy,
i.e., a mapping from state to action which maximizes the long term expected
cumulative reward. In a traﬃc signal control setting, the state captures the
distribution of traﬃc on the road network, the action space consists of diﬀerent
phases (red, green, amber) on signalized intersections and the reward is a metric
of traﬃc eﬃciency.
Compared to online RL approaches [48], oﬄine (or batch) RL shifts the focus
of learning from data exploration to data-driven policy building. The oﬄine
policy building is challenging due to deviation in the state-action visitation
by the policy being learned and the policy that logged the static dataset [14,
25]. A number of diﬀerent solution frameworks are proposed for oﬄine RL
that are either model-free [11, 23, 55, 21, 20] or derive a Markov Decision
2

Process (MDP) model [44, 57, 19, 58] from the data set. We focus on model-
based RL approaches which have been shown to oﬀer better regularization in
presence of uncertain data. Such approaches are characterized by a mechanism to
penalize under-explored or under-represented transitions, a notion referred to as
pessimism under uncertainty [14]. While the RL algorithms, by nature, are highly
sensitive to hard-to-tune hyper-parameters [31], incorporation of the uncertainty
penalties adds further supplementary hyper-parameters. These are shown to
aﬀect the performance of oﬄine learning signiﬁcantly [28]. Since interaction
to the environment is not permitted in the oﬄine setting, adjustments to the
hyper-parameters are not trivial.
We build on the DAC framework [44], which derives a ﬁnite Markov Decision
Process (MDP) [40] from a static dataset and solves it using an optimal planner.
The MDP derivation uses empirical averages to interpolate contributions from
nearby transitions seen in the dataset with pessimistic penalties applied to
derivation of the rewards based on the coverage of the neighborhood. DAC, in a
manner similar to the model-based oﬄine RL algorithms discussed previously, is
sensitive to its hyper-parameters relating to the pessimistic costs. We incorporate
an adaptive pessimistic reward shaping in DAC which makes it both robust
to dataset properties and signiﬁcantly faster to train by eliminating online
interactions required for tuning magnitude of conservatism. Our adaptive reward
penalty formulation relies on local Lipschitz smoothness [36] assumption on the
Q-values exhibited by the true (but unknown) MDP, a much weaker assumption
compared to the DAC-MDP framework.
We provide the same theoretical
guarantees on optimality while exhibiting a superior empirical performance.
Figure 1 illustrates our contribution, dubbed Adaptive(A)-DAC, evaluated
on a real traﬃc signal control setup. A-DAC ﬁnds a policy signiﬁcantly better
than a common behavioral (or data collection) policy in a small fraction of time
compared to online learning and does so out-of-the-box. A key insight of our
approach is that data collected from cyclic policies that are oblivious to rate
of traﬃc arrival and is often the norm in many traﬃc signal scenarios, can be
leveraged to infer superior policies which improve overall traﬃc eﬃciency.
Contributions:
• We formulate traﬃc signal control as an oﬄine RL problem. While RL
has recently been proposed for oﬄine optimization, to the best of our
knowledge, it has not been used for the traﬃc signal control before.
• We extend a recent model-based oﬄine RL framework, DAC, to our problem
and improve it by employing an adaptive reward penalty mechanism that
enables the best trade-oﬀs in the performance and the policy building
overheads. We provide Probably-Approximately-Correct (PAC) guarantees
for A-DAC under more relaxed and realistic assumptions on the Q-function.
• We propose a methodology for data collection at a traﬃc intersection using
macro statistics provided by traﬃc authorities. We evaluate our approach
3

Figure 2: A simple signalized inter-
section with two traﬃc ﬂows: North-
South (NS) and West-East (EW).
Table 1: A small experience dataset
collected using Cyclic traﬃc signal
control policy applied on the inter-
section in Figure 2.
State s
Action a
State s′
Reward r
(|NS|, |EW|)
(1,5)
EW
(3,3)
2
(3,3)
NS
(1,5)
2
(6,1)
NS
(2,3)
4
(2,3)
EW
(6,1)
2
(0,5)
EW
(2,3)
2
(2,3)
NS
(0,5)
2
Table 2: Derived rewards for the core states identiﬁed from the experience
dataset in Table 1.
State s
Averagers (C = 0)

A-DAC
(|NS|, |EW|)
˜R(s, NS)
˜R(s, EW)
˜R(s, NS)
˜R(s, EW)
˜R(s, NS)
˜R(s, EW)
˜R(s, NS)
˜R(s, EW)
(2,3)
2.67
2
2.41
1.77
1.85
1.25
1.58
1.53
(6,1)
2.67
2
2.29
1.16
1.46
-0.7
1.17
0.32
(3,3)
2.67
2
2.45
1.66
1.98
0.89
1.82
1.31
(1,5)
2.67
2
2.14
1.85
0.96
1.52
0.55
1.70
(0,5)
2.67
2
2.03
1.82
0.63
1.43
0.14
1.65
on a complex signalized roundabout where traﬃc is coordinated using
eleven phases.
Outline: The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
In Section 2, we
introduce a small idealized traﬃc control problem as a working example. A
primer on oﬄine RL methods and their applicability to traﬃc control is provided
in Section 3. In Section 4, our proposed approach, A-DAC, is introduced and
elaborated upon. Section 5 reasons about suitability of our approach to the traﬃc
control problem. Section 6, then, evaluates A-DAC and other baselines using a
complex signalized roundabout. The most relevant related work is presented in
Section 7 and we conclude in Section 8 with a summary of the work.
2
Basic Traﬃc Signal Control
We start with a simple scenario of traﬃc signal control ﬁrst presented in [42]
where an optimal model for traﬃc light phase duration is derived based on
simplistic assumptions. When these assumptions are relaxed in a realistic setting,
more complex machinery is required for optimal control which we present later.
Consider a traﬃc signal at an intersection which controls traﬃc in only two
directions: either from north to south (NS) or from west to east (EW) (See
Figure 2). Suppose the traﬃc follows a Poisson process with the rate of traﬃc
arrival being λ1 and λ2 respectively for the two traﬃc ﬂows. The traﬃc starts
arriving from time t = 0 and the total cycle time is T. The number of vehicles
entering any incoming traﬃc arms is uniformly distributed by deﬁnition of the
Poisson process and the expected number at time t is given by λt. The optimal
4

setting for the duration of the green phase for NS can be derived by minimizing
the average delay faced by a vehicle. It evaluates to:
λ1
λ1+λ2 T. The equation
states that the green phase duration should be proportional to the arrival rate
of the vehicles. It can be easily generalized to a case of n exclusive traﬃc ﬂows
where the optimal green phase duration for an edge i is
λi
Pn
i=0 λi T.
We relax the assumption of the known arrival rate. Instead, we assume
an experience dataset of vehicle movement at the intersection exists where the
signal is controlled by a cyclic policy. The Cyclic policy simply alternates green
phase between the NS ﬂow and the EW ﬂow at every time step, mimicking a
commonly observed scenario. The idea is to use the dataset to devise a smarter
control policy. We study some of the recent developments in oﬄine RL towards
this problem scenario before introducing a real signalized roundabout we target.
The techniques we develop are general enough to apply directly to the more
complex test environment.
3
Oﬄine Reinforcement Learning
In Reinforcement Learning (RL) [48], an agent interacts with an environment,
assumed to be a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [40], in order to learn an optimal
control (action selection) policy. The MDP is given by a tuple (S, A, P, R, γ),
with a state space S, an action space A, transition dynamics P(s, a, s′), a
stochastic reward function R(s, a) and a discount factor γ ∈[0, 1). The agent
aims to learn a policy function π : S →A which maximizes the expected sum of
discounted rewards. Formally, the objective of RL is given by the following.
max
π
E
at∼π(.|st)
st+1∼P (.|st,at)
h ∞
X
t=0
γtR(st, at)
i
(1)
The policy π has a Q-function Qπ(s, a) giving the expected inﬁnite-horizon
discounted reward starting with state-action pair (s, a). The optimal policy π∗
maximizes the Q-function over all policies and state-action pairs. The maximum
Q-values are computed by repeated application of the Bellman backup [5] operator
B stated below.
B[Q](s, a) = R(s, a) + γ
E
s′∼P (.|s,a)

max
a
Q(s′, a)

(2)
RL strives to discover a near-optimal policy by exploring actions in the
environment. In an oﬄine or batch setting [25, 9], the environment is replaced
by a static dataset collected apriori.
The dataset D is made up of tuples
{(si, ai, ri, s′
i)} where each tuple takes action ai from state si to transition to
state s′
i while giving the reward ri. The dataset is collected from multiple
episodes/trajectories of the form (s1, a1, r1, s2, . . . , sH) where H is the trajectory
length.
Example: Table 1 presents a sample experience data set collected by a policy
cycling between the actions NS and EW. The state is given by a vector of the
5

number of vehicles arriving from each incoming lane. The data set includes three
trajectories, each contributing two tuples. Duplicates are removed to make the
example concise.
In the basic traﬃc control setup outlined in Section 2, an action corresponds
to activating green phase for one of the traﬃc ﬂows for a ﬁxed time duration,
called an observation period. Therefore, ai ∈{NS, EW}. Observation state is
given by a vector of the number of vehicles arriving from each incoming traﬃc
arm, making it 2-dimensional in our case. Reward is a non-negative integer
denoting the number of vehicles that cross the signal during the observation
period.
3.1
Model-free Learning
The ﬁrst solution approach we consider is to adapt a popular oﬀ-policy Q-
learning approach Deep Q Network (DQN) [29] to the oﬄine setting. The
oﬄine setting often causes extrapolation errors in Q-learning which result from
mismatch between the dataset and the state-action visitation of the policy under
training.
[14] proposes a batch-constrained Q learning (BCQ) approach to
minimize distance between the selected actions and the dataset. BCQ trains
a state-conditioned generative model of the experience dataset. In discrete
settings, the model Gω gives a good estimate of the behavioral policy πb used to
collect data. That means, we can constrain the selected actions to data using a
threshold τ ∈[0, 1):
π(a|s) =
arg max
a′|Gω(a′|s)/ maxˆa Gω(ˆa|s)>τ
Q(s, a′)
(3)
While the BCQ is eﬀective at pruning the under-explored transitions, its
beneﬁts are limited when the behavioral policy tends to a uniform distribution
which holds true in our case: The behavior policy πb we aim to utilize is Cyclic
for which πb(a|s) = πb(a) =
1
|A|.
In another oﬄine RL approach, a minimalistic change to classic TD3 algo-
rithm [12] is proposed in [11] which regularizes the TD3 policy with a behavioral
cloning (BC) [35, 39] term:
π ←arg max
π
E
(s,a)∼D
h
λ Q
 s, π(s)

−
 π(s) −a
2i
(4)
Here, λ is a normalizing scalar that is set to a value inverse of the average
critic (Q) function value. This approach is termed TD3+BC and is regarded as
the current state-of-the-art model-free oﬄine RL algorithm.
3.2
Derived MDP-based Learning
A contrastive approach to constraining the RL to the dataset is to derive an
MDP from the data and either solve it optimally or use model-based policy
optimization (MBPO) [17]. This approach provides better generalization since
each transition gets more supervision compared to the oﬀ-policy approaches.
6

There exist multiple recent approaches built on this principle called Model-
based (MB-)RL [47]. MBRL primarily learns an approximate transition model
and (optionally) a reward model by supervising data followed by a phase of
uncertainty quantiﬁcation to deal with out-of-distribution visitations [57, 19, 58].
We employ a simple instantiation, called DAC-MDP [44], which is based on
Averagers’ framework [15]. The idea is to learn transitions and rewards as
empirical averages over the nearest neighbors in the state-action space.
It
lends to a natural approximation and enables an intuitive uncertainty quantiﬁer.
Furthermore, DAC-MDP creates a ﬁnitely- representated MDP by working on a
set of core states which can be reached from any non-core state using a one-step
transition and do not allow transition to a non-core state from within. The ﬁnite
structure of the MDP implies that an accurate solution is feasible (such as by
using a value iteration solver) despite an inﬁnite continuous state space. We
contribute an adaptive reward penalty mechanism to the DAC framework which
works as an eﬀective uncertainty quantiﬁer. Before outlining our contributions,
we formalize the DAC framework.
Assumption 3.1. We assume a continuous state space S and a ﬁnite action
space A. We are given a nearest neighbor function NN(s, a, k, α) that ﬁnds at
most k nearest neighbors to a state-action pair (s, a) with an optional maximum
distance threshold α. NN uses a metric function d, such as Euclidean [50],
that keeps the pairs with diﬀerent actions inﬁnitely distant while the distance
between the pairs with the same action is evaluated on the state metric space:
For example, d(si, ai, sj, aj) = ||si −sj|| if ai = aj, ∞otherwise.
We use shorthand dij for distance between pairs (si, ai) and (sj, aj). Notation
d′
ij indicates a normalized version of distance dij. Given a smoothness parameter
k and a distance threshold α, the derived MDP ˜
M is deﬁned below.
Deﬁnition 3.2. MDP
˜
M = (S, A, ˜R, ˜P, γ) shares the state space and the
action space of the underlying MDP M.
For a state-action pair (s, a), let
kNN = NN(s, a, k, α) be its nearest neighbors from D.
The reward and
transition functions are then deﬁned as:
˜R(s, a) = 1
k
X
i∈kNN
ri, ˜P(s, a, s′) = 1
k
X
i∈kNN
I[s′ = s′
i]
DAC modiﬁes the reward function to penalize transitions to an under-explored
region with an additive penalty parameterized by a cost parameter C ≥0:
˜R(s, a) = 1
k
X
i∈kNN
 ri −C ∗d(s, a, si, ai)

(5)
It should be noted that while the reward shaping in model-based online RL
acts as a way to incorporate additional incentive based on domain knowledge to
an otherwise sparse reward function [32], the oﬄine setting uses it as a means to
incorporate pessimism to the MDP.
7

Example: Table 2 compares the rewards derived with diﬀerent cost penalties.
k = 3 throughout and the distances are normalized to the maximum distance for
ease of presentation. As an example, ˜RC=0((2, 3), NS) = 1
3(r[1] + r[2] + r[5]) =
1
3(4 + 2 + 2) = 2.67, where r[.] is indexes Table 1. State (2, 3), for which the
reward r from dataset is equal for both actions, is assigned a higher reward for
action NS due to inﬂuence from a high-reward neighbor (6, 1).
The DAC framework builds a ﬁnite MDP by focusing on a set of core states
that are extracted from the data set D as SD = {s′
i|(si, ai, ri, s′
i)}. As stated
previously, states within SD do not transition to non-core states. The MDP
built over the core states is solved using any standard tabular solver such as
value iteration to compute values ˜V for the core states. We can then compute ˜Q
for a non-core state using the following 1-step lookup which is used to transition
from the non-core state to one of the core states:
˜Q(s, a) = ˜R(s, a) + γ
X
s′∈˜
P (s,a)
˜P(s, a, s′). ˜V (s′)
(6)
Example: Consider a new state (1, 4). Its Q-values on MDP with no cost penal-
ties and γ = 0.99 evaluate to ˜QC=0((1, 4), NS) = 7.92 and ˜QC=0((1, 4), EW) =
7.25. The policy ˜π would, therefore, choose action NS which is suboptimal since
the state indicates more traﬃc on the EW lane. Cost penalties help us in this
instance: The MDP derived with C = 2 gives ˜QC=2((1, 4), NS) = 32.6 and
˜QC=2((1, 4), EW) = 32.9.
The setting C = 2 is not arbitrary: it is the lowest
C value for which the EW action gets chosen. We discuss this choice further in
the next section.
4
A-DAC MDP Derivation
We have just shown through example that building oﬄine solutions for traﬃc
control is not trivial even in the simplest of the scenarios. We build an adaptive
approach for reward shaping that retains the optimality guarantees while improv-
ing the eﬃciency of the DAC framework signiﬁcantly; the resulting framework is
called as A-DAC.
Deﬁnition 4.1. A-DAC automatically adjusts the penalties built into the
reward function of the derived MDP ˜
M in the following manner:
Given kNN = NN(s, a, k, α) and rmax = max
i∈kNN ri
˜R(s, a) = 1
k
X
i∈kNN
ri −rmax ∗d′(s, a, si, ai)
It should be noted that d′ is a normalized version of d which brings the penalty
term to the units of rewards.1 The intuition behind using the max reward in the
1For practicality, we use max-normalization: d′ = d/dmax, where dmax is the diameter of
the point space and is approximately calculated by sampling a few points from data set D and
aggregating distance from these points to all points in D.
8

Figure 3: A conﬁguration of k-nearest neighbors for state (s, a) where k −1
neighbors are at distance 1 each with reward 1. The remaining neighbor ﬂoats
at distance rmax bringing in reward rmax where rmax > 1.
Figure 4: Comparison of rewards derived by DAC with diﬀerent settings of cost
C to those obtained by A-DAC using the conﬁguration in Figure 3 controlled by
variable rmax. A-DAC penalizes the conﬁgurations with under-explored regions
more while keeping the rewards high for homogeneous conﬁgurations.
neighborhood is to penalize the under-explored but highly rewarding transitions
more heavily. Let’s understand with an example.
Example: We saw earlier that for state (2, 3) from Table 2, action NS brings a
higher reward in DAC. This is due to inﬂuence from a high-reward-getter neighbor
(6, 1). It can be noticed from the same table that A-DAC’s adaptive rewards
make both the actions equally rewarding. Moreover, Q-values for a non-core state
(1, 4) evaluate to ˜QA-DAC((1, 4), ‘NS’) = 31.4 and ˜QA-DAC((1, 4), ‘EW’) = 32.5
selecting the action EW automatically.
We present a canonical use case in Figure 3 to illustrate how the rewards
are shaped in A-DAC. Of the k neighbors considered, one neighbor is kept
ﬂoating to simulate diﬀerent types of neighborhood. e.g. rmax = 1 gives the most
homogeneous conﬁguration, while a high rmax replicates an under-represented
region. Figure 4 shows how a global cost parameter C would shape the reward
for (s, a). While a low C gives high rewards for an under-represented region, a
high C is detrimental to the homogeneous conﬁgurations. A-DAC can be seen
to oﬀer a good balance.
Optimality. The policy learned by solving the A-DAC ˜
M, denoted ˜π, can
9

potentially be arbitrarily sub-optimal in true MDP M. We obtain a lower bound
on the values obtained by policy V ˜π in relation to the values V ∗provided by
the optimal policy π∗in M under a “smoothness” assumption.
Assumption 4.2. A-DAC assumes local Lipschitz continuity [36] for Q-function
Q: For a state-action pair (si, ai) and another pair (sj, aj) in its neighborhood,
i.e., d′
ij < α for α ∈[0, 1], there exists a local constant LQ(i, α) ≥0 such that
|Q(si, ai) −Q(sj, aj)| ≤LQ(i, α)d′
ij.
The local continuity is a much weaker assumption compared to the global
smoothness assumed in the DAC framework. Further, it is found to be practical
based on an analysis of our traﬃc control setup presented in Section 5. In
addition, we assume that the rewards are bounded to [0, Rmax] which holds for
most practical applications including ours. ˜π, then, provides the following PAC
guarantee.
Theorem 4.3. Given a static dataset D with its sample complexity indicated
by covering number (see Deﬁnition A.2) NSA(α) and an A-DAC MDP ˜
M built
on D with parameters k and α, if
˜
Q2
max
ϵ2s
ln

2NSA(α)
δ

≤k ≤2NSA(α)
δ
, then
V ˜π ≥V ∗−2ϵs + ¯dmaxRmax
1 −γ
, w.p. 1 −δ
The proof is presented in Appendix A.The ﬁrst component ϵs denotes the
maximum sampling error caused by using a ﬁnite number of neighbors; it helps
us set a lower bound on k. The second component denotes the estimation error
due to neighbors being at non-zero distance: Quantity ¯dmax gives the worst case
average distance which is upper bounded by α and can be lowered by augmenting
the data set D with more diverse data.
5
A-DAC’s Feasibility to Traﬃc Control
We use the simple two action single intersection model in Figure 2 to analyze
A-DAC’s feasibility to traﬃc control.
We assume a ﬁxed rate of arrival for each of the two incoming lanes where
λEW = 3 ∗λNS. The starting state is assumed to be (NS, EW) = (1, 3). A
maximum capacity (Rmax) of 4 is allowed in order to maintain a steady ﬂow. On
this setup, two experience trajectories are collected using Cyclic control policy
as illustrated in Figure 5. It can be easily seen that this policy moves 3T vehicles
in T timesteps. Next, A-DAC is trained on this toy dataset. Figure 6 shows a
rollout with the same starting state. It can be noticed that a cumulative reward
of 4T is achieved, giving 33% improvement over the behavioral policy (and
matching the optimal policy). It shows that A-DAC generalizes well. Inspect
state (2,5) as an instance: The only action observed from it in the dataset is
NS, but our policy has learned to take action EW instead.
10

Figure 5: Two experience trajectories from the traﬃc intersection in Figure 2
taken using Cyclic behavior policy under a ﬁxed traﬃc load assumption.
Figure 6: Policy learned by A-DAC using the dataset in Figure 5 improves the
behavior policy by 33%.
Finally, using the same model, we can show that for the Q-function, local
Lipschitz continuity is the right condition to enforce. For example, suppose the
arrival rate on each lane is λ1 and λ2 respectively. Assume, we start the cycle
from the λ1 lane, then the optimal return is:
J(π∗) =
λ2
1
λ1 + λ2
+ γ ∗
λ2
2
λ1 + λ2
+ γ2 ∗
λ2
1
λ1 + λ2
+ . . .
=
1
1 −γ2 ∗
λ2
1
λ1 + λ2
+
γ
1 −γ2 ∗
λ2
2
λ1 + λ2
Now if we assume that the λ1 > 0 and λ2 > 0 and λ1 + λ1 ≥δ, the above
expression is upper bounded by a convex function c ∗(λ2
1 + λ2
1) for some c > 0
which is locally Lipschitz (as a function of λ1 and λ2).
6
Evaluation
This section addresses the following questions:
1. How well is the data collected from simple cyclic behavioral policy exploited by
oﬄine learners? (§6.3)
2. Does a partially trained behavior policy oﬀer any added beneﬁts to oﬄine
learning? (§6.4)
3. How do diﬀerent latent state representations used in A-DAC compare? (§6.5)
4. How does A-DAC’s eﬃciency and hyperparameter sensitivity compare to
prior work? (§6.6)
Before delving into these questions, we describe a real complex traﬃc round-
about environment used in evaluation (§6.1) and the details of our experimental
11

Figure 7: A signalized roundabout A-DAC optimizes. 68 loop detector devices
installed in and around the junction report the traﬃc they observe which forms
the state.
setup (§6.2).
6.1
Environment for a Signalized Roundabout
We model a signalized roundabout shown in Figure 7. It is a complex intersection
containing multiple lanes in each traﬃc arm and 10 traﬃc signals controlling the
area. We model the state of traﬃc as a 68-dimensional vector, each dimension
providing the number of vehicles seen at a designated location.
An action
corresponds to a phase of traﬃc that covers a certain conﬁguration of the
traﬃc signals. Details on engineering the states, actions, and rewards for this
intersection are provided in Appendix B. The appendix also provides details on
creating an experience batch from a micro-simulator bootstrapped with macro
traﬃc statistics when access to the real experience trajectories data is limited.
6.2
Experimental Setup
We use the signalized roundabout detailed in Section 6.1 for evaluation. Each
episode lasts an hour with 360 time steps. O-D matrix data is available for
each hour of a typical weekday which allows us to create a single day batch. A
random noise is added to the matrix when creating a larger batch. Two batches
are used: (a) 1 day batch giving ≈10k timesteps, and (b) 1 week batch giving
≈70k timesteps.
Behavioral policies. We study two data collection policies:
1. Cyclic: Cycles through all actions. Represents a scenario commonly found
across traﬃc intersections.
2. Partial-RL: An RL policy is partially trained via online interactions. A noisy
version of the policy is then used to control data. This policy has been shown to
be suitable for oﬄine learning previously [13].
Batch collection and evaluation is carried out using SUMO microsimulator [27].
A ﬁxed ﬁve hour workload, that corresponds to ﬁve RL episodes, is used for
12

1 day batch
1 week batch
300
400
500
Avg returns/ hour
Oﬄine RL algorithms on Cyclic batch
Behavioral
Online RL
BCQ
DQN
TD3+BC
MOReL
MOPO
DAC
A-DAC (ours)
Figure 8: Comparison of oﬄine RL algorithms on Cyclic batch. Error bars
indicate the min-max interval obtained after 5 runs with diﬀerent seeds under
the best model settings. BCQ, TD3+BC, MOReL, and MOPO fail to improve
the behavioral policy. Both DAC and A-DAC improve the policy signiﬁcantly,
even matching the Online RL performance with the larger batch, While DAC
needs a large evaluation overhead, A-DAC works out-of-the-box.
evaluation throughout: it includes two hours of light traﬃc, one hour of medium
traﬃc, and two hours of peak traﬃc. Each single hour episode measures the
cumulative discounted rewards. The average return across the ﬁve hours is
reported as our performance measure.
MDP derivation in DAC requires a nearest neighbor index: We use a memory-
mapped fast approximate nearest neighbor search index [1].
Distances are
max-normalized by diameter of the state space before deriving MDP. We use a
sampling-based fast approximate algorithm to estimate the diameter. Derived
MDP is solved optimally with a value iteration algorithm [2] which can exploit
sparseness in transition matrix for eﬃciency gains.
Baselines. We compare A-DAC against recent approaches to oﬄine learning.
Firstly, we use three model-free oﬄine RL baselines, namely, DQN, BCQ, and
TD3+BC. Next, we use MOReL and MOPO as two representatives of the general
MBPO [17] approach that covers both classical (na¨ıve) MBRL and Pessimistic
MDP-based MBRL. We ﬁrst tune the parameters controlling pessimistic costs
in each of the algorithms and report the results for the best setting.2 Finally,
we analyze the DAC-MDP framework which, too, is tuned for cost parameter
C using a grid search as suggested in [44]. Some of the baselines we use here
are originally developed for continuous action spaces; We describe the necessary
modiﬁcations for our discrete action setup in Appendix C. An online RL policy
is also included in the evaluation which uses an oﬀ-policy DQN fully trained for
close to 100k timesteps.
2We use grid search to tune the parameters in both MOReL and MOPO that relate to
behavior ranging from classical MBRL to highly pessimistic MBRL. It has been observed that
depending on the nature of the data set (stationary or moving) or its size, the best settings
diﬀer. We only report the results obtained on the best tuned version here.
13

1 day batch
1 week batch
400
450
500
Avg returns/ hour
Oﬄine RL algorithms on Partial-RL batch
Behavioral
Online RL
BCQ
DQN
TD3+BC
MOReL
MOPO
DAC
A-DAC (ours)
Figure 9: Comparison of oﬄine RL algorithms on Partial-RL batch. Error
bars indicate the min-max interval obtained after 5 runs with diﬀerent seeds
under the best model settings. Failures of DQN, MOReL, and MOPO exemplify
the deadly triad issue in RL. Both DAC and A-DAC, on account of a more
principled approximation of the dynamics manage to improve the behavior
policy, the magnitude being higher on the larger batch. TD3+BC provides the
best improvement where data from the partially trained policy aids with early
identiﬁcation of good actions on account of BC regularization.
6.3
Cyclic Policy Batch
Figure 8 compares the algorithms on the Cyclic dataset. Approaches that employ
pessimism, viz., BCQ and both MBRL algorithms, fail to improve the behavioral
policy as the Cyclic policy does not oﬀer much insight that the deep function
approximators (employed either to learn the policy or the Q-values) can easily
exploit. DAC-based policies provide considerable performance improvements
due to the nearest neighbor-based dynamics approximation specialized for ﬁnite
spaces like ours. For DAC, we only report results from the best hyper-parameter
setting found after 6 online evaluations. As seen in Figure 1, the performance is
highly sensitive to these settings. A-DAC, on the other hand, does not need
extra online evaluations and either matches or equals the performance of the
best DAC policy.
6.4
Partial RL Policy Batch
Figure 9 compares the oﬄine RL algorithms on the Partial-RL dataset. BCQ
manages to exploit this batch better with its constrained Q-value approximation.
Surprisingly, the pessimistic MBRL approaches fail to even match the behavioral
policy performance. Along with DQN, these suﬀer from the issue of “the deadly
triad of deep RL” [48] which exempliﬁes the inherent diﬃculties in planning
with learned deep-network models. The incorporation of behavioral cloning into
TD3 policy updates in TD3+BC makes the good actions stand out early during
the training and, as an eﬀect, it works much better here than on Cyclic data set.
DAC framework simpliﬁes the dynamics derivation process thus signiﬁcantly
14

Table 3: Comparison of the state representations used in A-DAC. Error bars
indicate the min-max interval obtained after 5 runs with diﬀerent seeds. The
Cyclic policy is improved signiﬁcantly using native state representation. The
Partial-RL batch is better optimized using the learned state representations.
A-DAC state representation
Batch type
Batch size
Loop Counts
BCQ
DQN
Cyclic
1 day
495 ± 5
473 ± 10
459 ± 12
1 week
487 ± 7
507 ± 5
460 ± 10
Partial-RL
1 day
477 ± 8
460 ± 10
488 ± 8
1 week
481 ± 5
504 ± 9
491 ± 4
Table 4: Comparison of oﬄine RL algorithms based on the overhead required to
build and evaluate policy given a Cyclic experience batch. DAC and A-DAC
use the state representation from BCQ. An Online RL algorithm is also included
for completeness.
Algorithm
Time (minutes)
Number of timesteps
Online RL
660
100k
BCQ
99
24k
DQN
101
25k
TD3+BC
100
20k
MBRL
65
18k
DAC
180
28k
A-DAC
113
24k
reducing the reliance on the learned models. Between DAC and A-DAC, A-
DAC, once again, matches or improves the best DAC policy performance without
any hyper-parameter tuning.
6.5
State Representations in A-DAC
Results for A-DAC (and for DAC) presented so far, did not discuss the latent
state representations used by the model. We analyze the following three state
representations:
1. Loop Counts: 68 dimensional native representation, corresponding to counts
from the loop detector devices.)
2. BCQ: Deep representation learned by BCQ algorithm. Penultimate layer of
a learned Q-network is used as a surrogate high dimensional state.
3. DQN: Deep representation learned by DQN algorithm. The original state
vector is mapped to a high dimensional space in a manner similar to BCQ.
Table 3 shows that the native state representation can exploit the simplistic
Cyclic batch really well. For a Partial-RL batch, however, a representation
learned by a strong oﬄine exploration algorithm, such as BCQ, oﬀers more
beneﬁts provided a suﬃciently large sized batch is available. DQN uses a highly
discriminative model which leads to a largely unchanged state representation
with increasing data size. Results point at the ﬂexibility of DAC framework
to use state representations learned from other batch learning approaches and
improve them further.
15

6.6
Eﬃciency and Hyperparameter Sensitivity
DAC results presented so far are obtained from the best policy from 6 policies
trained with diﬀerent hyperparameters based on a guideline given in [44]. It
should be recalled that DAC requires two hyperparameters: a smoothness
parameter k, and a cost penalty C. A-DAC uses the parameter k as well as a
distance threshold α for smoothness while the cost penalty is not required. We
compare sensitivity of the algorithms to each parameter in Appendix D. The
main takeaways are presented next.
DAC has been shown to be robust to the smoothness parameter k; It holds
for A-DAC’s smoothness parameters too. We set a high value of α, such as 0.8,
and use a low value of k, 5 by default, which enables eﬃcient computation while
achieving robust results. DAC is highly sensitive to parameter C. A signiﬁcant
time overhead is required for online evaluations in order to tune this parameter.
A-DAC oﬀers robustness guarantees that are experimentally veriﬁed.
We compare the total time overhead for our baselines in Table 4 using
conservative settings for evaluation stopping criteria or for the amount of policy
optimization. In addition to the policy evaluation, we have to use signiﬁcant
computation overhead for building the MDP and solving it optimally. (See
Appendix D for details.) With DAC, this overhead multiplies by the number
of MDPs it derives in order to explore the best policy. While computational
advances in future can potentially reduce this overhead, it is unlikely to be a
non-trivial component of the overall optimization time.
7
Related work
7.1
Traﬃc Signal Control
Classical transportation engineering techniques for Traﬃc Signal Control (TSC)
can be categorized as optimal control [8] or distributed network-of-queues con-
trol [51]. The widely adopted adaptive traﬃc control systems such as Scats [45]
largely depend on pre-deﬁned rules or expert knowledge on traﬃc intersection
management. There has been a lot of research work in recent years employing
RL techniques to support dynamic traﬃc signal control [42, 52, 33]. These
approaches develop diﬀerent models for state and reward functions in order to
optimize various objectives such as throughput, waiting time, or carbon emis-
sions [56, 53]. Recent deep learning RL approaches such as deep policy gradient
or graph convolutions have found success on more complex problems such as
coordinated multi-agent control [6].
The related domain of Autonomous Vehicle (AV) control has recently seen
a widespread use of RL for automation [49, 54], with some approaches even
deploying the solutions at a small scale [46, 26].
[43] is the only work, to the
best of our knowledge, that uses oﬄine RL for AV control. Our work should be
similarly treated as an important ﬁrst step towards exploiting the big potential
of oﬄine RL in TSC.
The RL-based approaches for both TSC and AV control prominently use
16

traﬃc micro-simulators. Many of the research projects use simulators built using
multiple simplifying assumptions both on the road networks and the traﬃc ﬂow
models for eﬃciency reasons [59, 10]. We make use of a mature open-source
micro-simulation framework of Sumo [27] which allows us to simulate real road
network with traﬃc modeled on the previously collected statistics generated by
loop detector devices installed in the real environment.
7.2
Oﬄine Model-free RL
Oﬀ-policy model-free RL methods [30] adapted to batch settings have been
shown to fail in practice due to extrapolation errors [14]. Most of the oﬄine RL
algorithms are built on top of an existing oﬀ-policy deep RL algorithm, such
as TD3 [12] or SAC [16]. In order to handle out-of-distribution errors, they
apply various regularization measures such as actor pre-training with imitation
learning [23], generative behavior cloning models [55, 20] KL-divergence [22, 18],
ensemble uncertainty quantiﬁers [3], behavior support constraints [21, 14] or
behavior cloning [11]. Each of these algorithmic modiﬁcations for conservatism
add supplementary hyper-parameters which may need to be tuned. In oﬄine
settings, however, it is not feasible to interact with the environment for tuning.
Our approach has a built-in adaptive pessimism which empowers it to work
out-of-the-box.
7.3
Oﬄine Model-based RL
Compared to model-free, the model-based oﬄine approaches have proven to be
more data-eﬃcient while also beneﬁting from more supervision [25, 57]. Our
work builds on this recent success of MBRL to oﬄine batches. Uncertainty
quantiﬁers are critical for generalization of the model [4]. Reward penalties
act as a strong regularizer [57, 19] and ﬁts naturally to the nearest neighbor
approximation used in our MDP model [44]. The strong approximation of the
dynamics and optimal planning on account of ﬁnite problem structure are key to
our approach avoiding the deadly triad of deep RL [48].
Further, our adaptive
mechanism for shaping the reward penalties enable a high quality out-of-the-box
performance while the other approaches are sensitive to hyper-parameters and
require a careful parameter tuning [28].
8
Conclusion
We have modeled traﬃc signal control as an oﬄine RL problem and learnt a
policy from a static batch of data without interacting with a real or simulated
environment. The oﬄine RL is a more realistic set up as it is practically infeasible
to learn a policy by interacting with a real environment. Similarly in a simulator
it is not clear how to integrate real data that is often available through traﬃc
signal operators.
17

We have introduced a model-based learning framework, A-DAC, that uses
the principle of pessimism under uncertainty to adaptively modify or shape the
reward function to infer a Markov Decision Process (MDP). Due to the adaptive
nature of the reward function, A-DAC works out of the box while the nearest
competitor requires substantial hyperparameter tuning to achieve comparable
performance. An evaluation is carried out on a complex signalized roundabout
showing a signiﬁcant potential to build high performance policies in a data
eﬃcient manner using simplistic cyclic batch collection policies. In future, we
would like to explore other applications in the traﬃc domain which can beneﬁt
from oﬄine learning.
18
