Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 42 (2011) 529-573
Submitted 08/11; published 11/11
Cloning in Elections: Finding the Possible Winners
Edith Elkind

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Piotr Faliszewski

AGH University of Science and Technology
Krakow, Poland
Arkadii Slinko

Department of Mathematics
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Abstract
We consider the problem of manipulating elections by cloning candidates. In our model,
a manipulator can replace each candidate c by several clones, i.e., new candidates that are
so similar to c that each voter simply replaces c in his vote with a block of these new
candidates, ranked consecutively. The outcome of the resulting election may then depend
on the number of clones as well as on how each voter orders the clones within the block. We
formalize what it means for a cloning manipulation to be successful (which turns out to be
a surprisingly delicate issue), and, for a number of common voting rules, characterize the
preference proﬁles for which a successful cloning manipulation exists. We also consider the
model where there is a cost associated with producing each clone, and study the complexity
of ﬁnding a minimum-cost cloning manipulation. Finally, we compare cloning with two
related problems: the problem of control by adding candidates and the problem of possible
(co)winners when new alternatives can join.
1. Introduction
In many real-life elections, some of the candidates may have fairly similar positions on major
issues, yet disagree on what is the best way to implement their common goals. Under many
voting rules, and most glaringly under Plurality voting, these candidates run the risk of
splitting the vote and losing to a candidate with an opposing program. This phenomenon
can be exploited to alter the election outcome. For instance, New York Times wrote about
a Republican political operative who recruited drifters and homeless people onto the Green
Party ballot and freely admitted that these candidacies may siphon some support from the
Democrats and therefore help Republicans (Lacey, 2010).
Such scenarios have been extensively studied in the (computational) social choice lit-
erature (see Section 6 for an overview). Depending on whether the manipulation is con-
templated by one of the candidates or by an external party, this issue is known as strategic
candidacy problem (this term was coined in Dutta, Jackson, & Le Breton, 2001, 2002) or
the problem of control by adding candidates.
In this paper we will address a variant of this problem that is known as cloning. It is
characterized by the following feature: each new candidate must be very similar to one of
the existing candidates. This form of manipulative behavior was ﬁrst identiﬁed and studied
c⃝2011 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
by Tideman (1987), who also gave a now classic example of a cloning strategy. Tideman
wrote: “When I was 12 years old I was nominated to be treasurer of my class at school.
A girl named Michelle was also nominated. I relished the prospect of being treasurer, so I
made a quick calculation and nominated Michelle’s best friend, Charlotte. In the ensuing
election I received 13 votes, Michelle received 12, and Charlotte received 11, so I became
treasurer”(Tideman, 1987, p. 1). The calculation was that, being friends, Michelle and
Charlotte are ‘similar’ and that their electorate will be split.
In Tideman’s example, the cloned alternative lost the election. However, one can also
imagine scenarios where by cloning an alternative we increase its chances of winning. For
example, suppose that an electronics website runs a competition for the best digital camera
by asking consumers to vote for their two favorite models from a given list.
If the list
contains one model of each brand, and 60% of the consumers prefer Sony to Nikon to
Kodak, while the remaining consumers prefer Kodak to Nikon to Sony, then Nikon will win
the competition. On the other hand, if Sony is represented by two similar models, then the
“Sony” customers are likely to vote for these two models of Sony, and the competition will
be won by a Sony camera.
Just as in the general candidate addition scenario, cloning presents an opportunity for a
party that is interested in manipulating the outcome of a preference aggregation procedure,
such as an election or a consumer survey. Such a party—most likely, a campaign manager for
one of the candidates—may invest in creating “clones” of one or more alternatives in order to
make its most preferred alternative (or one of its “clones”) win the election. This campaign
management strategy has certain advantages over introducing an entirely new candidate:
In the latter case, it may be hard to predict how the voters rank the new candidate, so the
campaign manager would have to either invest in eliciting the new candidate’s rankings, or
be prepared to deal with rankings that diﬀer from her initial expectations. In comparison,
the outcomes of cloning are much more predictable, and therefore manipulation by cloning
may be easier to implement. A natural question, then, is which voting rules are resistant to
such manipulation, and whether the manipulator can compute the optimal cloning strategy
for a given election in a reasonable amount of time.
As mentioned above, the ﬁrst study of cloning was undertaken by Tideman (1987), who
introduced the concept of independence of clones as a criterion for voting rules. Apparently
unaware of Tideman’s work, Laﬀond, Laine, and Laslier (1996) introduced the notion of
composition consistency, which is an analogue of independence of clones for tournament
solutions (Laslier, 1997), i.e., voting rules that are deﬁned on the majority relation that
corresponds to the voters’ preferences. Later, Laslier (1996, 2000) introduced the notion of
cloning consistency, which is equivalent to independence of clones. We will discuss these
results in more detail in Section 6.
In all these papers, the authors concentrated on ﬁnding out whether a certain voting
rule is independent of clones or on constructing new rules with this property. In our work,
we take a somewhat diﬀerent perspective: Instead of looking at cloning as a manipulative
action that should be prevented, we view cloning as a campaign management tool. This
point of view raises a number of questions that have not been considered—or have been
considered from a diﬀerent angle—in the previous work:
What does it mean for cloning to be successful? We assume that the campaign man-
ager can produce clones of existing candidates, and the voters rank them in response.
530

Cloning in Elections
We assume that clones are similar enough to be ranked as a group by each voter;
however, the order of clones in such groups may diﬀer from one voter to another.
Since the campaign manager cannot control or predict the order of clones in each
voter’s ranking, we assume that this order is random, i.e., each voter ranks the cloned
candidates in each possible order with the same probability; indeed, this would be
the case if all clones were indistinguishable. In this probabilistic model, each cloning
strategy succeeds with a certain probability. Let q be some real number between 0 and
1. We say that manipulation by cloning is q-successful if the probability of electing a
desired candidate p is at least q. We focus on two extreme cases: (1) p wins under
each possible ordering of the clones, and (2) p wins under at least one ordering of
the clones. In case (1), the cloning is 1-successful; in case (2), following the notation
typically used when dealing with limits in continuous mathematics, we will say that
the cloning is 0+-successful.
In which instances of elections can cloning be successful? While the previous work
shows that many well-known voting rules are susceptible to cloning, no attempt has
been made to characterize the elections in which a speciﬁc candidate can be made
a winner with respect to a given voting rule by means of cloning. However, from
the point of view of a campaign manager who considers cloning as one of the ways
to run the campaign, it would be important to know if he can change the outcome
of a given election by a cloning manipulation. Thus, in this paper we provide such
characterization results for several prominent voting rules. Often, the candidates for
which a successful cloning manipulation exists can be characterized in terms of well-
known notions of social choice such as Pareto undominated alternative (a candidate
c is Pareto undominated if for every other candidate c′ there is a voter that prefers c
to c′), Condorcet loser (candidate c is a Condorcet loser if for every other candidate
c′ more than half of the voters prefer c′ and c), or Uncovered Set (see Section 5.3 or
Miller, 1977; Fishburn, 1977; Laslier, 1997).
Which candidates can be cloned and to what extent? The existing research on clo-
ning does not place any restrictions on the number of clones that can be introduced,
or on the identities of the candidates that can be cloned. On the other hand, it is clear
that in practical campaign management scenarios these issues cannot be ignored; not
all candidates can be cloned, and creating a clone of a given candidate may be costly.
Thus, we consider settings in which each clone of each candidate comes at a cost, and
we seek a least expensive successful cloning strategy. We will mostly focus on the
standard model where clones come at zero cost, and on the unit cost model, where
each clone has the same cost.
What is the computational complexity of ﬁnding cloning strategies? Finally, we
investigate the computational complexity of ﬁnding successful cloning strategies. In
practice, it is not suﬃcient to know that cloning might work: We need to know
exactly which strategy to use. We believe that our paper is the ﬁrst to consider the
computational aspect of cloning. Following the line of work initiated by the seminal
papers of Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick (1989, 1992), we seek to classify prominent
531

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
voting rules according to whether they admit eﬃcient algorithms for ﬁnding a cloning
manipulation.
One might argue that in real-life elections cloning is not a practical campaign manage-
ment tool: After all, recruiting a new candidate that is suﬃciently similar to the existing
ones may be very diﬃcult, if not impossible. Nonetheless, there are natural scenarios where
our model of cloning is practical and well-motivated. Below, we provide two such examples.
First, let us consider an election in which parties nominate candidates for some position,
and each party can nominate several candidates. The voters, especially those not following
the political scene closely, are likely to perceive candidates who belong to the same party
as clones. A party’s campaign manager might attempt to strategically choose the number
of candidates nominated by her party. In fact, she might even be able to aﬀect the number
of candidates nominated by other parties (e.g., by accusing them of not giving the voters
enough choice).
Second, let us consider an environment where, as suggested by Ephrati and Rosenschein
(1997), software agents vote to choose a joint plan (that is, the alternatives are possible
joint plans or steps of possible joint plans). In such a system, the agents can easily come up
with minor variations of the (steps of the) plan, eﬀectively creating clones of the candidates.
(A very similar example regarding a society of agents choosing a project to implement is
given in Laslier, 1996).
In both cases it is reasonable to assume that all clones are ranked contiguously and the
cost of creating each clone is the same; moreover, to be successful, a cloning strategy should
be easy to compute. Therefore our model provides a good ﬁt for these scenarios.
2. Preliminaries
We start by presenting a brief overview of the social choice concepts that will be used in this
paper; we point the reader to the book of Arrow, Sen, and Suzumura (2002) for additional
background.
Given a set A of alternatives (also called candidates), a voter’s preference R is a linear
order over A, i.e., a total transitive antisymmetric binary relation over A. An election E
with n voters is given by its set of alternatives A and a preference proﬁle R = (R1, . . . , Rn),
where Ri is the preference of voter i; we write E = (A, R). For readability, we sometimes
write ≻i in place of Ri. Sometimes when specifying a preference order Ri we write X ≻i Y ,
where X and Y are two disjoint subsets of A. This notation means that each member of
X is preferred to each member of Y but the relative ordering of candidates within X and
within Y is irrelevant to the discussion (unless speciﬁed separately). Also, we denote by
|R| the number of voters in the election. Given an election E = (A, R), we say that an
alternative c ∈A is Pareto undominated if for each alternative c′ ∈A, c′ ̸= c, at least one
voter ranks c ahead of c′. Given two candidates a, c ∈A, we set W(c, a) = |{i | c ≻i a}|.
We say that c beats a in their pairwise contest if W(c, a) > W(a, c); if W(c, a) = W(a, c),
the pairwise contest between a and c is said to be tied.
A voting rule F is often deﬁned as a mapping from elections with a ﬁxed set of alter-
natives A to the set 2A \ {∅} of all nonempty subsets of A. However, in this work, we are
interested in situations where the number of alternatives may change. Thus, we require
voting rules to be deﬁned for arbitrary ﬁnite sets of alternatives and preference proﬁles
532

Cloning in Elections
over those alternatives. We say that a voting rule F is a mapping from pairs of the form
E = (A, R), where A is some ﬁnite set and R is a preference proﬁle over A, to nonempty
subsets of A. The elements of F(E) are called the winners of the election E. Thus, we allow
an election to have more than one winner, i.e., we work with social choice correspondences;
this model is also called the non-unique winner model.
In this paper we consider the following voting rules (for all rules described in terms of
scores the winners are the alternatives with the maximum score):
Plurality. The Plurality score ScP (c) of a candidate c ∈A is the number of voters that
rank c ﬁrst.
Veto. The Veto score ScV (c) of a candidate c ∈A is the number of voters that do not rank
c last.
Borda. Given an election (A, R) with |R| = n, the Borda score ScB(c) of a candidate
c ∈A is given by ScB(c) = n
i=1 |{a ∈A | c ≻i a}|.
k-Approval. For any k ≥1, the k-Approval score Sck(c) of a candidate c ∈A is the
number of voters that rank c in the top k positions. Plurality is simply 1-Approval.
Plurality with Runoﬀ. In the ﬁrst stage, all but two candidates with the top two Plural-
ity scores are eliminated. Then, we run a pairwise contest between the two survivors;
the winner(s) are the candidate(s) who get at least ⌈|R|/2⌉votes at this stage, i.e.,
win or tie the pairwise contest. We may need to break a tie after the ﬁrst stage if there
are more than two candidates with the maximum Plurality score, or one top-scorer
and several candidates with the second-best Plurality score. To this end we use the
parallel universes tie-breaking rule (Conitzer, Rognlie, & Xia, 2009): a candidate c is
considered to be a winner if he wins or ties in the runoﬀfor some way of breaking ties
after the ﬁrst stage.
Maximin. The Maximin score ScM(c) of a candidate c ∈A is ScM(c) = mina∈A W(c, a),
i.e., it is the number of votes that c gets in his worst pairwise contest.
Copeland. The Copeland score ScC(c) of a candidate c ∈A is |{a | W(c, a) > W(a, c)}| −
|{a | W(a, c) > W(c, a)}|. That is, c receives 1 point for each pairwise contest she
wins, 0 points for a tie, and −1 point for each pairwise contest she loses. This is
equivalent to the more conventional deﬁnition, in which, for each candidate a, c gets
1 point if she wins the pairwise contest against a, 0.5 points if there is a tie, and 0 if
she loses the contest.
A candidate c is a Condorcet winner (respectively, Condorcet loser) if for each other
candidate a it holds that W(c, a) > W(a, c) (respectively, W(c, a) < W(a, c)). Naturally,
not every election has a Condorcet winner or a Condorcet loser. Observe that in a Copeland
election with m candidates the score of a Condorcet winner is m −1 and the score of a
Condorcet loser is −(m −1).
Many results of this paper are computational and thus we assume that the reader is
familiar with the standard notions of computational complexity such as classes P and NP,
many-one reductions, NP-hardness and NP-completeness. Most of our NP-hardness results
follow by reductions from the Exact Cover by 3-Sets problem, deﬁned below.
533

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Garey & Johnson, 1979). An instance (G, S) of Exact Cover by 3-
Sets (X3C) is given by a ground set G = {g1, . . . , g3K} and a family S = {S1, . . . , SM}
of subsets of G, where |Si| = 3 for each i = 1, . . . , M. It is a “yes”-instance if there is a
subfamily S′ ⊆S, |S′| = K, such that for each gi ∈G there is an Sj ∈S′ such that gi ∈Sj,
and a “no”-instance otherwise.
3. Our Framework
Cloning and independence of clones were previously deﬁned by Laslier (2000), Tideman
(1987), and Zavist and Tideman (1989). However, we need to modify the deﬁnition given
in these papers in order to model the manipulator’s intentions and the budget constraints.
We will now describe our model formally.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let E = (A, (R1, . . . , Rn)) be an election with a set of candidates A =
{c1, . . . , cm}. We say that an election E′ = (A′, (R′
1, . . . , R′
n)) is obtained from E by replac-
ing a candidate cj ∈A with k clones for some k > 0 if A′ = (A \ {cj}) ∪{c(1)
j , . . . , c(k)
j } and
for each i ∈[n], R′
i is a total order over A′ such that for any a ∈A \ {cj} and any s ∈[k]
it holds that c(s)
j
≻′
i a if and only if cj ≻i a.
We say that an election E∗= (A∗, R∗) is cloned from an election E = (A, R) if there
is a vector of nonnegative integers (k1, . . . , km) such that E∗is derived from E by replacing
each cj, j = 1, . . . , m, with kj clones.
Thus, when we clone a candidate c, we replace her with a group of new candidates that
are ranked together in all voters’ preferences. Observe that according to the deﬁnition above,
cloning a candidate cj once means simply changing his name to c(1)
j
rather than producing
an additional copy of cj. While not completely intuitive, this choice of terminology simpliﬁes
some of the arguments in the rest of the paper.
The deﬁnition above is essentially equivalent to the one given by Zavist and Tideman
(1989); the main diﬀerence is that we explicitly model cloning of more than one candidate.
However, we still need to introduce the two other components of our model: a deﬁnition of
what it means for a cloning to be successful, and the budget.
We start with the former, assuming throughout this discussion that the voting rule
is ﬁxed.
Observe that the ﬁnal outcome of cloning depends on the relative ranking of
the clones chosen by each voter, which is typically not under the manipulator’s control.1
Thus, a cloning may succeed for some orderings of the clones, but not for others. The
election authorities may approach this issue from the worst-case perspective, and consider it
unacceptable when a given cloning succeeds for at least one ordering of clones by the voters.
Alternatively, they can take an average-case perspective, i.e., assume that the voters rank
the clones randomly and independently, with each ordering of the clones being equally likely
(due to similarities among the clones), and consider it acceptable for a cloning manipulation
to succeed with probability that does not exceed a certain threshold. Similarly, while an
extremely cautious manipulator would view cloning as successful only if it succeeds for all
1. Our general model, and, speciﬁcally, the notion of 0+-successful cloning (to be deﬁned in a few para-
graphs), captures the situation where the manipulator does have full control over the ordering of the
clones in voters’ preferences.
534

Cloning in Elections
orderings, a more practically-minded one would be happy with a cloning that succeeds with
high probability. We will now present a deﬁnition that captures all of these attitudes.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Given a positive real q, 0 < q ≤1, we say that the manipulation by
cloning (or simply cloning) is q-successful if (a) the manipulator’s preferred candidate is
not a winner of the original election, and (b) a clone of the manipulator’s preferred candidate
is a winner of the cloned election with probability at least q.
The two worst-case approaches discussed above are special cases of this framework.
Indeed, a cloning succeeds for all orderings if and only if it is 1-successful. Similarly, it
succeeds for some ordering if and only if it is q-successful for some q > 0 (where q may
depend on |A| and |R|). In the latter case, we will say that the cloning is 0+-successful; this
is equivalent to saying that the manipulator would succeed if he could dictate each voter
how to order the clones. We will use this equivalent formulation very often as it simpliﬁes
proofs.
Observe that, according to our deﬁnition, the manipulator succeeds as long as any one of
the clones of the preferred candidate wins. This assumption is natural if the clones represent
the same company (e.g., Coke Light and Coke Zero) or political party.
However, if a
campaign manager has created a clone of his candidate simply by recruiting an independent
candidate to run on a similar platform, he may ﬁnd the outcome in which this new candidate
wins less than optimal. We could instead deﬁne success as a victory by the original candidate
c (i.e., the clone c(1)), but, at least for neutral voting rules, this is equivalent to scaling down
the success threshold q by a factor of k, where k is the number of clones of the preferred
candidate.
Indeed, any preference proﬁle in which the original candidate wins can be
transformed into one in which some clone wins, by switching their order in each voter’s
preferences, so c(1) wins with the same probability as any other clone. In particular, this
means that under this deﬁnition a cloning manipulation can only be 1-successful if it does
not clone the manipulator’s preferred candidate.
Another issue that we need to address is that of the costs associated with cloning. Indeed,
the costs are an important aspect of realistic campaign management, as the manager is
always restricted by the budget of the campaign. The most general way to model the cloning
costs for an election with the initial set of candidates A = {c1, . . . , cm} is by introducing a
cost function p: [m] × Z+ →Z+ ∪{0, +∞}, where p(i, j) denotes the cost of producing the
j-th copy of candidate ci. Note that p(i, 1) corresponds to not producing additional copies
of i, so we require p(i, 1) = 0 for all i ∈[m]. We remark that it is natural to assume that all
costs are nonnegative (though some of them may equal zero), whereas the assumption that
all costs are integer-valued is made for computational reasons; this is not a real restriction
as monetary values are discrete.
We assume that the marginal cost of introducing an additional cloned candidate eventu-
ally becomes constant, that is, there exists a t > 1 such that p(i, j) = p(i, t) for each j > t.
This ensures that the cost function has a ﬁnite representation; speciﬁcally, we can encode
p as an m-by-t table with entries in Z+ ∪{0, +∞}.
Deﬁnition 3.3. An instance of the q-Cloning problem for q ∈{0+} ∪(0, 1] is given by
the initial set of candidates A = {c1, . . . , cm}, a preference proﬁle R over A with |R| = n, a
manipulator’s preferred candidate c ∈A, a parameter t > 1, a cost function p: [m] × [t] →
535

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
Z+∪{0, +∞} (with the interpretation that p(i, j) = p(i, t) for all i = 1, . . . , m and all j > t),
a budget B, and a voting rule F. We ask if there exists a q-successful cloning with respect
to F that costs at most B.
For many of the voting rules that we consider, it is easy to bound the number of clones
needed for 0+-successful or 1-successful cloning (if one exists), and this bound is usually
polynomial in n and m. Thus, t can often be assumed to be polynomial in n and m.
We focus on two natural special cases of q-Cloning:
1. Zero Cost (ZC): p(i, j) = 0 for all i ∈[m], j ∈Z+. In this case we would like to
decide if an election is manipulable by cloning when money is not a concern.
2. Unit Cost (UC): p(i, j) = 1 for all i ∈[m], j ≥2. This model assumes that creating
each new clone has a ﬁxed cost that is equal for all candidates.
We say that an election E is q-manipulable by cloning with respect to a voting rule F if
it admits a q-successful manipulation by cloning with respect to F in the ZC model.
In the rest of the paper, we characterize the q-manipulable elections and discuss the
complexity of the q-Cloning problem for a number of well-known voting rules, focusing on
the ZC and UC models. Clearly, hardness results for these special cases also imply hardness
results for the general cost model. Similarly, hardness results for the ZC q-Cloning imply
hardness results for UC q-Cloning; to reduce ZC q-Cloning to UC q-Cloning it suﬃces
to set B = +∞. We emphasize that whenever we say that q-Cloning is easy, we refer
to the general cost model; in contrast, q-manipulability refers to susceptibility to cloning
manipulation with zero costs and/or unlimited budget.
4. Prominent Voting Rules for Which Cloning is Easy
In this section we study q-Cloning for Plurality, Plurality with Runoﬀ, Veto, and Maximin.
Surprisingly, these four rules exhibit very similar behavior with respect to cloning.
4.1 Plurality
We start by considering Plurality, which is arguably the simplest voting rule.
Theorem 4.1. An election is 0+-manipulable by cloning with respect to Plurality if and
only if the manipulator’s preferred candidate c does not win, but is ranked ﬁrst by at least
one voter. Moreover, for Plurality 0+-Cloning can be solved in linear time.
Proof. Clearly, if c has no ﬁrst-place votes, no cloning manipulation can make her a winner.
Now, assume that c’s Plurality score ScP (c) is at least 1, and let C = {a ∈A | ScP (a) >
ScP (c)} denote the set of candidates whose Plurality score is greater than that of c. For
each a ∈C, we create ka = ⌈ScP (a)
ScP (c)⌉clones of a.
Recall that to show that a cloning is 0+-successful, we only need to specify an ordering
of the clones that makes c a winner. One such ordering can be obtained as follows. For
each a ∈C, let Ra denote the set of orders in which a is ranked ﬁrst.
Split Ra into
ka groups, where the ﬁrst ka −1 groups have size ScP (c), while the last group has size
ScP (a) −(ka −1)ScP (c) ≤ScP (c). Let the voters in the i-th group rank the i-th clone of
536

Cloning in Elections
a ﬁrst, followed by the rest of the clones in an arbitrary order. Under this ordering of the
clones, the Plurality score of each candidate is at most ScP (c), so c is a winner, i.e., our
cloning is 0+-successful.
To prove the second statement of the theorem, note that the above-described algorithm
for ﬁnding a 0+-successful cloning is optimal: we can reduce a candidate’s Plurality score
only by cloning this candidate, and if a candidate a with score ScP (a) > ScP (c) is cloned
less than ka times, at least one of its clones will obtain more than ScP (c) Plurality votes.
Thus, we simply need to compute the cost of cloning each candidate a ∈C exactly ka times,
and compare it with our budget B.
It is not too hard to strengthen the ﬁrst statement of Theorem 4.1 from 0+-manipulability
to q-manipulability for any q ∈(0, 1).
Theorem 4.2. For any q ∈(0, 1), a Plurality election is q-manipulable by cloning if and
only if the manipulator’s preferred candidate c does not win, but is ranked ﬁrst by at least
one voter. However, no Plurality election is 1-manipulable by cloning.
Proof. Fix q ∈(0, 1). Suppose that the manipulator’s preferred candidate c does not win,
but ScP (c) > 0. For each candidate a ∈A with ScP (a) > ScP (c), we set s = ScP (a) and
create k =
s
2

⌈m−1
1−q ⌉clones of a. Then the probability that one of the clones of a will be
top-ranked two or more times is at most k ·
s
2

·
1
k2 ≤
1−q
m−1. By the union bound, with
probability at least q none of the newly introduced clones gets more than one vote. On the
other hand, none of the uncloned candidates had more Plurality votes than c, and cloning
did not change that. Therefore, c is among the winners of the resulting election. However,
obviously the manipulator cannot make c a winner with probability 1: if all voters order
the clones in the same way, the “most popular” clone of each candidate will have the same
Plurality score as the original candidate.
The procedure described in the proof of Theorem 4.2 introduces at most (m−1)
n
2

⌈m−1
1−q ⌉
clones; this number is polynomial in m and n for any constant q. However, this number of
clones is not necessarily optimal, i.e., our procedure is not a polynomial-time algorithm for
q-Cloning. In fact, the complexity of Plurality q-Cloning for q ∈(0, 1) remains an open
problem.
4.2 Veto and Plurality with Runoﬀ
The Veto rule exhibits extreme vulnerability to cloning.
Theorem 4.3. Any election in which the manipulator’s preferred candidate c does not win
is 1-manipulable by cloning with respect to Veto. Moreover, for Veto both 0+-Cloning and
1-Cloning can be solved in linear time.
Proof. Consider a proﬁle in which the Veto score of the manipulator’s preferred candidate
c is k. This means that c is ranked last n −k times. If we clone c at least n −k + 1 times,
we are guaranteed that at least one clone of c is never ranked last, so it is among the Veto
winners.
537

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
For 0+-Cloning, observe that it is not useful to clone candidates other than c. Thus,
the optimal solution is to make two copies of c and ask all voters to order them in the same
way. Then the “better” clone is never ranked last and is among the winners.
For 1-cloning, let ℓbe the Veto score of the election winner(s), and let k be the Veto
score of c. As argued above, we do not beneﬁt from cloning candidates other than c, so we
only need to determine the optimal number of c’s clones. Suppose ﬁrst that ℓ= n. Then,
by the argument above, it is suﬃcient to create n −k + 1 clones of c. It is easy to see that
this number is also necessary: if there are n−k or fewer clones, each of them may be ranked
last by some voter.
Now, suppose that ℓ< n. Let ℓ′ = n −ℓ, k′ = n −k, set r = ⌊k′
ℓ′+1⌋, and create r + 1
clones of c. This number of clones is clearly suﬃcient: we have r + 1 >
k′
ℓ′+1, so if each
clone of c is ranked last at least ℓ′ + 1 times, then the total number of voters that rank c
last in the original proﬁle would be at least (ℓ′ + 1)(r + 1) > k′, a contradiction. On the
other hand, it is necessary to introduce at least r + 1 clones. Indeed, if there are only r
clones, we can split the voters that rank c last into r groups, where the ﬁrst r −1 groups
have size ℓ′ + 1, the last group has size k′ −(r −1)(ℓ′ + 1) ≥ℓ′ + 1 (where the inequality
follows from r ≤
k′
ℓ′+1), and the voters in the i-th group rank the i-th clone of c last. In this
preference proﬁle, each clone of c is vetoed as least ℓ′ + 1 times and therefore is not among
the winners.
We now consider Plurality with Runoﬀ.
Theorem 4.4. An election is 0+-manipulable by cloning with respect to Plurality with
Runoﬀif and only if the manipulator’s preferred candidate c is not a current winner, and
either
(1) ScP (c) ≥2, or
(2) ScP (c) = 1 and c wins or ties its pairwise contest against some alternative w whose
Plurality score is strictly positive.
Moreover, for Plurality with Runoﬀ0+-Cloning can be solved in polynomial time.
Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that ScP (c) ≥2. We can introduce two clones of c, which we will
denote by c(1) and c(2), split the voters who rank c ﬁrst into two nonempty groups, ask the
voters in the ﬁrst group to rank c(1) ﬁrst, and ask the voters in the second group to rank
c(2) ﬁrst. Next, for each candidate a ̸= c we create ScP (a) clones of a, and ask the i-th
voter among those who rank a ﬁrst to rank the i-th clone of a ﬁrst. In the resulting election,
the Plurality score of both c(1) and c(2) is at least 1, and the Plurality score of any other
candidate is at most 1. Thus, there is a way to break ties after the ﬁrst round so that both
c(1) and c(2) progress to the ﬁnal round, and one of them wins. As we apply the parallel
universes tie-breaking rule, this means that this cloning is 0+-successful.
If ScP (c) = 1, we use the same strategy as in the previous case, except that we do not
clone c. In the resulting election the Plurality score of any candidate is at most 1. Let w be
an alternative with nonzero Plurality score that loses or ties its pairwise election against c.
It is easy to see that any clone of w also loses or ties its pairwise election against c. Since
w’s Plurality score in the original election is positive, there exists a parallel universe where
c and a clone of w meet in the ﬁnal, which means that c is a winner of the resulting election.
538

Cloning in Elections
Thus, we see that the conditions of the theorem are suﬃcient. We will now show that
they are necessary. First, note that if c is not ranked ﬁrst by any voter, then c will not
win irrespective of which candidates we clone. Indeed, if in the cloned election there are
two candidates with nonzero Plurality scores, c will not reach the ﬁnal, and if all voters
rank some candidate a ̸= c ﬁrst, c may reach the ﬁnal, but will lose to a in the ﬁnal. Now,
suppose that ScP (c) = 1, but any alternative w with ScP (w) > 0 beats c in their pairwise
contest; as argued above this also holds for any clone of w. Since c is not a winner prior to
cloning, there exists at least one other candidate with nonzero Plurality score, and therefore
at most one clone of c can progress to the second round; hence, there is no beneﬁt to cloning
c. Moreover, even if c reaches the second round, he has to face (a clone of) some alternative
with nonzero Plurality score in the original election, and by our assumption any such clone
would beat c in the ﬁnal.
To complete the proof of the theorem, it remains to give a polynomial-time algorithm
for 0+-Cloning under Plurality with Runoﬀ. As suggested by the discussion above, there
are two ways to make c a winner: we can either (1) try to clone c (and possibly some other
alternatives) in order to ensure that only clones of c go to the runoﬀ, or (2) try to clone
alternatives other than c only, to ensure that c goes to the runoﬀagainst an alternative
that she can defeat. Our algorithm implements both options and accepts if either of them
is within the budget.
For option (1), we introduce two clones of c, which we will denote by c(1) and c(2) (clearly,
there is no beneﬁt to creating more than two clones of c). It is not hard to see that our
optimal strategy is to ask the voters to order these clones so that they get (almost) identical
Plurality scores, i.e., so that the Plurality scores of c(1) and c(2) are ⌈ScP (c)
2
⌉and ⌊ScP (c)
2
⌋,
respectively. Let k = ⌊ScP (c)
2
⌋, and let C = {a ∈A \ {c} | ScP (a) > k} denote the set of
candidates whose Plurality score is greater than that of c(2). For each candidate a ∈C, we
introduce ka = ⌈ScP (a)
k
⌉clones of a. With nonzero probability, this action ensures that the
Plurality score of each alternative except c(1) and c(2) does not exceed k, and thus there is
a parallel universe in which c(1) competes against c(2) in the runoﬀand one them wins. It
is easy to see that this strategy gives the cheapest way of implementing option (1).
Option (2) can be used only if candidate c wins or ties her pairwise contest against
at least one other candidate with nonzero Plurality score.
Let D = {a ∈A \ {c} |
ScP (a) ≥1 and W(c, a) > W(a, c)}. For each w ∈D we compute the cost of the manipu-
lation that results in c competing against w in the runoﬀin one of the parallel universes;
we then pick the cheapest of these manipulations. It remains to explain how to compute
such a manipulation for a speciﬁc w ∈D.
Let k = min{ScP (c), ScP (w)}, and let C = {a ∈A\{c, w} | ScP (a) > k}. If not cloned,
the candidates in C can prevent c and w from meeting each other in the ﬁnal round. Thus,
we create ka = ⌈ScP (a)
k
⌉clones of each a ∈C. It is easy to see that this manipulation
results in a nonzero chance of c winning and that we cannot produce fewer clones for a
given w ∈D. This completes the proof.
We can also characterize elections that are q-manipulable with respect to Plurality with
Runoﬀfor q ∈(0, 1].
539

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
Theorem 4.5. For any q ∈(0, 1), an election is q-manipulable by cloning with respect
to Plurality with Runoﬀif and only if it is 0+-manipulable by cloning with respect to it.
However, no election is 1-manipulable.
Proof. It is immediate that under Plurality with Runoﬀno election is 1-manipulable: if our
preferred candidate is not a winner and after cloning all voters rank the clones identically,
then our preferred candidate still loses.
To see that for each q ∈(0, 1) an election is q-manipulable with respect to Plurality
with Runoﬀif and only if it is 0+-manipulable with respect to it, it suﬃces to combine the
proofs of Theorems 4.4 and 4.2. In more detail, the proof of Theorem 4.2 explains how to
clone some of the candidates so that with probability at least q the Plurality scores of all
candidates in the resulting proﬁle R′ do not exceed 1. We will now argue that whenever this
happens (i.e., with probability q) c is a Plurality with Runoﬀwinner as long as he satisﬁes
the conditions of Theorem 4.4.
Indeed, suppose that in R′ the Plurality score of each candidate is at most 1. Then if
c’s Plurality score in the original election is at least 2, it has to be the case that at least two
clones of c have positive Plurality scores in R′, and hence there is a parallel universe where
they meet in the ﬁnal. On the other hand, if c’s Plurality score in the original election is 1,
but he beats or ties some candidate w with nonzero Plurality score in a pairwise election,
for R′ there is a parallel universe where c meets (a clone of) w in the ﬁnal. Thus, c is a
Plurality with Runoﬀwinner in R′, and the proof is complete.
We remark that the cloning strategy presented in the proof of Proposition 4.5 is, in a
sense, degenerate: it operates in the same way irrespective of the identity of the preferred
candidate c, and has the eﬀect of making all “eligible” candidates the Plurality with Runoﬀ
winners.
(This can be seen as an artifact of the non-unique winner model, where this
outcome is viewed as acceptable. If we are interested in making c the unique Plurality with
Runoﬀwinner, we may need a more sophisticated cloning strategy; however, this question
is outside of the scope of this paper.) Observe also that under Plurality with Runoﬀcloning
can be used to manipulate in favor of a Condorcet loser.2
Example 4.6. Let us consider the following Plurality with Runoﬀelection: A = {a, b, c, d},
and there are 17 voters whose preference orders are:
c ≻a ≻b ≻d
8 voters
a ≻b ≻d ≻c
3 voters
b ≻a ≻d ≻c
3 voters
d ≻a ≻b ≻c
3 voters
Clearly, c is a Condorcet loser. Further, if we apply Plurality with Runoﬀ, c gets into the
second round, but then loses there. Yet if we produce two clones of c, it is possible that
each of them receives four Plurality points, enters the runoﬀand, as a result, one of them
wins the election.
2. We are grateful to one of the JAIR referees for this example.
540

Cloning in Elections
4.3 Maximin
Surprisingly, Maximin behaves in essentially the same way as Plurality with respect to
cloning, i.e., by cloning a candidate, we can reduce its Maximin score to 1 with nonzero
probability.
Consider the following election, which will be used in our constructions throughout this
section. Let E = (A, R) with A = {a1, . . . , ak}, R = (R1, . . . , Rk), where for i ∈[k] the
preferences of the i-th voter are given by ai ≻i ai+1 ≻i . . . ≻i ak ≻i a1 ≻i . . . ≻i ai−1.
We will refer to any election that can be obtained from E by renaming the candidates as a
k-cyclic election. In this election, assuming a0 = ak, for each i = 1, . . . , k there are k −1
voters that prefer ai−1 to ai and 1 voter that prefers ai to ai−1. Thus, the Maximin score
of each candidate in A is 1. Further, this remains true if we add arbitrary candidates to
the election, no matter how the voters rank the additional candidates. This means that by
cloning a candidate a in an n-voter election n times and telling the voters to order the n
clones of a as in an n-cyclic election, we can reduce a’s Maximin score to 1.
Theorem 4.7. An election is 0+-manipulable by cloning with respect to Maximin if and
only if the manipulator’s preferred candidate c does not win, but is Pareto undominated.
Further, for Maximin 0+-Cloning can be solved in linear time. However, no election is
1-manipulable by cloning with respect to Maximin.
Proof. Clearly, if all voters prefer some alternative a to c, then after any cloning the Maximin
score of c will be 0, whereas the Maximin score of at least one alternative is positive, and
hence c cannot win. On the other hand, if c is undominated, its Maximin score is at least
1. Now, we can use the construction described above to reduce the Maximin score of any
other candidate to 1, thus making c a winner.
Our algorithm for Maximin 0+-Cloning relies on the observation that the only way to
change the Maximin score of a candidate is to clone her, thereby reducing her score. Now,
suppose that ScM(c) = s. We will argue that we have a “yes”-instance of 0+-Cloning if
and only if our budget allows us to introduce ⌈n
s ⌉clones for each candidate a such that
ScM(a) > s; clearly, this condition can be checked in linear time.
Indeed, for each candidate a whose Maximin score exceeds s we can do the following.
We create ⌈n
s ⌉clones of a, divide the voters in s groups, where the size of the ﬁrst s −1
groups is ⌈n
s ⌉, and the last group consists of the remaining t ≤⌈n
s ⌉voters. For each of the
ﬁrst s −1 groups, we ask the voters to rank the clones according to an ⌈n
s ⌉-cyclic election;
the voters in the last group vote as the ﬁrst t voters in an ⌈n
s ⌉-cyclic election. Clearly, in
each group, for any i = 1, . . . , ⌈n
s ⌉there is at most one voter who ranks the i-th clone above
the (i −1)-st clone. Thus, in the resulting election, the Maximin score of any clone of a is
at most s, and therefore c is a winner of that election.
For the converse direction, we need to show that if we create less than ⌈n
s ⌉clones of a,
the Maximin score of at least one of them will exceed s. Indeed, suppose that we create
t < ⌈n
s ⌉clones of a; denote these clones by a(1), . . . , a(t). Given an arbitrary preference
proﬁle over these clones, consider a directed graph whose vertices are the clones and there
is an edge from a(i) to a(j) if at least n−s voters prefer a(i) to a(j). Note that if the Maximin
score of each clone is at most s, each vertex of this graph must have an incoming edge. In
particular, this means that our graph cannot be acyclic. We will now argue that each cycle
541

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
in this graph has length at least ⌈n
s ⌉; clearly, this implies that the graph contains at least
⌈n
s ⌉vertices, a contradiction.
To see this, suppose that there is a cycle of length r < ⌈n
s ⌉. Relabel the clones along this
cycle as a(1), . . . , a(r), i.e., assume that for each i = 1, . . . , r at least n−s voters prefer a(i) to
a(i+1) (where a(r+1) = a(1)). By induction on i it is easy to see that for each i = 1, . . . , r−1,
there are at least n −si voters whose preference order ≻satisﬁes a(1) ≻. . . ≻a(i+1). For
i = r −1, this implies that at least n−s(r −1) > s voters prefer a(1) to a(r), a contradiction
with the assumption that there is an edge from a(r) to a(1).
This establishes that our
algorithm for 0+-Cloning is correct.
Finally, it is easy to see that no election is 1-manipulable with respect to Maximin.
Indeed, the only way to change a candidate’s Maximin score is to clone him. However, after
the cloning, all voters may order all clones in the same way, in which case the most popular
clone will have the same Maximin score as the original alternative.
It is not clear if one can strengthen the result of Theorem 4.7 to q-manipulability for
q ∈(0, 1). This amounts to the following question: Suppose that for a ﬁxed n we randomly
draw n permutations of {1, . . . , k}. Let P(n, k) be the probability that for each i ∈[k] there
is a j ∈[k] such that j precedes i in at least n −1 permutations. Is it the case that, as
k →∞, the probability P(n, k) approaches 1?
Our computations show that this is unlikely to be the case.3 For (n, k) = (5, 20) there
was only one success out of 106 random trials and only three for (n, k) = (5, 50). For both
(n, k) = (7, 20) and (n, k) = (7, 50) not a single random trial out of 106 trials was successful.
This means that, even if Maximin is q-manipulable for some ﬁxed q > 0, the number of
clones needed would be astronomical.
5. Three Rules for Which Cloning May Be Diﬃcult
We now consider Borda, k-Approval, and Copeland rules, for which cloning-related problems
are signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult.
5.1 Borda Rule
For the Borda rule, the necessary and suﬃcient condition for the existence of a 0+-successful
manipulation by cloning is the same as for Maximin: the manipulator’s favorite alternative
has to be Pareto undominated. However, Borda and Maximin exhibit diﬀerent behavior
with respect to 1-manipulability. Moreover, from the point of view of ﬁnding a minimum-
cost cloning, Borda appears to be harder to deal with than Maximin.
Theorem 5.1. An election is 0+-manipulable by cloning with respect to Borda if and only if
the manipulator’s preferred candidate c does not win, but is Pareto undominated. Moreover,
UC 0+-Cloning for Borda can be solved in linear time.
Proof. Note ﬁrst that if we create k clones of an alternative a that was ranked in position
j in some order Ri, then Ri’s contribution to the scores of all alternatives ranked above a
increases by k −1, Ri’s contribution to the scores of all alternatives ranked below a does
3. We are grateful to Danny Chang for his help in performing these experiments.
542

Cloning in Elections
not change, and, ﬁnally, the top-ranked clone of a receives k −1 more points from Ri than
a used to receive. We will now use this observation to prove the theorem.
Suppose ﬁrst that all voters prefer some alternative a to c. Note that this implies that
ScB(a) > ScB(c). If we create k clones of some alternative x ̸= c, a, for each preference
ordering Ri there are three possibilities:
1. In Ri, x is ranked above both a and c. Then cloning x does not change the Borda
scores of a and c.
2. In Ri, x is ranked below a and above c. Then cloning x increases the Borda score of
a by k −1 and does not change the score of c.
3. In Ri, x is ranked below both a and c. Then cloning x increases the Borda scores of
both a and c by k −1.
Thus, any single act of cloning an alternative in A \ {c, a} (and hence any combination of
them) does not reduce the gap between the scores of a and c. Further, if we clone a and/or
c, in every ordering Ri each clone of a is ranked above each clone of c, and hence has a
higher Borda score. Thus, c cannot be made a winner by cloning.
For the converse direction, let C = {a ∈A | ScB(a) > ScB(c)}. For each a ∈C, let
na be the number of voters that prefer c to a, i.e., na = W(c, a). Let sa denote the score
diﬀerence between a and c, i.e., sa = ScB(a) −ScB(c). Now, set k = maxa∈C⌈sa
na ⌉, and
create k +1 clones of c. Consider the preference proﬁle in which all voters rank all clones of
c in the same way. Let c∗be the top-ranked clone of c. Observe that the Borda score of c∗
in the new proﬁle exceeds the original Borda score of c by kn, where n is the total number
of voters. Now, consider some alternative a ∈C. For each order Ri in which a was ranked
above c, Ri’s contribution to the score of a increased by k, and for each order Ri in which a
was ranked below c, Ri’s contribution to the score of a remained the same. Thus, a’s score
has increased by k(n −na). Hence, using Sc′
B(a) and Sc′
B(c∗) to denote the scores of a and
c∗after cloning, by our choice of k we have Sc′
B(a)−Sc′
B(c∗) = ScB(a)−ScB(c)−kna ≤0.
We conclude that in the resulting preference proﬁle the Borda score of c∗is at least as high
as that of any other alternative, i.e., our cloning is 0+-successful.
We will now argue that our input constitutes a “yes”-instance of UC 0+-Cloning if
and only if maxa∈C⌈sa
na ⌉+ 1 ≤B, where B is the cloning budget, i.e., the manipulation
constructed above is optimal in the UC model. Indeed, consider an alternative a ∈C that
maximizes the expression sa
na . By creating t + 1 clones of some alternative d ̸= c, a we can
increase the distance between c and a in the orders in which d is ranked below c but above
a by t, and thus reduce the gap between a and c by t. Obviously, there are at most na such
orders. For any other order Ri, cloning d may increase Ri’s contribution to the score of a,
or aﬀect Ri’s contributions to scores of a and c in the same way. Thus, creating t+1 clones
of an alternative d ∈A \ {a, c} can contribute at most tna to closing the gap between c and
a. A similar argument applies to cloning c or a, showing that the contribution from t + 1
clones of either of these alternatives is also bounded by tna. Hence, we have to create at
least ⌈sa
na ⌉+ 1 clones.
Is it possible to strengthen Theorem 5.1 to q-manipulability for some constant q ∈(0, 1]?
It turns out that for Borda these questions are signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult than for the rules
we have considered so far.
543

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
We will ﬁrst consider the situation where the manipulator is restricted to cloning her
favorite candidate. We remark that this special case of our model is very natural: For
instance, a party may be able to nominate several candidates, but is not in a position to
force other parties to do so. In this case, for an even number of voters, we can characterize
the elections that can be 1-manipulated by cloning with respect to Borda.
Let c be the manipulator’s preferred candidate. We will show that, by cloning c, we
can deal with the candidates who currently have a higher Borda score than c, as long as
they lose to c in a pairwise election. However, we have to be careful to ensure that c’s
Borda score remains higher than that of the candidates who beat c in a pairwise election.
Formally, let
A+ = {a ∈A \ {c} | SB(a) > SB(c)},
A−= {a ∈A \ {c} | SB(a) ≤SB(c)}.
Let sa = |SB(a) −SB(c)| for each a ∈A \ {c}, and set
na =

W(c, a) −W(a, c)
if a ∈A+,
W(a, c) −W(c, a)
if a ∈A−.
Finally, let r+ = +∞if na ≤0 for some a ∈A+ and r+ = max{ 2sa
na | a ∈A+} otherwise,
and let r−= min{ 2sa
na | a ∈A−, na > 0}. We are now ready to state our criterion.
Theorem 5.2. An election with an even number of voters can be 1-manipulated with respect
to Borda by cloning the manipulator’s preferred candidate c if and only if c does not win
and ⌈r+⌉≤⌊r−⌋.
Proof. Let n denote the number of voters. Suppose that ⌈r+⌉> ⌊r−⌋. Consider any cloning
that involves c only. Suppose it results in k clones of c, which we denote by c(1), . . . , c(k).
Let s denote the original Borda score of c. To show that this cloning is not 1-successful, it
suﬃces to describe an ordering of the clones that results in all clones of c losing the election.
Consider a proﬁle where the ﬁrst n
2 voters rank the clones as c(1) ≻· · · ≻c(k), while the
remaining n
2 voters rank the clones in the opposite order. Clearly, the Borda score of any
clone is s + n
2 (k −1). We will now consider two cases.
Case 1 (r+ = +∞). This means that there is an alternative a such that na ≤0, i.e.,
a is preferred to c by at least n
2 voters and has a higher Borda score than c. Our
cloning increases a’s score by at least n
2 (k −1), so its ﬁnal Borda score is at least
sB(a) + n
2 (k −1) > s + n
2 (k −1). Thus, after cloning, all clones of c will still have
lower scores than a, i.e., the cloning is not 1-successful.
Case 2 (r+ < +∞). In this case, there exists a candidate a ∈A+ such that na > 0 and
r+ = 2sa
na . Consider a candidate b ∈A−such that r−= 2sa
na ; we have nb > 0. The
condition ⌈r+⌉> ⌊r−⌋can be rewritten as ⌈2sa
na ⌉> ⌊2sb
nb ⌋. After the cloning, a’s Borda
score is sB(a) + n−na
2
(k −1), and b’s Borda score is sB(b) + n+nb
2
(k −1). Thus, for c
to be a winner, k must satisfy
s + n(k −1)
2
≥sB(a) + n −na
2
(k −1);
s + n(k −1)
2
≥sB(b) + n + nb
2
(k −1).
544

Cloning in Elections
Hence, we obtain
sa = sB(a) −s ≤na
2 (k −1),
sb = s −sB(b) ≥nb
2 (k −1).
Since k is integer, this implies r+ = ⌈2sa
na ⌉≤k −1 ≤⌊2sb
nb ⌋= r−, a contradiction.
For the opposite direction, we will show that the ordering of the clones constructed above
is the worst possible for the manipulator. Formally, suppose that we generate k clones of
c for some k ≥1. Consider a voter who gives j points to c. It is not hard to see that this
voter gives j + (j + 1) + · · · + (j + k −1) = kj + k(k−1)
2
points to all clones of c. Thus, the
total Borda score of all clones is equal to ks + n k(k−1)
2
, where s is the Borda score of c prior
to cloning. It follows that the Borda score of at least one clone is s + n
2 (k −1) or higher.
Since ⌈r+⌉≤⌊r−⌋, we have r+ < +∞. Set k = 1 + ⌈r+⌉, and consider an arbitrary
alternative a ∈A+.
As r+ < +∞, we have na > 0.
Therefore, a gains n−na
2
(k −1)
points from cloning. Now, it is not hard to see that k ≥1 + 2sa
na implies s + n
2 (k −1) ≥
SB(a) + n−na
2
(k −1), which means that after the cloning some clone of c beats a.
To ﬁnish the proof, consider a candidate b ∈A−. If nb ≤0, after the cloning the score
of b is at most SB(b) + n k−1
2
≤s + n k−1
2 , so b still loses to or ties with some clone of c. On
the other hand, if nb > 0, the cloning increases the score of b by n+nb
2
(k −1) points. We
have
k −1 =

r+
≤

r−	
≤

2sb
nb

≤2sb
nb
.
Therefore, after the cloning, the score of b is
SB(b) + n + nb
2
(k −1) ≤SB(b) + n
2 (k −1) + sb = s + nk −1
2
,
i.e., b’s Borda score does not exceed that of some clone of c.
It is not hard to see that the second part of the proof (the “if” direction) works for
the odd number of voters as well. However, for the “only if” direction, the argument does
not go through.
We can, however, prove a slightly weaker necessary condition.
Deﬁne
ˆr+ = +∞if na ≤0 for some a ∈A+ and ˆr+ = max{ 2sa−1
na
| a ∈A+} otherwise, and let
ˆr−= min{ 2sa+1
na
| a ∈A−, na > 0}.
Proposition 5.3. If an election with an odd number of voters can be 1-manipulated with
respect to Borda by cloning the manipulator’s preferred candidate c, then ⌈ˆr+⌉≤⌊ˆr−⌋.
We relegate the proof of Proposition 5.3 to Appendix A. We remark that it is not clear
if the converse direction of Proposition 5.3 holds: the condition ⌈ˆr+⌉≤⌊ˆr−⌋is weaker than
⌈r+⌉≤⌊r−⌋, and we were unable to prove that it is suﬃcient for 1-manipulability with
respect to Borda.
The proof of Theorem 5.2 indicates which orderings of the clones are most problematic
for the manipulator: these are the orderings that grant each clone roughly the same number
of points. But this is exactly the expected outcome if the orderings are generated uniformly
at random! Thus, our proof shows that for Borda a manipulator who clones c only should
be prepared for the worst-case scenario.
545

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
Note, however, that we are not limited to cloning c. Indeed, cloning other candidates
might be more useful with respect to 1-manipulability. For example, suppose that c is Pareto
undominated, and, moreover, the original preference proﬁle contains a candidate c′ that is
ranked right under c by all voters (one can think of this candidate as an “inferior clone” of
c; however, we emphasize that it is present in the original proﬁle). Then one can show that
by cloning c′ suﬃciently many times we can make c a winner with probability 1. However,
cloning c itself does not have the same eﬀect if the voters order the clones randomly or
adversarially to the manipulator. This is illustrated by the following example.
Example 5.4. Let us consider the following Borda election.
The set of candidates is
C = {a, b, c, d}, and there are four voters, whose preference orders are:
R1 : a ≻c ≻b ≻d
R2 : a ≻c ≻b ≻d
R3 : a ≻c ≻b ≻d
R4 : d ≻c ≻b ≻a
ScB(a) = 9
ScB(b) = 4
ScB(c) = 8
ScB(d) = 3
The winner here is a with 9 points. However, replacing b with three clones b1, b2, b3 is a
1-successful manipulation in favor of c since the new score of a is 15, while the new score
of c is 16, no matter how the clones are ordered. At the same time, we cannot make c a
winner with probability 1 by cloning him alone. Indeed, if we split c into k + 1 clones, and
each voter orders the clones uniformly at random, the expected score of each clone of c is
4(2 + k
2) = 8 + 2k (and, since the number of voters is even, the proof of Theorem 5.2 gives
an explicit ordering of the clones in which each clone gets 8 + 2k points), whereas a’s score
is 9 + 3k.
This shows that, in general, we may need to clone several candidates that are placed
between c and its “competitors” in a large number of votes, and determining the right
candidates to clone might be diﬃcult. Indeed, it is not clear if a 1-successful manipulation
for Borda can be found in polynomial time; answering this question is a challenging open
problem.
A related question that is not answered by Theorem 5.1 is the complexity of 0+-Cloning
(and, more generally, q-Cloning for q ∈{0+}∪(0, 1]) in the general cost model. Note that
there is a certain similarity between this problem and that of 1-manipulability: in both cases,
it may be suboptimal to clone c. Indeed, for general costs, we can prove that q-Cloning
is NP-hard for any q.
Theorem 5.5. For Borda, q-Cloning in the general cost model is NP-hard for any rational
q ∈(0, 1] as well as for q = 0+. Moreover, this is the case even if p(i, j) ∈{0, 1, ∞} for all
i ∈[m], j ∈Z+.
Proof. We provide a reduction from X3C. Let (G, S) be an instance of X3C, where G =
{g1, . . . , g3K} is the ground set and S = {S1, . . . , SM} is a family of 3-element subsets of G.
Let N = 3K. We construct an instance of our problem as follows. Let T = {t1, . . . , tM}.
We let the set of alternatives be A = G∪T ∪{c, u, w}, where c is the manipulator’s preferred
alternative. For each i = 1, . . . , M, we create two voters with preference orders R2i−1 and
R2i. The preference order R2i−1 is given by
R2i−1 : G \ Si ≻c ≻ti ≻Si ≻u ≻w ≻T \ {ti},
546

Cloning in Elections
while the preference order R2i is given by
R2i : w ≻Si ≻u ≻c ≻G \ Si ≻T.
Further, we require that the candidates in G are ranked in the opposite order in R2i and
R2i−1, i.e., for any j, ℓ= 1, . . . , M we have gj ≻2i gℓif and only if gℓ≻2i−1 gj. Finally, there
is one voter whose preference order is given by
R2M+1 : G ≻c ≻T ≻u ≻w.
The cloning costs are deﬁned as follows. For each i = 1, . . . , M, producing one additional
clone of ti costs 1, and producing further clones of ti costs 0. Cloning any other alternative
costs +∞. Finally, we set B = K.
It is easy to verify that from each pair of votes (R2i−1, R2i)
1. c gets (M + 5) + (N −3 + M) = 2M + N + 2 points,
2. each gj gets (M + N + 2) + M = 2M + N + 2 points (this remains true if gj ∈Si),
3. each tj gets at most (M + 4) + (M −1) = 2M + 3 points,
4. u gets M + (M + N −2) = 2M + N −2 points, and
5. w gets (M −1) + (M + N + 2) = 2M + N + 1 points.
Thus, because of the last voter, the overall Borda score of each alternative in G exceeds
that of c by at least 1 and at most N, while the score of any other alternative is lower than
that of c.
Note that if we create N + 1 clones of ti, which we can do at cost 1, we ensure that c’s
score is at least as high as that of the alternatives in Si, irrespective of how the voters order
the clones. However, cloning ti does not change the diﬀerence in scores between c and the
alternatives in G \ Si. Within our budget, we can clone K alternatives from T, N + 1 times
each. Thus, any cover of G of size K = N/3, i.e., any exact cover, can be transformed into
a 1-successful cloning manipulation for our instance.
Conversely, consider any cloning manipulation of cost at most K. Suppose that it clones
the alternatives ti1, . . . , tis, s ≤K. If {Si1, . . . , Sis} is not a cover of G, there is some element
gi ∈G that is not covered by ∪s
j=1Sij. This means that our cloning manipulation did not
change the diﬀerence in scores between gi and c, i.e., gi still has a higher Borda score than
c. Hence, this cloning is not 0+-successful. Thus, any 0+-successful cloning of cost at most
K corresponds to a cover of G.
Now, consider any q ∈(0, 1]. If our input instance of X3C is a “yes”-instance, the
election that we have constructed admits a 1-successful cloning, which is also a q-successful
cloning (as well as a 0+-successful cloning). On the other hand, if we start with a “no”-
instance of X3C, our election does not admit a 0+-successful cloning, and hence a q-
successful cloning. Thus, the proof is complete.
Observe that the cost function used in the proof of Theorem 5.5 is very natural: some
candidates cannot be cloned at all, while for others, there is a certain upfront cost associated
with creating the ﬁrst clone (e.g., researching the platform and/or identity of the candidate),
but all subsequent clones can be created for free.
547

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
5.2 k-Approval
We will now demonstrate that there is a family of scoring rules for which deciding whether
a given election is 0+-manipulable is computationally hard. Speciﬁcally, this is the case for
k-Approval for any k ≥2. Our proof gives a reduction from the problem Dominating Set,
deﬁned below.
Deﬁnition 5.6. An instance of the Dominating Set problem is a triple (V, E, s), where
(V, E) is an undirected graph and s is an integer. We ask if there is a subset W of V such
that (a) |W| ≤s and (b) for each v ∈V either v ∈W or v is connected to a vertex in W.
Theorem 5.7. For the k-Approval rule, it is NP-hard to decide whether a given election is
0+-manipulable by cloning.
Proof. First, we remark that one can always make an alternative a a k-Approval winner
with nonzero probability as long as a is ranked ﬁrst by at least one voter. Indeed, we can
simply clone all other alternatives suﬃciently many times (e.g., kn times, where n is the
number of voters). This ensures that there exists a preference proﬁle over the resulting set
of alternatives in which each candidate other than a gets at most one k-Approval point.
However, this condition is not necessary. Indeed, a candidate can be a k-Approval winner
even if no voter ranks him ﬁrst. Thus, in our hardness reduction, we ask whether we can
help a candidate that is never ranked ﬁrst.
Consider an instance (V, E, s) of Dominating Set, where V = {v1, . . . , vt}. We can
assume without loss of generality that the graph (V, E) has no isolated vertices and s < t.
We will construct an election based on (V, E, s) as follows. There is a candidate vi for each
vertex of the graph, a candidate c whom we would like to make a winner, an additional
candidate w, and a set D of dummy candidates. The exact number of dummy candidates,
which will be polynomial in the size of (V, E), will become clear after we describe the set
of voters. For each voter, we only specify which of the nondummy candidates she ranks in
the top k positions. Clearly, the order of candidates ranked in positions k + 1 or lower does
not aﬀect the outcome of the election. Further, we assume that each dummy candidate
is ranked among the top k positions by exactly one voter. (Thus, the number of dummy
candidates is bounded from above by k times the number of voters.)
For each i = 1, . . . , t, the i-th voter places vi ﬁrst and ranks c in position k. Each of the
next 4t2−t−s voters places w ﬁrst and ranks c in position k. Further, for each (undirected)
edge (vi, vj) ∈E, there are 2s voters that rank vi ﬁrst and vj second and 2s voters that
rank vj ﬁrst and vi second.
v1
· · ·
vt
w
· · ·
w
· · ·
vi
· · ·
vi
vj
· · ·
vj
· · ·
...
· · ·
...
...
· · ·
...
...
vj
· · ·
vj
vi
· · ·
vi
...
c
· · ·
c
c
· · ·
c
· · ·
...
· · ·
...
...
· · ·
...
...
t
4t2 −t −s
2s
2s
Observe that based on the votes constructed so far, the score of c is 4t2 −s, the score of
w is 4t2 −t −s, and the score of each vi, i = 1, . . . , t, is at most 4s(t −1) + 1. We now
add polynomially many voters, each of which ranks w or some candidate from V ﬁrst (and
some dummy candidates in positions 2, . . . , k), so that w gets 4t2 −2s points in total and
548

Cloning in Elections
each candidate in V gets exactly 4t2 points in total (note that this is possible since t > s).
Clearly, the number of the voters constructed at this stage is polynomially bounded in our
input size.
We claim that the constructed election is 0+-manipulable if and only if the graph (V, E)
has a dominating set of size at most s. Indeed, suppose ﬁrst that (V, E) has a dominating
set W of size at most s. We clone each candidate from W exactly k +2s(k −1) times. Now,
consider the following preference proﬁle over the cloned alternatives. Split the clones into
2s + 1 groups, so that the ﬁrst group has size k and the remaining groups have size k −1.
For each vi ∈W, we order the clones as follows:
1. The i-th voter ranks the ﬁrst group of vi’s clones in the ﬁrst k positions.
2. For each j such that (vj, vi) ∈E, the ℓ-th voter among the 2s voters that used to
rank vj ﬁrst and vi second now ranks the (ℓ+ 1)-st group of vi’s clones in positions
2, . . . , k.
3. All other voters order the clones arbitrarily.
Under this preference proﬁle, c gets 4t2 −2s points: he has been “pushed out” of the
top k slots in s out of the ﬁrst t votes, but did not lose any other points. The clone of
each candidate vi ∈W gets at most 4t2 −2s points, too. Indeed, ﬁx some vi ∈W. By
our assumption, the graph (V, E) has no isolated vertices. Thus, there is some vertex vj
connected to vi, and so there are 2s voters that (before cloning) rank vj in the ﬁrst position
and vi in the second position. Let us denote this set of voters by Eji. Now, consider the
proﬁle after cloning. The ﬁrst k clones of vi are not ranked in the ﬁrst k positions by any
voter in Eji, and thus each of them receives at most 4t2 −2s points. Now consider the ℓ-th
group of vi’s clones, ℓ= 2, . . . , 2s + 1: these clones are ranked in the top k positions by
exactly one voter in Eji, and by none of the ﬁrst t voters. Thus, these clones’ scores are at
most 4t2 −(2s −1) −1 = 4t2 −2s. We conclude that the score of each clone of vi is at most
4t2 −2s.
Now, consider any candidate vj ∈V \ W. Since W is a dominating set for (V, E), there
exists a vi ∈W such that (vi, vj) ∈E. Since the 2s voters that used to rank vi ﬁrst and
vj second now rank some clones of vi in the top k positions, vj is “pushed out” of the top
k positions in at least 2s votes. Consequently, its k-Approval score is at most 4t2 −2s. As
the k-Approval score of w was 4t2 −2s prior to cloning and was not aﬀected by cloning, we
conclude that after cloning c is a winner of the election with nonzero probability.
Conversely, suppose that we can make c a winner with nonzero probability by cloning
some of the candidates. Observe ﬁrst that we could not have cloned w. Indeed, if we clone
w, c is “pushed out” of the top k positions in 4t2 −t −s votes, so her score is at most t.
On the other hand, in the original preferences, each vi ∈V is ranked ﬁrst at least 4t times.
Therefore, to make c a winner after cloning w, we would have to clone each of vi ∈V .
However, if we do that, c’s k-Approval score goes down to 0, so she cannot be a winner.
We conclude that w is not cloned. As w is not ranked in positions 2, . . . , k in any of the
votes, and therefore cannot be “pushed out”, this means that w’s ﬁnal score is 4t2 −2s,
and therefore c’s ﬁnal score must be at least 4t2 −2s. This, in turn, means that we can
clone at most s candidates in V , as cloning any such candidate reduces c’s score by 1. On
the other hand, we need to reduce the score of each vi ∈V by at least s. This can be done
549

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
either by cloning vi or by cloning some alternative that is ranked ﬁrst by some voter that
ranks vi second. This means that each vi ∈V either is cloned or has a neighbor in (V, E)
that has been cloned, i.e., the set of cloned alternatives forms a dominating set of (V, E).
As we have argued that the size of this set is at most s, this completes the reduction.
We can also show that it is NP-hard to decide whether an election is 1-manipulable with
respect to k-Approval.
Theorem 5.8. For any given k ≥2, it is NP-hard to decide whether a given election is
1-manipulable by cloning with respect to k-Approval.
Proof. We will ﬁrst present the proof for k = 2, and then show how to generalize it to all
integer k ≥2. The reduction is from X3C. Let an instance (G, S) of X3C be given by a
ground set G = {g1, . . . , g3K} and a family S = {S1, . . . , SM} of subsets of G, where for
each i = 1, . . . , M we write gi1, gi2, gi3 to denote the members of Si. We can assume without
loss of generality that M > K > 3. Given such an instance, we construct an election as
follows. The set of alternatives is A = G ∪T ∪{c, w} ∪D, where T = {t1, . . . , tM}, and D
is the set of dummy candidates. In what follows, we place the dummy candidates so that
each of them appears at most once in the ﬁrst two rows.
We will now specify the ﬁrst two positions in each vote. For i = 1, . . . , M, the i-th
voter ranks ti ﬁrst and c second. Each of the next M2 voters ranks w ﬁrst and a dummy
alternative second. Then we also have M groups of 3M voters, where in the i-th group (a)
each voter ranks ti ﬁrst, and (b) each of the candidates gi1, gi2, and gi3 is ranked second by
exactly M voters. Further, for each i ∈G, we add Ni = M(M + 1 −|{j | gi ∈Sj}|) voters
that rank gi ﬁrst and a dummy candidate second. Finally, we add N = M2 −M +K voters
who rank c ﬁrst and a dummy candidate second.
t1
· · ·
tM
w
· · ·
w
· · ·
ti
ti
ti
· · ·
gi
· · ·
gi
· · ·
c
· · ·
c
c
· · ·
c
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
gi1
gi2
gi3
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
M
M2
3
Ni
N
In this proﬁle, the score of each ti is 3M + 1, the score of c is M2 + K, the score of w is
M2, and the score of each gi is M2 + M. The scores of dummy candidates are equal to 1,
and their number is clearly polynomial in M. As K < M, the set of winners in this proﬁle
is G, and c is M −K points behind. Now, if we clone some candidate gi ∈G, the voters
may still rank all clones of gi in the same order, so no manipulation that relies on cloning
candidates in G is 1-successful. Therefore, to bridge the gap between c and the candidates
in G, we need to clone some of the candidates in T. However, we cannot clone more than
K of them, since otherwise the score of c will fall below the score of w (while we can clone
w as well, the voters may still order all clones of w in the same way, in which case the
top-ranked clone of w still gets M2 points). On the other hand, for each gi ∈G we need to
clone at least one tj ∈T such that gi ∈Sj, since otherwise the score of gi will not go down.
Thus, a 1-successful manipulation corresponds to a cover of G of size at most K, i.e., an
exact cover. Conversely, cloning a set of candidates T ′ ⊆T such that {Sj | tj ∈T ′} is an
exact cover of G is a 1-successful cloning.
For k > 2, this construction can be modiﬁed as follows. In each vote, we insert a group
of new k −2 dummy candidates between the ﬁrst and the second position (so that in each
550

Cloning in Elections
vote the candidate that used to be ranked second is now ranked in position k and each
dummy candidate is ranked in top k positions exactly once). It is easy to see that the proof
goes through without change.
5.3 Copeland
To analyze cloning under the Copeland rule, we need some additinal deﬁnitions. For an
election E with a set of candidates A, its pairwise majority graph is a directed graph (A, X),
where X contains an edge from a to b if more than half of the voters prefer a to b; we say
that a beats b if (a, b) ∈X. If exactly half of the voters prefer a to b, we say that a and
b are tied (this does not mean that their Copeland scores are equal). For any a ∈A, we
denote by U(a), D(a) and T(a) the sets of all alternatives that beat a, are beaten by a, or
are tied with a, respectively.
For an odd number of voters, the graph (A, X) is a tournament, i.e., for each pair
(a, b) ∈A2, a ̸= b, we have either (a, b) ∈X or (b, a) ∈X. In this case, we can make
use of a well-known tournament solution concept of Uncovered Set (Miller, 1977; Fishburn,
1977; Laslier, 1997), deﬁned as follows. Given a tournament (A, X), a candidate a is said
to cover another candidate b if a beats b as well as every other candidate beaten by b. The
Uncovered Set of (A, X) is the set of all candidates not covered by other candidates.
It turns out that if the number of voters is odd, the Uncovered Set coincides with the set
of candidates that can be made Copeland winners by cloning. In contrast with our previous
characterization results, this holds for all values of q ∈(0, 1] ∪{0+}.
Theorem 5.9. For any q ∈(0, 1] ∪{0+}, a Copeland election E with an odd number of
voters is q-manipulable by cloning if and only if the manipulator’s preferred candidate c
does not win, but is in the Uncovered Set of the pairwise majority graph of E.
Proof. Consider an election E with a set of m alternatives A and an odd number of voters.
Let (A, X) be its pairwise majority graph. Suppose ﬁrst that c is covered by some a ∈A.
In this case ScC(c) < ScC(a). Creating k clones of an alternative x increases by k −1 the
score of each alternative that beats x and decreases by k −1 the score of each alternative
that is beaten by x. Hence, the gap between c and a cannot be reduced by cloning a third
alternative. Moreover, if we replace c with k clones, the score of each clone of c will be at
most ScC(c) + k −1, while the score of a becomes ScC(a) + k −1. Similarly, if we replace
a with k clones, the scores of each clone of a will be at least ScC(a) −(k −1), while the
score of c becomes ScC(c) −(k −1). This shows that cloning c or a would not help either.
Thus, no matter which alternatives we clone, we cannot close the gap between a and c (or
its highest-scoring clone).
Conversely, suppose that c is in the Uncovered Set. Since the number of candidates
is odd, we have T(c) = ∅, and since c is uncovered, we have U(c) ̸= A \ {c}. Therefore,
D(c) ̸= ∅. We will proceed in two stages. First, we will secure that either c or its clone has
a higher Copeland score than any alternative from D(c), and then we will take care of the
alternatives from U(c). At stage one we create 2m + 1 clones of c. This lowers the score
of each alternative in D(c) by 2m and raises the score of each alternative in U(c) by 2m.
A simple counting argument shows that, for any ordering of the clones by the voters, there
exists a clone of c whose score is greater or equal to the original score of c; denote this clone
551

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
by c′. For each alternative x, let Sc′
C(x) denote x’s score after stage one. For each x ∈D(c)
we have
Sc′
C(c′) ≥ScC(c) ≥−(m −1) > ScC(x) −2m = Sc′
C(x),
i.e., c′ has a higher Copeland score than x. On the other hand, for any x ∈U(c) we have
Sc′
C(c′) ≥ScC(c) ≥−(m −1) ≥ScC(x) −(2m −2) = Sc′
C(x) −(4m −2).
At stage two we create 4m + 1 clones of each alternative in D(c). This increases the
score of c′ by 4m|D(c)|. Further, for any a ∈D(c), the score of any clone of a constructed
at this stage exceeds Sc′
C(a) by at most 4m|D(c)|. Thus, at this stage, c′ has a higher
Copeland score than any of the newly-generated clones. Finally, since c was not covered,
no candidate in U(c) beats all candidates in D(c); in fact, any a ∈U(c) is beaten by some
b ∈D(c). Thus, the last step increases the score of each candidate in U(c) by at most
4m(|D(c)| −1) −4m = 4m(|D(c)| −2). It follows that c′ now has a higher Copeland score
than any candidate that is not a clone of c.
For elections with an even number of voters, the situation is signiﬁcantly more compli-
cated. The notion of Uncovered Set can be extended to pairwise majority graphs of arbitrary
elections in a natural way (see, e.g., Brandt & Fischer, 2007): we say that u covers c if u
beats c and all alternatives beaten by c, and, in addition, c loses to all alternatives that beat
u. In particular, this means that u does not cover c if it is beaten by some alternative that
is tied with c. This deﬁnition generalizes the one for the odd number of voters. However,
for an even number of voters, the condition that c is in the Uncovered Set turns out to be
necessary, but not suﬃcient for manipulability by cloning.
Proposition 5.10. In a Copeland election E with an even number of voters in which the
manipulator’s preferred candidate c is covered, c cannot be made a winner by cloning.
Proof. Suppose that c is covered by u. The Copeland score of c is given by |D(c)| −|U(c)|.
Now, u beats all alternatives in D(c), and any alternative that beats u is necessarily in U(c).
Thus, u has a strictly higher Copeland score than c. Now, suppose we create k + 1 clones
of some a ∈A. This can increase the score of c (or one of its clones) only if a ∈D(c) ∪{c};
however, then the score of u also increases by k. On the other hand, this can decrease the
score of u only if a beats u. However, in this case the score of c also decreases by k. We
conclude that c cannot be made a winner by cloning.
However, the converse is not true, as illustrated by the following example.
Example 5.11. Consider an election with A = {a, b, c, u, w}. Suppose that a beats u, u
beats b, b beats w, w beats a, u and w beat c, and any other pair of candidates is tied.
Note that by McGarvey’s theorem (1953) there are voters’ preferences that produce this
pairwise majority graph. In this election, c is undominated. Indeed, while he is beaten by
u and w, he is tied with an alternative that beats u, namely, a, and with an alternative
that beats w, namely, b. However, c’s score is negative, and will remain negative after any
cloning. On the other hand, by a counting argument, in any election where some alternative
has a negative Copeland score, at least one other alternative has a positive Copeland score.
Hence, c cannot be made a winner by cloning.
552

Cloning in Elections
    

    

  

 
  
a
u
w
b
c
Figure 1: Candidate c is undominated, but cannot be made a winner by cloning
Instead, we can characterize 0+-manipulable proﬁles in terms of the properties of the
induced (bipartite) subgraph of (A, X) whose vertices are, on the one hand, the candidates
that are tied with c, and, on the other hand, the candidates that beat both c and all
candidates beaten by c. However, it is not clear if this characterization leads to a polynomial-
time algorithm for detecting such proﬁles.
Speciﬁcally, for a proﬁle in which c is not covered to be 0+-manipulable by cloning in
favor of c, the following must hold. Let Y = T(c) and let Z be the set of all candidates
that beat both c and all candidates beaten by c. We associate with each candidate z ∈Z
a number sz = ScC(z) −ScC(c). Our goal is to assign a nonnegative integer q(y) to every
y ∈Y so that for each z ∈Z we have

(y,z)∈X
q(y) −

(z,y)∈X
q(y) ≥sz.
(1)
Indeed, if this linear program has an integer nonnegative solution (q∗(y))y∈Y , we can replace
each y ∈Y with q∗(y)+1 clones. This will lower the score of each z ∈Z by 
(y,z)∈X q∗(y)−

(z,y)∈X q∗(y) and thus ensure that c’s Copeland score is at least as high as that of any
candidate in Z. We can then take care of the rest of the candidates by cloning c (and asking
all voters to order all clones of c in the same way) and the candidates in D(c), as in the
proof of Theorem 5.9. Thus, condition (1) is suﬃcient for 0+-manipulability. (We remark,
however, that additional constraints may be needed for 1-manipulability, since cloning c
may have a stronger eﬀect on candidates in Z than on the “average” clone of c.)
Conversely, if such an assignment is impossible, there is no way to ensure that all
candidates in Z have a lower Copeland score than c. Indeed, cloning c or the candidates
in D(c) will not help, as any such candidate is also beaten by any candidate in Z. On the
other hand, cloning a candidate in U(c) will harm c (or its clones) at least as much as it
will harm the candidates in Z. Thus, the only way to close the gap between c and the
candidates in Z is to clone candidates in T(c), as captured by our integer linear program.
Note also that if the linear program (1) does not admit an integer solution, this remains
to be the case if we clone some of the candidates. Indeed, cloning candidates in A \ (Y ∪Z)
does not change (1). Cloning a candidate z ∈Z replaces an existing constraint with several
identical ones. Finally, if the program obtained by cloning a candidate y ∈Y has a feasible
solution, it can be easily transformed into a feasible solution for the original program.
Once we introduce costs, optimal cloning becomes hard even for elections with an odd
number of voters and even in the UC model.
553

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
Theorem 5.12. For Copeland, UC q-Cloning is NP-hard for each q ∈{0+} ∪(0, 1].
Proof. We give a reduction from X3C. Let I = (G, S) be our input instance, where G =
{g1, . . . , g3K} is the ground set and S = {S1, . . . , SM} is a family of 3-element subsets of G.
It will be convenient to assume that M ≥2K; we can always achieve this by duplicating
some sets in S.
We will construct an instance of Copeland elections with a preferred
candidate c such that if I is a “yes”-instance of X3C, then there is a 1-successful cloning
that introduces at most K clones, and, furthermore, if I is a “no”-instance of X3C, then
there does not exist a 0+-successful cloning that introduces at most K clones.
The set of candidates for our election will be A = G ∪F ∪D ∪{c}, where c is the
manipulator’s preferred candidate, F = {f1, . . . , fM}, and D = {d1, . . . , d3M+2}.
The
cloning budget is set to K. We describe the voters by providing the outcomes of all head-
to-head contests between candidates in A. By McGarvey’s theorem (McGarvey, 1953), any
such tournament can be realized as the majority relation of a certain preference proﬁle,
which can be computed in polynomial time. The results of head-to-head contests between
the candidates in G ∪F ∪{c} will be as follows:
1. c beats each fj ∈F.
2. Each gi ∈G beats c.
3. For each gi ∈G and each Sj ∈S, gi beats fj if and only if gi /∈Sj.
4. All the remaining contests within G ∪F ∪{c} result in a tie.
If we limit ourselves to candidates in G ∪F ∪{c}, we have the following scores: (a) c has
M −3K points, (b) each gi ∈G has between 1 and M + 1 points, and (c) each fj ∈F has
at most 0 points.
Further, we set the results of head-to-head contests between candidates in G ∪F ∪{c}
and those in D as follows:
5. c beats 2M + 2K ≤3M candidates in {d1, . . . , d3M}.
6. Each gi ∈G beats exactly as many candidates in {d1, . . . , d3M} as to have score
3M −K + 1.
7. All the other contests between candidates in G ∪F ∪{c} and those in D result in a
tie.
Finally, we set the contests within D as follows: Each di ∈{d1, . . . , d3M} loses to d3M+1
and to d3M+2, and all the remaining contests within D result in a tie. Let N = 3M. In the
resulting election we have the following scores:
1. c has N −K points.
2. Each gi ∈G has N −K + 1 points.
3. dN+1 and dN+2 have N points each.
4. Every other candidate has at most 0 points.
554

Cloning in Elections
Consider some nonnegative integer k. Replacing a single candidate with k+1 clones increases
other candidates’ scores by at most k, and the score of each clone can diﬀer from that of the
cloned candidate by at most k. As a result, the only candidates that can be winners after
a cloning manipulation of cost K are those in G ∪{c, dN+1, dN+2}. Thus, in the following
discussion we will consider the scores of these candidates only.
Introducing a single clone of some fj ∈F increases by 1 the scores of c and of each
gi /∈Sj. Thus, if there is a set J ⊆{1, . . . , M} such that |J| = K and ∪i∈JSi = G, then
introducing a single clone of each candidate in {fi | i ∈J} ensures that c is a winner of
the election. This does not depend on how the voters order the introduced clones, i.e., this
cloning strategy is 1-successful.
For the converse direction, we will now argue that if there is a 0+-successful cloning of
cost at most K, then I is a “yes”-instance of X3C. Let us consider such a 0+-successful
cloning. We have to introduce K clones, because each additional clone can increase c’s
score by at most 1, c trails dN+1 and dN+2 by K points, and after any cloning some clones
of dN+1 and dN+2 will have at least N points. Consequently, we cannot clone any of the
candidates in D: cloning any di ∈D \{dN+1, dN+2} increases the scores of dN+1 and dN+2,
and cloning dN+1 or dN+2 does not increase c’s score. Cloning any gi ∈G also does not
increase c’s score, and thus we can only clone members of F ∪{c}. We will now argue that
the cloned members of F correspond to a cover of G (note that this implies that there is
exactly K of them, and each of them is cloned exactly once). Indeed, suppose otherwise,
and let gi be an element of G that is not covered by the union of the sets that correspond
to cloned members of F. Then our cloning manipulation increases the score of gi by K, as
each new clone contributes to the increase of gi’s score. On the other hand, any cloning that
is within our budget can increase c’s score by at most K, so c still trails gi, a contradiction
with the assumption that our cloning manipulation is 0+-successful. This completes the
proof.
6. Related Work
We will now review several lines of research that are related to our work. We start by
discussing the relevant work that originates in the social choice community (Section 6.1),
and then move on to the computational study of voting problems. In Section 6.2 we provide a
detailed comparison between cloning and the classic problem of control by adding candidates
(Bartholdi et al., 1992), and in Section 6.3 we discuss other related work in computational
social choice.
6.1 Cloning in Social Choice Literature
The ﬁrst study of cloning was undertaken by Tideman (1987). He started by deﬁning which
subsets of the alternative set A are clones for a given proﬁle. Speciﬁcally, he deﬁned a
proper subset S of A that contains at least two alternatives to be a clone-set if no voter
ranks any candidate outside of S in between the members of S or as tied with some member
of S. This deﬁnition reﬂects the idea that each voter ﬁnds the candidates in S similar. Now,
every proﬁle R on A deﬁnes a set of clone-sets C(R) ⊆2A. Tideman deﬁnes a voting rule
to be independent of clones if and only if the following two conditions are met when clones
are on the ballot:
555

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
1. A candidate that is a member of a set of clones wins if and only if some member of
that set of clones wins after a member of the set is eliminated from the ballot.
2. A candidate that is not a member of a set of clones wins if and only if that candidate
wins after any clone is eliminated from the ballot.
Tideman considered a number of well-known voting rules, and discovered that among these
rules STV was the only one that satisﬁed his criterion. However, STV does not satisfy
many other important criteria for voting rules, such as Condorcet consistency or mono-
tonicity. Thus, Tideman proposed a new voting rule, the “ranked pairs rule,” that was
both Condorcet consistent and independent of clones in all but a small fraction of set-
tings. Subsequently, Zavist and Tideman (1989) proposed a modiﬁcation of this rule that
is completely independent of clones. Later it was shown that some other voting rules, such
as Schulze’s rule (2003), are also independent of clones.
Tideman considered resistance
to cloning to be an important normative requirement for voting rules, and the method of
ranked pairs proposed by him and Zavist showed how this condition may be satisﬁed.
Another notion related to cloning is that of composition consistency, due to Laﬀond et al.
(1996). It is deﬁned for tournament solution concepts (i.e., social choice correspondences
that take tournaments as inputs). For a given alternative set A, let T (A) denote the set of
all tournaments on A. A non-empty subset C of A is a component of T ∈T (A) if for any
c, c′ ∈C and for any a ∈A\C it holds that (a, c) ∈T if and only if (a, c′) ∈T; a component
C is said to be nontrivial if 1 < |C| < |A|. A tournament T is said to be composed if it has
at least one nontrivial component. Components of a tournament are natural counterparts
of clone-sets of a preference proﬁle.
Let A1, . . . , AK be K disjoint ﬁnite sets of alternatives, and let T1, . . . , TK be K tour-
naments such that for each k = 1, . . . , K it holds that Tk ∈T (Ak). Moreover, let T ∗be a
tournament in T ([K]), where [K] = {1, 2, . . . , K}. The composition product of T ∗by tour-
naments T1, . . . , TK is the tournament T = Π(T ∗; T1, . . . , TK) deﬁned on A = A1 ∪. . . ∪AK
as follows. For each k, k′ ∈[K] and each (a, b) ∈Ak × Ak′ the tournament T contains the
pair (a, b) if and only if (i) k ̸= k′ and (k, k′) ∈T ∗or (ii) k = k′ and (a, b) ∈Tk.
A tournament solution concept φ is said to be composition-consistent if for each compo-
sition product T = Π(T ∗; T1, . . . , TK) in T (A) it holds that φ(T) = 
{φ(Tk) | k ∈φ(T ∗)}.
This property may be illustrated in the following way. Suppose that there are K diﬀerent
projects that a given society can choose to implement. Further, each project Ak, k ∈[K],
has nk diﬀerent variants. Composition consistency guarantees that we will choose the best
variant of the best project irrespectively of whether we use a two-stage procedure that ﬁrst
chooses the best project and then its best variant, or simply set up a single tournament in
order to choose among all variants of all projects.
Laﬀond et al. (1996) and Laslier (1996) suggested a similar construction for social choice
correspondences (which are referred to as voting rules in this paper). Given a set X, let
Rn(X) be the set of all n-voter proﬁles on X. Let A1, . . . , AK be K disjoint ﬁnite sets of
alternatives, and consider K preference proﬁles R1, . . . , RK, where Rk = (Rk
1, . . . , Rk
n) is a
proﬁle in Rn(Ak) for k ∈[K]. Let R∗= (R∗
1, . . . , R∗
n) ∈Rn([K]). The composition product
Π(R∗; R1, . . . , RK) of R∗by proﬁles R1, . . . , RK is the n-voter proﬁle R = (R1, . . . , Rn)
deﬁned on A = A1 ∪. . . ∪AK as follows. For each k, k′ ∈[K] and each (a, b) ∈Ak × Ak′
we set a Ri b if and only if (i) k ̸= k′ and k R∗
i k′ or (ii) k = k′ and a Rk
i b. A social choice
556

Cloning in Elections
correspondence φ is said to be composition-consistent if for any n > 0 and any composition
product R = Π(R∗; R1, . . . , RK) in Rn(A) it holds that φ(R) = 
{φ(Rk) | k ∈φ(R∗)}.
Laﬀond et al. (1996) and Laslier (1996) proved that a number of tournament solution
concepts such as the Banks Set, the Uncovered Set, the Tournament Equilibrium Set (TEQ),
and the Minimal Covering Set are composition-consistent, but several other tournament
solution concepts and social choice correspondences such as the Top Cycle, the Slater rule,
the Copeland rule, and all scoring rules are not composition-consistent.
Laslier (2000) also introduced the notion of cloning consistency. A social choice corre-
spondence φ is said to be cloning-consistent if for any n > 0 and any composition product
R = Π(R∗; R1, . . . , RK) in Rn(A), it holds that φ(R) = 
{Ak | k ∈φ(R∗)}. This require-
ment says that if one clone of an alternative is winning, then all clones of that alternative
must win as well. This property is useful when the set of alternatives is fuzzy, but—as
the author himself acknowledged—terrible if the number of alternatives is ﬁxed and clearly
deﬁned.
The concept of a composed proﬁle is not necessarily useful for manipulation by cloning,
but is very relevant to what one might call decloning. The idea of decloning is to reveal
whether or not a proﬁle (or, a tournament) could have been obtained as a result of cloning
and, if possible, identify the underlying composition product. Recently, decloning proved
to be a useful preprocessing tool for dealing with voting rules that have a computationally
hard winner determination problem (Conitzer, 2006; Betzler, Fellows, Guo, Niedermeier, &
Rosamond, 2009; Brandt, Brill, & Seedig, 2011). The extended abstract of the current pa-
per, which was presented at the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AAAI-2010), initiated a complexity-theoretic study of decloning in voting; this topic was
further investigated by Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko (2011). However, decloning deserves
careful study on its own and thus has been omitted from this paper.
The concept of resistance to cloning appeared also in the context of study of self-
selectivity of social choice functions. Koray and Slinko (2008) discovered that self-selectivity
is a stronger requirement than resistance to cloning, even if deletion of candidates is viewed
as a special form of cloning (one that replaces a candidate with zero clones). This partially
explains why the universally self-selective functions are necessarily dictatorial, as discovered
earlier by Koray (2008). Koray and Slinko (2008) circumvent this impossibility result by
relaxing the property of self-selectivity: they require the social choice function to select it-
self only among other “reasonable” social choice functions. The concept of being reasonable
involves a social choice correspondence (for example, the one that selects all Pareto optimal
alternatives), and it is essential that this social choice correspondence is resistant to cloning
of essential alternatives (for the deﬁnition of an essential alternative see Koray & Slinko,
2008).
6.2 Comparison of Cloning and Other Models of Adding Candidates
A problem that is closely related to cloning is that of election control. In general, this term
refers to manipulating the result of an election by changing its structure (e.g., by either
adding or deleting candidates or voters). The computational study of election control was
initiated by Bartholdi et al. (1992) who, among other issues, considered constructive control
by adding candidates (CCAC). In their model, we are given a set of registered candidates,
557

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
a set of spoiler candidates, and a set of voters, with preferences over both the registered
candidates and the spoiler candidates (however, before we take any action, only the regis-
tered candidates participate in the election). The task is to decide if it is possible to select
a subset of spoiler candidates so that when these candidates are registered, the preferred
candidate becomes a winner. Subsequently, Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, Hemaspaandra,
and Rothe (2009) reﬁned this model by introducing a bound on the number of candidates
that can be added.
Formally, we will use the following deﬁnition of the CCAC problem, which is based on
the one given by Faliszewski et al. (2009).
Deﬁnition 6.1. Let F be a voting rule. In the constructive control by adding candidates
problem (F-CCAC) we are given an election (C ∪A, R), where C ∩A = ∅, a designated
candidate p ∈C, and a nonnegative integer t. We ask if there is a set A′ ⊆A of size at
most t such that p is the unique F-winner of the election (C ∪A′, R).4
In the deﬁnition above, the set C corresponds to already registered candidates and the set
A is the set of “spoiler” candidates that the manipulator can introduce into the election.
Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick considered only two rules, Plurality and Condorcet’s rule
(i.e., the rule that selects a Condorcet winner if one exists and no winners otherwise), and
focused on standard worst-case complexity results, classifying control problems as either
NP-complete or in P.
Many researchers followed up on their work by studying various
other voting rules (Erd´elyi, Nowak, & Rothe, 2009b; Faliszewski et al., 2009; Faliszewski,
Hemaspaandra, & Hemaspaandra, 2011) and various other settings (Liu, Feng, Zhu, &
Luan, 2009; Betzler & Uhlmann, 2009; Faliszewski et al., 2011), of which perhaps most
prominent are destructive control of Hemaspaandra, Hemaspaandra, and Rothe (2007) and
control in multi-winner elections of Meir, Procaccia, Rosenschein, and Zohar (2008). We
point the reader to the recent survey of Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra
(2010) for more details on election control.
While q-Cloning (and, in particular, UC q-Cloning) and CCAC control are similar
in that both of them deal with adding new candidates, neither of these problems is a special
case of the other. Indeed, they place diﬀerent restrictions on the candidates to be added
and their positions in the votes. Speciﬁcally, in q-Cloning the new candidates must be
clones of existing candidates, but (especially in 0+-Cloning) we have some freedom as to
how to arrange the new candidates in the votes. In contrast, in CCAC control problems,
the spoiler candidates need not be adjacent to each other in all votes, but the order of all
the candidates in each vote is predetermined.
A somewhat diﬀerent model of adding candidates has been recently proposed by Cheva-
leyre, Lang, Maudet, and Monnot (2010). In this paper, the authors consider the following
scenario. An election is happening over a period of time and candidates may still join in.
At a given point, we know all the candidates that have registered by then and the vot-
ers’ preferences over those candidates. Each voter may place new candidates arbitrarily
in her vote. Given that at most k new candidates may still appear, which of the already
registered ones still have a chance of winning? (Note that, as in the case of cloning, the
addition of new candidates may beneﬁt some of the original candidates and hurt some of
4. Unique-winner model is standard for control problems.
558

Cloning in Elections
the others.) Chevaleyre et al. (2010), and—in a very recent follow-up work—Xia, Lang,
and Monnot (2011), give computational complexity results for the problem of ﬁnding the
possible (co)winners when new alternatives join (PcWNA). Their work diﬀers from ours in
that they do not require the new candidates to be clones of preexisting ones (in particular,
they do not require the new candidates to be ranked consistently, consecutively by all the
voters), and diﬀers from control by adding candidates in that they allow introducing arbi-
trary new candidates (as opposed to introducing already-ranked-by-voters candidates from
a predeﬁned set of spoilers). Formally, their model is a special case of the possible winner
problem, introduced by Konczak and Lang (2005), and further studied by many other re-
searchers (Xia & Conitzer, 2011; Betzler & Dorn, 2010; Bachrach, Betzler, & Faliszewski,
2010; Baumeister & Rothe, 2010).
Table 1 provides a comparison of the complexity of control by adding candidates (CCAC
control), possible co-winner determination when new alternatives can join (PcWNA), and
q-Cloning for q ∈{0+, 1} in the UC model (using the UC model is analogous to counting
the number of new candidates in the CCAC control problems). To ﬁll the ﬁrst column
of Table 1, we provide complexity results for CCAC control for Plurality with Runoﬀ, k-
approval, Borda, and Veto, which were missing from the existing literature. Since these
results are tangential to the topic of our paper, we relegate them to Appendix B.
Table 1 shows that cloning and PcWNA are computationally incomparable (assuming
P ̸= NP). For example, for 2-Approval 0+-Cloning is NP-hard, whereas PcWNA is in P.
On the other hand, for Maximin 0+-Cloning is in P, while PcWNA is NP-complete.
In contrast, Table 1 appears to indicate that CCAC control is harder than cloning.
These results are not entirely surprising: we can construct contrived instances of CCAC
control by placing the spoiler candidates in any way we like, so as to facilitate computational
hardness proofs. One may therefore conjecture that UC 0+-Cloning is always easier than
CCAC control. However, it turns out that this is not the case.
Theorem 6.2. There is a voting rule for which constructive control by adding candidates
is in P, but UC 0+-Cloning is NP-hard.
The proof of Theorem 6.2 is given in Appendix B; while the voting rule constructed in
this proof is highly artiﬁcial, it demonstrates that UC 0+-Cloning cannot be reduced to
CCAC control (unless P = NP).
To wrap up our discussion of control by adding candidates, we mention an interesting
twist to the standard model of election control that was recently studied by Faliszewski,
Hemaspaandra, Hemaspaandra, and Rothe (2011) and Brandt, Brill, Hemaspaandra, and
Hemaspaandra (2010). In these papers, the authors study the complexity of control (as
well as manipulation and bribery) for single-peaked electorates. Their main ﬁnding is that
many control problems that are known to be NP-hard for unrestricted preferences (and
most control problems belong to this category) turn out to be solvable in polynomial time
when the preferences are single-peaked. In comparison, cloning is computationally feasible
for many rules even without assuming special properties of the electorate. As a side note,
we mention that cloning a candidate may destroy single-peakedness of an election: if each
voter ranks the clones uniformly at random, the resulting ranking of the clones is unlikely
to be single-peaked. The problem of “collapsing” the minimum number of clones in order
to make a given election single-peaked is studied in detail by Elkind et al. (2011).
559

Elkind, Faliszewski & Slinko
Voting rule
CCAC control
PcWNA
0+-Cloning
1-Cloning
Plurality
NPC
(Bartholdi
et al., 1992)
P (Betzler & Dorn,
2010)
P
—
Maximin
NPC (Faliszewski
et al., 2011)
NPC (Xia et al., 2011)
P
—
Plurality
w/Runoﬀ
NPC
P (Xia et al., 2011)
P
—
Veto
NPC
P (Betzler & Dorn,
2010)
P
P
Borda
NPC
P (Chevaleyre et al.,
2010)
P
?
2-Approval
NPC
P (Chevaleyre et al.,
2010)
NP-hard
NP-hard
k-Approval,
k ≥3
NPC
NPC
(Chevaleyre
et al., 2010)
NP-hard
NP-hard
Copeland
NPC (Faliszewski
et al., 2009)
?
NP-hard
NP-hard
Table 1: The complexity of control via adding candidates (CCAC), of possible co-winner
determination when new alternatives can join (PcWNA), and of q-Cloning in
the UC model for q ∈{0+, 1}. Note that for Plurality, Plurality with Runoﬀand
Maximin 1-successful cloning is impossible. All the results on CCAC control are in
the unique-winner model (though some of them are also proved in the non-unique
winner model), whereas we work in the non-unique winner model. The PcWNA
results for Plurality and Veto follow directly from the more general results of
Betzler and Dorn (2010) for the possible winner problem. Xia et al. (2011) also
give an NP-completeness result for a variant of Copeland rule known as Copeland0,
where the score of a candidate is simply the number of head-to-head contests that
this candidate wins.
560

Cloning in Elections
6.3 Cloning and Campaign Management
To a large extent, our work on cloning is motivated by applications of cloning in campaign
management. However, campaign management can be understood in multiple other ways
as well. In particular, the issue of campaign management in voting has been previously
studied from the computational perspective by Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko (2009), who
introduced the problem of swap bribery. In their model, each voter is associated with a
certain cost function, which describes how diﬃcult it is to make local changes to this voter’s
preferences. The goal of the campaign manager is to ensure that a given candidate becomes a
winner at the smallest possible cost. While this problem turns out to be NP-hard for almost
all voting rules, some of its special cases admit polynomial-time solutions. Further, if one
focuses on a variant of swap bribery where one is only allowed to shift forward the preferred
candidate, it is possible to ﬁnd eﬀective (approximation) algorithms (Elkind et al., 2009;
Elkind & Faliszewski, 2010; Schlotter, Elkind, & Faliszewski, 2011). Going in a diﬀerent
research direction, Dorn and Schlotter (2010) provide parameterized complexity study of
swap bribery. Of course, the standard model of bribery (Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, &
Hemaspaandra, 2009), where one can pay a voter to change his vote arbitrarily, can also be
interpreted in the context of campaign management.
Also, the probabilistic model put forward in this paper, and, in particular, our deﬁnition
of q-successful cloning is similar in spirit to the model of Erd´elyi, Fernau, Goldsmith, Mattei,
Raible, and Rothe (2009a), where voters are bribed to increase their probabilities of voting
in favor of a particular alternative.
Finally, the problem of cloning is particularly relevant in open, anonymous environments,
such as the Internet. In such settings, a problem closely related to cloning candidates is that
of cloning voters. Speciﬁcally, in an anonymous environment an agent might be capable of
creating several instances of itself and vote multiple times. Voting rules that are resistant
to this kind of manipulation are called false-name-proof; they were studied by Conitzer
(2008). A variant of this framework in which, similarly to our general model, creating new
identities is costly was subsequently considered by Wagman and Conitzer (2008).
7. Conclusions
We have provided a formal model of manipulating elections by cloning, characterized 0+-
manipulable and 1-manipulable proﬁles for many well-known voting rules, and explored the
complexity of ﬁnding a minimum-cost cloning manipulation. The grouping of voting rules
according to their susceptibility to manipulation diﬀers from most standard classiﬁcations
of voting rules: e.g., scoring rules behave very diﬀerently from each other, and Maximin is
more similar to Plurality than to Copeland. Future research directions include designing
approximation algorithms for the minimum-cost cloning under voting rules for which this
problem is known to be NP-hard, and extending our results to other voting rules.
