How to Answer Why - Evaluating the Explanations of AI Through  
Mental Model Analysis 
Tim Schrills† 
 Institute for Multimedia and Interactive Systems 
 University of Lübeck 
 Lübeck, Germany 

Thomas Franke 
 Institute for Multimedia and Interactive Systems 
 University of Lübeck 
 Lübeck, Germany 

 
ABSTRACT 
To achieve optimal human-system integration in the context of 
user-AI interaction it is important that users develop a valid 
representation of how AI works. In most of the everyday interaction 
with technical systems users construct mental models (i.e., an 
abstraction of the anticipated mechanisms a system uses to perform 
a given task). If no explicit explanations are provided by a system 
(e.g. by a self-explaining AI) or other sources (e.g. an instructor), 
the mental model is typically formed based on experiences, i.e. the 
observations of the user during the interaction. The congruence of 
this mental model and the actual systems functioning is vital, as it 
is used for assumptions, predictions and consequently for decisions 
regarding system use. A key question for human-centered AI 
research is therefore how to validly survey users’ mental models. 
The objective of the present research is to identify suitable 
elicitation methods for mental model analysis. We evaluated 
whether mental models are suitable as an empirical research 
method. Additionally, methods of cognitive tutoring are integrated.  
We propose an exemplary method to evaluate explainable AI 
approaches in a human-centered way.  
KEYWORDS 
Human-AI interaction; explainable AI; machine learning; Mental 
Models, Human-automation interaction 
1  INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
Explainable AI (XAI) aims to improve various aspects of human-
AI interaction, such as trust, traceability or predictability through 
explanations [1]. It can be assumed that all these factors are 
essentially influenced by the congruence of users’ mental models 
and the actual system functioning (i.e., in the following labelled as 
‘physical model’). In the sense of cognitive science, a mental model 
can be understood as a set of knowledge elements that are 
interrelated [2]. From the existence of these elements and their 
connection, for example, the behavior of a system can be mentally 
simulated. These simulations are used to make predictions, i.e. 
assumptions about how the system will behave (in the case of an 
AI, for example, what classification will be made based on an 
input). This leads to the following conclusion: the higher the 
congruence between a mental model and the functioning of the 
system, the more accurate and correct the predictions [6]. 
Nevertheless, the number of correct predictions alone is not 
sufficient as a metric of an explanation’s value, since it is not 
possible to deduce which errors in the mental model possibly cause 
prediction errors. In contrast, the extent of congruence (between 
users’ models and physical model) before and after an explanation, 
interaction or other intervention can be used as a measure of an 
explanation’s performance. For an adequate evaluation of systems 
- which also provides information on which knowledge elements 
are critical and can pose problems - a quantitative method for the 
elicitation of mental models is necessary. Hence, the development 
of a mental model analysis (MMA) is considered necessary [cf. 3]. 
Three different factors must be considered, which can lead to 
reduced congruence: (a) The absence of relevant knowledge 
elements; (b) the existence of irrelevant knowledge elements; and 
(c) the incorrect relation of knowledge elements. A simple example 
is a medical AI to classify presence of diabetes based on various 
factors. Potential users might not know, for example, that the AI 
also considers the time at which the diagnosis is requested, because 
for example meals have an effect on blood sugar level, (a) and thus 
gives a false prediction. Or users might assume that the AI 
integrates certain correlations, e.g. to assess blood glucose 
differently in diabetics than in healthy people - although the 
proportion of diabetics in the training data set may have been too 
low (c). While all these cases can be resolved post-hoc by an 
explanation, methods must be developed to reveal the differences 
between users’ mental models and the physical model, e.g. to 
trigger specific explanations or to improve the presentation of the 
explanations. 
In examining the impact of explanation, two objectives could be 
pursued: (1) It must be evaluated whether an explanation reduces 
the distance between the mental model of a user and the physical 
model. However, this is not always possible, since the physical 
model is (1a) not extractable or (1b) cannot be presented in a 
comprehensible way. (2) It is to be examined, which elements are 
influenced by an explanation. This could be important to 
understand whether an explanation is effective. The goal of MMA 
is thus not to determine whether a user has a better understanding 
of the physical model. Rather, the goal is to discover how 
knowledge elements are influenced by interventions, especially 

 
 
 
 
explanations. Combined with e.g. tasks concerning prediction or 
the subjective rating (by, using e.g. the System Causability Scale 
[4]), a better depiction of explanations’ effects can be provided. 
2  MENTAL MODEL ANALYSIS METHODS 
We propose to structure existing methods into three different 
categories: The graphical representation of geothermal energy as in 
[9] is an example for (i) the mere collection of knowledge elements. 
Both, missing and irrelevant knowledge elements can be identified. 
By querying correlative relationships as in [5], an (ii) undirected 
relationship can be identified. Thus, besides (a) and (b), a subset of 
errors of (c) can be addressed. For a complete survey of mental 
models (i.e. a, b and c) it is necessary to identify (iii) directional 
relationships between knowledge elements. This can be done by 
collecting directed graphs (see [8]).  
Additionally, we assume that the process of, for example, a 
classification, could be better surveyed by another format. A simple 
method for this could be the query of rules - but in what form can 
rules be queried? In the field of cognitive tutors, constraint-based 
tutoring systems [7] are used. These consist of a certain set of rules 
which are always composed of a relevance and a satisfaction 
clause. The first one triggers the rule, i.e. the circumstance that must 
be present for the fulfillment of the rule to be checked. In the 
example given above, this could be a heart disease. The latter 
represents a circumstance that must be present for the entire rule to 
be considered fulfilled, resulting in a simple if-then structure. For 
example, it could be that the blood pressure is ignored in the 
diagnosis. The advantage of this method is that the mental 
representation does not have to be modelled sequentially, but all 
existing, directed connections can be represented independently of 
each other. At the same time, the individual rules can be assumed 
to be simple enough to not cause a cognitive overload for 
participants. 
3 PROPOSITION OF TEST PROCEDURE 
Based on the analytical discussion above, we propose a procedure 
to apply constraint-based rules in the elicitation of mental models. 
For this purpose, participants are presented with different patient 
profiles and their symptoms. Furthermore, a classification of a 
Mock-Up AI is presented, which is based on clearly defined rules. 
This means that the rules that are to be applied are already known 
in advance to the researcher. This is different from the investigation 
of explanations in neural networks, for example, because they are 
unknown due to their nature as black boxes. To investigate the 
effect of an explanation it is not necessary that the physical model 
is given. However, by constructing such a system for research 
purposes it is possible to deliberately install problems that may 
occur in the real context (e.g. due to insufficient training data). 
After a defined number of observations, the participants are asked 
to define the rule set, according to which the AI makes its 
classification, by choosing relevance and satisfaction clauses. 
These consist of observable information from the patient profile. 
For example, the relevance clause could be that blood glucose is 
above a certain level, while the satisfaction clause is that a symptom 
is fatigue. Finally, it is assessed whether a fulfilled constraint 
increases or decreases the probability of classification. For 
example, in the given example, the classification "diabetes" might 
become more likely. A selection list is offered (for relevance, 
satisfaction and classification). The number of correct elements, 
missing elements and correct relations is then used to examine the 
congruence of the mental model and the physical model. 
4  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
We have proposed that the elicitation of mental models is a key step 
for the systematic improvement of XAI. Based on the proposed 
methodology, as a next step, the extent to which constraint-based 
rules are suitable to collect mental models and to quantitatively 
represent the changes triggered by e.g. explanations should be 
evaluated. This may open up a large and fruitful research space to 
AI researches, to create truly human centered AI that enables 
symbiotic cooperation and enhances the formation of explanation-
based trust and acceptance.
