Learn Dynamic-Aware State Embedding for Transfer
Learning
Kaige Yang
University College London

Abstract
Transfer reinforcement learning aims to improve the sample efﬁciency of solving
unseen new tasks by leveraging experiences obtained from previous tasks. We
consider the setting where all tasks (MDPs) share the same environment dynamic
except reward function. In this setting, the MDP dynamic is a good knowledge to
transfer, which can be inferred by uniformly random policy. However, trajectories
generated by uniform random policy are not useful for policy improvement, which
impairs the sample efﬁciency severely. Instead, we observe that the binary MDP
dynamic can be inferred from trajectories of any policy which avoids the need of
uniform random policy. As the binary MDP dynamic contains the state structure
shared over all tasks we believe it is suitable to transfer. Built on this observation,
we introduce a method to infer the binary MDP dynamic on-line and at the same
time utilize it to guide state embedding learning, which is then transferred to new
tasks. We keep state embedding learning and policy learning separately. As a
result, the learned state embedding is task and policy agnostic which makes it
ideal for transfer learning. In addition, to facilitate the exploration over the state
space, we propose a novel intrinsic reward based on the inferred binary MDP
dynamic. Our method can be used out-of-box in combination with model-free RL
algorithms. We show two instances on the basis of DQN and A2C. Empirical results
of intensive experiments show the advantage of our proposed method in various
transfer learning tasks.
1
Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning has gone through a rapid development in recent years and show near-
human or super-human performance in many domains like games [18], protein-folding [17] and
robotic [9]. Despite countless success, there still remains many challenges. One is the limited
ﬂexibility in solving different tasks. Human excel at adjusting behaviour in new tasks when the goal
is changing. This ability relies on the efﬁcient transfer of knowledge accumulated in one task to
others.
Transfer learning in RL aims to leverage the acquired knowledge from seen tasks to efﬁciently solve
unseen tasks. In order to generalize to unseen tasks, an agent needs to abstract the general aspect of
tasks. In this work, we are interested in a particular instance of transfer learning setting where all tasks
(MDPs) are the same except the reward functions. In this setting, one of the general aspect of tasks is
the shared dynamic of MDPs. However, the MDP dynamic is typically unknown or requires a large
amount of data to learn and prone to error. For example, [13] and [12] proposed to learn the MDP
dynamic via uniform random policy. To obtain an accurate estimation, it requires a large amount
of interactions between agent and the environment, which is infeasible in case of large state space.
Moreover, the data generated by uniform random policy can not be utilized for policy improvement.
This impairs the sample efﬁciency severely.
Report Draft.
arXiv:2101.02230v1  [cs.LG]  6 Jan 2021

Instead, we observe that the binary MDP dynamic, unlike MDP dynamic, can be inferred from
trajectories generated by any policy. This avoids the need of uniform random policy and allows
the agent to infer the dynamic as the same time of improving policy. The transition matrix of the
binary MDP dynamic is the binary version of the transition matrix of MDP dynamic. To estimate it, a
signiﬁcant less amount of data is required. As the binary MDP dynamic contains the information of
state structure which is shared by all tasks, we believe such knowledge is suitable to transfer.
Built on the observation, we design an agent that can infer the binary MDP dynamic online and
leverage it to guide state embedding, which is then transferred to new tasks. Specially, we propose a
method to learn the binary MDP dynamic gradually from trajectories generated by policy iteration
procedure. At the same time, we utilize it to guide state embedding learning in a way that close states
have similar embedding. This is based on the intuition that in general consecutive states have similar
state values. We keep the state embedding learning and policy learning separately. This ensure the
policy-dependency of state embedding minimal which improves its ability for transfer learning.
In addition, to have an accurate estimation of the binary MDP dynamic, it is crucial that the agent
visit the whole state space. However, exploration in RL is a long-standing challenge. To encourage
the agent to visit more states, we propose a novel intrinsic reward based on the inferred binary MDP
dynamic. Namely, an action is rewarded if the next state has been visited limited times and has few
neighbors. Empirical results show that the intrinsic reward encourages the agent to explore signiﬁcant
larger state space than ϵ-greedy, which in turn speeds up the dynamic learning, state embedding
learning and policy learning.
Our methods can be applied generally to various model-free RL algorithms and requires minimal
changes of RL framework. The main contributions of this work can be listed as follows:
• We introduce a method to infer the binary MDP dynamic gradually based on policy iteration
trajectories.
• We propose a loss function to learn state embedding in line with the inferred dynamic.
• We propose a novel intrinsic reward to encourage exploration.
• Through intensive experiments, we show the advantage of our methods over baselines on
various transfer learning tasks.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the related work.
In Section 3, the setting of reinforcement learning and transfer learning are described. Section 4
introduces the binary MDP dynamic and the proposed method to infer it. Section 5 presents the
proposed state embedding learning method. Section 6 describes the proposed intrinsic reward. In
section 7, two proposed algorithms are presented. Experiment results are reported in Section 8.
Section 9 includes the conclusion and future research directions.
2
Related Work
A number of works have focused on learning state embedding in line with the underlying shared
MDP dynamic across tasks to facilitate the transfer learning ability. These works can be roughly
categorized into two lines of research: 1), ﬁrst infer the transition matrix of the MDP dynamic
via uniform random policy and then learn state embedding through graph-based node embedding
techniques; 2), learn successor representation (SR) or successor feature (SF) of good policies in seen
tasks and transfer the learned SR/SF to unseen tasks. Here, we intensively discuss these research.
[13] proposed to learn the transition matrix through uniform random policy. The transition matrix
is viewed as the adjacency matrix of state graph where nodes represent states and edge weights
represent the transition probability. Then, the eigenvectors of Laplacian, named proto-value-function
(PVF), are used as state embedding. As PVF encodes the spectral structure of the state graph, make it
suitable for transfer learning. The eigendecomposition of graph Lapalcian is infeasible in case of
large state space which limits it applicability in practice. [12] proposed to learn transition matrix as
[13]. But, the state embedding is learned through node2vec [6] algorithm. Beside node2vec, many
other node-embedding techniques can be utilized like DeepWalk[16] and GraphSage[7] in [21]. As
discussed before, the transition matrix requires a large amount of data to estimate and prone to error.
More importantly, the data generated by uniform random policy is not useful for policy improvement,
which impairs the sample efﬁciency seriously.
2

In contrast, our work aims to infer the binary transition matrix which requires much less data to
estimate. Furthermore, it can be inferred from data generated by any policy. This allows the agent
infer the binary transition matrix at the same time of improving policy.
An alternative line of research is based on successor representation (SR) [5]. In tabular case, SR
decouples the state value into future state occupancy and rewards which makes it suitable for transfer
learning in ﬁxed MDP dynamic. [2] generalized SR to function approximation case, named successor
feature (SF). The state value is decomposition into representation of future state feature occupancy
(SF) and rewards. SF is dependent on the MDP dynamic and behaviour policy and is task-independent,
while rewards are purely task-dependent. Thus, when SF under a policy is learned, it is possible to
quickly evaluate the state value of the same policy under new tasks. However, the policy-dependency
of SR/SF limits their applicability in transfer learning for two reasons. First, as pointed in [8] [11] a
good policy in one task may performs poorly in another task. It is possible that important states in
new tasks are not desirable in previous task. Thus, SR/SF of such states are not well represented by
good policy in old tasks. This makes it hard for the agent to ﬁnd optimal routes in new tasks. Second,
SR/SF are excel at evaluating a given policy under different tasks. However, to solve a task, the agent
follows generalized policy iteration (GPI) [19], where the policy keeps improving rather than remains
the same. It means the SR/SF of one particular policy is quickly out-of-date as the policy is changing.
To overcome these limitations, several attempts have been made. [11] proposed successor maps. [10]
proposed Universal Successor Feature (USF).
Broadly speaking, SR/SF is a state embedding encoding the MDP dynamic and policy jointly. To
avoid negative transfer in unseen tasks, the policy-dependency of SR/SF need to be carefully dealt
with. In contrast, our work learns state embedding based on binary MDP dynamic, which is policy
agnostic. This ensures positive transfer to unseen tasks as long as under the same MDP dynamic.
As we also propose a novel intrinsic reward to encourage exploration, we brieﬂy review related works.
RL agents rely on reward provided by environment to update its value function or policy. Thus it is
essential for an agent to explore the state space efﬁciently to come cross rewards. Intrinsic rewards
have been proposed to encourage agent to visit novel states. [15] proposed curiosity-based approach
where a model is trained to predict the next state given the current state and action. The prediction
error is used as the intrinsic reward. In such way, the agent is encouraged to visit states the model
is uncertain (high prediction error). [3] [1] proposed count-based approaches where the inverse of
state visitation count is used as intrinsic reward to encourage agent to explore less visited states. [14]
proposed to reward an action if the representation of the current state and next state are signiﬁcant
different. [20] deﬁned the novelty of a state as the sparsity in the area around the state in latent state
space.
Unlike existing works, our proposed intrinsic reward based on state-count and the number of neighbors
of each state. The inferred binary MDP dynamic can be viewed as a graph of states. The neighbors of
each state is deﬁned as the one-step reachable states. An action is rewarded if the next state has been
visited less times and has few neighbors. Intuitively, if a state has no or few neighbors, it is good
indicator that the space around this state is not well explored. To the best of our knowledge, our work
is the ﬁrst one leverages the neighbors of states as intrinsic reward.
3
Reinforcement Learning and Transfer Learning
Consider a MDP denoted as tuple M = (S, A, P, R, γ) where S is the state space, A is the action
space. The transition kernel P(s′|s, a) gives the transition probability to state s′ given action a is
taken in state s. A policy π(a|s) denotes the probability of action a in state s. The state value V (s)
and state-action value Q(s, a) under policy π are deﬁned as follows:
V π(s) = E[
∞
X
t=1
γtr(st)|s0 = s]
(1)
Qπ(s, a) = E[
∞
X
t=1
γtr(st)|s0 = s, a0 = a]
(2)
The goal is to ﬁnd the optimal policy π∗whose V-value and Q-value function satisfy the Bellman
Optimal Equation:
V π∗(s) = r(s) + γE[V π∗(s′)]
(3)
3

Qπ∗(s, a) = r(s) + γ max
a′∈A E[Qπ∗(s′, a′)]
(4)
We are interested in a particular instance of the transfer learning problem, where the environ-
ment dynamic is ﬁxed, but the reward function varies (e.g., goal location in maze navigation).
Formally, deﬁne a set of MDP as {M1, M2, ..., MK} where each MDP is denotes as a tuple
Mi = (Si, Ai, Pi, Ri, γi). In our setting, all components of MDP are ﬁxed, except for the reward
function. i.e., Ri ̸= Rj, ∀(i, j) ∈[K]. We use function approximator f(·, θ) to predict state
value V (s) where θ is the function parameters. Denote φ(s) as state embedding, then V (s) can be
expressed as
V (s) = f(φ(s), θ)
(5)
State value V (s) is different under different policy and task. Denote V π
Mi(s) as the state value under
policy π in task Mi, which is
V π
Mi(s) = f(φ(s), θπ
Mi)
(6)
where θπ
Mi is the function parameters speciﬁed to policy π and task Mi.
An ideal state embedding φ(s) should have properties: 1), state value V (s) is a simple function
of φ(s); 2), φ(s) is a good discriminator for the states. In this work, we use another function
approximator g(·, α) to learn state embedding where φ(s) = g(s, α). We notice that consecutive
states are in general have similar state values. Thus, it is intuitively to encode consecutive states
with similar embedding. The information of state structure (which states are consecutive) is contains
in the MDP dynamic. Deﬁne M as the transition matrix of a MDP where each entry of M is
M(s, s′) = P
a∈A P(s′|s, a). If M(s, s′) is known, we can enforce the similarity between state
embedding in proportional to M(s, s′). e.g., the inner product φ(s)T φ(s′) ∝M(s, s′).
In transfer learning, if we can learn state embedding φ(s) from one task Mi, which is in line with
the underlying dynamic M, as all tasks share the same dynamic, such state embedding can be reused
in solving unseen new tasks {Mj}, j ̸= i.
However, the MDP dynamic M is typically unknown. Despite it can be estimated via uniform
random policy, i.e, M(s, s′) ≈P
a∈A π0(a|s)P(s′|s, a) where π0(a|s) = 1/|A|, This requires a
large amount of data and prone to error. More importantly, the data generated by uniform random
policy is not helpful for policy improvement. This jeopardises the sample efﬁciency severally. To
circumvent this issue, we observe that the binary transition matrix also contains the state structure
and can be leveraged for state embedding learning. More importantly, the binary transition matrix
can be inferred from data generated by any policy. This avoids the need of uniform random policy
and allows the agent to infer the dynamic at the same of improving policy. We deﬁne the binary MDP
transition matrix in next section.
4
Binary MDP transition matrix
We denote M as the MDP transition matrix where M(s, s′) = P
a∈A P(s′|s, a) is the transition
probability from state s to state s′. The binary MDP transition matrix ¯M is deﬁned as
¯
M(s, s′) =
1
if M(s, s′) > 0
0
if M(s, s′) = 0
(7)
Intuitively, ¯M is the skeleton of MDP dynamic M, which contains the underlying state structure. We
denote Mπ as the policy transition matrix where M π(s, s′) = P
a∈A P(s′|s, a)π(a|s). We point
out a relationship between the binary MDP transition matrix ¯M and policy transition matrix Mπ.
Lemma 1. Suppose ¯M and Mπ are deﬁned as above. The following holds for any policy π.
∀(si, sj) ∈S, if ¯
M(si, sj) = 0, then M π(si, sj) = 0
(8)
and
∀(si, sj) ∈S, if M π(si, sj) > 0, then, ¯
M(si, sj) = 1
(9)
In words, Eq. 8 says that if there is no transition between state si and sj in the underlyin MDP,
there will be no such transition under any policy π. Eq. 9 says that if under any policy π, there is a
transition between si and sj, it must be true that ¯
M(si, sj) = 1.
4

Lemma 1 makes the foundation of this work, which means ¯M can be recovered from trajectories
generated by any policy π under the MDP. Formally, ¯M can be recovered based on trajectories
T = {T1, ..., Tm}.
¯
M(si, sj) =
1
if ∃(si = st, sj = st+1) ∈T
0
otherwise
(10)
If the state space S is fully explored by T , ¯M can be inferred accurately. However, in practice, fully
explore the state space is infeasible when the state space is large. To facilitate the exploration, we
propose a novel intrinsic reward in Section 6. Before that, in Section 5 we show how to utilize the
inferred binary transition matrix for state embedding learning.
5
State Embedding
As the binary transition matrix represents the state structure, we propose a loss function to learn state
embedding in align with the state structure. Suppose |S| = N is the number of states. Denote the
state embedding matrix as Φ ∈RN×d where φ(si) ∈Rd, the i-th row of Φ, is the embedding of
state i. The embedding Φ can be learned via neural network. The similarity between φ(si) and φ(sj)
can be measured by dot product l(si, sj) = φ(si)T φ(sj). To enforce consecutive states have similar
states and non-consecutive states have dissimilar embedding we convert the binary transition matrix
¯M into a new matrix W where each entry is deﬁned as
W(si, sj) =
1
if ¯
M(si, sj) = 1
−1
if ¯
M(si, sj) = 0
(11)
Given W, the state embedding can be learned through the loss function below
Ls = || ˆ
W −W||2
(12)
where ˆ
W = ΦΦT measures the similarity between states.
Moreover, to avoid two consecutive states have too similar embedding, we force embedding of all
states to be at least w apart as in [20], where w is a hyper-parameter.
Lcsc = max(||φi −φj||2 −w, 0)
(13)
Note that these two loss function are not conﬂicted. As Ls poses constraints on inner product distance,
while Lcsc on l2 distance. The overall loss function for state embedding learning is L = Ls + Lcsc.
Maintaining the matrix W is impractical in case of large state space. To circumvent this issue, we
maintain a buffer Dt
s = {s0, , ..., st} containing the unique states experienced so far. We also store
the neighbors of each state Nt(si). At each train step, a batch of states Bs is sampled uniformly from
Dt
s. The associated binary transition matrix is constructed based on neighbors of each state in Bs.
It is worth to note that we keep the state embedding learning and state-value learning separately. This
minimizes the policy-dependency of state embedding which facilitate its applicability for transfer
learning. The neural network modules for embedding learning and state value learning are shown
in Fig 1. The embedding module is trained by L = Ls + Lcsc while the value module is trained by
TD-error of state value.
6
Intrinsic reward
To have an accurate estimation of the binary transition matrix, it is essential to explore the state space
efﬁciently. To facilitate the exploration, we follow the works on intrinsic reward exploration, where
the extrinsic reward is augmented with an intrinsic reward (exploration bonus). Speciﬁcally, we
propose an intrinsic reward (IR) to encourage explore less visited states. The idea is that an action is
rewarded if the next state has few neighbors and visited few times. Formally, denote Nt(s) as the
life-long visiting count which is the visiting count of state s over the past episodes. Denote de
t(s) as
episodic-neighborhood namely the number of neighbors of state s found within the current episode,
which is reset as 1 at the beginning of each episode. Formally, the intrinsic reward (IR) is deﬁned as:
ρt(s) =
1
p
Nt(s)de
t(s)
(14)
5

Figure 1: Embedding module and value module
Note that ρt(s) is large when both Nt(s) and de
t(s) are small. A small de
t(s) indicates the area around
state s is not well explored by this episode. We use it as an indicator for exploration. We also notice
that some states may indeed have few neighbors in the underlying MDP (i.e., de
t(s) remains small).
In this case, ρt(s) = 1/
p
de
t(s) would encourage the agent to visit such states indeﬁnitely. To avoid
this issue, we make use of Nt(s) the visiting count of state s over all past episodes. This ensures that
ρt(s) approaches 0 even de
t(s) remains small. The compound reward is deﬁned as
rt(s, at, s′) = re
t + βρt(s′)
(15)
where re
t is the extrinsic reward provided by environment and ρt is the intrinsic reward and β is a
scaling hyper-parameter.
7
Algorithm
The above described state embedding learning and intrinsic reward can be used in combination of
any model-free RL algorithms. Here, we give an instance, named State2Emb+, on the basis of DQN.
In the appendix, we provide another instance based on Actor-critic.
8
Experiments
With experiments we aim to answer following questions: 1), does the proposed algorithm State2emb
perform better than baseline algorithms in transfers learning setting. 2), does the propose intrinsic
reward (Eq. 14) result in more efﬁcient exploration?
8.1
Transfer Learning
To answer the ﬁrst question, we test algorithms on transfer learning problems. Here, we describe the
detail of experiment setting.
Environments: We test algorithms on navigation tasks [4] with various difﬁculty. A easy task is
empty-room (ER) shown in Fig 2-a. A medium task is Four-room (FR) shown in Fig 2-b. A hard
task is Multi-room (MR) shown in Fig 2-c.
Experiment Setting: We test algorithms on a set of tasks, where all task share the same MDP
dynamic except the reward functions. This corresponds to different goal location in maze navigation
tasks. The ﬁrst task is treated as the source task from where algorithms learn state embedding. The
rest are target tasks where the learned embedding remain ﬁxed. In all tasks, the goal is to navigate
to the goal as soon as possible (ﬁnd the shortest path). Any episode terminates either the goal is
arrived or the max step number nmax is exhausted. No reward is given before arriving the goal. Upon
arriving the goal the reward is deﬁned as 1 −0.9 ∗(ne/nmax) where ne is the step number of current
episode. Under such reward, long success episode is rewarded less than short success episode.
Baseline Algorithms: We compare the proposed algorithm State2Emb and State2emb+ to baseline
algorithms PVF, state2vec, SR, DSF, DQN and Actor-Critic. We do not include USF and BSF in
baselines as these algorithms require the access of source target as well as target tasks when learn
6

Algorithm 1: State2Emb+
Input
:max episode number: Tmax, hyper-parameter: β, discount factor: γ, update frequency:
tfreq
Initialization : agent policy π, experience buffer Dexp, state buffer Ds, state neighbors
N(s) = {}, ∀s ∈S.
for t ≤Tmax do
1. Select action at ∼π(st).
2. Record transition (st, at, st+1, re
t ).
3. Update state visitation count N(st) ←N(st) + 1.
4. Update state neighbors Nst ←Nst ∪{st+1} if st+1 /∈Nst.
5. Update dst = |N(st)|.
6. Calculate intrinsic reward ρt(st+1) via Eq. 14.
7. Update state buffer Ds ←Ds ∪st+1 if st+1 /∈Ds.
8. Update eperience bufffer Dexp ←Dexp ∪{(st, at, re
t , ρt(st+1), st+1)}.
9. if t mod tfreq == 0 then
• Sample experience batch Bexp = {(s, a, re, ρ(s′), s′)} ∈Dexp.
• Train value module with Bexp.
• Sample state batch Bs = {s1, ..., sk} ∈Ds.
• Construct binary transition matrix W via {Ns1, ...Nsk}.
• Train value module with Bs via L = Ls + Lcsc.
end
end
(a) ER
(b) FR
(c) MR
Figure 2: Navigation Tasks
state embedding. While in our setting, target tasks are only accessible after source task. The state
embedding is learned from the source task, which remains ﬁxed in target tasks.
In Fig 3, we show the performance of algorithms in ER (results of FR and MR will be shown in
appendix). All algorithms are test on four consecutive tasks where the locations of start and goal
are random selected as the beginning of each task. Each task lasts for T = 1000 episodes. Fig 3-
a compares the results of PVF, Node2vec, State2emb and State2emb+. The state embedding
dimension is set as d = 10 across all algorithms.
Several patterns are observed. First, during the source task (the ﬁrst 1000 episodes), the episodic
reward of Node2vec and PVF remains low (almost zero). This is because that node2vec and PVF
make use of uniform random policy to estimate the MDP dynamic. In contrast, State2emb and
State2emb follow generalized policy iteration to ﬁnd optimal policy for the source task and at the
same time estimate the binary MDP dynamic. As is discussed before, binary MDP dynamic can be
estimated following any policy which avoids the need of uniform random policy. Second, on the target
tasks, state2emb and state2emb+ have highly competitive performance with node2vec. Note that
7

(a)
(b)
Figure 3: ER
the computational complexity of state embedding learning of node2vec is much higher than that of
state2emb. Speciﬁcally, after learning the MDP dynamic, node2vec unitizes skip-gram to learn
state embedding which involves simulating random walks and learn state embedding. In contrast,
state2emb learns state embedding based on sample batches via gradient descent at the same time
of improving policy. Third, PVF performs poorly with d = 10. This is due to the fact that the state
structure is represented by the full set of proto-value-function (PVFs) with dimension d = N (the
number of states). If we only use top-10 PVFs, a large part of information state-structure is missing.
To have a better performance, a lager d is required which impairs the computational efﬁciency.
Fig 3-b compares the performance of SR and DSF. It is clearly that state2emb performs much better.
The relative poor performance of SR and DSF is due to the policy-dependency of SR and SF. As
discussed before, at the end of the source task, SR and SF are learned based on the optimal policy of
source task. However, the optimal policy of source task is not guaranteed to be good for target tasks.
It is possible that important states in target tasks may not be well represented by the learned SR/SF
which makes it hard for the agent to ﬁnd optimal policy of target tasks. In contrast, state2emb
learns state embedding based on binary MDP dynamic which is policy diagnostic and guarantees the
positive transfer to target tasks.
Finally, state2emb+ performs better than state2emb which is due to more efﬁcient exploration as
a result of the proposed instrinsic reward.
8.2
Intrinsic Reward
In this subsection, we examine the impact of the proposed intrinsic reward (IR) (Eq. 14) on exploration
and policy learning. We aim to answer the following questions: 1), does the IR encourage the agent
to explore the state space more efﬁcient than ϵ-greedy? 2), does the IR keep pushing the exploration
frontier forward? 3), does the IR speed up the convergence to optimal policy?
To answer the above questions, we test algorithms on ER task. Speciﬁcally, Q-Learning, SR, DQN
and AC use ϵ-greedy for exploration. Their counterparts Q-Learning+, SR+, DQN+ and AC+ employs
ϵ-greedy and the proposed IR. The ϵ probability is decayed following ϵ = 0.9 × 0.95t + 0.1, where t
is the episode index.
Fig 4 compares the performance of algorithms with and without the proposed intrinsic reward.
Apparently, all performances are enhanced by IR. The reason is simple more efﬁcient exploration. To
see this more clearly, Fig 5 shows the heatmap of state visitation count and IR. Speciﬁcally, Fig 5-a
and Fig 5-b show the heatmap of state visitation count, after T = 100 episodes, of Q-Learning and
Q-Learning+, respectively. Clearly, with the same number of episode, Q-learning+ explores more
state space than Q-Learning. The only difference between these two algorithms is the proposed
intrinsic reward. Fig 5-c shows the heatmap of IR. We can see that high value IR locates at less
visited states which encourages the agent to keep explore new areas.
8

Figure 4: Impact of IR on policy learning
(a) Q-Learning
(b) Q-Learning+
(c) Q-Learning+
Figure 5: Heatmap of state visitation and IR
9
Conclusion
In this work, to solve transfer RL problme, we ﬁrst point out the binary MDP dynamic can be
inferred from any policy. As it contains the state structure information which is shared by all tasks,
we proposed to learn state embedding in align with the inferred dynamic. Moreover, to encourage
exploration we proposed a novel intrinsic reward based on the inferred binary dynamic. Through
intensive experiments, we show the advantage of proposed algorithms in comparison with baselines.
Several research directions can be explored. First, this work only applies to discrete state space case.
It is an interesting direction to extend it to continuous state space. Second, the inferred binary MDP
dynamic can be utilized for reward shaping or reward propagation. We believe this shall speeds up
the policy convergence signiﬁcantly.
