Knowledge AI: New Medical AI Solution for 
Medical image Diagnosis 
Yingni Wang1, Shuge Lei1,2, Jian Dai1, Kehong Yuan1* 
1 Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China 
2 Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, SC, United States 

 
ABSTRACT The implementation of medical AI has always been a problem. The effect of traditional 
perceptual AI algorithm in medical image processing needs to be improved. Here we propose a method of 
knowledge AI, which is a combination of perceptual AI and clinical knowledge and experience. Based on 
this method, the geometric information mining of medical images can represent the experience and 
information and evaluate the quality of medical images. 
Keywords Artificial intelligence algorithm, knowledge AI, breast ultrasound, super-resolution
 
 

 
1. Introduction 
There is a big difference between natural images and medical images. Natural images are generally 
obtained by visible light in life, such as landscape and people photos. In addition, data obtained by lidar or 
structured light also fall into the category of natural images. Natural image is the data representation of visual 
information transmitted by nature. On the other hand, medical images are mostly derived from human tissues, 
which are the results of imaging from certain parts in vivo or in vitro. The main imaging methods include 
optical microscopy, ultrasound, MRI, CT and PET. People can recognize natural images accurately through 
continuous cognition and learning, but medical images can only be recognized through long-term training 
and combined with clinical experience. 
Deep learning has achieved very good results in natural image recognition, segmentation and target 
detection, and has good generalization performance. In 2016, ResNet won the champion at ILSVRC
（ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge）with 96.4% accuracy, which is far better than 
traditional machine learning algorithms. Common natural images are very familiar to us, and they are easy 
for human beings to understand and accept. At the same time, the black box problem in the natural image 
AI algorithm can usually be ignored, and there is no particularly high requirement for the interpretability of 
the algorithm. But for medical AI, we pay more attention to the interpretability of results, whose realization 
must rely on clinical knowledge and experience. 
The current AI is in a state of weak artificial intelligence, which only has the ability of perception and 
comparison, and lacks the learning, understanding and reasoning of information, which is called perceptual 
AI. The existing perceptual AI methods cannot fully reflect the knowledge and experience information 
hidden in medical images. However, the performance of deep learning in the field of medical image 
processing is not satisfactory. Esteva et.al used GoogleNet based on Inception V3 to classify skin images 
into three categories of benign, malignant and non-neoplastic lesions, but the accuracy of CNN could only 
be reached 72%1. This means that three out of every 10 patients will be misdiagnosed, a figure that is 
clinically unacceptable. 
Knowledge AI, on the other hand, aims to give artificial intelligence abilities similar to those of the human 
brain, that is, to grasp knowledge and reason. We embed the geometric registration method and digital 
twinning method into the existing perceptual AI model to mine the shape and structure information of the 
detected parts, and make comparison through the standard map, so as to realize the expression of knowledge 
and experience. With natural images, we can deepen our understanding through constant contact. But this is 
not set up for the medical images, we cannot achieve qualitative breakthrough by the accumulation of 
quantity. That is to say, we cannot make ourselves capable of being a doctor by viewing medical images 
many times, because doctors' diagnostic ability of medical images is acquired through accumulated practice 
on the basis of their rich experience. For AI algorithms, perceptual AI can have a deeper understanding of 
images through repeated learning and training, but merely improving the ability of understanding cannot 
help perceptual AI to have the function of independent analysis and diagnosis. 
Compared with natural images, medical images contain abundant disease information, but the recognition 
of medical images requires rich clinical knowledge and experience. This also determines that medical AI is 
not simply perceptual AI(P-AI), but a combination of perceptual AI and clinical knowledge and experience, 
which called knowledge AI(K-AI),as shown in Fig.1. 

 
 
Fig.1 The architecture of K-AI. 
2. METHOD  
2.1 PIPLINE of KNOWLEDGE AI 
2.1.1 Perceptual AI 
Perceptual AI uses an attention mechanism to locate parts of an image where key information is hidden, 
learning the importance of different local features. Scientific studies have shown that when human beings 
observe the environment, their brains tend to focus only on a few important local regions to obtain the 
information needed to construct a description of the object and the surrounding environment. The attention 
mechanism of deep learning is exactly the same. The neural network learns the importance of different parts 
and combines them together. The perceptual AI based on attention mechanism can improve the efficiency 
and accuracy of algorithm operation. However, the traditional deep learning method uses a series of 
convolutional neural networks to automatically extract features from all regions of the image, which 
consumes a lot of time and computing power. The core of perceptual AI is the attention mechanism, which 
is summed up by the habit of observing the environment. 
The attention mechanism can be regarded as the use of information in the feature mapping of the later 
layers of the network to select and locate the most discriminating part of the input signal. The attention 
module is a branch network with a feature map node in the main network. Generally speaking, the attention 
mechanism of the feature map response of different layers in the network is different. According to 
experience, in the shallower layer network, the attention characteristic map focuses on the background and 
other areas, while in the deep layer structure, it focuses on the objects to be classified. Furthermore, it shows 
that the deep level feature map has higher abstractness and semantic expression ability2. 
2.1.2 Knowledge 
Different from natural images, medical images have certain regularity in terms of spatial structure and 
content, and the content in the image is relatively certain. If you take an ultrasound of the heart, for example, 
the atria and the ventricles must be spatially adjacent to each other and surrounded by the epicardium. 
Therefore, in the medical AI algorithm, we can add certain prior knowledge to the model, which will 
greatly improve the performance of the algorithm. In this model, geometric registration and knowledge map 
are added to the perceptual AI mentioned in the previous section to mine the information in the image, and 
anatomical knowledge, organ structure, imaging features and other prior knowledge are added to the model. 
For example, in the analysis of breast ultrasound images, the neural network will look for the connection 
between local tissues and surrounding parts as well as other tissues in previous and next frame images, so as 
to better capture the characteristics of organ structure. At the same time, we also used geometric registration 
method to construct the standard brain atlas construction model based on brain MRI images. The 
construction of standard brain atlas plays an important role in recognizing the complexity of brain structure. 
For a fixed input, we get the Jacobian determinant (JD) and curl vector (CV) by geometric method and use 
them as the input of the neural network to get the standard brain atlas by training and geometric registration 
method. 

 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig.2 The standard brain atlas construction model:(a) Standard atlas generation method,(b)The structure of Voxel-Morph CNN 
Network.  
2.1.3 Experience 
The diagnosis of clinical diseases not only requires medical knowledge, but also depends on the clinical 
experience accumulated by doctors in practice. Different doctors may perceive the same ultrasound image 
differently, and less experienced doctors may not be able to capture key information about the diagnosis of 
the disease. In this study, geometric methods are used to conduct information mining on medical images, so 
as to obtain deeper diagnostic information, which can help inexperienced young doctors make correct 
diagnosis and help them carry out their work with higher accuracy and confidence. The expression of 
experience is mainly embodied in two aspects, one is the Quality control of ultrasonic image, the other is the 
explicit expression of texture features in medical images. 
 
Fig. 3.  Different doctors have different perceptions of ultrasound images:(a)Breast cancer lesion in ultrasound image(b) The grid 
image from (a),(c) Image generated by JD from (a),(d)(e)(f) Image generated by CV from (a). 
It is very important to accurately locate the standard incisions from the dynamic ultrasound images for 
subsequent physiological parameters measurement and disease diagnosis when using ultrasonic images for 
disease diagnosis. In the past, standard section identification was mainly made by doctors manually, but this 
method not only needs a lot of time and energy, but also depends on the clinical work experience of 
sonographers3. The automatic identification algorithm of ultrasonic standard section based on deep 
convolutional network proposed in this paper can quickly and accurately locate the standard section in the 
process of physician scanning, thus helping young doctors improve the efficiency of ultrasonic diagnosis 
and relieve working pressure. 

 
 
Fig. 4.  Standard section of ultrasound images and diagnosis of lesions 
The cause of cancer is that normal cells grow out of control under the combined action of genetic, 
environmental and other factors, and then develop into a kind of invasive disease. In the process of disease 
development, the variation of cell genome will accumulate gradually, and the cell subsets with different 
biological behaviors will be differentiated in different directions. At the macroscopic level, the tumors were 
heterogeneous with differences in cell phenotypes within the tumors, and the imaging results showed 
differences in texture features. Studies have shown that tumor heterogeneity is closely related to the 
treatment regimens and the prognostic effect. However, the distinguish of tumor heterogeneity requires rich 
clinical experience, and inexperienced young doctors are easy to ignore the texture that is not obvious in the 
image4. 
  
Fig. 5.  Representation and AI realization of physician experience :(a) T1 MRI images,(b) The grid image from (a),(c) 
Image generated by JD from (a),(d)(e)(f) Image generated by CV from (a), 3 channels. 
Different from CT and MRI medical imaging, the quality of ultrasound image is greatly affected by the 
physician's operation. In general, high quality ultrasound images have better diagnostic results. We propose 
an objective evaluation model of ultrasonic image quality based on meta learning to comprehensively 
evaluate the acquired ultrasonic image. 
For the same subject, the images collected by the same device with different imaging parameters are 
different. Take MRI imaging as an example, the image resolution will change significantly under 1.5T and 
3.0T magnetic field intensity. In order to avoid the impact of image differences caused by different 
equipment and parameters on the final analysis results, we proposed the SRGAN network model to improve 
the robustness of image acquisition. 
2.1.4 Combination of perception, knowledge and experience 
1) 
The serial model：Firstly, the perceptual AI algorithm is used to analyze the medical data, and 
then the prior knowledge and clinical experience are combined for analysis and judgment. 
2) 
The coupled model: It can directly act on image acquisition and guide sonographers to obtain high 
quality images. We first process the input through the perceptual AI structure, and then evaluate 

 
the network output by embedding knowledge and experience information through geometric 
methods and digital twinning techniques. When the output is inconsistent with the expectation, the 
network structure is adjusted by the penalty function; otherwise, the current output is taken as the 
final result. 
 
Fig. 6.  The coupled method we proposed 
3) 
The parallel model: It is a results-oriented method to evaluate medical images at the same time of 
data acquisition, which does not have a guiding role. 
2.2 DATA AND PREPROCESSING 
Obtaining medical data has always been a difficult task, and there are no suitable public data set resources 
on the Internet. The data set of our experiment comes from the database of the Ultrasound Imaging 
Department of Peking University Shenzhen Hospital. We collected 6,860 pictures, including 2,065 images 
with benign lesions and 3,495 images with malignant lesions, and 1,300 images without lesions. 
Table 1  The dataset used in our experiment 
Dataset 
Images with benign 
nodules 
Images with malignant 
nodules 
Images without 
nodules 
Training Dataset 
1870 
3160 
0 
Validation Dataset 
195 
335 
1300 
In the data marking stage, five doctors used the open-source software LabelImg to label these data sets, which 
were collected from 2804 patients. In order to ensure the accuracy of the data, one doctor marks the image while 
the other doctor checks it. 
The target detection model must have a target during the training process; only the image of the lesion is helpful 
to the training model. Therefore, as shown in Table 1, we finally selected 5030 lesion images as the training set, 
530 lesion images, and 1300 disease-free images as the validation set. 
2.3 METRICS IN OUR EXPERIMENT 
The purpose of the experiment is to improve the clarity of ultrasound images and improve the detection accuracy 
of the target detection model. Therefore, the evaluation indicators we use in our experiments are mainly from the 
field of target detection and digital imagery.  
Table 2  The metrics used in the experiments 
Evaluation index 
Method of calculation 
Precision 
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃 
Recall 
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁 
Specificity 
𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑁+ 𝐹𝑃 
mAP 
Area covered under PR curve 

 
MSE 
𝑀𝑆𝐸=
1
𝐻× 𝑊∑ 
𝐻
𝑖=1
∑ 
𝑊
𝑗=1
(𝑋(𝑖, 𝑗) −𝑌(𝑖, 𝑗))2 
PSNR 
𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅= 10 ⋅log10⁡(𝑀𝐴𝑋𝐼
2
𝑀𝑆𝐸) 
SSIM 
SSIM⁡(𝑥, 𝑦) =
(2𝜇𝑥𝜇𝑦+ 𝑐1)(2𝜎𝑥𝑦+ 𝑐2)
(𝜇𝑥2 + 𝜇𝑦2 + 𝑐1)(𝜎𝑥2 + 𝜎𝑦2 + 𝑐2) 
RTP 
The task reduced by AI machine 
As shown in Table 2, in order to evaluate the effect of lesion feature detection, we used four indicators: precision, 
recall, sensitivity, and mAP value. In the calculation formula, TP and FN represent the number of positive samples 
inferred as positive and negative samples, and FP and TN represent the number of negative samples inferred as 
positive and negative. Obviously, Precision reflects the model's ability to accurately identify lesion images, and 
Specificity reflects the model's ability to accurately identify disease-free images. Draw a curve composed of recall 
score and precision score on the coordinate axis. The area of the curve represents the AP value, which is usually 
used to comprehensively measure the accuracy of the detector model. The classification task is not the same as 
the target detection task. It only makes a judgment on whether it is diseased or not, rather than the location of the 
lesion in the ultrasound image. Therefore, our experiment is divided into two tasks: lesion detection and image 
classification, but the scoring principle is the same. 
We have also defined an RTP indicator (Reduced Task Proportion), which means that the AI-assisted diagnostic 
device helps doctors reduce the workload. It should be pointed out that our Multi-AI Model does not make a 
definite evaluation for every input picture. Only when the evaluations of all sub-models are consistent, the system 
will give its judgment, and all other pictures will be given to the doctor. Since it only selects certain pictures to 
make judgments, we use RTP indicators to comprehensively evaluate the practical significance of the model. 
3. Evaluation methodology   
3.1 Implementation of geometric methods 
We use geometric methods to mine the experiential information in brain MRI images, and represent the 
experiential information through AI models. The method based on geometric topology can explore the structure, 
deformation and other information in the image in a deeper level, so as to help doctors find the critical diagnostic 
information for the disease but difficult to find due to lack of experience. 
3.2 Quality control model 
3.2.1 Standard section recognition model of ultrasonic image 
In this study, a model of ultrasonic standard section recognition was built based on deep convolutional neural 
network. We realize standard section recognition mainly by looking for the key organs which play an important 
role in locating standard section and their spatial position relations.Different from the traditional classification 
method based on convolutional neural network, adding prior knowledge such as spatial location and structure can 
improve the learning and reasoning ability of the network. 
3.2.2 SRGAN network quality control model 
The GAN network consists of a generator model (G) and a discriminative model (D). The G model is 
responsible for generating data that is as close to the real sample as possible, and the D model is used to score the 
output result, which is to judge whether the generated sample is true or false. As shown in Fig.8, the input of the 
G model of the SRGAN network is a low-resolution image ILR, and the high-resolution output image ISR will 
be used as the input of the D model together with the original image IHR.  

 
 
 
Fig. 7.  The framework of SRGAN 
When training SRGAN, it uses a four times downsampling factor to obtain low-resolution images and optimizes 
in an alternating manner to solve the minimum-maximum adversarial problem: 
𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝜃𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝜃𝐷⁡𝔼𝐼𝐻𝑅∼𝑝train(𝐼𝐻𝑅)[log𝐷𝜃𝐷(𝐼𝐻𝑅)] + 𝔼𝐼𝐿𝑅∼𝑝𝐶(𝐼𝐿𝑅) [log (1 −𝐷𝜃𝐷(𝐺𝜃𝐺(𝐼𝐿𝑅))]]  (1) 
Different from previous works, they deﬁned a novel perceptual loss using high-level feature maps of the VGG 
network5, combined with a discriminator that encourages solutions perceptually hard to distinguish from the HR 
reference images6. The VGG loss is defined as the Euclidean distance between the feature representation of the 
reconstructed image 𝑮𝜽𝑮(𝑰𝑳𝑹)and the reference image 𝑰𝑯𝑹: 
𝑙𝑉𝐺𝐺/𝑖.𝑗
𝑆𝑅
=
1
𝑊𝑖,𝑗𝐻𝑖,𝑗∑
∑
−
𝐻𝑖,𝑗
𝑦=1
𝑊𝑖,𝑗
𝑥=1
(𝜙𝑖,𝑗(𝐼𝐻𝑅)𝑥,𝑦−𝜙𝑖,𝑗(𝐺𝜃𝐺(𝐼𝐿𝑅))
𝑥,𝑦)2  (2) 
The method of independent alternating iterative training makes the two networks oppose to each other. In the 
end, the goal of the G network can "deceive" the D network, and the G network is what we need7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.  Our proposed architecture of Generator Network with corresponding kernel size (k), number of feature maps (n) 
and stride (s) indicated for each convolutional layer. 
The loss function of SRGAN network is defined as follows： 
𝑙𝐶𝑉
𝑆𝑅=
1
𝑊𝑖,𝑗𝐻𝑖,𝑗∑
∑
(𝐶𝑉(𝐼𝐻𝑅)𝑥,𝑦−𝐶𝑉(𝐺(𝑦, 𝐼𝐿𝑅))𝑥,𝑦)
2
𝐻𝑖,𝑗
𝑦=1
𝑊𝑖,𝑗
𝑥=1
  (3) 
Here 𝑾𝒊,𝒋 and 𝑯𝒊,𝒋 describes the dimensions of the CV feature maps from 𝑰𝑯𝑹 and⁡𝑮(𝒚,𝑰𝑳𝑹). 
3.2.3 Objective Evaluation Model of Ultrasonic Image Quality Based on Meta-learning 
In order to evaluate the quality of acquired images with objective criteria, an objective evaluation model of 
ultrasonic image quality based on meta-learning was established. The model firstly refines the evaluation tasks of 
different clinicians on the quality of ultrasound images into the selection of meta-tasks, which is achieved by 
measuring the similarity of the gradient direction between tasks and sorting them by algorithm. 
After determining the meta-tasks, the ultrasonic image quality evaluation model based on the joint gradient 
optimization was constructed. Firstly, the meta-tasks were sampled into the meta-training set, and the joint 
gradient was optimized through the deep regression network to construct the quality evaluation model. 
The mathematical subjective evaluation method of ordered attributes is as follows： 

 
(𝒙𝟏, 𝒙𝟐, … , 𝒙𝒌) = (
𝒅𝟏𝟏, 𝒅𝟏𝟐, … , 𝒅𝟏𝒌
…, … , … ……
𝒅𝒌𝟏, 𝒅𝒌𝟐, … , 𝒅𝒌𝒌
) (
𝒑𝟏
…
𝒑𝒌
)  (4) 
 
Fig. 8.  Our proposed architecture of  quality evaluation model. 
4. Conclusion   
  Medical image recognition must rely on knowledge and experience because of the particularity of its imaging 
and content. By combining doctors' clinical knowledge and experience with traditional perceptual AI, the 
knowledge AI proposed by us can endow algorithm with the ability to infer and think, fully mine the information 
in medical images, and obtain better performance. It has a broad application prospect in the future medical industry.
