Kernel Belief Propagation
Le Song,1 Arthur Gretton,1,2 Danny Bickson,1 Yucheng Low,1 Carlos Guestrin1
1 School of Computer Science, CMU; 2Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit & MPI for Biological Cybernetics
Abstract
We propose a nonparametric generalization of
belief propagation, Kernel Belief Propagation
(KBP), for pairwise Markov random ﬁelds. Mes-
sages are represented as functions in a repro-
ducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), and mes-
sage updates are simple linear operations in the
RKHS. KBP makes none of the assumptions
commonly required in classical BP algorithms:
the variables need not arise from a ﬁnite do-
main or a Gaussian distribution, nor must their
relations take any particular parametric form.
Rather, the relations between variables are rep-
resented implicitly, and are learned nonparamet-
rically from training data. KBP has the advan-
tage that it may be used on any domain where
kernels are deﬁned (Rd, strings, groups), even
where explicit parametric models are not known,
or closed form expressions for the BP updates
do not exist.
The computational cost of mes-
sage updates in KBP is polynomial in the train-
ing data size. We also propose a constant time
approximate message update procedure by rep-
resenting messages using a small number of ba-
sis functions. In experiments, we apply KBP to
image denoising, depth prediction from still im-
ages, and protein conﬁguration prediction: KBP
is faster than competing classical and nonpara-
metric approaches (by orders of magnitude, in
some cases), while providing signiﬁcantly more
accurate results.
1
Introduction
Belief propagation is an inference algorithm for graphical
models that has been widely and successfully applied in a
great variety of domains, including vision (Sudderth et al.,
2003), protein folding (Yanover & Weiss, 2002), and turbo
decoding (McEliece et al., 1998). In these applications,
the variables are usually assumed either to be ﬁnite dimen-
sional, or in continuous cases, to have a Gaussian distri-
bution (Weiss & Freeman, 2001). In many applications of
graphical models, however, the variables of interest are nat-
Appearing in Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2011, Fort Laud-
erdale, FL, USA. Volume 15 of JMLR: W&CP 15. Copyright
2011 by the authors.
urally speciﬁed by continuous, non-Gaussian distributions.
For example, in constructing depth maps from 2D images,
the depth is both continuous valued and has a multimodal
distribution. Likewise, in protein folding, angles are mod-
eled as continuous valued random variables, and are pre-
dicted from amino acid sequences. In general, multimodal-
ities, skewness, and other non-Gaussian statistical features
are present in a great many real-world problems. The corre-
sponding inference procedures for parametric models typ-
ically involve integrals for which no closed form solutions
exist, and are without computationally tractable exact mes-
sage updates. Worse still, parametric models for the rela-
tions between the variables may not even be known, or may
be prohibitively complex.
Our ﬁrst contribution in this paper is a novel generalization
of belief propagation for pairwise Markov random ﬁelds,
Kernel BP, based on a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS) representation of the relations between random
variables. This extends earlier work of Song et al. (2010)
on inference for trees to the case of graphs with loops. The
algorithm consists of two parts, both nonparametric: ﬁrst,
we learn RKHS representations of the relations between
variables directly from training data, which removes the
need for an explicit parametric model. Second, we pro-
pose a belief propagation algorithm for inference based
on these learned relations, where each update is a linear
operation in the RKHS (although the relations themselves
may be highly nonlinear in the original space of the vari-
ables). Our approach applies not only to continuous-valued
non-Gaussian variables, but also generalizes to strings and
graphs (Sch¨olkopf et al., 2004), groups (Fukumizu et al.,
2009), compact manifolds (Wendland, 2005, Chapter 17),
and other domains on which kernels may be deﬁned.
A number of alternative approaches have been developed to
perform inference in the continuous-valued non-Gaussian
setting. Sudderth et al. (2003) proposed an approximate
belief propagation algorithm for pairwise Markov random
ﬁelds, where the parametric forms of the node and edge
potentials are supplied in advance, and the messages are
approximated as mixtures of Gaussians: we refer to this
approach as Gaussian Mixture BP (this method was in-
troduced as “nonparametric BP”, but it is in fact a Gaus-
sian mixture approach). Instead of mixtures of Gaussians,
Ihler & McAllester (2009) used particles to approximate
the messages, resulting in the Particle BP algorithm. Both
Gaussian mixture BP and particle BP assume the potentials
arXiv:1105.5592v1  [cs.LG]  27 May 2011

Kernel Belief Propagation
to be pre-speciﬁed by the user: the methods described are
purely approximate message update procedures, and do not
learn the model from training data. By contrast, kernel BP
learns the model, is computationally tractable even before
approximations are made, and leads to an entirely differ-
ent message update formula than the Gaussian Mixture and
Particle representations.
A direct implementation of kernel BP has a reason-
able computational cost:
each message update costs
O(m2dmax) when computed exactly, where m is the num-
ber of training examples and dmax is the maximum degree
of a node in the graphical model. For massive data sets
and numbers of nodes, as occur in image processing, this
cost might still be expensive. Our second contribution is
a novel constant time approximate message update proce-
dure, where we express the messages in terms of a small
number ℓ≪m of representative RKHS basis functions
learned from training data. Following an initialization cost
linear in m, the cost per message update is decreased to
O(ℓ2dmax), independent of the number of training points
m. Even without these approximate constant time updates,
kernel BP is substantially faster than Gaussian mixture BP
and particle BP. Indeed, an exact implementation of Gaus-
sian mixture BP would have an exponentially increasing
computational and storage cost with number of iterations.
In practice, both Gaussian mixture and particle BP require
a Monte Carlo resampling procedure at every node of the
graphical model.
Our third contribution is a thorough evaluation of kernel BP
against other nonparametric BP approaches. We apply both
kernel BP and competing approaches to an image denoising
problem, depth prediction from still images, protein con-
ﬁguration prediction, and paper topic inference from ci-
tation networks: these are all large-scale problems, with
continuous-valued or structured random variables having
complex underlying probability distributions. In all cases,
kernel BP performs outstandingly, being orders of magni-
tude faster than both Gaussian mixture BP and particle BP,
and returning more accurate results.
2
Markov Random Fields And Belief
Propagation
We begin with a short introduction to pairwise Markov ran-
dom ﬁelds (MRFs) and the belief propagation algorithm.
A pairwise Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) is deﬁned on an
undirected graph G := (V, E) with nodes V := {1, . . . , n}
connected by edges in E. Each node s ∈V is associated
with a random variable Xs on the domainX (we assume
a common domain for ease of notation, but in practice
the domains can be different), and Γs := {t|(s, t) ∈E}
is the set of neighbors of node s with size ds := |Γs|.
In a pairwise MRF, the joint distribution of the variables
X := {X1, . . . , X|V|} is assumed to factorize according to
a model P(X) = 1
Z
Q
(s,t)∈E Ψst(Xs, Xt) Q
s∈V Ψs(Xs),
where Ψs(Xs) and Ψst(Xs, Xt) are node and edge poten-
tials respectively, and Z is the partition function that nor-
malizes the distribution.
The inference problem in an MRF is deﬁned as calculat-
ing the marginals P(Xs) for nodes s ∈V and P(Xs, Xt)
for edges (s, t) ∈E. The marginal P(Xs) not only pro-
vides a measure of uncertainty of Xs, but also leads to a
point estimate x⋆
s := argmax P(Xs). Belief Propagation
(BP) is an iterative algorithm for performing inference in
MRFs (Pearl, 1988). BP represents intermediate results of
marginalization steps as messages passed between adjacent
nodes: a message mts from t to s is calculated based on
messages mut from all neighboring nodes u of t besides
s, i.e.,
mts(Xs) =
Z
X
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψt(Xt)
Y
u\s
mut(Xt)dXt. (1)
Note that we use Q
u\s to denote Q
u∈Γt\s, where it is un-
derstood that the indices range over all neighbors u of t ex-
cept s. This notation also applies to operations other than
the product. The update in (1) is iterated across all nodes
until a ﬁxed point, m⋆
ts, for all messages is reached. The re-
sulting node beliefs (estimates of node marginals) are given
by B(Xs) ∝Ψs(Xs) Q
t∈Γs m⋆
ts(Xs).
For acyclic or tree-structured graphs, BP results in node
beliefs B(Xs) that converge to the node marginals P(Xs).
This is generally not true for graphs with cycles. In many
applications, however, the resulting loopy BP algorithm
exhibits excellent empirical performance (Murphy et al.,
1999). Several theoretical studies have also provided in-
sight into the approximations made by loopy BP, partially
justifying its application to graphs with cycles (Wainwright
& Jordan, 2008; Yedidia et al., 2001).
The learning problem in MRFs is to estimate the node and
edge potentials, which is often done by maximizing the ex-
pected log-likelihood EX∼P⋆(X)[log P(X)] of the model
P(X) with respect to the true distribution P⋆(X). The re-
sulting optimization problem usually requires solving a se-
quence of inference problems as an inner loop (Koller &
Friedman, 2009); BP is often deployed for this purpose.
3
Properties of Belief Propagation
Our goal is to develop a nonparametric belief propagation
algorithm, where the potentials are nonparametric func-
tions learned from data, such that multimodal and other
non-Gaussian statistical features can be captured.
Most
crucially, these potentials must be represented in such a
way that the message update in (1) is computationally
tractable. Before we go into the details of our kernel BP
algorithm, we will ﬁrst explain a key property of BP, which
relates message updates to conditional expectations. When
the messages are RKHS functions, these expectations can
be evaluated efﬁciently.

Le Song, Arthur Gretton, Danny Bickson, Yucheng Low, Carlos Guestrin
Yedidia et al. (2001) showed BP to be an iterative algorithm
for minimizing the Bethe free energy, which is a variational
approximation to the log-partition function, log Z, in the
MRF model P(X). The beliefs are ﬁxed points of BP al-
gorithm if and only if they are zero gradient points of the
Bethe free energy. In Section 5 of the Appendix, we show
maximum likelihood learning of MRFs using BP results in
the following equality, which relates the conditional of the
true distribution, the learned potentials, and the ﬁxed point
messages,
P⋆(Xt|Xs) =
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψt(Xt) Q
u\s m⋆
ut(Xt)
m⋆
ts(Xs)
, (2)
where P⋆(Xs) and m⋆
ts(Xs) are assumed strictly positive.
Wainwright et al. (2003, Section 4) derived a similar rela-
tion, but for discrete variables under the exponential fam-
ily setting. By contrast, we do not assume an exponential
family model, and our reasoning applies to continuous vari-
ables. A further distinction is that Wainwright et al. spec-
ify the node potential Ψs(Xs) = P⋆(Xs) and edge poten-
tial Ψ(Xs, Xt) = P⋆(Xs, Xt)P⋆(Xs)−1P⋆(Xt)−1, which
represent just one possible choice among many that satis-
ﬁes (2). Indeed, we next show that in order to run BP for
subsequent inference, we do not need to commit to a par-
ticular choice for Ψs(Xs) and Ψ(Xs, Xt), nor do we need
to optimize to learn Ψs(Xs) and Ψ(Xs, Xt).
We start by dividing both sides of (1) by m⋆
ts(Xs), and
introducing 1 = Q
u\s
m⋆
ut(Xt)
m⋆
ut(Xt),
mts(Xs)
m⋆
ts(Xs) =
Z
X
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψt(Xt) Q
u\s m⋆
ut(Xt)
m⋆
ts(Xs)
×
Y
u\s
mut(Xt)
m⋆
ut(Xt) dXt.
(3)
We next substitute the BP ﬁxed point relation (2) into (3),
and reparametrize the messages mts(Xs) ←
mts(Xs)
m⋆
ts(Xs), to
obtain the following property for BP updates (see Section
6 in the Appendix for details):
Property 1 If we learn an MRF using BP and subse-
quently use the learned potentials for inference, BP updates
can be viewed as conditional expectations,
mts(Xs) =
Z
X
P⋆(Xt|Xs)
Y
u\s mut(Xt) dXt
= EXt|Xs
Y
u\s mut(Xt)

.
(4)
Using similar reasoning, the node beliefs on convergence
of BP take the form B(Xs) ∝P⋆(Xs) Q
t∈Γs m⋆
ts(Xs). In
the absence of external evidence, a ﬁxed point occurs at the
true node marginals, i.e., B(Xs) ∝P⋆(Xs) for all s ∈V.
Typically there can be many evidence variables, and the
belief is then an estimate of the true conditional distribution
given the evidence.
The above property of BP immediately suggests that if be-
lief propagation is the inference algorithm of choice, then
MRFs can be learned very simply: given training data
drawn from P⋆(X), the empirical conditionals bP(Xt|Xs)
are estimated (either in parametric form, or nonparametri-
cally), and the conditional expectations are evaluated us-
ing these estimates.
Evidence can also be incorporated
straightforwardly: if an observation xt is made at node t,
the message from t to its neighbor s is simply the empirical
likelihood function mts(Xs) ∝bP(xt|Xs), where we use
lowercase to denote observed variables with ﬁxed values,
and capitalize unobserved random variables.
With respect to kernel belief propagation, our key insight
from Property 1, however, is that we need not explicitly
recover the empirical conditionals bP(Xt|Xs) as an inter-
mediate step, as long as we can compute the conditional
expectation directly. We will pursue this approach next.
4
Kernel Belief Propagation
We develop a novel kernelization of belief propagation,
based on Hilbert space embeddings of conditional distri-
butions (Song et al., 2009), which generalizes an earlier
kernel algorithm for exact inference on trees (Song et al.,
2010). As might be expected, the kernel implementation
of the BP updates in (4) is nearly identical to the ear-
lier tree algorithm, the main difference being that we now
consider graphs with loops, and iterate until convergence
(rather than obtaining an exact solution in a single pass).
This difference turns out to have major implications for the
implementation: the earlier solution of Song et al. is poly-
nomial in the sample size, which was not an issue for the
the smaller trees considered by Song et al., but becomes
expensive for the large, loopy graphical models we address
in our experiments. We defer the issue of efﬁcient imple-
mentation to Section 5, where we present a novel approxi-
mation strategy for kernel BP which achieves constant time
message updates.
In the present section, we will provide a detailed deriva-
tion of kernel BP in accordance with Song et al. (2010).
While the immediate purpose is to make the paper self-
contained, there are two further important reasons: to pro-
vide the background necessary in understanding our efﬁ-
cient kernel BP updates in Section 5, and to demonstrate
how kernel BP differs from the competing Gaussian mix-
ture and particle based BP approaches in Section 6 (which
was not addressed in earlier work on kernel tree graphical
models).
4.1
Message Representations
We begin with a description of the properties of a message
mut(xt), given it is in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS) F of functions on the separable metric space X
(Aronszajn, 1950; Sch¨olkopf & Smola, 2002). As we will
see, the advantage of this assumption is that the update pro-
cedure can be expressed as a linear operation in the RKHS,
and results in new messages that are likewise RKHS func-
tions. The RKHS F is deﬁned in terms of a unique pos-
itive deﬁnite kernel k(xs, x′
s) with the reproducing prop-
erty ⟨mts(·), k(xs, ·)⟩F = mts(xs), where k(xs, ·) indi-

Kernel Belief Propagation
cates that one argument of the kernel is ﬁxed at xs. Thus,
we can view the evaluation of message mts at any point
xs ∈X as a linear operation in F: we call k(xs, ·)
the representer of evaluation at xs, and use the shorthand
k(xs, ·) = φ(xs). Note that k(xs, x′
s) = ⟨φ(xs), φ(x′
s)⟩F;
the kernel encodes the degree of similarity between xs and
x′
s. The restriction of messages to RKHS functions need
not be onerous: on compact domains, universal kernels
(in the sense of Steinwart, 2001) are dense in the space of
bounded continuous functions (e.g., the Gaussian RBF ker-
nel k(xs, x′
s) = exp(−σ ∥xs −x′
s∥2) is universal). Ker-
nels may be deﬁned when dealing with random variables
on additional domains, such as strings, graphs, and groups.
4.2
Kernel BP Message Updates
We next deﬁne a representation for message updates, un-
der the assumption that messages are RKHS functions.
For simplicity, we ﬁrst establish a result for a three node
chain, where the middle node t incorporates an incom-
ing message from u, and then generates an outgoing mes-
sage to s (we will deal with multiple incoming messages
later). In this case, the outgoing message mts(xs) eval-
uated at xs simpliﬁes to mts(xs) = EXt|xs[mut(Xt)].
Under some regularity conditions for the integral, we can
rewrite message updates as inner products, mts(xs) =
EXt|xs[⟨mut, φ(Xt)⟩F]
=

mut, EXt|xs[φ(Xt)]

F us-
ing the reproducing property of the RKHS. We refer to
µXt|xs := EXt|xs[φ(Xt)] ∈F as the feature space em-
bedding of the conditional distribution P(Xt|xs). If we
can estimate this quantity directly from data, we can per-
form message updates via a simple inner product, avoiding
a two-step procedure where the conditional distribution is
ﬁrst estimated and the expectation then taken.
An expression for the conditional distribution embedding
was proposed by Song et al. (2009). We describe this ex-
pression by analogy with the conditioning operation for a
Gaussian random vector z ∼N(0, C), where we partition
z = (z⊤
1 , z⊤
2 )⊤such that z1 ∈Rd and z2 ∈Rd′. Given the
covariances C11 := E[z1z⊤
1 ] and C12 := E[z1z⊤
2 ], we can
write the conditional expectation E[Z1|z2] = C12C−1
22 z2.
We now generalize this notion to RKHSs. Following Fuku-
mizu et al. (2004), we deﬁne the covariance operator CXsXt
which allows us to compute the expectation of the prod-
uct of function f(Xs) and g(Xt), i.e. EXsXt[f(Xs)g(Xt)],
using linear operation in the RKHS. More formally, let
CXsXt : F 7→F such that for all f, g, h ∈F,
EXsXt[f(Xs)g(Xt)] = ⟨f, EXsXt [φ(Xs) ⊗φ(Xt)] g⟩F
= ⟨f, CXsXtg⟩F
(5)
where we use tensor notation (f ⊗g)h = f ⟨g, h⟩F . This
can be understood by analogy with the ﬁnite dimensional
case: if x, y, z ∈Rd, then (x y⊤)z = x(y⊤z); furthermore,
(x⊤x′)(y⊤y′)(z⊤z′)
=
⟨x ⊗y ⊗z, x′ ⊗y′ ⊗z′⟩Rd3
given x, y, z, x′, y′, z′ ∈Rd.
Based on covariance op-
erators, Song et al. deﬁne a conditional embedding op-
erator which allow us to compute conditional expecta-
tions EXt|xs[f(Xt)] as linear operations in the RKHS. Let
UXt|Xs := CXtXsC−1
XsXs such that for all f ∈F,
EXt|xs[f(Xt)] =

f, EXt|xs[φ(Xt)

F =

f, µXt|xs

F
=

f, UXt|Xsφ(xs)

F .
(6)
Although we used the intuition from the Gaussian case in
understanding this formula, it is important to note that the
conditional embedding operator allows us to compute the
conditional expectation of any f ∈F, regardless of the
distribution of the random variable in feature space (aside
from the condition that h(xs) := EXt|xs[f(Xt)] is in the
RKHS on xs, as noted by Song et al.). In particular, we
do not need to assume the random variables have a Gaus-
sian distribution in feature space (the deﬁnition of feature
space Gaussian BP remains a challenging open problem:
see Appendix, Section 7).
We can thus express the message update as a linear opera-
tion in the feature space,
mts(xs) =

mut, UXt|Xsφ(xs)

F .
For multiple incoming messages, the message updates fol-
low the same reasoning as in the single message case, albeit
with some additional notational complexity (see also Song
et al., 2010). We begin by deﬁning a tensor product repro-
ducing kernel Hilbert space H := ⊗dt−1F, under which
the product of incoming messages can be written as a sin-
gle inner product. For a node t with degree dt = |Γt|, the
product of incoming messages mut from all neighbors ex-
cept s becomes an inner product in H,
Y
u\s mut(Xt) =
Y
u\s ⟨mut, φ(Xt)⟩F
=
O
u\s mut, ξ(Xt)

H
,
(7)
where ξ(Xt) := N
u\s φ(Xt). The message update (4)
becomes
mts(xs) =
O
u\s mut, EXt|xs [ξ(Xt)]

H
.
(8)
By analogy with (6), we can deﬁne the conditional embed-
ding operator for the tensor product of features, such that
UX⊗
t |Xs : F →F⊗satisﬁes
µX⊗
t |xs := EXt|xs [ξ(Xt)] = UX⊗
t |xsφ(xs).
(9)
As in the single variable case, UX⊗
t |xs is deﬁned in terms of
a covariance operator CX⊗
t Xs := EXtXs[ξ(Xt) ⊗φ(Xs)]
in the tensor space, and the operator CXsXs. The operator
UX⊗
t |Xs takes the feature map φ(xs) of the point on which
we condition, and outputs the conditional expectation of
the tensor product feature ξ(Xt). Consequently, we can
express the message update as a linear operation, but in a
tensor product feature space,
mts(xs) =
O
u\s mut, UX⊗
t |Xsφ(xs)

H
.
(10)
The belief at a speciﬁc node s can be computed as B(Xs) =
P⋆(Xs) Q
u∈Γs mus(Xs) where the true marginal P⋆(Xr)
can be estimated using Parzen windows. If this is unde-
sirable (for instance, on domains where density estimation

Le Song, Arthur Gretton, Danny Bickson, Yucheng Low, Carlos Guestrin
cannot be performed), the belief can instead be expressed
as a conditional embedding operator (Song et al., 2010).
4.3
Learning Kernel Graphical Models
Given a training sample of m pairs

(xi
t, xi
s)
	m
i=1
drawn i.i.d. from P⋆(Xt, Xs), we can represents messages
and their updates based purely on these training examples.
We ﬁrst deﬁne feature matrices Φ = (φ(x1
t), . . . , φ(xm
t )),
Υ = (φ(x1
s), . . . , φ(xm
s )) and Φ⊗=
 ξ(x1
t), . . . , ξ(xm
t )

,
and corresponding kernel matrices K = Φ⊤Φ and L =
Υ⊤Υ. The assumption that messages are RKHS functions
means that messages can be represented as linear combina-
tions of the training features Φ, i.e., bmut = Φβut, where
βut ∈Rm. On this basis, Song et al. (2009) propose a
direct regularized estimate of the conditional embedding
operators from the data. This approach avoids explicit con-
ditional density estimation, and directly provides the tools
needed for computing the RKHS message updates in (10).
Following this approach, we ﬁrst estimate the covariance
operators bCXtXs =
1
mΦΥ⊤, bCX⊗
t Xs =
1
mΦ⊗Υ⊤and
bCXsXs =
1
mΥΥ⊤, and obtain an empirical estimate of the
conditional embedding operator,
bUX⊗
t |Xs = Φ⊗(L⊤+ λmI)−1Υ⊤,
(11)
where λ is a regularization parameter. Note that we need
not compute the feature space covariance operators explic-
itly: as we will see, all steps in kernel BP are carried out
via operations on kernel matrices.
We now apply the empirical conditional embedding op-
erator to obtain a ﬁnite sample message update for (10).
Since the incoming messages bmut can be expressed as
bmut = Φβut, the outgoing message bmts at xs is
O
u\s Φβut, Φ⊗(L + λmI)−1Υ⊤φ(xs)

H
=
K
u\s Kβut
⊤
(L + λmI)−1Υ⊤φ(xs)
(12)
where J is the elementwise vector product. If we deﬁne
βts = (L+λmI)−1(J
u\s Kβut), then the outgoing mes-
sage can be expressed as bmts = Υβts. In other words,
given incoming messages expressed as linear combinations
of feature mapped training samples from Xt, the outgo-
ing message will likewise be a weighted linear combination
of feature mapped training samples from Xs. Importantly,
only m mapped points will be used to express the outgoing
message, regardless of the number of incoming messages
or the number of points used to express each incoming mes-
sage. Thus the complexity of message representation does
not increase with BP iterations or degree of a node.
Although we have identiﬁed the model parameters with
speciﬁc edges (s, t), our approach extends straightfor-
wardly to a templatized model, where parameters are
shared across multiple edges (this setting is often natural
in image processing, for instance). Empirical estimates of
the parameters are computed on the pooled observations.
The computational complexity of the ﬁnite sample BP up-
date in (12) is polynomial in term of the number of training
samples. Assuming a preprocessing step of cost O(m3) to
compute the matrix inverses, the update for a single mes-
sage costs O(m2dmax) where dmax is the maximum degree
of a node in the MRF. While this is reasonable in compari-
son with competing nonparametric approaches (see Section
6 and the experiments), and works well for smaller graphs
and trees, a polynomial time update can be costly for very
large m, and for graphical models with loops (where many
iterations of the message updates are needed). In Section
5, we develop a message approximation strategy which re-
duces this cost substantially.
5
Constant Time Message Updates
In this section, we formulate a more computationally ef-
ﬁcient alternative to the full rank update in (12).
Our
goal is to limit the computational cost of each update to
O(ℓ2dmax) where ℓ≪m. We will require a one-off pre-
processing step which is linear in m. This efﬁcient message
passing procedure makes kernel BP practical even for very
large graphical models and/or training set sizes.
5.1
Approximating Feature Matrices
The key idea of the preprocessing step is to approxi-
mate messages in the RKHS with a few informative ba-
sis functions, and to estimate these basis functions in a
data dependent way. This is achieved by approximating
the feature matrix Φ as a weighted combination of a sub-
set of its columns.
That is, Φ ≈ΦIWt, where I :=
{i1, . . . , iℓ} ⊆{1, . . . , m}, Wt has dimension ℓ× m, and
ΦI = (φ(xi1
t ), . . . , φ(xiℓ
t )) is a submatrix formed by tak-
ing the columns of Φ corresponding to the indices in I.
Likewise, we approximate Υ ≈ΥJ Ws, assuming |J | = ℓ
for simplicity. We thus can approximate the kernel matrices
as low rank factorizations, i.e., K ≈W ⊤
t KIIWt and L =
W ⊤
s LJ J Ws, where KII := Φ⊤
I ΦI and LJ J = Υ⊤
J ΥJ .
A common way to obtain the approximation Φ ≈ΦIWt
is via a Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization procedure in fea-
ture space, where an incomplete set of ℓorthonormal ba-
sis vectors Q := (q1
t , . . . , qℓ
t) is constructed from a greed-
ily selected subset of the data, chosen to minimize the
reconstruction error (Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004,
p.126). The original feature matrix can be approximately
expressed using this basis subset as Φ ≈QR where R ∈
Rℓ×m are the coefﬁcients under the new basis. There is
a simple relation between Q and the chosen data points
ΦI, i.e., Q = ΦIR−1
I , where RI is the submatrix formed
by taking the columns of R corresponding to I. It fol-
lows that Wt = R−1
I R. All operations involved in Gram-
Schmidt orthogonalization are linear in feature space, and
the entries of R can be computed based solely on kernel
values k(xt, x′
t). The cost of performing this orthogonal-
ization is O(mℓ2). The number ℓof chosen basis vectors
is inversely related to the approximation error or residual

Kernel Belief Propagation
ϵ = maxi ∥φ(xi
t) −ΦIW i
t ∥F (W i
t denotes column i of
Wt). In many cases of interest (for instance, when a Gaus-
sian RBF kernel is used), a small ℓ≪m will be sufﬁcient
to obtain a small residual ϵ for the feature matrix, due to
the fast decay of the eigenspectrum in feature space (Bach
& Jordan, 2002, Appendix C).
5.2
Approximating Tensor Features
The approximations Φ ≈ΦIWt and Υ ≈ΥJWs, and as-
sociated low rank kernel approximations are insufﬁcient for
a constant time approximate algorithm, however. In fact,
directly applying these results will only lead to a linear time
approximate algorithm: this can be seen by replacing the
kernel matrices in (12) by their low rank approximations.
To achieve a constant approximate update, our strategy is
to go a step further: in addition to approximating the kernel
matrices, we further approximate the tensor product feature
matrix in equation (11), Φ⊗≈Φ⊗
I′W ⊗
t
(W ⊗
t
∈Rℓ′×m).
Crucially, the individual kernel matrix approximations ne-
glect to account for the subsequent tensor product of these
messages. By contrast, our proposed approach also approx-
imates the tensor product directly. The computational ad-
vantage of a direct tensor approximation approach is sub-
stantial in practice (a comparison between exact kernel BP
and its constant and linear time approximations can be
found in Section 3 of the Appendix) .
The decomposition procedure for tensor Φ⊗≈Φ⊗
I′W ⊗
t
follows exactly the same steps as in the original feature
space, but using the kernel kdt−1(xt, x′
t), and yielding an
incomplete orthonormal basis in the tensor product space.
In general the index sets I′ ̸= I, meaning they select dif-
ferent training points to construct the basis functions. Fur-
thermore, the size ℓ′ of I′ is not equal to the size ℓof I
for a given approximation error ϵ. Typically ℓ′ > ℓ, since
the tensor product space has a slower decaying spectrum,
however we will write ℓin place of ℓ′ to simplify notation.
5.3
Constant Time Approximate Updates
We now compute the message updates based on the various
low rank approximations. The incoming messages and the
conditional embedding operators become
O
u\s mut ≈
O
u\s ΦIWtβut,
(13)
eUX⊗
t |Xsφ(xs) ≈Φ⊗
I′WtsΥ⊤
J φ(xs),
(14)
where Wts := W ⊗
t (W ⊤
s LJ J Ws + λmI)−1W ⊤
s . If we
reparametrize the messages mut as mut = ΦIαut where
αut := Wtβut, we can express the message updates for
mts(xs) as
mts(xs) ≈
K
u\s KI′Iαut
⊤
WstΥ⊤
J φ(xs),
(15)
where KI′I denotes the submatrix of K with rows in-
dexed I′ and columns indexed I.
The outgoing mes-
sage mts can also be reparametrized as a vector αts =
W ⊤
st
J
u\s KI′Iαut

. In short, the message from t to
s is a weighted linear combination of the ℓvectors in ΥJ .
We note that Wts can be computed efﬁciently prior
to the message update step, since W ⊗
t (W ⊤
s LJ J Ws +
λmI)−1W ⊤
s = W ⊗
t W ⊤
s (WsW ⊤
s + λmL−1
J J )−1L−1
J J via
the Woodbury expansion of the matrix inverse. In the latter
form, matrix products WsW ⊤
s and W ⊗
t W ⊤
s cost O(ℓ2m);
the remaining operations (size ℓmatrix products and inver-
sions) are signiﬁcantly less costly at O(ℓ3). This initializa-
tion cost of O(ℓ3 + ℓ2m) need only be borne once.
The cost of updating a single message mts in (15) be-
comes O(ℓ2dmax) where dmax is the maximum degree of
a node. This also means that our approximate message up-
date scheme will be independent of the number of training
examples. With these approximate messages, the evalua-
tion of the belief bB(xr) of a node r at xr can be carried out
in time O(ℓdmax).
Finally, approximating the tensor features introduces ad-
ditional error into each message update. This is caused
by the difference between the full rank conditional em-
bedding operator bUX⊗
t |Xs in (11) and its low rank coun-
terpart eUX⊗
t |Xs in (14).
Under suitable conditions, this
difference is bounded by the feature approximation error
ϵ, i.e., ∥bUX⊗
t |Xs −eUX⊗
t |Xs∥HS ≤2ϵ(λ−1 + λ−3/2) (see
Section 8 of the Appendix for details).
6
Gaussian Mixture And Particle BP
We brieﬂy review two state-of-the-art approaches to non-
parametric belief propagation: Gaussian Mixture BP (Sud-
derth et al., 2003) and Particle BP (Ihler & McAllester,
2009). By contrast with our approach, we must provide
these algorithms in advance with an estimate of the condi-
tional density P⋆(Xt|Xs), to compute the conditional ex-
pectation in (4). For Gaussian Mixture BP, this conditional
density must take the form of a mixture of Gaussians. We
describe how we learn the conditional density from data,
and then show how the two algorithms use it for inference.
A direct approach to estimating the conditional density
P⋆(Xt|Xs) would be to take the ratio of the joint empir-
ical density to the marginal empirical density. The ratio
of mixtures of Gaussians is not itself a mixture of Gaus-
sians, however, so this approach is not suitable for Gaus-
sian Mixture BP (indeed, message updates using this ratio
of mixtures would be non-trivial, and we are not aware of
any such inference approach). We propose instead to learn
P⋆(Xt|Xs) directly from training data following Sugiyama
et al. (2010), who provide an estimate in the form of a mix-
ture of Gaussians (see Section 1 of the Appendix for de-
tails). We emphasize that the updates bear no resemblance
to our kernel updates in (12), which do not attempt density
ratio estimation.
Given the estimated bP(Xt|Xs) as input, each nonparamet-
ric inference method takes a different approach. Gaussian
mixture BP assumes incoming messages to be a mixture of

Le Song, Arthur Gretton, Danny Bickson, Yucheng Low, Carlos Guestrin
(a) Sunset image
(b) Noisy image
50
100
150
200
250
10
15
20
25
Number of Colors
RMSE
Kernel BP
Discrete BP
Gaussian Mixture BP
Particle BP
50
100
150
200
250
1
10
100
1000
Number of Colors
Runtime (s)
Kernel BP
Discrete BP
Gaussian Mixture BP
Particle BP
(c) Denoising error
(d) Runtime
Figure 1: Average denoising error and runtime of kernel BP com-
pared to discrete, Gaussian mixture and particle BP over 10 test
images with varying numbers of rings. Runtimes are plotted on a
logarithmic scale.
b Gaussians. The product of dt incoming messages to node
t then contains bdt Gaussians. This exponential blow-up
is avoided by replacing the exact update with an approxi-
mation. An overview of approximation approaches can be
found in Bickson et al. (2011); we used an efﬁcient KD-tree
method of Ihler et al. (2003) for performing the approxi-
mation step. Particle BP represents the incoming messages
using a common set of particles.These particles must be
re-drawn via Metropolis-Hastings at each node and BP it-
eration, which is costly (although in practice, it is sufﬁcient
to resample periodically, rather than strictly at every iter-
ation). By contrast, our updates are simply matrix-vector
products. See Appendix for further discussion.
7
Experiments
We performed four sets of experiments. The ﬁrst two were
image denoising and depth prediction problems, where we
show that kernel BP is superior to discrete, Gaussian mix-
ture and particle BP in both speed and accuracy, using a
GraphLab implementation of each (Low et al., 2010). The
remaining two experiments were protein structure and pa-
per category prediction problems, where domain-speciﬁc
kernels were crucial (for the latter see Appendix, Sec. 4).
Image denoising: In our ﬁrst experiment, the data con-
sisted of grayscale images of size 100 × 100, resembling a
sunset (Figure 1(a)). The number of colors (gray levels) in
the images ranged across 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 175,
200, 225 and 250, with gray levels varying evenly from 0 to
255 from the innermost ring of the sunset to the outermost.
As we increased the number of colors, the grayscale transi-
tion became increasingly smooth. Our goal was to recover
the original images from noisy versions, to which we had
added zero mean Gaussian noise with σ = 30. We com-
pared the denoising performance and runtimes of discrete,
Gaussian mixture, particle, and kernel BP.
The topology of our graphical model was a grid of hid-
den noise-free pixels with noisy observations made at each.
The maximum degree of a node was 5 (four neighbours
and an observation), and we used a template model where
both the edge potentials and the likelihood functions were
shared across all variables. We generated a pair of noise-
free and noisy images as training data, at each color num-
ber. For kernel BP, we learned both the likelihood function
and the embedding operators nonparametrically from the
data. We used a Gaussian RBF kernel k(x, x′), with ker-
nel bandwidth set at the median distance between training
points, and residual ϵ = 10−3 as the stopping criterion for
the feature approximation (see deﬁnition of ϵ in Section
5.1). For discrete, Gaussian mixture, and particle BP, we
learned the edge potentials from data, but supplied the true
likelihood of the observation given the hidden pixel (i.e., a
Gaussian with standard deviation 30). This gave compet-
ing methods an important a priori advantage over kernel
BP: in spite of this, kernel BP still outperformed compet-
ing approaches in speed and accuracy.
In Figure 1(c) and (d), we report the average denoising
performance (RMSE: root mean square error) and runtime
over 30 BP iterations, using 10 independently generated
noisy test images. The RMSE of kernel BP is signiﬁcantly
lower than Gaussian mixture and particle BP for all num-
bers of colors. Although the RMSE of discrete BP is about
the same as kernel BP when the number of colors is small,
its performance becomes worse than kernel BP as the num-
ber of colors increases beyond 100 (despite discrete BP
receiving the true observation likelihood in advance). In
terms of speed, kernel BP has a considerable advantage
over the alternatives: the runtime of KBP is barely affected
by the number of colors. For discrete BP, the scaling is ap-
proximately square in the number of colors. For Gaussian
mixture and particle BP, the runtimes are orders of magni-
tude longer than kernel BP, and are affected by the variabil-
ity of the resampling algorithm.
Predicting depth from 2D images: The prediction of 3D
depth information from 2D image features is a difﬁcult in-
ference problem, as the depth may be ambiguous: sim-
ilar features can occur at different depths.
This creates
a multimodal depth distribution given the image feature.
Furthermore, the marginal distribution of the depth can it-
self be multimodal, which makes the Gaussian approxima-
tion a poor choice (see Figure 2(b)). To make a spatially
consistent prediction of the depth map, we formulated the
problem as an undirected graphical model, where a depth
variable yi ∈R was associated with each patch of an im-
age, and these variables were connected according to a 2D
grid topology. Each hidden depth variable was linked to
an image feature variable xi ∈R273 for the correspond-
ing patch. This formulation resulted in a graphical model
with 9, 202 = 107 × 86 continuous depth variables, and
a maximum node degree of 5. Due to the way the images
were taken (upright), we used a templatized model where
horizontal edges in a row shared the same potential, ver-
tical edges at the same height shared the same potential,
and patches at the same row shared the same likelihood

Kernel Belief Propagation
(a) Image and depth pair
(b) Depth distribution
Kernel BP Discrete BP Particle BP Gauss. Mix.
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
Mean Abs. Err. of log10 depth
Kernel BP Discrete BP Particle BP Gauss. Mix.
1
10
100
1000
Runtime (s)
(c) Depth prediction error
(d) Runtime
Figure 2: Average depth prediction error and runtime of kernel
BP compared to discrete, Gaussian mixture and particle BP over
274 images. Runtimes are on a logarithmic scale.
Kernel BP
Particle BP
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Mean Cosine Similarity
(a) Angle distribution
(b) Prediction accuracy
Figure 3: Average angle prediction accuracy of kernel versus
particle BP in the protein folding problem.
function. Both the edge potentials between adjacent depth
variables and the likelihood function between image fea-
ture and depth were unknown, and were learned from data.
We used a set of 274 images taken on the Stanford campus,
including both indoor and outdoor scenes (Saxena et al.,
2009). Images were divided into patches of size 107 by 86,
with the corresponding depth map for each patch obtained
using 3D laser scanners (e.g., Figure 2(a)). Each patch was
represented by a 273 dimensional feature vector, which
contained both local features (such as color and texture)
and relative features (features from adjacent patches). We
took the logarithm of the depth map and performed learning
and prediction in this space. The entire dataset contained
more than 2 million data points (107 × 86 × 274). We
applied a Gaussian RBF kernel on the depth information,
with the bandwidth parameter set to the median distance
between training depths, and an approximation residual of
ϵ = 10−3. We used a linear kernel for the image features.
Our results were obtained by leave-one-out cross valida-
tion. For each test image, we ran discrete, Gaussian mix-
ture, particle, and kernel BP for 10 BP iterations. The aver-
age prediction error (MAE: mean absolute error) and run-
time are shown in Figures 2(c) and (d). Kernel BP pro-
duces the lowest error (MAE=0.145) by a signiﬁcant mar-
gin, while having a similar runtime to discrete BP. Gaussian
mixture and particle BP achieve better MAE than discrete
BP, but their runtimes are two order of magnitude slower.
We note that the error of kernel BP is slightly better than the
results of pointwise MRF reported in Saxena et al. (2009).
Protein structure prediction: Our ﬁnal experiment inves-
tigates the protein folding problem. The folded conﬁgu-
ration of a protein of length n is roughly determined by a
sequence of angle pairs {(θi, ωi)}n
i=1, each speciﬁc to an
amino acid position. The goal is to predict the sequence
of angle pairs given only the amino acid sequence. The
two angles (θi, ωi) have ranges [0, 180] and (−180, 180]
respectively, such that they correspond to points on the unit
sphere S2. Kernels yield an immediate solution to infer-
ence on these data: Wendland (2005, Theorem 17.10) pro-
vides a sufﬁcient condition for a function on S2 to be posi-
tive deﬁnite, satisﬁed by k(x, x′) := exp(σ ⟨x, x′⟩), where
⟨x, x′⟩is the standard inner product between Euclidean co-
ordinates. Given the data are continuous, multimodal, and
on a non-Euclidean domain (Figure 3(a)), it is not obvious
how Gaussian mixture or discrete BP might be applied. We
therefore focus on comparing kernel and particle BP.
We obtained a collection of 1, 400 proteins with length
larger than 100 from PDB. We ﬁrst ran PSI-BLAST to gen-
erate the sequence proﬁle (a 20 dimensional feature for
each amino acid position), and then used this proﬁle as
features for predicting the folding structure (Jones, 1999).
The graphical model was a chain of connected angle pairs,
where each angle pair was associated with a 20 dimen-
sional feature. We used a linear kernel on the sequence fea-
tures. For the kernel between angles, the bandwidth param-
eter was set at the median inner product between training
points, and we used the approximation residual ϵ = 10−3.
For particle BP, we learned the nonparametric potentials
using exp(σ ⟨x, x′⟩) as the basis functions.
In Figure 3(b), we report the average prediction accuracy
(Mean Cosine Similarity between the true coordinate x
and the predicted x′, i.e., ⟨x, x′⟩) over a 10-fold cross-
validation process. In this case, kernel BP achieves a sig-
niﬁcantly better result than particle BP while running much
faster (runtimes not shown due to space constraints).
8
Conclusions and Further Work
We have introduced kernel belief propagation, where the
messages are functions in an RKHS. Kernel BP performs
learning and inference on challenging graphical models
with structured and continuous random variables, and is
more accurate and much faster than earlier nonparametric
BP algorithms. A possible extension to this work would
be to kernelize tree-reweighted belief propagation (Wain-
wright et al., 2003). The convergence of kernel BP is a fur-
ther challenging topic for future work (Ihler et al., 2005).
Acknowledgements:
We thank Alex Ihler for the Gaussian
mixture BP codes and helpful discussions.
LS is supported
by a Stephenie and Ray Lane Fellowship.
This research was
also supported by ARO MURI W911NF0710287, ARO MURI
W911NF0810242, NSF Mundo IIS-0803333, NSF Nets-NBD
CNS-0721591 and ONR MURI N000140710747.

Le Song, Arthur Gretton, Danny Bickson, Yucheng Low, Carlos Guestrin
Supplementary to Kernel Belief Propagation
Section 1 contains a review of Gaussian mixture BP and particle BP, as well as a detailed explanation of our strategy for
learning edge potentials for these approaches from training data. Section 2 provides parameter settings and experiment
details for particle BP and discrete BP, in the synthetic image denoising and depth reconstruction experiments. Section
3 contains a comparison of two different approximate feature sets: low rank approximation of the tensor features and
low rank approximation of the individual features alone. Section 4 is an experiment on learning paper categories using
citation networks. Sections 5 and 6 demonstrate the optimization objective of locally consistent BP updates, and provide a
derivation of these updates in terms of the conditional expectation. Section 7 discusses the kernelization of Gaussian BP.
Section 8 gives the error introduced by low rank approximation of the messages.
1
Gaussian Mixture and Particle BP
We describe two competing approaches for nonparametric belief propagation: Gaussian mixture BP, originally known as
non-parametric BP (Sudderth et al., 2003), and particle BP (Ihler & McAllester, 2009). For these algorithms, the edge
potentials Ψ(xs, xt), self-potentials ψ(xt), and evidence potentials Ψ(xt, yt) must be provided in advance by the user.
Thus, we begin by describing how the edge potentials in Section 2 of the main document may be learned from training
data, but in a form applicable to these inference algorithms: we express P(xt|xs) as a mixture of Gaussians. We then
describe the inference algorithms themselves.
In learning the edge potentials, we turn to Sugiyama et al. (2010), who provide a least-squares estimate of a conditional
density in the form of a mixture of Gaussians,
P(v|u) =
b
X
i=1
αiκi(u, v) = α⊤κu,v,
where κi(u, v) is a Gaussian with diagonal covariance centred at1 (qi, ri). Given a training set {(uj, vj)}m
j=1, we obtain
the coefﬁcients
α :=

bH + λI
−1 ˆh

+
,
where bH := Pm
j=1
R
V κuj,vκ⊤
uj,vdv, ˆh := Pm
j=1 κuj,vj, λ is a regularization coefﬁcient, and [α]+ sets all negative entries
of its argument to zero (the integral in bH can easily be computed in closed form). We emphasize that the Gaussian mixture
representation takes a quite different form to the RKHS representation of the edge potentials. Finally, to introduce evidence,
we propose to use kernel ridge regression to provide a mean value of the hidden variable xt given the observation yt, and
to center a Gaussian at this value: again, the regression function is learned nonparametrically from training data.
We now describe how these edge potentials are incorporated into Gaussian mixture BP. Assuming the incoming messages
are each a mixture of b Gaussians, the product of dt such messages will contain bdt Gaussians, which causes an exponential
blow-up in representation size and computational cost. In their original work, Sudderth et al. address this issue using an
approximation scheme. First, they subsample from the incoming mixture of bdt Gaussians to draw b Gaussians, at a
computational cost of O(dtτb2) for each node, where τ is the number of iterations of the associated Gibbs sampler (see
their Algorithm 1). The evidence introduced via kernel ridge regression is then incorporated, using a reweighting described
by their Algorithm 2. Finally, in Algorithm 3, b samples

xi
t
	b
i=1 are drawn from the reweighted mixture of b Gaussians,
and for each of these,

xi
s
	b
i=1 are drawn from the conditional distribution xs|xi
t arising from the edge potential ψ(xs, xt)
(which is itself a Gaussian mixture, learned via the approach of Sugiyama et al.). Gaussians are placed on each of the
centres

xi
s
	b
i=1, and the process is iterated.
In our implementation, we used the more efﬁcient multiscale KD-tree sampling method of Ihler et al. (2003). We converted
the Matlab Mex implementation of Ihler (2003) to C++, and used GraphLab to execute sampling in parallel with up to 16
cores. An input parameter to the sampling procedure is ϵ, the level of accuracy. We performed a line search to set ϵ for
high accuracy, but limited the execution time to be at most 1000 times slower than KBP.
Finally, we describe the inference procedure performed by Particle BP. In this case, each node t is associated with a set
of particles

xi
t
	b
i=1, drawn i.i.d. from a distribution Wt(xt). Incoming messages mut are expressed as weights of the
particles xi
t. Unlike Gaussian mixture BP, the incoming messages all share the same set of particles, which removes
1These centres may be selected at random from the training observations. We denote the mixture kernel by κ(u, v) to distinguish it
from the RKHS kernels used earlier.

Kernel Belief Propagation
the need for Parzen window smoothing. The outgoing message mts is computed by summing over the product of these
weights and the edge and evidence potentials at the particles, yielding a set of weights over samples

xi
s
	b
i=1 at node s; the
procedure is then iterated (see Ihler & McAllester, 2009, eq. 8). We again implement this algorithm using edge potentials
computed according to Sugiyama et al. Since an appropriate sample distribution Wt is hard to specify in advance, a
resampling procedure must be carried out at each BP iteration, to refresh the set of samples at each node and ensure the
samples cover an appropriate support (this is a common requirement in particle ﬁltering). Thus, each iteration of Particle
BP requires a Metropolis-Hastings chain to be run for every node, which incurs a substantial computational cost. That
said, we found that in practice, the resampling could be conducted less often without an adverse impact on performance,
but resulting in major improvements in runtime, as described in Section 2 below. See (Ihler & McAllester, 2009, Section
6) for more detail.
2
Settings for Discrete and Particle BP
2.1
Depth Reconstruction from 2-D Images
2.1.1
Discrete BP
The log-depth was discretized into 30 bins, and edge parameters were selected to achieve locally consistent Loopy BP
marginals using the technique described in Wainwright et al. (2003). Empirically, ﬁner discretizations did not improve
resultant accuracy, but increased runtime signiﬁcantly. We used the Splash scheduling of Gonzalez et al. (2009) since it
provided the lowest runtime among all tested schedulings.
2.1.2
Particle BP
The particle belief propagation implementation was particularly difﬁcult to tune due to its excessively high runtime. Theo-
retically, results comparable to the Kernel BP method were attainable. However in practice, the extremely high cost of the
resampling phase on large models meant that only a small number of particles could be maintained if a reasonable runtime
was to be achieved on our evaluation set of 274 images.
Ultimately, we decided to ﬁnd a conﬁguration which allowed us to complete the evaluation in about 2 machine-days on an
8-core Intel Nehalem machine; allowing inference on each evaluation image to take 10 minutes of parallel computation.
For each image, we ran 100 iterations of a simple linear-sweep scheduling, using 20 particles per message, and resampling
every 10 iterations. Each resampling phase ran MCMC for a maximum of 10 steps per particle. We also implemented
acceleration tricks where low weight particles (< 1E −7 after normalization) were ignored during the message passing
process. Empirically this decreased runtime without affecting the quality of results.
2.2
Synthetic Image Denoising
2.2.1
Discrete BP
To simplify evaluation, we permitted a certain degree of “oracle” information, by matching the discretization levels during
inference with the color levels in the ground-truth image.
We evaluated combined gradient/IPF + BP methods here to learn the edge parameters. We found that gradient/IPF per-
formed well when there were few colors in the image, but failed to converge when the number of colors increased into the
hundreds. This is partly due to the instability of BP, as well as the large number of free parameters in the edge potential.
Therefore once again, edge potentials were selected using the technique described in Wainwright et al. (2003). This
performed quite well empirically, as seen in Figure 1(c) (main document).
2.2.2
Particle BP
The high runtime of the Particle Belief Propagation again made accuracy evaluation difﬁcult. As before, we tuned the
particle BP parameters to complete inference on the evaluation set of 110 images in 2 machine days, allowing about 25
minutes per evaluation image. We ran 100 iterations of 30 particles per message, resampling every 15 iterations. Each
resampling phase ran MCMC for a maximum of 10 steps per particle.

Le Song, Arthur Gretton, Danny Bickson, Yucheng Low, Carlos Guestrin
3
Effects of Approximate Message Updates
In this section, we study how different levels of feature approximation error ϵ affect the speed of kernel BP and the
resulting performance. Our experimental setup was the image denoising experiment described in Section 5.1 of the main
document. We note that the computational cost of our constant message update is O(ℓ2dmax) where ℓis inversely related
to the approximation error ϵ. This is a substantial runtime improvement over naively applying a low rank kernel matrix
approximation, which only results in a linear time update with computational cost O(ℓmdmax). In this experiment, we
varied the feature approximation error ϵ over three levels, i.e. 10−1, 10−2, 10−3, and compared both speed and denoising
performance of the constant time update to the linear time update.
From Figures 4 (a) and (c), we can see that for each approximation level, the constant time update achieves about the same
denoising performance as the linear time update, while at the same time being orders of magnitude faster (by comparing
Figures 4 (b) and (d)). Despite the fact that the constant time update algorithm makes an additional approximation to the
tensor product features, its denoising performance is not affected. We hypothesize that the degradation in performance is
largely caused by representing the messages in terms of a small number of basis functions, while the approximation to the
tensor features introduces little additional degradation.
Another interesting observation from Figure 4 (d) is that the runtime of constant time kernel BP update increases as the
number of colors in the image increases. This is mainly due to the increased number of test points as the color number
increases; and also partially due to the increased rank needed for approximating the tensor features. In Figure 5, we plot
the rank needed for kernel feature approximation and tensor feature approximation for different numbers of colors and
different approximation errors ϵ. It can be seen that in general, as we use a smaller approximation error, the rank increases,
leading to a slight increase in runtime.
Finally, we compare with kernel belief propagation in the absence of any low rank approximation (KBP Full). Since KBP
Full is computationally expensive, we reduced the denoising problem to images of size 50 × 50 to allow KBP to ﬁnish in
reasonable time. We only compared on 100 color images, again for reasons of cost. We varied the feature approximation
error for the constant time and linear time approximation over three levels, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3, and compared both speed
and denoising performance of KBP Full versus the constant time and linear time updates.
The comparisons are shown in Figure 6. We can see from Figure 6(a) that the denoising errors for constant time and
linear time approximations decrease as we decrease the approximation error ϵ. Although the denoising error of KBP Full
is slightly lower than constant time approximations, it is a slight increase over the linear time approximation at ϵ = 10−3.
One reason might be that the kernel approximation also serves as a means of regularization when learning the conditional
embedding operator. This additional regularization may have slightly improved the generalization ability of the linear time
approximation scheme. In terms of runtime (Figure 6(b)), constant time approximation is substantially faster than linear
time approximation and KBP Full. In particular, it is nearly 100 times faster than the linear time algorithm, and 10000
times faster than KBP Full.
4
Predicting Paper Categories
In this experiment, we predict paper categories from a combination of the paper features and their citation network. Our
data were obtained by crawling 143,086 paper abstracts from the ACM digital library, and extracting the citation networks
linking these papers. Each paper was labeled with a variable number of categories, ranging from 1 to 10; there were a total
of 367 distinct categories in our dataset. For simplicity, we ignored directions in the citation network, and treated it as an
undirected graph (i.e, we did not distinguish “citing” and “being cited”). The citation network was sparse, with more than
85% of the papers having fewer than 10 links. The maximum number of links was 450.
Paper category prediction is a multi-label problem with a large output space. The output is very sparse: the label vectors
have only a small number of nonzero entries. In this case, the simple one-against-all approach of learning a single predictor
for each category can become prohibitively expensive, both in training and in testing. Recently, Hsu et al. (2009) proposed
to solve this problem using compressed sensing techniques: high dimensional sparse category labels are ﬁrst compressed
to lower dimensional real vectors using a random projection, and regressors are learned for these real vectors. In the testing
stage, high dimensional category labels are decoded from the predicted real vectors of the test data using orthogonal
marching pursuit (OMP).
For the purposed of the present task, however, the compressed sensing approach ignores information from the citation net-
work: papers that share categories tend to cite each other more often. Intuitively, taking into account category information

Kernel Belief Propagation
50
100
150
200
250
7
8
9
10
11
12
BP denoise errors
Number of Colors
RMSE
KBPLinear (ε=10−1)
KBPLinear (ε=10−2)
KBPLinear (ε=10−3)
50
100
150
200
250
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
BP denoise runtimes
Number of Colors
Runtime (s)
KBPLinear (ε=10−3)
KBPLinear (ε=10−1)
KBPLinear (ε=10−2)
(a) Error (linear time approximation)
(b) Runtime (linear time approximation)
50
100
150
200
250
7
8
9
10
11
BP denoise errors
Number of Colors
RMSE
KBP (ε=10−1)
KBP (ε=10−3)
KBP (ε=10−2)
50
100
150
200
250
1
1.5
2
2.5
BP denoise runtimes
Number of Colors
Runtime (s)
KBP (ε=10−3)
KBP (ε=10−2)
KBP (ε=10−1)
(c) Error (constant time approximation)
(d) Runtime (constant time approximation)
Figure 4: Average denoising error and runtime of linear time kernel BP versus constant time kernel BP, using different
feature approximation errors, over 10 test images with a varying number of image colors.
from neighboring papers in the citation network should improve the performance of category prediction. This intuition
can be formalized using undirected graphical models: each paper i contains a category variable yi ∈{0, 1}367, and these
variables are connected according to the citation network; each category variable is also connected to a variable xi corre-
sponding to the abstract of the paper. In our experiment, we used 9700 stem words for the abstracts, and xi ∈R9700 was
the tf-idf vector for paper i. The graphical model thus contains two types of edge potential, Ψ(yi, yi) and Ψ(yi, yk), where
k ∈N(j) is the neighbor of j according to the citation network.
It is difﬁcult to learn this graphical model and perform inference on it, since the category variables yi have high cardinality,
making the marginalization step in BP prohibitively expensive. Inspired by the compressed sensing approach for multilabel
prediction, we ﬁrst employed random projection kernels, and then used our kernel BP algorithm. Let A ∈Rd×367 be
a random matrix containing i.i.d. Gaussian random variables of zero mean and variance 1/d. We deﬁned the random
projection kernel for the category labels to be k(y, y′) = ⟨Ay, Ay′⟩= ⟨φ(y), φ(y′)⟩, and used a linear kernel for the
abstract variables. We ran kernel BP for 5 iterations, since further iterations did not improve the performance. MAP
assignment based on the belief was performed by ﬁnding a unit vector φ(ˆy) = Aˆy that maximized the belief. The sparse
category labels ˆy were decoded from φ(ˆy) using OMP.
To measure experimental performance, we performed 10 random splits of the papers, where in each split we used 1/3 of
the papers for training and the remaining 2/3 for testing. The random splits were controlled in such a way that high degree
nodes (with degree > 10) in the citation networks always appeared in the training set. Such splitting reﬂects the data
properties expected in real-world scenarios: important papers (high degree nodes which indicate either inﬂuential papers

Le Song, Arthur Gretton, Danny Bickson, Yucheng Low, Carlos Guestrin
50
100
150
200
250
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
Feature Approximation
Number of Colors
Rank
KBP (ε=10−3)
KBP (ε=10−2)
KBP (ε=10−1)
50
100
150
200
250
6
7
8
9
10
11
Tensor Feature Approximation
Number of Colors
Rank
KBP (ε=10−3)
KBP (ε=10−2)
KBP (ε=10−1)
(a) Rank for feature approximation
(b) Rank for tensor feature approximation
Figure 5: The rank obtained for kernel feature approximation and tensor feature approximation for different levels of
approximation error ϵ, for the image denoising problem.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
KBP ε=10−1
KBP ε=10−2
KBP ε=10−3
KBPLinear ε=10−1
KBPLinear ε=10−2
KBPLinear ε=10−3
Full
RMSE
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
KBP ε=10−1
KBP ε=10−2
KBP ε=10−3
KBPLinear ε=10−1
KBPLinear ε=10−2
KBPLinear ε=10−3
Full
Runtime (s)
(a) Error
(b) Runtime (vertical axis is in log scale)
Figure 6: (a) Denoising error for the constant time approximate update (KBP) and linear time approximate update (KB-
PLinear), over three levels of approximation error ϵ = {10−1, 10−2, 10−3}, versus kernel BP without low rank approxi-
mation (Full). (b) Runtime corresponding to different approximation schemes.
or survey papers) are usually labeled, whereas the majority of papers may not have a label; the automatic labeling is mainly

We compared against the regression technique of Hsu et al. for multilabel prediction, and a baseline prediction using the
top k most frequent categories. For both our method and the method of Hsu et al., we used a random projection matrix
with d = 100.
Results are shown in Figure 7. Kernel BP performs better than multilabel prediction via compressed sensing (i.e., the
independent regression approach, which ignores graphical model structure) over a range of k values. In particular, for the
top 10 and 20 predicted categories, kernel BP achieves recall scores of 0.419 and 0.476, respectively, as opposed to 0.362
and 0.417 for independent regression.
5
Local Marginal Consistency Condition When Learning With BP
In this section, we show that ﬁxed points of BP satisfy particular marginal consistency conditions (29) and (30) below. As
we will see, these arise from the fact that we are using a Bethe free energy approximation in ﬁtting our model, and the form
of the ﬁxed point equations that deﬁne the minimum of the Bethe free energy. The material in this section draws from a
number of references (for instance Yedidia et al., 2001, 2005; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008; Koller & Friedman, 2009), but

Kernel Belief Propagation
Figure 7: Comparison of kernel BP, multilabel prediction via compressed sensing (regression), and a baseline prediction
using the top k most frequent categories (mean) for ACM paper category prediction.
is presented in a form speciﬁc to our case, since we are neither in a discrete domain nor using exponential families.
The parameters of a pairwise Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) can be learned by maximizing the log-likelihood of the model
P with respect to true underlying distribution P⋆. Denote the model by
P(X) := 1
Z
Y
(s,t)∈E
Ψst(Xs, Xt)
Y
s∈V
Ψs(Xs)
where Z :=
R
X
Q
(s,t)∈E Ψst(Xs, Xt) Q
s∈V Ψs(Xs) is the partition function that normalizes the distribution. The model
parameters {Ψst(Xs, Xt), Ψs(Xs)} can be estimated by maximizing
L = EX∼P⋆(X) [log P(X)]
= EX∼P⋆(X)

X
(s,t)∈E
log Ψst(Xs, Xt) +
X
s∈V
log Ψs(Xs) −log Z

.
(16)
Deﬁne eΨst(Xs, Xt) := log Ψst(Xs, Xt) and eΨs(Xs) := log Ψs(Xs).
Setting the derivatives of L with respect to
n
eΨst(Xs, Xt), eΨs(Xs)
o
to zero, we have
∂L
∂eΨs(Xs)
= P⋆(Xs, Xt) −
∂log Z
∂eΨst(Xs, Xt)
= 0,
(17)
∂L
∂eΨs(Xs)
= P⋆(Xs) −∂log Z
∂eΨs(Xs)
= 0.
(18)
For a general pairwise MRF on a loopy graph, computing the log-partition function, log Z, is intractable. Following e.g.
Yedidia et al. (2001, 2005) and Koller & Friedman (2009, Ch. 11), log Z may be approximated as a minimum of the Bethe
free energy with respect to a new set of parameters {bst, bs},
F({bst, bs}) =
X
(s,t)∈E
Z
X
Z
X
bst(Xs, Xt) [log bst(Xs, Xt) −log Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψs(Xs)Ψt(Xt)] dXsdXt
−
X
s∈V
(ds −1)
Z
X
bs(Xs) [log bs(Xs) −log Ψs(Xs)] dXs,
(19)
subject to normalization and marginalization constraints,
R
X bs(Xs)dXs = 1,
R
X bst(Xs, Xt)dXs = bt(Xt). Let F ⋆:=
min{bst,bs} F (we note that Bethe free energy is not convex, and hence there can be multiple local minima. Our reasoning
does not require constructing a speciﬁc local minimum, and therefore we simply write F ⋆). The zero gradient conditions

Le Song, Arthur Gretton, Danny Bickson, Yucheng Low, Carlos Guestrin
on the partial derivatives of L are then approximated as
∂L
∂eΨs(Xs)
≈P⋆(Xs, Xt) −
∂F ⋆
∂eΨst(Xs, Xt)
= 0,
(20)
∂L
∂eΨs(Xs)
≈P⋆(Xs) −
∂F ⋆
∂eΨs(Xs)
= 0.
(21)
Since F is a linear function of
n
eΨst(Xs, Xt), eΨs(Xs)
o
for every ﬁxed {bst, bs}, Danskin’s theorem (Bertsekas, 1999, p.
717) gives us a way to compute the partial derivatives of F ⋆. These are
∂F ⋆
∂eΨst(Xs, Xt)
= ∂F({b⋆
st, b⋆
s})
∂eΨst(Xs, Xt)
= b⋆
st(Xs, Xt),
(22)
∂F ⋆
∂eΨs(Xs)
= ∂F({b⋆
st, b⋆
s})
∂eΨs(Xs)
= b⋆
s(Xs),
(23)
where {b⋆
st, b⋆
s} := argmin{bst,bs} F. Therefore, according to (20) and (21), learning a pairwise MRF using the Bethe
energy variational approximation to the log partition function results in the following matching conditions,
P⋆(Xs, Xt) = b⋆
st(Xs, Xt),
(24)
P⋆(Xs) = b⋆
s(Xs).
(25)
We now introduce the notion of belief propagation as a means of ﬁnding the minima of the Bethe free energy. This will in
turn lead to local marginal consistency conditions for learning with BP. Yedidia et al. (2001) showed that the ﬁxed point of
F (and therefore the global minimum {b⋆
st, b⋆
s}) must satisfy the relations
b⋆
st(Xs, Xt) = αΨst(Xs, Xt)Ψs(Xs)Ψt(Xt)
Y
u∈Γs\t
m⋆
us(Xs)
Y
v∈Γt\s
m⋆
vt(Xt),
(26)
b⋆
s(Xs) = αΨs(Xs)
Y
u∈Γs
m⋆
us(Xs),
(27)
where α denotes a normalization constant and {m⋆
ts} are the ﬁxed point messages,
m⋆
ts(Xs) = α
Z
X
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψt(Xt)
Y
u∈Γt\s
m⋆
ut(Xt) dXt.
(28)
Thus,
P⋆(Xs, Xt) = αΨst(Xs, Xt)Ψs(Xs)Ψt(Xt)
Y
u∈Γs\t
m⋆
us(Xs)
Y
v∈Γt\s
m⋆
vt(Xt),
(29)
P⋆(Xs) = αΨs(Xs)
Y
u∈Γs
m⋆
us(Xs).
(30)
Combining these relations and assuming that P⋆(Xs) and m⋆
ts(Xs) are strictly positive, we can also obtain the consistent
relation for the local conditionals,
P⋆(Xt|Xs) = P⋆(Xs, Xt)
P⋆(Xs)
=
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψs(Xt) Q
u∈Γt\s m⋆
ut(Xt)
m⋆
ts(Xs)
.
(31)
6
BP Inference Using Learned Potentials
The inference problem in pairwise MRFs is to compute the marginals or the log partition function for the model with
learned potentials. Belief propagation is an iterative algorithm for performing approximate inference in MRFs. BP can
also be viewed as an iterative algorithm for minimizing the Bethe free energy approximation to the log partition function.
The results of this algorithm are a set of beliefs which can be used for obtaining the MAP assignment of the corresponding
variables.
The BP message update (with the learned potentials) is
mts(Xs) = α
Z
X
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψt(Xt)
Y
u∈Γt\s
mut(Xt) dXt,
(32)
and at any iteration, the beliefs can be computed using the current messages,
Bst(Xs, Xt) = αΨst(Xs, Xt)Ψs(Xs)Ψt(Xt)
Y
u∈Γs\t
mus(Xs)
Y
v∈Γt\s
mvt(Xt),
(33)
Bs(Xs) = αΨs(Xs)
Y
u∈Γs
mus(Xs).
(34)
To see how the message update equation can be expressed using the true local conditional P⋆(Xt|Xs), we divide both size

Kernel Belief Propagation
of (32) by the ﬁxed point message m⋆
ts(Xs) during BP learning stage, and introduce 1 =
Q
u∈Γt\s m⋆
ut(Xt)
Q
u∈Γt\s m⋆
ut(Xt). The message
update equation in (32) can then be re-written as
mts(Xs)
m⋆
ts(Xs) =
Z
X
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψt(Xt) Q
u∈Γt\s mut(Xt)
m⋆
ts(Xs)
Y
u∈Γt\s
mut(Xt)
m⋆
ut(Xt) dXt.
(35)
The belief at any iteration becomes
Bs(Xs) = αΨs(Xs)
Y
u∈Γs
mus(Xs) =
 Y
u∈Γs
mst(Xs)
m⋆
st(Xs)
!  
αΨs(Xs)
Y
u∈Γs
m⋆
st(Xs)
!
.
(36)
We reparameterize the message as
mst(Xt) ←−mst(Xt)
m⋆
st(Xt) .
(37)
Since the potentials are learned via BP, we can use the relation in (31) to obtain
mts(Xs) =
Z
X
P⋆(Xt|Xs)
Y
u∈Γt\s
mut(Xt) dXt.
(38)
Similarly, we obtain from (30) that
Bs(Xs) =
 Y
u∈Γs
mst(Xs)
!
P⋆(Xs).
(39)
Messages from Evidence Node
Given evidence xt at node Xt, the outgoing message from Xt to Xs is mts(Xs) =
αΨst(Xs, xt)Ψt(xt). Using similar reasoning to the case of an internal node, we have
mts(Xs)
m⋆
ts(Xs) = Ψst(Xs, xt)Ψt(xt)
m⋆
ts(Xs)
(40)
=
Ψst(Xs, xt)Ψt(xt) Q
u∈Γt\s m⋆
ut(xt)
m⋆
ts(Xs)
1
Q
u∈Γt\s m⋆
ut(xt)
(41)
= P⋆(xt|Xs)
1
Q
u∈Γt\s m⋆
ut(xt)
(42)
∝P⋆(xt|Xs)
(43)
where Q
u∈Γt\s m⋆
ut(xt) is constant given a ﬁxed value Xt = xt. Reparametrizing the message mts(Xs) ←mts(Xs)
m⋆
ts(Xs), the
outgoing message from the evidence node is simply the true likelihood function evaluated at xt.
7
A Note on Kernelization of Gaussian BP
In this section, we consider the problem of deﬁning a joint Gaussian graphical model in the feature space induced by a
kernel. We follow Bickson (2008) in our presentation of the original Gaussian BP setting. We will show that assuming a
Gaussian in an inﬁnite feature space leads to challenges in interpretation and estimation of the model.
Consider a pairwise MRF,
P(X) =
Y
s∈V
Ψs(Xs)
Y
(s,t)∈E
Ψst(Xs, Xt).
(44)
In the case of the Gaussian, the probability density function takes the form
P(X)
∝
exp
 −1
2(X −µ)⊤A(X −µ)

∝
exp
 −1
2X⊤AX −b⊤X

,
where A = C−1 is the precision matrix, and
Aµ = b.
Putting this in the form (44), the node and edge potentials are written
Ψs(Xs) ≜exp
 −1
2X⊤
s AssXs + bsXs

(45)
and
Ψst(Xs, Xt) ≜exp
 −X⊤
s AstXt

.
(46)
We now consider how these operations would appear in Hilbert space. In this case, we would have
Ψs(Xs) := exp
 −1
2 ⟨φ(Xs), Assφ(Xs)⟩F + ⟨bs, φ(Xs)⟩F

,
and
Ψst(Xs, Xt) := exp (−⟨φ(Xs), Astφ(Xt)⟩F) .

Le Song, Arthur Gretton, Danny Bickson, Yucheng Low, Carlos Guestrin
We call the Ass and Ast precision operators, by analogy with the ﬁnite dimensional case. At this point, we already
encounter a potential difﬁculty in kernelizing Gaussian BP: how do we learn the operators Ass, bs and Ast from data? We
could in principle deﬁne a covariance operator C with (s, t)th block the pairwise covariance operator Cst, but Ast would
then be the (s, t)th block of C−1, which is difﬁcult to compute. As we shall see below, however, these operators appear in
the BP message updates.
Next, we describe a message passing procedure for the Gaussian potentials in (45) and (46). The message from t to s is
written
mts(Xs) =
Z
X
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψt(Xt)
Y
u∈Γt\s
mut(Xt)
|
{z
}
(a)
dXt.
We ﬁrst consider term (a) in the above. We will assume, with justiﬁcation to follow, that mut(Xt) takes the form
mut(Xt) ∝exp
 −1
2X⊤
t PutXt + µ⊤
utXt

,
where the terms Put and µut are deﬁned by recursions speciﬁed below (we retain linear algebraic notation for simplicity).
It follows that Ψt(Xt) Q
u∈Γt\s mut(Xt) is proportional to a Gaussian,
Ψt(Xt)
Y
u∈Γt\s
mut(Xt) ∝exp

−1
2X⊤
t Pt\sXt + µ⊤
t\sXt

,
where we deﬁne the intermediate operators
µt\s := µt +
X
u∈Γt\s
µut
and
Pt\s := Ass +
X
u∈Γt\s
Put .
To compute the message mts(Xs), we integrate
mts(Xs)
=
Z
X
Ψst(Xs, Xt)Ψt(Xt)
Y
u∈Γt\s
mut(Xt) dXt
=
Z
X
exp (−XtAtsXs) exp

−1
2X⊤
t Pt\sXt + µ⊤
t\sXt

dXt
(47)
Completing the square, we get the parameters of the message mts in the standard form,
Pts = −A⊤
tsP −1
t\sAts
(48)
µts = −µ⊤
t\sP −1
t\sAts.
(49)
There are two main difﬁculties in implementing the above procedure in feature space. First, it is not clear how to learn
the precision operators from the data. Second, we need to invert these precision operators. Thus, it remains a challenging
open question to deﬁne Gaussian BP in feature space. The feature space Gaussian BP updates may be contrasted with the
kernel BP updates we propose in the main text. The latter have regularized closed form empirical estimates, and they are
very different from the Gaussian BP form in (47) and parameter updates in (48) and (49).
8
Message Error Incurred by the Additional Feature Approximation
We bound the difference between the estimated conditional embedding operator bUX⊗
t |Xs and its counterpart eUX⊗
t |Xs after
further feature approximation. Assume ∥φ(x)∥F ≤1, and deﬁne the tensor feature ξ(x) := N
u\s φ(x). Denote by ˜ξ(x)
and ˜φ(x) the respective approximations of ξ(x) and φ. Furthermore, let the approximation error after the incomplete QR
decomposition be ϵ = max
n
maxX

φ(x) −˜φ(x)

F , maxX

ξ(X) −˜ξ(x)

H
o
. It follows that

 bUX⊗
t |Xs −eUX⊗
t |Xs

HS
(50)
≤

 bCX⊗
t Xs( bCXsXs + λmI)−1 −eCX⊗
t Xs( eCXsXs + λmI)−1

HS
(51)
≤

( bCX⊗
t Xs −eCX⊗
t Xs)( bCXsXs + λmI)−1

HS +

 eCX⊗
t Xs
h
( eCXsXs + λmI)−1 −( bCXsXs + λmI)−1i

HS
(52)
≤1
λm

 bCX⊗
t Xs −eCX⊗
t Xs

HS +
1
λ3/2
m

 bCXsXs −eCXsXs

HS .
(53)

Kernel Belief Propagation
For the ﬁrst term,
1
λm

 bCX⊗
t Xs −eCX⊗
t Xs

HS
(54)
= 1
λm

1
m
X
i
ξ(xi
s)φ(xi
s)⊤−1
m
X
i
˜ξ(xi
s)˜φ(xi
s)⊤

HS
(55)
≤1
λm
1
m
X
i

ξ(xi
s)φ(xi
s)⊤−˜ξ(xi
s)˜φ(xi
s)⊤

HS
(56)
≤1
λm
max
i

ξ(xi
s)φ(xi
s)⊤−˜ξ(xi
s)˜φ(xi
s)⊤

HS
(57)
≤1
λm
max
i
n

ξ(xi
s)φ(xi
s)⊤−˜ξ(xi
s)φ(xi
s)⊤

HS +

˜ξ(xi
s)φ(xi
s)⊤−˜ξ(xi
s)˜φ(xi
s)⊤

HS
o
(58)
≤2ϵ
λm
.
(59)
Similarly, for the second term,
1
λ3/2
m

 bCXsXs −eCXsXs

HS ≤
2ϵ
λ3/2
m
.
(60)
Combining the results, we obtain

 bUX⊗
t |Xs −eUX⊗
t |Xs

HS ≤2ϵ(λ−1
m + λ−3/2
m
).
(61)
