DMOps: Data Management Operations and Recipes
Eujeong Choi 1 * Chanjun Park 1 *
Abstract
Data-centric AI has shed light on the significance
of data within the machine learning (ML) pipeline.
Recognizing its significance, academia, industry,
and government departments have suggested vari-
ous NLP data research initiatives. While the abil-
ity to utilize existing data is essential, the ability
to build a dataset has become more critical than
ever, especially in the industry. In consideration
of this trend, we propose a ”Data Management
Operations and Recipes” to guide the industry in
optimizing the building of datasets for NLP prod-
ucts. This paper presents the concept of DMOps
which is derived from real-world experiences with
NLP data management and aims to streamline
data operations by offering a baseline.
1. Introduction
With the emergence of Data-centric AI (Polyzotis & Zaharia,
2021; Mazumder et al., 2022), various in-depth natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) data research has been introduced
in academia alongside the wide range of policies from in-
dustry and government departments (Pencheva et al., 2020).
In the case of academia, there are studies boosting model
performance through large-scale datasets (Liu et al., 2021;
Costa-juss`a et al., 2022) along with the production of bench-
mark datasets for objective performance comparison be-
tween models (Wang et al., 2018; Ruder, 2021). Further-
more, there are also benchmark datasets that specialize in
specific tasks (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Alt et al., 2020). The
government contributes to the field by implementing public
data open policies and releasing datasets from the National
Statistics department (Panagos et al., 2012).
However, the industry frequently dives into an untapped and
specialized domain, where a ready-to-go dataset is rarely
there. Especially for B2B companies, there is usually an
*Equal contribution 1Upstage, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
urgent demand for data that fits their customers or business
items (Pustejovsky & Stubbs, 2012). Since the open source
and benchmark datasets are normally insufficient to meet
these specific demands, additional data production is always
a necessary step to initiate a particular task. As a result, the
majority of AI businesses started to build their own task-
specific datasets, alongside the emergence of companies
that specialize in operating crowd workers to meet these
demands. Additionally, research on efficient data production
on human-in-the-loop started to make appearance (Doan,
2018; Wu et al., 2022).
Despite its necessity, there has been a paucity of studies
in the field of NLP data production from an industry per-
spective. To the best of our knowledge, there has not yet
been research that proposes the entire process starting from
analyzing the business standpoint to data annotation and
evaluation. Therefore, we propose a ”Data Management Op-
erations and Recipes (DMOps)” that will assist in building
an NLP dataset efficiently and economically. Specially, we
propose a DMOps that can produce high-quality NLP data
needed in manufacturing deep learning models.
2. DMOps
Data management operations involve the integration of hu-
man input and decision-making into a data management
pipeline or system. This involves a series of tasks such as
data annotation, data quality assurance, and other activities
that require a human touch (Doan, 2018; Goosen, 2019;
Solis et al., 2019; Eo et al., 2021). One way to implement
data management operations is through the use of recipes.
Recipes are step-by-step instructions for performing a spe-
cific task or set of tasks and can be used to guide human
workers through the NLP data management process.
Our Data Recipes consists of 12 steps. Through these steps,
we go over the entire process of data operations : from
establishing the goal of the project to delivering the final
data to the modeling team. The name and explanation of
each step is as follows.
1. Establish the Project Goal
: Analyzing the purpose
and requirements of data production is the first step of the
recipe. This step requires collaboration with a team of NLP
engineers and business operators. Through communication,
arXiv:2301.01228v3  [cs.DB]  26 Jun 2023

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2023
we can decide the input and output format of data that is
suitable to the model of choice, and also set data milestones
that fit the timeline of the business operation team.
Unlike academia where research starts from related works or
enhancing existing benchmark datasets, the industry starts
with its users and customer needs (Tarafdar et al., 2019;
Kerzel, 2021; Alenezi et al., 2022). This gap between the
two areas must be considered when setting the goal in the
first place. To build a good dataset in the industry, we need
to start from the end-user’s needs and requirements (Laato
et al., 2022).
2. Secure Raw Data
: Researching and collecting raw
data is the second step of the recipes.
Five possible
cases of collecting raw data are 1) the client providing
the raw data (Ahmed, 2004), 2) using open-sourced pub-
lic data (Lhoest et al., 2021), and 3) purchasing the raw
data from its source platform, 4) crawl from website (Pant
et al., 2004) 5) crowdsourcing (Estell´es-Arolas & Gonz´alez-
Ladr´on-de Guevara, 2012; Hossain & Kauranen, 2015). The
key issue here is the copyright of each data source. License
information must be checked thoroughly, and getting a le-
gal review is recommended before its usage (Khayyat &
Bannister, 2015).
Furthermore, providing access and editing rights to the raw
data must be dealt with caution. To prohibit unauthorized
modifications from multiple parties, a sturdy data storage
structure with limited access rights are necessary.
3. Data Pre-processing
: The third step is improving the
quality of the raw data through pre-processing. Basically
the pre-processing consists of two main tasks: first, adjust-
ing the format of data regarding its requirements, second,
filtering non-ethical, privacy invading, and noisy data (Wie-
gand et al., 2018; Park et al., 2020). This step is all about
practicing quality over quantity.
These preprocessing steps can be broadly divided into two
tasks. The first task is to improve the quality of the data
based on the inherent characteristics of the data (Rahm
et al., 2000; Ridzuan & Zainon, 2019). A representative
example of this is parallel corpus filtering in machine trans-
lation (Koehn et al., 2020), which is a data-centric method
that improves the performance of the model without chang-
ing the structure of the model by only controlling the quality
of the data (Park et al., 2022).
The second task is to address ethical issues with the
data (Van Wel & Royakkers, 2004). This includes attaching
data license information in advance or masking personal
information if it exists. If these tasks are not clearly carried
out in advance, there may be a risk of not being able to use
the data even after data annotation and validation (Martin,
2020). This is why it is considered a highly important task.
4. Design a Data Schema
: The fourth step involves
designing an efficient annotation schema that captures all
required information. This step is crucial, as it requires
capturing the desired information fully while also ensur-
ing efficiency to prevent cognitive overload for annotators.
Also, figuring out parts that can be somewhat automated
(pseudo-labeling) and parts that need human intervention
(annotating) is essential in making the process efficient and
moreover, accurate. With few pilot annotation iterations, the
data scheme is expected to reach its optimal design (Gregor
et al., 2020; He et al., 2022).
This step is one of the most important steps in designing
data, such as ”What kind of meaningful information to
extract in Information extraction (IE)? (Hobbs & Riloff,
2010)”, ”What entity to tag in name entity recognition
(NER) (Mansouri et al., 2008)”, ”In document summariza-
tion How much information should be compressed? (Yao
et al., 2017)”, ”When constructing data for machine trans-
lation (MT), should paraphrase, literal translation, or tran-
scendental translation be used? (Stahlberg, 2020)”.
In academia, these elements are already pre-determined
and research is conducted in that state, but in industry, this
information must also be re-designed according to customer
needs (Tseng et al., 2021).
5. Prepare a Guideline
: The fifth step is the documenta-
tion of the data scheme. Its purpose is to deliver the designed
annotation system to the expected annotators. The difficulty
of the guideline should be monitored since the clarity and
detailed explanation may be in a trade-off relationship.
6. Recruit Annotators
: The sixth step is recruiting the
annotators. The key is to select workers that are fit for
the task for an efficient and accurate outcome. The best
case would be selecting those who scored high on a test
similar to the actual annotation task. Additionally, ethical
considerations are also necessary. Good data is one that is
created with fair compensation for the workers and without
any unnecessary costs. It is important to take these factors
into account as well (Foley et al., 2014).
7. Instruct Annotators
: The seventh step is instruct-
ing the annotators with the guideline made above. In this
stage, two-way communication that draws out questions
and debates is the key whereas one-sided communication is
discouraged.
8. Data Annotation
: This step involves annotating the
actual data, where annotators transfer their linguistic, cog-
nitive, and visual intuition into the data. To ensure con-
sistency among annotators, it is important to establish a
unified approach and provide a safe environment for ques-
tions. Keeping a question log is also suggested to prevent

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2023
inconsistencies within the corresponding answers.
In addition, in the field of NLP, the development of annota-
tion tools is of paramount importance. This is due to several
key factors, including the need for quality control, efficiency,
and scalability (Grosman et al., 2020). In terms of quality
control, an annotation tool allows for data annotation to
be performed in a consistent and accurate manner. This is
crucial for ensuring the quality of the data used for training
NLP models. Additionally, an annotation tool can make
the annotation process more efficient, which is especially
important when building large datasets or for data that needs
to be annotated quickly (Pei et al., 2022).
Scalability is also a crucial factor to consider when develop-
ing an annotation tool. As the amount of NLP data continues
to grow, a tool that can handle the volume of data is essen-
tial. Furthermore, an annotation tool can be designed to
assist human annotators, providing suggestions and feed-
back, thus increasing annotation speed and reducing human
error (Perry, 2021).
To sum up, the development of a well-designed annotation
tool is essential for NLP data management. It is a crucial
step in training and evaluating NLP models and can greatly
aid in preserving and analyzing linguistic data.
9. Data Internal Factor Verification
: This ninth step is
inspecting the annotated data. During this step, inspectors,
who are usually selected from the annotator pool, must
identify commonly occurring human errors and sort out
the edge cases through discussions. Considering the nature
of the Human-in-the-loop process, this step is essential to
ensure the fidelity of the dataset.
In this stage, we recommend consensus labeling (Tang &
Lease, 2011). Inter-annotator agreement (IAA) should be
used to check the consistency of data labels (Ragheb &
Dickinson, 2013; Boh´aˇc et al., 2017) due to the potential for
human errors and misunderstandings of annotation guide-
lines. As human annotators are prone to inconsistencies
and errors, it is necessary to verify the consistency of labels
through IAA.
Certainly, data annotation can also be carried out in two
steps. In the first round, rough annotation is performed on
about 10 data, and IAA is checked in advance to correct the
workers’ misunderstandings. In the second round, using the
corrected knowledge of the workers, the task of annotating
all data is undertaken in a more thorough manner. In other
words, by effectively combining the data annotation stage
and the data inspection stage, the efficiency of the workers
can be improved.
To sum up, data internal factor verification step is a process
of validation for the inherent elements of the data. However,
it does not verify external factors or the relationship between
the data and the model (i.e. if the data truly helps improve
the performance of the model). Therefore, additional steps
such as ”data external factor verification” and ”data evalu-
ation through model verification” should be considered to
fully validate the data.
10. Data External Factor Verification
: The tenth step is
verifying the data external Factor. When inspecting data, it
is necessary to first determine whether the work has been
completed by observing the given guideline. Also, 1) data
sufficiency, 2) data diversity, 3) data trustworthiness, 4)
data privacy and security 5) data ethics suitability should be
reviewed (Roh et al., 2019; Koo et al., 2022).
In other words, going beyond the internal information of the
data, it is a step to thoroughly examine the sufficiency, diver-
sity, reliability, security, and ethics of the data from various
perspectives. The best way to conduct this verification is
through Institutional Review Boards or external advisory
committees (Blee & Currier, 2011).
11.
Data Evaluation via Model Verification
: The
eleventh step is verifying the quality of data through ac-
tual modeling. In order to quantitatively verify whether the
data is made as planned, various experiments are conducted
such as checking data efficiency by increasing the amount
of data or sectioning the data to check the consistency of its
quality (Moon et al., 2021; Park et al., 2021). It is natural
to find artifacts within one’s data; after identifying the re-
peated errors, revisiting the recipes from step 5 is frequently
required to enhance the quality of data. If there are parts that
do not match our purpose while proceeding the steps, we
should return to stage 5 and revise the guideline for another
iteration.
To complement the ’human-in-the-loop’ cycle, it’s essential
to detect errors through the model and clean them through
human intervention. This cycle ensures error-free data and
alignment with the model’s outcomes, resulting in cohesive
results. The goal is to create data that is both error-free and
coherent with the model.
12. Data Deliverables
: Final step of the recipes is de-
livering the final data outcome. In other words, it is the
process of delivering annotated data to engineers or cus-
tomers. When delivering, the versioning must be adapted to
the protocol, and it is important to reveal the features of the
data with its sample. Furthermore, after going through the
exploratory data analysis (EDA) process, it is recommended
to deliver the data analysis and the quality evaluation docu-
ment together.
The quality of data in industry can be assessed based on sev-
eral factors, including the informativeness of metadata, the
legitimacy of data sources (e.g., compensated workers with-

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2023
out unnecessary cost), well-established versioning systems,
and intuitive and organized data storage structures. While
these factors may seem obvious, they are crucial to creating
high-quality data. In academia, these factors may not be
given as much weight, but in industry, they are critical and
together can elevate good data to the level of great data.
3. Discussion of DMOps
Why DMOps?
Our proposed ”DMOps” provides a uni-
versal and fixed process for data construction that can be
applied to any NLP task or domain. This approach can serve
as a baseline for data production, as it ensures a consistent
and reliable process for generating high-quality data. The
visualization of DMOps is shown in Figure 1.
Future of DMOps
As DMOps evolve, automation will
play a larger role in data production. This requires im-
proving the efficiency and automation of current human-
performed tasks. Additionally, synthetic data will become
increasingly important, and methods for efficient inspec-
tion of this data through self-annotation by humans need
to be developed. Managing data generated by large-scale
language models like ChatGPT 1 and GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020) efficiently is crucial in maintaining high data quality.
4. Conclusion and Future Works
In this paper, we presented DMOps, a task-agnostic method-
ology for efficiently producing high-quality NLP data with
human annotation, which can serve as a baseline for any
NLP data production. To increase the reliability of the pro-
posed process, we plan to conduct quantitative verification
at each stage of the process in the future. Additionally, we
aim to conduct a study to investigate the difference in data
quality when using the proposed data recipes compared to
not using them.
