Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 36 (2009) 341-385
Submitted 05/09; published 11/09
Multilingual Part-of-Speech Tagging: Two Unsupervised Approaches
Tahira Naseem

Benjamin Snyder

Jacob Eisenstein

Regina Barzilay

Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge MA 02139
Abstract
We demonstrate the effectiveness of multilingual learning for unsupervised part-of-speech tag-
ging. The central assumption of our work is that by combining cues from multiple languages, the
structure of each becomes more apparent. We consider two ways of applying this intuition to the
problem of unsupervised part-of-speech tagging: a model that directly merges tag structures for
a pair of languages into a single sequence and a second model which instead incorporates mul-
tilingual context using latent variables. Both approaches are formulated as hierarchical Bayesian
models, using Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling techniques for inference. Our results demon-
strate that by incorporating multilingual evidence we can achieve impressive performance gains
across a range of scenarios. We also found that performance improves steadily as the number of
available languages increases.
1. Introduction
In this paper, we explore the application of multilingual learning to part-of-speech tagging when no
annotation is available.1 The fundamental idea upon which our work is based is that the patterns of
ambiguity inherent in part-of-speech tag assignments differ across languages. At the lexical level, a
word with part-of-speech tag ambiguity in one language may correspond to an unambiguous word
in the other language. For example, the word “can” in English may function as an auxiliary verb,
a noun, or a regular verb. However, many other languages are likely to express these different
senses with three distinct lexemes. Languages also differ in their patterns of structural ambiguity.
For example, the presence of an article in English greatly reduces the ambiguity of the succeeding
tag. In languages without articles, however, this constraint is obviously absent. The key idea of
multilingual learning is that by combining natural cues from multiple languages, the structure of
each becomes more apparent.
Even in expressing the same meaning, languages take different syntactic routes, leading to
cross-lingual variation in part-of-speech patterns. Therefore, an effective multilingual model must
accurately represent common linguistic structure, yet remain ﬂexible to the idiosyncrasies of each
language. This tension only becomes stronger as additional languages are added to the mix. Thus,
a key challenge of multilingual learning is to capture cross-lingual correlations while preserving
individual language tagsets, tag selections, and tag orderings.
1. Code,
data
sets,
and
the
raw
outputs
of
our
experiments
are
available
at
http://groups.csail.mit.edu/rbg/code/multiling pos.
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
In this paper, we explore two different approaches for modeling cross-lingual correlations. The
ﬁrst approach directly merges pairs of tag sequences into a single bilingual sequence, employing
joint distributions over aligned tag-pairs; for unaligned tags, language-speciﬁc distributions are still
used. The second approach models multilingual context using latent variables instead of explicit
node merging. For a group of aligned words, the multilingual context is encapsulated in the value of
a corresponding latent variable. Conditioned on the latent variable, the tagging decisions for each
language remain independent. In contrast to the ﬁrst model, the architecture of the hidden variable
model allows it to scale gracefully as the number of languages increases.
Both approaches are formulated as hierarchical Bayesian models with an underlying trigram
HMM substructure for each language. The ﬁrst model operates as a simple directed graphical
model with only one additional coupling parameter beyond the transition and emission parameters
used in monolingual HMMs. The latent variable model, on the other hand, is formulated as a
non-parametric model; it can be viewed as performing multilingual clustering on aligned sets of
tag variables. Each latent variable value indexes a separate distribution on tags for each language,
appropriate to the given context. For both models, we perform inference using Markov Chain Monte
Carlo sampling techniques.
We evaluate our models on a parallel corpus of eight languages: Bulgarian, Czech, English,
Estonian, Hungarian, Romanian, Serbian, and Slovene. We consider a range of scenarios that vary
from combinations of bilingual models to a single model that is jointly trained on all eight lan-
guages. Our results show consistent and robust improvements over a monolingual baseline for
almost all combinations of languages. When a complete tag lexicon is available and the latent vari-
able model is trained using eight languages, average performance increases from 91.1% accuracy
to 95%, more than halving the gap between unsupervised and supervised performance. In more re-
alistic cases, where the lexicon is restricted to only frequently occurring words, we see even larger
gaps between monolingual and multilingual performance. In one such scenario, average multilin-
gual performance increases to 82.8% from a monolingual baseline of 74.8%. For some language
pairs, the improvement is especially noteworthy; for instance, in complete lexicon scenario, Serbian
improves from 84.5% to 94.5% when paired with English.
We ﬁnd that in most scenarios the latent variable model achieves higher performance than the
merged structure model, even when it too is restricted to pairs of languages. Moreover the hidden
variable model can effectively accommodate large numbers of languages which makes it a more
desirable framework for multilingual learning. However, we observe that the latent variable model
is somewhat sensitive to lexicon coverage. The performance of the merged structure model, on the
other hand, is more robust in this respect. In the case of the drastically reduced lexicon (with 100
words only), its performance is clearly better than the hidden variable model. This indicates that the
merged structure model might be a better choice for the languages that lack lexicon resources.
A surprising discovery of our experiments is the marked variation in the level of improvement
across language pairs. If the best pairing for each language is chosen by an oracle, average bilingual
performance reaches 95.4%, compared to average performance of 93.1% across all pairs. Our
experiments demonstrate that this variability is inﬂuenced by cross-lingual links between languages
as well as by the model under consideration. We identify several factors that contribute to the
success of language pairings, but none of them can uniquely predict which supplementary language
is most helpful. These results suggest that when multi-parallel corpora are available, a model that
simultaneously exploits all the languages – such as the latent variable model proposed here – is
342

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
preferable to a strategy that selects one of the bilingual models. We found that performance tends
to improves steadily as the number of available languages increases.
In realistic scenarios, tagging resources for some number of languages may already be available.
Our models can easily exploit any amount of tagged data in any subset of available languages.
As our experiments show, as annotation is added, performance increases even for those languages
lacking resources.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 compares our approach with
previous work on multilingual learning and unsupervised part-of-speech tagging. Section 3 presents
two approaches for modeling multilingual tag sequences, along with their inference procedures and
implementation details. Section 4 describes corpora used in the experiments, preprocessing steps
and various evaluation scenarios. The results of the experiments and their analysis are given in
Sections 5, and 6. We summarize our contributions and consider directions for future work in
Section 7.
2. Related Work
We identify two broad areas of related work: multilingual learning and inducing part-of-speech tags
without labeled data. Our discussion of multilingual learning focuses on unsupervised approaches
that incorporate two or more languages. We then describe related work on unsupervised and semi-
supervised models for part-of-speech tagging.
2.1 Multilingual Learning
The potential of multilingual data as a rich source of linguistic knowledge has been recognized since
the early days of empirical natural language processing. Because patterns of ambiguity vary greatly
across languages, unannotated multilingual data can serve as a learning signal in an unsupervised
setting. We are especially interested in methods to leverage more than two languages jointly, and
compare our approach with relevant prior work.
Multilingual learning may also be applied in a semi-supervised setting, typically by projecting
annotations across a parallel corpus to another language where such resources do not exist (e.g.,
Yarowsky, Ngai, & Wicentowski, 2000; Diab & Resnik, 2002; Pad´o & Lapata, 2006; Xi & Hwa,
2005). As our primary focus is on the unsupervised induction of cross-linguistic structures, we do
not address this area.
2.1.1 BILINGUAL LEARNING
Word sense disambiguation (WSD) was among the ﬁrst successful applications of automated multi-
lingual learning (Dagan et al., 1991; Brown et al., 1991). Lexical ambiguity differs across languages
– each sense of a polysemous word in one language may translate to a distinct counterpart in another
language. This makes it possible to use aligned foreign-language words as a source of noisy super-
vision. Bilingual data has been leveraged in this way in a variety of WSD models (Brown et al.,
1991; Resnik & Yarowsky, 1997; Ng, Wang, & Chan, 2003; Diab & Resnik, 2002; Li & Li, 2002;
Bhattacharya, Getoor, & Bengio, 2004), and the quality of supervision provided by multilingual
data closely approximates that of manual annotation (Ng et al., 2003). Polysemy is one source of
ambiguity for part-of-speech tagging; thus our model implicitly leverages multilingual WSD in the
context of a higher-level syntactic analysis.
343

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
Multilingual learning has previously been applied to syntactic analysis; a pioneering effort was
the inversion transduction grammar of Wu (1995). This method is trained on an unannotated parallel
corpus using a probabilistic bilingual lexicon and deterministic constraints on bilingual tree struc-
tures. The inside-outside algorithm (Baker, 1979) is used to learn parameters for manually speciﬁed
bilingual grammar. These ideas were extended by subsequent work on synchronous grammar in-
duction and hierarchical phrase-based translation (Wu & Wong, 1998; Chiang, 2005).
One characteristic of this family of methods is that they were designed for inherently multilin-
gual tasks such as machine translation and lexicon induction. While we share the goal of learning
from multilingual data, we seek to induce monolingual syntactic structures that can be applied even
when multilingual data is unavailable.
In this respect, our approach is closer to the unsupervised multilingual grammar induction work
of Kuhn (2004). Starting from the hypothesis that trees induced over parallel sentences should
exhibit cross-lingual structural similarities, Kuhn uses word-level alignments to constrain the set
of plausible syntactic constituents. These constraints are implemented through hand-crafted deter-
ministic rules, and are incorporated in expectation-maximization grammar induction to assign zero
likelihood to illegal bracketings. The probabilities of the productions are then estimated separately
for each language, and can be applied to monolingual data directly. Kuhn shows that this form of
multilingual training yields better monolingual parsing performance.
Our methods incorporate cross-lingual information in a fundamentally different manner. Rather
than using hand-crafted deterministic rules – which may require modiﬁcation for each language
pair – we estimate probabilistic multilingual patterns directly from data. Moreover, the estimation
of multilingual patterns is incorporated directly into the tagging model itself.
Finally, multilingual learning has recently been applied to unsupervised morphological seg-
mentation (Snyder & Barzilay, 2008). This research is related, but moving from morphological to
syntactic analysis imposes new challenges. One key difference is that Snyder & Barzilay model
morphemes as unigrams, ignoring the transitions between morphemes. In syntactic analysis, transi-
tion information provides a crucial constraint, requiring a fundamentally different model structure.
2.1.2 BEYOND BILINGUAL LEARNING
While most work on multilingual learning focuses on bilingual analysis, some models operate on
more than one pair of languages. For instance, Genzel (2005) describes a method for inducing a
multilingual lexicon from a group of related languages. This work ﬁrst induces bilingual models for
each pair of languages and then combines them. We take a different approach by simultaneously
learning from all languages, rather than combining bilingual results.
A related thread of research is multi-source machine translation (Och & Ney, 2001; Utiyama
& Isahara, 2006; Cohn & Lapata, 2007; Chen, Eisele, & Kay, 2008; Bertoldi, Barbaiani, Federico,
& Cattoni, 2008) where the goal is to translate from multiple source languages to a single target
language. By using multi-source corpora, these systems alleviate sparseness and increase transla-
tion coverage, thereby improving overall translation accuracy. Typically, multi-source translation
systems build separate bilingual models and then select a ﬁnal translation from their output. For in-
stance, a method developed by Och and Ney (2001) generates several alternative translations from
source sentences expressed in different languages and selects the most likely candidate. Cohn and
Lapata (2007) consider a different generative model: rather than combining alternative sentence
translations in a post-processing step, their model estimates the target phrase translation distribu-
344

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
tion by marginalizing over multiple translations from various source languages. While their model
combines multilingual information at the phrase level, at its core are estimates for phrase tables that
are obtained using bilingual models.
In contrast, we present an approach for unsupervised multilingual learning that builds a single
joint model across all languages. This makes maximal use of unlabeled data and sidesteps the
difﬁcult problem of combining the output of multiple bilingual systems without supervision.
2.2 Unsupervised Part-of-Speech Tagging
Unsupervised part-of-speech tagging involves predicting the tags for words, without annotations of
the correct tags for any word tokens. Generally speaking, the unsupervised setting does permit the
use of declarative knowledge about the relationship between tags and word types, in the form of a
dictionary of the permissible tags for the most common words. This setup is referred to as “semi-
supervised” by Toutanova and Johnson (2008), but is considered “unsupervised” in most other pa-
pers on the topic (e.g., Goldwater & Grifﬁths, 2007). Our evaluation considers tag dictionaries of
varying levels of coverage.
Since the work of Merialdo (1994), the hidden Markov model (HMM) has been the most com-
mon representation2 for unsupervised tagging (Banko & Moore, 2004). Part-of-speech tags are
encoded as a linear chain of hidden variables, and words are treated as emitted observations. Recent
advances include the use of a fully Bayesian HMM (Johnson, 2007; Goldwater & Grifﬁths, 2007),
which places prior distributions on tag transition and word-emission probabilities. Such Bayesian
priors permit integration over parameter settings, yielding models that perform well across a range
of settings. This is particularly important in the case of small datasets, where many of the counts
used for maximum-likelihood parameter estimation will be sparse. The Bayesian setting also facil-
itates the integration of other data sources, and thus serves as the departure point for our work.
Several recent papers have explored the development of alternative training procedures and
model structures in an effort to incorporate more expressive features than permitted by the genera-
tive HMM. Smith and Eisner (2005) maintain the HMM structure, but incorporate a large number
of overlapping features in a conditional log-linear formulation. Contrastive estimation is used to
provide a training criterion which maximizes the probability of the observed sentences compared to
a set of similar sentences created by perturbing word order. The use of a large set of features and a
discriminative training procedure led to strong performance gains.
Toutanova and Johnson (2008) propose an LDA-style model for unsupervised part-of-speech
tagging, grouping words through a latent layer of ambiguity classes. Each ambiguity class corre-
sponds to a set of permissible tags; in many languages this set is tightly constrained by morpho-
logical features, thus allowing an incomplete tagging lexicon to be expanded. Haghighi and Klein
(2006) also use a variety of morphological features, learning in an undirected Markov Random Field
that permits overlapping features. They propagate information from a small number of labeled “pro-
totype” examples using the distributional similarity between prototype and non-prototype words.
Our focus is to effectively incorporate multilingual evidence, and we require a simple model
that can easily be applied to multiple languages with widely varying structural properties. We view
this direction as orthogonal to reﬁning monolingual tagging models for any particular language.
2. In addition to the basic HMM architecture, other part-of-speech tagging approaches have been explored (Brill, 1995;
Mihalcea, 2004)
345

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
I
l
o
v
e
f
i
s
h
J
’
a
d
o
r
e
l
e
s
p
o
i
s
s
o
n
a
n
i
o
h
e
v
d
a
g
i
m
M
u
j
h
e
m
a
c
h
c
h
l
i
p
a
s
a
n
d
h
a
i
I
l
o
v
e
f
i
s
h
J
’
a
d
o
r
e
l
e
s
p
o
i
s
s
o
n
I
l
o
v
e
f
i
s
h
J
’
a
d
o
r
e
l
e
s
p
o
i
s
s
o
n
(
a
)
(
b
)
(
c
)
Figure 1: Example graphical structures of (a) two standard monolingual HMMs, (b) our merged
node model, and (c) our latent variable model with three superlingual variables.
3. Models
The motivating hypothesis of this work is that patterns of ambiguity at the part-of-speech level differ
across languages in systematic ways. By considering multiple languages simultaneously, the total
inherent ambiguity can be reduced in each language. But with the potential advantages of leveraging
multilingual information comes the challenge of respecting language-speciﬁc characteristics such as
tag inventory, selection and order. To this end, we develop models that jointly tag parallel streams
of text in multiple languages, while maintaining language-speciﬁc tag sets and parameters over
transitions and emissions.
346

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Part-of-speech tags reﬂect the syntactic and semantic function of the tagged words. Across
languages, pairs of word tokens that are known to share semantic or syntactic function should have
tags that are related in systematic ways. The word alignment task in machine translation is to
identify just such pairs of words in parallel sentences. Aligned word pairs serve as the cross-lingual
anchors of our model, allowing information to be shared via joint tagging decisions. Research in
machine translation has produced robust tools for identifying word alignments; we use such a tool
as a black box and treat its output as a ﬁxed, observed property of the parallel data.
Given a set of parallel sentences, we posit a hidden Markov model (HMM) for each language,
where the hidden states represent the tags and the emissions are the words. In the unsupervised
monolingual setting, inference on the part-of-speech tags is performed jointly with estimation of
parameters governing the relationship between tags and words (the emission probabilities) and be-
tween consecutive tags (the transition probabilities). Our multilingual models are built upon this
same structural foundation, so that the emission and transition parameters retain an identical inter-
pretation as in the monolingual setting. Thus, these parameters can be learned on parallel text and
later applied to monolingual data.
We consider two alternative approaches for incorporating cross-lingual information. In the ﬁrst
model, the tags for aligned words are merged into single bi-tag nodes; in the second, latent variable
model, an additional layer of hidden superlingual tags instead exerts inﬂuence on the tags of clusters
of aligned words. The ﬁrst model is primarily designed for bilingual data, while the second model
operates over any number of languages. Figure 1 provides a graphical model representation of the
monolingual, merged node, and latent variable models instantiated over a single parallel sentence.
Both the merged node and latent variable approaches are formalized as hierarchical Bayesian
models. This provides a principled probabilistic framework for integrating multiple sources of
information, and offers well-studied inference techniques. Table 1 summarizes the mathematical
notation used throughout this section. We now describe each model in depth.
3.1 Bilingual Unsupervised Tagging: A Merged Node Model
In the bilingual merged node model, cross-lingual context is incorporated by creating joint bi-tag
nodes for aligned words. It would be too strong to insist that aligned words have an identical
tag; indeed, it may not even be appropriate to assume that two languages share identical tag sets.
However, when two words are aligned, we do want to choose their tags jointly. To enable this, we
allow the values of the bi-tag nodes to range over all possible tag pairs ⟨t, t′⟩∈T × T ′, where T
and T ′ represent the tagsets for each language.
The tags t and t′ need not be identical, but we do believe that they are systematically related.
This is modeled using a coupling distribution ω, which is multinomial over all tag pairs. The
parameter ω is combined with the standard transition distribution φ in a product-of-experts model.
Thus, the aligned tag pair ⟨yi, y′
j⟩is conditioned on the predecessors yi−1 and y′
j−1, as well as the
coupling parameter ω(yi, y′
j).3 The coupled bi-tag nodes serve as bilingual “anchors” – due to the
Markov dependency structure, even unaligned words may beneﬁt from cross-lingual information
that propagates from these nodes.
3. While describing the merged node model, we consider only the two languages ℓand ℓ′, and use a simpliﬁed notation
in which we write ⟨y, y′⟩to mean ⟨yℓ, yℓ′⟩. Similar abbreviations are used for the language-indexed parameters.
347

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
Notation used in both models
xℓ
i
–
The ith word token of the sentence in language ℓ.
yℓ
i
–
The ith tag of the sentence in language ℓ.
aℓ,ℓ′
–
The word alignments for the language pair ⟨ℓ, ℓ′⟩.
φℓ
t
–
The transition distribution (over tags), conditioned on tag t in lan-
guage ℓ. We describe a bigram transition model, though our imple-
mentation uses trigrams (without bigram interpolations); the ex-
tension is trivial.
θℓ
t
–
The emission distribution (over words), conditioned on tag t in
language ℓ.
φ0
–
The parameter of the symmetric Dirichlet prior on the transition
distributions.
θ0
–
The parameter of the symmetric Dirichlet prior on the emission
distributions.
Notation used in the merged node model
ω
–
A coupling parameter that assigns probability mass to each pair of
aligned tags.
ω0
–
A Dirichlet prior on the coupling parameter.
Ab
–
Distribution over bilingual alignments.
Notation used in the latent variable model
π
–
A multinomial over the superlingual tags z.
α
–
The concentration parameter for π, controlling how much proba-
bility mass is allocated to the ﬁrst few values.
zj
–
The setting of the jth superlingual tag, ranging over the set of in-
tegers, and indexing a distribution set in Ψ.
Ψz = ⟨ψ1
z, ψ2
z, . . . , ψn
z ⟩
–
The zth set of distributions over tags in all languages ℓ1 through
ℓn.
G0
–
A base distribution from which the Ψz are drawn, whose form is
a set of n symmetric Dirichlet distributions each with a parameter
ψ0.
Am
–
Distribution over multilingual alignments.
Table 1: Summary of notation used in the description of both models. As each sentence is treated
in isolation (conditioned on the parameters), the sentence indexing is left implicit.
348

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
We now present a generative account of how the words in each sentence and the parameters
of the model are produced. This generative story forms the basis of our sampling-based inference
procedure.
3.1.1 MERGED NODE MODEL: GENERATIVE STORY
Our generative story assumes the existence of two tagsets, T and T ′, and two vocabularies W and
W ′ – one of each for each language. For ease of exposition, we formulate our model with bigram
tag dependencies. However, in our experiments we used a trigram model (without any bigram
interpolation), which is a trivial extension of the described model.
1. Transition and Emission Parameters. For each tag t ∈T, draw a transition distribution φt
over tags T, and an emission distribution θt over words W. Both the transition and emission
distributions are multinomial, so they are drawn from their conjugate prior, the Dirichlet (Gel-
man, Carlin, Stern, & Rubin, 2004). We use symmetric Dirichlet priors, which encode only an
expectation about the uniformity of the induced multinomials, but not do encode preferences
for speciﬁc words or tags.
For each tag t ∈T ′, draw a transition distribution φ′
t over tags T ′, and an emission distribution
θ′
t over words W ′, both from symmetric Dirichlet priors.
2. Coupling Parameter. Draw a bilingual coupling distribution ω over tag pairs pairs T × T ′.
This distribution is multinomial with dimension |T| · |T ′|, and is drawn from a symmetric
Dirichlet prior ω0 over all tag pairs.
3. Data. For each bilingual parallel sentence:
(a) Draw an alignment a from a bilingual alignment distribution Ab. The following para-
graph deﬁnes a and Ab more formally.
(b) Draw a bilingual sequence of part-of-speech tags (y1, ..., ym), (y′
1, ..., y′
n) according to:
P((y1, ..., ym), (y′
1, ..., y′
n)|a, φ, φ′, ω).4 This joint distribution thus conditions on the
alignment structure, the transition probabilities for both languages, and the coupling
distribution; a formal deﬁnition is given in Formula 1.
(c) For each part-of-speech tag yi in the ﬁrst language, emit a word from the vocabulary W:
xi ∼θyi,
(d) For each part-of-speech tag y′
j in the second language, emit a word from the vocabulary
W ′: x′
j ∼θ′
y′
j.
This completes the outline of the generative story. We now provide more detail on how align-
ments are handled, and on the distribution over coupled part-of-speech tag sequences.
Alignments
An alignment a deﬁnes a bipartite graph between the words x and x′ in two parallel
sentences . In particular, we represent a as a set of integer pairs, indicating the word indices.
Crossing edges are not permitted, as these would lead to cycles in the resulting graphical model;
thus, the existence of an edge (i, j) precludes any additional edges (i + a, j −b) or (i −a, j + b),
4. We use a special end state, rather than explicitly modeling sentence length. Thus the values of m and n are determined
stochastically.
349

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
for a, b ≥0. From a linguistic perspective, we assume that the edge (i, j) indicates that the words
xi and x′
j share some syntactic and/or semantic role in the bilingual parallel sentences.
From the perspective of the generative story, alignments are treated as draws from a distribu-
tion Ab. Since the alignments are always observed, we can remain agnostic about the distribution
Ab, except to require that it assign zero probability to alignments which either: (i) align a single
index in one language to multiple indices in the other language or (ii) contain crossing edges. The
resulting alignments are thus one-to-one, contain no crossing edges, and may be sparse or even
possibly empty. Our technique for obtaining alignments that display these properties is described in
Section 4.2.
Generating Tag Sequences
In a standard hidden Markov model for part-of-speech tagging, the
tags are drawn as a Markov process from the transition distribution. This permits the probability
of a tag sequence to factor across the time steps. Our model employs a similar factorization: the
tags for unaligned words are drawn from their predecessor’s transition distribution, while joined tag
nodes are drawn from a product involving the coupling parameter and the transition distributions
for both languages.
More formally, given an alignment a and sets of transition parameters φ and φ′, we factor the
conditional probability of a bilingual tag sequence (y1, ..., ym), (y′
1, ..., y′
n) into transition probabil-
ities for unaligned tags, and joint probabilities over aligned tag pairs:
P((y1, ..., ym), (y′
1, ..., y′
n)|a, φ, φ′, ω) =
Y
unaligned i
φyi−1(yi)
Y
unaligned j
φ′
y′
j−1(y′
j)
Y
(i,j)∈a
P(yi, y′
j|yi−1, y′
j−1, φ, φ′, ω).
(1)
Because the alignment contains no crossing edges, we can still model the tags as generated
sequentially by a stochastic process. We deﬁne the distribution over aligned tag pairs to be a product
of each language’s transition probability and the coupling probability:
P(yi, y′
j|yi−1, y′
j−1, φ, φ′, ω) =
φyi−1(yi) φ′
y′
j−1(y′
j)ω(yi, y′
j)
Z
.
(2)
The normalization constant here is deﬁned as:
Z =
X
y,y′
φyi−1(y) φ′
y′
j−1(y′) ω(y, y′).
This factorization allows the language-speciﬁc transition probabilities to be shared across aligned
and unaligned tags.
Another way to view this probability distribution is as a product of three experts: the two tran-
sition parameters and the coupling parameter. Product-of-expert models (Hinton, 1999) allow each
information source to exercise very strong negative inﬂuence on the probability of tags that they
consider to be inappropriate, as compared with additive models. This is ideal for our setting, as it
prevents the coupling distribution from causing the model to generate a tag that is unacceptable from
the perspective of the monolingual transition distribution. In preliminary experiments we found that
a multiplicative approach was strongly preferable to additive models.
350

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
3.1.2 MERGED NODE MODEL: INFERENCE
The goal of our inference procedure is to obtain transition and emission parameters θ and φ that can
be applied to monolingual test data. Ideally we would choose the parameters that have the highest
marginal probability, conditioned on the observed words x and alignments a,
ˆθ, ˆφ = arg max
θ,φ
Z
P(θ, φ, y, ω|x, a, θ0, φ0, ω0)dydω.
While the structure of our model permits us to decompose the joint probability, it is not pos-
sible to analytically marginalize all of the hidden variables. We resort to standard Monte Carlo
approximation, in which marginalization is performed through sampling. By repeatedly sampling
individual hidden variables according to the appropriate distributions, we obtain a Markov chain
that is guaranteed to converge to a stationary distribution centered on the desired posterior. Thus,
after an initial burn-in phase, we can use the samples to approximate a marginal distribution over
any desired parameter (Gilks, Richardson, & Spiegelhalter, 1996).
The core element of our inference procedure is Gibbs sampling (Geman & Geman, 1984). Gibbs
sampling begins by randomly initializing all unobserved random variables; at each iteration, each
random variable ui is then sampled from the conditional distribution P(ui|u−i), where u−i refers
to all variables other than ui. Eventually, the distribution over samples drawn from this process will
converge to the unconditional joint distribution P(u) of the unobserved variables. When possible,
we avoid explicitly sampling variables which are not of direct interest, but rather integrate over
them. This technique is known as collapsed sampling; it is guaranteed never to increase sampling
variance, and will often reduce it (Liu, 1994).
In the merged node model, we need sample only the part-of-speech tags and the priors. We are
able to exactly marginalize the emission parameters θ and approximately marginalize the transition
and coupling parameters φ and ω (the approximations are required due to the re-normalized product
of experts — see below for more details). We draw repeated samples of the part-of-speech tags, and
construct a sample-based estimate of the underlying tag sequence. After sampling, we construct
maximum a posteriori estimates of the parameters of interest for each language, θ and φ.
Sampling Unaligned Tags
For unaligned part-of-speech tags, the conditional sampling equations
are identical to the monolingual Bayesian hidden Markov model. The probability of each tag de-
composes into three factors:
P(yi|y−i, y′, x, x′, θ0, φ0) ∝P(xi|yi, y−i, x−i, θ0)P(yi|yi−1, y−i, φ0)P(yi+1|yi, y−i, φ0),
(3)
which follows from the chain rule and the conditional independencies in the model. The ﬁrst factor
is for the emission xi and the remaining two are for the transitions. We now derive the form of each
factor, marginalizing the parameters θ and φ.
For the emission factor, we can exactly marginalize the emission distribution θ, whose prior is
Dirichlet with hyperparameter θ0. The resulting distribution is a ratio of counts, where the prior acts
as a pseudo-count:
P(xi|y, x−i, θ0) =
Z
θyi
θyi(xi)P(θyi|y, x−i, θ0)dθyi =
n(yi, xi) + θ0
n(yi) + |Wyi|θ0
.
(4)
Here, n(yi) is the number of occurrences of the tag yi in y−i, n(yi, xi) is the number of occur-
rences of the tag-word pair (yi, xi) in (y−i, x−i), and Wyi is the set of word types in the vocabulary
351

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
W that can take tag yi. The integral is tractable due to Dirichlet-multinomial conjugacy, and an
identical marginalization was applied in the monolingual Bayesian HMM of Goldwater and Grif-
ﬁths (2007).
For unaligned tags, it is also possible to exactly marginalize the parameter φ governing transi-
tions. For the transition from i −1 to i,
P(yi|yi−1, y−i, φ0) =
Z
φyi−1
φyi−1(yi)P(φyi|y−i, φ0)dφyi−1 = n(yi−1, yi) + φ0
n(yi−1) + |T|φ0
.
(5)
The factors here are similar to the emission probability: n(yi) is the number of occurrences of
the tag yi in y−i, n(yi−1, yi) is the number of occurrences of the tag sequence (yi−1, yi), and T is
the tagset. The probability for the transition from i to i + 1 is analogous.
Jointly Sampling Aligned Tags
The situation for tags of aligned words is more complex. We
sample these tags jointly, considering all |T × T ′| possibilities. We begin by decomposing the
probability into three factors:
P(yi, y′
j|y−i, y′
−j, x, x′, a, θ0, θ′
0, φ, φ′, ω) ∝P(xi|y, x−i, θ0)P(x′
j|y′, x′
−j, θ′
0)P(yi, y′
j|y−i, y′
−j, a, φ, φ′, ω).
The ﬁrst two factors are emissions, and are handled identically to the unaligned case (For-
mula 4). The expansion of the ﬁnal, joint factor depends on the alignment of the succeeding tags.
If neither of the successors (in either language) are aligned, we have a product of the bilingual
coupling probability and four transition probabilities:
P(yi, y′
j|y−i, y′
−j, φ, φ′, ω) ∝ω(yi, y′
j)φyi−1(yi)φyi(yi+1)φ′
y′
j−1(y′
j)φ′
y′
j(y′
j+1).
Whenever one or more of the succeeding words is aligned, the sampling formulas must account
for the effect of the sampled tag on the joint probability of the succeeding tags, which is no longer
a simple multinomial transition probability. We give the formula for one such case—when we are
sampling a joint tag pair (yi, y′
j), whose succeeding words (xi+1, x′
j+1) are also aligned to one
another:
P(yi, yj|y−i, y′
−j, a, φ, φ′, ω) ∝ω(yi, y′
j)φyi−1(yi) φ′
y′
j−1(y′
j)
"
φyi(yi+1) φ′
y′
j(y′
j+1)
P
t,t′ φyi(t) φ′
y′
j(t′) ω(t, t′)
#
. (6)
Intuitively, if ω puts all of its probability mass on a single assignment yi+1 = t, y′
j+1 = t′,
then the transitions from i to i + 1 and j to j + 1 are irrelevant, and the ﬁnal factor goes to one.
Conversely, if ω is indifferent and assigns equal probability to all pairs ⟨t, t′⟩, then the ﬁnal fac-
tor becomes proportional to φyi(yi+1)φ′
y′
j(y′
j+1), which is the same as if xi+1 and xj+1 were not
aligned. In general, as the entropy of ω increases, the transition to the succeeding nodes exerts a
greater inﬂuence on yi and y′
j. Similar equations can be derived for cases where the succeeding tags
are not aligned to each other, but one of them is aligned to another tag, e.g., xi+1 is aligned to x′
j+2.
As before, we would like to marginalize the parameters φ, φ′, and ω. Because these parameters
interact as a product-of-experts model, these marginalizations are approximations. The form of the
marginalizations for φ and φ′ are identical to Formula 5. For the coupling distribution,
Pω(yi, y′
j|y−i, y′
−j, ω0) ≈
n(yi, y′
j) + ω0
N(a) + |T × T ′|ω0
,
(7)
352

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
where n(yi, y′
j) is the number of times tags yi and y′
j were aligned, excluding i and j, and N(a)
is the total number of alignments. As above, the prior ω0 appears as a smoothing factor; in the
denominator it is multiplied by the dimensionality of ω, which is the size of the cross-product of the
two tagsets. Intuitively, this approximation would be exactly correct if each aligned tag had been
generated twice — once by the transition parameter and once by the coupling parameter — instead
of a single time by the product of experts.
The alternative to approximately marginalizing these parameters would be to sample them using
a Metropolis-Hastings scheme as in the work by Snyder, Naseem, Eisenstein, and Barzilay (2008).
The use of approximate marginalizations represents a bias-variance tradeoff, where the decreased
sampling variance justiﬁes the bias introduced by the approximations, for practical numbers of
samples.
3.2 Multilingual Unsupervised Tagging: A Latent Variable Model
The model described in the previous section is designed for bilingual aligned data; as we will see
in Section 5, it exploits such data very effectively. However, many resources contain more than
two languages: for example, Europarl contains eleven, and the Multext-East corpus contains eight.
This raises the question of how best to exploit all available resources when multi-aligned data is
available.
One possibility would be to train separate bilingual models and then combine their output at test
time, either by voting or some other heuristic. However, we believe that cross-lingual information
reduces ambiguity at training time, so it would be preferable to learn from multiple languages jointly
during training. Indeed, the results in Section 5 demonstrate that joint training outperforms such a
voting scheme.
Another alternative would be to try to extend the bilingual model developed in the previous
section. While such an extension is possible in principle, the merged node model does not scale well
in the case of multi-aligned data across more than two languages. Recall that we use merged nodes
to represent both tags for aligned words; the state space of such nodes grows as |T|L, exponential
in the number of languages L. Similarly, the coupling parameter ω has the same dimension, so
that the counts required for estimation become too sparse as the number of languages increases.
Moreover, the bi-tag model required removing crossing edges in the word-alignment, so as to avoid
cycles. This is unproblematic for pairs of aligned sentences, usually requiring the removal of less
than 5% of all edges (see Table 16 in Appendix A). However, as the number of languages grows, an
increasing number of alignments will have to be discarded.
Instead, we propose a new architecture speciﬁcally designed for the multilingual setting. As
before, we maintain HMM substructures for each language, so that the learned parameters can
easily be applied to monolingual data. However, rather than merging tag nodes for aligned words,
we introduce a layer of superlingual tags. The role of these latent nodes is to capture cross-lingual
patterns. Essentially they perform a non-parametric clustering over sets of aligned tags, encouraging
multilingual patterns that occur elsewhere in the corpus.
More concretely, for every set of aligned words, we add a superlingual tag with outgoing edges
to the relevant part-of-speech nodes. An example conﬁguration is shown in Figure 1c. The super-
lingual tags are each generated independently, and they inﬂuence the selection of the part-of-speech
tags to which they are connected. As before, we use a product-of-experts model to combine these
cross-lingual cues with the standard HMM transition model.
353

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
This setup scales well. Crossing and many-to-many alignments may be used without creating
cycles, as all cross-lingual information emanates from the hidden superlingual tags. Furthermore,
the size of the model and its parameter space scale linearly with the number of languages. We now
describe the role of the superlingual tags in more detail.
3.2.1 PROPAGATING CROSS-LINGUAL PATTERNS WITH SUPERLINGUAL TAGS
Each superlingual tag speciﬁes a set of distributions — one for each language’s part-of-speech
tagset. In order to learn repeated cross-lingual patterns, we need to constrain the number of values
that the superlingual tags can take and thus the number of distributions they provide. For example,
we might allow the superlingual tags to take on integer values from 1 to K, with each integer
value indexing a separate set of tag distributions. Each set of distributions should correspond to a
discovered cross-lingual pattern in the data. For example, one set of distributions might favor nouns
in each language and another might favor verbs, though heterogenous distributions (e.g., favoring
determiners in one language and prepositions in others) are also possible.
Rather than ﬁxing the number of superlingual tag values to an arbitrary size K, we leave it un-
bounded, using a non-parametric Bayesian model. To encourage the desired multilingual clustering
behavior, we use a Dirichlet process prior (Ferguson, 1973). Under this prior, high posterior prob-
ability is obtained only when a small number of values are used repeatedly. The actual number of
sampled values will thus be dictated by the data.
We draw an inﬁnite sequence of distribution sets Ψ1, Ψ2, . . . from some base distribution G0.
Each Ψi is a set of distributions over tags, with one distribution per language, written ψ(ℓ)
i . To
weight these sets of distributions, we draw an inﬁnite sequence of mixture weights π1, π2, . . . from
a stick-breaking process, which deﬁnes a distribution over the integers with most probability mass
placed on some initial set of values. The pair of sequences π1, π2, . . . and Ψ1, Ψ2, . . . now deﬁne
the distribution over superlingual tags and their associated distributions on parts-of-speech. Each
superlingual tag z ∈N is drawn with probability πz, and is associated with the set of multinomials
⟨ψℓ
z, ψℓ′
z , . . .⟩.
As in the merged node model, the distribution over aligned part-of-speech tags is governed by
a product of experts. In this case, the incoming edges are from the superlingual tags (if any) and
the predecessor tag. We combine these distributions via their normalized product. Assuming tag
position i of language ℓis connected to M superlingual tags, the part-of-speech tag yi is drawn
according to,
yi ∼φyi−1(yi) QM
m=1 ψℓ
zm(yi)
Z
,
(8)
where φyi−1 indicates the transition distribution, zm is the value of the mth connected superlingual
tag, and ψℓ
zm(yi) indicates the tag distribution for language ℓgiven by Ψzm. The normalization Z is
obtained by summing this product over all possible values of yi.
This parameterization allows for a relatively simple parameter space. It also leads to a desirable
property: for a tag to have high probability, each of the incoming distributions must allow it. That is,
any expert can “veto” a potential tag by assigning it low probability, generally leading to consensus
decisions.
We now formalize this description by giving the stochastic generative process for the observed
data (raw parallel text and alignments), according to the multilingual model.
354

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
3.2.2 LATENT VARIABLE MODEL: GENERATIVE STORY
For n languages, we assume the existence of n tagsets T 1, . . . , T n and vocabularies, W 1, . . . , W n,
one for each language. Table 1 summarizes all relevant parameters. For clarity the generative
process is described using only bigram transition dependencies, but our experiments use a trigram
model, without any bigram interpolations.
1. Transition and Emission Parameters. For each language ℓ= 1, ..., n and for each tag
t ∈T ℓ, draw a transition distribution φℓ
t over tags Tℓand an emission distribution θℓ
t over
words W ℓ, all from symmetric Dirichlet priors of appropriate dimension.
2. Superlingual Tag Parameters. Draw an inﬁnite sequence of sets of distributions over tags
Ψ1, Ψ2, . . ., where each Ψi is a set of n multinomials ⟨ψ1
i , ψ2
i , . . . ψn
i ⟩, one for each of n
languages. Each multinomial ψℓ
i is a distribution over the tagset T ℓ, and is drawn from a
symmetric Dirichlet prior; these priors together comprise the base distribution G0, from which
each Ψi is drawn.
At the same time, draw an inﬁnite sequence of mixture weights π ∼GEM(α), where
GEM(α) indicates the stick-breaking distribution (Sethuraman, 1994) with concentration
parameter α = 1. These parameters deﬁne a distribution over superlingual tags, or equiva-
lently over the part-of-speech distributions that they index:
z
∼
P∞
k πkδk=z
(9)
Ψ
∼
P∞
k πkδΨ=Ψk
(10)
where δΨ=Ψk is deﬁned as one when Ψ = Ψk and zero otherwise. From Formula 10, we can
say that the set of multinomials Ψ is drawn from a Dirichlet process, conventionally written
DP(α, G0).
3. Data. For each multilingual parallel sentence:
(a) Draw an alignment a from multilingual alignment distribution Am. The alignment a
speciﬁes sets of aligned indices across languages; each such set may consist of indices
in any subset of the languages.
(b) For each set of indices in a, draw a superlingual tag value z according to Formula 9.
(c) For each language ℓ, for i = 1, . . . (until end-tag reached):
i. Draw a part-of-speech tag yi ∈T ℓaccording to Formula 8.
ii. Draw a word wi ∈W ℓaccording to the emission distribution θyi.
One important difference from the merged node model generative story is that the distribution
over multilingual alignments Am is unconstrained: we can generate crossing and many-to-one align-
ments as needed. To perform Bayesian inference under this model we again use Gibbs sampling,
marginalizing parameters whenever possible.
355

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
3.2.3 LATENT VARIABLE MODEL: INFERENCE
As in section 3.1.2, we employ a sampling-based inference procedure. Again, standard closed forms
are used to analytically marginalize the emission parameters θ, and approximate marginalizations
are applied to transition parameters φ, and superlingual tag distributions ψℓ
i; similar techniques are
used to marginalize the superlingual tag mixture weights π. As before, these approximations would
be exact if each of the parameters in the numerator of Formula 8 were solely responsible for other
sampled tags.
We still must sample the part-of-speech tags y and superlingual tags z. The remainder of the
section describes the sampling equations for these variables.
Sampling Part-of-speech Tags
To sample the part-of-speech tag for language ℓat position i we
draw from:
P(yℓ
i|y−(ℓ,i), x, a, z) ∝P(xℓ
i|xℓ
−i, yℓ)P(yℓ
i+1|yℓ
i, y−(ℓ,i), a, z)P(yℓ
i|y−(ℓ,i), a, z)
(11)
where y−(ℓ,i) refers to all tags except yℓ
i. The ﬁrst factor handles the emissions, and the latter two
factors are the generative probabilities of (i) the current tag given the previous tag and superlingual
tags, and (ii) the next tag given the current tag and superlingual tags. These two quantities are similar
to equation 8, except here we integrate over the transition parameter φyi−1 and the superlingual tag
parameters ωℓ
z. We end up with a product of integrals, each of which we compute in closed form.
Terms involving the transition distributions φ and the emission distributions θ are identical to
the bilingual case, as described in Section 3.1.2. The closed form for integrating over the parameter
of a superlingual tag with value z is given by:
Z
ψℓ
z(yi)P(ψℓ
z|ψℓ
0)dψℓ
z = n(z, yi, ℓ) + ψℓ
0
n(z, ℓ) + T ℓψℓ
0
where n(z, yi, ℓ) is the number of times that tag yi is observed together with superlingual tag z in
language ℓ, n(z, ℓ) is the total number of times that superlingual tag z appears with an edge into
language ℓ, and ψℓ
0 is a symmetric Dirichlet prior over tags for language ℓ.
Sampling Superlingual Tags
For each set of aligned words in the observed alignment a we need
to sample a superlingual tag z. Recall that z is an index into an inﬁnite sequence
⟨ψℓ1
1 , . . . , ψℓn
1 ⟩, ⟨ψℓ1
2 , . . . , ψℓn
2 ⟩, . . . ,
where each ψℓ
z is a distribution over the tagset T ℓ. The generative distribution over z is given by
Formula 9. In our sampling scheme, however, we integrate over all possible settings of the mixture
weights π using the standard Chinese Restaurant Process closed form (Escobar & West, 1995):
P
 zi
z−i, y

∝
Y
ℓ
P
 yℓ
i
zi, z−i, y−(ℓ,i)

·
(
1
k+αn(zi)
if zi ∈z−i
α
k+α
otherwise
(12)
The ﬁrst group of factors is the product of closed form probabilities for all tags connected to the
superlingual tag, conditioned on zi. Each of these factors is calculated in the same manner as
equation 11 above. The ﬁnal factor is the standard Chinese Restaurant Process closed form for
posterior sampling from a Dirichlet process prior. In this factor, k is the total number of sampled
superlingual tags, n(zi) is the total number of times the value zi occurs in the sampled superlingual
tags, and α is the Dirichlet process concentration parameter (see Step 2 in Section 3.2.2).
356

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
3.3 Implementation
This section describes implementation details that are necessary to reproduce our experiments. We
present details for the merged node and latent variable models, as well as our monolingual baseline.
3.3.1 INITIALIZATION
An initialization phase is required to generate initial settings for the word tags and hyperparameters,
and for the superlingual tags in the latent variable model. The initialization is as follows:
• Monolingual Model
– Tags: Random, with uniform probability among tag dictionary entries for the emitted
word.
– Hyperparameters θ0, φ0: Initialized to 1.0
• Merged Node Model
– Tags: Random, with uniform probability among tag dictionary entries for the emitted
word. For joined tag nodes, each slot is selected from the tag dictionary of the emitted
word in the appropriate language.
– Hyperparameters θ0, φ0, ω0: Initialized to 1.0
• Latent Variable Model
– Tags: Set to the ﬁnal estimate from the monolingual model.
– Superlingual Tags: Initially a set of 14 superlingual tag values is assumed — each value
corresponds to one part-of-speech tag. Each alignment is assigned one of these 14 values
based on the most common initial part-of-speech tag of the words in the alignment.
– Hyperparameters θℓ
0, φℓ
0: Initialized to 1.0
– Base Distribution Gℓ
0: Set to a symmetric Dirichlet distribution with parameter value
ﬁxed to 1.0
– Concentration Parameter α: Set to 1.0 and remains ﬁxed throughout.
3.3.2 HYPERPARAMETER ESTIMATION
Both models have symmetric Dirichlet priors θ0 and φ0, for the emission and transition distribu-
tions respectively. The merged node model also has symmetric Dirichlet prior ω0 on the coupling
parameter. We re-estimate these priors during inference, based on non-informative hyperpriors.
Hyperparameter re-estimation applies the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm after each full epoch
of sampling the tags. In addition, we run an initial 200 iterations to speed convergence. Metropolis-
Hastings is a sampling technique that draws a new value u from a proposal distribution, and makes
a stochastic decision about whether to accept the new sample (Gelman et al., 2004). This decision is
based on the proposal distribution and on the joint probability of u with the observed and sampled
variables xℓand yℓ.
We assume an improper prior P(u) that assigns uniform probability mass over the positive reals,
and use a Gaussian proposal distribution with the mean set to the previous value of the parameter and
357

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
variance set to one-tenth of the mean.5 For non-pathological proposal distributions, the Metropolis-
Hastings algorithm is guaranteed to converge in the limit to a stationary Markov chain centered on
the desired joint distribution. We observe an acceptance rate of approximately 1/6, which is in line
with standard recommendations for rapid convergence (Gelman et al., 2004).
3.3.3 FINAL PARAMETER ESTIMATES
The ultimate goal of training is to learn models that can be applied to unaligned monolingual data.
Thus, we need to construct estimates for the transition and emission parameters φ and θ. Our
sampling procedure focuses on the tags y. We construct maximum a posteriori estimates ˆy, indi-
cating the most likely tag sequences for the aligned training corpus. The predicted tags ˆy are then
combined with priors φ0 and θ0 to construct maximum a posteriori estimates of the transition and
emission parameters. These learned parameters are then applied to the monolingual test data to ﬁnd
the highest probability tag sequences using the Viterbi algorithm.
For the monolingual and merged node models, we perform 200 iterations of sampling, and select
the modal tag settings in each slot. Further sampling was not found to produce different results. For
the latent variable model, we perform 1000 iterations of sampling, and select the modal tag values
from the last 100 samples.
4. Experimental Setup
We perform a series of empirical evaluations to quantify the contribution of bilingual and multilin-
gual information for unsupervised part-of-speech tagging. Our ﬁrst evaluation follows the standard
procedures established for unsupervised part-of-speech tagging: given a tag dictionary (i.e., a set of
possible tags for each word type), the model selects the appropriate tag for each token occurring in
a text. We also evaluate tagger performance when the available dictionaries are incomplete (Smith
& Eisner, 2005; Goldwater & Grifﬁths, 2007). In all scenarios, the model is trained using only
untagged text.
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the parallel data and part-of-speech annotations used for system
evaluation. Next we describe a monolingual baseline and the inference procedure used for testing.
4.1 Data
As a source of parallel data, we use Orwell’s novel “Nineteen Eighty Four” in the original English
as well as its translation to seven languages — Bulgarian, Czech, Estonian, Hungarian, Slovene,
Serbian and Romanian.6 Each translation was produced by a different translator and published in
print separately by different publishers.
This dataset has representatives from four language families — Slavic, Romance, Ugric and
Germanic. This data is distributed as part of the publicly available Multext-East corpus, Version 3
(Erjavec, 2004). The corpus provides detailed morphological annotation at the token level, including
part-of-speech tags. In addition, a lexicon for each language is provided.
5. This proposal is identical to the parameter re-estimation applied for emission and transition priors by Goldwater and
Grifﬁths (2007).
6. In our initial publication (Snyder et al., 2008), we used a subset of this data, only including sentences that have
one-to-one alignments between all four languages considered in that paper. The current set-up makes use of all the
sentences available in the corpus.
358

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Percentage Aligned
Sentences
Words
BG
CS
EN
ET
HU
RO
SL
SR
Bulgarian (BG)
6681
101175
-
41.7
50.5
33.5
31.3
41.5
45.4
45.9
Czech (CS)
6750
102834
41.0
-
41.9
39.1
30.7
31.7
56.2
48.4
English (EN)
6736
118426
43.2
36.4
-
34.4
32.9
42.5
44.6
40.9
Estonian (ET)
6477
94900
35.7
42.4
42.9
-
33.8
29.2
44.8
39.7
Hungarian (HU)
6767
98428
32.2
32.0
39.6
32.6
-
26.9
34.6
30.3
Romanian (RO)
6519
118330
35.5
27.5
42.5
23.4
22.4
-
30.8
32.1
Slovene (SL)
6688
116908
39.3
49.4
45.2
36.4
29.1
31.2
-
51.2
Serbian (SR)
6676
112131
41.4
44.4
43.2
33.6
26.6
33.9
53.4
-
Table 2: Percentage of the words in the row language that have alignments when paired with the
column language.
The corpus consists of 118,426 English words in 6,736 sentences (see Table 3). Of these sen-
tences, the ﬁrst 75% are used for training, taking advantage of the multilingual alignments. The
remaining 25% are used for evaluation. In the evaluation, only monolingual information is made
available to the model, to simulate performance on non-parallel data.
4.2 Alignments
In our experiments we use sentence-level alignments provided in the Multext-East corpus. Word-
level alignments are computed for each language pair using GIZA++ (Och & Ney, 2003). The
procedures for handling these alignments are different for the merged node and latent variable mod-
els.
4.2.1 MERGED NODE MODEL
We obtain 28 parallel bilingual corpora by considering all pairings of the eight languages. To
generate one-to-one alignments at the word level, we intersect the one-to-many alignments going in
each direction. This process results in alignment of about half the tokens in each bilingual parallel
corpus. We further automatically remove crossing alignment edges, as these would induce cycles in
the graphical model. We employ a simple heuristic: crossing alignment edges are removed based
on the order in which they appear from left to right; this step eliminates on average 3.62% of the
edges. Table 2 shows the number of aligned words for each language pair after removing crossing
edges. More detailed statistics about the total number of alignments are provided in Appendix A.
4.2.2 LATENT VARIABLE MODEL
As in the previous setting, we run GIZA++ on all 28 pairings of the 8 languages, taking the inter-
section of alignments in each direction. Since we want each latent superlingual variable to span as
many languages as possible, we aggregate pairwise lexical alignments into larger sets of densely
aligned words and assign a single latent superlingual variable to each such set. Speciﬁcally, for
each word token, we consider the set of the word itself and all word tokens to which it is aligned.
If pairwise alignments occur between 2/3 of all token pairs in this set, then it is considered densely
359

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY











Figure 2: An example of a multilingual alignment conﬁguration. Nodes correspond to words to-
kens, and are labeled by their language. Edges indicate pairwise alignments produced
by GIZA++. Boxes indicate alignment sets, though the set C1 is subsumed by C2 and
eventually discarded, as described in the text.
connected and is admitted as an alignment set. Otherwise, increasingly smaller subsets are consid-
ered until one that is densely connected is found. This procedure is repeated for all word tokens
in the corpus that have at least one alignment. Finally, the alignment sets are pruned by removing
those which are subsets of larger alignment sets. Each of the remaining sets is considered the site
of a latent superlingual variable.
This process can be illustrated by an example. The sentence “I know you, the eyes seemed to
say, I see through you,” appears in the original English version of the corpus. The English word
token seemed is aligned to word tokens in Serbian (ˇcinilo), Estonian (n¨ais), and Slovenian (zdelo).
The Estonian and Slovenian tokens are aligned to each other. Finally, the Serbian token is aligned to
a Hungarian word token (mintha), which is itself not aligned to any other tokens. This conﬁguration
is shown in Figure 2, with the nodes labeled by the two-letter language abbreviations.
We now construct alignment sets for these words.
• For the Hungarian word, there is only one other aligned word, in Serbian, so the alignment
set consists only of this pair (C1 in the ﬁgure).
• The Serbian word has aligned partners in both Hungarian and English; overall this set has
two pairwise alignments out of a possible three, as the English and Hungarian words are
not aligned. Still, since 2/3 of the possible alignments are present, an alignment set (C2) is
formed. C1 is subsumed by C2, so it is eliminated.
• The English word is aligned to tokens in Serbian, Estonian, and Slovenian; four of six possible
links are present, so an alignment set (C3) is formed. Note that if the Estonian and Slovenian
words were not aligned to each other then we would have only three of six links, so the set
360

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
would not be densely connected by our deﬁnition; we would then remove a member of the
alignment set.
• The Estonian token is aligned to words in Slovenian and English; all three pairwise alignments
are present, so an alignment set (C4) is formed. An identical alignment set is formed by
starting with the Slovenian word, but only one superlingual tag is created.
Thus, for these ﬁve word tokens, a total of three overlapping alignment sets are created. Over
the entire corpus, this process results in 284,581 alignment sets, covering 76% of all word tokens.
Of these tokens, 61% occur in exactly one alignment set, 29% occur in exactly two alignment sets,
and the remaining 10% occur in three or more alignment sets. Of all alignment sets, 32% include
words in just two languages, 26% include words in exactly three languages, and the remaining 42%
include words in four or more languages. The sets remain ﬁxed during sampling and are treated by
the model as observed data.
Number
Tags per token when lexicon contains ...
Trigram
of Tokens
all words
count > 5
count > 10
top 100 words
Entropy
Bulgarian (BG)
101175
1.39
4.61
5.48
7.33
1.63
Czech (CS)
102834
1.35
5.27
6.37
8.24
1.64
English (EN)
118426
1.49
3.11
3.81
6.21
1.51
Estonian (ET)
94900
1.36
4.91
5.82
7.34
1.61
Hungarian (HU)
98428
1.29
5.42
6.41
7.85
1.62
Romanian (RO)
118330
1.55
4.49
5.53
8.54
1.73
Slovene (SL)
116908
1.33
4.59
5.49
7.23
1.64
Serbian (SR)
112131
1.38
4.76
5.73
7.61
1.73
Table 3: Corpus size and tag/token ratio for each language in the set. The last column shows the
trigram entropy for each language based on the annotations provided with the corpus.
4.3 Tagset
The Multext-East corpus is manually annotated with detailed morphosyntactic information. In our
experiments, we focus on the main syntactic category encoded as the ﬁrst letter of the provided
labels. The annotation distinguishes between 14 parts-of-speech, of which 11 are common for all
languages in our experiments. Appendix B lists the tag repository for each of the eight languages.
In our ﬁrst experiment, we assume that a complete tag lexicon is available, so that the set of
possible parts-of-speech for each word is known in advance. We use the tag dictionaries provided
in the Multext-East corpus. The average number of possible tags per token is 1.39. We also experi-
mented with incomplete tag dictionaries, where entries are only available for words appearing more
than ﬁve or ten times in the corpus. For other words, the entire tagset of 14 tags is considered. In
these two scenarios, the average per-token tag ambiguity is 4.65 and 5.58, respectively. Finally we
also considered the case when lexicon entries are available for only the 100 most frequent words.
In this case the average tags per token ambiguity is 7.54. Table 3 shows the speciﬁc tag/token ratio
for each language for all scenarios.
361

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
In the Multext-East corpus, punctuation marks are not annotated with part-of-speech tags. We
expand the tag repository by deﬁning a separate tag for all punctuation marks. This allows the model
to make use of any transition or coupling patterns involving punctuation marks. However, we do
not consider punctuation tokens when computing model accuracy.
4.4 Monolingual Comparisons
As our monolingual baseline we use the unsupervised Bayesian hidden Markov model (HMM) of
Goldwater and Grifﬁths (2007). This model, which they call BHMM1, modiﬁes the standard HMM
by adding priors and by performing Bayesian inference. Its performance is on par with state-of-
the-art unsupervised models. The Bayesian HMM is a particularly informative baseline because
our model reduces to this baseline when there are no alignments in the data. This implies that any
performance gain over the baseline can only be attributed to the multilingual aspect of our model.
We used our own implementation after verifying that its performance on the Penn Treebank corpus
was identical to that reported by Goldwater and Grifﬁths.
To provide an additional point of comparison, we use a supervised hidden Markov model trained
using the annotated corpus. We apply the standard maximum-likelihood estimation and perform in-
ference using Viterbi decoding with pseudo-count smoothing for unknown words (Rabiner, 1989).
In Appendix C we also report supervised results using the “Stanford Tagger”, version 1.67. Al-
though the results are slightly lower than our own supervised HMM implementation, we note that
this system is not directly comparable to our set-up, as it does not allow the use of a tag dictionary
to constrain part-of-speech selections.
4.5 Test Set Inference
We use the same procedure to apply all the models (the monolingual model, the bilingual merged
node model, and the latent variable model) to test data. After training, trigram transition and word
emission probabilities are computed, using the counts of tags assigned in the ﬁnal training iteration.
Similarly, the ﬁnal sampled values of the hyperparameters are selected as smoothing parameters. We
then apply Viterbi decoding to identify the highest probability tag sequences for each monolingual
test set. We report results for multilingual and monolingual experiments averaged over ﬁve runs and
for bilingual experiments averaged over three runs. The average standard-deviation of accuracy over
multiple runs is less than 0.25 except when the lexicon is limited to the 100 most frequent words.
In that case the standard deviation is 1.11 for monolingual model, 0.85 for merged node model and
1.40 for latent variable model.
5. Results
In this section, we ﬁrst report the performance for the two models on the full and reduced lexicon
cases. Next, we report results for a semi-supervised experiment, where a subset of the languages
have annotated text at training time. Finally, we investigate the sensitivity of both models to hyper-
parameter values and provide run time statistics for the latent variable model for increasing numbers
of languages.
7. http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml
362

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Avg
BG
CS
EN
ET
HU
RO
SL
SR
1. Random
83.3
82.5
86.9
80.7
84.0
85.7
78.2
84.5
83.5
2. Monolingual
91.2
88.7
93.9
95.8
92.7
95.3
91.1
87.4
84.5
3. MERGEDNODE: average
93.2
91.3
96.9
95.9
93.3
96.7
91.9
89.3
90.2
4. LATENTVARIABLE
95.0
92.6
98.2
95.0
94.6
96.7
95.1
95.8
92.3
5. Supervised
97.3
96.8
98.6
97.2
97.0
97.8
97.7
97.0
96.6
6. MERGEDNODE: voting
93.0
91.6
97.4
96.1
94.3
96.8
91.6
87.9
88.2
7. MERGEDNODE: best pair
95.4
94.7
97.8
96.1
94.2
96.9
94.1
94.8
94.5
Table 4: Tagging accuracy with complete tag dictionaries. The ﬁrst column reports average results
across all languages (see Table 3 for language name abbreviations). The latent variable
model is trained using all eight languages, whereas the merged node models are trained on
language pairs. In the latter case, results are given by averaging over all pairings (line 3),
by having all bilingual models vote on each tag prediction (line 6), and by having an oracle
select the best pairing for each target language (line 7). All differences between LATENT-
VARIABLE, MERGEDNODE: voting, and Monolingual (lines 2, 4, and 6) are statistically
signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 according to a sign test.
5.1 Full Lexicon Experiments
Our experiments show that both the merged node and latent variable models substantially improve
tagging accuracy. Since the merged node model is restricted to pairs of languages, we provide
average results over all possible pairings. In addition, we also consider two methods for combining
predictions from multiple bilingual pairings: one using a voting scheme and the other employing an
oracle to select the best pairings (see below for additional details).
As shown in Line 4 of Table 4, the merged node model achieves, on average, 93.2% accuracy,
a two percentage point improvement over the monolingual baseline.8 The latent variable model —
trained once on all eight languages — achieves 95% accuracy, nearly two percentage points higher
than the bilingual merged node model. These two results correspond to error reductions of 23% and
43% respectively, and reduce the gap between unsupervised and supervised performance by over
30% and 60%.
As mentioned above, we also employ a voting scheme to combine information from multiple
languages using the merged node model. Under this scheme, we train bilingual merged node models
for each language pair. Then, when making tag predictions for a particular language — e.g., Roma-
nian — we consider the preferences of each bilingual model trained with Romanian and a second
language. The tag preferred by a plurality of models is selected. The results for this method are
shown in line 6 of Table 4, and do not differ signiﬁcantly from the average bilingual performance.
Thus, this simple method of combining information from multiple language does not measure up to
the joint multilingual model performance.
8. The accuracy of the monolingual English tagger is relatively high compared to the 87% reported by Goldwater and
Grifﬁths (2007) on the WSJ corpus. We attribute this discrepancy to the differences in tag inventory used in our
data-set. For example, when Particles and Prepositions are merged in the WSJ corpus (as they happen to be in our
tag inventory and corpus), the performance of Goldwater’s model on WSJ is similar to what we report here.
363

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
Full Lexicon
Counts > 5
Counts > 10
Top 100
5
10
15
20
25
improvement over random
 
 
Monolingual
Merged Node
Latent Variable
Figure 3: Summary of model performance in full and reduced lexicon conditions. Improvement
over the random baseline is indicated for the monolingual baseline, the merged node
model (average performance over all possible bilingual pairings), and the latent variable
model (trained on all eight languages). “Counts > x” indicates that only words with
counts greater than x were kept in the lexicon; “Top 100” keeps only the 100 most com-
mon words.
We use the sign test to assess whether there are statistically signiﬁcant differences in the accu-
racy of the tag predictions made by the monolingual baseline (line 2 of Table 4), the latent variable
model (line 4), and the voting-based merged node model (line 6). All differences in these rows are
found to be statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. Note that we cannot use the sign test to compare the
average performance of the bilingual model (line 3), since this result is an aggregate over accuracies
for every language pair.
5.2 Reduced Lexicon Experiments
In realistic application scenarios, we may not have a tag dictionary with coverage across the en-
tire lexicon. We consider three reduced lexicons: removing all words with counts of ﬁve or less;
removing all words with counts of ten or less; and keeping only the top 100 most frequent words.
Words that are removed from the lexicon can take any tag, increasing the overall difﬁculty of the
task. These results are shown in Table 5 and graphically summarized in Figure 3. In all cases, the
monolingual model is less robust to reduction in lexicon coverage than the multilingual models. In
the case of the 100 word lexicon, the latent variable model achieves accuracy of 57.9%, compared to
53.8% for the monolingual baseline. The merged node model, on the other hand, achieves a slightly
higher average performance of 59.5%. In the two other scenarios, the latent variable model trained
on all eight languages outperforms the bilingual merged node model, even when an oracle selects
the best bilingual pairing for each target language. For example, using the lexicon with words that
appear greater than ﬁve times, the monolingual baseline achieves 74.7% accuracy, the merged node
model using the best possible pairings achieves 81.7% accuracy, and the full latent variable model
achieves an accuracy of 82.8%.
364

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Avg
BG
CS
EN
ET
HU
RO
SL
SR
Counts > 5
Random
63.6
62.9
62
71.8
61.6
61.3
62.8
64.8
61.8
Monolingual
74.8
73.5
72.2
87.3
72.5
73.5
77.1
75.7
66.3
MERGEDNODE: average
80.1
80.2
79
90.4
76.5
77.3
82.7
78.7
75.9
LATENTVARIABLE
82.8
81.3
83.0
88.1
80.6
80.8
86.1
83.6
78.8
MERGEDNODE: voting
80.4
80.4
78.5
90.7
76.4
76.8
84.0
79.7
76.4
MERGEDNODE: best pair
81.7
82.7
79.7
90.7
77.5
78
84.4
80.9
79.4
Counts > 10
Random
57.9
57.5
54.7
68.3
56
55.1
57.2
59.2
55.5
Monolingual
70.9
71.9
66.7
84.4
68.3
69.0
73.0
70.4
63.7
MERGEDNODE: average
77.2
77.8
75.3
88.8
72.9
73.8
80.5
76.1
72.4
LATENTVARIABLE
79.7
78.8†
79.4
86.1
77.9
76.4
83.1
80.0
75.9
MERGEDNODE: voting
77.5
78.4†
75.3
89.2
73.1
73.3
81.7
76.1
73.1
MERGEDNODE: best pair
79.0
80.2
76.7
89.4
74.9
75.2
82.1
77.6
76.1
Top 100
Random
37.3
36.7
32.1
48.9
36.6
36.4
33.7
39.8
33.8
Monolingual
53.8
60.9‡
44.1
69.0
54.8∗
56.8
51.4
49.4
44.0
MERGEDNODE: average
59.6
60.1
52.5
73.5
59.5
59.4
61.4
56.6
53.4
LATENTVARIABLE
57.9
65.5
49.3
71.6
54.3∗
51.0
57.5
53.9
60.4
MERGEDNODE: voting
62.4
61.5‡
55.4
74.8
62.2
60.9
64.3
62.3
57.5
MERGEDNODE: best pair
63.6
64.7
55.3
77.4
61.5
60.2
69.3
63.1
56.9
Table 5: Tagging accuracy in reduced lexicon conditions. “Counts > x” indicates that only words
with counts greater than x were kept in the lexicon; “Top 100” keeps only the 100 most
common words. The latent variable model is trained using all eight languages, whereas
the merged node models are trained on language pairs. In the latter case, results are given
by averaging over all pairings, by having all bilingual models vote on each tag prediction,
and by having an oracle select the best pairing for each target language. Other than the
three pairs of results marked with †, ‡, and ∗, all differences between “monolingual”,
“LATENTVARIABLE”, and “MERGEDNODE: voting” are statistically signiﬁcant at p <
0.05 according to a sign test.
Next we consider the performance of the bilingual merged node model when the lexicon is
reduced for only one of the two languages. This condition may occur when dealing with two lan-
guages with asymmetric resources, in terms of unannotated text. As shown in Table 6, the merged
models on average scores 5.7 points higher than the monolingual model when both tag dictionar-
ies are reduced, but 14.3 points higher when the partner language has a full tag dictionary. This
suggests that the bilingual models effectively transfer the additional lexical information available
for the resource-rich language to the resource-poor language, yielding substantial performance im-
provements.
Perhaps the most surprising result is that the resource-rich language gains as much on average
from pairing with the resource-poor partner language as it would have gained from pairing with a
language with a full lexicon. In both cases, an average accuracy of 93.2% is achieved, compared to
the 91.1% monolingual baseline.
365

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
Monolingual
Bilingual (Merged Node)
Reduced
Full
Both reduced
Reduced language
Unreduced language
Both full
BG
60.9
88.7
60.1
71.3
91.6
91.3
CS
44.1
93.9
52.5
66.7
97.1
96.9
EN
69.0
95.8
73.5
82.4
95.8
95.9
ET
54.8
92.7
59.5
65.6
93.3
93.3
HU
56.8
95.3
59.4
63.0
96.7
96.7
RO
51.4
91.1
61.4
69.3
91.5
91.9
SL
49.4
87.4
56.6
63.3
89.1
89.3
SR
44.0
84.5
53.4
63.6
90.3
90.2
Avg.
53.8
91.2
59.5
68.1
93.2
93.2
Table 6: Various scenarios for reducing the tag dictionary to the 100 most frequent terms.
5.3 Indirect Supervision
Although the main focus of this paper is unsupervised learning, we also provide some results in-
dicating that multilingual learning can be applied to scenarios with varying amounts of annotated
data. These scenarios are in fact quite realistic, as previously trained and highly accurate taggers
will usually be available for at least some of the languages in a parallel corpus. We apply our latent
variable model to these scenarios by simply treating the tags of annotated data (in any subset of
languages) as ﬁxed and observed throughout the sampling procedure. From a strictly probabilistic
perspective this is the correct approach. However, we note that, in practice, heuristics and objec-
tive functions which place greater emphasis on the supervised portion of the data may yield better
results. We do not explore that possibility here.
supervised language(s)...
BG
CS
EN
ET
HU
RO
SL
SR
All others
None
accuracy for...
BG
69.1
68.0
65.9
60.4
67.1
73.9
69.6
76.2
65.5
CS
50.8
52.2
50.2
51.2
51.0
56.6
53.1
76.6
49.3
EN
62.6
70.5
68.1
61.8
61.9
80.6
69.5
82.8
71.6
ET
57.2
58.0
57.7
56.1
56.4
59.8
57.1
72.5
54.3
HU
50.3
50.0
53.1
51.4
51.1
49.8
50.0
62.3
51.0
RO
62.8
61.6
61.3
57.8
58.5
62.9
59.2
74.9
57.5
SL
55.0
56.8
55.6
53.2
54.4
54.7
56.2
77.7
53.9
SR
64.9
65.9
64.1
63.5
61.6
63.4
69.9
72.5
60.4
Avg
57.7
61.7
58.9
58.6
57.7
57.9
64.8
59.2
74.4
57.9
Table 7: Performance of the latent variable model when some of the eight languages have super-
vised annotations and the others have only the most frequent 100 words lexicon. The
ﬁrst eight columns report results when only one of the eight languages is supervised. The
penultimate column reports results when all but one of the languages are supervised. The
ﬁnal column reports results when no supervision is available (repeated from Table 5 for
convenience).
366

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Table 7 gives results for two scenarios of indirect supervision: where only one of the eight
languages has annotated data, and where all but one of the languages has annotated data. In both
cases, the unsupervised languages are provided with a 100 word lexicon, and all eight languages are
trained together. When only one of the eight languages is supervised, the results vary depending on
the choice of supervised language. When one of Bulgarian, Hungarian, or Romanian is supervised,
no improvement is seen, on average, for the other seven languages. However, when Slovene is su-
pervised, the improvement seen for the other languages is fairly substantial, with average accuracy
rising to 64.8%, from 57.9% for the unsupervised latent variable model and 53.8% for the mono-
lingual baseline. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the results are more impressive when all but one of the
languages is supervised. In this case, the average accuracy of the lone unsupervised language rises
to 74.4%. Taken together, these results indicate that any mixture of supervised resources may be
added to the mix in a very simple and straightforward way, often yielding substantial improvements
for the other languages.
5.4 Hyperarameter Sensitivity and Runtime Statistics
Both models employ hyperparameters for the emission and transition distribution priors (θ0 and φ0
respectively) and the merged node model employs an additional hyperparameter for the coupling
distribution prior (ω0). These hyperparameters are all updated throughout the inference procedure.
The latent variable model uses two additional hyperparameters that remained ﬁxed: the concen-
tration parameter of the Dirichlet process (α) and the parameter of the base distribution for super-
lingual tags (ψ0). For the experiments described above we used the initialization values listed in
Section 3.3.1. Here we investigate the sensitivity of the models to different initializations of θ0,
φ0, and ω0, and to different ﬁxed values of α and ψ0. Tables 8 and 9 show the results obtained
for the merged node and latent variable models, respectively, using a full lexicon. We observe that
across a wide range of values, both models yield very similar results. In addition, we note that the
ﬁnal sampled hyperparameter values for transition and emission distributions always fall below one,
indicating that sparse priors are preferred.
As mentioned in Section 3.2 one of the key theoretical beneﬁts of the latent variable approach is
that the size of the model and its parameter space scale linearly with the number of languages. Here
we provide empirical conﬁrmation by running the latent variable model on all possible subsets of
the eight languages, recording the time elapsed for each run9. Figure 4 shows the average running
time as the number of languages is increased (averaged over all subsets of each size). We see that the
model running time indeed scales linearly as languages are added, and that the per-language running
time increases very slowly: when all eight languages are included, the time taken is roughly double
that for eight monolingual models run serially. Both of our models scale well with tagset size and
the number of examples. The time dependence on the former is cubic, as we use trigram models and
employ Viterbi decoding to ﬁnd optimal sequences at test-time. During the training time, however,
the time scales linearly with the tagset size for the latent variable model and quadratically for the
merged node model. This is due to the use of Gibbs sampling that isolates the individual sampling
decision on tags (for the latent variable model) and tag-pairs (for the merged node model). The
dependence on the number of training examples is also linear for the same reason.
9. All experiments were single-threaded and run using an Intel Xeon 3.0 GHz processor
367

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
MERGEDNODE: hyperparameter initializations
φ0
1.0
0.1
0.01
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
θ0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.1
0.01
1.0
1.0
ω0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.1
0.01
BG
91.3
91.3
91.3
91.3
91.2
91.1
91.3
CS
96.9
97.0
97.0
96.9
96.8
96.5
97.1
EN
95.9
95.9
95.9
95.9
95.9
95.9
95.9
ET
93.3
93.4
93.3
93.4
93.2
93.4
93.2
HU
96.7
96.7
96.7
96.7
96.7
96.7
96.8
RO
91.9
91.8
91.8
91.9
91.8
91.8
91.8
SL
89.3
89.3
89.3
89.3
89.4
89.3
89.3
SR
90.2
90.2
90.2
90.2
90.2
90.2
90.2
Avg
93.2
93.2
93.2
93.2
93.2
93.1
93.2
Table 8: Results for different initializations of the hyperparameters of the merged node model. φ0,
θ0 and ω0 are the hyperparameters for the transition, emission and coupling multinomials
respectively. The results for each language are averaged over all possible pairings with the
other languages.
LATENTVARIABLE: hyperparameter initializations & settings
α
1.0
0.1
10
100
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
ψ0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.1
0.01
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
φ0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.1
0.01
1.0
1.0
θ0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.1
0.01
BG
92.6
92.6
92.6
92.6
92.6
92.7
92.6
92.6
92.6
92.6
CS
98.2
98.1
98.2
98.2
98.1
98.1
98.2
98.1
98.2
98.1
EN
95.0
95.0
94.9
94.8
95.1
95.2
95.0
94.9
94.9
95.0
ET
94.6
95.0
95.0
94.9
94.2
94.8
95.0
94.9
94.9
94.5
HU
96.7
96.7
96.7
96.7
96.7
96.6
96.7
96.7
96.7
96.7
RO
95.1
95.0
95.1
95.1
95.2
95.1
95.0
94.9
95.1
95.0
SL
95.8
95.8
95.8
95.8
95.8
95.8
95.8
95.8
95.8
95.8
SR
92.3
92.3
92.3
92.3
92.4
92.4
92.3
92.3
92.3
92.3
Avg
95.0
95.1
95.1
95.0
95.0
95.1
95.1
95.0
95.1
95.0
Table 9: Results for different initializations and settings of hyperparameters of the latent variable
model. φ0 and θ0 are the hyperparameters for the transition and emission multinomials re-
spectively and are updated throughout inference. α and ψ0 are the concentration parameter
and base distribution parameter, respectively, for the Dirichlet process, and remain ﬁxed.
6. Analysis
In this section we provide further analysis of: (i) factors that inﬂuence the effectiveness of language
pairings in bilingual models, (ii) the incremental value of adding more languages in the latent vari-
368

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Figure 4: Average running time for 1000 iterations of the latent variable model. Results are av-
eraged over all possible language subsets of each size. The top line shows the average
running time for the entire subset, and the bottom line shows the running time divided by
the number of languages.
able model, (iii) the superlingual tags and their corresponding cross-lingual patterns as learned by
the latent variable model, and (iv) whether multilingual data is more helpful than additional mono-
lingual data. We focus here on the full lexicon scenario, though we expect our analysis to extend to
the various reduced lexicon cases considered above as well.
6.1 Predicting Effective Language Pairings
We ﬁrst analyze the cross-lingual variation in performance for different bilingual language pairings.
As shown in Table 10, the performance of the merged node model for each target language varies
substantially across pairings. In addition, the identity of the optimally helpful language pairing
also depends heavily on the target language in question. For instance, Slovene, achieves a large
improvement when paired with Serbian (+7.4), a closely related Slavic language, but only a mi-
nor improvement when coupled with English (+1.8). On the other hand, for Bulgarian, the best
performance is achieved when coupling with English (+6) rather than with closely related Slavic
languages (+2.4 and +0). Thus, optimal pairings do not correspond simply to language relatedness.
We note that when applying multilingual learning to morphological segmentation the best results
were obtained for related languages, but only after incorporating declarative knowledge about their
lower-level phonological relations using a prior which encourages phonologically close aligned
morphemes (Snyder & Barzilay, 2008). Here too, a more complex model which models lower-level
morphological relatedness (such as case) may yield better outcomes for closely related languages.
As an upper bound on the merged node model performance, line 7 of Table 10 shows the results
when selecting (with the help of an oracle) the best partner for each language. The average accu-
racy using this oracle is 95.4%, substantially higher than the average bilingual pairing accuracy of
93.2%, and even somewhat higher than the latent variable model performance of 95%. This gap in
369

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
performance motivates a closer examination of the relationship between languages that constitute
effective pairings.
MERGEDNODE MODEL
coupled with...
Avg
BG
CS
EN
ET
HU
RO
SL
SR
accuracy for...
BG
91.3
90.2
94.7
92.3
90.6
91.2
91.1
88.7†
CS
96.9
95.3
97.5
97.8
96.3
96.4
97.4
97.4
EN
95.9
96.1
95.9†
95.8†
95.8†
95.8†
96.1
96.0
ET
93.3
93.0
94.0
92.9†
92.2†
93.0
94.2
93.9
HU
96.7
96.8
96.6
96.8
96.9
96.8
96.5
96.7
RO
91.9
94.1
90.6†
92.0
91.3
90.3†
91.3
93.9
SL
89.3
88.5
88.1
89.2
89.8
87.5†
87.5†
94.8
SR
90.2
88.5
88.2
94.5
94.2
89.5
85.0
91.4
Table 10: Merged node model accuracy for all language pairs. Each row corresponds to the perfor-
mance of one language, each column indicates the language with which the performance
was achieved. The best result for each language is indicated in bold. All results other than
those marked with a † are signiﬁcantly higher than the monolingual baseline at p < 0.05
according to a sign test.
6.1.1 CROSS-LINGUAL ENTROPY
In a previous publication (Snyder et al., 2008) we proposed using cross-lingual entropy as a post-
hoc explanation for variation in coupling performance. This measure calculates the entropy of a
tagging decision in one language given the identity of an aligned tag in the other language. While
cross-lingual entropy seemed to correlate well with relative performance for the four languages
considered in that publication, we ﬁnd that it does not correlate as strongly for all eight languages
considered here. We computed the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient (Myers & Well, 2002) between
the relative bilingual performance and cross-lingual entropy. For each target language, we rank the
remaining seven languages based on two measures: how well the paired language contributes to
improved performance of the target, and the cross-lingual entropy of the target language given the
coupled language. We compute the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient between these two rankings to
assess their degree of overlap. See Table 19 in the Appendix for a complete list of results. On
average, the coefﬁcient was 0.29, indicating a weak positive correlation between relative bilingual
performance and cross-lingual entropy.
6.1.2 ALIGNMENT DENSITY
We note that even if cross-lingual entropy had exhibited higher correlation with performance, it
would be of little practical utility in an unsupervised scenario since its estimation requires a tagged
corpus. Next we consider the density of pairwise lexical alignments between language pairs as
a predictive measure of their coupled performance. Since alignments constitute the multilingual
anchors of our models, as a practical matter greater alignment density should yield greater oppor-
tunities for cross-lingual transfer. From the linguistic viewpoint, this measure may also indirectly
370

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
capture the correspondence between two languages. Moreover, this measure has the beneﬁt of be-
ing computable from an untagged corpus, using automatically obtained GIZA++ alignments. As
before, for each target language, we rank the other languages by relative bilingual performance, as
well as by the percentage of words in the target language to which they provide alignments. Here
we ﬁnd an average Pearson coefﬁcient of 0.42, indicating mild positive correlation. In fact, if we
use alignment density as a criterion for selecting optimal pairing decisions for each target language,
we obtain an average accuracy of 94.67% — higher than average bilingual performance, but still
somewhat below the performance of the multilingual model.
6.1.3 MODEL CHOICE
The choice of model may also contribute to the patterns of variability we observe across language
pairs. To test this hypothesis, we ran our latent variable model on all pairs of languages. The results
of this experiment are shown in Table 11. As in the case of the merged node model, the performance
of each target language depends heavily on the choice of partner. However, the exact patterns of
variability differ in this case from those observed for the merged node model. To measure this vari-
ability, we compare the pairing preferences for each language under each of the two models. More
speciﬁcally, for each target language we rank the remaining seven languages by their contribution
under each of our two models, and compute the Pearson coefﬁcient between these two rankings. As
seen in the last column of Table 19 in the Appendix, we ﬁnd a coefﬁcient of 0.49 between the two
rankings, indicating positive, though far from perfect, correlation.
LATENTVARIABLE MODEL
coupled with...
Avg
BG
CS
EN
ET
HU
RO
SL
SR
accuracy for...
BG
91.9
92.2
91.9
91.6
91.6
92.1
92.3
91.8
CS
97.2
97.5
97.5
97.6
97.4
97.4
96.5
96.8
EN
95.7
95.7†
95.7†
95.7†
95.6†
95.7†
95.7†
95.8†
ET
93.9
94.8
94.3
93.4
92.3†
93.9
94.5
94.1
HU
96.8
97.0
96.8
96.7
96.7
96.8
96.6
96.8
RO
93.2
94.6
92.1
92.4
92.3
92.1
94.4
94.7
SL
90.5
88.6
87.7
92.4
95.2
87.5†
87.6†
94.6
SR
91.6
94.7
88.5
94.5
94.5
89.7
88.0
91.1
Table 11: Accuracy of latent variable model when run on language pairs. Each row corresponds
to the performance of one language, each column indicates the language with which the
performance was achieved. The best result for each language is indicated in bold. All
results other than those marked with a † are signiﬁcantly higher than the monolingual
baseline at p < 0.05 according to a sign test.
6.1.4 UTILITY OF EACH LANGUAGE AS A BILINGUAL PARTNER
We also analyze the overall helpfulness of each language. As before, for each target language, we
rank the remaining seven languages by the degree to which they contribute to increased target lan-
guage performance when paired in a bilingual model. We can then ask whether the helpfulness
371

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
rankings provided by each of the eight languages are correlated with one another — in other words,
whether languages tend to be universally helpful (or unhelpful) or whether helpfulness depends
heavily on the identity of the target language. We consider all pairs of target languages, and com-
pute the Pearson rank correlation between their rankings of the six supplementary languages that
they have in common (excluding the two target languages themselves). When we average these pair-
wise rank correlations we obtain a coefﬁcient of 0.20 for the merged node model and 0.21 for the
latent variable model. These low correlations indicate that language helpfulness depends crucially
on the target language in question. Nevertheless, we can still compute the average helpfulness of
each language (across all target languages) to obtain something like a “universal” helpfulness rank-
ing. See Table 20 in the appendix for this ranking. We can then ask whether this ranking correlates
with language properties which might be predictive of general helpfulness. We compare the univer-
sal helpfulness rankings10 to language rankings induced by tag-per-token ambiguity (the average
number of tags allowed by the dictionary per token in the corpus) as well as trigram entropy (the
entropy of the tag distribution given the previous two tags). In both cases we assign the highest
rank to the language with lowest value, as we expect lower entropy and ambiguity to correlate with
greater helpfulness. Contrary to expectations, the ranking induced by tag-per-token ambiguity actu-
ally correlates negatively with both universal helpfulness rankings by very small amounts (-0.28 for
the merged node model and -0.23 for the latent variable model). For both models, Hungarian, which
has the lowest tag-per-token ambiguity of all eight languages, had the worst universal helpfulness
ranking. The correlations with trigram entropy were only a little more predictable. In the case
of the latent variable model, there was no correlation at all between trigram entropy and universal
helpfulness (-0.01). In the case of the merged node model, however, there was moderate positive
correlation (0.43).
6.2 Adding Languages in the Latent Variable Model
While bilingual performance depends heavily on the choice of language pair, the latent variable
model can easily incorporate all available languages, obviating the need for any choice. To test
performance as the number of languages increases, we ran the latent variable model with all possi-
ble subsets of the eight languages in the full lexicon as well as all three reduced lexicon scenarios.
Figures 5, 6, 7, and 8 plot the average accuracy as the number of available languages varies for all
four lexicon scenarios (in decreasing order of the lexicon size). For comparison, the monolingual
and average bilingual baseline results are given. In all scenarios, our latent variable model steadily
gains in accuracy as the number of available languages increases, and in most scenarios sees an
appreciable uptick when going from seven to eight languages. In the full lexicon case, the gap be-
tween supervised and unsupervised performance is cut by nearly two thirds under the unsupervised
latent variable model with all eight languages.
Interestingly, as the lexicon is reduced in size, the performance of the bilingual merged node
model gains relative to the latent variable model on pairs. In the full lexicon case, the latent variable
model is clearly superior, whereas in the two moderately reduced lexicon cases, the performance
on pairs is more or less the same for the two models. In the case of the drastically reduced lexicon
10. We note that the universal helpfulness rankings obtained from each of the two multilingual models match each other
only roughly: their correlation coefﬁcient with one another is 0.50. In addition, “universal” in this context refers only
to the eight languages under consideration and the rankings could very well change in a wider multilingual context.
372

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Figure 5: The performance of the latent variable model as the number of languages varies (averaged
over all subsets of the eight languages for each size). LEFT: Average performance across
all languages. Scores for monolingual and bilingual merged node models are given for
comparison.
RIGHT: The Performance for each individual language as the number of
available languages varies.
(100 words), the merged node model is the clear winner. Thus, it seems that of the two models, the
performance gains of the latent variable model are more sensitive to the size of the lexicon.
The same four ﬁgures (5, 6, 7, and 8) also show the multilingual performance broken down by
language. All languages except for English tend to increase in accuracy as additional languages are
added to the mix. Indeed, in the two cases of moderately reduced lexicons (Figures 6 and 7) all lan-
guages except for English show steady large gains which actually increase in size when going from
seven to the full set of eight languages. In the full lexicon case (Figure 5), Estonian, Romanian, and
Slovene display steady increases until the very end. Hungarian peaks at two languages, Bulgarian
at three languages, and Czech and Serbian at seven languages. In the more drastic reduced lexicon
case (Figure 8), the performance across languages is less consistent and the gains when languages
are added are less stable. All languages report gains when going from one to two languages, but
only half of them increase steadily up to eight languages. Two languages seem to trend downward
after two or three languages, and the other two show mixed behavior.
In the full lexicon case (Figure 5), English is the only language which fails to improve. In the
other scenarios, English gains initially but these gains are partially eroded when more languages are
added. It is possible that English is an outlier since it has signiﬁcantly lower tag transition entropy
than any of the other languages (see Table 3). Thus it may be that internal tag transitions are simply
more informative for English than any information that can be gleaned from multilingual context.
373

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
Figure 6: The performance of the latent variable model for the reduced lexicon scenario (Counts >
5), as the number of languages varies (averaged over all subsets of the eight languages
for each size). LEFT: Average performance across all languages. Scores for monolingual
and bilingual merged node models are given for comparison. RIGHT: The Performance
for each individual language as the number of available languages varies.
Figure 7: The performance of the latent variable model for the reduced lexicon scenario (Counts >
10), as the number of languages varies (averaged over all subsets of the eight languages
for each size). LEFT: Average performance across all languages. Scores for monolingual
and bilingual merged node models are given for comparison. RIGHT: The Performance
for each individual language as the number of available languages varies.
374

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Figure 8: The performance of the latent variable model for the reduced lexicon scenario (100
words), as the number of languages varies (averaged over all subsets of the eight lan-
guages for each size).
LEFT: Average performance across all languages. Scores for
monolingual and bilingual merged node models are given for comparison. RIGHT: The
Performance for each individual language as the number of available languages varies.
6.3 Analysis of the Superlingual Tag Values
In this section we analyze the superlingual tags and their corresponding part-of-speech distributions,
as learned by the latent variable model. Recall that each superlingual tag intuitively represents
a discovered multilingual context and that it is through these tags that multilingual information
is propagated. More formally, each superlingual tag provides a complete distribution over parts-
of-speech for each language, allowing the encoding of both primary and secondary preferences
separately for each language. These preferences then interact with the language-speciﬁc context
(i.e. the surrounding parts-of-speech and the corresponding word). We place a Dirichlet process
prior on the superlingual tags, so the number of sampled values is dictated by the complexity of the
data. In fact, as shown in Table 12, the number of sampled superlingual tags steadily increases with
the number of languages. As multilingual contexts becomes more complex and diverse, additional
superlingual tags are needed.
Number of languages
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Number of superlingual tag values
11.07
12.57
13.87
15.07
15.79
16.13
16.50
Table 12: Average number of sampled superlingual tag values as the number of languages increases.
Next we analyze the part-of-speech tag distributions associated with superlingual tag values.
Most superlingual tag values correspond to low entropy tag distributions, with a single dominant
part-of-speech tag across all languages. See, for example, the distributions associated with superlin-
375

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
gual tag value 6 in Table 13, all of which favor nouns by large margins. Similar sets of distributions
occur favoring verbs, adjectives, and the other primary part-of-speech categories. In fact, among the
seventeen sampled superlingual tag values, nine belong to this type, and they cover 80% of actual
superlingual tag instances. The remaining superlingual tags correspond to more complex cross-
lingual patterns. The associated tag distributions in those cases favor different part-of-speech tags
in various languages and tend to have higher entropy, with the probability mass spread more evenly
over two or three tags. One such example is the set of distributions associated with the superlingual
tag value 14 in Table 13, which seems to be a mixed noun/verb class. In six out of eight languages
the most favored tag is verb, while a strong secondary choice in these cases is noun. However,
for Estonian and Hungarian, this preference is reversed, with nouns being given higher probability.
This superlingual tag may have captured the phenomenon of “light verbs,” whereby verbs in one
language correspond to a combination of a noun and verb in another language. For example the En-
glish verb whisper/V, when translated into Urdu, becomes the collocation whisper/N do/V. In these
cases, verbs and nouns will often be aligned to one another, requiring a more complex superlingual
tag. The analysis of these examples shows that the superlingual tags effectively learns both simple
and complex cross-lingual patterns
TAG VALUE 6
BG
P(N) = 0.91, P(A) = 0.04, ...
TAG VALUE 14
BG
P(V ) = 0.66, P(N) = 0.21, ...
CS
P(N) = 0.92, P(A) = 0.03, ...
CS
P(V ) = 0.60, P(N) = 0.22, ...
EN
P(N) = 0.97, P(V ) = 0.00, ...
EN
P(V ) = 0.55, P(N) = 0.25, ...
ET
P(N) = 0.91, P(V ) = 0.03, ...
ET
P(N) = 0.52, P(V ) = 0.29, ...
HU
P(N) = 0.85, P(A) = 0.06, ...
HU
P(N) = 0.44, P(V ) = 0.34, ...
RO
P(N) = 0.90, P(A) = 0.04, ...
RO
P(V ) = 0.45, P(N) = 0.33, ...
SL
P(N) = 0.94, P(A) = 0.03, ...
SL
P(V ) = 0.55, P(N) = 0.24, ...
SR
P(N) = 0.92, P(A) = 0.03, ...
SR
P(V ) = 0.49, P(N) = 0.26, ...
Table 13: Part-of-speech tag distributions associated with two superlingual latent tag values. Prob-
abilities of only the two most probable tags for each language are shown.
6.3.1 PERFORMANCE WITH REDUCED DATA
One potential objection to the claims made in this section is that the improved results may be due
merely to the addition of more data, so that the multilingual aspect of the model may be irrelevant.
We test this idea by evaluating the monolingual, merged node, and latent variable systems on train-
ing sets in which the number of examples is reduced by half. The multilingual models in this setting
have access to exactly half as much data as the monolingual model in the original experiment. As
shown in Table 14, both the monolingual baseline and our models are quite insensitive to this drop
in data. In fact, both of our models, when trained on half of the corpus, still outperform the mono-
lingual model trained on the entire corpus. This indicates that the performance gains demonstrated
by multilingual learning cannot be explained merely by the addition of more data.
376

MULTILINGUAL PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING
Avg
BG
CS
EN
ET
HU
RO
SL
SR
MONOLINGUAL: full data
91.2
88.7
93.9
95.8
92.7
95.3
91.1
87.4
84.5
MONOLINGUAL: half data
91.0
88.8
93.8
95.7
92.6
95.3
90.2
87.5
84.5
MERGEDNODE: (avg.) full data
93.2
91.3
96.9
95.9
93.3
96.7
91.9
89.3
90.2
MERGEDNODE: (avg.) half data
93.0
91.1
96.6
95.7
92.7
96.7
92.0
88.9
89.9
LATENTVARIABLE: full data
95.0
92.6
98.2
95.0
94.6
96.7
95.1
95.8
92.3
LATENTVARIABLE: half data
94.7
92.6
97.8
94.7
93.9
96.7
94.4
95.4
92.2
Table 14: Tagging accuracy on reduced training dataset, with complete tag dictionaries; results
on the full training dataset are repeated here for comparison. The ﬁrst column reports
average results across all languages (see Table 3 for language name abbreviations).
7. Conclusions
The key hypothesis of multilingual learning is that by combining cues from multiple languages, the
structure of each becomes more apparent. We considered two ways of applying this intuition to the
problem of unsupervised part-of-speech tagging: a model that directly merges tag structures for a
pair of languages into a single sequence and a second model which instead incorporates multilingual
context using latent variables.
Our results demonstrate that by incorporating multilingual evidence we can achieve impressive
performance gains across a range of scenarios. When a full lexicon is available, our two models
cut the gap between unsupervised and supervised performance by nearly one third (merged node
model, averaged over all pairs) and two thirds (latent variable model, using all eight languages). For
all but one language, we observe performance gains as additional languages are added. The sole
exception is English, which only gains from additional languages in reduced lexicon settings.
In most scenarios, the latent variable model achieves better performance than the merged node
model, and has the additional advantage of scaling gracefully with the number of languages. These
observations suggest that the non-parametric latent variable structure provides a more ﬂexible paradigm
for incorporating multilingual cues. However, the beneﬁt of the latent variable model relative to the
merged node model (even when running both models on pairs of languages) seems to decrease with
the size of the lexicon. Thus, in practical scenarios where only a small lexicon or no lexicon is
available, the merged node model may represent a better choice.
Our experiments have shown that performance can vary greatly depending on the choice of
additional languages. It is difﬁcult to predict a priori which languages constitute good combinations.
In particular, language relatedness itself cannot be used as a consistent predictor as sometimes
closely related languages constitute beneﬁcial couplings and sometimes unrelated languages are
more helpful. We identify a number of features which correlate with bilingual performance, though
we observe that these features interact in complex ways. Fortunately, our latent variable model
allows us to bypass this question by simply using all available languages.
In both of our models, lexical alignments play a crucial role as they determine the typology
of the model for each sentence. In fact, we observed a positive correlation between alignment
density and bilingual performance, indicating the importance of high quality alignments. In our
experiments, we considered the alignment structure an observed variable, produced by standard MT
377

NASEEM, SNYDER, EISENSTEIN & BARZILAY
tools which operate over pairs of languages. An interesting alternative would be to incorporate
alignment structure into the model itself, to ﬁnd alignments best tuned for tagging accuracy based
on the evidence of multiple languages rather than pairs.
Another limitation of the two models is that they only consider one-to-one lexical alignments.
When pairing isolating and synthetic languages11 it would be beneﬁcial to align short analytical
phrases consisting of multiple words to single morpheme-rich words in the other language. To
do so would involve ﬂexibly aligning and chunking the parallel sentences throughout the learning
process.
An important direction for future work is to incorporate even more sources of multilingual
information, such as additional languages and declarative knowledge of their typological properties
(Comrie, 1989). In this paper we showed that performance improves as the number of languages
increases. We were limited by our corpus to eight languages, but we envision future work on
massively parallel corpora involving dozens of languages as well as learning from languages with
non-parallel data.
Bibliographic Note
Portions of this work were previously presented in two conference publications (Snyder, Naseem,
Eisenstein, & Barzilay, 2008, 2009). The current article extends this work in several ways, most
notably: we present a new inference procedure for the merged node model which yields improved
results (Section 3.1.2) and we conduct extensive new empirical analyses of the multilingual results.
More speciﬁcally, we analyze properties of language combinations that contribute to successful
multilingual learning, we show that adding multilingual data provides much greater beneﬁt than
increasing the quantity of monolingual data, we investigate additional scenarios of lexicon reduc-
tion, we investigate scalability as a function of the number of languages, and we experiment with
semi-supervised settings (Sections 5 and 6).
