Stream-Flow Forecasting of Small Rivers Based on
LSTM
Youchuan Hu
College of Letters and Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, United States

2nd Le Yan
Computer and Information College
Hohai University
Nanjing, China

3rd Tingting Hang
Wanjiang University of Technology
Maanshan, China

4th Jun Feng
Computer and Information College
Hohai University
Nanjing, China

Abstract—Stream-ﬂow forecasting for small rivers has always
been of great importance, yet comparatively challenging due
to the special features of rivers with smaller volume. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) methods have been employed in this area for
long, but improvement of forecast quality is still on the way.
In this paper, we tried to provide a new method to do the
forecast using the Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) deep
learning model, which aims in the ﬁeld of time-series data.
Utilizing LSTM, we collected the stream ﬂow data from one
hydrologic station in Tunxi, China, and precipitation data from
11 rainfall stations around to forecast the stream ﬂow data from
that hydrologic station 6 hours in the future. We evaluated
the prediction results using three criteria: root mean square
error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), and coefﬁcient
of determination (R2). By comparing LSTM’s prediction with
predictions of Support Vector Regression (SVR) and Multilayer
Perceptions (MLP) models, we showed that LSTM has better
performance, achieving RMSE of 82.007, MAE of 27.752, and
R2 of 0.970. We also did extended experiments on LSTM model,
discussing inﬂuence factors of its performance.
Index Terms—machine learning, deep learning, LSTM, stream-
ﬂow forecasting, small rivers
I. INTRODUCTION
Worldwide, ﬂoods are considered as one of the most com-
mon and naturally distributed risks to life and property [1].
According to [2], in 2017, ﬂood were the most inﬂuential
disaster with respect to number of people affected - 59.6%
of people affected by natural disasters were affected by ﬂood.
Due to its burstiness and uncertainties, ﬂoods remain to be
a comparatively hard-to-prevent disaster, and more advanced
controls methods are eagerly needed. Among them, ﬂood
forecasting is always a crucial one. A timely and precise ad-
vance warning allows ample time for more mitigating actions
and less damage by the disaster. However, when it comes
to medium or small rivers, various problems exert excess
challenges on the forecasting process. Due to the low capacity
of those rivers, ﬂoods often abrupt in appearance, rapid in
conﬂuence, and short in forecast period [3]. Thus, more
sophisticated forecast methods are always in high demand.
Main traditional stream ﬂow forecasting methods are those
which employ physical hydrologic models or traditional ma-
chine learning algorithms. Hydrologic models that use the
data of river stage, stream ﬂow, or runoff volumes to forecast
ﬂoods are mainly based on mathematical and physical analysis
of hydrologic process, thus they are usually deterministic,
and forecast results are normally exhibited as time series
of estimates [4]. Results of these models are often easily
deteriorated if the data fed in contain certain degree of
error or environmental noise [5]. With the development of
artiﬁcial intelligence and the approach of big data, researchers
began to use data-driven models
instead of mathematic or
physic models - to study various aspects of hydrological
phenomenon. Data-driven models focus less on the exact
logic and physic theories behind the forecast and more on
the potential relationships lying inside the huge amount of
data, thus remarkably reduce the amount of work done due
to the non-linear feature and noise complexity of hydrological
models, and improve the accuracy of the forecast. However,
traditional machine learning models manipulate every input
and output in a discrete manner, thus have limited performance
in the area of prediction, which involves time-series data and
every piece of data at a certain time has relationship with
recent data. Prediction result of most of traditional models are
accompanied by considerable errors.
As described above, physical models and traditional ma-
chine learning algorithms both have limited performance due
to: 1, erroneous and chaotic data, and 2, special feature of
time-series prediction. In this paper, we use the LSTM (Long
Short-Term Memory) model a kind of circular memory neural
networks developed from RNN (Recurrent Neural Network)
in stream ﬂow prediction to try to solve above two problems.
As a sophisticated machine learning model, LSTM works well
in dealing with chaotic data resulting from the complexity of
real environment, and instability of medium or small rivers.
Moreover, our prediction method involving the use of LSTM
has innovation comparing to methods using traditional models,
arXiv:2001.05681v1  [cs.LG]  16 Jan 2020

in the way that LSTM has memory, and every output is based
on previous outputs, thus has ability to take advantage of
the information between time-series data, and works better
in predicting the stream ﬂow changes that is a trend along
time. The main idea of this paper is to use LSTM to analysis
big amount of stream ﬂow data, accompanied by rainfall data
collected from various precipitation stations along the rivers
to estimate the future stream ﬂow of a certain spot in a river,
and compare the prediction result with traditional machine
learning model SVR (Support Vector Regression) and deep
learning model MLP (Multilayer Perceptions). The results of
the comparative experiment conducted in this paper proved
that LSTM model contributes to stream-ﬂow forecasting of
small rivers with respect to:
1) Better model stability. Different from other two models,
LSTM performs forecast that does not produce frequent
and obvious ﬂuctuations of stream ﬂow line in cases of
small rainfalls.
2) Better model reliability. LSTM is more accurate in
forecasting stream ﬂow peaks, which is vital to early
warning of ﬂoods.
3) More intelligent in capturing the features of data. By
extended experiments, we observed that LSTM is able
to read different combinations of input data, including
history stream ﬂow volume, rainfall data, and areal
rainfall data, and improve model accuracy based on all
of them.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2,
works related to development and current situation of stream
ﬂow forecasting are listed. In section 3, the RNN model, which
is the origin and foundation of LSTM, and the LSTM model
are introduced. Then the complete experiment process of
testing the performance of LSTM, including data preparation,
model training, comparative models selecting, evaluation crite-
ria choosing, ﬁnal results, and extended experiments of LSTM
performance are presented in section 4. At last, conclusion
comes out in section 5.
II. RELATED WORKS
In recent years, there are more and more data-driven AI
model stream ﬂow forecasting methods that are developed and
put into practice. According to Yaseen, et al. [6], internation-
ally there are mainly ﬁve areas of focus: ANN (Artiﬁcial neural
network), SVM (Support vector machine), Fuzzy (Fuzzy logic
method), EC (Evolutionary computing methods), and W-AI
(Wavelet-complementary modeling).
An ANN is a kind of Artiﬁcial intelligence information pro-
cessing system that resembles the biological neural networks
of human brains [7]. In 2002, Hsu et al. [8] proposed the self-
organizing linear output map (SOLO) a kind of multivariate
ANN procedure
to forecast rainfall-runoff. Cigizoglu [9]
tested the performance of GRNN (Generalized regression
neural network) regarding the intermittent daily mean ﬂows
forecasting and estimation in 2005. In 2010, Kagoda et al.
[10] used RBFNN (Radial Basis Function Neural Network) to
perform 1-day forecasts of stream-ﬂow and proved that it is a
relatively more superior method.
SVM is popularized in last 20 years as an effective method
solving the noisy problems. In 2005, Sivapragasam and Liong
[11] experimented the performance of SVM in stream-ﬂow
prediction and yielded promising results. Asefa et al. [12]
used SVM approach to predict seasonal and hourly multi-scale
stream-ﬂow in 2006. In 2011, Noori et al. [13] assessed the
input variables determination on the SVM model performance
using PCA, Gamma test, and forward selection techniques for
monthly stream ﬂow prediction.
The theory of fuzzy sets was introduced by LotﬁA. Zadeh
in 1965. Fuzzy has been used to deal with the uncertainties
inside the variables in models. In 2007, a neuro-fuzzy model
was introduced by El-Shaﬁe et al. [14] to forecast the monthly
basis inﬂow of the Nile river. In 2009, ¨Ozger [15] utilized the
Mamdani and the TakagiSugeno (TS) fuzzy inference systems
for stream-ﬂow value prediction. Sanikhani and Kisi [16], in
2012, developed two different adaptive neuro-fuzzy (ANFIS)
techniques to estimate monthly river ﬂow.
EC (Evolutionary Computing) is the collective of Evolution-
ary Algorithms (EA) that are used in the process of selection,
mutation, and reproduction on a population of individual
structures that undergo evolution [4]. In 1999, Savic et al.
[17] conducted the ﬁrst research on the employment of Evolu-
tionary Computing in the ﬁeld of stream-ﬂow modeling. The
performance of Genetic Programming and ANN in stream-
ﬂow forecasting were compared by Makkeasorn et al. [18]
in 2008. In 2009, the river inﬂow prediction ability of LGP
was investigated by Guven [19] and the comparison with MLP
and GRNN methods was carried out, and the result proved that
LGP had a better performance.
Wavelet Transform (WT) is a method that focuses on
handling data of time series. Wavelet and neuro-fuzzy con-
junction model was employed by Shiri and Kisi [20] in
2010 to make daily, monthly, and yearly stream-ﬂow model.
In 2014, wavelet transform-genetic algorithm-neural network
model (WAGANN) was proposed by Sahay and Srivastava
[21] for forecasting monsoon river ﬂows one day ahead.
III. MODELS
A. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
First developed in 1980s, RNN obtained its specialness due
to its structure: the neurons are connected with each other
and self-looped, thus the structure is able to display dynamic
temporal behaviors and remember the information from last
process [22]. The basic and classic logic of RNN is presented
below [23]:
ht = fh(xt, ht−1) = φh(W T ht−1 + U T xt)
(1)
yt = fo(ht, xt) = φo(V T ht)
(2)
In one unit, xt is the input, ht represents the hidden state,
and yt is the output. The subscript represents time. Firstly,
hidden state output from last time is combined with current
input (each with the weights W T and U T ), the result of which

is transformed by a nonlinear function - tanh or sigmoid,
conventionally
and then fed into the hidden state. Then,
the hidden state takes its weight V T , transformed by another
nonlinear function, and at last the result is accepted by yt. In
this way, current output yt is affected by last hidden state, thus
obtains short memory.
One signiﬁcant problem of classical RNN is that, due to its
looped feature, the error of backward propagation depends on
the weights in an exponential manner. Thus, error signals of
RNN vanish or blow up in long-term process [24].
B. Long Short-Term Memory network (LSTM)
To solve the gradient blowing up or vanishing problem,
LSTM was introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber [24]
in 1997, which used memory cells and gates to control the
long-term information saved in the network keep or through
away.
gt = σ(Ugxt + Wght−1 + bf)
(3)
it = σ(Uixt + Wiht−1 + bi)
(4)
ect = tanh(Ucxt + Wcht−1 + bc)
(5)
ct = gt ∗ct−1 + it ∗ect
(6)
ot = σ(Uoxt + Woht−1 + bo)
(7)
ht = ot ∗tanh(ct)
(8)
U and W are the weights of input into different gates: input
gate (it), input modulate gate (ect), forget gate (gt), and output
gate (ot). b is bias vectors, ct is cell state, and ht is hidden
state. All these controllers determine how much information
to receive from the last loop, and how much to pass to the
new state.
By actively choosing useful information to store and others
to reject, LSTM provides a solution to the gradient explosion
and vanishing problem faced by RNN.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, the complete experiment process of the
stream-ﬂow forecast of the rivers in Tunxi, China using Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence data-driven model is presented, including
data preparation, model training, comparative models select-
ing, evaluation criteria choosing, ﬁnal results, and expended
experiments of LSTM performance.
A. Data Collection and Division
The data for the experiment is collected from Tunxi District,
Huangshan City, Anhui Province, China. According to [25],
Tunxi catchment has a drainage area of 2696.76 km2. Its
altitude is low in east and increases gradually towards west.
As affected by continental monsoon climate, the rainfall differs
a lot between years. In one year, the rainfall also has uneven
separation. More than 50% of the annual precipitation happens
between April and June. Stream-ﬂow changes in Tunxi area
have the feature of small rivers: complexity and abruptness,
which is suitable to test the forecast ability of models.
The experiment data consists of the stream-ﬂow volume
data of Tunxi which was collected from a hydrologic station,
and rainfall data from 11 precipitation stations located on the
upstream of the hydrologic station. There are in total 18648
pieces of data collected from 1981 to 2003.
B. Data Pre-processing
The experiment will use the stream-ﬂow data and precip-
itation data from 11 rainfall stations in the past 12 hours to
forecast the stream-ﬂow volume of the 6th hour in the future.
In order to transform the raw data into the form suitable for
supervised learning, in this experiment, a series to supervised
function is used. After the transformation, the data turns into
the form as shown in Tab. I.
Q(t+X) represents the stream-ﬂow data from (t-12) to (t+5),
which means from 12 hours in the past to 6 hours in the
future. P1(t+X) to P11(t+X) represents the precipitation data
of the 11 rainfall stations from (t-12) to (t+5). Then, the 1st-
144th columns (from Q(t-12) to P11(t-1)) are selected to be
the features (x set), which contain the stream-ﬂow and all
the precipitation data of the past 12 hours. The 205th column
(Q(t+5)) is selected to be the target (y set), which is the stream-
ﬂow data of the 6th hour in the future.
When the data are transformed into time-series format, only
those which have enough data in front of and after it to form
a time series are kept. Thus, some rows at the beginning or
in the end are thrown away. After the 12 - 6 transformation
mentioned above, 18237 pieces of data are kept. They are
divided by an around 7:3 ratio - 13000 pieces are used as a
training set, and 5237 used as a test set.
As the data of this experiments is collected from different
stations and through a large time span, the dimension of
the different sets of data are not the same. In order for the
models to have better performance, the data goes through a
normalization process using the MinMaxScaler function in the
sklearn package, and is uniﬁed to [0,1]. The formula follows:
x
′ =
x −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(9)
C. Model Training
The LSTM model used in the experiment is based on keras
library, the python deep learning library. The amount of hidden
layer nodes is one of the parameters need to be determined
in the model. By experiments, model with 64 nodes has the
best performance. The optimizer, batch size and epochs are
also parameters that inﬂuence the performance of the model.
The choice of optimizer inﬂuences how the loss function is
minimized, thus how the model heads to the ﬁnal outcome.
Standard choices include momentum, Adagrad, RMSProp,
Adam, etc. By experiments, the Adam optimizer is chosen.
Batch size affects the amount of data processed at a time.
Through batches, the model updates multiple times before
processing the whole dataset and thus the dynamics of the
process is affected. As small batch size greatly slows down
training speed and big batch size causes overﬁtting, on balance
the batch size is set to 72 in this experiment. Epochs are the

TABLE I
HEADINGS OF DATA AFTER SERIES TO SUPERVISED TRANSFORMATION
Features
Target
Q(t-12)
P1(t-12)
P2(t-12)
...
P11(t-1)
...
Q(t+5)
...
Fig. 1. Loss of train and test sets of LSTM models with different epochs.
times the model runs through the whole data. According to
Fig. 1, when epochs are approximately 30, the loss of test set
is the lowest. So, the epochs are set to 30 in this experiment.
D. Comparative Models Selecting
To evaluate the performance of the proposed model LSTM,
another two models are chosen to be comparative models. The
former is a traditional machine learning method, while the
latter is a deep learning method.
• SVR: Support Vector Regression is a model derived from
Support Vector Machine. According to [26], ”The idea of
SVR is based on the computation of a linear regression
function in a high dimensional feature space where the
input data are mapped via a nonlinear function.” The
kernel function and two parameters - C and gamma -
should be determined for model setup. In this paper,
RBF kernel function is selected, and by grid search, the
combination of (C=0.095, gamma=0.165) is chosen.
• MLP: Multilayer perceptrons are a class of ANN, which
the nonlinear computing elements are arranged in a feed-
forward layered structure [27]. In this paper, the MLP
model of 1 hidden layer is selected.
E. Evaluation Criteria
Three metrics are used in this paper as the evaluation
criteria: root mean square error (RMSE), median absolute error
(MAE), and coefﬁcient of determination (R2).
RMSE is a common measurement method to show the
difference between value predicted and value observed. Its
formula is the following:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
m
m
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(10)
Where m denotes the total number of values, yi denotes the
value predicted, and ˆyi denotes the value observed. The square
root uniforms the outcome (error) scale with the input scale.
RMSE value is always non-negative. A lower RMSE value
means a better prediction.
MAE works in a similar way to RMSE except that the error
is linear. Its formula is the following:
MAE = 1
m
m
X
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(11)
Since it works in a linear way, MAE does not penalize big
errors more than small errors, but present them as they were.
Similar to RMSE, MAE value is always non-negative, and a
lower MAE value means a better prediction.
R2, or coefﬁcient of determination, is a metric based on
MSE (MSE is the square of RMSE). It differs from the
preceding two metrics in that the scale of outcome does not
depend on scale of input. The formula is the following:
R2 = 1 −
Pm
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
Pm
i=1(yi −y)2
(12)
y is the mean of all values predicted. The denominator is the
total variation of the predicted values. In most of the cases,
R2 value is in range [0,1], and a higher value means a better
prediction.
F. Results
Feed the data and run the models, the results in the form
of errors of SVR, MLP, and LSTM model are in Tab. II.
The prediction results in the form of graphs are in Fig. 2.
From Tab. II, we can ﬁgure out that LSTM has the best
performance among the three models with respect to all three
evaluation criteria. Thus, statistically the LSTM model has
the best prediction accuracy. Fig. 2 shows that the LSTM
prediction result of stream-ﬂow data almost excellently ﬁts
the actual situations. Different from the SVR and MLP pre-
dictions, LSTM prediction does not yield obvious nonexistent
small peaks or valleys. Moreover, with respect to prediction of
major stream ﬂow peaks, LSTM model is considerably better
than MLP model, and slightly better than SVR model.
The results show that the remember-forget ability of LSTM
greatly helps the model to predict non-linear and time-series
data and have a relatively better performance on the forecast
of stream-ﬂow of rivers. However, LSTM still have errors in
the major peak prediction most of the major peak predictions
exceeds the actual value by approximately 10 per cent. Better
results may be achieved through adjustment of training process
or larger and better available data base.
G. Extended Experiments for LSTM
1) Combinations of input data: Tab. III shows the error of
LSTM models fed with different combinations of input data,
while all other conditions stay the same as in the standard
experiment. The result shows that history stream-ﬂow data
play a signiﬁcant role in the accuracy of forecast, but rainfall
(and areal rainfall) data are also indispensable. However, upon

(a) SVR
(b) MLP
(c) LSTM
Fig. 2. Prediction results of SVR, MLP, and LSTM models
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF ERRORS OF MODELS
Evaluation Criteria
SVR model
MLP model
LSTM model
RMSE
136.022
99.359
82.007
MAE
63.939
35.248
27.752
R2
0.917
0.956
0.970
the presence of rainfall-related data, different combinations of
rainfall data types do not pose a large difference on the result.
Rainfall data are relatively more helpful than areal rainfall
data.
2) Change of predict time step: The predict time step is
how far in the future does the LSTM model predict. The
standard model in this paper has a predict time step of 6.
That is, upon receiving the newest data, the model gives out
predictions for the 6th hour in the future from now. Fig. 3
shows the values of three evaluation criteria of LSTM models
with different predict time step, while all other conditions
stay the same as the standard model in this paper. The results
imply that predict time step has a negative correlation with the
accuracy of the model, which makes sense since it’s harder for
models to predict further into the future.
3) Change of encoder time step: The encoder time step is
the number of hours of history data fed into the LSTM model.
The encoder time step of the standard model in this paper is
12. Fig. 4 shows the errors of models with different encoder
time steps. Approximately, models with encoder time step in
the range of [12,14] have the best forecast accuracy.
V. CONCLUSION
Forecast is always critical in saving humans lives and prop-
erties from the ﬂood disaster. This paper proposed a method
of stream-ﬂow forecast using LSTM network a kind of deep
learning neural network derived from RNN, equipped with
a remember-forget system to avoid parameter blowing up or
vanishing. To prove its advantage in time-series forecast with
non-linear features, it is compared to the machine learning
SVR model and deep learning MLP model in forecasting the
stream-ﬂow of Tunxi, China. Results of the experiment show
that LSTM model provides more stable and more accurate
prediction comparing to SVR and MLP models, proving its
ability.
However, there is still room for improvement in the LSTM
stream-ﬂow forecasting model: the results show errors in peak
volume forecast which cannot be ignored. The models may be
improved in the following ways: First, Due to the limit of time
and hardware capacity, the parameter choices of LSTM model
are only based on simple tests and lack of thorough study.
Moreover, most of default parameters of the model remain
in their original value without adjustments. More study on
the parameter adjustment may improve the models accuracy.
Second, the data used in the experiment have a time span
of more than 20 years. Due to the lack of technology and
management in the past, the original data have a certain degree
of disorder and deﬁciency, and various kinds of amendments
are made to the data. Feeding data with higher quality may
improve the models performance.
