Leveraging Multilingual Transformers for Hate
Speech Detection
Sayar Ghosh Roy, Ujwal Narayan, Tathagata Raha, Zubair Abid and Vasudeva Varma
Information Retrieval and Extraction Lab, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India
Abstract
Detecting and classifying instances of hate in social media text has been a problem of interest in Natural
Language Processing in the recent years. Our work leverages state of the art Transformer language
models to identify hate speech in a multilingual setting. Capturing the intent of a post or a comment on
social media involves careful evaluation of the language style, semantic content and additional pointers
such as hashtags and emojis. In this paper, we look at the problem of identifying whether a Twitter
post is hateful and offensive or not. We further discriminate the detected toxic content into one of the
following three classes: (a) Hate Speech (HATE), (b) Offensive (OFFN) and (c) Profane (PRFN). With a
pre-trained multilingual Transformer-based text encoder at the base, we are able to successfully identify
and classify hate speech from multiple languages. On the provided testing corpora, we achieve Macro
F1 scores of 90.29, 81.87 and 75.40 for English, German and Hindi respectively while performing hate
speech detection and of 60.70, 53.28 and 49.74 during fine-grained classification. In our experiments, we
show the efficacy of Perspective API features for hate speech classification and the effects of exploiting
a multilingual training scheme. A feature selection study is provided to illustrate impacts of specific
features upon the architecture’s classification head.
Keywords
HASOC 2020, Hate Speech Detection, XLM-RoBERTa, Perspective API
1. Introduction
With a rise in the number of posts made on social media, an increase in the amount of toxic
content on the web is witnessed. Measures to detect such instances of toxicity is of paramount
importance in today’s world with regards to keeping the web a safe and healthy environment
for all. Detecting hateful and offensive content in typical posts and comments found on the web
is the first step towards building a system which can flag items with possible adverse effects
and take steps necessary to handle such behavior.
In this paper, we look at the problem of detecting hate speech and offensive remarks within
tweets. More specifically, we attempt to solve two classification problems. Firstly, we try to
assign a binary label to a tweet indicating whether it is hateful and offensive (class HOF) or not
FIRE ’20, Forum for Information Retrieval Evaluation, December 16–20, 2020, Hyderabad, India

~ https://sayarghoshroy.github.io/ (S. Ghosh Roy); https://www.ujwalnarayan.ml/ (U. Narayan);
https://github.com/tathagata-raha/ (T. Raha); https://zubairabid.com/ (Z. Abid); https://irel.iiit.ac.in/vasu/index.html
(V. Varma)

© 2020 Copyright for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
CEUR
Workshop
Proceedings
http://ceur-ws.org
ISSN 1613-0073
CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS.org)
arXiv:2101.03207v1  [cs.CL]  8 Jan 2021

(class NOT). Secondly, if the tweet belongs to class HOF, we classify it further into one of the
following three possible classes: (a) HATE: Contains hate speech, (b) OFFN: Is offensive, and (c)
PRFN: Contains profanities.
The language in use on the web is in a different text style as compared to day-to-day speech,
formally written articles, and webpages. In order to fully comprehend the social media style of
text, a model needs to have knowledge of the pragmatics of emojis and smileys, the specific
context in which certain hashtags are being used, and it should be able to generalize to various
domains. Also, social media text is full of acronyms, abbreviated forms of words and phrases,
orthographic deviations from standard forms such as dropping of vowels from certain words,
and contains instances of code mixing.
The escalation in derogatory posts on the internet has prompted certain agencies to make
toxicity detection modules available for web developers as well as for the general public. A
notable work in this regard is Google’s Perspective API1 which uses machine learning models
to estimate various metrics such as toxicity, insult, threat, etc., given a span of text as input. We
study the usefulness of these features for hate speech detection tasks in English and German.
In recent years, utilizing Transformer-based [1] Language Models pre-trained with certain
objectives on vast corpora [2] has been crucial to obtaining good representations of textual
semantics. In our work, we leverage the advances in language model pre-training research and
apply the same to the task of hate speech detection. Lately, we have witnessed the growing
popularity of multilingual language models which can work upon input text in a language
independent manner. We hypothesize that such models will be effective on social media texts
across a collection of languages and text styles. Our intuition is experimentally verified as we
are able to obtain respectable results on the provided testing data for the two tasks in question.
2. Related Work
In this section, we will provide a brief overview of the variety of methods and procedures
applied in attempts to solve the problem of hate speech detection. Approaches using Bag of
Words (BoW) [3] typically lead to a high number of false positives. They also suffer from data
sparsity issues. In order to deal with the large number of false positives, efforts were made to
better characterize and understand the nature of hate speech itself. This led to the formation
of finer distinctions between the types of hate speech [4]; in that, hate speech was further
classified into “profane" and “offensive". Features such as N-gram graphs [5] or Part of Speech
features [6] were also incorporated into the classification models leading to an observable rise
in the prediction scores.
Later approaches used better representation of words and sentences by utilizing semantic
vector representations such as word2vec [7] and GloVe [8]. These approaches outshine the
earlier BoW approaches as similar words are located closer together in the latent space. Thus,
these continuous and dense representations replaced the earlier binary features resulting in a
more effective encoding of the input data. Support Vector Machines (SVMs) with a combination
of lexical and parse features have been shown to perform well for detecting hate speech as well.
[6]
1https://www.perspectiveapi.com/

Language
Train
Test
English
3708
814
German
2373
526
Hindi
2963
663
Table 1
Dataset Size (in number of tweets)
The recent trends in deep learning led to better representations of sentences. With RNNs, it
became possible to model larger sequences of text. Gated RNNs such as LSTMs [9] and GRUs
[10] made it possible to better represent long term dependencies. This boosted classification
scores, with LSTM and CNN-based models significantly outperforming character and word
based N-gram models. [11] Character based modelling with CharCNNs [12] have been applied
for hate speech classification. These approaches particularly shine in cases where the offensive
speech is disguised with symbols like ‘*’, ‘$’ and so forth. [13]
More recently, attention based approaches like Transformers [1] have been shown to cap-
ture contextualized embeddings for a sentence. Approaches such as BERT [2] which have
been trained on massive quantities of data allow us to generate robust and semantically rich
embeddings which can then be used for downstream tasks including hate speech detection.
There have also been a variety of open or shared tasks to encourage research and development
in hate speech detection. The TRAC shared task [14] on aggression identification included
both English and Hindi Facebook comments. Participants had to detect abusive comments and
distinguish between overtly aggressive comments and covertly aggressive comments. OffensEval
(SemEval-2019 Task 6) [15] was based on the the Offensive Language Identification Dataset
(OLID) containing over 14,000 tweets. This SemEval task had three subtasks: discriminating
between offensive and non-offensive posts, detecting the type of offensive content in a post
and identifying the target of an offensive post. At GermEval, [16] there was a task to detect
and classify hurtful, derogatory or obscene comments in the German language. Two sub-tasks
were continued from their first edition, namely, a coarse-grained binary classification task and a
fine-grained multi-class classification problem. As a novel sub-task, they introduced the binary
classification of offensive tweets into explicit and implicit.
3. Dataset
The datasets for the tasks were provided by the organizers of the HASOC ’202. [17] The data
consists of tweets from three languages: English, German and Hindi, and was annotated on two
levels. The coarse annotation involved a binary classification task with the given tweet being
marked as hate speech (HOF) or not (NOT). In the finer annotation, we differentiate between
the types of hate speech and have four different formal classes:
1. HATE: This class contains tweets which highlight negative attributes or deficiencies of cer-
tain groups of individuals. This class includes hateful comments towards individuals based
2https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/26027

Language
NOT
HOF
English
1852
1856
German
1700
673
Hindi
2116
847
Table 2
Training set label distribution: Task 1
Language
NONE
HATE
OFFN
PRFN
English
1852
158
321
1377
German
1700
146
140
387
Hindi
2116
234
465
148
Table 3
Training set label distribution: Task 2
on race, political opinion, sexual orientation, gender, social status, health condition, etc.

https://t.co/otdmH0wquk”
2. OFFN: This class contains tweets which are degrading, dehumanizing or insulting towards
an individual. It encompasses cases of threatening with violent acts.
Example: “By shitting yourself and taking the backdoor out, instead of fronting up to the
public.”
3. PRFN: This class contains tweets with explicit content, profane words or unacceptable
language in the absence of insults and abuse. This typically concerns the usage of
swearwords and cursing.

4. NONE: This class contains the tweets which do not fit into the above three classes i.e it
does not contain instances of hate and offence.

for ps plus I need this.”
In table 1, we list the data size in number of tweets, and in tables 2 and 3, we provide the
number of instances of different classification labels.
4. Approach
In this section, we outline our approach towards solving the task at hand.
4.1. Preprocessing
We utilized the python libraries tweet-preprocessor3 and ekphrasis4 for tweet tokenization and
hashtag segmentation respectively. For extracting English and German cleaned tweet texts,
3https://github.com/s/preprocessor
4https://github.com/cbaziotis/ekphrasis

tweet-preprocessor’s clean functionality was used. For Hindi tweets, we tokenized the tweet
text on whitespaces and symbols including colons, commas and semicolons. This was followed
by removal of hashtags, smileys, emojis, URLs, mentions, numbers and reserved words (such as

4.2. Feature Engineering
In addition to the cleaned tweet, we utilize tweet-preprocessor to populate certain information
fields which can act as features for our classifiers. We include the hashtag text which is
segmented into meaningful tokens using the ekphrasis segmenter for the twitter corpus. We

and smileys. We extract emojis which can be processed in two ways. We initially experimented
with the emot5 python library to obtain the textual description of a particular emoji. For example,
‘
’ maps to ‘smiling face with open mouth & cold sweat’ and ‘
’ maps to ‘panda’. We later
chose to utilize emoji2vec [18] to obtain a semantic vector representing the particular emoji.
The motivation behind this is as follows: the text describing the emoji’s attributes might not
capture all the pragmatics and the true sense of what the emoji signifies in reality. As a concrete
example, consider ‘
’, the tongue emoji. The textual representation will not showcase the
emoji’s association with ‘joking around, laughter and general goofiness’ which is its real world
implication. We expect emoji2vec to capture these kinds of associations.
4.3. Perspective API Features
We perform experiments with features extracted from the Perspective API. The API uses machine
learning models to estimate various numerical metrics modeling the perceived impact which a
post or a comment might have within a conversation. Right now, the Perspective API does not
support Hindi natural language text in Devanagari script. Thus, our experiments are on German
and English. On German text, the API provides scores which are real numbers between 0 and 1
for the following fields: ‘toxicity’, ‘severe toxicity’, ‘identity attack’, ‘insult’ and ‘profanity and
threat’. For English text, in addition to the fields for German, the API provides similar scores
for the fields: ‘sexually explicit’, ‘obscene’ and ‘toxicity fast’ (which simply uses a faster model
for computing toxicity levels on the back-end).
For both English and German tweets, we extract perspective API scores for all available fields
using (a) the complete tweet as is, and (b) the extracted cleaned tweet text excluding emojis,
smileys, URLs, mentions, numbers, hashtags and reserved words. Thus, we have 18 features for
English tweets and 12 features for German tweets to work with.
We trained multi-layer perceptron classifiers for English and German using a concatenation
of these features as the input vector. In addition to these classifiers trained in the monolingual
setting, we trained an English-German multilingual classifier using the 12 perspective API
features which are common to English and German. The datapoints in the corresponding
training sets were randomly shuffled and standardized. The same standardization values were
used on the test set during inference. We tried out multiple training settings with different
5https://github.com/NeelShah18/emot

Raw Tweet Text

disturb please, he is
enjoying his snacks while
making those little dance
BBÿ
#BBMAsTopSocial BTS
#JUNGKOOK #정국…
Cleaned Text
: Dont disturb please,
he is enjoying his
snacks while making
those little dance BTS
Emojis
B  
  B
ÿ
Hashtags
#BBMAsTopSocial
#JUNGKOOK
#정국
emoji2vec
Static
Transformer
Transformer
Encoder
Classiﬁer
True Label
Predicted
Label
concat
loss
Figure 1: Model Overview
activation functions and optimization techniques. The best results with Perspective features are
presented in Section 5.
4.4. Proposed Transformer-based Models
We leverage Transformer-based [1] masked language models to generate semantic embeddings
for the cleaned tweet text. In addition to the cleaned tweet’s embedding, we generate and
utilize semantic vector representations for all the emojis and segmented hashtags available
within the tweet. The segmented hash embeddings are generated using the same pre-trained
Transformer model such that the text and hashtag embeddings are grounded in the same latent
space. emoji2vec is used to create the emojis’ semantic embeddings. The Transformer layers
encoding the cleaned tweet text are updated during the fine-tuning process on the available
training data. For classification, we use the concatenation of the cleaned tweet’s embedding
with the collective embedding vector for segmented hashtags and emojis.
We are required to encode a list of emojis & a list of segmented hashtags, both of which can
be of variable lengths. Therefore, we average the vector representations of all the individual
emojis or segmented hashtags as the case may be, to generate the centralised emoji or hashtag
representation. This is simple, intuitive, and earlier work on averaging local word embeddings
to generate global sentence embeddings [19] has showed that this yields a comprehensive vector
representation for sentences. We assume the same to hold true for emojis and hashtags as well.
The concatenated feature-set is then passed to a two layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP). The
loss from the classifier is propagated back through the cleaned tweet Transformer encoder during
training. We experimented with XLM-RoBERTa (XLMR) [20] as our pre-trained Transformer in
various training settings. XLM-RoBERTa has outperformed similar multilingual Transformer

Activation
Optimization
English
German
Task 1
Task 2
Task 1
Task 2
monolingual
identity
adam (early-stop)
89.68
53.90
75.40
41.84
tanh
adam (early-stop)
88.93
47.07
79.25
43.00
multilingual
identity
sgd (adaptive LR)
88.82
47.02
72.89
38.86
identity
adam (early-stop)
88.44
46.00
72.63
42.83
tanh
sgd (adaptive LR)
87.69
44.86
75.38
38.80
tanh
adam (early-stop)
87.95
46.03
76.68
46.40
Table 4
Perspective API Experiments (Best results highlighted in bold)
models such as mBERT(multilingual BERT) [2] and multilingual-distilBERT [21] on various
downstream tasks. We therefore chose XLMR as our base Transformer model for the purpose
of the shared task. A high level overview of our model flow is shown in figure 1.
For fine-tuning our XLMR Transformer weights, we perform learning rate scheduling based
on the actual computed macro F1-scores on the validation split instead of using the validation
loss. As opposed to simply using early-stopping to prevent overfitting, we consider the change
in validation performance at the end of each training iteration. If the validation performance
goes down across an iteration, we trace back to the previous model weights and scale down our
learning rate. Training stops when the learning rate reaches a very small value 𝜖6. Although ex-
pensive, this form of scheduling ensures that we maximize our Macro F1-score on the validation
split. For further details on specific implementation nuances and choice of hyperparameters,
refer to Section 6.
5. Results
In this section, we provide quantitative performance evaluations of our approaches on the
provided testing-set, the evaluation metric used throughout being the macro F1-score.
In table 4, we present our study on usage of Perspective API features with a multi-layer
perceptron classifier for English and German tasks. We notice that these features are able to
provide respectable results on the hate and offensive content detection but cannot compete with
the Transformer-based models when fine-grained classification is required. In the monolingual
mode, our exhaustive grid search showed that the use of identity activation for English and
tanh activation for German are the most effective MLP hidden layer activation settings. Table 4
lists the best activation functions and optimization techniques for particular (task, language)
pairs. We observe that German Task 2 benefits from the multilingual mode and we attribute this
to the additional data from the English training examples which allow the model to generalize
better. However, a drop in the English results is witnessed which might be due to the reduction
in the number of available features.
In table 5, we present results using our proposed Transformer-based models. We present
6Set to 1e-12 in our experiments.

Model
English
German
Hindi
Task 1
Task 2
Task 1
Task 2
Task 1
Task 2
XLMR-freeze-mono
83.92
52.38
66.85
41.52
68.25
40.45
XLMR-freeze-multi
82.02
51.02
68.34
48.60
66.27
41.59
XLMR-adaptive
90.29
59.03
81.04
52.99
75.40
45.87
XLMR-tuned
90.05
60.70
81.87
53.28
74.29
49.74
Table 5
Performance of Proposed Transformer-based Models (Best results highlighted in bold)
Features
English
German
Hindi
Task 1
Task 2
Task 1
Task 2
Task 1
Task 2
monolingual
cleaned text
83.27
49.12
69.23
39.12
68.45
45.18
cleaned text + emoji
83.60
49.78
68.05
40.54
68.21
45.48
cleaned text + hashtag
83.17
53.60
66.23
41.91
66.98
50.08
multilingual
cleaned text
80.47
47.88
71.07
46.66
64.84
44.39
cleaned text + emoji
82.73
51.90
72.73
43.24
67.83
41.83
cleaned text + hashtag
81.22
50.06
68.52
47.31
68.19
44.71
Table 6
Feature Selection Study (Best results highlighted in bold)
XLMR-freeze-mono and XLMR-freeze-multi as baselines in which we use the pre-trained XLM-
RoBERTa Transformer weights without any fine-tuning7. Only the classifier head is trained in
these models. We train six separate models for the three languages (two tasks per language)
and report corresponding results in the monolingual mode. In multilingual mode, we only train
two models on the aggregated training data for the two tasks and use that for inference across
the three languages.
The models: XLMR-adaptive and XLMR-tuned use our proposed adaptive learn rate schedul-
ing. In XLMR-tuned, the epsilon value of the Adam optimizer was set to 1e-7 as this experimental
setting provided gains on the validation split in our hyper-parameter tuning phase. In both of
these models, we jointly fine-tune the XLM-RoBERTa Transformer weights and the classifier
head in a multilingual setting. Our proposed models significantly outperform baselines with
frozen Transformer weights which is both intuitive and expected.
Finally, in table 6, we show results for a study on feature selection using pre-trained XLM-
RoBERTa as the Transformer architecture for generating text embeddings. Note that our
primary models including XLMR-freeze utilize all of the discussed features. Like XLMR-freeze,
the Transformer layers are frozen and not fine-tuned during the training process. The table
is separated into monolingual and multilingual modes of training. Results are showed using
different feature collections, namely, ‘cleaned tweet text only’, ‘cleaned tweet + hashtags’, and
‘cleaned tweet + emojis’ as inputs to the classifier. We observe a performance drop for English
7We used UKPLab’s sentence-transformers library’s pre-trained model: ‘xlm-r-100langs-bert-base-nli-mean-
tokens’ for this task. The model is available at https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers.

and Hindi and a considerable performance gain for German while moving from monolingual to
multilingual training settings.
6. Experimental Details
We used Hugging Face’s8 implementation of XLM-RoBERTa in our proposed architecture. Our
architectures using Transformer models with custom classification heads were implemented
using pytorch9. We used Adam optimizer for training with an initial learning rate of 2e-5,
dropout probability of 0.2 with other hyper-parameters set to their default values. We updated
weights based on cross-entropy loss values. For studies with Perspective API Features and
experiments where we do not fine-tune the Transformer weights, we used scikit-learn’s [22]
implementation of a multi-layer perceptron and UKPLab’s sentence-transformers library [23]
whenever applicable.
In our Perspective API experiments, we used deep multi-layer perceptrons with 12 and 9
hidden layers for the binary and multi-class classification modes respectively. Across all our
experimental settings, we used a batch size of 200 with other hyper-parameter values set to
default. We performed an exhaustive grid search for every multi-layer perceptron model varying
the activation function, size of hidden layer, optimization algorithm and type of learning rate
scheduling. We reported results using the grid search settings which performed the best on a
4-fold cross validation on the training set. Our experimentation code is publicly available at
https://github.com/sayarghoshroy/Hate-Speech-Detection.
7. Conclusion
In this paper, we have leveraged the recent advances in large scale Transformer-based language
model pre-training to build models for coarse detection and fine-grained classification of
hateful and offensive content in social media posts. Our experiments showcase the utility
and effectiveness of language models pre-trained with multi-lingual training objectives on a
variety of languages. Our studies show the efficacy of Perspective API metrics by using them as
standalone features for hate speech detection. Our best model utilized semantic embeddings for
cleaned tweet text, emojis, and segmented hashtags as features, and a customized two-layer feed-
forward neural network as the classifier. We further conducted a feature selection experiment
to view the impact of individual features on the classification performance. We concluded that
the usage of hashtags as well as emojis add valuable information to the classification head. We
plan to further explore other novel methods of capturing social media text semantics as part of
future work.
8https://huggingface.co/
9https://pytorch.org/
