Visualization of Hyperspectral Images Using
Moving Least Squares
Danping Liao
College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University, HangZhou, China

Siyu Chen
College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University, HangZhou, China

Yuntao Qian
College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University, HangZhou, China

Abstract—Displaying the large number of bands in a hyper-
spectral image (HSI) on a trichromatic monitor has been an
active research topic. The visualized image shall convey as much
information as possible from the original data and facilitate image
interpretation. Most existing methods display HSIs in false colors,
which contradict with human’s experience and expectation. In
this paper, we propose a nonlinear approach to visualize an input
HSI with natural colors by taking advantage of a corresponding
RGB image. Our approach is based on Moving Least Squares
(MLS), an interpolation scheme for reconstructing a surface from
a set of control points, which in our case is a set of matching
pixels between the HSI and the corresponding RGB image. Based
on MLS, the proposed method solves for each spectral signature a
unique transformation so that the nonlinear structure of the HSI
can be preserved. The matching pixels between a pair of HSI and
RGB image can be reused to display other HSIs captured by the
same imaging sensor with natural colors. Experiments show that
the output images of the proposed method not only have natural
colors but also maintain the visual information necessary for
human analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
The high spectral resolution of a hyperspectral image (HSI)
enables accurate target detection and classiﬁcation. Human
interaction with HSIs is crucial for image interpretation and
analysis. Displaying an (HSI) is a challenging task since
an HSI contains much more bands than the capability of a
trichromatic monitor. One common solution is to consider
HSI visualization as a dimension reduction problem where
the number of bands is reduced to 3 for a color visualization.
Although the requirements of HSI visualization are task de-
pendent, there are some common goals such as information
preservation, consistent rendering and natural palette [1].
A straightforward way for color representation is to select
three of the original bands and map them to the RGB space [2],
[3]. However, band selection methods only take the selected
spectrum into account. As a result, the information in other
bands is ignored. To preserve the information across the
full wavelength range, dimension reduction methods such
as independent component analysis (ICA) [4] and principal
component analysis (PCA) [5] have been applied to HSI
visualization. These linear transformation models are based on
the global distribution of data, thus the intrinsic characteristics
of HSIs such as the nonlinear and local structures are not well
preserved.
To preserve the nonlinear structure of HSIs, manifold learn-
ing methods such as isometric feature mapping (ISOMAP) [6]
and locally linear embedding (LLE) [7] have been applied.
To preserve the pairwise spectral distance in HSIs, Mignotte
proposed a nonstationary Markov random ﬁeld model [8] and
later extended this approach to address the tradeoff between
the preservation of spectral distances and the separability
of features [9]. Kotwal and Chaudhuria used a nonlinear
bilateral ﬁlter with edge preserving characteristic to com-
pute the weights of bands at each pixel for band image
fusion [10]. These nonlinear approaches demonstrate excellent
performance in preserving the intrinsic information of HSIs.
While most existing methods try to convey as much infor-
mation as possible from the original data to the visualized
image, most of them display HSIs in false colors. In general
false color visualizations can be hard to interpret when ob-
ject colors are very different from their natural appearance.
Moreover, most data-adaptive methods suffer the problem of
“inconsistent rendering”, i.e., the same objects/materials being
displayed with very different colors in different images, which
also hinders the interpretation of HSIs. Therefore, “natural
palette” and “consistent rendering” gradually become two im-
portant criteria for evaluating the quality of HSI visualization.
To generate natural looking visualizations, Jacobson et
al. [1] proposed a linear spectral weighting function to fuse
all the bands in an HSI. The weighting function is a stretched
version of the CIE 1964 tristimulus color matching functions
in the visible range. As the weighting function is ﬁxed, this
model can generate consistent colors. However, compared
with other data adaptive methods, the model preserves less
information for each speciﬁc images. Another approach for
displaying HSIs with natural colors was proposed by Connah
et al. [11], which takes advantage of a corresponding RGB
image. To obtain a natural-looking visualization, the gradient
of each pixel in the visualization is constrained to be the same
with that of its matching pixel in the corresponding RGB
image. This method requires pixel-wise matching between the
HSI and the corresponding RGB image, which is sometimes
difﬁcult to achieve especially when the HSI and the RGB
image are acquired by sensors mounted on different platforms,
such as the airplane and satellite, with different geometrical
distortions. Liao et al. [12] proposed an approach to display
HSIs with natural colors based on manifold alignment between
arXiv:1801.06635v1  [cs.CV]  20 Jan 2018

an HSI and a high resolution RGB image. The HSI and
the RGB image are ﬁrstly projected to a common space
by manifold alignment, Then the HSI is projected from the
common space to the RGB space to generate a ﬁnal image
that has similar colors to the corresponding RGB image. One
advantage of the approach is that it only requires a small
number of matching pixels. However, the estimated mapping
function from the spectral space to RGB space is linear, which
shows some limitation in representing the local structure of the
HSI.
In this paper, we propose a nonlinear method to display
HSIs with natural colors. Our goal is to produce an output
image which not only maintains the information of the input
HSI but also has similar colors to a corresponding RGB image.
Our method is based on Moving Least Squares (MLS), which
is a local and nonlinear interpolation scheme for reconstructing
a surface from a set of control points [13]. In the task of HSI
visualization, we use MLS to generate a color representation
of an input HSI through a set of matching pixels between the
HSI and the corresponding RGB image. Compared with the
methods that use a single transformation to map all the pixels
in the HSI to the RGB space, the proposed method estimates a
transformation for each pixel individually by solving a unique
weighted least squares problem for each spectral signature.
The strong locality of MLS allows our model to preserve the
local structure of HSIs very well.
One advantage of the proposed method is that the matching
pixels between a pair of HSI and RGB image can be reused
to visualize other similar HSIs acquired by the same imaging
sensor. Since the matching pixels set up the mapping relation
between the high dimensional spectral space and the RGB
space, the same/similar objects in different images are pre-
sented with consistent colors. Another advantage is that our
model does not require precise pixel-wise matching between
the HSI and RGB image. Instead, it only requires a small
number of matching pairs that represent the same/similar
objects, which greatly increases the ﬂexibility of the approach.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II gives
a brief description of MLS and some related works. Section III
presents the MLS based HSI visualization approach. Some
application scenarios are also discussed in this section. The
experimental results are described in Section IV. Finally,
conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. MOVING LEAST SQUARES
Moving Least Squares (MLS) is a scattered point inter-
polation technique for generating surfaces [13]. Within the
framework of MLS, a continuous function can be recon-
structed from a set of point samples (control points). The
technique is attractive since the surface is reconstructed by
local computations and it generates a surface that is smooth
everywhere.
Based on the distances between the control points and an
input point, MLS solves a unique weighted least squares to
evaluate each input point individually. Let X be a set of control
points and Y the given function values of the control points.
Given an arbitrary point x to be evaluated, MLS aims to ﬁnd
a transformation fx to map it to the target space. The optimal
function fx is acquired by minimizing the following weighted
least squares
X
k
wk | fx(Xk) −Yk |2
(1)
where Xk is the kth control point and Yk is its given function
value. The summation is taken over all the control points. The
weights wk have the form
wk =
1
|x −Xk|2α ,
(2)
which are larger for the control points that are closer to x.
The name Moving Least Squares comes from the fact that the
weights wk change depending on the point x to be evaluated.
Therefore, MLS obtains a different transformation fx for
different x.
The MLS approach has been successfully applied in image
deformation [14], surface reconstruction [15], and image su-
perresolution and denoising [16]. Recently, Hwang et al. [17]
used MLS to transfer the colors from a source RGB image to
a target RGB image. The matching pixels between the input
images serve as the control points for interpolation. For each
RGB value in the target image, the method computes an afﬁne
function to map it to a desired color. The goal for estimating
the optimal afﬁne function for each color is formalized as
minimizing the summation of a set of weighted least squares
over the control points.
In this paper, we apply MLS to display HSIs in natural
colors. Our work shares the same idea with [17] in that we
try to “transfer” the colors of a corresponding RGB image
to the visualization of an HSI. The main contribution of this
work is that we further formalize the objective function in
Eq.(1) in matrix form, and derive a solution in the form of
matrix multiplication, which can be easily parallelized and
be computed more efﬁciently compared to the solutions in
summation form.
III. HYPERSPETRAL IMAGE VISUALIZATION BASED ON
MLS
We introduce an MLS based mechanism to display an HSI
with natural colors. The key idea is to generate an output
3D image through a set of matching pixels between the HSI
and a corresponding RGB image. In this section we ﬁrst
introduce the MLS algorithm for HSI visualization, followed
by a coarse-to-ﬁne searching process to ﬁnd matching pixels.
Finally, two other visualization scenarios are discussed.
A. Moving Least Squares Framework
Let U ∈Rp×n and V ∈R3×n be a set of matching pixel
values from an HSI and an RGB image respectively, where
p is the number of bands in the HSI, and n is the number
of matching pixel pairs. These matching pixels will serve as
the control points to construct the output color image. Let
Uk and Vk denote the kth pair of matching pixels. Given a
high dimensional spectral signature x in the HSI, we aim to

ﬁnd a transformation fx to transform it to the 3D RGB space.
Within the framework of MLS, the goal is to ﬁnd the fx that
minimizes the following weighted least squares
G(fx) =
n
X
k=1
wk | fx(Uk) −Vk |2 .
(3)
As the spectral angle distance (SAD) is commonly used to
measure the distance between a pair of pixels in an HSI, the
weight wk for an input x is deﬁned as
wk =
1
SAD(x, Uk)
(4)
where
SAD(x, Uk) = arccos( x · Uk
∥x∥∥Uk∥).
(5)
Note that weights wk change depending on the spectral
signature x to be evaluated, thus the proposed method solves
a different weighted least problem for different x. Therefore,
the optimal transformation fx varies for each x, which allows
our method to preserve the local and nonlinear structure of
HSIs.
In the image deformation work [14], a rigid transformation
fx was chosen since it maintains the geometric properties with
less degrees of freedom. In the color transfer task [17], fx was
set to an afﬁne transformation to model different elements of
the color deformation. In this work, we also choose afﬁne
transformation to model the nonlinearities in HSIs. Thus fx is
represented by
fx(x) = FT
x x + bx
(6)
where Fx is a p×3 matrix representing a linear transformation
and bx is a 3 × 1 vector representing a translation. Taking the
partial derivative of Eq.(3) with respect to bx, we get
bx = v −FT
x u
(7)
with u and v being the weighted centroids:
u =
P
k wkUk
P
k wk
,
v =
P
k wkVk
P
k wk
.
(8)
Eq.(6) can then be rewritten as
fx = FT
x (x −u) + v
(9)
and Eq.(3) becomes
G(Fx) =
n
X
k=1
wk|FT
x Uk −Vk|2
(10)
where U and V are acquired by subtracting u and v from each
column of U and V respectively. Eq.(10) can be rewritten in
matrix form as
G(Fx) = tr(FT
x UWU
T Fx −2FT
x UWV + VWV
T )
(11)
where W is an n × n diagonal matrix with Wkk = wk, and
tr(·) denotes the trace of a matrix. This objective function is
convex and differentiable. Its derivative with respect to Fx is
∂G
∂Fx
= 2UWU
T Fx −2UWV.
(12)
(a) The 50th band of the HSI
(b) The corresponding RGB image
Fig. 1. An HSI and its corresponding RGB image of the Washington D.C.
mall.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 2. Three HSIs and their corresponding RGB images. (a) The 50th band
of the Moffett Field. (b) The ﬁrst band of D04. (c) The ﬁrst band of G03. (d)
The RGB image of Moffett Field. (e) The RGB image of D03. (f) The RGB
image of G03.
The optimal Fx that minimizes the objective function can be
obtained by
Fx = (UWU
T )−1UWV
T .
(13)
When Fx and bx are acquired, a spectral signature x is
transformed to an RGB color by Eq.(6). A natural-looking
representation of the HSI can be obtained after mapping all
the pixels in the HSI to the RGB space.
B. Finding the Matching Pixels Between an HSI and an RGB
Image
Image registration is a common way to ﬁnd the matching
pixels between two images. However, as an HSI and the
corresponding RGB image are often captured by different
cameras with different angles and image distortions, it is very
difﬁcult to obtain a precise image registration. In this paper
we propose a two-step coarse-to-ﬁne searching process. Firstly,
the HSI and the RGB image are registered via a homography
transform to get a coarse matching. Scale-invariant feature
transform (SIFT) is widely used to detect the matching key
points between images due to its robustness to changes in
scale, orientation, and illumination [18]. In this paper, we ﬁrst
extract the SIFT key points from each band image of the HSI
and the RGB image, and then select a few of the most similar

(a) LP band selection
(b) Manifold alignment
(c) Stretched CMF
(d) Bilateral ﬁltering
(e) Bicriteria optimization
(f) MLS
Fig. 3.
Visual comparison of different visualization approaches on the
Washington DC Mall data set.
pairs as the matching key points. With the matching key points
we estimate a homography transform using the Direct Linear
Transformation (DLT) algorithm [19].
To obtain a more accurate matching, for each pixel in the
HSI, we search for its ﬁnal matching pixel in the neighborhood
window of the current matching one with SIFT distance. In
our experiments, the size of the window is set to 9×9. To ﬁnd
a set of matching pairs, we randomly select 1% of pixels in
the HSI and then ﬁnd their matching pixels in the RGB image
using the above process.
C. Other Visualization Scenarios
Reusing the Obtained Matching Pixels to Visualize Similar
HSIs: Based on the fact that the same types of objects shall
have similar spectral responses with the same sensor, the
matching pixels between a pair of HSI and RGB image can be
directly applied to visualize other semantically similar HSIs
captured by the same imaging sensor. This scenario is very
helpful for a quick overview of a batch of similar HSIs since
(a) LP band selection.
(b) Manifold alignment
(c) Stretched CMF
(d) Bilateral ﬁltering
(e) Bicriteria
optimiza-
tion
(f) MLS
Fig. 4. Visual comparison of different visualization approaches on the Moffett
Field data set.
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON ENTROPY.
Visualization methods
Washington
Moffett
G03
D04
LP Band Selection
6.59
6.36
4.73
5.58
Manifold Alignment
7.40
6.89
6.64
7.02
Stretched CMF
3.89
5.28
6.31
7.13
Bilateral Filtering
3.31
5.87
6.05
7.27
Bicriteria Optimization
5.75
6.00
5.73
6.06
MLS
7.00
6.30
7.01
7.39
the matching process between the HSI and the RGB image
only needs to be done once.
Displaying an HSI Aided by an RGB Image Captured on
a Different Site: The MLS-based visualization method only
requires a small number of matching pixel pairs for color
constraint. Thus in the absence of a corresponding RGB image
captured on the same site as the input HSI, a semantically
similar RGB image can be used to help visualization. In this
case, interactive tools can be developed for users to manually
select a number of matching pixels between the two images.
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON RMSE.
Visualization methods
Washington
Moffett
G03
D04
LP Band Selection
68.35
49.93
95.19
83.35
Manifold Alignment
58.41
27.30
32.88
23.08
Stretched CMF
92.46
58.50
44.09
28.70
Bilateral Filtering
102.43
56.70
78.54
61.14
Bicriteria Optimization
98.47
57.94
69.60
75.70
MLS
46.85
19.07
16.45
29.78

(a) LP band selection
(b) Manifold alignment
(c) Stretched CMF
(d) Bilateral ﬁltering
(e) Bicriteria
optimiza-
tion
(f) MLS
Fig. 5. Visual comparison of different visualization approaches on the G03
data set.
(a) LP band selection
(b) Manifold alignment
(c) Stretched CMF
(d) Bilateral ﬁltering
(e) Bicriteria
optimiza-
tion
(f) MLS
Fig. 6. Visual comparison of different visualization approaches on the D04
data set.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSIONS
We compare our results against several recently proposed vi-
sualization approaches including band selection using LP [3],
stretched CMF [1], bilateral ﬁltering [10], bicriteria opti-
mization [9] and manifold alignment [12]. We also give the
experimental results on two other application scenarios.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 7. Visualizations of similar HSIs generated by reusing a set of matching
pixels. (a) The ﬁrst band of F02. (b) The visualization of F02. (c) The ﬁrst
band of G02. (d) The visualization of G02.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8. Visualization of D04 generated with the aid of an RGB image captured
on a different site. (a) The ﬁrst band of D04. (b) An RGB image of different
site. (c) The visualization of D04.
A. Hyperspectral Imaging Data
Four HSI data sets were used to evaluate the performance
of different visualization methods. One remote sensing HSI
data set was taken over the Washington D.C. mall by the
Hyperspectral Digital Imagery Collection Experiment (HY-
DICE) sensor. The data consists of 191 bands after noisy
bands removed. Each band image has a size of 1208 × 307.
Fig. 1(a) shows its 50th band image. Fig. 1(b) shows the
registered corresponding RGB image obtained from Google
Earth. Another remote sensing HSI data was captured by
the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)
over Moffett Field, California. The data consists of 224 bands,
and each band has a size of 501 × 651. Its 50th band image
is shown in Fig. 2(a). The corresponding RGB image shown
in Fig. 2(d) was also obtained from Google Earth.
The other two HSI data sets named “G03” and “D04”
were captured by a ground-based OKSI hyperspectral imaging
system mounted with a tunable LCTF ﬁlter. Each data set has
18 bands ranging from 460nm to 630nm at 10nm interval.
The size of each band is 960 × 1280. Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(c)

show the ﬁrst band images of D04 and G03 respectively.
Their corresponding RGB images were taken by a Nikon D60
SLR digital camera and are shown in Fig. 2(e) and Fig. 2(f)
respectively.
B. Comparison of Visualization Methods
Fig. 3 shows the visual comparison of different visualization
approaches on the Washington D.C. mall data. It can be seen
that output image of the proposed method is very easy to
understand since it has very natural colors similar to that of
the corresponding RGB image in Fig. 1(b). Also, the details in
the HSI are clearly represented. The comparative results on the
Moffett ﬁeld, G03 and D04 data sets are provided in Fig. 4-6
respectively. Likewise, in these experiments our approach not
only shows great performance on displaying the HSIs with
natural colors but also preserves the local structure of the HSIs.
Quantitative assessment of HSI visualization does not have
a universally accepted standard. In this paper, we adopt two
quantitative metrics: entropy of the output image [10] and root
mean square error (RMSE) between the output image and the
corresponding RGB image [4].
Entropy is a statistical measure of randomness that can be
used to characterize the texture of an image. An image with
higher entropy generally contains richer information. Table I
shows the comparative results in terms of entropy. It can be
found that the results of the proposed method have relatively
large entropy compared to other approaches, which suggests
that the proposed method is able to preserve the information
of the HSI for analysis.
The RMSE between the output image and the corresponding
RGB image is a straightforward way to evaluate the “natu-
ralness” of the output image is [4]. The comparative RMSE
results are given in Table II. We can see that the output images
of the proposed method have smaller RMSE compared to
other methods in most cases, which shows clearly that the
proposed method is an excellent approach for displaying HSIs
with natural colors.
C. Generalizing the Matching Pixels to Visualize Other HSIs
Once we have obtained the matching pixels between an
HSI and a corresponding RGB image, the matching pixels
can be reused to visualize semantically similar HSIs captured
by the same hyperspectral imaging sensor. In this experiment,
the matching pixels between the G03 data set and its cor-
responding RGB image are applied to visualize three HSI
data sets named “F02” and “G02”, which were captured by
the same imaging sensor. Fig. 7 shows the ﬁrst band images
and the visualizations of these HSIs. It can be seen that the
proposed method has nice performance in displaying these
HSIs with natural colors. Besides, the same classes of objects
are presented with consistent colors across the three images.
D. Displaying an HSI with an RGB Image of a Different Site
In this experiment, we visualize the D04 data set (see
Fig. 8(a)) aided by an RGB image captured on a different
site (see Fig. 8(b)). Fourteen matching pixel pairs between
the two images were manually selected to serve as control
points. Fig. 8(c) shows the color representation of D04. We
can see that this image has natural colors and maintains the
basic information in the HSI, which shows that our algorithm
performs well with a limited number of matching pixels
between images captured on different sites.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We have presented a novel approach to visualize HSIs with
natural colors based on the MLS interpolation scheme. The
key idea is to construct a 3D color representation of an input
HSI through a set of matching pixels between the HSI and
a corresponding RGB image. Our method solves for each
spectral signature a unique transformation so that the nonlinear
structure of the HSI can be preserved. One advantage of the
proposed method is that the matching pixels between an HSI
and an RGB image can be directly applied to visualize similar
HSIs captured by the same imaging sensor. Our method also
works well when the HSI and the corresponding RGB image
are captured on different sites. In the future, we plan to take the
spatial information into account to better preserve the spatial
structure of HSIs.
