Bayesian Regression Approach for
Building and Stacking Predictive Models
in Time Series Analytics
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Ivan Franko National University of Lviv
Lviv, Ukraine

Abstract. The paper describes the use of Bayesian regression for build-
ing time series models and stacking diﬀerent predictive models for time
series. Using Bayesian regression for time series modeling with nonlin-
ear trend was analyzed. This approach makes it possible to estimate an
uncertainty of time series prediction and calculate value at risk character-
istics. A hierarchical model for time series using Bayesian regression has
been considered. In this approach, one set of parameters is the same for
all data samples, other parameters can be diﬀerent for diﬀerent groups
of data samples. Such an approach allows using this model in the case
of short historical data for speciﬁed time series, e.g. in the case of new
stores or new products in the sales prediction problem. In the study of
predictive models stacking, the models ARIMA, Neural Network, Ran-
dom Forest, Extra Tree were used for the prediction on the ﬁrst level
of model ensemble. On the second level, time series predictions of these
models on the validation set were used for stacking by Bayesian regres-
sion. This approach gives distributions for regression coeﬃcients of these
models. It makes it possible to estimate the uncertainty contributed by
each model to stacking result. The information about these distributions
allows us to select an optimal set of stacking models, taking into account
the domain knowledge. The probabilistic approach for stacking predic-
tive models allows us to make risk assessment for the predictions that
are important in a decision-making process.
Keywords: Time Series, Bayesian Regression, Machine Learning, Stack-
ing, Forecasting, Sales
1
Introduction
Time series analytics is an important part of modern data science. The examples
of diﬀerent time series approaches are in [2,3,5,10,11,21,22]. In [6,9,18–20,23],
a range of ensemble-based methods for classiﬁcation problems is considered. In
[14], the authors studied a lagged variable selection, hyperparameter optimiza-
tion, as well as compared classical and machine learning based algorithms for
time series. Sales prediction is an important part of modern business intelligence
arXiv:2201.02034v1  [stat.AP]  6 Jan 2022

2
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
[7,13,24]. Sales can be regarded as a time series. However, time series approaches
have some limitations for sales forecasting. For instance, to study seasonality,
historical data for large time period are required. But it frequently happens that
there are no historical data for a target variable, e.g. when a new product is
launched. Furthermore, we must take into consideration many exogenous fac-
tors inﬂuencing sales. We can consider time series forecasting as a regression
problem in many cases, especially for sales time series. In [16], we considered
linear models, machine learning and probabilistic models for time series mod-
eling. In [15], we regarded the logistic regression with Bayesian inference for
analysing manufacturing failures. In [17], we study the use of machine learning
models for sales predictive analytics. We researched the main approaches and
case studies of implementing machine learning to sales forecasting. The eﬀect
of machine learning generalization has been studied. This eﬀect can be used for
predicting sales in case of a small number of historical data for speciﬁc sales
time series in case when a new product or store is launched
[17]. A stacking
approach for building ensemble of single models using Lasso regression has also
been studied. The obtained results show that using stacking techniques, we can
improve the eﬃciency of predictive models for sales time series forecasting [17].
In this paper, we consider the use of Bayesian regression for building time
series predictive models and for stacking time series predictive models on the
second level of the predictive model which is the ensemble of the models of the
ﬁrst level.
2
Bayesian Regression Approach
Probabilistic regression models can be based on Bayesian theorem [4,8,12]. This
approach allows us to receive a posterior distribution of model parameters us-
ing conditional likelihood and prior distribution. Probabilistic approach is more
natural for stochastic variables such as sales time series. The diﬀerence between
Bayesian approach and conventional Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) method is
that in the Bayesian approach, uncertainty comes from parameters of model,
as opposed to OLS method where the parameters are constant and uncertainty
comes from data. In the Bayesian inference, we can use informative prior distri-
butions which can be set up by an expert. So, the result can be considered as a
compromise between historical data and expert opinion. It is important in the
cases when we have a small number of historical data. In the Bayesian model, we
can consider the target variable with non Gaussian distribution, e.g. Student’s
t-distribution. Probabilistic approach enables us an ability to receive probability
density function for the target variable. Having such function, we can make risk
assessment and calculate value at risk (VaR) which is 5% quantile. For solv-
ing Bayesian models, the numerical Monte-Carlo methods are used. Gibbs and
Hamiltonian sampling are the popular methods of ﬁnding posterior distributions
for the parameters of probabilistic model [4,8,12].
Bayesian inference makes it possible to do nonlinear regression. If we need
to ﬁt trend with saturation, we can use logistic curve model for nonlinear trend

Bayesian Regression Approach for Building And Stacking Predictive Models
3
and ﬁnd its parameters using Bayesian inference. Let us consider the case of
nonlinear regression for time series which have the trend with saturation. For
modeling we consider sales time series. The model can be described as:
log(Sales) ∼N(µSales, σ2)
µSales =
a
1 + exp(bt + c) + βP romoPromo+
βT imeTime +
X
j
βwd
j WeekDayj,
(1)
where WeekDayj - are binary variables, which is 1 in the case of sales on an
appropriate day of week and 0 otherwise. We can also build hierarchical models
using Bayesian inference. In this approach, one set of parameters is the same for
all data samples, other parameters can be diﬀerent for diﬀerent groups of data
samples. In the case of sales data, we can consider trends, promo impact and
seasonality as the same for all stores. But the impact of a speciﬁc store on sales
can be described by an intersect parameter, so this coeﬃcient for this variable
will be diﬀerent for diﬀerent stores. The hierarchical model can be described as:
Sales ∼N(µSales, σ2)
µSales = α(Store) + βP romoPromo+
βT imeTime +
X
j
βwd
j WeekDayj,
(2)
where intersect parameters α(Store) are diﬀerent for diﬀerent stores.
Predictive models can be combined into ensemble model using stacking ap-
proach [6,9,18–20,23]. In this approach, prediction results of predictive models
on the validation set are treated as covariates for stacking regression. These pre-
dictive models are considered as a ﬁrst level of predictive model ensemble. Stack-
ing model forms the second level of model ensemble. Using Bayesian inference
for stacking regression gives distributions for stacking regression coeﬃcients. It
enables us to estimate the uncertainty of the ﬁrst level predictive models. As pre-
dictive models for ﬁrst level of ensemble, we used the following models: ARIMA’,
’ExtraTree’, ’RandomForest’, ’Lasso’, ’NeuralNetowrk’. The use of these models
for stacking by Lasso regression was described in
[17]. For stacking, we have
chosen the robust regression with Student’s t-distribution for the target variable
as
y ∼Studentt(ν, µ, σ)
(3)
where
µ = α +
X
i
βixi,
(4)
ν is a distribution parameter, called as degrees of freedom, i is an index of
the predictive model in the stacking regression, i ∈{ ’ARIMA’, ’ExtraTree’,
’RandomForest’, ’Lasso’, ’NeuralNetowrk’ }.

4
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
3
Numerical Modeling
The data for our analysis are based on store sales historical data from the “Ross-
mann Store Sales” Kaggle competition [1]. For Bayesian regression, we used Stan
platform for statistical modeling
[4]. The analysis was conducted in Jupyter
Notebook environment using Python programming language and the following
main Python packages pandas, sklearn, pystan, numpy, scipy,statsmodels, keras,
matplotlib, seaborn. For numerical analysis we modeled time series with multi-
plicative trend with saturation. Figure 1 shows results of this modeling where
mean values and Value at Risk (VaR) characteristics are given. VaR was calcu-
lated as 5% percentile. Figure 2 shows probability density function of regression
coeﬃcients for Promo factor. Figure 3 shows box plots for probability density
function of seasonality coeﬃcients.
Fig. 1. Time series and trend forecasting
Let us consider Bayersian hierarchical model for time series. Intersect pa-
rameters α(Store) in the model (2) are diﬀerent for diﬀerent stores. We have
considered a case with ﬁve diﬀerent stores. Figure 4 shows the boxplots for the
probability density functions of intersect parameters. The dispersion of these
dsitributions describes an uncertainty of inﬂuence of speciﬁed store on sales. Hi-
erarchical approach makes it possible to use such a model in the case with short
historical data for speciﬁc stores, e.g. in the case of new stores. Figure 5 shows
the results of the forecasting on the validation set in the two cases, the ﬁsrt case
is when we use 2 year historical data and the second case is with historical data
for 5 days. We can see that such short historical data allow us to estimate sales
dynamics correctly. Figure 6 shows box plots for probability density function

Bayesian Regression Approach for Building And Stacking Predictive Models
5
Fig. 2. Probability density function of regression coeﬃcients for Promo factor
Fig. 3. Box plots for probability density function of seasonality coeﬃcients

6
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
of intersect parameters of diﬀerent time series in case of short time period of
historical data for a speciﬁed store Store 4. The obtained results show that the
dispersion for a speciﬁc store with short historical data becomes larger due to
uncertainty caused by very short historical data for the speciﬁed store.
Fig. 4. Boxplots for probability density functions of intersect parameters
Fig. 5. Forecasting on the validation set for speciﬁed time series in cases with diﬀerent
size of historical data
Let us consider the results of Bayesian regression approach for stacking pre-
dictive models. We trained diﬀerent predictive models and made the predictions
on the validation set. The ARIMA model was evaluated using statsmodels pack-
age, Neural Network was evaluated using keras package, Random Forest and

Bayesian Regression Approach for Building And Stacking Predictive Models
7
Fig. 6. Box plots for probability density function of intersect parameters of diferent
time series in case of short time period of historical data for a speciﬁed store Store 4.
Extra Tree was evaluated using sklearn package. In these calculations, we used
the approaches described in [17]. Figure 7 shows the time series forecasts on
the validation sets obtained using diﬀerent models.
The results of prediction of these models on the validation sets are considered
as the covariates for the regression on the second stacking level of the ensemble of
models. For stacking predictive models we split the validation set on the training
and testing sets. For stacking regression, we normalized the covariates and target
variable using z-scores:
zi = xi −µi
σi
,
(5)
where µi is the mean value, σi is the standard deviation. The prior distributions
for parameters α, β, σ in the Bayesian regression model (3)-(4) are considered as
Gaussian with mean values equal to 0, and standard deviation equal to 1. We split
the validation set on the training and testing sets by time factor. The parameters
for prior distributions can be adjusted using prediction scores on testing sets or
using expert opinions in the case of small data amount. To estimate uncertainty
of regression coeﬃcients, we used the coeﬃcient of variation which is deﬁned
as a ratio between the standard deviation and mean value for model coeﬃcient
distributions:
vi = σi
µi
,
(6)
where vi is the coeﬃcient of variation, σi is a standard deviation, µi is the mean
value for the distribution of the regression coeﬃcient of the model i. Taking
into account that µi can be negative, we will analyze the absolute value of the
coeﬃcient of variation |vi|. For the results evaluations, we used a relative mean
absolute error (RMAE) and root mean square error (RMSE). Relative mean
absolute error (RMAE) was considered as a ratio between the mean absolute

8
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Fig. 7. Forecasting of diﬀerent models on the validation set
error (MAE) and mean values of target variable:
RMAE = E(|ypred −y|)
E(y)
100%
(7)
Root mean square error (RMSE) was considered as:
RMSE =
rPn
i (ypred −y)2
n
(8)
The data with predictions of diﬀerent models on the validation set were split
on the training set (48 samples) and testing set (50 samples) by date. We used
the robust regression with Student’s t-distribution for the target variable. As
a result of calculations, we received the following scores: RMAE(train)=12.4%,
RMAE(test)=9.8%, RMSE(train)=113.7, RMSE(test)= 74.7. Figure
8 shows
mean values time series for real and forecasted sales on the validation and test-
ing sets. The vertical dotted line separates the training and testing sets. Figure
9 shows the probability density function (PDF) for the intersect parameter.
One can observe a positive bias of this (PDF). It is caused by the fact that we
applied machine learning algorithms to nonstationary time series. If a nonsta-
tionary trend is small, it can be compensated on the validation set using stacking
regression.
Figure 10 shows the box plots for the PDF of coeﬃcients of models. Figure
11 shows the coeﬃcient of variation for the PDF of regression coeﬃcients of
models.
We considered the case with the restraints to regression coeﬃcient of models
that they should be positive. We received the similar results: RMAE(train)=12.9%,

Bayesian Regression Approach for Building And Stacking Predictive Models
9
Fig. 8. Time series of mean values for real and forecasted sales on validation and testing
sets
Fig. 9. The PDF for intersect parameter of stacking regression

10
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Fig. 10. Box plots for the PDF of regression coeﬃcients of models
Fig. 11. Absolute values of the coeﬃcient of variation for the PDF of regression coef-
ﬁcients of models

Bayesian Regression Approach for Building And Stacking Predictive Models
11
RMAE(test)=9.7%, RMSE(train)=117.3, RMSE(test)=76.1. Figure
12 shows
the box plots for the PDF of model regression coeﬃcients for this case.
Fig. 12. Box plots for the PDF of regression coeﬃcients of models
All models have a similar mean value and variation coeﬃcients. We can ob-
serve that errors characteristics RMAE and RMSE on the validation set can
be similar with respect to these errors on the training set. It tells us about the
fact that Bayesian regression does not overﬁt on the training set comparing to
the machine learning algorithms which can demonstrate essential overﬁtting on
training sets, especially in the cases of small amount of training data. We have
chosen the best ExtraTree stacking model and conducted Bayesian regression
with this one model only. We received the following scores: RMAE(train)=12.9%,
RMAE(test)=11.1%, RMSE(train)=117.1, RMSE(test)=84.7. We also tried to
exclude the best model ExtraTree from the stacking regression and conducted
Bayesian regression with the rest of models without ExtraTree. In this case
we received the following scores: RMAE(train)=14.1%, RMAE(test)=10.2%,
RMSE(train)=139.1, RMSE(test)=75.3. Figure 13 shows the box plots for the
PDF of model regression coeﬃcients, ﬁgure 14 shows the coeﬃcient of variation
for the PDF of regression coeﬃcients of models for this case study. We received
worse results on the testing set. At the same time these models have the similar
inﬂuence and thus they can potentially provide more stable results in the future
due to possible changing of the quality of features. Noisy models can decrease
accuracy on large training data sets, at the same time they contribute to suﬃ-
cient results in the case of small data sets. We considered the case with a small
number of training data, 12 samples. To get stable results, we ﬁxed the ν pa-
rameter of Student’s t-distribution in Bayesian regression model (3)-(4) equal to
10. We received the following scores: RMAE(train)=5.0%, RMAE(test)=14.2%,
RMSE(train)=37.5, RMSE(test)=121.3. Figure 15 shows mean values time se-

12
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Fig. 13. Box plots for the PDF of regression coeﬃcients of models
Fig. 14. Absolute values of the coeﬃcient of variation for the PDF of models regression
coeﬃcients

Bayesian Regression Approach for Building And Stacking Predictive Models
13
ries for real and forecasted sales on the validation and testing sets. Figure 16
shows the box plots for the PDF of regression coeﬃcients of models. Figure 17
shows the coeﬃcient of variation for the PDF of regression coeﬃcients of models.
In this case, we can see that an other model starts playing an important role
comparing with the previous cases and ExtraTree model does not dominate.
The obtained results show that optimizing informative prior distributions of
Fig. 15. Mean values time series for real and forecasted sales on the validation and
testing sets in the case of small training set
stacking model parameters can improve the scores of prediction results on the
testing set.
4
Conclusion
Bayesian regression approach for time series modeling with nonlinear trend was
analyzed. Such approach allows us to estimate an uncertainty of time series pre-
diction and calculate value at risk (VaR) characteristics. Hierarchical model for
time series using Bayesian regression has been considered. In this approach, one
set of parameters is the same for all data samples, other parameters can be dif-
ferent for diﬀerent groups of data samples. This approach makes it possible to
use such a model in the case with short historical data for speciﬁed time series,
e.g. in the case of new stores or new products in the sales prediction problem.
The use of Bayesian inference for time series predictive models stacking has
been analyzed. A two-level ensemble of the predictive models for time series was
considered. The models ARIMA, Neural Network, Random Forest, Extra Tree
were used for the prediction on the ﬁrst level of ensemble of models. On the

14
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Fig. 16. Box plots for the PDF of regression coeﬃcients of models in the case of small
training set
Fig. 17. Absolute values of the coeﬃcient of variation for the PDF of regression coef-
ﬁcients of models in the case of small training set

Bayesian Regression Approach for Building And Stacking Predictive Models
15
second stacking level, time series predictions of these models on the validation
set were conducted by Bayesian regression. Such an approach gives distributions
for regression coeﬃcients of these models. It makes it possible to estimate the
uncertainty contributed by each model to the stacking result. The information
about these distributions allows us to select an optimal set of stacking mod-
els, taking into account domain knowledge. Probabilistic approach for stacking
predictive models allows us to make risk assessment for the predictions that is
important in a decision-making process. Noisy models can decrease accuracy on
large training data sets, at the same time they contribute to suﬃcient results in
the case of small data sets. Using Bayesian inference for stacking regression can
be useful in cases of small datasets and help experts to select a set of models
for stacking as well as make assessments of diﬀerent kinds of risks. Choosing the
ﬁnal models for stacking is up to an expert who takes into account diﬀerent fac-
tors such as uncertainty of each model on the stacking regression level, amount
of training and testing data, the stability of models. In Bayesian regression, we
can receive a quantitative measure for the uncertainty that can be a very useful
information for experts in model selection and stacking. An expert can also set
up informative prior distributions for stacking regression coeﬃcients of models,
taking into account the domain knowledge information. So, Bayesian approach
for stacking regression can give us the information about uncertainty of predic-
tive models. Using this information and domain knowledge, an expert can select
models to get stable stacking ensemble of predictive models.
