Kepler Eclipsing Binary Stars. III. Classiﬁcation of Kepler Eclipsing Binary
Light Curves with Locally Linear Embedding
Gal Matijeviˇc
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, University of Ljubljana, Jadranska 19, 1000 Ljubljana,
Slovenia

Andrej Prˇsa
Dept. of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Villanova University, 800 E Lancaster Ave, Villanova, PA
19085, USA

Jerome A. Orosz and William F. Welsh
Department of Astronomy, San Diego State University, 5500 Campanile Dr., San Diego, CA
92182, USA
Steven Bloemen
Instituut voor Sterrenkunde, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200 D, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
and
Thomas Barclay
NASA Ames Research Center/BAER Institute, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035, USA
ABSTRACT
We present an automated classiﬁcation of 2165 Kepler eclipsing binary (EB) light
curves that accompanied the second Kepler data release. The light curves are clas-
siﬁed using Locally Linear Embedding, a general nonlinear dimensionality reduction
tool, into morphology types (detached, semi-detached, overcontact, ellipsoidal). The
method, related to a more widely used Principal Component Analysis, produces a
lower-dimensional representation of the input data while preserving local geometry and,
consequently, the similarity between neighboring data points. We use this property to
reduce the dimensionality in a series of steps to a one-dimensional manifold and classify
light curves with a single parameter that is a measure of ”detachedness” of the sys-
tem. This fully automated classiﬁcation correlates well with the manual determination
of morphology from the data release, and also eﬃciently highlights any misclassiﬁed
arXiv:1204.2113v1  [astro-ph.SR]  10 Apr 2012

– 2 –
objects. Once a lower-dimensional projection space is deﬁned, the classiﬁcation of ad-
ditional light curves runs in a negligible time and the method can therefore be used
as a fully automated classiﬁer in pipeline structures. The classiﬁer forms a tier of the
Kepler EB pipeline that pre-processes light curves for the artiﬁcial intelligence based
parameter estimator.
Subject headings: binaries: eclipsing — methods: data analysis — methods: numerical
1.
Introduction
The NASA Kepler mission carries out essentially uninterrupted, ultrahigh precision photomet-
ric observations of ∼160, 000 stars in the Cygnus and Lyra constellations since its launch in 2009
March. It is designed to discover exoplanets by the transit method. The details regarding mission
operation and instrumentation can be found in Batalha et al. (2010), Borucki et al. (2010), Caldwell
et al. (2010), Koch et al. (2010). The mission already yielded several exciting results, including
the ﬁrst ever discovery of transiting circumbinary planets (Doyle et al. 2011; Welsh et al. 2012)
and the detection of several Earth sized planets (Gautier et al. 2012; Fressin et al. 2012; Muirhead
et al. 2012). In addition to its impact on exoplanetary science, Kepler literally revolutionized the
eclipsing binary (EB) ﬁeld. A set of 2165 EBs has been identiﬁed and made available via two data
releases (Prˇsa et al. 2011; Slawson et al. 2011, parts I and II, respectively) and quite a few papers
studied individual Kepler EBs (e.g., Southworth et al. 2011; Steﬀen et al. 2011; Welsh et al. 2011;
Winn et al. 2011).
The EB analysis pipeline employed for the construction of the catalog consisted of the following
steps: (1) EB signature detection: all threshold crossing events (abrupt changes in the source ﬂux)
identiﬁed by the main Kepler pipeline have been tagged and all recurring events considered; (2)
data detrending: all intrinsic variability (such as chromospheric activity, interaction, etc.)
and
extrinsic variability (i.e., third light contamination and instrumental artifacts) are removed by the
iterative ﬁtting of the photometric baseline; (3) the determination of the ephemerides: the time-
space data are phase folded and the dispersion minimized; (4) morphological classiﬁcation: the
determination of the EB morphology based on the light curve shape is done by manual inspection
into detached (D), semi-detached (SD), overcontact (OC), ellipsoidal (ELV), and uncertain (UNC)
sources; (5) analytic approximation: every light curve is ﬁt by a polynomial chain (polyﬁt; Prˇsa
et al. 2008) to ﬁnd an analytic description; and (6) EB characterization: submitting the analytic
approximation to the artiﬁcial intelligence based tier EBAI (Prˇsa et al. 2008). The tier consists
of a set of morphology-based neural networks to perform a nonlinear regression of light curves and
obtain the principal parameters of EBs.
The inadequate part of the pipeline is morphological classiﬁcation because it is based on visual
inspection. This approach is inherently subjective and the classiﬁcation may be unreliable and is
prone to errors. Moreover, this is not a feasible approach for large data sets, so an automated

– 3 –
approach is much more favorable.
There have already been signiﬁcant eﬀorts focusing on the
topic of automatic classiﬁcation of variable star light curves (Eyer & Blake 2005; Sarro et al. 2006;
Debosscher et al. 2007; Blomme et al. 2011; Dubath et al. 2011; Richards et al. 2011, among others).
Most of the employed methods share a common point of using training sets of known light curves
that deﬁne the classes to which the unknown light curves are assigned to. They also work for a
broader range or variables and include many diﬀerent pulsating and other types besides eclipsing
binaries.
Since our goal is to produce a classiﬁcation of Kepler EB light curves based on the
similarity between the light curves themselves and not to classify them according to the externally
deﬁned classes, we instead propose a method of Locally Linear Embedding (LLE). The method was
devised by Roweis & Saul (2000) as a general nonlinear dimensionality reduction tool. It already
found its application in astronomy and has recently been used for classiﬁcation of Sloan Digital Sky
Survey galaxy and quasar spectra (VanderPlas & Connolly 2009) as well as stellar spectra (Daniel
et al. 2011).
2.
Eclipsing Binary Data
The data classiﬁed in this paper are a part of the second Kepler catalog of EB stars (Slawson
et al. 2011). The catalog contains 2165 EBs from the ﬁrst three quarters (Q0, Q1, and Q2). All
light curves were processed and calibrated with the Kepler EB pipeline. According to the manual
classiﬁcation, the sample consists of 1261 detached, 152 semi-detached, 469 overcontact binaries,
137 ellipsoidal variables, and 146 uncertain systems.
For our analysis, the phase-folded light curves with their primary eclipse centered at the
zero phase were ﬁt using polyfit. In general, polyfit uses a chain of m piece-wise connected
polynomials of order n to approximate light curves ranging from well detached systems with narrow
primary eclipses to overcontact systems with near-sinusoidal signals. In particular, we ﬁtted a chain
of four quadratic functions. Note that this choice is not motivated by any EB physics but is rather
the simplest model that performs reasonably well.
Having calculated polyfit models for all EBs, we sampled these analytic representations in
1000 equidistant phase points between −0.5 and 0.5. The number of sampling points was selected
so that even the narrowest primary eclipses of detached systems are suitably covered.
3.
Locally Linear Embedding
The method was introduced by Roweis & Saul (2000) as a dimensionality reduction alternative
to the more commonly used algorithms like the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) or Multidi-
mensional Scaling. A particular appeal of this method is in the determination of the local relations
between data points rather than global properties of the data set.

– 4 –
Considering the remarkable eﬀectiveness of the method, its implementation is relatively simple
and can be outlined in three main steps. A detailed description and derivation can be found in
Roweis & Saul (2000), de Ridder & Duin (2002), Saul & Roweis (2003) and VanderPlas & Connolly
(2009). We recap the main steps here.
Consider each polyfit light curve sampled at 1000 equidistant phases as a point in a D = 1000
dimensional phase space, where the number of dimensions is determined by the number of phase
bins in which we sample the model light curve. We aim to represent the data from this high-
dimensional space in a signiﬁcantly lower-dimensional space (say, d = 2 or 3) where correlations
between light curves can be more easily understood and visualized. In the polyfit space, all light
curve models are represented by N vectors xi. In the ﬁrst step we identify k nearest neighbors
per data point, xj, j = 1 . . . k for every i, as deﬁned by the Euclidean distance. This particular
choice of the metric does not prefer any of the dimensions since all of them contribute equally to
the distance, however the metric can generally be non-Euclidean.
Next, the local geometry of each data point is characterized by a linear combination of its
neighbors. This is appropriate only if the neighborhood points are always close enough to each data
point so that the linear approximation is valid. The cost function that measures the reconstruction
error is written as
E(W) =
X
i
xi −
X
j
wijxj

2
,
(1)
where the inner summation goes over all of the neighbors of each data point i, calculated in
the previous step, and the outer summation goes over all data points. Weights wij describe the
contribution of the jth neighbor to the reconstruction of the ith point. We seek such weights that,
when multiplied by the vectors of the neighborhood points, will minimize the diﬀerence between
the ith point and this weighted sum. The weights of interest may be computed by minimizing the
cost function, subject to the constraint:
X
j
wj = 1.
(2)
This is done by using a standard Lagrangian multiplier method. By using Equation (2), the ith
component of Equation (1) can be rewritten as
Ei(W) =

X
j
wij(xi −xj)

2
=
k
X
j=1
k
X
l=1
wjwlCjl,
(3)
where
Cjl = (xi −xj)T (xi −xl)
(4)
is the neighborhood correlation matrix. The optimal weights are then given by
wj =
P
l C−1
jl
P
m
P
n C−1
mn
.
(5)

– 5 –
Instead of computing an inverse of the matrix C, a more practical approach is to solve the linear
system:
X
j
Cjlwl = 1,
(6)
and rescale the weights so that they satisfy the condition in Equation (2). In general, the matrix
C can be singular and so the weights wj would be ill deﬁned. A way to overcome this problem is
to add a small multiple of the identity matrix to the correlation matrix:
C →C + rI.
(7)
VanderPlas & Connolly
(2009) discovered that the value of the regularization parameter r =
10−3Tr(C) works well.
A ﬁnal, third step of the method involves mapping of the data points onto a lower, d-
dimensional space Y . The embedding cost function that needs to be minimized in order to ﬁnd the
projected space Y can be written in a similar fashion as Equation (1):
E(Y ) =
X
i
yi −
X
j
wijyj

2
.
(8)
Instead of optimizing the weights wij, we keep them ﬁxed and optimize the coordinates yi. This
way we ﬁnd a low-dimensional space whose local patches are geometrically equivalent to the patches
of the high-dimensional space, meaning that the intrinsic relations between neighboring data points
are (approximately) preserved. The computation of the optimal space Y reduces to a calculation
of the eigenvectors of a sparse matrix (for details, see one of the listed sources for LLE). The
projection is deﬁned by the ﬁrst d eigenvectors that correspond to the smallest eigenvalues and the
solution with the zero eigenvalue (which exist because of the constraint in Equation (2)) and can
be omitted since it only amounts to the translation in space (Roweis & Saul 2000).
Once the low-dimensional space Y is deﬁned, new data points are easily projected onto it
by ﬁnding their nearest neighbors and reconstructing the weights. After that only the projected
coordinates need to be calculated from the absolute value term in Equation (8).
The advantage of LLE over other dimensionality reduction methods is in its low number of
free parameters. When the input data are deﬁned, the only two free parameters are the number of
nearest neighbors, from which the local reconstruction is made, and the regularization parameter
r. The algorithm is not computationally intensive and the classiﬁcation procedure of the whole
sample takes only a few seconds on a personal computer.
4.
Classiﬁcation Results
The Kepler EB catalog includes 2165 objects. Of those, 42 have longer periods than the span of
Kepler observations and, therefore, the polyfit model could not be reliably ﬁtted. Those objects
were omitted from further analysis, leaving 2123 EBs.

– 6 –
0.996
1.000
1.004
0.998
1.000
1.002
0.998
1.000
0.998
1.000
1.002
0.900
0.950
1.000
0.995
1.000
0.900
0.950
1.000
0.995
1.000
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Phase
0.900
0.950
1.000
Fig. 1.— Three diﬀerent groups of outliers as described in the text. The black dots are observed
data, and the white lines are polyﬁt light curves. The top three examples show light curves with
small eclipse depth; the next three light curves feature additional intrinsic variations; and the last
three light curves suﬀer from bad detrending or bad ﬁts. In all cases polyﬁt failed to adequately
represent the underlying observed light curve.

– 7 –
All input light curves were then vertically rescaled to the unit ([0, 1]) interval.
This way,
the eﬀects of the third light contamination and orbital inclination are minimized. Had this not
been done, the depth of the eclipses would have been the driving parameter and classiﬁcation
would have been dominantly triggered on the overall amplitude rather than on the morphology
of the light curve. Given the large Kepler pixel size (4′′ × 4′′), a signiﬁcant number of targets
is contaminated by third light and this causes additional problems for classifying un-normalized
data. If we used LLE on the non-scaled data, the light curves would be classiﬁed by amplitude;
hence, any detached, semi-detached, or overcontact systems with similar eclipse depths would be
lumped together, while two morphologically identical sources, one diluted by third light and the
other undiluted, would end up in the diﬀerent parts of the LLE manifold.
Initially we calculated the projection for the whole data set; we varied the number of k nearest
neighbors for each data point and the regularization parameter r. Regardless of the choice of those
two parameters (within reasonable limits), the projection always highlighted a group of outliers.
Closer inspection of those objects revealed that polyfit failed to adequately ﬁt their observed
light curves, mainly for three reasons: (1) small eclipse depths (∼10−3) are buried in noise; (2) the
presence of intrinsic variations (spots, pulsations, accretion, . . . ); and (3) diﬃculties with detrending
(Figure 1). In some cases the aﬀected light curves could be represented with a larger number of
higher order polynomials, but this would more likely lead to overﬁtting rather than giving a better
representation. For that reason we excluded 551 aﬀected light curves from the sample used to
generate the mapping. After pruning, 1572 EBs were used to compute the ﬁnal projection. This
does not aﬀect the ﬁnal classiﬁcation sample, as all sources, including any subsequently added ones,
can still be mapped to the lower-dimensional space by the same projection.
Experimentation with the ﬁnal sample showed that the best choice for the number of nearest
neighbors is around k = 20, and that the projection onto a two-dimensional subspace preserves a
suﬃcient amount of morphological information for classiﬁcation purposes. An example from Saul &
Roweis (2003) shows that the exact number of neighbors is not critical; our results conﬁrm that since
a modest variation in this number (i.e., between 15 and 25) did not aﬀect the projection signiﬁcantly.
For the value of the regularization parameter we chose r = 10−2 Tr(C), which is somewhat larger
than suggested in the literature. The rationale for this is that larger values penalize large weights,
producing a smoother projection. The ﬁnal projection to d2 = 2 was made in two steps. First, we
projected all light curves onto a three-dimensional subspace (cf. Figure 2, top panels), from where
it was evident that the projection is a well-constrained 2-dimensional manifold. We then made
another projection from d1 = 3 to d2 = 2 with k = 10 nearest neighbors, depicted in the middle
panel of Figure 2. This two-step method yielded a better separation between diﬀerent classes of
EBs than a direct projection to 2 dimensions. Examples of the ﬁnal projections when calculated
with a diﬀerent set of free parameters are shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2.
The middle panel in Figure 2 demonstrates that the projection of light curves can be further
represented by the one-dimensional curve with a relatively limited scatter. In a good portion of
all cases the scatter is caused by the diﬀerences in the ﬂux levels and phase positions of secondary

– 8 –
Fig. 2.— LLE projection of 1572 Kepler EB light curves sampled in 1000 phase points (D = 1000)
and ﬁrst projected onto d1 = 3D subspace (the upper three panels show individual component
cross-sections), followed by a projection to a d2 = 2D subspace. Note that the values on the x and
y axes of the diagrams are arbitrary since the projections do not depend on global translations,
rotations and scalings. EB classes from existing manual classiﬁcation are depicted by diﬀerent
colors. The inset in the middle diagram shows the spline ﬁt to the main line and a selection of
15 light curves depicted in Figure 3. The bottom four diagrams show the LLE projection using
diﬀerent values for the number of nearest neighbors used in the calculations and the values of the
regularization parameter r. For all four cases k1 is the number of nearest neighbors used in the
ﬁrst projection, and k2 is the number used in the second projection.

– 9 –
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Phase
0.95
1.01
0.97
1.01
0.75
1.05
0.85
1.05
0.985
1.005
0.82
1.02
0.45
1.10
0.55
1.05
0.84
1.02
0.70
1.05
0.993
1.002
0.96
1.01
0.94
1.01
0.75
1.05
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.92
1.02
 15
c =0.999
 14
c =0.959
 13
c =0.892
 12
c =0.810
 11
c =0.708
 10
c =0.622
  9
c =0.519
  8
c =0.416
  7
c =0.347
  6
c =0.247
  5
c =0.175
  4
c =0.116
  3
c =0.075
  2
c =0.027
  1
c =0.003
Fig. 3.— Polyﬁt representations of EB light curves along the main classiﬁcation sequence on the
two-dimensional projection depicted in Figure 2. The light curves are enumerated according to the
labeled points on the classiﬁcation sequence and the classiﬁcation parameter c is given for each
point on the left. The light curves are not rescaled to the [0, 1] range as they were for the LLE
projection but are rather given in the original scaling. The values along the y axes specify their
ﬂux variation ranges.

– 10 –
eclipses. The density of points along the main classiﬁcation sequence is roughly constant. There is
a remarkable correspondence between the LLE determination of morphology and the manual EB
classiﬁcation ﬂag (colors levels in Figure 2). There is, however, some overlap between the manually
classiﬁed types, most notably between detached and semidetached systems, and between overcon-
tact, ellipsoidal, and uncertain systems. Closer inspection reveals that this overlap is real and that
the points that overlap are indeed intrinsically similar. This clearly implies that manual classiﬁ-
cation suﬀered from subjective notions of the classiﬁer. Morphology types are thus aligned with
the main classiﬁcation sequence: the leftmost part of the sequence is populated by well detached
systems with very narrow primary eclipses, followed by the detached systems with progressively
wider eclipses that ﬁnally morph into semidetached systems. These further advance into a region of
overcontact systems that ends with an overlap of population of systems exhibiting near-sinusoidal
variations. Curiously, the rightmost part of the sequence is where all the unknown/uncertain sys-
tems reside, implying that the dubious classiﬁcation stems from light curve similarity that cannot
be resolved without additional data, i.e., follow-up spectroscopy.
In order to quantitatively characterize diﬀerent classes of EBs, we ﬁt the main classiﬁcation
sequence with a smoothed spline function (cf. the middle panel in Figure 2). We deﬁne a classiﬁ-
cation parameter c for each light curve along the ﬁtted spline that is closest to a given data point,
ranging from 0 to 1. A selection of 15 light curves that lie along the spline is shown in Figure 3.
The width of the primary eclipse changes continuously with the classiﬁcation parameter c; the
depth and the phase of the secondary eclipse do not inﬂuence the classiﬁcation notably. Since the
width of the primary eclipse is the measure of the sum of relative radii of the two components, the
classiﬁcation parameter is a good measure of the relative separation between the components in
the binary system. However, it should be noted that EB physics is too complex to be put in only
a single parameter so the values of the classiﬁcation parameter should only be used as guidelines.
Since the classiﬁcation parameter and the sum of relative radii are notably correlated, we
tested if correlation exists between the orbital periods and c. The obvious trend is depicted in
Figure 4: the longer period systems, which are predominantly detached, have small values of the
classiﬁcation parameter. Overcontact systems and, more so, ellipsoidal variables are clumped in the
region with short periods and large values of c. The values of c that separate diﬀerent EB classes
could be estimated by comparing them to the manual classiﬁcation. As a guideline, all systems
with c < 0.5 are predominantly detached. The range of c for semidetached systems is harder to
estimate due to the overlaps, but broadly they lie in the 0.5 < c < 0.7 range. Overcontact systems
are dominating 0.7 < c < 0.8 region, after which a mixture of ellipsoidal variables and systems with
uncertain classiﬁcation sets in.
5.
Update to the catalog
The live version of the Kepler EB catalog is served on http://keplerEBs.villanova.edu
and on MAST, http://archive.stsci.edu/kepler. With this paper we introduce a new column

– 11 –
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
c
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cumulative fraction
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
log(P) [days]
Fig. 4.—
Correlation between the orbital period P and the classiﬁcation parameter c. Colors
correspond to the manually classiﬁed EB types as in Figure 2. The bottom diagram shows the
cumulative histogram with respect to c.

– 12 –
to the catalog that contains the classiﬁcation parameter c. The community can thus further reﬁne
the mining of the catalog according to the particular scientiﬁc interest. For example, a search can
be limited to well-detached EBs by querying the entries with c < 0.1 or to near-sinusoidal light
curves for the entries with c > 0.9.
6.
Summary
In this paper we present a fully automated, objective Kepler EB light curve classiﬁcation
scheme based on the LLE algorithm. The method highlights the local geometrical properties of
light curves in high-dimensional space (spun by the number of phase points in a light curve) and
projects them to a lower-dimensional subspace. For our purposes we projected the light curves onto
a two-dimensional space where individual morphological types are well deﬁned by a spline ﬁt with
relatively little scatter. Based on that, we deﬁne a classiﬁcation parameter c, a single parameter
that marches along the spline and, hence, provides a quantitative representation of the binary star
morphology.
The classiﬁcation of the whole sample runs in negligible time; once the projected subspace is
deﬁned, additional light curves can be classiﬁed on the ﬂy (several thousand light curves per second
on a typical personal computer). This fact makes our approach appealing for integration into the
existing analysis pipelines.
However, since the classiﬁcation of a light curve depends on the automated polyfit model,
the latter should always be inspected for any systematic problems. The classiﬁcation parameter
readily serves as a ”best guess” at the morphology class, but full-ﬂedged modeling might still be
necessary to conﬁrm the classiﬁcation reliability.
Funding for the Kepler mission is provided by NASA’s Science Mission Directorate. G.M.
acknowledges support from the Slovenian Research Agency. A.P. acknowledges the Kepler Partic-
ipating Scientist Program NSR 303065. S.B. acknowledges funding from the European Research
Council under the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013)/ERC
grant agreement no. 227224 (PROSPERITY), as well as from the Research Council of K. U. Leuven
grant agreement GOA/2008/04.
