Model-based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
with Cooperative Prioritized Sweeping
Eugenio Bargiacchi1, Timothy Verstraeten1,
Diederik M. Roijers2, Ann Now´e1
1Vrije Universiteit Brussel

Abstract
We present a new model-based reinforcement learning algo-
rithm, Cooperative Prioritized Sweeping, for efﬁcient learn-
ing in multi-agent Markov decision processes. The algorithm
allows for sample-efﬁcient learning on large problems by ex-
ploiting a factorization to approximate the value function.
Our approach only requires knowledge about the structure
of the problem in the form of a dynamic decision network.
Using this information, our method learns a model of the en-
vironment and performs temporal difference updates which
affect multiple joint states and actions at once. Batch updates
are additionally performed which efﬁciently back-propagate
knowledge throughout the factored Q-function. Our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithm sparse cooperative
Q-learning algorithm, both on the well-known SysAdmin
benchmark and randomized environments.
Consider a control problem where multiple agents must
learn to cooperate to achieve a common goal in an environ-
ment with unknown and complex dynamics, such as robot
soccer (Kok et al. 2003), warehouse commissioning (Claes
et al. 2017), and trafﬁc light control (Wiering 2000). Such
problems cannot be solved optimally in general even if the
dynamics of the environment are known in advance, due to
the size of both state and action spaces being exponential in
the number of agents. Large environments also require in-
creasingly large amounts of data to learn effectively, which
are often impractical to obtain in real-life scenarios.
In this paper, we introduce an approximate method for
fast, sample efﬁcient reinforcement learning (RL) with a
large set of cooperative agents, called cooperative prior-
itized sweeping (CPS). Speciﬁcally, we generalize prior-
itized sweeping (PS) (Moore and Atkeson 1993) to lin-
early factored Q-functions (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2001;
2002). We use model-based RL, which consists in learning
a model of the environment, and using it to learn a value
function and extract a policy for the agents. We represent
this model using a dynamic decision network and exploit the
state-action dependency graph to efﬁciently construct and
manage the priority queue. CPS performs updates similar
to Q-Learning, but is able to back-propagate these changes
through the Q-function by using the factored model. All up-
dates are stored in a priority queue, such that the largest
changes are back-propagated ﬁrst in an anytime fashion.
S1
S2
S3
S4
S′
1
S′
2
S′
3
S′
4
A1
A2
A3
(a) A simple DDN in compact
form.
S1
S2
S3
S4
S′
1
S′
2
S′
3
S′
4
(b) A DBN induced by a partic-
ular joint action.
Figure 1: How to represent a multi-agent factored MDP.
1
Problem Formulation
A multi-agent Markov decision process (MMDP) is a tu-
ple ⟨S, A, T, R, γ⟩, where S and A are the state and ac-
tion spaces, T is the transition function which describes the
environment’s dynamics, R is the reward function associ-
ating rewards with joint state-action pairs and γ ∈[0, 1)
is the discount factor representing the importance of future
rewards. The joint action space is the Cartesian product of
the action spaces of each agent, i.e., A = A1 × · · · × AK.
The state space is the Cartesian product of state factors, i.e.,
S = S1 × · · · × SN.
In an MMDP, the interactions between the state fac-
tors and agents are assumed to be sparse. Therefore, we
use a Dynamic Decision Network (DDN) to describe them
(Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002). A DDN can be graphically
represented in a compact form as a directed graph where
each edge marks the direct inﬂuence of one variable over
another. Note that, while compact, such a representation can
lose information, as in a DDN actions induce conditional de-
pendencies which may be subsets of the edges represented.
More speciﬁcally, an edge in the graph marks that a relation-
ship exists for at least one action. For example, in Figure 1,
the state variable S′
1 may depend solely on S1 when A1 = 0,
i.e., P(S′
1 | S1, S2, A1 = 0) = P(S′
1 | S1, A1 = 0), but may
depend on both S1 and S2 when A1 = 1. This information is
part of the DDN itself— but usually not represented graphi-
cally.
arXiv:2001.07527v1  [cs.LG]  15 Jan 2020

Using the DDN formulation, we can formulate the transi-
tion function of an MMDP as
T(s′ | s, a) =
Y
i
Ti(s′
i | s, a),
(1)
where a is the part of a on which s′
i depends, and s is the
part of s on which s′
i depends given action a. Therefore each
joint action induces a Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN)
out of the DDN (Figure 1b).
We assume the reward function has the same structure as
T, such that R(s, a) = P
i Ri(s, a) where each Ri has the
same domain (S, A) as Ti. Given this structure, we assume
that rewards are sampled, both from the environment and
from the model, as vectors with N elements. This is useful
when updating the factored Q-function (see Section 2.2).
This representation is somewhat different from what some
other multi-agent RL algorithms use (e.g., (Kok and Vlassis
2004)), which is to consider rewards on a per-agent basis,
rather than on a per-state factor basis. In other words, they
consider reward samples to be vectors with K entries, i.e.,
one per agent. However, it is always possible to represent an
agent-based reward function as a state-based one by simply
adding one additional state factor per agent to convey the
rewards.
2
Cooperative Prioritized Sweeping
To be able to learn in a factored MMDP, it is key to ex-
ploit the factored structure to learn an (approximate) sparse
Q-function (Section 2.2). For example, Sparse Cooperative
Q-Learning (SCQL) (Kok and Vlassis 2004) learns a fac-
torised Q-function on a per-agent or a per-edge (2-agent
factor) basis. However, the model-free approach with one-
step look-ahead bootstrapping that SCQL uses is not very
sample-efﬁcient. A straightforward idea to increase sample-
efﬁciency would be to learn an approximate MMDP model
(Section 2.1), and perform planning on this model to ob-
tain an approximate sparse Q-function (Guestrin et al. 2003;
Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002). The state-of-the-art plan-
ning algorithm employs an LP that computes the approxi-
mate value function that minimizes the max-norm distance
to the optimal one (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002). How-
ever, because this requires solving a large scale LP at every
time step as we learn the model, the computational require-
ments make such a model-based approach infeasible.
In this section, we propose a new model-based approach
for MMDPs that generalizes the idea of prioritized sweep-
ing (Moore and Atkeson 1993) to the multi-agent setting,
by both using direct experience and simulated experience
from an MMDP model (Section 2.3–2.5) to learn the sparse
Q-function. Our algorithm—cooperative prioritized sweep-
ing (Algorithm 1)—thus beneﬁts from the sample-efﬁciency
of a model-based approach, while keeping the computation
time in check.
2.1
Learning the Model
Cooperative prioritized sweeping (CPS) approximates a
model of the environment to determine how changes must
be back-propagated through the value function after an up-
date. Furthermore, this model is also used to generate new
simulated experience that is sampled in batches and used to
update the value function multiple times every time step.
In order to learn the MMDP model, we assume that the
DDN structure is fully described prior to learning. We use
this structure for three purposes: to improve learning, to in-
crease sample-efﬁciency, and to structure the CPS queue so
that it contains parent sets rather than complete states (see
Section 2.4). Given the structure of the MMDP, we learn the
transition dynamics by maintaining estimates of the propor-
tion that a state s′
i is reached after taking a local joint action
a in a local joint state s of its parents in the DDN (Andre,
Friedman, and Parr 1998):
Ti(s′
i | s, a) =
Ns,a,s′
i + N 0
s,a,s′
i
P
s′′
i ∈Si Ns,a,s′′
i + N 0
s,a,s′′
i
(2)
where N 0
s,a,s′′
i are the priors on the model before interaction
begins. The reward function can be learned accordingly.
2.2
One-step Q-Function Updates
CPS learns the Q-function of the MMDP in a factorized
manner. This means that it approximates the true Q-function
as a linear sum of smaller components:
Q(s, a) ≈ˆQ(s, a) =
X
x
ˆQx(s, a)
(3)
We assume that the domains of each ˆQx are obtained by
back-propagating some subset of the components in S (we
call these basis domains). This is the same process that is
used to obtain ˆQ from a suitably factored value function ˆV
made out of basis functions in approximate MMDP planning
(Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002). This assumption is impor-
tant in order to correctly back-propagate rewards. For exam-
ple, in Figure 1a, selecting variable S′
1 as a basis results in a
corresponding domain of its ˆQ component of S1 ∧S2 ∧A1.
Selecting both S′
1 ∧S′
2 results in a corresponding domain
of S1 ∧S2 ∧S3 ∧A1 ∧A2. The set of basis domains can
be chosen arbitrarily—although some choices tend to per-
form better than others. Deﬁning larger and more domains
leads to better accuracy, but at the cost of higher computa-
tion times for joint action selection. For example, CPS uses
variable elimination to select the optimal action, which is
known to be exponential in the induced width of the coordi-
nation graph of the factored Q-function (after conditioning
on the current state s), which in turn increases with the size
and number of the domains in the factorization. Construct-
ing a ˆQ made up of a single factor with the entire state space
S as its basis degenerates the algorithm to single-agent PS,
as it would make ˆQ = Q.
After each interaction with the environment, we obtain
an experience tuple, ⟨s, a, s′, r⟩, which CPS uses to update
the factored Q-function. Since CPS takes a model-based ap-
proach, the ideal update would ﬁrst use the data to update
the model (both T and R), and then use the model to update
the Q-function:
ˆQ(s, a) = R(s, a) + γ
X
s′
T(s′ | s, a) ˆV (s′)
(4)

Indeed, this operation, using a ˆV factored with the rele-
vant basis domains, is not only possible but also relatively
cheap (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2001): each ˆQx compo-
nent can be updated separately, while ensuring that ˆQ fully
reﬂects the changes of the just updated model. However,
back-propagating the changes made to ˆQ to ˆV is not straight-
forward; to do so, an algorithm would need to solve an ex-
pensive LP (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2001). This opera-
tion makes performing batches of updates to the Q-function
computationally infeasible, and would prevent the algorithm
from leveraging the learnt MMDP model.
Because full backups are not feasible for the factored Q-
functions, CPS employs local TD updates:
ˆQ(s, a) = ˆQ(s, a)+α

R(s, a) + γ max
a′
ˆQ(s′, a′) −ˆQ(s, a)

(5)
To perform this update, CPS requires the optimal joint ac-
tion, a′⋆, for the next joint state s′, and thus needs to maxi-
mize ˆQ for this joint state. This can be done efﬁciently using
Variable Elimination (VE).1 Once the optimal full joint ac-
tion a′⋆for s′ has been found, we can then split the update
of the Q-function per component:
ˆQx(s, a) = ˆQx(s, a)+α

Rx(s, a) + γ ˆQx(s′, a′⋆) −ˆQx(s, a)

(6)
The only thing left is to compute Rx(s, a), as its domain
will likely be different from any of the Ri functions in the
learnt MMDP model, due to the back-propagation of the ba-
sis domains. Hence, for each Si in the original basis domain
of ˆQx, we compute Rx as a weighted sum of their respec-
tive Ri, where the weights are inversely proportional to how
many ˆQy have Si in their original basis domain:
Rx(s, a) =
X
i
I(Si ∈Basisx(S))
Ri(s, a)
N ˆ
Q(Basis(Si))
(7)
where I is the indicator function and N ˆ
Q(Basis(Si)) is
the number of ˆQy factors ( ˆQx included) which have Si in
their basis domain. We also indicate with s, a the parts of
s, a required by Ri. This works because we are assuming
that R has the same DDN structure as T, and due to the
back-propagation, if Rx had Si in its basis domain, then s
and a must contain the parents of si which are required by
Ri.
These updates are similar to those performed in SCQL
(Kok and Vlassis 2004; 2005). However, CPS determines
the shape of the Q-function and how it partitions the rewards
using the basis domains, while SCQL does this in terms of
agents and their direct neighbours.
1We note that VE is an exact algorithm for coordination graphs
that can be replaced by approximate algorithms (Kok and Vlassis
2005; Marinescu and Dechter 2005; Liu and Ihler 2012) if need be.
2.3
Temporal Differences for Batch Q-Function
Updates
In order to perform batch updates on the Q-function to back-
propagate useful values, CPS computes a series of temporal
differences (TD) which represent how much the Q-function
has changed due to the last update. This process is differ-
ent from the single-agent PS algorithm (Moore and Atkeson
1993; Andre, Friedman, and Parr 1998) in two key aspects:
how we deﬁne the TD, and how CPS computes it.
Single-agent PS computes a single TD for the state s that
is being updated. In our case, we update each ˆQx indepen-
dently, resulting in a series of ∆x, deﬁned as
∆x = Rx(s, a) + γ ˆQx(s′, a′⋆) −ˆQx(s, a).
(8)
Given the factored Q-function (Equation 3) and factor up-
date rule (Equation 6), we could reconstruct a full TD by
simply summing them together, i.e., ∆= P
x ∆x. How-
ever, given the structure of our MMDP, computing a single
TD for the whole state s is wasteful: given the structure of
our MMDP, each ∆x of ˆQx(s, a) not only reﬂects changes
for the single state s, but all states that contain s. In the same
way, the change in value of ˆQx(s, a) not only affects the
value of all possible parents of s, but of all possible par-
ents of s. An interesting consequence of this fact is that our
deﬁnition of a TD changes from the single-agent PS algo-
rithm, where the TD is computed with respect to the change
in the value function for the updated state s. This is because
there is no reason to perform additional updates if the actual
value function for the state is not modiﬁed. In our case, this
is different, as any single ˆQx(s, a) value might contribute to
ˆV (s) in some state where s ⊆s—although actually obtain-
ing this information is not practical. Instead, we assume that
the change is indeed modifying ˆV , and compute the TDs di-
rectly on the change that CPS performs without the need to
actually check ˆV or perform any additional maximizations.
As these TDs are computed without the knowledge of how
much each ∆x actually affects ˆV , this means that CPS tends
to overestimate changes in order to not miss any.
Given these considerations, our goal is to obtain a series
of TDs which:
1. Reﬂect the actual changes we have applied to the Q-
function, without passing through ˆV .
2. Do not lose the information about how much each part of
the state space was changed.
3. Are suitable for back-propagation in order to select new
(s, a) pairs to update.
The ∆x satisfy the ﬁrst two constraints, but not the third,
as back-propagating their domain would mismatch the do-
main of any ˆQx. Therefore, we transform them into a set of
N elements ∆i, one for each factor of the state-space
∆i = I(i ∈xs) ∆x
|xs|
(9)
where xs refers to the state domain part of ˆQx. In this for-
mat, these can be used in the back-propagation step (see Sec-
tion 2.4). Note that the ∆i are only used to sample from the
queue, and not in the actual ˆQ updates.

2.4
Updating the Queue
CPS maintains a priority queue containing the changes it has
done to the Q-function, where the priority is equal to the
magnitude of the change. The key idea is to back-propagate
these changes during batch updates to the Q-values of the
parents of each si. Since CPS must do this given the limited
time between interactions with the environment, the updates
should be done from the highest priority to the lowest until
the time runs out.
CPS uses the ∆i to update the queue. Note that we go a
single step backwards in time, such that our s is now consid-
ered a future state. Then, for each si, CPS iterates over all
the possible values of its parents Parents(si) = (s′′, a′′) as
determined by the DDN of the problem.
The algorithm can now compute the priority p of these
parents as p = Ti(si|Parents(si)) · ∆i, i.e., the probability
of observing this transition times the estimated amount of
change of that particular component. Note that we do not
include γ in the priority since it would not affect the relative
ordering of the queue. If p is greater than a threshold value
θ, it is added as a new entry to the queue, or increase its
value by p if such an entry already exists. The entry will
contain the parents of s′
i (and their values), together with the
computed priority p.
2.5
Sampling from the Queue
CPS needs to sample from the queue to perform the batch
updates required to increase the accuracy of the Q-function.
In single-agent PS, this operation is relatively straightfor-
ward: a state-action pair is sampled, and a new Q update
is done. However, in CPS, the queue only contains partial
state-action pairs, while a complete state-action pair is nec-
essary to sample a new state and reward from the model and
select the next optimal joint action needed to perform a full
Q-function update. Thus, CPS extracts multiple compatible
entries from the priority queue, and combines them into a
complete state-action pair.
While the optimal choice would be the set with the high-
est combined priority, ﬁnding this set is equivalent to the
knapsack problem, which is known to be NP-hard. A good
heuristic would be to traverse the priority queue in order,
greedily extracting the ﬁrst (s, a) entry from the queue, and
then greedily selecting all entries which are compatible with
both it and previously selected entries, where compatible
means that the same parents (si, ai) must have the same val-
ues in all selected entries. Unfortunately, this option is also
not viable, as it would require examining all entries in the
queue, which would be too computationally expensive to do
repeatedly. However, by ignoring the order of priority, this
strategy can be implemented very efﬁciently with the help
of radix trees for bookkeeping, which signiﬁcantly reduces
the number of comparisons needed. Thus, CPS still pops the
highest priority entry from the queue, but randomizes the
subsequent search order. In this way, we ensure that every
compatible entry in the queue has a chance of being selected,
and that all updates are performed in the limit.
Once the set of entries has been ﬁnalized, CPS removes
them from the priority queue, and proceeds to use them to
update the factored Q-function. If some elements local state-
action (si, ai) required to construct a full joint action are
not in the selected set, CPS supplements these by uniformly
sampling them from their respective domain. Another option
would be to iterate over every possible combination of the
missing values and do an update for each combination, but
this operation would too expensive, as the number of updates
would increase exponentially with the number of unassigned
values. Finally, using the newly obtained (s, a) pair, CPS
uses the model to sample a new state s′ and rewards r, and
updates ˆQ as described in Section 2.2.
Algorithm 1: Cooperative Prioritized Sweeping
1: while True do
2:
Select action a given state s following policy π
3:
(s′, r) ←Execute action a in state s
4:
Update T, R using (s, a, s′, r)
5:
a′⋆←Use variable elimination for s′
6:
Update ˆQ(s, a) using (s, a, s′, a′⋆)
7:
for every state factor i do
8:
∆i ←Compute from TDs of ˆQ
9:
for every pair s′′, a′′ that is parent of si do
10:
p ←∆i · T(s′
i = si | s′′, a′′)
11:
if p > θ then
12:
Add to Queue s′′, a′′ with priority p
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
end for
16:
for number of batch updates do
17:
(s, a) ←Pop Queue max
18:
for every pair (s′′, a′′) in Queue, randomly do
19:
if (s, a) and (s′′, a′′) are compatible then
20:
Append (s′′, a′′) to (s, a)
21:
Remove (s′′, a′′) from Queue
22:
end if
23:
end for
24:
(s, a) ←Fill missing values of (s, a) randomly
25:
(s′, r) ←Sample from T, R using s and a
26:
Update ˆQ
27:
Update Queue with all ∆i
28:
end for
29: end while
3
Experiments
To test the performance of CPS, we evaluate it empirically
on the SysAdmin problem (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002)
and randomly generated MMDPs.
In the SysAdmin setting, a series of interconnected ma-
chines randomly obtain jobs that they must complete. Over
time, the machines may fail or die, and this in turn affects the
probability of failures for adjacent machines. Each machine
is associated with an agent, which can either do nothing or
reboot its machine. Rebooting a machine resets its state, but
loses all work. Each completed job receives a reward of 1 for
its associated agent. We use three different topologies: a ring
with 300 agents, a torus with 100 agents in a 10x10 grid and

 0
 500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
cps tg=1500
cps tg=3000
cps tg=5000
rnd 
scql tg=1500
scql tg=3000
scql tg=5000
(a) Regret over time w.r.t. the best possible approximation
(LP) in the shared ring control setting.
 0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
cps tg=500
cps tg=1000
cps tg=3000
rnd 
scql tg=250
scql tg=500
scql tg=1000
scql tg=3000
(b) Regret over time w.r.t. CPS tg = 250 in the ring set-
ting, with 300 agents.
 0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
cps tg=250
cps tg=500
cps tg=1000
cps tg=3000
rnd 
scql tg=250
scql tg=500
scql tg=1000
scql tg=3000
(c) Regret over time w.r.t. the best possible approximation
(LP) in the random setting with 3 agents.
 0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
cps tg=500
cps tg=1000
cps tg=3000
rnd 
scql tg=250
scql tg=500
scql tg=1000
scql tg=3000
(d) Regret over time w.r.t. CPS tg = 250 in the torus set-
ting, with 100 agents.
 0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
cps batch=5
cps batch=10
cps batch=20
cps batch=30
(e) Regret over time w.r.t. a batch size of 50 in the torus
setting. tg here is 1000 for all runs.
 0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
cps tg=500
cps tg=1000
cps tg=3000
rnd 
scql tg=250
scql tg=500
scql tg=1000
scql tg=3000
(f) Regret over time w.r.t. CPS tg = 250 in the random
setting, with 15 agents.
Figure 2: Mean and standard deviation of cumulative regret over time for different methods in each setting (lower is better).
Note that in all plots but 2a and 2c regret may go down since it is computed w.r.t. a speciﬁc algorithm, as the LP upper bound
is too expensive to compute.
a shared control setting with a ring of 12 machines where
each is controlled by its two adjacent agents. In this last set-
ting, a machine reboots with a probability of 0.15 if only one
agent issues the rebooting command, and with a probability
of 1 if both do. We only use 12 agents so that it is feasible to
use a factored LP (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002) to obtain
the best possible approximation and compute the true regret.
We select each machine’s state and load pair as the basis do-

mains, which is equivalent to the “single” basis reported in
(Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002).
Additionally, we evaluate the performance of CPS on ran-
domly generated MMDPs. The DDNs for these problems
were generated by connecting each S′
i with Si, plus a ran-
dom number of state and action factors (max 3) locally close
to i. The transition tables were ﬁlled by uniformly sam-
pling transition vectors. We generated sparse reward func-
tions containing random values in [−1, 0, 1] for the parents
of random factors Si, which are selected independently with
probability 0.3. We select as basis domains all pairs of ad-
jacent state factors (Si, Si+1). We show results for two ran-
domly generated MMDPS, one with 4 state factors and 3
agents, and another with 20 state factors and 15 agents. Both
environments had to be kept relatively small, as on one hand
the LP approach was very slow in these less structured envi-
ronments, while on the other SCQL had trouble handling the
large number of rules required to represent the Q-function
(in the millions) with more than 15 agents.
We compare our results against 3 benchmarks: a ran-
dom policy as a naive approach, the factored LP planning
method on the ground truth MMDP model as the upper
bound (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002), and Sparse Coop-
erative Q-Learning (SCQL) (Kok and Vlassis 2004). SCQL
runs used optimistic initialization to improve its exploration,
with all its Q-function values set to 5.0, as without it SCQL
was not able to learn correctly. Both SCQL and CPS use a
constant learning rate of 0.3, and an ε-greedy policy with ε
linearly decreasing from 0.9 to 0. We tested different time
steps at which the exploration probability ε must reach 0,
reported as parameter tg in Figure 2. CPS, SCQL and the
LP approach all use the same Q-function factorization. CPS
has no prior knowledge about the transition and reward func-
tions at the beginning of each run. All results were averaged
over 100 runs. Each experiment ran on a single core of an
AMD FX-8350 CPU.
CPS consistently outperforms SCQL in all settings, and
is able to obtain good policies with very few samples: 250
time steps are enough to learn a close-to-optimal policy in an
environment with 2300 actions and 9300 states. At the same
time, exploring for a longer time leads to slightly better poli-
cies.
Figure 2e shows the relationship between regret and batch
size in CPS in the SysAdmin torus setting. As the batch size
decreases, regret increases. However, smaller batch sizes
still converge to the same policy over time. Because of the
limited exploration time, the learnt model is imperfect. This
results in slightly sub-optimal decisions inversely correlated
with the batch size, as batch updates are sampled from the
learnt model. Therefore, lower batch sizes show decreasing
regret in the later time steps.
4
Related Work
In general, exact planning in factored multi-agent settings
is unfeasible for larger numbers of agents, for all but prob-
lems with very few agents (Scharpff et al. 2016). Some
sub-classes of decentralized versions of such problems ex-
ist that do permit an exact factorization of the value function
(Becker et al. 2004; Nair et al. 2005; Witwicki and Durfee
2010). However, the cost of decentralization is still arbitrar-
ily large, and planning in these specialized models is still
expensive. Therefore, for model-based reinforcement learn-
ing it is better to directly approximate a factored sparse Q-
function, as this obviates the need for the additional over-
simplifying model restrictions that using such models would
entail.
In this paper, we make use of variable elimination
(Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002) to select the optimal joint
action given w.r.t. an approximate value function. Such joint
action selection can also be done approximately, e.g., via
max-plus (Kok and Vlassis 2005), AND/OR tree search
(Marinescu and Dechter 2005), or variational methods (Liu
and Ihler 2012). We note that this is orthogonal to our con-
tributions and can be added easily if the complexity of the
chosen graphical structure of the value function requires it.
Finally, recent advances have been made in deep multi-
agent reinforcement learning (Gupta, Egorov, and Kochen-
derfer 2017; Foerster et al. 2018; Hernandez-Leal, Kartal,
and Taylor 2018). The most related method to ours from this
line of research is QMIX (Rashid et al. 2018) which—to
our knowledge—is the only deep MARL method to exploit
some type of factorization. However, this method is limited
to Q-functions that are monotonic in its constitution com-
ponents, and thus not yet able to handle arbitrary factoriza-
tions of the Q-function. It is our hope that the contributions
presented in this paper will also contribute to future deep
MARL methods that can handle any factorization, especially
in light of the fact that it has been observed that the sparse
factored representation for the value functions we employ is
equivalent to a single layer neural network with features cor-
responding to its basis functions (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr
2002).
5
Discussion and Conclusions
We have presented a new model-based reinforcement learn-
ing algorithm, Cooperative Prioritized Sweeping, which ex-
ploits the structure of a coordination graph in an MMDP to
both learn a model of the environment and update the Q-
function in a sample-efﬁcient manner. The algorithm main-
tains a priority queue containing partial state-action pairs,
representing the parts of the Q-function which are most ben-
eﬁcial to update. The queue is sampled in batches between
interactions with the environment, and the model is used to
sample possible new state and reward pairs, which are then
used to update the Q-function. CPS can learn good policies
using signiﬁcantly less data than the previous state-of-the-
art, resulting in signiﬁcantly less regret over time.
Currently, CPS uses a naive ε-greedy exploration strategy.
In future work, we aim to improve exploration; instead of
randomly sampling a completely random joint-action when
exploring, we would like to select the joint-action that max-
imizes the collection of information from each T and R fac-
tor, similar to previous work in multi-agent bandits (Bar-
giacchi et al. 2018). Such an approach could further reduce
the sample complexity of CPS. We will also implement sup-
port for context-speciﬁc independence using rules (Guestrin,
Venkataraman, and Koller 2002). Finally, we aim to use the

techniques presented in this paper as a basis for construct-
ing a deep MARL that can fully support arbitrary factored
Q-functions.
