Modeling Human-AI Team Decision Making
Wei Ye,1 Francesco Bullo, 2 Noah Friedkin, 2 Ambuj K Singh 2*
1 Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China
2 University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA

Abstract
AI and humans bring complementary skills to group delib-
erations. Modeling this group decision making is especially
challenging when the deliberations include an element of risk
and an exploration-exploitation process of appraising the ca-
pabilities of the human and AI agents. To investigate this
question, we presented a sequence of intellective issues to a
set of human groups aided by imperfect AI agents. A group’s
goal was to appraise the relative expertise of the group’s
members and its available AI agents, evaluate the risks as-
sociated with different actions, and maximize the overall re-
ward by reaching consensus. We propose and empirically
validate models of human-AI team decision making under
such uncertain circumstances, and show the value of socio-
cognitive constructs of prospect theory, inﬂuence dynamics,
and Bayesian learning in predicting the behavior of human-
AI groups.
1
Introduction
Group decision making has been ever important in organiza-
tions and missions. And now, intelligent agents have become
fundamental to everyday life: assistants on mobile devices,
pedagogical agents in tutoring systems, and robots collab-
orating with humans. As such, integrating AI agents into
human groups while being aware of their complementary
strengths and abilities has become vital (Crandall et al. 2018;
Gaur et al. 2016; Kamar, Hacker, and Horvitz 2012; Shirado
and Christakis 2017; Wang et al. 2016). We explore models
for decision making in mixed teams while building on the
constructs of prospect theory and appraisal systems.
Groups/teams frequently encounter decisions involving
varying amounts of risk and reward. Cumulative Prospect
Theory (Tversky and Kahneman 1992a) (formerly Prospect
Theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979a)) provides a basis for
such decision-making by establishing that individuals make
decisions based on the potential value of losses and gains
among the set of available options. Cumulative Prospect
Theory proposes that individuals compute an internal evalu-
ation for each prospect that is determined by a value function
and a probability weighting function. The value function
is S-shaped and asymmetrical, capturing loss aversion. The
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
probability weighting function encodes the hypothesis that
individuals overreact to small probability events, but under-
react to large probability events.
Group decision making is based on how team members
appraise others. Team members’ opinions of others depend
on the issue and evolve over time, based on their perfor-
mance. Such opinions can be represented by an appraisal
network (Mei et al. 2017), or equivalently by its correspond-
ing row-stochastic appraisal matrix. The edges of this matrix
are weighted, depict trust/distrust, friendship/animosity, or
more generally to what degree a team member is inﬂuenced
by particular others. The eigenvector centrality of each per-
son in an irreducible aperiodic appraisal matrix is a summary
measure of each team member’s relative importance in de-
termining the team’s decision making.
In order to understand how a human-AI team reaches a
decision in uncertain environments, we carried out cyber-
human experiments in which a team is asked to answer a
sequence of questions. The task is to answer intellective
questions from different categories such as history, science
and technology, etc. Every team consists of four members
each with access to its own AI agent. The AI agents give the
correct answer at a ﬁxed probability (unknown to the team
members); however, the baseline probabilities vary across
the agents. Each question is answered in four timed phases.
In the ﬁrst phase, every team member records his/her indi-
vidual response for the question. In the second phase, the
response of every team member is displayed on the screen
and a chat plugin (the only communication channel) is en-
abled for communication. Team members then record their
choices and decide whether or not to use an AI agent (and
which AI agent to use) in an optional third phase. In the
fourth and ﬁnal phase, the team submits an answer. The cor-
rect answer to each question is displayed at the end of each
round. Note that if the group has relied on the incorrect re-
sponse of an AI agent, then the group’s trust in that agent
(and their other available AI agents) may be eroded. After
every ﬁve questions an inﬂuence survey is presented. This is
ﬁlled in by each team member to record the relative direct
inﬂuence of each of his/her teammates on his/her opinion.
The team members are also asked to rate the accuracy of all
four AI agents based on their interactions with them.
The ﬁrst step of a team’s decision making consists of de-
liberating and choosing one of the multiple choice options
arXiv:2201.02759v1  [cs.HC]  8 Jan 2022

or choosing to consult an AI agent. In case a team chooses
to consult an AI agent, the second decision making step
consists of integrating the agent’s answer with the team’s
choices and reporting a ﬁnal answer. Each possible action
in a decision making step is associated with a probability of
success and a reward. From the viewpoint of Prospect The-
ory, each action is a gamble and the team needs to choose
between multiple gambles. We observe the actions by the
teams but not the perceived probability of success, probabil-
ity weighting function, or the valuation function.
We investigate and compare four models that predict the
decisions of the teams. The ﬁrst two models capture the ap-
praisal process in a team, while the last two models capture
the appraisal process as well as decision making under risks.
We outline these four models below.
The ﬁrst model, NB (Naive Bayes), captures the accuracy
of a human/AI-agent using a beta distribution that is updated
at each round (after observing whether it was correct or in-
correct) using Bayes rule. A Naive Bayes assumption is used
to integrate the responses of the human/AI-agents and obtain
the probability of using an option or an agent. The second
model, CENT (Centrality), integrates individual responses
through an interpersonal inﬂuence system. The probability
of the team choosing an option is computed as the sum of
the eigenvector centrality values of each individual choosing
that option. The assumption underlying this computation is
always satisﬁed in our data. A similar weighting process is
used to integrate the team’s evaluation of the AI-agents. The
third model, PT-NB (Prospect Theory coupled with Naive
Bayes), uses Prospect Theory to analyze the actions of the
team as a set of gambles. The probabilities of success and re-
ward of each gamble are computed as in the model NB. The
team chooses among these gambles based on Prospect The-
ory parameters of the team (learned through an initial train-
ing sequence). The ﬁnal model, PT-CENT (Prospect Theory
coupled with Centrality), again uses Prospect Theory to an-
alyze the actions of the team as a set of gambles. The proba-
bilities of success and reward of each gamble are computed
as in the model CENT. A team again chooses among these
gambles based on Prospect Theory.
We measure the accuracy of the above four models us-
ing our experimental data. This measurement is non-trivial
since only the team’s chosen action is observed and not the
team’s detailed preferences for each of the actions. We re-
solve this difﬁculty by considering the set of probability dis-
tributions (on the actions) over which the chosen action is
dominant and computing the minimum distance (based on
cross-entropy loss) over this set to the model’s predicted
probability distribution.
2
Related Work
Group performance is not simply a sum of individual per-
formance, but ruled by patterns of interactions, inﬂuence,
and other relationships among group members. We know
that transactive memory systems (TMS) (Wegner 1987)) are
activated in group members’ levels of expertise and poten-
tial contributions to tasks are appraised. We know that in-
terpersonal inﬂuence systems are automatically generated
in groups (Friedkin and Johnsen 2011). And we know that
groups’ opinions on multidimensional issues are generally
constrained to a decision space of feasible positions that is
the group’s convex hull of initial displayed positions (Fried-
kin et al. 2019).
An excellent survey of human-AI teaming has been put
forth in a recent paper (O’Neill et al. 2020). (DeCostanza
et al. 2018) discusses the mechanisms for enhancing team-
work in human-AI teams and outlines the critical scientiﬁc
questions that must be addressed to enable this vision.
Group constructs have also been proposed in machine
learning—experts, weak learners, crowd-sourced workers—
to achieve goals that no single individual can accomplish on
its own. In the case of boosting (Schapire 1990), one can
obtain a “strong learner” that is able to predict arbitrarily
accurately based on an ensemble of “weak learners” whose
predictions are slightly better than random guessing. In the
case of “learning from expert advice” (Cesa-Bianchi et al.
1997), an algorithm works with a group of K arbitrary “ex-
perts” who give daily “stock predictions” and who perform
nearly as well as the “expert” that has the best “track record”
at any given time. It is an iterative game in which in each iter-
ation the “player” must make a decision and the experts with
the best track record may change over time. The “Multi-
armed Bandits” (MAB) problems (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and
Fischer 2002) can be thought of as a variant of the problem
of “learning from expert advice” in which a “player” can
only observe the payoff of the “expert” at each iteration. In
the case of “crowd sourcing” (Welinder et al. 2010), an al-
gorithm aggregates the inputs of a large group of unreliable
“participants”, evaluates each “participant”, and then infers
the ground truth.
Humans and AI are clearly different in their cognitive and
processing capabilities (Cummings 2014). Groups with AI
involvement should be designed so that the raw computa-
tional and search power of computers for state-space reduc-
tion can be combined with group inductive reasoning, espe-
cially in uncertain environments. What is the optimal group-
AI design for a given decision? This is a question pervad-
ing all kinds of groups that oriented to speciﬁc types of is-
sues. Taxonomies and ontologies for characterizing group
decision-making have been deﬁned (Sheridan and Verplank
1978; Endsley and Kaber 1999; Rasmussen 1987) in order
to investigate the optimal composition of groups. The be-
havior of groups with AI involvement must be observable
and predictable. This is challenging in complex uncertain
environments. While groups often adopt satisﬁcing strate-
gies (Simon 1957; Friedkin et al. 2019), AI utilizes search
space reduction strategies such as limited look-ahead, con-
straint relaxation, and heuristics. Both groups and AI are
subject to bias and faulty information: groups by their mem-
bers’ beliefs and AI by the available data and training pro-
tocols. Since observability and predictability have ramiﬁca-
tions on the level of trust (Stubbs, Hinds, and Wettergreen
2007), groups with AI involvement must have conﬁdence
that the behavior of their AI is consistent with an accept-
able common ground whatever the displayed initial beliefs
of the group’s members might be (Marathe et al. 2018b;
Li, Sun, and Miller 2016; Chen and Barnes 2014; Telesford
et al. 2016; Garcia et al. 2017; Marathe et al. 2018a).

Theory of mind (ToM) (Premack and Woodruff 1978;
Baker, Saxe, and Tenenbaum 2011; Cuzzolin et al. 2020;
Oguntola, Hughes, and Sycara 2021; Rabinowitz et al. 2018)
broadly refers to humans’ ability to represent the mental
states of others, including their desires, beliefs, and inten-
tions. This ability to attribute mental states to others is a key
component of cognition that needs to be incorporated into
AI in order to model and interact with humans.
Human teams can display magniﬁed cognitive capacity
and unique cognitive abilities that emerge from the inter-
action between the team members. Collective intelligence
refers to a team’s ability to produce intelligence and behav-
iors beyond the individual (Woolley et al. 2010). How to in-
tegrate AI into human teams in order to produce cognitive
abilities that go beyond the individual or the group of hu-
mans is an important question (Bansal et al. 2019).
Research from psychology suggests that people process
uncertainty and information in general using dual processes:
an implicit (automatic), unconscious process and an explicit
(controlled), conscious process (Chaiken and Trope 1999).
The second process is encoded by analytic algorithms, rules,
and reasoning systems, and can be modeled equally well for
humans and AI agents. It is the ﬁrst implicit automatic sys-
tem and its interaction with the explicit system that is harder
to model in humans, and poses challenges for a theoretical
understanding of mixed human-AI teams.
Uncertainty itself can be separated into two kinds:
aleatoric and epistemic (Der Kiureghian and Ditlevsen 2009;
Fox and ¨Ulk¨umen 2011). Aleatoric uncertainty refers to the
notion of randomness (as in coin ﬂipping): the variability
in the outcome of an experiment that is due to inherently
random effects. Epistemic uncertainty refers to uncertainty
caused by a lack of knowledge of decision makers. This un-
certainty can in principle be reduced by a proper recognition
of expertise on teams and protocols that reveal explanations
on why a fact may be true.
Both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty require teams
to deal with decisions involving varying amounts of risk
and reward under conditions that are not completely ratio-
nal. The most successful behavioral model of risky decision
making is prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979b;
Tversky and Kahneman 1992b). According to it, individu-
als make decisions based on the potential value of losses
and gains among the set of available options. It proposes
that individuals compute an internal evaluation for each
prospect that is determined by a value function and a prob-
ability weighting function. The value function is S-shaped
and asymmetrical, capturing loss aversion. The probabil-
ity weighting function encodes the hypothesis that individu-
als overreact to small probability events, but under-react to
large probability events. The theory deviates from its ratio-
nal competitor, expected utility theory (Fishburn and Fish-
burn 1970), which assumes that people evaluate the outcome
of a decision in terms of the expected reward, independent
of any cognitive biases (such as risk aversion). Other recent
theories explaining individual choices under risk/uncertainty
include dynamic decision models (Pleskac, Diederich, and
Wallsten 2015) such as dynamic ﬁeld theory (Busemeyer
and Townsend 1993).
3
Proposed Models of Decision Making
Decision Tasks
A team in our experiments consists of four humans and four
AI agents. The accuracy of each AI agent is ﬁxed during
an experiment and ranges between 0.6 and 0.9. Humans are
informed that the accuracy of each AI agent is at least 0.5.
The reward for a correct answer c1 is 4, the penalty for an in-
correct answer c2 is 1, and the penalty for consulting an AI
agent c3 is 1. Multiple choice questions are posed sequen-
tially to a team. After answering every ﬁve questions, each
team member reports the relative inﬂuence of each mem-
ber, which collectively generates a row stochastic weight
matrix W (and the inﬂuence network) for the team. Each
team member also rates the accuracy of the AI-agents after
every ﬁve questions.
There are two sequential decision tasks in our experiment:
• Decision Task 1. Integration of human responses and
decision on the use of AI agents. A team ﬁrst needs to
integrate the decisions of the team members into a group
response, and decide whether it needs to utilize an AI
agent to help answer the posed question correctly. And
if an AI agent is to be invoked, the team needs to decide
which of the four AI agents to use.
• Decision Task 2. Integration of AI agent and human
responses. If an AI agent is consulted, then the team
needs to integrate its response with the prior human re-
sponses into a group response.
Figure 1 shows the two decision tasks. The ﬁrst decision
task consists of eight possible actions: the ﬁrst four actions
Aθ1, . . . , Aθ4 correspond to the decision of using one of the
four choices to the posed question without consulting an
agent, and the next four actions Ag1, . . . , Ag4, correspond
to the decision of using an AI agent. Action Aθi is associ-
ated with probability pθi while action Agi is associated with
probability pgi. For the second decision task, the team needs
to integrate the answer of an agent with the answers of the
human team members and decide on one of the four choices.
In this case, the task consists of four actions: Aθ1, . . . , Aθ4,
which are associated with probabilities qθ1, . . . , qθ4, respec-
tively. For a team to be successful, it needs to reach consen-
sus on which action to take in the ﬁrst decision task; further-
more, if one of the agents is chosen, then the team needs to
achieve consensus on one of the four actions in the second
decision task.
We next present a sequence of models that explain the de-
cision making of a team. The ﬁrst model uses Bayes rules to
combine the individual choices into the team’s response. The
second model achieves this integration through a weighting
mechanism based on the eigenvector centralities of the in-
dividuals. The last two models utilize Prospect Theory to
reﬂect how teams combine appraisal with decision making
in risky environments.
Model NB: Integration through Bayes Rule
Model NB uses Bayes rule to integrate human-AI choices
into a team response. We explain the model by considering
ﬁrst decision task depicted in Figure 1. The modeling can

choose agent Agj with
probability pgj
pg4, Ag4
pg1, Ag1
Decision Task 1
choose option Aθi
with probability pθi
pθ1, Aθ1
pθ4, Aθ4
ask an agent
choose option Aθi
with probability qθi
qθ1, Aθ1
qθ4, Aθ4
Decision Task 2
Figure 1: Decision making in the human-AI teams. The ﬁrst decision task involves choosing one of the four options presented
with each question or choosing one of the agents for help. The second decision task integrates the agent’s response with the
earlier individual choices.
be broken down into three steps: Step 1 considers the indi-
vidual responses made by individuals, Step 2 considers the
choice of an agent, and Step 3 integrates the choices made
in the previous two steps into a model for the eight actions
in Figure 1.
Step 1: Let Θ be the random variable corresponding to a
team’s collective response. It ranges over the four choices to
the posed question represented by θi, i = 1 . . . 4. Let θ∗be
the correct choice. Let random variable Ri be the response of
individual i. Model NB predicts the probability of the team
reaching the decision on choice θk as follows:
P(Θ = θk|Ri, i = 1 . . . 4)
= P(Ri, i = 1 . . . 4|Θ = θk) × P(Θ = θk)
P(Ri, i = 1 . . . 4)
(1)
The above equation can be reduced by assuming that the
individual choices are independent given the team’s choice:
p′
θk = P(Θ = θk|Ri, i = 1 . . . 4)
= (Π4
i=1P(Ri|Θ = θk)) × P(Θ = θk)
P(Ri, i = 1 . . . 4)
(2)
When Ri = θk, the term P(Ri|Θ = θk) is assumed to
equal E[1{Ri = θ∗}], the expected performance of individ-
ual i. Otherwise, P(Ri|Θ = θk) = 1−E[1{Ri=θ∗}]
3
. In other
words, a team deciding the same as an individual’s choice
assumes that the individual is correct and a team deciding
differently from an individual assumes that the individual is
incorrect. These assumptions imply that the group discov-
ers the truth only if some individual suggests it. The value
E[1{Ri = θ∗}] is deﬁned by a beta distribution with two
parameters that are initialized to one (leading to a uniform
prior over the range [0,1]), and updated after each response
by an individual. The prior probabilities P(Θ = θk) are as-
sumed to be 0.25, and the term in the denominator of Eq. 2
is found by normalization. Note that 1 is the indicator func-
tion.
Step 2: The expected performance of agent i is again mod-
eled using a beta distribution. The initial values of the two
parameters are chosen so that we have a uniform prior over
[0.5,1] to account for the fact that the accuracy of each agent
is declared at the outset to be at least 0.5. The parameters are
updated following each round in which an agent is consulted
and its accuracy is observed. The probability of choosing
agent gi is p′
gi =
E[1{Gi=θ∗}]
ΣjE[1{Gi=θ∗}]].
Step 3: Based on the probability of each action (choosing
an option or an agent), we compute the expected reward for
each possible action. The reward for choosing option θi is
xθi = c1×p′
θi−c2×(1−p′
θi). And the reward for consulting
agent i is xgi = (c1 −c3) × p′
gi −(c2 + c3) × (1 −p′
gi).
We use the softmax function to transform xθi and xgi into
probability values:
pθi =
exθi
Σjexθj + Σjexgj ,
(3)
pgi =
exgi
Σjexθj + Σjexgj .
(4)
This concludes the modeling of the ﬁrst decision task. Next,
we consider how model NB explains the second decision
task. Let gj be the agent that the team consulted. We inte-
grate the response Gj of the agent as follows:
q′
θk = P(Θ = θk|Ri, i = 1 . . . 4, Gj)
= (P(Gj|Θ = θk)Π4
i=1P(Ri|Θ = θk)) × P(Θ = θk)
P(Ri, i = 1 . . . 4, Gj)
(5)
When Gj = θk, the term P(Gj|Θ = θk) is assumed to equal
E[1{Gj = θ∗}], the expected performance of agent j. Oth-
erwise, P(Gj|Θ = θk) = 1−E[1{Gj=θ∗}]
3
. P(Ri|Θ = θk)
is deﬁned similarly (and as in Eq. 2). Based on the above
probabilities, we again compute the expected reward for
each possible action. The reward for choosing option θi is
yθi = (c1 −c3) × q′
θi −(c2 + c3) × (1 −q′
θi). We again

use the softmax function to transform yθi into probability
values:
qθi =
eyθi
Σjeyθj
(6)
Model CENT: Integration by Interpersonal
Inﬂuence System
This model integrates individual responses through an in-
terpersonal inﬂuence system. Each individual in the experi-
ment is asked to rate the inﬂuence of other members in their
team after every ﬁve questions. This leads to an inﬂuence
network N (as shown in Figure 2) whose centralities are
used to weigh the choices of the team members. Consider
Decision Task 1 (Figure 1) ﬁrst. The modeling is again done
in three steps.
H1
δ1
H2
δ2
H3
δ3
H4
δ4
A1
π1
A2
π2
A3
π3
A4
π4
π1,1
π2,1
π3,1
π4,1
Figure 2: The appraisal networks. The shaded box is the
appraisal matrix between the individuals on the team. The
eigenvalues of the matrix are denoted by δ. These individu-
als also appraise the agents. The π values denote these ap-
praisals.
Step 1:
The probability of the team choosing option θk is
modeled as the sum of the eigenvector centrality values in
network N of each individual who has chosen option θk. If
the centrality value of individual i is δi then we obtain the
following for the probability of choosing option θk.
p′
θk = P(Θ = θk|Ri, i = 1 . . . 4) =
Σi1θk(Ri) × δi
P(Ri, i = 1 . . . 4)
(7)
Step 2:
This step uses a weighting process to model the
team’s collective appraisal of the agents. Let the i-th indi-
vidual’s appraisal of the j-th agent be πij. Note that the val-
ues πij are collected during the experiment after every ﬁve
questions. Let the eigenvector centrality values of individual
i be δi as before. We model the collective appraisal of agent
j as πj and the probability of choosing agent gj as p′
gj:
πj = Σiδiπi,j
(8)
p′
gj =
πj
Σjπj
.
(9)
Step 3:
As in Step 3 of NB, we ﬁrst compute the reward
for each possible action and then transform all the rewards
to probabilities using the softmax function.
This concludes the modeling of the ﬁrst decision task.
For the second decision task, we need to integrate the re-
sponse Gj of the consulted agent j into the collective choice
of the team. This integration now (as opposed to Decision
Task 1) needs to consider the choice made by the agent
and the choices made by the team prior to consultation with
the agent. We utilize a parameter w for this integration: w
weighs the inﬂuence placed in the agent’s response as com-
pared to the inﬂuence placed in the initial human responses.
This (global) parameter is learned by a training sample of
teams. We have the following resulting probability q′
θk of
choosing option θk in Decision Task 2.
q′
θk = P(Θ = θk|Ri, i = 1 . . . 4, Gj)
= 1θk(Gj) × πj × w + Σi1θk(Ri) × δi × (1 −w)
P(Ri, i = 1 . . . 4, Gj)
(10)
Based on these probabilities, we compute the expected re-
wards and derive the probabilities of choosing the four ac-
tions as in model NB.
Model PT-NB: Integration through Prospect
Theory and Naive Bayes
This model uses Prospect Theory to analyze the actions of
the team as a set of gambles. For the ﬁrst decision task, the
estimation of probabilities p′
θi, p′
gi (Steps 1 and 2) is exactly
as in model NB. Step 3 now utilizes Prospect Theory pa-
rameters to integrate them and obtain the probabilities for
the eight actions.
We model the choices made by the team using ﬁve
Prospect Theory parameters (α, β, λ, γ+, γ−). α = β ∈
[0, 1], γ+/−∈[0, 1], and λ ∈[0, 10]. The gamble for op-
tion θi is {(c1, p′
θi), (c2, 1 −p′
θi)} and the gamble for the
use of agent gi is {(c1 −c3), p′
gi), (c2 + c3, 1 −p′
gi)}. The
corresponding rewards xθi and xgi are computed as follows:
xθi = cα
1 × exp(−(log 1
pθi
)γ+)
+

−λ|c2|β × exp(−(log
1
1 −pθi
)γ−)

xgi = (c1 −c3)α × exp(−(log 1
pgi
)γ+)
+

−λ|c2 + c3|β × exp(−(log
1
1 −pgi
)γ−)

(11)
Finally, we use the softmax function to transform these
rewards into probability values pθi and pgi.
This concludes the modeling of the ﬁrst decision task. The
computations for the second decision task are similar. We
use the probabilities q′
θk from model NB and the Prospect
Theory parameters to compute the rewards yθi and these are
converted into probabilities qθi using the softmax function.
Note that the gambles for all four options involve the same
rewards and this will result in a similar model as NB.
Model PT-CENT: Integration through Prospect
Theory and Interpersonal Inﬂuence System
The development of this model is similar to PT-NB except
that the model CENT is now used for computing the proba-

bilities p′
θi, p′
gi and q′
θi. Using the Prospect Theory parame-
ters, we obtain the rewards xθi, xgi and yθi. Finally, we use
the softmax function to obtain the probabilities pθi and pgi
for the eight actions in Decision Task 1 shown in Figure 1,
and the probabilities qθi for the four actions in Decision Task
2 shown in Figure 1. Again, since the gambles for the four
options involve the same rewards, this will result in a similar
model as CENT.
4
Evaluation of Models
Experimental Details
We worked with 30 teams, and 45 questions were sequen-
tially posed to each team through the POGS (Kim et al.
2017) interface, a software system designed for conducting
team experiments. Each intellective question is coupled with
four alternative answers. Each question is answered in four
phases, of duration 30 seconds, 30 seconds, 15 seconds and
45 seconds, respectively. In the ﬁrst phase, every team mem-
ber records his/her initial individual response for the ques-
tion. In the second phase, the responses of every team mem-
ber are displayed on the screen and the chat plugin is en-
abled for communication. In the next 15 seconds, the team
decides whether or not to invoke the help of an AI agent
(and/or which AI agent to invoke); only one AI agent can
be invoked per question. In the fourth phase, the team sub-
mits an answer. The correct answer to each question is dis-
played after submitting the answer. Over the sequence of 45
questions, this process generates an associated sequence of
nine inﬂuence networks (denoted by a row-stochastic weight
matrix W). Consensus is reached by a team if each mem-
ber chooses the same answer or chooses to invoke the same
agent for help. If an agent is consulted then the team again
needs to reach consensus on which answer to report. If con-
sensus is not reached, then the task has failed and the team’s
response is deemed incorrect.
Our analysis is based on the 9 × 30 = 270 occasions of
team answers to the nine questions that involved a report
of weight matrices. All the reported W are irreducible and
aperiodic structures with a unique normalized left eigenvec-
tor, which we take as the measure of each team member’s
relative inﬂuence centrality. (These W matrices as well as
the agent appraisal matrices π do converge in our experi-
ments.) In turn, the measure of the inﬂuence centrality of
a particular initial answer is the sum of the eigenvalues of
those members who chose it as their initial (pre-discussion)
answer. Thus, the inﬂuence’s predicted answer for the team
is the multiple choice alternative that has a largest sum of
eigenvalue inﬂuence centralities.
Results
Our main experimental results are about how well the pro-
posed models predict decision making. In order to measure
this correspondence, we ﬁrst need to deﬁne a measurement
criterion, or a loss function, that measures the correspon-
dence between the model and the experimental data.
Metrics for Measuring Model Accuracy
In both deci-
sion tasks, each of our models generates a probability dis-
tribution over the actions (eight actions in the ﬁrst decision
task and four in the second). In the experimental data, we do
not have the probability values the team computed, only the
action chosen. As a result, we need to consider the distance
between the model’s predicted distribution and all possible
data distributions in which the observed action is the dom-
inant choice. We focus on measuring the smallest distance
from a model to the family of possible distributions that ﬁt
the team’s action. The other possibility of using an expected
distance is considerably more complex since we need to as-
sign probabilities to each feasible distribution. Let q be the
speciﬁc distribution produced by a model with a maxima for
action j, and let action i be the action chosen by the team.
We consider all possible distributions p in which the value of
pi is as high as all pk, and then compute the distance between
the distributions to measure the correspondence. We adopt
the measure of cross-entropy H for measuring the corre-
spondence. Since cross-entropy is not symmetric, this gives
us two possibilities. First, the loss function L(1) minimizes
the entropy H(q, p):
L(1) =
min
p s.t. ∀k: pk≤pi −
n
X
i=1
qi log(pi)
(12)
(We have also considered the loss function L(2) that min-
imizes H(p, q) with similar results.) Instead of generating
all such distributions and ﬁnding the optimal p, we obtain
an analytical solution. The distribution p that minimizes the
loss function can be computed as follows:
i = j =⇒
p = q
i ̸= j =⇒
pk =
(
(1/nH) P
k∈qH qk,
if k ∈qH
qk,
otherwise,
where qH consists of those indices k for which qk ≥qi and
nH is the size of qH.
Random Baseline: In order to assess the statistical signif-
icance of the models, we also compare with a baseline that
makes a random choice uniformly among the possible ac-
tions at each step. For Decision Task 1, the probability of
each action is 0.125 and for Decision Task 2, the probability
of each action is 0.25.
Learning Parameters
For models PT-NB and PT-CENT
in the ﬁrst decision task, we use the loss functions to learn
the ﬁve parameters for Prospect Theory. We use a training
set of 30 questions to learn these using grid search for each
team. We vary the values of α, β and γ+/−from 0 to 1 in
steps of 0.1 and the value of λ from 0 to 10 in steps of 1. Us-
ing these parameters, we validate the models on the remain-
ing 15 questions in the dataset for each team. For the second
decision task, since the gambles for all four options involve
the same rewards, models PT-NB and PT-CENT are similar
to models NB and CENT, respectively. We only report the
results of the latter two models. Parameter w in Equation 10
is learned by considering a random set of 20 teams and the
results are validated on the remaining 10 teams.
Validation of Models
For the ﬁrst decision task in Fig-
ure 1, the loss values of each model are given in Table 1(a).
As mentioned earlier, the values are averaged over 30

teams over the last 15 questions. The Wilcoxon signed-rank
test (Wilcoxon 1992) shows the results of the four models
are signiﬁcantly superior to that of the random model (sig-
niﬁcance level < 0.01). Table 1(b) shows that the appraisal-
based models NB and CENT perform similarly in explain-
ing a human-AI team’s decision making. The models PT-NB
and PT-CENT also perform similarly and are superior to
the previous two models (Wilcoxon signed-rank test signiﬁ-
cance level < 0.01). This implies that modeling the inherent
risk in decision making leads to a superior model.
Model
Loss L(1)
NB
1.08 ± 0.16
CENT
1.14 ± 0.14
PT-NB
0.55 ± 0.19
PT-CENT
0.57 ± 0.17
RANDOM
2.08 ± 0
(a)
Wilcoxon signed-rank test
p-value for L(1)
W(NB,CENT)
0.02
W(NB,PT-NB)
<0.01
W(NB,PT-CENT)
<0.01
W(CENT,PT-NB)
<0.01
W(CENT,PT-CENT)
<0.01
W(PT-NB, PT-CENT)
0.24
(b)
Table 1: (a) The loss values of (NB, CENT) are similar
to each other and so are the loss values of (PT-NB, PT-
CENT). The latter two models are superior suggesting that
teams consider both risk/reward and appraisal in their de-
cision making. (b) The models PT-NB and PT-CENT are
signiﬁcantly better than NB and CENT. (Wilcoxon signed-
rank test. The null hypothesis is that the two related paired
samples come from the same distribution.)
Next, we consider the second decision task in Figure 1.
Since the risk/reward of each action is the same, models PT-
NB and NB become similar, and so do models PT-CENT
and CENT. Thus, we only report the values for NB and
CENT. Since the AI agents are consulted about 25.7% of
the time, there are fewer samples for this decision task. We
learn the parameter w by considering a random set of 20
teams and present the validation results for the remaining
10 teams in Table 2(a). The parameter w is learned to be
0.9, suggesting that the teams consult the agents only when
they are unsure of the choices and, as a result, and place a
high degree of trust in the agent’s answer. Both models are
superior to the random model (Wilcoxon signed-rank test
signiﬁcance level < 0.01).
For the second decision task (when an AI agent is con-
sulted), we also investigate how teams integrate the re-
sponses from the AI agents in their deliberations. For this,
we designed two other models for this decision task: one in
which the best human response is returned (neglecting the
agent response) and another in which the agent’s response
is returned (neglecting the human responses). Models NB-H
and CENT-H are models of the former kind while NB-A and
CENT-A are models of the latter kind. As can be seen from
Table 2(a), models that rely only on human responses (NB-H
and CENT-H) do not explain the team behavior, suggesting
that teams do integrate the agent responses. The good behav-
ior of the agent-only models (NB-A and CENT-A) as well
as the high value of parameter w (learned to be 0.9) suggests
that teams rely much more on the agent response in this de-
cision task. This can be explained by the fact that the teams
proceed to the second decision task involving an AI agent
only if they are unsure of the correct choice.
Model
Loss L(1)
NB
0.47 ± 0.11
NB-H
0.91 ± 0.20
NB-A
0.49 ± 0.14
CENT
0.33 ± 0.06
CENT-H
0.95 ± 0.17
CENT-A
0.74 ± 0.20
RANDOM
1.39 ± 0
(a)
Wilcoxon signed-rank test
p-value for L(1)
W(NB,NB-A)
0.02
W(NB,NB-H)
<0.01
W(NB-A,NB-H)
<0.01
W(CENT,CENT-A)
<0.01
W(CENT,CENT-H)
<0.01
W(CENT-A,CENT-H)
<0.01
(b)
Table 2: (a) The models NB and CENT are the best at pre-
dicting the actions of a team. Models that rely on the hu-
man response only (NB-H and CENT-H) do not do as well,
suggesting that the agent’s response is integrated into the ﬁ-
nal decision. Models that rely on the agent only (NB-A and
CENT-A) also perform well, suggesting that the agent’s re-
sponse is weighed highly in this decision task. (b) The mod-
els NB and CENT are signiﬁcantly better than NB-H and
CENT-H, respectively. Models NB-A and CENT-A are also
signiﬁcantly better than NB-H and CENT-H, respectively.
5
Conclusions
Our experimental setting provides a unique platform for
understanding how human-AI team members learn each
other’s expertise and how they coordinate to solve intellec-
tive tasks in uncertain and risky environments. We proposed
four models to explain the dynamics of human-AI team deci-
sion making. We ﬁnd that, although appraisal-based models
NB and CENT perform adequately in explaining human-AI
team’s decision making, the prospect theory based models
PT-NB and PT-CENT exhibit more accurate explanations.
This ﬁnding establishes the importance of modeling the in-
herent risk in uncertain decision making. Our results raise a
number of possibilities for future studies including the use of
active AI participating agents and the use of reinforcement
learning for modeling the decision making.
