Etymo: A New Discovery Engine for AI Research
WEIJIAN ZHANG, The University of Manchester
JONATHAN DEAKIN, The University of Manchester
NICHOLAS J. HIGHAM, The University of Manchester
SHUAIQIANG WANG, JD.com
We present Etymo (https://etymo.io), a discovery engine to facilitate artificial intelligence (AI) research and development. It aims to
help readers navigate a large number of AI-related papers published every week by using a novel form of search that finds relevant
papers and displays related papers in a graphical interface. Etymo constructs and maintains an adaptive similarity-based network
of research papers as an all-purpose knowledge graph for ranking, recommendation, and visualisation. The network is constantly
evolving and can learn from user feedback to adjust itself.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: web search, content analysis, similarity-based network, graph centrality, data visualisation
1
INTRODUCTION
The rapid growth of global scientific output creates new challenges for information retrieval. The problem is particularly
acute in AI (artificial intelligence) research. ArXiv (https://arxiv.og), for example, gains around 500 new AI-related
papers every week and the number is growing. As a result, it is difficult for researchers to keep up-to-date with the
latest developments in AI research. We have built a new discovery engine for scholarly research called Etymo that
addresses this challenge.
Citations of scientific papers are generally considered an important indicator of a paper’s impact [4]. Google Scholar’s
ranking algorithm is not publicly known, but research [1] has shown that citation counts have the highest weighting in
its ranking algorithm. However, recent publications have few or no citations so it is difficult to use citations to judge
the importance of very recent papers; thus, recent insightful publications are difficult to rank. Our idea is to build a
similarity-based network and use this information for information retrieval tasks.
How can we obtain links in a non-hypertext setting? Our approach is to infer links from the distributed vector
representation of the full-text papers, i.e., if the cosine similarity between the vector representations is large, we link
these two papers. It turns out that inferred links are similar to the citation network because papers talking about the
same subject tend to cite one another. However, the analogy between hyperlinks and generated links is not perfect. In
particular, auto-generated links are a noisier source of information and much more prone to spam.
He et al. [3] proposed a meta-approach called HICODE (HIdden COmmunity DEtection) for discovering the hidden
community structure in a network. By removing certain edges from the network (weakening the strength of certain
structures), one can uncover other structures in the network. Similarly, we can strengthen and weaken the connectivity
of the network structure so as to improve our ranking algorithm and filter out unwanted papers. We do this by exploiting
papers’ social media activities (such as the number of retweets on Twitter) and certain information from user feedback.
The resulting graph is used for ranking, recommendation, and visualisation. Note also that inferred links can be
generated faster than citations (papers may take 1 year to be cited, but inferred links can be generated almost instantly).

Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:1801.08573v1  [cs.IR]  25 Jan 2018

We use a combination of PageRank and Reverse PageRank for ranking papers, which we find gives better search
results than pure PageRank or HITS [5]. In Reverse PageRank, we compute PageRank on the graph with reversed
direction, i.e., reverse the direction of each edge (i, j) to (j,i). Fogaras [2] shows that Reversed Page Rank scores express
hub quality. We have also designed and implemented a new search interface where we display search results as a
combination of a list and relationship visualisation. This new interface allows readers to quickly locate relevant and
related papers.
Our Etymo discovery engine provides a way to evaluate new research papers by exploiting the full-text of research
papers. It challenges the traditional list-based search interface by combining an item list with item relationship
visualisation. Etymo updates its database on a daily basis and is free to use for all (demo available at https://etymo.io).
Registered users can also write notes and receive recommendations.
2
RELATED WORKS
Recently, researchers have realised that the full text of scientific papers is an important resource for search and other
applications. Indeed, Salatino et al. [10] use the semantic enhanced topic network (where nodes are topics and edges
are their co-occurrences in a sample of publications) to identify the appearance of new topics. Sateli et al. [11] analyze
full-text research articles to generate semantic user profiles. Semantic Scholar (https://www.semanticscholar.org) 1 is a
search engine for scholarly research that analyzes and links key information from the full text of research papers for
improving search results. Similarly, Etymo makes use of the full text of papers to generate a similarity-based network,
which is then used for information retrieval tasks.
3
ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW
The dependency graph of Etymo is shown in Figure 1. Etymo has several crawlers for downloading research papers
from different journal websites. For each paper in our database, we store both the PDF version of the paper and the
metadata, including author name, journal name, paper abstract, and the date of publication.
In the Analysis stage, we convert all the PDFs to text using pdftotext 2. We then apply Doc2Vec [7] and TF-IDF
[9, Chap 6] to represent a document d as numeric vectors vDoc2V ec(d) and vtf −idf (d) respectively. Both algorithms
represent a paper by a numeric vector such that papers with similar content are close to each other in the vector
space. This content similarity information is then used for building a similarity-based network of all the papers in the
database. We generate two networks using the two alorithms and find in practice a combination of the two networks
can product better results than just using one of the two. We use t-SNE [8] to find the paper locations and network
centrality algorithms for the paper ranking. We also generate a lexicon from the TF-IDF’s global term weights, which is
later used in search. The main components of Etymo consist of a search engine and a feed engine. Results from both
engines are displayed as a list and graph visualisation.
4
SYSTEM FEATURES
Etymo has two important features that help it produce useful search results. First, it uses a document vector representa-
tion of the full-text papers to build a similarity-based network, where papers are nodes and similar papers are linked.
This network is adaptive because of a user feedback mechanism: users’ stars, clicks and Twitter mentions are used to
reinforce the ‘correct’ connections and weaken the ‘unimportant’ ones. The resulting network is then used for ranking
1https://techcrunch.com/2016/11/11/scientists-gain-a-versatile-modern-search-engine-with-the-ai-powered-semantic-scholar/
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pdftotext
2

Research Papers
Social Media
Crawler
Analysis
Lexicon
Similarity-based
Network
Paper Ranking
Paper Location
Feed
Search
Fig. 1. The dependency graph of Etymo. The direction of an arrow indicates the dependence of the two components connected by it.
The red rectangles represent our data source; the green rectangles are the two main components of Etymo.
and recommendation. Second, we have designed and implemented a novel search interface, with results presented both
in a traditional item list and with a visualisation showing paper relationships in order to help users quickly find related
papers and have a general idea of a research area.
4.1
Similarity-based Network
To construct the similarity-based network, one first needs to represent documents using numeric vectors. We use a
distributed representation of the documents called Doc2Vec [7] and a bag of words model called TF-IDF. We then
construct the similarity-based network using the cosine similarity measure. One potential problem with this similarity-
based network approach is that it does not distinguish a high quality paper from a bad one. We argue that we can use
user feedback to adjust the network structure in order to give important papers higher weights.
4.1.1
Adaptive Network and Ranking. Each paper is a node in the network and similar papers are linked together.
We compute the cosine similarity of every pair of paper vectors in the database. If the cosine similarity score of two
papers’ vector representations is larger than a given threshold, we link these two papers. In other words, if u ∈Rn and
v ∈Rn (where n = 1000 in practice) are the vector representation of two papers pu and pv, we define
cosine_similarity(u,v) =
Ín
i=1 uivi
∥u∥∥v∥,
3

where ∥u∥=
Í
i u2
i
1/2
. If cosine_similarity(u,v) = w > α, where α is a threshold, we link paper pu and pv by an
edge with weight w.
Calculating the similarity scores of two papers has a time complexity O(n). Adding a new paper when there are
already m papers in the network therefore costs O(mn), which is clearly prohibitive for large m. One potential solution
is to calculate a new paper’s similarity on a representative subset of the existing papers, i.e., find top k high quality
papers, where k ≪n. Since our graph centrality ranking provides a measure of paper quality, we use the top k high
ranking papers as a representative subset. Then for a new paper, we only calculate its similarity with these k papers.
Similarity-based networks are vulnerable to spam. For example, if a paper contains a large number of important
key words in AI research, it may have a high connectivity on the network hence a high score in the ranking. We use
authors’ votes to adjust the structure of the network in three main ways:
(1) We use user stars to increase the edge weights to a node, this increases the number of edges to that node. In
other words, a paper with many user stars connects to more papers than a paper with few.
(2) We use user libraries to infer connectivities: increasing edge weights between the papers in a user’s library.
(3) We weaken the connectivities of a highly ranking paper if it has poor click rates.
Finally, we turn the undirected similarity-based network into a directed network using the temporal information
from the paper published date. As a result, a new paper on this network ‘recommends’ a old paper if they have similar
content or user data suggests that they are related. Intuitively we attempt to predict the citation network structure of
new research papers when their citations are not available.
4.2
Go Beyond List: Relationship Visualisation
A few recent scholar engines incorporate some form of visualisation in displaying their search results. AMiner (https:
//aminer.org/)[13] shows similar authors and the ego network, which consists of a centre node (“ego”) and the nodes to
whom the ego node is directly connected to. AceMap [12] displays the citation relationships between academic papers
on a map, in a similar way to Google Maps. What we do differently is that we provide a combination of the traditional
list of results with a content similarity-based relationship visualisation. Figure 2 shows the web interface of Etymo.
Why do we need a new interface? The most important reason is that it saves our time in finding interesting research
papers. The information we usually need is the top ten papers from the search results and the papers related to them,
but there is no easy way to access all of that information at once using the traditional list interface. For example, to see
related papers of the current search result in Google Scholar, a user needs to click on multiple ’related article’ links. In
Etymo, a user can check the top ten rated papers on the list and locate all the related papers on the graph at the same
time.
5
EXPERIMENTS
Etymo has over 36000 papers in the database and we typically add 500 new papers every week. The Analysis uses an
instance of Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) m4.xlarge, which has 16 vCPUs and 64GB memory.
We update our database on a daily basis. During each update, we need to first find two sets of vector representations
for all the newly added papers using Doc2Vec and TF-IDF. Training of both models are done on a weekly basis. We
then use t-SNE to find the x,y location of all the papers, i.e., reduce these 1000 dimensional vectors to 2 dimensional
vectors. The computation of t-SNE can be done in O(N log N) and requires O(N) memory [14], which makes it possible
to learn embedding of data sets with millions of objects. The number of nodes in our similarity-based network is equal
4

Fig. 2. The web interface of Etymo. The left part is a list of search results ordered by importance, while the right part is the
corresponding visualisation of each paper in the list. Each paper is represented by a node and related papers are close to each other.
The size of the node represents the importance and colour represents journal.
to the number of papers in our database. We apply PageRank and Reverse PageRank on this network. The predominant
method for computing the PageRank is the power method. At each iteration, we do a sparse matrix vector multiplication,
which has complexity O(pN), where p is the average number of non-zero elements on every row of the matrix and N is
the dimension of the matrix. Usually 10 iterations can produce a good approximate ranking [6, Chap 8.2].
In general, we found that network-based ratings can improve search results by highlighting historically important
papers. For the query “t-sne” (a popular machine learning algorithm for dimensionality reduction) we show the top 5
search results in the tables below. Table 1 shows the results which include the PageRank and Reverse PageRank ratings
on the similarity-based network, while Table 2 does not. We noticed that the one with network-based ratings gives more
weight to important papers. Note that Maaten and Hinton’s "Visualizing Data using t-SNE" is the original t-SNE paper.
Comparing with Google Scholar’s search results in Table 3, Etymo’s top search results include more recent publications.
6
CONCLUSION
It is hard to quantify new things. In research, the value of a newly published work is usually unknown until citations
become available. The value of this work is to provide a new approach to improve search results on new papers
by exploiting the paper full text content and social media data. Our user interface combines the item list with item
relationship visualisation, which saves researchers time in finding interesting research papers.
5

Table 1. Top 5 search results of the search query "t-sne". The results include a combination of PageRank and Reverse PageRank
ratings.
Authors
Year
Title
Laurens van der Maaten,
Geoffrey Hinton
2008
Visualizing Data using t-SNE
Laurens van der Maaten
2014
Accelerating
t-SNE
using
Tree-Based Algorithms
Yanshuai Cao, Luyu Wang
2017
Automatic Selection of t-SNE
Perplexity
George
C.
Linderman,
Manas
Rachh,
Jeremy
G.
Hoskins,
Stefan
Steinerberger,
Yuval
Kluger
2017
Efficient Algorithms for t-
distributed Stochastic Neigh-
borhood Embedding
Yukun Chen, Jianbo Ye, Jia
Li
2017
Aggregated Wasserstein Met-
ric and State Registration for
Hidden Markov Models
Table 2. Top 5 search results of the search query "t-sne". The results do not include any network-based ratings.
Authors
Year
Title
Yanshuai Cao, Luyu Wang
2017
Automatic Selection of t-SNE
Perplexity
Laurens van der Maaten
2014
Accelerating
t-SNE
using
Tree-Based Algorithms
Maaten, Laurens van der,
Hinton, Geoffrey
2008
Visualizing Data using t-SNE
Richard R. Yang, Mike
Borowczak
2017
Assessing Retail Employee
Risk Through Unsupervised
Learning Techniques
Martin
Renqiang
Min,
Hongyu Guo, Dinghan
Shen
2017
Parametric
t-Distributed
Stochastic Exemplar-centered
Embedding
