(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 3, 2010 
Ontology-supported processing of clinical text using 
medical knowledge integration for multi-label 
classification of diagnosis coding  
 
Phanu Waraporn1,4,*, Phayung Meesad2, Gareth Clayton3  
1Department of Information Technology, Faculty of Information Technology 
2Department of Teacher Training in Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Technical Education 
3Department of Applied Statistics, Faculty of Applied Science  
King Mongkut’s University of Technology North Bangkok 
 4Division of Business Computing, Faculty of Management Science 
Suan Sunandha Rajabhat University 
Bangkok, Thailand  

 
Abstract—This paper discusses the knowledge integration of 
clinical information extracted from distributed medical ontology 
in order to ameliorate a machine learning-based multi-label 
coding 
assignment 
system. 
The 
proposed 
approach 
is 
implemented using a decision tree based cascade hierarchical 
technique on the university hospital data for patients with 
Coronary Heart Disease (CHD). The preliminary results 
obtained show a satisfactory finding. 
Keywords-component; 
medical 
ontology, 
diagnosis 
coding, 
knowledge integration, machine learing, decision tree. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
From the fact that the typical character of any medical data 
is heterogeneous, traditional machine learning approach alone 
cannot be directly applied to solve efficiently our study in the 
area of automating the clinical coding task. Therefore, we 
present a knowledge integration method based on the 
utilization of distributed medical ontology support knowledge 
capturing and integration and machine learning techniques to 
enhance a coding assignment of multi-label medical text.  
Text Categorization or Text Assignment (TA) as part of the 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) consists the assignment 
of one or more preexisting categories to a text document [1]. 
In multi-label assignment, the problem can comprise various 
classes. 
As large unstructured and structured medical databases are 
being 
generated 
momentarily, 
difficulties 
accessing, 
integrating, extracting, and managing knowledge out of them 
are among many reasons researchers are trying to overcome 
including utilizing ontology, a form of knowledge-based 
systems which are repositories of structured knowledge such 
as UMLS, MeSH, ICD, etc. 
 
According to Nelson et al.[2], several studies have shown 
that the use and integration of several knowledge sources 
improves the quality and efficiency of information systems 
using the query on the ontology , specifically so in the domain 
specific such as the health information systems or medicine. 
An ontology is a specification of a conceptualization that 
defines and/or specifies the concepts, relationships, and other 
distinctions that are relevant for modeling a domain. Such 
specification 
takes 
the 
form 
of 
the 
definitions 
of 
representational vocabulary (classes, relations, and so on), 
which provide meanings to the vocabulary and formal 
constraints on its coherent use [3].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1. The framework of officially accepted disease [6]. 
 
 
In compliance with the WHO ICD 10 for Coronary 
Heart Disease [4], a domain specific ontology based on a 
distributed architecture is constructed for use in the work to 
support the knowledge capturing and integration processes. As 
depicted in Figure 1 below an adapted framework of officially 
accepted disease generated in HOZO [5] representing a high 
level medical ontology in our work which can be shared and 
30
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 3, 2010 
reused.  
 
The essence in managing knowledge about semantic 
relations, how to acquire as well as how to integrate them  and 
finally how to put them altogether are discussed. Of many 
machine learning algorithms, we short-listed few of them and 
preliminary tests are performed. We compare the results with 
our own classifier, a variant of the existing decision tree, and 
conclude that our approach marginally outperform the 
traditional ones. 
 
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows: first, a 
related work section comments on some relevant works in the 
field; section 3 briefly introduces the proposed system 
architecture; section 4 summarizes the data collection and 
experiments along with the preliminary results. We deliver the 
conclusions and future work in the epilogue of section 5. 
 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
 
A. Ontology 
 
Our aim of enhancing the automatic assignment of 
medical coding by automatically integrating ontologies is 
guided by the use of ontologies in various natural language 
processing tasks such as automatic summarization, text 
annotation and word sense disambiguation, among other [7]. 
Advantage of using ontologies in the area of relevance-
feedback, corpus-dependent knowledge models and corpus-
independent knowledge models on the domain-specific and 
domain-independent ontologies all contribute to ameliorate 
information retrieval systems [8]. 
 
Domain-independent ontologies such as WordNet/ 
Medical 
WordNet 
though 
improves 
a 
word 
sense 
disambiguation, it has so broad coverage that it can be 
debatable for the ambiguous terms making a domain-specific 
ontologies, particularly on the part of a terminology which is 
less ambiguous. Further more, it models terms and concepts 
corresponding to a specific or given domain [9]. 
 
In our case, an Ischaemic Heart Disease ontology is 
manually built by reusing the framework, high level, relations 
and concepts defined in accordance with [6]. Figures 2 and 
Figure 3 illustrates the property inheritance and top level, 
respectively. 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2 Property Inheritance in HOZO Heart Disease [6]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3 High Level category in HOZO [6]. 
 
 
B. Medical Knowledge Integration Framework and Process 
 
 
In a complex domain such medicine, knowledge 
integration requires consolidation of the heterogeneous 
knowledge and reconfirm it with the induced models since it 
originates from sources with different levels of certainty and 
completeness. Therefore, new models are collectively learned 
and comprehensively evaluated based on existing knowledge. 
Figure 4 illustrates the overview of medical knowledge 
integration whilst a more comprehensive medical knowledge 
integration process is depicted in Figure 5. 
 
 
 
 
Fig.4 Overview of medical knowledge integration architecture, adapted 
from [10]. 
 
 
31
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 3, 2010 
 
 
Fig.5 Domain knowledge integrated into medical knowledge integration 
process, adapted from [10]. 
 
 
C. Clinical data/text 
 
 
Patient records in use are the discharge summary records 
generally contain the principal diagnosis (PDx) information. 
The particular of secondary diagnosis (SDx) may appear 
provided that there is additional ailment requiring treatment in 
addition to the PDx. If any, SDx can be the details about the 
comorbidity, complication, status of the disorder; chronic, 
acute and external cause of the injury. Additionally, depending 
on the necessity, the treatment may involve other medical 
procedures (PROC) and such details are to be itemized. In the 
case where only PDx is reported, the coding process is fairly 
simple and fast. Generally, however, the patient records 
contain many SDxs and multiple PROC. The coder duty is to 
translate those PDx(s), SDx(s) and PROC information into 
corresponding ICD 10 code(s). Other patient data aside from 
the discharge summary includes but not limited to prescription 
information sheet, laboratory results, drug prescribed nurse 
note, progress note, and other records [11].  
 
 
D. Multi-label Classification Task[12][13] 
 
 
 
A pattern recognition, classification, categorization can be 
viewed as a mapping from a set of input variables to an output 
variable representing the class label. In classification problems 
the task is to assign new inputs to labels of classes or 
categories. As input data the patient’s anamnesis, subjective 
symptoms, observed symptoms and syndromes, measured 
values (e.g. blood pressure, body temperature etc.) and results 
of laboratory tests are taken. This data is coded by vector x, 
the components of which are binary or real numbers. The 
patients are classified into categories D1, …, Dm that 
correspond to their possible diagnoses d1, …., dm. Also 
prediction of the patient’s state can be stated as classification 
problem. On the basis of examined data represented with 
vector x patients are categorized into several categories P1, …, 
Pm that correspond to different future states. For example five 
categories with the following meaning can be considered: P1 
can mean death, P2 deterioration of the patient’s state, P3 
steady state, P4 improvement of the patient’s state and P5 
recovery. 
 
As opposed to binary classification, multiple labels (e.g., 
Breathing, Blood circulation, and Pain) are considered. In 
binary classification there was one label (e.g., Breathing) and 
the task was to assign instances either to the class of topically 
related (i.e., belongs to the class of Breathing) or to the class 
of topically unrelated (i.e., does not belong to the class of 
Breathing) 
objects. 
In 
other 
words, 
the 
multi-label 
classification task can be restructured to multiple binary 
classification tasks - one for each topic-label. The only 
difference in the multi-class classification is that in multi-label 
classification, each instance can belong to several classes at 
the same time.  
 
E. Diagnosis Coding 
 
 
 
From Figure 6, a ICD 10 for Coronary Heart Disease 
(CHD) is presented in a hierarchical form. The top first level is 
the high/concept level class where the second and third levels 
are major and minor classes, respectively. The minor class 
gives more specific information yet not comprehensively 
enough when compared with other major medical concepts 
and ontologies like UMLS, GALEN, SNOMED CT, etc. This 
is due to the fact that information is served differently. 
 
 
Key words/terms extracted from patient discharge 
summary will undergo the coding process and provided that 
all relevant information are in accordance, this summary will 
finally be assigned a corresponding ICD 10 code(s) as per 
specified in the ICD 10. 
 
 
 
 
Fig.6 ICD 10 for Coronary Heart Disease in hierarchical form. 
 
 
With the preceding background and related works, a 
system for automating the ICD 10 coding assignment for CHD 
can now begin. In the next section, a framework for such a 
system will be introduced. Furthermore, data collected for this 
32
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 3, 2010 
preliminary experiment will be briefed and early result of 
applying the proposed novel method called cascade 
hierarchical Decision Tree (chiDT), a twice processing of 
Decision Tree C4.5 algorithm, is presented. 
 
III. 
THE PURPOSED FRAMEWORK AND PRELIMINARY 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
 
This section explains the proposed framework appeared in 
Figure 7 below. Our emphasis is on the one surrounded by the 
red block. 
 
 
 
Fig.7 High level framework for automating ICD 10 coding assignment. 
 
A machine-learning approach using a cascade of two 
classifiers trained on the same data is used to predict the 
codes. Both classifiers are trained with the same data, and 
perform multi-label classification by decomposing the task 
into 11 (out of 28) binary classification problems, one for each 
code. In this setting, it is possible for a classifier to predict an 
empty, or impossible, combination of codes. Such known 
errors are used to trigger the cascade: when the first classifier 
makes a known error, the output of the second classifier is 
used instead as the final prediction. No further correction of 
the output of the second classifier is performed as preliminary 
experiments suggested that this would not further improve the 
performance.  
 
In the context of Thai people based on data collected 
during year 2009 for all patients with Coronary Heart Disease 
(CHD) in one university hospital, out of 28 ICD 10 codes in 
the CHD group, 11 classes were reported, the rest is non 
existed.  
 
196 patients with CHD were reported to the university 
hospital during 2009. 53 patient records were then separated 
for training purpose. These instances were carefully selected 
in order to cover all the classes. In order to understand the data 
for preliminary testing purpose, we recombined 53 training 
records with the 143 remaining and untrained ones and based 
on chiDT classifier using WEKA [14] as a processing engine, 
the following early results were reported.  The following 
tables detail the results generated for each different classifier. 
 
Table 1 represents the results of 53 carefully selected 
records covering 11 classes widely seen in Thailand and used 
for training. While Tables 2 to 4 present the results on all 196 
records used for training the chiDT, SVM and Fuzzy 
classifiers, respectively. 
 
chiDT  
Correctly Classified Instances          52               98.1132 % 
Incorrectly Classified Instances         1                1.8868 % 
Kappa statistic                          0.9756 
Mean absolute error                      0.012  
Root mean squared error                  0.0818 
Relative absolute error                  4.5652 % 
Root relative squared error             22.5907 % 
Total Number of Instances               53   
 
Table 1 With original 53 selected for training, the chiDT alone gave 
approximately 98.11 % accuracy. 
 
chiDT 
Correctly Classified Instances         185               94.3878 % 
Incorrectly Classified Instances        11                5.6122 % 
Kappa statistic                          0.9323 
Mean absolute error                      0.0107 
Root mean squared error                  0.0927 
Relative absolute error                  7.0466 % 
Root relative squared error             33.6758 % 
Total Number of Instances              196     
 
Table 2 With original 196 selected for training, the chiDT alone gave 
approximately 94.39 % accuracy. 
 
 
 
 
33
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 3, 2010 
SVM 
Correctly Classified Instances         183               93.3673 % 
Incorrectly Classified Instances        13                6.6327 % 
Kappa statistic                          0.9196 
Mean absolute error                      0.1492 
Root mean squared error                  0.2642 
Relative absolute error                 97.9788 % 
Root relative squared error             95.9388 % 
Total Number of Instances              196  
 
Table 3 With original 196 selected for training, the chiDT with Support 
Vector Machine (SVM) classifier gave approximately 93.37 % accuracy. 
 
FLR 
Correctly Classified Instances         184               93.8776 % 
Incorrectly Classified Instances        12                6.1224 % 
Kappa statistic                          0.9262 
Mean absolute error                      0.0111 
Root mean squared error                  0.1055 
Relative absolute error                  7.3094 % 
Root relative squared error             38.3185 % 
Total Number of Instances              196     
 
Table 3 With original 196 selected for training, the chiDT with Fuzzy 
classifier gave approximately 93.87 % accuracy. 
 
The early result of this preliminary experiments displays 
that the proposed chiDT classifier based on cascade 
hierarchical architecture does produce satisfying output 
followed marginally by Fuzzy and SVM techniques. 
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we have provided an overview of the proposed 
machine learning algorithm titled cascade hierarchical 
Decision Tree (chiDT). Though the result was not so 
distinctively conclusive due to limited number of the data set, 
the authors expect that with increased sample size, the result 
should improve the yield substantially. To conclude that this 
algorithm is reliable, a cost sensitivity analysis (CSA) will be 
tested apart from other standard model evaluation techniques. 
These works represent an upcoming work to be carried out. 
Also it would be appropriate to mention that by integrating 
ontology and medical knowledge integration framework into 
this work, future medical knowledge management would 
enhance both works of computer scientists and clinical 
specialists, to name just a few, for the improved classifiers and 
clinically generic models, respectively. 
 
 
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
We would like to extend our sincere thanks to staff at the 
Mahidol University’s Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital 
Division of Molecular Genetics, staff at the National Center 
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC) and 
staff at the Human Language Technology Laboratory of the 
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center 
(NECTEC) for all resources and advices discussed in this 
experimental study. In addition, we acknowledge the team at 
the Mizoguchi Laboratory of the Institute of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, Osaka University for allowing us to 
access the software, HOZO, an ontology editor.
