Political Depolarization of News Articles
Using Attribute-aware Word Embeddings
Ruibo Liu,1 Lili Wang,1 Chenyan Jia,2 Soroush Vosoughi1
1Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College
2Moody College of Communication, The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Political polarization in the US is on the rise. This polariza-
tion negatively affects the public sphere by contributing to the
creation of ideological echo chambers. In this paper, we focus
on addressing one of the factors that contributes to this polar-
ity, polarized media. We introduce a framework for depolar-
izing news articles. Given an article on a certain topic with a
particular ideological slant (eg., liberal or conservative), the
framework ﬁrst detects polar language in the article and then
generates a new article with the polar language replaced with
neutral expressions. To detect polar words, we train a multi-
attribute-aware word embedding model that is aware of ide-
ology and topics on 360k full-length media articles. Then, for
text generation, we propose a new algorithm called Text An-
nealing Depolarization Algorithm (TADA). TADA retrieves
neutral expressions from the word embedding model that not
only decrease ideological polarity but also preserve the origi-
nal argument of the text, while maintaining grammatical cor-
rectness. We evaluate our framework by comparing the de-
polarized output of our model in two modes, fully-automatic
and semi-automatic, on 99 stories spanning 11 topics. Based
on feedback from 161 human testers, our framework suc-
cessfully depolarized 90.1% of paragraphs in semi-automatic
mode and 78.3% of paragraphs in fully-automatic mode. Fur-
thermore, 81.2% of the testers agree that the non-polar con-
tent information is well-preserved and 79% agree that de-
polarization does not harm semantic correctness when they
compare the original text and the depolarized text. Our work
shows that data-driven methods can help to locate political
polarity and aid in the depolarization of articles.
Introduction
Political polarization refers to an individual’s stance on a
given issue that is heavily affected by their identiﬁcation
with a particular political party (e.g., Democratic or Republi-
can) or ideology (e.g., liberal or conservative). Political po-
larization has been recognized as a major issue undermin-
ing western democracies (Youngmann 2019; Groseclose and
Milyo 2005; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010). Partisan media
often exacerbates this problem; in fact, it is reported that po-
litically polarized articles can gradually change the attitudes
of communities (Iyyer et al. 2014), limit the topics in public
discussions (Chen et al. 2018b), or even have a substantial
effect on the evolution of policy (Dardis et al. 2008).
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
In this paper, we propose a data-driven framework to de-
tect and reduce political polarity in a given news article.
The framework is intended to be used by authors to depo-
larize their articles while maintaining their message. The
tool will not change the stance of an author; it will trans-
form the text to say the same thing, but in a less polar way.
To illustrate this point, consider an article talking about ille-
gal immigrants. The polarity of that article can be changed
by simply changing the phrase illegal immigrants with un-
documented immigrants. The polarity can be changed the
other way around by changing the former phrase with illegal
aliens. This change in polarity does not affect the message
of the article; it just softens (in the case of the ﬁrst example)
or hardens (in the case of the second example) the tone. The
polarity of an article can be transferred by changing a few
polarity markers without changing the meaning of the text;
these polarity markers can be explicit phrases (e.g., illegal
immigrants) or more subtle expressions (e.g., can’t pay for
health insurance vs. can’t prove coverage of health insur-
ance).
Our framework is composed of two main parts: a po-
larity detection mechanism based on attribute-aware word
embeddings, and an algorithm for fully automatic or semi-
automatic depolarization. The polarity detection model de-
tects phrases and expressions that make an article polar. The
model is context-aware (topic-aware), meaning that a phrase
could be detected as polar in articles about a particular topic
while not being detected as polar in other topics. The depo-
larization algorithm suggests changes to the polar language
detected by the polarity detection model that would reduce
the polarity of the article, while at the same time preserving
the meaning, the message and the stance of the article (e.g.,
the algorithm would not change the word ban to approve as
that would change the stance of the article). Furthermore, the
depolarization algorithm attempts to keep the article contex-
tually meaningful, cohesive, comprehensible and grammat-
ically correct (something that most current transfer models
do not do well).
Our method is inspired by recent works on encoding
attribute-speciﬁc information into word embeddings (Sub-
ramanian et al. 2018; Lample et al. 2019; Logeswaran, Lee,
and Bengio 2018), and works on adversarial text generation
arXiv:2101.01391v2  [cs.CL]  19 Apr 2021

(Ren et al. 2019; Alzantot et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018a;
Zhao et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2017; Singh and Palod 2018).
In our case, we treat political ideology and topic as two sep-
arate attributes and train a multi-attribute-aware word em-
bedding model. Our embeddings can not only capture the
general context of words, but also the nuanced differences
in their usage in speciﬁc contexts, such as different top-
ics and ideological slants. Next, we propose an algorithm,
called TADA, for generating depolarized (or neutral) text
that can replace polar language (identiﬁed using the multi-
attribute-aware word embedding model) with grammatically
correct neutral language (also extracted using the our multi-
attribute-aware model). TADA can be used fully automat-
ically, where a new depolarized article is fully generated
by the tool, or semi-automatically, where users can decide
which of the suggested changes to accept. We evaluate our
models and algorithm qualitatively and quantitatively.
Related Work
Political polarity and bias in the media have long been
studied in the ﬁelds of communication and political sci-
ence, going back to at least the 1950s
(Scammell and
Semetko 2018). Its impact on the political process has also
been extensively studied (Kahneman and Tversky 2013;
Huillery 2009; Glaeser and Goldin 2007). Speciﬁcally, stud-
ies show that if news consumers regularly receive polar
news, they are prone to adopting similar polar views, and
tend to start exclusively “following” the media outlets whose
reporting conforms with their established beliefs, thus spi-
ralling into an echo chamber where their bias is further rein-
forced.
Polarity Detection There is a wealth of work on how to de-
tect polarity in media. Yano et al. (Yano, Resnik, and Smith
2010) performed sentence-level manual polarity annotation
on blog posts from 2008 and they showed that words captur-
ing emotion and named entities of opposing political parties
can be a strong indicator of polarity. In recent years, auto-
mated identiﬁcation of political polarity and bias in news
has gained more attention. Gentzkow et al. (Gentzkow and
Shapiro 2010) derive a ”slant index” to rate the ideologi-
cal polarity of newspapers. They ﬁrst identify words that are
used much more frequently by one party than by another
from the Congressional Record, and then compute a slant
index (same concept as polarity) based on the frequency
of these party-speciﬁc tokens. Lin et al. (Lin, Bagrow, and
Lazer 2011) proposed a scheme for bias categorization. The
scheme includes the political party, frequently mentioned
legislators, region, ideology, and gender. Iyyer et al. (Iyyer
et al. 2014) apply a recursive neural network (RNN) to iden-
tify the political position evinced by a sentence. Owing to
RNN’s modelling power on sequential data, they claim that
their model can capture both syntactic and semantic features.
However, in terms of the detection output of the highest
probability n-grams for two ideologies, their model strug-
gles to distinguish non-polar content and polar indicators.
Lexical variations have also been studied in non-political
contexts. Shoemark et al. (Shoemark et al. 2017) conduct
a large-scale study of dialect variation on Twitter in the UK.
Their data-driven approach identiﬁes Scotland-speciﬁc lexi-
cal features.
Text Style Transfer There are parallels between the de-
polarization stage of our framework and the general ﬁeld
of linguistic style transfer. One of the mainstream meth-
ods for style transfer is to rely on variants of auto-encoders
to generate “transferred” text (Zhou and Neubig 2017;
Mueller, Gifford, and Jaakkola 2017; Guu et al. 2018;
Yang and Eisenstein 2017; Bowman et al. 2015). Works
that rely on auto-encoders for style transfer require a large
parallel corpus. There is a lack of ideal parallel corpus
for our task that aligns sentences with the same content
but different political ideology (Subramanian et al. 2018;
Tian, Hu, and Yu 2018). Due to the lack of such corpus
and also because of the difﬁculty of disentangling polar text
with non-polar content (Dai et al. 2019a; Prabhumoye et al.
2018), these works fail to output meaningful indicators of
polar text and in most cases, the output is problematic in
grammar and hardly understandable (Wu et al. 2019). Chen
et al.’s (Chen et al. 2018b) work, which uses style trans-
fer to ﬂip the bias in the news headlines, is the most sim-
ilar to ours. They ﬁrst analyze bias among the articles and
then use a cross-aligned auto-encoder trained on opposite-
ideology news data to generate ﬂipped titles. The main lim-
itation of this work, as stated by the authors, is that even in
their successful cases, the overlap of generated and ground-
truth headlines is very low, which means the auto-encoder
model has the tendency to discard too much information
even from non-polar content part. We differ from their work
in the model selection and also integrating salient words up-
sampling into the feature selection (this is explained in detail
later in the paper). Also, we extend the task to the depolar-
ization of the entire article, instead of only headlines, which
is a more challenging problem since we have to preserve
contextual and grammatical correctness across the whole ar-
ticle.
More recent works on style transfer pay more attention
to the quality of generation and whether the newly created
text can successfully preserve the non-style content. These
approaches are mostly template-based: they ﬁrst identify tar-
get words that contribute a lot to style, and then replace these
words and generate new expressions. Li et al. (Li et al. 2018)
propose a simple but efﬁcient approach called “Delete, Re-
trieve, Generate”, which deletes stylized n-grams based on
corpus-level statistics and stylizes it based on similar, re-
trieved sentences. Wu et al.’s work “Point-Then-Operate
(PTO)” (Wu et al. 2019) also follows this two-step man-
ner to transfer style, which consists of a high-level agent
that proposes operation positions and a low-level agent that
alters the sentence. Huang et al. (Huang et al. 2019) bring
synonyms from a dictionary as external reference informa-
tion to improve generation quality, and they view the trans-
fer generation task from the point of view of human’s: hu-
mans tend to replace words or phrases in the original sen-
tence with their corresponding synonyms and make nec-
essary changes to ensure the new sentences are ﬂuent and
grammatically correct. Our work is inspired and builds upon
these dictionary-guided methods, but rather than using an
off-the-shelf dictionary that can only guarantee grammatical
correctness, we train a “dynamic dictionary” (dynamic with

Main Embedding
[1 x 256]
[1 x 256]
[1 x 256]
[1 x 256]
Salience Score
Loss Func
Salient Words
Ideology Embedding
Topic Embedding
Negative Samples Embeddings
from Other Options
True Target Word
Embedding
Context Words
Embeddings
Ten illegal_aliens including a man
previously convicted of drug_charges,
were arrested by Border Patrol agents ...
Ten immigrants, including a man
previously convicted of drug_charges,
were arrested by Border Patrol agents ...
TADA
Attribute-Aware Embeddings Training
1
2
Input
Output
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Overview of (a) dynamic attribute-aware embeddings training, and (b) TADA algorithm of our framework.
respect to topic and ideology) on an attributes-labeled cor-
pus so that such a dictionary can not only preserve grammar
but also can serve as a strong reference for a depolarized-text
generation. This paper is related to another attempt from our
lab at transferring the political polarity of news articles us-
ing a transformer-based conditional generator (Liu, Jia, and
Vosoughi 2021).
Approach
Our model is comprised of a dynamic multi-attribute em-
bedding model which is used to detect polar phrases and a
probabilistic algorithm for depolarizing the detected polar
text. In this section we explain our framework in detail.
Dynamic Attribute-aware Model
In order to capture attribute-invariant as well as multi-
attribute-aware information, we extend a current single-
attribute dynamic model (Gillani and Levy 2019) to multi-
attribute case through making following changes: (1) we
adopt a two-step procedure, ﬁrst we pre-train attribute-
speciﬁc embeddings using datasets for each attribute (i.e.,
we train embedding models using articles with different
ideologies and topics). Next, we jointly train am attribute-
invariant embedding on the full dataset with attribute
weights initialled as pre-trained embeddings, (2) we inte-
grate salient words (words that can help distinguish one
attribute option from another) features into the joint train-
ing step to promote saliency of attribute-speciﬁc words, (3)
we replace the original negative sampling objective function
with attribute-aware negative sampling objective so that our
training can converge faster and the model is able to reﬂect
attribute features in the ﬁnal embeddings.
The basic idea of our attribute-aware model for the em-
bedding of a word w can be deﬁned as follows:
E(w, A1, ..., Ak) = Em(w) + ∑
A1
pA1EA1(w) + ...
+ ∑
Ak
pAkEAk(w)
(1)
where
Em
∈
R∣V ∣×emb
denotes
the
attribute-
invariant
embedding
(main
embedding)
of
w,
and
EA1(w), ..., EAk(w)
∈
R∣V ∣×k represents the shift of
main embedding in speciﬁc attribute domain. We denote
the embedding corresponding to each possible option for an
attribute A as EA(w); note that this framework supports
embeddings for multiple attributes (denoted by EA1(w)
to EAk(w)). For each option in each attribute, we sum up
all embeddings from all options in a weighted form (pAi
is the weight vector for attribute i), and add it to the main
embedding. We add these embeddings along the embedding
axis and use the new summed-up matrix (E(w, A1, ..., Ak))
as the ﬁnal embedding. The resulting model is shown in
Figure 1 (a).
Integrating Salient Words
One limitation of our “main
+ attribute” structure is that all negative samples that help
training converge come from the same vocabulary set, mean-
ing that we cannot have the model pay more attention to
words that are more salient in one category (within the same
attribute). This becomes an issue when an attribute has many
categories (for instance our topic attribute which has 11 cat-
egories). As shown in Table 1, the most similar terms of the
same query word illegal show nearly no difference when we
switch the topic.
Certain words are strongly associated with a particular at-
tribute. For instance the phrase illegal aliens is a strong in-
dicator of conservative ideology, which means that it should
be a good candidate of negative samples in the other two ide-
ology options. Based on this observation, we identify a set
of salient words that serve as strong indicators of different
attribute options. We integrate these salient words into our
training by making them more likely to appear in negative
samples. This way our attribute-aware model can converge
faster and output higher-quality word embeddings. Speciﬁ-
cally, the salience score S for a word w with respect to the
attribute option Oi is:

S(w, Oi) = GM(
count(w, Oi)
N
∑
n=1
count(w, On)
,
count(w, Oi)
∑
wi∈∣V ∣
count(wi, Oi))
(2)
where the ﬁrst fraction is the probability that a word w is
from option Oi (i.e., P(Oi∣w)), while the second fraction is
the probability that w can be found in Oi (i.e., P(w∣Oi)).
GM is the geometry mean of these two terms. Note that we
perform laplace smoothing and normal distribution normal-
ization on the two terms.
Using this deﬁnition, the salience score of a word w with
respect to option Oi depends on P(w∣Oi) and P(Oi∣w).
This means that a word with a high salience score is highly
frequent in Oi while not being universally frequent (simi-
lar to the TF-IDF score). We use this score to sort our vo-
cabulary set for each option, and then we apply a weighted
(in terms of salient score) up-sampling on those words that
are marked as salient (we explain this in more detail in the
following section). Speciﬁcally, when we generate negative
samples for a given activated option of an attribute (e.g.,
the option liberal for ideology attribute), we randomly pick
words with a certain probability that has been modiﬁed by
the salient words up-sampling algorithm.
Attribute-aware
Objective
Function
We
choose
a
CBOW (Continuous Bag of Words) model (Mikolov et al.
2013) as our base to train the attribute embedding since it is
reported to perform relatively well with large datasets (Schn-
abel et al. 2015). The original negative sampling objective
function from Mikolov’s work (Mikolov et al. 2013) can be
represented as:
J(θ) = arg max
θ
(log σ(vc ⋅vw)+
∑
(w,c)∈D′
log σ(−vc ⋅vw))
(3)
where vw and vc are a pair of word and context in vector
form, σ denotes the sigmoid function and D′ is the set of
so-called “negative samples”. The goal is to ﬁnd parameters
to maximize the probability of positive cases (context words
c are indeed around word w) while minimize the probabil-
ity of negative cases (word-context pairs (w, c) ∈D′ where
D′ are a set of randomly sampled pairs). This works well
if no attribute is considered. However, it is highly possible
that some negative cases we randomly sample for one at-
tribute are actually positive samples in another attribute. As
described earlier, this problem becomes even more severe
as the number of attributes and the options for the attributes
increases.
In the previous section we described how we create a list
of salient words for each attribute option. We integrate these
words in the objective function to improve negative sam-
pling and dampen the issues described above. We do this by
creating a “reversed” salient-word bank for each option Oi,
which is in turn used to generate negative samples. Words
that are salient with respect to an option appear less often in
the reversed bank of that option and vice versa. The count
for word w in the reversed salient-word bank for option Oi
is calculated as:
Count(w) = M × 1
p, where p =
S(w, Oi)
∑w∈V S(w, Oi)
(4)
here S(w, Oi) is the salience score we deﬁned in Equation 2,
M is a relatively large number (108) close to the total count
of words in our dataset. This equation ensures that words
that are salient with respect to an attribute option will ap-
pear less in that options word bank and thus has less chance
of being selected as a negative sample and vice versa. We
generate and store these words banks in advance to speed
training.
Through this salient-based negative sampling method, we
are able to improve the quality of our attribute-aware word
embeddings. Our model is evaluated later in this paper.
Detect and Depolarize Polar Text
Detect Polar Words
Using the attribute-aware model, we
deﬁne a measure of polarity for a word as the distance be-
tween its embeddings in different ideology attributes (lib-
eral, neutral, conservative). Mathematically, our deﬁnition
of polarity score P for each word w in topic t is:
P(w, t) =
∑
si,sj∈S
cos(E(w, si, t), E(w, sj, t))
(5)
where S is the set of all ideology attributes and E is the
attribute-aware embedding. We apply z-score normalization
on each word’s polarity score within the same topic. As a
result all polarity scores’ mean µ is located at zero, with sev-
eral sigma σ deviation in two directions. We treat the words
that have above-zero polarity as polar words, and for the
sake of generalization we ﬁlter out words whose frequency
is lower than 500.
The polarity of a paragraph (or even a full article) can be
calculated by adding the polarity score of each polar word
(a word with normalized polarity greater than 0). We ignore
non-polar words in our calculation as we do not want the
polarity of a paragraph to be artiﬁcially lowered due to its
length. At this point, we have the polarity score of each para-
graph and a set of polar words in the paragraphs. The next
step is to replace those polar words with neutral words such
that the polarity of the paragraphs go down.
Depolarized-Text Generation
In this section, we intro-
duce the Text Annealing Depolarization Algorithm (TADA)
as our solution to the depolarization task. The workﬂow of
TADA is shown in Figure 1 (b).
In addition to polarity detection, the multi-attribute-aware
word embedding model can also be used to ﬁnd a polar
word’s neutral replacement.
For a word wi from source ideology si within topic t, its
neutral expression wN can be retrieved using the following
equation:
wN ∶= arg min(cos(E(wi, si, t), E(wi, neutral, t))) (6)

this amounts to retrieving wi’s most similar word in the neu-
tral ideology and the same topic t. The distance is measured
using cosine similarity. To ensure the correctness of gram-
mar, we ﬁlter out those candidates whose part-of-speech
(POS) are not the same as the original word’s POS. For each
detected polar word, a neutral candidate list (denoted as wN )
is retrieved and sorted using this method. We limit the list
for each polar word to the top 20 candidates for the search
algorithm (which means ∣wN ∣= 20).
TADA is a modiﬁed simulated annealing algorithm that
balances depolarization performance and ﬂuency. The algo-
rithm is also highly efﬁcient. Let us ﬁrst deﬁne the optimiza-
tion goal of our task: Given a paragraph consisting of words
w in topic t, assume after s replacement steps we obtain a
new sequence of words w∗= {w1, ..., wm}. The reward R
of the whole modiﬁcation is:
R(w∗, w, t) =
1
s + λ[
step 1
ÌÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÐÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÎ
−P(w∗, t) +F(w∗, w)
ÍÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÑÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÒÏ
step 2
]
(7)
where P is the polarity score we mentioned in the previous
part, F is the ﬂuency score of the newly generated sequence
w∗with respect to the original paragraph w. Also, we use s
to normalize the total rewards in terms of how many steps it
takes to reach the optimum replacement, and we add a regu-
larization term λ to avoid inﬁnity reward R caused by zero
step/no modiﬁcation (i.e., s = 0). We set the hyperparameter
λ = 0.01 through empirical observation.
As shown in Equation 7, we compute the reward in a two-
step manner: in step one, we compute the polarity score P of
the randomly generated modiﬁed sequences (w∗) (note that
a modiﬁcation is only made when the polarity score of the
sentence is lowered); and then in step two, we sum up the
ﬂuency score F and the negative polarity score of each can-
didate sequence to produce the ﬁnal reward R. Given such a
reward deﬁnition, the training goal of our TADA algorithm
is to pick the proper sequence modiﬁcation that has the high-
est reward after several iterations.
It is possible that no modiﬁcations will be made in the
ﬁrst step if there are none that reduce the polarity score. In
that case the second step will not go into effect and the al-
gorithm will terminate with no changes on the sequence. To
decrease the number of unchanged cases we can set a lower
Tmin in Algorithm 1, which leads to more iterations for the
depolarization.
We choose the BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002) score as an
estimation of ﬂuency (F). BLEU is computed based on
how many n-gram overlap between the newly generated
text and the original one. We believe it is more suitable
than other language model scoring methods because the re-
placement (i.e., depolarization) causes a slight stylistic shift
(words with the same meaning but different styles). Com-
pared to other language model methods (e.g., BERT) BLEU
is more sensitive to such changes. Another reason for se-
lecting BLEU is speed. Some neural language models, like
BERT, suffer from slow evaluation scoring (Lan et al. 2019),
Since we are not rewriting the whole sentence but perform-
ing modiﬁcation on the tokens, we choose BLEU as our
light-weight and fast ﬂuency metric.
Algorithm 1: Text Annealing Depolarization
Input: Original polar text ⟨w1, . . . , wm⟩
Output: Neutral text neutral
T ←Tmax
neutral ←[]
for w1 to wm do
if P(wi) > threshold (P(wi) by Eq. 5) then
retrieve wN of wi (by Eq. 6)
t ←0
while T > Tmin do
Randomly init best from wN
next ←RandomPickCandidates(T, best)
∆R ←R(next) −R(best) (R by Eq. 7)
if ∆R < 0 ∧random < Paccept(T, ∆R) then
best ←next
else
Discard next
t ←t + 1
T ←
Tmax
log(t+d)
neutral ←Merge best back to text
return neutral
Given the reward function, the fully-automatic mode re-
lies on an efﬁcient search algorithm that can ﬁnd the best
combination of neutral words. Given an article whose length
is l and the vocab size is ∣V ∣(a very large number), the
search space of common sequential decoding methods (Shen
et al. 2017; John et al. 2018; Dai et al. 2019b) is ∣V ∣l, and
the ﬁnal generation often drops into a local optimum because
of its accumulation feature. Reinforcement-learning-based
methods (Gong et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2018) have more ac-
curate quality control over the generation and partially over-
come the local optimum problem, however, these methods
rely on continuous sampling of candidate sequences (still
∣V ∣l search space), which result in low efﬁciency. Our al-
gorithm, TADA, improves the efﬁciency in two perspec-
tives: We ﬁrst narrow the search space for each token from
∣V ∣to ∣wN ∣, which is a limited-length neutral replacement
words list proposed by our dynamic attribute-aware model.
Then, instead of using sequential decoding to generate a re-
placed sequence, we use the simulated annealing algorithm
as our template, and modify it to meet our requirements. The
overview of our algorithm (called TADA) is shown in Algo-
rithm 1.
We keep the general framework of the classical simu-
lated annealing algorithm: The optimization procedure be-
gins with a maximum temperature Tmax, and after sev-
eral iterations the optimization stops, when the temperature
reaches Tmin. Instead of relying on the normal token-by-
token decision, we decouple the search space with the length
of the input. The replacement only happens when there are
polar words detected, and we deploy a propose-and-judge
manner as the core logic of TADA. In this way, assuming

there are k words being detected as polar words, the search
space of our algorithm is thus ∣wN ∣k, where k is not neces-
sarily related to the input length and ∣wN ∣is limited to 20.
We make use of the efﬁcient search method in the classical
simulated annealing algorithm. Each iteration of our algo-
rithm can be described in three steps:
1. Randomly pick polar words in a paragraph, and randomly
pick neutral candidates for each selected polar word. Use
these candidates to do the replacement, and compute the
reward score (R).
2. If the newly computed reward score is smaller than the
best, which means the polarity has decreased and ﬂuency
is well-conserved, accept these candidates to generate a
new paragraph.
3. If not, accept the candidates with probability Paccept =
exp(−∆R
T ).
We also use several tricks to improve the generation qual-
ity. For example, in order to guarantee that the picked can-
didates are grammatically correct, we ﬁlter out the candi-
dates whose POS is not the same as the POS of the origi-
nal word. Also, we dynamically adjust the “cooling speed”
(∆T) based on the length of the paragraph since longer para-
graph may need more iterations to ﬁnd the best candidates
combination. In general, given the observation that certain
polar words or phrases contribute a lot to the polarity, TADA
adopts a propose-and-judge procedure, avoiding the unnec-
essary token-by-token sequential decoding from scratch. We
make use of a pre-trained attribute-aware model to shrink the
search space of neutral replacement to guarantee our algo-
rithm runs efﬁciently. (All the parameters used in the model
are listed in the Implementation section.)
Implementation
Datasets
The data for this project was collected from Media Cloud1,
which is an academic research project led by MIT and Har-
vard University. The platform collects articles from a large
number of media outlets and makes the content available via
an API.
We followed the political issues deﬁned by a survey-based
website2 and chose 11 topics (shown in Table 4) four our
data collection. For each topic, we use the words under
the corresponding title on isidewith.com as query keywords.
(E.g. topic: Social Issue →query terms: abortion, gay mar-
riage, death penalty, etc) We collected around 360k full-
length articles from May 1st, 2018 to May 1st, 2019 (about
6GB of plain text), as our training data (similar to Liu et al.
2021). The articles are from 22 media outlets. We assign an
ideological polarity label to each outlet using data from the
Pew Research Center. The data from Pew is based on a sur-
vey of news consumption by people with different political
afﬁliation 3. The labels we assigned for polarity are liberal
1https://mediacloud.org/
2https://www.isidewith.com/polls
3https://www.journalism.org/interactives/media-
polarization/table/overall/
(corresponding to Pew’s consistently liberal and mostly lib-
eral labels), neutral (corresponding to Pew’s mixed label),
and conservative (corresponding to Pew’s consistently con-
servative and mostly conservative labels). Each article was
also labeled with a topic. The assigned topic labels are based
on the corresponding title name for the query terms. For ex-
ample an article which was collected by the abortion key-
word query would be labeled as having the topic Social Is-
sues.
Training
We train our attribute-aware model in two steps: (1) We train
the attribute embeddings with the part of the training data
that correspond to the attribute option that is activated. For
example, the data we use to train liberal embeddings is all
the articles from liberal media (including New York Times,
NPR, Hufﬁngton Post, etc.), (2) After we obtain the embed-
dings for all possible attribute options (in our case, there are
three ideology embeddings and 11 topic embeddings, total-
ing 14 embeddings), we jointly train the main (universal)
embedding and all the attribute embeddings. This step is cru-
cial as it aligns all the words from different semantic spaces
into the same vector space.
The training of our dynamic attribute-aware model on a
Google Cloud Platform with NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPU took
about one hour for ﬁve epochs on the joint training (after ﬁve
epochs we observed a decrease in the accuracy, so we choose
ﬁve as the epoch number). The training accuracy reached
around 87% at the 5th epoch. All our embeddings have 256
dimensions. The number of negative samples is 32. We add
L2 regularizer 10−8 to the fused embedding layer (main +
attribute embeddings). The window size of CBOW is 3.
For the TADA algorithm, we set the start temperature
Tmax to 1000 and set Tmin to 100. We use t to record the
step sizes, and at the end of each iteration T will be updated
to
Tmax
log(t+d) where d can be set as static constant or a length-
related variable. We set d to 1 for the efﬁciency requirement.
Two Modes: Semi and Fully-automatic
There are two core modules in our framework, the dy-
namic word embedding model and TADA depolarization al-
gorithm. For the purpose of ablation study, we develop two
modes of our framework: semi-automatic mode and fully au-
tomatic mode. Fully automatic mode makes use of the whole
framework, while the semi-automatic mode only uses a par-
tial TADA algorithm requiring the help of human editors to
depolarize the article. Speciﬁcally, after our system detects
the polar words in a given article, it retrieves their corre-
sponding neutral options and provide them for human edi-
tors to choose from. The human editors have to then consider
various criteria, such as the contextual consistency, the over-
all ﬂuency, and the depolarization strength when performing
the replacement. Ideally, we expect the TADA algorithm to
produce similar results as the human-guided version.
Evaluation
At its core, our framework is comprised of two main parts:
the attribute-aware word embeddings, and the TADA depo-

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
illegal
illegally
prohibited
unlawful
illicit
amnesty
banned
illegitimate
money_laundering
border_crossing
drugs
illegal
illegally
prohibited
illicit
unlawful
cocaine
banned
prohibit
border_crossing
drugs
marijuana
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
illegal
illegally
prohibited
unlawful
illicit
amnesty
banned
illegitimate
money_laundering
border_crossing
drugs
illegal
illegally
prohibited
illicit
unlawful
cocaine
banned
prohibit
border_crossing
drugs
marijuana
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.00
0.05
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
washington
washington
washington
government
government
government
Polarity = 0.323
Polarity = 0.735
Topic: Immigration
Topic: Immigration
Topic: Criminal Justice
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: Several visualization examples in embedding space to verify our model manages to capture attribute-aware polarity. In
(a), we plot 2D projections of the words “government” and “washington” from liberal, neutral and conservative within the same
topic “Immigration”. In (b) and (c), we plot the ten nearest words to the word “illegal” in two different topics (“Immigration”
and “Criminal Justice”). We prove that our model can not only measure the lexical polarity within the same topic (ideology-
aware), but also reﬂect the discrepancy between different topics (topic-aware).
larization algorithm. Thus, our evaluation is focused on (1)
Illustrating that our word embeddings manage to capture at-
tribute information, (2) Measuring the effectiveness of our
depolarization algorithm, TADA.
Topic: Immigration
Topic: Healthcare
Term: illegal
Word
Cosine
Word
Cosine
illegally
0.2714
illegally
0.2203
possession
0.2163
banning
0.1998
criminal
0.2056
possession
0.1942
illicit
0.2016
smuggle ◁
0.1906
suspected
0.2013
border crossing ⋆
0.1888
unlawful
0.1996
illicit
0.1878
prohibited
0.1942
prohibited
0.1854
drugs ⋆
0.1935
trafﬁcking ◁
0.1845
felony
0.1907
drugs ⋆
0.1754
Table 1: The top 10 most similar words to the word illegal in
the immigration and drugs topics, before we integrate salient
words into the joint training. We use ◁to mark words that
are unique to one topic and we use ⋆to mark the phrase
border crossing and the word drug which we think should
not appear in the most similar list for both topics.
Attribute-Aware Word Embeddings
To illustrate that our word embeddings successfully learned
ideology and topic information, we ﬁrst perform a qualita-
tive experiment to test our model’s awareness of attributes.
We choose a pair of words washington vs. government,
which has been reported as an example of how the left and
the right use different words to refer to the same thing (Abadi
2017; Miller 2011), to check whether our attribute-aware
embeddings can successfully discover such known knowl-
edge. Since the second step of our training involves jointly
training attribute-invariant and attribute-aware embeddings,
we are able to extract (and plot) word vectors from different
attribute domains in the same vector space. Figure 2 shows
the 2D projections of the words washington and government
from different ideological attributes (but the same topic, in
this case, “Immigration”).
Topic: Immigration
Topic: Healthcare
Term: illegal
Word
Cosine
Word
Cosine
illegally
0.2872
illegally
0.2682
unlawful
0.2422
possession
0.2266
trafﬁcking
0.2311
criminal
0.1988
prohibited
0.2217
drugs ↑
0.1979
banning
0.2208
money laundering ↑
0.1966
minors
0.2101
smuggle
0.1917
felony
0.2099
unlawful
0.1904
undocumented ↑
0.2081
marijuana ↑
0.1874
ﬁrearms
0.2056
suspected
0.1848
Table 2: The top 10 most similar words to the word illegal
in the “Immigration” and “Drugs” topics, after we integrate
salient words into the joint training. We use ↑to indicate the
rise in ranking of certain words.
Recall we deﬁned the polarity of a word as the distance
between its embeddings in different ideology attributes. This
corresponds to the area of the triangle shown in ﬁgure 2. We
can see that the word washington is more polar than the word
government. This makes sense intuitively as the word wash-
ington is a political term often used to refer to the federal
government, like phrases Washington spending, Washington
waste, Washington taxation, which is reported in the book
Words that Work by Frank Luntz (Luntz 2007) and other re-
lated works (Marangos 2008; Lemmon 2013). In this quali-
tative case we thus verify our model is able to correctly cap-
ture the polarity phenomenon.
In the second experiment, we look at the similarity task
for a given word in different topics. As shown in Table 1 and
Table 2, we perform similarity checks on the term illegal
within two topics: “Immigration”, and “Healthcare”, and
we use cosine similarity as our distance metric. Table 1
shows the most similar words to the word illegal before
we integrate salient words into the training. Though there
are some differences between the two topics, it is hard to

Topics
Liberal (L)
Neutral (N)
Conservative (C)
Total Polar
Success %
before
after
∆%↓
before
after
before
after
∆%↓
before
after
Social Issues
7
3
57.1%
4
12
7
3
57.1%
14
6
57.1%
Immigration
12
4
60.1%
11
29
20
10
50.0%
32
14
56.3%
Miscellaneous
33
12
63.3%
10
74
60
17
71.7%
93
29
67.0%
Healthcare
20
2
90.0%
9
47
33
13
60.0%
53
15
71.7%
Climate
25
13
48.0%
4
33
30
13
56.7%
55
26
52.8%
Trade
79
24
69.6%
40
165
91
21
76.9%
170
45
73.5%
Election
106
34
67.9%
40
207
142
47
64.6%
248
81
67.3%
Foreign Policy
28
15
46.4%
11
70
67
21
68.7%
95
36
62.1%
Education
39
17
56.4%
15
51
32
18
43.8%
71
35
50.7%
Criminal Justice
39
4
89.7%
14
71
36
14
61.0%
75
18
76.0%
Vaccination
20
3
85.0%
5
30
11
3
72.2%
31
6
80.6%
Overall
408
131
67.9%
163
789
529
180
66.0%
937
311
66.8%
Table 3: The success rate of fooling an external ideology classiﬁer after we perform the depolarization algorithm TADA on
1,100 original polar text across 11 topics. The success rate is deﬁned by Equation 8. The F1 score of the external classiﬁer is
0.8974 (liberal, neutral, conservative three-class classiﬁcation).
tell the difference between these two topics. Also the word
border crossing is sort of misleading in the context of drugs:
Though some drug trade is related to crossing the border, the
phrase is more likely to be used in the context of immigra-
tion. At the very least, if such a phrase is frequent in both
topics indeed, we would like to see the model treat them se-
mantically different in different topics. Another potentially
problematic word is drug, which ranks high in both of the
topics. We compare these results to ones generated using a
model that uses our salient word up-sampling algorithm.
The version of our model that uses salient word up-
sampling performs better on the same similarity task. Table 2
shows the results. We can observe that words like drugs,
money laundering and marijuana rank higher in the list for
the topic drug, and the word undocumented has joined the
list for the topic immigration. Though qualitative in nature,
these evaluations help shed light on the performance of dif-
ferent aspects of our model.
Depolarized-Text Generation Algorithm (TADA)
To verify the effectiveness of our depolarization algorithm
(TADA), we use an automatic evaluation framework.
We train an ideology classiﬁer with three classes, lib-
eral, neutral, and conservative on the whole training dataset
((F1 ≈90%) to be used for judgement. For a given text, we
use this classiﬁer to detect its ideology before and after it
has been depolarized by TADA. For a given corpus of text
(comprised of liberal (L), neutral (N) and conservative (C)
texts), we deﬁne the depolarization success rate of TADA as:
Success % = count(after N) −count(before N)
count(before L) + count(before C)
(8)
The rate focuses on the increased number of neutral text
against the total number of polar text by measuring how
many newly generated samples will be judged by the ex-
ternal classiﬁer to be neutral. We choose fasttext by Face-
book (Bojanowski et al. 2016) as our external classiﬁer and
pick the best parameter set through grid search (dimen-
sion=500, n-gram=3). For our evaluation, we sample 1,100
polar articles (L and C) from 11 topics, matching the orig-
inal distribution. We run these article through TADA and
measure the success rate using Equation 8.
The result is shown in Table 3. We list all 11 topics results
and show the before and after ideology distribution. TADA
performs slightly better on the originally liberal text (overall
67.9% vs. 66.0% of originally conservative), and from the
topic-wise perspective, TADA performs best on the Vaccina-
tion topic (80.6%) but worst on the Education topic (50.7%).
We think that the discrepancy between topics is due to cer-
tain topics having more salient words and phrases, which
gives TADA more options to work with, and some topics
having very few salient phrases, which causes potential dif-
ﬁculties for the TADA algorithm to depolarize. Overall, we
achieve a success rate of 66.8% over the 1,100 samples.
Human Judgement Evaluation
To ﬁgure out whether TADA’s depolarization is truly recog-
nized as successful by humans (which is the ultimate goal of
this paper), we conducted a online experiment on the Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) platform in 2019. MTurk is
an increasingly popular platform for online data collection
with a population of workers that is typically more diverse
in age and racial distribution than American college sam-
ples (Buhrmester, Kwang, and Gosling 2011).
Participants
We recruited 161 participants (N = 161) to take part in the
evaluation process. The participants were all from the United

States. The average age of the participants was 40.55 years-
old (SD=13.99, Median=37). More than half (57.1%) of the
participants were male, and 42.9% were female. Participants
on average received 15.8 years of education (SD = 2.80,
Median = 16). When asked to self-report their party afﬁlia-
tions, 83 participants (51.5%) were self-reported Democrats,
48 participants (29.8%) were self-reported Republican, and
30 participants (18.6%) were independent. Accordingly, 78
participants (48.4%) preferred to read liberal media, and 42
participants (26.1%) preferred to read conservative media.
Stimuli
We randomly selected 33 sets of paragraphs from TADA’s
generation pool from 11 topics (listed in Table 4). Each set
has one original paragraph, one paragraph with text edited
by semi-automatic mode and one with text edited by the
fully-automatic mode. In total, we selected 99 paragraphs
as our evaluation samples.
Procedures
The 161 participants were randomly assigned to one of the
three groups. People who were assigned to group A were
presented texts from the topics Social Issues, Immigration,
Miscellaneous, Healthcare. Group B was shown the topics
Climate, Trade, Elections, and Foreign Policy and group C
the topics Education, Criminal Justice, Vaccination. We did
this to ensure that single participant does not have to read
texts pertaining to 11 different topics.
Before the experiment, participants were asked to an-
swer a pre-exposure questionnaire about their demograph-
ics, party afﬁliation, political attitude, and favorite media
outlets. During the experiment, for each set, participants
were exposed to three versions of paragraphs (original, de-
polarized using the semi-automatic mode, and depolarized
using the fully-automatic mode) without being informed of
the actual type. After reading each paragraph without know-
ing whether it was depolarized or not, participants were
asked to rate the polarity, ideology and readability of the
paragraphs on the 7-point Likert scale.
Next, the participants were informed of the actual type of
each version and were presented the three versions of the
stories at the same time. The participants were then asked to
answer a post-exposure questionnaire about the performance
of the algorithm. Participants were asked to choose the least
polar version. They were also asked questions about whether
the three versions were about the same topic, and whether
three versions were semantically similar. The participants
were also asked to rate the depolarization success of the
semi-automated and fully automated versions. All questions
were measured on a 7-point scale.
Measurements
Demographic measures included gender, racial category,
years of education, and age. Political attitude was mea-
sured by a 7-point scale (1-Extremely liberal; 4-Moderate;
7-Extremely conservative) as:
• “Generally speaking, where would you place yourself on
the following scale?”
Topics
Mean (SD) of the Extent of Polarity
Original
Semi-auto
Fully-auto
Social Issues
4.77 (1.48)
4.22 (1.54)
4.03 (1.69)
Immigration
4.63 (2.04)
4.63 (1.78)
4.4 (1.72)
Miscellaneous
5.5 (1.65)
4.9 (1.92)
5.22 (1.73)
Healthcare
3.95 (1.69)
3.67 (1.42)
3.4 (1.66)
Climate
4.07 (1.48)
3.63 (1.44)
3.55 (1.55)
Trade
4.87 (1.86)
4.53 (1.67)
4.4 (1.59)
Election
4.28 (1.93)
3.98 (1.89)
4.13 (1.75)
Foreign Policy
4.8 (1.42)
4.48 (1.56)
4.25 (1.76)
Education
4.38 (1.93)
4.47 (1.91)
4.43 (1.8)
Criminal Justice
3.63 (1.77)
3.37 (1.58)
3.55 (1.52)
Vaccination
4.13 (1.73)
4.05 (1.66)
3.88 (1.59)
Table 4: Mean of the extent of polarity for each topic in three
modes (original, semi-automatic and fully-automatic). We
also mark the SD (standard deviation) for each mean.
Party afﬁliation was measured by 7-point scale (1-Strong
Democratic; 4-Independent; 7-Strong Republican) as:
• “Generally speaking, do you usually think of yourself as
a Republican, a Democrat, or an Independent?
After reading each paragraph without knowing the ver-
sion type (i.e., whether it was an original article or a depo-
larized article), participants were asked about the bias, ideol-
ogy, and the readability of the paragraph. Bias was measured
by as (1- Extremely unbiased to 7- Extremely biased):
• “How biased do you think this story is?”
Ideology was measured as (1-Extremely liberal; 4-
Moderate; 7-Extremely conservative):
• “What ideology do you think this story is?”
The readability measure included ﬁve items adapted from
a previous study by Haim et al. (Haim and Graefe 2017),
namely, well-written, concise, comprehensive, coherent, and
clear. The reliability of the ﬁve items of readability was
Cronbach’s α = 0.94, M = 19.51, SD = 8.47, which was very
high. Thus, we can average ﬁve metrics into one as a general
reliability index.
In the post-exposure questionnaire, three questions were
used to test the content preserving performance:
• “Do you agree that the three paragraphs above talk about
the same topic?”
• “Do you agree that the three paragraphs above hold the
same political views?”
• “Do you agree that the three paragraphs above are se-
mantically similar?”
Results
Depolarization. As mentioned earlier, the extent of polarity
was measured on a 7-point scale, with higher values cor-
responding to greater polarity. The average polarity of the

Topics
Original vs. Semi
Original vs. Fully
t
df
p-Value
t
df
p-Value
Social Issues
2.88
59
0.005 **
3.69
59
0.00 ***
Immigration
0.00
59
1.00
1.37
59
0.18
Miscellaneous
3.49
59
0.00 ***
1.29
59
0.20
Healthcare
1.25
59
0.22
2.45
59
0.017 *
Climate
2.39
59
0.02 **
2.47
59
0.016 *
Trade
2.88
59
0.005 **
3.5
59
0.00 ***
Election
1.8
59
0.08
0.76
59
0.45
Foreign Policy
2.45
59
0.017 *
2.74
59
0.008 **
Education
-0.4
59
0.69
-0.23
59
0.82
Criminal Justice
1.49
59
0.14
0.34
59
0.74
Vaccination
0.52
59
0.61
1.2
59
0.23
Table 5: Two paired samples t-tests on the polarity of paired
paragraphs from 11 topics. The purpose is to determine
whether there is statistical difference in polarity between
the original text and the output of the depolarized-text gen-
eration algorithm in both the semi-automatic and fully-
automatic modes. (* corresponds to p <0.05, ** to p <0.01
and *** to p <0.001)
articles (as speciﬁed by the participants) for each version
of the stories is shown in Table 4. Furthermore, we used
paired sample t-tests to examine whether there were signif-
icant differences in perceived polarity between the original
and depolarized stories. These results are shown in Table 5.
The results show that for certain topics, there were statis-
tically signiﬁcant reductions in participants’ perceived po-
larity when comparing original articles to their depolarized
versions (for both modes). (The magnitude of the reduction
can be seen in Table 4 and the statistical signiﬁcance in Table
5. In general, there were no notable differences between the
semi-automatic and fully-automatic versions, which means
that further improvements to the framework need to be fo-
cused on the attribute-aware word embeddings (which are
used by both the semi-automatic and fully-automatic ver-
sions) our depolarization algorithm could achieve compara-
ble and competitive results as human-aided method.
Readability (Pairwise Comparison)
Pair
Mean (SD)
t
df
p-Value
Original vs. Semi
4 (1.67)
3.93 (1.69)
0.891
50
0.377
Original vs. Fully
4 (1.67)
4.07 (1.71)
-0.558
50
0.579
Semi vs. Fully
3.93 (1.69)
4.07 (1.71)
-1.094
50
0.279
Table 6: T-test on the readability of original text, the gener-
ation from semi-automatic mode and from fully-automatic
mode. We do not observe
Readability. Our results show that our depolarization al-
gorithms, TADA, did not weaken readability. Paired sam-
ple t-tests showed that no signiﬁcant difference existed
among readability of the three versions (Table 6). The semi-
automatic and fully-automatic edited versions were as read-
able as the original text.
Content Preserving. Three questions were used to test the
content preserving performance, as listed in the ”Measure-
ments” section. Recall that these questions were asked post-
exposure where participants were shown the three versions
of the texts at the same time and asked three questions.
The ﬁrst question was intended as a soft content preserving
check, since it is possible that the topic of a text remains the
same while the political position is completely ﬂipped. The
second questions is a harder check as it is asking about the
political views contained in the text; it is again easy to imag-
ine a scenario where the political views are preserved while
the meaning is changed. Finally, the third question gets at
the preservation of the meaning (semantics) conveyed in the
text. Results showed that on average 81.2% of the partici-
pants agreed that the three versions of the texts were talking
about the same topic, 75.2% of the participants agreed that
the three versions of the texts had the same political view,
and 79% of the participants agreed that the three versions of
the texts had the same meaning. We can see that across all
three measures, over three quarters of the participants felt
that the content of the texts had been preserved in the depo-
larization process.
Conclusions
In this work, we proposed a framework for depolarizing
news articles which can be used either fully-automatically or
semi-automatically. At the core of our framework is a novel
attribute-aware word embedding model which is trained on
two attributes (ideology and topic), using data from Media
Cloud. The model can be used to detect polar content in
articles. We also proposed a probabilistic algorithm, called
TADA, that can depolarize text using our attribute-aware
word embedding model. We evaluated our framework and
its components empirically, qualitatively, and through hu-
man evaluations, showing that our framework is capable of
depolarizing articles for certain topics while preserving the
meaning and without damaging readability.
While our best-tested model performs well, there is still
much room for improvement. For example, the polarity de-
tection of our model is not truly contextualized, we need
to further consider the inﬂuence of context on the polar-
ity score. Additionally, since as part of our attribute-aware
model we create separate word embeddings for each at-
tribute, our model cannot be easily scaled to handle a large
number of attributes. The limitation of memory could be a
potential bottleneck for the extension. Future work could in-
volve employing contextual language models in our frame-
work, more memory efﬁcient methods for creating multi-
attribute-aware embeddings and exploring continuous at-
tributes. Moreover, the general ﬁeld that this paper falls un-
der suffers from a lack of established evaluation benchmarks
and metrics. More work needs to be done to address these
shortcoming and unify the ﬁeld.
