THOUSANDS OF AI AUTHORS ON THE FUTURE OF AI
PREPRINT
Katja Grace*†‡
AI Impacts
Berkeley, California
United States

Harlan Stewart†
AI Impacts
Berkeley, California
United States
Julia Fabienne Sandkühler†
Department of Psychology
University of Bonn
Germany
Stephen Thomas†
AI Impacts
Berkeley, California
United States
Ben Weinstein-Raun
Independent
Berkeley, California
United States
Jan Brauner‡
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
United Kingdom
Richard C. Korzekwa†‡
AI Impacts
Berkeley, California
United States
January 2024
ABSTRACT
In the largest survey of its kind, we surveyed 2,778 researchers who had published in top-tier artificial
intelligence (AI) venues, asking for their predictions on the pace of AI progress and the nature and
impacts of advanced AI systems. The aggregate forecasts give at least a 50% chance of AI systems
achieving several milestones by 2028, including autonomously constructing a payment processing
site from scratch, creating a song indistinguishable from a new song by a popular musician, and
autonomously downloading and fine-tuning a large language model. If science continues undisrupted,
the chance of unaided machines outperforming humans in every possible task was estimated at 10%
by 2027, and 50% by 2047. The latter estimate is 13 years earlier than that reached in a similar
survey we conducted only one year earlier [Grace et al., 2022]. However, the chance of all human
occupations becoming fully automatable was forecast to reach 10% by 2037, and 50% as late as 2116
(compared to 2164 in the 2022 survey).
Most respondents expressed substantial uncertainty about the long-term value of AI progress: While
68.3% thought good outcomes from superhuman AI are more likely than bad, of these net optimists
48% gave at least a 5% chance of extremely bad outcomes such as human extinction, and 59% of net
pessimists gave 5% or more to extremely good outcomes. Between 37.8% and 51.4% of respondents
gave at least a 10% chance to advanced AI leading to outcomes as bad as human extinction. More
than half suggested that “substantial” or “extreme” concern is warranted about six different AI-related
scenarios, including spread of false information, authoritarian population control, and worsened
inequality. There was disagreement about whether faster or slower AI progress would be better for the
future of humanity. However, there was broad agreement that research aimed at minimizing potential
risks from AI systems ought to be prioritized more.
∗Corresponding author
†Equal Contribution
‡Shared senior authorship
arXiv:2401.02843v3  [cs.CY]  8 Oct 2025

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
1
Introduction
Artificial intelligence appears poised to reshape society. Decision-makers are working to address opportunities and
threats due to AI in the private sector [OpenAI, 2023], academia [Center for Human-compatible Artificial Intelligence,
2023], and government at the state, national, and international levels [Newsom, 2023, AI.gov, 2023, Inter-Agency
Working Group on Artificial Intelligence, 2022].
Navigating this situation requires judgments about how the progress and impact of AI are likely to unfold. However,
there is a lack of apparent consensus among AI experts on the future of AI [Korzekwa and Stewart, 2023]. These
judgments are difficult, and there are no established methods of making them well. Thus we must combine various
noisy methods, such as extrapolating progress trends [Villalobos, 2023]; reasoning about reference classes of similar
events [Grace et al., 2021]; analyzing the nature of agents [Omohundro, 2008]; probing qualities of current AI systems
and techniques [Park et al., 2023]; applying economic models to AI scenarios [Jones, 2023, Trammell and Korinek,
2023]; and relying on forecasting aggregation systems such as markets, professional forecasters, and the judgments of
various subject matter experts.
One important source of evidence comes from the predictions of AI researchers. Their familiarity with the technology
and the dynamics of its past progress puts them in a good position to make educated guesses about the future of
AI. However, they are experts in AI research, not AI forecasting and might thus lack generic forecasting skills and
experience, or expertise in non-technical factors that influence the trajectory of AI. While AI experts’ predictions should
not be seen as a reliable guide to objective truth, they can provide one important piece of the puzzle.
We conducted a survey of 2,778 AI researchers who had published peer-reviewed research in the prior year in six top
AI venues (NeurIPS, ICML, ICLR, AAAI, IJCAI, JMLR). This to our knowledge constitutes the largest survey of AI
researchers to date. The survey took place in the fall of 2023, after an eventful year of broad progress (including the
launch of ChatGPT and GPT-4, Google’s Bard, Bing AI Chat, Anthropic’s Claude 1 and 2), shift in public awareness
of AI issues (including two widely signed and publicized AI safety letters [Future of Life Institute, 2023, Center for
AI Safety, 2023]), and governments beginning to address questions of AI regulation in the US, UK, and EU [Biden,
2023, Amodei, 2023, gov.uk, 2023, European Parliament, 2023]. The survey included questions about the speed and
dynamics of AI progress, and the social consequences of more advanced AI.
2
The Survey
This survey, the “2023 Expert Survey on Progress in AI,” or ESPAI, is the third in a series of very similar surveys. The
first two were conducted in 2016 [Grace et al., 2018a] and 2022 [Grace et al., 2022]. The 2023 survey included around
four times as many participants as the 2022 survey by expanding from two publication venues (NeurIPS and ICML) to
six. It also includes several new questions to probe the nature of future AI systems and diverse potential risks. The
survey complements a collection of recent work gathering views on similar questions from the public [Stein-Perlman,
2023] and corporate leadership [Chui et al., 2023]. The full set of questions is available from AI Impacts [2023a].
Most questions solicited responses in one of three ways: on a Likert scale (multiple choice along a single axis); a
probability estimate; or an estimate of a future year. A smaller number of questions asked for write-in responses or
numerical estimates.
The way a question is framed can greatly influence the response, and this seems more likely for complex questions
[Tversky and Kahneman, 1981]. To assess and mitigate framing effects, we often posed different variations of questions
on the same topic to different random subsets of respondents. For example, all questions about how soon a milestone
would be reached were framed in two ways: fixed-years and fixed-probabilities. Half of respondents were asked to
estimate the probability that a milestone would be reached by a given year (“fixed-years framing”), while the other half
were asked to estimate the year by which the milestone would be feasible with a given probability (“fixed-probabilities
framing”). To minimize confusion, each participant received one framing throughout the survey.
In several parts of the survey, each participant randomly received questions on only one of several topics, to keep
the survey brief. We allocated these questions to differently sized subsets of participants based on factors like the
importance of the question and the relative value of a larger sample size. This means that most questions were not
assigned to all 2,778 participants (see Section 6: Methods).
Several questions asked participants to estimate how many years until a milestone will be feasible. In these questions,
we asked participants to provide three year-probability pairs (either via the fixed-years framing or fixed-probabilities
framing described above), which we used to approximate a probability distribution for that participant by fitting a
gamma cumulative distribution function to these points.
2

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
2023
2063
2103
2143
2183
2223
Equations governing virtual worlds
Truck Driver
Replicate ML paper
Install wiring in a house
ML paper
Publishable math theorems
High Level Machine Intelligence (all human tasks)
Millennium Prize
Surgeon
AI Researcher
Full Automation of Labor (all human jobs)
Year
Milestones
Task
Job
HLMI/FAOL
Simple Python code given spec and examples
Good high school history essay
Angry Birds (superhuman)
Answer factoid questions with web
World Series of Poker
Read text aloud
Transcribe speech
Answer open−ended fact questions with web
Translate text (vs. fluent amateur)
Group new objects into classes
Fake new song by specific artist
Answers undecided questions well
Top Starcraft play via video of screen
Build payment processing website
Telephone banking services
Translate speech using subtitles
Atari games after 20m play (50% vs. novice)
Finetune LLM
Construct video from new angle
Top 40 Pop Song
Recognize object seen once
All Atari games (vs. pro game tester)
Learn to sort long lists
Fold laundry
Random new computer game (novice level)
NYT best−selling fiction
Translate text in newfound language
Explain AI actions in games
Assemble LEGO given instructions
Win Putnam Math Competition
5km city race as bipedal robot (superhuman)
Beat humans at Go (after same # games)
Find and patch security flaw
Retail Salesperson
2023
2028
2033
2038
2043
Year
Figure 1: Most milestones are predicted to have better than even odds of happening within the next ten years,
though with a wide range of plausible dates. The figure shows aggregate distributions over when selected milestones
are expected, including 39 tasks, four occupations, and two measures of general human-level performance (see
Section 3.2), shown as solid circles, open circles, and solid squares respectively. Circles/squares represent the year
where the aggregate distribution gives a milestone a 50% chance of being met, and intervals represent the range of
years between 25% and 75% probability. Note that these intervals represent an aggregate of uncertainty expressed by
participants, not estimation uncertainty. The displayed milestone descriptions are summaries; for full descriptions, see
Appendix C.
3

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
3
Results on AI Progress
3.1
How soon will 39 tasks be feasible for AI?
The survey asked about when each of 39 tasks would become feasible, where “feasible” was described as meaning “one
of the best resourced labs could implement it in less than a year if they chose to. Ignore the question of whether they
would choose to.” Each respondent was asked about four tasks, so that each task received around 250 estimates. Each
respondent gave three probability-year pairs per task.
To aggregate the responses, we first fit a gamma distribution to each participant’s three probability-year pairs, and then
computed the mean across the participants’ individual gamma distributions.
All but four of the 39 tasks were predicted to have at least a 50% chance of being feasible within the next ten years
(Figure 1). This includes several economically very valuable tasks—such as coding an entire payment processing site
from scratch and writing new songs indistinguishable from real ones by hit artists such as Taylor Swift. It also includes
tasks that imply substantial progress in sample-efficiency (e.g. ‘Beat novices in 50% of Atari games after 20 minutes of
play’), AI-driven AI progress (e.g. autonomously fine-tuning an open-source LLM), and robotics (e.g. folding laundry).
The six tasks expected to take longer than ten years were: “After spending time in a virtual world, output the differential
equations governing that world in symbolic form” (12 years), “Physically install the electrical wiring in a new home”
(17 years), “Research and write” (19 years) or “Replicate” (12 years) “a high-quality ML paper,” “Prove mathematical
theorems that are publishable in top mathematics journals today” (22 years), and solving “long-standing unsolved
problems in mathematics” such as a Millennium Prize problem (27 years).
3.1.1
Comparison with 2022
32 AI task questions were identical to those in the 2022 survey, as well as the 2016 survey [Grace et al., 2018a], with
the exception of minor edits to task descriptions for updated accuracy between 2016 and 2022 [AI Impacts, 2023b].
All tasks from Grace et al. [2018a] were included, regardless of whether the authors would judge them to be achieved.
The survey population included more conferences in 2023, but this did not appear to have a notable effect on opinion
(See 5.2.3). Figure 2 shows how expected dates for reaching these milestones shifted from 2022 to 2023.
Between 2022 and 2023, aggregate predictions for 21 out of 32 tasks moved earlier. The aggregate predictions for 11
tasks moved later.
On average, for the 32 tasks included in both the 2022 and 2023 surveys, the 50th percentile year they were expected to
become feasible shifted 1.0 years earlier (SD = 2.0, SE = 0.18).
3.2
How soon will human-level performance on all tasks or occupations be feasible?
We asked how soon participants expected AI systems to outperform humans across all activities, which we framed in
two ways: as either tasks, in the question about “High-Level Machine Intelligence” (HLMI), or occupations, in the
question about “Full Automation of Labor” (FAOL).
3.2.1
How soon will ‘High-Level Machine Intelligence’ be feasible?
We defined High-Level Machine Intelligence (HLMI) thus:
High-level machine intelligence (HLMI) is achieved when unaided machines can accomplish every
task better and more cheaply than human workers. Ignore aspects of tasks for which being a human
is intrinsically advantageous, e.g. being accepted as a jury member. Think feasibility, not adoption.
We asked for predictions, assuming “human scientific activity continues without major negative disruption.” We
aggregated the results (n=1,714) by fitting gamma distributions, as with individual task predictions in 3.1.
In both 2022 and 2023, respondents gave a wide range of predictions for how soon HLMI will be feasible (Figure 3).
The aggregate 2023 forecast predicted a 50% chance of HLMI by 2047, down thirteen years from 2060 in the 2022
survey. For comparison, in the six years between the 2016 and 2022 surveys, the expected date moved only one year
earlier, from 2061 to 20601.
The aggregate 2023 forecast predicted a 10% chance of HLMI by 2027, down two years from 2029 in the 2022 survey.
See Appendix B for a table comparing this with Full Automation of Labor, which is discussed below.
1Reported as 2059 in 2022; small code changes and improvements to data cleaning between surveys shifted the aggregate slightly.
4

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Figure 2: Expected feasibility of many AI milestones moved substantially earlier in the course of one year
(between 2022 and 2023). The milestones are sorted (within each scale-adjusted chart) by size of drop from 2022
forecast to 2023 forecast, with the largest change first. The year when the aggregate distribution gives a milestone a
50% chance of being met is represented by solid circles, open circles, and solid squares for tasks, occupations, and
general human-level performance respectively. The three groups of questions have different formats that may also
influence answers. For full descriptions of the summarized milestones, see Appendix C.
5

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
2025
2050
2075
2100
Year
Probability of HLMI
2023 Aggregate Forecast (with 95% Confidence Interval)
2022 Aggregate Forecast (with 95% Confidence Interval)
Random Subset of 2023 Forecasts
Random Subset of 2022 Forecasts
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
2050
2100
2150
2200
Year
Probability of FAOL
2023 Aggregate Forecast (with 95% Confidence Interval)
2022 Aggregate Forecast (with 95% Confidence Interval)
Random Subset of 2023 Forecasts
Random Subset of 2022 Forecasts
Figure 3: Aggregate forecast for 50th percentile arrival time of High-Level Machine intelligence (HLMI) dropped
by 13 years between 2022 and 2023. The forecast for 50th percentile arrival time of Full Automation of Labor
(FAOL) dropped by 48 years in the same period. However, there is still a lot of uncertainty. “Aggregate Forecast”
is the mean distribution over all individual cumulative distribution functions. For comparison, we included the 2022
Aggregate Forecast. To give a sense of the range of responses, we included random subsets of individual 2023 and 2022
forecasts. Note that the thinner ‘confidence interval‘ in 2023 (compared to 2022) is due to our increased confidence
about the average respondents’ views due to a larger sample size, not respondents’ predictions converging.
6

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
3.2.2
How soon will ‘Full Automation of Labor’ be feasible?
The other framing of the question about how soon AI systems would outperform humans across all activities was about
“Full Automation of Labor,” or FAOL. We defined FAOL thus:
Say an occupation becomes fully automatable when unaided machines can accomplish it better
and more cheaply than human workers. Ignore aspects of occupations for which being a human is
intrinsically advantageous, e.g. being accepted as a jury member. Think feasibility, not adoption.
[. . . ]
Say we have reached ‘full automation of labor’ when all occupations are fully automatable. That is,
when for any occupation, machines could be built to carry out the task better and more cheaply than
human workers.
Before the participants (n=774) were asked about the full automation of labor, respondents were asked when four specific
occupations would become fully automatable: “Truck driver,” “Surgeon,” “Retail salesperson,” and “AI researcher”
(Figure 1). They were also asked to think of an existing human occupation that they thought would be among the final
ones to be fully automatable. They were then asked when ‘full automation of labor’ (FAOL) would be achieved.
The aggregate 2023 forecast predicted a 50% chance of FAOL by 2116, down 48 years from 2164 in the 2022 survey
(Figure 3). We checked if this difference was significant for participants who received the question in the fixed-
probabilities framing, and found that it was (p = .0052, Yuen’s test (bootstrap version); see Appendix F). There is about
a 70-year difference between the mean 50% prediction for HLMI and the mean 50% prediction for FAOL. We discuss
this surprising finding in the next section, “Framing effect of HLMI vs FAOL.”
Compared to 2016, 2023 has earlier 50% estimates but later 10% estimates. (See Appendix B)
The answers to the write-in question about an existing occupation likely to be among the last automatable were
categorized according to O*NET’s All Job Family Occupations categories [O*NET, 2023]. The top five most-
suggested categories were: “Computer and Mathematical” (91 write-in answers in this category), “Life, Physical, and
Social Science” (77 answers), “Healthcare Practitioners and Technical” (56), “Management” (49), and “Arts, Design,
Entertainment, Sports, and Media” (39).
The answers to the write-in question about an existing occupation likely to be among the last automatable were
categorized according to O*NET’s categories [O*NET, 2023]. The top five most-suggested categories were: “Computer
and Mathematical” (91 write-in answers in this category), “Life, Physical, and Social Science” (77 answers), “Healthcare
Practitioners and Technical” (56), “Management” (49), and “Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media” (39).
3.2.3
Differences between HLMI and FAOL
Predictions for a 50% chance of the arrival of FAOL are consistently more than sixty years later than those for a 50%
chance of the arrival of HLMI. This was seen in the results from the surveys of 2023, 2022, and 2016. This is surprising
because HLMI and FAOL are quite similar: FAOL asks about the automation of all occupations; HLMI asks about the
feasible automation of all tasks. Since occupations might naturally be understood either as complex tasks, composed of
tasks, or closely connected with one of these, achieving HLMI seems to either imply having already achieved FAOL, or
suggest being close.
We do not know what accounts for this gap in forecasts. Insofar as HLMI and FAOL refer to the same event, the
difference in predictions about the time of their arrival would seem to be a framing effect.
However, the relationship between “tasks” and “occupations” is debatable. And the question sets do differ beyond
definitions: only the HLMI questions are preceded by the instruction to “assume that human scientific activity continues
without major negative disruption,” and the FAOL block asks a sequence of questions about the automation of specific
occupations before asking about full automation of labor. So conceivably this wide difference could be caused by
respondents expecting major disruption to scientific progress, or by the act of thinking through specific examples
shifting overall anticipations. From our experience with question testing, it also seems possible that the difference is
due to other differences in interpretation of the questions, such as thinking of automating occupations but not tasks as
including physical manipulation, or interpreting FAOL to require adoption of AI in automating occupations, not mere
feasibility (contrary to the question wording).
7

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
3.2.4
Demographic differences
Geographical background was correlated with expectations about the timing of human-level performance: respondents
whose undergraduate education was in Asia anticipated an 11 year earlier arrival of HLMI than participants from
Europe, North America, or other regions combined. See Appendix A for more demographic comparisons.
3.2.5
Do participants think they agree on timing of HLMI?
We asked respondents a set of “meta” questions about their views on others’ views (n=671). One meta question asked
to what extent they thought that they disagreed with the typical AI researcher about when HLMI would exist. 44% said
“Not much,” 46% said “A moderate amount,” and 10% said “A lot.”
3.3
Framing effect of fixed-years vs fixed-probabilities
All questions about how soon a milestone would be reached were framed in two ways: fixed-years and fixed-probabilities.
In either framing, we ask for three year-probability pairs, but in one we fix a set of probabilities (10%, 50%, 90%) and
ask how many years until the participant would assign each probability to the milestone being met, whereas in the other
framing we fix a set of future years (usually 10 years, 20 years, 50 years) and ask about the probability of the milestone
occurring by that year.
The fixed-years framing has been previously observed to produce systematically later predictions [Grace et al., 2018a,
2022], but we do not know if one framing is more accurate than the other. Here we have used both and combined them
with equal weight.
The previously-observed framing effect was again observed in this survey. For example, the year with a 50% chance
of HLMI from participants answering in the fixed-year frame (34 years) was twice as far into the future as that for
participants answering in the fixed-probability frame (17 years). However, it’s notable that even the larger of these two
is shorter than 2022’s combined forecast (37 years), demonstrating a substantial shift of predictions closer to the present
(Fig 18 in Appendix B).
Speed of progress in AI in first and second half of career
First half faster
About the same
Second half faster
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
2016
2022
2023
Figure 4: Most respondents indicated that the pace of progress in their area of AI increased between the first
and second half of their time in a field. Participants were asked whether the second half of the time they had spent
working in their area of AI saw more progress than the first half. The median time working in the area was 5 years.
3.4
Change in observed rates of progress
We asked respondents which AI area they had worked in for the longest and whether progress in the second half was
faster than the first (Figure 4).
8

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
3.5
What causes AI progress?
We asked about the sensitivity of progress in AI capabilities to changes in five inputs: 1) researcher effort, 2) decline
in cost of computation, 3) effort put into increasing the size and availability of training datasets, 4) funding, and 5)
progress in AI algorithms. We asked respondents to imagine that only half as much of each input had been available
over the past decade,2 and the effect they would expect this to have had on the rate of AI progress. The results are
shown in Figure 5.
0
25
50
75
100
Researcher
effort
Falling cost 
of computing
Effort into 
increasing 
size and 
availability
of training sets
Funding
Progress in 
AI algorithms
% Less progress in AI
Figure 5: Estimated reduction in AI progress if inputs had been halved over the past decade. Red dots represent
means. Boxes contain the 25th to 75th percentile range; middle lines are medians. Whiskers are the least and greatest
values that are not more than 1.5 times the interquartile range from the median. Participants estimated that halving
the drop in costs of computing would have had the greatest effect on AI progress over the last decade, while halving
‘researcher effort’ and ‘progress in AI algorithms’ would have had the least effect. Overall, all the included inputs were
seen as having contributed substantially to AI progress.
There was a wide range of views about each input, implying a large degree of uncertainty. Additionally, the relatively
even distribution of predictions cuts against a common narrative that progress in cheap computing is the dominant
driver of AI progress. Across all inputs, we observe many more answers of “0%” (no difference) and “100%” (all AI
progress lost) than we would expect, which suggests to us possible misunderstandings of the question.
3.6
Will there be an intelligence explosion?
We asked respondents about the possibility, after HLMI is hypothetically achieved, of an ‘intelligence explosion,’ as
explained in this question:
Some people have argued the following:
If AI systems do nearly all research and development, improvements in AI will accelerate
the pace of technological progress, including further progress in AI.
Over a short period (less than 5 years), this feedback loop could cause technological
progress to become more than an order of magnitude faster.
How likely do you find this argument to be broadly correct?
The results to this first question are shown in Figure 6.
2The declining cost of computation was an exception; here it was framed as “over the last n years,” and the question was about
costs falling around half as far on a log scale. This was done to match previous surveys.
9

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Likelihood of argument being broadly correct
Quite likely (0-20%)
Likely (21-40%)
About even chance 
(41-60%)
Unlikely (61-80%)
Quite unlikely (81-
100%)
0%
10%
20%
30%
2016
2022
2023
Figure 6: Since 2016 a majority of respondents have thought that it’s either “quite likely,” “likely,” or an “about
even chance” that technological progress becomes more than an order of magnitude faster within 5 years of
HLMI being achieved.
Median probability (N)
2016
2022
2023
Explosive progress 2 years after HLMI
20% (225)
20% (339)
20% (298)
Explosive progress 30 years after HLMI
80% (225)
80% (339)
80% (297)
Intelligence explosion argument is broadly correct
“41-60%” (232)
“41-60%” (386)
“41-60%” (299)
AI is vastly better than humans 2 years after HLMI
10% (213)
10% (371)
10% (281)
AI is vastly better than humans 30 years after HLMI
50% (214)
60% (371)
60% (282)
Table 1: Results of three questions regarding a hypothetical intelligence explosion have remained remarkably
stable since 2016.
The other two ‘intelligence explosion’ questions were about the likelihood of a dramatically increased rate of global
technological advancement 2 and 30 years post-HLMI, and AI that can outperform humans across all professions 2 and
20 years post-HLMI. Results are shown in Table 1.
In sum, across these three questions, the median participant did not overall expect something like a rapid acceleration of
progress from an ‘intelligence explosion,’ but did give substantial credence to it.
Further figures related to intelligence explosion questions are in Appendix B.
3.7
What will AI systems in 2043 be like?
Concerns about risks from future AI systems are often linked to specific traits related to alignment, trustworthiness,
predictability, self-directedness, capabilities, and jailbreakability. We asked respondents how likely it was that at least
some state-of-the-art AI systems in 2043 would have each of eleven such traits (n ∈[649, 667]3).
All 11 traits were considered to have a relatively high chance of existing in AI systems in 2043, though with much
uncertainty. Only one trait had a median answer below ‘even chance’: “Take actions to attain power.” While there was
no consensus even on this trait, it’s notable that it was deemed least likely, because it is arguably the most sinister, being
key to an argument for extinction-level danger from AI [Carlsmith, 2022].
3i.e. the number of people (n) who answered each of these eleven questions was between 649 and 667
10

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Figure 7: Respondents’ estimates of the likelihood that at least some AI systems in 2043 will have each of these
traits; organized from least to most likely.
Answers reflected substantial uncertainty and disagreement among participants. No trait attracted near-unanimity on any
probability, and no more than 55% of respondents answered “very likely” or “very unlikely” about any trait. (Figure 7)
There were areas of agreement, however. For instance, a large majority of participants thought state-of-the-art AI
systems in twenty years would be likely or very likely to:
1. Find unexpected ways to achieve goals (82.3% of respondents),
2. Be able to talk like a human expert on most topics (81.4% of respondents), and
3. Frequently behave in ways that are surprising to humans (69.1% of respondents)
3.8
Will AI in 2028 truthfully and intelligibly explain its decisions?
Likelihood of explainability by 2028
Very unlikely 
(<10%)
Unlikely (10-40%)
Even odds (40-
60%)
Likely (60-90%)
Very likely (>90%)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Figure 8: Most respondents considered it unlikely that users of AI systems in 2028 will be able to know the true
reasons for the AI systems’ choices, with only 20% giving it better than even odds. (n=912)
11

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Uninterpretable reasoning in AI systems is often considered an AI risk factor, potentially leading to outcomes ranging
from unjust biases in treatment of people to active pursuit of harm hidden by capable agents. We thus asked about the
interpretability of AI systems in five years (Figure 8):
For typical state-of-the-art AI systems in 2028, do you think it will be possible for users to know the
true reasons for systems making a particular choice? By “true reasons” we mean the AI correctly
explains its internal decision-making process in a way humans can understand. By “true reasons” we
do not mean the decision itself is correct.
This is related to the question in Section 3.7, which asked how likely it was that at least some state-of-the-art AI systems
in 2043 (fifteen years later), “can be trusted to accurately explain their actions.” The median answer there was “even
chance” (40-60% likely), compared to “unlikely” (10-40%) on this question.
4
Results on Social Impacts of AI
4.1
How concerning are 11 future AI-related scenarios?
We asked participants (n=1,345) about eleven potentially concerning AI scenarios, such as AI-enabled misinformation,
worsened economic inequality, and biased AI systems worsening injustice. We asked how much concern each deserved
in the next thirty years (Figure 9).
Each scenario was considered worthy of either substantial or extreme concern by more than 30% of respondents. As
measured by the percentage of respondents who thought a scenario constituted either a “substantial” or “extreme”
concern, the scenarios worthy of most concern were: spread of false information e.g. deepfakes (86%), manipulation of
large-scale public opinion trends (79%), AI letting dangerous groups make powerful tools (e.g. engineered viruses)
(73%), authoritarian rulers using AI to control their populations (73%), and AI systems worsening economic inequality
by disproportionately benefiting certain individuals (71%).
There is some ambiguity about the reason why a scenario might be considered concerning: it might be considered
especially disastrous, or especially likely, or both. From our results, there’s no way to disambiguate these considerations.
4.2
How good or bad for humans will High-Level Machine Intelligence be?
We asked participants to assume that, at some point, “high-level machine intelligence” (HLMI) will exist, as defined
in Section 3.2. Given this assumption for the sake of the question, we asked how good or bad they expect the overall
impact of this to be “in the long run” for humanity.
Respondents exhibited diverse views on the future impact of advanced AI (Figure 10), highlighting how respondents’
views are more complex than can be represented by an ‘optimism vs pessimism‘ axis. Many people who have high
probabilities of bad outcomes also have high probabilities of good outcomes. A majority spread their credence across
the entire spectrum of outcomes, with 64% assigning non-zero probabilities to both extremely good and extremely
bad scenarios. 68.3% of participants found good outcomes more likely than bad outcomes, while 57.8% considered
extremely bad outcomes (e.g. human extinction) a nontrivial possibility (≥5% likely). Even among net optimists,
nearly half (48.4%) gave at least 5% credence to extremely bad outcomes, and among net pessimists, more than half
(58.6%) gave at least 5% to extremely good outcomes. The broad variance in credence in catastrophic scenarios shows
there isn’t strong evidence understood by all experts that this kind of outcome is certain or implausible.
The median prediction for extremely bad outcomes, such as human extinction, was 5% (mean 9%). Over a third of
participants (38%) put at least a 10% chance on extremely bad outcomes. This is comparable to, but somewhat lower
than, rates of assigning at least 10% to extinction-level outcomes in answers to other questions more directly about
extinction, between 41% and 51% (see Section 4.3). On the very pessimistic end, one in ten participants put at least a
25% chance on outcomes in the range of human extinction).
Since 2022, mean overall probability on extreme outcomes (good or bad) has fallen slightly (Figure 11). The proportion
of people who put at least a 10% chance on extremely bad outcomes (e.g. human extinction) has fallen from 48% in
2022 in 2023, and the mean prediction for this type of outcome is down from 14% to 9.0%.
Appendix A contains comparisons between results from different demographics on this question, and Appendix B
contains another relevant figure.
12

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Figure 9: Amount of concern potential scenarios deserve, organized from most to least extreme concern.
0
25
50
75
100
Probability
Extremely good
(e.g. rapid growth in
human flourishing)
On balance good
More or less neutral
On balance bad
Extremely bad
(e.g. human extinction)
Figure 10: Respondents exhibited diverse views on the expected goodness/badness of High Level Machine
Intelligence (HLMI). We asked participants to assume, for the sake of the question, that HLMI will be built at some
point. The figure shows a random selection of 800 responses on the positivity or negativity of long-run impacts of
HLMI on humanity. Each vertical bar represents one participant and the bars are sorted left to right by a weighted sum
of probabilities corresponding to overall optimism. Responses range from extremely optimistic to extremely pessimistic.
Over a third of participants (38%) put at least a 10% chance on extremely bad outcomes (e.g. human extinction).
13

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
probability given by respondents (means)
Overall impact of HLMI in the long run
extremely good (e.g. rapid 
growth in human 
on balance good
neutral
on balance bad
extremely bad (e.g. human 
extinction)
0%
10%
20%
30%
probability given by respondents (medians)
Overall impact of HLMI in the long run
extremely good (e.g. rapid 
growth in human 
on balance good
neutral
on balance bad
extremely bad (e.g. human 
extinction)
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
2022
2023
Figure 11: Mean but not median predictions in 2023 (n=2704) about the consequences of HLMI have shifted
slightly away from extreme outcomes compared to 2022 (n=559). Error bars indicate the standard error.
Question 1: What probability do you put on future AI advances 
causing human extinction or similarly permanent and severe 
disempowerment of the human species?
Question 2: What probability do you put on human inability to 
control future advanced AI systems causing human extinction or 
similarly permanent and severe disempowerment of the human 
Question 3: What probability do you put on future AI advances 
causing human extinction or similarly permanent and severe 
disempowerment of the human species within the next 100 years?
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
2022 (mean)
2022 (median)
2023 (mean)
2023 (median)
Figure 12: Mean and median predictions to three questions on human extinction. Error bars indicate the
standard error. (Question 1 n=149 in 2022 and 1321 in 2023. Question 2 n=162 in 2022 and 661 in 2023. Question 3
was asked only in 2023, n=655).
4.3
How likely is AI to cause human extinction?
To further clarify views on the “extremely bad (e.g. human extinction)” scenarios in the question on overall impacts,
participants were given one of three similar questions about human extinction. Their differences were intended to help
isolate exactly how concerning different scenarios are, what respondents expect to happen, and how much difference
working makes.
Answers to these questions were mostly consistent, with medians of 5% or 10%. These are also close to answers to
the question on general value of long-run impact,5, which might suggest the bulk of the “extremely bad (e.g. human
extinction)” answers to that question is from human extinction or similarly permanent and severe disempowerment of
the human species, as opposed to other outcomes that respondents to that question may have had in mind but that would
have been less severe.
Depending on how we asked, between 41.2% and 51.4% of respondents estimated a greater than 10% chance of human
extinction or severe disempowerment (see Figure 13). This is comparable to, but somewhat higher than, the proportion
of respondents—38%—who assigned at least 10% to “extremely bad” outcomes “(e.g. human extinction)” in the
question asking “How good or bad for humans will High-Level Machine Intelligence be?” (See Section 4.2)
4Bold font was not present in the original questions; it has been added here to emphasize the differences between wordings. Any
individual respondent did not see more than one of these questions.
5“Assume for the purpose of this question that HLMI will at some point exist. How positive or negative do you expect the overall
impact of this to be on humanity, in the long run? Please answer by saying how probable you find the following kinds of impact,
with probabilities adding to 100%”
14

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Statistics
2022 Result
2023 Result
What probability do you put on future AI ad-
vances causing human extinction or similarly
permanent and severe disempowerment of the
human species?
N; Mean (SD);
Median (IQR)
149; 15.7% (22.1%);
5% (19%)
1321; 16.2% (23%);
5% (19%)
What probability do you put on human in-
ability to control future advanced AI sys-
tems causing human extinction or similarly
permanent and severe disempowerment of the
human species?
N; Mean (SD);
Median (IQR)
162; 20.5% (26.2%);
10% (29%)
661;
19.4% (26%);
10% (29%)
What probability do you put on future AI ad-
vances causing human extinction or similarly
permanent and severe disempowerment of the
human species within the next 100 years?4
N; Mean (SD);
Median (IQR)
Not asked
655; 14.4% (22.2%);
5% (19.9%)
Table 2: Respondents’ estimates in 2022 and 2023 for the probability that AI causes human extinction. For each
of the two questions that were asked in both years, the results are very similar.
Participants who gave a probability of 10% or higher
Extremely bad overall impact of HLMI in the long run (e.g. human 
extinction)
Question 1: What probability do you put on future AI advances 
causing human extinction or similarly permanent and severe 
disempowerment of the human species?
Question 2: What probability do you put on human inability to control 
future advanced AI systems causing human extinction or similarly 
permanent and severe disempowerment of the human species?
Question 3: What probability do you put on future AI advances 
causing human extinction or similarly permanent and severe 
disempowerment of the human species within the next 100 years?
0%
20%
40%
60%
Figure 13: Percent of participants who gave a probability of 10% or higher to an extremely bad outcome of
HLMI (e.g. human extinction) (see Section 4.2) or to the three questions specifically about human extinction or
disempowerment.
15

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Answer
Portion of respondents
Much slower
4.8%
Somewhat slower
29.9%
Current speed
26.9%
Somewhat faster
22.8%
Much faster
15.6%
Table 3: There was disagreement about whether faster or slower global AI progress over the next five years would
be best for humanity’s future.
Appendix A contains comparisons between results from different demographics on this question.
4.4
Views on others’ concerns about AI
Respondents were asked a set of “meta” questions about their views on others’ views (n=671). One question was, “To
what extent do you think people’s concerns about future risks from AI are due to misunderstandings of AI research?”
10.7% said "Almost entirely.” 44% said “To a large extent.” 29.1% said “Somewhat.” 14.6% said “Not much.” 1.6%
said “Hardly at all.” This may reflect a view amongst AI researchers that the general public misunderstands AI.
4.5
What rate of AI progress would produce the most optimism?
We asked participants “What rate of global AI progress over the next five years would make you feel most optimistic for
humanity’s future? Assume any change in speed affects all projects equally.” There was disagreement on whether faster
or slower progress would be preferable, though large divergence from the current speed was less popular (Table 3).
4.6
How much should AI safety research be prioritized?
We asked some respondents one version of a question about AI research prioritization that matched previous surveys,
and we asked other respondents a near-identical question that had been slightly updated. In the old version of the
question, we defined AI safety research as follows:
Let ‘AI safety research’ include any AI-related research that, rather than being primarily aimed
at improving the capabilities of AI systems, is instead primarily aimed at minimizing potential
risks of AI systems (beyond what is already accomplished for those goals by increasing AI system
capabilities).
Examples of AI safety research might include:
• Improving the human-interpretability of machine learning algorithms for the purpose of improv-
ing the safety and robustness of AI systems, not focused on improving AI capabilities
• Research on long-term existential risks from AI systems
• AI-specific formal verification research
• Policy research about how to maximize the public benefits of AI
The updated question is identical except for the inclusion of this example:
• Developing methodologies to identify, measure, and mitigate biases in AI models to ensure fair
and ethical decision-making
In both variations, we asked, “How much should society prioritize AI safety research, relative to how much it
is currently prioritized?” A Welch t-test found that the difference between the two framings was not significant
(t(1327) = −0.58, p = 0.564, d = −0.03), so the results were combined (n=1329). A large majority of respondents
thought that AI safety research should be prioritized more than it currently is. The percentage of researchers who
thought so increased compared to earlier surveys, but only slightly since 2022. (Figure 14)
16

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
% of answers
How much AI safety research should be prioritized
Much less
Less
About the same
More
Much more
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
2016
2022
2023
Figure 14: 70% of respondents thought AI safety research should be prioritized more than it currently is.
Developments since the 2022 survey have not substantially changed the proportion of participants who think AI safety
should be prioritized “more” ore “much more”.
4.7
How worthy and hard is the alignment problem?
A second set of AI safety questions was based on Stuart Russell’s formulation of the alignment problem [Russell, 2014].
This set of questions began with a summary of Russell’s argument—which claims that with advanced AI, “you get
exactly what you ask for, not what you want”—then asked:
1. Do you think this argument points at an important problem?
2. How valuable is it to work on this problem today, compared to other problems in AI?
3. How hard do you think this problem is, compared to other problems in AI?
The majority of respondents said that the alignment problem is either a “very important problem” (41%) or “among the
most important problems in the field” (13%), and the majority said the it is “harder” (36%) or “much harder” (21%) than
other problems in AI. However, respondents did not generally think that it is more valuable to work on the alignment
problem today than other problems. (Figure 15)
17

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Not a real problem
Not an important problem
Moderately important 
problem
Very important problem
Among the most 
important problems in the 
field
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Importance
Much less 
valuable
Less 
valuable
As valuable
More 
valuable
Much more 
valuable
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Value of working on today
Much 
easier
Easier
As hard
Harder
Much 
harder
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
2016
2022
2023
Difficulty
Figure 15: Attitudes towards Stuart Russell’s formulation of the alignment problem. Participants viewed the
alignment problem as important and difficult, but not more valuable to work on than other problems.
18

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
5
Discussion
5.1
Summary of results
Participants expressed a wide range of views on almost every question: some of the biggest areas of consensus are on
how wide-open possibilities for the future appear to be. This uncertainty is striking, but several patterns of opinion are
particularly informative.
While the range of views on how long it will take for milestones to be feasible can be broad, this year’s survey saw a
general shift towards earlier expectations. Over the fourteen months since the last survey [Grace et al., 2022], a similar
participant pool expected human-level performance 13 to 48 years sooner on average (depending on how the question
was phrased), and 21 out of 32 shorter term milestones are now expected earlier.
Another striking pattern is widespread assignment of credence to extremely bad outcomes from AI. As in 2022, a
majority of participants considered AI to pose at least a 5% chance of causing human extinction or similarly permanent
and severe disempowerment of the human species, and this result was consistent across four different questions, two
assigned to each participant. Across these same questions, between 38% and 51% placed at least 10% chance on
advanced AI bringing these extinction-level outcomes (see Figure 13).
In general, there were a wide range of views about expected social consequences of advanced AI, and most people put
some weight on both extremely good outcomes and extremely bad outcomes. While the optimistic scenarios reflect AI’s
potential to revolutionize various aspects of work and life, the pessimistic predictions—particularly those involving
extinction-level risks—serve as a stark reminder of the high stakes involved in AI development and deployment.
Concerns were expressed over many topics beyond human extinction: over half of eleven potentially concerning AI
scenarios were deemed either “substantially” or “extremely” concerning by over half of respondents.
5.2
Caveats and limitations
5.2.1
Forecasting is hard, even for experts
Forecasting is difficult in general, and subject-matter experts have been observed to perform poorly [Tetlock, 2005,
Savage et al., 2021]. Our participants’ expertise is in AI, and they do not, to our knowledge, have any unusual skill at
forecasting in general.
There are signs in this research and past surveys that these experts are not accurate forecasters across the range of
questions we ask. For one thing, on many questions different respondents give very different answers, which limits
the number of them who can be close to the truth. Nonetheless, in other contexts, averages from a large set of noisy
predictions can still be relatively accurate [Surowiecki, 2004], so a question remains as to how informative these
aggregate forecasts are.
Another piece of evidence against the accuracy of forecasts is the observation of substantial framing effects (See
Sections 3.2 and 3.3). If seemingly unimportant changes in question framing lead to large changes in responses, this
suggests that even aggregate answers to any particular question are not an accurate guide to the answer. In an extreme
example in a closely related study, Karger et al. [2023] found college graduates gave answers nearly six orders of
magnitude apart when asked in different ways to estimate the size of existential risks from AI: When given example odds
of low-probability events, estimates were much lower. A similar effect might apply at some scale to our participants,
though their expertise and quantitative training might mitigate it. Participants who had thought more in the past about AI
risks seem to give higher numbers, suggesting they are unlikely to give radically lower numbers with further examples
of risks (see Table 4).
Despite these limitations, AI researchers are well-positioned to contribute to the accuracy of our collective guesses
about the future. While unreliable, educated guesses are what we must all rely on, and theirs are informed by expertise
in the relevant field. These forecasts should be part of a broader set of evidence from sources such as trends in computer
hardware, advancements in AI capabilities, economic analyses, and insights from forecasting experts. However, AI
researchers’ familiarity with the relevant technology, and experience with the dynamics of its progress, make them
among the best-positioned to make informative educated guesses.
5.2.2
Participation
The survey was taken by 15% of those we contacted. This appears to be within the typical range for a large expert
survey. Based on an analysis by Hamilton [2003], the median response rate across 199 surveys was 26%, and larger
invitation lists tend to yield lower response rates: surveys sent to over 20,000 people, like ours, are expected to have
19

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
a response rate in the range of 10%. In specialized samples, such as scientists, lower response rates are common
due to sampling challenges, as exemplified by on Assessing Fundamental Attitudes of Life Scientists as a Basis for
Biosecurity Education [2009], which achieved a 15.7% response rate in a survey of life scientists.
As with any survey, our results could be skewed by participation bias, if participants had systematically different
opinions than those who chose not to participate. We sought to minimize this effect by aiming to maximize response
rate, and by limiting cues about the survey content available before opting to take the survey. We looked for evidence of
response bias at the survey level and question level for some questions, and did not find any that would affect the results
to a large extent (see Appendix D for more detail).
5.2.3
Change in sample from 2022
The two past editions of ESPAI have only surveyed researchers at NeurIPS and ICML, whereas this year we also
contacted researchers who published in ICLR, AAAI, IJCAI, and JMLR. This could make comparison between survey
years less meaningful, if the populations have different opinions. However where we checked, the subset of 2023
participants who published in NeurIPS or ICML specifically appeared to have very similar opinions to the full sample.
6
Methods
In October 2023, we distributed a survey of perspectives about the future of AI to people who had recently published at
one of six top-tier AI venues. The questions focused on topics such as the timing of AI progress, the future impact
of AI, and AI safety. The survey and its implementation were approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of
Bonn (248/23-EP). The survey and its analysis were preregistered [Sandkühler et al., 2023].
6.1
Survey questions
Most questions were identical to those asked previously in surveys conducted in 2016 [Grace et al., 2018a] and 2022
[Grace et al., 2022]. For each of two questions, we added a new version with modified phrasing and randomly assigned
participants either the version of the question asked in Grace et al. [2022] or the new version. We also added several
new questions which were not based on questions from Grace et al. [2018a] or Grace et al. [2022]. While designing
new questions, we tested them in a series of interviews with AI researchers and students. The full survey is available on
the AI Impacts Wiki (Link in Appendix E).
As in Grace et al. [2018a] and Grace et al. [2022], most questions were randomly assigned to only a subset of participants,
in order to keep the number of questions for each participant low. The survey was hosted on the Qualtrics survey
platform.
For a full description of the survey’s flow, see the diagram in Figure 16.
6.2
Randomization
Some questions were available in the two types of framing we call the “fixed-years framing” and the “fixed-probabilities
framing.” In the “fixed-probabilities framing,” we asked respondents how many years until they thought each AI task
would be feasible with a small chance (10%), an even chance (50%), and a high chance (90%). In the “fixed-years
framing,” we asked respondents how likely they thought it was that each AI task would be feasible within the next 10
years, 20 years and 50 years (or 40 years6). The questions available in these two framings were
• those asking when narrow AI tasks would become feasible
• that asking when human-level machine intelligence (HLMI) would become feasible.
• those asking when occupations would be automated
Respondents were randomly allocated to either the “fixed-years framing” or the “fixed-probabilities framing” (allocation
ratio: 1:1) and then received all the questions above using the same framing.
6.3
Recruitment
We recruited participants who published in 2022 at any of six top-tier AI venues: the Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), the International Conference
6The HLMI-framing used 40 years instead of 50 years. This was done to keep the survey consistent with the previous surveys,
where this discrepancy was introduced by mistake.
20

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
Figure 16: Individual components of the survey and their randomization. Horizontal divisions represent participants
being randomly split between questions (parenthetical percentages also give the fraction of participants receiving each
question block). There was further randomization (not shown), within some question blocks.
21

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
on Learning Representations (ICLR), The AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), The Journal of Machine
Learning Research (JMLR), and the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI). Compared to the
2022 survey [Grace et al., 2022], which was distributed to a randomly-selected half of the researchers who published
in 2021 at NeurIPS or ICML, the 2023 survey was distributed to more than three times as many recipients, and to
recipients from a wider range of AI specialties.

(2006 pilot surveys) or October 10th, 2023.
6.4
Fielding
Data was collected using an online survey, which was conducted through the Qualtrics survey platform, and delivered

to be offered a reward of $50 reward or an equivalent charitable donation,7 and another 5% to a pilot group to not
be offered a reward. On October 11 2023, invitations to complete the survey were sent to the pilot groups. Because
the paid pilot survey group had substantially higher response rates, we decided to offer the reward to all participants
(including those who had been in the unpaid group). We used the third-party payment service BHN for sending rewards
to the bulk of participants.

on the 13th, the 18th, the 20th, the 22nd and the 23rd and to all other participants on the 17th, the 20th, the 22nd, and the
23rd.

were informed that the results of the survey would be anonymized. For an example of a typical invitation letter, see
Appendix E.

responses were deemed ‘finished’ by Qualtrics. Because participants received randomized subsets of the questions, the
number of responses is far less than 2,778 for most individual questions.
6.5
Data preparation
Edits were made to the raw data before analysis in the hope of preserving its intended meaning. For example, we
observed cases where participants gave non-numerical answers to numerical questions or reported probabilities for
an event having happened that decreased in time. These were deemed to be errors. If a participants’ answers to a
fixed-years or fixed-probability question involved probabilities that decreased in time, these answers were removed.
Additionally, for participants who answered with decreasing probabilities for at least one question, we removed answers
to fixed time questions for which the probabilities summed to 100%. In total, 196 participants gave answers with
decreasing probabilities, and 7 of these users gave answers summing to 100% for fixed time questions.
Some participants gave answers to fixed-probabilities questions which identified a particular year, rather than a number
of years in the future. For example, 2033 instead of 10. To address this, we subtracted 2023 from answers to fixed-years
questions greater than 2000 and less than 3000.
Non-numerical answers to numerical questions were removed, except when an unambiguous interpretation was possible.
For example, “10%” was changed to 10 and “<20” was changed to 20. Some participants entered non-numerical
answers to express the view that a probability would never reach a particular value or would reach it at a point infinitely
far in the future (for example, “infinity” or “never”). In these cases, the number of years was set to 100,000,000. Our
analysis was insensitive to the value of this upper bound.
Data cleaning, analysis, and figure-creation was performed using R statistical software, version 4.3.1, SPSS (Version
29), Google Sheets, and Creately.
7Ultimately participants were also generally offered a further choice of equivalent gift-cards. Some participants were not permitted
by the payment service to receive rewards, and we noted in the invitation that in some countries only charitable donations would be
available.
22

Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of AI
PREPRINT
7
