Stochastic Shortest Path with Energy Constraints in POMDPs
Tom´aˇs Br´azdil
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic

Krishnendu Chatterjee
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria

Martin Chmel´ık
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria

Anchit Gupta
IIT Bombay
Mumbai, India

Petr Novotn´y
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria

Abstract
We consider partially observable Markov decision pro-
cesses (POMDPs) with a set of target states and posi-
tive integer costs associated with every transition. The
traditional optimization objective (stochastic shortest
path) asks to minimize the expected total cost un-
til the target set is reached.
We extend the tradi-
tional framework of POMDPs to model energy con-
sumption, which represents a hard constraint. There
are energy levels that may increase and decrease with
transitions, and the hard constraint requires that the
energy level must remain positive in all steps till the
target is reached. Our contribution is twofold. First,
we present a novel algorithm for solving POMDPs with
energy levels, developing on existing POMDP solvers
and using real-time dynamic programming as its main
method. Our second contribution is related to policy
representation. For larger POMDP instances the poli-
cies computed by existing solvers are too large to be
understandable. We present an automated procedure
based on machine learning techniques that automati-
cally extracts important decisions of a policy and com-
putes its succinct, human readable representation. Fi-
nally, we show experimentally that our algorithm per-
forms well and computes succinct policies on a number
of POMDP instances from the literature that were nat-
urally enhanced with energy levels.
1
Introduction
Motion and task planning for autonomous agents are
one of the classical problems studied in AI and robotics.
One of the main challenges that make the problem dif-
ﬁcult is the presence of uncertainty about the state
of the agent and its environment [33], caused for in-
stance by the agent’s unreliable sensors. To account for
these issues, powerful abstract frameworks for solving
planning problems under uncertainty were developed,
among which the Partially observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs) play a crucial role.
Each POMDP describes a discrete, typically ﬁnite-
state system that exhibits both probabilistic and non-
deterministic behaviour [54, 41]. Probabilities are use-
ful for modelling sensor errors, hardware failures, and
similar events whose rate of occurrence can be estab-
lished empirically, while non-determinism represents
the freedom of the agent’s controller to choose appro-
priate control input. The imperfection of agent’s sen-
sors is represented by observations. In every step the
controller receives an observation but not the current
state itself.
Policies (policies), i.e.
rules for resolv-
ing non-determinism in POMDPs, can be viewed as
blueprints for implementing concrete controllers of the
agent. Hence, given a POMDP modelling an agent and
its environment the usual task is to ﬁnd a policy en-
suring that the behaviour of the system conforms to a
given speciﬁcation or objective.
Various types of objectives in POMDPs have been
studied. Typically it is assumed that there is a reward
(resp. cost) function that assigns rewards (resp. costs)
to transitions of the system. The goal of the agent is
to maximize (resp. minimize) the reward (resp. cost)
over a ﬁnite-horizon [52], or over an inﬁnite horizon [55],
where the sequence of rewards (resp. costs) can be ag-
gregated by considering the discounted reward [42, 53]
or the average reward [43, 21], etc. Particularly relevant
from the planning point of view is the indeﬁnite-horizon
(or stochastic shortest path) objective [8, 5, 17], which
asks to compute a policy that reaches a state from a
given set of target states T and minimizes the expected
total cost till the target set T is reached, i.e., the ex-
pected sum of costs of all transitions traversed before
reaching T. Typically T is such that reaching a state of
T corresponds to the agent completing some assigned
task.
1
arXiv:1602.07565v2  [cs.AI]  11 May 2016

Energy and Soft vs. Hard Constraints
Most au-
tonomous robotic devices operate under certain energy
constraints, i.e. they need a steady supply of some re-
source (in the form of, e.g.
fuel, electricity, etc.)
to
operate correctly. While the stochastic shortest path
(SSP) objective can in principle express speciﬁcations
of the form ”complete the task while minimizing the ex-
pected consumption of some resource,” this approach is
not suitable for modelling of resource-constrained sys-
tems, as the SSP objective only talks about the ex-
pected cost, without giving any guarantees on the cost
of concrete executions of the modelled system, i.e., it is
an example of a soft constraint. In particular, to use
costs in SSP objectives to model resource consumption
we would need to assume that the amount of a resource
consumed by making a transition (represented by the
transition’s cost) is always available. This is not always
realistic. An autonomous robot typically has a battery
of a ﬁnite capacity (or a fuel tank of ﬁnite volume) which
is continually depleted as the robot operates. The to-
tal amount of a resource required to complete the task
can exceed this capacity, prompting the robot to pe-
riodically recharge the battery (or refuel the tank) at
special charging points (petrol stations). When the re-
source is depleted, no action remains available to the
robot, i.e., keeping the energy level positive is a hard
constraint that must hold along every single execution
of the system, no matter the outcomes of stochastic
choices. (The issue of expectation-based vs. execution-
based constraints was already examined in the setting
of perfectly observable MDPs, see [1, 50, 51, 49].)
In this paper we address this issue and extend
POMDPs with energy constraints.
That is, to a
POMDP M with a given objective we assign a positive
integer capacity cap and to each transition of M we
assign an integer update representing the amount of a
resource consumed or reloaded by this transition. Such
a POMDP starts with some initial level of a resource
(say cap, i.e. the resource is loaded to full capacity)
which is then modiﬁed as the system evolves: when-
ever a transition with some update u is traversed, the
resource level changes from ℓto min{ℓ+ u, cap} (dis-
carding any quantity exceeding cap captures the fact
that the robot’s storage capacity cannot be exceeded).
The task is to ﬁnd a policy ensuring the original objec-
tive and at the same time ensuring that the resource
level stays positive till the target is reached.
Our Results on POMDPs with Energy Con-
straints
We study energy-reachability problem for
POMDPs.
In the qualitative version of the problem
we ask to ﬁnd a policy that ensures that the expected
total cost is ﬁnite before reaching the target state and
at the same time keeps the resource level positive. In
the quantitative version we additionally seek for a pol-
icy that, on top of above two conditions, minimizes
the expected total cost till the target is reached. We
show how to solve both these problems by reducing
them to corresponding problems in POMDPs without
energy constraints.
In particular, we show that the
qualitative energy-reachability problem is EXPTIME-
complete, i.e.
it has the same complexity as uncon-
strained qualitative reachability.
We experimentally
evaluate our approach on standard POMDP models of
robot planning.
Representation of Policies
Solving POMDPs with
energy-reachability objectives highlights another rele-
vant issue: the representation the computed policies.
Policies in POMDPs are often represented in a form of
a table [8] or plan graphs [33], which are equivalent to
so called ﬁnite-memory policies used in veriﬁcation [20].
Size of these structures can become very large and not
very readable by humans. For instance, policies ensur-
ing that a target state is reached with probability 1
might require table or plan graph of size exponential in
the size of the POMDP [19].
There are two reasons why size and representation of
policies matter. First, as oﬄine-computed policies have
to be implemented on real-world devices, it is advis-
able to reduce their memory requirements so that they
ﬁt into the device’s memory and do not cause delays
through ineﬃcient memory access. The second issue,
to which we devote a particular attention in this paper,
is the one of human readability. From the engineering
point of view it is vital to be able to visualize the policy
and understand its behaviour. This is reﬂected in nu-
merous informal rules for safety-critical system design
that enforce ”simplicity” and ”readability” [29, 57] as
well as in academic treatments of the subject [35, Chap-
ter 2 on ”Simplicity”]. Although many methods for pol-
icy computation in POMDPs produce results that are
correct by design, the behaviour induced by the com-
puted policy in an actual device might not be reason-
able, due to either using an improper model of the sys-
tem, or too weak speciﬁcation that does not rule out all
undesirable behaviours. In such a case, comprehension
of the computed policy can lead the system designer
to reﬁne the model or speciﬁcation in an appropriate
way. Easily understandable descriptions of policies can
be also interesting for type approval authorities.
Readability of policies is relevant for POMDPs in gen-
eral, but the issue is especially pronounced in energy-
constrained POMDPs, as the standard representation
does not reveal which decisions depend on states and
which depend on current resource level, an information
useful for identifying bottlenecks caused by insuﬃcient
storage capacity or exploiting the fact that policy’s de-
pendency on resource levels might not be complex (e.g.
”when low on fuel, go to a gas station”).
2

Our Results on Policy Representation
We study
succinct representation of policies via decision trees.1 A
decision tree (DT) is an easily visualisable data struc-
ture in which leaves represents actions prescribed by
the policy and branching in internal nodes represents
decisions that the policy makes in order to select a suit-
able action. To obtain a DT-representation from the
corresponding table representation we utilize machine
learning techniques for learning DTs.
There advan-
tage of this approach is that learning algorithms are
often able to exploit the structure of the model, iden-
tify the crucial decisions made by the policy and encode
only these decisions in the DT. This typically results
in much more succinct representation without signiﬁ-
cant loss of the policy’s performance. To support this
claim, we present experimental results on learning DT-
represented policies using several well-known learning
tools. As discussed in the previous paragraph, our ap-
proach can be seen as a generic technique for POMDPs
which is particularly apt for use in the presence of en-
ergy constraints.
2
Related Work
Our model of POMDPs with energy constraints, where
the goal is to optimize the expected total cost while en-
suring constraints on resource consumption, resembles
the standard framework of constrained POMDPs [30,
59, 34] a generic framework for enforcing constraints in
POMDPs which has received considerable attention in
various application domains [61, 31, 60] (see also [1] for
related concepts in the setting of perfectly observable
MPDs).
The crucial diﬀerence between constrained
POMDPs and our energy constraints is that the con-
straints in constrained POMDPs are soft, i.e. they are
bounds on the expectation of some quantity, while we
require that the resource level stays always positive (not
just on average) in all runs (see also a discussion in Sec-
tion 1).
As mentioned earlier, we extend the previous work on
indeﬁnite-horizon objective [8, 5, 17] by adding energy
constraints. Our notion of energy constraints is simi-
lar to the one used in veriﬁcation, in particular to so
called energy games and MDPs [16, 18] and consump-
tion games [11], although none of these concepts was
considered in a partially observable setting so far. DTs
have already been successfully used to represent policies
in veriﬁcation of perfectly observable MDPs modelled in
the well-known PRISM tool [10]. For POMDPs, in [9]
they consider a situation where the POMDP itself is en-
coded succinctly using DTs and similar structures, and
they use this assumption to design a speciﬁc algorithm
1These should not be confused with policy trees that represent
a complete behaviour of a POMDP under a ﬁxed policy [33].
computing a desired policy (which itself is not encoded
as a DT). In contrast, we assume that the model is given
explicitly and use generic machine learning methods to
infer succinct representations of policies.
In [7] they
study relationship of DTs and POMDPs from an in-
verse perspective, POMDPs are used as a tool for learn-
ing decision trees from generic datasets. DTs were also
used to represent policies in a reinforcement-learning
setting [25], where the agent has no a priori model of
the environment.
The need for succinct and eﬃcient representation of
policies motivated the study of ﬁnite-state controllers
(FSCs) in POMDPs [22, 28, 37, 24].
Intuitively, the
approach is based on direct search for a small policy
represented as a ﬁnite (possibly stochastic) transducer
whose transitions are labelled by observations. In every
step, the state of the transducer changes according to
the transition function and latest observation received,
and the controller then outputs an action to be per-
formed based on the current state of the transducer.
While this approach was shown to produce small and
well-performing policies, we argue that our approach,
while having similar goal, is conceptually diﬀerent and
oﬀers an orthogonal set of advantages. The main dif-
ference is that FSCs represent a function whose domain
are histories of actions and observations: each state of
the ﬁnite transducer implicitly carries an information
about the set of histories that lead the transducer to
this state. The transducer thus captures an operational
aspect of a policy, i.e. the way in which it is executed
as a program. On the other hand, DTs represent func-
tions whose domain is the set of beliefs: given a belief,
a single root-leaf traversal of a DT is used to estab-
lish an action to be performed. Thus, DTs capture the
logic of agent’s decision in a concrete time instant; it is
up to the agent to keep an (accurate or approximate)
representation of its belief (which can be done using
standard computations) and thus to take care of the
history-dependent aspect of decision making. The lat-
ter approach more explicitly captures the decision mak-
ing process as a human-like inference of suitable action
from available information, and thus we believe that it
provides better readability. Another advantage of our
approach, which is validated by our experiments, is that
the machine learning techniques we use are able to auto-
matically identify the ”most important” decisions that
amount for the majority of optimization eﬀorts.
Fi-
nally, we show that FSCs can be prone to storing an
unnecessary amount of data about resource levels. We
further explain diﬀerences between the two formalism
on a concrete example at the end of Section 5.
One crucial diﬀerence between previous approaches
to policy succinctness in both POMDP [22] and other
settings [25] is that in previous work they concurrently
optimize both the performance of a policy and its size,
3

which requires dedicated algorithms, while we sepa-
rate these tasks: ﬁrst we search for a well-performing,
though possibly ”ugly” policy, and then learn its suc-
cinct representation (similar approach was used in [23],
where policies computed by point-based methods were
”compiled” into FSCs). Thus, we present a framework
for obtaining succinct representations in which various
state-of-the art algorithms for POMDP solving and DT
learning can be used.
On the POMDP side, this al-
lows us to keep up with advances in solving of large
POMDPs. On the DT side, we can use well-developed
machine learning tools that already oﬀer a selection of
methods for tree pruning and visualization, which is
important for readability.
3
Preliminaries
Notation
We use N0, N, Z to denote the sets of non-
negative, positive, and all integers, respectively.
For
n ∈N we denote by [n] the set {1, . . . , n}.
Let X,
Y be ﬁnite sets. For a function f : X →Y and sets
X′ ⊆X, Y ′ ⊆Y we denote by f(X′) the image of X′
under f, i.e. the set {y ∈Y | ∃x ∈X′ : f(x) = y} and
by f −1(Y ′) the pre-image of Y ′ under f, i.e. the set
{x ∈X | f(x) ∈Y ′}. We denote by D(X) the set of
all probability distributions on X, i.e. of all functions
f : X →[0, 1] s.t.
P
x∈X f(x) = 1.
For f ∈D(X)
we denote by supp(f) the support of f, i.e.
the set
{x ∈X | f(x) > 0}. A probability distribution f is
Dirac if |supp(f)| = 1. An encoding size of an object
O (i.e. the number of bits needed to represent O) is
denoted by ||O||.
POMDPs
A Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP) is a tuple M = (S, A, δ, Z, O, λ)
where: S is a ﬁnite set of states; A is a ﬁnite alphabet
of actions; δ: S ×A →D(S) is a probabilistic transition
function assigning to every state-action pair a probabil-
ity distribution over the successor states (i.e. δ(s, a)(s′)
denotes the probability of making a transition from s
to s′ under action a); Z is a ﬁnite set of observations;
O: S×A →D(Z) is a probabilistic observation function
assigning a probability distribution over observations to
every state-action pair; and λ is an initial probability
distribution over the states of M. We write δ(s′|s, a) as
a shorthand for δ(s, a)(s′).
Remark 1 (Deterministic observation function). We
remark that deterministic observation functions of type
O : S →Z are suﬃcient in POMDPs. Informally, the
probabilistic aspect of the observation function is cap-
tured in the transition function, and by enlarging the
state space with the product with the observations, we
obtain an observation function only on states [17]. Thus
in the sequel without loss of generality we will always
consider observation function of type O : S →Z which
greatly simpliﬁes the notation.
Runs and Histories
A run (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) in a
POMDP is an alternating sequence of states and ac-
tions s0, a1, s1, a2, s2, . . . such that s0 ∈supp(λ) and
for every i ≥0 it holds δ(si+1|si, ai+1) > 0. To a run
w = s0, a1, s1, a2, . . . we assign an observed run, i.e.
a corresponding observation-action sequence O(w) =
O(s0), a1, O(s1), a2, . . . . A history (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) is
an alternating sequence of observations and actions de-
noted as ρ = z0, a1, z1, a2, z2, . . . , such that there exists
a run w for which ρ = O(w) (note that we already
assume that function O is deterministic as noted in Re-
mark 1).
The length of a ﬁnite run w = s0, a1, . . . , sk is the
number len(w) = k, i.e.
the number of actions per-
formed along w. The length of an inﬁnite run is ∞,
and the lengths of (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) histories are de-
ﬁned likewise. We denote by RunM and FHistM the
sets of all runs and ﬁnite histories in M, respectively.
Policies
A policy (or a policy) in POMDP M is a
function σ of type FHistM →D(A). Intuitively, poli-
cies are abstractions of controllers for the system mod-
elled by M: the control is exerted by choosing a suitable
action in every decision step, depending on the history
of the system’s evolution. A run w = s0, a1, s1, . . . con-
forms to a policy σ if for all 0 ≤i < len(w) the distri-
bution σ(O(s0, a1, . . . , si)) assigns positive probability
to action ai+1.
Semantics of POMDPs
The behaviour of M un-
der a policy σ can be intuitively described as follows:
ﬁrst, an initial state s0 is sampled according the ini-
tial distribution λ. Then the system evolves in discrete
steps. In a step i ≥0, let wi = s0, a1, s1, a2, . . . ai, si
be the current ﬁnite run, i.e. the sequence of traversed
states and chosen actions up to the i-th step (we have
w0 = s0).
An action ai is sampled according to the
distribution σ(O(wi)), and then a successor state si+1
is sampled according to the distribution δ(si, ai).
In
the next step the same procedure is performed with
run wi+1 = s0, a1, s1, a2, . . . ai+1, si+1, etc. The process
evolves in this manner ad inﬁnitum. This intuitive de-
scription can be formalized by constructing a suitable
probability measure Pσ assigning probabilities to sets
of inﬁnite runs in M. The construction of Pσ is stan-
dard [6]. We denote by Eσ the expected value operator
induced by Pσ.
Objectives
An objective is a mathematical formal-
ization of a desired behaviour of a system modeled by
a POMDP. In this paper we study POMDPs that com-
4

bine reachability, stochastic shortest path, and energy
objectives.
• A reachability objective is given by a set T ⊆S
of target states. A run s0, a1, s1, . . . satisﬁes such
an objective if it eventually reaches a state from T,
i.e. if si ∈T for some i ≥0. We denote by ReachT
the set of all inﬁnite runs that satisfy a reachability
objective with target set T.
• A total cost objective is given by a tuple (T, c),
where T is again a set of target states and c : S ×
A →N is a cost function assigning a positive in-
teger cost to every state-action pair. Total cost is
a quantitative objective, i.e. instead of saying that
a run satisﬁes the objective or not, we measure
the ”quality” of a run by assigning a number to it.
Here we assign to an inﬁnite run w = s0, a1, s1, . . .
its total cost TC c
T (w) = Pm
i=1 c(si−1, ai), where
m = inf{j ≥0 | sj ∈T}. (We stipulate that an
empty sum equals zero. Note that if m = ∞, then
TC c
T (w) = ∞.)
• An energy objective is given by a tuple (E, cap, T),
where E : A × Z →Z is a function assigning a
resource change to every action-observation pair,
cap
∈
N0 is a non-negative capacity, and T
is a set of target states.
For (s, a, n) ∈S ×
A × [cap] we deﬁne a one-step resource update
EnUpcap(s, a, n) = min{cap, n + E(a, O(s))}. For
a run w = s0, a1, s1, . . . we put an energy level af-
ter i ∈N0 steps along w, where 0 ≤i ≤len(w),
to be a number ELcap
E (w, i) deﬁned inductively as
follows: ELcap
E (w, 0) = cap and for i ≥1 we put
ELcap
E (w, i) = EnUpcap(si−1, ai, ELcap
E (w, i −1)).
In other words, we assume that the resource level
is initially at full capacity and is then changed by
performing various actions.
Should the resource
level rise above cap, the excess amount is immedi-
ately discarded. An inﬁnite run w = s0, a1, s1, . . .
satisﬁes an energy objective given by (E, cap, T)
if ELcap
E (w, i) > 0 for all 0 < i ≤m, where
m = inf{j ≥0 | sj ∈T}. We denote the set of
all such satisfying inﬁnite runs by Safecap
E,T .
Remark 2. Note that per our deﬁnition the resource
level at every step is perfectly observable.
This is a
reasonable assumption whenever the modelled energy-
constrained agent is equipped with suﬃciently precise
charge/fuel sensors. In this our model resembles mixed-
observability POMDPs [40, 2], and indeed in the next
section we will present a transformation of POMDPs
with energy constraints into standard POMDPs in
which resource levels are a fully observable component
of each state. However, mixed observability is used to
enhance the performance of exact and point-based algo-
rithms, while we aim for solution via simulation-based
techniques, namely RTDP-Bel.
Since, in the words
of [2], online techniques cannot be probably adapted
to beneﬁt from mixed observability, we stick to stan-
dard POMDP formulations. For further applications of
mixed observability, see, e.g. [15, 13].
Computational Tasks
Given a POMDP M, a set
of states T, an resource change function E, and a
capacity cap, we deﬁne the set of energy-safe poli-
cies EnSafeM
T (E, cap).
A policy σ belongs to the set
EnSafeM
T (E, cap) if for all inﬁnite runs w conforming
to policy σ we have w ∈Safecap
E,T .
Given a policy
σ ∈EnSafeM
T (E, cap) we deﬁne the value of σ as the
expectation Val(σ) = Eσ[TC c
T ].
We are interested in minimizing the expected cost
till the target set T is reached while keeping the energy
level positive, i.e., we are interested in approximating
the following value:
optCost =
inf
σ∈EnSafeM
T (E,cap) Val(σ)
We aim to solve the following computational prob-
lems:
1. The qualitative energy-reachability problem asks
whether optCost < ∞.
2. The quantitative energy-reachability problem asks
for a policy σ such that Val(σ) approximates the
value optCost.
Remark 3. We remark about POMDPs without energy
constraints and the restrictions of the cost function:
1. The problem of approximating optimal cost optCost
in POMDPs without energy constraints for positive
costs was shown to be decidable in [17].
2. The problem of approximating optimal cost optCost
for general costs (positive and negative) was proved
to be undecidable in [17] already for POMDPs with-
out energy constraints.
As policies are per deﬁnition inﬁnite objects, in both
the qualitative and quantitative problems we aim to
compute their ﬁnite representations.
One of the pri-
mary aims of this paper is to address the eﬃciency of
such representations, our goal being to ﬁnd succinct
and/or human-readable ways to encode the computed
policies.
4
Solving Energy-Reachability
Problems
For the rest of the section let us ﬁx a POMDP M, target
set T, functions c, E and a capacity cap. We will eval-
uate the complexity of presented algorithms in terms of
||M|| and ||cap||. We assume that cap is represented in
binary, i.e. cap is at most exponential in ||cap||.
To solve both types of energy-reachability problems
we construct a product POMDP M× by encoding the
5

resource levels in M× directly into the states. Formally,
M× has a set of states S× = S × [cap] ∪{⊥}, where
⊥is a newly added sink state, and the same set of
actions as M. A transition function δ× of M× is deﬁned
as follows: for all (s, n) ∈S × [cap], all a ∈A s.t.
EnUpcap(s, a, n) ≥1, and all ˜s ∈S× we have
δ×(˜s|(s, n), a) =
(
δ(s′|s, a)
if ˜s = (s′, EnUpcap(s, a, n))
0
otherwise;
and for every other ˆs ∈S×, a ∈A the distribution
δ×(ˆs, a) is Dirac, assigning 1 to state ⊥.
The set of
observations in M× is Z× = Z ∪{⊥}, and observa-
tion function O× is such that O×(s, n) = O(s) for each
(s, n) ∈S × [cap] and O×(⊥) = ⊥. Finally, the ini-
tial distribution λ× assigns to each tuple of the form
(s, cap) probability λ(s), and 0 to all other states. We
also extend the reachability and total cost objectives to
M× by deﬁning a new target set T× = T × [cap] and
cost function c× such that c×((s, n), a) = c(s, a) and
c×(⊥, a) = 1, for every action a.
It is straightforward to verify that POMDP M×
can be automatically constructed in time polynomial
in ||M|| and exponential in ||cap||.
There is a natural correspondence between runs, his-
tories, and policies in M and M× which preserves the
properties related to our objectives. In particular, for
every policy σ ∈EnSafeM
T (E, cap) that almost surely
reaches T one can construct a policy ˜σ in M× such that
˜σ almost surely reaches T× and E˜σ[TC c×
T×] = Eσ[TC c
T ];
and vice versa, any policy in M× that almost surely
reaches target, can be transformed into a policy of the
same expected cost in EnSafeM
T (E, cap). If the policy
σ to be transformed is ﬁnitely represented, the ﬁnite
representation of the transformed policy ˜σ can be com-
puted in time polynomial in ||M×|| and ||σ||.
It follows that to solve the qualitative energy-
reachability problem for M it suﬃces to solve the qual-
itative reachability problem for M×, i.e.
compute a
policy ˜σ such that P˜σ(ReachT×) = 1. Algorithm solv-
ing the qualitative reachability problem based on be-
lief supports was presented in [17, 3].
We brieﬂy re-
call the approach: A belief support of a ﬁnite history
ρ = z0, a1, z1, . . . , zn is a set B(ρ) of states in which
the POMDP can be with positive probability after the
sequence ρ is observed, i.e.
B(ρ) = {s ∈S | ∃w =
s0, a1, s1..., sn ∈RunM× : ρ = O(w) ∧s = sn}. The
algorithm computes for each U ∈BS(M×) = {U ⊆
S | ∃ρ ∈FHistM× : B(ρ) = U} a set of so-called al-
lowed actions in U: intuitively, action a is allowed in U
if playing action a in any situation where the observed
ﬁnite history has belief support U results into situation
in which the target set can still be reached with prob-
ability 1 by some policy. One can show that if there
is a state s ∈supp(λ0) such that B(O(s)) admits no
allowed action, then no policy in M× can reach the
target almost surely. Otherwise the algorithm outputs
a policy σall which for each ﬁnite history ρ plays all ac-
tions allowed in B(ρ) with uniform probability. It can
be proves that for σall it holds Pσall(ReachT×) = 1.
The running time of the algorithm and the space
needed to represent σall is dominated by a polynomial in
the the size of BS(M×), i.e. in the number of reachable
belief supports. This number can be trivially bounded
by 2|S×|, which is an expression doubly exponential in
||cap||. However, from the construction of M× we get
the following improved bound:
Lemma 1. It holds |BS(M×)| ≤2|S|·cap.
As a consequence we get the following.
Theorem 1. The qualitative energy-reachability prob-
lem for POMDPs is EXPTIME-complete.
Proof. The upper bound follows from Lemma 1, and
from the complexity of constructing M× and trans-
lating its policies to M.
The lower bound follows
from EXPTIME-hardness of qualitative reachability in
POMDPs [19].
To solve the quantitative energy-reachability prob-
lem, we again use an algorithm for POMDPs without
energy, namely the one from [17], and apply it to M×.
The algorithm, which assumes that the sets of allowed
actions were already computed via the aforementioned
method, ﬁnds a policy of small cost that almost surely
reaches T×, using a modiﬁed version of RTDP-Bel [8].
RTDP-Bel is an adaptation of the real-time dynamic
programming value iteration [4] to POMDPs. It is an
approximative method which does not guarantee con-
vergence to optimum, but it is known to produce near-
optimal policies on many instances where optimal costs
can be computed using exact methods [17].
Hence,
results produced by RTDP-Bel are a useful yardstick
against which policies obtained by other methods can be
compared. Due to the absence of guarantees we do not
investigate the theoretical complexity of the algorithm.
Its experimental evaluation can be found in Section 6.
The policy output by modiﬁed RTDP-Bel bases its
decision in every step on the current belief, i.e.
the
probability distribution over the set of states represent-
ing the likelihood of being in particular states given the
current history of states and observations [33]. As the
space of beliefs is continuous, the policy operates on its
discretized version, which allows it to be represented by
a ﬁnite table storing one action per discretized belief.
Not all beliefs have to be stored in the table: RTDP-Bel
can converge to optimum without considering all reach-
able beliefs. Still, memory required to store the table
might be too large for the policy to be understandable.
In the next section we present a framework for convert-
ing table-represented policies into a more succinct and
human-readable form.
6

5
Succinct
Representation
of
Policies
A policy in M× computed by the RTDP-Bel is a func-
tion which to every belief assigns an action to be taken.
Formally, a belief is a probability distribution b on S×
such that supp(b) ⊆O−1
× (z) for some observation z.
As indicated above, RTDP-Bel considers only dis-
cretized beliefs, that is beliefs whose probabilities are
rounded to a ﬁnite mesh.
For technical reasons, the
RTDP-Bel represents such discretized beliefs as vectors
of non-negative integers from an interval [0, B] where
B is a bound which determines the precision of the ap-
proximation.
Thus each belief in M× can be represented as a vector
b ∈ZS+1 whose ﬁrst |S| components are integers from
[0, B], and whose last component is in [cap]. Given such
a belief b, the true probability of being in a state s with
the energy n is (approximately) equal to bs/B, where
bs is the component corresponding to state s.
For simplicity, we assume that actions are named in
such a way that A = {0, 1, . . . , kA}.
5.1
Decision Trees
There are numerous possibilities of succinctly repre-
senting sets of vectors of numbers (and functions on
such sets) in a human readable form. One of the most
popular formalisms suitable for this purpose are deci-
sion trees (DT see [44, 38]). We use DTs to represent
functions of beliefs in POMDPs. For convenience, we
follow closely the deﬁnition of DT used in [10].
Let
V = {v1, . . . , vd} be a set of variable names.
Deﬁnition 1. A decision tree over the set of variables
V is a tuple T = (Tr, ρ, θ) where Tr is a ﬁnite rooted
binary (ordered) tree with a set of inner nodes N and a
set of leaves L, ρ assigns to every inner node a predicate
of the form [vi ∼const] where vi ∈V , const ∈Z,
∼∈{≤, <, ≥, >, =}, and θ assigns to every leaf a non-
negative integer.
A DT T over V determines a function f : Zd →Z as
follows: For a vector ⃗v = (¯v1, . . . , ¯vn) ∈Zd, we ﬁnd a
path p from the root to a leaf ℓsuch that for each inner
node n on the path, the predicate ρ(n) is satisﬁed by
substitution vi = ¯vi iﬀthe ﬁrst child of n is on p. Then
we put f(⃗v) = f(¯v1, . . . , ¯vn) = θ(ℓ).
In our setting
the set of variable names is chosen so as to suitably
characterize the current belief. Typically, one can put
V = S ∪{Energy}, although diﬀerent sets can be used
as well. The domain of values assigned to leaves is the
set of actions A = {0, 1, . . . , kA}.
Training DT.
We describe the process of learning a training set, which
can also be understood as storing the input/output
behaviour of a function described by data.
As-
sume that we are given a training sequence τ
=
(⃗v1, f1), . . . , (⃗vk, fk) (repetitions allowed!)
that spec-
iﬁes the desired input/output behaviour, i.e.
each
⃗vi = (vi
1, . . . , vi
n) ∈Zd is a training input and fi ∈Z is
the expected output. The goal is to learn a DT which
exhibits the input/output behaviour prescribed by the
training sequence.
A standard process of learning according to the algo-
rithm ID3 [44, 38] proceeds as follows:
1. Start with a single node (root), and assign to it the
whole training sequence.
2. For
a
node
n
with
a
sequence
τ
=
(⃗v1, f1), . . . , (⃗vk, fk),
(a) if all training examples in τ have the same
expected output value (i.e.
there is x such
that fi = x for all i), set θ(n) = x and stop;
(b) otherwise,
• choose a predicate with the “highest in-
formation gain” (with lowest entropy, see
e.g. [38, Sections 3.4.1, 3.7.2]),
• split τ (according to the inputs) into se-
quences satisfying and not satisfying the
predicate, assign them to the ﬁrst and the
second child, respectively,
• go to step 2 for each child.
Intuitively, the predicate with the highest information
gain tends to make a clear cut among the classes.
In addition, the ﬁnal tree can be pruned. This means
that some leaves are merged, resulting in a smaller tree
at the cost of some imprecision of storing. The pruning
phase is quite sophisticated, hence for the sake of sim-
plicity and brevity, we omit the details here. We use
the standard C4.5 algorithm and refer to [45, 38]. In
Section 6, we comment on eﬀects of parameters used
in pruning. We also use the CART algorithm [12] with
so called Gini index instead of the information gain to
select the best splits (there are also diﬀerences in prun-
ing).
5.2
Learning a DT Policy
Our goal is to train a DT to succinctly represent a policy
computed by RTDP-Bel. We use RTDP-Bel to generate
a training set using the following procedure:
• Compute a policy σ using RTDP-Bel that solves
the quantitative energy-reachability problem.
• Run a speciﬁed number m of simulations of σ, each
of a ﬁxed length ℓ. In every step of each simulation
produce a new training instance (b, σ(b)) where
– b is the current belief,
7

– σ(b) is the action chosen by σ in the current
step.
The above procedure generates a training sequence of
pairs τ = (b1, σ(b1)), . . . , (bk, σ(bk)) where k = m · ℓ.
We feed this sequence into a learning algorithm for DT
and obtain a decision tree approximating behaviour of
σ on beliefs visited by the simulations.
Producing τ using RTDP-Bel should serve as a tool
for detecting the most important decisions of σ. The
intuition is that whenever a decision in a belief is made
repeatedly in many simulations, it is worth remember-
ing in the DT.
Execution of a DT Policy.
The agent maintains the
current belief over the state-space. The decision tree
T represents a function from beliefs to recommended
actions as described in Section 5.1. In every step, the
agent computes the value of the function for the current
belief. Whenever a non-allowed action is recommended
by the decision tree, we detect this and play all allowed
actions uniformly at random, taking advantage of the
precomputed set of allowed actions. Note that similar
situation may also arise when executing a policy com-
puted by RTDP-Bel: such a policy does not typically
store decisions for all beliefs (see Section 4) and hence it
might happen during its execution that no entry for the
current belief can be found. Whatever action the imple-
mentation chooses in such a situation, the action must
be allowed in the current belief-support, because after
playing a non-allowed action, the set of target states
would not be reached with probability 1. It is thus rea-
sonable to assume that the precomputed information
on allowed actions must be stored when executing any
of the two types of policies. Hence, we view the diﬀer-
ence between the size of the RTDP-Bel policy (i.e. the
number of entries in its table) and the size of the DT
learned from this policy (i.e. the number of its nodes)
to be the primary measure of how much succinctness
can be achieved by using decision trees.
Comparison with Finite-state Controllers.
We
illustrate the conceptual diﬀerences between ﬁnite-state
controllers and decision trees on a toy POMDP ex-
ample. Figure 1 depicts the Energy-constrained Tiger
POMDP which is an extension of the famous Tiger
problem introduced in [32]. Imagine an agent standing
in front of two closed doors. Behind one of the doors is
a tiger and behind the other is a treasure. If the agent
opens the door with the tiger a huge cost is received.
In all other situations no cost is received. After open-
ing any of the doors the POMDP reaches a terminal
conﬁguration.
The agent can also listen, in order to
gain some information about the location of the tiger.
Unfortunately, listening is not entirely accurate. There
is a 15% chance that the agent will hear a tiger be-
Figure 1: Energy-constrained Tiger Problem.
hind the left-hand door when the tiger is really behind
the right-hand door, and vice versa. We consider two
cases in the ﬁrst one the listening action has no resource
consumption and in the second case it has a resource
consumption associated with the action. In the second
case if the agent is running out of the resource, it may
decide to recharge in a neighbouring location.
In the case without energy consumption, the opti-
mal cost is 0, as for every ε ≥0 there is a number
T such that after performing L listening actions the
robot builds enough conﬁdence about the position of
the tiger so as to choose the good door with probability
at least 1 −ε. At the same time, L listening actions
are necessary to build such a conﬁdence, and L →∞
as ε →0. To represent a policy that waits until enough
conﬁdence is built and then decides we can employ both
FSCs and DTs. In the case of FSC the corresponding
ﬁnite transducer needs to have number of states propor-
tional to L, as it needs to count the number of listening
actions so far as well as results of these actions. In a
DT case the policy can be represented using a DT with
5 nodes, which is depicted in Figure 2.
We use two
variables Tiger −Left and Tiger −Right, that represent
the probability that the tiger is behind the respective
door. In each step the robot straightforwardly extracts
these probabilities from its current belief and uses the
decision tree to select an appropriate action. (A solid
line to a successor is taken if the condition inside an in-
ner node is satisﬁed, otherwise the dashed line is taken.
The parameter δ represents the conﬁdence level suﬃ-
cient for door selection.) In particular, the size of the
tree is independent of ε.
In the case with energy consumption, the FSC either
needs to store the information on the current resource
level in the transducer’s state, or, if the resource lev-
els are contained in observations (as is the case in our
reduction in the previous section), the FSC needs to
have, in each of its states, at least one outgoing tran-
sition per each energy level (as there must be at least
one outgoing transition for each possible observation).
Thus, the size of such a controller is proportional also to
the capacity cap. On the other hand, using a DT it suf-
ﬁces to slightly modify the tree in Figure 2. We need to
use an additional variable representing the current re-
source level (which we assume is precisely known to the
robot), and add a new root node which tests whether
8

Tiger −Left ≥δ
Open −Door −Left
Tiger −Right ≥δ
Open −Door −Right
Listen
Figure 2: Decision Tree for the Tiger Problem.
the energy is greater than 1: if it is, the robot goes to
a sub-tree depicted in Figure 2, otherwise it recharges
in the neighbouring location.
6
Experimental results
We have extended the POMDP ﬁle format introduced
in [14] with the constructs necessary to model resource
consumption. We have implemented Algorithm 1 that
implements the product construction of Section 4. We
use a modiﬁed version of the RTDP-Bel POMDP
solver [8] to solve these energy-constrained POMDPs
and generate training data for machine learning tools
(see the previous section).
Algorithm 1
Input: POMDP M with energy-reachability ob-
jective
Output: A succinct policy σ if there exists one
M×
←
constructProduct(M)
▷Section 4
σr
←
RTDP−Bel(M×)
τ
←
trainingData(σr)
▷Section 5
σ
←
trainTree(τ)
▷Section 5
return: σ
Generating Training Data. In all the examples we con-
sider we choose appropriate variables to characterize
the beliefs , e.g. in grid-like environments we have vari-
ables for the current row, column, and current resource
level (recall that resource level is perfectly observable).
We parse the policy produced by RTDP-Bel to obtain
a training sequence (⃗v1, a1), (⃗v2, a2), . . . where each ⃗vi
is a vector of variable values characterizing a belief to
which the RTDP-Bel policy assigns action ai.
Decision Tree Learning. We use three diﬀerent methods
to obtain decision trees for our examples:
1. In the ﬁrst scenario decision trees are constructed
using the Weka machine learning package [27]. The
Weka suite oﬀers various decision tree classiﬁers.
We use the J48 classiﬁer, which is an implementa-
tion of the C4.5 algorithm [45];
2. We use the package rpart [58] from R [46] which
implements the CART algorithms of [12]. We use
the Gini index as default for selecting the best
splits.
We have experimented with tree pruning
using complexity parameters (see [58]).
3. Finally, we constructed trees using the package
tree [47] of R which implements algorithms of [48].
In this case, the default measure for selecting splits
is the deviance (see [48]). Note that the results of
tree and rpart packages are usually very diﬀerent.
We experimented on two well-known examples of
POMDPs naturally extended with resource levels. Typ-
ically, we assume that all the actions of the agent de-
crease the resource level and there are speciﬁc recharg-
ing locations in the area that restore the resource level
to the maximum capacity. The POMDP examples we
considered are the following: (A) We consider the Hall-
way example from [36, 56, 53, 8]. (B) We consider the
RockSample example from [8, 53].
6.1
Succinct Policies: Example
In this part we discuss an example of a succinct human
readable policy for the Hallway examples
1
2
0
Energy < 2.5
Energy ≥2.5
y7 ≥10
y7 < 10
Figure 3: policy for Hallway on an 8x8 grid with cap =
10.
Example 1. Figure 3 shows a decision tree computed
via Tree package for an instance of a Hallway exam-
ple, which models a robot navigation in a maze. We
use variable names x1, . . . , x8, y1, . . . , y8, Energy, where
the values xn, yn represent the probability that the x
or y coordinate, respectively, of the robot is equal to n
(we have B = 20, i.e. value 20 represents probability
1). For better readability, predicates are not contained
within nodes, they label edges instead. To execute a pol-
icy represented by the tree, the robot looks, in every step,
on its current belief. If the current resource level is at
least 3 (recall that resource levels are integers), it per-
forms action 0 (”move forward”). Otherwise the robot
checks the probability of the current y coordinate being
7. If it is smaller than 1
2, the robot turns left (action
1), otherwise it turns right (action 2). If at any point
the action recommended by the tree is not allowed, the
robot chooses an allowed action uniformly at random.
6.2
Discussion on Experimental results.
We present the results of our approach in Table 1. Ev-
ery entry contains the following information: (i) the
name of the benchmark; (ii) the size of the state space;
(iii) the maximum resource level cap; (iv) the size of
the the product state space S× after a preprocessing
9

Name
|S|
cap
|S×|
Val(σall)
RTDP-Bel
Weka
RPart
Tree
Mem. size
Val
DT. size
Val
DT. size
Val
DT. size
Val
Hallway5x5
51
10
197
568.001
216
10.998
–
–
–
–
–
–
Hallway6x6
83
10
443
862.746
314
15.143
1
32.390
17
22.143
15
31.596
Hallway8x8
155
10
961
954.160
537
21.020
5
44.399
21
26.396
5
52.689
Hallway10x10
259
15
2437
984.647
2441
23.027
–
–
25
60.643
55
573.983
Hallway13x13
435
10
2852
958.284
1684
31.492
–
–
–
–
51
58.395
Hallway17x17
835
10
5163
797.728
2777
26.904
15
46.627
7
41.820
9
40.480
Hallway17x17
835
15
8882
716.796
6305
27.159
9
59.022
7
51.880
51
38.400
Hallway19x19
1103
10
8891
883.223
6801
30.131
15
148.184
5
142.537
3
44.614
RockSample[3,4]
435
7
2403
12.891
1257
6.146
31
8.52
11
12.948
1
13.638
RockSample[3,5]
1011
7
5425
12.412
395
6.920
19
8.275
13
12.405
1
8.275
RockSample[4,4]
771
7
4297
14.852
570
9.408
25
14.285
11
14.964
1
15.644
RockSample[5,4]
1803
6
5679
16.290
421
9.578
25
17.192
11
17.044
1
17.192
Table 1: Experimental results
step which removes unreachable states; (v) the value
of the policy σall that plays all allowed actions uni-
formly at random; (vi) RTDP-Bel entries, that present
the size of the computed policy and its corresponding
value; (vii) for Weka, RPart, Tree we present the size of
the computed decision tree and the value of the corre-
sponding policy. The entries labelled with ”-” did not
have a run that reaches the set of target states T, en-
tries in italics do not reach the set of target states T
with all the runs within the run cut-oﬀlength of 1000,
i.e., the expected cost for the policies may be higher.
The bold-faced entries present the best result among
the three considered DT-learning tools.
The entries show that removing the unreachable
states from the product POMDP M× is eﬃcient and
allows scaling to larger instances, e.g., a naive prod-
uct construction in entry Hallway 10x10 would yield
a product POMDP with 3885 states compared to the
2437 reachable states.
In most of the cases our approach succeeded and com-
puted a signiﬁcantly smaller policy than the standard
policy computed by RTDP-Bel. The computed succinct
policies usually perform slightly worse than the optimal
explicit policy, however still overwhelmingly outperform
the naive policy σall that plays all actions uniformly
at random. For instance, the tree for Hallway8x8 pre-
sented in Example 1 identiﬁes two crucial decisions (one
based on current resource level, and one on crossing a
certain ”latitude”) with which the policy already signif-
icantly outperforms σall and achieves performance rel-
atively close to the RTDP-Bel policy of size 537. In-
terestingly, this suggests that POMDPs with SSP ob-
jectives exhibit a phenomenon known as Pareto princi-
ple [39], where a small fraction of decisions accounts for
majority of optimization eﬀort. Moreover, the learning
techniques we used are typically able to identify such
decisions. Even for RockSample examples, where there
is not much room for imprecision (σall incurs only the
double the cost incurred by the corresponding RTDP-
Bel policy) the DT policies performed relatively well on
some instances.
Interestingly, no approach signiﬁcantly outperforms
any other and for each of the three considered ap-
proaches there are entries where it dominates.
On a
fraction of examples, such as Hallway 5x5 or on the
large RockSample instances, the learned policies do not
perform well. One way of improving the performance
of DT policies would be to use more expressive vari-
ants of DTs, such as linear DTs, that can capture gen-
eral linear dependencies between variables. Testing this
conjecture would require extending the aforementioned
DT-learning tools with the capability of learning linear
DTs, which we deem to be a viable direction of future
work.
7
Conclusion
In this work we have considered POMDPs with a set
of target states, positive integer costs associated with
every transition, and resource levels. We present a novel
algorithm for solving POMDPs enhanced with resource
levels based on the existing POMDP solvers and the
RTDP method. We consider three diﬀerent approaches
to obtain succinct and human-readable policies. On two
scalable domains from the existing literature we present
succinct policies that perform only slightly worse than
the optimal policy, while being signiﬁcantly smaller.
