Siamese Residual Neural Network for Musical Shape 
Evaluation in Piano Performance Assessment 
Xiaoquan Li1, Stephan Weiss1, Yijun Yan2, Yinhe Li2, Jinchang Ren2, John Soraghan1, Ming Gong1 
1Centre for Signal and Image Processing, Dept. Electronic & Electrical Engineering, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK 
2National Subsea Centre, School of Computing, Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen, UK 

Abstract— Understanding and identifying musical shape plays an 
important role in music education and performance assessment. 
To simplify the otherwise time- and cost-intensive musical shape 
evaluation, in this paper we explore how artificial intelligence (AI) 
driven models can be applied. Considering musical shape 
evaluation as a classification problem, a light-weight Siamese 
residual neural network (S-ResNN) is proposed to automatically 
identify musical shapes. To assess the proposed approach in the 
context of piano musical shape evaluation, we have generated a 
new dataset, containing 4116 music pieces derived by 147 piano 
preparatory exercises and performed in 28 categories of musical 
shapes. The experimental results show that the S-ResNN 
significantly outperforms a number of benchmark methods in 
terms of the precision, recall and F1 score. 
Keywords—Piano 
Performance 
Assessment; 
Audio 
Classification; Musical Shape Evaluation; Siamese Network. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
As a sub-task of music information retrieval (MIR), music 
performance assessment (MPA) has drawn considerable 
attention [1, 2]. In practical music education, MPA helps to 
improve a candidate's ability to perform. However, it needs 
comprehensive music perception and cognition which are 
mostly built up via long-term practice and understanding. 
Currently, MPA for piano students is mostly guided by music 
trainers, resulting in extensive time and resources needed. An 
AI-driven MPA would be particularly useful for raising the 
efficacy of music education whilst reducing the cost (Fig. 1). 
The marking criteria of music scores in some music 
educational exams, such as the Associated Board of the Royal 
Schools of Music (ABRSM) in the UK, are determined by five 
elements, i.e., pitch, time, tone, shape and overall performance 
[3]. Many machine learning and deep learning models have been 
explored to evaluate the pitch, time, rhythm and tone in MPA 
[2]. Typical works include convolutional neural network (CNN) 
for local tempo and tempo stability assessment [4], support 
vector regressor for assessing rhythmic accuracy and tone 
quality [5], fusion of CNN and recurrent network for pitch 
extraction [6], and the integration of 2DCNN and 3DCNN for 
evaluation of piano skills [7], etc.  
However, musical shape evaluation for MPA remains 
unaddressed to date. Musical shape, as a unit to build a coherent 
narrative music environment, is one of the most evident 
characteristics, which offers a more ecologically valid way of 
understanding the feeling responses to the music than seeing 
music as expressive of particular emotional states [8]. Due to its 
abstraction and multisensory perception, the musicology study 
has progressed slowly. In 1963, Langer [9] proposed a famous 
theory of ‘sound the way moods feel’ where musical shape is 
considered as a fundamental unit in music’s intrinsic properties. 
In 2006, Eitan and Granot [10] discussed the associations of 
dynamics, pitch, time, and articulation to musical shape by 
comparing the music perception with musicians and non-
musicians. The result found that time patterns are highly related 
to the musical shapes. Pitch and dynamics patterns are 
potentially linked with musical shape, which required further 
investigation. To tackle this issue, Küssner and Leech-Wikinson 
[11] carried out an extensive study in 2014 and discovered that
pitch does not closely associate with musical shape. In 2017,
Daniel [8] defined that musical shape refers to the small
dynamics changes in music that can represent feeling and
movement states, or any tiny changes varying with time, giving
life-like qualities to music. Therefore, the core in musical shape
evaluation is to discriminate the time and dynamics patterns in
music pieces.
Lerch presented a critical review of MPA [12] and pointed 
out that most MIR researchers neglect the difference between 
score-like and performance information. Although many 
scholars have studied time and dynamics patterns with the 
corresponding datasets reported [12], they do not intend to 
evaluate the music’s intrinsic properties. Thus, it brings a large 
barrier for using existing MIR technique to interpret the music’s 
intrinsic properties. To break through this bottleneck, it is crucial 
to add a new dimension to MPA, conducting the study of 
musical shape evaluation to align the human perception with 
music’s intrinsic properties. For this purpose, a specific dataset 
is also needed. Thus, we report on a new musical shape 
evaluation dataset (see details in Section 2) where all music 
pieces are performed by 3 music trainers and 10 young students. 
Inspired by the concept shown in Fig. 1, we define the music 
pieces performed by music trainers based on their music 
Fig. 1. Concept of current MPA in music education. 
This is a peer reviewed, accepted author manuscript of the following conference contribution: Li, X., Weiss, S., Yan, Y., Li, Y., Ren, J., Soraghan, J., & Gong, 
M. (2023). Siamese residual neural network for musical shape evaluation in piano performance assessment. 1-5. Paper presented at 31st European Signal 
Processing Conference, Helsinki, Finland. 
1

cognition and perception having the normal musical shape and 
the corresponding ones performed by students having the 
specific musical shape to be identified. 
From a signal processing perspective, the problem we are 
addressing is the evaluation of musical shape based on the 
integration of two key typical parameters: dynamics and tempo 
which capture two important aspects of a musical performance, 
i.e., the level of loudness and the speed of the music,
respectively. For this purpose, some typical audio feature
extraction methods have been explored [13]. Then machine
learning model such as Support Vector Machine (SVM) can be
used for improved decision making [14, 15]. On a different note,
musical shape is an example of how multisensory capacity is
facilitated by the sensorimotor cortex in the brain [8], and the
neocortex is organized in a manner to make the underlying
processes as efficient as possible. This has motivated us to
develop a deep neural model for musical shape evaluation.
Currently, many variant deep learning methods have been
explored based on VGG16 
[16], ResNet50 
[17] and
DenseNet161 [18] for audio feature extraction. However, most
of them are not designed for music education.
A Siamese network is an architecture with two identical 
branches, where each takes one set of input data and the weights 
and bias of any neural network in each branch are the same [19]. 
The advantage of this architecture is that it can learn semantic 
similarity from the two inputs and does not need to rely on large 
datasets to perform well [20]. On the other hand, residual blocks 
[17] have attracted much attention thanks to the strong feature
representation capability. As a result, its variants have been
widely used for image classification and can produce impressive
performance [21].
Taking the advance of both deep learning frameworks and 
following the concept shown in Fig. 1, we propose a Siamese 
residual neural network (S-ResNN) in this paper. In this model, 
the music piece played by music trainer and the corresponding 
one played by student are taken as the inputs which will be 
transformed into spectrum before sending to both branches. 
Then the proposed S-ResNN will extract the global spectral 
feature and identify the musical shapes in the piano pieces. 
Extensive experiments on our proposed musical shape 
evaluation dataset have shown the superiority of S-ResNN when 
comparing with the combination of machine learning and 
conventional signal processing methods, and three typical deep 
learning models. The main contributions of this paper are 
highlighted below. 
•
We explore a new dimension of MPA, which connects
the human perception with music intrinsic properties;
1 https://zenodo.org/record/7225090#.Y0_mCXbMKUk 
•
We have complied a new musical shape evaluation
dataset1, including 4116 high-quality piano recordings in
28 classes of musical shapes;
•
We propose a S-ResNN method2 to evaluate the musical
shape in the piano pieces for promoting piano education.
II.
DATASET DESCRIPTION
Inspired by [2][22], we select a well-established educational 
book on piano finger practice to cover the possible correlation 
of finger strength and construct a comprehensive experiment. 
The exercises composed by both Hanon [23] and Schmitt [24] 
are two highly admitted textbooks. As Schmitt has more various 
pitch patterns than Hanon, the latter is highly controversial [25]. 
Thus, we introduce a new musical shape evaluation dataset here, 
which has collected 147 music pieces (83 polyphony, 20 scales, 
12 arpeggios, and 32 staccato) from Schmitt [24].  
There are plenty of musical shapes in terms of various time 
and dynamics patterns [8]. To validate our concept, we consider 
the normal musical shape as a speed of 60 beat per minute (bpm) 
with normal dynamics. A single time pattern in terms of faster 
and slower speed is performed as 72 bpm and 50 bpm, which are 
represented as Adagio and Largo in music theory, respectively. 
It is worth noticing that the actual performing speed is between 
50 (50 bpm * 1 note) - 288 (72 bpm * 4 notes) notes per minute. 
Stronger and weaker dynamics patterns at 60 bpm are 
represented as Forte and Piano, respectively. Taking another 4 
time and dynamics patterns into account, 8 basic musical shapes 
are first determined in Table I, which are then extended to 16 
combinations where the corresponding descriptions are shown 
in Table II. In addition, three supplementary musical shapes, i.e., 
Swing, Give and Take are also evaluated in our study. Swing is 
the most important feature in Jazz which is a popular music style 
20 century [12]. Give and Take are advanced and delayed 
movement of time in the music pieces, respectively [8]. Thus, 28 
categories of shape (1 normal and 27 specific) are performed on 
147 music pieces, resulting in 4116 recordings in WAV format, 
with a sampling rate of 48 KHz and a period of 7 seconds. In this 
2 https://github.com/lixiaoquan731/Musical-Shape-Evaluation 
TABLE II. DESCRIPTION OF EXTENDED 16 SHAPES. 
Adagio (72 bpm) 
Largo (50 bpm) 
Rit. (60→50 bpm) 
Accel. (60→72 bpm) 
Forte (f) 
f + 72 bpm 
f + 50 bpm 
f + 60→50 bpm 
f + 60→72 bpm 
Piano (p) 
p + 72 bpm 
p + 50 bpm 
p + 60→50 bpm 
p + 60→72 bpm 
Cresc. (p→f) 
p→f + 72 bpm 
p→f + 50 bpm 
p→f + 60→50 bpm 
p→f + 60→72 bpm 
Decresc. (f→p) 
f→p + 72 bpm 
f→p + 50 bpm 
f→p + 60→50 bpm 
f→p + 60→72 bpm 
TABLE I. DESCRIPTION OF 8 BASIC SHAPES. 
No. 
Shape 
Description 
1 
Forte 
Dynamics 
Strong dynamics and denoted as f on the score 
2 
Piano 
Weak dynamics and denoted as p on the score 
3 
Cresc. 
Gradually increase the dynamics from p to f 
4 
Decresc. 
Gradually reduce the dynamics from f to p 
5 
Adagio 
Time 
Perform the score with 72 bpm 
6 
Largo 
Perform the score with 50 bpm 
7 
Rit. 
Gradually reduce the speed from 60 - 50 bpm 
8 
Accel. 
Gradually increase the speed from 60 - 72 bpm 
2

study, music pieces with normal and 27 musical shapes were 
played by music trainers and students, respectively. All 
categories can be clearly separable from listening. 
III.  PROPOSED METHOD 
Fig. 2 illustrates the architecture of the proposed model as 
well as essential parameter information. The input of our model 
is a pair of audio recordings including the music piece with 
specific musical shape and its corresponding one with normal 
musical shape. A Constant-Q transform (CQT) [26] is employed 
to generate the spectrogram for each audio recording. The 
reason for selecting CQT is because it has been frequently 
utilised as time-frequency transform in many MIR tasks [27]. 
Theoretically, any time-frequency transform methods can be 
fitted into our model. 
S-ResNN contains two pyramid-structured branches where 
the weights are shared. Each branch has four stages comprising 
a convolutional layer and a residual block. Given an input 𝑋𝑖
𝑠 
in each stage, where 𝑠∈[1,2] is the number of input spectral 
feature map and 𝑖∈[1,4] is the number of stages. The output 
𝑌𝑖
𝑠of each convolutional layer can be expressed as  
𝑌𝑖
𝑠= 𝜎(𝐵𝑁(𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑖(𝑋𝑖
𝑠))) 
(1) 
where 𝜎(∙)  and 𝐵𝑁(∙)  represent the rectified linear unit 
(ReLU) 
activation 
function 
and 
batch 
normalization, 
respectively. Then the 𝑋𝑖
𝑙 will keep updating by 
𝑋𝑖+1
𝑠
= 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝐵𝑙(𝑀𝑃(𝑌𝑖
𝑠)) 
(2) 
where 𝑀𝑃(∙) denotes a 3 × 3 max pooling layer with a stride 
2, and 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝐵𝑙 denotes the residual block. The implementation 
of residual block is shown in Fig. 2, which follows the standard 
structure in ResNet50 [28]. In each stage, the kernel size of 
convolutional layer and residual block is the same. The outputs 
of two branches, 𝐺1 and 𝐺2, are then concatenated together, 
followed by a dropout layer 𝐷(∙)  and a flatten layer 𝐹(∙). To 
accurately evaluate the musical shapes in the piano pieces, we 
consider it as a classification task, for which a commonly used 
loss function, the cross entropy ℒ, is adopted, as defined below. 
ℒ𝑝,𝑙= −1
𝑡 ∑(𝑙∗𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝) + (1 −𝑙) ∗𝑙𝑜𝑔(1 −𝑝))
𝑡
𝑖=1
 
(3) 
𝑝= 𝐹(𝐷(𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑒[𝐺1, 𝐺2])) 
where t, p and l denote the number of inputs, predicted 
probability, and the classification label, respectively.  
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETTING 
The proposed S-ResNN is trained on NVIDIA Quadro RTX 
6000 with 200 epochs and a batch size of 16. For fast 
convergence, stochastic gradient descent is selected as the 
optimizer where the learning rate, momentum and weight decay 
are set as 1e-3, 0.9 and 0.0005, respectively. The spatial size of 
the input spectrogram image is set to 3 × 224 × 224. 
For quantitative evaluation, three widely used metrics 
including the precision, recall and F1 score are adopted. Each 
experiment was repeated 10 times, and averaged results are 
reported in the Section 4. Within each repetition, training and 
testing data are randomly selected without overlap. Different 
training rates ranging from 10% to 70% in each class have been 
used for training. 
To validate the efficacy of our proposed model, 
comprehensive experiments are carried out where conventional 
audio content analysis (ACA) methods and deep learning 
models are used for benchmarking. For the audio methods, some 
classic MIR techniques including Zero Cross Rate (ZCR), Mel-
frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC), spectral centroid 
(SpCen), spectral rolloff (SpRf), spectral flux (SpFlux), spectral 
skewness (SpSkew) and spectral flatness (SpFlat) are used to 
extract the audio feature followed by a popular classifier i.e., 
support vector machine (SVM) for the decision making. The 
models of audio feature extraction and SVM is employed from 
ACA system [13] and LIBSVM tool [29], respectively. Deep 
learning models (e.g., VGG16 [16], ResNet50 [17], and 
DenseNet161 [18]) are employed from Openmmlab’s image 
classification toolbox [30]. 
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A. Comparison with benchmarking methods 
An objective comparison between our method and other 
benchmarking methods is shown in Fig. 3. As seen, S-ResNN 
always leads to a higher recall for all training rates. This is due 
to the fusion of Siamese structure and residual blocks, making 
 
Fig. 2. Diagram of S-ResNN. Conv and BN represent the convolutional layer and the batch normalization layer, respectively. 
3

full use of spectral features to better characterize various musical 
shapes. 
Meanwhile, when the training rate is greater than 20%, the 
baseline deep learning models consistently produce better 
results than the ACA methods. This is due to the fact that deep 
learning models can extract more representative global features 
than ACA methods with sufficient training data. Thus, the 
complex time and dynamics patterns in music pieces can be 
better identified. In addition, the features extracted by ACA 
methods consist of numerous local temporal and/or spectral 
features that are insufficient to characterize the musical shapes 
adequately. The parameter selection (i.e., hop and block size in 
ZCR and spectral properties, and number of coefficients in 
MFCC, etc) also affects the classification performance of ACA 
methods, making them less practicability.  
Table III shows the average classification results and 
standard deviation (STD) of 7 training rates, where it is seen that 
our S-ResNN is superior to other baseline deep learning models 
in terms of higher classification accuracy and lower STD. ACA 
methods have generally lower STD, indicating their stability, 
but their classification accuracy is much lower than deep 
learning models under different training rates. On a different 
point, when the training sample is not sufficient (e.g., 10% 
training rate as seen in Fig. 3), the baseline deep learning models 
produce inferior results than some ACA methods such as SpFlux 
and SpSkew, etc. However, out proposed S-ResNN still yields 
the best accuracy, which further validate its effectiveness when 
dealing with limited training data. 
B. Parameter efficiency 
Table IV reveals the efficiency of our method and baseline 
deep learning models. It is observed that our proposed S-ResNN 
has fewest parameters but needs adequate computation cost. The 
main reason is that S-ResNN has fewer weighted layer than 
baseline deep learning models, but the size of fully connected 
(FC) layer at the end of each branch is 6400 × 2048, leading 
to higher Flops than ResNet50 and DenseNet161. This issue can 
be potentially solved by reducing the kernel size but increasing 
the number of convolutional layers with larger stride. With a 
deeper structure but fewer spatial size of convolutional feature 
maps, the size of FC layers can be much reduced, and the 
discriminative information of musical shapes can be well 
extracted. Thus, a much better balance between effectiveness 
and efficiency can be achieved.  
C. Generalization experiment 
To further validate the robustness and reliability of our 
proposed model, we have conducted a generalization 
experiment where 10 music pieces selected from Hanon were 
performed, resulting 250 music recordings with 25 classes of 
musical shapes (excluding Swing, Give and Take). Then all 
models trained on Schmitt music pieces will be directly tested 
on Hanon music pieces. Comparison of various models using 
different training rates is shown in Fig. 4. As seen, the proposed 
S-ResNN has much better generalization ability than other 
benchmark methods though it produces comparable accuracy to 
SpFlux in 10% training rate. This actually motivates us to 
improve the few-shot learning ability of the model by 
combining data augmentation, attention mechanisms and meta-
learning strategies in the future.  
TABLE III. COMPARISON OF CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE WITH MEAN 
VALUE AND CORRESPONDING STD OF 7 TRAINING RATES  
Methods 
Precision (%) 
Recall (%) 
F1 score (%) 
ZCR 
32.25± 5.29 
32.75± 5.25 
32.75± 5.25 
MFCC 
59.24± 3.44 
70.23± 2.56 
62.20± 3.26 
SpCen 
73.37± 4.73 
74.03± 4.48 
73.38± 4.72 
SpRf 
66.50± 6.16 
67.23± 5.72 
66.55± 6.03 
SpFulx 
83.01± 3.34 
83.30± 3.19 
83.03± 3.31 
SpSkew 
78.73± 5.42 
79.82± 4.67 
78.87± 5.26 
SpFlat 
70.99± 6.55 
71.90± 6.10 
71.07± 6.47 
VGG16 
86.39± 13.63 
87.12± 12.96 
86.29± 13.86 
ResNet50 
91.13± 9.97 
91.26± 9.81 
91.06± 10.11 
DenseNet161 
86.30± 11.95 
87.04± 10.87 
86.24± 12.07 
S-ResNN 
93.81± 6.60 
93.98± 6.43 
93.78± 6.67 
 
Fig. 3. Comparison of various approaches in dependence of different training
rates on Schmitt music recordings. 
Table IV. Comparison of proposed method and baseline deep learning 
models on efficiency 
Method 
VGG16 
ResNet50 
DenseNet161 
S-ResNN 
Params (M) 
138.36 
25.56 
28.68 
14.88 
Flops (G) 
15.5 
4.12 
7.82 
9.78 
 
Fig. 4. Comparison of various approaches in dependence of different training 
rates on Hanon music recordings. 
4

VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we bring a new insight of musical shape 
evaluation into MPA. Musical shape evaluation is a bridge to 
link the human perception with music’s intrinsic properties, 
which addresses the shortage of existing MPA framework. A 
new architecture S-ResNN is proposed for musical shape 
evaluation, where a new dataset is also built as an extra outcome. 
Comprehensive 
experiments 
have 
shown 
our 
method 
outperforms not only conventional benchmarking approaches 
but also several deep learning models. In future work, we plan 
to further improve and validate our model on wider application 
scenarios, where the current dataset will be extended to include 
increased categories of music scores and musical shapes. 
Furthermore, some open-source tools such as MusicXML and 
MusPy [31] can be used to adjust the time and dynamics to 
various levels that are sometimes hardly performed manually.
