XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 
Vision-based inspection system employing 
computer vision & neural networks for detection of 
fractures in manufactured components 
 
 
Sarthak J. Shetty 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
R.V. College of Engineering 
Bengaluru, India 

 
Abstract—we are proceeding towards the age of automation 
and robotic integration of our production lines [5]. Effective 
quality-control systems have to be put in place to maintain the 
quality of manufactured components. Among different quality-
control systems, vision-based inspection systems have gained 
considerable amount of popularity [8] due to developments in 
computing power and image processing techniques. In this 
paper, we present a vision-based inspection system (VBI) as a 
quality-control system, which not only detects the presence of 
defects, such as in conventional VBIs, but also leverage 
developments in machine learning to predict the presence of 
surface fractures and wearing. We use OpenCV, an open 
source computer-vision framework, and Tensorflow, an open 
source machine-learning framework developed by Google Inc., 
to accomplish the tasks of detection and prediction of presence 
of surface defects such as fractures of manufactured gears. 
Keywords—vision-based 
inspection 
system, 
machine 
learning, machine vision, Tensorflow, Inception V3, OpenCV, 
image-processing, manufacturing, robotics, manufacturing, 
quality control 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Vision-based inspection systems (hereafter abbreviated 
as VBI), are employed as quality-control systems along 
various critical points in the production line [8], [6], [9], 
employing cameras for the detection of defects in 
manufactured components. Due to advances in processor 
design we now have access to vast volumes of computing 
power and open source libraries, utilizing robust image-
processing techniques for the detection of fractures. VBIs 
can analyze various features of the manufactured component 
through a camera feed interfaced with a computer system for 
the analysis of the same. Irregularities are highlighted by the 
system and are visible on the display paired with the system. 
The image is then passed onto a fracture-prediction system 
which employs a machine learning framework and provides 
a probabilistic value of whether or not the given component 
is fractured or not.  
This combination of image-processing techniques and 
machine learning tools serves dual processes: a) The 
OpenCV based computer-vision sub-system provides a 
visual reference for the human operator allowing them to 
check, and counter-check for defects which may or may not 
be apparent to the machine-learning sub-system. b) Inception 
V3, a Tensorflow based machine-learning model [10] with 
retrained final layers, provides a probabilistic value of 
whether a surface defect such as a fracture or defect is 
present or not. The machine learning model may identify 
defects that might not be apparent to the human operator, or 
are too minute for computer vision filters to effectively 
highlight. 
II. LITERATURE SURVEY 
Edwards, M [5] has provided a review of how the 
manufacturing industry poses to be revolutionized by the 
advent of robots, and also the rapid adoption of robotics for 
the completion of variety of tasks in production lines. 
Chen, F.L. et. al [2], describes one of the first machine-
vision based inspection systems along computer integrated 
manufacturing system (CIMS), describing it‟s measurement 
flexibility, non-destructive property and high resolution as 
significant advantages over other inspection systems. 
Baygin, Mehmet et. al [1] has proposed a machine-vision 
based inspection system for identifying defects in printed 
circuit boards (PCBs). The system measures the dimensions 
of the holes drilled in the circuit board, and also checks 
whether the dimensions are within 2μm of the set value. 
Stojanovic, Radovan et. al [9] has proposed a real-time 
machine-vision based inspection system which employs 
neural networks for the identification and classification of 
defects in textiles. 
Malamas, N. E et. al [8] has provided a wide review on 
industrial machine-vision. Advantages of machine-vision 
based systems over human inspection have also been 
discussed broadly in the publication.  
III. PROPOSED APPROACH 
As mentioned earlier, the VBI system that we have 
developed is based on two parts: a) An OpenCV based 
computer-vision system that applies different convolution 
filters on a specimen image, highlighting any fractures or 
defects on the surface. b) A TensorFlow based convolutional 
neural network model known as Inception V3 model. The 
final layers of this neural network are retrained on two 
categories of images: a) normal Gears & b) defective gears, 
to distinguish between normal gears and broken gears.   
A Google-Image webscraper [12] was used to scrape 
Google Images to generate the aforementioned dataset 
comprising of 200 images of normal gears and 200 images of 
fractured gears. This dataset was then used to re-train the 
final layers of the Inception V3 connvolutional neural 
network.  

A variety of filters are used for the detection of edges in 
images [7], [3]. In this paper, the image processing system 
will be employing the use of a filter-bank (also known as a 
kernel-bank in this context), comprising of 4 convolution-
filters:  
1. Sobel X  
2. Sobel Y  
3. Laplacian  
4. Sharpen  
These filters are applied on a gray-scale version of the 
image. Carrying out operations on grayscale images has been 
deemed computationally lightweight for embedded systems 
such as FPGAs, which are often employed for machine-
vision tasks in production lines [8]. 
Once the image has been converted into grayscale, it is 
subjected to the above filters. The filters are convolution 
matrices which, through simple convolution operations with 
the grayscale images generate an output image in which the 
edges of the component are highlighted. Since the matrices 
have the ability to highlight edges, they can highlight the 
fractures which are present on the surface of the component.  
The image is then passed on to the prediction model, 
which provides a probabilistic prediction of a fracture or 
crack being present on the surface. 
IV. OVERVIEW OF MODEL 
 
Fig. 1. Overview of model 
V. CONVERSION FROM RGB TO GREYSCALE  
Initially, the image is converted to gray-scale from RGB, 
since it is computationally more light-weight and faster to 
process. For example, below we have provided two sets of 
images to an example filter; the image on the left is obtained 
by applying the “Sobel X” convolution filter on a grayscale 
image of the gear, whereas the image on the right is obtained 
by applying the “Sobel X” convolution-filter on a color 
image of the gear. 
 
             
 
Fig. 2. Comparision of convolution output for a grayscale image (L) input 
versus output for a color image input (R) 
As we can notice, the features of the grayscale image are 
recognizable, whereas the features in the color image are 
indecipherable. The image obtained from this process is used 
by the remaining stages of the computer vision sub-system. 
However, since the machine-learning model was trained on 
color images, the color image of the gears is passed onto the 
machine-learning subsystem. 
VI. APPLYING GAUSSIAN BLUR 
The color image of the component (obtained through a 
camera feed above the production line), is likely to have a lot 
of noise associated with. Before proceeding with the rest of 
steps, we apply a Gaussian blur on the image, smoothen it, 
and thereby reducing the associated noise. 
             
 
Fig. 3. Comparision of original [L] and resultant image after applying 
Gaussian blur (R) 
 
However, the stand deviation of the Gaussian blur 
applied on the image should not be increased incessantly. In 
some cases blurring the image too much leads to smudging 
of the edges, once the filters have been applied. [Fig. 4]. 
             
     
Fig. 4. Comparision of Sobel-X filtered images, when the standard 
deviation of blurring (along X and Y axes) is 13 (L) and 3 (R)   

VII. KERNEL-BANK 
The convolution-filters mentioned earlier are also 
referred to as “kernels”. These kernels are two dimensional 
matrices, which, through a series of mathematical operations 
with the grayscale image, produce output images with 
highlighted fractures. In this system, we employ 4 different 
kernels, which are: 
A. Sobel-X kernel 
This kernel is employed for detection of horizontal edges 
in images. It is a 3x3 matri which is convolved with the 
grayscale image to obtain a resultant image in which the 
horizontal edges are highlighted. It is represented as „Gx‟. 
 
 
Fig. 5. Matrix representation of Sobel-X operator (Note: ‘I’ is the matrix 
representation of grayscale image) 
B. Sobel-Y kernel 
Similar to the Sobel-X operator, the Sobel-Y operator is 
also used for edge detection. It is also a 3x3 matrix, which 
when convolved with the grayscale image to obtain a 
resultant in which the vertical edges are highlighted. It is 
represented as „Gy‟. 
 
 
Fig. 6. Matrix representation of Sobel-Y operator (Note: ‘I’ is the matrix 
representation of grayscale image) 
 
C. Laplacian Kernel 
The Laplace operator obtains the second derivative of the 
pixel intensity. Once the Sobel operators are applied on an 
image, the gradient of the pixels at the edge are the highest. 
Hence, the second derivative of the intensity at this point will 
be 0, and hence the edge can be detected. 
 
 
Fig. 7. Laplace equation for determining second derivative of pixel 
intensity 
 
D. Sharpen Kernel 
Images are usually composed of fine details, and these 
details tend to have high frequency components that make 
the image richer. If these high frequency components are 
attenuated, details of the images tend to be lost. Hence, in 
order to exaggerate the details and edges of the images, we 
pass the grayscale image through a sharpening kernel. 
VIII. RESULTS OF CONVOLUTION  
TABLE I.  
IMAGES OBTAINED AFTER CONVOLUTION 
Serial 
No. 
Images obtained after convolution 
Kernel Applied 
Result of convolution 
1. 
Sharpen 
2. 
Sobel X 
3. 
Sobel Y 
4. 
Laplacian 
 
IX. GENERATING DATASET FROM GOOGLE IMAGES 
In order to train the TensorFlow model, a large dataset 
of images has to be provided. In this paper, we wish to 
distinguish between broken and normal gears. Hence, we 
use a Google Images webscraper [12] to generate the two 
datasets of 200 images each; a) an image dataset of normal 
gears b) an image dataset of broken gears.  
X. RETRAINING FINAL LAYERS OF INCEPTION V3 
Inception V3 is a TensorFlow based machine-learning 
model, trained on a dataset of images belonging to 1000 
classes, with an identification error rate of just 3.4% (for 
comparison, humans exhibit an identification rate of 5.1% 
on the same dataset) [11].  
 
In order to prevent the model from memorizing the 
features in the dataset (“overfitting”) [4], the dataset is split 
into a) training, b) validation & c) test set. The training of 
the model is accordingly judged using three metrics; a) 
training accuracy, b) validation accuracy & c) cross entropy. 

 
Fig. 8. Division of datset during retraining of the model 
A. Training Data & Training Accuracy 
This is the prediction accuracy that the model attains 
when it‟s being trained on the portion of the dataset that is 
reserved as the training set. It comprises of nearly 60% of the 
image 
dataset, 
on 
which 
the 
model 
is 
trained.
 
Fig. 9. Increase in training accuracy with number of steps during 
retraining 
B. Validation Data & Validation Accuracy 
The validation data is used to keep the model in check 
during training, to make sure that it is not overfitting on the 
data provided, and randomly views it during training. 
 
Fig. 10. Increase in validation accuracy with number of steps during 
retraining 
Accordingly, the validation accuracy is the measure of 
how well the model correctly labels the images when the 
model is being trained on the validation data. 
C. Test Data 
This portion of the data is kept away from the training 
data & validation data during the training period. This data is 
used to determine the final accuracy of the model, once the 
training process on the other two sets has completed. Hence, 
the model will be making predictions on previously unseen 
data.  
D. Cross-Entropy 
This metric is used to determine how close the 
distribution of predictions made by the model is to the true 
distribution. Our aim is to reduce the cross-entropy as much 
as possible (as shown in Fig. 11.), to ensure that the 
predictions made by the model closely resemble the actual 
labels in the dataset. 
 
Fig. 11. Gradual decrease in cross-entropy during training and validation 
with number of steps during retraining. 
XI. PREDICTING THE PRESENCE OF DEFECTS 
When the image is routed to the machine-learning sub-
system, the pre-trained TensorFlow model tries to 
probabilistically determine which category the gear falls into. 
If the probability assigned to either category (in this case, 
normal gear and broken gear) exceeds 0.5, then the gear is 
classified into that particular category. 
 
Fig. 12. Result from the trained TensorFlow model 
If the gear is predicted by the model to be broken, it is 
immediately discarded from the production line. In some 
cases however, the system can wrongly predict the gear to be 
fractured; in such a case, the computer-vision system can be 
used by a human operator to visually check for the presence 
of defects. 

XII. RESULTS OF RETRAINED MODEL 
In most the cases the machine-learning sub-system 
correctly predicts the label of the component; as shown 
below in Table II. However, in some cases a label may be 
wrongly assigned to the given component. This feature of the 
system has been highlighted in the table below as well. 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS FROM SYSTEM 
 
For instance, in the second example, the model has 
incorrectly labelled the gear as broken, even though there are 
no apparent signs of wear or defects. Apart from this, the 
model does fairly well, clearly distinguishing between 
normal and broken gears. 
XIII. SCOPE FOR FURTHER DEVELOPMENT 
As seen in the previous section, the model can incorrectly 
label a given component (Table II, serial no. 2). This is 
primarily due to the size of our dataset used to retrain the 
model. In order to improve the predictions generated by this 
model, we have to increase the size of this dataset and 
introduce the model to more and more examples, thereby 
increasing the variety of samples that the model has  
a. Images shown were not part of the initial dataset that the model was trained on 
 
previously encountered. In order to further improve the 
detection of fractures by the computer-vision subsystem, we 
can incorporate a wider array of filters, to reduce the noise 
without necessarily reducing the quality and the richness of 
the image in the process. 
Serial No. 
Prediction obtained from VBI 
Input Image 
Predictions 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
 
4.
