Boosted Generative Models
Aditya Grover, Stefano Ermon
Computer Science Department
Stanford University

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for using unsupervised boost-
ing to create an ensemble of generative models, where models
are trained in sequence to correct earlier mistakes. Our meta-
algorithmic framework can leverage any existing base learner
that permits likelihood evaluation, including recent deep ex-
pressive models. Further, our approach allows the ensemble
to include discriminative models trained to distinguish real
data from model-generated data. We show theoretical condi-
tions under which incorporating a new model in the ensemble
will improve the ﬁt and empirically demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of our black-box boosting algorithms on density es-
timation, classiﬁcation, and sample generation on benchmark
datasets for a wide range of generative models.
1
Introduction
A variety of deep generative models have shown promising
results on tasks spanning computer vision, speech recog-
nition, natural language processing, and imitation learn-
ing (Poon and Domingos 2011; Oord, Kalchbrenner, and
Kavukcuoglu 2016; Kingma and Welling 2014; Goodfellow
et al. 2014; Zhao, Song, and Ermon 2017; Li, Song, and Er-
mon 2017). These parametric models differ from each other
in their ability to perform various forms of tractable infer-
ence, learning algorithms, and objectives. Despite signiﬁ-
cant progress, existing generative models cannot ﬁt complex
distributions with a sufﬁciently high degree of accuracy, lim-
iting their applicability and leaving room for improvement.
In this paper, we propose a technique for ensembling (im-
perfect) generative models to improve their overall perfor-
mance. Our meta-algorithm is inspired by boosting, a tech-
nique used in supervised learning to combine weak clas-
siﬁers (e.g., decision stumps or trees), which individually
might not perform well on a given classiﬁcation task, into
a more powerful ensemble. The boosting algorithm will at-
tempt to learn a classiﬁer to correct for the mistakes made by
reweighting the original dataset, and repeat this procedure
recursively. Under some conditions on the weak classiﬁers’
effectiveness, this procedure can drive the (training) error to
zero (Freund, Schapire, and Abe 1999). Boosting can also
be thought as a feature learning algorithm, where at each
round a new feature is learned by training a classiﬁer on a
Copyright c⃝2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
reweighted version of the original dataset. In practice, algo-
rithms based on boosting perform extremely well in machine
learning competitions (Caruana and Niculescu-Mizil 2006).
We show that a similar procedure can be applied to gen-
erative models. Given an initial generative model that pro-
vides an imperfect ﬁt to the data distribution, we construct
a second model to correct for the error, and repeat recur-
sively. The second model is also a generative one, which
is trained on a reweighted version of the original training
set. Our meta-algorithm is general and can construct ensem-
bles of any existing generative model that permits (approx-
imate) likelihood evaluation such as fully-observed belief
networks, sum-product networks, and variational autoen-
coders. Interestingly, our method can also leverage powerful
discriminative models. Speciﬁcally, we train a binary classi-
ﬁer to distinguish true data samples from “fake” ones gen-
erated by the current model and provide a principled way to
include this discriminator in the ensemble.
A prior attempt at boosting density estimation proposed a
sum-of-experts formulation (Rosset and Segal 2002). This
approach is similar to supervised boosting where at ev-
ery round of boosting we derive a reweighted additive es-
timate of the boosted model density. In contrast, our pro-
posed framework uses multiplicative boosting which multi-
plies the ensemble model densities and can be interpreted as
a product-of-experts formulation. We provide a holistic the-
oretical and algorithmic framework for multiplicative boost-
ing contrasting with competing additive approaches. Unlike
prior use cases of product-of-experts formulations, our ap-
proach is black-box, and we empirically test the proposed
algorithms on several generative models from simple ones
such as mixture models to expressive parameteric models
such as sum-product networks and variational autoencoders.
Overall, this paper makes the following contributions:
1. We provide theoretical conditions for additive and multi-
plicative boosting under which incorporating a new model
is guaranteed to improve the ensemble ﬁt.
2. We design and analyze a ﬂexible meta-algorithmic boost-
ing framework for including both generative and discrim-
inative models in the ensemble.
3. We demonstrate the empirical effectiveness of our algo-
rithms for density estimation, generative classiﬁcation,
and sample generation on several benchmark datasets.
arXiv:1702.08484v2  [cs.LG]  22 Dec 2017

2
Unsupervised boosting
Supervised boosting provides an algorithmic formalization
of the hypothesis that a sequence of weak learners can cre-
ate a single strong learner (Schapire and Freund 2012). Here,
we propose a framework that extends boosting to unsuper-
vised settings for learning generative models. For ease of
presentation, all distributions are with respect to any arbi-
trary x ∈Rd, unless otherwise speciﬁed. We use upper-case
symbols to denote probability distributions and assume they
all admit absolutely continuous densities (denoted by the
corresponding lower-case notation) on a reference measure
dx. Our analysis naturally extends to discrete distributions,
which we skip for brevity.
Formally, we consider the following maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) setting. Given some data points X =
{xi ∈Rd}m
i=1 sampled i.i.d. from an unknown distribu-
tion P, we provide a model class Q parameterizing the dis-
tributions that can be represented by the generative model
and minimize the Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence with re-
spect to the true distribution:
min
Q∈Q DKL(P∥Q).
(1)
In practice, we only observe samples from P and hence,
maximize the log-likelihood of the observed data X. Select-
ing the model class for maximum likelihood learning is non-
trivial; MLE w.r.t. a small class can be far from P, whereas
a large class poses the risk of overﬁtting in the absence of
sufﬁcient data, or even underﬁtting due to difﬁculty in op-
timizing non-convex objectives that frequently arise due to
the use of latent variable models, neural networks, etc.
The boosting intuition is to greedily increase model ca-
pacity by learning a sequence of weak intermediate models
{ht ∈Ht}T
t=0 that can correct for mistakes made by previ-
ous models in the ensemble. Here, Ht is a predeﬁned model
class (such as Q) for ht. We defer the algorithms pertain-
ing to the learning of such intermediate models to the next
section, and ﬁrst discuss two mechanisms for deriving the ﬁ-
nal estimate qT from the individual density estimates at each
round, {ht}T
t=0.
2.1
Additive boosting
In additive boosting, the ﬁnal density estimate is an arith-
metic average of the intermediate models:
qT =
T
X
t=0
αt · ht
where 0 ≤αt ≤1 denote the weights assigned to the in-
termediate models. The weights are re-normalized at every
round to sum to 1 which gives us a valid probability density
estimate. Starting with a base model h0, we can express the
density estimate after a round of boosting recursively as:
qt = (1 −ˆαt) · qt−1 + ˆαt · ht
where ˆαt denotes the normalized weight for ht at round t.
We now derive conditions on the intermediate models that
guarantee “progress” in every round of boosting.
Theorem 1. Let δt
KL(ht, ˆαt) = DKL(P∥Qt−1) −DKL(P∥Qt)
denote the reduction in KL-divergence at the tth round of
additive boosting. The following conditions hold:
1. Sufﬁcient: If EP
h
log
ht
qt−1
i
≥0, then δt
KL(ht, ˆαt) ≥0
for all ˆαt ∈[0, 1].
2. Necessary: If ∃ˆαt ∈(0, 1] such that δt
KL(ht, ˆαt) ≥0,
then EP
h
ht
qt−1
i
≥1.
Proof. In Appendix A.1.
The sufﬁcient and necessary conditions require that the
expected log-likelihood and likelihood respectively of the
current intermediate model, ht are better-or-equal than those
of the combined previous model, qt−1 under the true distri-
bution when compared using density ratios. Next, we con-
sider an alternative formulation of multiplicative boosting
for improving the model ﬁt to an arbitrary data distribution.
2.2
Multiplicative boosting
In multiplicative boosting, we factorize the ﬁnal density es-
timate as a geometric average of T + 1 intermediate models
{ht}T
t=0, each assigned an exponentiated weight αt:
qT =
QT
t=0 hαt
t
ZT
where the partition function ZT =
R QT
t=0 hαt
t dx. Recur-
sively, we can specify the density estimate as:
˜qt = hαt
t
· ˜qt−1
(2)
where ˜qt is the unnormalized estimate at round t. The base
model h0 is learned using MLE. The conditions on the inter-
mediate models for reducing KL-divergence at every round
are stated below.
Theorem 2. Let δt
KL(ht, αt) = DKL(P∥Qt−1) −DKL(P∥Qt)
denote the reduction in KL-divergence at the tth round of
multiplicative boosting. The following conditions hold:
1. Sufﬁcient:
If
EP [log ht]
≥
log EQt−1[ht],
then
δt
KL(ht, αt) ≥0 for all αt ∈[0, 1].
2. Necessary: If ∃αt ∈(0, 1] such that δt
KL(ht, αt) ≥0,
then EP [log ht] ≥EQt−1[log ht].
Proof. In Appendix A.2.
In contrast to additive boosting, the conditions above
compare expectations under the true distribution with expec-
tations under the model distribution in the previous round,
Qt−1. The equality in the conditions holds for αt = 0,
which corresponds to the trivial case where the current in-
termediate model is ignored in Eq. (2). For other valid αt,
the non-degenerate version of the sufﬁcient inequality guar-
antees progress towards the true data distribution. Note that
the intermediate models increase the overall capacity of the
ensemble at every round. As we shall demonstrate later, we
ﬁnd models ﬁt using multiplicative boosting to outperform
their additive counterparts empirically suggesting the condi-
tions in Theorem 2 are easier to fulﬁll in practice.

Algorithm 1 GenBGM(X = {xi}m
i=1, T rounds)
Initialize d0(xi) = 1/m for all i = 1, 2, . . . , m.
Obtain base generative model h0.
Set (unnormalized) density estimate ˜q0 = h0
for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
- Choose βt and update dt using Eq. (4).
- Train generative model ht to maximize Eq. (3).
- Choose αt.
- Set density estimate ˜qt = hαt
t
· ˜qt−1.
end for
Estimate ZT =
R
˜qT dx.
return qT = ˜qT /ZT .
From the necessary condition, we see that a “good” in-
termediate model ht assigns a better-or-equal log-likelihood
under the true distribution as opposed to the model distribu-
tion, Qt−1. This condition suggests two learning algorithms
for intermediate models which we discuss next.
3
Boosted generative models
In this section, we design and analyze meta-algorithms for
multiplicative boosting of generative models. Given any
base model which permits (approximate) likelihood evalua-
tion, we provide a mechanism for boosting this model using
an ensemble of generative and/or discriminative models.
3.1
Generative boosting
Supervised boosting algorithms such as AdaBoost typically
involve a reweighting procedure for training weak learn-
ers (Freund and Schapire 1995). We can similarly train
an ensemble of generative models for unsupervised boost-
ing, where every subsequent model performs MLE w.r.t a
reweighted data distribution Dt:
max
ht EDt[log ht]
(3)
where dt ∝
 p
qt−1
βt
(4)
and βt ∈[0, 1] is the reweighting coefﬁcient at round t. Note
that these coefﬁcients are in general different from the model
weights αt that appear in Eq. (2).
Proposition 1. If we can maximize the objective in Eq. (3)
optimally, then δt
KL(ht, αt) ≥0 for any βt ∈[0, 1] with the
equality holding for βt = 0.
Proof. In Appendix A.3.
While the objective in Eq. (3) can be hard to optimize in
practice, the target distribution becomes easier to approxi-
mate as we reduce the reweighting coefﬁcient. For the ex-
treme case of βt = 0, the reweighted data distribution is
simply uniform. There is no free lunch however, since a low
βt results in a slower reduction in KL-divergence leading to
a computational-statistical trade-off.
The pseudocode for the corresponding boosting meta-
algorithm, referred to as GenBGM, is given in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 2 DiscBGM(X = {xi}m
i=1, T rounds, f-div)
Initialize d0(xi) = 1/m for all i = 1, 2, . . . , m.
Obtain base generative model h0.
Set (unnormalized) density estimate ˜q0 = h0
for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
- Generate negative samples from qt−1
- Optimize rt to maximize RHS in Eq. (5).
- Set ht = [f ′]−1 (rt).
- Choose αt.
- Set density estimate ˜qt = hαt
t
· ˜qt−1.
end for
Estimate ZT =
R
˜qT dx.
return qT = ˜qT /ZT .
In practice, we only observe samples from the true data dis-
tribution, and hence, approximate p based on the empiri-
cal data distribution which is deﬁned to be uniform over
the dataset X. At every subsequent round, GenBGM learns
an intermediate model that maximizes the log-likelihood of
data sampled from a reweighted data distribution.
3.2
Discriminative boosting
A base generative model can be boosted using a discrimina-
tive approach as well. Here, the intermediate model is spec-
iﬁed as the density ratio obtained from a binary classiﬁer.
Consider the following setup: we observe an equal num-
ber of samples drawn i.i.d. from the true data distribution
(w.l.o.g. assigned the label y = +1) and the model distribu-
tion in the previous round Qt−1 (label y = 0).
Deﬁnition 1. Let f : R+ →R be any convex, lower semi-
continuous function satisfying f(1) = 0. The f-divergence
between P and Q is deﬁned as, Df(P∥Q) =
R
q·f (p/q) dx.
Notable examples include the Kullback-Liebler (KL) di-
vergence, Hellinger distance, and the Jenson-Shannon (JS)
divergence among many others. The binary classiﬁer in dis-
criminative boosting maximizes a variational lower bound
on any f-divergence at round t:
Df (P∥Qt−1) ≥sup
rt∈Rt
 EP [rt] −EQt−1[f ⋆(rt)]

.
(5)
where f ⋆denotes the Fenchel conjugate of f and rt : Rd →
domf ⋆parameterizes the classiﬁer. Under mild conditions
on f (Nguyen, Wainwright, and Jordan 2010), the lower
bound in Eq. (5) is tight if r⋆
t = f ′ (p/qt−1).
Hence, a solution to Eq. (5) can be used to estimate den-
sity ratios. The density ratios naturally ﬁt into the multiplica-
tive boosting framework and provide a justiﬁcation for the
use of objectives of the form Eq. (5) for learning intermedi-
ate models as formalized in the proposition below.
Proposition 2. For any given f-divergence, let r⋆
t denote the
optimal solution to Eq. (5) in the tth round of boosting. Then,
the model density at the end of the boosting round matches
the true density if we set αt = 1 and ht = [f ′]−1 (r⋆
t ) where
[f ′]−1 denotes the inverse of the derivative of f.
Proof. In Appendix A.4.

(a) Target
(b) Base model
Figure 1: The mixture of Gaussians setup showing (a) true
density and (b) base (misspeciﬁed) model.
The pseudocode for the corresponding meta-algorithm,
DiscBGM is given in Algorithm 2. At every round, we train
a binary classiﬁer to optimize the objective in Eq. (5) for a
chosen f-divergence. As a special case, the negative of the
cross-entropy loss commonly used for binary classiﬁcation
is also a lower bound on an f-divergence. While Algorithm 2
is applicable for any f-divergence, we will focus on cross-
entropy henceforth to streamline the discussion.
Corollary 1. Consider the (negative) cross-entropy objec-
tive maximized by a binary classiﬁer:
sup
ct∈Ct
EP [log ct] + EQt−1[log(1 −ct)].
(6)
If a binary classiﬁer ct trained to optimize Eq. (6) is Bayes
optimal, then the model density after round t matches the
true density if we set αt = 1 and ht = ct/1−ct.
Proof. In Appendix A.5.
In practice, a classiﬁer with limited capacity trained on a
ﬁnite dataset will not generally be Bayes optimal. The above
corollary, however, suggests that a good classiﬁer can pro-
vide a ‘direction of improvement’, in a similar spirit to gra-
dient boosting for supervised learning (Freund and Schapire
1995). Additionally, if the intermediate model distribution
ht obtained using the above corollary satisﬁes the conditions
in Theorem 2, it is guaranteed to improve the ﬁt.
The weights αt ∈[0, 1] can be interpreted as our con-
ﬁdence in the classiﬁcation estimates, akin to the step size
used in gradient descent. While in practice we heuristically
assign weights to the intermediate models, the greedy opti-
mum value of these weights at every round is a critical point
for δt
KL (deﬁned in Theorem 2). For example, in the ex-
treme case where ct is uninformative, i.e., ct ≡0.5, then
δt
KL(ht, αt) = 0 for all αt ∈[0, 1]. If ct is Bayes optimal,
then δt
KL attains a maxima when αt = 1 (Corollary 1).
3.3
Hybrid boosting
Intermediate models need not be exclusively generators or
discriminators; we can design a boosting ensemble with any
combination of generators and discriminators. If an interme-
diate model is chosen to be a generator, we learn a generative
model using MLE after appropriately reweighting the data
points. If a discriminator is used to implicitly specify an in-
termediate model, we set up a binary classiﬁcation problem.
Table 1: Average test NLL for mixture of Gaussians.
Model
NLL (in nats, with std. error)
Base model
4.69 ± 0.01
Add model
4.64 ± 0.02
GenBGM
4.58 ± 0.10
DiscBGM-NCE
4.42 ± 0.01
DiscBGM-HD
4.35 ± 0.01
3.4
Regularization
In practice, we want boosted generative models (BGM) to
generalize to data outside the training set X. Regularization
in BGMs is imposed primarily in two ways. First, every in-
termediate model can be independently regularized by incor-
porating explicit terms in the learning objective, early stop-
ping based on validation error, heuristics such as dropout,
etc. Moreover, restricting the number of rounds of boost-
ing is another effective mechanism for regularizing BGMs.
Fewer rounds of boosting are required if the intermediate
models are sufﬁciently expressive.
4
Empirical evaluation
Our experiments are designed to demonstrate the superi-
ority of the proposed boosting meta-algorithms on a wide
variety of generative models and tasks. A reference im-
plementation of the boosting meta-algorithms is available
at https://github.com/ermongroup/bgm. Addi-
tional implementation details for the experiments below are
given in Appendix B.
4.1
Multiplicative vs. additive boosting
A common pitfall with learning parameteric generative
models is model misspeciﬁcation with respect to the true un-
derlying data distribution. For a quantitative and qualitative
understanding of the behavior of additive and multiplica-
tive boosting, we begin by considering a synthetic setting
for density estimation on a mixture of Gaussians.
Density estimation on synthetic dataset.
The true data
distribution is a equi-weighted mixture of four Gaussians
centered symmetrically around the origin, each having an
identity covariance matrix. The contours of the underlying
density are shown in Figure 1a. We observe 1, 000 train-
ing samples drawn independently from the data distribution
(shown as black dots in Figure 2), and the task is to learn
this distribution. The test set contains 1, 000 samples from
the same distribution. We repeat the process 10 times for
statistical signiﬁcance.
As a base (misspeciﬁed) model, we ﬁt a mixture of two
Gaussians to the data; the contours for an example instance
are shown in Figure 1b. We compare multiplicative and addi-
tive boosting, each run for T = 2 rounds. For additive boost-
ing (Add), we extend the algorithm proposed by Rosset and
Segal (2002) setting ˆα0 to unity and doing a line search over
ˆα1, ˆα2 ∈[0, 1]. For Add and GenBGM, the intermediate

(a) Add model (1)
(b) Add model (2)
(c) GenBGM (1)
(d) GenBGM (2)
(e) DiscBGM-NCE (1)
(f) DiscBGM-NCE (2)
(g) DiscBGM-HD (1)
(h) DiscBGM-HD (2)
Figure 2: Multiplicative boosting algorithms such as GenBGM (c-d) and DiscBGM with negative cross-entropy (e-f) and
Hellinger distance (g-h) outperform additive boosting (a-b) in correcting for model misspeciﬁcation. Numbers in parenthesis
indicate boosting round t.
models are mixtures of two Gaussians as well. The classi-
ﬁers for DiscBGM are multi-layer perceptrons with two hid-
den layers of 100 units each and ReLU activations, trained
to maximize f-divergences corresponding to the negative
cross-entropy (NCE) and Hellinger distance (HD) using the
Adam optimizer (Kingma and Welling 2014).
The test negative log-likelihood (NLL) estimates are
listed in Table 1. Qualitatively, the contour plots for the es-
timated densities after every boosting round on a sample in-
stance are shown in Figure 2. Multiplicative boosting algo-
rithms outperform additive boosting in correcting for model
misspeciﬁcation. GenBGM initially leans towards maximiz-
ing coverage, whereas both versions of DiscBGM are rela-
tively more conservative in assigning high densities to data
points away from the modes.
Heuristic model weighting strategies.
The multiplicative
boosting algorithms require as hyperparameters the number
of rounds of boosting and weights assigned to the interme-
diate models. For any practical setting, these hyperparame-
ters are speciﬁc to the dataset and task under consideration
and should be set based on cross-validation. While automat-
ically setting model weights is an important direction for fu-
ture work, we propose some heuristic weighting strategies.
Speciﬁcally, the unity heuristic assigns a weight of 1 to ev-
ery model in the ensemble, the uniform heuristic assigns a
weight of 1/(T + 1) to every model, and the decay heuristic
assigns as a weight of 1/2t to the tth model in the ensemble.
In Figure 3, we observe that the performance of the algo-
rithms is sensitive to the weighting strategies. In particular,
DiscBGM produces worse estimates as T increases for the
“uniform” (red) strategy. The performance of GenBGM also
degrades slightly with increasing T for the “unity” (green)
strategy. Notably, the “decay” (cyan) strategy achieves sta-
ble performance for both the algorithms. Intuitively, this
0
1
2
3
4
5
T
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.0
NLL (in nats)
Base
Unity
Uniform
Decay
(a) GenBGM
0
1
2
3
4
5
T
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.0
NLL (in nats)
(b) DiscBGM-NCE
Figure 3: Train (dashed curves) and test (bold curves) NLL
(in nats) for weighting heuristics on mixture of Gaussians.
T is the number of rounds of boosting. The base model is
shown as a black cross at T = 0.
heuristic follows the rationale of reducing the step size in
gradient based stochastic optimization algorithms, and we
expect this strategy to work better even in other settings.
However, this strategy could potentially result in slower con-
vergence as opposed to the unity strategy.
Density estimation on benchmark datasets.
We now
evaluate the performance of additive and multiplicative
boosting for density estimation on real-world benchmark
datasets (Van Haaren and Davis 2012). We consider two
generative model families: mixture of Bernoullis (MoB) and
sum-product networks (Poon and Domingos 2011). While
our results for multiplicative boosting with sum-product net-
works (SPN) are competitive with the state-of-the-art, the
goal of these experiments is to perform a robust comparison
of boosting algorithms as well as demonstrate their applica-
bility to various model families.
We set T = 2 rounds for additive boosting and GenBGM.

Table 2: Experimental results for density estimation. Negative log-likelihoods reported in nats. Lower is better with best per-
forming models in bold. Overall, multiplicative boosting outperforms additive boosting and baseline models speciﬁed as Mix-
ture of Bernoullis (MoB, middle columns) and Sum Product Networks (SPN, right columns).
Dataset
#vars
MoB Base
Add
GenBGM
DiscBGM
SPN Base
Add
GenBGM
DiscBGM
Accidents
111
42.23
43.19
41.43
34.51
31.08
29.92
29.55
28.09
Retail
135
11.27
12.24
11.20
10.91
14.94
11.27
11.21
10.88
Pumsbstar
163
55.67
55.91
50.66
34.93
26.70
25.00
25.00
23.69
DNA
180
99.42
100.37
99.23
98.45
92.60
86.93
87.79
86.63
Kosarek
190
11.72
12.57
12.41
11.13
12.71
10.97
10.73
10.67
Ad
1556
63.13
63.73
63.19
54.79
19.19
18.12
18.14
17.82
Table 3: Experimental results for classiﬁcation. Prediction accuracy for predicting one variable given the rest. Higher is better
with best performing models in bold. Multiplicative boosting again outperforms additive boosting and baseline models speciﬁed
as Mixture of Bernoullis (MoB, middle columns) and Sum Product Networks (SPN, right columns).
Dataset
#test
MoB Base
Add
GenBGM
DiscBGM
SPN Base
Add
GenBGM
DiscBGM
Accidents
283,161
0.8395
0.8393
0.8473
0.9043
0.9258
0.9266
0.9298
0.9416
Retail
595,080
0.9776
0.9776
0.9776
0.9792
0.9780
0.9790
0.9789
0.9791
Pumsb-star
399,676
0.8461
0.8501
0.8819
0.9267
0.9599
0.9610
0.9611
0.9636
DNA
213,480
0.7517
0.7515
0.7531
0.7526
0.7799
0.7817
0.7828
0.7811
Kosarek
1,268,250
0.9817
0.9816
0.9818
0.9831
0.9824
0.9838
0.9838
0.9838
Ad
763,996
0.9922
0.9923
0.9818
0.9927
0.9982
0.9981
0.9982
0.9982
Since DiscBGM requires samples from the model density at
every round, we set T = 1 to ensure computational fairness
such that the samples can be obtained efﬁciently from the
base model sidestepping running expensive Markov chains.
Model weights are chosen based on cross-validation. The
results on density estimation are reported in Table 2. Since
multiplicative boosting estimates are unnormalized, we use
importance sampling to estimate the partition function.
When the base model is MoB, the Add model underper-
forms and is often worse than even the baseline model for
the best performing validated non-zero model weights. Gen-
BGM consistently outperforms Add and improves over the
baseline model in a most cases (4/6 datasets). DiscBGM per-
forms the best and convincingly outperforms the baseline,
Add, and GenBGM on all datasets. For results on SPNs, the
boosted models all outperform the baseline. GenBGM again
edges out Add models (4/6 datasets), whereas DiscBGM
models outperform all other models on all datasets. These
results demonstrate the usefulness of boosted expressive
model families, especially the DiscBGM approach, which
performs the best, while GenBGM is preferable to Add.
4.2
Applications of generative models
Classiﬁcation.
Here, we evaluate the performance of
boosting algorithms for classiﬁcation. Since the datasets
above do not have any explicit labels, we choose one of the
dimensions to be the label (say y). Letting x¯y denote the
remaining dimensions, we can obtain a prediction for y as,
p(y = 1|x¯y) =
p(y = 1, x¯y)
p(y = 1, x¯y) + p(y = 0, x¯y)
which is efﬁcient to compute even for unnormalized models.
We repeat the above procedure for all the variables predict-
ing one variable at a time using the values assigned to the re-
maining variables. The results are reported in Table 3. When
the base model is a MoB, we observe that the Add approach
could often be worse than the base model whereas GenBGM
performs slightly better than the baseline (4/6 datasets). The
DiscBGM approach consistently performs well, and is only
outperformed by GenBGM for two datasets for MoB. When
SPNs are used instead, both Add and GenBGM improve
upon the baseline model while DiscBGM again is the best
performing model on all but one dataset.
Sample generation.
We compare boosting algorithms
based on their ability to generate image samples for the bina-
rized MNIST dataset of handwritten digits (LeCun, Cortes,
and Burges 2010). We use variational autoencoders (VAE)
as the base model (Kingma and Welling 2014). While any
sufﬁciently expressive VAE can generate impressive exam-
ples, we design the experiment to evaluate the model com-
plexity approximated as the number of learnable parameters.
Ancestral samples obtained by the baseline VAE model
are shown in Figure 4a. We use the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) as a proxy for approximately evaluating the
marginal log-likelihood during learning. The conventional
approach to improving the performance of a latent variable
model is to increase its representational capacity by adding
hidden layers (Base + depth) or increasing the number of
hidden units in the existing layers (Base + width). These
lead to a marginal improvement in sample quality as seen
in Figure 4b and Figure 4c.
In contrast, boosting makes steady improvements in sam-
ple quality. We start with a VAE with much fewer parameters
and generate samples using a hybrid boosting GenDiscBGM
sequence VAE→CNN→VAE (Figure 4d) . The discrimi-
nator used is a convolutional neural network (CNN) (Le-
Cun and Bengio 1995) trained to maximize the negative
cross-entropy. We then generate samples using independent

(a) Base VAE
(200-100)
(b) Base + depth
(200-100-100)
(c) Base + width
(300-100)
(d) GenDiscBGM
(100-50)
Figure 4: The boosted model (d) demonstrates how ensembles of weak learners can generate sharper samples, compared to
naively increasing model capacity (a-c). Note that we show samples of binarized digits and not mean values for the pixels. VAE
hidden layer architecture given in parenthesis.
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) runs. The boosted se-
quences generate sharper samples than all baselines in spite
of having similar model capacity.
5
Discussion and related work
In this work, we revisited boosting, a class of meta-
algorithms developed in response to a seminal question: Can
a set of weak learners create a single strong learner? Boost-
ing has offered interesting theoretical insights into the fun-
damental limits of supervised learning and led to the devel-
opment of algorithms that work well in practice (Schapire
1990; Freund, Schapire, and Abe 1999; Friedman 2002;
Caruana and Niculescu-Mizil 2006). Our work provides
a foundational framework for unsupervised boosting with
connections to prior work discussed below.
Sum-of-experts.
Rosset and Segal (2002) proposed an
algorithm for density estimation using Bayesian networks
similar to gradient boosting. These models are normalized
and easy to sample, but are generally outperformed by mul-
tiplicative formulations for correcting for model misspec-
iﬁcation, as we show in this work. Similar additive ap-
proaches have been used for improving approximate poste-
riors for speciﬁc algorithms for variational inference (Guo et
al. 2016; Miller, Foti, and Adams 2017) and generative ad-
versarial networks (Tolstikhin et al. 2017). For a survey on
variations of additive ensembling for unsupervised settings,
refer to the survey by Bourel and Ghattas (2012).
Product-of-experts.
Our multiplicative boosting formula-
tion can be interpreted as a product-of-experts approach,
which was initially proposed for feature learning in energy
based models such as Boltzmann machines. For example,
the hidden units in a restricted Boltzmann machine can be
interpreted as weak learners performing MLE. If the num-
ber of weak learners is ﬁxed, they can be efﬁciently up-
dated in parallel but there is a risk of learning redundant fea-
tures (Hinton 1999; Hinton 2002). Weak learners can also
be added incrementally based on the learner’s ability to dis-
tinguish observed data and model-generated data (Welling,
Zemel, and Hinton 2002). Tu (2007) generalized the latter
to boost arbitrary probabilistic models; their algorithm is a
special case of DiscBGM with all α’s set to 1 and the dis-
criminator itself a boosted classiﬁer. DiscBGM additionally
accounts for imperfections in learning classiﬁers through
ﬂexible model weights. Further, it can include any classiﬁer
trained to maximize any f-divergence.
Related techniques such as noise-contrastive estimation,
ratio matching, and score matching methods can be cast as
minimization of Bregman divergences, akin to DiscBGM
with unit model weights (Gutmann and Hirayama 2011).
A non-parametric algorithm similar to GenBGM was pro-
posed by Di Marzio and Taylor (2004) where an ensemble
of weighted kernel density estimates are learned to approxi-
mate the data distribution. In contrast, our framework allows
for both parametric and non-parametric learners and uses a
different scheme for reweighting data points than proposed
in the above work.
Unsupervised-as-supervised learning.
The use of den-
sity ratios learned by a binary classiﬁer for estimation was
ﬁrst proposed by Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani (2001)
and has been subsequently applied elsewhere, notably
for parameter estimation using noise-contrastive estima-
tion (Gutmann and Hyv¨arinen 2010) and sample generation
in generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et
al. 2014). While GANs consist of a discriminator distin-
guishing real data from model generated data similar to Dis-
cBGM for a suitable f-divergence, they differ in the learning
objective for the generator (Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka
2016). The generator of a GAN performs an adversarial
minimization of the same objective the discriminator max-
imizes, whereas DiscBGM uses the likelihood estimate of
the base generator (learned using MLE) and the density ra-
tios derived from the discriminator(s) to estimate the model
density for the ensemble.
Limitations and future work.
In the multiplicative boost-
ing framework, the model density needs to be speciﬁed
only up to a normalization constant at any given round of
boosting. Additionally, while many applications of gener-
ative modeling such as feature learning and classiﬁcation
can sidestep computing the partition function, if needed it
can be estimated using techniques such as Annealed Impor-

tance Sampling (Neal 2001). Similarly, Markov chain Monte
Carlo methods can be used to generate samples. The lack of
implicit normalization can however be limiting for applica-
tions requiring fast log-likelihood evaluation and sampling.
In order to sidestep this issue, a promising direction for
future work is to consider boosting of normalizing ﬂow
models (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2014; Dinh, Sohl-
Dickstein, and Bengio 2017; Grover, Dhar, and Ermon
2018). These models specify an invertible multiplicative
transformation from one distribution to another using the
change-of-variables formula such that the resulting distri-
bution is self-normalized and efﬁcient ancestral sampling is
possible. The GenBGM algorithm can be adapted to nor-
malizing ﬂow models whereby every transformation is in-
terpreted as a weak learner. The parameters for every trans-
formation can be trained greedily after suitable reweighting
resulting in a self-normalized boosted generative model.
6
Conclusion
We presented a general-purpose framework for boosting
generative models by explicit factorization of the model
likelihood as a product of simpler intermediate model den-
sities. These intermediate models are learned greedily using
discriminative or generative approaches, gradually increas-
ing the overall model’s capacity. We demonstrated the effec-
tiveness of these models over baseline models and additive
boosting for the tasks of density estimation, classiﬁcation,
and sample generation. Extensions to semi-supervised learn-
ing (Kingma et al. 2014) and structured prediction (Sohn,
Lee, and Yan 2015) are exciting directions for future work.
