ML for Flood Forecasting at Scale
Sella Nevo1 Vova Anisimov1 Gal Elidan2 Ran El-Yaniv3 Pete Giencke5
Yotam Gigi2 Avinatan Hassidim4 Zach Moshe1 Mor Schlesinger5 Guy Shalev1
Ajai Tirumali1 Ami Wiesel2 Oleg Zlydenko5 Yossi Matias1,5
Abstract
Effective riverine ﬂood forecasting at scale is hindered by a multitude of factors,
most notably the need to rely on human calibration in current methodology, the
limited amount of data for a speciﬁc location, and the computational difﬁculty
of building continent/global level models that are sufﬁciently accurate. Machine
learning (ML) is primed to be useful in this scenario: learned models often surpass
human experts in complex high-dimensional scenarios, and the framework of
transfer or multitask learning is an appealing solution for leveraging local signals
to achieve improved global performance. We propose to build on these strengths
and develop ML systems for timely and accurate riverine ﬂood prediction.
Floods are the most common and deadly natural disaster in the world. Every year, ﬂoods cause from
thousands to tens of thousands of fatalities [1, 22, 2, 21, 14], affect hundreds of millions of people
[14, 21, 2], and cause tens of billions of dollars worth of damages [1, 2]. These numbers have only
been increasing in recent decades [23]. Indeed, the UN charter notes ﬂoods to be one of the key
motivators for formulating the sustainable development goals (SDGs), and directly challenges us:
"They knew that earthquakes and ﬂoods were inevitable, but that the high death tolls were not." [3]
Early warning systems for ﬂoods, even with limited lead time and accuracy, can reduce both fatalities
and economic damages by over a third, and in some cases almost by half [4, 27, 5]. Unfortunately, the
majority of human costs that are due to ﬂooding are concentrated in developing countries [14], which
often lack effective and actionable early warning systems due to limited data collection, funding, or
professional expertise [29]. The result is that, across multiple countries, thousands die on average
every year, and relief and mitigation efforts have little information to rely on.
We focus on riverine ﬂoods which are responsible for much of the effect on human life, and for
which we believe the opportunity for ML-based predictive models is substantial. Perhaps the biggest
challenge in scaling current hydrologic modeling efforts to a global scale is the parameter calibration
process - an optimization process aimed at matching model outputs to ground-truth measurements.
The standard existing methodology involves signiﬁcant manual work, which is arduous and time
consuming [10, 15], difﬁcult to teach [10], and is often over-parameterized [9]. The result is that
models that appear to work well at construction time, are often not able to generalize because of the
complex and dynamic nature of the problem [7]. Indeed, there have been many attempts to automate
this process, but without being able to reach a level of accuracy and reliability that is sufﬁcient for
use in operational systems [10, 24]. Practical use has thus been limited to either semi-automatic
processes which include manual intervention or interaction, [10, 17], or to aggressive constraining of
the model that leads to inferior results [8, 15].
The ﬁeld of Machine Learning (ML) is incredibly well-placed to overcome the above limitations
since many of the core challenges that stand in the way of automatic calibration of hydrologic models
are central to the ML arsenal. In fact, most large-scale ML systems these days replaced and improved
on earlier inferior system that were built and calibrated by hand. There have been previous efforts at
using ML for ﬂood prediction, but these have been typically limited to a handful of basins or even a
1 Google Research
2 Google Research and The Hebrew University
3 Google Research and Technion -
Israel Institute of Technology
4 Google Research and Bar-Ilan University
5 Google Crisis Response
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
arXiv:1901.09583v1  [cs.LG]  28 Jan 2019

single one [28, 30, 13, 18, 11, 20, 19, 12]. More often than not, the learned model was not able to
compete with manual calibration or achieve sufﬁcient reliability for operational use. We believe that
substantially better models can be learned by utilizing data at a larger scale. We also believe that
recent advances in inductive transfer, transfer learning and multitask learning (see [26] for a recent
survey) can overcome the difﬁculty of learning effective models from multiple related sources.
One of the main reasons the potential of ML for ﬂood prediction has not yet been realized is that there
are few organizations (or even communities) that have all the necessary components for success under
one roof: knowledge and experience in operational ﬂood forecasting; the ability to centralize data at
a global scale; the required expertise in ML; the ability to effectively deploy predictive information.
To start changing this reality, we developed and recently deployed an operational hydro-dynamic
model, in a pilot area around Patna, India [25], with the explicit goal of preparing the ground for
integrating ML models into the process. In this model, the physical processes are relatively well
understood for several decades now [31], and relatively little calibration is required. It receives
real-time measurements and short-term forecasts of river water levels in real-time, and produces
an inundation map estimating the ﬂood extent. Based on past events, our model’s ﬂood extent
estimates are accurate down to a spatial resolution of 300 meters, achieving over 90% recall and
over 75% precision. These results have been borne out by our ﬁrst alerts produced in real time for
the 2018 monsoon season. While our initial results are promising for this "simple" component of
ﬂood prediction, we did run into challenges we believe machine learning is well placed to solve: high
computational costs of the physics-based simulations; inaccuracies due to error-prone and biased
inputs; manual calibration that still dominates the amount of work required for each new location.
The above launched hydro-dynamic model is just one component of a full ﬂood forecasting system,
and the best understood one at that. We believe ML can improve the quality of multiple components,
including ones that are not well simulated by physics-based models, from absorption and snow-melt
models to river discharge estimation. Toward making this possible, we are collecting, organizing and
combining open data sets from different sources to make this problem more accessible for the ML
community. Together with the launched hydro-dynamic model, we believe this sets the ground for
the development, assessment, and deployment of ML models at the scale of countries and continents.
Concretely, we believe ML can provide large contributions to operational ﬂood forecasting systems
along each of the following axes:
ML-based hydro-dynamic modeling Computational costs still limit the scope and the resolution
of hydro-dynamic models. These costs could potentially be reduced by up to orders of
magnitude by integrating ML-based derivation methods, as has been experimentally done
for other ﬂuid dynamics systems (see e.g. [6]).
Remote discharge estimation Limited data is perhaps the most substantial obstacle for incorporat-
ing ML into the hydrology ﬁeld. Gauges measuring discharge and water levels are relatively
scarce, on the order of 100,000 globally. Yet the quantity, quality and variety of satellites
constantly imaging all rivers is rising at a rapid pace. Improving our ability to estimate river
discharge without in-situ measurements is a task that is both critical for the hydrology ﬁeld,
and incredibly well suited for ML. See [16] for our preliminary work in this area.
ML hydrologic models Data-driven hydrology models often under-perform, mainly due to lack
of sufﬁcient data: for each basin there are typically only hundreds to thousands of mea-
surements. Yet, hydrologic phenomena follows the same physical principles everywhere,
and it is reasonable to assume that by jointly considering the tasks of ﬂood prediction at
multiple locations we can do better. We conjecture that by utilizing recent advances in
transfer learning, we can do just that, and effectively learn at a global scale.
Hybrid physics-ML hydrologic models An alternative to the pure ML approach above, is to adopt a
hybrid approach where an ML model is integrated with classical physics-based components,
which can contain important prior knowledge about the structure of the domain. Intuitively,
one could view this approach as allowing the conceptual components to capture the majority
of the hydrologic modeling, while the ML model is responsible for calibration, error
corrections, and perhaps additional processes that were not well modelled.
In summary, we believe ML is particularly suited to improve effective ﬂood prediction at scale, and
we are excited to catalyze more academic and non-academic efforts in this direction.
2
