Search Based Code Generation for Machine Learning Programs
Muhammad Zubair Malik, Muhammad Nawaz,
Nimrah Mustafa
Information Technology University of the Punjab
Lahore, Pakistan

edu.pk
Junaid Haroon Siddiqui
LUMS School of Science and Engineering
Lahore, Pakistan

ABSTRACT
Machine Learning (ML) has revamped every domain of life as it
provides powerful tools to build complex systems that learn and
improve from experience and data. Our key insight is that to solve
a machine learning problem, data scientists do not invent a new
algorithm each time, but evaluate a range of existing models with
different configurations and select the best one. This task is labori-
ous, error-prone, and drains a large chunk of project budget and
time. In this paper we present a novel framework inspired by pro-
gramming by Sketching[8] and Partial Evaluation[4] to minimize
human intervention in developing ML solutions. We templatize
machine learning algorithms to expose configuration choices as
holes to be searched. We share code and computation between dif-
ferent algorithms, and only partially evaluate configuration space
of algorithms based on information gained from initial algorithm
evaluations. We also employ hierarchical and heuristic based prun-
ing to reduce the search space. Our initial findings indicate that our
approach can generate highly accurate ML models. Interviews with
data scientists show that they feel our framework can eliminate
sources of common errors and significantly reduce development
time.
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine Learning (ML) is a set of techniques that give computers
the ability to learn specific tasks from the data without being ex-
plicitly programmed. We are living in the golden age of machine
learning—ML algorithms have defeated humans in chess, learned to
drive autonomously, beat humans in Jeopardy, and out performed
humans in fundamentally innate tasks of image recognition as well
as speech understanding. While most of these battles were won by
well funded teams of highly trained engineers, machine learning
tools remain prohibitively expensive for average users and domain
experts. In this paper we present software engineering techniques
that make machine learning algorithms more usable by reducing
the time to specify them and making them less costly to build.
Sculley et al. [7], based on their experience at Google, observe
that software engineers developing ML code often have less time
to write high quality code or explore the best solutions. Fernández-
Delgad et al. [3] in a large scale study of various classifiers and
datasets note that even well trained data scientists choose only
classifiers from a range of familiar classifiers and do not necessarily
pick the best ones. Moreover, the developers are susceptible to
various machine learning pitfalls that existing APIs and frameworks
do not protect against [2]. As more and more applications move
to incorporate machine learning components in them, there is a
need to provide better software engineering and tool support to
developers.
Solar-Lezama [8] presented the Sketching framework to synthe-
size and generate code automatically from partial implementation
i.e. a high level specifications with holes. To generally express the
models as templates, we use a similar approach used by sketches.
Search mechanisms fill the holes to specify the models for specific
data and hyperparameters. Sketching uses SAT-based inductive
synthesis but our framework uses heuristics guided searching to
fill the holes. To reduce the search space and runtime, we exploit
partial evaluation [4]. While searching optimal hyperparameters,
we can treat a previously trained model as partial evaluated and
can update it for new combinations of hyperparameters. Thornton
et al. used Bayesian optimization in Auto-Weka [9] to search for
models and hyperparameters for a given dataset and integrated
it with Weka [5]. The focus of their technique is to optimize and
automate the model searching mechanism using a statistical ap-
proach i.e. Bayesian optimization. By contrast, we show that we can
develop a comprehensive machine learning framework using soft-
ware engineering techniques such as sketching, partial evaluation,
and searching using rule based decision.
In this paper we present a proof of concept implementation of
our machine learning pipeline. We have selected a set of supervised1
learning algorithms and stored their templates, similar to sketches
with holes. The user can set up the problem by providing a data
source, its format, and select the column with class labels. Our
approach preprocesses the data, normalizes it, and analyzes the
data for its classes and features. We use a systematic search to find
the best hyperparameter configuration that fills the "holes" for each
classification algorithm. We only partially evaluate the search space
and employ heuristics to prune our search space. Our approach
ranks the algorithms based on their accuracy and returns the top
candidate.
Contributions: We make various novel contributions in this
work. We are the first to employ code synthesis and compiler opti-
mization techniques to generate machine learning code. Existing
model selection techniques [9] do not prune search space and sim-
ply attempt to find an optimum value based on a given criteria, and
they do not work across various algorithms. We borrow meticulous
engineering steps traditionally used in compiler optimization to
prune the search space as well as transfer computation and infor-
mation across algorithms.
2
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
In this section we demonstrate how our prototype classifiers real
life datasets by selecting the right model with optimal hyperpa-
rameters and pruning search space using partial-evaluation and
1Supervised machine learning algorithms assume that the training data has class labels
available
arXiv:1801.09373v2  [cs.SE]  6 Feb 2018

rules. Suppose we want to determine labels of ‘Glass Identification’
dataset from UCI repository [1]. We call the program as:
metaClassifier(format=’CSV’, source=’./glass.csv’,
verbose=True, hasHeader=True)
Some arguments like data source are mandatory while others like
data format are optional which are either inferred like data for-
mat or can be set as default such as default verbose=False. The
arguments are parsed and the program is initialized. The holes of
data acquisition sketches are filled by determining the data source
and format and the potential search space is built i.e. classifiers
and their hyperparameters’ candidate space. By default, the size of
search space for classification is more than a thousand i.e. the sum
of the combinations of hyperparameters of all classifiers under con-
sideration. In case of the SVC, the hyperparameters’ candidate space
is given below having forty combinations of hyperparameters:
CSVcandSpace =

kernel ∈{linear,rbf ,siдmoid}
C ∈{1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000}



kernel ∈{poly}
C ∈{1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000}
deдree ∈{3, 4, 5, 6, 7}



The dataset is analyzed to determine that it has ten features,
two hundreds and fourteen instances and six classes implying it
is a multiclass dataset and prune out all classifiers and/or hyper-
parameters from candidate space specific to binary-class datasets
like for Logistic Regression, multi_class ∈{multinomial} instead
of multi_class ∈{multinomial,ovr}, because ovr repeatedly uses
a binary approach to fit multiclass datasets. Next, linearly separable
test’ using perceptron is carried out. Its code is generated by filling
the holes of perceptron with default parameters (penalty=None,
alpha=0.0001 etc.) to classify the dataset and the accuracy is com-
puted which is 43% (< 50%). Concluding that the data is not linearly
separable, the search space is updated by removing linear classifiers
such as linearSVC, and hyperparameters such as liblinear from
solvers for Logistic Regression and linear from kernels of SVC.
This reduces the search space to about 80% of the original.
After preliminary pruning, the program begins to search the best
model and optimal hyperparameters while dynamically pruning
the remaining search space. It starts from the sketch of SVC:
SVC(C=??, kernel=??, degree=??)
by filling the holes from the above given candidate space e.g. C=1,
kernel=rbf (linear kernel is pruned and degree is needed only if
kernel=poly). Next it tries kernel=rbf, C={10, 100} and deter-
mines that by increasing C beyond 10, the accuracy is not increasing
so rules out higher values of C. Same rule applies to max_iter and
some other numeric hyperparameters to reduce search space. Fur-
ther models and their hyperparameters are tried while pruning
out the search space. Search space reduces to about 60% of the
original and when it exhausts, the model configuration with high-
est accuracy is selected to predict the labels, which is SVC(C=10,
kernel=rbf) in this case. Consider another example of ‘Wisconsin
Breast Cancer Dataset‘ from UCI dataset repository which is linearly
separable binary class dataset. Passing the linear separability test
i.e. running perceptron, LinearSVC on this dataset, we can rule
out all non-linear options (both classifiers and hyperparameters).
3
APPROACH
Our approach to develop the framework is similar to fundamental
ML pipeline. Every module of pipeline automates the work to miti-
gate the human intervention and reduces the search space wherever
possible. Figure 1 demonstrates our pipeline approach. Module A
acquires the datasets from given source provided by a user as ar-
guments. The test and training datasets are fed to Module B for
data preparation without any human intervention to standardize
the data like predicting the missing values and data transformation.
After common preprocessing, the framework inspects data in Mod-
ule D to get its size i.e. the number of instances, features, number of
classes, and also run some simple tests like linear separability test.
Using the results of inspection and heuristics, Module E updates
the search space by including or excluding the linear models and
their hyperparameters—building the list of classifiers 𝒞and the list
of their corresponding hyperparameters ℋ.
After preparation, the labeled (training) datasets is used for
model-selection using stratified K-fold cross validation where
the framework selects the best model without user intervention. In
Module C, labeled dataset is split in k stratified folds i.e. Dlabeled =
{D1, D2, ..., Dk }. Module F picks the classifier sketch C and its hy-
perparameters’ candidate space ℋfrom search space and generates
code by filling the holes of sketch and the generated model is trained
using train set i.e. Dlabeled\Di, 1 < i < k. In Module G, the labels
are predicted for test features i.e. Di using model testing. Accuracy
is computed using predicted labels and actual labels in Module H,
Model Evaluation. After each model evaluation, heuristics are
gathered to update and prune the search space for example if ac-
curacy is not increased by increasing the value of max_iter in
Logistic Regression, we can remove all combinations of hyperpa-
rameters with higher values of max_iter. When the search space
exhausts, our framework selects the model with highest accuracy
to predict the labels of unlabeled (test) dataset in Module I and the
predicted labels are output to user.
Algorithm 1 outlines our framework to solve classification prob-
lems automatically. The framework takes minimum information
like data source and format, labels’ information, time budget, etc.
as arдs. It parses the arдs and sets the fields of options (line 2); a
dictionary holding global variables and behavior of the framework.
3.1
Model Selection, Hyperparameters
Optimization and Feature Selection
Our framework prototype treats the classification problem as a
meta-search — the combined selection of classifier, its best hyperpa-
rameters and features selection. Suppose we have a set of classifiers,
𝒞= {C1, C2, ..., Cn} and their respective hyperparameters spaces
as ℋ= {H1, H2, ..., Hn}. Algorithm 1 from line 8 to 17 iterates
over the search space while updating and reducing. The search con-
tinues until interruption due to resource budget constraints or the
search space 𝒮= Í
i |Hi | exhausts. In time constraints, where 𝒮
does not exhaust, to find the potentially best model, the searching
algorithm takes some decisions based on previous observations
(explained in §3.2). In a given dataset, each feature/attribute doesn’t
contribute to a solution equally. Line 9 selects best features of the
dataset for C. From line 10 to 15, the algorithm iterates over all fea-
sible combinations of hyperparameters of Hi for a given classifier
2

Figure 1: Framework Pipeline
Algorithm 1 Meta Classifier
1: procedure metaClassifier(arдs)
2:
options ←parse(arдs)
▷options is global dictionary
3:
Dtrain, Dtest = acqreData()
4:
preprocess(Dtrain, Dtest )
▷Common preprocessing
5:
inspectData(Dtrain, Dtest ) ▷Inspect and run basic test
6:
Build list 𝒞and corresponding ℋ
▷based on data tests
7:
results ←ϕ
▷To hold results of cross validation
8:
while not interrupted And C ←𝒞.removeHead() do
9:
Dtrain, f eatures = SelectFeatures(C, Dtrain)
10:
while ℋC not exhausts do
▷ℋC is the grid of C
11:
Initialize C with Hj
C
▷Set jth combination
12:
acc,std = evaluateModel(C, Dtrain)
13:
results.Add(acc,std, C, Hj
C, f eatures)
14:
Update ℋC
15:
end while
16:
Update 𝒞and ℋ
17:
end while
18:
Get appropriate model i.e with max(accu) and min(std)
19:
y = model.predict(Dtest )
20:
return y
21: end procedure
Ci and using stratified cross validation, the scores (accuracy and std.
deviation) are calculated and recorded in results.
3.2
Optimizations
The naïve searching mechanism can end up owing limited time
budget and in those cases, sometime the searched model may not be
the best one. To mitigate these situations, we used different software
engineering techniques. In this subsection, we describe the non-
exhaustive list of the optimization tactics used in our prototype
framework.
Sharing of Code and Computation: Machine learning models
solving similar problems like classification have tendency to share
code and computation to a reasonable extent. For example, instead
of loading data from either local storage or remote server for every
model separately, an obvious optimization is to load data once and
perform some common preprocessing before executing some model
on it.
Templatization and Code Generation: For generalization of the
models, we define them as templates in the same fashion as of the
sketches for program synthesis [8]. The partial implementation of
models is generic enough to synthesize (generate) the final code
with specific data and hyperparameters.
Partial Evaluation: While searching the best hyperparameters
of a model, for two consecutive combinations (where usually, the
value of one hyperparameter is changed), we can use the previously
fitted model as a partially evaluated module and update it. For ex-
ample, finding the optimal number of epochs for stochastic gradient
descent used by many ML models, instead of restarting iteration
and initializing coefficients to zeros, we can resume iterations by
retaining the coefficients. Moreover, different hyperparameters of
a model usually control independent properties of an underlying
algorithm.
Heuristics: Previous execution of a model with a combination of
hyperparameters may, in some cases, omit other combinations. For
example, while searching for the best hyperparameters for logistic
regression, if the accuracy does not improve with the increase of
max_iter (but keeping all other hyperparameters constant), we
can skip all combinations of hyperparameters with higher values of
max_iter. Similarly, the observations derived from the executions
of one model can lead to the prioritization of other models. This
raises the probability that the best model is selected despite interrup-
tion due to time constraints. For example, if we run SGDClassifier
and its accuracy with loss=perceptron is very low, we should try
classifier Perceptron at the end. We continue updating our search
space i.e. the list 𝒞and hyperparameters ℋbased on the observa-
tions to reduce the search space and prioritize models.
Rule based Optimization: The knowledge and insights of the data
scientists guiding the search for the best performing model can be,
in fact, translated into a long rule-based list, thereby automating
the human decision making process, as in rule based expert systems.
Following are a few examples:
• Linearly Separable Test: We should start the search using
SVM classifier (i.e C1 = SVM) without some kernel or with
linear kernel. If the score/accuracy is reasonably high, we
can conclude that data is potentially linearly separable and
we should first try other linear classifiers such as SVM with
fine tuning.
• Each hyperparameter is not used in every combination. Thus,
we can ignore these to reduce the search space. For instance,
in case of scikit-learn’s logistic regression, n_jobs and
warm_start hyperparameters are ignored if solver is set
to liblinear. Similarly, in case of sklearn.svm.SVC, the
hyperparameter degree is ignored for all kernels except
kernel=poly.
3

Dataset
Best Hyperparameters
Accu
Breast Cancer
LR
solver=liblinear, max_iter=10, penalty=l1, C=1 0.98
Iris
LR
solver=newton-cg, max_iter=100,
1
multi_class=multinomial, pen=l2, C=100
Glass
SVC kernel=rbf, C=10
0.76
Ionosphere
SVC kernel=rbf, C=10
0.88
Diabetes
SVC kernel=linear, C=1
0.78
Sonar
SVC kernel=rbf, C=1
0.82
Table 1: Best Models with Hyperparameters and Accuracy
4
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
In order to evaluate our proposed framework, we implemented a
prototype having the following classifiers: Logistic Regression, Per-
ceptron, Support Vector Machine (SVM) Classifier and Linear SVM
Classifier. Instead of implementing these classifiers from scratch, we
used scikit-learn [6] as the underlying models along with some
basic preprocessing and grid search to find the optimal hyperparam-
eters. Our framework is designed generically to further incorporate
other classifiers such as Naive Bayes, as well as preprocessing tech-
niques and optimization insights. In the same fashion, we can scale
it for other machine learning problems such as regression, clustering
etc.
We evaluated the prototype on some common datasets from UCI
Machine Learning Repository [1]. Table 1 shows the best model
with optimal hyperparameters, accuracies and execution time of
the test suit. In order to evaluate usability, we are interviewing ML
practitioners to gather data on the time, effort and cost splurged in
writing and debugging code. So far, we have anecdotal evidence that
even experienced ML users fall into common pitfalls such as not
using stratification, not identifying outliers, forgetting to normalize,
or using different scales on train and test sets resulting in loss of
precious time and effort. We plan to carry out a full scale qualitative
and quantitative usability study and anticipate that ML users and
particularly domain experts would benefit from the implementation
support and ML insights provided by the framework.
5
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Search based software engineering can revolutionize the field of
machine learning. We strongly believe that work presented in this
paper will be foundational in a massive effort to democratize ma-
chine learning and enable average users and domain experts to take
full advantage of the technology. We have abstracted and templa-
tized ML algorithms thus exposing interfaces for searching it. We
foresee many promising future direction arising from our work:
Self Application of Machine Learning: One key observation
of our work is that we can apply machine learning to discover and
find better machine learning solutions. The curse of dimensionality
and search space explosion have been a key hindrance in applying
machine learning to itself. Initial approaches attempted to explore
the entire space or approach it with random searching. We have
presented a more systematic method that prunes the space based on
human insights, which is comparable to how data scientists make
decision and produce equivalent results. We believe this provides
an avenue to explore other ML techniques to pick the best ML
algorithm. For example, a Deep Neural Network (DNN) which
decides which ML approach will work best for the given data and
classification problem.
Transfer Learning among ML Algorithms: When data sci-
entist run a machine learning algorithm, they naturally select the
parameters and hyperparameters based on earlier runs of other
algorithms or prior runs on a smaller dataset. This transfer of knowl-
edge is the key to reducing the state space. In this paper we have
used heuristics to transfer information, but in the future we are
working on analytical solutions to this problem. The key advan-
tage of an analytical solution is that it allows us to initialize the
parameters of the algorithms optimally thus reducing the time for
algorithm convergence.
Searching for Algorithm Architecture: We also see the pos-
sibility of extending our work to directly search the architecture of
ML algorithm, chaining different algorithms and composing them
like software modules. A simple example of compositional search
would be to have a DNN that combines DNNs to find nose, ears,
lips and eyes to find a face. This creates a possibility of building
Wide Neural Networks where parts are searched in parallel.
Optimizing for Commodity Hardware: MapReduce and Spark
have demonstrated the power of distributed system in exploring
large search spaces in fraction of seconds. We believe that search
based ML will become main stream as we port our search to exploit
large scale distributed systems.
6
CONCLUSION
In this work we have demonstrated that software engineering tech-
niques can make machine learning accessible to average users. We
are able to represent ML algorithms with holes that our approach
can efficiently and optimally fill with rules guided systematic search.
We have also implemented a machine learning pipeline to search
across different ML algorithms and transfer knowledge between
models being evaluated to minimize the human effort. The ultimate
objective of our research is to build an end-to-end machine learning
solution that can find the best model without any human interven-
tion. The work presented here is a very promising first step in this
direction.
