Convolutional Neural Network for Earthquake
Detection and Location
Thibaut Perola,∗, Micha¨el Gharbib, Marine A. Denollec
aJohn A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA
bComputer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
cEarth and Planetary Sciences department, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
Abstract
The recent evolution of induced seismicity in Central United States calls for
exhaustive catalogs to improve seismic hazard assessment.
Over the last
decades, the volume of seismic data has increased exponentially, creating a
need for eﬃcient algorithms to reliably detect and locate earthquakes. To-
day’s most elaborate methods scan through the plethora of continuous seismic
records, searching for repeating seismic signals. In this work, we leverage the
recent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence and present ConvNetQuake, a highly
scalable convolutional neural network for earthquake detection and location
from a single waveform. We apply our technique to study the induced seis-
micity in Oklahoma (USA). We detect 20 times more earthquakes than previ-
ously cataloged by the Oklahoma Geological Survey. Our algorithm is orders
of magnitude faster than established methods.
The recent exploitation of natural resources and associated waste water
injection in the subsurface have induced many small and moderate earth-
quakes in the tectonically quiet Central United States [Ellsworth, 2013]. In-
duced earthquakes contribute to seismic hazard. During the past 5 years only,
six earthquakes of magnitude higher than 5.0 might have been triggered by
nearby disposal wells. Most earthquake detection methods are designed for
large earthquakes. As a consequence, they tend to miss many of the low-
magnitude induced earthquakes that are masked by seismic noise. Detecting

Preprint submitted to XXX
February 8, 2017
arXiv:1702.02073v1  [physics.geo-ph]  7 Feb 2017

and cataloging these earthquakes is key to understanding their causes (nat-
ural or human-induced); and ultimately, to mitigate the seismic risk.
Traditional approaches to earthquake detection [Allen, 1982; Withers
et al., 1998] fail to detect events buried in even modest levels of seismic
noise. Waveform similarity can be used to detect earthquakes that originate
from a single region, with the same source mechanism. Waveform autocor-
relation is the most eﬀective method to identify these repeating earthquakes
from seismograms [Gibbons and Ringdal, 2006]. While particularly robust
and reliable, the method is computationally intensive and does not scale to
long time series. One approach to reduce computation is to select a small set
of short representative waveforms as templates and correlate only these with
the full-length continuous time series [Skoumal et al., 2014]. The detection
capability of template matching techniques strongly depends on the number
of templates used. Today’s most elaborate methods seek to reduce the num-
ber of templates by principal component analysis [Harris, 2006; Harris and
Dodge, 2011; Barrett and Beroza, 2014; Benz et al., 2015], or locality sensitive
hashing [Yoon et al., 2015]. These techniques still become computationally
expensive as the database of templates grows. More fundamentally, they do
not address the issue of representation power. These methods are restricted
to the sole detection of repeating signals. Finally, most of these methods do
not locate earthquakes.
We cast earthquake detection as a supervised classiﬁcation problem and
propose the ﬁrst convolutional network for earthquake detection and loca-
tion (ConvNetQuake).
Our algorithm builds on recent advances in deep
learning [Krizhevsky et al., 2012; LeCun et al., 2015; van den Oord et al.,
2016; Xiong et al., 2016]. It is trained on a large dataset of labeled waveforms
and learns a compact representation that can discriminate seismic noise from
earthquake signals. The waveforms are no longer classiﬁed by their similarity
to other waveforms, as in previous work. Instead, we analyze the waveforms
with a collection of nonlinear local ﬁlters. During the training phase, the ﬁl-
ters are optimized to select features in the waveforms that are most relevant
to classify them as either noise or an earthquake. This bypasses the need to
store a perpetually growing library of template waveforms. Thanks to this
representation, our algorithm generalizes well to earthquake signals never
seen during training. It is more accurate than state-of-the-art algorithms
and runs orders of magnitude faster. Additionally, ConvNetQuake outputs a
probabilistic location of an earthquake’s source from a single waveform. We
evaluate our algorithm and apply it to induced earthquakes in Central Ok-
2

lahoma (USA). We show that it uncovers earthquakes absent from standard
catalogs.
Results
Data. The state of Oklahoma (USA) has recently experienced a dramatic
surge in seismic activity [Ellsworth, 2013; Holland, 2013; Benz et al., 2015]
that has been correlated with the intensiﬁcation of waste water injection [Ker-
anen et al., 2013; Walsh and Zoback, 2015; Weingarten et al., 2015; Shirzaei
et al., 2016]. Here, we focus on the particularly active area near Guthrie
(Oklahoma). In this region, the Oklahoma state Geological Survey (OGS)
cataloged 2021 seismic events from 15 February 2014 to 16 November 2016
(see Figure 1). Their seismic moment magnitudes range from Mw -0.2 to Mw
5.8. We use the continuous ground velocity records from two local stations
GS.OK027 and GS.OK029 (see Figure 1). GS.OK027 was active from 14
February 2014 to 3 March 2015. GS.OK029 was deployed on 15 February
2014 and has remained active since. Signals from both stations are recorded
at 100 Hz on 3 channels corresponding to the three spatial dimensions: HHZ
oriented vertically, HHN oriented North-South and HHE oriented West-East.
Generating location labels. We partition the 2021 earthquakes into 6 ge-
ographic clusters. For this we use the K-Means algorithm [MacQueen et al.,
1967], with the Euclidean distance between epicenters as the metric. The
centro¨ıds of the clusters we obtain deﬁne 6 areas on the map (Figure 1). Any
point on the map is assigned to the cluster whose centro¨ıd is the closest (i.e.,
each point is assigned to its Vorono¨ı cell). We ﬁnd that 6 clusters allow for
a reasonable partition of the major earthquake sequences. Our classiﬁcation
thus contains 7 labels, or classes in the machine learning terminology: class
0 corresponds to seismic noise without any earthquake, classes 1 to 6 corre-
spond to earthquakes originating from the corresponding geographic area.
Extracting windows for classiﬁcation. We divide the continuous wave-
form data into monthly streams. We normalize each stream individually by
subtracting the mean over the month and dividing by the absolute peak am-
plitude (independently for each of the 3 channels). We extract two types of
10 second long windows from these streams: windows containing events and
windows free of events (i.e. containing only seismic noise).
To select the event windows and attribute their geographic cluster, we use
the catalogs from the OGS. Together, GS.OK027 and GS.OK029 yield 2918
3

windows of labeled earthquakes for the period between 15 February 2014 and
16 November 2016.
We look for windows of seismic noise in between the cataloged events.
Because some of the low magnitudes earthquakes we wish to detect are most
likely buried in seismic noise, it is important that we reduce the chance of
mislabeling these events as noise. This is why we use a more exhaustive cat-
alog created by Benz et al. [2015] to select our noise examples. This catalog
covers the same geographic area but for the period between 15 February and
31 August 2014 only and does not locate events. This yields 831,111 windows
of seismic noise.
Training/testing split. We split the windows dataset into two indepen-
dent sets: a test set and a training set. The test set contains all the windows
for July 2014 (209 events and 131,072 windows of noise) while the training
set contains the remaining windows.
Dataset augmentation. Deep classiﬁers like ours have many trainable
parameters. They require a large amount of examples of each class to ovoid
overﬁtting and generalize correctly to unseen examples.
To build a large
enough dataset of events, we use streams recorded at two stations (GSOK029
and GSOK27, see Figure S3). The input of our network is a single waveform
recorded at either of these stations. Furthermore, we generate additional
event windows by perturbing existing ones with zero-mean Gaussian noise.
This balances the number of event and noise windows during training, a
strategy to regularize the network and prevent overﬁtting [Sietsma and Dow,
1991; Jaitly and Hinton, 2013; Cui et al., 2015; Salamon and Bello, 2016].
ConvNetQuake. Our model is a deep convolutional network (Figure 2). It
takes as input a window of 3-channel waveform data and predicts its label
(noise or event, with its geographic cluster). The parameters of the network
are optimized to minimize the discrepancy between the predicted labels and
the true labels on the training set (see the Methods section for details).
Detection accuracy. In a ﬁrst experiment to assess the detection perfor-
mance of our algorithm, we ignore the geographic label (i.e., labels 1–6 are
considered as a single “earthquake” class). The detection accuracy is the per-
centage of windows correctly classiﬁed as earthquake or noise. Our algorithm
successfully detects all the events cataloged by the OGS, reaching 100 % ac-
curacy on event detection (see Table 1). Among the 131,972 noise windows
4

of our test set, ConvNetQuake correctly classiﬁes 129,954 noise windows. It
classiﬁes 2018 of the noise windows as events. Among them, 1902 windows
were conﬁrmed as events by the autocorrelation method (detailed in the sup-
plementary materials). That is, our algorithm made 116 false detections, for
an accuracy of 99.9 % on noise windows.
Location accuracy. We then evaluate the location performance. For each
of the detected events, we compare the predicted class (1–6) with the true
geographic label. We obtain 74.5 % location accuracy on the test set (see
Table 1).
For comparison with a “chance” baseline, selecting a class at
random would give 1/6 = 16.7 % accuracy.
We also experimented with a larger number of clusters (50, see Figure S4)
and obtained 22.5 % in location accuracy, still 10 times better than chance at
1/50 = 2 %. This performance drop is not surprising since, on average, each
class now only provides 40 training samples, which is insuﬃcient for proper
training.
Probabilistic location map. Our network computes a probability distri-
bution over the classes.
This allows us to create a probabilistic map of
earthquake location. We show in Figure 3 the maps for a correctly located
event and an erroneous classiﬁcation. For the correctly classiﬁed event, most
of the probability mass is on the correct class. This event is classiﬁed with
approximately 99 % conﬁdence. For the misclassiﬁed event, the probability
distribution is more diﬀuse and the location conﬁdence drops to 40 %.
Generalization to non-repeating events. Our algorithm generalizes well
to waveforms very dissimilar from those in the training set. We quantify this
using synthetic seismograms, comparing our method to template matching.
We generate day-long synthetic waveforms by inserting multiple copies of
a given template over a Gaussian noise ﬂoor, varying the Signal-to-Noise-
Ratio (SNR) from -1 to 8 dB. An example of synthetic seismogram is shown
in Figure S2.
We choose two templates waveforms T1 and T2 (shown in Figure S1).
Using the procedure described above, we generate a training set using T1 and
two testing sets using T1 and T2 respectively. We train both ConvNetQuake
and the template matching method (see supplementary materials) on the
training set (generated with T1).
On the T1 testing set, both methods successfully detect all the events. On
the other testing set (containing only copies of T2), the template matching
5

method fails to detect inserted events even at high SNR. ConvNetQuake
however recognizes the new (unknown) events. The accuracy of our model
remarkably increases with SNR (see Figure 4). For SNRs higher than 7 dB,
ConvNetQuake detects all the inserted seismic events.
Many events in our dataset from Oklahoma are non-repeating events (we
highlighted two in Figure 1). Our experiment on synthetic data suggests
that methods relying on template matching cannot detect them while Con-
vNetQuake can.
Earthquake detection on continuous records. We run ConvNetQuake
on one month of continuous waveform data recorded with GS.OK029 in July
2014. The 3-channel waveforms are cut into 10 second long, non overlap-
ping windows, with a 1 second oﬀset between consecutive windows to avoid
possibly redundant detections. Our algorithm detects 4225 events never cat-
aloged before by the OGS. This is about 5 events per hour. Autocorrelation
conﬁrms 3949 of these detections (see supplementary for details). Figure 6
shows the most repeated waveform (479 times) among the 3949 detections.
Comparison with other detection methods. We compare our detection
performances to autocorrelation and Fingerprint And Similarity Threshold-
ing (FAST, reported from Yoon et al. [2015]). Both techniques can only ﬁnd
repeating events, and do not provide event location.
Yoon et al. [2015] used autocorrelation and FAST to detect new events
during one week of continuous waveform data recorded at a single station with
the a single channel from 8 January 2011 to 15 January 2011. The bank of
templates used for FAST consists in 21 earthquakes: a Mw 4.1 that occurred
on 8 January 2011 on the Calaveras Fault (North California) and 20 of its
aftershocks (Mw 0.84 to Mw 4.10, a range similar to our dataset). Table 1
reports the classiﬁcation accuracy of all three methods. ConvNetQuake has
an acccuracy comparable to autocorrelation and outperforms FAST.
Scalability to large datasets. The runtimes of the autocorrelation method,
FAST, and ConvNetQuake necessary to analyze one week of continuous wave-
form data are reported in Table 1. Our runtime excludes the training phase
which is performed once. Similarly, FAST’s runtime excludes the time re-
quired to build the database of templates. We ran our algorithm on a dual
core Intel i5 2.9 GHz CPU. It is approximately 13,500 times faster than
autocorrelation and 48 times faster than FAST (Table 1). ConvNetQuake
is highly scalable and can easily handle large datasets. It can process one
6

month of continuous data in 4 minutes 51 seconds while FAST is 120 times
slower (4 hours 20 minutes, see Figure 5a).
Like other template matching techniques, FAST’s database grows as it
creates and store new templates during detection. For 2 days of continuous
recording, FAST’s database is approximately 1 GB (see Figure 5b). Process-
ing years of continuous waveform data would increase dramatically the size
of this database and adversely aﬀect performance. Our network only needs
to store a compact set of parameters, which entails a constant memory usage
(500 kB, see Figure 5b).
Discussion
ConvNetQuake achieves state-of-the-art performances in probabilistic event
detection and location using a single signal. For this, it requires a pre-existing
history of cataloged earthquakes at training time. This makes it ill-suited
to areas of low seismicity or areas where instrumentation is recent. In this
study we focused on local earthquakes, leaving larger scale for future work.
Finally, we partitioned events into discrete categories that were ﬁxed before-
hand. One might extend our algorithm to produce continuous probabilistic
location maps. Our approach is ideal to monitor geothermal systems, natural
resource reservoirs, volcanoes, and seismically active and well instrumented
plate boundaries such as the subduction zones in Japan or the San Andreas
Fault system in California.
Methods
ConvNetQuake takes as input a 3-channel window of waveform data and
predicts a discrete probability over M categories, or classes in the machine
learning terminology. Classes 1 to M −1 correspond to predeﬁned geographic
“clusters” and class 0 corresponds to event-free “seismic noise”. The clusters
for our dataset are illustrated in Figure 1.
Our algorithm outputs a M-
D vector of probabilities that the input window belongs to each of the M
classes. Figure 2 illustrates our architecture.
Network architecture. The network’s input is a 2-D tensor Z0
c,t repre-
senting the waveform data of a ﬁxed-length window. The rows of Z0 for
c ∈{1, 2, 3} correspond to the channels of the waveform and since we use 10
second-long windows sampled at 100 Hz, the time index is t ∈{1, . . . , 1000}.
7

The core of our processing is carried out by a feed-forward stack of 8 convo-
lutional layers (Z1 to Z8) followed by 1 fully connected layer z that outputs
class scores. All the layers contain multiple channels and are thus repre-
sented by 2-D tensors. Each channel of the 8 convolutional layers is obtained
by convolving the channels of the previous layer with a bank of linear 1-D
ﬁlters, summing, adding a bias term, and applying a point-wise non-linearity
as follows:
Zi
c,t = σ
 
bi
c +
Ci
X
c′=1
3
X
t′=1
Zi−1
c′,st+t′−1 · W i
cc′t′
!
for i ∈{1, . . . , 8}
(1)
Where σ(·) = max(0, ·) is the non-linear ReLU activation function.
The
output and input channels are indexed with c and c′ respectively and the
time dimension with t, t′. Ci is the number of channels in layer i. We use 32
channels for layers 1 to 8 while the input waveform (layer 0) has 3 channels.
We store the ﬁlter weights for layer i in a 3-D tensor W i with dimensions
Ci−1 × Ci × 3. That is, we use 3-tap ﬁlters. The biases are stored in a 1-D
tensor bi. All convolutions use zero-padding as the boundary condition.
Equation (1) shows that our formulation slightly diﬀers from a standard
convolution: we use strided convolutions with stride s = 2, i.e. the kernel
slides horizontally in increments of 2 samples (instead of 1). This allows us to
downsample the data by a factor 2 along the time axis after each layer. This
is equivalent to performing a regular convolution followed by subsampling
with a factor 2, albeit more eﬃciently.
Because we use small ﬁlters (the kernels have size 3), the ﬁrst few layers
only have a local view of the input signal and can only extract high-frequency
features. Through progressive downsampling, the deeper layers have an ex-
ponentially increasing receptive ﬁeld over the input signal (by indirect con-
nections). This allow them to extract low-frequency features (cf. Figure 2).
After the 8th layer, we vectorize the tensor Z8 with shape (4, 32) into a
1-D tensor with 128 features ¯Z8. This feature vector is processed by a linear,
fully connected layer to compute class scores zc with c = 0, 1, ..., M −1 given
by:
zc =
128
X
c′=1
¯Z8
c′ · W 9
cc′ + b9
c
(2)
Thanks to this fully connected layer, the network learns to combine multiple
parts of the signal (e.g., P-waves, S-waves, seismic coda) to generate a class
score and can detect events anywhere within the window.
8

Finally, we apply the softmax function to the class scores to obtain a
properly normalized probability distribution which can be interpreted as a
posterior distribution over the classes conditioned on the input Z0 and the
network parameters W and b:
pc = P(class = c|Z0, W, b) =
exp(zc)
PM−1
k=0 exp(zk)
c = {0, 1, . . . , M −1}
(3)
W = {W 1, . . . , W 9} is the set of all the weights , and b = {b1, . . . , b9} is the
set of all the biases.
Compared to a fully-connected architecture like in Kong et al. [2016]
(where each layer would be fully connected as in Equation (2)), convolutional
architectures like ours are computationally more eﬃcient.
This eﬃciency
gain is achieved by sharing a small set of weights across time indices. For
instance, a connection between layers Z1 and Z2, which have dimensions
500×32 and 250×32 respectively, requires 3072 = 32×32×3 parameters in
the convolutional case with a kernel of size 3. A fully-connected connection
between the same layers would entail 128, 000, 000 = 500 × 32 × 250 × 32
parameters, a 4 orders of magnitude increase.
Furthermore, models with many parameters require large datasets to
avoid overﬁtting. Since labeled datasets for our problem are scarce and costly
to assemble, a parsimonious model such as ours is desirable.
Training the network. We optimize the network parameters by minimiz-
ing a L2-regularized cross-entropy loss function on a dataset of N windows
indexed with k:
L = 1
N
N
X
k=1
M−1
X
c=0
q(k)
c
log
 p(k)
c

+ λ
9
X
i=1
∥W i∥2
2
(4)
The cross-entropy loss measures the average discrepancy between our pre-
dicted distribution p(k) and the true class probability distribution q(k) for all
the windows k in the training set. For each window, the true probability
distribution q(k) has all of its mass on the window’s true class:
q(k)
c
=
(
1 if class(k) = c
0 otherwise
(5)
9

To regularize the neural network, we add an L2 penalty on the weights
W, balanced with the cross-entropy loss via the parameter λ = 10−3. Regu-
larization favors network conﬁgurations with small weight magnitude. This
reduces the potential for overﬁtting [Ng, 2004].
Since both the parameter set and the training data set are too large to
ﬁt in memory, we minimize Equation (4) using a batched stochastic gradient
descent algorithm. We ﬁrst randomly shuﬄe the N = 702, 748 windows from
the dataset. We then form a sequence of batches containing 128 windows
each. At each training step we feed a batch to the network, evaluate the
expected loss on the batch, and update the network parameters accordingly
using backpropagation [LeCun et al., 2015]. We repeatedly cycle through
the sequence until the expected loss stops improving. Since our dataset is
unbalanced (we have many more noise windows than events), each batch is
composed of 64 windows of noise and 64 event windows.
For optimization we use the ADAM [Kingma and Ba, 2014] algorithm,
which k.pdf track of ﬁrst and second order moments of the gradients, and is
invariant to any diagonal rescaling of the gradients. We use a learning rate
of 10−4 and keep all other parameters to the default value recommended by
the authors. We implemented ConvNetQuake in TensorFlow [Abadi et al.,
2015] and performed all our trainings on a NVIDIA Tesla K20Xm Graphics
Processing Unit. We train for 32,000 iterations which takes approximately
1.5 h.
Evaluation on an independent testing set. After training, we test the
accuracy of our network on windows from July 2014 (209 windows of events
and 131,072 windows of noise). The class predicted by our algorithm is the
one whose posterior probability pc is the highest. We evaluate our predictions
using two metrics.
The detection accuracy is the percentage of windows
correctly classiﬁed as events or noise. The location accuracy is the percentage
of windows already classiﬁed as events that have the correct cluster number.
