AlteregoNets: a way to human augmentation
Dr. David Kupeev ∗1
1 Rafael Advanced Defense Systems Ltd., POB 2250, Haifa,
3102102 Israel
Abstract
A person dependent network, called an AlterEgo net, is proposed for
development. The networks are created per person. It receives at input
an object descriptions and outputs a simulation of the internal person’s
representation of the objects.
The network generates a textual stream resembling the narrative stream
of consciousness depicting multitudinous thoughts and feelings related to
a perceived object. In this way, the object is described not by a ’static’ set
of its properties, like a dictionary, but by the stream of words and word
combinations referring to the object.
The network simulates a person’s dialogue with a representation of the
object. It is based on an introduced algorithmic scheme, where perception
is modeled by two interacting iterative cycles, reminding one respectively
the forward and backward propagation executed at training convolution
neural networks. The ’forward’ iterations generate a stream representing
the ’internal world’ of a human.
The ’backward’ iterations generate a
stream representing an internal representation of the object.
People perceive the world diﬀerently. Tuning AlterEgo nets to a spe-
ciﬁc person or group of persons, will allow simulation of their thoughts
and feelings. Thereby these nets is potentially a new human augmentation
technology for various applications.
Keywords: human augmentation; human perception; big data surveillance;
natural language processing; deep learning;
Contents
1
Introduction
2

1
arXiv:1901.09786v1  [cs.AI]  23 Jan 2019

2
The BiWheel scheme for modeling human object perception
5
2.1
Modeling a ﬂow of human thoughts and feelings by a sequence
of iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Modeling alterations of perceived object’s properties . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Overview of BiWheel scheme. Received and perceived.
. . . . .
12
2.4
Implementation of BiWheel Scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
AE nets for simulation of human perception
19
3.1
Multiobject AE nets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Personalizion of AE nets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Conclusions and lateral research directions
20
Acknowledgment
22
A Use of BiWheel scheme for the automatic generation of the art
content
22
1
Introduction
Undoubtedly, modern computers perform arithmetical computations better than
humans. Also, in recent years, the computers began to solve the problems of
detection and classiﬁcation in images in many hearings better than the man.
Likewise, the topic of algoritmic simulation of human perception of objects re-
ceived some coverage in the research literature [12,14,20,22]. However, to the
best of our knowledge, to this day there have been no attempts to algorithmi-
cally generate the context that approximates what people perceive. This article
is such an attempt.
Our goal is to enable computers to yield data which approximates internal
human representations of perceived objects. These representation are the ﬂows
of thoughts [52] and emotions [40] related to an object, or groups of objects.
The objects are given to us in some modality, usually visual or textual. For
example, the object depicted in Fig. 1 (A) is visual. One may assume that when
the object is perceived, its certain representation acts ’inside a person’. These
representations can not be reproduced or operated directly. One may refer to
them as the ﬁrst level object representations. The percept [25] (ibid, (C)) may
be considered as the mental image [24] of the object. It is naturally that the
majority of scientiﬁc investigations of the mental image focus upon visual mental
imagery [38]. This is what the person sees in a perceived image. On the other
hand, we may consider the ﬂow of thoughts [50] and feelings [40] related to the
object. (In some sense one may see this as a ﬂow of perceived object properties.)
This is the internal human representation which we want to simulate.
One may consider the task of further representing the ﬁrst level representa-
tions by tractable data, visual or textual, with which algorithms can operate.
It may be viewed as constructing the second level object representations. It
seems that natural representation of the percept is the image, and of the ﬂow of
2

Figure 1:
Relations between representations of perceived objects. (A): The
image [65] perceived by Don Quixote in the episode with windmills [46]. (B):
The ﬂow of thoughts [50] modeled in this paper. (C): The percept [25] of the
input image. (D), (E): The textual and image media representing the human
representations. The ﬂow of thoughts is naturally represented as a text, and
the percept as an image. (D) depicts the representations constructed in this
article. The dashed arrow (AB) denotes partial forming of the mental state
bypassing the percept. For example, the feel of a color of a shoe [25] may be
obtained without forming the whole image of the shoe. Green dashed arrow
(AD) denotes optional use of the tools for image annotations [23].
3

thoughts is the textual stream. In this paper we describe an algorithm for sim-
ulating ﬂows of thoughts by textual streams, resembling the narrative stream
of councioseness [51].
A key feature of our approach is that we represent the perceived object
properties not just as static attributes associated with the object (e.g., an object
may be ’large’ or ’small’), but in dynamic fashion – as a textual stream. And
it’s not surprising. Indeed, at the ﬁrst representation level, we may treat the
human thoughts related to a perceived object as a kind of the ’general’ ﬂow of
thoughts [50]. And the second level representation of this ﬂow generated by our
algorithm (Sect.2) may be seen as a particular case of the narrative stream of
consciousness [51].
The objects whose perception is simulated in our paper are paintings, histor-
ical emblems the person may mentally interact with, social scenes, etc. We do
not impose a formal criterion for selecting such objects, one may just note that
the richer is the set of the notions which may be associated with the object, the
more suitable is the object for simulating the process of its perception under
our model.
We do not impose strict assumptions about the nature of the ﬂow of the
human thoughts and emotions we want to simulate (referred at Fig.1 (B)).
Indeed, one may suggest that this ﬂow may be roughly expressed by means of a
natural language [57], but deﬁnitely this is not a natural language. On the other
hand, our algorithm yields a stream of words and word combinations, similar
to ibid (D). However, there is no contradiction – we represent the ﬂow of some
(unknown) modality by textual data.
Also, it may be noted that eventually our goal is not to approximate well
the human perception. Indeed, the computer calculates not like humans, the
computational models of visual recognition [27] diﬀer from that by humans
[37], etc. Hence our goal is deﬁned as a rough computer modeling of certain
mechanisms of human perception.
This underlines a ’target gap’: on the one hand we want to simulate the
perception as best as possible, and on the other we assume in advance that it
can not be done perfectly. This raises the problem of validation of our simu-
lation. What does a well-built simulation mean? For example, in the research
on image classiﬁcation [45], the quality of computer simulation is validated by
the comparison with the ’ground truth’ [26] – an a priori known true picture
classiﬁcation. But in our task the ’ground truth’ is the internal human rep-
resentation that we just want to simulate. Answering the above question, we
expect that the actual veriﬁcation of our approach may be mediated, as in the
below example.
To generate the desired context, we introduce a machine model for human
perception called the Alterego (AE) net. In the course of this article, we ﬁrst
describe the approach to creating a ’universal’ AE network. Then we consider
how, given a data stream associated with a speciﬁc person, or a group of persons,
to tune up the universal AE net to this person or the group.
One may suggest various applications of these nets. Imagine, for example, a
group of several thousand people, where for every person from the group there
4

exist an AE network associated with the person. Suppose that prior to a cham-
pionship in a certain city the networks are fed data (pictures, text) associated
with the sporting event. Than if any network generates a content semantically
similar [16] to ”and then there were none” song [44] (Agatha Christie [35]), this
serves as a ’red ﬂag’ signal for the respective person intentions.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
• The AlterEgo net is created per person.
• It receives at input an object descriptions and produce at output a rep-
resentation of the internal person representation of the object, referred as
the ﬁrst level object representations. The ﬁrst level object representation
is a ﬂow of thoughts [50] and feelings related to a perceived object.
• The BiWheel algorithm generates two interacting textual streams, similar
to the narrative ﬂow of consciousness [51].
• One of the above streams is comprised of the word combinations seman-
tically related to a perceived object. The stream is a second level repre-
sentation of the human object representation.
• This second level representation is a description of the object which is not
just a set of object properties, but the text stream.
Our paper is organized as follows. We start Sect. 2 with modeling a ﬂow of
human thoughts [50] and feelings by a sequence of iterations (Sect. 2.1). Then
extend the model to incorporate alterations of the perceived properties of ob-
jects (Sect. 2.2) as iterations. These two types of iterations are lump together in
an iterative scheme modeling human perception of objects (BiWheel scheme).
An algorithmic implementation of the scheme is presented in Sect. 2.4. Further
(Sect. 3.1), we describe how the introduced AE network is generalized to percep-
tion of several objects. Finally, we explain the personalization of the AE nets –
tuning of the nets to a speciﬁc person or a group of persons, allowing generation
of the representations reﬂecting their thought and felt contents, diﬀerent for
diﬀerent humans (Sect. 3.2). Conclusions and description of the lateral research
directions associated with the AE nets complete the paper.
2
The BiWheel scheme for modeling human ob-
ject perception
In this section we describe our model of interactions of the ﬂow of thoughts [50]
and feelings of a person with the mental images of the objects [24]. The ﬂow
is modeled by textual streams resembling [51]. The model is illustrated on the
examples of an advertisement image, a historical emblem, and a social scene.
We call the model the BiWheel scheme because it includes two interacting loops
(Fig. 2 (B), (C)).
5

Figure 2:
Illustration to BiWheel scheme (best viewed in color). The support
and interleaving streams, are depicted respectively by green and yellow arrows.
(A): Perception of the advertisement image (Sect. 2.1).
(B): Perception of the historical emblem [53] (Sect. 2.1).
(C): Perception of the social scene shown at Fig. 3.
Brown arrows at (A), (B): the elements inserted to the PAS (resp. OAS) stream
may be obtained using external tools for image annotations.
6

Figure 3:
The image from Fig. 2 (C) [66].
In Sect. 2.1, we describe a ’clockwise’ loop comprising a ﬁrst ’wheel’ of the
scheme. In Sect. 2.2 the scheme is extended to modeling perception of the ob-
jects with ambiguous meaning. This is done by supplementing the scheme with
a ’counter-clockwise’ loop (Sect. 2.2). An overview of the scheme is given in
Sect. 2.3. In Sect. 2.4 we present the suggested algorithmic implementation of
the BiWheel scheme.
2.1
Modeling a ﬂow of human thoughts and feelings by a
sequence of iterations
In this section we describe the ﬁrst ’wheel’ of the BiWheel scheme. We consider
two examples. In the ﬁrst one a person meets an advertisement image. In a
second example a person meets a historical emblem, or refer to it in his thoughts.
Consider a person walking on a road.
The person generates the ﬂow of
thoughts and feelings, reﬂecting its current mental state [58]. The ﬂow’s ele-
ments at close temporal positions tend to be associated with each other [55].
We may represent this ﬂow as a sequence of words and short word combina-
tions with semantic meaning [60], like:
PAS = ’street view’, ’weather’, ’cold’, ... .
(1)
We call such sequence a Person Aligned Semantic
stream (PAS). By some
analogy with universal algebra operations [18] we call the stream elements the
terms. Since the PAS represents the ﬂow of thoughts and feelings, the terms at
closer positions tend to be closer semantically.
Now suppose that during the walk the man meets an advertisement image
of Coca Cola (Fig. 4 (A)) which may inﬂuence his ﬂow of thoughts and feelings.
Let us ask whether there exist a linkage between the encountered image and the
man’s thoughts and feelings, prior to the act of image perception? The answer
is yes since the advertising targets the basic psychological needs [6], in other
7

Figure 4:
The images refereed to in Table 1: (A), (B), and (C) are from [71],
[72], and [73] respectively.
words, the advertising is virtually answering requests that already exist in the
modeled ﬂow of thoughts. For example, among the human’s thoughts there may
exist the represented in the PAS as:
x1 = ’I wanna drink’ ∈PAS
(2)
The x1 may be considered as a request virtually sending to the image (Fig. 2(A)).
Among the notions associated with the image content there exist
x2 = ’Drink’,
(3)
semantically related to x1.1
Transition x1 →x2 is illustrated at Fig. 2 (A): we submit to the object
representation (the notions associated with the object) an input, and obtain
the response depending on the properties of the representation. This resembles
the forward step in in training convolutional neural networks [64], which is
basically the calculation of the network value for a given input. Respectively,
we refer to such transitions as forward iterations.
Forward iterations are comprised of ’sending’ terms of the PAS stream to
the object, comparing them with the concepts [39] associated with the object,
and generating the ’answers’, sending back to the stream. (The requests which
are not relevant to the object do not yield the responses.) The iterations may
be seen as a ’dialogue’ between a PAS stream and an object.
1It is worth to note a certain duality [9]: like the person’s consciousness before the act
of perceiving the image contains ’requests’ terms associated with the image (like x1), so the
image ’contains’ the terms, which may be associated with the user’s request (like x2). This is
a precondition of the interaction between a person and an image.
8

Figure 5:
(Best viewed in color.) (A): The PAS stream. The elements of the
support substream are depicted in green, of the interleaving stream in yellow.
(B): The OAS stream. The elements of the support substream are depicted
in yellow, of the interleaving stream in brown. Optionally, the elements of the
interleaving streams may be obtained by using annotation tools. (A) and (B):
In the both PAS and OAS streams the elements obtained by using selective
summarization are depicted in violet.
The PAS can be seen now as comprised of the support and interleaving
streams, as illustrated in Fig. 5 (A). The support stream consists of the terms,
related to the person, like x1 in Eq. 2 and sent as requests to the object. The
interleaving stream consists of the terms related to the object, like x2 of Eq. 3,
sending as responses to the PAS. By their meaning, the responses may conform
to the support stream (as in the above example), or contradict it (as we will
see in (Sect. 2.2). After the responses having been inserted to the PAS, they
operate as regular stream elements, yielding the associated PAS terms.
9

Table 1 Eventual interpretation of advertisement images.
x1
x2
The need cat-
egory accord-
ing to [31]
Image
’I wanna drink’
’Drink’
Physiological
Fig. 4 (A)
Feeling
of
ac-
complishment
Feeling
of
ac-
complishment
Self-
Actualization
Fig. 4 (B)
An
aesthetic
feeling
An
aesthetic
feeling
Aesthetic
Fig. 4 (C)
In our second example we show how the forward iterations model perception
of historical emblems. Let us consider Fig. 2 (B), where hammer and sickle [53]
are depicted. As in the above example, consider a man walking on a road. Let
us imagine the following ’dialog’ between the PAS stream and the set of the
concepts associated with the emblem.
In the PAS stream (Eq. 1), at some iteration step, is generated a term
x1 = ’I wanna go walk’.
(4)
Similarly to the above example, the term is compared with the ones associated
with the emblem. There may be found a term
x2 = ’You are going to collective work to help the motherland!’
(5)
semantically related to x1, depicted with green dashed lines in Fig. 2 (B). As in
the example with the advertisement image, x2 may be inserted to the PAS, and
and the forward iterations will continue. On the other hand, the x2 may ﬁre a
contradiction signal with the PAS (like neuron [56]) and thus not be inserted to
the stream. This option is considered in the next section.
In the examples considered in this section the perceived object ’operates’
like a function: it receives an input term x1 and returns the response. In the
following section we consider how alterations of perceived properties of objects
may be modeled.
2.2
Modeling alterations of perceived object’s properties
When we look at advertising images, their meaning is unequivocal – they rarely
have ambiguous interpretation.
For many others perceived objects it is not
so. For example, historical emblems may have quite diﬀerent meanings. For
instance, the ’Hammer and sickle’ symbol of the former Soviet Union [54] was
associated by some people with the ideas of freedom [33,36], and on the other
hand, by other people, their negation [32]. Another example of objects that
allow diﬀerent interpretations are social scenes and situations estimated by per-
sons. The meaning of such objects may be altered during the perception pro-
cess [25].
10

In this section we extend the PAS model of Sect. 2.1 – it will simulate also
alterations of perceived properties of objects during the perception act. This
is done by adding the second iteration loop to the BiWheel model. The model
extension will be illustrated on the examples of a historical emblem and a social
scene.
Let us consider a sequence of semantically related terms associated with
a perceived object.
We call it the Object Aligned Semantic (OAS) stream.
This stream consists of the terms describing perceived properties of the object.
Actually we have dealt with this stream in the previous section, this is the
stream where from the terms x2 were selected. For example, for the image from
Fig. 4 (A) the OAS may consist of the terms like
OAS =’red’, ’Coca Cola’, ’drink’, ’star’,’rays’,... .
(6)
It may be regarded as a stream of annotations of the advertising image.
Let us turn again to the second example from the previous section. What
will happen if the ideas [63] associated with the emblem come in collision with
the human thoughts and feeling?
Then likely the person’s thoughts will be
switched to the object itself, leading to rethinking its properties. As a result
the meaning of the object for that person may be alternated.
In our model this is represented as ﬁring collision between the object repre-
sentation’s response (x2 Eq. 5) and the notions comprising the PAS stream of
the person. It leads to switching the data processing to the OAS stream, and
starting enumeration of the terms semantically close to x2. This might lead to
a change in the semantic meanings (currently) associated with the object.
Our next example is illustrated by Fig. 2 (C) and related to estimation of
social scenes. Suppose a person is summoned to a commission (illustrated at
Fig. 3), which will make a decision regarding him, and it is known in advance
that the decision may be biased, for the person or against.2 The person does
not know the bias and hesitates.
As in Sect. 2.1 we model the person’s ﬂow of thoughts as a PAS stream of
terms, say:
PAS = ’they’, ’they are kind to us’, ’this city light is friendly to us’,
’they’, ’they are kind to us’, ’this city light is friendly to us’,
’look, they have the same jacket as we have’,
’this is a deeply friendly jacket’, ...
(7)
Similarly to the above example (Eq. 6), we model the mental image of the
environment (commission) by an OAS stream:
OAS = ’jacket’, ’commission’, ’people’, ’came against us’,
’came for us’, ’does not matter’, ...
(8)
2The example was developed basing on some person’s experience at the oral entrance
examination for Moscow University Faculty of Mechanics and Mathematics in the past.
11

At some point in time, terms x1 from the PAS are compared with the envi-
ronment – veriﬁed w.r.t. the mental image of the commission and initiate the
responses x2. The obtained response may contradict to the PAS stream, e.g., for
x1 = ’this is a deeply friendly jacket’, the x2 = ’this jacket is not friendly to us at all’.
At this moment the forward iterations are interrupted, and our simulation pro-
cess is switched to enumeration of the properties of the commission, starting
with x2. The iterations yield a new portion of an OAS stream, like:
OAS = ... ’this jacket is not friendly to us at all’, ’jacket’,’commission’,
’people’, ’came against us’, ’came for us’, ’the jacket does not matter’,
’they want to frighten us with their uniform’, ’the hostile unity of their
’clothes’, ...
(9)
In the both above examples, the elements x2 from the OAS serve as mag-
nets attracting the person’s attention, inﬂuencing formation of subsequent OAS
elements. Accordingly, these elements may be seen as forming an interleaving
stream to the support (proper) OAS. In this way, similarly to the PAS, the OAS
stream is comprised of the support and interleaving streams.
If we interpret obtaining the ’answers’ x2 from the OAS stream to x1 as
a calculation of the value of an OAS ’function’ at x1, then generation of the
new terms of Eq. 9 may be treated as updating the function parameters. This
resembles the backpropagation step in training convolutional neural networks
[64], where the network parameters are updated.
We keep this notation for
the whole iteration loop (Figs. 2 (B), (C)) together with the forward iteration
notation (Sect. 2.1).
In forming the OAS streams there may occur what may be called selective
summarization - selection of a small set of the terms consistent with the stream.
For example, ’non friendly jacket’ and ’my predecessor has suﬀered from the
commission’ appeared in the OAS of Eq. 9, may lead to a new term ’non friendly
commission for me’ (Fig. 5 (B)). This may be seen as a kind of compression of
the OAS. Similar summarization may act on the PAS stream.
It is interesting to note that forming the PAS and OAS streams resembles
exploring the YouTube [42] engine. Indeed, each stream looks like a sequence of
annotations displayed by the engine after a user has picked a video. We explore
this similarity in Sect. 2.4.
In the latter two sections we have studied the forward and backward loops
comprising the BiWheel algorithm. In the next section we overview the whole
scheme.
2.3
Overview of BiWheel scheme. Received and perceived.
Generation of the PAS and OAS streams is based on the following principles:
1. In each stream the generated terms tend to be semantically close to re-
cently generated terms of the stream.
12

Figure 6:
(A)–(E):Sequential forming the PAS and OAS streams by BiWheel
scheme. The added elements are denoted by dots. (A),(B),(C): new element
are added to the PAS stream are semantically related to the previous PAS
elements. (C): The new element is semantically related to the terms from the
OAS (considered as the element from the interleaving stream). (D),(E),(F): new
elements are added to the OAS stream are semantically related to the previous
OAS elements. (E): The new element is semantically related to the terms from
the PAS (considered as the element from the interleaving stream). (F): The new
element is obtained from the annotation tool (considered as the element from
the interleaving stream).
2. Periodically, the generated terms of each stream tend to be semantically
related to terms of the opposite stream.
3. Some terms of the OAS stream may be input from external annotations
tools.
One may summarize the work of the BiWheel scheme as follows (Fig. 6):
1. PAS is a stream of mutually associated terms representing the alternated
mental state of a person.
2. OAS is a stream of mutually associated terms representing the alternated
perceived properties of the object.
3. Current elements of the PAS stream are compared with the semantically
related current OAS elements, the latter are sent to the PAS as the OAS
responses.
4. These responses are embedded to the PAS stream, or (if contradict to
PAS) invoke a reestimation of the object properties.
13

Figure 7: Asymmetric data transfer between the PAS and OAS streams. The
arrows 1, 2, and 3 are explained in the text. The arrows 4 and 5 denote the
support PAS and OAS streams (Sects. 2.1 and 2.2 ).
5. The reestimation proceeds as adding to the OAS new terms associated
with the responses, or adding the object’s descriptions from annotation
tools.
6. The summarization is optionally performed on both the streams.
Let us note that each of the generated streams may include term repetitions.
It is worth to mention that the interaction between the PAS and OAS streams
is non symmetric. As we saw above, at forward iterations, elements of OAS
are embedded to PAS and start to participate in forming the stream (arrow
3 in Fig. 7). In contrast to this, at backward iterations, no new elements are
embedded to the OAS stream. Namely, at the start of a backward iteration,
the elements of OAS that have invoked switching from the forward to backward
iteration, are beginning to form continuation of the stream (ibid, arrow 2).
Together with annotations from external tools (ibid, arrow 1), the asymmetry
indicates the transfer of a new ’information’ from outside the streams to the
OAS, and then to the PAS stream.
The OAS stream is constructed in such a way that it depends both on the
perceived object and on the person. Indeed, this is the object describing content,
because the OAS is generated per object. And this is person derived content
because the OAS is depends on interactions with the PAS stream, which reﬂects
the internal world of the person. But how the OAS stream approximates the
perceived content (Fig.1 (D), (E))?
14

An OAS stream starts to be generated being not dependent on the person
(Eq. 8): these streams built for diﬀerent persons may begin with the same terms.
Furthermore, the elements of the OAS stream embedded to the PAS (Sect. 2.1)
may be interpreted as perceived object properties. These may be seen as the
OAS terms the person associates with the current PAS terms. Although their
selection depends on the person, it does not aﬀect the OAS stream. Further-
more, the interleaving OAS stream is comprised of the OAS terms which have
switched the person’s attention, and so convey a person’s ’imprint’. Thus the
interleaving stream may be seen as consisting of the perceived object properties
in a strong sense. Furthermore, the interleaving stream inﬂuences the whole
OAS stream.
In this way the OAS stream is a representation of the ’thought & felt’ con-
tent of the person, whereas the interleaving substream may be considered as
representing this content in a strict sense.
It is interesting to note that the work of the scheme is reminiscent of training
the neural network [49].
Indeed, the former is comprised of iterations that
may be referred as forward and backward (Sects. 2.1,2.2). Thus, our modeling
of human perception may be considered as reinforcement learning [28] of the
network associated with the perceived object. For example, perception by a
person of an apple is modeled as the person’s dialog with a network ’Apple’,
accompanying with a simultaneous training of the network.
The properties of the BiWheel loops are summarized below in Table 2 in
informal fashion.
15

Table 2 Informal properties of the dual loops: comparison.
Activity:
Forward
Backward
The notation associated:
internal,
inhale,
passive, atomistic
external,
exhale,
active, holistic
Direction:
Clockwise
Counter-clockwise
Stream name:
Person
Aligned
Stream = support
+
interleaving
stream
Object
Aligned
Stream = support
+
interleaving
stream
Support stream:
A sequence of as-
sociations
yielded
by
the
person’s
paradigm
A sequence of asso-
ciations yielded by
the object’s repre-
sentation of a hu-
man
Interleaving stream:
Responses from the
object to the sup-
port stream based
on associations of
the terms
Insertions
to
the
support
stream
based
on
associa-
tions of the terms,
or obtained using
from the external
annotation tools
Interpretation of the inter-
leaving stream:
The ’thought & felt
by the object ’
The ’thought & by
the person’
2.4
Implementation of BiWheel Scheme
Below we describe the suggested simplest algorithmic implementation of the
scheme. It simulates a perception of an ’average’ person, located in an environ-
ment ENV of an object OBJ.
Both the PAS and OAS streams are comprised of the terms of a text corpus.
We initialize the PAS to a small family
W = {w1, w2, . . . , wI}
(10)
of the words and short word combinations describing the environment ENV of
a person. For example ’street’, ’going along’, ’the weather in the city’, etc. We
refer to those terms as the generating elements of the stream. Our goal is to
generate the PAS (Eq. 12) subjected to the following conditions:
• Environmental condition: terms wi are semantically close to the terms
from W;
16

• Continuity condition: terms wi tend to be close to recently generated
terms {wi0 | i0 < i}.
We denote the PAS stream generated subjected to these conditions by:
PAS = < W > .
(11)
The stream is constructed as a sequence of terms
PAS = w1, w2, . . . ,
(12)
in such a way that at every step i a new term wi is generated subjected to
the environmental condition with probability p, and to the continuity condition
with probability 1 −p, where p is a predeﬁned probability value. In the former
case wi is constructed to be similar to at least one term from W. In the latter,
it is constructed to be similar to the term, randomly selected (with probability
proportional to λ weight assignment) from the set of recently generated terms
(Algorithm 1). In both the cases, wi is selected to be semantically similar to a
certain term w′ ∈{wj | j < i}, referred further as attractor.
Given an attractor w′, construction of wi may proceed by retrieval terms
from text corpora and selection those semantically close to w′. For example,
to treat the attractor as a document and map it to a set of documents with
semantically similar content using semantic hashing [29]. Then one may perform
an exhaustive search of n-grams [61] in the retrieved documents, and select the
terms semantically similar to the attractor [5].
Let us notice that the generation of the PAS stream (Eq. 12) resembles
retrieval operations using the YouTube [42] engine, where a user randomly
searches the items related to the input terms W.
Indeed, fulﬁllment of the
environmental condition is similar to queering the engine with terms from W
and assigning wi the annotation of a video vid randomly selected from the list of
retrieved videos. Respectively, fulﬁllment of the continuity condition is similar
to selecting vid, and assigning to a wi the annotation of a randomly selected
video from the YouTube suggestion list [13]. In such a way the PAS stream could
be generated using deep neural networks, like the YouTube recommendations
algorithm [4].
Likewise to PAS, we initialize the OAS stream to a family of terms describing
the properties of the input object OBJ:
V = {v1, v2, . . . , vI}.
(13)
For example, if the described object is an apple, then
V (Apple) = {apple, green apple, fruit, fruit nutrition . . .}.
(14)
Similarly to PAS, we may generate the OAS subjective to the environmental
(proximity of the generated terms vi to V ) and continuity conditions, denote
it as:
17

Algorithm 1 The simplest AE net
input: environment ENV, perceived object OBJ
output: OAS stream
1. Initialization:
Generate the starting portion P of PAS stream, P = W, following Eq. 10.
Generate the starting portion O of OAS stream, O = V , following Eq. 13.
2. Controller:
perform Step 3, Step 4, Step 3, Step 4 . . .
3. Forward iteration:
3.1. Form a new portion P of PAS stream, generating the elements wi
semantically close to W and to the element with larger weight λ
After the portion generation, assign weights λ(wi) = 1, to the re-
cently generated elements, normalize distribution λ to unit sum.
3.2. For PAS elements of P ﬁnd a set S ⊆O of semantically related
elements in OAS, preferring the elements with larger weight µ.
3.2.1. Construct S1 ⊆S, consisting of elements semantically similar to
the PAS elements.
Form interleaving portion to PAS: add the terms from S1 to the
PAS with weights λ = 1, normalize distribution λ to unit sum.
3.2.2. Construct S2 ⊆S, consisting of elements semantically contra-
dicting the PAS elements.
Form interleaving portion to OAS: add S2 to the OAS with
weight µ = 1, normalize distribution µ to unit sum.
3.3. Return to the controller block.
4. Backward iteration:
4.1. Form a new portion O of OAS stream, generating the elements vj
semantically close to V and to the element with larger weight µ
After the portion generation, assign weights µ(wi) = 1, to the re-
cently generated elements,normalize distribution µ to unit sum.
4.2. Optional step. Add new elements to the OAS using the annotation
tools. After the portion generation, assign weights µ(wi) = 1, to the
recently generated elements,normalize distribution µ to unit sum.
4.3. Return to the controller block.
18

OAS = < V > .
(15)
The work of our BiWherel scheme is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Over the course of the algorithm running, the set of the terms S in Step. 3.2.
is constructed by enumeration of the pairs of terms
L = { (t1, t2)}, t1 ∈P, t2 ∈O },
(16)
selecting the set of L1 ⊂L of semantically related pairs of the terms, and
calculation of projection
S = {t1 | (t1, t2) ∈L1}.
(17)
The S2 ⊆S in Step. 3.2.2. is constructed by selecting L2 ⊂L1 consisting of
semantically contradicting terms (t1, t2) ∈L1 [21], following projection calcula-
tion:
S2 = {t1 | (t1, t2) ∈L2}.
(18)
Our description of the BiWheelscheme given in (Sect. 2) may cause the ques-
tion: why AE is called the net? The AE implementation considered in this sec-
tion answers this question. Indeed, the AE is implemented using a kit of NLP
instruments which, in their turn, are naturally implemented using the deep
learning tools. Therefore, the AE may be seen as a compound deep learning
net.
The networks AE considered up to this point are limited by two main fac-
tors: networks model the perception of one object and do not imitate human
perception in a person-dependent fashion. In the next section, we extend the
BiWheel model to overcome these limitations.
3
AE nets for simulation of human perception
In the previous sections we described the simplest AE net which consists of a
single BiWheel scheme. The net models perception of a single object. In this
section we introduce the Multiobject AE nets allowing to model perception of
several objects. We also discuss how Multiobject AE nets may be tuned for
modeling perception of diﬀerent persons.
3.1
Multiobject AE nets
Multiobject AE net is generalization of the BiWheel scheme for simulating per-
ception of several objects.
Given a BiWheel scheme and a family of a new
objects the Multiobject AE is constructed by incorporation to the scheme the
OAS loops, representing the objects. As the result, the PAS stream of the new
net is receiving the interleaving embedments from several OAS streams. This
is illustrated at Fig. 8.
One may notice that our implementation of the simplest AE net (Sect.2.4)
is easily generalized to the multiobject format. The Multiobject AE may be
19

Figure 8: Multiobject AE net.
implemented in multithread fashion, one thread per object, in such a way that
every thread is responsible for forming the OAS stream for the respective object.
3.2
Personalizion of AE nets
The AE nets considered so far do not deal with a person speciﬁc information
and accordingly model perception of an ’average’ human. Tuning to the spe-
ciﬁc person may be done incorporation to the input environment of the scheme
(Sect. 2.4) the person speciﬁc information. Given a person H and a set of terms
T(H) representing this information (this may be referred as the set of person
speciﬁc features terms), we may add T(H) to the generating set of the PAS
stream (Eq. 11):
PASH = < W ∪TH > .
(19)
The TH may be constructed as a verbal description of the person, e.g.,
TH = {’age: 35 – 50’, movie:”Call Me by Your Name”},
(20)
or be retrieved from the content environment associated with the the person,
like the search engine queries. This is illustrated at Fig. 9. In a similar fashion,
the personalization may be performed for a group of of persons.
4
Conclusions and lateral research directions
In this paper we introduced a scheme for modeling internal human represen-
tation of perceived objects. The scheme is based on two pivots. First is the
idea that ability to dialog characterizes a human [15]. Second, the inference,
inspired by recent advances in NLP, like Word2Vec, claiming that iterations
may be more important than their non-iterative counterparts [10]. We simulate
the object perception as iterative dialog between the persons. We believe that
this simulation may be more powerful than descriptions comprised of the ’static’
information.
20

Figure 9: Personalized AE net.
The scheme generates the data approximating the internal human content.
This allows to suggests numerous scenarios for its application. For example,
given conglomeration of persons, one may associate with every person of the
conglomeration an AE net, and train the nets using the observations associated
with the persons. Then for a certain input object, for example, an advertisement
image, the trained nets generate the content approximating how the people
perceive the object. This may be used for construction of the input objects that
are desirable by the persons, in per person fashion. In another scenario, the
AE nets associated with every person from a given conglomeration are used for
search of the people with a speciﬁed characteristics of their perceived content.
An example of such application has been considered in the introduction. In
a third scenario, the AE nets may be generalized to simulate communication
between the contents perceived by diﬀerent people. In such a way one may
model a crowd perception [41]3.
There are exist additional directions of the research of AE. The ﬁrst is related
to modeling the percfeived visual content. The AE nets described in this paper
model the human thought content by textual stream. It may be desirable given
a perceived object (Fig. 1 (A)), to model the mental image [24] (Fig. 1 (C)) by
digital image [47] (ibid (E)), i.e., to model the ’seen’ instead of the ’thought’. It
is worth to note that from the point of view of the artiﬁcial intelligence research,
modeling the ’seen’ is not bound to simulation of the human perception. Indeed,
it may be desirable to enable the neural network trained to seek the mushrooms
in the photographies, given the image shown Fig. 10 (A), to yield the output
similar to that of ibid (B). This may resemble the Deep Dream approach [3],
but in contrast to the latter, the sought image should be obtained at the output
end of the AE network, and not at the end of the input image. This is the topic
of our current research.
3Of course, such social measurements can only be carried out under control provided with
social mechanisms.
21

Figure 10:
Whether we may train a neural network to seek the mushrooms in
the photographies, and given an input image (A) [70], to yield the image similar
to (B) [69]?
Another lateral direction of the AE research is their use for the human
content creation, for example, automatic poetry generation [8]. We outline this
approach in Appendix A.
We believe that AE networks will ﬁnd applications beyond the described in
this article.
The image and text data from [65] – [73] were used in the preparation.
Acknowledgment
I wish to acknowledge Drs. Eyal Nitzany, Daniel Segel, and Michael Katz for
their help that greatly improved the manuscript.
A
Use of BiWheel scheme for the automatic
generation of the art content
It seems very likely that the BiWheel scheme may be used also for simulation
of the art content creation, for example, automatic poetry generation [8]. Let
us show how the scheme is related to to the perception of the existing poetic
texts. Consider the following example. A human may obtain aesthetic impres-
sion while reading a piece of poetry describing the sea (e.g., [59]), if suddenly
feels that the sea’s noise referred in the poem resembles the physical rhythm of
the text read. The ”sea’s noise” may be seen as elements of the PAS stream
(Sect. 2.1) representing the human ﬂow of thoughts generated while perceiving
the poem. The rhythm of the text may be associated with the subsequence of
the OAS stream (Sect. 2.2) describing perceived physical properties of the text
(along with visual text appearance). Receiving the impression of resemblance
mentioned above, may be seen as ﬁring similarity signal between the PAS and
OAS streams. In such a way, the peaks of aesthetic impression correspond to
the pairs of semantically similar elements in these streams (depicted in Fig. 6
by blue segments). Analogously, our model may describe perception of aesthet-
ically eﬃcient texts of small length, like ”Rain, Steam and Speed” of J. M. W.
22

Turner [62], or presented in [19]. It seems therefore that our scheme may be
used is similar fashion as generative model for the art content creation.
Probably, similar mechanism may be used also for automatic generation of
the simplest mathematical propositions, for example, from the groups theory
[17].
