Imitating Driver Behavior with Generative Adversarial Networks
Alex Kueﬂer1, Jeremy Morton2, Tim Wheeler2, and Mykel Kochenderfer2
Abstract— The ability to accurately predict and simulate
human driving behavior is critical for the development of intelli-
gent transportation systems. Traditional modeling methods have
employed simple parametric models and behavioral cloning.
This paper adopts a method for overcoming the problem of
cascading errors inherent in prior approaches, resulting in
realistic behavior that is robust to trajectory perturbations.
We extend Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning to the
training of recurrent policies, and we demonstrate that our
model outperforms rule-based controllers and maximum likeli-
hood models in realistic highway simulations. Our model both
reproduces emergent behavior of human drivers, such as lane
change rate, while maintaining realistic control over long time
horizons.
I. INTRODUCTION
Accurate human driver models are critical for realistic
simulation of driving scenarios, and have the potential to
signiﬁcantly advance research in automotive safety. Tradi-
tionally, human driver modeling has been the subject of both
rule-based and data-driven approaches. Early rule-based at-
tempts include parametric models of car following behavior,
with strong built-in assumptions about road conditions [1] or
driver behavior [2]. The Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) [3]
extended this work by capturing asymmetries between accel-
eration and deceleration, preferred free road and bumper-to-
bumper headways, and realistic braking behavior. Such car-
following models were later extended to multilane conditions
with controllers like MOBIL [4], which maintains a utility
function and “politeness parameter” to capture intelligent
driver behavior in both acceleration and turning. These
controllers are all largely characterized by smooth, collision-
free driving, but rely on assumptions about driver behavior
and a small set of parameters that may not generalize well
to diverse driving scenarios.
In contrast, imitation learning (IL) approaches rely on data
typically provided through human demonstration in order to
learn a policy that behaves similarly to an expert. These
policies can be represented with expressive models, such
as neural networks, with less interpretable parameters than
those used by rule-based methods. Prior human behavior
models for highway driving have relied on behavioral cloning
(BC), which treats IL as a supervised learning problem,
ﬁtting a model to a ﬁxed dataset of expert state-action pairs
[5–8]. ALVINN [9], an early BC approach, trained a neural
network to map raw images and rangeﬁnder inputs to discrete
1Alex Kueﬂer is in the Symbolic Systems Program at Stanford University,

2Are in the department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA {jmorton2, wheelert,

turning actions. Recent advances in computing and deep
learning have allowed this approach to scale to realistic
scenarios, such as parking lot, highway, and markerless
road conditions [10]. These BC approaches are conceptually
sound [11], but tend to fail in practice as small inaccuracies
compound during simulation. Inaccuracies lead the policy to
states that are underrepresented in the training data (e.g., an
ego-vehicle edging towards the side of the road), which leads
to yet poorer predictions, and ultimately to invalid or unseen
situations (e.g., off-road driving). This problem of cascading
errors [12] is well-known in the sequential decision making
literature and has motivated work on alternative IL methods,
such as inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [14].
Inverse reinforcement learning assumes that the expert
follows an optimal policy with respect to an unknown reward
function. If the reward function is recovered, one can simply
use RL to ﬁnd a policy that behaves identically to the
expert. This imitation extends to unseen states; in highway
driving a vehicle that is perturbed toward the lane boundaries
should know to return toward the lane center. IRL thus
generalizes much more effectively and does not suffer from
many of the problems of BC. Because of these beneﬁts, some
recent efforts in human driver modeling emphasize IRL [15,
16]. However, IRL approaches are typically computationally
expensive in their recovery of an expert cost function.
Instead, recent work has attempted to imitate expert behavior
through direct policy optimization, without ﬁrst learning
a cost function [13, 17]. Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning (GAIL) [17] in particular has performed well on a
number of benchmark tasks, leveraging the insight that expert
behavior can be imitated by training a policy to produce
actions that a binary classier mistakes for those of an expert.
In this work, we apply GAIL to the task of modeling
human highway driving behavior. Our major contributions
are twofold. First, we extend GAIL to the optimization
of recurrent neural networks, showing that such policies
perform with greater ﬁdelity to expert behavior than feed-
forward counterparts. Second, we apply our models to a
realistic highway simulator, where expert demonstrations
are given by real-world driver trajectories included in the
NGSIM dataset [18, 19]. We demonstrate that policy net-
works optimized by GAIL capture many desirable properties
of earlier IL models, such as reproducing emergent driver
behavior and assigning high likelihood to expert actions,
while simultaneously reducing collision and off-road rates
necessary for long horizon highway simulations. Unlike past
work, our model learns to map raw LIDAR readings and
simple, hand-picked road features to continuous actions,
adjusting only turn-rate and acceleration each time step.
arXiv:1701.06699v1  [cs.AI]  24 Jan 2017

II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
We regard highway driving as a sequential decision mak-
ing task in which the driver obeys a stochastic policy π(a | s)
mapping observed road conditions s to a distribution over
driving actions a. Given a class of policies πθ parameterized
by θ, we seek to ﬁnd the policy that best mimics human
driving behavior. We adopt an IL approach to infer this policy
from a dataset consisting of a sequence of state-action tuples
(st, at). IL can be performed using BC or reinforcement
learning.
A. Behavioral Cloning
Behavioral cloning solves a regression problem in which
the policy parameterization is obtained by maximizing the
likelihood of the actions taken in the training data. BC works
well for states adequately covered by the training data. It
is forced to generalize when predicting actions for states
with little or no data coverage, which can lead to poor
behavior. Unfortunately, even if simulations are initialized
in common states, the stochastic nature of the policies allow
small errors in action predictions to compound over time,
eventually leading to states that human drivers infrequently
visit and are not adequately covered by the training data.
Poorer predictions can cause a feedback cycle known as
cascading errors [20].
In a highway driving context, cascading errors can lead
to off-road driving and collisions. Datasets rarely contain
information about how human drivers behave in these situ-
ations, which can lead BC policies to act erratically when
they encounter such states.
Behavioral cloning has been successfully used to produce
driving policies for simple behaviors such as car-following
on freeways, in which the state and action space can be
adequately covered by the training set. When applied to
learning general driving models with nuanced behavior and
the potential to drive out of lane, BC only produces accurate
predictions up to a few seconds [5, 6].
B. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) instead assumes that drivers
in the real world follow an expert policy πE whose actions
maximize the expected, global return
R(π, r) = Eπ
" T
X
t=0
γtr(st, at)
#
(1)
weighted by a discount factor γ ∈[0, 1). The local reward
function r(st, at) may be unknown, but fully characterizes
expert behavior such that any policy optimizing R(π, r) will
perform indistinguishably from πE.
Learning with respect to R(π, r) has several advantages
over maximum likelihood BC in the context of sequential
decision making [21]. First, r(st, at) is deﬁned for all state-
action pairs, allowing an agent to receive a learning signal
even from unusual states. In contrast, BC only receives a
learning signal for those states represented in a labeled, ﬁnite
dataset. Second, unlike labels, rewards allow a learner to
establish preferences between mildly undesirable behavior
(e.g., hard braking) and extremely undesirable behavioral
(e.g., collisions). And ﬁnally, RL maximizes the global, ex-
pected return on a trajectory, rather than local instructions for
each observation. Once preferences are learned, a policy may
take mildly undesirable actions now in order to avoid awful
situations later. As such, reinforcement learning algorithms
provide robustness against cascading errors.
III. POLICY REPRESENTATION
Our learned policy must be able to capture human driving
behavior, which involves:
• Non-linearity in the desired mapping from states to
actions (e.g., large corrections in steering to avoid
collisions caused by small changes in the current state).
• High-dimensionality of the state representation, which
must describe properties of the ego-vehicle, in addition
to surrounding cars and road conditions.
• Stochasticity because humans may take different actions
each time they encounter a given trafﬁc scene.
To address the ﬁrst and second points, we represent all
learned policies πθ using neural networks. To address the
third point, we interpret the network’s real-valued outputs
given input st as the mean µt and logarithm of the diagonal
covariance log νt of a Gaussian distribution. Actions are cho-
sen by sampling at ∼πθ(at | st). An example feedforward
model is shown in Fig. 2. We evaluate both feedforward and
recurrent network architectures.
Feedforward neural networks directly map inputs to out-
puts. The most common architecture, multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs), consist of alternating layers of tunable weights and
element-wise nonlinearities. Neural networks have gained
widespread popularity due to their ability to learn robust
hierarchical features from complicated inputs [22, 23], and
have been used in automotive behavioral modeling for ac-
tion prediction in car-following contexts [6, 24–27], lateral
position prediction [28], and maneuver classiﬁcation [29].
The feedforward MLP is limited in its ability to adequately
address partially observable environments. In real world driv-
ing, sensor error and occlusions may prevent the driver from
seeing all relevant parts of the driving state. By maintaining
sufﬁcient statistics of past observations in memory, recurrent
policies [30, 31] disambiguate perceptually similar states by
acting with respect to histories of, rather than individual,
observations. In this work, we represent recurrent policies
using Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) networks due to their
comparable performance with fewer parameters than other
architectures [32].
We use similar architectures for the feedforward and
recurrent policies. The recurrent policies consist of ﬁve
feedforward layers that decrease in size from 256 to 32
neurons, with an additional GRU layer consisting of 32
neurons. Exponential linear units (ELU) were used through-
out the network, which have been shown to combat the
vanishing gradient problem while supporting a zero-centered
distribution of activation vectors
[33]. The MLP policies
have the same architecture, except the GRU layer is replaced

with an additional feedforward layer. For each network
architecture, one policy is trained through BC and one policy
is trained through GAIL. In all, we trained four neural
network policies: GAIL GRU, GAIL MLP, BC GRU, and
BC MLP.
IV. POLICY OPTIMIZATION
Contrary to BC, which is trained with traditional regres-
sion techniques, reinforcement learning policies do not have
training labels for individual actions. Controller performance
is instead evaluated by expected return. This approach is
problematic in modeling human drivers, as the reward func-
tion r(st, at) is unknown. We ﬁrst discuss a method for
training a policy with a known reward function and then
provide a method for learning the reward function.
A. Trust Region Policy Optimization
Policy gradient algorithms are a particularly effective
class of reinforcement learning techniques for optimizing
differentiable policies, including neural networks. As with
standard backpropagation, network parameters are optimized
using gradient-based updates, but the gradient can only be
approximated using simulated rollouts of the policy interact-
ing with the environment.
This empirical gradient estimate typically exhibits a high
amount of variance. In practice, this variance can cause
parameter updates that do not improve or even reduce perfor-
mance. In this work, we use Trust Region Policy Optimiza-
tion (TRPO) to learn our human driving policies [34]. TRPO
updates policy parameters through a constrained optimization
procedure that enforces that a policy cannot change too much
in a single update, and hence limits the damage that can be
caused by noisy gradient estimates.
Although the true reward function that governs the be-
havior of any particular human driver is unknown, domain
knowledge can be used to craft a surrogate reward function
such that a policy maximizing this quantity will realize a
similar stochastic state-action mapping as πE. Drivers avoid
collisions and going off road, while also favoring smooth
driving and minimizing lane-offset. If such features can
be combined into a reward function that closely approxi-
mates the true reward function for human driving r(st, at),
then modeling driver behavior reduces to RL. However,
handcrafting an accurate reward function is often difﬁcult,
which motivates the use of Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning.
B. Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning
Although
r(st, at)
is
unknown,
a
surrogate
reward
˜r(st, at) may be learned directly from data, without making
use of domain knowledge. GAIL [17] trains a policy to
perform expert-like behavior by rewarding it for “deceiving”
a classiﬁer trained to discriminate between policy and expert
state-action pairs. Consider a set of simulated state-action
pairs Xθ = {(s1, a1), (s2, a2), ..., (sT , aT )} sampled from
πθ and a set of expert pairs XE sampled from πE. For a
neural network Dψ parameterized by ψ, the GAIL objective
is given by:
max
ψ
min
θ
V (θ, ψ) =
E
(s,a)∼XE[log Dψ(s, a)]+
E
(s,a)∼Xθ[log(1 −Dψ(s, a))].
(2)
When ﬁtting ψ, Equation (2) can simply be interpreted as
a sigmoid cross entropy objective, maximized by minibatch
gradient ascent. Positive examples are sampled from XE and
negative examples are sampled from rollouts generated by
interactions of πθ with the simulation environment. However,
V (θ, ψ) is non-differentiable with respect to θ, requiring
optimization via RL.
In order to ﬁt πθ, a surrogate reward function can be
formulated from Eq. (2) as:
˜r(st, at; ψ) = −log(1 −Dψ(st, at)),
(3)
which approaches inﬁnity as tuples (st, at) drawn from Xθ
become indistinguishable from elements of XE based on the
predictions of Dψ. After performing rollouts with a given
set of policy parameters θ, surrogate rewards ˜r(st, at; ψ) are
calculated and TRPO is used to perform a policy update.
Although ˜r(st, at; ψ) may be quite different from the true
reward function optimized by experts, it can be used to drive
πθ into regions of the state-action space similar to those
explored by πE.
V. DATASET
We use the public Next-Generation Simulation (NGSIM)
datasets for US Highway 101 [19] and Interstate 80 [18].
NGSIM provides 45 minutes of driving at 10 Hz for each
roadway. The US Highway 101 dataset covers an area in Los
Angeles approximately 640 m in length with ﬁve mainline
lanes and a sixth auxiliary lane for highway entrance and
exit. The Interstate 80 dataset covers an area in the San
Francisco Bay Area approximately 500 m in length with six
mainline lanes, including a high-occupancy vehicle lane and
an onramp.
Trafﬁc density in both datasets transitions from uncon-
gested to full congestion and exhibits a high degree of
vehicle interaction as vehicles merge on and off the high-
way and must navigate in congested ﬂow. The diversity of
driving conditions and the forced interaction of trafﬁc partic-
ipants makes these sources particularly useful for behavioral
studies. The trajectories were smoothed using an extended
Kalman ﬁlter [35] on a bicycle model and projected to lanes
using centerlines extracted from the NGSIM CAD ﬁles. Cars,
trucks, buses, and motorcycles are in the dataset, but only
car trajectories were used for model training.
VI. EXPERIMENTS
In this work, we use GAIL and BC to learn policies for
two-dimensional highway driving. The performance of these
policies is subsequently evaluated relative to baseline models.

Fig. 1: GAIL diagram. Circles represent values, rect-
angles represent operations, and dotted arrows rep-
resent recurrence relations. Whereas policy πθ states
st and actions at are evaluated by discriminator Dψ
during both training of πθ and Dψ, expert pairs
(boxed) are sampled only while training Dψ.
Fig. 2: Architecture for the feedforward multilayer
perceptron driving policy. The network output µ and
covariance parameters ν are used to construct a Gaus-
sian distribution over driver actions.
A. Environment
All experiments were conducted with the rllab reinforce-
ment learning framework [36]. The simulation environment
is a driving simulation on the NGSIM 80 and 101 road
networks. Simulations are initialized to match frames from
the NGSIM data, and the ego vehicle is randomly chosen
from among the trafﬁc participants in the frame. Simulations
are run for 100 steps at 10 Hz and are ended prematurely if
the ego vehicle is involved in a collision, drives off road, or
drives in reverse.
The ego vehicle is driven according to a bicycle model
with acceleration and turn-rate sampled from the policy net-
work. All other trafﬁc participants are replayed directly from
the NGSIM data, but are augmented with emergency braking
in the event of an imminent rear-end collision with the ego
vehicle. Speciﬁcally, if the acceleration predicted by the
Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) [3] is less than an activation
threshold of −2 m/s2, the vehicle then accelerates according
to the IDM while tracking the closest lane centerline. The
IDM is parameterized with a desired speed equal to the
vehicle’s speed at transition, a minimum spacing of 1 m,
a desired time headway of 0.5 s, a nominal acceleration of
3 m/s2, and a comfortable braking deceleration of 2.5 m/s2.
B. Features
All experiments use the same set of features. These
features can be decomposed into three sets. The ﬁrst set,
the core features, are eight scalar values that provide basic
information about the vehicle’s odometry, dimensions, and
the lane-relative ego state. These are listed in Table I.
The core features alone are insufﬁcient to describe the
local context. Information about neighboring vehicles and
the local road structure must be incorporated as well. Several
approaches exist for encoding such information in hand-
selected features relevant to the driving task [37]. Rather than
TABLE I: Core features used by the neural networks.
Feature
Units
Description
Speed
m s−1
longitudinal speed
Vehicle Length
m
bounding box length
Vehicle Width
m
bounding box width
Lane Offset
m
lateral centerline offset
Lane-Relative Heading
rad
heading angle in the Frenet frame
Lane Curvature
m−1
curvature of closest centerline point
Marker Dist. (L)
m
lat. dist. to left lane marking
Marker Dist. (R)
m
lat. dist. to right lane marking
restrict the model to a subset of vehicle relationships, we
introduce a more general and ﬂexible feature representation.
In addition to the core features, a set of LIDAR-like
beams emanating from the vehicle are used to gather infor-
mation about its surroundings. These beams measure both
the distance and range rate of the ﬁrst vehicle struck by
them, up to a maximum range. Our work used a maximum
range of 100 m, with 20 range and range rate beams, each
spaced uniformly in complete 360° coverage around the ego
vehicle’s center, as shown in Fig. 3.
Finally, a set of three indicator features are used to identify
when the ego vehicle encounters undesirable states. These
features take on a value of one whenever the ego vehicle is
involved in a collision, drives off road, or travels in reverse,
and are zero otherwise. All features were concatenated into
a single 51-element vector and fed into each model.
The previous action taken by the ego vehicle is not
included in the set of features provided to the policies. We
found that policies can develop an over-reliance on previous
actions at the expense of relying on the other features con-

Fig. 3: LIDAR-like beams used for measuring range and
range rate.
tained in their input. To counteract this problem, we studied
the effect of replacing the previous actions with random noise
early in the training process. However, it was found that even
with these mitigations the inclusion of previous actions had
a detrimental effect on policy performance.
C. Baseline Models
The ﬁrst baseline that we used to compare against our
deep policies is a static Gaussian (SG) model, which is an
unchanging Gaussian distribution π(a | s) = N(a | µ, Σ) ﬁt
using maximum likelihood.
The second baseline model is a BC approach using mixture
regression (MR) [6]. The model has been used for model-
predictive control and has been shown to work well in
simulation and in real-world drive tests. Our MR model is
a Gaussian mixture over the joint space of the actions and
features, trained using expectation maximization [38]. The
stochastic policy is formed from the weighted combination
of the Gaussian components conditioned on the features.
Greedy feature selection is used during training to select a
subset of predictors up to a maximum feature count threshold
while minimizing the Bayesian information criterion [39].
The ﬁnal baseline model uses a rule-based controller to
govern the lateral and longitudinal motion of the ego vehicle.
The longitudinal motion is controlled by the Intelligent
Driver Model with the same parameters as the emergency
braking controller used in the simulation environment. For
the lateral motion, MOBIL [4] is used to select the desired
lane, with a proportional controller used to track the lane
centerline. A small amount of noise is added to both the
lateral and longitudinal accelerations to make the controller
nondeterministic.
D. Validation
To evaluate the relative performance of each model, a
systematic validation procedure was performed. For each
model, 1,000 ten-second scenes were simulated 20 times
each in an environment identical to the one used to train
the GAIL policies. As these rollouts were performed, several
metrics were extracted to quantify the ability of each model
to simulate human driver behavior.
1) Root-Weighted
Square
Error:
The
root-weighted
square error (RWSE) captures the deviation of a model’s
probability mass from real-world trajectories [40]. For pre-
dicted variable v over m trajectories, we estimate the RWSE
by sampling n = 20 simulated traces per recorded trajectory:
RWSEH =
v
u
u
t 1
mn
m
X
i=1
n
X
j=1

v(i)
H −ˆv(i,j)
H
2
,
(4)
where v(i)
H
is the true value in the ith trajectory at time
horizon H and ˆv(i,j)
H
is the simulated variable under sample
j for the ith trajectory at time horizon H. We extract the
RWSE in predictions of global position, centerline offset,
and speed over time horizons up to 5 s.
2) Kullback-Leibler Divergence: Driver models should
produce distributions over emergent quantities that match
those observed in real-world data. For each model, empirical
distributions were computed over speed, acceleration, turn-
rate, jerk, and inverse time-to-collision (iTTC) over simu-
lated trajectories. The closeness between the simulated and
real-world distributions was quantiﬁed using the Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence. Piecewise uniform distributions
with 100 evenly spaced bins were used.
3) Emergent Behavior: We also extracted a set of emer-
gent metrics that indicate model imitation performance in
relation to the NGSIM dataset. These additional metrics are
the lane change rate, the offroad duration, the collision rate,
and the hard brake rate.
The lane change rate is the average number of times a
vehicle makes a lane change within a 10-second trajectory.
Offroad duration is the average number of time steps per
trajectory that a vehicle spends more than 1 m outside the
closest outer road marker. The collision rate is the fraction
of trajectories where the ego vehicle intersects with another
trafﬁc participant. The hard brake rate captures the frequency
at which a model chooses to brake harder than −3 m/s2.
The environment in which validation occurs is not entirely
realistic, as the non-ego vehicles have pre-recorded trajecto-
ries and do not always properly respond to deviations of
the ego vehicle from its original trajectory, leading to an
artiﬁcially high number of collisions. Hence, we also extract
the hard brake rate to help quantify how often dangerous
driving situations occur.
VII. RESULTS
Validation results for root-weighted square error are given
in Fig. 4. The root-weighted square error results show
that the feedforward BC model has the best short-horizon
performance, but then begins to accumulate error for longer
time horizons. GAIL produces more stable trajectories and
it short term predictions perform well. One can clearly see
the controller adhere to the lane-centerline, so its lane offset
error is close to a constant 0.5, which demonstrates that
human drivers do not always closely track the nearest lane-
centerline.
KL divergence scores are given in Fig. 5. The KL diver-
gence results show very good tracking for SG in everything
but jerk. SG cannot overﬁt, and always takes the average
action. Its performance in other metrics is poor. GAIL
GRU performs well on the iTTC, speed, and acceleration
metrics. It does poorly with respect to turn-rate and jerk.

iTTC
Speed
Acceleration
Turn-rate
Jerk
0
0.5
1
1.5
KL divergence
IDM+MOBIL
SG
MR
BC MLP
BC GRU
GAIL MLP
GAIL GRU
Fig. 5: The KL divergence for various emergent metrics pulled from 10 s trajectories.
Lane Change Rate
Offroad Duration
Collision Rate
Hard Brake Rate
0
0.5
1
1.5
Emergent Value
NGSIM
IDM+MOBIL
SG
MR
BC MLP
BC GRU
GAIL MLP
GAIL GRU
Fig. 6: Emergent values for each model.
0
2
4
6
Position (m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Lane Offset (m)
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
Horizon (s)
Speed (m/s)
IDM+MOBIL
SG
MR
BC MLP
BC GRU
GAIL MLP
GAIL GRU
Fig. 4: The root weighted square error for each candidate model vs.
prediction horizon. Deep policies outperform the other methods.
This poor performance is likely due to the fact that, on
average, the GAIL GRU policy takes similar actions to
humans, but oscillates between actions more than humans.
For instance, rather than outputting a turn-rate of zero on
straight road stretches, it will alternate between outputting
small positive and negative turn-rates. In comparison with
the GAIL policies, the BC policies are worse with iTTC. The
GRU version has the largest KL divergence in acceleration,
mostly due to its accelerations being generally small in
magnitude, but does reasonably well with turn-rate and jerk.
Validation results for emergent variables are given in
Fig. 6. The emergent values show that GAIL policies outper-
form the BC policies. The GAIL GRU policy has the closest
match to the data everywhere except for hard brakes (it rarely
takes extreme actions). Mixture regression largely performs
better than SG and is on par with the BC policies, but is still
susceptible to cascading errors. Offroad duration is perhaps
the most striking statistic; only GAIL (and of course IDM +
MOBIL) are able to stay on the road for extended stretches.
SG never brakes hard because it only drives straight, and it
has a high collision rate as a consequence. It is interesting
that the collision rate for IDM + MOBIL is roughly the same
as the collision rate for GAIL GRU, despite the fact that IDM
+ MOBIL should not collide. The inability of other vehicles
within the simulation environment to fully react to the ego-
vehicle may explain this phenomenon.
The results demonstrate that GAIL-based models capture
many desirable properties of both rule-based and machine
learning methods, while avoiding common pitfalls. With
the exception of the hand-coded controller, GAIL policies
achieve the lowest collision and off-road driving rates, con-
siderably outperforming baseline and similarly structured BC
models. However, GAIL also achieves a lane change rate
closer to real human driving than any other method against
which it is compared.
Furthermore, extending GAIL to recurrent policies leads to
improved performance. This result is an interesting contrast
with the BC policies, where the addition of recurrence largely
does not lead to better results. Thus, we ﬁnd that recurrence

by itself is insufﬁcient for addressing the detrimental effects
that cascading errors can have on BC policies.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
This paper demonstrates the effectiveness of deep imi-
tation learning as a means of training driver models that
perform realistically over long time horizons, while simul-
taneously capturing microscopic, human-like behavior. Our
contributions have been to (1) extend Generative Adversarial
Imitation Learning to the optimization of recurrent policies,
and to (2) apply this technique to the creation of a new, intel-
ligent model of highway driving that outperforms the state
of the art on several metrics. Although behavioral cloning
still outperforms Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning
on short (∼2 s) horizons, its greedy behavior prevents it from
achieving realistic driving over an extended period. The use
of policy optimization by Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning enables us to overcome this problem of cascading
errors to produce long-term, stable trajectories. Furthermore,
the use of policy representation by deep, recurrent neural
networks enables us to learn directly from general sensor
inputs (i.e., LIDAR distance and range rate) that can capture
arbitrary trafﬁc states and simulate partial observability.
We have argued that reinforcement learning schemes in-
corporating surrogate reward functions overcome problems
arising from supervised learning in highway driver modeling.
As such, future work may wish to explore ways of combining
other reward signals with our own. Whereas Generative
Adversarial Imitation Learning captures human-like behavior
present in the dataset, simulators may also wish to enforce
certain behaviors (e.g., explicitly modeling driver style) by
combining the learned, surrogate reward with a reward
function crafted from hand-picked features. An engineered
reward function could also be used to penalize the oscil-
lations in acceleration and turn-rate produced by the GAIL
GRU. Finally, we offer our model of human driving behavior
as an important element for simulating realistic highway con-
ditions. Future work will apply our model to decision making
and safety validation. The code associated with this paper can
be found at https://github.com/sisl/gail-driver.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This material is based upon work supported by the Ford
Motor Company, Robert Bosch LLC, and the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program
under Grant No. DGE-114747.
