Learning Conversational Systems that Interleave Task and Non-Task Content
Zhou Yu
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213

Alan W Black
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213

Alexander I. Rudnicky
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213

Abstract
Task-oriented dialog systems have been applied in
various tasks, such as automated personal assis-
tants, customer service providers and tutors. These
systems work well when users have clear and ex-
plicit intentions that are well-aligned to the sys-
tems’ capabilities. However, they fail if users in-
tentions are not explicit. To address this shortcom-
ing, we propose a framework to interleave non-
task content (i.e. everyday social conversation)
into task conversations.
When the task content
fails, the system can still keep the user engaged
with the non-task content. We trained a policy us-
ing reinforcement learning algorithms to promote
long-turn conversation coherence and consistency,
so that the system can have smooth transitions be-
tween task and non-task content. To test the effec-
tiveness of the proposed framework, we developed
a movie promotion dialog system. Experiments
with human users indicate that a system that in-
terleaves social and task content achieves a better
task success rate and is also rated as more engag-
ing compared to a pure task-oriented system.
1
Introduction
The most familiar communication setting for people is talk-
ing to another human. Therefore, normal users would transfer
their human-human behavior patterns and expectations to in-
teractions with a system. For example, though users quickly
learned that Microsoft Cortana (a personal assistant) could
not handle social content, 30% of the total user utterances
addressing it are social content [Jiang et al., 2015]. There-
fore, one possible way to improve conversational system per-
formance is to imitate human behaviors. Countless obser-
vations suggest that human conversations usually interleave
social content with task content [Schegloff, 1968]. For ex-
ample, we usually open a conversation with “How are you
doing?”; we also divert to social topics during meetings; and
we would most likely end our workday conversations with
chitchat of our weekend plans. However, traditional conver-
sational systems are mainly task-oriented. These systems can
complete tasks such as booking airline tickets [Zue et al.,
1994], searching for bus information [Raux et al., 2005], and
making restaurant reservations [Jurcıcek et al., 2011]. These
systems do not involve social content mainly because the task
is relatively simple and the user intention and system capabil-
ity are well calibrated.
To move our current systems to tackle tasks that are more
complex and especially those where most users do not have
clear intentions, we propose a dialog framework to fuse task
and non-task conversation content. To achieve the content
transition smoothness, we trained dialog policies using rein-
forcement learning algorithms. We built an example dialog
system, a movie promotion system that promotes a speciﬁc
movie according to users’ interests and uses social conversa-
tion to engage users to complete the task. There are several
types of audience research conducted by ﬁlm distributors in
connection with domestic theatrical releases [Martin, 2002].
Such audience research can cost $1 million per movie, es-
pecially when scores of TV advertisements are tested and re-
tested. Therefore, we argue that having conversational system
to elicit audience information voluntarily to replace paid sur-
veys would reduce the cost and improve the survey quality.
We published the source code of the software implementa-
tion of the framework, an example movie promotion system,
and the conversation data collected with human users.1 The
framework is general and applicable in different domains,
such as political surveying, language learning, and public
health education. The theoretical framework and the soft-
ware implementation enables researchers and developers to
build example dialog systems in different domains, hopefully
leading to big impact beyond discourse and dialog research.
2
Related Work
Current task-oriented dialog systems focus on completing a
task together with the user. They can perform bus informa-
tion search [Raux et al., 2005], ﬂight booking [Zue et al.,
1994], direction giving [Yu et al., 2015a], etc.
However,
these systems can only focus on one task at a time.
The
famous personal assistants, such as Apple’s Siri are com-
posed of many of these single-task systems. These single-task
systems’ underlying mechanisms are mainly frame-based or
agenda-based [Rudnicky and Xu, 1999]. The architecture of
traditional dialog systems is slot-ﬁlling, which pre-deﬁnes the
1https://github.com/echoyuzhou/ticktock_
text_api
arXiv:1703.00099v1  [cs.CL]  1 Mar 2017

structure of a dialog state as a set of slots to be ﬁlled during
the conversation. For an airline booking system, an example
slot is “destination city”. An example corresponding system
utterance generated from that slot is ”Which city are you ﬂy-
ing to?” Recently researchers have also started to look into
end-to-end learning for task-oriented systems. Though the
progress is still preliminary [Bordes and Weston, 2016], the
premise of having a learning method that generalizes across
domains is appealing.
Differing from task-oriented systems, non-task-oriented
systems do not have a stated goal to work towards. Neverthe-
less, they are useful for social relationship bonding and have
many other use cases, such as keeping elderly people com-
pany [Higashinaka et al., 2014], facilitating language learn-
ing [Jia and Ruan, 2008], and simply entertaining users [Yu
et al., 2016a]. Because non-task systems do not have a goal,
they do not have a set of restricted states or slots to follow.
A variety of methods were therefore proposed to generate
responses for them, such as machine translation [Ritter et
al., 2011], retrieval-based response selection [Banchs and Li,
2012], and sequence-to-sequence models with different struc-
tures, such as, vanilla recurrent neural networks [Vinyals and
Le, 2015], hierarchical neural models [Serban et al., 2015],
and memory neural networks [Dodge et al., 2015].
However, there is no research on combining these two
types of dialog systems so far. Therefore, our work is the
ﬁrst attempt to create a framework that combines these two
types of conversations in a natural and smooth manner for the
purpose of improving conversation task success and user en-
gagement. Such a framework is especially useful to handle
users who do not have explicit intentions.
To combine these two types of conversation systems
smoothly, we trained a response selection policy with rein-
forcement learning algorithms. Reinforcement learning algo-
rithms have been used in traditional task-oriented systems to
track dialog states [Williams and Young, 2007]. They have
also been used in non-task oriented systems. The Q-learning
method was used to choose among a set of statistical tem-
plates and several neural model generated responses in [Yu
et al., 2016b], while the policy gradient method was used in
[Li et al., 2016]. Different from these pure task or pure non-
task systems, we applied reinforcement learning algorithms
to train policies that choose among task and non-task candi-
date responses to optimize towards a coherent, consistent and
informative conversation with respect to different users.
3
Framework Description
The framework has four major components: a language un-
derstanding module, a task response generator, a non-task
response generator and a response selection policy. Figure 1
shows the information ﬂow among these components. A user
utterance is sent to both the language understanding mod-
ule and the non-task response generator.
The understand-
ing model then extracts useful information to help the task
response generator to produce task-oriented candidates. Si-
multaneously, the non-task response generator also produces
non-task candidates. Finally, the response selection policy se-
lects among all the candidates to produce a system response.
Figure 1: Framework Architecture. A user utterance is sent to
both a language understanding module and a non-task response gen-
erator. The understanding model then extracts useful information to
help a task response generator to produce task-oriented candidates.
Simultaneously, the non-task response generator also produces non-
task candidates. Finally, a response selection policy selects among
all the candidates to produce a system response.
We will discuss each component in details below.
The language understanding module extracts information
required by the task from user responses, and sends the in-
formation to the task response generator. There are many ap-
proaches to perform language understanding. A rule-based
keyword-matching method is sufﬁcient for simple tasks [He
and Young, 1998], while learning-based methods perform
better in complex tasks. The understanding task can be for-
mulated as different learning problems: for example a super-
vised classiﬁcation problem that can be solved by algorithms,
such as Support Vector Machines [Williams et al., 2015]; or a
sequence labeling problem that can be solved by algorithms,
such as recurrent neural networks [Mesnil et al., 2013].
The task response generator produces a list of task re-
sponse candidates considering the information passed from
the language understanding module.
The most common
method to generate these candidates is pre-deﬁned statisti-
cal templates that are used in traditional slot-ﬁlling task ori-
ented systems [Rambow et al., 2001]. Each template intends
to elicit information required by the task. While the non-
task response generator produces a list of social response
candidates. This component could be implemented by var-
ious methods mentioned in the related work, such as machine
translation, sequence-to-sequence, keyword retrieval, or an
ensemble of these methods. The non-task content intends
to make the conversation more coherent and engaging, thus
keeping users in the conversation. Therefore, users would
have more chance to complete the task.
The response selection policy sequentially chooses among
all the response candidates (non-task or task candidates) to
optimize towards natural and engaging interactions. Differ-
ent reinforcement learning algorithms could be applied to
train the policy, such as Q-learning [Sutton and Barto, 1998],
SARSA [Sutton and Barto, 1998], and policy gradient [Sut-
ton and Barto, 1998]. Different reinforcement learning algo-
rithms would be preferred with respect to other framework
components’ implementation.
For instance, if the number
of response candidates are limited and the dialog states can
be represented in tabular forms, then Q-learning is sufﬁcient.

While if the state representation is continuous, then the policy
gradient method is preferred. In the next section, we will use
a movie promotion task as an example to describe example
algorithms in details.
4
Example Dialog Task: Movie Promotion
The movie promotion task has a goal to promote a movie tak-
ing account of users’ preferences. To imitate human-human
conversation, the framework suggests to open conversations
with a non-task conversation topic related to the task. There-
fore, the movie promotion system starts a conversation say-
ing: “Hello, I really like movies. How about we talk about
movies?” We then describe the implementation details of
each component.
4.1
Language Understanding Module
Because the user responses’ sentence structure is relatively
simple and the information to extracted is mainly ‘yes/no’
and named entities, we used a shallow parser to provide fea-
tures, and then a set of pre-designed rules for each task tem-
plate. For example, for the response to the “If Seen Movie?”
template, we simply used a key-word matching rule to clas-
sify the utterance to ‘yes’ or ‘no’ categories. The extracted
information is then fed to the task response generator. The
collected information is also useful for task analysis.
4.2
The Task Response Generator
The task response generator produces response candidates us-
ing a sets of pre-deﬁned language generation templates con-
sidering the information received from the language under-
standing module. We designed the following eight templates
to approach the goal of promoting a movie, such as “Captain
America: Civil War”.
• Elicit movie type: The system elicits the user’s pre-
ferred movie type, e.g. “Do you like superhero movies
or Disney movies?”.
• Introduce favorite superhero: The system expresses
its favorite superhero is Captain America, in order to
lead to the movie for promotion, e.g. “My favorite su-
perhero is Captain America.”
• Ground on superhero: We crawled wiki-webpages to
build a superhero knowledge database that includes all
the superheroes’ details, such as real name, eye colors,
origin, etc. If the user mentions any superhero, the sys-
tem will talk about some attributes of that superhero,
e.g. “I really like Iron Man’s blue eyes.”
• Discuss relevant movie: The system talks about a rele-
vant movie the user mentioned before, e.g. “I really like
the ﬁrst Avenger movie, have you seen it before?”
• Discuss movie detail: The system further elaborates on
the details of the mentioned relevant movie, e.g.“I really
liked the ﬁrst Avenger movie. When Iron Man came
back alive, I cried.”
• Saw the movie: The system asks the user if they saw
the movie for promotion, e.g.“Have you seen the new
superhero movie, ‘Captain America: Civil War’?”
• Promote the movie: The system promotes the intended
movie. e.g. “One of my friends just saw ‘Captain Amer-
ica: Civil War’. He told me it is a really nice movie,
much better than the previous Captain America movie.”
• Invite to the movie: The system suggests to see the pro-
moted movie together, e.g. “Do you want to see Captain
America: Civil War together?”
4.3
Non-Task Response Generator
The non-task generator provides three types of candidate re-
sponses via three methods described below.
• A keyword retrieval method trained on a CNN interview
corpus [Yu et al., 2015b].
• A skip-thought vector model [Kiros et al., 2015] trained
on the Movie Subtitle dataset [Lison and Tiedemann,
2016]
• A set of conversation strategies that generated via sta-
tistical templates that emulate human-human conversa-
tion strategies, in order to foster user coordination, un-
derstanding and adaptation. In particular, we designed
three types of conversation strategies following [Yu et
al., 2016b].
– Active participation strategies engage users by
actively contributing to the conversation, such
as asking more information on the current topic
[Wendler, 2014].
– Grounding strategies assist open-domain natu-
ral language understanding.
Grounding strate-
gies were automatically synthesized via leverag-
ing knowledge-base (e.g.
Google Knowledge
Graph) information and natural language process-
ing algorithms, such as named-entity detection and
statistical language generation.
– Personalized strategies support adaptions to users
by leveraging automatically extracted information
from individual user’s conversation history.
An
example personalized strategy is to suggest talk-
ing more about a certain topic knowing that the
user was previously engaged in that topic.
4.4
Response Selection Policy
The response selection policy is designed to select candi-
dates provided by the two response generators. Conversa-
tion processes can be modeled as Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) [Williams and Young, 2007]. Therefore, we used
reinforcement learning algorithms to train a policy that opti-
mizes towards conversations with long-term coherence, con-
sistency, variety, and continuity.
Speciﬁcally, we used Q-
learning, a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm. Be-
cause it handles discrete states well and learns a Q table that
supports a model that makes both debugging and interpre-
tation easier. Another advantage of Q-learning is that it also
makes encoding expert knowledge easier, as it is a model-free
algorithm. By encoding expert knowledge, the search space
can be reduced, thus making the algorithm converge faster. In
all, Q-learning is a good choice with respect to the implemen-
tation choice of other components of the system.

In a reinforcement learning setting, we formulate the
problem as (S, A, R, γ, α), where S is a set of states that
represents the system’s environment, in this case the con-
versation history so far. A is a set of actions available per
state. In our setting, the actions are strategies available. By
performing an action, the agent can move from one state to
another. Executing an action in a speciﬁc state provides the
agent with a reward (a numerical score), R(s, a). The goal
of the agent is to maximize its total reward. It does this by
learning which action is optimal to take for each state. The
action that is optimal for each state is the action that has
the highest long-term reward.
This reward is a weighted
sum of the expected values of the rewards of all future steps
starting from the current state, where the discount factor
γ ∈(0, 1) trades off the importance of sooner versus later
rewards.
γ may also be interpreted as the likelihood to
succeed (or survive) at every step. The algorithm therefore
has a function that calculates the quantity of a state-action
combination, Q : S × A →R. The core of the algorithm
is a simple value iteration update. It assumes the old value
and makes a correction based on the new information at each
time step, t. The critical part of the modeling is to design ap-
propriate states, actions and a corresponding reward function.
State and Action Design It is difﬁcult to design states
for conversational systems, as one slight change from a user
response may lead to a completely different conversation. We
reduced the state space by incorporating extra knowledge,
the statistics obtained from conversational data analysis.
Following [Yu et al., 2016b], we include features: turn index,
number of times each strategy executed, sentiment polarity
of all previous utterances, coherence conﬁdence of the
response, and most recently used strategy. We constructed
the reward table based on the statistics provided in [Yu et al.,
2016b] . We utilized expert knowledge to construct rules to
constrain the reward table. For example, if certain strategies
have been used before, then the reward of using it again
immediately is heavily penalized. Please see a detailed list of
constrains in the appendix. These constraints may result in
less optimal solutions, but reduce the state and action search
space considerably. The actions are simply all the response
candidates produced by both task and non-task generators.
Reward Function Design We designed the reward function
to be a linear combination of four metrics:
turn-level
appropriateness (App), conversational depth (ConvDepth),
information
gain
(InfoGain),
and
conversation
length
(ConvLen). Except for the ﬁrst metric which is an immediate
reward, all the others are delayed rewards. We ﬁrst initiated
weights associate to each metric manually, and reﬁne them
in training later. One difﬁculty for interactive tasks is that
during training, we can not interrupt the interaction ﬂow
by asking users to give turn-by-turn immediate feedback.
To solve this problem, we used pre-trained predictors to
approximate these metrics, which is similar to inverse
reinforcement learning.
We will describe all the metrics
along with methods to approximate them in the details below.
• Turn-level appropriateness (App): reﬂects the coher-
ence of the system’s response in each conversational
turn. For later experiments, we adopted the same an-
notation scheme in [Yu et al., 2016c] and used the ap-
propriateness predictor provided in [Yu et al., 2016b],
which trained on 1256 annotated turns.
The perfor-
mance of the automatic appropriateness detector is 0.73
in accuracy (majority vote is 0.5 in accuracy).
• Conversation depth (ConvDepth): reﬂects the num-
ber of consecutive utterances that share the same topic.
We followed the same annotation scheme in [Yu et al.,
2016b]: labeling conversations having ten or more con-
secutive turns to be deep and others as shallow. We used
the predictor trained on 100 conversations from [Yu et
al., 2016b]. It has 72.7% in accuracy, while the majority
vote baseline accuracy is 63.6%.
• Information gain (InfoGain): reﬂects the number of
unique words that are introduced into the conversation
from both the system and the user. We believe that the
more information the conversation has, the better the
conversational quality is. This metric is calculated auto-
matically by counting the number of unique words after
the utterance is tokenized.
• Conversation Length (ConvLen): reﬂects how long
the user want to stay in the conversation. We approx-
imated it by the number of turns in the overall conver-
sation. The assumption is that the more the users want
to interact with the system, the better the system is.
5
Experiments
We built three systems for the movie promotion task.
• Task-Global: This does not have a non-task response
generator and therefore can only output task responses.
Its response selection policy is trained with the entire
conversation history.
• Mix-Local: This has both the task and non-task gen-
erators, and a response selection policy considers three
previous turns as interaction history.
• Mix-Global: This has both the task and non-task gen-
erators, and a response selection policy trained with the
entire interaction history.
We used another chatbot, A.L.I.C.E.2, which is powered
by rules, as a user simulator to train the response selection
policy for all systems. During training, we restart conversa-
tions if the user simulator repeats the same utterance. It took
200, 1000, and 8000 conversations respectively for the Task-
Global, Mix-Local, and Mix-Global systems to converge.
Besides testing the system with the user simulator, we also
recruited human users on crowdsourcing platforms (Amazon
Mechanical Turk and Crowd Flower). We recruited crowd
workers that are located in the U.S. and have a previous task
approval rate that is higher than 95%. We asked them to inter-
act with the system for as long as they want. They were only
allowed to interact with one of the three systems once, thus
preventing them exploiting the task. Within two days, 150
2http://alice.pandorabots.com/

crowd workers participated and produced 50 conversations
for each system. The users also reported their gender and
age range after the interaction. In addition, we asked them
to rate how engaged they were throughout the conversation
in a 1-5 Likert scale (a higher score indicates more engage-
ment). Table 1 shows an example conversation produced by
the Mix-Global system. We consider the task to be successful
if the user received all the task responses. Apart from the task
success rate, the self-reported user engagement score is also
included for evaluation.
6
Results and Analysis
From experiments, we found that the system that interleaves
non-task content and considers the entire conversation
history in policy training performs the best in both simulated
and real-world settings. We discuss detailed statistics below:
Finding 1: Involving non-task content makes the user more
engaged and at the same time increases the task success rate.
Figure 2 shows that the Mix-Global system outperformed the
Task-Global system with respect to both the task success rate
and the user self-reported engagement rating with statistical
signiﬁcance (t-test, p< 0.001). The average user self-reported
engagement is 2.3 (SD=0.42) for the Task-Global system, and
4.4 (SD=0.21) for the Mix-Global system. The task success
rate of the Mix-Global system outperformed (78%) the Task-
Global system (23%) with a big margin. The good perfor-
mance comes from the fact that in the Mix-Global system,
the non-task responses handled the user utterances that task
responses could not handle. Therefore the user could remain
in the conversation, providing the system with more opportu-
nities to complete the task.
Figure 2: The Mix-Global system outperformed the Task-
Global system on both user engagement and task success.
Table 1 shows an example conversation between the
Mix-Global system and a human user. Utterances 7, 9, and
11 are system non-task responses. They were selected by
the policy for yielding coherent and consistent conversations.
For example, utterance 9 “What I meant to say was, what is
it that you hate?” was chosen to promote topic consistency
and at the same time to preserve local coherence. Non-task
content also contributes to content variety.
Overall, the
1 Non-Task: Hello, I really like movies. How about we talk
about movies?
2 User: I like watching movies too.
3 Task: Do you like superhero movies or Disney movies?
4 User: I like superhero movies.
5 Task: My favorite superhero is Captain America.
6 User: I like Spider-man.
7 Non-Task: Do you watch them with your kids?
8 User: I don’t have any children.
9 Non-Task: What I meant to say was, what is it that you
hate?
10 User: I hated the last Fantastic Four movie.
11 Non-Task: Are you talking about Fantastic Four, the 2005
ﬁlm.
12 User: Yes. I am.
12 Task: I really like the ﬁrst Avenger movie, have you seen
it before?
Table 1: An example conversation between a human user and
the Mix-Global system. Utterances 7, 9, and 11 are social
responses that selected by the policy to keep the conversation
coherent, consistent and informative.
policy trained with reinforcement learning algorithms makes
the transition between non-task and task smoother.
We
suspect that is the major reason that users ﬁnd the system
that interleaves non-task and task content more engaging .
However, the Mix-Global system still fails to engage some
users who do not have any interest in superhero movies.
For example, one user replied: “No, I haven’t seen [Captain
America: Civil War], I am not a stupid teenager or a stupid
robot.” and left the conversation early.
Finding 2: Incorporating longer interaction history engages
users better and improves task success rate. Figure 3 shows
that the user self-reported engagement of the Mix-Local
system (4.0 (SD=0.32)) outperformed the Mix-Global sys-
tem (4.4 (SD=0.21)) with a moderate statistical signiﬁcance
(p<0.05).
The Mix-Global system also outperformed the
Mix-Local system on task completion rate (70% VS. 78%).
Therefore, statistics suggest that a system considers the
entire conversation history in planning is more engaging and
completes the task more often, compared with a system that
only takes the previous three utterance history. The small
margin is caused by the fact that the task conversation is
not very long (8 responses in total). Therefore, we expect a
stronger performance impact for tasks that are more complex
that require longer conversations.
Finding 3: We also found that the system interleaves social
content and is powered by a policy trained with the entire
conversation history performs best in all the individual met-
rics in the reward function in both simulated and real-world
(interacting with human users) settings (see Table 2 and 3 for
details). We follow the convention in [Yu et al., 2016b] to
consider conversations that have 10 or more consistent turns
on the same topic to be deep conversations. Because the Task-
Global system only produces conversations with 8 turns, we

Figure 3: The Mix-Global system outperformed the Mix-
Local system on both user engagement and task success.
do not compare it on the conversation depth metric. Among
all the metrics, we found response coherence (App) improved
most by incorporation social content, indicating the smooth
transition has the biggest impact on the overall performance
improvement. However, we also found that all systems’ per-
formance is always lower in the real-world setting compared
to the simulated setting. Probably because the user simulator
is limited and it was powered by an extensive set of rules.
System
App
ConvDepth
InfoGain
ConvLen
Task-Global
32.5%
NA
34.5
5.7
Mix-Local
76.3%
77%
52.4
13.7
Mix-Global
80.1%
88%
66.8
17.4
Table 2: The Mix-Global system performed the best when
interacting with a simulated user.
System
App
ConvDepth
InfoGain
ConvLen
Task-Global
31.3%
NA
39.3
5.3
Mix-Local
73.0%
71%
62.4
13.0
Mix-Global
76.7%
79%
67.2
15.8
Table 3: The Mix-Global system performed the best when
interacting with human users.
7
Movie Promotion Task Data Analysis
To validate the usability of the example movie promotion
system, we conduct a brief analysis on the information
collected by the system.
We found three interesting sug-
gestive phenomena that would be of interest to the ﬁlm
industry, though the user sample pool is relatively small (150
participants) and biased (crowd workers located in the U.S.).
Participants prefer superhero movies over Disney movies.
We found that 42% of participants preferred superhero
movies, 22% of participants preferred Disney movies, and
36% of participants liked both or neither. Overall, superhero
movies are more popular than Disney movies among our par-
ticipants. One possible explanation is that we surveyed only
U.S. residents.
Men prefer superhero movies. Among the 150 participants,
102 (57 men) of them were asked if seen the promoted movie
and 42 (41%) of them did. Among them 57.9% of men saw
the ﬁlm, while only 20.0% of women did. 90 participants
were asked if they would like to see the promoted movie,
and 80% of them said yes. Men were more likely to go along
with the invitation than women (77.8% of men and 68.3% of
women said yes). Both ﬁndings indicate that men compared
to women are more interested in the promoted movie.
Twenty-year-olds like superhero movies most.
We sep-
arate the participants into ﬁve different age groups: below
20, 20-30, 30-40, 40-50, and 50 above.
People who had
seen the promoted movie spread across all age groups,
and mostly concentrate in the 20-30 age group (27 out of
42).
Even though our participants are mostly in this age
group (78 out of 150), we still found that there are more
participants in their 20s who have seen the promoted movie
compared to other groups with statistical signiﬁcance (t-test
p < 0.05). In addition, compared to participants in other age
groups, participants in their 20s are more likely to accept the
invitation to see the promoted movie together (39 out of 42).
Statistics reported by the Motion Picture Association of
America shows a similar trend. They found that females ac-
counted for only 42% of the audience for “Captain America:
The Winter Soldier”, and 18-25 age group attended movie
most per capita is the 18-25 in 2015 [MPAA, 2015].
8
Conclusion and Future Work
We proposed a framework to develop conversational systems
that interleave task content with non-task content in a nat-
ural manner, in order to improve conversation task success
and user engagement. The framework is mainly powered by
a statistical policy that selects among task and non-task can-
didate responses to optimize towards long-term conversation
effectiveness. This framework is general enough to apply to
many tasks, and is especially useful for tasks where users of-
ten do not have any concrete intentions. We also designed an
example system under the framework that promotes movies
to validate the framework. Through experiments conducted
with both a simulator and real human users, we found the
system that interleaves non-task content achieved better task
success and user engagement. We also validated the systems
usage by ﬁnding some interesting phenomena from the data
collected that correlates with statistics reported by theatrical
associations. Although our participant sample size is small,
we believe these statistics could still help movie makers un-
derstand their markets better.
While the example task centers on movie promotion, there
is nothing speciﬁc to the task design which could not be trans-
ferred immediately to other domains such as product recom-
mendations, public health education, customer services and
political surveys. Future work would further investigate dif-
ferent types of representations for reinforcement learning al-
gorithms so as to make the framework generalize well across
domains.
