Speech-to-SQL: Towards Speech-driven SQL Query Generation
From Natural Language Question
Yuanfeng Song1,2, Raymond Chi-Wing Wong1, Xuefang Zhao2, Di Jiang2
1The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China 2AI Group, WeBank Co., Ltd, China

ABSTRACT
Speech-based inputs have been gaining significant momentum with
the popularity of smartphones and tablets in our daily lives, since
voice is the most easiest and efficient way for human-computer
interaction. This paper works towards designing more effective
speech-based interfaces to query the structured data in relational
databases. We first identify a new task named Speech-to-SQL, which
aims to understand the information conveyed by human speech and
directly translate it into structured query language (SQL) statements.
A naive solution to this problem can work in a cascaded manner,
that is, an automatic speech recognition (ASR) component followed
by a text-to-SQL component. However, it requires a high-quality
ASR system and also suffers from the error compounding problem
between the two components, resulting in limited performance.
To handle these challenges, we further propose a novel end-to-
end neural architecture named SpeechSQLNet to directly translate
human speech into SQL queries without an external ASR step.
SpeechSQLNet has the advantage of making full use of the rich
linguistic information presented in speech. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the first attempt to directly synthesize SQL based on ar-
bitrary natural language questions, rather than a natural language-
based version of SQL or its variants with a limited SQL grammar.
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed problem and model,
we further construct a dataset named SpeechQL, by piggyback-
ing the widely-used text-to-SQL datasets. Extensive experimental
evaluations on this dataset show that SpeechSQLNet can directly
synthesize high-quality SQL queries from human speech, outper-
forming various competitive counterparts as well as the cascaded
methods in terms of exact match accuracies. We expect speech-to-
SQL would inspire more research on more effective and efficient
human-machine interfaces to lower the barrier of using relational
databases.
KEYWORDS
speech-to-SQL, SQL query generation, speech-driven querying sys-
tem, relational database, speech-to-X
1
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the vast majority of data in our lives is stored in rela-
tional databases, and an essential tool for accessing these data is
through structured query language (SQL) commands [24]. However,
SQL has a rather complex grammar and long learning curve, and
the difficulty of mastering SQL blocks many non-technical users
and data analysts to use SQL. To facilitate these users to perform
A preprint.
What’s the average age of 
students who have a pet? 
Spoken Query
Interaction
Layer
Translation
Layer
Execution
Layer
Cascaded
18
ASR engine Text-to-SQL Speech-to-SQL
S
T
DBMS
Database
Table
Result
SELECT AVG(age) FROM 
students WHERE PET !=NULL
End-to-end 
Figure 1: Speech-driven database querying using Speech-to-
SQL; Text is shown only for illustrating the speech content,
which is not available in real scenarios.
data queries, automatically generating SQL queries from natural
language (NL) questions, or text-to-SQL, has been extensively stud-
ied in natural language processing (NLP) and database communities
recently [1, 25, 35, 36, 43, 50, 76].
Compared with the text-based input, it is widely believed that
the voice-based interface is a much easier and efficient way for
human-computer interaction. According to the user study in [51],
the voice-based interface could allow users to compose SQL queries
considerably faster by up to 6.7x compared to typing on a text-based
interface in a tablet device. Meanwhile, with the popularity of smart
smartphones and tablets in our daily lives, dozens of voice-based
applications have emerged in the market in the past decades, such
as voice-based search engines [2], voice-based AI assistants, and
chatbots (e.g., Siri, Xiaoice, Google Home, and Cortana) [46] and
voice-based databases [51].
In parallel, studies already exist for building voice-based inter-
faces for database systems in the research community [51, 52, 59, 60].
For example, SpeakQL implements a voice-based query interface
for structured data that enables users to input SQL with speech.
Utama et al. [60] designed a system named EchoQuery, which also
supports users to query the database with voice. However, these
studies usually restrict the voice as a query to be an NL-based
version of SQL or its variants with a limited subset of SQL gram-
mar, and thus, they still require the users to have professional
background and skill in SQL language. For example, EchoQuery
requires that the basic query request should be in the form like
“What is the {Aggregation}{Columns(s)} of {Table(s)}?”,
and SpeakQL requires the query to be an exact SQL statement such
as “Select Salary From Employees Where Name Equals John”.
As such, none of them achieves translating common flexible speech-
based NL questions into SQL queries, a harder yet more valuable
task widely believed to be a more efficient and straightforward
way of human-machine interaction that lowers the barrier of using
relational databases.
In this paper, we work towards designing more effective voice-
based interfaces that attempt to handle common NL questions to
arXiv:2201.01209v1  [cs.DB]  4 Jan 2022

manipulate the structured data stored in the relational database. To-
wards this goal, we first present a new task named Speech-to-SQL,
which aims to understand the information conveyed by human
speech and translate it into the corresponding SQL query, as shown
in Figure 1. A naive solution to this task can work in a cascaded
fashion, namely first converting speech signals into their corre-
sponding transcripts with an automatic speech recognition (ASR)
component, and then conducting downstream SQL generation by
a text-to-SQL component. While this approach can alleviate the
problem to a certain extent, it suffers the error compounding prob-
lem, that is, the ASR module produces myriad forms of errors in
the recognized transcripts which brings a big technical challenge
for following text-to-SQL conversion. In our analysis, we found
that existing text-to-SQL models are not robust to these ASR errors.
For example, according to our analysis, a 33% ASR error rate would
cause more than 36% accuracy reduction for the downstream SQL
conversion. Lastly, from a greater and broader perspective, there
are around 7000 languages in the world and nearly half of them
lack a commonly used written form [67], which prohibits these
languages from benefiting from any existing text-driven NLP tech-
nologies. This also prompts many parallel studies on speech-to-X
applications that bypass the text, where “X” refers to a wide range
of modalities such as text (in a language same as the source one
or a translated one) [5], speech (in a language same as the source
one or a translated one) [63], image [38], general-purpose program
code (e.g., Java, Python) [16, 44], software model [6], and so on.
However, despite these strong motivations, no work has been done
on a direct end-to-end speech-to-SQL conversion in literature.
Motivated by the above-mentioned issues, we aim to explore
the end-to-end neural approach that does not require an external
ASR step for speech-to-SQL in this work. To validate the ratio-
nale of this problem and the following possible models, we first
construct a benchmark dataset named SpeechQL, by piggybacking
the public text-to-SQL datasets - WikiSQL [79] and Spider [73].
Then, we design an advanced neural architecture, SpeechSQLNet,
to directly explore the semantics presented in the speech and syn-
thesize the corresponding SQL queries. In particular, SpeechSQLNet
seamlessly integrates speech encoder, Graphical Neural Network
(GNN), and transformer as its backbones to conduct speech pars-
ing for unlabelled speech data without an ASR step as a premise,
and the whole network is optimized in an end-to-end fashion. The
modality gap between speech and text is the biggest challenge for
training our SpeechSQLNet architecture. As such, we design two
novel pre-training mechanisms, speech-sentence and speech-item
pre-training, to further boost the performance. The speech-sentence
pre-training is based on an auto-encoder to force the two modalities
to map into the same hidden space. The speech-item pre-training
aims to identify the references of tables and columns in the speech
queries. Experimental evaluations on this proposed dataset show
that SpeechSQLNet could synthesize high-quality SQL queries di-
rectly from speech. We hope speech-to-SQL will become a popular
task and show some insights into more effective and intelligible
speech-driven human-machine interfaces for relational databases.
The contributions of the work can be summarized as follows.
• We propose a kind of new query interface with its correspond-
ing task, Speech-to-SQL, that lowers the barriers of using SQL
and relational databases. To promote further research in this task,
we construct a benchmark dataset SpeechQL. To the best of our
knowledge, this work is the first attempt in the literature that aims
to directly synthesize SQL from an arbitrary human question in
speech and bypasses text. (Section 3)
• We explore two approaches, the cascaded one and the end-
to-end one (i.e., SpeechSQLNet), to synthesize the SQL queries
from speech. Compared with the cascaded one, SpeechSQLNet
has the advantage of reducing the error-compounding problem by
optimizing in an end-to-end style, achieving a better performance
compared with the cascaded methods. (Section 4 & Section 5)
• To bridge the challenging modality gap between speech and
text, we propose a novel speech-sentence pre-training mechanism
that employs an autoencoder-based framework to map the speech
and text into the same hidden space. Furthermore, to handle the
schema-linking problem, we propose another speech-item pre-
training mechanism to empower the modal’s capability in iden-
tifying the refereed items in the speech query. (Section 6)
• We conducted extensive experiments on this proposed bench-
mark dataset, compared with several strong baselines. Experimental
results show that SpeechSQLNet can significantly outperform not
only other end-to-end baselines but also improve the cascaded mod-
els, such as an advanced model - IRNet [21], by up to 11.96% in
terms of exact match accuracy. (Section 7)
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We first intro-
duce some preliminaries in Section 2. Then we give the detailed
problem setup in Section 3, following by the introduction of the
naive cascaded approach in Section 4. The proposed SpeechSQLNet,
including the model structure as well as its components, is illus-
trated in Section 5. The specially-designed training mechanism is
discussed in Section 6. Experimental evaluations are then presented
in Section 7, followed by a comprehensive review of the related
work in Section 8. Finally, we conclude the work in Section 9.
2
PRELIMINARIES
We introduce some preliminary knowledge about sequence-to-
sequence and transformer structure, which helps the understanding
of the following concept in this paper.
2.1
Sequence-to-Sequence Structure
Sequence-to-Sequence architecture [13], or Seq2Seq for short, refers
to a series of neural architectures that map a given sequence of
elements (i.e., words, speech signals) into another sequence. Many
tasks such as machine translation or ASR enjoy a common Seq2Seq
structure and can be solved under the Seq2Seq framework. Take
English-to-Chinese machine translation as an example, the input
sequence of a Seq2Seq network designed for this task is the source
language (i.e., English) while the output sequence is the target lan-
guage (i.e., Chinese). The network usually consists of an encoder
and a decoder, where the former takes the input sequence and
converts it into some hidden representations, and the latter maps
these hidden representations into the target sequence. The com-
mon choice of the encoder and decoder can be a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) [41] or Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). The
speech-to-SQL problem also enjoys a Seq2Seq structure and can
also be considered to be a special case of Seq2Seq conversion. As
such, we also employed several basic Seq2Seq network architectures
as baselines for performance comparison in this work.
2

2.2
Transformer-based Structure
As a special case of the Seq2Seq structure, Ashish et al. [61] pro-
pose a neural network named transformer that shows promising
performance in various NLP tasks such as machine translation
and dialogue systems. A novel architecture named multi-head self-
attention is designed, which is formally defined as
MultiHead(𝑄, 𝐾,𝑉) = Concat(ℎ1,ℎ2, · · · ,ℎ𝑛)𝑊𝑜,
(1)
where𝑄is the query, 𝐾is the key,𝑉is the value, and𝑊𝑜is learnable
parameters. 𝑛is the number of heads, and each ℎ𝑖is obtained from
an attention module, defines as
ℎ𝑖= Attention(𝑄𝑊𝑄
𝑖, 𝐾𝑊𝐾
𝑖,𝑉𝑊𝑉
𝑖),
(2)
Attention(𝑄𝑖, 𝐾𝑖,𝑉𝑖) = softmax(
𝑄𝑖𝐾𝑇
𝑖
√︁
𝑑𝑘
)𝑉𝑖,
(3)
where𝑑𝑘= 𝑑model/𝑛is the dimension of queries𝑄𝑖,𝑊𝑄
𝑖
∈R𝑑model×𝑑𝑘,
𝑊𝐾
𝑖
∈R𝑑model×𝑑𝑘, 𝑊𝑉
𝑖
∈R𝑑model×𝑑𝑘, and 𝑊𝑜∈R𝑑model×𝑑model are
the parameters of the network.
The transformer consists of multiple stacked encoder and de-
coder layers. The encoder contains several layers consisting of a
self-attention module followed by a position-wise feed-forward
layer, defined as
FFN(𝑋) = max(0,𝑋𝑊1 + 𝑏1)𝑊2 + 𝑏2,
(4)
where FFN(·) refers to feed-forward network, 𝑊1 and 𝑊2 are the
weight matrices of each layer, 𝑏1 and 𝑏2 are the corresponding
bias, and 𝑋is the input matrix. To further capture the sequential
information, a positional encoding (PE) [61] mechanism is further
employed, which mathematically defined as
PE(𝑝𝑜𝑠,2𝑖) = sin(𝑝𝑜𝑠/100002𝑖/𝑑model),
(5)
PE(𝑝𝑜𝑠,2𝑖+1) = cos(𝑝𝑜𝑠/100002𝑖/𝑑model),
(6)
where 𝑝𝑜𝑠is the token position in a sequence, 𝑖is the dimension
index.
3
PROBLEM SETUP
After introducing the preliminaries, we are ready to give the formal
definition of the speech-to-SQL problem, and the benchmark dataset
constructed to evaluate the rationale of the proposed problem and
possible models.
3.1
Speech-to-SQL Problem
Suppose that we have a speech corpus D of 𝑀instances, denoted
as D = {d1, · · · , d𝑀}, where d𝑖(𝑖∈{1, · · · , 𝑀}) represents the 𝑖-th
instance. The superscript 𝑖is ignored for simplicity in the following
discussion. Each training instance d is in the format of {𝑥,𝑦,𝑆},
where 𝑥is a speech recording expressing the NL question, 𝑦is its
translation in SQL query, and 𝑆is the schema of the corresponding
database with which 𝑦will be executed. The speech-to-SQL problem
aims to learn a model which can translate an unseen question-
schema pair {𝑥′,𝑆′} to its corresponding SQL query 𝑦′. Specifically,
the schema 𝑆includes the collection of tables 𝑇𝑥= {𝑡𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=1, the
collection of columns 𝐶𝑥= {𝑐𝑖,𝑗}𝐿𝑖
𝑗=1 for each table 𝑡𝑖∈𝑇𝑥, where
𝑁is the total number of tables, and 𝐿𝑖is the number of columns in
table 𝑡𝑖.
student
pet
Databases
Speech 
Question
Target 
SQL
Please find the average age of students who do not have a cat pet ?
SELECT Avg(age) FROM student 
WHERE sid NOT IN (SELECT sid FROM pet)
sid
sid
sname
age
pid
pname
student
pet
pid
color
sname
age
sid
pname
foreign key
pid
foreign key
Select AVG(age) FROM student
WHERE pid=NULL
DB 1
DB 2
Figure 2: Two examples of the speech-to-SQL problem, show-
ing that different databases (schemas) can result in different
desired SQL queries, even for the same speech question.
Figure 2 gives two example for a vivid illustration. In the first
example, the user expresses their data requirement by simply asking
a question “Please find the average age of students who
do not have a cat pet?” to the speech-based interface of the
databases. Given the schema of the database as “student (sid,
sname, age), pet (pid, sid, pname)” and the above speech
(without the corresponding transcript), the speech-to-text task aims
to directly synthesize the desired SQL query “SELECT AVG(age)
FROM student WHERE sid NOT IN (SELECT sid FROM pet)”.
Finally, the DBMS could execute the generated SQL and display the
final results to the user. For the second case, the same NL question
is queried by the user on another database with schema “student
(sid, pid, sname, age), pet (pid, color, pname)”, and the
desired SQL would be “SELECT AVG(age) FROM student WHERE
pid = NULL” correspondingly, to guarantee the correctness of the
final results.
3.2
Speech-to-SQL Dataset
Since speech-to-SQL is a new task, there are currently no existing
datasets in the literature that are suitable for evaluating its perfor-
mance. Following the same practice of using text-to-speech (TTS)
technology [18] to generate the spoken captions in the speech-to-
image task [38, 66, 67], we create a new dataset based on public
text-to-SQL datasets WikiSQL [79] and Spider [73] by converting
the textual statement into speech using a TTS module.
There are several text-to-SQL datasets in the text-to-SQL field.
Spider dataset is a small-scale dataset for cross-domain text-to-SQL
evaluation annotated by human experts. It contains 8,625 training
instances, 1,034 validation instances, and 2,147 test instances. One
of the reasons that Spider is popular in the text-to-SQL field is that
it contains diverse databases, ranging from restaurants, scholars, to
academics, without overlaps in the training, development, and test
sets, which makes it a good benchmark to conduct cross-domain
evaluation. The WikiSQL dataset is another popular dataset in the
text-to-SQL task. Compared with the Spider, WikiSQL only covers
simple queries in form of aggregate-where-select structure, but
the size of the WikiSQL dataset is much larger. To combine the
merits of these two datasets, we merge them and further augment
the data with the method proposed in [72], and finally, we manually
check the validity of the generated samples. As a first step towards
3

Table 1: The Statistics of the proposed SpeechQL Dataset
Statistic
Train
Validation
Test
Total
No. of Instances
31431
1100
2200
34731
No. of Databases
13199
1058
2023
13601
Length of Speech
37.43h
1.33h
2.61h
41.37h
Avg NL Length
11.85
11.97
11.83
11.85
Avg SQL Length
9.1
9.05
9.03
9.09
Vocab Size
-
-
-
15908
speech-to-SQL, over complicated SQL cases are not included and
we leave them for future work.
For the TTS module, we synthesize the raw waveform from the
Mel spectrogram using MelGAN [29], with a stable and efficient
filter bank – pseudo quadrature mirror filter bank (Pseudo-QMF)
[42]. We then apply FastPitch [31] to FastSpeech 2 [49] to generate
the mel spectrogram from text. Finally, we obtain a new dataset
which we named SpeechQL. The detailed statistics of this dataset
can be found in Table 1.
4
A NAIVE BASELINE: THE CASCADED
APPROACH
A naive solution to the speech-to-SQL task can work in a cascaded
fashion, namely, first converting speech signals into their corre-
sponding transcripts with an ASR system, and then conducting
downstream text-to-SQL conversion. In this section, we mainly
discuss this cascaded solution from its main components: ASR in
Section 4.1 and text-to-SQL in Section 4.2.
4.1
Automatic Speech Recognition
Mathematically, the hybrid ASR component transcribes the user’s
voice question into a textual output, which can be expressed as
follows:
w∗= arg max
w (log 𝑃𝐿𝑀(w) + 𝜆log 𝑃𝐴𝑀(a|w)),
(7)
where 𝜆is a trade-off parameter. 𝑃𝐴𝑀is an acoustic model (AM),
evaluating how sounds combine to produce word sequence, and
𝑃𝐿𝑀is a language model (LM), picking the word sequence that has
the largest probability in human language perspective [54, 55].
The ASR component plays a critical role in the cascaded approach
for speech-to-SQL, however, constructing an SQL domain ASR is
hard since the NL questions contain many domain-specific words,
especially in the database contents. These words can easily be
misrecognized, for example, in a real case from SpeechQL dataset,
the original question is “Which Video has a PSIP Short Name
of rt?”. It is as easily-recognizable as “What video has a safe
short name of artie”, even by the widely-used ASR engines
provided by Google 1, Microsoft AI Cloud 2, or Baidu Cloud 3. The
reason for this phenomenon is obvious, that is, the trained data
used to construct their ASR model usually lack SQL domain-specific
data. Hence, it would be better and flexible if we could construct
an ASR model by ourselves with a SQL-domain dataset.
1https://cloud.google.com/speech-to-text
2https://azure.microsoft.com/cognitive-services
3https://ai.baidu.com/tech/speech/asr
To alleviate the above-mentioned problem, we turn to a two-
step (i.e., pre-training and fine-tuning) approach to build a reliable
and accurate ASR model dedicated to the SQL domain. Specifically,
we first train the ASR model with a large-scale in-house English
dataset with around 8000h speech from general domains, then
the pre-trained ASR model is further fine-tuned with the small-
scale text-to-SQL data to adapt to the database domain. For the
ASR system, we utilize the Kaldi “Chain” model [47] as the AM
component and employ a trigram LM as the LM component. The
DNN component of the “Chain” model is a Time Delay Neural
Network (TDNN) [64]. To further improve the performance, an
advanced rescoring mechanism named L2RS [54, 55], integrated
with BERT [17], is also adopted in the 𝑁-best rescoring step. We
employ the widely-used metric, Word Error Rate (WER), as the
main indicator for the performance of the constructed ASR model.
WER is formally defined as
𝑊𝐸𝑅= 𝑆+ 𝐷+ 𝐼
𝑇
,
(8)
where 𝑆, 𝐷, and 𝐼represent the number of word substitutions, dele-
tions, and insertions, respectively, and 𝑇is the total number of
words in the ground-truth transcript. From the definition, we can
conclude that WER reflects the quality of the ASR decoding result,
and the lower the value, the better the decoding result. Overall,
we achieve a WER of 34.451%, a relatively low error rate in this
specific SQL domain. The well-tuned ASR model makes the cas-
caded approaches very strong baselines since parallel studies in the
speech-to-image task such as [67] employ the ASR model with a
far high WER (around 50%) as their baseline.
4.2
Text-to-SQL Conversion
The text-to-SQL model aims to convert the NL questions into SQL
queries, with previous studies such as Seq2SQL [79], SeqNet [69],
EditSQL [76], IRNET [21], and so on. In our implementation, we
directly construct text-to-SQL models with existing techniques on
our datasets. The existing text-to-SQL model is usually trained
based on a clean dataset, that is, the NL questions contain no er-
rors. However, in our scenario, the NL question is recognized by an
ASR module, which produces myriad forms of errors in recognized
transcriptions that further introduce the error compounding prob-
lem, a technical challenge for following text-to-SQL conversion.
To improve the performance, we then explore the possibility of
end-to-end speech-to-SQL conversion.
5
OUR PROPOSED END-TO-END MODEL:
SPEECHSQLNET
Directly synthesizing SQL queries from speech signals is hard due
to the modality gap between speech signals (i.e., audio modality)
and database schema (i.e., text modality) . Inspired by the common
text-to-SQL architectures [21, 65, 69], the SpeechSQLNet model first
uses a speech encoder to convert the speech signals into hidden
representations. In the meantime, the schema, which greatly affects
the desired SQL, is also converted into hidden features by a GNN-
based encoder to preserve its structural information. Finally, the
speech embedding, together with the schema features, is fused to
synthesize the corresponding SQL query with semantic consistency.
The overall structure of the proposed model is illustrated in Figure 3.
4

Speech Encoder
Schema Encoder
CNN
× 𝑁!""
BN
ReLU
Conv Block
𝐻#
$%&
𝐻#
$
Conv Block
FFN
GCN
GCN
BiLSTM
𝐺
𝑍!
Speech-Schema 
Relation-aware 
Encoder
SQL-aware Decoder
𝑍'
𝑍#
𝑋#
𝑋'
Multi-head
Attention
Multi-head
Attention
𝑍#
𝑍'
𝒈𝒂,𝒔
+
𝑄#
𝐾#
𝑉#
𝐾'
𝑉'
+
Layer Norm
FeedForward
Layer Norm
+
Addition
𝑍#
𝑆
+,-''𝐴
× 𝑁.
𝑍#
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
Root
Select
Order
Schema
…
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
Agg
Column
Table
Pointer Net
ℎ/%&
𝑍'
#𝑦
ApplyRule
SelectItem
ℎ/
Figure 3: The Network Structure of the Proposed SpeechSQLNet Model, including a speech-encoder, a schema-encoder, and a
SQL-aware decoder. The output of SpeechSQLNet is an abstract structure tree ˜𝑦in SemQL [21], which is further converted into
the desired SQL query 𝑦.
In this section, we detail the proposed SpeechSQLNet model from
its four main components: Speech Encoder (Section 5.1), Schema
Encoder (Section 5.2), Speech-Schema Relationship-aware Encoder
(Section 5.3), and SQL-aware Decoder (Section 5.4).
5.1
Speech Encoder
5.1.1
Raw Feature Extraction from Speech Signals. Theoretically,
it should be possible to synthesize SQL directly from the digitized
waveform, due to the strong modeling capability of exiting DNNs.
However, human speech signals are highly variable, and the objec-
tive of conducting feature extraction is to reduce the variabilities.
Specifically, the typical variability that we would like to eliminate
includes the effect of the periodicity or pitch, the amplitude of ex-
citation signal and fundamental frequency [10]. Inspired by the
common practice in ASR, in our implementation, we extract 96
log-scaled Mel-band energies from speech 𝑥using sliding windows
of 1024 samples (≈46𝑚𝑠), with 512 overlaps and the Hamming
windowing function, to serve as inputs 𝑋𝑎∈R𝑙𝑎×96 for speech
encoder.
5.1.2
Speech Embedding from CNN-based Architecture. After ex-
tracting the feature embeddings from the digitized waveform, we
design a speech encoder that employs a convolutional neural net-
work (CNN)-based structure to preserve the continuity of speech.
Specifically, the network is composed of a series of convolutional
blocks, each of which is stacked by a CNN module [28] and a batch
normalization (BN) [23] module. The process of each block can be
denoted as:
𝐻(𝑙)
𝑎
= 𝑓(BN(𝑙) (CNN(𝑙) (𝐻(𝑙−1)
𝑎
))),
(9)
𝐻(0)
𝑎
= 𝑋𝑎,
(10)
where 𝑙= {1, . . . , 𝑁𝑎} is the layer number of stacked blocks, 𝐻(𝑙)
𝑎
∈
R𝑙(𝑙)
𝑎×𝑑(𝑙)
𝑎
is the hidden representation of the speech features, deliv-
ered from the 𝑙-th layer and sent to the (𝑙+ 1)-th layer, 𝑙(𝑙)
𝑎
and 𝑑(𝑙)
𝑎
are the length and size of 𝑙-th layer speech hidden representation,
respectively. 𝑓(·) is a activation function and in our network, we
choose the popular ReLU function [20]. Lastly, we obtain a speech
embedding 𝑍𝑎∈R𝑙(𝑁𝑎)
𝑎
×𝑑(𝑁𝑎)
𝑎
by the speech encoder as
𝑍𝑎= 𝐻(𝑁)
𝑎
,
(11)
where 𝑁𝑎is the number of layers in speech stacked blocks.
5.2
Schema Encoder
Even for the same NL question, it has been proven that the schema
of the database greatly influences the structure of the desired SQL
query [8]. As such, we need to preserve the schema information
from both the semantic and the structural perspectives. In Speech-
SQLNet, we first convert the database schemas into graphs, and
then employ the GNN-based architecture as the schema encoder.
5.2.1
Converting Database Schema into Graph. To leverage the
structure information, we define an undirected graph 𝐺= {𝑉, 𝐸}
to represent the schema. An example with two tables is shown in
Figure 4. Specifically, each node 𝑣𝑖∈𝑉is either a table 𝑡∈𝑇𝑥or a
column 𝑐∈𝐶𝑥, and each edge 𝑒𝑖,𝑗= (𝑣𝑖, 𝑣𝑗) ∈𝐸is designed based
on the database relations. There are two types of edges in the graph,
and each of them represents a way how columns and tables correlate
to one another, including table-column (edge between table 𝑡𝑖∈𝑇𝑥
and its column 𝑐𝑗∈𝐶𝑥= {𝑐𝑖,𝑗}𝐿𝑖
𝑗=1) and foreign-key (edge between
5

sid
age
sname
pid
Student
pid
sid
pname
Pet
student
pet
sid
sid
sname
age
pid
pname
column node
table node
table-column edge
foreign-key edge
Figure 4: An Example of Converting Database Schema into
Graph
foreign key linking two different tables). Considering that items
with the same name contribute to the feature construction and SQL
decoder in the same way, the columns with the same name, even in
a different table, are represented by the same node. Finally, for each
node 𝑣, we could get its neighborhood 𝑁(𝑣) = {𝑢∈𝑉|𝑢, 𝑣∈𝐸}.
Node sequences and their adjacent matrix are serving as inputs 𝑋𝑠
for the schema encoder.
5.2.2
Converting the NL into Node Embedding. To retain the se-
mantic information, instead of randomly initializing the embedding
of each node in the graph, we adopt an LSTM-based network to
generate the embedding. For a node 𝑣𝑖∈𝑉, each token in the node
is first converted into an embedding vector, and then a bidirectional
LSTM (BiLSTM) is employed to convert the variable-length node
tokens’ embedding into fixed-length hidden state vectors. The out-
put vectors of the forward and backward LSTM are concatenated
together, followed by a feed-forward network (FFN) to construct
the node embedding ℎ𝑣𝑖∈R𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙. Then the initial embedding of
the schema graph, denoted as 𝐻𝑠∈R𝑙𝑠×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙which includes 𝑙𝑠
nodes, is calculated as follows.
ℎ𝑣𝑖= FFN(BiLSTM(𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑(𝑣𝑖))),
(12)
𝐻𝑠= [ℎ𝑣0, . . . ,ℎ𝑣𝑙𝑠].
(13)
5.2.3
GCN-based Schema Encoder. Given the schema in the form
of a graph, we would like to capture the overall structure and
the detailed connections for each node. As such, we use a GNN-
based encoder to embed the schema graph 𝐺into a hidden space
representation. Its main idea is to update embedding ℎ𝑣for each
node𝑣by aggregating its own featuresℎ𝑣and its neighbors’ features
ℎ𝑢, where 𝑢∈𝑁(𝑣), as Eq. (14).
ℎ𝑣= 𝑓(Θ𝑇
∑︁
𝑢∈{𝑁(𝑣)∪𝑣}
¯𝐴𝑢,𝑣ℎ𝑢),
(14)
where 𝑓(·) is an activation function, Θ is learned parameter, and
¯𝐴𝑢,𝑣is correlation coefficient between node 𝑢and node 𝑣computed
by the adjacency matrix [27]. In practice, we apply a 2-layered GCN
to get the final schema embedding, thus one column embedding
is related to its neighbor nodes (table) and nodes in the common
table. The final schema embedding 𝑍𝑠∈R𝑙𝑠×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙is obtained by
𝑍𝑠= GCN(GCN(𝐻𝑠)).
(15)
5.3
Speech-Schema Relation-aware Encoder
In traditional text-to-SQL tasks, schema-linking, which identifies
references of tables and columns in the NL questions, could greatly
improve the accuracy of the models [34]. While it is trivial to iden-
tify the mentioned database keywords in an NL query, it’s quite hard
to assign the linking information between the speech and database
in advance. As such, we design an advanced encoder to predict the
relation information between speech and database automatically.
5.3.1
Self-learned Schema Linking. The goal of schema-linking is to
recognize the items (table, column, and database values) mentioned
in the speech question and then enhance the speech embedding
by incorporating the embeddings from these correlated items. This
module takes the speech embedding 𝑍𝑎and the schema embedding
𝑍𝑠as input and then outputs an advanced hybrid speech embed-
ding. Concretely, a feed-forward network is applied to the speech
and schema firstly, which aims to map them into a common hidden
space. To learn a speech representation that considers its related
schema items, we further perform an attention mechanism [61]
over the speech frames and the schema items. A semantic simi-
larity score, denoted as 𝑔𝑎,𝑠∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑙𝑠(𝑙𝑎is short for 𝑙(𝑁𝑎)
𝑎
, which
denotes the length of speech in the output layer), and 𝑔𝑖,𝑗
𝑎,𝑠is calcu-
lated between 𝑖-th speech frame and 𝑗-th schema nodes to serve
as a schema-linking relevance score, and then the weighted sum
of the schema embedding is concatenated to the original speech
embedding. Mathematically, the whole process is represented as
follows.
𝑔𝑎,𝑠=
𝑍𝑎(𝑍𝑠)𝑇
||𝑍𝑎|| · ||𝑍𝑠||,
(16)
𝐶𝑎= 𝑔𝑎,𝑠𝑍𝑠,
(17)
𝑍𝑎= 𝑍𝑎+ 𝐶𝑎,
(18)
where 𝐶𝑎∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙.
5.3.2
Multi-modal Transformer-based Fusion. To leverage both
multi-modal and long-term temporal relationships among different
modalities (i.e., audio and text), we learn a joint representation for
the speech and the schema by a multi-modal transformer-based
encoder. Inspired by the vanilla transformer structure [61], the
encoder is composed of a stack of basic blocks, each of which con-
sists of a multi-head attention mechanism, a fully connected feed-
forward network, and a layer normalization [3]. However, different
from the basic transformer structure, we add two attention modules
in our multi-modal transformer, the first of which is a self-attention
(SA) module designed for learning the relationships inherent in one
modality, while the latter of which is a crossmodal attention (CA),
which is proposed to fuse the latent relation information among
different modalities.
Due to space limitations, we only illustrate the generation pro-
cess of the improved speech embedding here, and the schema em-
bedding is constructed similarly. Given the inputs from the two
modalities (i.e., the speech embedding 𝑍𝑎and the schema embed-
ding 𝑍𝑠), we define the speech query as 𝑄𝑎= 𝑍𝑎𝑊𝑄𝑎∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,
speech key as 𝐾𝑎= 𝑍𝑎𝑊𝐾𝑎∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙, speech value as 𝑉𝑎=
𝑍𝑎𝑊𝑉𝑎∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙, schema key as 𝐾𝑠= 𝑍𝑠𝑊𝐾𝑠∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙, and
schema value as 𝑉𝑠= 𝑍𝑠𝑊𝑉𝑠∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙.
6

Stmt
Root
Root
Select
Where?
Order?
GroupBy?
Select
op
AND | OR
|
Root
INTERSECT | UNION | EXCEPT 
Having?
Column*
Where
Where
Where
Column
Root?
Root
|
Order
Column
ASC | DESC
Limit?
Having
Column
op
Root?
GroupBy
op
Column
> | < | ≥ | ≤ | = | ≠ | LIKE | NOT LIKE| IN | BETWEEN 
Figure 5: The Grammar of SemQL
We first employ the SA module over the speech embedding to
obtain 𝑌𝑆𝐴
𝑎
∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙, then perform the crossmodal attention
between the speech and the schema to get 𝑌𝐶𝐴
𝑎
∈R𝑙𝑎×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙. Fur-
thermore, the sum of 𝑌𝑆𝐴
𝑎
and 𝑌𝐶𝐴
𝑎
is used to represent the multi-
modal speech output 𝑌𝑎, whose 𝑖-th time step is a weighted sum of
𝑉𝑎and 𝑉𝑠, with the weight determined by a Softmax(·) score ma-
trix. Finally, layer normalization and feed-forward network, which
has been proved effective in improving the performance in prior
works [3], are also incorporated into the encoder. After the above-
mentioned steps, we could get a new embedding for the speech
and the schema, denoted as 𝑍𝑎and 𝑍𝑠, respectively. We repeat this
process 𝑁𝑒times to obtain the final embedding. Mathematically,
the whole process can be represented as:
𝑌𝑆𝐴
𝑎
= MultiHead(𝑄𝑎, 𝐾𝑎,𝑉𝑎),
(19)
𝑌𝐶𝐴
𝑠
= MultiHead(𝑄𝑎, 𝐾𝑎,𝑉𝑠),
(20)
𝑌𝑎= 𝑌SA
𝑎
+ 𝑌CA
𝑎,
(21)
𝑌𝑎= LN(𝑌𝑎+ 𝑍𝑎),
(22)
𝑍𝑎= LN(FFN(𝑌𝑎) + 𝑌𝑎),
(23)
where MultiHead(·) means the multi-head mechanism mentioned
in section 2.2, LN(·) is the layer normalization, and FFN(·) refers to
feed-forward network.
5.4
SQL-aware Decoder
Since SQL is a programming language with clear and strict grammar,
it would be better to encode this grammar information as a prior
to guide the generation process. Following the practice in text-
to-SQL [21], in our implementation, we also choose the grammar
of SemQL, as shown in Figure 5. Our decoder is adapted from a
grammar-based structure commonly-used in the text-to-SQL task
[21], which employs a LSTM architecture to synthesize SemQL by
choosing a sequence of actions denoted as ˜𝑦. Mathematically, the
generation process of a SemQL query sequence ˜𝑦can be formalized
as:
𝑝( ˜𝑦|𝑥,𝑆) =
𝑇
Ö
𝑖=1
𝑝(𝑎𝑖|𝑥,𝑆,𝑎<𝑖),
(24)
where 𝑎𝑖means an action applied at step 𝑖, 𝑎<𝑖are all the previous
actions before step 𝑖, and 𝑇is the number of all the actions to
predict 𝑦. The actions involved in the generation process of Eq. (24)
is further categorized into two types: (i) ApplyRule: applying a
production rule to the current grammar tree till finishing the SQL
sketch; (ii) SelectSchema: selecting a column or table item from the
schema to complete the SQL query.
5.4.1
ApplyRule. The objective of the ApplyRule step is to con-
struct a context-free grammar tree of the SQL query [21]. In every
step, we select the most probable branch given the previous route,
and employ an LSTM-based structure to simulate the process. At
each prediction step 𝑖, the LSTM state is updated based on previous
state ℎ𝑖−1 ∈R𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙, previous action embedding 𝑎𝑖−1 ∈R𝑑𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
(𝑑𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛is the size of the action embedding), previous action type
embedding 𝑛𝑖−1 ∈R𝑑𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒(𝑑𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒is the size of the action type em-
bedding), and previous context representation of LSTM 𝑐𝑖−1. Then
a Luong attention mechanism [39] is implemented where all of
the speech final embeddings 𝑍𝑎would be taken into computation,
finally the probability of selecting a rule is calculated by Eq. (28).
ℎ𝑖= LSTM([𝑎𝑖−1;𝑛𝑖−1;𝑐𝑖−1],ℎ𝑖−1),
(25)
𝑐𝑖= Softmax(ℎ𝑇
𝑖𝑊𝑎𝑍𝑇
𝑎)𝑍𝑎,
(26)
𝑢𝑖= tanh([ℎ𝑖;𝑐𝑖]𝑊𝑢+ 𝑏𝑢),
(27)
𝑝( ˜𝑦𝑖= 𝑎𝑖|𝑥,𝑆,𝑎<𝑖) = Softmax(tanh(𝑢𝑇
𝑖𝑊𝑝+ 𝑏𝑝)),
(28)
where [; ] refers to concatenation operation, 𝑊𝑎∈R𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,
𝑊𝑢∈R2𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙are the trainable weights, 𝑊𝑝∈R𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙×𝑛𝑎
(𝑛𝑎is the number of actions and𝑛𝑎=46 in our setting),𝑏𝑐is trainable
bias, and the initial state ℎ0 is obtained by a max-pooling operation
of the speech embedding 𝑍𝑎.
5.4.2
SelectSchema. To fill in the specific item in the target SQL,
another LSTM-based structure is also employed. In this part, we
need to predict the operation (e.g., max, min, count) and the item
(column or table) involved in the speech given the schema. The
schema varies in every case and the desired items are also not
fixed, which is quite different from the ApplyRule part. As such, we
further employ the pointer network [62] to handle this issue. The
probability of selecting a schema item is calculated as follows
𝑝( ˜𝑦𝑖= 𝑎𝑖|𝑥,𝑠,𝑎<𝑖) = Softmax(𝑢𝑇
𝑖𝑊𝑠𝑍𝑇
𝑠),
(29)
where 𝑊𝑠∈R𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙is a trainable weight matrix. In partic-
ular, table options are restricted to the tables where the selected
column is corresponding to.
6
MODEL TRAINING
Even though we have designed several modules to fuse the informa-
tion from different modalities, there still exists a large gap between
the speech modality and the text modality. To further minimize this
modality gap, we propose a two-step framework (i.e., pre-training
and fine-tuning) to train this network. The network first conducts
model pre-training (Section 6.1 and Section 6.2) to align a common
hidden space for each pair of speech and its corresponding tran-
script sentence, and then conducts fine-tuning (Section 6.3) based
on the datasets of speech-SQL pairs. It should be noticed that the
pre-training step is optional, depending on the availability of the
transcripts. Furthermore, the dataset used for the pre-training step
is not necessarily required in the SQL domain.
7

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Decoder
Encoder
𝑋!
𝑍!
#𝑋!
𝑋"
𝑍"
#𝑋#
Contrastive 
Loss 𝐿$
Reconstruction Loss 𝐿!
Reconstruction Loss 𝐿"
Figure 6: The Network Structure in the Speech-Sentence Pre-
training Step.
6.1
Speech-Sentence Pre-Training
As shown in Figure 6, we design an autoencoder (AE)-based frame-
work to match speech and text sentence with two different AEs.
Semantic representations for different modalities are mapped by
a speech autoencoder (SAE) and a text autoencoder (TAE) respec-
tively, and these two representations are forced to be close to each
other. Since we employ the same encoder like the one mentioned
in Section 5.1 for the SAE, and the same encoder as the one men-
tioned in Section 5.2 for the TAE, the network parameters after this
pre-training step can be reused in the following fine-tuning phase.
And the decoders of the SAE and the TAE have reversed modules
of their encoders according to the design rules of AEs. The loss of
the network L is composed of three parts: a reconstruction loss of
speech input L𝑎, a reconstruction loss of transcript input L𝑠, and
a contrastive loss between the speech and text pairs L𝑝, which can
be formulated as follows.
L(𝑋𝑎, ˜𝑋𝑠) = L𝑎+ L𝑠+ L𝑝,
(30)
L𝑎= 𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑋𝑎|| ˆ𝑋𝑎),
(31)
L𝑠= 𝐷𝐾𝐿( ˜𝑋𝑠|| ˆ𝑋𝑠),
(32)
L𝑝= −log
𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑠𝑖𝑚(ℎ𝑏𝑎,ℎ𝑏𝑠))
Í
𝑖[𝑖≠𝑏] exp(𝑠𝑖𝑚(ℎ𝑏𝑎,ℎ𝑖𝑠))
,
(33)
𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑍𝑎,𝑍𝑠) =
ℎ𝑇𝑎ℎ𝑠
∥ℎ𝑎∥· ∥ℎ𝑠∥,
(34)
where 𝑋𝑎and ˜𝑋𝑠are the inputs of speech and transcript, ˆ𝑋𝑎and
ˆ𝑋𝑎are the reconstructed outputs by the AEs, 𝐷𝐾𝐿(·||·) is a KL
divergence used to measure the reconstruction loss. For contrastive
loss, suppose a minibatch 𝐺=
n
(𝑋𝑏𝑎, ˜𝑋𝑏𝑠)
o𝑁𝑏
𝑏=1 with 𝑁𝑏examples
is training simultaneously, and ℎ𝑏𝑎and ℎ𝑏𝑠are the intermediate
representation of an example 𝑏where ℎ𝑏𝑎is produced by a max-
pooling operation from 𝑍𝑎. And the loss is designed to shorten the
distance between the same text and speech pair, and enlarge the
distance between different text and speech pair. After training the
AEs, embeddings extracted from speech and schema encoder can
be regarded as close enough to each other.
6.2
Speech-Item Pre-training
The objective of the speech-item pre-training phase serves as the
same objective of the schema-linking step in the text-to-SQL task,
that is, to explicitly identify if an item from the database schema is
refereed by the speech question. Given the speech query and a item
from the schema, their embeddings are first extracted by the speech
and text encoder trained in the above-mentioned pre-training phase.
Then a cosine-similarity following by Sigmoid nonlinearity function
is employed to predict the existence as Eq. (35).
ˆyf = Sigmoid(𝑊𝑓sim(𝑍𝑎,ℎ𝑠) + 𝑏𝑓)),
(35)
where 𝑊𝑓∈R𝑙𝑞and 𝑏𝑓are trainable parameters.
The training dataset for this pre-training step can easily be ob-
tained from the original speech-to-SQL dataset. For any instance
{x, y, S} in the speech-to-SQL dataset, we could compose multiple
new training instances, each of which can be denoted as {x,𝑐,𝑦𝑓},
where 𝑐is a column item from the schema 𝑆, the label 𝑦𝑓equals
to 1 when 𝑐appears in SQL 𝑦, otherwise 0. Finally, we employ the
cross-entropy loss to in this pre-training step, defined as
L(yf, ˆyf) = −(yT
f log ˆyf + (1 −yT
f ) log (1 −ˆyf)),
(36)
6.3
Model Fine-tuning
After above-mentioned pre-training phases, we obtain trained weights
for speech encoder and schema text encoder. During this fine-tuning
step, we will first load the weights by the pre-training step in ad-
vance if they exists, and then train the model globally with speech-
to-SQL data, maximizing the log-likelihood of ground true action
sequences defined as:
L = max
∑︁
(𝑥,𝑆,𝑦) ∈D
∑︁
𝑎𝑖∈𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑦𝑅𝑢𝑙𝑒
log𝑝( ˜𝑦𝑖= 𝑎𝑖|𝑥,𝑆,𝑎<𝑖)
+
∑︁
𝑎𝑖∈𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑎
log𝑝( ˜𝑦𝑖= 𝑎𝑖|𝑥,𝑆,𝑎<𝑖)).
(37)
The whole network is trained in an end-to-end style with stochastic
gradient descent methods such as Adam [26].
7
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed model
in terms of quantitative metrics. We first describe the experimental
setup, including baselines in Section 7.1, implementation details in
Section 7.2, and evaluation measurements in Section 7.3. Then we
present the results in Section 7.4 to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed models by comparing them with these baselines.
7.1
Baselines
There is currently no literature that achieves direct SQL generation
from arbitrary speech questions. Existing text-to-SQL approaches
assume the availability of the transcripts for each speech, either
labeled by human annotators or recognized by an ASR system.
In our experiments, we compare carefully designed methods to
this problem, which can be roughly categorized into the cascaded
approach and the end-to-end approach. For the cascaded approach,
the discussed well-trained ASR system is first used to decode the
transcripts for each speech, and then a text-to-SQL model is adopted
8

to generate the SQL queries. Specifically, we adopt the following
four cascaded baselines.
• ASR + Seq2SQL: Seq2SQL [79] is the first DNN-based ap-
proach to solve text-to-SQL problem. The model is a straight-
forward Seq2Seq neural network, which takes the text as the
input and the SQL statement as the output.
• ASR + SQLNet: SQLNet [69] employs a more refined slot
filling strategy. It takes advantage of the fact that most of
the queries in the WikiSQL dataset can be represented in a
standard “SELECT _ FROM _ WHERE _” format.
• ASR + IRNet: IRNet [21] is an advanced text-to-SQL model
that improves the above two methods by representing the
SQL statement with the SemSQL grammar in an abstract
syntax tree (AST) format. This representation captures the
structure information of the SQL generation problem and
achieves much better results than the previous methods.
• ASR + EditSQL: EditSQL [76] is another advanced text-to-
SQL model that performs very well on SQL generation task.
This model could reuse previously generation results at the
token level, which makes it a very strong baseline for per-
formance comparison.
For the end-to-end approach, we design and implement the follow-
ing three baselines.
• SpeechSeq2SQL: This baseline employs a vanilla Seq2Seq
model directly trained on the speech-to-SQL dataset that
converts the speech signals into its corresponding SQL. The
encoder and the decoder are both Bi-LSTM, and we name
this method SpeechSeq2SQL.
• Transformer: Transformer has shown quite promising per-
formance on various NLP tasks from machine translation
[15, 30], dialogue system [32, 77], to ASR [75, 80]. In our
experiment, we also implement the transformer structure
according to [61], with the speech question as the input and
the SQL query as the output.
• SpeechSQLNet: this method is the end-to-end model that
we designed in this work, which employs novel encoders,
SQL-aware decoder, and pre-training mechanisms that are
dedicated to this speech-to-SQL task.
To ensure fairness and reproducibility, we train all the models
with the same training set, tune their parameters with the same
validation set, and finally evaluate the performance on the same
testing set. We try our best to tune the parameters of these models
to achieve their best performance.
7.2
Implementation Details
The speech encoder is composed of a 6-layer CNN module with
1 input channel and 128 output channels, which takes speech fea-
tures of the same size by resampling and zero-padding as needed.
The schema encoder takes word embedding as inputs, which is
initialized with a BiLSTM with 512 hidden units, and the outputs
are produced by a 2-layers GCN. The transformer has a 2-layer
encoder, with head size, feed-forward size, and hidden size set to
be 4, 1024, 512 respectively. The dimension of action embedding
and type embedding in the SQL-aware decoder are all set to 12. In
addition, the pre-training models keep the same size as the above
Table 2: Performance of Different Speech-to-SQL Methods.
Method
Validation
Test
Query Acc.
TPQ
Query Acc.
TPQ
ASR + Seq2SQL
0.0518
0.093
0.0568
0.089
ASR + Transformer
0.0955
0.096
0.0782
0.094
ASR + IRNet
0.4264
0.146
0.4455
0.140
ASR + EditSQL
0.4973
0.128
0.5116
0.125
SpeechSeq2SQL
0.1918
0.003
0.1886
0.003
Transformer
0.1791
0.003
0.1805
0.004
SpeechSQLNet
0.5355
0.070
0.5415
0.070
settings. During the training period, the learning rate, decay rate,
dropout rate, and batch size of the network are set to 0.0001, 0.8,
0.3, and 256 respectively. All the experiments were conducted on
a server with a 72 Intel Core Processor (Xeon), 314 GB memory,
Tesla K80 GPU, and CentOS.
7.3
Evaluation Metrics
Two widely-used metrics in SQL generation task is used in our
experiments to validate the effectiveness of the proposed model.
• Query-Match Accuracy: This metric evaluates the percent-
age of matches between the generated SQL with the ground
truth. To alleviate the negative effect of condition order,
we further decouple each SQL statement into several parts:
“select column”, “aggregator”, and “condition”. Instead of di-
rectly comparing the SQL string, we take the condition part
as a set and compare each element in the set.
• Average Time Per Query (TPQ): This metric evaluates the
averaged inference time cost of a query by various methods,
and it reflects how fast each model can process the speech
query.
7.4
Experimental Results
7.4.1
Comparison of Accuracy. The accuracies of our proposed
model together with the baseline on the dev and test datasets are
presented in Table 2, from which we could conclude the following
observations.
The cascaded approaches do not perform very well and are not
competitive. The main reason is that they suffer the error com-
pounding problem between components, i.e., recognition errors
leading to larger SQL conversion errors. Some end-to-end methods
can outperform the cascaded methods by a large margin (e.g., ASR
+ Seq2SQL v.s SpeechSeq2SQL), proving the necessity of exploring
approaches that bypass the text for the speech-to-SQL problem.
The end-to-end approach has the advantage of naturally retaining
the rich linguistic information in the speech, and conducting global
optimization to reduce the errors. However, their capabilities to
capture this linguistic information are not equally powerful. The
performance of the baseline SpeechSeq2SQL method is less power-
ful than other end-to-end methods, and the reason is obvious. The
SpeechSeq2SQL does not consider the specificity of the SQL gener-
ation problem, and hence has limited ability in both understanding
the information converted in the speech and the database schema.
9

Table 3: Ablation Study Results.
Method
Validation Query Acc.
Test Query Acc.
SpeechSQLNet
0.5355
0.5415
w/o GCN
0.5209
0.5164
w/o Linking
0.5273
0.5195
w/o Fusion
0.4600
0.4532
w/o SQL
0.4472
0.4219
The transformer-based structure could improve the performance
compared with the basic SpeechSeq2SQL model, which is consistent
with previous studies [30, 77]. Among all these methods, the pro-
posed method SpeechSQLNet uses a powerful speech encoder and a
schema encoder to extract meanings from the speech and database
schema, and hence it could beat all compared methods. Further-
more, the SQL-aware decoder can guide the generation process
with the SQL grammar. This set of experiments verifies the ratio-
nale of the proposed speech-to-SQL problem and the effectiveness
and necessity of the end-to-end approach.
7.4.2
Ablation Studies: The Effects of Each Network Component. In
this section, we performed ablation studies to show the contribution
of each component in SpeechSQLNet. Specifically, we first evaluate
the SpeechSQLNet with all the components as the baseline. Each
model is then represented by the name(s) of the components that it
removes or replaces. To evaluate the effectiveness of the schema
encoder, we replace it with a vanilla RNN-based encoder (w/o GCN).
For the schema-linking component, we compared it with a baseline
without it (w/o Linking). For the transformer-based fusion part,
we remove it and name the baseline w/o Fusion. Finally, for the
SQL-aware decoder, we replace it with a basic RNN-based decoder
(w/o SQL). All the results are listed in Table 3.
Compared with the model without the schema-linking part, the
performance decreases greatly, up to 10.76% relative accuracy re-
duction. The significant reduction demonstrates the effectiveness of
our proposed schema-linking mechanism in addressing the speech-
to-SQL task. Other modules show similar conclusions. For example,
the fusion mechanism brings around 16.40% relative improvement,
while the SQL-aware decoder shows around 28.35% relative im-
provement. However, compared with a vanilla RNN encoder, the
GNN-based schema encoder only shows an 0.69% relative improve-
ment. The main reason is that the schema encoder mainly handles
the complicated queres across tables, while most of the cases in
our dataset focus on SQL queries on single tables (from WikiSQL).
However, a further case study with multiple tables in the following
Section 7.4.5 shows the necessity of involving a GNN-based schema
encoder in handling these complicated queries.
7.4.3
Ablation Studies: The Effects of The Pre-training Mechanisms.
We also conduct another set of ablation studies to show the effective-
ness of the two proposed pre-training mechanisms. Each model is
still represented by the name(s) of the components that it removes,
namely w/o SSPT, w/o SIPT, and w/o Both, referring to trained
models without the speech-sentence pre-training mechanism, with-
out the speech-item pre-training mechanism, and without these
two pre-training mechanisms, respectively.
Table 4: The Effects of The Pre-training Mechanisms.
Method
Validation Query Acc.
Test Query Acc.
SpeechSQLNet
0.5355
0.5415
w/o SSPT
0.5136
0.5027
w/o SIPT
0.4982
0.5109
w/o Both
0.4655
0.4577
As shown in Table 4, these two pre-training mechanisms together
bring around 15.29% relative query match accuracy improvements
in the test set, showing the necessity and effectiveness of involving
these pre-training mechanisms to align the semantic representation
for speech and text. Specifically, the speech-sentence pre-training
mechanism solely brings about 4.97% relative query match accuracy
improvements in the test set, while the speech-item pre-training
mechanism solely shows a 3.29% relative query match accuracy
improvement. Lastly, it should be noticed that, unlike the training
step, the labeled data used in the pre-training step are not restricted
to the SQL domain, and any labeled ASR dataset can be used.
7.4.4
Hyper-parameter Study. In this section, we study the perfor-
mance variation affected by the parameters such as the number of
GCN layers, head numbers, and the number of transformer layers.
And the results are show in Figure 7.
As shown in Figure 7a, a large number of GCN layers does not
always lead to better performance. The performance reaches a peak
at layer 2 and then decreases when the number exceeds this value.
Previous studies on GNN [12] have also shown similar observa-
tions. And the reason is obvious, that is, the learning capacity of
the model increases with the increasing of the layers, however, too
many layers require more data to train [37]. Then for the other two
parameters - the head numbers and the number of transformer lay-
ers, we also observe similar phenomena in Figure 7b and Figure 7c,
respectively.
7.4.5
Case Study. We list two cases to vividly show the generated
SQLs by the various baselines as well as our model in Table 5. The
first case illustrates the error pounding problem between the ASR
and the text-to-SQL components. The cascaded methods fail since
the ASR model misrecognized “draws” to “drawers” and “byes” to
“bites”, and thus the downstream text-to-SQL models all failed. This
reflects the fact that the robustness of the cascaded solution is
weak and the error compounding problem greatly affects the final
SQL conversion accuracy. However, the results generated by the
end-to-end baselines such as SpeechSeq2SQL and Transformer are
partly correct. Compared with all these baselines, our designed
SpeechSQLNet could accurately capture the semantics conveyed by
the speech question and then generates the SQL query accurately.
The second case shows how the schema could affect the predicted
SQL. Since the required columns are from two tables, the desired
SQL has a complicated ‘Join’ operations between the ‘Product’ and
the ‘Ref_Colors’ tables. In this case, even the ASR module correctly
recognizes the transcript, most of the cascaded approaches such as
EditSQL and Transformer still fail to give the correct predictions.
In contrast, the SpeechSQLNet could accurately identify the cor-
responding tables and columns, which validates the necessity of
exploring end-to-end solutions for the Speech-to-SQL problem.
10

0.5
0.51
0.52
0.53
0.54
0.55
1
2
3
4
Query Match Acc.
No. of GCN Layers
Validation
Test
(a) GCN Layer
0.51
0.52
0.53
0.54
0.55
1
2
3
4
Query Match Acc.
No. of Transformer Layers
Validation
Test
(b) Transformer Layer
0.51
0.52
0.53
0.54
0.55
1
2
4
8
Query Match Acc.
No. of Transformer Heads
Validation
Test
(c) Transformer Head
Figure 7: The Hyper-parameter Study of the SpeechSQLNet Model
Table 5: Two SQL Examples Generated by Various Cascaded and The End-to-end Methods.
Speech Query
What is the lowest number of draws with more than 1 byes?
What is the name of the product with the color description ’yellow’?
Schema
wimmra(Wimmera_fl,wins,byes,losses,draws,against)
Products(product_id, color_code, product_name, ...),
Ref_Colors(color_code, color_description)
Ground Truth SQL
SELECT MIN(draws) FROM Wimmera WHERE byes > 1
SELECT T1.product_name FROM Products AS T1 JOIN Ref_Colors
AS T2 WHERE T2.color_description = 1
ASR Result
what is the lowest number of drawers with more than one bites
what is the name of the product with the color description yellow
ASR + Seq2SQL
SELECT MIN(runners) FROM Boston WHERE draws > 1
SELECT name FROM Kazakhstan WHERE upstream = 1
ASR + Transformer SELECT MIN(sample_size) FROM Martin WHERE
vote_to_evict = 1
SELECT name FROM 2008 WHERE 2008_club = 1
ASR + IRNet
SELECT MIN(*) FROM Wimmera WHERE draws > 1
SELECT T1.product_name FROM Products AS T1 JOIN Ref_Colors
AS T2 WHERE T2.color_description = 1
ASR + EditSQL
SELECT MIN(against) FROM Wimmera WHERE wins > 1
SELECT product_name FROM Products WHERE color_description = 1
SpeechSeq2SQL
SELECT MIN(draws) FROM 1908 WHERE byes > 1
SELECT name FROM Match_season WHERE college =1
Transformer
SELECT MIN(draws) FROM Golden WHERE byes > 1
SELECT name FROM List WHERE 2012_club = {value}
SpeechSQLNet
SELECT MIN(draws) FROM Wimmera WHERE byes > 1
SELECT T1.product_name FROM Products AS T1 JOIN Ref_Colors
AS T2 WHERE T2.color_description = 1
7.4.6
Summary. The experimental evaluations on the SpeechQL
dataset demonstrate the superiority of SpeechSQLNet model over
several strong baselines, including various cascaded ones as well
as the end-to-end ones. For example, SpeechSQLNet achieves up
to 11.96% exact match accuracy improvements compared with the
advanced IRNet model. The effectiveness of each designed com-
ponent is further validated by the ablation study. Specifically, the
novel pre-training mechanisms bring around 15.29% relative query
match accuracy improvements in the test set. The two generated
examples in the case study section also vividly reflect the value of
this problem and the superiority of our proposed method.
8
RELATED WORK
Our work is closely related to the research fields of text-to-SQL,
speech-driven querying systems, and speech-to-X. We briefly sur-
vey the most related work from these three aspects.
8.1
Text-to-SQL
Text-to-SQL aims to provide databases with a text-based interface.
Past literature in this field can be classified into three categories: rule
and template-based approach, statistical learning-based approach,
and end-to-end neural network-based approach. Typical studies in
rule and template-based approaches include works such as SODA
[7], QUICK [74], SINA [53], and NLQ/A [78]. These approaches
normally work in a similar style and suffer the drawback of poor
flexibility since users may express their questions using different
linguistic styles. For example, SODA [7] adopts a five-step pipeline
to translate a keyword-based NL input question into an SQL query.
NLQ/A [78] extends the input to pattern-based NL and supports
more complex questions like concepts. A comprehensive survey
on classic approaches can be found in [1]. The statistical learning-
based approach can partially relieve the drawback and improve the
flexibility, with typical studies in this category such as KBQA [14]
and AMUSE [22]. Recent trends in deep neural networks (DNNs)
also promote the development on end-to-end neural network-based
approach. Representative studies in this category include Seq2SQL
[79], SQLNet [70], TypeSQL [71], Syntax SQL [57], IRNET [21], and
its extensions such as NL2pSQL [11]. There are also some public
datasets released in the community to promote the research on this
field, such as Spider [73], TableQA [56], and WikiSQL [79]. The
Spider dataset is a small-scale cross-domain dataset that contains
complex nested and join queries. WikiSQL is much larger in size,
11

however, it mainly focuses on simple queries on limited domains.
TableQA is another large-scale cross-domain NL2SQL dataset in
the Chinese language.
While text-to-SQL can bridge the gap between SQL and NL and
provide a text-based interface for DMBS, we believe that the voice-
based interface is a much easier and faster way for interacting
with DBMS. According to the user study in [51], the voice-based
interface can enable users to compose SQL queries considerably
faster by up to 6.7x compared to typing on a text-based interface
in a tablet device. Hence, in this work, we take one step further to
explore the possibility of a speech-driven interface for databases.
8.2
Speech-driven Querying Systems
Speech-driven querying systems have a long history with a sub-
stantial amount of industrial applications. To name a few, Nu-
ance’s Dragon NaturallySpeaking4 supports various basic voice
commands. Mainstream search engines such as Google, Baidu, and
Bing all provide voice-based inputs to search the web. With the
popularity of smart devices and mobile phones, AI-powered assis-
tants such as Xiaoice, Siri, Alexa, and Google Home also provide
users interaction with the system based on voice, e.g., querying
daily weather and traffic, keeping track of airline flight, and so on.
Speech-driven SQL-based systems have also been studied in the
research community. For example, EchoQuery [40] aims to trans-
late user’s voice input into SQL queries. SpeakQL [51, 52] supports
a subset of SQL statements and enables users to interact with the
system with a speech-based interface. TalkSQL [45] implements
a similar function to SpeakQL, which also works in a three-step
manner, first allowing a user to input some voice command, then
translating the inputs into SQL queries, and finally delivering exe-
cution results to the user. CiceroDB-Zero [59] enables participants
to explore large data sets via voice interfaces.
However, none of these studies focuses directly on SQL gener-
ation from arbitrary common NL questions expressed in speech,
and they usually work in a cascaded manner. Furthermore, some
of them restrict the spoken queries to be an NL-based version of
SQL or its variants with a limited subset of SQL grammar, and thus,
they still require users to have a professional background in SQL.
8.3
Speech-to-X
Speech-to-X refers to a wide range of speech-driven tasks including
speech-to-text, speech-to-image, speech-to-code, speech-to-model,
and so on. Among all these tasks, speech-to-text is the most com-
mon one with dozens of existing studies. When the text refers to
the transcript corresponding to the speech, this problem is also
well-known as the ASR problem. Currently, the most commonly
used ASR model is the hybrid model, which typically consists of two
components: an acoustic model (AM) and a language model (LM).
The AM translates the speech signals features (e.g., MFCC [19])
into the corresponding phonemic representation, while the LM
calculates the probability of the decoded word sequences from the
natural language perspective. With the dominating performance
of DNN-based models in NLP tasks, the end-to-end ASR system
also becomes quite popular in the research community with studies
such as LAS [9], RNN Transducer [48], Attention-based Models
4https://www.nuance.com/dragon
[4, 68], and RNN Transducer with Attention [58]. However, in terms
of ASR applications in the industry, the hybrid one still dominates
the market due to its relatively good performance. In our work, we
also employ the hybrid ASR with the text-to-SQL as the baseline
method.
The speech-to-text problem also covers diverse applications be-
sides ASR. Another task worth mentioning is the speech-to-text
translation [5], where the “text” here refers to the translated text
in another language different from the one in the source speech.
The speech-to-text translation is very helpful especially for low-
resource scenarios where neither machine translation nor ASR is
available. Speech-to-speech translation [63] takes one step further
to directly generate speech in the target language, and it is applied
in NLP applications such as cross-lingual dialogue systems. Be-
sides text, dozens of studies have also explored the possibility of
converting other modalities such as image (i.e., speech-to-image)
[38, 66, 67], code (i.e., speech-to-code or programming-by-voice)
[16, 33], and software model (i.e., voice-driven modeling) [6].
Different to be the above-mentioned studies, speech-to-SQL is
an urgent task that aims to explore the information conveyed by
human speech and convert it into a SQL statement. It can be consid-
ered to be a special case of the general speech-to-code problem. All
aforementioned speech-driven applications, including speech-to-
SQL, directly generate the target due to three reasons: (i) avoiding
the possible error compounding between components in the cas-
caded systems; (ii) further reducing the error by retaining the rich
linguistic information in the speech; and (iii) unlocking the power of
advanced NLP technologies to the languages that lack a commonly
used written form [67]. We believe that speech-to-SQL would not
only benefit the database area for providing user-friendly interfaces
of DBMS, but also promote research of programming-by-voice in
software engineering and enlarge the speech-to-X family.
9
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel paradigm speech-driven interface
for the relational database, together with its corresponding task
speech-to-SQL, aiming to directly convert human speech into SQL
queries. Cascaded methods, as well as end-to-end models named
SpeechSQLNet, are proposed to solve this problem. Extensive exper-
imental evaluations on the constructed corpus show that Speech-
SQLNet can generate high-quality SQL queries, outperforming sev-
eral competitive baselines.
The experimental results also validate the rationale of the Speech-
to-SQL problem. In the next step, we would like to explore more
end-to-end methods on Speech-to-SQL. In particular, our work
shows that speech signals contain rich extra-linguistic information
that is not available from text, and it would be interesting to explore
a more detailed inner structure of speech signals when designing
speech-to-SQL models. We wish Speech-to-SQL would become a
popular task as text-to-SQL, and will also show inspire further
works on designing novel speech-driven applications.
