Maximum Entropy Generators
for Energy-Based Models
Rithesh Kumar1∗
Sherjil Ozair1
Anirudh Goyal1
Aaron Courville1,2
Yoshua Bengio1,2,3
1Mila, Université de Montréal
2Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR)
3 Institute for Data Valorization (IVADO)
Abstract
Maximum likelihood estimation of energy-based models is a challenging problem
due to the intractability of the log-likelihood gradient. In this work, we propose
learning both the energy function and an amortized approximate sampling mecha-
nism using a neural generator network, which provides an efﬁcient approximation
of the log-likelihood gradient. The resulting objective requires maximizing entropy
of the generated samples, which we perform using recently proposed nonparametric
mutual information estimators. Finally, to stabilize the resulting adversarial game,
we use a zero-centered gradient penalty derived as a necessary condition from the
score matching literature. The proposed technique can generate sharp images with
Inception and FID scores competitive with recent GAN techniques, does not suffer
from mode collapse, and is competitive with state-of-the-art anomaly detection
techniques.
1
Introduction
Unsupervised learning promises to take advantage from unlabelled data, and is regarded as crucial
for artiﬁcial intelligence (Lake et al., 2017). Energy-based modeling (EBMs, LeCun et al. (2006))
is a family of unsupervised learning methods focused on learning an energy function, i.e., an
unnormalized log density of the data. This removes the need to make parametric assumptions about
the data distribution to make the normalizing constant (Z) tractable. However, in practice, due
to the very same lack of restrictions, learning high-quality energy-based models is fraught with
challenges. To avoid explicitly computing Z or its gradient, Contrastive Divergence (Hinton, 2000)
and Stochastic Maximum Likelihood (Younes, 1998; Tieleman, 2008a) rely on Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) to approximately sample from the energy-based model. However, MCMC-based
sampling approaches frequently suffer from long mixing times for high-dimensional data. Thus,
training of energy-based models has not remained competitive with other unsupervised learning
techniques such as variational auto-encoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and generative adversarial
networks or GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
In this work, we propose Maximum Entropy Generators (MEG), a framework in which we train
both an energy function and an approximate sampler, which can either be fast (using a generator
network G) or uses G to initialize a Markov chain in the latent space of the generator. Training such
a generator properly requires entropy maximization of the generator’s output distribution, for which
we take advantage of recent advances in nonparametric mutual information maximization (Belghazi
et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2018; Oord et al., 2018; Poole et al., 2018).

Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:1901.08508v2  [cs.LG]  27 May 2019

xdata
xmodel
ℒEBM
Eθ
Eθ
MCMC
xdata
xmodel
ℒEBM
Eθ
Eθ
z
Gω
Figure 1 – Left: Traditional maximum likelihood training of energy-based models. Right: Training
of maximum entropy generators for energy-based models
To evaluate the efﬁcacy of the proposed technique, we compare against other state-of-the-art tech-
niques on image generation, accurate mode representation, and anomaly detection. We demonstrate
that the proposed technique is able to generate CIFAR-10 samples which are competitive with
WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017) according to the Fréchet Inception Distance (Heusel et al., 2017)
and Inception Score (Salimans et al., 2016), and is able to generate samples of all the 104 modes of
4-StackedMNIST at the correct data frequencies.
We demonstrate that our technique trains energy functions useful for anomaly detection on the
KDD99 dataset, and that it performs as well as state-of-the-art anomaly detection techniques which
were specially designed for the task, and vastly outperform other energy-based and generative models
for anomaly detection.
To summarize our contributions, we propose maximum entropy generators (MEG), a novel frame-
work for training energy-based models using amortized neural generators and mutual information
maximization. We show that the resulting energy function can be successfully used for anomaly
detection, and outperforms recently published results with energy-based models. We show that MEG
generates sharp images – with competitive Inception and FID scores – and accurately captures more
modes than standard GANs, while not suffering from the common mode-mixing issue of many
maximum likelihood generative models which results in blurry samples.
2
Background
Let x denote a sample in the data space X and Eθ : X →R an energy function corresponding to the
negative logarithm of an unnormalized estimated density density function
pθ(x) = e−Eθ(x)
Zθ
∝e−Eθ(x)
(1)
where Zθ :=
R
e−Eθ(x)dx is the normalizing constant or partition function. Let pD be the training
distribution, from which the training set is drawn. Towards optimizing the parameters θ of the energy
function, the maximum likelihood parameter gradient is
∂Ex∼pD[−log pθ(x)]
∂θ
= Ex∼pD
∂Eθ(x)
∂θ

−Ex∼pθ(x)
∂Eθ(x)
∂θ

(2)
where the second term is the gradient of log Zθ, and the sum of the two expectations is zero
when training has converged, with expected energy gradients in the positive phase (under the data
pD) matching those under the negative phase (under pθ(x)). Training thus consists in trying to
separate two distributions: the positive phase distribution (associated with the data) and the negative
phase distribution (where the model is free-running and generating conﬁgurations by itself). This
observation has motivated the pre-GAN idea presented by Bengio (2009) that “model samples are
negative examples" and a classiﬁer could be used to learn an energy function if it separated the data
distribution from the model’s own samples. Shortly after introducing GANs, Goodfellow (2014) also
made a similar connection, related to noise-contrastive estimation (Gutmann & Hyvarinen, 2010).
One should also recognize the similarity between Eq. 2 and the objective function for Wasserstein
GANs or WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017).
The main challenge in Eq. 2 is to obtain samples from the distribution pθ associated with the energy
function Eθ. Although having an energy function is convenient to obtain a score allowing comparison
2

of the relative probability for different x’s, it is difﬁcult to convert an energy function into a generative
process. The commonly studied approaches for this are based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo, in which
one iteratively updates a candidate conﬁguration, until these conﬁgurations converge in distribution to
the desired distribution pθ. For the RBM, the most commonly used algorithms have been Contrastive
Divergence (Hinton, 2000) and Stochastic Maximum Likelihood (Younes, 1998; Tieleman, 2008a),
relying on the particular structure of the RBM to perform Gibbs sampling. Although these MCMC-
based methods are appealing, RBMs (and their deeper form, the deep Boltzmann machine) have
not been competitive in recent years compared to autoregressive models (van den Oord et al.,
2016), variational auto-encoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and generative adversarial networks or
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
What has been hypothesized as a reason for poorer results obtained with energy-based models trained
with an MCMC estimator for the negative phase gradient is that running a Markov chain in data space
is fundamentally difﬁcult when the distribution is concentrated (e.g, near manifolds) and has many
modes separated by vast areas of low probability. This mixing challenge is discussed by Bengio
et al. (2013) who argue that a Markov chain is very likely to produce only sequences of highly
probable conﬁgurations: if two modes are far from each other and only local moves are possible
(which is typically the case when performing MCMC), it becomes exponentially unlikely to traverse
the “desert” of low probability that can separate two modes. This makes mixing between modes
difﬁcult in high-dimensional spaces with strong concentration of probability mass in some regions
(e.g. corresponding to different categories) and very low probability elsewhere.
3
Maximum Entropy Generators for Energy-Based Models
We thus propose using an amortized neural sampler to perform fast approximate sampling to train the
energy model. We begin by replacing the model distribution pθ in in Eq. 2 by a neural generator G
parametrized by w. We deﬁne PG as the distribution of the outputs G(z) for z ∼pz where pz is a
simple prior distribution such as a standard Normal distribution.
∂LE
∂θ
= Ex∼pD
∂Eθ(x)
∂θ

−Ex∼pG(x)
∂Eθ(x)
∂θ

(3)
To minimize the approximation error, pG must be close to pθ. To do so, we tune G to minimize
the KL divergence KL(pG||pθ), which can be rewritten in terms of minimizing the energy of the
samples from the generator while maximizing the entropy at the output of the generator:
KL(pG||pθ) = −H[pG] −EpG[log pθ(x)]
(4)
= −H[pG] + EpG[Eθ(x)] + log Zθ
(5)
When taking the gradient of KL(pG||pθ) with respect to the parameters w of the generator, the
log-partition function log Zθ disappears and we can optimize w by minimizing
LG = −H[pG] + Ez∼pzEθ(G(z))
(6)
where pz is the prior distribution of the latent variable of the generator.
In order to approximately maximize the entropy H[pG] at the output of the generator, we use one
recently proposed nonparametric mutual information maximization techniques (Belghazi et al., 2018;
Oord et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2018). Poole et al. (2018) show that these techniques can be uniﬁed
into a single framework derived from the variational bound of Barber & Agakov (2003). Since the
generator is deterministic, mutual information between inputs and outputs reduces to simply entropy
of the outputs, since the conditional entropy of a deterministic function is zero:
I(X, Z) = H(X) −H(X|Z) = H(G(Z)) −
:0
H(G(Z)|Z)
In particular, we use the estimator from Hjelm et al. (2018), which estimates the Jensen-Shannon
divergence between the joint distribution (p(x, z)) and the product of marginals (p(x)p(z)). We refer
to this information measure as IJSD(X, Z). We found that the JSD-based estimator works better in
practice than the KL-based estimator (which corresponds to the mutual information).
The estimator of Hjelm et al. (2018) is given by
IJSD(X, Z) = sup
T ∈T
Ep(X,Z)[−sp(−T(X, Z))] −Ep(X)p(Z)[sp(T(X, Z))]
(7)
3

where sp(a) = log(1 + ea) is the softplus function. The supremum is approximated using gradient
descent on the parameters of the discriminator T.
With X = G(Z) the output of the generator, IJSD(G(Z), Z) is one of the terms to be maximized in
the objective function for training G, which would maximize the generator’s output entropy H(G(Z)).
Thus the ﬁnal training objective to be minimized for the generator G and the energy func-
tion E is
LG = −IJSD(G(Z), Z) + Ez∼pzEθ(G(z))
(8)
LE = Ex∼pDEθ(x) −Ez∼pzEθ(G(z))
(9)
where Z ∼pz, the latent prior (typically a N(0, I) Gaussian).
3.1
Improving training stability
As can be seen from the above equations, the generator and the energy function are in an adversarial
game, similar to generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014). This makes optimization
via simultaneous gradient descent challenging since the gradient vector ﬁeld of such an optimization
problem is non-conservative as noted by Mescheder et al. (2017). This is particularly accentuated by
the use of deep neural networks for the generator and the energy function. In particular, we noticed
that during training the magnitude of the energy function values would diverge.
To help alleviate this issue we look towards another technique for learning energy-based models
called score matching proposed by Hyvärinen (2005). Score matching estimates the energy function
by matching the score functions of the data density and the model density, where the score function
ψ is the gradient of the log density with respect to the sample ψ(x) = ∂log p(x)
∂x
. If ψD(x) and
ψE(x) are the score functions under the data distribution and model distribution respectively, the
score matching objective is given by
JSM = Ex∼PD
h
∥ψD(x) −ψE(x)∥2
2
i
.
While the score function for the data distribution is typically unknown and would require estimation,
Theorem 1 in Hyvärinen (2005) shows that with partial integrations, the score matching objective can
be reduced to the following objective which does not depend on the score function under the data
distribution:
JSM = Ex∼PD
 X
i
∂iψi(x) + 1
2ψi(x)2

= Ex∼PD
 X
i
−∂2E(x)
∂2xi
+ 1
2
−∂E(x)
∂xi
2
= Ex∼PD
1
2

∂E(x)
∂x

2
2
+
X
i
−∂2E(x)
∂2xi

(10)
The above objective is hard to optimize when using deep neural networks because of the difﬁculty
in estimating the gradient of the Hessian diagonal, so we use the ﬁrst term in our objective, i.e. the
zero-centered gradient penalty, pushing the data points to sit near critical points (generally a local
minimum) of the energy function.
This term is also similar to the gradient penalty regularization proposed by Gulrajani et al. (2017)
which however is one-centered and applied on interpolations of the data and model samples, and is
derived from the Lipschitz continuity requirements of Wasserstein GANs (Arjovsky et al., 2017).
3.2
Improving sample quality via latent space MCMC
Since MEG simultaneously trains a generator and a valid energy function, we can improve the quality
of samples by biasing sampling towards high density regions. Furthermore, doing the MCMC walk
in the latent space should be easier than in data space because the transformed data manifold (in
latent space) is ﬂatter than in the original observed data space, as initially discussed by Bengio et al.
4

(2013). The motivation is also similar to that of the “truncation trick” used successfully by Brock
et al. (2018). However, we use an MCMC-based approach for this which is applicable to arbitrary
latent distributions.
We use the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA, Girolami & Calderhead (2011)), with
Langevin dynamics producing a proposal distribution in the latent space as follows:
˜zt+1 = zt −α∂Eθ(Gω(zt))
∂zt
+ ϵ
√
2 ∗α, where ϵ ∼N(0, Id)
Next, the proposed ˜zt+1 is accepted or rejected using the Metropolis Hastings algorithm, by computing
the acceptance ratio:
r = p(˜zt+1)q(zt|˜zt+1)
p(zt)q(˜zt+1|zt)
(11)
p(˜zt+1)
p(zt)
= exp

−Eθ(Gω(˜zt+1)) + Eθ(Gω(zt))
	
(12)
q(˜zt+1|zt) ∝exp
−1
4α
˜zt+1 −zt + α∂Eθ(Gω(zt))
∂zt
2
2

(13)
and accepting (setting zt+1 = ˜zt+1) with probability r.
4
Experiments
To understand the beneﬁts of MEG, we ﬁrst visualize the energy densities learnt by our generative
model on toy data. Next, we evaluate the efﬁcacy of our entropy maximizer by running discrete mode
collapse experiments to verify that we learn all modes and the corresponding mode count (frequency)
distribution. Furthermore, we evaluate the performance of MEG on sharp image generation, since this
is a common failure mode of models trained with maximum likelihood which tend to generate blurry
samples (Theis et al., 2015). We also compare MCMC samples in visible space and our proposed
sampling from the latent space of the composed energy function. Finally, we run anomaly detection
experiments to test the application of the learnt energy function.
We’ve released open-source code2 for all the experiments.
4.1
Visualizing the learned energy function
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2 – Probability density visualizations for three popular toy dataset (a) 25-gaussians, (b) swiss
roll, and (c) 8-gaussians. Density was estimated using a sample based approximation of the partition
function.
Generative models trained with maximum likelihood often suffer from the problem of spurious
modes and excessive entropy of the trained distribution, where the model incorrectly assigns high
probability mass to regions not present in the data manifold. Typical energy-based models such
as RBMs suffer from this problem partly because of the poor approximation of the negative phase
gradient, as discussed above, and the large price paid in terms of log-likelihood for not putting enough
probability mass near data points (i.e. for missing modes).
2https://github.com/ritheshkumar95/energy_based_generative_models
5

To check if MEG suffers from spurious modes, we train the energy-based model on synthetic
2D datasets (swissroll, 25gaussians and 8gaussians) and visualize the energy function. From the
probability density plots on Figure 2, we can see that the energy model doesn’t suffer from spurious
modes and learns a sharp distribution.
4.2
Investigating Mode Collapse
GANs are notorious for having mode collapse issues wherein certain modes of the data distribution
are not represented by the generated distribution. Since the generator is trained to minimize its KL
divergence with the energy model distribution (which is trained via maximum likelihood), we expect
the generator to faithfully capture all the modes of the data distribution. Our theory requires we
maximize entropy of the generated distribution, which we believe is instrumental in ensuring full
mode capture.
To empirically verify MEG captures all the modes of the data distribution, we follow the same
experimental setup as (Metz et al., 2016) and (Srivastava et al., 2017). We train our generative
model on the StackedMNIST dataset, which is a synthetic dataset created by stacking MNIST on
different channels. The number of modes are counted using a pretrained MNIST classiﬁer, and
the KL divergence is calculated empirically between the generated mode distribution and the data
distribution.
Table 1 – Number of captured modes and Kullback-Leibler divergence between the training and
samples distributions for ALI (Dumoulin et al., 2016), Unrolled GAN (Metz et al., 2016), Vee-
GAN (Srivastava et al., 2017), WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017). Numbers except MEG and
WGAN-GP are borrowed from Belghazi et al. (2018)
(Max 103)
Modes
KL
Unrolled GAN
48.7
4.32
VEEGAN
150.0
2.95
WGAN-GP
959.0
0.7276
MEG (ours)
1000.0
0.0313
(Max 104)
Modes
KL
WGAN-GP
9538.0
0.9144
MEG (ours)
10000.0
0.0480
From Table 1, we can see that MEG naturally covers all the modes in that data, without dropping a
single mode. Apart from just representing all the modes of the data distribution, MEG also better
matches the data distribution as evidenced by the signiﬁcantly smaller KL divergence score compared
to the baseline WGAN-GP.
Apart from the standard 3-StackMNIST, we also evaluate MEG on a new dataset with 104 modes (4
stacks)3 which is evidence that MEG does not suffer from mode collapse issues unlike state-of-the-art
GANs like WGAN-GP.
4.3
Modeling Natural Images
While the energy landscapes in Figure 2 provide evidence that MEG trains energy models with sharp
distributions, we next investigate if this also holds when learning a distribution over high-dimensional
natural images. Energy-based models trained with existing techniques produce blurry samples due to
the energy function not learning a sharp distribution.
We train MEG on the standard benchmark 32x32 CIFAR10 dataset for image modeling. We ad-
ditionally train MEG on the 64x64 cropped CelebA - celebrity faces dataset to report qualitative
samples from MEG. Similar to recent GAN works (Miyato et al., 2018), we report both Inception
Score (IS) and Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) scores on the CIFAR10 dataset and compare it with
a competitive WGAN-GP baseline.
3The 4-StackedMNIST was created in a way analogous to the original 3-StackedMNIST dataset. We
randomly sample and ﬁx 128 × 104 images to train the generative model and take 26 × 104 samples for
evaluations.
6

Table 2 – Inception scores and FIDs with unsupervised image generation on CIFAR-10. We used
50000 sample estimates to compute Inception Score and FID.
Method
Inception score
FID
Real data
11.24±.12
7.8
WGAN-GP
6.81 ± .08
30.95
MEG (Generator)
6.49 ± .05
35.02
MEG (MCMC)
7.31 ± .06
33.18
From Table 2, we can see that in addition to learning an energy function, MEG-trained generative
model produces samples comparable to recent GAN methods such as WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al.,
2017). Note that the perceptual quality of the samples improves by using the proposed MCMC
sampler in the latent space. See also Figure 3 in Appendix B for an ablation study which shows that
MCMC on the visible space does not perform as well as MCMC on the latent space.
4.4
Anomaly Detection
Apart from the usefulness of energy estimates for relative density estimation (up to the normalization
constant), energy functions can also be useful to perform unsupervised anomaly detection. Unsuper-
vised anomaly detection is a fundamental problem in machine learning, with critical applications in
many areas, such as cyber-security, complex system management, medical care, etc. Density estima-
tion is at the core of anomaly detection since anomalies are data points residing in low probability
density areas. We test the efﬁcacy of our energy-based density model for anomaly detection using
two popular benchmark datasets: KDDCUP and MNIST.
KDDCUP
We ﬁrst test our generative model on the KDDCUP99 10 percent dataset from the
UCI repository (Lichman et al., 2013). Our baseline for this task is Deep Structured Energy-based
Model for Anomaly Detection (DSEBM) (Zhai et al., 2016), which trains deep energy models such
as Convolutional and Recurrent EBMs using denoising score matching (Vincent, 2011) instead of
maximum likelihood, for performing anomaly detection. We also report scores on the state of the art
DAGMM (Zong et al., 2018), which learns a Gaussian Mixture density model (GMM) over a low
dimensional latent space produced by a deep autoencoder. We train MEG on the KDD99 data and
use the score norm ||∇xEθ(x)||2
2 as the decision function, similar to Zhai et al. (2016).
Table 3 – Performance on the KDD99 dataset. Values for OC-SVM, DSEBM values were obtained
from Zong et al. (2018). Values for MEG are derived from 5 runs. For each individual run, the
metrics are averaged over the last 10 epochs.
Model
Precision
Recall
F1
Kernel PCA
0.8627
0.6319
0.7352
OC-SVM
0.7457
0.8523
0.7954
DSEBM-e
0.8619
0.6446
0.7399
DAGMM
0.9297
0.9442
0.9369
MEG (ours)
0.9354 ± 0.016
0.9521 ± 0.014
0.9441 ± 0.015
From Table 3, we can see that the MEG energy function outperforms the previous SOTA energy-based
model (DSEBM) by a large margin (+0.1990 F1 score) and is comparable to the current SOTA model
(DAGMM) speciﬁcally designed for anomaly detection. Note that DAGMM is specially designed for
anomaly detection, while MEG is a general-purpose energy-based model.
MNIST
Next we evaluate our generative model on anomaly detection of high dimensional image
data. We follow the same experiment setup as (Zenati et al., 2018) and make each digit class an
anomaly and treat the remaining 9 digits as normal examples. We also use the area under the precision-
recall curve (AUPRC) as the metric to compare models. From Table 4, it can be seen that our energy
model outperforms VAEs for outlier detection and is comparable to the SOTA BiGAN-based anomaly
detection methods for this dataset (Zenati et al., 2018) which train bidirectional GANs to learn both
7

Table 4 – Performance on the unsupervised anomaly detection task on MNIST measured by area
under precision recall curve. Numbers except ours are obtained from (Zenati et al., 2018). Results for
MEG are averaged over the last 10 epochs to account for the variance in scores.
Heldout Digit
VAE
MEG
BiGAN-σ
1
0.063
0.281 ± 0.035
0.287 ± 0.023
4
0.337
0.401 ± 0.061
0.443 ± 0.029
5
0.325
0.402 ± 0.062
0.514 ± 0.029
7
0.148
0.29 ± 0.040
0.347 ± 0.017
9
0.104
0.342 ± 0.034
0.307 ± 0.028
an encoder and decoder (generator) simultaneously and use a combination of the reconstruction error
in output space as well as the discriminator’s cross entropy loss as the decision function.
Our aim here is not to claim state-of-the-art on the task of anomaly detection but to demonstrate the
quality of the energy functions learned by our technique, as judged by its competitive performance
on anomaly detection.
5
Related Work
Early work on deep learning relied on unsupervised learning (Hinton et al., 2006; Bengio et al., 2007;
Larochelle et al., 2009) to train energy-based models (LeCun et al., 2006), in particular Restricted
Boltzmann Machines, or RBMs. Hinton (2000) proposed k-step Contrastive Divergence (CD-k), to
efﬁciently approximate the negative phase log-likelihood gradient. Subsequent work have improved
on CD-k such as Persistent CD (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009; Tieleman, 2008b). Hyvärinen (2005)
proposed an alternative method to train non-normalized graphical models using Score Matching,
which does not require computation of the partition function.
Kim & Bengio (2016) and Dai et al. (2017) also learn a generator that approximates samples from
an energy-based model. However, their approach for entropy maximization is different from our
own. Kim & Bengio (2016) argue that batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) makes the
hidden activations of the generator network approximately Gaussian distributed and thus maximize
the log-variance for each hidden activation of the network. Dai et al. (2017) propose two approaches
to entropy maximization. One which minimizes entropy of the inverse model (pgen(z|x)) which
is approximated using an amortized inverse model similar to ALI (Dumoulin et al., 2016), and
another which makes isotropic Gaussian assumptions for the data. In our work, we perform entropy
maximization using a tight mutual information estimator which does not make any assumptions about
the data distribution.
Zhao et al. (2016) use an autoencoder as the discriminator and use the reconstruction loss as a
signal to classify between real and fake samples. The autoencoder is highly regularized to allow its
interpretation as an energy function. However Dai et al. (2017) prove that the EBGAN objective does
not guarantee the discriminator to recover the true energy function. The generator diverges from the
true data distribution after matching it, since it would continue to receive training signal from the
discriminator. The discriminator signal does not vanish even at optimality (when PG = PD) if it
retains density information, since some samples would be considered "more real" than others.
6
Conclusion
We proposed MEG, an energy-based generative model that produces energy estimates using an
energy model and a generator that produces fast approximate samples. This takes advantage of
novel methods to maximize the entropy at the output of the generator using a nonparametric mutual
information lower bound estimator. We have shown that our energy model learns good energy
estimates using visualizations in toy 2D datasets and through performance in unsupervised anomaly
detection. We have also shown that our generator produces samples of high perceptual quality by
measuring Inception Scores and Fréchet Inception Distance and shown that MEG is robust to the
respective weaknesses of GAN models (mode dropping) and maximum-likelihood energy-based
models (spurious modes).
8

7
