A Classiﬁcation Reﬁnement Strategy for Semantic Segmentation
James W. Davis, Christopher Menart, Muhammad Akbar
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Eng., Ohio State University
Columbus, OH USA

Roman Ilin
RYAP, Air Force Research Laboratory
Wright Patterson AFB, OH USA

Abstract—Based on the observation that semantic segmen-
tation errors are partially predictable, we propose a compact
formulation using confusion statistics of the trained classiﬁer
to reﬁne (re-estimate) the initial pixel label hypotheses. The
proposed strategy is contingent upon computing the classiﬁer
confusion probabilities for a given dataset and estimating a
relevant prior on the object classes present in the image to
be classiﬁed. We provide a procedure to robustly estimate the
confusion probabilities and explore multiple prior deﬁnitions.
Experiments are shown comparing performances on multiple
challenging datasets using different priors to improve a state-
of-the-art semantic segmentation classiﬁer. This study demon-
strates the potential to signiﬁcantly improve semantic labeling
and motivates future work for reliable label prior estimation
from images.
Keywords-semantic segmentation; confusion probabilities;
probabilistic reﬁnement
I. INTRODUCTION
Semantic segmentation is a challenging computer vision
problem wherein a class label is assigned to each pixel in
an image. This provides much richer scene information than
traditional image classiﬁcation, and therefore is inherently
a more difﬁcult task. While image classiﬁcation requires
the detection of the primary object, semantic segmentation
requires precise, localized pixel-wise detections. Annotating
training images for semantic segmentation in a supervised
manner is more expensive and time-consuming, hence most
public datasets are relatively small in comparison to those
for image classiﬁcation (e.g., ImageNet [1]).
Current semantic segmentation methods show promis-
ing results on multiple datasets, however systematic errors
in their output can be readily found. For example, Re-
ﬁneNet [2] mis-classiﬁes ground as sidewalk so often
in the PASCAL-Context dataset [3] that pixels classiﬁed as
sidewalk are 60% likely to actually be ground. In this
example, pixel accuracy would be improved by simply re-
labeling all sidewalk pixels as ground. However, it is
more preferable to use this confusion knowledge to better
reason about certain situations in a probabilistic manner.
We categorize labeling errors into one of two types of
mistakes. An “in-context” labeling error is when a pixel is
assigned an incorrect label from the set of actual labels for
the given image (e.g., a foreground object label is assigned
to an incorrect location). An “out-of-context” labeling error
Figure 1.
Example contextual errors of ReﬁneNet on PASCAL-Context.
In-Context: The sofa back in the left image is classiﬁed as floor, which
is incorrect even though the label correctly appears elsewhere in the image.
Out-of-Context: A portion of the right image is classiﬁed as motorbike,
which is not a valid label anywhere in the image.
is an invalid pixel label assignment that is outside of the
actual label set for the image (e.g., an indoor object label is
assigned to a pixel in an image of an outdoor scene). Actual
examples of these errors are shown in Fig. 1.
Given that a classiﬁer will have similar performance char-
acteristics on related images, analysis of the classiﬁcation
errors and label confusions across a dataset should support a
secondary (post-processing) reﬁnement stage to re-estimate
the output label conﬁdences to better classify the pixels,
reducing both in-context and out-of-context errors. The
proposed approach is based on these underlying motivations.
Our method is derived from a direct marginalization of
p(l|d), the probability of label l given input data d, resulting
in a decomposition of the formulation into classiﬁer output
label probabilities and learned classiﬁer/truth confusions.
Applied together, the framework treats the conﬁdence levels
of the original classiﬁer output as partial evidence, and
incorporates the confusion information to determine the ﬁnal
probability of witnessing each object label at each location
in an image. In a sense, this confusion approach can be con-
sidered a form of context-aware re-estimation. We present
a robust method to compute the confusion probabilities and
also outline various label priors used to bias the reﬁnement.
arXiv:1801.07674v1  [cs.CV]  23 Jan 2018

Upper bound performances of the framework with various
priors are reported for three challenging datasets to justify
the approach.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes related work in semantic segmentation. Section
III describes our framework for classiﬁer reﬁnement using
label confusion probabilities and priors. Section IV presents
experimental results showing the performance improvements
of the approach on multiple datasets, followed by a conclu-
sion in Sect. V
II. RELATED WORK
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) such as [2], [4]–
[6] have achieved unprecedented results in semantic seg-
mentation. However, they also introduce a tension between
precise localization and inclusion of broader image context
[7]. Many recent innovations in network architecture were
motivated by this issue, including dilated convolution [5],
multi-scale prediction [8], zoom-out features [9], recursive
convolutional networks [10], and convolutional upsampling
[2], [11].
Context is exploited using additional techniques, such
as K-nearest-neighbors methods [12], conditional random
ﬁelds (CRFs) [13], [14], and precision matrices [15]. These
approaches remain relevant in part due to their ﬂexibility.
Research has continued to investigate estimating and em-
ploying co-occurrence statistics for CRFs [16], and some
recent methods have attempted to integrate CRFs directly
into neural models [17], [18]. Our proposed method provides
a Bayesian framework to incorporate context formed by
confusion probabilities and label priors to inﬂuence pixel-
level decisions.
The most related work to the proposed framework is the
approach of LabelBank [19]. Both methods process sec-
ondary information to adjust the conﬁdence values produced
by a base classiﬁer. LabelBank uses a CNN architecture
to estimate which classes are present in the image, then
essentially ﬁlters out labels in the output of the base semantic
segmentation classiﬁer that do not belong to this list. The
method therefore focuses on the removal of out-of-context
errors. Our strategy is more ﬂexible, as we include additional
confusion probabilities and relax the requirement of binary
estimation of the classes, which together allow the method
to be more general to remove both in-context and out-
of-context errors. Furthermore, our approach is supported
within a Bayesian framework, rather than applying an ad
hoc masking technique. We will show in the experiments
that the upper bound performance capability of our approach
is above the LabelBank optimum.
As we describe our procedure to reﬁne the classiﬁer
output label probabilities, one may be tempted to view this
as a form of boosting. Similar to boosting, our approach is a
staged process, ﬁrst running the base classiﬁer then reﬁning
the output hypotheses (two stages). However, boosting trains
a series of multiple (weak) classiﬁers using re-weighted
examples based on the errors from the previous stage(s).
III. APPROACH
Let C be a given semantic segmentation classiﬁer that
generates pixel-wise label hypotheses for images. The output
of C at each pixel site provides a conﬁdence/probability
for every possible class (typically attained using softmax).
For image data di at each pixel site i for each possible
label l ∈L, we denote the classiﬁer output probabilities
as P(C(di) = l|di). Note that we differentiate this from
the typical classiﬁer output notation of P(l|di). The ﬁnal
predictions are usually made by choosing the label that is
assigned the highest conﬁdence/probability at each site.
We propose a Bayesian method to exploit the confusions
exhibited by classiﬁer C to probabilistically reﬁne and
improve the estimate of the best label at each site. We begin
by examining P(lgt
i |di), the probability of site i having its
ground truth label (lgt
i ) given the image data di. Note that
this probability is not the classiﬁer output probability, and
hence is currently independent of any particular classiﬁer.
A marginalization of this probability over the possible
classiﬁer outputs yields
P(lgt
i |di) =
X
c∈L
P(lgt
i , C(di) = c|di)
(1)
=
X
c∈L
P(lgt
i |C(di) = c, di) · P(C(di) = c|di)(2)
=
X
c∈L
P(lgt
i |C(di) = c) · P(C(di) = c|di)
(3)
The ﬁrst term in the two-part decomposition of Eqn. 3 rep-
resents the confusion relationship between the ground truth
label and the classiﬁer C outputs. The second term contains
the classiﬁer’s output probabilities, as initially described.
Applying Bayes’ Rule to the ﬁrst term in Eqn. 3 yields
P(lgt
i |C(di) = c) = P(C(di) = c|lgt
i ) · P(lgt
i )
P(C(di) = c)
(4)
where the denominator P(C(di) = c) is computed from the
integration of the numerator over all possible labels in the set
L. We relax these probabilities to be both site-independent
and data-independent for ease in learning and for general-
ization. Hence the probability for any pixel (regardless of
site location or image) having any label l ∈L given the
classiﬁer’s selected class label c is
P(l|C(di) = c) = P(C = c|l) · P(l)
P(C = c)
(5)
where P(C = c|l) is the generalized confusion (or mis-
match) probability between a given/known label and the
classiﬁer’s output, and P(l) is a prior on the label l.
Merging Eqn. 5 into Eqn. 3 yields the reﬁnement, or
re-estimation, formulation of the original site-dependent

classiﬁer output probabilities P(C(di) = c|di), ∀c ∈L into
more confusion-aware probabilities. The probability of any
output label l ∈L given the input data is now described by
P(l|di) =
X
c∈L
P(C = c|l) · P(l) · P(C(di) = c|di)
P(C = c)
(6)
Hence Eqn. 6 can be used to determine the new reﬁned
probabilities for each possible label l ∈L at pixel site i.
We can efﬁciently formulate this process employing a
single transformation matrix with all possible label com-
binations. An |L| × |L| reﬁnement matrix R is deﬁned
as R(c1, c2) = P(c1|C = c2), given by all c1, c2 ∈L
instantiations within Eqn. 5. For pixel site i in the test image,
we construct the vector of site-dependent base classiﬁer
output probabilities as Xi(c) = P(C(di) = c|di), ∀c ∈L.
Following Eqn. 6, ∀l ∈L, and employing matrix R, it is
equivalent to reﬁne the original classiﬁer output probabilities
with the linear transformation
ˆXi = R · Xi
(7)
As usual, the selected class label for site i will be the
label/entry in ˆXi (instead of Xi) that is maximal.
This reﬁnement process is conducted for each site in the
test image being classiﬁed. Since the matrix R is computed
only once (and ﬁxed) for the entire image using site-
independent data (with Eqn. 5), the re-estimation procedure
is quite fast and computationally efﬁcient.
The reﬁnement framework is straightforward to derive,
but as we will show, can be used to signiﬁcantly improve
performance. We next present the means to robustly compute
confusion probabilities and detail various forms of the prior
expectations needed for this process.
A. Confusion Probabilities
The site-independent classiﬁer/truth confusion (error)
probabilities P(C = c|l) required in Eqn. 6 can be readily
learned from data by collecting all sites (for all images
employed) having a speciﬁc ground truth label and determin-
ing the frequency of those sites the classiﬁer assigned label
c ∈L. To ensure all probabilities are deﬁned, a minimum
value of 10−4 is used for any confusion pairing (before
the ﬁnal normalization of counts into probabilities) if the
number of sites is 0 for a particular classiﬁcation output
given the ground truth label.
Region Border Artifacts. Region border labeling artifacts
are common to all semantic segmentation classiﬁers due to
imprecise manual ground truth labeling along the borders
of objects, spatial pooling, etc. For example, in Fig. 2(a)
we show an example training image, and in Fig. 2(b) we
present its ground truth region labels. The ground truth
region borders (i.e., edge map) are shown in Fig. 2(c). The
pixel labeling errors on this image made by the segmentation
classiﬁer ReﬁneNet-Res101 [2] (trained on the dataset that
includes this image) are highlighted in Fig. 2(d). As is
(a) Image
(b) Truth
(c) Truth borders
(d) Classiﬁer errors
Figure 2.
Region border classiﬁcation errors. (a) Input image. (b) Ground
truth regions. (c) Region borders. (d) Pixels mislabeled by the classiﬁer.
typical with other semantic segmentation classiﬁers, we
consistently ﬁnd labeling errors along the borders of regions.
In this example, the classiﬁer performed particularly well for
the image as a whole, with nearly all of the errors occurring
only at the region borders (other images will show additional
larger errors within regions).
When learning the classiﬁer/truth confusions, these border
pixel errors should be ignored as they can pollute the
desired statistics. They are merely artifacts that should not
be considered. Therefore we limit the computation of the
P(C = c|l) confusions to only non-border pixel sites to
avoid negatively inﬂuencing the confusion probabilities.
To accomplish this, we ﬁrst ﬁnd all ground truth region
border pixels in each image, then perform a spatial dilation
of those border pixels. Only the complement of this pixel
set in the image is employed for the computation of the
confusion probabilities. The resultant confusion probabilities
are computed across all of the images to be analyzed and
provides a single robust confusion representation for the
entire dataset (not per image).
We additionally note that this underlying labeling issue
at region borders therefore suggests that pixel-wise evalua-
tions and comparisons of semantic segmentation approaches
would be more appropriate if ignoring these pixels (which
they currently do not discount).
Training vs. Test/Validation Data. It is also important to
compute the confusion probabilities from data not used to
train the base classiﬁer C. The confusions from training data
will not be well representative of the types of confusions that
will occur on additional (validation, test) data.
To illustrate, we begin by representing the confusion
probabilities P(C = c|l) as an |L| × |L| matrix with the
rows representing the class labels c ∈L given by the base

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Ground Truth Label
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Classifier Ouput Label
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Ground Truth Label
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Classifier Ouput Label
(a) Training confusions
(b) Testing confusions
Figure 3.
Confusion probability matrices constructed from PASCAL-
Context using ReﬁneNet-101 on (a) training and (b) testing data.
classiﬁer output (best class hypothesis) and the columns
signifying the ground truth classes l ∈L (same set of
classes). Therefore each (m, n) cell in the matrix holds
the value P(C = m|n). In a scenario with absolutely no
confusions, this matrix would be strictly diagonal. Any off-
diagonal entries denote errors that exist in the output of the
classiﬁer. Note that this matrix is different from the earlier
reﬁnement matrix R.
To demonstrate the need for computing these confusion
probabilities from separate validation data (instead of the
training data itself), we show in Fig. 3(a) the confusion prob-
ability matrix generated from the PASCAL-Context training
set (∼5K images) using ReﬁneNet-Res101 (trained on this
data). Notice the strong diagonal structure, showing that the
classiﬁer did indeed ﬁt the training data well. However,
to compare, that same trained classiﬁer was employed on
the PASCAL-Context test set (∼5K images, with ground
truth available) and the resulting confusion probabilities
are shown in Fig. 3(b). These results show much greater
off-diagonal confusions, demonstrating that the classiﬁer is
prone to making more and qualitatively different types of
mistakes on unseen data. Hence, these confusion probability
differences demonstrate the need to learn the confusions
from examples separate from the training data, ideally from
a validation set if one is available
However, we have found that many semantic segmentation
approaches do not follow the standard machine learning
practice of withholding a separate validation set out of the
training data. They instead tend to use all available training
data and validate directly on the test set (as ground truth for
test data is typically available). As previously stated, it is
recommended for the proposed approach to retain a small
set of validation data (not used to train the base classiﬁer)
to learn the confusion probabilities. If no validation data is
available when using a pre-trained model, a small random
sample of test data could be employed.
B. Deﬁning Prior Expectations
With the confusion probabilities now computed, the only
remaining component necessary for classiﬁcation reﬁnement
is the label prior P(l). This term represents a prior expec-
tation of a given class label l, and can be deﬁned in several
ways.
Uniform Prior: The simplest naive approach would be
to employ a non-informative uniform prior. We refer to this
version as Puniform(l) = 1/|L|. With this prior all effort of
reﬁning the classiﬁer probabilities would be placed onto the
learned confusions.
Global Prior: The prior could also be interpreted globally
as the probability of observing class l for any randomly
selected pixel across the dataset (using ground truth informa-
tion). This prior can be computed simply by L1-normalizing
the histogram of class labels collected throughout the entire
training dataset. We refer to this prior as Pglobal(l). How-
ever, this formulation may bias the reﬁnement to the most
dominant class labels in the dataset.
Binary Prior: Alternatively, we could specify the prior
locally, estimating it for each image individually. A binary
prior has a constant value for those classes present in the
image and zero elsewhere (with the L1-norm equal to 1).
We refer to this prior as Pbinary(l). It should be easier to
estimate this image-level prior than dense per-pixel label
assignments (i.e., semantic segmentation). This prior has
also been explored in LabelBank [19].
Histogram Prior: Similar to the binary prior, we can
construct a more informative non-binary prior using the L1-
normalized histogram of classes present in the image. We
refer to this prior as Phist(l). We posit that estimating this
class-frequency histogram of labels for an image will be
more difﬁcult than for the binary prior, but similarly should
be easier to estimate than the full per-pixel label assignments
of an image.
Unconstrained Prior: Lastly, the prior could be viewed
more abstractly, separated from any binary or frequency-
based constraint on its interpretation. In this case, for a
given collection of annotated and classiﬁed sites in an image
along with the confusion probabilities, the best possible prior
could be solved using non-linear multi-variate techniques by
minimizing the negative log-loss of the ﬁnal reﬁned class
probabilities for the target ground truth labels. Based on
Eqn. 6, this is given by solving for P(l) within the loss
Loss = −
#sites
X
i=1
log
 max

P(lgt
i |di), ϵ

(8)
where ϵ = 10−10. In our experiments with this prior, we used
Matlab’s fmincon solver with the interior-point algorithm.
We refer to the resulting (solved) unconstrained prior as
Puc(l).
We will examine and compare these different prior for-
mulations in Sect. IV, though we note that other deﬁni-

tions/interpretations of the priors may be possible.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We present experimental results and analyses of the
proposed reﬁnement approach across 3 challenging datasets
commonly used for semantic segmentation. ADE20K [20]
is a recent dataset of varied scenes with 20K training and
2000 testing images having a dense labeling of 150 classes.
PASCAL-Context [3] is a densely-labeled dataset of various
scenes with 59 labels and is comprised of 4998 training
and 5105 testing images. NYUDv2 [21] contains RGB-D
images (RGB only is analyzed) of indoor rooms (bedrooms,
kitchens, bathrooms, etc.) with 795 training and 654 testing
images (we employed the typical 425 × 560 image crop, as
provided by [22]).
We selected the ReﬁneNet [2] CNN semantic segmen-
tation model as the base classiﬁer to be reﬁned with our
approach. ReﬁneNet is a ResNet-based architecture that em-
ploys residual chained pooling to localize coarse predictions
using high-resolution features from multiple paths. This
model has been previously trained on the aforementioned
datasets and has been publicly-released online (ReﬁneNet-
Res101 trained on PASCAL-Context & NYUDv2, and
ReﬁneNet-Res152 trained on ADE20K). Note that Re-
ﬁneNet includes the background (void) class as a valid
output label, but in this work we removed background label
from their outputs and renormalized the remaining label
conﬁdences.
A. Confusion Probabilities
We ﬁrst present the computed confusion probability ma-
trices for the three datasets. As discussed in Sect. III,
the use of training (instead of validation) data to compute
the confusion probabilities P(C = c|l) can lead to poor
performance. Since validation hold-out sets were not used
by ReﬁneNet for any of the datasets, we instead used the
suggested random sample of test data (as pseudo-validation)
to compute the confusion probabilities for each dataset.
The number of randomly sampled test images for each
dataset was 500 (of 2000) for ADE20K, 1000 (of 5105)
for PASCAL-Context, and 200 (of 654) for NYUDv2.
The
resulting
confusion
probability
matrices
using
the
approach
outlined
in
Sect.
III-A
are
shown
in
Fig.
4.
There
are
clearly
many
off-diagonal
confu-
sions present in each dataset. Some example confu-
sion situations include {animal/rug, river/water}
in ADE20K, {sofa/computer, ground/sidewalk} in
PASCAL-Context, and {door/wall, box/other-prop}
in NYUDv2. We also note the similarity of the sampled
confusion probabilities for PASCAL-Context in Fig. 4(b) to
the confusions derived from the entire test set (shown in
Fig. 3(b)).
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Ground Truth Label
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Classifier Output Label
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Ground Truth Label
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Classifier Output Label
(a) ADE20K
(b) PASCAL-Context
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Ground Truth Label
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Classifier Output Label
(c) NYUDv2
Figure 4. Confusion probability matrices generated using test data samples
for the examined datasets.
B. Reﬁnement with Different Priors
We analyzed the standard score metrics of pixel accu-
racy and mean Intersection-over-Union (IoU) for various
reﬁnements of the base classiﬁer using the different priors
described in Sect. III-B. The resulting scores from the base
classiﬁer on the three datasets are presented in the top row
of Tables I & II.
Results
using
the
non-informative
uniform
prior
Puniform(l) = 1/|L| and global prior Pglobal(l) with the
corresponding dataset confusion probability matrix (from
Fig. 4) are provided in the second and third rows of the
tables. The two methods are generally within ±1% of the
base classiﬁer, hence there is no signiﬁcant change after
reﬁnement (as expected). The pixel accuracy scores for
Pglobal(l) are higher than Puniform(l), which is a result of
the bias to more dominate classes in the dataset. The lower
mean IoU scores for Pglobal(l) also reﬂect this bias.
We next examined the use of the more informative image-
based priors, where we present the ceiling (best possible
performance) metrics of reﬁnement across the datasets. We
used the ground truth data available to compute the optimal
priors for each deﬁnition, leaving estimation of these partic-
ular priors to future work. This study is used to demonstrate
the full potential of the proposed strategy and motivate future
efforts.
For a relevant baseline of the image-based priors, we ﬁrst
show (in the fourth row of the tables) the upper bound ceiling
results possible with the LabelBank [19] method. This ap-

ADE20K
PASCAL-Context
NYUDv2
Base Classiﬁer (ReﬁneNet [2])
78.6%
78.2%
72.9%
Uniform Prior Puniform(l)
77.0%
64.6%
72.7%
Global Prior Pglobal(l)
80.0%
77.7%
72.9%
LabelBank [19] (upper bound)
83.7%
85.7%
76.8%
Binary Priors Pbinary(l) (upper bound)
85.9%
87.0%
78.1%
Histogram Priors Phist(l) (upper bound)
88.1%
88.4%
80.3%
Unconstrained Priors Puc(l) (upper bound)
89.0%
90.2%
82.6%
Table I
PIXEL ACCURACY SCORES ON TEST DATA BEFORE/AFTER VARIOUS REFINEMENTS.
ADE20K
PASCAL-Context
NYUDv2
Base Classiﬁer (ReﬁneNet [2])
34.0%
50.5%
45.2%
Uniform Prior Puniform(l)
35.1%
49.8%
45.5%
Global Prior Pglobal(l)
34.6%
49.1%
43.8%
LabelBank [19] (upper bound)
44.9%
62.0%
53.6%
Binary Priors Pbinary(l) (upper bound)
53.6%
65.1%
55.9%
Histogram Priors Phist(l) (upper bound)
57.7%
68.7%
59.2%
Unconstrained Priors Puc(l) (upper bound)
59.3%
72.2%
62.5%
Table II
MEAN IOU SCORES ON TEST DATA BEFORE/AFTER VARIOUS REFINEMENTS.
proach removes (only) the out-of-context label errors using
the optimal binary mask on the output label probabilities. We
see a signiﬁcant improvement in the ceilings of both pixel
accuracy (3.9-7.5%) and mean IoU (8.4-11.5%) over the
base classiﬁer. We note that this method is equivalent to our
reﬁnement approach using the optimal/known binary priors
Pbinary(l) with an identity confusion probability matrix (no
confusions).
Employing the binary priors Pbinary(l), as above, but
now with the computed confusion matrix, performance is
improved. The ﬁfth row of the table shows an increase of
1.3-2.2% for pixel accuracy and 2.3-8.7% for mean IoU
above the previous optimal LabelBank method (uses no
confusion information). This shows that use of the confusion
probabilities indeed can be used to increase the performance
by additionally removing many in-context errors (not possi-
ble with the LabelBank masking method).
Using the histogram priors Phist(l) provides a further
increase above the Pbinary(l) results, with an additional
increase of 1.4-2.2% for pixel accuracy and 1.6-3.6% in
mean IoU. This is expected, given the prior is better adjusted
to reﬂect the true distribution of labels in each image.
Lastly, the unconstrained priors Puc(l) give the expected
best upper bound performance of all the prior versions,
yielding an additional increase over Phist(l) of 0.9-2.3% in
pixel accuracy and 1.6-3.3% in mean IoU. As these priors
are solved to optimize the given reﬁnement formulation, the
improvements should be close to the maximum theoretically
possible results.
C. Discussion and Future Directions
Overall, we see possible reﬁnement gains over the base
classiﬁer of 9.7-12.0% in pixel accuracy and 17.3-25.3% for
mean IoU across the datasets. These upper bound results
show that there is still much room for improvement in the
classiﬁer that can be achieved using reﬁnement with the
confusion probabilities and appropriate priors. When the
prior is deﬁned globally (independent of the image), as
in Puniform(l) or Pglobal(l), and used together with the
confusion probabilities to reﬁne the test images, there is
minimal beneﬁt (or even a slight loss in some datasets). The
notable gains are achieved when the priors are computed
independently for each test image. The presented results
with the image-based priors Pbinary(l), Phist(l), and Puc(l)
demonstrate that increasingly higher gains are possible in
both pixel accuracy and mean IoU with the proposed strat-
egy.
Based on these results, future work will address in more
detail how particular prior expectations can be reliably
estimated from image data. One may consider construct-
ing the priors from the base classiﬁer’s existing semantic
segmentation results (e.g., determine Pbinary(l) or Phist(l)
from the histogram of labels given by the classiﬁer for a
test image), but this reﬁnement yields no improvement as
it is obviously biased to the base classiﬁer results. One
possible method may be to ﬁnd other similar training images
for a test image and use a weighted combination of their
priors, as images that appear similar likely have related
label priors. Another path to explore is a specialized deep
learning technique to estimate the prior directly from the
input image itself. Unlike the semantic segmentation task

(or even image classiﬁcation) which is typically a trained to
1-hot categorical vectors of class labels, the target outputs
here are multinomial distributions.
Though an approach already exists in [19] to estimate
Pbinary(l), the normalized label histogram prior Phist(l)
shows a higher performance ceiling and hence a method to
estimate this prior would be more beneﬁcial. We expect the
unconstrained priors Puc(l), which resulted in the highest
performance metrics, will be more difﬁcult to estimate from
test images as the priors are a function of both the image
labels present and the base classiﬁer confusion probabilities.
Hence we suggest that estimation of the histogram-based
priors Phist(l) may be the best focus for future research.
As the proposed method continues to produce label prob-
abilities/conﬁdences, it can therefore be easily integrated
with other processing strategies or further context-based
reasoning. For example, instead of probabilistically reﬁning
each pixel site independently of other sites, a more holistic
approach, such as formulating a spatial random ﬁeld (e.g.,
CRF), could be employed to produce a more spatially-
consistent solution.
V. CONCLUSION
Semantic segmentation is a complex visual task requiring
reliable and consistent pixel-wise label predictions. Current
models produce systematic errors which can be exploited to
reﬁne the initial conﬁdences of the classiﬁer. We presented a
general Bayesian strategy for classiﬁer reﬁnement, deriving a
straight-forward and compact description comprised of con-
fusion probabilities, label priors, and classiﬁer conﬁdences.
By understanding the types of mistakes made in the classiﬁer
label assignments, we demonstrated the strong potential of
the proposed method by successfully reﬁning a state-of-the-
art classiﬁcation model on multiple datasets. The results
further motivate future research into reliably estimating prior
expectations from images.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the United States
Air
Force
Research
Laboratories
under
contract
No.
GRT00044839/60056946, Subcontract 60056946.
