Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 38 (2010) 535-568
Submitted 05/10; published 08/10
Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
Jos de Bruijn

Stijn Heymans

Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstraße 9-11, A-1040 Vienna, Austria
Abstract
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) is a Semantic Web standard that provides
a data language, simply called RDF, as well as a lightweight ontology language, called
RDF Schema. We investigate embeddings of RDF in logic and show how standard logic
programming and description logic technology can be used for reasoning with RDF. We
subsequently consider extensions of RDF with datatype support, considering D entailment,
deﬁned in the RDF semantics speciﬁcation, and D* entailment, a semantic weakening of D
entailment, introduced by ter Horst. We use the embeddings and properties of the logics to
establish novel upper bounds for the complexity of deciding entailment. We subsequently
establish two novel lower bounds, establishing that RDFS entailment is PTime-complete
and that simple-D entailment is coNP-hard, when considering arbitrary datatypes, both in
the size of the entailing graph. The results indicate that RDFS may not be as lightweight
as one may expect.
1. Introduction
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) (Klyne & Carroll, 2004), together with its
vocabulary description language RDF Schema (RDFS) (Brickley & Guha, 2004), constitutes
the basic language of the Semantic Web. Statements in RDF are triples of the form ⟨s, p, o⟩.
Sets of triples are called RDF graphs: intuitively, each triple can be viewed as an edge from
node s to node o with label p. Here, s, o, and p are constant symbols – uniform resource
identiﬁers (URIs) or literals (e.g., strings) – or anonymous identiﬁers, called blank nodes.
Consider, for example, the graphs S = {⟨o, rdf:type, A⟩, ⟨A, rdfs:subClassOf, B⟩} and
E = {⟨o, rdf:type, B⟩}. Hayes (2004) deﬁnes notions of RDF and RDFS entailment. We
have that, compared with RDF entailment, RDFS entailment gives additional meaning to
rdfs:subClassOf statements: S RDFS-entails E, but S does not RDF-entail E.
The RDF semantics speciﬁcation (Hayes, 2004) deﬁnes four increasingly expressive nor-
mative entailment relations between RDF graphs, namely simple, RDF, RDFS, and D
entailment, where the latter extends RDFS entailment with support for datatypes (e.g.,
strings and integers). Furthermore, it deﬁnes extensional RDFS (eRDFS) entailment as
a possible extension of RDFS entailment that is more in line with description logic-based
languages such as OWL DL (Patel-Schneider, Hayes, & Horrocks, 2004) and OWL 2 DL
(Motik, Patel-Schneider, & Parsia, 2009b). Intuitively, the diﬀerence between the RDFS
and eRDFS entailment regimes is that, for the latter, whenever an ontological relation (e.g.,
subclass or property domain) implicitly holds in an interpretation, the corresponding RDF
statement (rdfs:subClassOf, rdfs:domain, respectively) must be true, whereas this is not
c⃝2010 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

de Bruijn & Heymans
always the case with the RDFS entailment regime. The following example illustrates this
diﬀerence.
Example 1. Let S be the graph
{⟨mother, rdfs:subPropertyOf, parent⟩, ⟨parent, rdfs:domain, Person⟩}
which says that Person is in the domain of parent, and the property mother is a sub-
property of parent. Using eRDFS entailment we can conclude from S that Person is in the
domain of mother:
S |=erdfs ⟨mother, rdfs:domain, Person⟩
since it must the case that the subject of any mother triple has the type Person; thus,
Person is implicitly in the domain of mother. We cannot draw this conclusion when using
RDFS entailment; in RDFS, only explicitly asserted domain constraints can be derived.
We further also consider D* entailment (ter Horst, 2005), which is a semantic weak-
ening of D entailment for the purpose of more eﬃcient computation of consequences. D*
entailment extends RDFS entailment, but is not more expensive in terms of computational
complexity.
There have been several investigations into the formal properties of the RDF semantics
(Gutierrez, Hurtado, & Mendelzon, 2004; Gutierrez, Hurtado, Mendelzon, & P´erez, 2010;
de Bruijn, Franconi, & Tessaris, 2005; ter Horst, 2005): Gutierrez et al. (2004, 2010) re-
construct the semantics from a graph database perspective, and de Bruijn et al. (2005)
reconstruct the semantics from a logical language perspective.
The investigation of the
RDF semantics by ter Horst (2005) stays very close to the RDF speciﬁcation. Additionally,
ter Horst shows that the entailment rules for computing RDFS entailment presented in the
original speciﬁcation (Hayes, 2004) are not complete with respect to the RDFS semantics.
These reconstructions have led to a number of complexity results for RDF entailment. In
particular, simple, RDF, and RDFS entailment are NP-complete in the combined size of the
graphs. This high complexity is due to the presence of blank nodes (essentially existentially
quantiﬁed variables): if the entailed graph is known to be ground, the respective problems
turn out to be decidable in polynomial time. These bounds have not been shown to be
tight. As we will show in Section 5, the bound is tight for RDFS entailment, but not for
simple and RDF entailment, which can be decided in logarithmic space.
To investigate the relationship between RDF and logic we embed the various RDF
entailment regimes in F-Logic (Kifer, Lausen, & Wu, 1995), which is a syntactic extension
of ﬁrst-order logic (FOL) with object oriented modeling constructs. F-Logic has constructs
to explicitly specify attributes, as well as generalization/specialization and instantiation
relationships. Like RDFS, the syntax of F-Logic has some seemingly higher-order features,
namely, the same identiﬁer can be used for a class, an instance, and an attribute. However,
the semantics of F-Logic is strictly ﬁrst-order (Kifer et al., 1995). It turns out that the
attribute value construct in F-Logic is exactly equivalent to the triple construct in RDF,
and the typing (class membership) construct in F-Logic is very close in spirit to the one in
RDF.
In addition, we consider the embedding of a large subset of extensional RDFS in FOL and
the tractable description logic language DL-LiteR (Calvanese, Giacomo, Lembo, Lenzerini,
536

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
& Rosati, 2007), thereby showing that, under certain restrictions, extensional RDFS can be
seen as a standard ﬁrst-order knowledge representation language.
Our contributions with this paper can be summarized as follows.
1. We deﬁne embeddings of simple, RDF, RDFS, and extensional RDFS into F-Logic,
and show that simple, RDF, and RDFS entailment can be decided using standard logic
programming techniques, as their embeddings are in the Horn fragment of F-Logic.
2. We deﬁne an alternative, direct embedding of extensional RDFS into the Horn frag-
ment of F-Logic for a fragment of RDF graphs, namely those in which the RDFS
vocabulary is only used in a standard way. We subsequently exploit earlier results
about the relationship between F-Logic statements and description logic statements
(de Bruijn & Heymans, 2008) to show that extensional RDFS reasoning with ground
RDF graphs can be reduced to reasoning in the tractable description logic DL-LiteR
(Calvanese et al., 2007).
3. We extend the embeddings mentioned under 1. with support for datatypes, considering
both D* and D entailment. The embeddings of the extensions of simple, RDF, and
RDFS entailment with D* datatype support are all essentially in the Horn fragment
of F-Logic. The extensions of simple, RDF, and RDFS with D datatype support can
be embedded in the Horn fragment of F-Logic when suitably restricting the datatypes
that may be considered.
4. We analyze the complexity of deciding the mentioned entailment relations. From the
mentioned embeddings we obtain a number of novel complexity upper bounds, namely,
simple and RDF entailment, as well as their extensions with datatypes (under suitable
restrictions), are in LogSpace in the size of the entailing graph and a large fragment
of extensional RDFS entailment is in NP in the combined size of the graphs and in
PTime in the size of the entailing graph. We also establish a novel PTime lower bound
for RDFS entailment and a novel coNP lower bound for simple entailment extended
with D datatype support, when considering arbitrary datatypes, both in the size of
the entailing graph. See Table 2 on page 553 for an overview of the complexity results
for RDF.
The structure of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we review the logics
under consideration, namely F-Logic and DL-LiteR. In Section 3 we review the RDF(S)
semantics, deﬁne embeddings into F-Logic and FOL, show faithfulness of these embeddings,
and demonstrate the relationship with DL-LiteR. In Section 4 we consider extensions of
the RDF entailment regimes with datatype support based on both D* and D entailment
and embeddings of these extensions into logic. In Section 5 we extensively investigate the
complexity of the various RDF entailment regimes. We conclude the paper and outline
future work in Section 6.
This paper extends a paper we published at the International Semantic Web Conference
(de Bruijn & Heymans, 2007) with embeddings of the D* and D entailment regimes and
novel lower bounds for the complexity of deciding RDFS, D*, and D entailment.
537

de Bruijn & Heymans
For reasons of legibility, the deﬁnitions of the various RDF-related notions of interpre-
tation may be found in Appendix A, the embeddings of the RDF entailment regimes may
be found in Appendix B, and the proofs of Sections 3 and 4 may be found in Appendix C.
2. Preliminaries
In this section we review F-Logic and DL-LiteR.
2.1 Frame Logic
We consider Frame Logic (F-Logic) as deﬁned by Kifer, Lausen, and Wu (1995). To simplify
matters, and because these constructs are not necessary for the embedding of RDF, we do
not consider function symbols, parameterized methods, functional (single-valued) methods,
inheritable methods, and compound molecules, following de Bruijn and Heymans (2008).
The signature of an F-language L is of the form Σ = ⟨C, P⟩with C and P disjoint sets of
constant and predicate symbols; each predicate symbol has an associated arity n ≥0. Let
V be a set of variable symbols. Terms and atomic formulas are constructed as usual: x ∈V
and c ∈C are terms and ⊤, ⊥, p(t1, . . . , tn), and t1 = t2 are atomic formulas, with p ∈P
an n-ary predicate symbol, and t1, . . . , tn terms.
A molecule in F-Logic is one of the following statements: (i) an is-a assertion of the
form t1 :t2, which states that an individual t1 is of type t2, or (ii) a data molecule (called
“method” by Kifer et al., 1995) of the form t1[t2 ↠t3], with t1, t2, and t3 terms, which
states that an individual t1 has an attribute t2 with value t3. An F-Logic molecule is ground
if it does not contain variables.
Formulas of an F-language L are either atomic formulas, molecules, or compound for-
mulas which are constructed in the usual way from atomic formulas, molecules, and the
logical connectives ¬, ∧, ∨, ⊃, the quantiﬁers ∃, ∀and the auxiliary symbols ‘(’ and ‘)’. We
denote universal closure, i.e., the universal quantiﬁcation of every variable that has a free
occurrence in the formula, with (∀).
A theory is a set of formulas. A theory or formula is called equality-free if the equality
symbol ‘=’ does not appear in it.
F-Logic Horn formulas are of the form (∀)B1 ∧. . . ∧Bn ⊃H, with B1,. . . , Bn, and H
atomic formulas or molecules. F-Logic Datalog formulas are F-Logic Horn formulas such
that every variable in H occurs in some equality-free Bi. The latter condition is called
safeness.
An F-structure is a tuple I = ⟨U, ∈U, IC, I↠, IP ⟩, where U is a non-empty set and ∈U is a
binary relation over U. A constant symbol c ∈C is interpreted as an element of the domain:
IC(c) ∈U. An n-ary predicate symbol p ∈P is interpreted as a relation over the domain
U: IP (p) ⊆Un. I↠associates a binary relation over U with each k ∈U: I↠(k) ⊆U × U.
Variable assignments B are deﬁned in the usual way.
Given an F-structure I, a variable assignment B, and a term t of L, tI,B is deﬁned as:
xI,B = xB for variable symbol x and tI,B = IC(t) for t ∈C.
Satisfaction of atomic formulas and molecules φ in I, given a variable assignment B,
denoted (I, B) |=f φ, is deﬁned as
– (I, B) |=f ⊤,
(I, B)̸|=f ⊥,
538

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
– (I, B) |=f p(t1, . . . , tn) iﬀ(tI,B
1
, . . . , tI,B
n ) ∈IP (p),
– (I, B) |=f t1 = t2 iﬀtI,B
1
= tI,B
2
,
– (I, B) |=f t1 :t2 iﬀtI,B
1
∈U tI,B
2
, and
– (I, B) |=f t1[t2 ↠t3] iﬀ⟨tI,B
1
, tI,B
3
⟩∈I↠(tI,B
2
).
This extends to arbitrary formulas in the usual way. An F-structure I satisﬁes a formula
φ, denoted I |=f φ, if (I, B) |=f φ for every variable assignment B. I satisﬁes a theory Φ ⊆L
if it satisﬁes all formulas in Φ; in this case, I is called a model of Φ. A theory Φ F-entails
a formula φ ∈L, denoted Φ |=f φ, iﬀfor every model I of Φ, I |=f φ.
A Herbrand F-structure is an F-structure I = ⟨U, ∈U, IC, I↠, IP ⟩such that U is the
set of constants and for every constant symbol c ∈C, IC(c) = c. As an abuse of notation,
for Herbrand structures we use I to denote both the structure and the set of ground atomic
formulas satisﬁed by the structure. Finally, a Herbrand F-structure I is a minimal Herbrand
model of a theory Φ if it is a model and there is no Herbrand F-structure I′ that is a model
of Φ such that I′ ⊊I.
Classical ﬁrst-order logic (FOL) is F-Logic without molecules. Contextual ﬁrst-order logic
is classical FOL where C and P are not required to be disjoint, predicate symbols do not
have an associated arity, and for every structure I = ⟨U, ∈U, IC, I↠, IP ⟩, IP assigns a
relation Ii
P (p) ⊆Un to every p ∈P, for every nonnegative integer i. We denote satisfaction
and entailment in classical and contextual ﬁrst-order logic using the symbols |= and |=c,
respectively. Contextual FOL is sometimes also referred to as FOL with “punning”.
F-Logic can be straightforwardly embedded into FOL, as shown in (Kifer et al., 1995,
Theorem 18.1).
Proposition 1. Let Φ and φ be an F-Logic theory and formula that do not contain the
binary and ternary predicate symbols isa and data, respectively, and let Φ′ and φ′ be the
FOL theory and formula obtained from Φ and φ by replacing every is-a molecule a:b with
isa(a, b) and every data molecule a[b ↠c] with data(a, b, c). Then,
Φ |=f φ iﬀΦ′ |= φ′
2.2 DL-LiteR
A DL-LiteR (Calvanese et al., 2007) language consists of pairwise disjoint sets of concept
(NC), role (NR), and individual (NI) identiﬁers.
Concepts and roles in DL-LiteR are
deﬁned as follows:
Cl
−→
A | ∃R
Cr
−→
A | ∃R | ¬A | ¬∃R
R, R′
−→
P | P −
with A ∈NC and P ∈NR, Cl and Cr left- (resp., right-)hand side concepts, and R and R′
roles.
A DL-LiteR knowledge base K = (T , A) consists of a TBox T , which is a set of inclusion
axioms of the forms
Cl ⊑Cr
R ⊑R′
539

de Bruijn & Heymans
DL syntax
FOL syntax
DL syntax
FOL syntax
π(A, X)
A(X)
π(Cl ⊑Cr)
∀x(π(Cl, x) ⊃π(Cr, x))
π(P, X, Y )
P(X, Y )
π(R1 ⊑R2)
∀x, y(π(R1, x, y) ⊃π(R2, x, y))
π(P −, X, Y )
P(Y, X)
π(A(a))
A(a)
π(∃R, X)
∃y(π(R, X, y))
π(P(a1, a2))
P(a1, a2)
π(¬A, X)
¬π(A, X)
π(¬∃R, X)
¬∃y(π(R, X, y))
y is a new variable
Table 1: Mapping of DL-LiteR to FOL
and an ABox A, which is a set of concept and role membership assertions of the forms
A(a)
P(a1, a2)
with a, a1, a2 ∈NI.
We deﬁne the semantics of DL-LiteR through a translation to FOL, in the form of the
mapping function π, which is deﬁned in Table 1.1 The mapping π extends naturally to sets
of axioms and assertions.
Given a DL-LiteR knowledge base K = (T , A), the FOL equivalent of K is the FOL
theory Φ = π(K) = π(T ) ∪π(A).
Contextual DL-LiteR is like DL-LiteR, except that the sets of concept (NC), role (NR),
and individual (NI) identiﬁers are not required to be disjoint. The semantics of a contextual
DL-LiteR knowledge base K = (T , A) is given through the same mapping π(K), which
yields a contextual FOL theory. Note that contextual DL-LiteR is essentially a subset of
the QL proﬁle of OWL 2 (Motik, Grau, Horrocks, Wu, Fokoue, & Lutz, 2009a).
3. RDF and RDF Schema
We ﬁrst review the deﬁnitions of the RDF syntax and semantics. We then proceed with
the embedding of graphs and axiomatization of the entailment regimes into F-Logic, and
ﬁnally the embedding of extensional RDFS into FOL and DL-LiteR.
3.1 RDF(S) Syntax and Semantics
We proceed with a review of the deﬁnitions of the RDF syntax (Klyne & Carroll, 2004) and
semantics (Hayes, 2004).
A vocabulary V = ⟨C, PL, T L⟩consists of a set C of RDF URI references (simply referred
to as URIs), a set PL of plain literals (i.e., Unicode character strings with an optional
language tag), and a set T L of typed literals (i.e., pairs (s, u) of a Unicode string s and a
URI u, denoting a datatype); see (Klyne & Carroll, 2004, Sections 6.4, 6.5, 6.6) for more
details about the speciﬁc form of these symbols. Note that C, PL, and T L are mutually
disjoint. The symbols in V are collectively referred to as names.
Let B be a set of blank nodes that is disjoint from the set of names in V . Terms are
names or blank nodes. A generalized RDF graph S is a set of generalized triples ⟨s, p, o⟩–
1. Borgida (1996) discusses the relationship between description logics and ﬁrst-order logic in detail.
540

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
subject, predicate, object – with s, p, o ∈C ∪PL ∪T L ∪B. A normal RDF graph S is a set
of normal triples ⟨s, p, o⟩, with s ∈C ∪B, p ∈C, and o ∈C ∪PL ∪T L ∪B.2 A ground triple
is a triple that does not contain blank nodes. A ground generalized, respectively normal
RDF graph is a set of ground generalized, respectively normal triples. With bl(⟨s, p, o⟩) ⊆B
(resp., bl(S) ⊆B) we denote the set of blank nodes in a triple ⟨s, p, o⟩(resp., graph S).
In the remainder, whenever speaking about triples or RDF graphs, we mean generalized
triples, respectively generalized RDF graphs, unless stated otherwise.
An interpretation is a tuple I = ⟨IR, IP, LV, IS, IL, IEXT⟩, where IR is a non-empty set,
called the domain, IP is a set of properties, LV ⊆IR is a set of literal values with PL ⊆LV,
IS is a mapping IS : C →IR∪IP, IL is a mapping IL : T L →IR, and IEXT is an extension
function IEXT : IP →2(IR×IR).
Given an interpretation I, a subset of the blank nodes B′ ⊆B, and a mapping A : B′ →
IR, which is used to interpret blank nodes, for any given term t we deﬁne tI,A as:
– if t ∈C, then tI,A = IS(t),
– if t ∈T L, then tI,A = IL(t), and
– if t ∈PL, then tI,A = t,
– if t ∈B′, then tI,A = A(t).
An interpretation I satisﬁes a triple ⟨s, p, o⟩with respect to a mapping A : B′ →IR, with
bl(⟨s, p, o⟩) ⊆B′, denoted (I, A) |= ⟨s, p, o⟩, if pI,A ∈IP and ⟨sI,A, oI,A⟩∈IEXT(pI,A). I
satisﬁes a graph S with respect to a mapping A : bl(S) →IR, denoted (I, A) |= S, if
(I, A) |= ⟨s, p, o⟩for every ⟨s, p, o⟩∈S.
An interpretation I satisﬁes an RDF graph S, denoted I |= S, if (I, A) |= S for some
mapping A : bl(S) →IR; in this case, I is a model of S.
Any interpretation is an s-
interpretation (simple interpretation).
The notions of rdf -, rdfs-, and erdfs-interpretation are deﬁned through additional con-
ditions on s-interpretation. For example, an s-interpretation is an rdf -interpretation only if
for every object k, k ∈IP iﬀ⟨k, IS(rdf:Property)⟩∈IEXT(IS(rdf:type)) and it satisﬁes
the triple ⟨rdf:nil, rdf:type, rdf:List⟩. Triples that are required to be satisﬁed by every
x-interpretation are called x-axiomatic triples, for x ∈{rdf, rdfs, erdfs} or simply axiomatic
triples when the entailment regime is clear from the context. The precise deﬁnitions of rdf -,
rdfs-, and erdfs-interpretation are found in Appendix A.
Entailment and Satisﬁability
Given a vocabulary V and an entailment regime x ∈
{s, rdf, rdfs, erdfs}, a generalized (resp., normal) RDF graph S x-entails a generalized (resp.,
normal) RDF graph E, denoted S |=x E, if every x-interpretation of V that is a model of
S is also a model of E.
Given an entailment regime x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs, erdfs}, a generalized (resp., normal) RDF
graph S is x-satisﬁable if it has a model that is an x-interpretation; otherwise it is x-
unsatisﬁable. The following observations can be made about satisﬁability for the various
entailment regimes; the observations concerning normal RDF graphs are due to Hayes
(2004).
Proposition 2.
1. Every generalized and every normal RDF graph is s-satisﬁable.
2. Every normal RDF graph is rdf-satisﬁable.
2. Normal RDF graphs correspond the RDF graphs deﬁned by Hayes (2004). In contrast to normal RDF,
generalized RDF graphs allow blank nodes and literals in predicate, and literals in subject positions.
541

de Bruijn & Heymans
3. There is a generalized RDF graph that is rdf-unsatisﬁable.
4. There is a normal (and generalized) RDF graph that is rdfs- and erdfs-unsatisﬁable.
3.2 Embedding RDF in Logic
We translate a graph to a conjunction of data molecules, where URIs and literals are
constant symbols and blank nodes are existentially quantiﬁed variables. We axiomatize the
entailment regimes using sets of formulas that are independent from the graphs. In the
remainder we assume that RDF graphs are ﬁnite.
Given a vocabulary V = ⟨C, PL, T L⟩, an F-language L conforms with V if it has a
signature of the form Σ = ⟨C′, P⟩, with C′ ⊇C ∪PL ∪T L.3
Deﬁnition 1. Let V be a vocabulary, let S be an RDF graph of V , let bl(S) = {b1, . . . , bn}
be the set of blank nodes appearing in S, let ⟨s, p, o⟩be a triple in S, and let L be an
F-language that conforms with V . Then,
tr(⟨s, p, o⟩)
=
s[p ↠o] and
tr(S)
=
∃b1, . . . , bn
  ^
{tr(⟨s, p, o⟩) | ⟨s, p, o⟩∈S}

are formulas of L.
The axiomatizations of the entailment regimes are theories Ψx, with x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs,
erdfs}, which are deﬁned in Appendix B.
If φ is an F-Logic formula in prenex normal form with only existential quantiﬁers, then
sk(φ) denotes the Skolemization of φ, i.e., every existentially quantiﬁed variable is replaced
with a globally unique new constant symbol. This extends to theories in the natural way.
Proposition 3. Let S be an RDF graph of a vocabulary V and let x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs} be an
entailment regime. Then, sk(tr(S)) ∪Ψx can be equivalently rewritten to a set of F-Logic
Horn formulas.
We have that Ψerdfs cannot be equivalently rewritten to a set of Horn formulas, because
of the use of universal quantiﬁcation in the antecedents of some of the implications in Ψerdfs.
We now show faithfulness of our embedding.
Theorem 1. Let S and E be RDF graphs of a vocabulary V , and let x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs, erdfs}
be an entailment regime. Then,
S |=x E
iﬀ
tr(S) ∪Ψx |=f tr(E) and
S is x-satisﬁable
iﬀ
tr(S) ∪Ψx has a model.
The following corollary follows immediately from Theorem 1 and the classical results
about Skolemization (see, e.g., Fitting, 1996).
Corollary 1. Let S and E be RDF graphs of a vocabulary V , and let x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs,
erdfs} be an entailment regime. Then,
S |=x E if and only if sk(tr(S)) ∪Ψx |=f tr(E).
3. Even though typed literals are pairs in RDF, we treat them simply as constant symbols in our embedding.
542

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
Observe that Ψrdf, Ψrdfs, and Ψerdfs are inﬁnite due to the inﬁnite set of RDF axiomatic
triples. However, for checking RDF entailment we need only a ﬁnite subset of Ψx. Given
an RDF graph S, let Ψx
−S be obtained from Ψx by removing all formulas originating from
axiomatic triples involving container membership properties (i.e., rdf: 1, rdf: 2, . . . ) not
appearing in S, with the exception of the axiomatic triples involving rdf: 1.
Proposition 4. Let S and E be RDF graphs and let x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs, erdfs} be an entailment
regime. Then,
S |=x E if and only if sk(tr(S)) ∪Ψx
−S∪E |=f tr(E).
By Proposition 3 we have that sk(tr(S)) ∪Ψs, tr(S)sk ∪Ψrdf, and sk(tr(S)) ∪Ψrdfs are
equivalent to sets of Horn formulas. Therefore, Proposition 4 implies that simple, RDF, and
RDFS entailment can be computed using reasoners that can compute ground entailment of
F-Logic Horn theories, such as FLORA-2 (Yang, Kifer, & Zhao, 2003). Notice that tr(E)
can be seen as a boolean conjunctive query (i.e., a yes/no query), where the existentially
quantiﬁed variables in tr(E) are the non-distinguished variables.
3.3 Direct Embedding of Extensional RDFS
We now consider an alternative, direct embedding of the extensional RDFS entailment
regime. This embedding, rather than axiomatizing the entailment regime, embeds ontolog-
ical statements, e.g., rdfs:subClassOf statements, directly as formulas.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the notion of standard use of the RDF(S) vocabulary, which intuitively
corresponds to not using the vocabulary in locations where it can change the semantics of
the RDF(S) ontology vocabulary (e.g., ⟨rdf:type, rdfs:subPropertyOf, a⟩).
Deﬁnition 2. Let S be an RDF graph. Then, S has only standard use of the RDF(S)
vocabulary if
• rdf:type, rdfs:subClassOf, rdfs:domain, rdfs:range, and rdfs:subPropertyOf do
not appear in subject or object positions of any triple in S and
• rdfs:ContainerMembershipProperty, rdfs:Resource, rdfs:Class, rdfs:Datatype,
and rdf:Property appear only in object positions of rdf:type-triples in S.
We are now ready to deﬁne the direct embedding trerdfs of the extensional RDFS entail-
ment regime for graphs with only standard use of RDFS vocabulary. While trerdfs deals with
an important part of the RDF(S) vocabulary, the axiomatization of the eRDFS semantics
of the remainder of the RDF(S) vocabulary may be found in Appendix B, in the form of
the theory Ψerdfs-V , where V is a vocabulary.
543

de Bruijn & Heymans
Deﬁnition 3. Let ⟨s, p, o⟩be an RDF triple. Then,
trerdfs(⟨s, type, Datatype⟩)
=
s:Datatype ∧∀x(x:s ⊃x:Literal),
trerdfs(⟨s, type, ContainerMembership-
=
s:ContainerMembershipProperty
Property⟩)
∧∀x, y(x[s ↠y] ⊃x[member ↠y]),
trerdfs(⟨s, type, o⟩)
=
s:o,
trerdfs(⟨s, subClassOf, o⟩)
=
∀x(x:s ⊃x:o),
trerdfs(⟨s, subPropertyOf, o⟩)
=
∀x, y(x[s ↠y] ⊃x[o ↠y]),
trerdfs(⟨s, domain, o⟩)
=
∀x, y(x[s ↠y] ⊃x:o),
trerdfs(⟨s, range, o⟩)
=
∀x, y(x[s ↠y] ⊃y :o), and
trerdfs(⟨s, p, o⟩)
=
s[p ↠o], otherwise.
Let S be an RDF graph and let bl(S) = {b1, . . . , bn} be the set of blank nodes in S. Then,
trerdfs(S) = {∃b1, . . . , bn(
^
{trerdfs(⟨s, p, o⟩) | ⟨s, p, o⟩∈S})}
We say that a term t occurs in a property position if it occurs as the predicate of
a triple, as the subject or object of an rdfs:subPropertyOf triple, as the subject of an
rdfs:domain or rdfs:range triple, or the graph contains ⟨t, rdf:type, rdf:Property⟩or
⟨t, rdf:type, ContainerMembershipProperty⟩. A term t occurs in a class position if it oc-
curs as the subject or object of an rdfs:subClassOf triple, as the object of an rdfs:domain,
rdfs:range, or rdf:type triple, as the subject of a triple ⟨t, rdf:type, rdfs:Class⟩, or as
the subject of a triple ⟨t, rdf:type, rdfs:Datatype⟩.
Let S be an RDF graph with only standard use of the RDF(S) vocabulary. The property
(resp., class) vocabulary of S consists of all the names appearing in property (resp., class)
positions in S or the RDF(S) axiomatic triples with only standard use of the RDF(S)
vocabulary.
Given two RDF graphs S and E with only standard use of the RDF(S) vocabulary, we
write E ⊴S if the property, resp. class vocabularies of E are subsets of the property, resp.
class vocabularies of S, there are no blank nodes in class or property positions in E,4 and
rdfs:Resource, rdfs:Class, and rdf:Property do not appear in E.
Theorem 2. Let S and E be RDF graphs with only standard use of the RDFS vocabulary
such that E ⊴S. Then,
S |=erdfs E iﬀtrerdfs(S) ∪Ψerdfs-V |=f trerdfs(E)
We deﬁne Ψerdfs-V
−S
analogously to Ψerdfs
−S , i.e., it does not contain statements concerning
container membership properties not appearing in the graph S, with the exception of rdf: 1.
The following proposition follows from an argument analogous to the proof of Property 4.
Proposition 5. Let S and E be RDF graphs with only standard use of the RDFS vocabulary
such that E ⊴S. Then,
S |=erdfs E iﬀsk(trerdfs(S)) ∪Ψerdfs-V
−S∪E |=f trerdfs(E).
4. This restriction on the use of blank nodes in the entailed graph was not mentioned in the extended
abstract of this paper (de Bruijn & Heymans, 2007). This was an error.
544

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
We have that whenever E does not contain the terms rdfs:subClassOf, rdfs:sub-
PropertyOf, rdfs:domain, and rdfs:range, trerdfs(E) is a conjunction of atomic molecules
preﬁxed by an existential quantiﬁers (i.e., a conjunctive query).
We have that sk(trerdfs(S)) ∪Ψerdfs-V
−S∪E is a ﬁnite set of Horn formulas.
Therefore, if
the graphs satisfy the mentioned conditions, query answering techniques used in F-Logic
reasoners such as FLORA-2 (Yang et al., 2003) can be used for checking extensional RDFS
entailment.
3.4 Embedding Extensional RDFS into First-Order Logic
We now consider an embedding of extensional RDFS entailment into ﬁrst-order logic (FOL),
based on the direct embedding of extensional RDFS in F-Logic deﬁned above.
We say that an F-Logic theory Φ is translatable to contextual FOL if Φ does not contain
unary or binary predicates and for every molecule of the form t1[t2 ↠t3] or t1 :t2 holds that
t2 is a constant symbol. FO(Φ) is the contextual FOL theory obtained from Φ by replacing:
• every data molecule t1[t2 ↠t3] with the atomic formula t2(t1, t3) and
• every is-a molecule t1 :t2 with the atomic formula t2(t1).
The following proposition follows immediately from an earlier result (de Bruijn & Heymans,
2008, Theorem 3.2).
Proposition 6. Let Φ, respectively φ, be an equality-free F-Logic theory, respectively for-
mula, that is translatable to contextual FOL. Then,
Φ |=f φ iﬀFO(Φ) |=c FO(φ).
We say that an RDF graph S is a non-higher-order graph if S does not contain blank
nodes in class or property positions, and has only standard use of the RDFS vocabulary.
Observe that if S is a non-higher-order RDF graph, then trerdfs(S) ∪Ψerdfs-V is translatable
to contextual FOL. Notice also that every ground RDF graph that has only standard use
of the RDFS vocabulary is a non-higher-order RDF graph.
Theorem 3. Let S and E be non-higher-order RDF graphs such that E ⊴S. Then,
S |=erdfs E iﬀFO(trerdfs(S) ∪Ψerdfs-V ) |=c FO(trerdfs(E)).
Proof. Follows immediately from Theorem 2, the fact that FO(trerdfs(S)) and
FO(trerdfs(E)) do not contain the equality symbol, and Proposition 6.
Concerning the relationship with DL-LiteR, we make the following observation.
Proposition 7. Let S be a ground non-higher-order graph.5 Then, FO(trerdfs(S)∪Ψerdfs-V )
can be equivalently rewritten to the FOL equivalent Φ = π(K) of a contextual DL-LiteR
knowledge base K.
Analogous to Proposition 5, one may discard the axiomatic triples concerning container
membership properties that are not used, and thus one only needs to reason with a ﬁnite
knowledge base.
5. Note that, when considering a variant of DL-LiteR that allows existentially quantiﬁed variables in the
ABox – also allowed in OWL DL – this restriction could be relaxed to S being a non-ground non-higher-
order RDF graph.
545

de Bruijn & Heymans
4. Extensions with Datatypes
The entailment regimes we dealt with in the previous section do not consider many of
the useful datatypes (e.g., strings, integers). In fact, rdf:XMLLiteral is the only datatype
that was considered. The RDF semantics speciﬁcation (Hayes, 2004) deﬁnes the notion
of D entailment (datatype entailment), which extends RDFS entailment with support for
datatypes. Ter Horst (2005) deﬁnes the notion of D* entailment, which is also an extension
of RDFS entailment, but semantically weaker than D entailment.
We ﬁrst review D*
entailment, after which we review D entailment. Both semantics were originally deﬁned as
extensions of RDFS entailment. However, one might extend any of the entailment regimes
we considered with datatype support. Therefore, we consider extensions of simple, RDF,
RDFS, and extensional RDFS entailment with both kinds of datatype semantics. We ﬁrst
review the datatype semantics, after which we present embeddings of both semantics into
F-Logic. Finally, we discuss a notion of normalization that may be used to remove equality
statements from the embeddings to speed up processing.
4.1 Extension of the RDF Entailment Regimes with Datatypes
Datatypes deﬁne sets of concrete data values (e.g., strings and integers), along with their
lexical representations. A datatype is a tuple d = ⟨Ld, V d, L2V d⟩consisting of
• a lexical space Ld, which is a set of character strings (e.g., “0”, “1”, “01”, . . . , in the
case of an integer datatype),
• a value space V d, which is a set of values (e.g., the numbers 0, 1, 2, . . . , in the case
of an integer datatype), and
• a lexical-to-value mapping L2V d, which is a mapping from the lexical space to the
value space (e.g., {“0” 7→0, “1” 7→1, “01” 7→1, . . .}, for an integer datatype).
A simple datatype map D is a partial mapping from URIs to datatypes. A simple datatype
map D is a datatype map if D(rdf:XMLLiteral) = xml where xml is the built-in XML
literal datatype as deﬁned in the RDF speciﬁcation (Klyne & Carroll, 2004). With dom(D)
and ran(D) we denote the domain and range of D, respectively.
Given a simple datatype map D, we call a typed literal (s, u) ∈T L well-typed if u ∈
dom(D) and s ∈LD(u); (s, u) is ill-typed if u ∈dom(D) and s /∈LD(u).
We now review the notions of D* and D entailment. Similar to the previous section,
the deﬁnitions of D*- and D-interpretations can be found in Appendix A.
D* entailment
Given a simple datatype map D, an RDF graph S s-D* entails an RDF
graph E, denoted S |=s-D* E, if every s-D*-interpretation that is a model of S is a model
of E.
Given a datatype map D, an RDF graph S x-D*-entails an RDF graph E, denoted
S |=x-D* E, if every x-D*-interpretation that is a model of S is a model of E, for x ∈
{rdf, rdfs, erdfs}.
Notice that if dom(D) = {rdf:XMLLiteral} and x ∈{rdf, rdfs, erdfs}, then x-D*-
entailment corresponds to x-entailment, with the exception that when considering rdf -D*-
entailment, the triple ⟨rdf:XMLLiteral, rdf:type, rdfs:Datatype⟩is additionally entailed.
In addition, if dom(D) = ∅, then s-D*-entailment corresponds to s-entailment.
546

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
The following example shows how equality may be introduced by the D* semantics.
Example 2. Consider a datatype map that contains the XML schema string datatype
(Peterson, Gao, Malhotra, Sperberg-McQueen, & Thompson, 2009). Certain equalities hold
between plain literals without language tags and typed literals of this datatype, because the set
of plain literals without language tags corresponds to the value space of the string datatype.
So, equalities such as “a” = (“a”, string) and “xxx” = (“xxx”, string) necessarily hold.
Similar for equalities between datatypes. For example, if the datatype map contains both
integer and decimal, then further equalities such as (“1”, integer) = (“1”, decimal) and
(“1”, decimal) = (“1.0”, decimal) necessarily hold.
D entailment
Given a simple datatype map D, an RDF graph S s-D-entails an RDF
graph E, denoted S |=s-D E, if every s-D-interpretation which is a model of S is a model
of E.
Given a datatype map D, an RDF graph S x-D-entails an RDF graph E, denoted
S |=x-D E, if every x-D-interpretation which is a model of S is a model of E, for x ∈
{rdf, rdfs, erdfs}. An RDF graph S x-D-entails an RDF graph E, denoted S |=x-D E, if
every x-D-interpretation which is a model of S is also a model of E.
There are two main diﬀerences between D* entailment and D entailment: (i) D en-
tailment allows for easy extension towards languages which can express equality between
URIs denoting datatypes; whenever two URIs denote the same datatype, typed literals
with these two URIs as datatypes are interpreted in the same way (see Example 3); and (ii)
D entailment directly links the class extension of a datatype with the value space of this
datatype. The latter complicates the evaluation of entailment somewhat, and was likely the
main motivation for the introduction of D* entailment. The complication becomes clear
when declaring blank nodes as members of speciﬁc datatypes, as illustrated in Example 4.
Example 3. Consider an extension of D entailment with equality by imposing the following
condition on interpretations:
(+) An interpretation I satisﬁes a triple ⟨x, owl:sameAs, y⟩with respect to a
blank node assignment A iﬀxI,A = yI,A.
Now consider a datatype map D = {bool 7→boolean}, where boolean is deﬁned as follows:
• Lboolean = {“1”, “0”, “t”, “f”},
• V boolean = {true, false}, and
• L2V boolean = {“1” 7→true, “0” 7→false, “t” 7→true, “f” 7→false},
and an RDF graph S = {⟨myBool, owl:sameAs, bool⟩, ⟨a, b, (“1”, myBool)⟩}. In D-inter-
pretations, typed literals of which the datatype URIs are interpreted the same are inter-
preted the same as well. Therefore, under D entailment extended with condition (+) the
triple ⟨a, b, (“t”, myBool)⟩can be derived from S: (“1”, myBool) and (“t”, myBool) are
both interpreted as L2V boolean(“1”) = L2V boolean(“t”) = true; hence, (“1”, myBool) and
(“t”, myBool) are interpreted in the same way in every interpretation. Similarly, it can be
shown that the triples ⟨a, b, (“1”, bool)⟩and ⟨a, b, (“t”, bool)⟩are entailed by S.
547

de Bruijn & Heymans
None of these derivations is valid when considering D* entailment extended with condi-
tion (+). In fact, because myBool is not in the domain of D, (“1”, myBool) is interpreted
as an arbitrary (abstract) symbol; it is treated in the same way as a URI.
Example 4. Consider a datatype map D that includes the XML schema datatypes string
and integer (Peterson et al., 2009), which have disjoint value spaces. Consider also the
graph S = {⟨: x, rdf:type, string⟩, ⟨: x, rdf:type, integer⟩}. In an rdfs-D*-interpre-
tation I the class extensions of string and integer are not necessarily the same as the
value spaces of the respective datatypes. Therefore, there may be an object k ∈IR that is
neither an integer nor a string, but which is in the class extensions of both string and
integer. Consequently, there is an rdfs-D*-interpretation that is a model of S and S is
rdfs-D*-satisﬁable.
In an rdfs-D-interpretation the class extensions of string and integer are necessarily
the same as the value spaces of the respective datatypes. Since these value spaces are disjoint,
there can be no object that is both in the class extension of string and in the class extension
of integer. Therefore, S is not rdfs-D-satisﬁable.
4.2 Embeddings of Datatypes in Logic
Given a datatype map D, we use a set of formulas Ψy ⊆L, deﬁned in Appendix B, to axiom-
atize the semantics of an entailment regime y ∈{x-D*, x-D}, with x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs, erdfs}.
Analogous to Proposition 3, we have:
Proposition 8. Let S be an RDF graph of a vocabulary V . Then, sk(tr(S)) ∪Ψy, with
y ∈{s-D*, rdf-D*, rdfs-D*, s-D, rdf-D, rdfs-D}, can be equivalently rewritten to a set of F-
Logic Horn formulas.
We ﬁrst show faithfulness of our embedding of D* entailment.
Theorem 4. Let S and E be RDF graphs of a vocabulary V , let D be a datatype map, and
let x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs, erdfs} be an entailment regime. Then,
S |=x-D* E if and only if tr(S) ∪Ψx-D* |=f tr(E) and
S is x-D*-satisﬁable iﬀtr(S) ∪Ψx-D* has a model.
We now turn to x-D-entailment. It turns out that when considering datatype maps with
arbitrary datatypes, one needs to reason by case (see Proposition 14 in Section 5), which
complicates matters. We therefore restrict ourselves to deﬁnite datatypes, which do not
bring this complication. An example of a deﬁnite datatype map is one that includes only
the set of datatypes in the OWL 2 EL and QL proﬁles (Motik et al., 2009a).
Deﬁnition 4. A datatype map D is deﬁnite if
• the value space of every datatype d ∈ran(D) is inﬁnite,
• for any n ≥1 distinct datatypes d1, . . . , dn ∈ran(D) holds that either (a) the value
spaces are disjoint, i.e., V di ∩V dj = ∅(1 ≤i < j ≤n) or (b) their intersection is
inﬁnite, i.e., V d1 ∩· · · ∩V dn is an inﬁnite set, and
548

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
• for no two datatypes d1, d2 ∈ran(D) holds that d1 ∈V d2.
Theorem 5. Let S and E be RDF graphs of a vocabulary V , let D be a deﬁnite datatype
map, and let x ∈{s, rdf, rdfs, erdfs} be an entailment regime. Then,
S |=x-D E if and only if tr(S) ∪Ψx-D |=f tr(E) and
S is x-D-satisﬁable iﬀtr(S) ∪Ψx-D has a model.
4.3 Normalization of Datatypes
The set of equality statements in the axiomatizations Ψx-D* and Ψx-D is potentially large
and, in general, polynomial in the size of the vocabulary V . In addition, it requires equality
reasoning, which tends to deteriorate the performance of a reasoner. We discuss how to
normalize the embedding of a graph in F-Logic, thereby removing the need for expressing
equality.
Given a vocabulary V , we assume a strict (e.g., lexicographical) order < on the set of
literals PL ∪T L. For a given datatype map D, we deﬁne V D = S
u∈dom(D) V D(u), i.e.,
the values in D. For each v ∈V D, we deﬁne the literals that represent the value v as:
v = {(s, u) ∈T L | L2V D(u)(s) = v} ∪{l ∈PL | l = v}. The representation of v, denoted
r(v), is the least element in v according to the order <.
Given a set of formulas Φ ⊆L such that L conforms with V , the datatype normalization
of Φ, denoted (Φ)n, is obtained from Φ by replacing every plain literal l ∈PL with r(l) and
replacing every well-typed literal (s, u) ∈T L with r(L2V D(u)(s)).
Observe that the only equality statements in the normalizations (tr(S) ∪Ψx-D)n and
(tr(S) ∪Ψx-D*)n are trivial statements of the form t = t, where t is a literal. Therefore,
these statements may be discarded.
The following proposition follows straightforwardly from the shape of the axiomatiza-
tions Ψy and the deﬁnition of normalization.
Proposition 9. Let S and E be RDF graphs of a vocabulary V , let D be datatype map D,
and let y ∈{s-D*, rdf-D*, rdfs-D*, erdfs-D*, s-D, rdf-D, rdfs-D, erdfs-D}. Then,
tr(S) ∪Ψy |=f tr(E) iﬀ(tr(S) ∪Ψy)n |=f (tr(E))n
5. Complexity
In this section we review the complexity of the various RDF entailment relations and present
several novel results, exploiting the embeddings presented in Sections 3 and 4.
The complexity of non-ground simple entailment and RDFS entailment, and upper bounds
for ground entailment are known from the literature, and analogous results for RDF en-
tailment follow immediately. Recall that, although the set of axiomatic triples is inﬁnite,
only a ﬁnite subset, linear in the size of the graphs, needs to be taken into account when
checking entailment (cf. Proposition 4).
Proposition 10 (Gutierrez et al., 2004, 2010; ter Horst, 2005; de Bruijn et al., 2005). The
decision problems S |=s E, S |=rdf E, S |=rdfs E, and S |=rdfs-D* E, given RDF graphs S
549

de Bruijn & Heymans
and E, are NP-complete in the combined size of S and E, and polynomial in the size of S.
If E is ground, then the respective problems are in PTime.
In addition, the problems S |=erdfs E and S |=rdfs-D E are NP-hard.
The membership proofs by Gutierrez et al. (2004, 2010), ter Horst (2005), and de Bruijn
et al. (2005) rely on the fact that the set of all (relevant) entailed triples of a given graph
can be computed in polynomial time using the RDFS entailment rules (ter Horst, 2005);
the problem can then be reduced to subgraph homomorphism. From Corollary 1 and the
fact that the problem of checking ground entailment in Datalog (Dantsin, Eiter, Gottlob,
& Voronkov, 2001) is polynomial in the size of the data (i.e., tr(S)) we obtain a novel
argument for membership.
NP-hardness of non-ground entailment has been shown through a reduction from a
known NP-hard problem (ter Horst, 2005).
From the embedding in F-Logic (Theorem 1), we obtain the following upper bound for
the complexity of simple and RDF entailment.
Proposition 11. Let S and E be RDF graphs. If E is ﬁxed, the problems S |=s E and
S |=rdf E are decidable in LogSpace in the size of S. The problems S |=s E and S |=rdf E
are decidable in LogSpace in the combined size of the graphs if E is ground.
Proof Sketch. It is easy to see that the only fact that could potentially be recursively de-
rived from Ψrdf is rdf:type[rdf:type ↠rdf:Property]; however, rdf:type[rdf:type ↠
rdf:Property] ∈Ψrdf. Thus, sk(tr(S)) and sk(tr(S))∪Ψrdf may be treated as nonrecursive
Datalog programs.
The proposition then follows straightforwardly from Corollary 1 and the fact that ground
entailment in nonrecursive Datalog is in LogSpace in the size of the data (Abiteboul, Hull,
& Vianu, 1995), with the data being the input RDF graphs.
It turns out that we cannot obtain a LogSpace upper bound for RDFS entailment. In
fact, it turns out that ground rdfs-, and hence ground rdfs-D*- and rdfs-D-entailment, is
PTime-hard.
Proposition 12. There exist ground RDF graphs S and E such that the decision problems
S |=rdfs E, S |=rdfs-D* E, and S |=rdfs-D E are PTime-hard.
Proof. We proceed by reduction from the PTime-hard problem path system accessibility
(Jones & Laaser, 1974; Gary & Johnson, 1979), which is deﬁned as:
Instance: A set X of nodes, subsets S, T ⊆X of source and terminal nodes, and a relation
R ⊆X × X × X.
Question: A node x ∈X is accessible if x ∈S or if there exist accessible nodes y, z ∈X
such that ⟨x, y, z⟩∈R. Is there an accessible terminal node t ∈T?
In the remainder sp is short for rdfs:subPropertyOf.
We now encode this problem into RDFS. The graph G is constructed as follows:
• for every source node x ∈S include the triple ⟨x, sp, sp⟩,
• for every terminal node x ∈T include the triple ⟨a, sp, x⟩, and
• for every tuple ⟨x, y, z⟩∈R include the triple ⟨x, y, z⟩.
550

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
We show that a node t ∈X is accessible iﬀG |=rdfs ⟨t, sp, sp⟩. It follows that there
exists an accessible node iﬀG |=rdfs ⟨a, sp, sp⟩.
(⇒) We proceed by induction.
Base case: if t ∈S then ⟨t, sp, sp⟩∈G, so clearly
G |=rdfs ⟨t, sp, sp⟩.
Induction step: consider ⟨t, y, z⟩∈R such that y, z are accessible. We have that ⟨t, y, z⟩
is included in G and G |=rdfs ⟨y, sp, sp⟩and G |=rdfs ⟨z, sp, sp⟩, since y and z are accessible.
Condition 10 in Table 5 implies that G |=rdfs ⟨t, sp, z⟩. By transitivity of sp (condition 9
in Table 5) we can subsequently conclude that G |=rdfs ⟨t, sp, sp⟩.
(⇐) Assume, on the contrary, that t ∈X is not accessible. It is then straightforward to
construct an rdfs-interpretation I such that I |=rdfs G and I ̸|=rdfs ⟨t, sp, sp⟩, a contradiction.
Using the correspondence of Proposition 7, the results on the complexity of reasoning
in DL-LiteR (Calvanese et al., 2007), and the classical results on skolemization (Fitting,
1996) we obtain the following result for extensional RDFS entailment. Recall the notion of
standard use of the RDFS vocabulary from Deﬁnition 2.
Proposition 13. Let S and E be RDF graphs with only standard use of the RDFS vo-
cabulary such that E ⊴S. Then, the problem of deciding S |=erdfs E is NP-complete, and
NLogSpace-complete if E is ground.
Proof. Assume that E is ground. We ﬁrst demonstrate membership.
We have that FO(sk(trerdfs(S)) ∪Ψerdfs-V ) is a theory of contextual FOL that is equiv-
alent to a contextual DL-LiteR knowledge base (by Proposition 7). If E is ground, then,
as a straightforward consequence from Theorems 2 and 3,
S |=erdfs E iﬀFO(sk(trerdfs(S)) ∪Ψerdfs-V
−S∪E ) |=c FO(trerdfs(E)).
A contextual DL-LiteR theory Φc (resp., formula φc) can be straightforwardly rewritten
to a corresponding classical DL-LiteR theory Φ (resp., formula φ) such that
Φc |=c φc iﬀΦ |= φ.
Since this transformation is linear in the size of the knowledge base, the complexity of
deciding satisﬁability and entailment of contextual DL-LiteR knowledge bases is the same
as that of DL-LiteR knowledge bases, namely NLogSpace (Calvanese et al., 2007).
Hardness is shown by reduction from a known NLogSpace-hard problem: Graph reach-
ability (Papadimitriou, 1994) can be encoded using subclass statements: edges in the
graph are represented in the RDF graph S by rdfs:subClassOf-triples and t is reachable
from s iﬀS |=erdfs {⟨s, rdfs:subClassOf, t⟩}.
This result immediately leads to the following NP algorithm for deciding S |=erdfs E, in
case E is not ground:
1. Guess a mapping θ from blank nodes in E to ground terms in FO(sk(trerdfs(S))∪Ψerdfs-V
−S∪E ).
2. Check whether FO(sk(trerdfs(S)) ∪Ψerdfs-V
−S∪E ) |=c FO(trerdfs(E)θ).
This algorithm is clearly sound and complete, since the theory FO(sk(trerdfs(S))∪Ψerdfs-V
−S∪E )
is universal.
NP-hardness follows from NP-hardness of simple entailment (Proposition 10), which is
straightforwardly encoded into extensional RDFS entailment.
551

de Bruijn & Heymans
For x-D-entailment with arbitrary datatype maps we obtain the following novel lower
bound.
Proposition 14. There are RDF graphs S and E and a datatype map D such that deciding
S |=s-D E is coNP-hard in the size of S.
Proof. We proceed by reduction from the complement of graph k-colorability for k ≥3,
i.e., the nonexistence of a k-coloring. This problem is coNP-complete (Gary & Johnson,
1979):
Instance: A graph G = ⟨V, E⟩and a positive integer k ≤|V | such that k ≥3.
Question: A k-coloring is an assignment from nodes to colors f : V →{1, 2, . . . , k} such
that no two adjacent nodes share the same color, i.e., if ⟨u, v⟩∈E, then f(u) ̸= f(v). Is it
the case that there is no k-coloring?
Let D be a datatype map that includes rdf:XMLLiteral and that maps a URI d to
a datatype D(d) with an ordered value space of cardinality k, let S be the smallest RDF
graph such that:
• for every v ∈V , ⟨v, rdf:type, d⟩∈S and
• for every ⟨u, v⟩∈E, ⟨u, R, v⟩∈S,
where R is a URI, and let H = {⟨:x, R, :x⟩}, where :x is a blank node.
We now show that G does not have a k-coloring if and only if S |=s-D H.
(⇒) Assume, on the contrary, that S ̸|=s-D H, which means there is an s-D-inter-
pretation I such that I |= S and I ̸|= H.
Therefore, (*) there is no s ∈IR such that
⟨s, s⟩∈IEXT(IS(R)). Consider any ⟨u, v⟩∈E; by (*) we have that IS(u) ̸= IS(v). Since
⟨u, rdf:type, d⟩, ⟨v, rdf:type, d⟩∈S, IS(u), IS(v) ∈D(d), by condition 20 in Table 8. Now
let f(v) = IS(v) for every v ∈V . We have that f is a k-coloring, a contradiction.
(⇐) Analogously, if there exists a k-coloring, one can construct an s-D-interpretation
that is a model of S, but not of H.
A polynomial (resp., logspace) datatype map D is a datatype map for which holds
that deciding well-typedness of literals and deciding L2V D(u)(s) = L2V D(u′)(s′) and l =
L2V D(u)(s), where l is a plain literal and (s, u), (s′, u′) are well-typed literals, can be done
in PTime (resp., LogSpace).
Considering deﬁnite datatype maps, we obtain the following lower bound from Theorem
5 and the data complexity of Datalog, exploiting Skolemization, analogous to Corollary 1,
and exploiting the fact that we need to take into account only a subset of the RDF(S)
axiomatic triples, analogous to Proposition 4.
Proposition 15. Let D be a deﬁnite polynomial datatype map. Then, the decision problems
S |=s-D E, S |=rdf-D E, and S |=rdfs-D E are NP-complete in the combined size of S and E,
and polynomial in the size of S. If E is ground, then the respective problems are in PTime.
It turns out that, analogous to the case without datatypes, we can further reﬁne the
upper bounds of simple- and rdf -entailment.
Lemma 1. Let Φ be a theory and let D be a logspace datatype map. Then, (Φ)n can be
computed in LogSpace.
552

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
Entailment
Restrictions on S
Restrictions on E
Complexity
|=s,|=rdf,|=rdfs
none
none
NP-complete
|=s,|=rdf
none
ground
LogSpace
|=rdfs
none
ground
P-complete
|=erdfs
none
none
NP-hard
|=erdfs
stand. RDFS
stand. RDFS
NP-complete
|=erdfs
stand. RDFS
stand. RDFS,
ground
NLogSpace-complete
Table 2: Complexity of Entailment S |=x E in RDF, measured in the combined size of S
and E
Entailment
∅
D*
deﬁnite D
D
x=s
LogSpace
LogSpace
LogSpace
coNP-hard
x=rdf
LogSpace
LogSpace
LogSpace
coNP-hard
x=rdfs
P-complete
P-complete
P-complete
coNP-hard
Table 3: Complexity of Entailment S |=x-D E and S |=x-D* E, measured in the size of S
Proof. With WL we denote the set of plain and well-typed literals, and with < the lexico-
graphical ordering over WL. If l is a plain literal, we deﬁne vl = l; if (s, u) is a well-typed
literal, v(s,u) = L2V D(u)(s). The following algorithm returns the representation of a literal
l ∈WL in LogSpace: iterate over all literals l′ < l, until the least literal l′′ such that vl′′ = vl
is found; observe that deciding l′ < l and deciding vl′′ = vl can be done in LogSpace.
From the lemma we obtain the following upper bound, by considerations analogous to
Proposition 11 and the fact that the axioms in ΨD\Ψrdf do not introduce recursion.
Proposition 16. Let S and E be RDF graphs and let D be a logspace datatype map. Then,
the problems S |=s-D* E and S |=rdf-D* E are decidable in LogSpace in the size of S, and in
the combined size of the graphs if E is ground.
Furthermore, if D is deﬁnite, the problems S |=s-D E and S |=rdf-D E are decidable in
LogSpace in the size of S, and in the combined size of the graphs if E is ground.
Table 2 summarizes the complexity of reasoning with the entailment regimes of RDF;
“stand. RDFS” stands for “only standard use of the RDFS vocabulary; S and E are such
that E ⊴S”. The results in the ﬁrst and fourth line of the table, and the upper bound
for ground rdfs-entailment were previously known (Gutierrez et al., 2004; de Bruijn et al.,
2005; ter Horst, 2005). To the best of our knowledge, the other results are novel.
Table 3 summarizes the complexity of reasoning with datatypes, measured in the size of
the entailing graph S. “Deﬁnite D” stands for D entailment restricted to deﬁnite datatype
maps. The LogSpace results require the datatype map D to be logspace as well, i.e., it
must be decidable in LogSpace whether two literals are equal under the interpretation given
by D. We suspect that many datatype maps of interest are logspace – examples are the
XML schema datatypes (Peterson et al., 2009). The upper bounds for rdfs- and rdfs-D*-
553

de Bruijn & Heymans
entailment are known from the literature (ter Horst, 2005). To the best of our knowledge,
the other results in the table are novel.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented embeddings of the diﬀerent RDF entailment regimes in F-Logic, and
we have shown how deductive database and description logic technology can be used for
reasoning with RDF.
Known complexity results from the ﬁelds of deductive databases and description logics
resulted in several novel upper bounds, in particular, ground simple- and rdf -entailment
are in LogSpace, as are the respective extensions with D* datatype semantics; non-ground
(resp., ground) erdfs-entailment of graphs with only standard use of the RDFS vocabulary
is in NP (resp., NLogSpace). To the best of our knowledge these are the ﬁrst known upper
bounds for extensional RDFS entailment for a nontrivial subset of RDF graphs. For the
case of extensions of simple-, rdf -, and rdfs-entailment with D datatype support, the upper
bounds for non-ground and ground entailment are the same as for D* entailment when
considering deﬁnite datatypes, which do not require reasoning by case.
In addition, we have established several lower bounds through reductions from known
hard problems.
In particular, rdfs-entailment turns out to be PTime-hard and simple-
entailment extended with D datatype support turns out to be coNP-hard, both in the size
of the entailing graph. We also found a matching lower bound for the NLogSpace result for
ground erdfs-entailment of graphs with only standard use of the RDFS vocabulary.
The negative result concerning ground rdfs-entailment (i.e., PTime-hardness) might
come as a surprise because the language seems far less expressive than other PTime-hard
languages (e.g., variable-free Datalog (Dantsin et al., 2001) and DL-LiteR,⊓, an extension
of DL-LiteR (Calvanese et al., 2007)). The PTime-hardness proof suggests that the com-
plexity originates from the possibility to use RDFS vocabulary in arbitrary places in RDF
statements, e.g., rdfs:subPropertyOf in the object position of a triple. Indeed, ground
entailment in the minimal RDFS fragment by Mu˜noz, P´erez, and Gutierrez (2009) can
be decided in O(nlogn).6 We suspect that the minimal RDFS fragment can be extended
with many useful features, such as class and property declarations and the RDFS metadata
vocabulary, without compromising the O(nlogn) upper bound. This is a topic for future
work.
The negative result concerning D entailment, even when not considering the RDFS vo-
cabulary (i.e., coNP-hardness), suggests that one should restrict oneself to a weaker datatype
semantics such as D* or one should use only deﬁnite datatype maps, which precludes the
use of ﬁnite datatypes such as bool or int (Peterson et al., 2009). The latter approach was
taken in the speciﬁcation of the tractable fragments (also called proﬁles) of OWL 2 (Motik
et al., 2009a), which has a datatype semantics similar to the D semantics.
The investigation reported on in this paper has formed the basis for the speciﬁcation of
combinations of RIF-BLD rules (RIF Working Group, 2010a), which are essentially Horn
logic formulas, with RDF graphs. The RIF RDF and OWL speciﬁcation (RIF Working
Group, 2010b) gives a model-theoretic account of the semantics of RIF-RDF combinations
6. This minimal RDFS disallows the use of any RDF(S) vocabulary besides the properties in the RDF(S)
ontology vocabulary, and allows the use of these properties only in the predicate position of triples.
554

Logical Foundations of RDF(S) with Datatypes
and suggests how such combinations can be embedded into RIF-BLD rules, based on the
embedding in Section 3.2. A particular challenge for future work is the combination of RDF
graphs with extensions of RIF-BLD that allow nonmonotonic negation in the rules, and the
interaction of this negation with blank nodes.
Another topic for future investigation is the precise relationship between extensional
RDFS and OWL. In particular, the relationship between extensional RDFS with only stan-
dard use of the RDFS vocabulary and the OWL 2 QL fragment of OWL 2 (Motik et al.,
2009a), which is based on contextual DL-LiteR. The embedding in the proof of Proposition
7 provides a promising starting point.
