Trading the Twitter Sentiment with Reinforcement Learning
Catherine Xiao

Wanfeng Chen

Abstract— This paper is to explore the possibility to use
alternative data and artiﬁcial intelligence techniques to trade
stocks. The efﬁcacy of the daily Twitter sentiment on predicting
the stock return is examined using machine learning methods.
Reinforcement learning(Q-learning) is applied to generate the
optimal trading policy based on the sentiment signal. The
predicting power of the sentiment signal is more signiﬁcant
if the stock price is driven by the expectation on the company
growth and when the company has a major event that draws
the public attention. The optimal trading strategy based on
reinforcement learning outperforms the trading strategy based
on the machine learning prediction.
I. INTRODUCTION
In a world where traditional ﬁnancial information is ubiq-
uitous and the ﬁnancial models are largely homogeneous,
ﬁnding hidden information that has not been priced in from
alternative data is critical. The recent development in Natural
Language Processing provides such opportunities to look
into text data in addition to numerical data. When the
market sets the stock price, it is not uncommon that the
expectation of the company growth outweighs the company
fundamentals. Twitter, a online news and social network
where the users post and interact with messages to express
views about certain topics, contains valuable information on
the public mood and sentiment. A collection of research [1]
[6] have shown that there is a positive correlation between
the ”public mood” and the ”market mood”. Other research[2]
also shows that signiﬁcant correlation exists between the
Twitter sentiment and the abnormal return during the peaks
of the Twitter volume during a major event.
Once a signal that has predicting power on the stock
market return is constructed, a trading strategy to express the
view of the signal is needed. Traditionally, the quantitative ﬁ-
nance industry relies on backtest, a process where the trading
strategies are tuned during the simulations or optimizations.
Reinforcement learning provides a way to ﬁnd the optimal
policy by maximizing the expected future utility. There are
recent attempts from the Artiﬁcial Intelligence community
to apply reinforcement learning to asset allocation [5], algo-
rithmic trading[3][7], and portfolio management[4].
The contribution of this paper is two-fold: First, the pre-
dicting power of Twitter sentiment is evaluated. Our results
show sentiment is more suitable to construct alpha signals
rather than total return signals and shows predicting power
especially when the Twitter volume is high. Second, we
proposed a trading strategy based on reinforcement learning
(Q-learning) that takes the sentiment features as part of its
states.
The paper is constructed as follows: In the second section,
scraping Tweets from Twitter website and preprocessing the
data are described in details. In the third section, assigning
sentiment scores to the text data is discussed. In the fourth
section, feature engineering and prediction based on the
sentiment score is discussed. In the ﬁfth section, how the
reinforcement learning is applied to generate the optimal
trading strategy is described.
II. TWITTER DATA SCRAPING AND PREPROCESSING
There are two options of getting the Tweets. First, Twitter
provides an API to download the Tweets. However, rate limit
and history limit make it not an option for this paper. Second,
scrapping Tweets directly from Twitter website. Using the
second option, the daily Tweets for stocks of interest from
2015 January to 2017 June were downloaded.
The predicting power of Twitter sentiment varies from
stock to stock. For stocks that are mostly driven by the com-
pany fundamentals and hold by the institutional investors,
the predicting power of the Twitter sentiment is limited.
For stocks that are priced by the public expectation on the
company’s future growth, Twitter sentiment describes the
conﬁdence and expectation level of the investors.
For this reason, two companies from the same industry,
Tesla and Ford are investigated on how Twitter sentiment
could impact the stock price. Tesla is an electronic car
company that shows consecutive negative operating cash ﬂow
and net income but carries very high expectation from the
public. Ford, is a traditional auto maker whose stock prices
has been stabilized to represent the company fundamentals.
To investigate how different key words impact the predict-
ing power of the sentiment score, two Tweet sets, a ticker
set and a product set, are prepared for each stock. The ﬁrst
set of Tweets are searched strictly according to the stock
ticker. The second set of Tweets are searched according to
the company’s products and news. The keywords for the
second dataset are deﬁned according to the top twenty related
keywords of the stock ticker according to Google Trend, a
web facility shows how often a certain word is searched
relative to Google’s total search volume. For example, ”Elon
Musk” is among the set of keywords that retrieve the second
tweets set for Tesla.
Tweets contain irregular symbols, url and emoji etc which
has to be preprocessed so that the NLP algorithm can extract
the relevant information efﬁciently. Examples of preprocess-
ing are described as below:
• Filter out tweets that contains http or .com Motiva-
tion: They’re usually ads e.g. #Fhotoroom #iPhone
arXiv:1801.02243v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2018

https://www.fhotoroom.com/fhotos/

• Filter out tweets that contain consecutive two question
marks (?). The reason is the coding of these tweets is
usually not recognizable.
• Filtering
out
none-English
tweets
using
Googles
Langdetect package.
III. SENTIMENT SCORE
To translate each tweet into a sentiment score, the Stanford
coreNLP software was used. Stanford CoreNLP is designed
to make linguistic analysis accessible to the general public. It
provides named Entity Recognition, co-reference and basic
dependencies and many other text understanding applica-
tions. An example that illustrate the basic functionality of
Stanford coreNLP is shown in Figure.1
Fig. 1.
Demo of the functionalities provided by Stanford CoreNLP
coreNLP can compute a sentiment score for each sentence
with value ranging from 0 to 4 , where 0 stands for negative,
and 4 stands for very positive. For tweets with multiple
sentences, the average of the sentiment scores of all sentences
is used as the sentiment score of the Tweets.
The number of Tweets varies everyday from a couple of
hundreds to over ten thousands, depends on if the company
has a major event that attracts the public attention. The
sentiment scores are normalized between 0 to 1, and features
based on the sentiment score is constructed and normalized.
Figure 2 shows the relationship between Tesla stock return
and stock sentiment score. According the distribution of the
sentiment score, the sentiment on Tesla is slightly skewed
towards positive during the testing period. The price has
been increased signiﬁcantly during the testing period, which
reﬂected the positive sentiment. The predicting power of
sentiment score is more signiﬁcant when the sentiment is
more extreme and less so when the sentiment is neutral.
IV. THE SENTIMENT MACHINE LEARNING MODEL
A. Feature Engineering
Feature engineering is the process to extract meaningful
information from the raw data in order to improve the
performance of machine learning mode. Domain knowledge
and intuition are often applied to keep the number of the
Fig. 2.
Histogram
features reasonable relative to the training data size. Two
categories of features are deﬁnes: technical features and
sentiment features. The technical features include previous
day’s return and volume, price momentum and volatility. The
sentiment features include number of Tweets, daily average
sentiment score, cross-section sentiment volatility, sentiment
momentum and reversal.
B. Machine Learning Prediction Model
The logistic regression with L1 regularization and RBF-
kernel SVM are applied to predict a binary outcome, i.e.
whether the stock return will be positive or negative in the
next day. Both technical and sentiment-based features carry
important information about the stock price and therefore are
provided as the model inputs. Half of the dataset is used for
training and the rest is used for testing.
The 3 fold cross validation is applied to learn the model
hyper-parameters. Speciﬁcally, the hyper-parameters C of
both models and of RBF-kernel SVM are learned such that
the dev set accuracy is maximized. The hyper-parameter C
in logistic regression determines the degree of regularization.
Smaller C means more regularization, i.e. high bias and low
variance. RBF-kernel SVM has two hyper-parameters, C and
. C controls the width of soft margin, smaller C allows
placing more samples on the wrong side of the margin. is a
parameter in RBF kernel. A larger means a Gaussian with
smaller variance and thus less inﬂuence of support vectors.
Typically, small C and large
lead to high bias and low
variance.
To evaluate if the sentiment feature improves the pre-
diction accuracy, a baseline model is deﬁned. The baseline
applies linear logistic regression to a set of stock technical
signals to predict the following days stock return sign (+/).
No sentiment features are provided to the baseline model.
C. Predicting using ticker dataset and product dataset
The predicting power for the ticker dataset and product
dataset are compared. The ticker dataset contains tweets
that searched strictly according to the stock ticker. The
2

Fig. 3.
The chart displays the accuracy on predicting the ”alpha”, which
deﬁnes as the return of the stock minus the return of its sector ETF.
product dataset is searched using keywords that related to
the company’s product and other related topic(see session II
for more details). The former dataset represents the investors’
sentiment, while the latter dataset represents customers sen-
timent.
In the Tesla case, using product tweets consistently outper-
forms using the ticker tweets(accuracy 0.6 vs 0.5), it is less
so in the Ford case(0.58 vs 0.55). The result is displayed
in Figure 3 First, this is because Tesla’s stock price is
driven more by the sentiment on its product instead of the
stock itself. For Ford, not many people actually express their
opinion about Ford’s product via Twitter. Secondly, Tesla has
many more product tweets than ticker tweets, but Ford is
opposite.
D. Predicting using logistic regression and SVM
In most cases, SVM performs only slightly better than
logistic regression in validation set, although much better
in testing set. This may be because the dataset is not
large enough to prevent SVM overﬁtting. The comparision
between the logistic regression and the SVM is displayed in
Figure 3
E. Predicting Total Return vs Alpha
It is important to identify which is a better target for the
prediction. Two targets, predicting ”alpha or predicting ”total
return” are compared. ”Alpha” deﬁnes as the excess stock
return over its sector ETF. ”Total return” is the absolution
stock return. Predicting ”alpha” achieves better performance
than predicting total return. This is because the sentiment
is more related to stocks idiosyncratic. Good sentiments
towards a speciﬁc company or its stock wont override the
overall stock market or sectors impact on the stock return.
F. Tesla vs Ford
The prediction accuracy on Tesla is higher than Ford
according to Figure3. The reason is because Tesla’s stock
price largely reﬂects the sentiment and conﬁdence level of
the public. The company has consecutive negative cash ﬂow
and net income, making prediction based on its fundamental
information unrealistic. On the other hand, the stock price
of Ford, which is a traditional automaker, is not that related
to the public sentiment.
G. Feature selection and overﬁtting
To improve the model accuracy, more features were con-
structed. However, more features do not result in better
accuracy. For example, in Figure 4, adding more features
improve the training accuracy but deteriorates out-of-sample
accuracy due to overﬁtting.
Fig. 4.
The chart shows an example of overﬁtting in the SVM model. The
overﬁtting is caused by adding too many features to the model inputs but
not providing enough data for the model to generalize. Different lines shows
the SVM performance under different γ parameter. None of the parameter
achieves better accuracy than a restricted set of features.
The recursive feature elimination and cross validation
(RFECV) for feature selection is experimented during the
feature selection phase. However, only similar or even
slightly worse performance was achieved by RFECV than
selecting features according to domain knowledge and intu-
ition. This is because recursive feature elimination is a greedy
algorithm and thus doesnt guarantee optimal solution.
V. Q-LEARNING
Q-learning is a model-free reinforcement learning tech-
nique. Speciﬁcally, Q-learning can be used to ﬁnd an optimal
policy given a Markov Decision Process(MDP). Instead of
learning the transition probability, Q-learning directly learns
the expected utility of taking an action from a certain state.
By maximizing the expected utility of the certain state, the
optimal policy is found.
Traditionally, quants propose trading strategies according
to backtest, where the optimal parameters are tuned by
maximizing the objective function based on historical data.
However, this common practice adopted by the investment
industry has drawbacks. First, it over-ﬁts the historical data
and doesn’t generalize to out of sample data. In addition, the
model need to be recalibrated periodically due to the eco-
nomic regime change. A strategy signiﬁcantly outperforms
in a high volatility environment might suffer signiﬁcantly in
a low volatility environment.
3

The Q-learning, in the opposite, learns from the feedback
from the market, and generates the optimal trading strategy
according to past experience, and automatically adapts to the
new market regime.
In this paper, the Q-learning algorithm is applied to gen-
erate the optimal trading strategy. The market is modeled as
a Markov Decision Process where the outcomes are random
and not under the control of the decision maker. The states
contain information of three categories: technical indicators,
sentiment features and portfolio information. The actions
contains buy, sell and hold. The reward is the next day market
return. The limit of leverage and the loss-cutting threshold
are implemented in the relation ship of successor state and
action. For example, if the leverage constrain has been met,
the actions that valid for this state are only ”hold” or ”sell”. If
the loss cutting threshold has been triggered, say the portfolio
lost half of the capital and this is the maximum tolerance of
loss, only the action that exit current position is valid.
A. Learning
Formally, the learning process deﬁnes as below. In Q-
learning the optimal expected utility of a (state, action) pair
ˆQopt(s, a) is updated with the rewards r and the expected
utility of the subsequent state ˆVopt(s′) after taking the action
a.
ˆQopt(s, a) ←(1 −η) ˆQopt(s, a) + η(r + γ ˆVopt(s′)
(1)
Vopt(s′) =
max
a′∈Actions(s′)
ˆQopt(s′, a′)
(2)
The optimal policy is proposed by Q-learning as
πopt(s) = arg max
a∈act(s) Qopt(s, a)
(3)
B. Function Approximation
Function approximation refers to the method to generalize
unseen states by applying machine learning methods. The Q-
table stores the expected utility for each (state,action) pair
that has been explored. When predicting the expected utility
for a certain (state, action) pair, we will look up the Q-table.
When the MDP has many states and actions, it is very likely
that a (state, action) pair has not been explored yet so the
estimate is not accurate. It is too slow to look up a gigantic
table and most likely there is not enough training data to
learn each of the state individually. Function approximation
uses features to capture the characteristics of the states and
applies stochastic gradient descent to update the weights on
each feature. More speciﬁcally, below equation is applied
to generalize the unseen state in this paper. Deﬁne features
φ(s, a) and weights w, then
ˆQopt(s, a; w) = w · φ(s, a)
(4)
For each (s, a, r, s′), apply stochastic gradient descent to
update the weights.
w ←w −η[ ˆQopt(s, a; w) −(r + γ ˆVopt(s′))]φ(s, a)
(5)
where η is the learning rate, r is the reward and γ is the
discount factor.
C. Exploration and Exploitation
It is necessary to balance the exploration and exploitation.
One might suggest naively to take action only according
to the optimal policy estimated by maximizing ˆQopt(s, a).
However, this greedy strategy is equivalent to stay in the
comfortable zone all the time in life, without gaining new
experience and unable to give reasonable prediction when
encounters unseen situations. Another extreme is to always
explore by choosing an action randomly. Without apply-
ing the hard lesson learned and obtaining the rewards,
the algorithm can lead to unsatisﬁable utility at the end.
Therefore, in this paper the Epsilon-greedy strategy is applied
for exploration. For a certain probability, the algorithm
acts randomly(exploration), for the rest the algorithm acts
optimally(exploitation).
D. Result and Discussion
Figure 5 shows the cumulative return over 1 year period.
The strategy trades daily. The Q-learning states include
portfolio position, sentiment features and technical indicators
such as price momentum. The machine learning strategy
predicts the binary movement (+ or -) of next trading day
price based on sentiment features and technical indicators.
The backtest rule based on the machine learning prediction
is to long the stock if the prediction is +, short the stock if -.
The baseline is the same with machine learning except only
the technical indicator was used as the feature. The oracle
model of this project is a trader who has insider information
about the stock and be able to bet and act correctly on every
single day of the testing period. The oracle model is able
to achieve 6 times of the initial capital at the end of testing
period.
Fig. 5.
The chart shows the trading strategy derived from Q-learning(in
blue) outperform the backtest result using machine learning features(in red).
Both of Q-learning strategy and machine learning strategy outperform the
baseline(in green).
There are observations that worth a discussion. At the
beginning of the testing period, the Q-learning has not learnt
how to estimate the expected utility of a certain action yet.
The performance of the initial period is more unstable than
4

later. Q-learning does better when the state is more common
because it accumulates more experience about the situation
but might not take the best action when a outlier state is
presented. The performance of the q-learning varies during
different batch due to the random nature of exploitation
and exploration. In general Q-learning is able to deliver
better performance than using the binary prediction from
the machine learning models. Both of the Q-learning and
machine learning model outperform the baseline model.
VI. FUTURE WORK
There are many areas that can be improved given more
resource and data. Below is a list of the improvement that
could make this idea more robust.
• Use intraday data to test the sentiment signal and Q-
learning. By training with more data and trading more
promptly, we expect both sentiment machine learning
model and Q-learning to do better.
• With more data, more features can be considered and
incorporated into the model.
• Apply different function approximators, for example,
neural net, to better generalize the states and provide
more stable behavior
• Add another class to the existing binary classiﬁer in-
signiﬁcant price change. The is motivated by preventing
the classiﬁer to ﬁt to the noise inherent in stock market
price movement, and lumps small, statistically insignif-
icant upward or downward movements indiscriminately
with large ones.
• Add crude oil future price as a feature to predict Tesla
stock alpha return sign
• Extend the sentiment analysis to other stocks and Cryp-
tocurrency, which is an asset class that driven even more
by the public sentiment.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The paper explores the possibility to predict stock price
using text data and reinforcement learning technique. Pre-
dicting stock price direction using Twitter sentiment is chal-
lenging but promising. Which stock and what to predict is
more important than how to predict. For example, Tesla,
a company driven by the expectation of the company’s
growth is a better target than Ford, a traditional auto maker.
Reinforcement learning is applied to ﬁnd the optimal trading
policy by learning the feedbacks from the market. The Q-
learning is able to adapt automatically if the market regime
shifts and avoid backtesting, a process applied by investment
industry that often overﬁt the historical data. Both of the ma-
chine learning model and the Q-learning model outperforms
the baseline model, which is a logistic regression without
sentiment features.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Anna Wang, who is the project
mentor, gives very practical suggestions and guidance. We
would like to thank Standford University for the very chal-
lenging and exciting CS221 course materials and Prof. Percy
Liang who did such a great job getting us interested in
sentiment analysis and reinforcement learning
