00 (2016) 1–19
1
C3A: A Cognitive Collaborative Control
Architecture For an Intelligent Wheelchair
Rupam Bhattacharyya a,∗, Adity Saikia a and Shyamanta M Hazarika a
a Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Tezpur University, Tezpur, 784028, India

Abstract. Retention of residual skills for persons who partially lose their cognitive or physical ability is of utmost importance.
Research is focused on developing systems that provide need-based assistance for retention of such residual skills. This paper
describes a novel cognitive collaborative control architecture C3A, designed to address the challenges of developing need- based
assistance for wheelchair navigation. Organization of C3A is detailed and results from simulation of the proposed architecture
is presented. For simulation of our proposed architecture, we have used ROS (Robot Operating System) as a control framework
and a 3D robotic simulator called USARSim (Uniﬁed System for Automation and Robot Simulation).
Keywords: Collaborative control, ROS, USARSim, 3D robotic simulator
1. Introduction
Recent progresses in the ﬁeld of humanitarian robotics and automation technology has brought smiles
to millions of people who suffer from cognitive and mobility impairment. In spite of tremendous progress
in the area of intelligent assistive devices, intelligent wheelchairs are yet to be widely accepted. Accord-
ing to a survey consisting of 200 clinicians, greater than 50% of wheelchair users reported complaint
with its control [23][5]. Further, persons who lose their cognitive/physical ability have to go through a
rehearsal of their residual capability in a continuous manner. This prevents them from losing any further
skill set and may rejuvenate them to acquire the lost abilities. For this reason, the assistance to human
patient must be offered on need basis [15]. We aspire to offer a wheelchair which can be used by people
having different levels of cognitive and/or physical impairment.
A novel cognitive collaborative control architecture is presented in this paper. Collaboration is best ex-
plained by the following examples. Let us consider that a human patient is currently sitting on an in-
telligent wheelchair with robotic arms. Their shared goal is to lift the pen placed on the table. Suppose
the human patient is active and moves near to the table; suddenly the human is no longer able to pro-
ceed further towards the goal. This situation is immediately traced by the robotic wheelchair and lifts

0000-0000/16/$00.00 c⃝2016
arXiv:1701.08761v1  [cs.RO]  30 Jan 2017

2
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
the pen from the table. For other type of collaboration, consider two persons are riding a tandem bicy-
cle. If one person slows down, then other person has to put some extra effort to maintain the balance
and to move on to the common destination. In both the examples, the adaptation is automatic because
of which collaboration is so delightful and effective. The conceptual understanding of the two terms;
namely “shared control" and “collaborative control" is essential for the readers to understand our ar-
chitecture in a better way. Following conceptual deﬁnitions of the two terms provided by Urdiales [8]
are considered as the standard one and the remaining section of this paper will follow these only.
Shared control:
“Situations where machines and persons cooperate to achieve a common goal fall within the ﬁeld of
shared control.”[8]
Collaborative control:
“Collaborative control is a speciﬁc type of shared control where there are no sharp control switches
between person and machine. Furthermore, humans always retain some control and are rewarded with
more when they perform better, yet receive more assistance when needed.”[8]
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we discuss the human-robot co-operative
approaches present in the literature and the requirements needed to design a cognitive agent. Section
3 describes C3A: a three layered cognitive collaborative control architecture. Section 4 is divided into
three subsections; namely Evaluation Metrics, Experimental Set Up, and Experimentation. In simula-
tion of our proposed architecture, we have used USARSim [35] and ROS [28]. P3AT robot is treated
as our wheelchair which imbibes our architecture. This research work envisages the integration of US-
ARSim/ROS to build a cognitive agent on top of C3A. Section 3 and Section 4 collectively gives an
insight to the systematic approach of designing and implementing the whole system. Section 5 deals with
performance of the whole system. Concluding remarks and future trend will be discussed in section 6.
2. Background
2.1. Approaches related to human-robot co-operation
Co-operation between human and robot addresses several relationships between them. As there is a
considerable difference in users’ ability to control a wheelchair, the system’s contribution to control plays
a signiﬁcant role. According to [9], control approaches in which human and robots (or machine) jointly
operate with each other to achieve a common destination can be classiﬁed into:
• safeguarded operation and
• shared control.
In safeguarded operation, robots will be completely controlled by the user and robot occasionally takes
over to avoid possible danger [9]. Table 1 will help the readers to understand the basic principle of a few
well known shared control approaches for human-robot co-operation. It is difﬁcult to discuss all these
approaches and their differences with collaborative control. Two survey papers namely [24] and [1]; are
good starting point to start research in human-robot co-operation/collaboration. From the discussion till
now; collaborative control seems to be the best for rehabilitation of patients.
Urdiales et. al. [9] can be considered as pioneer in collaborative control strategy for wheelchair. A num-
ber of smart wheelchairs - MAID, NavChair, TinMan and SmartChair use shared control [34]; differing

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
3
Table 1 : Different shared control approaches of human-robot co-operation
Approach
Co-operative strategy (intuitive
deﬁnition from the literature)
Remark
Supervisory
control
It is described as the concept in which
control is performed by an intelligent
controller under the supervision of a
human instead of the human perform-
ing direct manual control
[22].
Supervisory control maybe necessary
when the human and the robot are
geographically separated or when a
single human supervises a large
number of robots.
Adjustable au-
tonomy
Enable the individual robots to act
fairly independently of one another,
while still allowing for tight, precise
coordination when necessary
[10].
Designed for multi-robot system
Sliding auton-
omy
Decisions about when to switch
between autonomous and tele-
operated control can be made
smoothly, both by humans and
by the robots themselves.
The autonomous system is given
the ability to ask for human
assistance[17]
[14].
Enable multiple heterogeneous
robots to work together, and
with humans.
Symbiotic
re-
lationship
The robot accomplishes tasks for
humans and ask for help only to
ﬁnish the task perfectly
[38].
A visitor-companion robot is
built using this strategy.
Mixed-
initiative inter-
action(MII)
Mixed-initiative interaction lets agents
work most effectively as a team and
agents dynamically adapt their
interaction style to best address the
problem at hand
[18].
Various deﬁnitions of MII is present
in literature.
In [16], a human-
robot collaborative architecture is
built using the MII approach.
Coactive
design
Coactive Design is a teamwork-cent-
ered approach. The fundamental pri-
nciple of Coactive Design recognizes
that the underlying interdependence
of participants in joint activity is a
critical factor in the design of human
-agent systems[25].
Collaborative Control is a ﬁrst
step toward Coactive Design.

4
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
only in how behaviors are implemented. There are two intelligent wheelchair technologies namely Smile
Rehab1 and TAO-7 Intelligent Wheelchair Base from AAI Canada2 which made the transition from the
lab environment to the public and commercial sectors [40]. A common problem in most of these systems
is that the man and the machine do not contribute to control simultaneously. Though see [9]; wherein this
is overcome using a purely reactive navigation system [32]. Urdiales et. al. [9] report detailed clinical
trails of their collaborative system based on reactive navigation. In [39], the collaborative controller uses
a multiple-hypotheses method to continuously predicts the short-term goals of the user and calculates an
associated conﬁdence of the prediction.
It is observed that literature related to the stability analysis of wheelchair controllers based on shared
control approaches is scarce. Novel techniques such as [41] and [42] can be a good starting point to
undergo such an analysis. With the availability of brain computer interfaces (BCI), a wheelchair can be
controlled through EEG signals [43]. Similar problem in a distributed environment has been studied in
[44].
2.2. Cognitive agent: requirement and design principle
Embodiment of cognition within an intelligent agent will bolster human robot interaction [2]. To gen-
erate rational behaviour in any external environment, agent should be embedded with well established
cognitive architecture like ACT-R [19] or SOAR [20]. The conceptual understanding behind a rational
agent and its behaviour in our context is provided below:
Rational agent: “A system that makes decisions by considering all possible actions and choosing the
one that leads to the best expected outcome can be treated as rational agent.”[37]
Rational behavior: Rational behavior in human-robot collaboration will be to assist the user whenever
required and our cognitive agent help us to attain this behavior.
However the selection of a particular cognitive architecture to tackle a distinct HCI problem is hugely
difﬁcult [30]. Our aim is to use a popular cognitive architecture and introduce within it certain novel
features to effect collaboration as these architectures don’t have any module for collaboration per se. This
certainly opens up the path of research in building a cognitive model incorporating collaboration into
it. ACT-R has been utilized successfully to model higher-level cognition phenomena, such as memory,
reasoning and skill acquisition [21]. This is the main reason that encourage us to incorporate the ﬂavor
of ACT-R into the C3A.
To imitate human cognition, cognitive agents can be constructed to act properly in changing environ-
ment. Throughout this paper, we have used cognitive agent, wheelchair and P3AT robot interchangeably.
The cognitive agent can be deﬁned as below [6]:
• Functions incessantly and autonomously in an environment.
• Able to accomplish activities in an adaptable and intelligent manner.
• Responsive to modiﬁcations in the environment.
• Proactive; exhibit goal-oriented and opportunistic behaviour.
• Take the initiative when required.
• Learn from experience.
1http://www.smilesmart-tech.com/assistive-technology-products/smile-smart-wheelchair/
2http://www.aai.ca/robots/tao_7.html

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
5
There must be some combination of the agent’s data structures and algorithms must reﬂect the knowl-
edge it has about its surrounding environment [26]. Agent architectures can be divided into three broad
categories based on [29]; we are interested in the reactive architecture which is deﬁned to be the one
that does not include any kind of central symbolic world model, and does not use complex symbolic
reasoning [29]. A subsumption architecture [32] is a hierarchy of task-accomplishing behaviours which
followed this alternative approach. Thus a compact collaborative control architecture with the ﬂavor of
ACT-R may be helpful in fulﬁlling a decent acceptance rate among users along with simultaneous control
and need-based assistance.
3. C3A : Cognitive Collaborative Control Architecture
The proposed cognitive collaborative control architecture is shown in Figure 1. It is inspired from
the work [11] and adaptation of well established cognitive architecture, ACT-R [19].
C3A is a layered
architecture with the following layers:
• User Interface Layer,
• Superior Control Layer and
• Local Control Layer.
The functionality of each layer and the inter dependence among them are described below.
3.1. User Interface Layer
User has to interact with this layer for setting the shared goal in the environment. We have assumed
that the user of our system is visually active. User Interface Layer helps the users to navigate the P3AT
through the maze environment with the help of keyboard. This layer is utilized by the users for interacting
with rest of the layers of C3A. The wheelchair will be used by people who have either physical disability
or cognitive disability or both. So, it is essential for us to determine how much help the patient should be
provided so that their residual skill remains intact. There are various effective tests to measure the current
health status of the patient. In [9], they have conducted ﬁve tests to calculate the cognitive/physical
disability score. The procedure followed by us to calculate the score can be found in the subsection 4.3.
This score is stored in procedural memory of the memory module for future usage. Later on, the score is
fed to the heuristic engine of the reactive module for further processing.
3.2. Superior Control Layer
This layer is composed of two sub-modules;
• Reactive Module and
• Reactive Navigator.
3.2.1. Reactive Module
This module is one of the important modules for proper functioning of the wheelchair. The reactive
module comprises of the following:
• Heuristic Engine,
• Memory Module and

6
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
Fig. 1. Cognitive Collaborative Control Architecture
• Interaction Layer.
1. Heuristic Engine The control architecture given in the Figure 1 is followed by both the machine
and human. These type of architectures designed for rehabilitation of patients should consist of modules
which corresponds to constant monitoring of local efﬁciencies of human/robot command or prediction
of intention of human as a driver or measuring the physiological state of the human. A method has been
proposed in [9] to calculate local efﬁciencies of human as well as robot. Similarly in [39], an approach
for intention prediction is given. Heuristic engine utilize the score from procedural memory to produce

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
7
a priority conﬁguration ﬁle. This ﬁle contains the priority of two modes of operation (human user and
machine) of the P3AT robot. The users with low cognitive score should be allowed to drive the P3AT
carefully. The intervention level of the system will be more and machine should take back the control
from the user as and when required. On the other hand the system’s intervention is less while the P3AT
is driven by users with high cognitive score.
Heuristic engine uses shared goal location(i,j) and agent position(i,j) with respect to maze environment
to produce a performance related metric called distance. This metric along with the priority conﬁguration
ﬁle will identify the quality of driving of the cognitive agent. The heuristic engine can guide us to model
an effective collaborator.
2. Memory Module
• Procedural memory,
• Episodic memory and
• Semantic memory.
One important design issue related to memory module is to identify which of the outputs of different
modules will go into which memory structure. Clear distinction among different memory structures is
given in [13].
a. Procedural memory
It is concerned with how things are done [13]. In achieving a particular shared goal, it is indeed an in-
evitable memory structure which utilizes perception, cognitive and motor skills of the agent. State and
action of agents in mobile robotics plays a vital role. Planning language help us to formalize the struc-
ture of states and actions. The states and actions of the cognitive agent will be included in procedural
memory. The cognitive and physical ability score is another entry into this memory structure from the
user interface layer.
b. Episodic Memory
It is concerned with the remembrance of personally experience event [13]. The human Wayﬁnding be-
haviour as explained in [4] follows different strategies to traverse the maze successfully. If we consider
Central Point Strategy of [4], then there must be speciﬁc states and their corresponding sequence of
actions that the agent tries to remember. Agent may also be interested in states and actions of two modes
of operation; because in the middle of the simulation human users’ incapability allows the shifting of
control to automated navigator of ROS.
c. Semantic memory
This memory structure will provide context i.e. from procedural memory it can collect certain states and
actions and based on which semantic memory try to assign meaning to the current situation.
Our future aim is to formalize the states and action of the cognitive agent. For the time being, the states
are internal to ROS environment and actions of all the modules are the result of different packages con-
currently executing. For successful functioning of the whole system, all packages are dependent on each
other through the publisher-subscriber mechanism of ROS.

8
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
3. Interaction Layer
This sub-module act like a communication backbone for entire architecture. It simultaneously interacts
with the heuristic engine, memory module and reactive navigator. Thus we have two communication
paths.
• Heuristic Engine-Interaction Layer-Reactive Navigator
• Memory Module-Interaction Layer-Reactive Navigator
a. Heuristic Engine-Interaction Layer-Reactive Navigator:
Heuristic Engine provides us the smart driver at any instant of time with the help of procedural memory.
From the User Interface Layer(see Figure 1), procedural memory receives cognitive score (no label),
goal location (label 3 of Figure 1) and agent position(label 6 of Figure 1). These three information is
utilized by heuristic engine to constitute two metrics (explained in subsection 4.1) for choosing the smart
driver. When the wheelchair is run for the ﬁrst time, then interaction layer access these metrics from
heuristic engine to invoke anyone of the two sub-modules of the reactive navigator. The communication
path is described in table 2. With the help of heuristic engine, interaction layer have to dynamically track
Table 2 : Detailed Speciﬁcation of Heuristic Engine-Interaction Layer-Reactive Navigator Communication Path
Input (From | To)
Label on Architec-
ture(ﬁgure 1)
Functionality
Heuristic Engine | Interaction Layer
4
Metric to choose smart driver at any instant
of time.
Reactive Navigator | Interaction Layer
1
States and action of the agent
Reactive Navigator | Interaction Layer
2
Maps of the environment generated by the
map_saver utility of ROS. This input
speciﬁcally comes from the automated navi-
gator of ROS. Agent Position(x, y) is calcu-
lated with respect to this map.
Reactive Navigator | Interaction Layer
6
Agent Position(x, y) is produced in the mid-
dle of simulation by the agent and stored in
procedural memory via the interaction layer.
which component of the reactive navigator has to be invoked. So, interaction layer also communicates
with the memory module for states and action sequences (label 1 from Figure 1) along with the agent
position(label 6 of Figure 1).
b. Memory Module-Interaction Layer-Reactive Navigator
This communication path is described through table 3 and table 4. Table 3 focuses on the communication
happening between interaction layer and automated navigator(mostly reactive navigator). On the other
hand, table 4 focuses on the communication happening between memory module and interaction layer.
Most of the labels (label 6, 4, 3, 2, 1) on the C3A (Figure 1) have already been explained in the previous
communication path.
The physical interaction through the User Interface Layer(see Figure 1) leads to change in various pa-
rameters shown through different labels in the C3A. Thus, it is the responsibility of the interaction layer
to be aware of such kind changes in the simulation environment. Labels 7 and 5 (of Figure 1) represents
the storage and retrieval of the speciﬁc states and action sequences of the agent which corresponds to

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
9
speciﬁc event in episodic memory of the memory module respectively. This happens through the inter-
action layer and implementation related to episodic memory is kept as future work.
Table 3 : Detailed Speciﬁcation of Memory Module-Interaction Layer-Reactive Navigator Communication Path
Input (From | To)
Label on Architec-
ture(ﬁgure 1)
Functionality
Interaction Layer | Reactive Navigator
4
Metric to choose smart driver at any instant
of time.
Interaction Layer | Reactive Navigator
3
Goal position is used by the agent to move
to the shared goal
Interaction Layer | Reactive Navigator
5
Speciﬁc action sequences and states of any
of the agent related to a particular event.
Interaction Layer | Reactive Navigator
6
Agent’s localization information and is vital
for the agent to trace the progress in achiev-
ing the shared goal.
Interaction Layer | Reactive Navigator
1
States and action of the agent
Interaction Layer | Automated Navigator
2
Map of the maze environment and used by
the global planner for planning the naviga-
tion strategy. Human patient can view the 2D
map while reaching to goal state. This 2D
map is generated by SLAM module of Au-
tomated Navigator of ROS and resembles to
3D version of the maze environment.
Table 4 : Detailed Speciﬁcation of Memory Module-Interaction Layer Communication
Input (From | To)
Label on Architec-
ture(ﬁgure 1)
Functionality
Memory Module | Interaction Layer
3
The goal (i, j) is the co-ordinate of the goal
position as given by the human patient and
stored in the procedural memory.
Memory Module | Interaction Layer
6
The Agent Position(x, y) is retrieved by the
interaction layer from procedural memory.
Memory Module | Interaction Layer
1,2
Retrieved from procedural memory by the
interaction layer and ﬁnally fed to the reac-
tive navigator.
Memory Module | Interaction Layer
5
Speciﬁc states and actions corresponding to
speciﬁc episode. It is retrieved by interaction
layer from episodic memory.
Interaction Layer | Memory Module
7
It is result of the processing of the states
and actions of the agent by the interaction
layer. These things are combined in such a
way that they collectively represent a pecu-
liar event during simulation.
Interaction Layer | Memory Module
1,2,6
Already explained above
3.2.2. Reactive Navigator
Before building a reactive navigator, system designer needs to be very focused in the speed sensitive
parts of the cognitive architecture. In, improving the speed sensitive information, ROS introduces a new

10
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
concept called “nodelets" which helps us to build reactive controller. These are almost similar to conven-
tional nodes but lots of important features are embedded into it. Reactive navigator is composed of two
sub-modules which is part of ROS control framework:
• Automated Navigator of ROS and
• Patient as Driver.
a. Automated Navigator of ROS:
ROS is composed of number of complex tools and libraries. Incorporation of details about automated
Fig. 2. Communication between USARSim Simulator and ROS
navigator will make the architecture shown in ﬁgure 1 clumsy. Our motivation is that the complexity of
ROS should not dominate the understanding of our control architecture.The automated navigator of ROS
is the machine in our approach.
Planning is essential for guiding the agent autonomously without causing any harm. Global planner is re-
lated to creating long term plans over the entire environment [31] and it takes input from global costmap
as shown in ﬁgure 3. Local planner is mainly used for obstacle avoidance which uses Local costmap.
The costmap_2d package of ROS provides a structure which is conﬁgurable. This package maintains
information about where should the robot navigate in the form of an occupancy grid [12]. Thus global
planner and local planner with the information of pose estimate from AMCL (Adaptive Monte Carlo
Localization) and obstacle information from costmap can plan effectively to reach the shared goal. The
sensor data (in our case SICK LMS200) may be utilized in building both the costmaps.
The text that is written in communication lines (shown in ﬁgure 3) will reﬂect the key functionality
of individual sub modules. Figure 2 describes the communication between Reactive Navigator and Lo-
cal Control Layer. It depicts the communication involved in implementing our architecture integrating

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
11
USARSim and ROS control framework. It will help the reader to understand the C3A in a better way.
Figure 3 describes the internal message passing between sub- modules of Automated Navigator of ROS.
This ﬁgure gives detailed understanding of the how the agent can move autonomously.
The functionality of Automated navigator of ROS is achieved through a ROS node called move_base.
This node is customized to modify the reactive behaviour (ﬁgure 3) ; so that collaboration can be
achieved.
b. Patient as Driver:
Fig. 3. Automated navigator of ROS with USARSimRos interface
This sub module uses ROS tele-operation to move around the maze environment through the keyboard.
The ROS node is teleop_twist_keyboard [36] and corresponds to the package brown_remotelab
[7].
3.3. Local Control Layer
This layer corresponds to the 3D USARSim simulator where both the P3AT robot and maze environ-
ment co-exist simultaneously. P3AT robot uses SICK LMS200 laser range ﬁnder. It can be augmented
with many other sensors. This sensor is an integral part of local control layer. All the actuators are
also part of this layer. Whenever the agent is tested in real time environment, then we need a real time
wheelchair. All the sensors, actuators and other hardware related aspects present in P3AT must be em-
bedded inside the real time wheelchair.

12
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
4. Simulation
4.1. Evaluation Metrics
There are lots of metrics [3] are suggested to test the performance of human-robot application. For ex-
perimental evaluation of the collaborative control of the P3AT robot, two types of metrics are considered.
• Condition related metric and
• Performance related metric.
Condition related metric It determines the cognitive status of the user of the wheelchair. This score leads
to a priority conﬁguration ﬁle. The ROS node, Cognitive_Score [see Table5] designed by us deals
with the computation of this metric.
Performance related metric This metric is related to effective collaboration and ﬁnding out the efﬁciency
of the agent while driving the P3AT. Agent drives the P3AT under two explicit modes of operation
namely,
• teleoperation (human is controlling the P3AT through keyboard) and
• Machine (Automated Navigator of ROS drives the P3AT).
Implicitly collaborative mode is enforced as discussed below.
Distance between the current position of the P3AT and shared goal location with respect to the
maze environment is selected as the performance metric. This distance is dynamically calculated. The
Velocity_multiplexer node and move_base node [see Table5] are customized in such a way
that the condition related metric along with performance related metric gives an effective way for the
human to collaborate smoothly with its machine counterpart.
The system behaviour can be understood by considering two scenarios.
Scenario: 1
Suppose, human is controlling the P3AT and the metric indicates that P3AT is moving away from the
goal. In this situation, as soon as human pauses (releases the keyboard) for a moment, then MACHINE
instantly takes over the Control of P3AT. We are considering implicit communication without prior co-
ordination. There is no explicit consensus between the two parties, but system treats this whole scenario
as a situation where assistance is required. Users can always take back the control from machine when-
ever it is desired to do so. Thus, human is not kept away from the control loop of the system. Our aim is
to allow user to utilize their own motor and cognitive skills.
Scenario: 2
Let us say, currently wheelchair is driven by human. Suppose the metric indicates that distance is reduc-
ing towards goal which indirectly tells about the good driving skills of the driver. So, right now even if
human pauses for a moment, then MACHINE won’t be able to take over the Control.
The behaviour of above two scenarios will be same when machine is considered to drive the robot. A
Finite State Machine (FSM) is shown in ﬁgure 4 which will help the readers to understand the ﬂow of the
entire architecture. Figure 5 can be used to describe the two scenarios involving collaboration. Circles
marked in ﬁgure 5 are the important zones. Pink cursor in Circle A shows the shared goal, the P3AT
robot can be seen as the box outlined with light green boundary.
Circle A is the area where human is driving the robot well; this represent the Scenario 2 described above.

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
13
Fig. 4. FSM describing entire ﬂow of the architecture.
Circle B and Circle C represent area where human is moving away from the shared goal. In such a
situation, MACHINE takes over the control of the P3AT robot. MACHINE corrects the erratic driving
behaviour of the human by taking over the control of the robot. Scenario 1 is visualized through these
circles.
4.2. Experimental Set Up
The experimental simulation set up is shown in ﬁgure 6. To start the services of different ROS nodes, a
universal launch ﬁle is created. Simulation starts from a “form ﬁll-up" process by the user. It is followed
by launching the testing arena which is the maze environment. This maze is designed using “Unreal
Development Kit" which is embedded inside USARSim simulator. The same maze is utilized for testing
all the participants. Except for the testing arena, every other utility is provided through ROS nodes. Table
5 gives a detailed speciﬁcation of the functionality of different ROS nodes and their correspondence with

14
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
Fig. 5. Collaboration between man and machine in USARSim-ROS environment
Fig. 6. Experimental simulation set up
C3A. Experimentation can start only after all nodes mentioned in table 5 functions properly3.
3Interested readers can access https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/d/0BwgHQRnAyRbgWXhhdWxlN0ctU0k/view?usp=sharing to
preview the snapshot of our whole system (the graph of the whole simulation when all ROS nodes are correctly running) in a
successful scenario.

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
15
Table 5 : Detailed Speciﬁcation of ROS nodes running inside the cognitive agent.
ROS Node
Functionality
Correspondance with the Col-
laborative Control Architecture
RosSim
1.
Provides
interface
be-
tween
ROS
and
USARSim,
2. helps in spawning a robot in USARSim,
3. Auto-discovering the robot’s sensors,
actuators
Resides in Local Control Layer
and provides service to Supe-
rior Control Layer
teleop_twist_keyboard
With the help of it Users can drive a robot
through keyboard
Local Control layer
amcl
amcl is a probabilistic localization system
for a robot moving in 2D
Reactive Navigator
slam_gmapping
provides SLAM capabilities
Reactive Navigator
move_base
given a goal in the world, it will attempt to
reach it with a mobile base.
Automated navigator of ROS
nodelet_manager
Implements nodelets
Reactive Module
Velocity_multiplexer
Multiplexes the velocity commands coming
from teleop_twist_keyboard and move_base
node.
Reactive Module
Cognitive_Score
Generate a priority conﬁguration ﬁle which
is used by Velocity_multiplexer node.
User Interface Layer
rviz
Visualization tool for setting shared goal
Superior Control Layer
map_server
allows dynamically generated maps to be
saved to ﬁle.
Reactive Navigator
The initial launching location of P3AT robot is same for all the participants. The term “shared goal"
is vital for any collaborative system. We have assumed that the user can clearly locate the shared goal
through the User Interface Layer. In this simulation, users can set a goal via ‘rviz’ window through
mouse-click/touch-pad over 2D map generated through SLAM module. The “shared goal" is ﬁxed in a
corner of the maze for all participants. The ‘rviz’ package acts as visualisation tool for the ROS. So, in
case of our C3A, the goal is universal; both machine and human can rely on it.
4.3. Experimentation
The cognitive collaborative control architecture is evaluated for its effectiveness by comparing the ma-
noeuvring time (total time required from start to goal) under the following modes.
1. human(standalone mode),
2. machine (standalone mode) and
3. collaborative control mode.
The cognitive score of the subjects is based on the questionnaire from the table 6. Questions are adapted
from standard papers Instrumental activities of daily living (IADL)[27] and Folstein test or mini-mental
state examination (MMSE)[33]. The questionnaire can be used as an instrument for analyzing the partic-
ipants in a short period of time.
Six subjects are taken in random. Each of them is made to go through the questionnaire; cognitive score
is evaluated. There are two groups of people; group A having high cognitive score (HCS) and group B
with low cognitive score (LCS). Four subjects belong to group A, as their cognitive score is more than
ﬁve. Two persons belong to group B; as they score less than ﬁve. Table 7 shows the proﬁle of six sub-

16
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
Table 6 Questionnaire used for cognitive score determination
Question
number
Question
Record Answer Here
Secured
Score
1
Have you played any game before?
Yes / No
⃝Negative Response
⃝Positive Response
2
Do you know about mazes?
Yes / No
⃝Negative Response
⃝Positive Response
3
Can you solve a maze on paper?
Yes / No
⃝Negative Response
⃝Positive Response
4
Can you utilize essential features of
your mobile phone?
Yes / No
⃝Negative Response
⃝Positive Response
5
Can you prepare adequate meals if
supplied with ingredients?
Yes / No
⃝Negative Response
⃝Positive Response
6
What is todayâ ˘A´Zs date?
Date
⃝Correct
⃝Incorrect
7
What city are we in?
City
⃝Correct
⃝Incorrect
8
Can you also tell me,what season it is?
Season
⃝Correct
⃝Incorrect
9
What ﬂoor are we in?
Floor
⃝Correct
⃝Incorrect
10
How many vowels in the word aeroplane?
4/ 5 / 6 / other
⃝Correct
⃝Incorrect
Deriving the total Cognitive score,
i) Add 1 for each correct and positive
response given by the subject,
ii) 0-4 = Low Cognitive Score (LCS)
5-10= High Cognitive Score (HCS)
Total
Score=_____
(Maximum
10)
jects that test our simulation. All the subjects are given three minutes to memorize/learn the navigation
commands and setting of global shared goal. Subjects are told about their task to be completed in the
simulated environment.

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
17
Table 7 : cognitive score proﬁling and behavioural estimation through observation
subject_id
Cognitive
Score
Group
Place-
ment
Behavior(Observed
during simulation)
Cognition(Observed
during simulation)
Attentiveness (Ob-
served during simu-
lation)
subject_1
10
A
Co-operative
Good memory
Very Attentive
subject_2
3
B
Need encouragement
Less skills related to
memorizing the Com-
mands
Attentive.
subject_3
9
A
None
Good memory
Attentive
subject_4
10
A
Need encouragement
Less skills related to
memorizing the Com-
mands.
Less Attentive
subject_5
2
B
Frustrated
Easily,
needs encouragement
Distractible,
Less
skills related to memo-
rizing the Commands
Attentive.
subject_6
10
A
Co-operative
Good memory and ex-
pressiveness
Very Attentive
5. Results
Figure 7 reports the manoeuvring time (in seconds) required by all the six subjects to reach the pre-
speciﬁed goal. All the three modes described in subsection 4.3 are shown in the ﬁgure 7. Machine time
for different runs is different. This is because of the way the machine navigates and users has nothing
to do with this. The machine in our case is the automated navigator of ROS. This navigator generates
different recovery behavior based on dynamic construction of Costmap. Costmap is built using the laser
scans obtained from SICK LMS200 laser range ﬁnder. A single laser scan might not arrive in the same
time window between two sets of experiment leading to a different Costmap and thus behavior. The
performance of the collaborative mode versus the human user (standalone mode) is compared to evaluate
the system. The autonomous navigation of ROS is highly conﬁgurable, making possible to use a large
number of algorithms. The driving behavior of different users will be different if there are no trafﬁc
rules. In our maze, there is no driving rule to go to the shared goal. Thus, in two different trials, the
user commands will leave the whole system in two different situations. Thus, the planners inside the
move_base node acts differently which gives rise to different completion time in collaborative control
mode.
As expected the time taken by the human to reach a particular goal is more as compared to driving
the P3AT in collaborative mode. All the LCS group i.e. group B participants’ beneﬁts from the C3A.
Similar trend can be observed in most of the participants of the HCS group i.e. group A participants’.
Note that an exception occurred in case of subject_4. Users were observed during simulation and
subjective estimation done. As seen from Table 7, subject_4 is less attentive and fails to memorize
the navigation commands properly; can not relate them to arrow keys. Even though, this subject is from
HCS group; its driving is erratic and frequently moves the robot away from the shared goal. Machine
requires more time to make corrections to bring the robot on-course, leading to increase in manoeuvring
time under collaboration.
Our architecture is not yet implemented in a real wheelchair. A differential model of the wheelchair has
to be created inside USARSim to replace the P3AT robot. Several real robots works successfully by

18
R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
Fig. 7. Time required with different subjects under three distinct modes of operation
using ROS which encourage us to believe that this initial simulation result is a good starting point to
build a real one. The generalizable nature of our ﬁndings is an important issue to discuss here. Our claim
is not to prove the generalized nature of our simulation result on different types of wheelchair users. This
initial research should be viewed as a new way to achieve the collaborative control by exploiting the
open Source research platform, ROS.
6. Final Comments
Robust real-world behavior can not be pre-programmed. ROS overcomes this limitation because of
its sound message passing and shared memory concept. The wheelchair control imbibing C3A is aware
of its location, driver quality along with other environmental facts such as proximity towards the shared
goal through the memory module. The navigation commands from user and the wheelchair are simulta-
neously active through ROS topic. Assistive wheelchair with collaborative control is achieved by C3A
through ROS is an approach of embodiment of cognition. ROS contains all the required features to build
an effective collaborative device.
The limitation of our approach are mentioned below:
– Our initial result with six participants is used to show that our approach has some positive directions.
Rigorous testing with more users are possible; once we implement the whole memory module. In
our future work, we try to incorporate more evaluation metric and rigorous statistical analysis to
improve our approach towards collaborative control.
– For simulation reported in this paper, the user has to be visually active to set the shared goal and
have motor control to operate the keys.
The novelty of the paper is the development of C3A and the functionality of ROS is effectively utilised to
analyze the utility of collaborative control. This approach for designing cognitively enabled wheelchair
introduces several new research avenues within the ROS environment. Instead of using autonomous
navigator of ROS, agent can be programmed to use a planner designed using formal methods. Several
researchers are working on EEG (electroencephalogram) based brain-actuated wheelchair system using
motor imagery. Overcoming the above mentioned limitations by extending ROS is part of our ongoing
research. Controlling the wheelchair through EEG is our future goal.

R. Bhattacharyya et al. / Tezpur University, India, Year: 2012-2014
19
