arXiv:2401.01259v5  [cs.LG]  25 Jun 2025
Do Concept Bottleneck Models Respect Localities?
Naveen Raman

Carnegie Mellon University
Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga

University of Cambridge
Juyeon Heo

University of Cambridge
Mateja Jamnik

University of Cambridge
Abstract
Concept-based explainability methods use human-understandable intermediaries to produce
explanations for machine learning models. These methods assume concept predictions can
help understand a model’s internal reasoning. In this work, we assess the degree to which
such an assumption is true by analyzing whether concept predictors leverage “relevant”
features to make predictions, a term we call locality. Concept-based models that fail to re-
spect localities also fail to be explainable because concept predictions are based on spurious
features, making the interpretation of the concept predictions vacuous. To assess whether
concept-based models respect localities, we construct and use three metrics to characterize
when models respect localities, complementing our analysis with theoretical results. Each
of our metrics captures a different notion of perturbation and assess whether perturbing “ir-
relevant” features impacts the predictions made by a concept predictors. We find that many
concept-based models used in practice fail to respect localities because concept predictors
cannot always clearly distinguish distinct concepts. Based on these findings, we propose
suggestions for alleviating this issue.
1
Introduction
Concept-based explainability provides insights into black-box machine learning models by constructing ex-
planations via human-understandable “concepts” (Kim et al., 2018; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2020).
For example, we can explain that an image was predicted to be a cherry because we predicted that the con-
cepts “Red Fruit” and “Circular Fruit“ were present in the image. Within this paradigm, Concept Bottleneck
Models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020) are a family of models that first predict concepts from an input (via a
concept predictor) and then predict a downstream label from these concepts (via a label predictor). This
design allows CBMs to provide concept-based explanations via their predicted concepts (Chauhan et al.,
2022; Shin et al., 2023; Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2023b).
Models within the concept-based paradigm rely on the assumption that a model’s concept predictions serve
as an explanation for its predictions (Koh et al., 2020). For example, if the concept predictor for “Red Fruit”
mistakenly learns to predict the “Circular Fruit” concept instead, then explanations based on the “Red Fruit”
concept predictor would be incorrect as this predictor fails to reflect the presence of “Red Fruit.” Therefore,
the faithfulness of concept predictors to their underlying concepts is critical because these models operate
under the strong assumption that concept predictions align with their corresponding semantic concepts.
Our work analyzes the faithfulness of concept predictors by assessing the degree to which a model’s concept
predictions are a proxy for a model’s internal reasoning. We do so to understand whether explanations from
1

Figure 1: We investigate whether concept-based models properly capture known concept “localities”. For
example, we train a CBM to predict whether an image has a fruit (left panel A), with concepts such as
“Has Bowl” and “Has Apple”. Here, concepts are localised to image subregions (middle panel B). We study
whether CBMs learn these localities by analysing how changes to input features, both within and outside a
concept’s locality, impact a CBM’s predictions (right panel C).
concept-based models are trustworthy, that is whether we can rely on the explanations from concept-based
models to gain insights (Vashney, 2022). We analyze the relationship between concept predictors and a
model’s internal reasoning through locality, which refers to the idea that oftentimes only a subset of features
are needed to predict a concept (Figure 1). For example, we assess the degree to which the prediction of the
concept “Red Fruit” is influenced by background features irrelevant to that concept. We construct a set of
experiments to assess whether concept-based models respect locality, as this can give us insight into their
trustworthiness. Our results reveal that concept-based models often fail to respect localities, a significant
shortcoming that casts doubt on their interpretability.
Our contributions are as follows: we (1) construct three metrics to quantify whether models respect localities
found in datasets, (2) conduct thorough experiments across a variety of architectural and training choices
to characterize when models respect localities, and (3) propose theoretical models to better understand the
impact of dataset construction on locality. 1
2
Related Works
Explainability and Locality
Our work is broadly situated within the eXplainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI) field, which aims to elucidate the reasons behind a black-box model’s predictions. Developing XAI
methods is difficult because of the variety of desiderata for XAI methods (Rudin et al., 2022), including
trustworthiness (Shen, 2022) and accuracy (Lipton, 2018). While a variety of XAI methods are used in
practice, such as saliency maps (Baehrens et al., 2010) and SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), prior work has
demonstrated the fragility of those methods by analyzing the patterns these methods learn (Adebayo et al.,
2018). Our work follows a similar perspective by studying the fragility of concept-based explanations through
the lens of locality.
Concept-based Explainability
Our investigation into locality touches upon various other phenomena
in concept-based models. Concept-based models use human-understandable concepts to explain a machine
learning model’s prediction (Kim et al., 2018). Methods vary from fully concept-supervised (Koh et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020; Yuksekgonul et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023), where one has access to task and concept
labels, to concept-unsupervised (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Yeh et al., 2020; Oikarinen et al., 2023; Pham et al.,
2024), where only task labels are available. In this paper, we explore CBMs (Koh et al., 2020) due to their
1We include our code and dataset construction details here: https://github.com/naveenr414/Spurious-Concepts
2

ubiquity as building blocks for state-of-the-art methods (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022; Yuksekgonul et al.,
2022; Kim et al., 2023; Oikarinen et al., 2023; Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2023c).
Prior work in concept-based explainability has shown that concept-based models are prone to “concept
leakage”, where label-specific information is undesirably encoded into concept predictions (Mahinpei et al.,
2021; Havasi et al., 2022). Follow-up works studied how leakage may be (1) detected at inference (Marconato
et al., 2022), (2) measured at test-time (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2023a; Marconato et al., 2024), (3) affected
by inter-concept correlations (Heidemann et al., 2023), and (4) exploited for adversarial attacks (Sinha
et al., 2023). Our work builds on these by studying the related but separate phenomena of locality, which
captures the robustness of concept predictors to perturbations. We build on similar work on spurious concept
correlations (Margeloiu et al., 2021; Furby et al., 2023; 2024) by introducing metrics to rigorously understand
the origin of this phenomenon in different architectural choices. Our work additionally builds on literature
studying inter-concept relationships in concept-based models by analyzing how incorrectly learning such
relationships can decrease the robustness of concept predictors (Raman et al., 2024). Finally, related to
our work is prior work which develops metrics for understanding concepts (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2023a;
Marconato et al., 2024); however, in contrast to these works, we focus on quantifying the ability of concept
predictors to rely on the relevant sets of features, rather than capturing whether they encode impurities or
leakages. We include a further comparison of our work with other metrics in Appendix B.7.
Spurious Correlations and Locality
Our work investigates whether concept predictors rely only on rel-
evant features while ignoring irrelevant features. Similar to our emphasis on whether concept-based models
rely on irrelevant features, prior work has investigated whether deep learning models exploit spurious corre-
lations (Geirhos et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2024). Previous work in spurious correlations investigated how factors
such as model size (Sagawa et al., 2020), loss function (Levy et al., 2020), and data augmentation (Srivastava
et al., 2020) impact spurious correlations. In this work, we similarly aim to systematically understand which
factors impact localities in concept-based models. However, we differentiate ourselves from prior studies of
spurious correlations because we (a) demonstrate that locality may fail to hold even in simple situations, and
(b) study how a failure of locality can lead to the breakdown of interpretability for popular concept-based
methods.
3
Why do we need locality?
We first formally define the problem of concept-based learning, then explain why we can use locality to
understand the relationship between model predictions and model reasoning.
3.1
Defining Concept-Based Learning
Concept-based learning is a supervised learning task where, given a set of input features, models produce
a label prediction and a corresponding concept-based explanation. In concept-based learning we are given
a set of features X = {x(i) ∈Rm}n
i=1, task labels Y = {y(i) ∈{1, · · · , L}}n
i=1, and concepts C = {c(i) ∈
{0, 1}k}n
i=1. Concepts are human-understandable attributes distilled from the raw input features x. For
example, if x is an image, then a concept could correspond to the attribute “Red Fruit”. Each c(i) is a 0-1
vector of length k, so that c(i)
j
= 1 indicates the presence of the j-th concept in x(i).
We can use concept-based learning to construct interpretable architectures. A popular example of concept-
based architectures is concept bottleneck models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020). CBMs are a two-stage ar-
chitecture consisting of a concept predictor g : x 7→ˆc and a subsequent label predictor f : ˆc 7→ˆy. The
concept predictor maps an input x to a set of interpretable concepts ˆc, and then the label predictor uses
these interpretable concepts to predict a label ˆy. During inference, for any input x, a CBM predicts both a
set of concepts ˆc = g(x) and a label ˆy = f(g(x)).
The explainability of concept-based models arises from the concept predictions ˆc.
Typically, the label
predictor f is a shallow neural network (e.g., a linear layer), so mispredicted labels can be traced back
to concept prediction issues. For example, if an image is incorrectly predicted to be an “apple”, then the
incorrect prediction can be traced back to an incorrect prediction for the “Red Fruit” concept.
3

3.2
Locality and Concept-Based Explainability
To understand the assumptions underpinning concept-based models, we first introduce the idea of locality.
We define locality as a dataset property where concepts can be fully predicted using some subset of features.
For any concept and data point combination, we define its local region as a minimal set of features needed
to fully predict the concept. Formally, for each concept j and data point x(i), we define its local region
as Lj(x(i)) ⊆{1 · · · m}, where m is the number of features in x(i). This corresponds to a minimum set of
features that can completely predict the corresponding concept value. For example, the “Red Fruit” concept
can be fully predicted using all the pixels from the foreground and none from the background. In Figure 1b,
we highlight examples of local regions for different concepts.
In this work, we claim that concept-based models should make concept predictions based only on the features
in a concept’s local region.
We believe that concept-based models can assist with interpretability, but
only when the underlying concept predictors respect localities. When concept-based models fail to respect
localities, they rely on features outside a concept’s local region to make predictions. Because features outside
of a concept’s local region have no impact on the true presence of a concept, concept-based models may rely
on spurious correlations to predict concepts. Concept prediction based on spurious correlations jeopardizes
the use of concepts as an explainability mechanism because the presence of a concept can no longer reliably
provide insight into a model’s reasoning. For example, if the “Red Fruit” concept is predicted using irrelevant
elements such as the presence of a “Fruit Bowl” rather than the presence of red fruit, then we cannot explain
predictions based on the “Red Fruit” concept.
A better understanding of localities allows for a better
understanding of the trustworthiness of concept-based models.
We answer some common misconceptions about locality:
1. Misconception #1: “Respecting localities and avoiding spurious correlations are the
same problem” - Spurious correlations and respecting localities are concerned with learning salient
patterns.
However, the motivations behind each are different; respecting localities is concerned
with the explainability of concept-based models, while spurious correlations are concerned with the
generalizability of models. Moreover, as we demonstrate in Section 5.1, even in datasets without
shortcuts, and therefore, no motivations to learn spurious correlations, concept-based models can
still fail to respect localities.
2. Misconception #2: “Global concepts negate locality” - If a concept is global and not confined
to a local subset of features, then the local region is all the features; Lj(x(i)) = [m]. In this scenario,
all concept predictors respect localities because no features exist outside a concept’s local region. In
this work, we do not focus on such global concepts because they do not yield much insight into the
nature of locality.
3. Misconception #3: “Not respecting localities is a benefit, not a drawback of concept-
based models” - While leveraging correlations between features outside of the local region and
the presence of a concept could lead to spurious yet accurate concept predictors, they endanger the
separation between concepts and labels in the concept-based model. Combining label and concept
predictions should reflect the presence of a concept rather than correlations. Otherwise, generating
trustworthy explanations from concept predictions becomes infeasible and concept predictors become
inherently less robust to changes to out-of-locality features.
4. Misconception #4: “Concept leakage and locality refer to the same phenomenon” -
Concept leakage refers to the phenomenon where information about downstream labels or overall
data distribution are “leaked” into concept predictions, which can reduce the purity of concept
predictions (Mahinpei et al., 2021). While locality is also concerned with concept predictors, its
focus is on the robustness of concept predictors to feature perturbations outside of a concept’s local
region.
Locality assesses whether concept predictions truly reflect a model’s reasoning about a
concept, while leakage assess whether downstream labels leak into concept predictions.
4

4
Quantifying Locality
We assess the reliability of concept-based models by analyzing whether these models respect localities in a
dataset. As noted in Section 3, concept-based models failing to respect localities jeopardizes the assumption
that concept predictions are indicators of a model’s reasoning behind a prediction.
For example, if the
prediction for the concept “Red Fruit” is not based on predicting red fruit but rather some correlated
concept, then it becomes difficult to explain model predictions based on concept predictions. We study the
extent to which models respect localities to understand whether we can trust the explanations and concept
predictions from concept-based models.
We construct three metrics to quantify locality because each metric captures a notion of perturbation that
concept-based models must be invariant to. When concept-based models respect localities, they are invariant
to perturbations outside of a concept’s local region. Each of our metrics for locality corresponds to a different
notion of perturbation; locality leakage corresponds to adversarial perturbations, locality intervention cor-
responds to in-distribution perturbations, and locality masking corresponds to out-of-distribution masking
perturbations. We present a pictorial example of each metric in Figure 1.
4.1
Locality Leakage
The locality leakage metric assesses a concept-based model’s invariance to adversarial distortion outside of
a concept’s local region. Prior work has demonstrated that adversarial perturbations can impact a model’s
predictions (Goodfellow et al., 2014). However, it is unknown whether adversarial perturbations outside of a
concept’s local region impact their predictions, especially in scenarios without spurious correlations between
features.
To formalize the impact of adversarial perturbations on a concept’s predictions, we define the locality leakage
metric as follows:
hl
 
g, k, {x(i)}n
i=1, {Lj}k
j=1
!
= 1
k
k
X
j=1
max
x′∈Rm s.t.
∀a∈Lj(x(i)), x′
a=x(i)
a
|g(x′)j −g(x(i))j|
(Locality Leakage)
Here, x′ is an adversarial data point, which perturbs features outside of the local region for concept j,
Lj(x(i)). For this data point, we measure the degree to which we can alter the prediction of concept j (i.e.,
|g(x′
j)−g(x(i))j|) simply through adversarial perturbation of features outside of a concept’s local region (i.e.,
∀a ∈Lj(x(i)), x′
a = x(i)
a ). Taken together, the locality leakage metric averages across all concepts j, the
maximum perturbation in concept prediction, |g(x′
j) −g(x(i))j|, by selecting an alternate data point x′ that
agrees on the local region Lj(x(i)). That is, x′ leverages features outside of its local region to modify the
prediction of concept j. A large locality leakage implies that modifications to irrelevant features significantly
impact a concept’s prediction.
In Appendix B.1, we consider an alternative formulation of the locality
leakage metric which constrains the magnitude of adversarial perturbations and demonstrates similar results
up to certain levels of constraints.
4.2
Locality Intervention
We introduce the locality intervention metric to assess a concept-based model’s invariance to in-distribution
shifts.
The locality leakage metric potentially suffers from perturbations leading to significantly out-of-
distribution features never seen in practice. To address this, we perturb features outside the local region
while ensuring that the resulting feature vector x′ is still in distribution and the underlying ground-truth
concept is unchanged. To perturb a data point x(i), we find an alternative data point x′ = x(l) ∈X, so that
concept j is unaltered, c(i)
j
= c(l)
j , while the prediction for concept j is maximally altered, |g(x(l)
j )−g(x(i))j|.
Because g(x(l))j ∈[0, 1] rather than being {0, 1}, the locality intervention metric allows us to quantify
the magnitude of impact that out-of-local region perturbations in a more fine-grained manner compared to
5

concept prediction accuracy. Formally, we define the locality intervention metric as follows:
hi
 
g, k, {x(i)}n
i=1, {c(i)}n
i=1
!
= 1
k
k
X
j=1
max
x(l)∈X s.t.
c(l)
j =c(i)
j
|g(x(l))j −g(x(i))j|
(Locality Intervention)
Here, we take the average perturbation |g(x(l))j−g(x(i))j| across concepts j, by seeing how much an alternate
data point x(l) with the same ground-truth concept value disagrees in concept prediction. In essence, this
measures a concept predictors susceptibility to in-distribution perturbations across other concepts outside
of concept j’s local region.
4.3
Locality Masking
We introduce a third metric that assesses a concept-based model’s invariance to a masking perturbation
outside a concept’s local region.
The locality masking metric resides between the locality leakage and
intervention metrics in terms of perturbation severity. The locality leakage metric adversarially perturbs
non-local region features, which can lead to out-of-distribution data points, while the locality intervention
metric ensures that perturbations are in distribution, but requires a large dataset C to find in-distribution
perturbations.
To get around the limitations of locality leakage and intervention, we assess the impact
masking concept j′ upon the prediction for concept j.
By relying on masking to perturb features, our
resulting features are not significantly out-of-distribution, especially because we only mask a fraction of the
total features. All we require is access to the localities for each concept, through, for example, bounding
boxers for concepts.
We assess two components for the locality masking metric: the locality relevant masking metric and the
locality irrelevant masking metric. For a concept j, the locality relevant masking metric computes the impact
of masking relevant features Lj(x(i)), while the locality irrelevant masking metric computes the impact of
masking features relevant to an unrelated concept j′, Lj′(x(i)). Let M(x(i), j) be the replacement of all
features in Lj(x(i)) with a constant mask value η. Additionally, let S(x(i), j) = {j′|Lj(x(i)) ∩Lj′(x(i)) = ∅},
which corresponds to the set of concepts such that the local region of j′ is non-overlapping with the local
region for j. This way, masking concept j′ should not impact the prediction for concept j. Then, we define
the locality relevant masking metric as:
hrm
 
g, k, {x(i)}n
i=1, M
!
= 1
k
k
X
j=1
 
|g(M(x(i), j))j −g(x(i))j|
!
(Relevant Masking)
Similarly, we define the locality irrelevant masking metric as:
him
 
g, k, {x(i)}n
i=1, M
!
= 1
k
k
X
j=1
1
|S(x(i), j)|
X
j′∈S(x(i),j)
|g(M(x(i), j′))j −g(x(i))j|
(Irrelevant Masking)
Here, M(x(i), j) defines a masking function that masks concept j in data point x(i). We analyze the impact
of masking upon the concept prediction, both when masking concept j (where we compute |g(M(x(i), j))j −
g(x(i))j|), and when masking concept j′ (where we compute |g(M(x(i), j′))j −g(x(i))j|). We note that we
divide by S(x(i), j) to account for the number of masked concepts j′.
Concept-based models that respect localities should be unimpacted by masking outside of the local region
and only impacted by perturbations to features within their local region. That is, such models should have
a high locality relevant masking metric and a low locality irrelevant masking metric.
5
Experiments
We construct experiments to assess whether CBMs respect localities in both (a) controlled testbed where
we can understand the impact of various factors and (b) real-world datasets where we can understand the
performance of concept-based models in practice.
6

Synthetic 2
Synthetic 4
CUB
COCO
Figure 2: We plot examples from our 2-object and 4-object synthetic datasets, along with examples from
CUB and COCO. For the synthetic datasets, concepts refer to the positions of each shape. For CUB, concepts
are the colours and shapes of different parts of the bird, and for COCO, concepts are the presence of objects
such as bowls and spoons.
5.1
Experimental Setup
Synthetic Datasets
We construct a synthetic dataset to understand locality in a controlled environment
(see Figure 2). Our synthetic dataset consists of k concepts and k
2 object locations. Each location consists
of a triangle or a square, corresponding to two concepts: “Is Square” and “Is Triangle”, for a total of k
concepts. For example, in the synthetic 2-object dataset, we have four concepts and two object locations.
We construct datasets with 1, 2, 4, and 8 objects. For the 1- and 2-object datasets, we construct 256 training
examples, while for the 4- and 8-object datasets we construct 1024 training examples due to the increased
number of concept combinations. We construct our dataset using synthetic objects so concepts for different
object locations are independent; the presence of a triangle on the left side gives no information on the shape
of the right. This construction implicitly should discourage models from picking up spurious correlations
due to the absence of shortcuts.
Non-Synthetic Datasets
To understand locality in more realistic scenarios, we evaluate concept-based
models on two non-synthetic datasets: Caltech-UCSD Birds (CUB) (Wah et al., 2011) and Common Objects
in Context (COCO) (Lin et al., 2014). We select these datasets because both are ubiquitous within concept-
based explainability (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2023). The CUB dataset consists of images
annotated with a bird species (the label) and properties, such as wing colour and beak length. This results
in 112 attributes, selected by Koh et al. (2020), which can be partitioned into 28 concept groups based
on the body part (e.g. wing). The COCO dataset consists of scenes with objects. The original COCO
dataset consists of 100 objects, and we randomly downsample this to 10 objects so that COCO and CUB
have comparable dataset sizes. Concepts refer to the presence of objects and the task label is a function
constructed from this concept that indicates whether any object in some fixed subset is present. We construct
a task in this manner following prior work (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022).
Other Experimental Details
We vary our architecture and training procedure across experiments and
detail these choices for each experiment individually. We run all experiments for three seeds on an NVIDIA
TITAN Xp GPU, with the total number of hours ranging from 100 to 200. We run experiments on a Debian
Linux platform with 4 CPUs and 1 GPU. We train our synthetic models for 50 epochs, our COCO model
for 25 epochs, and our CUB model for 100 epochs, selecting each based on the time at which accuracy and
loss reach convergence. For CUB and COCO we select a learning rate of 0.005, while for the synthetic
experiments, we select 0.05, selecting this through manual inspection of model performance.
5.2
Impact of Architecture
We analyze how architecture choice impacts whether concept-based models respect locality. We perform our
experiments across the different synthetic object datasets (see Section 5.2); we do so because we can quickly
evaluate architectures without tuning parameters due to the simplicity of the dataset. Additionally, even
smaller models can learn the synthetic dataset, while the same is not true for CUB and COCO. Here, we first
evaluate models based on our locality leakage metric. To instantiate locality leakage, we employ projected
7

3
4
5
6
7
Layers
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Locality Leakage
1-object dataset
2-object dataset
4-object dataset
8-object dataset
(a) Model Depth
3
4
5
6
7
Model Depth
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Metric
Accuracy
Leakage
(b) Fixed Parameters
3
4
5
6
7
Model Depth
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Metric
Accuracy
Leakage
(c) Fixed Receptive Field
Figure 3: We find that deep concept predictors lead to higher locality leakage, implying that deep concept
predictors leverage features beyond a concept’s local region. Such a trend occurs even when accounting for
the number of parameters (b) or the receptive field size(c).
gradient descent to find the data point x′ that maximizes |g(x′)j −g(x(i))j| for each concept j. Projected
gradient descent allows us to quickly find x′, while ensuring that concepts within the local region Lj(x(i))
remain constant. In Section 5.3, we consider our locality intervention and masking metrics.
Prior work in spurious correlations by Sagawa et al. (2020) demonstrates that larger models learn more
spurious correlations, so we naturally investigate whether such a pattern holds for localities. We construct a
set of concept predictors which vary in depth from 3 to 7 layers, where deeper models have more parameters.
We train all models for 50 epochs; at 50 epochs, all models achieve perfect task and concept accuracy.
We compare the locality leakage for our models across varying model depths and find in Figure 3 that
deeper models tend to have higher locality leakages. Across all models and dataset combinations, the locality
leakage is at least 0.4, implying that on average, concept predictions can be changed by at least 40% through
adversarial perturbations. We also find that increasing model depth leads to higher locality leakages, with
7-layer models having locality leakages over 0.9 for all synthetic datasets. This mimics the trend found in
the spurious correlation literature where deeper models tend to produce more spurious correlations (Sagawa
et al., 2020). Comparing across our synthetic datasets, we find that the 8-object dataset produces models
with the highest leakage for all models except for 5-layer models. Our experiments reveal that deeper models,
which also correspond to models with more parameters, tend to respect locality less.
While deeper models lead to higher levels of locality leakage, it is unclear whether this is due to (a) the
concept predictors being deeper, (b) the concept predictors having more parameters, or (c) the concept
predictors having a larger receptive field.
To distinguish between these scenarios, we construct concept
predictors that hold either (a) the number of parameters or (b) the receptive field size constant. We again
vary the model depth between 3 and 7 layers for both settings and compare both the concept accuracy and
the locality leakage metric for these models.
We find that depth, rather than the number of parameters or receptive field size after all convolutions,
is primarily responsible for the increase in locality leakage. In Figure 3b and Figure 3c, we find that even
when holding the number of parameters or receptive field size constant, depth-7 models still exhibit a locality
leakage of 1.0. Between depth 4 and depth 7 we find that the locality leakage is non-decreasing, so increasing
depth either increases locality leakage or keeps it at 1.0. Our results imply that overly deep models could
be partially responsible for concept-based models failing to respect localities.
5.3
Dataset Choice
Locality Intervention
To understand how concept-based models perform beyond synthetic datasets, we
assess robustness to in-distribution (through locality intervention) and out-of-distribution (through locality
masking) perturbations in real-world datasets. For in-distribution perturbations, we conjecture that train-
ing diversity plays a large role because more diverse training datasets allow concept predictors to better
differentiate between concepts. To quantify this, we analyze the impact of train-time concept combinations
8

0%
25% 50% 75% 100%
% Concept Combinations
0%
25%
50%
Locality Intervention
(a) Synthetic
0%
25% 50% 75% 100%
% Concept Combinations
0%
10%
20%
30%
Locality Intervention
CUB
COCO
(b) CUB and COCO
Figure 4: We find that datasets with a larger number of concept combinations can reduce the locality
intervention metric in synthetic (a) and real-world scenarios (b). Therefore, training with a diverse set of
concept combinations can help improve the in-distribution robustness of concept predictors.
CUB
COCO
Dataset
0%
5%
10%
15%
Locality Masking
Relevant Mask
Irrelevant Mask
(a) Locality Masking
(b) Masking Example
Figure 5: To assess robustness to out-of-distribution perturbations, we compare the relevant and irrelevant
masks for the CUB and COCO datasets. For CUB, masking relevant or irrelevant concepts similarly impacts
predictions, indicating that concept predictors leverage features beyond a concept’s local region to make
predictions. For example, masking the tail of the bird (b) does not lead to changes in prediction for the
concept of “Tail Colour.”
on test-time locality intervention. We compare this trend for three datasets: the 8-object synthetic dataset,
CUB, and COCO. For each dataset we vary the fraction of concept combinations from 25% to 100%. For
example, 25% corresponds to sampling 25% of the values for c(i) seen in the training dataset and filtering
the training dataset to only use tuples (x(i), c(i), y(i)) with corresponding c(i). 100% corresponds to using
the original training dataset. We ensure that perturbations do not impact concept labels by creating a set
of data points for each concept combination c. By doing so, we can always find a data point where concept
j is held constant, while other concepts j′ are varied.
We analyze the relationship between the diversity of the training concept and the locality intervention in
Figure 4 and find that more combinations of concepts decrease the locality intervention. In the synthetic
dataset, observing 50% of concept combinations reduces the locality intervention to 0.06. We see similar
inflexion points for CUB and COCO as using 50% of concept combinations reduces locality intervention
to 0.14. For all three data sets, increasing the diversity of the training set reduces locality intervention,
demonstrating the importance of constructing data sets with a large number of combinations of concepts.
Our results reflect that dataset-related changes can impact in-distribution perturbations, while architectural
changes can impact out-of-distribution perturbations.
9

5
10
20
30
40
50
Epochs
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Locality Leakage
Accuracy
Leakage
(a) Epochs
0.0004
0.004
0.04
Weight Decay
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Metric
Accuracy
Leakage
(b) ℓ2 Regularization
3
4
5
6
7
Layers
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Locality Leakage
Num Objects 2
adversarial
control
(c) Adversarial Training
Figure 6: We find that training time modifications such as (a) early stopping, (b) ℓ2 regularization, and (c)
adversarial training cannot significantly reduce locality leakage without also impacting accuracy. Applying
adversarial training leads to locality leakage values between 0.6 and 0.9 across all concept predictor depths,
so all concept predictors exhibit some locality leakage.
Locality Masking
Next, we investigate the performance of concept-based models with real-world datasets
through the locality masking metric. Locality masking captures more realistic out-of-distribution perturba-
tions than locality leakage because the perturbations are not as dramatic, making it more appropriate for use
with real-world datasets. For CUB, we have access to the centroid of each concept, so we mask all concepts
within a radius of ϵ = 0.3l, where l is the image width (we evaluate the impact of varying ϵ in Appendix B.6).
To avoid masking unrelated features, we mask only features closer to the centre of the masked concept than
the centre of any other concept. For COCO we are provided the bounding box, so we use that instead. We
select such an ϵ for CUB because it masks each concept without covering adjacent concepts; experiments
with other values of ϵ reveal similar trends. We fill masked values with zero (black) but confirm our results
using mean-masks in Appendix B.4.
In Figure 5, we assess locality masking for CUB and COCO. For CUB, we find only a 4.7% difference between
relevant and irrelevant masks, indicating that concept predictors leverage features beyond a concept’s local
region to make predictions. In both COCO and CUB, the locality masking metric is at most 15%; intuitively,
even when fully masking the concept, concept predictors can make predictions with only a 15% loss in
accuracy. For example, masking the bird’s tail in Figure 5b does not hinder tail colour prediction. This
occurs because concept-based models infer a tail’s colour from its body or head. Such behaviour is undesirable
because concept predictors become detached from the concepts themselves, so predictions for the tail of a
bird reflect properties of the body and head.
5.4
Training Modifications
We analyze the impact of modifications to training procedures, including the number of epochs and loss
function, upon the locality leakage metric. Our results in Section 5.2 demonstrated that the selection of
architecture impacted locality leakage, so it would be natural to understand whether training modifications
also impact locality leakage. Prior work demonstrated that early stopping, which occurs when training stops
after the loss converges or increases for a fixed number of epochs, can prevent overfitting (Caruana et al.,
2000). We investigate whether such phenomena can impact locality, so we analyze the impact of training
iterations upon locality. We vary the number of epochs from 5 to 50 and analyze the impact upon accuracy
and leakage.
In Figure 6, we find that increasing the number of epochs leads to increased accuracy while also increasing
locality leakage. When we train models for 30 or more epochs, they achieve perfect concept accuracy but
also achieve a locality leakage of at least 0.9. Moreover, there exists no training setting where the model
achieves perfect accuracy while having a small locality leakage.
We additionally investigate whether modifications to the training loss can improve the locality properties
of concept-based models. We consider two types of training modifications: ℓ2 regularization (weight decay)
10

Table 1: Recent iterations of CBMs such as CEM and ProbCBM can reduce locality leakage for synthetic
and real-world datasets due to their increased representational capacity. However, VLM-based approaches
such as label-free CBMs fail to differentiate between relevant and irrelevant masking, showing that this
model fails to address locality. We refrain from evaluating locality masking on the synthetic dataset because
it would be redundant with the locality intervention metric.
Dataset
CBM Variant
Accuracy
Leakage
Relevant Masking
Irrelevant Masking
Synthetic
CBM Baseline (7-Layer)
100.0% ± 0.0%
1.000 ± 0.000
0.500 ± 0.000
0.052 ± 0.037
CEM
100.0% ± 0.0%
0.724 ± 0.028
0.380 ± 0.002
0.355 ± 0.012
ProbCBM
100.0% ± 0.0%
0.635 ± 0.014
0.384 ± 0.000
0.329 ± 0.002
CUB
CBM Baseline (7-Layer)
67.1% ± 0.4%
-
0.113 ± 0.002
0.107 ± 0.002
Label-Free CBM
74.6% ± 0.0%
-
0.053 ± 0.001
0.052 ± 0.001
CEM
68.1% ± 1.0%
-
0.035 ± 0.001
0.034 ± 0.001
ProbCBM
68.2% ± 0.8%
-
0.008 ± 0.001
0.007 ± 0.000
COCO
CBM Baseline (7-Layer)
83.9% ± 0.3%
-
0.144 ± 0.014
0.095 ± 0.004
CEM
83.6% ± 1.1%
-
0.024 ± 0.009
0.020 ± 0.012
ProbCBM
83.3% ± 0.4%
-
0.024 ± 0.003
0.008 ± 0.001
and adversarial training.
We select ℓ2 regularization because prior work showed that it can potentially
reduce spurious correlations (Sagawa et al., 2019), while we select adversarial training because adversarially
trained models are potentially more robust (Jin et al., 2020). For ℓ2 regularization, we vary the weight decay
parameter in {0.0004, 0.004, 0.04} and evaluate on the 2-object synthetic dataset with the 7-layer model. For
adversarial training, we incorporate an adversarial loss and analyze the impact across different model depths
in the 2-object synthetic dataset.
In Figure 6b and Figure 6c, we find that neither ℓ2 regularisation nor adversarial training can reduce locality
leakage beyond 0.6 without impacting accuracy. While large amounts of ℓ2 regularization can reduce the
locality leakage down to 0.5, we find that this also leads to a reduction in accuracy. When concept predictors
have few layers, adversarial training leads to more locality leakage, while even for 6 and 7-layer concept
predictors, the locality leakage is at least 0.8. This demonstrates that adversarial training fails to enforce
that concept-based models respect localities.
5.5
CBM Variants
Newer CBM variants have alleviated issues ranging from representational power (Espinosa Zarlenga et al.,
2022) to uncertainty (Kim et al., 2023), so we investigate the impact of these advances on our locality leakage
metric. We evaluated the performance of three CBM variants according to accuracy and leakage (on the
synthetic dataset) or masking (on the CUB and COCO datasets):
1. Concept Embedding Models address the low representational power of CBMs by allowing each
concept to be represented through a vector (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022).
2. Probabilistic concept bottleneck models (ProbCBMs) enable more accurate uncertainty
estimates by modelling concept embeddings as normally distributed vectors (Kim et al., 2023).
3. Label Free CBMs incorporate large language models so CBMs can be trained without needing
ground-truth labels for concepts. It does so by generating a concept set for a given list of labels
and using the embeddings of this concept set to train label predictors (Oikarinen et al., 2023). We
evaluate label-free CBMs only on the CUB dataset because they rely on human-understandable
descriptions for each label, which are not present for the synthetic or COCO datasets.
We compare metrics across these CBM variants in Table 1. We find that CEMs and ProbCBMs reduce
the leakage in the synthetic dataset, although a leakage of 0.6 still indicates that concept predictions can
be modified by 60% of the original value. Moreover, ProbCBMs have a higher gap between relevant and
irrelevant masking compared to the baseline CBM in the COCO dataset. Meanwhile, in the CUB dataset,
11

label-free CBMs only tighten the gap between relevant and irrelevant masking by a factor of 6.
CEMs
and ProbCBMs represent a potential panacea to address locality because they better model the embedding
space for each concept, which assists concept predictors in differentiating between concepts. For example,
ProbCBMs allow concept predictors to incorporate uncertainty when making concept predictions. With
label-free CBMs, we find that the difference between relevant and irrelevant masking is almost nonexistent,
implying that concept predictors leverage features beyond the local region. Our results with other variants
of CBMs demonstrate that better-trained concept predictors, with better representational capacities, have
the potential to reduce locality-related issues in some situations, though locality-related issues still persist
with such models.
6
Theoretical Insights into Locality
To understand whether our empirical takeaways from Section 5 are an artefact of our experimental setup, we
investigate the fundamental relationships between concept-based models and locality. We aim to formalize
our study of locality intervention by analyzing how dataset construction impacts concept predictors.
Datasets with many concepts and few data points make it difficult to learn good concept predictors. For
example, if a dataset only contains images of cherries and no images of strawberries, then the “Red Fruit”
concept would be perfectly correlated with the “Circular Fruit” concept. This makes it difficult or impossible
to distinguish these two concepts, which means that the underlying concept predictors do not correspond to
the true concept. We formalize this idea through the theorem below:
Theorem 6.1. Suppose out of k total concepts, we can predict m, {γ1, γ2, · · · γm} ⊂{1, 2 . . . k}, with perfect
accuracy, P[ˆcj ̸= cj] = 0∀j ∈{γ1, γ2, . . . , γm}. Let Mj,q,i,r = P[cj = q|ci = r] be a correlation matrix, where
q, r ∈{0, 1}. For any concept whose value we do not know (j /∈{γ1, γ2 . . . γm}), if for s different triplets
(q, i, r), with i ∈{γ1, γ2 . . . γm}, we have (a) Mj,q,i,r ≥1 −α and (b) P[ci = r] ≥β, then there exists a
concept predictor that achieves error ϵ = P[ˆcj ̸= cj] ≤α+(1−β)s, using only information about the concepts
{γ1, γ2 . . . γm}, g(x)j = w(g(x)γ1, g(x)γ2, . . . , g(x)γm) for the concept predictor g and for some function w.
We present some intuition and interpretation for our Theorem. In the theorem, γ1, γ2, . . . , γm ∈[k] represent
the m concepts that are perfectly known and Mj,q,i,r ∈[0, 1] represents the probability that concept j ∈[k]
has a value of q ∈[0, 1], given that concept i ∈[k] has a value of r ∈[0, 1]. If concept j is correlated
sufficiently many other concepts i then we can train a concept predictor with low error ϵ. The error rate, ϵ
is dictated by two factors: α, which represents the correlation rate between concept i and concept j (that is,
P[cj = q|ci = r] ≥1 −α), and β, which represents the probability that concept i is r (that is P[ci = r] ≥β).
Our bound on ϵ is strict when s is large, as in that scenario, (1 −β)s is small, while the α term becomes
tight. Our bound can additionally be modified even if concepts in {γ1, γ2, . . . , γm} are known up to error δ.
In that scenario, our bound then becomes ϵ ≤α + δ + (1 −β)s, so we only pay a linear cost in the error rate.
Theorem 6.1 highlights the interaction between architecture, dataset, and locality. Intuitively, the theorem
implies there exists concept predictors with low error that only leverage a subset of concepts for prediction.
These concept predictors make predictions irrespective of the true presence of a concept. For example, this
implies there exists low-error concept predictors for “Red Fruit” and “Circular Fruit” that only leverage the
“Red Fruit” concept, so the concept predictor for “Circular Fruit” is made irrelevant of whether the image
contains a circular fruit. We prove such a theorem by explicitly constructing the low error concept predictor
and analyzing this predictor. Here, α corresponds to the level of independence between concepts, so low α
corresponds to situations where concepts are highly correlated, and β is the frequency at which concept i
is r. In essence, datasets with highly correlated concepts can lead to concept-based models failing to respect
localities, as they fail to distinguish between concepts. Such results mirror the trends in Section 5, where
increasingly diverse datasets can improve robustness to in-distribution perturbations.
7
Discussion
Avoiding Locality in Practice
While vanilla CBM models generally fail to respect localities, we describe
architectural and dataset choices that can help alleviate this issue.
Both our empirical (Section 5) and
12

theoretical (Section 6) results demonstrate that larger and more diverse datasets can improve the adherence
of concept-based models to localities found in the dataset. Concept-based models require datasets with
different combinations of concepts so that concept predictors can distinguish between concepts. Moreover,
our empirical results demonstrate that smaller models tend to exhibit less locality; this is partially because
these models are less prone to overfitting the spurious correlations found in datasets. Finally, models with
improved representational capacity can better distinguish between concepts, as shown through the improved
performance of ProbCBM and CEM models. Taken together, we recommend the following: (a) practitioners
ought to be cautious about interpreting concept predictions as the arbiter of truth, (b) when possible, the
datasets used by practitioners should be large and contain diverse concept combinations so concept predictors
can distinguish between concepts, and (c) practitioners should use smaller models and models with greater
representational capacity (e.g., CEMs or ProbCBMs) when possible.
Limitations and Future Work
Our work is an initial inquiry into the relationship between locality and
concept-based models which naturally leads to future work. We look at two real-world datasets for concept-
based models; we select these datasets because of their ubiquity and use across concept-based learning tasks.
Future work could build on this by considering more datasets including across other modalities, such as those
for tabular data (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2023c). Additionally, future work could consider the application
of our metrics to both the regression and generation settings. We can extend our metrics to the regression
setting in a straightforward manner by modifying the label predictor to predict continuous values, while
extension to the generative setting would require analogous metrics so modifications to concepts only modify
relevant generated features. Our work considers a set of architectural and training-related modifications to
assess their impact on locality. Our study is not exhaustive; there are always new training techniques and
modifications to architectures that could potentially alleviate issues related to locality. However, we aimed
to construct a thorough study that studied a variety of modifications to better understand locality and its
relationship to the assumptions made by concept-based models.
8
Conclusion
Concept-based models rely on the assumption that concept predictions can give insight into a model’s rea-
soning. We test whether this assumption holds by analyzing whether concept-based models respect locality.
We construct three metrics to quantify locality and apply these across architectural and training configu-
rations. We find that lack of respect for locality is a pervasive problem that is partially alleviated through
diverse training data and smaller architectures. We complement our empirical results with a theoretical
analysis that demonstrates how concept correlations can lead to concept-based models which fail to respect
locality. Our study sheds light into the assumptions underlying concept-based models and gives insight into
how concept-based models can be constructed with trustworthy explanations.
Broader Impacts
Our paper analyses the robustness of concept predictors, which underpin the explainability of CBMs. Un-
derstanding and improving explainability allows for safer machine learning model deployment, and our work
aims to improve such deployments through better-understood interpretability algorithms.
