arXiv:1301.1444v2  [cs.AI]  6 Dec 2013
The Annals of Applied Statistics
2013, Vol. 7, No. 2, 714–738
DOI: 10.1214/12-AOAS625
c
⃝Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2013
OBJECT-ORIENTED BAYESIAN NETWORKS FOR A DECISION
SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT1
By Julia Mortera, Paola Vicard and Cecilia Vergari
Universit`a Roma Tre, Universit`a Roma Tre and Universit`a di Bologna
We study an economic decision problem where the actors are two
ﬁrms and the Antitrust Authority whose main task is to monitor and
prevent ﬁrms’ potential anti-competitive behaviour and its eﬀect on
the market. The Antitrust Authority’s decision process is modelled
using a Bayesian network where both the relational structure and the
parameters of the model are estimated from a data set provided by
the Authority itself. A number of economic variables that inﬂuence
this decision process are also included in the model. We analyse how
monitoring by the Antitrust Authority aﬀects ﬁrms’ strategies about
cooperation. Firms’ strategies are modelled as a repeated prisoner’s
dilemma using object-oriented Bayesian networks. We show how the
integration of ﬁrms’ decision process and external market information
can be modelled in this way. Various decision scenarios and strategies
are illustrated.
1. Introduction.
Firms in many cases have incentives to cooperate (col-
lude) to increase their proﬁts. The possibility for ﬁrms to collude does not
depend solely on their decision but also on external circumstances. First
of all, ﬁrms need to comply with antitrust laws. If the Antitrust Authority
(AA) ﬁnds negative anti-competitive eﬀects, resulting from ﬁrms’ coopera-
tive behaviour, it may intervene to prevent the ﬁrms from merging.
The AAs decision process is modelled here by using a Bayesian network
(BN) or Probabilistic Expert System (PES) [Cowell et al. (1999)] estimated
from real data. A BN is a graphical model that encodes the probabilistic
relationships among the variables of interest allowing for the application of
fast general-purpose algorithms to compute inferences.
Often governments may ﬁnd negative anti-competitive eﬀects resulting
from a merger. As a consequence, the decision by ﬁrms to cooperate is
Received November 2011; revised September 2012.
1Supported by a PRIN07 Italian Research Grant. Sections 3.1, 4.1 and 4.3 are due to
C. Vergari, the remaining sections are due to J. Mortera and P. Vicard.
Key words and phrases. Antitrust Authority, Bayesian networks, mergers, model inte-
gration, prisoner’s dilemma, repeated games.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
2013, Vol. 7, No. 2, 714–738. This reprint diﬀers from the original in pagination
and typographic detail.
1

2
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
actually aﬀected by the decision process of the AA. The AA may start
an investigation either because two ﬁrms make a formal request to merge
(explicit collusion) or because the authority suspects that two ﬁrms are
implicitly colluding. In what follows the term merger will be used for both
explicit and implicit collusion.
We also study how the AAs monitoring aﬀects ﬁrms’ strategies about co-
operation. For this purpose, the ﬁrms’ set of potential strategies are modelled
in turn as a repeated prisoner’s dilemma using object-oriented Bayesian net-
works (OOBNs) [Koller and Pfeﬀer (1997), Bangsø and Wuillemin (2000)].
OOBNs are a recent extension of BNs which allow for a hierarchical deﬁni-
tion and construction of a BN. They provide a compact and intuitive repre-
sentation of the repeated prisoner’s dilemma (PD). Furthermore, thanks to
the modularity and ﬂexibility of this approach, various sources of uncertainty
within the game and generalizations of the repeated prisoner’s dilemma can
be analysed. We use the PD as a naive representation of ﬁrms’ economic
interaction, the focus of this paper being that of analysing the evolution
of ﬁrms’ behaviour according to various external scenarios. For theoretical
aspects on suboptimal strategies in Bayesian games see, for example, Young
and Smith (1992).
We present two diﬀerent networks: the ﬁrst models the AAs decision pro-
cess, and the second represents the behaviour of the two ﬁrms in a duopoly.
OOBNs give the graphical framework to integrate these two networks and
to represent their time evolution. Both the graphical structure and the as-
sociated probability tables of AAs decision process network are estimated
from a real data set. As a result, we obtain the estimated probability that
AA intervenes to prevent anticompetitive behaviour of a merger. For various
economic sectors (markets of interest) we study the sensitivity of coopera-
tive outcomes with respect to factors such as geographical size, market share,
Herﬁndahl–Hirschman Index (HHI) variation, vertical eﬀects, the presence
of entry barriers and buyer power. The global OOBN model which inte-
grates the AAs decision process with a duopoly model is used to obtain the
optimal decision in light of a series of interesting scenarios that could occur
in practice.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we brieﬂy describe the
merger control problem. We illustrate the BN for the AAs decision process
estimated from the data and show its use in various scenarios in Section 3.
A brief introduction to the prisoner’s dilemma is illustrated in Section 4.1
followed by the Bayesian network representation of the PD in Section 4.2.
After introducing the repeated prisoner’s dilemma in Section 4.3, in Section
4.4 we show how this can be represented as an OOBN. In Section 5 we show
how we integrate the PD network with the AA network obtaining a general
purpose global representation of the problem, and in Section 5.1 we apply
this to several decision scenarios. Finally, in Section 6 we draw conclusions
and discuss further developments.

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
3
Fig. 1.
(a) Pictorial representation of the AA decision process and Firms’ behavior in a
Duopoly. (b) Corresponding representation for a repeated scenario.
2. The merger control problem.
The AA studies the impact of a merger
on the market and its consequences on social welfare. Hence, the AAs de-
cision aﬀects the dynamics in ﬁrms’ economic interaction as well as the
corresponding equilibrium outcome. When choosing between cooperating or
defecting, ﬁrms take the AAs decision process into account, both when they
formally request to merge and in the case of implicit collusion.
In our setup, the actors are as follows: the Antitrust Authority and the
two merging ﬁrms, termed Firm1 and Firm2 (the duopolists). Figure 1(a)
shows a pictorial representation of the eﬀects of AAs control activity on
Firms’ behaviour. The two rounded rectangles, AA and Duopoly, represent
the AAs decision process and the Firms’ merging strategy, respectively. The
AAs decision process is modelled by a Bayesian network learned from real
data (see Sections 3.2 and 3.3). The duopoly is modelled as a PD using a
Bayesian network for decision making (see Section 4). The two networks are
then integrated giving rise to a global model, where both the AAs decision
process and the duopoly are represented by OOBNs. Figure 1(a) represents a
single stage (vertical slice) of the overall model. The merger problem, as well
as AAs activity, evolve in time. Figure 1(b) gives a graphical representation
of the decision process dynamics. Details on these networks are given in
Sections 4 and 5.
3. Antitrust Authority’s decision process.
3.1. Current practice.
The primary task of the AA is to enforce the an-
titrust law which prohibits anticompetitive behaviour, so as to prevent a
reduction in social welfare.2 In particular, the AA is responsible for de-
tecting the following: (a) agreements restricting competition; (b) abuses of
dominant positions; (c) merger operations involving the creation or strength-
ening of dominant positions in ways that eliminate or substantially reduce
competition.
2For details on the Italian antitrust law and AAs tasks see: http://www.agcm.it/en.

4
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Table 1
Description of the variables in the AA network
Variable
States
Description
Years
{1991–1996, 1997–2000,
Reference periods
2001–2003}
ATECO
Mining, food & beverage
Relevant market
Manufacture, etc. (see Figure 3)
Geo size
{Sub-national, national,
Size of the relevant market
supra-national}
Buyer power
{Yes, No}
Presence (Yes) of competitive
pressure on the merging parties
Entry barriers
{Yes, No}
Presence (Yes) of entry barriers
HHI variations
{0, (0,100), [100, 500),
Variation in market
[500, 1000), ≥1000 }
concentration index
Post market share
{<20%, [20%–40%], >40%}
Post-merger market share
Vertical eﬀects
{Yes, No}
Presence (Yes) of vertical
eﬀects
AA intervention
{0, 1}
No (0)/Yes (1)
Once the Authority has received a complaint or has collected informa-
tion on possible interference with competition, a preliminary examination
is carried out and if there are alleged violations of the Antitrust law, the
AA carries out a full investigation. The law requires that whenever the po-
tentially merging ﬁrms exhibit sale revenues in excess of certain predeﬁned
thresholds, the merger operation must be notiﬁed to the authority in ad-
vance. The thresholds are updated annually according to the deﬂator index
for gross domestic product.
Decisions on a merger are based on a case by case examination and, to
our knowledge, currently, no speciﬁc models are used. The law also does not
give any speciﬁc thresholds for relevant variables, such as market share or a
market concentration index.
3.1.1. The data.
The data we use were collected by the Italian Antitrust
Authority and concern all the cases examined from 1991 to 2003. This data
set consists of 6920 observations. Based on this data set, La Noce et al.
(2006) developed a logit model to analyse the impact of diﬀerent factors on
the Authority decision. Following La Noce et al. (2006), we consider rele-
vant markets aﬀected by the merger as elementary units of analysis. These
markets are denoted by the ISTAT (Italian National Institute of Statistics)
economic activity code ATECO.
Table 1 describes the variables in the data set that were used to estimate
the AA network. The Herﬁndahl–Hirschman Index, HHI, is deﬁned as the
sum of the squares of n ﬁrms’ market share, Pn
i αi2, where αi denotes

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
5
Fig. 2.
Logical constraints for AA network estimation.
ﬁrm i’s market share and Pn
i αi = 100. Increase in the HHI indicates a
decrease in competition and an increase in market power. Vertical eﬀects
refer to the anticompetitive eﬀects that a vertical merger could imply, that
is, the possibility to raise entry barriers by input foreclosure or by customer
foreclosure.
The estimation (learning) process of a Bayesian network consists of two
phases: the graphical structure estimation and the conditional probability
table estimation. These will be illustrated in turn.
3.2. Estimation of the network’s graphical structure.
The graphical struc-
ture of the AA network representing the AA decision process is obtained by
a combination of subject-matter knowledge, provided by a domain expert,
and the information in the data.
The Necessary Path Condition (NPC) algorithm [Steck (2001)] imple-
mented in Hugin is used to estimate the graphical structure of the network.
The NPC is a constraint-based algorithm recursively testing marginal and
conditional association between categorical variables. The NPC algorithm
allows the user to choose the most suitable among independence equivalent
models. The NPC algorithm takes into account logical constraints, such as
presence/absence of a link or assignment/ban of a speciﬁc direction between
variables.
The logical constraints we implemented here are shown in Figure 2. These
imply that if there is a relation between two variables in diﬀerent boxes,
it must have the same direction as that in Figure 2. Furthermore, if two
variables belong to the same box, their association (if it exists) can be in any
one of the two possible directions. For example, if node AA Intervention3 is
connected with any of the other variables, the direction has to be from these
into AA Intervention node (AA decision logically depends on the values of
the other variables). This means that arrows from AA Intervention to any
other variable are logically prohibited. The reference period (node Years) is
not inﬂuenced by any of the other variables in the model.
The dependence structure—based on the logical constraints given in Fig-
ure 2—learnt from the data is shown in Figure 3. The main dependence
relationships estimated from the data are as follows:
3Here we indicate nodes in teletype.

6
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Fig. 3.
AA network showing the dependencies of AA Intervention on the relevant vari-
ables describing the market and the marginal probabilities of the variables.
(i) The market of interest (ATECO) can depend on Year: an economic
sector could be more relevant and worth investigating during one of the
three reference periods (note that the president of the AA changed in 1997
and from 2001 Italian currency Lira was replaced by the Euro).
(ii) AA Intervention depends directly on HHI Variation, Vertical
Effects, Post Market Share, Geo Size and Entry Barriers. Furthermore,
the relevant market (ATECO) does not aﬀect AAs decision (AA Intervention)
directly but only through the relevant features of the market and of the merg-
ing ﬁrms (HHI Variation, Vertical Effects, Post Market Share, Geo Size
and Entry Barriers).
These results are consistent with those in Bergman, Jakobsson and Razo
(2005) and La Noce et al. (2006).
(iii) The
Herﬁndahl–Hirschman
concentration
index
variation
(HHI
Variation) depends on all the variables that logically precede it or are
on an equal footing (as shown in Figure 2), whereas Post Market Share
depends only on Entry Barriers, Geo Size and ATECO. An explanation of
this could be that when a market sector is characterised by entry barriers
(because of patents or increasing returns to scale) we expect that this market

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
7
may be composed of a few ﬁrms with high market shares, thus inﬂuencing
Post Market Share and a relevant HHI Variation.
Many other conditional independencies can be read oﬀthe AA network in
Figure 3, but for brevity they will not be presented here.
3.3. Estimation of the probability tables.
To complete the construction
of our model, we estimate the conditional probability distributions of the
variables from the data. The EM-algorithm [Dempster, Laird and Rubin
(1977)] is used for learning the probabilities.
The network in Figure 3 exhibits a complex association structure among
the variables. For example, node HHI variation has seven parents. Its con-
ditional probability table has 17×33 ×23 ×5 = 18,360 entries corresponding
to the state space of its parent variables: ATECO, Post Market Share, Years,
Geo Size, Entry Barriers, Buyer Power, Vertical Effects, as well as HHI
Variation’s state space. Many of these combinations are not represented in
the data set, although they cannot be considered impossible ex ante. In fact,
according to Bergman, Jakobsson and Razo (2005), if a threshold for relevant
variables—like post market share—can be detected in AAs legal practice,
this threshold may vary according to other variables, such as buyer power
and entry barriers. Therefore, no variable level combinations can in principle
be ruled out. So, in order to avoid that certain possible conﬁgurations in the
conditional probability tables have zero probability, we set noninformative
nonzero prior probabilities.
Figure 3 displays the marginal probabilities4 estimated from our data.
Note, for example, that the probability of an AA intervention is only 0.0189,
which could be due to the fact that in most cases, 74.38%, the post market
share is less than 20% and entry barriers and vertical eﬀects are absent (with
probability 0.9793 and 0.9268, resp.), HHI index is less than 100 in 87.85%
of the cases and only in 15.38% the geographical size is supra-national.
3.4. Using the network.
Once the model has been estimated, we can ad-
dress a number of questions about the AAs decision process. Various possible
scenarios can be examined by inserting and propagating the appropriate ev-
idence throughout the network. We illustrate three hypothetical scenarios.
Scenario A. What is the probability of an AA intervention in a merger
request when there are entry barriers in the market? This scenario is rep-
resented in Figure 4(a). The posterior probability of an AA Intervention
increases from 0.0189 to 0.5790 when the evidence Entry Barriers = Yes is
inserted and propagated throughout the network.
Scenario B. How would the probability obtained in Scenario A change if
the Herﬁndahl–Hirschman concentration index variation (HHI variation)
4In all ﬁgures probabilities are expressed as percentages.

8
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Fig. 4.
Scenarios (a), (b) and (c) giving marginal posterior probabilities for the AA
network.
is in the class [100,500)? Note in Figure 4(b) that the probability of AA
Intervention now increases to 0.7741.
The network can be used not only for direct reasoning about the proba-
bility of AA Intervention, but also for reasoning about possible “causes”
of a given AA decision.
Scenario C. A question about competition authorities’ behaviour that has
been rarely addressed in the literature is about the type of mergers that are
typically prohibited [Bergman, Jakobsson and Razo (2005)]. Our network
can be used for this purpose. Suppose that the AA decides to intervene
in a ﬁrm’s merger request. What are the most plausible reasons of this
decision? Figure 4(c) gives the posterior probabilities given the evidence
that AA Intervention is equal to one. On comparing Figures 3 and 4(c) we
see that:
• The probability of entry barriers increases from 0.0207 to 0.6367;
• The probability of vertical eﬀects increases from 0.0732 to 0.4536. This
is an interesting result, since, although there is common agreement about
the relevance of vertical eﬀects for AAs decision on a merger request, it is

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
9
Table 2
Payoﬀmatrix for the
prisoner’s dilemma
Firm2
C
D
Firm1
C
a,a
c,d
D
d,c
b,b
controversial whether vertical eﬀects inﬂuence the market negatively by
foreclosing competitors or positively by reducing transaction costs. Here
we ﬁnd that the presence of vertical eﬀects is much more probable for
those ﬁrms where AA decides to intervene. La Noce et al. (2006) found
similar results.
• The probability of post market share less than 20% decreases from 0.7438
to 0.0922, whereas the probability of post market share greater than 40%
increases from 0.0777 to 0.7006.
• The HHI index decreases in the ﬁrst two classes and increases in the last
three classes.
Note that when evidence is propagated in the network, all marginal proba-
bility tables are updated accordingly.
4. Duopoly representation.
4.1. The prisoner’s dilemma.
The prisoner’s dilemma [Flood (1958)] de-
scribes cooperation by rational agents. The PD is a 2-player symmetric game
where the two players have the same rˆole and have the same set of poten-
tial strategies termed cooperate C and defect D. The PD is a simultaneous
game where the players choose just once and simultaneously and the unique
equilibrium5 is the pair of strategies (D, D). Players’ payoﬀs are such that
defect is a dominant strategy, that is, a strategy that is preferred by each
player independently of his/her rival. The problem is that this strategy is in-
eﬃcient since both players would gain more if they cooperated and adopted
the (C, C) strategy. The source of the dilemma lies in the fact that each
player has an incentive to defect if the rival player cooperates, so that an
agreement to cooperate would not be credible.
Simultaneous games, such as the PD, are commonly represented in either
the normal or the extensive form. In the normal form representation, the PD
can be described by the payoﬀmatrix in Table 2. The two ﬁrms, Firm1 and
Firm2, have two available strategies: cooperate C or defect D. The payoﬀs
5An equilibrium is a strategy pair such that no player can improve his position by
unilaterally changing his decision. In other words, it is a situation in which all players
choose mutual best responses.

10
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Fig. 5.
(a) Tree representation of the simultaneous duopoly game. (b) Corresponding
Bayesian network representation.
need to be such that d > a > b ≥c and 2a > (c + d) > 2b, so that (C,C)
maximises players’ joint payoﬀ. Given that b < a, the strategy pair (D,D)
is strictly worse than (C,C).
In the extensive form the game is represented by a tree. Figure 5(a) shows
the tree representation (equivalent to Table 2) of the simultaneous duopoly
game. Firm1 moves ﬁrst and chooses either C or D, Firm2 moves second
but without knowing what Firm1 did.
A symmetric duopoly, such as a market with two symmetric proﬁt-maxi-
mising ﬁrms in mutual competition, can be modelled as a PD. The duopoly
proﬁt is the gain of each of the sellers in this market.
Suppose the two ﬁrms produce identical goods, incurring constant margi-
nal costs, and they compete setting their prices. Since consumers will buy
from the ﬁrm charging the lowest price, ﬁrms have an incentive to undercut
their price to conquer the market (noncooperative or defect strategy). At
equilibrium ﬁrms will set the competitive price (the market price under

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
11
perfect competition which is equal to ﬁrm’s marginal cost of production),
gaining duopoly proﬁt b = 0. This result is often called a paradox, since
there are just two ﬁrms in the market and still the perfectly competitive
strategy yields zero proﬁt. However, if ﬁrms decide to cooperate and set the
monopoly price, they can share positive monopoly proﬁts. The monopoly
proﬁt is always greater than twice the duopoly proﬁt, 2a > 2b.
In most markets, from a consumer’s point of view, goods are not identical.
This gives ﬁrms the ability to raise the price above the marginal cost of
production without losing their customers to competitors. In a symmetric
duopoly with product diﬀerentiation ﬁrms produce and sell diﬀerentiated
goods (imperfect substitutes). As long as product diﬀerentiation is not too
large, ﬁrms face a PD: if they cooperate, they could share monopoly proﬁt,
but they have incentive to defect if the rival cooperates. However, when
goods are imperfect substitutes, ﬁrms make positive duopoly proﬁt, b > 0,
under the noncooperative strategy pair (D,D). This duopoly proﬁt is smaller
than half the monopoly proﬁt, b < a, so that the cooperative strategy C is
superior for each ﬁrm singly.
4.2. The prisoner’s dilemma network.
Bayesian networks for decision
support systems can incorporate both decision nodes and utility nodes [Jensen
(2001)], giving rise to an inﬂuence diagram (ID) representation. IDs were
extended by Lauritzen and Nilsson (2001) to allow for limited information
decision problems (LIMIDs). A diﬀerent approach to represent and solve
games using graphical models was initially proposed by Smith (1996) and
later by La Mura (2000), Kearns, Littman and Singh (2001) and Koller and
Milch (2003).
The one stage PD being a symmetric game can be represented by the
ID network in Figure 5(b). The simultaneity of the game is implemented
by representing Firm1 as a random variable (oval node) and Firm2 as the
decision maker (rectangular node) having two possible actions: defect D and
cooperate C. Firm2’s decision is inﬂuenced by Firm1. Firm1’s associated
prior probability distribution represents Firm2’s subjective opinion about
Firm1’s behaviour. Random variable Firm1 has two states, defect (coded as
0) and cooperate (coded as 1), with uniform prior probabilities indicating
Firm2’s ignorance about Firm1’s choice. Firm2 could assign diﬀerent prior
probabilities based on his/her prior knowledge about Firm1’s behaviour.
Table 3 shows Firms2’s utility [node Firm2’s utility U2 in Figure 5(b)]
based on Firm1 and Firm2’s actions. Thanks to game symmetry, Table 3 is
equivalent to the normal form payoﬀmatrix given in Table 2.
Once the network is compiled, the optimal decision for Firm2 is automati-
cally computed by maximising expected utility. Since the game is symmetric,
Firm2’s optimal strategy coincides with Firm1’s optimal strategy and this
pair of strategies constitutes a Nash equilibrium. Thus, in the ID represen-
tation the choice of Firm2 as decision maker is without loss of generality.

12
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Table 3
Firm2’s utility U2 conditional on Firm1 and Firm2’s actions
Firm1
Defect (0)
Cooperate (1)
Firm2
Defect (0)
Cooperate (1)
Defect (0)
Cooperate (1)
U2
b
c
d
a
In what follows we always consider Firm2 as the decision maker. The
prior probability distribution on the random variable Firm1 reﬂects Firm2’s
subjective opinion on the type of rival player he/she is playing against.
4.3. Repeated prisoner’s dilemma.
Since ﬁrms interact more than once,
we need to consider the repeated version of the PD. In repeated games,
players’ actions are observed at the end of each period and their overall payoﬀ
is the sum of the payoﬀs in each stage discounted by a factor δ ∈[0,1]. Thus,
players may condition their play on the opponents past play. Here we assume
that ﬁrms never forget previous moves and other information acquired, in
other words, we assume that ﬁrms have perfect recall.
The repeated PD analyzes how threats and promises about future be-
haviour can aﬀect and improve current behaviour. When the time horizon
is indeﬁnite ﬁrms may decide to adopt a cooperative strategy where the
discount factor δ represents uncertainty about the number of stages faced
by ﬁrms. This uncertainty is usually not modelled within the game itself.
In Section 5 we illustrate how to incorporate this uncertainty in the merger
control problem.
4.4. OOBN for repeated prisoner’s dilemma.
Generalising the tree rep-
resentation in Figure 5(a) to repeated games is both computationally and
graphically demanding. The game tree grows exponentially with the num-
ber of stages. For example, Figure 6(a) shows the tree representation of a
two-stage PD.
OOBNs are particularly well suited for an application area such as the
present because the similarity between network elements (the stages of the
game) can be exploited in a modular and ﬂexible construction. Object-
oriented Bayesian networks have a hierarchical structure where a node itself
can represent a (object-oriented) network containing several instances of
other generic classes of networks. Instances have interface input and output
nodes as well as ordinary nodes. Instances of a particular class have identical
conditional probability tables for noninput nodes. Instances are connected
by arrows from output nodes into input nodes. These arrows, as well as
those from ordinary nodes to input nodes, represent identity links, whereas
arrows between two ordinary nodes or an output node and an ordinary
node represent probabilistic dependence. The graphical simplicity automat-

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
13
Fig. 6.
(a) Tree representation of the two-stage duopoly game. (b) Corresponding OOBN
representation.
ically produces computational eﬃciency. As a result, increasingly complex
networks can be constructed by simply adding new objects which perform
diﬀerent tasks.
Since we assume perfect recall, Hugin6 version 6.9 software, which au-
tomatically implements the fact that at every stage the decision maker re-
calls all previous decisions, is used to build the networks. This implies that
each decision depends on the decisions taken in all previous stages, so even
though the graphical representation does not implicitly represent this, in
the junction tree construction [Cowell et al. (1999)] these dependencies are
explicitly considered. In what follows we indicate an instance in bold. Fig-
ure 6(b) shows the OOBN two-stage repeated game that corresponds to
the tree representation in Figure 6(a). Each rounded rectangle represents
an instance termed Duopoly and models a stage of the repeated game. In
order to specify the links between successive stages (instances), Figure 5(b)
6www.hugin.com.

14
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Fig. 7.
Class network for repeated PD with associated marginal prior probability tables.
(which represents each Duopoly instance) needs to be generalised as shown
in Figure 7.
The node Firm1∗models the behaviour of Firm1 in the next stage. In
each stage the game can either continue or terminate. Firm1 and Firm1∗
now need to be given three states: defect (0), cooperate (1) and stop (2).
Since in a repeated game every stage depends on the actions taken in the pre-
vious stages, Firm1∗is logically dependent on Firm2. Uncertainty about the
existence of further stages is modelled by adding a new random node stop?.
Node stop? has two states, {0,1} according to whether the game continues
or stops and has a Bernoulli distribution Bin(1,1 −delta). The parameter
node delta is the probability that the game continues P(stop? = 0). Node
delta has a uniform prior distribution over a plausible set of values.
In the ﬁrst stage, to ensure that the game starts, Firm1 can only choose
between defect and cooperate. Table 4 gives the conditional probability dis-
tribution of Firm1∗given stop? and Firm2. It shows that if the game stops
(stop? = 1), Firm1∗stops with certainty, else Firm1∗cooperates or defects
according to Firm2’s decision. This implements the tit for tat (TFT) strat-
Table 4
Conditional probability table for Firm1∗given stop? and Firm2
Stop?
No (0)
Yes (1)
Firm2
Defect (0)
Cooperate (1)
Defect (0)
Cooperate (1)
Defect (0)
1
0
0
0
Cooperate (1)
0
1
0
0
Stop (2)
0
0
1
1

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
15
Fig. 8.
Generalised repeated PD network representing various strategies and incomplete
information.
egy in which Firm1 begins by cooperating and cooperates as long as Firm2
cooperates, and defects otherwise. Variations on this strategy will be shown
in Section 4.4.1.
4.4.1. Other strategies.
Experimental results show that people, contrary
to standard prescriptions of game theory, may cooperate more frequently
than expected [Andreoni and Miller (1993)]. An explanation behind this
empirical evidence is provided by the theoretical models of Kreps and Wilson
(1982) and Kreps et al. (1982). Figure 7 can be modiﬁed to provide a general
class network that explicitly incorporates a set of potential strategies for
Firm1 other than TFT. This network is displayed in Figure 8. The network
can, for example, model a repeated PD with incomplete information, that
is, where there is uncertainty about the type of rival that a ﬁrm is going
to face. The conditional probability distribution of Firm1∗reﬂects Firm2’s
uncertainty about its opponent. If Firm2 believes Firm1 to be “altruistic”, it
can expect Firm1 to cooperate, with probability αD > 0, even if it defected
in the previous stage. On the other hand, if Firm2 believes Firm1 to be
“egoistic”, then it expects Firm1 to cooperate, with probability αC < 1,
even if it cooperated in the previous stage.
Additional nodes, Firm1∗|D and Firm1∗|C, having Bernoulli distribu-
tions with parameter nodes alpha D and alpha C are added to the network
of Figure 7. Node Firm1∗takes value 2 if the game stops in the current
stage, whereas if the game continues (stop? = 0), the value of Firm1∗de-
pends on that of Firm2. If Firm2 defects (cooperates), Firm1∗is Firm1∗|D
(Firm1∗|C), with alpha D (alpha C) being the probability that Firm1 will
cooperate in the next stage given that Firm2 defected (cooperated) in the
previous stage. The conditional probability distribution of Firm1∗is thus

16
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Fig. 9.
Integrated AA-duopoly merger stage game.
deﬁned by the logical expression if (stop == 1,2,if (Firm2 == 0,Firm1∗|D,
Firm1∗|C)).7 Firm1∗represents Firm2’s subjective opinions about Firm1’s
behaviour in each single stage of the repeated game.
This model can also incorporate a large set of strategies, including TFT,
and it can model scenarios where the probability that the game continues
depends on external factors. An illustrative example is given in Section 5.
5. Global network.
Thanks to the modularity and ﬂexibility of OOBNs,
it is possible to integrate the AA and the Duopoly networks, giving rise
to a unique overall OOBN representation of the problem [Figure 1(a)]. An
expanded representation of this model is shown in Figure 9.
7The function if (A,x,y) takes value x if condition A is satisﬁed, otherwise y.

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
17
Fig. 10.
OOBN representing a three-stage repeated merger game with uncertainty about
the number of stages.
The Duopoly network (the bottom network) in Figure 9 is similar to the
network in Figure 8 except that the uncertainty about the next stage stop?
is now identiﬁed with AA Intervention in the AA network (the top network
in Figure 9) representing AAs decision process.
The AA decision process is usually dynamic; it can change over time due
to changes in the antitrust law as well as changes in market conditions. We
are thus interested in the repeated version of the model in Figure 9.
Figure 10 represents the global model (Figure 9) repeated four times for
a three-stage merger game with uncertainty on the number of stages. In
general, an OOBN with n + 1 instances models a game repeated n times
with uncertainty about the successive stage. In this model, the AAs decision
process is represented by the same instance in each period. This is justiﬁed
by assuming that, even if the AA decides not to intervene, it continues
monitoring ﬁrms’ behaviour in successive stages.
5.1. Firms’ strategy.
We now study the sensitivity of cooperative be-
haviour with respect to two sets of utilities and all the factors that might
directly or indirectly inﬂuence the AAs decision. We consider both the TFT
strategy and a more general strategy. The TFT strategy can be implemented
using the global network by setting Firm1∗= 1 in stage Duopoly 1 and
Firm1∗|C = 1, Firm1∗|D = 0 in all other stages.

18
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Table 5
Firm2’s utility U2 for a market with perfect substitutability
Firm1
Defect (0)
Cooperate (1)
Firm2
Defect (0)
Cooperate (1)
Defect (0)
Cooperate (1)
U2
0
−10
150
100
5.1.1. TFT strategy: Perfect substitutability.
Table 5 shows an example
of Firm2’s utility for a market with perfect substitutable goods. Figures 11,
12 and 13 show the marginal probabilities for a selection of random variables
and the expected utilities for the decision nodes in the ﬁrst stage AA 1 and
Duopoly 1.
Fig. 11.
Marginal probabilities and optimal decision in the ﬁrst stage AA 1 and
Duopoly 1, under perfect substitutability, when Firm1 plays TFT.

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
19
Fig. 12.
Marginal probabilities and optimal decision in the ﬁrst stage AA 1 and
Duopoly 1, under perfect substitutability, when Firm1 plays TFT, Entry Barriers = Yes
and HHI Variation >= 1000.
When no evidence about the variables in the market is inserted in the
network (Figure 11) Firm2’s optimal decision is to cooperate (1), having
expected utility equal to 443.40 (while defect has expected utility equal
to 385.47). This could be in part due to the small probability of an AA
intervention, 0.0189.
Figure 12 shows the case where there are entry barriers in the market of
interest (Entry Barriers = Yes) and the merger causes the HHI variation
to be in the last class (HHI Variation >= 1000). The resulting probability
of AA intervention shoots up to 0.9435 and Firm2’s optimal decision is to
defect with expected utility of 394.72, against 350.93 for cooperating. This
strategy still remains optimal (although with a smaller gap between the
expected utilities) when based only on the presence of entry barriers.

20
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Fig. 13.
Marginal probabilities and optimal decision in the ﬁrst stage AA 1 and
Duopoly 1, under perfect substitutability, when Firm1 plays TFT, Entry Barriers = Yes,
HHI Variation >= 1000 and Buyer Power = Yes.
Figure 13 shows the case where, as before, there are entry barriers, the
HHI variation is ≥1000, and customers exert competitive pressure on the
merging parties (Buyer Power = Yes). The probability of AA intervention
decreases from 0.9435 to 0.2915 and Firm2’s optimal decision is to cooperate,
having expected utility of 416.14. It is interesting to note that buyer power
is able to counterbalance the eﬀect of both entry barriers and a large HHI
variation.
5.1.2. TFT strategy: Imperfect substitutability.
We now use Firm2’s util-
ity for a market with imperfect substitutable goods given in Table 6.
Figure 14 shows results when evidence about the market is not available.
Firm2’s optimal decision is to cooperate (1), having expected utility equal

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
21
Table 6
Firm2’s utility U2 for a market with imperfect substitutability
Firm1
Defect
Cooperate
Firm2
Defect
Cooperate
Defect
Cooperate
U2
100
50
160
150
to 601.33 (while defect has expected utility equal to 513.21). Again, this is
most plausibly due to the small probability of an AA intervention.
When Entry Barriers = Yes and HHI Variation >= 1000, Firm2’s ex-
pected utility to cooperate or to defect is almost equal, although the prob-
ability of AA intervention is close to 1 (Figure 15).
Fig. 14.
Marginal probabilities and optimal decision in the ﬁrst stage AA 1 and
Duopoly 1, under imperfect substitutability, when Firm1 plays TFT.

22
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
Fig.
15.
Marginal
probabilities
and
optimal
decision
in
the
ﬁrst
stage
AA 1
and
Duopoly 1,
under
imperfect
substitutability,
when
Firm1
plays
TFT,
Entry
Barriers = Yes and HHI Variation >= 1000.
Furthermore, in contrast to perfect substitutability, accounting for the
presence of entry barriers alone is not suﬃcient to modify the optimal deci-
sion from cooperate to defect. The main reason being that when the ﬁrms’
products are imperfect substitutes, the set of utilities reﬂects the fact that
the defect strategy does not correspond to such a strong punishment, so
that a ﬁrm can continue to cooperate even if there is high risk that the
game might stop.
5.1.3. Incomplete information.
Assume that Firm2 has incomplete in-
formation about the type of rival it is going to face. This is a reasonable
scenario, as ﬁrms are likely to be uncertain about their rivals’ costs and
beneﬁts from cooperation.
Table 7 shows Firm2’s expected utility in case of perfect substitutabil-
ity (based on Firm2’s utility given in Table 5) for diﬀerent probability

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
23
Table 7
Firm2’s expected utility for diﬀerent values of αC and αD, without evidence, with
evidence E1 and E2, for likelihood evidence and for the TFT strategy
Without evidence
With evidence E1
With evidence E2
αC
αD
E[u(D)]
E[u(C)]
E[u(D)|E1]
E[u(C)|E1]
E[u(D)|E2]
E[u(C)|E2]
1
0.25
337
388
329
339
322
298
0.8
0.25
286
316
278
277
271
245
0.6
0.25
238
250
228
219
220
193
0.4
0.25
203
193
190
170
180
152
1
0.2
332
388
326
339
321
298
0.8
0.2
281
316
275
277
270
245
0.6
0.2
231
247
225
217
219
193
0.4
0.2
192
188
183
167
177
149
1
0.1
321
388
321
339
320
298
0.8
0.1
270
316
270
277
269
245
0.6
0.1
219
243
219
215
218
193
0.4
0.1
172
179
171
159
170
143
Likelihood
280
313
273
275
268
243
TFT
385
443
390
394
395
353
values of αC and αD (nodes alpha C and alpha D in Figure 9). Three
types of information about the relevant market are considered: no evi-
dence, evidence E1 = {Post Market Share ≥40%, Entry Barriers = Yes
and Buyer Power = Yes} and evidence E2 = {Entry Barriers = Yes and
HHI Variation ∈[500–1000]}. The optimal decision yielding the highest ex-
pected utility for each scenario is italicised.
The second last row of Table 7 gives the results when inserting a uniform
likelihood function for αC > 0.5 and αD < 0.5. In this case, Firm2’s optimal
decision is to cooperate under no evidence and E1. Whereas, for E2, when
the probability of AA intervention is close to one, E[u(D)|E2] > E[u(C)|E2],
so Firm2’s optimal decision is to defect. These results coincide with those
obtained using the TFT strategy shown in the last row of Table 7. Recall
that the TFT strategy corresponds to setting αC = 1 and αD = 0 in all
Duopoly instances.
Now, suppose Firm2 believes that its rival cooperates—with probabil-
ity αC = 0.8—if Firm2 cooperates; and cooperates—with probability αD =
0.25—even if Firm2 defects. This is implemented in the network insert-
ing and propagating evidence alpha C = 0.8 and alpha D = 0.25 in each
Duopoly instance. As we can see in Table 7, Firm2’s expected utility to
cooperate, E[u(C)] = 316, is greater than to defect, E[u(D)] = 286. Intro-
ducing evidence E1 in AA 1, the two decisions become almost utility equiv-

24
J. MORTERA, P. VICARD AND C. VERGARI
alent. Whereas, under the TFT strategy, E1 yields an optimal decision to
cooperate E[u(C)|E1] = 394, whereas E[u(D)|E1] = 390.
Recall that when information about the relevant market is not taken into
account, the probability of AA intervention is 0.0189. If the probability that
Firm1 cooperates when Firm2 defects is very small (αD = 0.1), then its op-
timal decision is to cooperate, even for small values of αC. On the other
hand, when αD ≥0.2, defecting is Firm2’s best choice for αC = 0.4, yield-
ing a diﬀerent behaviour from that obtained using the TFT strategy. How-
ever, using evidence E1, when the probability of AA intervention is 0.514,
E[u(D)|E1] > E[u(C)|E1] even when Firm1 is slightly altruistic, αD ≤0.2
and αC ≤0.6. Furthermore, if αD = 0.25, then E[u(D)|E1] > E[u(C)|E1] also
for αC ≤0.8. If the TFT strategy is adopted, Firm2 optimally cooperates
both under no evidence and E1, whereas for E2 the associated probability of
AA intervention is very large, so that Firm2’s optimal decision is to defect
for all values of αC and αD considered here.
While the examples shown here are merely illustrative, the number of
questions and diﬀerent strategies that can be analysed is clearly huge and
increases with the number of stages considered.
6. Conclusion.
When the antitrust authority starts an investigation, the
two potentially merging ﬁrms are likely to represent a relevant share of the
market, hence, they might aﬀect the price of the goods traded. In contrast,
the decisions of other ﬁrms inside the market, but outside the merged en-
tity, can be assumed to be irrelevant. In circumstances such as these, a PD
duopoly model is a reasonable representation.
From an economic perspective, the methodology we present can be seen
as a useful decision support system. It models and integrates the diﬀerent
uncertainty sources deriving from a rival competitor and from the economic
environment. Furthermore, the model can be updated as we consider new
cases, changes in market conditions or new antitrust regulations. The em-
phasis in this paper is to show the potentiality of OOBNs in the analysis of
duopoly markets with external uncertainty. For the sake of simplicity, the
duopoly is represented by a rather naive game theoretic model; in future
studies we wish to implement a more complex interaction model between
ﬁrms.
As is standard in industrial organization, the ﬁrm is seen as a single de-
cision making unit; generalisations of our OOBN to model ﬁrms’ internal
organization could also be considered. Indeed, a ﬁrm’s top and middle man-
agement may have diﬀerent objectives from its owner. An appropriate BN
could be built to model these interrelationships and incorporate them into a
more general OOBN model. This would yield a more complete and realistic
picture of ﬁrms’ cooperative behaviour. We hope to develop this and other
aspects in the future.

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
25
Acknowledgements.
We are indebted to Carlo Cazzola, Mauro La Noce
and Valerio Ruocco of the Italian Antitrust Authority for providing the data.
We thank the referee and Associate Editor for their insightful comments. We
also thank Mario Tirelli and Filippo Calciano for suggestions on a previous
version.
