International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
DOI:10.5121/ijasa.2015.3401                                                                                                                           1 
 
 
TOWARD ORGANIC COMPUTING APPROACH 
FOR CYBERNETIC RESPONSIVE 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
Clement Duhart1,2 and Cyrille Bertelle2 
 
1ECE Paris, LACSC, France 
2Normandie Univ, LITIS, FR CNRS 3638, Le Havre University, France 
 
ABSTRACT. 
 
The developpment of the Internet of Things (IoT) concept revives Responsive Environments (RE) 
technologies. Nowadays, the idea of a permanent connection between physical and digital world is techno-
logically possible. The capillar Internet relates to the Internet extension into daily appliances such as they 
become actors of Internet like any hu-man. The parallel development of Machine-to-Machine 
communications and Arti cial Intelligence (AI) technics start a new area of cybernetic. This paper presents 
an approach for Cybernetic Organism (Cyborg) for RE based on Organic Computing (OC). In such 
approach, each appli-ance is a part of an autonomic system in order to control a physical environment. 
The underlying idea is that such systems must have self-x properties in order to adapt their behavior to 
external disturbances with a high-degree of autonomy. 
 
KEYWORDS: 
 
 Organic Computing, Arti cial Neural Network, Responsive Environment, Internet of Things 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
 
Since the 90's, the developpment of enabling technologies for Internet of Things (IoT) has 
received a lof of interests from di erent research communities. The identi cation of people and 
things has permitted their representation into digi-tal world through Radio Frequency IDenti 
cation (RFID) technologies. This has permitted a lot of applications to be developped for logistic 
traceability and ac-cess control in many domains such as transportation, industrial or building. 
The growing use of such devices for Smart-Structure has required Wireless Sensor and Actor 
Networks (WSAN) in order to monitor and manage them. A lot of issues is appeared to establish 
a heterogeneous network infrastructure which must be energy e cient with several manufacturers 
and services. Hence the middlewares have received a particular attention in order to abstract such 
issues to applica-tions of future services. Nowadays, there are well-de ned standard protocols like 
IPv6 LoW Power Wireless Area Networks (6LoWPAN) with a lot of middle-ware solutions. The 
extension of Internet into the daily environments of human is coming to regulate shared resources 
like energy or to improve accessibility, protection and assistance for persons. The term of 
Ambient Intelligence (AmI) groups the whole of research activities to design control systems for 
such appli-cation. However their information architectures stay an open question regarding the 
management of these distributed systems in large scale networks 
 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
2 
 
In this paper, an approach based on Organic Computing (OC) is investigated in order to design 
autonomic systems which must be autonomous to achieve their tasks and adaptive to address 
runtime issues produced by unpredictable disturbances. The Section 2 presents related works 
regarding AmI by introducing the recent interests for OC. Then the Section 3 presents the 
proposed model for Organic Ambient Intelligence (OrgAmI) with the rst implementations of 
function components in Section 4. Finally the conclusion with perspectives of this proposal are 
presented in Section 5. This contribution synthesises several papers already published or under 
submission in order to present a general overview of the proposed model which is implemented in 
EMMA framework. 
 
2. RELATED WORKS 
 
2.1 Ambient Intelligence 
 
The term of AmI is refer to application of Arti cial Intelligence (AI) on Re-sponsive 
Environments (RE). A lot of approaches for AmI are presented in the survey of Sadri et al. [13]. 
Two main categories of models can be proposed: 
 
Rule-based and Context Awareness. A Rule-based model de nes a set of rules to apply actions 
according to a system state such as the Event-Condition-Action (ECA) model of Augusto et al. 
[3,2] in a Smart Home application. The set of required rules to manage complex situation is very 
di cult to de ne. Hence Ac-tion Planning focuses on the determination of the best path of actions 
according to current system state such as presented in Simpson et al [15]. Decision Tree (DT) is a 
sub-model to consider the possibility of deviations from the expected result to the nal 
environment state because of hidden variables. Stankovski et al. [16] presents an application on 
Smart Home with successfull results. However this model-based approach requires a full 
knowledge of possible states of the environment which are not always easily to model due to 
discretization and ac-curancy issues. Even if theFuzzy Logic is a model to relax the speci cation 
of rule description such as investigated in Doctor et al [5], the consistency of large rule set is a 
strong issue. Reasoning Engines focus on general context of the system instead of particular 
variables to determine the system state. Magerkurth et al. [10] presents an architecture based on 
ontologies which are meta-descriptions of the system. The states are not only depending of 
independent variables but also their relation. The system infers the real system state according to 
the match-ings between ontology patterns and the internal state representation. However an 
ontology stay a model which must be de ned. Aztiria et al. [4] presents a survey of learning 
technics in order to build empirically the system model. On one hand the model is extracted 
online from system runtime and on the other hand it can be improved continously. However 
learning process requires a lot of data which are not always easily available to design operational 
systems. 
 
Finally, there are a lot of AI technics to design decision systems, however the control of RE stays 
an issue. The managed environment is an open and dynamic environment which is inherently a 
Complex System (CS). The new approach of Multi Agent System (MAS) considers each 
appliance such as an autonomous agent implemented with previsouly presented AI technics. The 
global system behavior is produced by the self-organization of agent interactions such as in Da 
Silva et al. [14]. Andrushevich et al. [1] use the MAPE-K model in order to design supervisor for 
such MAS application. It is composed of four modules: Monitor-ing, Analysis, Planning and 
Execution which exchange information through a common knownledge space. This control loop 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
3 
 
is a common model to design au-tonomic system e.g. systems with self-x properties to manage 
CS. 
 
2.2 Organic Computing 
 
M•uller-Schloer et al. present in their book [11] a compilation of papers working on OC. This 
new paradigm is motivated by the necessity to de ne a framework in order to control self-
organization process in large and complex networks. A lot of contributions in Multi Agent 
System (MAS) proposes frameworks with self-x properties, however there is no well-de ned and 
common de nitions. In this book, the contributors propose a framework to de ne mathematically 
the terms of au-tonomy, organization, adaptivity, robustness and others with their relations. OC 
framework focuses on methodology to develop self-organized MAS with trustwor-thy responses. 
Stegh•ofer et al. [17] discuss about the challenges and perspectives of such systems. Trustworthy 
systems provide a correct response independently to internal or external disturbances by a self-
adaptation of its internal param-eters. The idea of autonomous system is concerning in the 
reduction of control parameters for the system by a supervisor. They are self-established by the 
whole system which is composed of a System under Observation and Control (SuOC) and its 
supervisor. Kasinger et al. [12] present the generic Observer-Controller model for OC systems. 
The component observer evaluates the current situation of the SuOC according to an observation 
model selected by expert. This model con gures the observer engine by selecting the proper 
analyzers and event pre-dictors to provide a context information to the controller. This last one 
evaluates the possible actions according to the constraints and selects the best one accord-ing to 
its history database. The constraint set is updated by a simulation engine in order to adapt human 
requirements to the SuOC. 
 
Finally the computational models of AmI are incoporated into OC architec-tures to built 
autonomic systems which should be able to evolve according to their environments. The proposed 
contributions are motivated to design Cyber-netic Organism (Cyborg) in line with the observation 
that evolution has already produced components required in autonomic system. Hence this work 
focuses on the basic mechanisms used in biological metabolism in order to propose a bio-inspired 
framework for Organic Ambient Intelligence (OrgAmI). 
 
3 ORGANIC AMBIENT INTELLIGENCE 
 
In following document, the term of Organic Ambient Intelligence (OrgAmI) is refering to a 
decision system based on an arti cial metabolism between the di er-ent appliances of the System 
under Observation and Control (SuOC). They are considered such as cells which communicate 
through endo- and exo-interactions in order to satisfy system goals under its constraints. The 
general architecture overview in Figure 1 is composed of three main levels corresponding to the 
MAPE-K model for autonomic system. Each appliance is a System on Chip (SoC) which 
communicates through a Wireless Sensor and Actor Networks (WSAN) in order to share its 
specialized services. Then these cellular services exchange information thanks to reactive rules 
based on Event-Condition-Action (ECA) model executed on a Resource Oriented Architecture 
(ROA) middleware. An OrgAmI function is an interaction graph of rule based agents which 
produce computation ows between the resources of cellular services. Hence supervisors are 
responsible to analysis OrgAmI behavior to learn interaction patterns in order to control the 
metabolism of the SuOC by updating reactive rules. An OrgAmI function, named Service 
Choreography (SC), is a distributed control loop between sensor and actuator cellular services. 
 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
4 
 
In practice, the daily use of the managed environment by human modi es the system metabolism. 
Then Observer-Controller supervisors extract reactive rule patterns in order to built or update 
knowledge. Hence this knownledge is instanciated according to goals and constraints of the 
SuOC in order to deploy or update online the SC. This knwoledge is built by symbolic inference 
from a statistical learning based on Arti cial Neural Network (ANN) in order to be shared and 
analyzed by human experts. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: General overview of OrgAmI architecture.  
 
3.1 Cellular Resource Middleware 
 
The Cellular Resource Middleware (CRM) abstracts hardware and network im-plementations to 
the metabolism layer such as presented in [9]. A WSAN is composed of tiny platforms which 
execute hard-coded services such as actuator and sensor drivers, system components or advanced 
processing. This specialized cellular services exchange information through a resource interface 
which man-age interactions with the metabolic environment like the membrane of biological 
cells. For example, an output resource connected to an actuator is driven through a distributed 
computation ow of cellular interactions over the SuOC when an event appears on an input 
resource connected to a sensor. A Service Choreog-raphy (SC) is a graph of such service 
interconnections. The ROA middleware illustrated in Figure 2 is composed of three basic cellular 
services used to model such distributed computation ows: 
 
{ Local Resources (/L/) are memory units to store logical or numerical values. 
 
{ System Resources (/S/) are input-output interfaces of cellular services. 
 
{ Agent Resources (/A/) are script les to model interaction mechanism in which an agent 
updates a target resource by a preprocessed payload accord-ing to current state of node 
resources. 
 
The Figure 3 illustrates a computation ow in which agents update remote resources which trigger 
other agents like a domino e ect. In the metabolic point of view, the activation of an agent is 

International Journal of Ambie
 
depending of the internal state o
produce an interaction computati
 
 
Fig. 2: Cellular middle
3.2  Formal Agent Model 
 
In De nition 1, an agent is an Ev
to a resource of a cellular service
 
De nition 1. An agent a on cell n
by the post-processed function P
and Xm with the interaction oper
P REa(Xn) is true. 
 
 
A Service Choreography (SC) i
according to the SuOC context c
new sensor value in a resource 
such as in De nition 2. 
 
De nition 2. A metabolic comp
resources of cellular services alo
 
The proposed model to design 
represented by transitions and r
metabolic processes are analyz
properties by classical algo-rithm
ent Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, Decem
of its cell in order to emit an interaction to anothe
ion ow over the SuOC. 
eware.                    
Fig. 3: Metabolic computation flow
 
 
vent-Condition-Action (ECA) rule in order to emit a
e. 
n is a reactive rule to update target resource y 2 Ym
P OSTa
y(Xn; Xm) regarding of the internal resource
ration of creation, deletion or update when the activa
 
 
is a set of interconnected services in order to con
composed of their state and those of the sensors. Th
produces an event on the cell which can activate 
putation ow f 2 F is an activation chain of agents 
ong the di usion path of pro-duced events on correspo
SC is based on an adapted Petri Network in whic
resources by places such as il-lustrated in Figure 
zed to validate their termination, input-output ran
ms found in Petri Network literature. In addition, 
mber 2015 
5 
er cells which 
 
w. 
an interaction 
of the cell m 
e states of Xn 
ation function 
ntrol actuators 
he release of a 
others agents 
updating the 
onding cells. 
ch agents are 
4. Hence the 
nge and other 
this model is 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
6 
 
completed by associating to each transition a place such as agents are also resources which can be 
modi ed. This adaption has strong implications such as the SC becomes dynamic with a Petri 
Network which evolves during its execution. In such sit-uation, the metabolism layer is a 
Complex System (CS) which cannot have a predictable behavior by an analytic approach such as 
it is open to external events and has self-rewriting capacity. In Organic Computing (OC) model, 
this issue is addressed by an o ine simulation to evaluate SuOC con gurations. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4: This SC computes p1(t) = p0(t 1) p0(t) through agent t0 and t1. If the value 50 is reached, the agent 
t2 deletes the metabolic process. 
 
3.3 Metabolic Mapping Deployment 
 
The metabolic mapping detailed in [6] consists in deploying the di erent re-sources over the 
WSAN according to cellular services and requirements of the OrgAmI. This process is composed 
of two steps: the rst one is performed by a preprocessor which determines the SC to deploy 
according to a WSAN target. Based on an intermediate graph of instanciation, a Pseudo Boolean 
Optimization (PBO) problem is formulated to compute the best resource mapping in order to 
minimize network communication load. 
 
Finally, there are several available deployment strategies based on self-writing cellular property. 
The agents have the ability to create new ones. Hence a gen-eral agent can contain other agent to 
deploy which can themselves contains other agents like a Matroska. Such composed agent allows 
the supervisor to delegate the deployment process to any cell. Otherwise it can generate a general 
agent which is responsible to deploy every resources by accrossing all cells. In such ap-proaches, 
the SC called Residual Network Agent (RNA) are deployed by another SC named Dynamic 
Network Agent (DNA). Hence the cells are programmed by a DNA process which deployed a 
RNA behavior. 
 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
7 
 
 
Fig. 5: Scheme overview of the di erent steps for mapping and deployment of SC stored in knowledge 
database onto Cellular Resource Middleware (CRM). 
 
4. APPLICATION: CEREBRAL CORTEX COMPONENTS 
 
This Section presents two applications of presented OrgAmI framework in order to model 
Cerebral Cortex (CC) components distributed over WSAN. In bio-logical brain, the CC contains 
major cognitive functions of sensing, acting and association. Following work presents rst 
implemented components of a toolbox for the design of future cyberbrains applied on Ambient 
Intelligence (AmI). The Motor Cortex (MC) is responsible of the planni cation, control and 
execution of movements which relates to actuator control. The Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) 
ensures behavior consistency in case of cognitive function con icts. 
 
4.1. Arti cial Neural Controller 
 
The Motor Cortex (MC) is a brain region reponsible of the planning and the execution of 
movements. The learning process is based notably on neural plas-ticity in order to establish 
synaptic connections between interneurons, Betz cells and others. Similarly in Arti cial Neural 
Network (ANN), the learning process determines such synaptic weights in order to control output 
neurons. 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
8 
 
The Arti cial Neural Controller (ANC) presented in [7] has been studied in order to control 
actuators according to the system context composed of their initial states and those of sensors. 
The proposed methodology to design ANC has permitted to conclude that it is preferred to use 
several specialized ANC instead of general one. Similarly, MC have specialized areas. Hence an 
ANC is composed of several ANN representing di erent behaviors. They are selected according to 
their relevance to perform the task such as illustrated in Figure 7. 
 
The Figure 6 presents its integration into the CRM. Even if the neurons can be directly modelled 
by CRM with an activation function based on agent and weights on L resources, the neural 
behaviors are stored into resources of a specialized cellular service for execution e ciency reason. 
Their training is performed remotely by collecting data when there is no relevant behavior. 
Finally the ANC service is connected to actuator and sensor resources by metabolic SC. 
 
 
 
Fig. 6: ANC middleware integration. 
 
Fig. 7: ANC overview architecture. 
 
The Figure 8 presents a runtime example of an ANC with one initial ANN behavior. The plot (a) 
shows the input-output signal composed of ve resources. The ANC should predict the correct next 
states of resources in order to control them before human acting manualy on actuators. Hence 
sequential plans are learnt state by state. The plot (b) presents prediction errors of the ANN 
behav-iors in order to decide between the selection of the best one or the learning of a new one. 
The behaviors are ordered in plot (c) according to their successive prediction errors during 
runtime in order to select the best one in plot (d). At initialization, there is only one behavior and 
it is not able to predict properly the next states. Hence the ANC collects data in order to learn a 
new ANN. When this signal appears a second time, this behavior is correctly selected. 
 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
9 
 
 
 
Fig. 8: ANC runtime example in which three di erent behaviors are learnt before being scheduled in order 
to control the input-output corresponding signals. 
 
Finally a methodology is proposed to generate statistical data set from a model of Decision Tree 
(DT) in order to prede ned behaviors. They are up-dated by the mixing of generated and collected 
data from runtime SuOC. The human actions on actuators re ne the behaviors during their 
learning process by correcting the ANC decisions. Then DT are extracted from learnt behavior 
using A-Priori algorithm in order to expand the knownledge database. 
 
4.2 Distributed Voting Procedure 
 
The Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) has an important function in arbitration of cognitive 
function con icts. The Stroop task proposed by Pardo et al. in 1990 produces its activation when a 
con ict appears during the reading of the word RED written in blue during a serial test. Its 
primary function of con ict monitoring stimulates other brain areas in order to resolve it. 
 
The Voting Procedures (VP) presented in [8] has been developped to address such issues in 
cyberbrain with an implementation on EMMA framework. In this paper, the SC are abstracted by 
a set of decision-makers which aggregate their preferences in con icting in order to take a 
common distributed and consistent decision. It is composed of an aggregation process illustrated 
in Figure 10 and a decision step. The aggregation is based on Network Average Consensus 
(NAC) algorithm which aggregates the utility values of agent preferences towards an averaged 
preference order in a fully distributed way. The NAC have very inter-esting properties of fault-
tolerance regarding switching network topology, packet lost and delayed transmission which are 
inherited by the VP. Moreover this al-gorithm is more e cient in terms of resolution time on 
Small-world topologies which can be also found in biological brain. Hence, the decision step 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
10 
 
evaluates the accuracy of the aggregation in order to re ne it to guarantee that there is not 
ambiguity between decision-makers. 
 
The Figure 9 illustrates the integration of VP algorithm on CRM. It is fully implemented by a SC. 
There are NACx agents which are reponsible of the x aggregations of preference values. An 
aggregation agent decides to stop it when the accurancy is enough in order to allow a selection 
agent to take a consistent decision. Otherwise the aggegation is repeated until reaching the 
required accu-rancy. The Figure 10 illustrates the aggregation process of ten decision-makers 
which have to select a parameter among ten. This process requires 50 iterations according to the 
initial preference orders and the WSAN topology. 
 
 
 
Fig. 9: VP middleware integration                Fig. 10: VP runtime example 
 
5. CONCLUSION 
 
This paper is the rst presentation of the underlying Organic Ambient Intel-ligence (OrgAmI) 
model in continuity of the software suite developpment of 
 
Environment Monitoring and Management Agent (EMMA) . Its di erent com-ponents have 
already been published or are under submission in the di erent technological and theorical 
disciplines of Wireless Sensor and Actor Networks (WSAN), Multi Agent System (MAS) and 
Organic Computing (OC). 
 
This bio-inspired framework focuses on the possibility to design fully dis-tributed Ambient 
Intelligence (AmI) functions at the elementary level of metabolic systems. It is assumed that 
natural systems are strongly autonomous and adap-tive thanks to their design by elementary 
assemblies which o ers them large possibilities of system recon gurations. Hence the proposed 
OrgAmI is a Sys-tem under Observation and Control (SuOC) based on an interaction metabolic 
model enabling self-x properties under the control of high level supervisors. Two rst components 
are implemented thanks to this bio-inspired framework in order to start investigation on the 
possibility to design distributed cyberbrain archi-tecture for Responsive Environments (RE). 
 
The development of an operational cyberbrain based on OrgAmI is still a long-term perspective. 
On one hand, a lot of neural functions found in biological brain should be implemented before to 

International Journal of Ambient Systems and Applications (IJASA) Vol.3, No.4, December 2015 
11 
 
be able to address cognitive aspect of AmI. And on the other hand, the control of such fully 
distributed system in which computations are operated at an interaction level required advanced 
analysis and planning tools to manage such autonomic system. 
 
The short-term development will address a use case of energy management ar-bitration in Smart 
Home application. A set of Arti cial Neural Controller (ANC) controls di erent appliances which 
negotiates together the energy thanks to the proposed Voting Procedures (VP). Hence the RE will 
learn to automatically con-trol the appliances according to their uses by human and an implicit 
scheduling based on energy availability during one-day period.
