Detecting Suspicious events in
Fast Information Flows
Kristiaan Pelckmans, Moustafa Aboushady, Andreas Br¨osemyr
January 8, 2021
Summary
We describe a computational feather-light and intuitive, yet provably eﬃcient algo-
rithm, named HALFADO. HALFADO is designed for detecting suspicious events in
a high-frequency stream of complex entries, based on a relatively small number of
examples of human judgement. Operating a suﬃciently accurate detection system
is vital for assisting teams of human experts in many diﬀerent areas of the modern
digital society. These systems have intrinsically a far-reaching normative eﬀect, and
public knowledge of the workings of such technology should be a human right.
On a conceptual level, the present approach extends one of the most classical
learning algorithms for classiﬁcation, inheriting its theoretical properties. It however
works in a semi-supervised way integrating human and computational intelligence.
On a practical level, this algorithm transcends existing approaches (expert systems)
by managing and boosting their performance into a single global detector.
We illustrate HALFADO’s eﬃcacy on two challenging applications: (1) for de-
tecting hate speech messages in a ﬂow of text messages gathered from a social media
platform, and (2) for a Transaction Monitoring System (TMS) in FinTech detecting
fraudulent transactions in a stream of ﬁnancial transactions.
This algorithm illustrates that - contrary to popular belief - advanced methods
of machine learning need not require neither advanced levels of computation power
nor expensive annotation eﬀorts.
1
arXiv:2101.02424v1  [cs.LG]  7 Jan 2021

The ability to detect suspicious events is arguably the most fundamental prop-
erty of intelligent beings. The expression of this capability as a machine-executable
recipe (an algorithm) is however challenging. Approaches based on supervised learn-
ing, model identiﬁcation or estimation, or density estimation are often governed by
information-theoretical, labeling and/or computational limitations, hampering the
ability to handle eﬀectively the present complex and high-frequency information
ﬂows.
The conventional approach is to divide this problem into a training phase and a
subsequent testing (and/or deployment) phase: asking the fundamental question at
what instance to change gears in order to perform overall well. Moreover, training
requires often unrealistic annotation eﬀorts. Approaches based on existing un- or
semi-supervised machine learning rely heavily on assumptions that might or might
not hold in the present case, rendering the result conditional. Practical considerations
constrain the setting even further: typically, one has only access to ﬁnite memory
and modest computation power to do this, we don’t have a budget to annotate
(’label’ or ’inspect manually’ cases) at will, and we should not rely on convenient
stochastic sampling assumptions or numerical representations of the cases in the
ﬂow. Since the presented information volumes of information are presented at an
enormous frequency, it is not even clear that one can do anything meaningful at all.
Examples of this settings are however ubiquitous in the modern digital society:
• In social media, we might want to make a detector of hate-speech, based on
the subjective judgement of a text message as hate-speech that a human expert
can make. We are given a human expert who can look into a small number
of text messages posted on a social media platform. Then we are challenged
to make an algorithm that learns from those few examples so as to ﬁlter the
many future cases for similar hate speech.
• In the context of FinTech, we might want to make a Transaction Monitoring
System (TMS) for fraud detection. Given a stream of ﬁnancial transactions,
each moving a certain amount between two (private) parties. Can we make an
algorithm assisting our team of human experts to ﬁlter out fraudulent trans-
actions from the high-frequency streams ﬂowing through modern TMSs?
There is considerable work on detection in general, and fraud/fault/anomaly de-
tection speciﬁcally: we point to [18, 5] and citations for stochastic approaches to
anomaly detection, to [2] and citations for an analysis based on mathematical sys-
tems theory, to [17] and citations for approaches in statistical signal processing, and
to [4] and citations for a recent survey based on methods of machine learning. Most
2

techniques that near the requirements are based on thresholds, need manual tuning,
or make stringent assumptions about the nature of the data. In [13], we present an
algorithm named FADO that works explicitly with numerical representations of the
transactions in the ﬂow, but is otherwise free from (stochastic) assumptions. The
present work however is novel in adopting the expert framework [3, 16] for this task.
The expert framework allows one to work with (existing) expert systems expressed
in Fortran77, Cobol, assembler, Mandarin Chinese, Urdu or other languages. The
aim of this paper is not to survey existing approaches1, but to indicate how a simple
and intuitive algorithm addresses the challenge well.
We present in Fig. (1) an algorithm called HALFADO, extending the classical
HALVING algorithm for classiﬁcation (e.g. [3], p.4). HALFADO starts with a large
number m of experts: each expert can either ﬂag a case as suspicious, or judge it
as normal. HALFADO maintains throughout the ﬂow an active set of experts that
proved earlier to perform well: the inadequate experts are dropped from the active
set when progressing through the stream. Assuming that a perfect expert exists
amongst those in the initial active set (i.e. the existence assumption), one can bound
the number of such reductions. By implementing the democratic majority vote on
the current active set, a wrong evaluation (or mistake) will leave (’HALF’) the active
set with the correct minority. In this way, we can at most make ⌊log2(m)⌋mistakes.
Finally - and most crucially - the algorithm ﬂags a transaction as potentially
suspicious if at least one expert in the active set ﬂags the case as such. When this
happens, a human expert has to inspect manually the case (‘Is the case really as
suspicious as this expert says, or not?’). This allows HALFADO to learn from those
manual inspections. The aim is then to keep the number of such manual inspections
to a minimum (classifying HALFADO as a semi-supervised learning algorithm), while
not implicating the recall rate of the detector. When the active set gets suﬃciently
small (i.e., is reduced suﬃciently well), HALFADO ensures that alerting as potentially
suspicious and prediction as suspicious aligns well.
Appendix A.1 provides an in-depth discussion of conceptual and theoretical con-
siderations of HALFADO. Appendix A.2 presents extensions of HALFADO for doing
away with the existence assumption. Appendix A.3 presents an extension of HAL-
FADO for managing risk factors.
Now let us summarise the ﬁndings of the two case studies (see Appendix A.4 and
A.5 for details2). In the case of information ﬂows on a social media platform, we
ﬂag messages as hate-speech with a much higher precision and recall than what is
achieved with a single-word detector. We are able to process > 5, 000 text messages
1Eﬀorts as https://www.kaggle.com/c/ieee-fraud-detection aim for such benchmarking.
2Data and code for reproducing the experimental results is at https://fado.life/halfado/.
3

Figure 1: Description of the HALFADO algorithm. Given are a stream of transac-
tions (displayed in the background), and a set of m experts. Initially, all m experts
are in the active set A. When progressing through the stream of transactions {yt},
experts disappear from A once implicated in a mistake of the majority vote of A.
The algorithm demands a case to be inspected manually, only if at least one expert
in the current A ﬂags the case.
4

per second, and prompt ‘our’ human experts only to look into 10,5% of the traﬃc.
Note that we are not allowed to release the data publicly, but we provide code for
collecting in realtime messages posted on a social media platform.
In the FinTech case study for retail banking, we are interested in ﬁnding plausible
risk factors that might lead to fraud. After a while, HALFADO works with a small
number of such risk factors. Overall, HALFADO requires one to manually inspect a
mere 7% of the presented ﬁnancial transactions. By comparison, one would have to
investigate manually 0.05% of the traﬃc if one were to know the actual risk factors
up front.
This 6.95% can then be seen as the price for not knowing (or having
to learn) the risk factors. Moreover, the experiment can handle almost > 40, 000
transactions per second on modest computational hardware. The approach inherits
accountability, privacy and ethical properties of the deployed experts.
In conclusion, HALFADO is theoretically proved and empirically seen to perform
eﬃciently and computationally fast. The expert-setting allows HALFADO to han-
dle non-numerically represented data avoiding cumbersome feature design [6] and
boosting existing expert systems. The conceptual ease of the approach encourages
useful practical modiﬁcations: we found especially the extension towards managing
risk factors to be thought provoking.
We think that the natural ability of HALFADO to handle an unknown number of
complimentary experts - each one representing potentially a diﬀerent Root Cause [8]
- points to an intriguing feature of this approach. Another fundamental property is
that learning here is really seen as eliminating bad solutions, rather than the approach
to learning as optimising a cost/loss function. This is reﬂected in the aﬄuence of the
method for handling conventional obstacles to learning as local minima or overﬁtting
[7]. It is however the practical relevance of this feather-light scheme, its ability to
work with existing expert systems, as well as the relief for the need for labeling, that
is likely to power many more surprising applications.
5
