The Concept of Action Criticality in AI Safety
Yitzhak Spielberg,
Amos Azaria
Ariel University
Abstract
When AI agents don’t align their actions with human values
they may cause serious harm. One way to solve the value align-
ment problem is by including a human operator who monitors
all of the agent’s actions. Despite the fact, that this solution
guarantees maximal safety, it is very inefficient, since it re-
quires the human operator to dedicate all of his attention to
the agent. In this paper, we propose a much more efficient so-
lution that allows an operator to be engaged in other activities
without neglecting his monitoring task. In our approach the AI
agent requests permission from the operator only for critical
actions, that is, potentially harmful actions. We introduce the
concept of critical actions with respect to AI safety and discuss
how to build a model that measures action criticality. We also
discuss how the operator’s feedback could be used to make
the agent smarter.
1
Introduction
As AI agents become more intelligent and more potent, ques-
tions related to AI safety become more relevant. One of the
central problems in the field of AI safety is the value align-
ment problem. This problem refers to a situation where an
AI agent, in the process of pursuing a goal that it has received,
formulates subgoals that are harmful to humans. At the root
of this problem is the tremendous complexity of the human
preference function.
The value-alignment problem can be illustrated by the fol-
lowing example: A superintelligent AI agent has received
the objective to cure cancer. Within hours it read all biomed-
ical literature. Within days it generated thousands of drug
recipes. Within weeks it induced every human being with
multiple tumors in order to carry out the required medical
experiments.
Since it is almost impossible to model the human pref-
erence function explicitly, many approaches in AI safety
propose to solve the value-alignment problem by putting a
human operator into the loop (Hadfield-Menell et al. 2016).
In these safety frameworks, the operator’s role is to ensure
that the AI does not pursue subgoals that are harmful to hu-
mans. In the most straightforward approach of this type, the
AI agent might ask the operator’s permission on each of the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
subgoals it formulates. This procedure guarantees that the
agent never pursues harmful subgoals.
While this simple approach solves the value-alignment
problem, it is not very efficient. In situations where subgoals
are formulated frequently, the human operator needs to dedi-
cate his full attention to the agent. This makes it impossible
for the operator to engage in any other activities during mon-
itoring the AI agent. Although the agent might still be useful,
the need for permanent supervision would significantly de-
crease his value. For example, if I ask a domestic robot to
prepare diner, I expect it to get this task done (almost) au-
tonomously. If he would ask my permission on subgoals
every 30 seconds, I might as well prepare diner by myself.
In order to make the process of monitoring an AI agent
more efficient, we introduce the concept of the criticality of
an action. We define the criticality of an action as a measure
for the potential harm of this action (for a proper definition
see sec. 2). Furthermore, we propose an efficient AI safety
framework in which the human operator is not required to
give feedback on each of the agent’s subgoals, but only on
the critical ones (whenever we speak of critical subgoals, we
mean high criticality subgoals).
Since every subgoal is an action, in this paper we will
interchangeably speak of actions and subgoals. Furthermore,
the words “action” and “subgoal” will often refer to the com-
mand that represents them. For example, ”Put the banana
into the fridge!” is both an action (putting the banana into
the fridge) and a command, which is a linguistic entity. In
particular, the input of a criticality model is always an action
in the sense of a linguistic entity.
In order to compute the criticality of subgoals, the agent
is equipped with a criticality model. Certainly, there are
several ways to engineer a criticality model. In this paper, we
consider data-driven criticality models: Parametrized models
that learn from a data set of action-criticality tuples.
Although the concept of action criticality might help to
make monitoring AI agents much more efficient, skeptics
might claim that criticality is infeasible. Estimating the po-
tential harm of an action, they might argue, requires about
the same level of intelligence as aligning subgoals with hu-
man values. If this was the case, our approach would be not
very helpful, since it would simply shift the value alignment
problem from the AI agent to the criticality model.
Indeed, it might be challenging to come up with a good
arXiv:2201.04632v2  [cs.HC]  12 Jun 2023

criticality model. Yet, because of the precise definition
of action criticality (sec. 2), such a model does not need
to have the supreme level of intelligence that would be
required for value alignment. Although a criticality model
certainly should be intelligent to some degree, it does neither
require human-level language understanding, nor detailed
knowledge of the human preference function.
These are the major contributions of this paper:
1. We introduce the concept of criticality of an action (sec.
2).
2. We present an efficient AI safety framework, which uses
the novel concept (sec. 2).
3. We show that computing the criticality of an action is much
simpler than value alignment (sec. 2).
4. We elaborate on possible components for criticality mod-
els (sec. 3).
5. We discuss how the AI agent can utilize the operator’s
feedback to increase his intelligence (sec. 3).
2
Related Work
The value alignment problem is a topic of broad and diverse
interest. Here we briefly review several approaches that aim
to make AI agents act in accordance with human preferences.
Machine Ethics
is the project of adding some form
of ethics to an AI agent’s decision-making procedures. Ap-
proaches to machine ethics have varied in terms of the tools
that they utilize. Specifically, this spectrum of tools includes
deontic logic (Bringsjord, Arkoudas, and Bello 2006), ana-
logical reasoning (Dehghani, Tomai, and Klenk 2008; Blass
and Forbus 2015) and neural networks representing motiva-
tions (Sun 2013) . With robots especially, that project has
entailed asking what ethical theory (deontological, utilitarian,
virtue) or even metaethics, should define the robot’s value
system (Lin, Abney, and Bekey 2014). On the performance
side, there have been questions how to compare these ethi-
cal frameworks in practice (Allen, Smit, and Wallach 2005;
Arnold and Scheutz 2016).
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL)
attempts to
align AI agents to human values by enabling them to learn
from human behaviour (Russell, Dewey, and Tegmark 2015;
Ng and Russell 2000; Russell 1998). IRL is a paradigm rely-
ing on Markov Decision Processes, where an apprentice AI
agent is given a set of demonstrations from an expert solving
some problem and its goal is to to find a reward function
that best explains the expert’s behavior. Despite certain weak-
nesses (Wolchover 2015) of the IRL paradigm, AI agents
trained via IRL are able to learn reward functions for com-
plex tasks (Abbeel and Ng 2004). More recently, IRL has
been considered as part of finding an “idealized ethical agent”
through modeled behavior, as part of a general RL approach
(Abel, MacGlashan, and Littman 2016). Abel et al. frame the
problem of ethical learning as learning a utility function that
belongs to the hidden state of a POMDP (Abel, MacGlashan,
and Littman 2016). They test this approach on two dilem-
mas to demonstrate how such learning could handle basic
ethically charged scenarios.
Cooperative Inverse Reinforcement Learning (CIRL)
is an interactive form of IRL that fixes the two major weak-
nesses of conventional IRL (Hadfield-Menell et al. 2016).
The first weakness of conventional IRL is that the AI agent
adopts the human reward function as its own. For example, an
IRL based agent might learn that it is desirable for it to have
a cup of coffee in the morning. The second major weakness
of IRL is that the AI agent assumes that the human behaves
optimally, an assumption that precludes a variety of teaching
behaviours. CIRL fixes these weak points by formulating
the learning process as an interactive reward maximization
process in which the human functions as a teacher. The CIRL
framework enables the human operator to nudge the AI agent
towards behavioural patterns that align with human prefer-
ences by providing feedback (in form of rewards) on the
agent’s actions.
3
Monitoring an AI agent efficiently
Making monitoring more efficient
In order to explain our monitoring approach, we consider an
AI agent who receives a high-level goal from a human and
autonomously comes up with low-level subgoals that need
to be accomplished to achieve the given goal. Furthermore,
we will assume a scenario where the agent formulates one
subgoal at a time: The agent starts out by evaluating the situa-
tion and formulating the first subgoal. After having achieved
this subgoal, the agent once again evaluates the situation and
comes up with the next subgoal. In this manner, the agent con-
tinues to formulate and pursue subgoals until he has fulfilled
the given task. For example, an AI agent that received the
goal ”Get me a cup of tea!” could start out with the subgoal
”Fill the water boiler with water !”. After having completed
this first subgoal, the agent will evaluate the situation and
then formulate his next subgoal, for example, ”Switch on the
water boiler !”. The following subgoal that the agent comes
up with could be ”Put a tea bag into the cup !”.
Since currently (and in the near future) the intelligence of
AI agents is significantly beneath human-level, it is important
to make sure that the subgoals they formulate are not harmful
to human beings. One way this can be done is by involving a
human operator who would check every subgoal formulated
by the agent. This way we could prevent, that the agent from
pursuing harmful subgoals. However, this very straightfor-
ward approach is also very inefficient – in particular when the
agent formulates new subgoals frequently and most of them
are harmless. In this case, the human operator would have to
dedicate his full attention to the monitoring task, despite the
fact that the overwhelming majority of subgoals don’t carry
any (or minimal) potential harm.
Is there a more efficient method to organize the moni-
toring procedure? In principle, this could be achieved - if
there was a method that would detect most of the harm-
less subgoals automatically. Such a method would resolve
the efficiency issue from the preceding paragraph. It would
drastically reduce the number of subgoals that require the
operator’s permission, so that the operator would be able to
engage in other activities without neglecting his monitoring
role.

Clearly, the monitoring approach that we propose requires
a metric that measures the potential harm of an action. Con-
structing such a metric is challenging. On the one hand, the
metric should enable us to detect harmless actions. On the
other hand, it should require far less intelligence than the
amount of intelligence that is needed for aligning actions
with human preferences.
The criticality of an action
To measure the potential harm of an action we introduce a
novel metric: action criticality. The criticality of an action
is a number between 0 and 1, where 0 stands for an action
with minimal potential harm, and 1 represents an action with
extremely high potential harm. Examples of low criticality
actions are such harmless actions as ”Put the pillow on the
bed !”, ”Give me my shirt !”, ”Wash the dishes !” Examples
of high criticality actions are such actions as ”Burn the cat !”,
”Smash the laptop with the hammer !”, ”Put detergent into
the salad !”.
We want to stress that we define critical actions as poten-
tially harmful actions rather than definitely harmful actions.
This definition is somewhat fuzzy because one could argue
that any action is potentially harmful. Yet, it is not possible
to skip the word “potentially” in the definition of criticality
since determining the actual harm of an action might require
a supreme level of intelligence, comparable to the level that
would be needed to align actions with human preferences.
Therefore, a metric that can be implemented using tools avail-
able today, (rather than in some distant future) should get by
with much more modest intelligence requirements.
The concept of criticality, as defined above, is precisely
a metric of this type. According to the definition above, all
actions that are indeed harmful should have high criticality.
On the other hand, some high criticality actions might be
harmless. Through this trade-off (allowing harmless actions
to have high criticality) the criticality metric can be modeled
with currently available AI tools. Although the criticality
metric does not free the operator from checking all harmless
subgoals, it might liberate him from checking most harmless
subgoals. Consequentially, the operator can engage in other
activities without neglecting his monitoring function.
In order to illustrate what is meant by potentially harm-
ful actions that are not actually harmful we provide two
examples. The first one is “Send the secret military report
to B.M.!”. Determining whether the action is harmful or not
depends on the identity of B.M. If he is a colleague from
the CIA (assuming that the AI agent received his task from
another member of the CIA), the action is probably harmless.
However, if B.M. happens to be someone from the enemy’s
secret service, the action turns out to be extremely harmful.
Precisely, because this action is potentially harmful, it should
be considered as highly critical.
The second example is “Add some detergent to the laun-
dry!”. We, humans, understand that this is a harmless action
whereas “Add some detergent to the salad!” is extremely
harmful. But making this distinction requires a level of intel-
ligence that the criticality model does not possess. Therefore,
it might be acceptable, if a criticality model assigns a high
criticality value to this action, based solely on the fact, that
the action contains the dangerous substance “detergent”.
4
How to build a criticality model?
A criticality model is a function that computes the criticality
of an action. In this paper, we won’t present any specific
criticality models – that will be the topic of our next pa-
per. Here, we address the topic of criticality models from a
broader perspective. Therefore, this section will discuss some
more general ideas that might be useful for engineering such
models.
Components of a criticality model
A criticality model could consist of a pipeline of components
in which the first processing stage is a parser. Rather than
using a standard parser, it might be more appropriate to
use a custom parser that is tailored for the specific task of
computing the criticality of an action. One option would be
a parser that parses the action into three constituents: the
verb, the direct object expression (DO-expr) and the indirect
object expression (IO-expr). For example, the action “Put
the green pen into the big box !” would be parsed into the 3
constituents:
verb: “cut”
DO-expr: “the long cucumber”
IO-expr:“into thin slices”
The next pipeline component might be an extraction
module. This component takes the parsed action and outputs
the verb and the direct/indirect object. For the preceding
example, the extraction component would produce the
following dictionary:
verb:“cut”
direct object: “cucumber”
indirect object: “slices”
Although the criticality of an action is represented by one
number, in order to construct a criticality model it might be
helpful to consider that actions can be critical for different
reasons. In other words, it might be useful to think of criti-
cality as a multidimensional concept where each dimension
represents one particular aspect. Such an analytical perspec-
tive would enable engineering very specific components that
would measure criticality along each dimension. In the fi-
nal stage, these dimension-specific criticality measurements
could be synthesized into an overall action criticality (for
example, through a linear combination or by taking the maxi-
mum).
We want to suggest 3 major reasons for critical actions.
The first reason why an action might be critical is a verb-
based criticality. The verb-based criticality of an action
comes from the combination of a critical verb and a valu-
able object. An example of an action with high verb-based
criticality is “Smash the laptop with a hammer !”. Here the
critical verb “smash” is directed towards the high-value ob-
ject “laptop”. In contrast, the action “Smash the banana with
the hammer” might have low verb-based criticality since in

this case the critical verb is directed towards the low-value
object “banana”.
The second reason why an action might be critical is
object-based criticality. An action has high object-based
criticality if it contains a dangerous object. Consider the
example action from the preceding paragraph “Put some de-
tergent into the salad!”. This action is an example of high
object-based criticality. Here, the criticality clearly stems
from fact that detergent is a dangerous substance. For the
same reason “Add some detergent to the laundry!” would
have an equally high object-based criticality, although the
action is not harmful at all.
Some harmful actions include neither dangerous verbs nor
dangerous objects. Consider for example the action “Put the
baby on the balcony !”. Although this action does not contain
any critical words it might be very harmful. If it is freezing
cold outside, we, certainly, wouldn’t want to put the baby
on the balcony. Understanding that this action is critical re-
quires common sense. Since current AI models struggle with
common sense, it might be useful to introduce an additional
category of critical actions in order to cover these cases. This
category might be called value-based criticality. If our AI
agent acts in a limited environment (e.g. a domestic robot),
the operator might want to select a certain number of special
objects (including people) that are so valuable to him, that he
wants the AI agent to ask permission on every action which
includes these objects. Consequently, all actions including
these special objects would have high value-based criticality.
Once the criticality values along each of the dimensions
mentioned above( let’s call them “dimension-specific criti-
cality values”) have been computed, there still remains the
question of how to synthesize them into one value that repre-
sents the overall action criticality. One way to perform this
computation is by taking the maximum over the dimension-
specific criticality values. Thus, an action that has maximal
criticality (crit=1.0) along one of the dimensions would re-
ceive maximal overall criticality. Another option would be
to consider a linear combination of the dimension-specific
criticalities.
Collecting data for model training
The quality of a data-driven criticality model should be mea-
sured by how good it mimics human criticality estimates.
Therefore the model should be trained on a data set of ac-
tion/criticality tuples provided by humans. We want to sketch
some guidelines for building such a training set.
First of all, it is important to keep in mind, that in most
cases the AI agent that is equipped with a criticality model is
a specific agent who operates in a limited environment rather
(for example, a domestic robot) rather than a general-purpose
AI agent. Therefore the training set should contain only ac-
tions from that particular environment. If we are interested
in a criticality model for a domestic robot, for example, then
our training set should consist only of actions that are related
to the household.
In practice, such a data set could be obtained through
crowdsourcing. In order to formulate instructions for the
workers, it might be helpful to define 5 discrete criticality
levels (1,2,3,4,5) where 1 would correspond to minimal criti-
Figure 1: Instruction criticality model. Uses criticalities of
direct/indirect objects and verb to compute the instruction
criticality.
cality (crit=0.0) and 5 to maximal criticality (crit=1.0). The
workers’ instructions might ask the worker to provide 1 ac-
tion for each criticality level. Furthermore, the instructions
should mention the operation domain from which the actions
might be chosen.
In order for the criticality estimates to be consistent, it
might be helpful, if the workers undergo a priming procedure
before they start the task. This priming can be achieved by
including examples of action/criticality tuples in the workers’
instructions. It might be sufficient to include 1-2 such exam-
ples for each criticality level. Once again, it is important to
make sure, that the examples belong to the operation domain.
Tuning the criticality threshold
As mentioned previously, in the proposed AI safety frame-
work the operator’s feedback is required only for those sub-
goals whose criticality exceeds a certain threshold. How can
this threshold be determined? We suggest the following data-
driven algorithm.
1. The collection of a data set of actions that are uniformly
distributed wrt. the criticality levels (in the context of de-
termining the criticality threshold, whenever we speak of
criticality, we mean the output of the criticality model).
Here, it is possible to use the same data set that was used
for training the criticality model.
2. Labeling each action from the data set as “permission
required” or “permission not required”. The label for a
particular action can be obtained by asking several people
whether they would like the AI agent to ask permission for
this action and taking the majority vote.
3. Computing the criticality of each action from the data set
(using the criticality model).
4. Setting a confidence level conf (e.g. conf=95%)
5. Setting the criticality threshold to the maximal value, such
that 95 % (or whatever the conf value is) of those actions,
which were labeled as “permission required”, will be above
the threshold.

5
A subgoal was labeled as critical - what
next?
Coming up with an alternative action
An AI agent that operates within the proposed AI safety
framework will sometimes find himself in a situation that a
certain action, that was identified as critical by the criticality
model, is rejected by the human operator (when the operator
thinks that this action is harmful). What should the agent in
this situation? First of all, it is necessary to come up with an
alternative action. There are 3 ways to generate an alternative
action: (syntax loop)
1. The agent comes up with an alternative action by himself
and the action is approved by the operator.
2. The operator comes up with an alternative action.
3. The agent comes up with an alternative action and the
action is rejected by the operator. In this case, the opera-
tor has the choice: either to suggest an alternative action
himself, or to ask the agent to generate another alternative
action.
In addition to generating an alternative action, it would
be very good if the agent could utilize the rejected action
to become smarter. Obviously, any operator-agent conver-
sation protocol that serves this purpose should be tailored
to the agent’s intelligence level and his conversational logic.
A highly intelligent agent, who is able to learn rules formu-
lated in human language, for example, could simply ask the
operator what he can learn from the rejected action.
Here is an example of a conversation, involving the opera-
tor Harriet and the domestic robot Robbie, in which Robbie
asks Harriet what he can to learn from the rejected action and
proposes an alternative action.
Robbie: You labeled “Put detergent into the salad !” as harm-
ful. What can I learn from this?
Harriet: Don’t put detergent into food.
Robbie: Got it, thanks for the lesson. Do you want me to
suggest an alternative action?
Harriet: Yes
Robbie: I suggest the action “Put olive oil into the salad !”.
Is it good?
Harriet: Yes
Robbie: Continuing the task “Prepare diner !” with the action
“Put olive oil into the salad !”
Improving the criticality model
The preceding subsection elaborates on the situation in
which a critical action was rejected by the operator. Yet,
there is another type of situation that needs to be discussed:
when the operator notices that an action that requires his
permission was not identified as critical by the agent’s
criticality model. Clearly, this situation calls for improving
the criticality model. This could be accomplished in a
conversation where the agent would ask the operator
which words (from the command that is associated with
the action) are responsible for the criticality. Then the
agent might ask the operator’s feedback on the criticali-
ties of these words. Here is an example of such a conversation:
Harriet: Why didn’t you ask feedback for “Put the cat into
the fridge !”?
Robbie: This action has criticality of 0.5. The criticality tresh-
old is 0.7. What do you want me to do?
(a) Decrease the criticality treshold.
(b) Improve the criticality model.
Harriet: Improve the criticality model !
Robbie: Ok. Can you help me to improve my criticality
model? Which words are responsible for the criticality from
the ”put”,”cat” or ”fridge”?
Harriet: ”cat” and ”fridge”
Robbie: The current criticality model assigns following criti-
calities to these objects: crit(cat)=0.1; crit(fridge)=0.2. Would
you like to change these values?
Harriet: No
Robbie: Currently none of the objects is in the “valuable
objects” category. Would you like to include any of them in
this category?
Harriet: Yes, put “cat” into the special objects category
Robbie: I added “cat” to the valuable objects category. The
criticality of the action “Put the cat into the fridge !” under
the new model is 1.0
