Dynamic Knowledge Graphs as Semantic Memory
Model for Industrial Robots
Mohak Sukhwani, Vishakh Duggal, Said Zahrai
ABB Discrete Automation and Robotics

Abstract—In this paper, we present a model for semantic mem-
ory that allows machines to collect information and experiences
to become more proﬁcient with time. Post semantic analysis of
the sensory and other related data, the processed information is
stored in the knowledge graph which is then used to comprehend
the work instructions expressed in natural language. This imparts
industrial robots cognitive behavior to execute the required tasks
in a deterministic manner. The paper outlines the architecture
of the system along with an implementation of the proposal.
Index Terms—cognitive, intelligence, robots, co-bots, ontology
I. INTRODUCTION
With latest advances in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) it has been
shown that the usability of machines is enhanced when they
become capable to process data, ﬁnd patterns and suggest
proper actions. From predictive maintenance to improved
Human-Machine collaboration, different intelligent systems
are currently in use and facilitate our daily tasks. AI based
techniques for modeling, forecasting and predicting machine
behavior play crucial role in present day Industrial setups. With
advancements in industrial connectivity and availability of
rich sensory data, AI based techniques can achieve noticeable
improvements in both efﬁciency and ﬂexibility [1], [2], [3].
Industrial robots are machines that are made to perform
complex tasks in factories. A typical robotic application [4],
[5], [6] requires a specialist to analytically decompose the
complicated task into smaller sub-tasks and actions. The expert
expresses detailed instructions in the form of robot programs
to make robot accomplish desired goals. This process needs
high level of expertise and is time consuming. An alternative
approach is to use predeﬁned set of templates [7] for vari-
ous tasks, prepared by experts - Block Based programming
interface [8] simpliﬁes the process to some extent without any
accuracy loss and makes it easier for non-specialists to learn
robot programming. Although these methods help, they do not
remove the needs for detailed instructions to be given to the
robot every time a new task is to be executed.
Considerable effort in research societies and industry is put
on making industrial robots more intelligent and thereby more
useful. Most of the current work is based on use of neural
networks and especially deep learning methodologies. These
methods allow the robot learn motor skills in a way close to
human learning. This make robots more skillful but for speciﬁc
purposes [9] and [10]. There are other statistical methods that
have been used to make robots more capable. [11] uses locally
Fig. 1. Cognition is the ability to acquire and process the information to learn
various tasks necessary for living. Part of this information containing rules and
facts is stored in Semantic Memory. The model proposed here aims to enhance
learning ability of industrial robots. The proposed model is implemented using
a dynamic knowledge graphs, where nodes describe the concepts and edges
the interactions between the nodes.
weighted learning (LWL) method to learn complex real-time
robot tasks. They introduce several LWL algorithms to model
complex phenomena during autonomous adaptive control of
robotic systems.
A useful and smart robot needs to cover large spectrum
of applications. As the application areas steadily grow, the
systems must accumulate experience, supervise themselves
and run diagnosis to avoid mistakes and errors. In an industrial
environment, they need to process a work instruction, extract
information and execute requested tasks consistent with valid
context in the environment, prior collected experiences and
rules extracted from product manuals. We claim that reaching
a high level of generality, needs more elaborate memory model
that are closer to human memory, see ﬁgure 1.
According to neuro-scientists, human long-term memory
can be divided to procedural and declarative. Procedural or
implicit memory is the unconscious memory that is used for
learning skills, such as balancing, biking and playing musical
instruments. These skills are typically acquired through rep-
etition and practice. Declarative memory is where facts and
events are stored and can be recalled consciously. Declarative
memory is further divided into episodic and semantic memory,
ﬁgure 2. Episodic memory stores information about events,
while semantic memory accumulates facts and data together
with logical relations [12]. The purpose of the work reported
arXiv:2101.01099v3  [cs.RO]  23 May 2021

Fig. 2. Generally accepted Human memory structure. Cognitive intelligence
for industrial robots can be obtained if a form of declarative memory is
conceived that allows the system collect experience, make decisions and use
the skills.
here is to build a model for semantic memory that allows
the robot to relate current observations to prior ones, draw
conclusion and take actions. Such a memory system is similar
to an expert system, that could interact with all sensors and
actuators and also dynamically expand.
Regardless memorizing and learning capability of the robot,
as any other work force in a factory, robots need instructions
to operate in correct manner. In order to accomplish the goal,
the robot needs to comprehend the instructions and perform
complex sequences of sophisticated and accurate manipulation
activities. As the instructions are given by a human, the most
intuitive interface would be natural languages. However, in
normal conversations concepts are vaguely described and state-
ments and commands are often ambiguous and incomplete. If
the instructions are expected to be given as natural language,
we need to build a system that resolves the ambiguities in the
language.
The problem considered is to give a robot the ability to
process a work instruction for an operator, extract information
and execute the requested tasks. The robot is expected to
execute tasks consistent with valid context in the environment,
prior experiences, rules extracted from product manuals and
the data collected by all interfaces and sensors available to
the system. We aim to do so by semantic analysis of the
valid context in relation to the prior knowledge and resolve
the discovered ambiguities. New and unseen concepts, if any,
are to be made clear in conversation with human operators.
The newly deﬁned concepts should be accumulated in a
semantic memory representation that allows expansion of the
capabilities of the robot. We believe that dynamic ontology-
based frameworks are strong alternatives to implement such a
memory system. We use Natural Language Processing ( NLP),
computer vision and knowledge graphs to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach on ABB’s, IRB 14000, YuMi.
It is worth pointing out that our focus is on semantics of
robotic manipulation in a manufacturing environment and we
do not intend to cover the world knowledge. The system needs
to recognize a set of objects and instructions that are related
to manipulation of them, limiting the scope of the problem
to object-action semantics for manufacturing purposes. The
memory model proposed here is not an alternative to other
related machine learning methods, but a complementary func-
tion to enhance the learning ability.
II. RELATED WORK
With affordable computing power, use of AI for industrial
applications has become a realistic target and a subject of aca-
demic research and industrial development. Robot Program-
ming languages and systems [4], [13] have been developed
to instruct the robot move accurately in a predeﬁned manner
or adapt to the environment by reacting to sensory inputs.
Commercially available robot systems [14], [15] provide that
with variable burden on the user; the more accurate the robot
system needs to be, the more detailed instructions are to be
given and programming becomes more cumbersome. Interest-
ingly, in many of such complex cases, a human operator does
not even need any instruction. For example, programming a
robot to perform cable assembly is a tough engineering work,
while instructing an operator can be as easy as making a circuit
diagram available. Experienced workers know how to read
the diagram and perform the task and inexperienced ones can
either learn very fast or simply ﬁnd out by experimentation
in a very short period of time. The question will then be, to
what extent AI can reduce the need for detailed programming
and allow robots be instructed as human workers ?
Expert systems were perhaps the ﬁrst form of artiﬁcial
intelligence used for industrial automation. They are memory
based approaches that comprise of knowledge database and
an inference engine. Expert systems have been used in past
to solve problems like fault detection and fault tolerance,
path and trajectory planning, obstacle detection, robot control,
path planar optimization for industrial robotics [16], [17],
[18]. The function of semantic memory is very similar to an
expert systems with extended ability to handle general sensory
information and be dynamically expandable.
With availability of big data sets, machine-learning based
robotic solutions have gained considerable traction. Super-
vised learning in vision AI for identiﬁcation and sorting of
objects [19], [20] and vision-based pose estimation [21] are
example of use of AI for robot perception. Unsupervised
Learning approaches have also been used in industrial settings
to augment safe human robot collaborations [2], [3]. End-to-
end systems that learn robotic grasping [22], [23], [24] can
now assist robots to pick up the parts that it has never seen
before. These methods were formulated as learning policies for
bin picking of multiple objects in robot’s ﬁeld of view. Similar
work has been done by using self-supervised learning [25],
[25] for precise pick-and-place application without explicit
object models, which has drastically reduced the training
time. Bayesian or probabilistic models are used for Imitation
Learning [26], [27], where the robot learns to perform a task
from demonstrations.
Although natural language processing is not a new area
of science, with advances in machine learning techniques,

the concepts have been elaborated fast during the past years.
Semantic role labeling, SRL is a technique of shallow se-
mantic parsing of natural language text to generate predicate-
argument structures of sentences. Shallow Semantic structures
play a crucial role in natural language understanding as
they abstract syntactic and morphological representations of
sentences.Predicates generally are verbs and verbal nouns.
They deﬁne the core meaning of the situation expressed in the
text. Arguments on the other hands are phrases that answers
questions as ‘who?’, ‘where?’, ‘when?’ etc. They deﬁne the
essential details to the situation expressed by a predicate.
End-to-end deep models [28] for SRL seem to work well
without syntactic inputs. Traditional Long Short Term Mem-
ory, LSTM, based architectures make sequential prediction
for arbitrary length sentences. They treat each sentence as
sequence of words and recursively process them. Present state
of art methods [29], [30] use deep attentional neural networks
for the task of SRL. When compared to traditional Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN), they draw the global dependencies
of the inputs using deep highway bidirectional LSTMs with
constrained decoding.
Probabilistic Action Cores (PRAC) interpreter [31], [32]
for natural-language instructions resolves the vagueness and
ambiguity of natural language. The system infers missing
information pieces to render an instruction executable by a
robot. It formulates this as a reasoning problem from the
perspective of Bayesian cognition. The system uses Markov
logic networks and learns joint probability distribution over
semantic network, to generate speciﬁc semantic representation
and infer missing aspects of action speciﬁcation. It is con-
nected to a robot planner that executes the computed plans.
Robotic agents have plan library that has parametrizable plans
for actions. The actions are reﬁned and instantiated according
to the instructions generated. Probablistic Graphical models
are constructed for each relevant action verbs and the most
probable action cores are inferred. The action roles attached
to respective action cores are retrieved from PRAC knowledge
base.
Ontology provides a framework for representing knowledge
in a speciﬁc domain and assists in understanding a speciﬁc
attribute of the world. Traditionally ontologies have been
used to make web intelligent (semantic web). It captures the
structure of the world and describes the domain knowledge.
There are no strict and correct ways to describe domain and
create ontology. As a standard framework people have used
Resource Description Framework (RDF) and Web Ontology
Language (OWL) to create ontologies for high expressive-
ness [33], [34].
III. SEMANTIC MEMORY MODEL
In this section, we explain the basic ideas of our memory
management system and roughly how the memory manager
interacts with the devices present in the system to gather
relevant information, store/expand the knowledge and execute
correct actions according to instructions. Our focus is robotic
Fig. 3.
Output and input devices are presented on left and right side,
respectively. The main actuator is the robot, and information is collected
by sensors like camera or command interfaces. The semantic memory as a
knowledge graph is in presented in the the middle, where objects are marked
with square boxes and ”?” before they are recognized and thereafter with
circles. (a), (b) and (c) show consecutive stages of knowledge graph explained
in this paper.
manipulation in manufacturing environment following the
given set of instructions.
For a system to be able to interact with the surrounding and
manipulate reachable objects, it needs to sense and recognize
the objects in the scene. Recognition in practice is a successful
match between measured descriptive quantities and preexisting
descriptions. Learning can be understood as accumulation of
information in an organized manner. The ability to reuse of
that in a controllable manner, to achieve desired effects, can
be considered as knowledge. We propose a system that that
is able to perform these steps and thereby provide necessary
ability to industrial robots to become steadily more competent
over-time to perform more manufacturing tasks and in a better
way.
The system consists of three essential components: (1)
input devices and sensors (2) output devices and actuators
(3) the semantic memory module. Memory module organizes
and stores the collected information from input devices. It
commands the output devices such that a realistic interaction
with the environment can be possible. We assume that there
is an input device to receive commands in natural language
and that there is a vision system to be able to sense the sur-
rounding. The robot system, with its conventional controller,
is in fact a collection of actuators and sensors. However, at
this stage, we consider robot as an actuator that is expected to
manipulate objects. Further, we focus on memory management
and assume that each device is smart enough for the interaction
with the semantic memory manager.
The core of our semantic memory manager is a dynamic
knowledge graph, where the nodes represent concepts and
objects and edges deﬁne relations between two nodes or how

Fig. 4. A semantic memory model to store information and use the experiences in a deterministic manner. We observe a subset of active elements of prior
knowledge and scene graphs with associated relational links between the them.
they interact with each other. The meaning of the edges, or
the related action, is deﬁned by another node in the graph.
The graph initially has only a minimum number of concepts,
such as elementary geometries like sphere, cube and basic
relations like ‘is’, ‘has’ and ‘is instance of’. The graph grows
in interaction with devices connected to the system and what
they observe or do. Conversation with a human operator will
be necessary for deﬁning new concepts in the system.
The knowledge graph has two distinct parts that are tightly
interconnected. These are the scene graph and prior knowl-
edge graph. The scene graph describes the surrounding world,
while the prior knowledge graph stores all concepts that have
been deﬁned earlier. One can argue that the prior knowledge
is type deﬁnitions while the scene graph holds information of
objects that are instances of those types.
Once an object is identiﬁed in the scene by one of input
devices, its properties are measured and stored. Assuming
that the input device is a camera, once an object is detected,
the camera is expected to output at least approximations for
location of the object, its shape, size and color, so that the
object can be identiﬁed. This means that the camera is smart
enough for our purpose. The measured properties are com-
pared with the existing types and concepts. If a match is found,
the identiﬁed object is labeled by creating relations to relevant
nodes of the prior knowledge graph with information about the
type of the object. If no match is found, a new concept will be
deﬁned and will be labeled by requiring information from the
operator. Obviously, with AI-based image processors, a large
number of objects can automatically be labeled, without help
from an operator.
As mentioned above, the robot, say ABB’s IRB 14000,
also called Yumi, is an actuator that operates on operands
Fig. 5. Schematic view of the memory management architecture, interaction
between accumulated knowledge and scene view and persistent storage for
the prior knowledge.
according to the instructions. Instructions are treated in exactly
same manner as an observed object, as explained above. The
sentence is recorded by the input device and is analyzed. Once
the roles in the sentence are deﬁned, the prior knowledge
graph will be searched to ﬁnd the relevant action or start to
record a new one. Execution of instructions means that the
robot operates on an object. For the topic of interest, it is not
important how the operations are implemented or learnt. They
can be programmed in traditional manner, be implemented

with some kind of learning method or can be taught the ﬁrst
time the instruction is given and are in general dependent on
the type of the operand. A robot system with such an ability
is smart enough for our purpose.
Figure 3 presents an example of the knowledge graph, the
system and how the instruction are received. At starting point,
the prior knowledge graph contains a number concepts. The
vision sensor records the scene and for each object deﬁnes
its signature so that the corresponding type can be found and
associated to the object. These associations are shown as links
between elements in the scene graph and elements in the prior
knowledge graph.
Figure 4 shows a subset of the prior knowledge graph related
to the actions. Here, we see that three different ‘Pick’ actions
are deﬁned for three different objects. At this moment, if
the instruction will be ‘Yumi, pick the nut!’ the system will
choose pick1, and look for a nut in the scene graph, get its
locations and execute the action with those inputs. If a new
object will need to be picked, Yumi will be able to suggest
to take it as a nut, screw or a clip and therefore no new
programming or teaching will be needed if the existing actions
are sufﬁcient. The instructions can be more speciﬁc with for
example specifying the color of the nut. In that case, a nut
with the speciﬁc color will be sought in the scene graph.
The strength of semantic modeling can be observed here. The
system does not learn an instruction as a whole, but learns
each concepts separately and combine them to take the right
action. How exactly it is done will become more evident by
description of the implementation details and analysis of the
experiments in the two following sections.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we present the details of our current im-
plementation. We are building a semantic memory and intend
to use it as a knowledge base for robotic manipulation. The
complete cycle includes data collection from environment and
its analysis, storage in the graphs and its use for execution of
instructions, ﬁgure 5
A. Semantic Data Processing
For a robot to execute a requested instruction and operate
on objects, it needs to analyze the inputs from all sensors
together with the instruction itself. We consider all input
devices together and intend to provide a semantic analysis
that allows ﬁnding correct objects and actions.
Identiﬁcation of object, ﬁnding its localization, orientation,
color, distance from the image sensor etc. are some pieces
of information that are needed for proper operation. We use
Fig. 6.
Workﬂow for estimation of object coordinates (x,y,z) and object
orientation (yaw,pitch, roll).
state-of-the-art, real-time object detection [35] based approach
followed by 3-D template matching to detect object coordi-
nates (x,y,z) and compute object orientation (yaw,pitch, roll),
see ﬁgure 6. The system detects objects in semi-moderate
complex environment, viz. homogeneous background with
modest illumination variations. The approach is invariant to
shape, size, texture and other properties of objects.
We
use
NVIDIA®
Jetson
Rudi
Embedded
System
board [36] with 1 TFLOP/s, 256 CUDA cores, 8GB LPDDR4
memory, 64-bit ARM® A57 CPUs (6 Core), 32GB eMMC for
object pose detection.At heart of 3D object recognition and
pose estimation is identifying set of correspondences between
two different clouds, one of them containing the actual object
and other containing the object from actual scene. We use
global descriptors to understand the notion of object. The
segmented point cloud from detected objects help us identify
prospective point cloud clusters. We remove false positives
by discarding point clouds smaller than certain threshold
- the threshold is computed by observing size of objects
in the database. We use, Clustered Viewpoint Feature His-
togram, CVFH [37] based global descriptor to compute point
cloud descriptors. Once all the descriptors have been computed
nearest neighbors search is performed in the database to do
correspondance matching, ﬁgure 6. Viewpoint information
encoded in descriptor is used to compute rotation and the
roll angle is computed using, Camera Roll Histogram, CRH.
The ﬁnal angle is computed by aligning the current CRH
with the stored descriptor. CVFH is the fastest of all global
descriptor among all the investigated descriptors. It takes
5ms to compute CVFH descriptor without down-sampling the
point cloud. With down sampling, the descriptor extracting
time is decreased to 1ms. [38], [39].
To process the instructions, we use deep SRL [29] based
approach to extract intent from user commands. SRL deter-
mines the latent predicate argument structure of a sentence and
provides representations that identify the meaning of sentence
and relationships among the actors and verbs in the sentence.
To baseline our approach we use Part-Of-Speech (POS)
Taggers to generates intermediate tags and use heuristics to
generate formatted output. Figure 7 compares both these ap-
proaches along with subject-predicate-object triplet extraction
method [40]. Tuning such systems could be difﬁcult and would
require considerable efforts to cover all possible use cases. The
output of intent extraction step is used by ‘dynamic’ robot
world knowledge ontology.
B. Building knowledge graphs
The knowledge graph was implemented using graph-tool
[41], a Python 3 module for manipulation and statistical
analysis of graphs or networks, which supports visualization of
graph along with efﬁcient on-the-ﬂy ﬁltering of vertices and
edges including standard topological algorithms. Algorithms
speciﬁc to our application along with interfaces for manipula-
tion of the graphs were added through the API’s provided by
the library.

Fig. 7. Comparison between different methods for understanding instructions using Heuristic over Part-Of-Speech (POS) Taggers, Deep SRL based method
and subject-predicate-object triplet extraction.
As mentioned above, the knowledge graph is divided into
two sub-graphs, prior knowledge graph and scene graphs, each
of which are populated by nodes interconnected with edges.
Each element is an instance of a class and embeds both infor-
mation and functions. Necessary functionality for information
management, retrieval as well as exchange between the two
sub-graphs are implemented in the head node of each, while
other nodes and edges include graph manipulation operations
such as creation, deletion, modiﬁcation, providing speciﬁc
instructions to be executed depending on the type of nodes
and edges.
Scene graph and prior knowledge are self-contained graphs,
but dependent on each other to shape a complete understanding
of the information. Initially both are empty, but the prior
knowledge can be populated programmatically or by reading
from ﬁle. The scene graph, which represents current active
world, is populated by the sensory data in relation to the prior
information available within prior knowledge graph. The steps
are presented below.
Nodes in the graph hold two types of information: labels
and properties, which either are static or dynamic. Node with
static information represent either an object or properties.
For example, the color node would store ‘Red’ or ‘Green’
and position node would store the position of object in real
world (X=10,Y=55,Z=-10). Dynamic information corresponds
to executable code, model or objects representing learned task,
ﬁgure 8.
The edges are directional and deﬁne relation between source
and destination nodes. They can either be of predeﬁned type,
‘has’, ‘is’ and ‘instance-of’, or any user deﬁned type, ﬁgure 8.
The predetermined types of edges have special importance in
the graph as follows:
1) has: Source node has destination node as a property.
2) is: Source node is of type destination node or child node
of type destination node.
3) instance-of: Source node in scene graph is an instance
of destination node in prior knowledge graph. This is
the only relation or edge which spans across both the
graphs.
The user deﬁned edges depict task with the given label. For
example, ‘pick’, ‘place’, ‘test’ are relations between the robot
and an object and point to nodes containing the actual task
implementation. The process to add an object to the scene
graph with reference available in the prior knowledge graph:
1) Object type in scene is detected from sensory data along
with its properties such as color, shape, size.
2) Node matching the object is searched in the prior
knowledge graph.
3) A node is added to the scene graph and is linked with
”instance-of” edge with selected Node.
4) The logic embedded within ‘instance-of’ edge renames
the node to ‘Label instance number’, where ‘Label’
is the type of the object found and the ‘number’ is
the instance number. Scene graph does bookkeeping of
number of instances of each Node.
5) A list of all nodes linked to the found node in the prior
knowledge graph with ”has” edge is created.
6) Each node in the list is added to the scene graph and
attached with the similar structure as in prior knowledge,
creating an exact copy in scene graph. This and all
previous steps are repeated for all nodes being added
to scene graph. Thus, all nodes in the scene graph will
be linked to their type nodes in prior knowledge graph.
7) Properties values collected from sensory data are added
to the respective nodes in the scene graph.
If no prior reference is found, additional information will be
required to create relations to existing information or expand
the prior knowledge.
C. Execution of instructions
When an instruction is given, it is broken down into
parts with roles identiﬁed and is expected to be executed in
context of current environment with the available accumulated
knowledge. To do that, nodes within scene graph and the

prior knowledge graph are matched with respective parts in
the instruction. This is done in the following way:
1) For each named object, e.g. ‘Yumi’ and ‘nut’, the
respective node in the prior knowledge graph is found.
2) For each named object, a list of all nodes connected to
the respective node in prior knowledge graph with “is”
and “instance-of” is created.
3) If there are any properties of the object requested in the
instruction such as color or size, the list will be ﬁltered
accordingly.
4) When a set of objects are now identiﬁed, the right action
with the given label is searched in prior knowledge graph
as an edge to link the right actor to the right object.
5) With all elements in the instructions identiﬁed, the
instruction can be executed.
The above steps will become clearer with an example.
Assume the instruction “YuMi, pick the nut!”. This is ﬁrst
broken into ‘YuMi’, ‘pick’ and ‘the nut’ and respective nodes
in the knowledge graph are identiﬁed. Thereafter, the objects
in the scene graph that relate to right types are identiﬁed; this
will result in ‘YuMi-1’ for ‘YuMi’ and ‘Nut-1’ and ‘Nut-2’
for ‘Nut’. The list will be ﬁltered if for example a speciﬁc
color is requested. If there is a match the target is found,
otherwise the closest match is proposed. For example, if Nut-
1 had property color as blue, while green is requested, the
system will inform the user about inability to ﬁnd exact object
and will ask whether the blue one can be accepted. Equally,
for the action, an edge with label ‘pick’ connecting ‘YuMi’ to
a “nut” is searched. If it is found, the action can be executed
and if there is none, the closest one will be suggested.
The above steps show how information is divided into
knowledge that needs to be saved and scene information that
should be built dynamically, how it is stored and how the
information is used to execute an instruction. The system is
complete if the necessary information is available. Further, it
was explained how object information is stored in the scene
graph and how a new type can be added to the knowledge
graph. What remains is the deﬁnition of action. In general,
we consider the action as a skill that the system should be
Fig. 8. A general description of nodes and edges in semantic memory design.
Nodes with static information represent either an object or properties. Edges
deﬁne relation between source and destination nodes. ’R’,’G’ and ’B’ in graph
denote red, green and blue colors respectively.
Fig. 9. The experimental setup includes: 1) YuMi IRB 14000, 2) Computing
device, a laptop, 3) a Vision sensor and 4) Industrial objects located on the
table.
capable of. Exactly how the skill is learned or programmed
is not information that needs to be stored in the semantic
memory and therefore not in the scope of this work. In the
current system, we have used available interfaces in ABB’s
controller for a convenient programming. The robot is moved
from one position to another, simply by guiding it by hand
and the gripper is activated by a command. The actions can
of course be provided as a library of pre-programmed skills
or as an AI-based skill package that should be trained.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A typical automation system includes, in addition to the
robot itself, a number of other elements. Elements such as
grippers, ﬁxtures, sensors, trays etc. work in tandem to make
a robotic application come to life. The objective of these
experiments is to enable the robot to operate on the repeated
tasks with least amount of programming effort. We teach a
Fig. 10.
Interaction with system and execution of instruction. When the
system starts, prior knowledge is loaded and the scene graph is populated
with observed objects (left). The system acts as shown in the middle column:
When an instruction arrives, it is analyzed and interpreted with help of prior
knowledge (left). The interpretation is matched with the scene graph to ﬁnd
correct objects (middle). Once the objects are identiﬁed and proper action is
found, the instruction will be executed. (right) The scene graph is updated,
reﬂecting the changes in the environment.

robot to learn by demonstration and reuse its experiences
using the memory structure we propose in this work. Our
experimental system, ﬁgure 9, is composed of the following
elements:
1) YuMi IRB 14000 [14], dual arm collaborative robot with
grippers .
2) A table to perform experiments on objects with robot.
3) Objects such as Nut, Box, Screw etc. kept on the table.
We use vision algorithms, section IV-A, to detect object
coordinates (x,y,z) and compute object orientation (yaw,pitch,
roll) in semi-moderate complex environment. Intel Core i3
4590 based laptop with 4GB RAM running on Ubuntu 18.04,
was used to interface with Jetson Rudi Embedded System
board [36]. We used Python3 to implement majority of the
components of the platform. The robots used were pro-
grammed using ABB RAPID [15] language.
We demonstrate the details of three experiments in the
following sections. The details include robot interactions,
command execution sequence, status of memory modules and
update details of the respective knowledge graphs .
A. Experiment 1:”YuMi, pick the screw!”
• Sensory module detects three items on the table. The
item details are added to the scene graph: ‘nut 1’ with
color property ‘green’ of type Nut, ‘screw 1’ with color
property ‘blue’ of type Screw and ‘box 1’ with color
property ‘gray’ of type Box and ”yumi 1” of type robot
YuMi.
• ‘yumi 1’ and ‘screw 1’ are selected and prior knowledge
is checked. Prior knowledge has information about ‘pick’
task with respect to YuMi and Screw. Hence, the task is
executed and screw is picked and removed, as observed
in ﬁgure 10.
• Sequentially, another command ”YuMi, pick the green
nut!” is given. Both ‘yumi 1’ ‘nut 1’ are are found in
prior knowledge graph. The task information for “pick”
with respect to YuMi and Nut and is executed. ‘nut 1’ is
picked and removed from scene.
In the above list,
number denotes the sequence number of
objects of the same type. For example, nut 1 and nut 2 are
the ﬁrst two instances of object type Nut.
B.
Experiment 2: ”YuMi, pick big clip!”
• Sensory module detects two items and adds them to the
scene graph : ‘clip 1’ with color property ‘green’ and
shape ‘big’ and ‘clip 2’ with color property ‘blue’ and
shape ‘small’ of type Clip along with ‘yumi 1’ of type
robot YuMi.
• As there are two nodes are of type clip, the properties
of each node are matched with the shape property ‘big’.
Scene graph has information of ‘clip 1’ and ‘yumi 1’
and prior knowledge details of ‘pick’ task with respect to
YuMi and Clip. Hence, the task is executed and ”clip 1”
is picked and removed.
Fig. 11.
Learning from observations. Initially, the graph includes basic
types and relations only (a). When a new object is observed, its features are
quantiﬁed (b). After that the observation is labeled with human help, both the
prior knowledge and scene graph are updated to include the new information
(c).
• Sequentially, another command ”YuMi, pick the blue
clip!” is given, ‘yumi 1’, ‘clip 2’ are selected as property
‘blue’ is matched with ‘clip 2’ and task is executed.
C. Experiment 3: ”YuMi, pick the new obj!”
Here, ”new obj” is used to refer to a label that is not known
to the system.
• Sensory module detects two items and adds them to scene
graph : ‘box-1’ with color property ‘gray’ and shape
‘square’ and ‘new object’ with color property ‘gray’ and
shape ‘square’ along with ‘yumi 1’ of type robot YuMi.
• The system, informs user about “new object” along with
detected properties. User instructs the system to add this
to prior knowledge graph. User either provides details
about its relation to existing objects,i.e ”box” or ”Nut”
etc or instructs the system to create a new type in
prior knowledge. In case a new type is created, node
‘new obj 1’ is created in scene graph.
• Since details of ‘pick’ are also missing from the graph,
system asks user to either train a new task (by demonstra-
tion) or link the same to one of the existing task labels
based on matching properties of other nodes, ﬁgure 11.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE EXTENSIONS
Similar to humans, industrial robots can use a combination
of memory models to analyze the environment, register and
accumulate the processed information for later use. While
general Machine learning based models are good for skill
learning, we need semantic memory to learn long term innate
concepts. Such memory models are similar to robotic expert
systems which are extended to general sensory information.
The approach presented in the paper, describes a memory
management architecture to learn from complex environments
and structure the same for future use. This structure when used

in tandem with NLP engine and vision cues leads to reduction
in programming time and increase in productivity.
We intend to extend the capabilities of intent extraction
algorithms, so that they can deal with complex set of advanced
human commands. This would require improvements in robot
execution planners too. Input commands in form of human
speech are also being experimented with. To make memory
representations more robust and extensible, we foresee a
future where base ontology can be initiated using web data
and product manuals. The ability to forget experiences over
a period of time and to be sure of the ones which robot
experiences quite often are few of the memory management
features we feel would be important in long run.
