arXiv:1501.05215v1  [stat.ME]  21 Jan 2015
A Separation theorem for Chain Event Graphs
Peter Thwaites1 and Jim Q. Smith2
1University of Leeds
2University of Warwick
Abstract: Bayesian Networks (BNs) are popular graphical models
for the representation of statistical problems embodying dependence
relationships between a number of variables. Much of this popularity
is due to the d-separation theorem of Pearl and Lauritzen, which al-
lows an analyst to identify the conditional independence statements
that a model of the problem embodies using only the topology of
the graph.
However for many problems the complete model de-
pendence structure cannot be depicted by a BN. The Chain Event
Graph (CEG) was introduced for these types of problem. In this pa-
per we introduce a separation theorem for CEGs, analogous to the
d-separation theorem for BNs, which likewise allows an analyst to
identify the conditional independence structure of their model from
the topology of the graph.
Keywords:
Bayesian Network, Chain Event Graph, conditional
independence, directed acyclic graph, graphical model, separation
theorem
1
Introduction
If the DAG (directed acyclic graph) of a Bayesian Network (BN) has a vertex set
{X1, X2, . . . , Xn}, then there are n conditional independence assertions which
can simply be read oﬀthe graph.
These are the properties that state that
a vertex-variable is independent of its non-descendants given its parents (the
directed local Markov property [20]). Answering most conditional independence
queries however, is not so straightforward. The d-separation theorem for BNs
was ﬁrst proved by Verma and Pearl [43], and an alternative version considered
in [22, 20, 9]. The theorem addresses whether the conditional independence
query A ∐B | C ? can be answered from the topology of the DAG of a BN,
where A, B, C are disjoint subsets of the set of vertex-variables of the DAG.
Separation theorems have been proved for more general classes of graphical
model including chain graphs [6], alternative chain graphs [2], and ancestral
graphs [30].
However, for many problems the available quantitative dependence infor-
mation cannot all be embodied in the DAG of a BN. The Chain Event Graph
1

(CEG) was introduced in 2006 [39, 38] for the representation & analysis of
precisely these sorts of problems. There have been a dozen papers on CEGs
published since then, principally concerned with their use for problem rep-
resentation (eg. [34]), probability propagation [41], learning and model selec-
tion [14, 15, 3, 33, 4, 10], and causal analysis [42, 37]. The motivation for the
development of this class is that CEGs are probably the most natural graphical
models for discrete processes when elicitation involves questions about how situ-
ations might unfold. Although the topology of these graphs is more complicated
than that of the BN, they are more expressive, as they allow us to represent
all structural quantitative information within the graph itself. Context-speciﬁc
symmetries which are not intrinsic to the structure of the BN [7, 23, 29, 31]
are fully expressed in the topology of the CEG, which also recognises logical
or structural zeros in probability tables, and the numbers of levels taken by
problem-variables. This last has been found to be essential to understanding
the geometry of BN models with hidden variables [1, 26]. In this paper we re-
turn to the mathematics underpinning CEG models, and provide a separation
theorem for these graphs.
The CEG is a tree-based graphical structure with a passing resemblance to
graphs such as Bozga & Malers’ probabilistic decision graph [8] (made popular
by Jaeger et al in [17]).
It diﬀers from these in that edges in a CEG label
events that might happen to an individual in a population given a particular
partial history, and the coalescing of vertices & colouring of edges together en-
code conditional independence/Markov structure. The colouring of CEGs and
their acyclicity also distinguish them from Markov state space diagrams. Finite
CEGs as discussed in this paper also have ﬁnite event spaces whose atoms cor-
respond to the distinct possible histories or developments that individuals in a
population might have. The tree-structure imparts to these atoms an additional
longitudinal element consisting of the stages of an individual’s development. We
note in passing that colour has recently been found to provide a valuable em-
bellishment to other graphical models (see for example [16]).
Even more so than is the case with BNs, there are a number of conditional
independence properties which can simply be read oﬀthe CEG [34], and given
the tree-based nature of the CEG these properties are naturally context-speciﬁc.
That is to say they are properties of the form A ∐B | Λ for some event Λ. An
example would be that a particular lifestyle-related medical condition is inde-
pendent of gender given that the subject is a smoker. An analogous statement
for a discrete BN would be of the form
p(A | B, C = c) = p(A | C = c)
for some subsets of variables A, B, C, some speciﬁc vector value c of C and
all vector values of A and B. The class of conditioning events we can tackle
with a CEG is however much richer than that generally considered when using
BN-based analysis.
In Section 2 we use a toy example to introduce CEGs. A naive criticism
of tree-based graphical structures is that they will be too complex for larger
2

problems. We note that the picture is simply for the investigator’s (or a client’s)
beneﬁt: as with any large system, analysts need to consider both local and global
aspects – the full CEG for a large problem may exist only as a set of computer
constraints; local aspects of the problem can be drawn out as a simple graph.
Our example here is small so that we can use it eﬀectively to illustrate key ideas.
We then formally deﬁne a CEG, and explain how coalescence & colouring
encode conditional independence structure. Events & random variables deﬁned
on CEGs are introduced through our example, as are sub-CEGs conditioned on
an event of interest.
In Section 3 we introduce elementary variables associated with the vertices
of the CEG, and use these to construct a separation theorem. Comparison with
the d-separation theorem for BNs is made through corollaries and our running
example. Section 4 develops some of the ideas from earlier sections.
2
Chain Event Graphs
Deﬁnitions of Chain Event Graphs (of varying degrees of complexity) have ap-
peared in many of the previous papers on these graphs. We oﬀer a detailed
formal deﬁnition here so that the theorems in later sections have a ﬁrm mathe-
matical foundation.
2.1
Event Trees
We introduce CEGs in this section through the use of a toy example, simple
enough to illustrate the key ideas.
The CEG is a function of an event tree [32], and was created to overcome
some of the shortcomings of these graphs. So we start by considering an event
tree elicited from some expert.
Example 1. A researcher is investigating a population of people whose parents
suﬀerered from an inherited medical condition C. She has information on the
gender of each individual; if and when they displayed a symptom S (never, before
puberty, after puberty); and whether or not they developed the condition C.
Her current research is retrospective so she also has these individual’s ages at
death. She suspects that the condition can lead to early death, so she produces
an indicator that for each individual records whether or not they died before the
age of 50. She knows that an individual who does not display symptom S will
not develop the condition.
An event tree for this information is given in Figure 1.
The tree is a natural description of the problem. The labels on the edges
of each root-to-leaf path (eg. male, display S before puberty, develop C, die
before 50) in Figure 1 follow a temporal order, and the absence of condition
edges in the 9th, 10th, 19th & 20th such paths reﬂects the expert’s knowledge
that individuals who do not display S do not develop C.
3

v0
v1
v2
v3
v7
v5
v9
S after
v10
v18
v17
v4
v6
v8
v36
Figure 1: Event tree for Example 1
An event tree T is a connected directed graph with no cycles. It has one root
vertex (v0) with no parents, whilst all other vertices have exactly one parent. A
leaf-vertex is a vertex with no children. We denote the vertex set of T by V (T )
and the edge set by E(T ). A directed root-to-leaf path in T is called a route.
Although an event tree could be used to represent an observer’s beliefs about
the possible developments of some individual, we make the assumption that the
tree relates to a population. Hence the routes of the tree describe precisely
the possible developments or histories that an individual in the population can
experience. This description takes the form of a sequence of edge-labels, each
describing what can happen next at a vertex. So in Figure 1 for example, an
individual who is male reaches vertex v1 where the possible immediate develop-
ments are that he displays S before puberty, after puberty or not at all.
We specify that the edges leaving any vertex in the tree must have distinct
labels; that each individual can only pass along one edge leaving any vertex,
and the choice of which edge is determined only by the variable controlling
the next stage of development (eg. symptom) and not by any possible further
developments downstream of these edges (ie. towards the leaves).
We also require that each route corresponds to a real possible development
or history of an individual in the population. So each such path has a non-
zero probability that some individual might take this path. Also, the number
4

of routes corresponds exactly to the number of distinct possible histories or
developments (deﬁned by the edge-labels) that some individual could experience.
Once we have a set of routes, and some ordering on these paths, then the
edge-labels deﬁne the tree structure. In our example the ﬁrst variable in our
order is gender, so v0 has two emanating edges, labelled male & female. The
second variable is symptom, so v1 & v2 both have three emanating edges, labelled
displays S before puberty, displays S after puberty & never displays S. We know
that individuals who never display S will not develop condition C, so the edges
emanating from v5 & v8 label the possible values of the life-expectancy indicator,
whereas those emanating from v3, v4, v6 & v7 label the possible values of
condition.
In this paper we use the notation λ to denote a route, and the set of routes
of T is labelled Λ(T ). When the tree is applied to a population, each route λ
corresponds to a possible history or development of an individual in the popu-
lation, and hence to an atom in an event space deﬁned by the tree. The sigma
ﬁeld of events associated with T is then the set of all possible unions of atoms
λ in Λ(T ). Note that the tree encodes an additional longitudinal development
or history for the individual, not encoded by the sigma ﬁeld alone [32]. Events
in the sigma ﬁeld of the tree are denoted Λ.
So for instance, in Example 1 the event Λ corresponding to displayed S before
puberty and died before the age of 50 is simply the union of the 1st, 3rd, 11th
& 13th routes in the tree in Figure 1.
Example 1 continued. Our researcher has done suﬃcient analysis of the data
to tell us that:
• life expectancy of individuals in this population is independent of gender
given that S is not displayed,
• males who display S at any point and females who display S before puberty
have the same joint probability distribution over the variables condition and life
expectancy.
Moreover
• if and when an individual displays S is independent of gender,
and she believes that
• males and females who display S at any point have the same probability of
developing the condition.
It is the fact that traditional trees cannot readily depict this sort of informa-
tion which has led to tree-based analysis not receiving the attention it deserves.
It is actually relatively easy to portray these types of conditional independence
or Markov properties on a tree – all we need to do is add colour to the edges, as
in Figure 2 (where edges with the same colouring carry the same probability).
Despite the colouring this is still a rather cumbersome representation. To
make it more compact we use the idea of coalesced trees, used in decision anal-
ysis since [27]. In a coalesced event tree vertices from which the sets of possible
complete future developments have the same probability distribution are coa-
lesced.
5

v0
v1
v2
v3
v7
v5
v9
after
v10
v18
v17
v4
v6
v8
v36
Figure 2: Coloured event tree for Example 1
So in the tree in Figure 2 we can coalesce the vertices v3, v4 & v6 and also the
vertices v5 & v8 (the vertices v9, v11 & v13 and v10, v12 & v14 are also coalesced,
but this coalescence is in a sense absorbed into that of v3, v4 & v6).
The combination of colouring and coalescence gives us a more compact graph
that allows us to portray all conditional independence properties of the type
described in Example 1 above.
So in Figure 3, the ﬁrst two of the four statements provided by our researcher
are depicted by the coalescence, but the latter two require the colouring of the
edges leaving v1 & v2 and v3+4+6 & v7. The colouring of the edges emanating
from v9+11+13 & from v10+12+14 is suppressed as it no longer yields any extra
information.
2.2
Probabilities on Trees
In section 2.1 we talked in general terms about probabilities on trees. In this
section we formalise these ideas.
In Figure 1 the probability of the atom {male, displayed S before puberty, de-
6

v0
v1
v2
v3+4+6
v7
v5+8
v9+11+13
before
after
after
v10+12+14
v15
v16
Figure 3: Coalesced event tree for Example 1
veloped C, died before 50} is clearly:
p(male) × p(displayed S before puberty | male)
× p(developed C | male, displayed S before puberty)
× p(died before 50 | male, displayed S before puberty, developed C)
which can be written as
πe(v1 | v0) πe(v3 | v1) πe(v9 | v3) πe(v17 | v9)
where πe(v17 | v9) is the probability of an individual having reached the vertex v9
in Figure 1 (ie. they are male, displayed S before puberty & developed C) then
taking the edge e(v9, v17) to reach the vertex v17 (ie. they die before 50) etc.
We can assign a probability to each atom of the event space as:
p(λ) =
Y
e(v,v′)∈λ
πe(v′ | v)
where e(v, v′) means the edge from vertex v to vertex v′, e(v, v′) ∈λ means
that e(v, v′) lies on the route λ, and πe(v′ | v) is the conditional probability of
traversing the edge e(v, v′) given that have reached the vertex v.
We call the probabilities {πe(v′ | v)} the primitive probabilities of the tree T .
7

The set {p(λ)} deﬁnes a probability measure over the sigma ﬁeld of events
formed by the atoms λ ∈Λ(T ). Strictly speaking these probabilities are the
fundamental probabilities of the system as they are the probabilities of the
atoms. Each primitive probability has then a unique value determined by these
{p(λ)}. The conditional probability of an edge e(v, v′) is given by:
πe(v′ | v) =
P
λ:e(v,v′)∈λ p(λ)
P
λ:v∈λ p(λ)
where the numerator is the sum of the probabilities of all routes utilising the edge
e(v, v′), and the denominator is the sum of the probabilities of all routes passing
through the start-vertex v of the edge e(v, v′). So for example in Figure 1 we
have:
πe(v17 | v9) =
p(λ1)
p(λ1) + p(λ2)
where λ1 is the atom corresponding to the route v0 −→v17 (λ(v0, v17)) and λ2
is the atom corresponding to the route v0 −→v18 (λ(v0, v18)).
In practice however, our elicitation of the tree is likely to yield primitive
probabilities of the sort described above, rather than probabilities of atoms.
2.3
Positions and Stages
To allow our event tree to encode the full conditional independence structure of
the model we introduce two partitions of the tree’s vertices.
Let V 0(T ) (⊂V (T )) be the set of non-leaf vertices of T (called situations
in [42]). Also let v ≺v′ denote that the vertex v precedes the vertex v′ on some
route.
Then for any non-leaf vertex va ∈V 0(T ) and leaf-vertex v′′
a ∈V (T ) \ V 0(T )
such that va ≺v′′
a, there is a unique subpath µ(va, v′′
a) comprising of the edges
of the route λ(v0, v′′
a) which lie between the vertices va and v′′
a.
Let:
πµ(v′′
a | va) =
Y
e(v,v′)∈µ(va,v′′
a )
πe(v′ | v)
Now each vertex v ∈V 0(T ) labels a random variable J(v) whose state space
J(v) can be identiﬁed with the set of v −→leaf subpaths {µ(v, v′′)}.
Deﬁnition 1. Positions. For an Event Tree T (V (T ), E(T )), the set V 0(T )
is partitioned into equivalence classes, called positions as follows:
Vertices va, vb ∈V 0(T ) are members of the same equivalence class (position) if
there
is
a
bijection
φ
between
J(va)
and
J(vb)
such
that
if
φ : µ(va, v′′
a) 7→µ(vb, v′′
b ), then
(a) the ordered sequence of edge-labels is identical for µ(va, v′′
a) and for µ(vb, v′′
b ),
(b) πµ(v′′
a | va) = πµ(v′′
b | vb).
Now, from section 2.1, tree structure is deﬁned by the edge-labels, so (a)
above means that the subtrees rooted in va and vb have identical topological
structure.
8

Similarly, from section 2.2, our edge probabilities are uniquely deﬁned by the
route probabilities. We can see that the edge probabilities in the subtrees rooted
in va and vb must be uniquely deﬁned by the sets of probabilities {πµ(v′′
a | va)}
and {πµ(v′′
b | vb)}. So (b) above means that the corresponding edge probabilities
in these two subtrees are equal.
So two vertices in a tree are in the same position if the sets of possible
complete future developments from these vertices have the same probability
distribution. We denote the set of positions of T by P(T )
We noted earlier that knowing this partition of vertices is insuﬃcient for
us to fully describe the conditional independence structure of the tree, so we
introduce a second partition.
Each vertex v ∈V 0(T ) also labels a random variable K(v) whose state space
K(v) can be identiﬁed with the set of directed edges e(v, v′) emanating from v.
Deﬁnition 2. Stages. For an Event Tree T (V (T ), E(T )), the set V 0(T ) is
partitioned into equivalence classes, called stages as follows:
Vertices va, vb ∈V 0(T ) are members of the same equivalence class (stage) if
there
is
a
bijection
ψ
between
K(va)
and
K(vb)
such
that
if
ψ : e(va, v′
a) 7→e(vb, v′
b), then πe(v′
a | va) = πe(v′
b | vb).
So two vertices in a tree are in the same stage if their sets of emanating edges
have the same probability distribution.
Note that the set of stages is coarser than the set of positions, and that
vertices in the same position are necessarily in the same stage.
We also add colouring to trees to illustrate the stage structure. So vertices
in the same stage are given the same colour, and edges emanating from vertices
in the same stage are coloured according to their probabilities / labels. This
induces a partition on E(T ).
2.4
Chain Event Graphs
The Chain Event Graph C is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), which is connected,
having a unique root vertex (with no incoming edges) and a unique sink vertex
(with no outgoing edges). Unlike the BN more than one edge can exist be-
tween two vertices of a CEG. The CEG also generally has its vertices and edges
coloured, although most of this paper will deal with uncoloured versions called
Simple CEGs. The root and sink vertices of a CEG are labelled w0 and w∞.
Deﬁnition 3. Chain Event Graph. The CEG C(T ) (a function of the tree
T (V (T ), E(T ))) is the graph with vertex set V (C) and edge set E(C) deﬁned by:
1. V (C) ≡P(T ) ∪{w∞};
2.
(a) For w, w′ ∈V (C)\{w∞} there is a directed edge e(w, w′) ∈E(C)
iﬀthere are vertices v, v′ ∈V 0(T ) such that the vertex v is in the
position w (∈P(T )), v′ is in the position w′ (∈P(T )), and there is
an edge e(v, v′) ∈E(T );
9

w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
winf
w6
male
female
before
after
never
before
after
never
develop C
not develop C
develop C
not develop C
before 50
after 50
before 50
after 50
w7
w8
w9
Figure 4: CEG for Example 1
(b) For w ∈V (C)\{w∞} there is a directed edge e(w, w∞) ∈E(C)
iﬀthere is a vertex v ∈V 0(T ) such that v is in the position w
(∈P(T )), and there is an edge e(v, v′) ∈E(T ) for some leaf-vertex
v′ ∈V (T )\V 0(T ).
Note that the vertex set of C(T ) consists of the positions of T and the sink-
vertex w∞. Positions in C(T ) are said to be in the same stage if the component
vertices (in T ) of these positions are in the same stage. Colouring in C(T ) is
inherited from T . The constraints associated with the positions & stages of a
CEG hold for the entire population to which the CEG has been applied,
Example 1 continued. To convert the coalesced tree from Figure 3 to a CEG
is straightforward. We simply combine the leaf-vertices into a sink-vertex w∞
as in Figure 4.
The positions here are w0 through w9. We note that w1 & w2 are in the
same stage (as can be seen from the colouring), w3 & w4 are in the same stage,
and each of w5 through w9 is in a stage by itself.
The position w3 encodes the conditional independence / Markov property
that males who display S at any point and females who display S before puberty
have the same joint probability distribution over the variables condition and life
expectancy. The position w5 encodes the property that life expectancy of indi-
viduals in this population is independent of gender given that S is not displayed.
The stage {w1, w2} encodes the property that if and when an individual dis-
10

plays S is independent of gender. The stage {w3, w4} encodes the property that
condition is independent of gender given S displayed.
Without ambiguity we simplify our notation C(T ) to C.
Analogously with the tree, a directed w0 →w∞path λ in C is called a route.
The set of routes of C is labelled Λ(C). We write w ≺w′ when the position w
precedes the position w′ on a route.
When the CEG is applied to a population, each route λ corresponds to a
possible history or development of an individual in the population, and hence
to an atom in the event space deﬁned by the CEG. The sigma ﬁeld of events
associated with C is then the set of all possible unions of atoms λ in Λ(C). Like
the tree, the CEG encodes an additional longitudinal development or history
for the individual, not encoded by the sigma ﬁeld alone. Events in the sigma
ﬁeld of the CEG are denoted Λ.
Note that the number of routes in the CEG equals the number in the tree and
corresponds exactly to the number of possible distinct histories or developments
that some individual in the population could experience. And since no route has
a zero probability, all edges in the CEG have non-zero conditional probabilities
associated with them.
Because the CEG’s atoms have this implicit longitudinal development asso-
ciated with them, certain events in the sigma ﬁeld are particularly important.
Let Λ(w) denote the event that an individual unit takes a route that passes
through the position w ∈V (C). Λ(w, w′) is then the union of all routes passing
through the positions w and w′, Λ(e(w, w′)) is the union of all routes passing
through the edge e(w, w′), and Λ(µ(w, w′)) is the union of all routes utilising
the subpath µ(w, w′).
2.5
Probabilities on CEGs
As with trees, underlying the CEG there is a probability space which is speciﬁed
by assigning probabilities to the atoms.
For each position w ∈V (C)\{w∞}
and edge e(w, w′) emanating from w, we denote by πe(w′ | w) the probability
of traversing the edge e(w, w′) conditional on having reached the position w.
We call the probabilities {πe(w′ | w) : e(w, w′) ∈E(C), w ∈V (C)\{w∞}} the
primitive probabilities of C.
Then, analogously with trees, for each atom λ:
p(λ) =
Y
e(w,w′)∈λ
πe(w′ | w)
as both the atoms and the primitive probabilities are identical to the corre-
sponding atoms and primitive probabilities in the tree.
The set {p(λ)} deﬁnes a probability measure over the sigma ﬁeld of events
formed by the atoms λ ∈Λ(C).
This assignment of probabilities implicitly demands a Markov property over
the ﬂow of the units through the graph. Thus, in the context of our medi-
cal example, the probablility of an individual with attributes (male, displayed
11

symptom S before puberty), (male, displayed symptom S after puberty) or (fe-
male, displayed symptom S before puberty) developing the condition depends
only on the fact that the subpaths corresponding to these pairs of attributes
terminate at the position w3, and not on the particular subpath leading to w3.
The probability this individual develops the condition is then πe(w6 | w3) ≡
p(Λ(e(w3, w6)) | Λ(w3)).
So we only need to know the position a unit has
reached in order to predict as well as is possible what the next unfolding of its
development will be.
This Markov hypothesis looks strong but in fact holds for many families of
statistical model. For example all event tree descriptions of a problem satisfy
this property, all ﬁnite state space context speciﬁc Bayesian Networks as well
as many other structures [34].
We can go further and state that the sets of possible future developments
(whether or not they developed the condition and whether or not they died
before the age of 50) for individuals taking any of these three subpaths must
be the same. Moreover the conditional probability of any particular subsequent
development must be the same for individuals taking any of these three sub-
paths.
Note also that if positions wa and wb are such that the sets of possible
future developments from wa and wb are identical, and the conditional joint
probability distributions over these sets are identical, then wa and wb are the
same position, and must be coalesced for our graph to be a CEG.
The probability of any event Λ in the sigma ﬁeld is hence of the form
p(Λ) =
X
λ∈Λ
p(λ) =
X
λ∈Λ
Y
e(w,w′)∈λ
πe(w′ | w)
where λ ∈Λ means that λ is one of the component atoms of the event Λ.
In this paper we will also use the following further notation:
πµ(w′ | w) ≡p(Λ(µ(w, w′)) | Λ(w)) denotes the probability of utilising the
subpath µ(w, w′) (conditional on passing through w),
π(w′ | w) ≡p(Λ(w, w′) | Λ(w)) = P
µ πµ(w′ | w) denotes the probability of
arriving at w′ conditional on passing through w.
Expressing a problem as a CEG allows domain experts to check their beliefs
in a very straightforward manner:
We stated in Section 2.1 that the expert in our example believed that males
& females who display S at any point have the same probability of developing C.
This is depicted in the colouring of the edges emanating from w3 & w4 in Fig-
ure 4. Our expert can now use the techniques developed in [14, 15, 3, 33] to test
the model represented by Figure 4 against alternative models with diﬀerent con-
ditional independence / Markov structure. Such a test might yield information
that grouped the vertices v3, v4, v6 & v7 from Figure 1 into diﬀerent positions
than those in Figure 4; or that the vertices v3, v4 & v6 are indeed in the same
stage and position, but that the vertex v7 is not in this stage (ie. the probability
of developing C is diﬀerent for females who display S after puberty), and so the
edges leaving w3 & w4 in Figure 4 would no longer have the same colouring.
12

2.6
Conditioning on events
Most conditional independence queries that could realistically be of interest to
an analyst can be answered purely by inspecting the topology of a CEG. And
most of these queries involve conditioning on what is known as an intrinsic
event.
Deﬁnition 4. Intrinsic events. Let CΛ be the subgraph of C consisting of only
those positions and edges that lie on a route λ ∈Λ, and the sink-vertex w∞.
Λ is intrinsic to C if the number of w0 −→w∞paths in CΛ equals the number
of atoms in the set {λ}λ∈Λ.
The idea of intrinsic events is closely related to that of faithfulness in BNs [24,
36]. Note that each atom (& therefore edge) in CΛ must by construction have
a non-zero probability, but edge-probabilities in CΛ may diﬀer from those in C
since some vertices in CΛ will have fewer emanating edges than they have in C,
and the probabilities on the emanating edges of any vertex must sum to one.
All atoms of the sigma ﬁeld of C are intrinsic, as are Λ(w), Λ(w, w′), Λ(e(w, w′)),
Λ(µ(w, w′)) (provided these are non-empty), and as is the exhaustive set Λ(w0).
If we include the empty set in the set of intrinsic events then we note that in-
trinsic sets are closed under intersection and so technically form a π-system (see
for example [18]) we can associate with the CEG C.
Not all events in the sigma ﬁeld are necessarily intrinsic, because the class of
intrinsic events is not closed under union. For example, for the CEG in Figure 4,
the event Λ consisting of the union of the two atoms described by the routes
male, display S before puberty, develop C, die before 50 and male, display S after
puberty, develop C, die after 50 produces a subgraph CΛ which has four distinct
routes, so Λ is not intrinsic. However, our interest in intrinsic events is that we
can condition on them, and we show below that conditioning on intrinsic events
often destroys the stage-structure of C. Conditioning on non-intrinsic events
usually destroys position-structure. From this we argue that if we know that we
wish to condition on an event such as the one described above, we would simply
sacriﬁce the position-structure of our CEG (knowing that it would probably be
lost in the conditioning anyway) and split (uncoalesce) the position w3 to form
a graph for which this event is intrinsic.
Even without such sleight of hand, the class of intrinsic events is rich enough
to encompass virtually all of the conditioning events in the conditional indepen-
dence statements we would like to query. In particular, if our model can be
expressed as a BN (with vertex-variables {Xj}) then any set of observations ex-
pressible in the form {Xj ∈Aj} ({Aj} subsets of the sample spaces of {Xj}) is a
proper subset of the set of intrinsic events deﬁned on the CEG of our model [41].
Example 1 continued. Suppose for illustrative convenience that the edges la-
belled male, female, displayed S before puberty, displayed S after puberty, never
displayed S, developed C, did not develop C in our CEG have the probabilities
1
2, 1
2, 1
4, 1
4, 1
2, 1
2, 1
2. Now let us condition on the event Λ which is the union of
all routes except {female, displayed S after puberty, did not develop C, died
13

before 50} and {female, displayed S after puberty, did not develop C, died after
50}. This event Λ is clearly intrinsic to C, and has the probability p(Λ) =
15
16.
When we condition on Λ, the routes λ which are components of Λ get new
probabilities p(λ | Λ) = p(λ, Λ)/p(Λ) = p(λ)/p(Λ). In this case each route has
its probability multiplied by 16
15. We leave it as a (simple) exercise to show that
all edge-probabilities remain unchanged except:
πe(w1 | w0) becomes 8/15
πe(w2 | w0) becomes 7/15
πe(w3 | w2) becomes 2/7
πe(w4 | w2) becomes 1/7
πe(w5 | w2) becomes 4/7
πe(w8 | w4) becomes 1
the edge πe(w9 | w4) does not exist in CΛ
So the positions w1 and w2 are no longer in the same stage.
So, as already noted, conditioning on an intrinsic event can destroy stage-
structure. This leads us to deﬁne an uncoloured version of the CEG.
Deﬁnition 5. Simple CEG A simple CEG (sCEG) is a CEG where there are
no constraints on edge-probabilities, except that (i) all edge-probabilities must
be greater than zero (a consequence of the requirement we made for trees), and
(ii) the sum of emanating-edge-probabilities for any position must equal one.
What this means in practice is that stage-structure is suppressed: there are
no stages which are not positions, and so colouring is redundant. There is an
analogy here with BNs to which one can always add edges, and sacriﬁce a little
conditional independence structure.
We show now that the class of sCEG models is closed under conditioning on
an intrinsic event:
Theorem 1. For an event Λ, intrinsic to C, the subgraph CΛ is an sCEG. If the
probability of any route λ in the sigma ﬁeld of CΛ is given by pΛ(λ) = p(λ | Λ),
then the edge-probabilities in CΛ are given by:
ˆπe(w′ | w) = p(Λ | Λ(e(w, w′)))
p(Λ | Λ(w))
πe(w′ | w)
The proof of this theorem is in the appendix. We note that this result has
been successfully used to develop fast propagation algorithms for CEGs [41].
Note that the probability of an atom λ in C conditioned on the intrinsic
event Λ is the probability of that atom in the sCEG CΛ (denoted pΛ(λ)). It is
then trivially the case that the probability of an event in C conditioned on the
event Λ is the probability of that event in the sCEG CΛ.
14

2.7
Random variables on sCEGs
Random variables measurable with respect to the sigma ﬁeld of C partition the
set of atoms into events. So consider a random variable X with state space X,
and let us denote the event that X takes the value x (∈X) by Λx. Then the set
{Λx}x∈X partitions Λ(C).
For any CEG there is a set of fairly transparent random variables which
includes as a subset the set of measurement variables of any BN-representation
of the model, if such a representation exists. These are called cut-variables and
are discussed in detail in Section 3.2. In Figure 4 for example, we have a variable
which could be called symptom, which could take the values 1, 2 & 3 (in some
order) for routes traversing edges labelled before, after and never. These are not
however the only variables we can deﬁne on a CEG, and we ﬁrst consider some
results for general variables.
Note that when we write X ∐Y we mean that p(X = x, Y
= y) =
p(X = x) p(Y = y) ∀x ∈X, y ∈Y, and that this is true for all distributions
P compatible with C. Now for an intrinsic event Λ, we can write X ∐Y | Λ if
and only if p(X = x, Y = y | Λ) = p(X = x | Λ) p(Y = y | Λ) for all values x
of X and y of Y (see for example [12]). That is X ∐Y | Λ ⇔p(Λx, Λy | Λ) =
p(Λx | Λ) p(Λy | Λ) for all Λx ∈{Λx}x∈X, Λy ∈{Λy}y∈Y.
Lemma 1. For a CEG C, variables X, Y measurable with respect to the sigma
ﬁeld of C, and intrinsic conditioning event Λ, the statement X ∐Y | Λ is true
if and only if X ∐Y is true in the sCEG CΛ.
The proof of this lemma is in the appendix. This is a particularly useful
property because it allows us to check any context-speciﬁc conditional inde-
pendence property by checking a non-conditional independence property on a
sub-sCEG.
To motivate the theory in the remainder of section 2 and in section 3, we
need a bigger example.
Example 2. Our researcher from Example 1 now turns her attention to an
ongoing study. Subjects who display the symptom S (at any point) may be given
a drug, and the probability of receiving this drug is not dependent on their gender
or when they displayed S. Those that develop the condition C may be given
treatment, and the probability of receiving this treatment is not dependent on
their gender, when they displayed S, or whether or not they received the earlier
drug. The CEG for this is given in Figure 5.
These two properties are depicted in the CEG by the positions w3 & w4 being
in the same stage, and by w10, w12 & w14 also being in the same stage.
Figure 5 also tells us that treatment and life expectancy are independent of
gender and when S displayed, given both the event drug given & develop C and
the event drug given & not develop C (the positions w10 & w11); and that life
expectancy is independent of gender and when S displayed given the event drug
not given, develop C & treatment given (the position w18).
15

w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
winf
w6
B
A
A
after 50
w7
w8
w9
w10
after 50
after 50
after 50
w11
w12
w13
w14
w15
w16
w17
w18
w19
w20
Figure 5: CEG for Example 2
Our researcher is interested in the relationships between condition & gender,
and between condition & when S displayed, for the subgroups (i) who were given
the drug, and (ii) who displayed S but were not given the drug.
In BN-theory, if we wish to answer the query X ∐Y | Z ?, one way we
might start doing this is by drawing the ancestral graph of {X, Y, Z} (see for
example [21]). We do this because variables in the BN which are not part of
this graph have no inﬂuence on the outcome of our query.
There is no direct analogy for this graph in CEG-theory, but we can consider
a pseudo-ancestral graph associated with a set of events or variables. So in
Example 2, all edges associated with treatment or life expectancy lie downstream
(ie. towards the sink-node) of the edges associated with gender, symptom, drug
and condition, so we can simply curtail our CEG so that it does not include
these edges.
So in Figure 5, the positions w5, w10, w11, w12, w13, w14 & w15 are coalesced
into a new sink-node w∞as in Figure 6. But w7 & w9 in Figure 5 were in the
same stage. As these nodes are now only one edge upstream of w∞, they get
coalesced into a single new position (w7 in Figure 6). Notice how much simpler
the pseudo-ancestral graph is than the original CEG.
We have noted above that stage-structure is often destroyed by conditioning
on an intrinsic event, but that the set of sCEGs is closed under this conditioning.
16

w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
winf
w6
B
A
N
A
dev C
dev C
not dev C
w7
Figure 6: Pseudo-ancestral graph for Example 2
So the remainder of our analysis is conducted on an uncoloured CEG.
The graph in Figure 7 is the uncoloured pseudo-ancestral sCEG C associated
with the queries that our researcher is interested in. This graph is analogous to
the moralised ancestral graph used in BN-based analysis.
There are two natural variables which partition Λ(C) – these are gender
(which partitions Λ(C) into events which we will call M (male) & F (female)), and
symptom (which partitions Λ(C) into events which we will call B (S displayed
before puberty), A (S displayed after puberty) & N (S never displayed)).
The variable associated with giving the drug partitions Λ(C) into three events
– drug given, S displayed but drug not given, and S not displayed and hence
drug not given. As the third of these events is exactly the event N above, we
will for brevity describe the second event (particularly when labelling edges)
simply as drug not given or no drug.
The variable associated with condition C partitions Λ(C) into three events –
C developed, S displayed but C not developed, and S not displayed and hence
C not developed. Again, as the third of these events is exactly the event N, we
will for brevity describe the second event simply as C not developed.
There is no ambiguity here as the queries our researcher is interested in
correspond to conditioning on the events drug given, and S displayed but drug
not given.
Her ﬁrst question concerns the relationship between condition and when S
displayed for the subgroup who were given the drug. This requires conditioning
on the event drug given, so we draw the sub-sCEG CΛ for this event. This is
given in Figure 8.
The relationships she is interested in concern the probabilities pΛ(C developed | B)
17

w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
winf
w6
B
A
N
A
dev C
dev C
not dev C
w7
Figure 7: Pseudo-ancestral sCEG C for Example 2
and pΛ(C developed | A), and these are given below:
pΛ(C developed | B)
= {pΛ(M) pΛ(B | M) × 1 × pΛ(C developed | (M, B) or (M, A) or (F, B))
+ pΛ(F) pΛ(B | F) × 1 × pΛ(C developed | (M, B) or (M, A) or (F, B))}
÷ {pΛ(M) pΛ(B | M) + pΛ(F) pΛ(B | F)}
= pΛ(C developed | (M, B) or (M, A) or (F, B))
= p(C developed | ((M, B) or (M, A) or (F, B)), drug given)
(2.1)
Note:
1. We do not need for our purposes here to evaluate the pΛ(. . . ) probabilities,
but if we wished to we could use the expression from Theorem 1.
2. The expression (2.1) is still the simplest expression even if we were to
reintroduce stage-structure and let w1 & w2 be in the same stage.
pΛ(C developed | A)
= {pΛ(M) pΛ(A | M) × 1 × pΛ(C developed | (M, B) or (M, A) or (F, B))
+ pΛ(F) pΛ(A | F) × 1 × pΛ(C developed | F, A)}
÷ {pΛ(M) pΛ(A | M) + pΛ(F) pΛ(A | F)}
which clearly does not equal expression (2.1).
3. The denominator is of course pΛ(A), but even if we let w1 & w2 be in the
same stage, the above expression only simpliﬁes to
18

w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
winf
w6
B
A
A
dev C
dev C
not dev C
Figure 8: CΛ for Λ = {drug given}
pΛ(M) pΛ(C developed | (M, B) or (M, A) or (F, B))+pΛ(F) pΛ(C developed | F, A),
which still does not equal expression (2.1).
Suppose we now consider the subgroup who displayed S but were not given
the drug and the sub-sCEG CΛ for the event drug not given. This CEG is given
in Figure 9.
The corresponding probabilities are:
pΛ(C developed | B)
= {pΛ(M) pΛ(B | M) × 1 × pΛ(C developed)
+ pΛ(F) pΛ(B | F) × 1 × pΛ(C developed)}
÷ {pΛ(M) pΛ(B | M) + pΛ(F) pΛ(B | F)}
= pΛ(C developed)
= p(C developed | drug not given)
pΛ(C developed | A)
= {pΛ(M) pΛ(A | M) × 1 × pΛ(C developed)
+ pΛ(F) pΛ(A | F) × 1 × pΛ(C developed)}
÷ {pΛ(M) pΛ(A | M) + pΛ(F) pΛ(A | F)}
= pΛ(C developed)
= p(C developed | drug not given)
So we have that whether C developed is independent of when S displayed, given
that S was displayed but the drug was not given.
4. We do not need to consider the case where S never displayed, as this has
no intersection with Λ: Given that S displayed but drug not given, I know
that S was displayed, but further knowledge of when it was displayed is
irrelevant for prediction of whether or not the subject developed C,
19

w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
winf
B
A
A
w7
Figure 9: CΛ for Λ = {drug not given}
5. This context-speciﬁc conditional independence property holds whether or
not we reintroduce stage-structure and let w1 & w2 be in the same stage.
Let us now consider our researcher’s other queries to do with the relationship
between condition and gender for our subgroups. From Figure 8 we can see that
if Λ = {drug given} then:
pΛ(C developed | M)
= pΛ(A or B | M) × 1 × pΛ(C developed | (M, B) or (M, A) or (F, B))
(2.2)
and pΛ(A or B | M) = 1, since A & B are the only edges leaving w1 in CΛ.
pΛ(C developed | F)
= pΛ(B | F) × 1 × pΛ(C developed | (M, B) or (M, A) or (F, B))
+ pΛ(A | F) × 1 × pΛ(C developed | F, A)
which clearly does not equal expression (2.2), and this is true even if we rein-
troduce stage-structure and let w1 & w2 be in the same stage.
From Figure 9 we can see that if Λ = {drug not given} then:
pΛ(C developed | M)
= pΛ(A or B | M) × 1 × pΛ(C developed)
= pΛ(C developed)
= p(C developed | drug not given)
pΛ(C developed | F)
= pΛ(B | F) × 1 × pΛ(C developed)
+ pΛ(A | F) × 1 × pΛ(C developed)
= pΛ(C developed)
= p(C developed | drug not given)
20

So we have that whether C developed is independent of gender, given that S was
displayed, but the drug was not given, and this is true irrespective of whether
we reintroduce stage-structure.
We notice that the topological feature which distinguishes Figure 9 from
Figure 8 is that in Figure 9 there is a cut-vertex (a single vertex not w0 or w∞,
through which all routes in the graph pass) lying between the edges associated
with gender & symptom (upstream) and those associated with condition (down-
stream). We return to cut-vertices and to their role in independence queries in
section 3.
Note also that the example above gives ample justiﬁcation for working with
sCEGs when considering conditional independence queries, rather than their
coloured counterparts.
3
A separation theorem for simple CEGs
In section 2.7 we introduced random variables on sCEGs. In section 3.1 we de-
velop this idea, before providing a separation theorem for sCEGs in section 3.2.
3.1
Position variables
As noted in Section 1, modiﬁed BNs of one type or another are widely used be-
cause real problems tend to contain more symmetries than can be represented
by a standard BN. What is generally not addressed in papers on these types
of graphs is the consequence that this extra structure has for the Markov re-
lationships between the problem variables. With CEGs we can address this
explicitly & automatically, and the ﬁrst step towards doing this is to consider
model variables which are more fundamental than the measurement variables
customarily considered when working with BNs. So in this section we describe
two types of elementary random variables, measurable with respect to the sigma
ﬁeld of C, that can be identiﬁed with each position w ∈V (C)\{w∞}. These are
the variables {I(w)}} and {X(w)} deﬁned below.
Note that when we say that a variable X takes the value x, this is equivalent
to saying that an individual from our population has a development which we
equate with a route λ, and that this route λ is an element of Λx, the event
corresponding to X = x.
For a position w, I(w) can take the values 1 or 0 depending on whether this
individual is on a route λ which does or does not pass through w. So:
I(w) =
 1
if w ∈λ
0
if w ̸∈λ
(where as above, w ∈λ means that the position w lies on the route λ).
Up until now we have labelled edges by their start and endpoints (eg.
e(w, w′)), but we can also label the edges leaving a position w by a set of
21

arbitrary labels of the form ex(w) (x = 1, 2, . . . ). We deﬁne X(w) by:
X(w) =
 x
if ex(w) ∈λ
0
if w ̸∈λ
So X(w) = x (̸= 0) if our individual is on a route λ which passes through w
and the edge ex(w).
Recall that a CEG depicts all possible histories of a unit in a population,
and gives a probability distribution over these histories. However, when a single
unit traverses one of the routes in the CEG, values are assigned to I(w) & X(w)
for all positions w ∈V (C).
Notice that since I(w) is clearly a function of X(w), to specify a full joint
distribution over the position variables, it is suﬃcient to specify the joint dis-
tribution of {X(w) : w ∈V (C)\{w∞}}. Note also that all atoms λ can be
expressed as an intersection:
λ =
\
w∈λ
{X(w) = xλ} ,
and events in the sigma algebra of C as the union of these atoms:
Λ =
[
λ∈Λ
( \
w∈λ
{X(w) = xλ}
)
,
where xλ (̸= 0) is the unique value of X(w) labelling the edge in the route λ.
Up until this point we have used the words upstream and downstream rather
loosely – in the context of sets of edges we have simply used these words to
mean further towards w0 and further towards w∞; but we need to formalise the
meanings here in the context of positions. So when we say that w1 is upstream
of w2, or w2 is downstream of w1, we mean that w1 ≺w2.
For any set A ⊂V (C), let XA denote the set of random variables {X(w) :
w ∈A} and IA the set {I(w) : w ∈A}. Also, for any w ∈V (C), let U(w) be
the set of positions in V (C) which lie upstream of the position w, D(w) the set
of positions which lie downstream of w, U c(w) the set of positions which do not
lie upstream of w, and Dc(w) the set of positions which do not lie downstream
of w.
Lemma 2. For any sCEG C and position w ∈V (C)\{w∞}, the variables
I(w), X(w) exhibit the position independence property that
X(w) ∐XDc(w) | I(w)
This result (an extension of the Limited Memory Lemma of [37]) is anal-
ogous to the Directed Markov property which can be used to deﬁne BNs (see
for example [28]), and which states that a BN vertex-variable is independent of
its non-descendants given its parents. It provides a set of conditional indepen-
dence statements that can simply be read from the graph, one for each position
in V (C). The proof of the lemma is in the appendix.
22

The statement that X(w) ∐XDc(w) | (I(w) = 1) can be read as: Given
a unit reaches a position w ∈V (C), whatever happens immediately after w
is independent of not only all developments through which that position was
reached, but also of all positions that logically have not happened or could not
now happen because the unit has passed through w.
3.2
Theorem and corollaries
It is doubtful whether BNs would have enjoyed their enormous popularity if it
were not so apparently easy to read conditional independence properties from
them.
In particular, the existence of the d-separation theorem [22, 43] has
allowed all practitioners to make some attempt at model interpretation with
some degree of conﬁdence.
The presence of any context-speciﬁc conditional independence structure how-
ever severely hampers analysts using BNs in their attempts to get accurate
pictures of the structure of their problems [7, 29]. In earlier sections of this
paper (and in particular in section 2.7) we have been developing the theory
needed for reading and representing (context-speciﬁc) conditional independence
structure using CEGs. In particular, Lemma 1 allows us to consider context-
speciﬁc queries by looking at the relevant sub-CEG; and Example 2 provides
the rationale for looking at sCEGs. We now provide a separation theorem for
sCEGs.
Using the standard terminology of non-probabilistic graph theory, we call
a position w ∈V (C)\{w∞} a cut-vertex if the removal of w and its associated
edges from C would result in a graph with two disconnected components. An
alternative description would be a position other than w0 through which all
routes pass.
We also remind readers at this point that when we write (for
example) X ∐Y we mean that p(X = x, Y = y) = p(X = x) p(Y = y)
∀x ∈X, y ∈Y, and that this is true for all distributions P compatible with C.
Theorem 2. In an sCEG C with w1, w2 ∈V (C)\{w∞} and w2 ̸≺w1,
X(w1) ∐X(w2) if and only if either (i) there exists a cut-vertex w such that
w1 ≺w ≺w2, or (ii) w2 is itself a cut-vertex.
The proof of this theorem is in the appendix. The variables {I(w)}} and
{X(w)} have an obvious intrinsic mathematical interest, but for more practical
purposes we need to be able to make statements about the relationships between
variables which are more closely analogous to the measurement variables used
in BN-based analysis. So, in the same way that our primitive probabilities were
used to build probabilities of subpaths and routes, we can use the X(w) variables
to build new bigger variables which have a more transparent interpretation for
the analyst.
In Figure 4, let X(wi) (for i = 5, 6, 7, 8, 9) equal 1 if an individual has a
development which takes them through the position wi and then they die before
the age of 50, and equal 2 if they have a development which takes them through
the position wi and then they die after the age of 50. Since an individual’s
23

development will take them through one & only one of {w5, w6, w7, w8, w9}, we
can deﬁne a life expectancy indicator across the whole CEG by
sup
wi:i∈{5,6,7,8,9}
X(wi)
which takes the value 1 if an individual dies before the age of 50, or 2 if they
die after the age of 50.
Analogously with the idea of a cut-vertex, a position cut is a set of positions
the removal of which from V (C) would result in a graph with two disconnected
components. This is formalised in Deﬁnition 6.
Deﬁnition 6. Position cut. A set of positions W ⊂V (C)\{w0, w∞} is a
position cut if {Λ(w) : w ∈W} forms a partition of Λ(C).
As noted above, for any position cut W, we can deﬁne a cut-variable; this is
formalised in Deﬁnition 7.
Deﬁnition 7. Cut-variable.
For a position cut W, the random variable
X(W) ≡supw∈W X(w) is called a cut-variable.
Note that X(W) can also be deﬁned as X(W) ≡P
w∈W X(w). The equivalence
of the two forms comes from the fact that X(w) > 0 for one & only one position
w ∈W.
In Figure 4 we have the obvious cut-variables gender and symptom. If we
assign values of 1 to edges labelled develop C, 2 to not develop C, 3 to die before
50, and 4 to die after 50, then X(W) for W = {w3, w4, w5} becomes a more
sophisticated cut-variable for developing the condition: X(W) takes the value 1
if & only if an individual develops C, but X(W) = 2 tells us that an individual
displayed symptom S yet did not develop C, and X(W) = 3 or 4 tells us that
an individual did not display S and therefore did not develop C.
Theorem 2 allows us to look at the detail of the Markov structure depicted
by our CEGs. The following corollaries allow us to get a broader picture.
Corollary 1. For an sCEG C with position cuts Wa and Wb, the property
X(w1)∐X(w2) holding for any w1 ∈Wa, w2 ∈Wb implies that X(Wa)∐X(Wb).
So, as one might expect, the presence of a cut-vertex in an sCEG renders
cut-variables upstream of this vertex independent of cut-variables downstream
of the vertex. The proof of the corollary is in the appendix.
As already noted, CEGs have been designed for the representation and anal-
ysis of asymmetric problems; and for symmetric problems a graph such as a BN
is more appropriate. But it is clear that where a problem can also be adequately
represented as a BN (without too much context-speciﬁc structure), the set of
cut-variables of a CEG-representation must contain the set of variables associ-
ated with the vertices of the BN, as these are simply the measurement variables
of the problem. Hence, if an sCEG C represents a model which admits a prod-
uct space structure, M, N are measurement variables of the model associated
24

with position cuts WM, WN, then the property M ∐N holds providing that
X(wm) ∐X(wn) for any wm ∈WM, wn ∈WN. This result follows immediately
from Corollary 1.
Of more interest to analysts of asymmetric problems is the result given in
Corollary 2, which ties together the ideas presented in Corollary 1 and Lemma 1.
Corollary 2. Let C be a CEG with position cuts Wa, Wb, and Λ an event
intrinsic to C.
If, in the sCEG CΛ, there exists a cut-vertex w such that
Wa ≺w ≺Wb, then X(Wa) ∐X(Wb) | Λ.
The proof of this corollary is in the appendix. We can immediately deduce
that if a CEG C represents a model which admits a product space structure,
M, N are measurement variables of the model associated with position cuts
WM, WN, and Λ is an event intrinsic to C, then if in the sCEG CΛ there exists
a cut-vertex w such that WM ≺w ≺WN, the property M ∐N | Λ must hold.
Recall from Section 2.7 that for a measurement variable X with state space X,
the event that X takes the value x (∈X) is denoted by Λx, and the set {Λx}x∈X
partitions Λ(C). So the query M ∐N | X ? can be answered by checking the
queries M ∐N | Λx ? for each x ∈X. If our problem elicitation indicates that
there are no context-speciﬁc variations in independence properties connected
with conditioning on the variable X, we can answer the query M ∐N | X ? by
looking at a single graph CΛx for some convenient value X = x.
Moreover, although this argument has been constructed under the assump-
tions that C admits a product space structure, and that M, N & X are mea-
surement variables of the problem, these assumptions are not strictly necessary;
it is suﬃcient that M & N are cut-variables, and that {Λx}x∈X partitions Λ(C).
And even these conditions can be relaxed, as we see in Example 3.
Example 3. An alternative drug becomes available, resulting in a revised sCEG
as in Figure 10.
Let Wa = {w0}, Wb = {w1, w2}, Wc = {w3, w4} and Wd = {w5, w6, w7, w8}.
Now, unlike Wb, the sets Wc & Wd are not position-cuts as they do not parti-
tion Λ(C). However, we can still deﬁne
X(Wc) = sup
w∈Wc
X(w),
X(Wd) = sup
w∈Wd
X(w)
X(Wc), X(Wd) (although not cut-variables) are both measurable with respect
to the sigma ﬁeld of C, but can, unlike X(Wa) or X(Wb), take zero values, if a
patient does not display the symptom.
If we let Λ1 be the event S displayed but drug not given, then we get the sub-
SCEG CΛ1 shown in Figure 9, from which we can read the statement
(X(Wa), X(Wb)) ∐X(Wd) | Λ1.
25

w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
winf
w6
B
A
N
A
dev C
dev C
not dev C
w7
w8
Figure 10: sCEG for Example 3
If we let Λ2 be the event old drug given, then we get the graph CΛ2 shown in
Figure 8, and as we have already shown,
(X(Wa), X(Wb)) /∐X(Wd) | Λ2.
If we let Λ3 be the event new drug given, then we get a graph CΛ3 which diﬀers
from that in Figure 9 only in that the cut-vertex is now w8, not w7. We can
then read the statement
(X(Wa), X(Wb)) ∐X(Wd) | Λ3.
Note that {Λi}i=1,2,3 here does not partition Λ(C).
Clearly we can call X(Wa) & X(Wb) gender (XG) & symptom (XS). If we
let X(w3) & X(w4) take the values 1, 2 & 3 for the outcomes no drug, old drug &
new drug, then X(Wc) takes the values 0, 1, 2 & 3 for did not display S so did not
receive drug, displayed S but did not receive drug, received old drug and received
new drug. So there is also no ambiguity in calling X(Wc) drug (XD). Taking a
similar approach to {X(wi)}i∈{5,6,7,8} we ﬁnd that there is also no ambiguity in
calling X(Wd) condition (XC), and (since X(Wc) = 0 ⇒X(Wd) = 0) collecting
these statements together gives the property
XC ∐(XG, XS) | (XD ̸= 2),
ie. condition is independent of gender & symptom given that did not receive the
old drug.
26

4
Discussion
Chain Event Graphs were introduced for the representation & analysis of prob-
lems for which the use of Bayesian Networks is not ideal. The class of models
expressible as a CEG includes as a proper subset the class of models expressible
as faithful regular or context-speciﬁc BNs on ﬁnite variables. Unlike the BN, the
CEG embodies the structure of the model state space and any context-speciﬁc
information in its topology. In this paper we have justiﬁed the use of sCEGs
for investigating context-speciﬁc conditional independence queries of the form
X ∐Y | Λ ?, and provided a separation theorem for sCEGs and position vari-
ables. The introduction of cut-variables (analogous to BN measurement vari-
ables, but more ﬂexible) provides a repertoire of techniques which will enable
researchers to tackle a comprehensive collection of conditional independence en-
quiries on models of asymmetric problems for which the available quantitative
dependence information cannot all be embodied in the DAG of a BN.
The research that led to this paper also yieded a number of other questions,
some of which are discussed here. The most obvious of these is Does the only
if part of Theorem 2 hold if we allow constraints on a CEG’s edge-probabilities
such as two edge-probabilities being equal?
The short answer is No, but the
problem is somewhat more subtle than this answer suggests. Some preliminary
work on this is described in [40], but a more comprehensive analysis awaits a
future paper.
For illustrative convenience the CEGs in the examples in this paper have
been constructed in temporal order, but this is not the only valid ordering of
a CEG. In [42] for instance, we had a CEG representing a police investigation
where the order of events was that in which the police took action or discovered
evidence (Extensive Form order [35]).
At the simplest level, there are valid
reorderings of a CEG in which the cut-variables appear in a diﬀerent sequence,
and there is a set of rules governing when adjacent cut-variables can be swapped
to produce a diﬀerent valid ordering. For CEGs depicting models which have a
natural product space structure with no context-speciﬁc anomolies, these rules
are relatively straightforward, but for more general CEGs where we might need
to consider swaps of sets of adjacent edges rather than of cut-variables, the
rules become very complex. However, it seems fairly certain that if two cut-
variables in a coloured CEG are independent then there is a valid reordered
pseudo-ancestral CEG of these variables in which the variables are separated by
a cut-vertex. We hope to yield more light on this in a future paper.
In [5] we have also looked at inﬁnite CEGs where an individual might come
back to (essentially) the same state at some future time point. These problems
can be expressed as a CEG analogous to the 2-time-sliced Dynamic BN [19], or
as a graph which is no longer acyclic. Both representations involve modiﬁcation
to the rules governing conditional independence structure. This is discussed
in [5], but there is an opportunity here for developing CEG semantics further.
27

Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Theorem 1:
Consider the underlying tree T of the CEG C(T ). The event Λ corresponds to a
union of routes of T . Let TΛ be the reduced tree consisting only of the vertices,
edges & routes that comprise Λ.
If we denote the probabilities of events in TΛ by pΛ(..), then clearly we require
that pΛ(λ) = p(λ | Λ).
Once route probabilities in a tree are given, edge-probabilities are uniquely
deﬁned. So letting the edge-probabilities in TΛ be denoted by ˆπe(v′ | v), and
letting the route λ ∈Λ be described by its edges as:
λ = Λ(e(v0, v1)) ∩Λ(e(v1, v2)) ∩· · · ∩Λ(e(vp, vq)),
we have:
pΛ(λ) = p(λ | Λ)
= p(Λ(e(v0, v1)), Λ(e(v1, v2)), . . . Λ(e(vp, vq)) | Λ)
= p(Λ(e(vp, vq)) | Λ(e(v0, v1)), Λ(e(v1, v2)), . . . , Λ)
× · · · × p(Λ(e(v1, v2)) | Λ(e(v0, v1)), Λ)
× p(Λ(e(v0, v1)) | Λ)
= pΛ(Λ(e(vp, vq)) | Λ(e(v0, v1)), Λ(e(v1, v2)), . . . )
× · · · × pΛ(Λ(e(v0, v1)))
= pΛ(Λ(e(vp, vq)) | Λ(vp))
× · · · × pΛ(Λ(e(v1, v2)) | Λ(v1))
× pΛ(Λ(e(v0, v1)))
using the Markov property of trees from section 2.2
=
Y
e(v,v′)∈λ
pΛ(Λ(e(v, v′)) | Λ(v))
=
Y
e(v,v′)∈λ
ˆπe(v′ | v)
If we now let CΛ inherit the edge-probabilities from TΛ, we have:
pΛ(λ) =
Y
e(w,w′)∈λ
ˆπe(w′ | w)
=
Y
e(w,w′)∈λ
pΛ(Λ(e(w, w′)) | Λ(w))
where, without ambiguity, we let pΛ(..) denote the probability of an event in CΛ.
28

Then
ˆπe(w′ | w) = pΛ(Λ(e(w, w′)) | Λ(w))
= p(Λ(e(w, w′)) | Λ(w), Λ)
= p(Λ(e(w, w′)), Λ(w), Λ)
p(Λ(w), Λ)
= p(Λ | Λ(e(w, w′)), Λ(w)) p(Λ(e(w, w′)), Λ(w))
p(Λ | Λ(w)) p(Λ(w))
= p(Λ | Λ(e(w, w′))) p(Λ(e(w, w′)), Λ(w))
p(Λ | Λ(w)) p(Λ(w))
since Λ(e(w, w′)) ⊂Λ(w)
= p(Λ | Λ(e(w, w′)))
p(Λ | Λ(w))
πe(w′ | w)
Under this edge-probability assignment, no edges in CΛ are given a zero prob-
ability, since each e(w, w′) ∈λ ∈Λ. And no position in CΛ needs to be split
(uncoalesced) in order for us to make this edge-probability assignment.
By construction two vertices in a tree on the same route cannot be in the
same position. So consider two vertices in CΛ which do not lie on the same route.
Then the collections of routes (elements of Λ) passing through each of these
vertices are disjoint. So we can assign the probability distribution over these
routes (in C) in such a way that the conditional joint probability distributions
on the subpaths emanating from these two vertices in CΛ are diﬀerent. Hence
our assignment does not require us to coalesce distinct positions in CΛ.
So position-structure is preserved.
Hence CΛ is an sCEG, and the set of sCEGs is closed under conditioning on
an intrinsic event.
Proof of Lemma 1:
Variables X, Y partition the set of atoms of C, and since Λ ⊂Λ(C), X, Y also
partition the set of atoms of CΛ.
Consider arbitrary events Λx, Λy from {Λx}x∈X, {Λy}y∈Y, and the event Λx∩Λy.
Then p(Λx | Λ) = pΛ(Λx) etc., and the statement
p(Λx, Λy | Λ) = p(Λx | Λ) p(Λy | Λ)
is true if and only if the statement
pΛ(Λx, Λy) = pΛ(Λx) pΛ(Λy)
is true. If either of these relationships holds for all Λx ∈{Λx}x∈X, Λy ∈{Λy}y∈Y,
then so does the other for all Λx ∈{Λx}x∈X, Λy ∈{Λy}y∈Y.
Hence X ∐Y | Λ if and only if X ∐Y in CΛ.
□
29

Proof of Lemma 2:
1. Consider a single route λ consisting of a subpath µ0(w0, w) between w0 and w,
the edge e(w, w′) labelled x (̸= 0), and a subpath µ1(w′, w∞) connecting w′ to w∞.
Now this route consists of a set of edges and by construction the probability p(λ)
of the route is equal to the product of the probabilities labelling each of these
edges. Moreover, the probability of any subpath of λ is equal to the product of
the probabilities labelling each of its edges. So p(λ) can be written as the prod-
uct of the probabilities of three subpaths: µ0(w0, w), e(w, w′) and µ1(w′, w∞).
Thus:
p(λ) = πµ0(w | w0) πe(w′ | w) πµ1(w∞| w′).
But the fact that λ utilises the subpath µ0(w0, w) between w0 and w allows
us to completely specify the value of the vector XU(w). By a slight abuse of
notation we can represent this as XU(w) = µ0(w0, w).
Consider now the event (XU(w) = µ0(w0, w), I(w) = 1, X(w) = x), which is
the union of all w0 →w∞routes which utilise the subpath µ0(w0, w) and the
edge e(w, w′). Then since this is an intrinsic event we can write:
p(XU(w) = µ0(w0, w), I(w) = 1, X(w) = x)
= p(Λ(µ0(w0, w)), Λ(w), Λ(e(w, w′)))
= πµ0(w | w0) πe(w′ | w)
X
µ1∈M1
πµ1(w∞| w′),
where M1 is the set of all subpaths from w′ to w∞. But P
µ1∈M1 πµ1(w∞| w′) = 1
since all paths through w′ terminate in w∞.
Similarly, for the event (XU(w) = µ0(w0, w), I(w) = 1) we have:
p(XU(w) = µ0(w0, w), I(w) = 1) = p(Λ(µ0(w0, w)), Λ(w)) = πµ0(w | w0).
So
p(X(w) = x | XU(w) = µ0(w0, w), I(w) = 1) = πµ0(w | w0) πe(w′ | w)
πµ0(w | w0)
= πe(w′ | w) = p(Λ(e(w, w′)) | Λ(w))
= p(X(w) = x | I(w) = 1).
Hence
X(w) ∐XU(w) | (I(w) = 1)
(1)
2. If I(w) = 1 then X(w′) = 0 for all w′ ∈Dc(w)∩U c(w), so we can completely
specify the value of the vector XDc(w)∩Uc(w), and expression (1) implies:
X(w) ∐XU(w) | (XDc(w)∩Uc(w), I(w) = 1)
(2)
Moreover if I(w) = 1, no further information about XDc(w)∩Uc(w) will assist us
in predicting the value of X(w). Hence
X(w) ∐XDc(w)∩Uc(w) | (I(w) = 1)
(3)
30

Using a result from [11], the expressions (2) and (3) yield the result:
X(w) ∐(XU(w), XDc(w)∩Uc(w) | (I(w) = 1)
⇒X(w) ∐XDc(w) | (I(w) = 1)
3. If I(w) = 0 then X(w) = 0, and no further information about XDc(w) will
assist us in predicting the value of X(w). Hence also
X(w) ∐XDc(w) | (I(w) = 0)
□
Proof of Theorem 2:
1. Suﬃcient conditions for independence. The suﬃcient conditions for
independence are an almost immediate consequence of similar results for Markov
processes, but we include a proof here for completeness.
Consider an sCEG C, and two positions w1, w2 ∈V (C)\{w∞} such that
w1 ≺w ≺w2 for some cut-vertex w. By construction I(w1) ̸≡0, I(w2) ̸≡0,
I(w) ≡1.
Consider the event (X(w1) = x1, X(w2) = x2) ≡(X(w1) = x1, I(w) = 1,
X(w2) = x2) for x1 ̸= 0, x2 ̸= 0.
This is the union of all routes passing
through w1, utilising an edge e(w1, w′
1) labelled x1, passing though w, passing
through w2, and utilising an edge e(w2, w′
2) labelled x2. By analogy with the
proof of Lemma 2 we can, since this is an intrinsic event, write:
p(X(w1) = x1, X(w2) = x2) =
X
µ0∈M0
πµ0(w1 | w0) πe(w′
1 | w1)
X
µ1∈M1
πµ1(w | w′
1)
×
X
µ2∈M2
πµ2(w2 | w) πe(w′
2 | w2)
X
µ3∈M3
πµ3(w∞| w′
2)
where M0 is the set of all subpaths from w0 to w1, M1 is the set of all subpaths
from w′
1 to w, M2 is the set of all subpaths from w to w2, and M3 is the set of all
subpaths from w′
2 to w∞. But P
µ0∈M0 πµ0(w1 | w0) is simply the probability
of reaching w1 from w0 etc., so this equals
= π(w1 | w0) πe(w′
1 |w1) π(w | w′
1) π(w2 | w) πe(w′
2 | w2) π(w∞| w′
2)
= π(w1 | w0) πe(w′
1 |w1) × 1 × π(w2 | w) πe(w′
2 | w2) × 1
Similarly for the event X(w1) = x1, we can write:
p(X(w1) = x1) = π(w1 | w0) πe(w′
1 | w1) × 1
so
p(X(w2) = x2 | X(w1) = x1) = π(w1 | w0) πe(w′
1 |w1) π(w2 | w) πe(w′
2 | w2)
π(w1 | w0) πe(w′
1 |w1)
= π(w2 | w) πe(w′
2 | w2)
31

Now consider the event (X(w2) = x2) ≡(I(w) = 1, X(w2) = x2). Analogously
with above we can write:
p(X(w2) = x2) = π(w | w0) π(w2 | w) πe(w′
2 | w2) π(w∞| w′
2)
= 1 × π(w2 | w) πe(w′
2 | w2) × 1
= p(X(w2) = x2 | X(w1) = x1)
It is straightforward to show that the result also holds for x1 = 0 and x2 = 0.
If w2 is itself a cut-vertex (with w1 ≺w2), then we replace I(w) = 1 by I(w2) = 1
in the above argument with the same result.
So a suﬃcient condition for X(w1) ∐X(w2) is that either w2 is itself a
cut-vertex, or there exists a cut-vertex w such that w1 ≺w ≺w2.
2. Necessary conditions for independence.
Let X(w1) ∐X(w2) (and since I(w) is a function of X(w), X(w1) ∐I(w2)
and I(w1) ∐I(w2)). Let the set of routes of C be partitioned into four subsets.
Call a route Type A if it passes through w2, but not through w1, Type B if it
passes through neither w1 nor w2, Type C if it passes through both w1 and w2,
and Type D if it passes through w1, but not through w2. Our proof proceeds
as follows:
(a) We show that we must have w1 ≺w2 (ie.
the set of Type C routes is
non-empty).
(b) We show that every route intersects with every other route at some point
downstream of w0 and upstream of w∞.
If two w0 →w∞routes share no
vertices except w0 and w∞, we call them internally disjoint. So there cannot
be two internally disjoint w0 →w∞routes in C
(c) We show that there must therefore be a cut-vertex between w0 and w∞.
(d) We show that either w1 is a cut-vertex or w2 is a cut-vertex, or there exists
a cut-vertex w such that w1 ≺w ≺w2.
(e) Finally we show that if w1 is a cut-vertex then there must also either be a
cut-vertex at w2 or a cut-vertex w such that w1 ≺w ≺w2.
(a) Suppose that w1
̸≺
w2
(and recall that w2
̸≺
w1).
Then
p(I(w2) = 1 | I(w1) = 1) ≡0.
I(w1) ∐I(w2) ⇒p(I(w2) = 1) ≡0
⇒I(w2) ≡0. This is impossible by construction. Therefore w1 ≺w2.
(b) We ﬁrst show that each Type C route intersects with every other route
at w1 or at w2 or at some point between these positions.
Let λ1 be a Type C route, and µ1(w1, w2) the subpath coincident with λ1
between w1 and w2. If the set of Type B routes is non-empty then let λ2 be a
Type B route which does not intersect with µ1 (ie. λ2 and µ1 have no positions
or edges in common).
Consider a distribution P which assigns (1) a probability of 1 −ǫ to every edge
of the subpath µ1(w1, w2), and (2) a probability of 1 −δ to each edge of the
route λ2.
Let the number of edges in µ1(w1, w2) be n(µ1) and the number
of edges in λ2 be n(λ2) (where both n(µ1) and n(λ2) are ﬁnite).
Then let
32

(1 −ǫ)n(µ1) > 0.9 and (1 −δ)n(λ2) > 0.8. If λ2 does not intersect with µ1 then
this is always possible.
Under P, assignment (1) gives us that
p(I(w2) = 1 | I(w1) = 1) ≥(1 −ǫ)n(µ1) > 0.9
and I(w1) ∐I(w2) implies that under this P
p(I(w2) = 1 | I(w1) = 0) > 0.9 ⇒p(I(w2) = 0 | I(w1) = 0) < 0.1
But assignment (2) gives us that
p(I(w2) = 0) ≥p(I(w1) = 0, I(w2) = 0) ≥p(λ2) = (1 −δ)n(λ2) > 0.8
⇒p(I(w2) = 0 | I(w1) = 0) > 0.8
※
The assumption I(w1) ∐I(w2) is incompatible with the assignments of (1)
and (2).
But these assignments are always possible if λ2 does not intersect
with µ1. Hence λ2 must intersect with µ1.
Hence each Type C route intersects with every Type B route at some point
downstream of w1 and upstream of w2. Also each Type C route intersects with
every Type A route (at w2), with every Type D route (at w1) and with every
other Type C route (at both w1 and w2).
We now consider routes that are not of Type C. If the set of non-Type C
routes is non-empty let λ3, λ4 be members of this set which do not intersect
except at w0 and w∞. Let µ(w1, w2) be a subpath between w1 and w2.
From above both λ3 and λ4 must intersect with µ. Let λ3 intersect with µ only
at the positions w31, . . . w3m, where w31 ≺· · · ≺w3m; and let λ4 intersect with
µ only at the positions w41, . . . w4n, where w41 ≺· · · ≺w4n. Without loss of
generality let w1 ⪯w31 ≺w41 ⪯w2, so that λ3 could be a route of Type B or
Type D, and λ4 could be a route of Type A or Type B.
Suppose ﬁrstly that w4n ≺w3m. Consider the subpath µ5(w1, w2) which coin-
cides with µ from w1 to w31 (if w31 ̸= w1), coincides with λ3 from w31 to w3m,
and coincides with µ from w3m to w2. This subpath µ5 does not intersect with
the route λ4. This is impossible since every route in C intersects with every
µ(w1, w2) subpath.
Suppose therefore that w3m ≺w4n. Consider the subpath µ6(w1, w∞) which
coincides with µ from w1 to w31 (if w31 ̸= w1) and coincides with λ3 from w31
to w∞; and the subpath µ7(w0, w2) which coincides with λ4 from w0 to w4n and
coincides with µ from w4n to w2 (if w4n ̸= w2). Consider also a distribution P
which assigns (1) a probability of 1−ǫ to every edge of µ6, and (2) a probability
of 1 −δ to every edge of µ7. Let the number of edges in µ6(w1, w∞) be n(µ6)
and the number of edges in µ7(w0, w2) be n(µ7) (where both n(µ6) and n(µ7)
are ﬁnite). Then let (1 −ǫ)n(µ6) > 0.9 and (1 −δ)n(µ7) > 0.8. If λ3 and λ4 do
not intersect then this is always possible.
Under P, assignment (1) gives us that
p(I(w2) = 0 | I(w1) = 1) ≥(1 −ǫ)n(µ6) > 0.9
33

and I(w1) ∐I(w2) implies that under this P
p(I(w2) = 0 | I(w1) = 0) > 0.9 ⇒p(I(w2) = 1 | I(w1) = 0) < 0.1
But assignment (2) gives us that
p(I(w2) = 1 | I(w1) = 0) > 0.8
※
The assumption I(w1) ∐I(w2) is incompatible with the assignments of (1)
and (2).
But these assignments are always possible if λ3 and λ4 do not in-
tersect. Hence λ3 and λ4 must intersect.
Hence each Type B route intersects with every Type A, Type B or Type D route,
and each Type A route intersects with every Type D route. Also, each Type A
route intersects with every other Type A route (at w2), and each Type D route
intersects with every other Type D route (at w1). So each route in C intersects
with every other route downstream of w0 and upstream of w∞.
Hence there cannot be two internally disjoint directed routes from w0 to w∞.
(c) To show that this implies the existence of a cut-vertex between w0
and w∞, we brieﬂy consider a CEG as a Flow Network where every edge and
every vertex (except w0 and w∞) has a (ﬂow) capacity of one. Then the maxi-
mum ﬂow through the CEG from w0 to w∞must equal the maximum number
of internally disjoint w0 →w∞routes. We can now use Ford & Fulkersons’ Max
Flow Min Cut Theorem [13]. This theorem applies to networks where only the
edges are given capacities, so we replace each vertex w ∈V (C)\{w0, w∞} by a
pair of vertices w−, w+ connected by an edge e(w−, w+) with a capacity of one
– the only edge emanating from w−being e(w−, w+) and the only edge entering
w+ being e(w−, w+).
The theorem states that for a Flow Network with a single source and a single
sink, the maximum ﬂow from source to sink equals the capacity of the minimum
cut, where cuts pass through the edges of the graph (ie. a cut partitions V (C)
into two collections of vertices with w0 in one collection and w∞in the other),
and the capacity of the minimum cut is the sum of the capacities of the edges
which are cut.
So if in our CEG we have no pairwise internally disjoint w0 →w∞routes,
then the maximum ﬂow through the CEG from w0 to w∞must equal one, and
the capacity of the minimum cut of the CEG must also equal one. Hence all
w0 →w∞routes must pass through a single edge.
Now this edge may be of the form e(w−, w+), in which case w is a cut-vertex;
or the edge may be of the form e(wa, wb) for wa ̸= wb, in which case both wa
and wb are cut-vertices. Hence there is a cut-vertex w such that w0 ≺w ≺w∞.
This result can also be arrived at by using a corollary of Whitney’s [44] Theo-
rem 7 (a result for undirected graphs, sometimes described as the 2nd variation
of Menger’s Theorem [25]).
(d) Suppose there exists a cut-vertex upstream of w1.
Then relabel this
cut-vertex as w0 and repeat the argument of (b)(c) to show that there exists a
cut-vertex between this new w0 and w∞. Since the number of positions in C is
34

ﬁnite, repeated use of this argument shows us that either w1 is a cut-vertex or
there exists a cut-vertex downstream of w1. A complementary argument shows
that there exists a cut-vertex at w2 or upstream of w2.
(e) Suppose w1 is a cut-vertex, but w2 is not. Then either (i) w2 lies exactly
one edge downstream of w1 on every w1 →w2 subpath, or (ii) there exists a
position w1
1 (̸= w2) exactly one edge downstream of w1 lying on a w1 →w2
subpath.
(i) We know that X(w1) ̸= 0 (since w1 is a cut-vertex), so if X(w1) takes a
value corresponding to an edge from w1 to w2, then I(w2) = 1 and X(w2) > 0;
otherwise I(w2) = X(w2) = 0. So X(w2) /∐X(w1).
※
(ii) If X(w1) takes a value corresponding to an edge from w1 to w1
1, then
I(w1
1) = 1; otherwise I(w1
1) = 0.
Hence I(w1
1) is a function of X(w1).
So
X(w1) ∐X(w2) ⇒X(w1) ∐I(w2) ⇒I(w1
1) ∐I(w2), and using the argument of
(b), (c), (d) above there must be a cut-vertex at w1
1 or between w1
1 and w2.
Therefore there exists a cut-vertex at w2 or a cut-vertex w such that
w1 ≺w ≺w2.
□
Proof of Corollary 1:
Let X(w1) ∐X(w2) hold for some w1 ∈Wa, w2 ∈Wb. Then by Theorem 2
either (i) w2 is a cut-vertex (in which case Wb consists of the one position w2),
or (ii) there exists a cut-vertex w such that w1 ≺w ≺w2.
Since Wa and Wb are position cuts, this implies that either (i) wa ≺w2
∀wa
∈Wa, or (ii) wa
≺w
≺wb
∀wa
∈Wa, wb
∈Wb, and hence
(i) X(wa) ∐X(w2) ∀wa ∈Wa, or (ii) X(wa) ∐X(wb) ∀wa ∈Wa, wb ∈Wb.
Note that X(wa), X(wb) pairwise independent for all wa, wb does not in
general imply groupwise independence, but it does here:
Any event characterised by the expression XWa = xa has the form:
X(w′
a) = xa (̸= 0) for some w′
a ∈Wa,
X(wa) = 0
∀wa ∈Wa\{w′
a}
So
p(XWa = xa, XWb = xb)
= p(X(w′
a) = xa, X(w′
b) = xb, X(w) = 0
∀w ∈Wa ∪Wb\{w′
a, w′
b})
for some w′
a ∈Wa, w′
b ∈Wb
= p(X(w′
a) = xa, X(w′
b) = xb)
since X(w′
a) ̸= 0 ⇒X(wa) = 0
∀wa ∈Wa\{w′
a} etc
= p(X(w′
a) = xa) p(X(w′
b) = xb)
35

since X(w′
a) ∐X(w′
b)
= p(X(w′
a) = xa, X(wa) = 0
∀wa ∈Wa\{w′
a})
× p(X(w′
b) = xb, X(wb) = 0
∀wb ∈Wb\{w′
b})
= p(XWa = xa) p(XWb = xb)
So XWa ∐XWb. But X(Wa) = supw∈Wa X(wa) is a function of XWa, and
X(Wb) is a function of XWb. Hence X(Wa) ∐X(Wb).
□
Proof of Corollary 2:
Since Λ is intrinsic to C, CΛ is a subgraph of C with V (CΛ) ⊂V (C).
Let Wa in CΛ be the subset of V (CΛ) which consists of elements of Wa in C.
Then Wa is well-deﬁned on CΛ, as is X(wa) for any wa ∈Wa.
X(Wa) is measurable with respect to the sigma-ﬁeld of C, so it partitions the
set of atoms of C. Since Λ ⊂Λ(C), it also partitions the set of atoms of CΛ, and
is well-deﬁned on CΛ as:
X(Wa) =
sup
wa ∈Wa
wa ∈V (CΛ)
X(wa).
Hence pΛ(X(Wa) = xa) = p(X(Wa) = xa | Λ), and all necessary terms are
deﬁned on CΛ consistently with their deﬁnitions on C.
In CΛ there exists a cut-vertex w such that Wa ≺w ≺Wb, so by Theorem 2,
X(wa) ∐X(wb) holds in CΛ for any wa ∈Wa ∩V (CΛ), wb ∈Wb ∩V (CΛ).
Hence by Lemma 1, X(Wa) ∐X(Wb) | Λ holds in C.
□
