Teaching Software Engineering for AI-Enabled Systems
Christian Kästner
Carnegie Mellon University
Eunsuk Kang
Carnegie Mellon University
ABSTRACT
Software engineers have significant expertise to offer when building
intelligent systems, drawing on decades of experience and meth-
ods for building systems that are scalable, responsive and robust,
even when built on unreliable components. Systems with artificial-
intelligence or machine-learning (ML) components raise new chal-
lenges and require careful engineering. We designed a new course
to teach software-engineering skills to students with a background
in ML. We specifically go beyond traditional ML courses that teach
modeling techniques under artificial conditions and focus, in lec-
ture and assignments, on realism with large and changing datasets,
robust and evolvable infrastructure, and purposeful requirements
engineering that considers ethics and fairness as well. We describe
the course and our infrastructure and share experience and all
material from teaching the course for the first time.
1
INTRODUCTION
More and more modern software systems include machine-learning
(ML) models for part of their functionality (e.g., recommendation
engines in e-business sites) or are even built around such models
(e.g., mobile apps for instant language translations). Artificial in-
telligence (AI), including the subfields of ML and data analytics,
are hot topics of interest to many of our students. Yet, while AI
courses abound, including more formal and more practical courses
and many online MOOC-style offerings and tutorials, we find that
little attention is paid to software-engineering aspects in building
complete systems that involve AI.
AI education typically focuses on algorithms and techniques
or on applying these techniques in artificial settings (e.g., fixed
datasets and Jupyter notebooks), narrowly focused on optimizing
model accuracy. However, for building real systems, many addi-
tional challenges become important, for example: How to build
robust AI pipelines and facilitate regular model updates? How to de-
ploy and update models in production? How to evaluate data and
model quality in production? How to deal with mistakes that the
model makes and manage associated risk? How to trade off between
various qualities, including learning cost, inference time, updatabil-
ity, and interpretability? How to design a system that scales to large
amounts of data? How to version models and data?
Faced with an increasing interest on AI topics from our students
and little offerings that address engineering concerns in AI courses,
we decided to design a new course that would address this niche:
Software Engineering for AI-Enabled Systems. This paper reports
on design considerations for a course that teaches software engi-
neering techniques for building systems with AI components and
experience from teaching the course for the first time. It is meant to
start a discussion and provides teaching materials (including slides,
exercises, and assignments) as sharable artifacts released under
a Creative Commons license at https://github.com/ckaestne/seai/.
Our technical simulation infrastructure for the assignments is avail-
able on request.
Figure 1: Overview of course topics
2
RELATED WORK AND SCOPE
The software-engineering research community focuses primarily
on how to use artificial intelligence techniques to solve software
engineering problems (AI4SE), for example, for finding bugs [e.g.,
12], triaging bugs [e.g., 18], or repairing bugs [e.g., 10]. For this
line of research, there are also corresponding graduate courses
taught by software engineering researchers, for example, Breaux’s
Artificial Intelligence for Software Engineering at Carnegie Mellon
or Siegmund’s Search-Based Software Engineering at the University
of Weimar. Our new course has the opposite focus: how software
engineering techniques can be used to build better systems with or
around AI components (SE4AI).
Software engineering concerns for AI-enabled systems arise in
practice when deploying and operating actual systems. Practition-
ers in large companies discuss their problems and custom solu-
tions in blog posts, talks, and position papers: For example, Google
teams discusses engineering challenges [14], technical debt [13],
testing challenges [3], tracking data provenance [5], and A/B test-
ing [17] and Uber discusses their learning platform in a series of
blog posts [7]; Microsoft studied the role of data analysts on their
software teams [9] as well as challenges in cross-sectional teams [1].
On the academic side, we found only limited software-engineering
research specific to AI-enabled systems. Arpteg et al. [2] inter-
viewed stakeholders from seven software projects using deep learn-
ing to characterize challenges. Some researchers focused on testing
ML implementations [16] and ML models [4, 19], with a recent
interest in testing and test coverage of neural networks [e.g., 11].
In contrast, requirements, software architecture, and process seem
rarely discussed in the academic literature when it comes to AI-
enabled systems.
While most books on AI focus on techniques and modeling,
Smith [15] and Hulten [8] have written books that focus more on
engineering aspects. Smith’s Machine Learning Systems [15] focuses
on technical implementations and commits on many specific design
arXiv:2001.06691v1  [cs.SE]  18 Jan 2020

Christian Kästner and Eunsuk Kang
decisions. In contrast, Hulten’s Building Intelligent Systems [8] ac-
tually covers many design considerations fairly broadly and is the
closest coverage we found for the intended course. We assign chap-
ters of Hulten’s book as required reading throughout the course.
3
COURSE DESIGN
We design the course with a specific tension between data scientists
and software engineers in mind: Data scientists often make great
progress at building models with cutting edge techniques, but turn-
ing those models into products is challenging. For example, data
scientists may work with unversioned notebooks on static data sets
and focus on optimizing model accuracy while ignoring scalability,
robustness, update latency, and operating cost. Software engineers
are trained to work with specifications and tend to focus on code,
but may not be aware of the difficulties of working with data and
unreliable models. They have a toolset for decision making, risk
management, and quality assurance but it is not always obvious
how to apply those to intelligent systems and their challenges. Our
course adopts a software-engineering perspective on building AI-
enabled systems, focusing on what a software engineer can do to
turn a machine learning idea into a scalable and reliable product. It
assumes a working relationship with a data scientist and focuses on
issues of design, implementation, operation, and quality assurance.
While there are distinct characteristics of AI components (es-
pecially ML models), they also relate to core topics in software
engineering, for example:
• ML components are used for problems for which we cannot spec-
ify a solution, because the specification would be too complex or
because it is unknown. Instead of providing a specification, one
sets a goal and trains a model to figure out the answer. With this
shift from deductive to inductive reasoning, we give up expect-
ing guarantees, but embrace best-effort solutions, fully accepting
that answers can be wrong. However, while we often teach the
value of clear and formal specifications, in practice, software en-
gineers already routinely deal with underspecified and unreliable
components. We have developed techniques to build reliable and
safe systems from unreliable or untrusted components – those
become essential when building AI-enabled systems.
• The environment plays a critical role in establishing require-
ments of an AI-enabled system. Evaluating the long-term impact
of a feedback loop or potential harm caused by a biased ML
model, for example, involves identifying relevant stakeholders,
their motivations, and interactions among them. Software engi-
neers distinguish between the machine and the world, identify
environmental assumptions, and evaluate quality in the con-
text of the environment – concepts that are also important for
building AI-enabled systems.
• ML components can have non-local and non-monotonic effects.
Local improvements may degrade other parts and their vari-
ous qualities, while identifying the source of a problem can be
challenging due to unclear provenance. In software engineering,
failures in modularity and compositionality are well understood,
e.g., with regard to feature interactions, calling for careful de-
sign and system-level testing. Similarly, a robust architecture
and quality assurance regime (beyond model accuracy) plays an
important role in AI-enabled systems.
• Evaluating model quality on a training set is well established and
increasingly attention is paid to bias and fairness, but models may
perform differently in production, and data drift and adversaries
may further degrade performance or compromise the system.
Software engineers have developed many techniques to monitor
systems, evaluate systems in production, and automate decisions,
including A/B testing and continuous deployment – again such
techniques become essential when building AI-enabled systems.
• Many models become large and expensive to learn, to use, and
to version. But again, we collected a vast body of knowledge on
building and operating distributed and scalable systems, tracking
revisions and variants, and manage configurations at scale –
which designers of AI-enabled systems can benefit from.
Overall, traditional software engineering projects come in different
sizes and complexity, in a spectrum from small and well-understood
projects to large and complex projects. We argue that AI-enabled
systems have only few truly unique challenges, but nontrivial AI
components tend to push such systems to the complex end of the
spectrum of software projects, often with important concerns about
safety, risk, scalability, and robustness. They share lots of challenges
with other complex and large-scale software projects and can bene-
fit from many corresponding techniques. We postulate that, while
developers of simple traditional systems may get away with poor
practices, most developers of AI-enabled systems will not – hence,
educating developers of AI-enabled systems in state-of-the-art soft-
ware engineering techniques is an important educational mission.
3.1
Scope and Lectures
To design the course, we settled on the following assumptions and
scoping rules:
(1) Explicit transfer of software engineering concepts to AI-enabled
systems using software-engineering terminology, techniques
and structure (e.g. test coverage, architecture views, fault trees).
(2) AI components largely considered as a black box with minimal
discussion of internals, focusing on tradeoffs (e.g., decision trees
vs. neural networks vs. symbolic AI); little focus on steps in the
data analytics process beyond necessary basics; not competing
with technical AI courses.
(3) Practice design decisions and analysis around concrete scenar-
ios; hands-on experience with implementing the plumbing (e.g,
monitoring, automated deployment, containers).
We identified topics around all stages of the software engineering
lifecycle, as summarized in Figure 1. Broadly, the lectures cover:
• Requirements: Understanding system goals; the lack of specifica-
tions for AI-components; identifying and measuring qualities of
interest (beyond model accuracy), setting expectations for safety,
security, and fairness; hazard analysis and fault tress; planning
how to deal with mistakes.
• Architecture: Considering tradeoffs among quality attributes
(e.g., learning time, inference latency, model size, updatabil-
ity, interpretability); planning where and how to deploy an AI-
component; planning telemetry; data provenance; model orches-
tration, service-oriented architectures.

Teaching Software Engineering for AI-Enabled Systems
• Implementation and operation: Designing scalable distributed
systems for data and computation; infrastructure for experimen-
tation, A/B testing, canary releases, and continuous delivery;
provenance and configuration management; system monitoring.
• Quality assurance: Measuring model quality offline and in pro-
duction; assuring data quality; testing the entire ML pipeline;
safety, security, and fairness analysis.
• Process: Iteration and planning; working with interdisciplinary
teams; technical debt; ethical decision making.
3.2
Assignments
A key design goal of this course is to provide hands-on software
engineering experience and to move away from merely building
and evaluating models on static datasets (e.g., from Kaggle.org).
That is, we need to create a setting in which many production
concerns can be addressed, such as scaling for large amounts of
data. In addition, to allow assignments around A/B testing, canary
releases, or detecting feedback loops, we need an environment in
which predictions that students make with their models have an
actual effect on the environment. To that end, we decided to design
core technical assignments around a simulation infrastructure.
Simulation Infrastructure. The key idea is to build a simulation
infrastructure with a secret ground-truth model of the world to sim-
ulate the behavior of environmental entities (e.g., users on a video
streaming app). Students do not have access to this model but can
partially observe the simulated world through shared events, and
thus learn their own models to represent the world. The simulation
then reacts to predictions that student teams provide through an
API. With this design, we have control of all produced data and
can scale the simulation to create suitable amounts of data, and,
more importantly, simulate feedback loops by having the simulated
world repeatedly react to the student predictions over time.
We have built such simulation for the scenario of a movie-
streaming service (think Netflix). We simulate several thousand
users picking, watching, and rating movies, creating a stream of
watching and rating events. We use an existing large dataset of
movie ratings [6] to build our ground-truth model of movie pref-
erences for each user (hidden from students). We import movie
data from the original dataset and use models to create artificial
but representative data about all our users (e.g., age, gender, occu-
pation, activity level). In our simulation, at the beginning of each
day, we decide when and which users are going to watch a movie
and enqueue them in a timed event queue. At the start time, the
system will request movies recommendations for that user from
the student API and use the ground-truth model to select a movie
among the recommended movies and a random sample of other
movies, picking the movie that (after adding some noise and a
small bonus for recommended movies) has the highest predicted
rating. We then queue a sequence of public events that represent
the user watching the movie, followed by an (optional) rating event
in which the simulated user reveals their real rating for the movie
(again derived from the ground-truth model, random noise, and a
small bonus to favor watched movies). The ground-truth model is
occasionally updated based on recent movie watching history.
The students interact with our simulator through (i) a stream
of events in an Apache Kafka server to which they can subscribe
(movie watch event, rating events, and logs about received rec-
ommendations), and (ii) an REST API to query information about
movies and users. In addition, we specify the interface for the rec-
ommendation service that they need to implement (REST API).
The system is designed such that students can evaluate their
models in production, e.g., how frequently do users watch recom-
mended movies, do they finish them, and how do they rate them?
In addition, it can exhibit feedback loops, e.g., students constantly
recommending horror movies will likely lead to many users de-
veloping a taste for horror movies. Furthermore, we can simply
hardcode data drift and schema changes or occasionally provide
corrupt data to challenge the robustness of the student’s infras-
tructure. The ground-truth model can use hidden information and
specifically encode biases–for example, wrong age data combined
with adolescent users strongly preferring R-rated movies. This en-
vironment is also flexible enough to illustrate how different goals
(e.g., maximizing profit rather than maximizing top ratings) can
lead to very different outcomes and unintended side effects.
Assignments. For the first year, we created a series of five group
assignments that build on the common movie streaming scenario:
(1) Modeling basics and offline evaluations: Collect data from the
system (Kafka stream and API) and build and evaluate a model
(usually collaborative filtering) to get familiar with the infras-
tructure, practice basic ML skills, and onboard all team members.
(2) Tradeoff analysis: Focus on measurement of various qualities
(beyond model accuracy) by trying and comparing different
modeling techniques and empirically discovering their tradeoffs.
(3) Infrastructure deployment and testing: Migrate the solution from
a Jupyter Notebook to a robust and scalable learning and infer-
ence infrastructure, build checks for data quality and test the
entire infrastructure, assess model quality in production, and
deploy the model as a REST API using Docker containers.
(4) Model updates: Fully automate model updates (continuous de-
ployment, including automated canary releases), deploy updates
without downtime, and perform experiments with A/B tests in
production using a self-developed infrastructure.
(5) Feedback loops: Analyze the system for potential feedback loops
and attack scenarios, design interventions, and continuously
monitor system performance.
In addition, we created 5 smaller individual assignments focusing
on (1) identifying engineering concerns in a report about an AI-
enabled system, (2) identifying safety requirements and using fault
trees to analyze a self-driving car accident, (3) modeling and dis-
cussing architecture tradeoffs regarding when and where to deploy
and update models for smart dashboard cameras, (4) discussing
and measuring fairness concerns in a credit rating dataset, and
(5) analyzing security vulnerabilities of an AI-based system using
threat modeling.
4
EXPERIENCE
We taught this class for the first time in the Fall 2019 semester to
a small group of 12 graduate students. From this experience, we
can derive a number of recommendations for future semesters and
others wishing to teach such a class.

Christian Kästner and Eunsuk Kang
Focus and prerequisites: We initially planned the class to require
both basic knowledge in ML and some software-engineering expe-
rience. This dual requirement limits the target audience of the class
and students actually taking the course often have gaps in either
area so that we need to repeat many concepts. We believe that the
better solution would be to teach separate sections for students
from either background – for ML students, we’d introduce software
engineering concepts from scratch (e.g., continuous integration,
versioning, software architecture) not making assumptions about
prior experience; for software-engineering students we could teach
a class that begins with a pragmatic introduction to ML pipelines
and model quality measures. For our Master’s program in software
engineering, the content could ideally be broken up into smaller
pieces that could be integrated as modules in our existing software
engineering classes on requirements, software architecture, and
quality assurance.
Simulator engineering: Building and running the simulator re-
quired nontrivial engineering effort and there were many features
that we could not implement in the first offering due to time con-
straints. For example, the watch behavior in our simulator is not
particularly realistic (e.g., we do not have power users who binge
multiple movies, we do not have a model for stopping, restarting,
or rewinding movies, we do not explicitly model demographics or
locations of users). We also found that the used scale with 160,000
users producing an average of 70 events per second and 1 recom-
mendation request per second is way too low to challenge students
to seriously consider operating cost and performance, resulting
sometimes in rather superficial engineering tradeoffs with obvious
answers. The ML task of recommending movies is also not computa-
tionally challenging enough to offer interesting tradeoff discussions
among different learning techniques. In future offerings, it may be
worth scaling the simulator to many more users and to explore
additional learning tasks that involve pictures, audio, or video.
Practical grounding: In addition to the movie recommendation
scenario used for homework, we use different scenarios in almost
every single lecture to discuss the breadth of different problems
and the importance of making system-specific design and tradeoff
decisions. At the same time, it may be worth exploring a few sce-
narios or even concrete implementations in more depth. Another
way to ground the course more in practice is to invite more guest
speakers that use AI in their systems.
Tooling: As AI is an active, rapidly evolving field, we struggled
with finding standard techniques or mature tools for emerging
topics such as fairness and explainability. In addition, the shift
of focus from code to data brings about an increasing demand for
software-engineering tools for data-intensive tasks, such as version-
ing of large datasets, data cleaning, and model quality evaluation.
Although a few tools exist for these tasks (e.g., the What-If tool
by Google), most are still experimental and challenging to use for
teaching. We believe that the software engineering community –
with its expertise in tool development and experimentation – has
a plenty of opportunities to contribute to the growing needs of
AI-enabled system developers and educators by developing a set of
mature tools and benchmarks.
5
CONCLUSION
Systems with an AI component are challenging to build and to
maintain. We designed a course to teach software engineering
to students interested in AI to foster broader thinking beyond a
narrow focus on static datasets and model quality. We shared our
experience and make all course material available under creative
commons license.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank all colleagues and
practitioners who encouraged and supported us in creating this
course and provided feedback on its content, including Travis
Breaux, Owen Cheng, Fei Fang, David Garlan, Michael Hilton, Geoff
Hulten, Pooyan Jamshidi, and Norbert Siegmund. We also greatly
appreciate the help of Yasasvi Hari, Dong Won Lee, Chu-Pan Wong,
and Zhendong Yuan in designing and implementing the course
infrastructure. Also thanks for the students in the first iteration of
the course for sticking with us and providing feedback.
