Artificial Immune Systems  
 
 
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract The human immune system has numerous properties that make it ripe for 
exploitation in the computational domain, such as robustness and fault toler- ance, 
and many different algorithms, collectively termed Artificial Immune Systems (AIS), have 
been inspired by it. Two generations of AIS are currently in use, with the first 
generation relying on simplified immune models and the second genera- tion utilising 
interdisciplinary collaboration to develop a deeper understanding of the immune 
system and hence produce more complex models. Both generations of algorithms 
have been successfully applied to a variety of problems, including anomaly detection, 
pattern recognition, optimisation and robotics. In this chapter an overview of AIS is 
presented, its evolution is discussed, and it is shown that the diversification of the field 
is linked to the diversity of the immune system itself, leading to a number of algorithms 
as opposed to one archetypal system. Two case studies are also presented to help 
provide insight into the mechanisms of AIS; these are the idiotypic network approach and 
the Dendritic Cell Algorithm.  
 
 
 
1 Introduction  
 
Nature has acted as inspiration for many aspects of computer science. A trivial ex- 
ample of this is the use of trees as a metaphor, consisting of branched structures, with 
leaves, nodes and roots. Of course, a tree structure is not a simulation of a tree, but it 
abstracts the principal concepts to assist in the creation of useful computing systems. 
Bio-inspired algorithms and techniques are developed not as a means of simulation, but 
because they have been inspired by the key properties of the un- derlying metaphor. 
The algorithms attempt to improve computational techniques by mimicking (to some 
extent) successful natural phenomena, with the goal of achiev-  
 
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  

 
 
1 

2 
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
ing similar desirable properties as the natural system. This is demonstrated in both 
neural networks [17] and genetic algorithms [25].  
Artificial Immune Systems (AIS) [20] are algorithms and systems that use the 
human immune system as inspiration. The human immune system is a robust, de- 
centralised, error tolerant and adaptive system. Such properties are highly desirable for 
the development of novel computer systems. Unlike some other bio-inspired 
techniques, such as genetic algorithms and neural networks, the field of AIS encom- 
passes a spectrum of algorithms that exist because different algorithms implement 
different properties of different cells. All AIS algorithms mimic the behaviour and 
properties of immunological cells, specifically B-cells, T-cells and dendritic cells 
(DCs), but the resultant algorithms exhibit differing levels of complexity and can 
perform a range of tasks.  
The major part of AIS work to date has been the development of three algorithms 
derived from more simplified models; negative selection, clonal selection and im- mune 
networks. However, these first-generation AIS algorithms have often shown 
considerable limitations when applied to realistic applications. For this reason, a 
second generation of AIS is emerging, using models derived from cutting-edge im- 
munology as their basis, not simply mechanisms derived from basic models found in text 
books.  
The aim of this chapter is to give the reader an overview of the field of AIS by 
taking a high level perspective of its evolution. In section 2 an overview of the major 
developments in immunology is presented, incorporating a number of immunologi- cal 
theories. Section 3 describes the development of AIS over the past two decades, and the 
next two sections showcase two particular examples of AIS algorithms; an idiotypic 
network in section 4 and the Dendritic Cell Algorithm (DCA) in section 5. Section 6 
concludes the chapter, with a summary and details of potential future trends.  
 
 
 
2 Immunological Inspiration  
 
The human immune system can be used as inspiration when developing algorithms to 
solve difficult computational problems. This is because it is a robust, decen- tralised, 
complex, and error-tolerant biological system; i.e. it possesses properties that make it 
ideal for certain application areas, such as computer intrusion detection and pattern 
recognition. The human system is also well-studied within immunology, and is viewed as 
the most sophisticated of immune systems in nature. Although its precise function 
remains undetermined, it is postulated that it has two roles; to pro- tect the body against 
invading micro-organisms (pathogens), and to regulate bodily functions (homeostasis).  
Immunologists like to describe the immune system as consisting of two parts, 
namely the innate immune system and the adaptive immune system. It was origi- nally 
thought that these were two distinct sub-systems with little crossover, with the innate 
system responding to known threats and the adaptive immune system tack-  

Artificial Immune Systems  
3 
 
ling previously un-encountered threats. However, current research suggests that it is the 
interplay between these two systems that provides the high level of protection required, 
i.e. the ability to discriminate between 'self' and 'nonself' entities.  
In this section the basic principles of immunology are introduced from the his- 
torical perspective of their development. For a more comprehensive, biological view of the 
immune system, the interested reader should refer to any of a number of more standard 
immunology texts, for example [43] and [15].  
 
 
 
2.1 Classical Immunology  
 
Until relatively recently, the central dogma of immunology was self-nonself dis- 
crimination through the principles of clonal expansion and negative selection. These 
concepts have dominated the field since they were first described, as they provide 
adequate explanation of the function of the adaptive immune system over the life- time 
of an individual.  
In 1891, Paul Ehrlich [49] and his colleagues postulated that the defence mech- 
anism against pathogens was the generation of immunity through the production of 
immunoglobulins termed antibodies. They showed that the antibodies generated are 
specific to the pathogen (antigen) being targeted, and suggested that the immune 
system must remove these antigens before an infection spreads, without responding to its 
own cells. This led to the theory of the horror autotoxicus, which states that "an 
organism would not normally mobilise its immunological resources to effect a destructive 
reaction against its own tissues" [48]. It was later discovered that a par- ticular type of 
lymphocyte (white blood cell) termed a B-cell is responsible for the production of 
antibodies, and that the antibodies are proteins that can potentially bind to the proteins 
present on the invading antigens.  
Following the characterisation of antibodies, the theory of clonal selection was 
proposed by Burnet [48]. This mechanism corroborated the notion of horror auto- 
toxicus and found that "an individual somehow manages to prevent all future ability to 
respond to auto antigens i.e. self, leaving intact the ability to respond actively to the 
universe of other antigens i.e. nonself" [48]. The notion implied that im- mune 
function contains a mechanism of tolerance, which Burnet described as an "irreversibly 
determined immunological self". This formed a major constituent of a theory known as 
central tolerance and was subsequently proven as valid experi- mentally, earning Burnet 
a Nobel prize for his efforts.  
The clonal selection theory has two constituents. First, B-cells are selected to be fit for 
purpose during a 'training period'. Cells expressing receptors (cell surface- bound 
antibodies) that can match antigen are kept to form the B-cell population, but cells that 
cannot bind to antigens are removed. Once B-cells are released into the periphery, 
encounter with external antigens causes the cells to produce free ver- sions of the B-cell 
receptor, i.e. antibodies, which can bind to the matching antigen. Second, the process of 
antibody tuning occurs through somatic hypermutation and affinity maturation [46]. If a 
B-cell matches an external antigen, the cell clones it-  

4 
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
self. However, the hypermutation process ensures that exact clones are not formed; the 
clones express B-cell receptors that are slight variants on the parent cell's re- ceptor. 
This is a type of biological optimisation, ultimately resulting in antibodies that can bind 
more successfully to external antigens. The antibodies can therefore be used as 
markers of nonself entities within the body. The whole process is termed affinity maturation 
and is used to generate the most responsive antibodies.  
As the century progressed, a second class of white blood cell, T-cells, were char- 
acterised, and in 1959, the principle of negative selection was proposed by Joshua 
Lederberg, a then colleague of Burnet. He established the link between foetal devel- 
opment and the generation of tolerance to self-substances, termed self-antigen, not- ing 
the co-occurence of the initial production of T-cells and tolerance to self-antigen. This led 
to the idea that the selection process implied "self learning through negative selection", and 
caused Lederberg to suggest that "whenever produced, lymphocytes (T-cells) undergo a 
period of immaturity during which antigen recognition results in their death" [16]. He also 
proposed that further activation of the T-cells in the tissue is needed for the cells to 
develop the ability to remove pathogens such as bacterial agents and virally-infected self 
cells.  
During embryonic development in the womb, T-cells migrate to an immune sys- tem 
organ, the thymus. Whilst in the thymus, the newly created T-cells are exposed to a 
comprehensive sample of self-antigen. Any T-cell displaying a receptor which matches a 
self-antigen is removed. This process continues until puberty, after which the thymus 
shrinks to a negligible size. So-called 'self-reactive' T-cells are thus eliminated through 
this filtering process.  
 
 
 
2.2 The Immunologists' 'Dirty Little Secret'  
 
According to Ehrlich's horror autotoxicus, the immune system should not respond to self 
and should aim to eliminate all sources of nonself. However, this phenomenon is not 
always observed, and numerous noteworthy exceptions have been discov-  
ered [43], questioning the credibility of the self-nonself dogma, for example:  
 
1. Vaccinations and immunisations require adjuvants, namely microbial particles  
that provide additional stimulation of the immune system;  
2. What the body classes as self changes over time, an effect termed changing self.  
This phenomenon is observed in women during pregnancy;  
3. Human intestines are host to colonies of bacteria that serve a symbiotic function.  
These organsims are clearly nonself, yet no immune response is mounted;  
4. In the western world, an individual's immune system can sometimes start to re-  
spond to benign particles such as pollen, cat saliva, latex, peanut proteins etc.  
resulting in allergic reactions;  
5. An individual's immune system can sometimes begin to attack its host in the form  
of autoimmune diseases, for example multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis.  

Artificial Immune Systems  
5 
2.3 Costimulation, Infectious-nonself and The Danger Theory  
 
Three main theories have both challenged and augmented the process of self-nonself  
discrimination including:  
• Costimulation  
• Infectious nonself  
• Danger signal recognition  
Some of the cells involved in these theories are part of the innate immune system  
that was first observed by Metchikoff in 1882 [48]. He noted that invertebrates such as 
shrimp and starfish mobilise phagocytes, which ingest invading pathogens, clear- ing the 
threat from the host. This first line of defence is also found in humans, and consists of a 
diverse array of interacting cell types. The innate system was initially seen as the 
adaptive system's lesser counterpart, as it did not appear to be as sophis- ticated. However, 
there has been renewed interest in the innate system, as it is now thought to provide some 
of the answers to the problems associated with the theories of adaptive immunity.  
The concept of costimulation was introduced in an attempt to overcome a prob- lem 
observed in the hypermutation of antibodies, i.e. if the resulting hypermutated 
antibodies have a structure that could react to self cells, it would cause horror auto- 
toxicus. It was hence suggested that B-cells work in conjunction with T-cells [48], and 
that a B-cell would be eliminated if it did not receive a costimulatory signal from a 
'helper T-cell'. Later it was shown that helper T-cells are also regulated by a 'stimulator cell' 
that provides the costimulatory signals. These professional antigen- presenting cells are 
known as dendritic cells (DCs) and are part of the innate immune system. The process of 
costimulation casts doubt on the theory of central tolerance, placing the innate system in 
control of the immune response.  
The infectious nonself model proposed by Janeway in 1989 [34] further improved 
understanding of costimulation. Janeway suggested that the DCs perform their own 
version of self-nonself discrimination. This is based on their ability to recognise the 
signatures of bacterial presence innately, a skill developed over millennia throughout the 
evolution of the species. It is shown that DCs contain a repertoire of receptors on their 
surface, tuned for binding to molecules produced exclusively by bacteria. These 
molecules are collectively termed PAMPs (pathogen-associated molecular patterns). 
Janeway showed that the induction of an immune response is facilitated by the 
production of costimulatory molecules from DCs. When exposed to PAMPs and antigen, 
the DC produces a collection of molecules that assist in their binding to a T-cell, 
increasing the time a T-cell remains in contact with a presented antigen. This timing issue 
is thought to be crucial in the activation of T-cells.  
Infectious nonself can explain the need to add adjuvants to vaccines. Adjuvants are 
formed from neutered bacterial detritus, which, according to the theory, provide the 
PAMPs necessary to mount an immune response. It also explains why no re- sponse 
is mounted to changing self, as the absence of a second signal leads to the deactivation 
of T-cells. However, the infectious nonself model cannot explain toler- ance to symbiotic 
bacteria, which produce PAMPs, yet are not eradicated from the  

6 
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
body. Furthermore, this model cannot explain the phenomena of autoimmunity and its 
relatively high frequency of occurrence in the western world.  
Despite the addition of a second costimulatory signal to the self-nonself model, it 
became apparent that a piece of the immunological puzzle was still missing. It was 
unclear why the immune system should respond to self, or why bacteria producing 
PAMPs were not classed as foreign. In 1994, Matzinger proposed that the immune 
system is controlled by the detection of damage to the body [42], not the detection of 
specific antigen structures or bacterial products. Matzinger suggested that the 
activating danger signals do not come from external sources, but are produced by the 
cells of the body when a cell dies unexpectedly (necrosis). The danger theory also 
proposes that the cells of the innate immune system can actively suppress an immune 
response in the absence of danger and in the presence of molecular signals produced 
when cells die normally (apoptosis).  
DCs are sensitive to both the signals of necrosis and apoptosis in addition to 
PAMPs, and are attracted to areas in which cells are dying. They collect debris, in- 
cluding potential antigens, and all of the molecules found in the extracellular matrix (their 
environment) contribute to the regulation of their internal signal processing 
mechanism. If a DC is exposed to the molecules from necrosing cells, it transforms to a 
mature state. If it is exposed to the suppressive molecules of apoptosing cells, then it is 
transformed to a semi-mature state. The DC eventually complexes with a T-cell, i.e., a 
DC and T-cell bind if the antigen collected and presented by the DC has a sufficient 
binding affinity with the T-cell antigen receptor. If the DC is in the mature state, the T-cell 
becomes activated and all entities bearing that antigen are eliminated. If the DC is semi-
mature, the T-cell is tolerised to the presented antigen and no response to it is generated. 
In this way, the processing of the input molecular signals provides the immune system 
with a sense of context; in other words, if an entity is foreign but harmless, then the 
immune system does not waste resources responding to it.  
The peripheral-tolerance danger model can also account for the effects of au- 
toimmunity; when a self-protein is present in the same place and at the same time as 
the antigen of a pathogen, the immune system may respond to its own tissue, as both 
host and foreign antigens are collected by the same DCs. This has been framed within 
the context of multiple sclerosis, as the symptoms frequently appear in combination with 
bacterial or viral infection.  
Despite its ability to explain several key anomalies, acceptance of the danger 
theory has been slow within immunology. There has been a lack of experimental 
evidence to support Matzinger's ideas, and no single 'danger signal' has been dis- covered, 
though characterisation of the molecules involved is improving as molec- ular techniques 
advance.  

Artificial Immune Systems  
7 
2.4 Idiotypic Networks: Interantibody Interactions  
 
In addition to the research on mechanisms of immune discrimination, theories ex- ist 
that attempt to explain the various emergent properties of the immune system. One of 
these theories is the idiotypic immune network theory, initially proposed by Jerne in 
1974 [35]. The theory postulates that interactions between immune cells (and not 
necessarily external agents) cause modulation in the behaviour of the im- mune system 
as a whole. This modulation is proposed to lead to the generation of immune memory, 
i.e. the ability of the immune system to remember past encoun- ters with pathogens, and 
hence provide a secondary response that is both accurate and rapid. The idiotypic 
network model does not attempt to contradict the principles outlined in classical 
immunology, but provides a complementary theory of antibody stimulation, where 
antibodies can inﬂuence other antibodies in addition to antigens. Idiotypic models have 
been developed, although no physical evidence exists to sup- port the theory.  
 
 
 
2.5 Summary  
 
Immunologists classify the human immune system into two distinct sub-systems, the 
innate and adaptive. Until recently the adaptive system, responsible for modifi- cation of 
the immune response over the lifetime of an individual (through the tuning of B and T-
cells), was viewed as far more sophisticated than its innate counterpart. The selection 
mechanisms of the B and T-cells, and their processes of adaptation form the major part 
of the self-nonself principle, which states that the immune sys- tem is activated in 
response to the detection of foreign antigen, but does not respond to self antigen. 
However, the adaptive model of immune activation has problems associated with it, 
and these have led immunologists to look in greater detail at the innate immune 
system, adapted over the lifetime of the species, which responds quickly to invaders based 
on receptors encoded within the genome. It is now thought that it is the interaction between 
the innate and adaptive systems and their cells that provides the necessary protection, 
and consequently, there has been fresh interest in the cells of the innate system, for 
example DCs. These are responsible for translating and integrating information from the 
tissue to the T-cells, which results in either ac- tivation or tolerisation of the immune 
system. While the classical self-nonself view is important to immune function, the 
interplay between the two systems and the cor- responding cells inﬂuences the ultimate 
decision as to whether or not to respond to an antigen.  

8 
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
3 The Evolution of Artificial Immune Systems  
 
AIS is the collective name for a number of algorithms inspired by the human im- mune 
system. Unlike genetic algorithms, for which there is an archetypal algorithm and variants 
thereupon, there exists no single algorithm from which all immune al- gorithms are 
derived. However, all research within AIS stems from foundations in theoretical 
immunology, and numerous parallel streams of research have been con- ducted over the 
past 20 years, resulting in the development of distinct sub-streams, including 
computational immunology. The evolution of the various approaches that exist within AIS 
is depicted in Figure 1, which shows significant papers (given in quotes) or algorithms 
that have shaped the field of AIS. The white-ringed hubs rep- resent the significant works 
within a particular sub-stream, and the terminating rect- angles show branches of the 
research that are not currently active. In addition, the proximity of the sub-stream to the 
stream of theoretical immunology in the cen- tre represents the extent of the 
immunological modelling, with more modern AIS approaches closer to the underlying 
metaphor.  
The diagram also shows that AIS are classified into two distinct groups; first and 
second-generation algorithms. The first-generation algorithms use simplistic models of 
immunology as the initial inspiration, for example negative and clonal selection. In 
contrast, the second-generation algorithms, for example, the Dendritic Cell Algo- rithm 
(DCA) [29], are built on a foundation of interdisciplinary research that allows for a much 
finer-grained encapsulation of the underlying immunology. Although most of the 
second-generation algorithms are still in their infancy, and require much more 
theortectical study, they are showing great promise in a number of application areas.  
In this section each of the sub-streams and its applications are described indi- 
vidually and in chronological order, so that the evolution of AIS can be traced. In 
particular, negative selection, clonal selection and immune network approaches (the key 
first-generation algorithms) are discussed in detail, and the recently-developed second-
generation algorithms that use the 'Conceptual Framework' methodology, are also treated.  
 
 
 
3.1 Computational and Theoretical Immunology  
 
A vein of computational and theoretical immunology lies at the core of AIS, as the 
process of developing mathematical models of immunological mechanisms is similar, at 
least, in principle to the development of immune inspired algorithms. It is not surprising, 
therefore, that theoretical models of immune phenomena acted as a foundation for the 
initial AIS algorithms, clonal and negative selection, and immune network-based 
approaches.  
In the case of the clonal selection principle, this was initially based on works 
carried out in the 1970s by Burnett [12], where affinity metrics were first charac- terised 
mathematically. In combination with this model, Jerne's idiotypic network  

Artificial Immune Systems 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 The evolution of AIS from 1978 to 2008.  
Watkins 
AIR
Cutello 2007
Opt-IA 
Timmis et al. 
JISY
DeCastro 
CLONALG 
Timmis et al. 
AINNE/RAIN 
De Castro 
AI-NET 
Kelsey et al 
BCA 
Watkins 
Parallel 
Hart & Ross 
For 
Idiotypic Networks 
Whitbrook et al. 2008 
For Robotic Control 
Idiotypic Networks 
Watanabe et al. 
For 
Idiotypic Networks 
Beauchemin et al. 
Modeling Viral 
Burnet 
And After' 
'Clonal 
Salazar-Bañuelos 
Stochastic Immune 
199
Bersini & 
Immune Networks 
Cohen 
Garden
`Tending 
Stepney et al. 
Conceptual 
Owen et al 
Threshold
Tunable 
Farmer et al. 
Machine 
Adaptation 
'Immune 
Perelson et al. 
Selection 
Andrews & Timmis 
Receptor 
Key 
Clonal 
Immune Networks 
Twycross 
Innate 
Twycross & Aickelin 
Libtissu
Hoffmeyr 
LISY
199
Forrest et 
Discrimination
Self-
200
Secker et 
Aickelin & 
Danger 
2004-
Aickelin et 
The Danger 
Computational 
2nd Generation 
Danger 
Alternative 
Dasgupta et al 
Real Valued Negative 
Dasgupta & Ji 
V-Detectors
Greenmsith 
Algorithm (DCA) 
Greensmith & Aickelin 
The Dendritic Cell 
The Deterministic DCA 
Negative 
199
Forrest & Hofmeyr 
'Immunity by 
Batlthrop 
RIO
Burgess 
Computer Immunology
Kephart 
IBM 
Kim & Bentley 2001-
Negative 
Empirical Studies 
Ayara et al 
Fault 
Negative Selection 
Stibor et al 2005-
Negative 
Theoretical Studies 

10  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
model was formalised by Farmer et al. in the 1980s [22], and stipulated the inter- 
action between antibodies mathematically. The network model was seen as having 
computationally useful properties, and provided a network-based approach distinct from 
both neural networks and genetic algorithms. The model was also interpreted by Bersini 
and Varela [9] with numerous refinements, and the combination of these two approaches 
forms the cornerstone of all AIS work that abstracts the idiotypic network.  
Similarly, a theoretical model of the selection of T-cells in the thymus by Perel- son 
et al. [10] resulted in the development of negative selection as a technique within AIS. This 
model detailed the selection of T-cells (based on affinity metrics) to model the suitability of 
a T-cell receptor (TCR) for the detection of potential non-self anti- gen. The transfer 
from theoretical immunology to an AIS algorithm was by virtue of a collaboration between 
Perelson and Forrest, using Forrest's expertise in machine learning to improve Perelson's 
model.  
It was around this time that the primary algorithms were applied to a battery of 
computational tasks, and AIS began to diverge from theoretical immunology. How- ever, 
although the initial performance of the developed algorithms was good, the techniques 
proved no better than the state-of-the-art algorithms that already existed in the chosen 
problem domains. Consequently, AIS researchers started to turn back to the underlying 
immunology (both experimental and theoretical), as it was as- sumed that the 
developed algorithms were based on out-dated, oversimplified mod- els of the computation 
actually performed by the human immune system. Of course, theoretical immunology had 
also progressed since the 1990s.  
In 2004, Cohen published a book entitled 'Tending Adam's Garden' [14], that described 
the immune system as a complex adaptive system. Other similar research into a systemic 
perspective of the immune system, paired with the increase in pop- ularity of 
interdisciplinary approaches, enticed AIS researchers to renew their in- terest in the 
underlying metaphors. At this point, theoretical immunologists were welcomed into 
the field of AIS, acting as translators between the complicated and dynamic world of 
experimental immunology and computation. The AIS algorithms developed as a result 
of this incorporated many new ideas from modern immunol- ogy and show promise to 
out-perform older systems. In addition, in a bid to attract more researchers with a 
background in immunology, the AIS community devised a computational immunology 
stream as part of its conference [8]. Three examples of high quality research in this 
area include a model of viral dynamics [7], an in- vestigation into the cellular maximal 
frustration principle [1], and a model of the stochastic nature of immune responses [47].  
As computational and theoretical immunology become more sophisticated, it 
seems likely that the boundaries between the two fields will blur, resulting in the 
development of more sophisticated AIS algorithms. AIS practicioners are hopeful that 
any new systems developed will remain faithful to the underlying principles, as 
stipulated by the creators of the 'Conceptual Framework' [51] approach to AIS 
development. Whether this approach will bear fruit is conjecture, but it has certainly given 
a lease of life to a field that has strayed far from its initial roots.  

Artificial Immune Systems  
11  
3.2 Negative Selection Approaches  
 
The first example of an implemented AIS performing a useful computational task was 
an incarnation of a self-nonself discrimination system, used for the detection of computer 
virus executables [24]. (Incidentally, the precursor to this system was the original 
collaboration between computer science and immunology, i.e. the develop- ment of a 
genetic algorithm-based approach for understanding the mechanisms of pattern 
recognition within the immune system [50].) The self-nonself discrimina- tion system 
involved creating a behaviour profile of sequences of system calls on a computer network 
during a period of normal function. To aid in detecting malicious intruders, any 
subsequent sequences were matched against the normal profile, and any deviations 
reported as a possible intrusion. This research and its related work is perhaps the most 
widely known and popularised AIS to date [23], as the data used  
is popular amongst the intrusion detection community, with nearly 1000 citations.  
The approach attracted a great deal of attention from the security community, as 
exemplified in the research of Kephart [38]. This was the first attempt to apply AIS within a 
commercial setting, and consequently introduced AIS to a wider audience. The research 
was inspired by the efforts of Forrest et al. [23] and subsequent work by Hofmeyr and 
Forrest [32] in their paper 'Immunity by Design', and inspired a more systemic approach 
to AIS development, as pursued by Burgess [11]. Kephart also attempted to build on the 
system-profiling approach to intrusion detection by implementing a heterogeneous AIS. 
His work, and also that of Burgess, are good examples of alternative approaches based 
on the self-nonself principle.  
However, the major development in this sub-stream was the introduction of a true 
negative selection algorithm in a system named 'Lisys', which consisted of three 
phases. Here, the first phase was used for the definition of self, i.e. the normal profile was 
generated from input data to encompass normal behaviour patterns de- fined in advance 
to form a sense of self. The second phase involved the generation of a set of random 
detectors containing a representation suitable for matching the patterns used to create 
the self profile. The final phase implemented the detection of anomalies in previously-
unseen data by comparing each detector against all self patterns contained within the self 
profile. If any of the randomly-generated detectors matched a self pattern, the detector was 
deemed unsuitable and was removed from the detector set. However, if the detector did 
not match any self items it was saved and became part of the pool used for anomaly 
detection. Thus, when the highly- tuned detector set was presented with unseen test 
data, if any detector matched a pattern, the pattern was classed as anomalous and 
marked accordingly. A depiction of the algorithm at the core of this system is given in 
Figure 2.  
A full description of the multiple-stage negative selection algorithm is given in the 
work by Hofmeyr [31], which encoded the detectors as bit strings and used an r-
contiguous bit function for matching. Extensions to the work include the in- 
corporation of real values into the encoding, the use of multi-dimentional vector 
representations known as V-detectors, and the use of adaptable thresholds to reduce false 
positives [6]. Negative-selection algorithms have also been employed to solve fault 
tolerance problems, and numerous other anomaly detection problems.  

12  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
 
 
Step One:  
Randomly generate initial detector- 
population with n detectors to cover  
the feature space, where each is 
one detector.  
 
 
 
 
 
Step Two:  
Using the training data, define  
regions of `self' space, representing normal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step Three:  
Delete all detectors which overlap  
with the defined self region, leaving 
detectors primed to detect nonself 
entities.  
 
 
 
 
 
Step Four:  
Introduce new pattern (antigen) and  
calculate affinity with nearest  
detector. If affinity is greater than a  
defined threshold, the detector is  
activated and the antigen is classed  
as anomalous (  
). Antigen with  
insufficient affinity are classed as  
normal (  
).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 An illustration of negative selection.  

Artificial Immune Systems  
13  
 
Despite its initial promise, negative selection has been shown to have a number of 
associated problems that can render it somewhat undesirable for use in network 
intrusion detection. First, the necessity to create a randomly-generated initial de- tector 
population can be prohibitive, because, as the dimensionality of the feature space 
increases, the number of detectors required to cover it increases exponentially. Second, 
negative selection is a one-shot supervised learning algorithm, where the definition of 
normal is not updated as time progresses. This is particularly relevant to computer 
security where what is defined as normal has the tendency to change over time. Negative 
selection algorithms can therefore cause excessive numbers of false positive alerts, 
which can cripple a system. The problems with the algorithm are discussed further in 
Kim and Bentley [39] and are proven theoretically by Stibor et al. [52]. Although 
numerous modifications and variants in representation have been made, such as the 
addition of variable length detectors, the algorithm seems fit for purpose only for small, 
constrained problems where the definition of normal is not likely to change and the set 
encompassing normal is small. For a comprehensive overview of the negative selection 
algorithm, the interested reader should refer to the review by Ji and Dasgupta [36].  
 
 
 
3.3 Clonal Selection Approaches  
 
During the early years of AIS, researchers recognised that, in addition to the T-cell 
inspiration employed by Forrest et al. [32], basic models of B-cells and their corre- 
sponding antibodies could act as a good underlying metaphor. B-cells produce an- 
tibodies of a specific configuration, and their diversity is stimulated upon encounter with a 
foreign antigen, where the resulting B-cell clones vary the receptor configura- tion in order 
to perform a biological local search to find the best-fitting receptor. The B-cell model 
appeared ripe for exploitation, given the similarities with local search and optimisation 
techniques, and in 2000 a theoretical model of the hypermutation process proposed by 
Burnett [12] served as inspiration for CLONALG [21], a pop- ular AIS algorithm involving 
an abstract version of the cloning and hypermutation process.  
All clonal selection-based algorithms (CSA) essentially centre around a repeated cycle 
of match, clone, mutate and replace, and numerous parameters can be tuned, including 
the cloning rate, the initial number of antibodies, and the mutation rate for the clones. 
CLONALG, AI-NET, the B-cell algorithm [37] and AIRS [60] all incorporate this basic 
functionality. (AI-NET contains constituents of both CSA and immune network 
approaches [19].) The CSA used in CLONALG is illustrated in Figure 3.  
CSAs have a strong resemblance to genetic algorithms without crossover, but their 
notion of affinity and their significantly higher mutation rate (the hypermu- tation 
component) distinguish them from similar adaptive algorithms. CSAs also share 
properties with both K-means and K-nearest neighbour approaches. The CSA technique 
would be most similar to a K-nearest neighbour scheme where K is one,  

14  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
 
 
Step One:  
Randomly generate initial antibody 
population with n detectors, where  
each  
is one antibody .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step Two:  
Introduce new pattern (antigen  
) 
and select the nearest clone  
(coloured) using a defined distance  
metric such as the Euclidean 
distance.  
 
 
 
 
 
Step Three:  
Clone nearest antibody in proportion to 
the affintiy between antibody and  
antigen. The greater the affinity the  
greater the number of clones 
produced.  
 
 
 
 
Step Four:  
Mutate clones, with distance of  
mutation inversely proportional to 
affinity. The greater the affinity the  
greater the distance between mutant 
antibodies.  
 
 
 
 
 
Step Five:  
Find best matching clone and assign 
clone's class to antigen. Delete other  
superfluous clones and for each  
deletion, replace with new randomly  
generated antibody. Repeat steps  
two to five until a stopping condition is 
met.  
 
 
 
Fig. 3 An illustration of clonal selection.  

Artificial Immune Systems  
15  
 
combined with features of K-means where the position of the centroids is adjusted 
(analogous to the creation of memory antibodies). However, again, the affinity met- rics 
and the hypermutation components make CSA somewhat distinct from these methods.  
The primary uses of CSA are for pattern recognition and optimisation, exem- 
plified by the successful application of an optimised variant of CLONALG termed Opt-
AI [18] to the prediction of protein secondary structure. It is the hypermuta- tion 
component of CSA, where a dynamic local search is performed, that implies its suitability 
for optimisation, and this is exemplified with Opt-IA. Another example of a CSA is 
AIRS, a successful multi-class classifier that contains a clonal selection component. This 
system also employs memory cells, created when a stimulated B- cell has a sustained 
affinity. Immune memory models frequently accompany clonal selection approaches, but 
the underlying immunology is rather unclear, even regard- ing the existence of such cells. 
This has made the development of specific models very difficult but possible, as 
demonstrated by Wilson et al. [63] with the motif- tracking algorithm.  
The process of repeated filtering of candidate solutions in the form of antibody 
populations results in a type of optimisation when taken within an AIS context, al- 
though it is debatable whether the solutions provided by the human immune system itself 
are optimal. As argued by Timmis and Hart [54], CSA has produced solutions that have a 
tendency to be the most robust, though not necessarily the most optimal. This makes them 
particularly suited for more complex optimisation problems such as multi-objective 
optimisation. Their robustness, coupled with the fact that they are one of the most 
well-understood of the AIS algorithms, makes them a popular choice amongst similar 
techniques.  
 
 
 
3.4 Idiotypic Network Approaches  
 
In this section, the basic principles of the idiotypic network theory proposed by Jerne 
[35] are explained, and a particular example of a hybrid system that combines an immune 
network with a clonal selection-based model is presented and discussed. A more detailed 
example of an artificial idiotypic network is provided in the case study in section 4.  
In order to understand the principles of the idiotypic network theory, it is nec- 
essary to introduce the concepts of epitopes, paratopes and idiotopes. The clonal 
selection theory states that division occurs for B-cells with receptors that have a high 
degree of match to a stimulating antigen's binding region or epitope pattern, and that 
these cells then mature into plasma cells that secrete the matching receptors or antibodies 
into the bloodstream. Once in the bloodstream the antibody combin- ing sites or 
paratopes bind to the antigen epitopes, causing other cells to assist with elimination. 
Antibody paratopes and antigen epitopes are hence complementary and are analogous to 
keys and locks. Paratopes can be viewed as master keys that may open a set of locks, and 
some locks can be opened by more than one key.  

16  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
However, Jerne's network theory suggests that antibodies also possess a set  
of epitopes and so are capable of being recognized by other antibodies. Epitopes 
unique to an antibody type are termed idiotopes, and the group of antibodies shar- ing 
the same idiotope belongs to the same idiotype. When an antibody's idiotope is 
recognized by the paratopes of other antibodies, it is suppressed and its concentra- tion is 
reduced. However, when an antibody's paratope recognizes the idiotopes of other 
antibodies, or the epitopes of antigens, it is stimulated and its concentration increases.  
The idiotypic network theory hence views the immune system as a complex net- work 
of paratopes that recognize idiotopes and idiotopes that are recognized by paratopes. 
This implies that B-cells are not isolated, but are communicating with each other via 
collective dynamic network interactions. The network continually adapts itself, 
maintaining a steady state that reﬂects the global results of interacting with the 
environment. This is in contrast to the clonal selection theory, which sup- ports the view 
that promotion of a B-cell to a memory cell is the result of antibody- antigen interactions 
only. Jerne states that each individual develops a unique, self- regulating immune 
network, and when it is established, it must possess stable fea- tures. He hence proposes 
that immunological memory may be more dependent upon network changes than upon the 
endurance of populations of memory cells.  
His theory asserts that antibodies continue communicating even in the absence of 
antigens, which produces continual change of concentration levels. A more re- cent 
model by Farmer et al. [22] adds additional dynamics that account for the 
domination of a single antibody in the presence of antigen, since the cell with the 
paratope that best fits the antigen epitope contributes more to the collective response. It 
presents itself to the system as the antigenic antibody, which disturbs the network, 
inducing further interantibody suppression and stimulation.  
Although the theory has been largely ignored by the wider immunology commu- nity, 
it has gained much popularity within AIS due to its ability to produce ﬂexible selection-
mechanisms. Furthermore, the behaviour of an idiotypic network can be considered 
intelligent, as it is both adaptive at a local level, and shows emergent properties at a 
global level. The system is also autonomous and completely decen- tralized, making it 
ideal for applications such as mobile-robot behaviour arbitra- tion [41][40][59], 
identifying good matches for recommendation software [13], and negotiating options for 
configuring communication software [53].  
An early example of AIS research inspired by Jerne's theory is the system named 'Jisys', 
developed by Hunt and Cooke, and later Timmis [33]. The system was based on the idiotypic 
network model formalised by Farmer et al. [22] and later Bersini and Varela et al. [9], 
and utilised the concepts of stimulation and suppression effects within a network of 
antibodies. The system can be considered as something of a hybrid, since it also 
incorporates the concepts of clonal expansion and somatic hy- permutation within the 
antibody populations. The system led to the development of a number of other network-
based systems, including ANNIE/RAIN [55], which is a resource-based unsupervised 
clustering algorithm and AINET [19]. Components from ANNIE/RAIN are incorporated 
into AIRS in addition to elements of clonal selection.  

Artificial Immune Systems  
17  
3.5 Danger Theory Approaches  
 
All of the algorithms described above (clonal and negative selection, and the im- 
mune networks) diverged from the underlying immunology at an early stage in their 
development. This phenomenon often occurs in AIS because, as novel variants are 
created, any remaining immune inspiration is abstracted away in order to produce 
systems that are easy to characterise computationally. Consequently, the resulting 
systems may fail to model certain computationally desirable features of the immune 
system. In addition, since the algorithms are developed from a computational per- 
spective, it can be difficult to distinguish AIS approaches from more established 
machine learning techniques. This is exemplified by the similarities of CSAs with K-
nearest neighbour approaches and evolutionary search techniques. Although the first-
generation algorithms continue to be applied to numerous pattern recognition, detection 
and classification problems, little progress has been made with the algo- rithms 
themselves for a number of years. This, coupled with the somewhat mediocre 
performances achieved by such algorithms on benchmark tests, has recently led AIS 
researchers to re-think the fundamentals of AIS design [54]. Instead of using highly- 
simplified models of isolated immune components, systems could be designed to 
incorporate more complex, current and sophisticated models. The idea gave rise to a 
hypothesis; would the incorporation of finer-grained models improve the perfor-  
mance of AIS algorithms, and make them more applicable?  
The Danger Project (Aickelin et al. [2]), a four year interdisciplinary collab- 
oration between an AIS development team and practical immunologists aimed to 
answer this fundamental question. Their research was chieﬂy motivated by the scal- ing 
and false positive problems associated with negative selection and was based on a 
proof of concept paper by Aickelin and Cayzer [3]. Here, the immune system was re-
examined in an attempt to overcome the difficulties, and it was postulated that negative 
selection-based intrusion detection systems may be missing a key con- stituent; danger 
signals.  
As described in section 2, the human immune system cannot rely on self-nonself 
discrimination alone, so it seems unreasonable to design AIS systems that depend only 
upon this principle. The aim of the Danger Project was to incorporate the danger 
theory into AIS, with a view to producing robust intrusion detection sys- tems, 
capable of fast real-time analysis and low rates of false alarms. At the start of the project 
in 2004, the working methodology of the research team was unique in AIS; the practical 
immunologists gave the computer scientists insight into the actual mechanisms of 
detection employed by the immune system, and the AIS researchers were able to build 
abstract computational models of the cells involved in the detec- tion of danger signals, 
which formed the basis of novel algorithms and frameworks. Moreover, the practical 
immunologists were able to assist in refining the models by performing experiments to fill 
in any gaps in knowledge that were identified.  
Two separate areas of research arose out of the danger project in addition to the 
published immunological results. The first was the development of the libtissue system, 
an agent-based framework that facilitated a style of agent-based simulation to house the 
novel algorithms [57]. A novel algorithm (termed 'tlr') was developed  

18  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
to test the framework, and showed some success when applied to the detection of 
anomalous system calls [56]. The algorithm is one of the few instances of AIS where more 
than one cell type is employed, in this case, DCs and T-cells. The second research 
area was the creation of the DCA [26], a second-generation example, and the newest 
addition to the mainstream set of AIS algorithms. The DCA is based on a model of the 
function of dermal dendritic cells and their ability to discriminate between healthy and 
infected tissue. In nature DCs correlate molecular signals found within tissue and use this 
information to assess the context of the monitored area. In addition to signal 
processing, DCs collect debris, which is processed to form antigen. After a period of 
time, DCs mature and migrate from the tissue to a lymph node, where they present their 
context information and their antigen to a population of T-cells, instructing the T-cell with 
the appropriate response.  
In the DCA, the DC mechanisms are abstracted and used to form the model. To date 
the DCA has been applied to port scan detection, insider attack detection, botnet zombie 
machine detection, standard machine learning intrusion datasets, robotic se- curity, 
schedule overrun detection in embedded systems, sensor networks, and other real-time, 
dynamic problems. In numerous cases the algorithm is performing well, producing low 
rates of false positives, and a deterministic variant that has enhanced computational 
performance is currently under investigation [28]. The algorithm is described in detail in 
section 5.  
 
 
 
3.6 Conceptual Framework Approaches  
 
In parallel with the Danger Project, Stepney et al. [51] also identify the lack of 
rigour in the metaphors used to inspire AIS. To overcome this problem, they propose a 
framework (the'Conceptual Framework') for the successful development of AIS. The 
methodology employs an iterative approach for the creation and testing of novel  
immune-inspired algorithms, and four stages are identified as key:  
• Observation: the biological system is probed using practical experimentation.  
• Models: computational models are constructed to examine the biological sys-  
tem further, and abstract models are created from the computational models for 
translation into algorithms.  
• Algorithms: computational systems are developed, implemented, and studied the-  
oretically using the abstract models as a blueprint.  
• Applications: the developed algorithms are applied to specific problems, with  
feedback to the algorithm for refinement.  
The design of the framework stipulates that the ﬂow of information between com-  
ponents is bi-directional, and involves an iterative process, updating the models and 
algorithms as information is incorporated. A framework for constructing algorithms is 
certainly necessary in principle, since it clearly defines the role each discipline must 
play, i.e. observation by immunologists, modelling by mathematicians, algo- rithm 
development by computer scientists, and application testing by engineers.  

Artificial Immune Systems  
19  
 
Models of receptor degeneracy by Andrews and Timmis [4] are in development using 
the Conceptual Framework approach, with one modification, i.e. no direct col- laboration 
with practical immunologists is formed. Instead, sophisticated immuno- logical literature 
is used as inspiration to construct a novel computational model. Here, the constructed 
model is of T-cell activation within a lymph node, and a com- putational model of the 
interactions between T-cells and antigen presenting cells (e.g. DCs) is implemented 
using principles of cellular automata. In this work, it is identified that one key feature of 
activation is the degeneracy of receptors across the T-cell population. Degeneracy is 
defined as "elements which are structurally dif- ferent but produce the same function...". 
For example, one particular T-cell receptor can respond to more than one binding agent 
with similar effects. Degeneracy is a de- sirable property that is inherent in numerous 
biological systems, and is of particular interest to AIS as it may enable reduction of the 
number of detectors required. This would impact on the dynamics of the first-generation 
approaches, negative selection included.  
The initial model is extended to incorporate tuneable activation thresholds for the 
responses of T-cells [5]. Dynamic thresholds are employed based on an exist- ing 
immunological model, where the signal strength needed to activate the T-cell is derived 
from the frequency and magnitude of the stimulation of the cell over time. Similar 
research into formalising threshold methods using a type of process algebra  
known as stochastic π calculus has also been carried out, and allows for the formu-  
lation of models within a defined modelling language [45], utilising the Conceptual  
Framework for its development.  
Both approaches have yielded immunologically and computationally interesting 
results. However, neither technique has matured to the stage of a workable algorithm and, 
thus, their applicability to the wider AIS context is still undetermined. It is hoped that 
the integration of these mechanisms will impact on the function of AIS at some point, 
stimulating others to follow the Conceptual Framework. However, at the present time, no 
realistic claims about its effectiveness can be made, as it is too new to have mature work 
associated with it.  
 
 
 
3.7 Summary  
 
AIS is a diverse field of study within bio-inspired computation, with the algorithms 
developed as distinct as the various parts of the immune system itself. This results in not 
one single AIS algorithm, but a collection of algorithms fit to solve a wide range of 
problems. Two generations of AIS are currently in use and development. The first-
generation approaches draw inspiration from theoretical immunology models in 
combination with 'text-book style' mechanisms. Two major techniques from the first-
generation, clonal and negative selection, share properties with other machine learning 
methods, such as K-nearest neighbour. Recently, second-generation algo- rithms have 
emerged, based on an interdiciplinary methodology. Although these approaches are 
still in the early stages of development, preliminary results, and the  

20  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
increasing popularity of algorithms like the DCA, suggest that second-generation 
algorithms may prove extremely useful.  
To reinforce the concepts presented in this section, two examples of immune- 
inspired algorithms are examined in more detail. These are the idiotypic network and 
the DCA, representing first and second-generation algorithms respectively.  
 
 
 
4 Case Study 1: The Idiotypic Network Approach  
 
Systems inspired by the idiotypic network theory include the interaction between 
antibodies, in addition to interactions between antibodies and antigens. Such sys- tems 
are computationally useful, despite the fact that no immunological evidence exists to 
support the underlying principles. Idiotypic network-based systems are largely 
inspired by the Farmer et al. computational model [22] of Jerne's idiotypic network theory 
[35], where binary strings of a given length l represent epitopes and paratopes. The model 
simplifies the biology so that each antigen and each antibody have only one epitope. Each 
antibody thus has a pair of binary strings [p, e], and each antigen has a single string [e]. 
The degree of fit between epitope and paratope strings is analogous to the affinity between 
real epitopes and paratopes, and uses the exclusive OR operator to test the bits of the 
strings (where 0 and 1 yields a positive score).  
Exact matching between p and e is not required and, as strings can match in any 
alignment, one needs only to define a threshold value s below which there is no 
reaction. For example if s was set at 6 and there were 5 matches (0 and 1 pairs) for a 
given alignment, the score for that alignment would be 0. If there were 6 matches, the 
score would be 1 and if there were 7 the score would be 2. The strength of  
reaction G for a given alignment is thus:  
 
G = 1 + µ,  
(1)  
 
where µ is the number of matching bits in excess of the threshold. The strength of 
reaction for all possible alignments mi j between two antibodies i and j is given by:  
 
q 
mi j =  ∑ Gk ,  
(2)  
k=1  
where q is the number of possible alignments. In the Farmer model, differential  
equation (3) describes continuous antibody concentration changes occurring as a result 
of antigen stimulation, interantibody stimulation and suppression, and the nat- ural death 
rate. Here, N is the number of antibodies and n is the number of antigens. The match 
specificities are given by m, with the first index referring to the epitope  
and the second to the paratope:  
 
dxi = c  
 
n 
 
N 
 
N 
∑1mjixiyj −k1 ∑1mijxixj + ∑1mjixixj  
− k2xi.  
(3)  
dt  
j=  
j=  
j=  

Artificial Immune Systems  
21  
 
The first sum in the square bracket expresses stimulation in response to all anti- gens. 
The xiy j terms model that the probability of a potential collision (i.e. match)  
between an antibody and an antigen (and hence the probability of stimulation) is de-  
pendent on their relative concentrations. The second and third sums represent sup- 
pression and stimulation respectively, in response to all other antibodies. Parameter  
k1 allows possible inequalities between interantibody stimulation and suppression,  
and the k2 term outside the brackets is a damping factor, which denotes the tendency  
of antibodies to die, at a constant rate, in the absence of interactions. Parameter c  
is a "rate" constant that simulates both the number of collisions per unit time and the rate 
of antibody production when a collision occurs. After each iteration, anti- body 
concentrations are usually reduced using some sort of squashing function, for  
example the one shown in equation (4):  
 
xi(t + 1) = 1 + exp(0.51− x (t + 1)) . i 
 
 
(4)  
The final antibody selected to tackle the presented antigen is the antibody with high-  
est concentration or the best antibody according to a metric that encompasses con- 
centration and affinity.  
Within mobile robotics, many researchers (e.g. Watanabe et al. [59]) encode anti- gens 
as environmental signals, and antibodies as robot behaviours, with the epitopes, paratopes 
and idiotopes encoded as binary strings. The antibodies have an action and a 
precondition (the paratope part), which are taken from fixed sets of actions and 
preconditions. They also have an idiotope part - a disallowed condition, which defines 
antibody connection. The final antibody structures are determined using a genetic 
algorithm that evolves suitable combinations of idiotope parameters, actions and 
preconditions. Both Farmer et al. [22] and Vargas et al. [58] have likened this technique 
to learning classifier systems (LCS) where antibodies can be thought of as classifiers with a 
condition and action part (the paratope) and a connection part (the idiotope). In LCS the 
action part must be matched to a condition (antigen epitope) and the connections show 
how the classifier is linked to the others. The presence of environmental conditions 
causes variations in classifier concentration levels in the same way that antigens disturb 
the antibody dynamics.  
In contrast to the binary coding techniques, the work of Whitbrook et al. [61], 
which is concerned with mobile robot navigation, uses a fixed idiotope matrix of real 
numbers I representing the degree of belief that an antibody-antigen combination is poor. 
A variable paratope-matrix of real numbers P, derived from antibody-antigen 
reinforcement learning (RL) scores, is used to model antibody-antigen affinities. Later 
work by these authors [62] deals with a set of N antibodies, where each is associated 
with a particular antigen, i.e. N = n. The technique evolves the action part of each 
antibody in the set and there are z sets. There are thus z matching antibodies for 
each antigen. The variable paratope is determined by RL as before, but the idiotope is 
derived directly from the paratope, and is also variable.  
P and I are used together to assess similarity between antibodies and hence de- 
termine interantibody stimulation and suppression levels. The antibody with the 
highest affinity to the presented antigen v is selected as the antigenic antibody, i.e.  

22  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
the antibody with the highest paratope value Piv, i = 1, ..., z. The system works by 
suppressing antibodies dissimilar to the antigenic antibody, and stimulating similar  
ones. This is done by comparing the idiotope of the antigenic antibody with the 
paratopes of the other antibodies to determine how much each is stimulated, and by 
comparing the antigenic paratope with the idiotopes of the others to calculate how 
much each should be suppressed. If the antigenic antibody is the rth antibody  
and n is the number of antigens, equations (5) and (6) govern the increase ε and  
decrease δ in affinity to v for each of the z matching antibodies, when stimulation  
and suppression occur respectively:  
 
n 
εiv =  
 
j= ∑1(1−Pij)Irjxijxrj  
n 
i = 1, ...,  
z,  
(5)  
δiv = k1 ∑ Pr jIi jxi jxr j  
i = 1, ...,  
z.  
(6)  
j=1  
The new affinity (Piv)2 is hence given by:  
 
(Piv)2 = (Piv)1 + εiv − δiv .  
(7)  
All concentrations are re-evaluated using a variation of Farmer's equation, and  
the antibody selected is the one with the highest activation, which is a product of 
concentration and affinity. The chosen antibody may be the antigenic antibody, or it may 
be some other that matches the presented antigen, in which case an idiotypic difference 
is said to occur. The research has so far shown that both real and virtual robots can 
navigate through mazes and other obstacle courses much more success- fully when they 
employ the idiotypic selection mechanism, as opposed to relying on RL only. The authors 
have also attempted to examine the relationships between the  
parameters k1, k2, and c, and the rates of idiotypic difference in order to gain insight  
into the mechansims that underlie the algorithm's superior performance.  
 
 
 
5 Case Study 2: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm (DCA)  
 
The DCA, a second-generation algorithm based on an abstract model of natural DCs, 
is one of the most recent additions to the AIS family. It is essentially a meta- heuristic 
that uses input signals (heuristic approximations of what is normal and anomalous) to 
perform context-sensitive anomaly detection through both correla- tion and 
classification. The primary use to date has been the detection of intrusions in the fields of 
network [27] and robotic security [44].  
Natural DCs are part of the innate immune system, and are responsible for ini- tial 
pathogen detection, acting as an interface between the innate and adaptive sys- tems. 
They exist in three states of differentiation; immature, mature (exposed to the molecules 
from necrosing cells), and semi-mature (exposed to the molecules from apoptosing 
cells), and it is their terminal state of differentiation that is used by the  

Artificial Immune Systems  
23  
 
adaptive immune system to decide whether or not to respond to a potentially harmful entity.  
The DCA abstracts a multi-resolution model of a natural DC. To this end, four  
data types are required:  
• Antigen: a enumerated type object with a value that is used as an identifier for  
the suspect data to be classified. For ideal functioning, a number of antigens of the 
same value should be used to form an antigen type.  
• PAMP signal: a real-valued attribute, where an increase in value is a definite  
indicator of anomaly.  
• Danger signal: a real-valued attribute, where an increase in value is a probable  
indicator of damage, but there is less certainty than with a PAMP signal.  
• Safe signal: a real-valued attribute, where an increase in value is a probable in-  
dicator of normality within a system. High values of the safe signal can cancel out 
the effects of both the PAMP and danger signals, possibly reducing the false positive 
rate of the DCA.  
Unlike the negative selection approaches, the DCA does not have an adaptive  
component and thus requires no formal training phase. Signal processing, the corre- lation 
between antigen and signals, is performed at the individual cell level, but the 
classification of antigen types occurs at the population level. In other words, each cell's 
input signals are transformed into cumulative output signals, with two output values per 
cell; the costimulatory signal (CSM), and the context value k, which is used to 
determine the terminal state of the cell. (A negative k represents a semi- mature cell 
and a positive k indicates a mature cell.) Each DC executes three steps  
per sampling iteration:  
1. Sample antigen: the DC collects antigen from an external source (in the form of  
an antigen array) and places the antigen in its own data structure for storage.  
2. Update input signals: the DC collects values of all input signals from a defined  
input signal array.  
3. Calculate interim output signals: at each iteration, each DC generates three tem-  
porary output signal values from the received input signals, and these output 
values are added to obtain the cell's CSM and k values.  
 
The DCA works on a static population of cells in which every cell removed  
is immediately replaced. Diversity is maintained across the population by random 
allocation of lifespan values within a specified range, i.e. when a cell is created it is 
given a limited time window for data sampling. This is also thought to add 
robustness to the algorithm. However, the lifespan reduces whenever the CSM value 
increases, since the CSM value is automatically derived from it. Once the lifespan is over, 
the cell ceases its sampling iterations and presents all the collected antigens, so that its k 
value can be determined. The cell is then reset and returned to the sampling iterations with 
a new lifespan value.  
The antigens presented by each cell are processed across all presentations by all  
members of the DC population. The anomaly score, Kα , of an antigen type is cal-  
culated using the k values presented in conjunction with each antigen type. Initial  

24  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin  
 
implementations of the DCA [30] are based on numerous probabilistic components, 
including random sorting of the DC population, probabilities of antigen collection, 
decay rates of signals, and numerous other parameters. While the same research 
shows that the algorithm can be successfully applied to real-world intrusion data, the 
system is very difficult to analyse given the sheer numbers of probabilities and 
parameters. Recently, a deterministic DCA [28] has been developed in order to ob- tain a 
greater understanding of the algorithm's function. The pseudocode for the deterministic 
version of DCA is given in Algorithm 1.  
 
 
input : Antigen and Signals  
output: Antigen Types and cumulative k values  
set number of cells;  
initialise DCs();  
while data do  
switch input do  
case antigen  
antigenCounter++;  
cell index = antigen counter modulus number of cells ;  
DC of cell index assigned antigen;  
update DC's antigen profile;  
end  
case signals  
calculate csm and k;  
for all DCs do  
DC.lifespan -= csm;  
DC.k += k;  
if DC.lifespan <= 0 then  
log DC.k, number of antigen and cell iterations ;  
reset DC();  
end  
end  
end  
end  
end  
for each antigen Type do  
calculate anomaly metrics;  
end  
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of the deterministic DCA.  
 
 
While the DCA removes the need to define self, it is still necessary to select a 
suitable antigen representation and to perform pre-classification of input signals. This 
represents a fundamental difference between this approach and negative selec- tion for 
example, as the DCA relies on heuristic-based signals that are not absolute 
representations of normal or anomalous. Although it bears an intitial resemblance to neural 
networks, the variable lifespan, the population dynamics and the combined functionality 
of filtering, correlation and classification set it apart from these other approaches. Full 
details of the DCA are presented in Greensmith [26] and Green- smith et al. [29].  

Artificial Immune Systems  
25  
6 Conclusions  
 
This chapter has examined AIS from the underlying immunology and the contro- 
versy surrounding competing theories, to the application and implementation of im- mune 
algorithms as exemplified by the DCA. As mentioned, AIS are distinct from other fields 
within bio-inspired computing as not one archetypal system is used, but different methods 
are employed for different purposes. There are two reasons for this; first, the immune 
system is itself multifunctional, performing many different natural computational tasks, 
and second, AIS researchers model the immune sys- tem in different ways to suit their 
goals. For example, clonal selection with its hy- permutation function performs a type of 
local search and can be modified to perform optimisation. Alternatively, the DCA is based 
on natural DCs, which are responsible for initial pathogen detection in tissue and can 
hence be used for anomaly detection.  
A shift is also evident in the methods used to create and develop AIS algorithms, from 
somewhat simplistic models based on out-dated immunology to sophisticated 
interdisciplinary approaches based on rigourous abstract modelling, see the Danger 
Project [2] and Conceptual Framework [51]. While the Conceptual Framework ap- 
proaches are not yet mature enough to yield tangible results, the DCA (developed using 
this method) is performing well across a range of problems [29] in comparison with other 
nature-inspired techniques.  
 
 
 
6.1 Future Trends in AIS  
 
The percentage of research directed towards specific areas of AIS can be estimated by 
looking at the AIS work reported in the 2008 ICARIS annual conference [8]. Exactly 
half of the papers in these proceedings are related to the application of first-
generation algorithms and their variants. The second largest category is that of the 
second-generation approaches, followed by theoretical studies of AIS and 
computational immunology. This differs vastly from the state of the field a mere five 
years ago, where the two largest groups of papers were applications of clonal and 
negative selection respectively, followed by idiotypic networks. This change in focus of 
the field suggests that, as the characterisation of the second-generation approaches 
improves, they will increase in popularity and may eventually dominate the field. What 
the future holds for AIS, like any discipline, is uncertain given that AIS algorithms are 
still evolving. As our knowledge of immunology increases, at some point in the future 
we may have the grounding and computational resources to build full, biologically accurate 
computational immune systems, based on both the innate and adaptive systems and 
their numerous cell types.  

26  
Julie Greensmith, Amanda Whitbrook and Uwe Aickelin
