Visual Simplified Characters’ Emotion Emulator 
Implementing OCC Model 
 
Ana Lilia Laureano-Cruces1,2,3, Laura Hernández-Domínguez2, Martha Mora-Torres2, Juan-Manuel Torres-
Moreno3 Jaime Enrique Cabrera-López2 
1 Departamento de Sistemas, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana – Azcapotzalco, 
San Pablo 180, CP.02200. México, DF. 
2 Posgrado en Ciencia e Ingeniería de la Computación, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 
Edif. Anexo IIMAS, 3er piso, Ciudad Universitaria, Coyoacán, México, D.F. C.P. 04510 

3 Laboratoire Informatique d'Avignon / Université d'Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse 
BP 91228, 84911 Avignon Cedex 9, France 

 
Abstract 
In this paper, we present a visual emulator of the 
emotions seen in characters in stories. This system is 
based on a simplified view of the cognitive structure 
of emotions proposed by Ortony, Clore and Collins 
(OCC Model). The goal of this paper is to provide a 
visual platform that allows us to observe changes in 
the characters’ different emotions, and the intricate 
interrelationships between: 1) each character’s 
emotions, 2) their affective relationships and actions, 
3) The events that take place in the development of a 
plot, and 4) the objects of desire that make up the 
emotional map of any story. This tool was tested on 
stories with a contrasting variety of emotional and 
affective environments: Othello, Twilight, and Harry 
Potter, behaving sensibly and in keeping with the 
atmosphere in which the characters were immersed. 
 
Keywords: 
synthetic 
emotions, 
OCC 
model, 
emotional 
environment, 
intelligent 
interfaces, 
decision-making process. 
 
1. Introduction 
Throughout history, Artificial Intelligence has sought 
to create machines that emulate intelligent behavior; 
in particular, it has attempted to repeat in the 
computer common behaviors of humans. The latter 
pursuit has resulted in efforts to create systems that 
can think and act like humans, following equanimous 
logical rules and norms oriented toward the 
fulfillment of well-defined objectives and goals. 
However, people are complex beings, whose actions 
do not depend only on measurable and provable 
logical chains of reasoning, but rather our emotions 
play a fundamental part in the decision-making 
process, and consequently in our actions and 
reactions. The latter are seen as powerful heuristic 
mechanisms that permit a decision-making process 
when there are numerous options [13, 17]. Examples 
of application include those related to the teaching-
learning process [9, 10, 15]. 
Consequently, it is to be supposed that to create 
machines that think and act like humans, we will 
need to contemplate the factors that make us act as 
humans, such as awareness and emotions. The 
inclusion of awareness in the development of 
intelligent agents is a very recent field that is only 
beginning to be studied and analyzed from a 
computational perspective, and one of the first 
approaches to that objective was made by [3], where 
emotions are one of the characteristics used to 
accomplish it. However, the inclusion of emotions in 
this area has been studied previously, and more 
extensively, by [16] in their theoretical design of the 
cognitive structure of emotions, the investigation 
forming the basis of our discussion in this paper and 
which we will refer to henceforth as the OCC Model 
(Ortoney, Clore, Collins). 
The article is organized as follows: section two offers 
an explanation of OCC Model and mentions research 
related to that approach. Section three describes the 
Visual Simplified Characters’ Emotion Emulator 
(EVE) system modeled based on simplified OCC 
theory. In section four we present and analyze 
scenarios from three perspectives: events, objects, 
and actions of agents, exemplified with the Othello 
ICGST Conference on Computer Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 19-21 December 2011
229

characters [18]. We explain the logic behind the 
system, meaning how quantitative reactions are 
formed to: events, objects, and agents. Finally, in the 
conclusions 
we 
discuss 
the 
implications 
for 
improving the software system; given that, in our 
view, the OCC Model provides an invaluable 
resource for modeling emotions from a cognitive 
perspective. 
 
2. Overview of the OCC Model 
The OCC Model proposes that we approach emotions 
in a delimited and formal context to establish a 
contained and well-defined structure that considers a 
finite number of possible situations that can trigger 
emotions [16]. To achieve this, the authors rule out 
aspects such as physiology, behavior, and linguistic 
expressions which are linked to emotions, and if 
considered can influence the decision-making process. 
Instead of considering these aspects, the OCC Model 
addresses emotions as specific types of cognitive 
processes based on personal and interpersonal 
descriptions of each situation, and therefore the 
results depend largely on the particular way each 
person can conceptualize each situation, and may 
take varying forms depending on the personal 
idiosyncrasies of the designer of the structure. 
The OCC Model was not created with the intention of 
making a computer actually feel emotions, but rather 
of making it, interpret the ways emotions can be 
included and evaluated by humans. Last has an effect 
in humans’ action. It can also be used to imitate a 
behavior that adapts to a given emotion of the user. 
With this in mind it is possible to take into account 
the events of a dynamic environment, and create 
interfaces that can interact with humans more 
realistically. 
 
2.1 Principal Aspects of the World According to 
the OCC Model 
The OCC Model postulates that emotions have a 
certain intensity or valence and that any reaction or 
emotion corresponds to an intensity with direction 
from the perspective of the standpoint of the person 
experiencing it. This model, takes into account the 
world under three central aspects to consider when 
dealing with emotions and the factors that trigger 
them: events (related to goals), agents (related to 
actions), and objects (related to the ability to attract). 
Events: are things that happen without necessarily 
requiring the intervention of an agent, for example 
when it starts to rain or a relation dies. 
The main feature in assessing an agent’s 
emotional reaction to an event is its desirability. 
Thus, the death of a loved one is a highly 
undesirable event, whereas the recovery of a 
loved one after a prolonged illness is highly 
desirable. 
Agents: are the main actors that will have some form 
of participation or causality in the emotional 
structure. Agents are not limited exclusively to 
persons, but in some cases there may also be 
inanimate objects or abstractions considered 
agents, as long as they can be considered 
actuators in their specific context. 
Agents are characterized by their ability to 
generate actions that change the course of events 
in a story and its emotional map. The actions each 
agent can take have a value of plausibility that 
makes it possible to determine the effect they will 
have when performed by a particular agent. For 
example, helping an old woman cross the street is 
a highly plausible event, while stealing candy 
from a child is a censurable event. Obviously, our 
assessment of an action’s degree of plausibility 
will depend on each person’s moral values and 
interpretations. 
Objects: are manifestations that are immersed in an 
environment and do not have an action or active 
participation in that environment, but which, 
nonetheless, have a certain level of attraction that 
transforms them into objects of desire or repulsion 
that can have a powerful influence on the emotional 
atmosphere. Objects are not necessarily physical 
manifestations; they can also be goals, desires, or 
even persons or ideas. Figure 1, shows a synthesis of 
the relevant aspects of the OCC Model [15, 16] 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The OCC model theory 
 
2.2 Related Work 
The OCC Model provides the primary foundation for 
our discussion in this paper. However, the system 
was constantly tested throughout its development and 
improvement for the classic story of Othello [18], 
based on the mental models proposed for the play by 
[6] and an approach based on cognitive and affective 
motivational structures [1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15]. 
The OOC Model has been utilizing successfully to 
generate behavior, which is conjoined with the 
external aspects of emotions. The above with and to 
generate an action consistent with the feelings who 
make the decision, [1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12] 
 
3. Description of EVE  
Visual Simplified Characters’ Emotion Emulator 
(EVE) was programmed in the Adobe Flash 
ICGST Conference on Computer Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 19-21 December 2011
230

development environment due to its excellent 
suitability for creating visual interfaces. 
This system was designed so that the user can create 
emotional and affective environments in real time, 
designing, with the system’s help, the characters that 
take part in the story, their interpersonal affective 
relationships, their possible actions, events, and the 
events and objects that will form part of the 
emotional architecture of each story 
 
3.1 Design of Agents 
For this system the agents considered are restricted to 
human characters from stories, unlike agents in the 
OCC Model which may also be inanimate objects. 
EVE was designed to emulate the emotional behavior 
of two, three, or four characters from a particular 
story. The limit on the maximum number of 
characters is due to an esthetic aspect of system 
output, as a larger number of characters on screen 
produce an overcrowded and unclear visual interface. 
The real-time design of interpersonal relationships 
among agents by users also influenced this factor. 
The user must describe each of the relationships 
between characters, and a larger number of agents 
would represent a profusion of relationships that 
could overwhelm the user. A pending task involves 
simplifying the graphic display. 
The system allows the user to characterize some 
components of the agents, including: name, hairstyle 
and color, and eyeglasses, in order to establish 
stronger identification between the agent and the 
character he represents (Figure 2). 
Figure 2. Interface to design agent’s physical appearance 
 
In addition to the characters’ physical appearance, the 
user can also define affective relationships between 
the agents (Figure 3). The range of values 
corresponding to affection ranges from -5 (total 
hatred), passing through 0 (indifference), to +5 
(unconditional love/friendship). The system does not 
prompt the user to define an agent’s level of affection 
toward himself given that, to reduce the exponentially 
of options, the system operates on the premise that all 
agents love themselves unconditionally. 
The assessment of interpersonal affections between 
agents is very important given that they constitute the 
basis for obtaining emotions of good will in the future, 
such as: happiness for someone’s good fortune, or ill 
will, such as: happiness in another’s misfortune. 
 
Figure 3. Design of affective relationships between agents 
 
3.2 Design of Events 
EVE sees events as things that happen in the course 
of a story, but are not direct consequences of the 
agents’ actions. Events are an environmental factor 
external to the characters which, notwithstanding, can 
affect them. 
The system shows the user an interface where she can 
assign a name or title to an event, as well as its level 
of desirability (Figure 4), with a range varying 
between -5 (undesirable) and +5 (very desirable). It is 
important to point out that, for this system, the level 
of desirability of an event is the same for everyone, 
which is not true in real life, as each person 
interprets an event from a different perspective which 
implies a different level of desirability. Again, this 
restriction is imposed because varying levels of 
desirability of events for agents would result in a 
wide variety of assignments that could overwhelm 
users when they design the environment. 
 
 
Figure 4. Event design interface 
 
3.3 Design of Objects 
As in the OCC Model, for the purposes of this system, 
objects are elements of the world that may be 
material (money, a house) or immaterial (goals, 
desires, abstractions). In the interface, objects are 
designed in a manner similar to that used to design 
events: they are assigned a name and a level of appeal 
or desirability ranging from -5 (a repulsive object) 
and +5 (a fascinating object). 
 
3.4 Design of Actions 
In the OCC Model actions are part of the agent 
behavior. The characterization of actions in EVE has 
been separated from the characterization of agents. 
Actions are defined as acts that are available for any 
of the agents to perform. Their characterization 
requires an interface identical to those used for 
objects and events, except that in this case the degree 
of plausibility of an event is assigned as a value in a 
ICGST Conference on Computer Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 19-21 December 2011
231

range from -5 (a highly censurable event) to +5 (a 
praiseworthy event). 
Design of actions by the user concludes the section 
on design of the environment and begins the stage of 
design of emotions. In any case, the system gives the 
user the option to go back at any time and change the 
values assigned to the different elements of the 
environment. 
 
3.5 Emotional Map 
Having designed: 1) agents and their relationships, 2) 
events, 3) objects, and 4) actions that will come into 
play when testing the system, we can observe a 
general map of the actual emotions of each of the 
characters that have been designed, the relationships 
between the characters, and the chances for 
realization of events, objects, and actions. The 
resulting map is shown in Figure 5.  
In this map (Figure 5) there is a large icon pertaining 
to each of the central characters, accompanied by a 
group of smaller icons showing the faces of the other 
characters. These smaller icons show the other 
characters’ mindset in relation to the central character. 
The right side of the map shows the events, objects, 
or actions that were previously defined by the user 
(defined in other screens), as well as their respective 
desirability, appeal, and plausibility (represented by a 
whole number in the range of -5 to 5). Also, a 
character can be selected to be the center: 1) of an 
event, 2) acquire an object, 3) perform an action, or 4) 
be affected by an action. This is achieved by clicking 
on the character’s large icon. 
 
Figure 5. Overall emotional map for the story of Harry Potter 
 
3.6 Emotions Considered in EVE 
There is a wide variety of emotions that can be 
experienced by a person, or a character in a story. To 
restrict emotional relationships, only three emotions 
were chosen: happiness, anger, and pride; with levels 
of intensity ranging from -5 to +5. 
Happiness: is, in fact, a two emotions representation: 
happiness and sadness. The range considered for this 
emotion is from -5 (distress), passing through 0 
(neutrality) to +5 (euphoria). The faces depicting 
each of these emotions are shown in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6. Representative faces for the range of values for the 
emotion sadness-happiness. 
 
Anger: is an emotion with a range of values varying 
from 0 (calm) to 5 (rage). There are no negative 
values for this emotion and its graphic representation 
is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7.Representative faces for the range of values for the 
emotion anger. 
 
Pride: like happiness, pride is represented by two 
emotions: pride and shame. The range of values 
considered for this emotion varies from -5 (shame), 
passing through 0 (neutrality) to +5 (pride). The faces 
depicting each of these emotions are shown in Figure 
8. 
 
Figure 8.Representative faces for the range of values for the 
emotions shame-pride. 
 
It is important to mention that, because this is a 
simulator of emotions in stories, the characters feel an 
emotion, but it does not disappear unless an event 
alters it; in other words, a historical record is kept of 
each character’s emotional status, and therefore if a 
character is sad and there is an event triggering 
happiness at a given time, that character will only feel 
happy to the extent that his previous sadness permits. 
Stated differently, an emotion felt previously can 
alter the intensity with which a given character 
experiences a new emotion, thereby presenting 
conflicting feelings. 
 
3.7 Affective Relationships 
Affective relationships among characters also have a 
visual representation, as an aid to the user’s 
understanding. Figure 9 shows each of the possible 
affective links there may be between the characters in 
a story. 
 
Figure 9.Visualization of affective relationships between 
characters. 
 
4. Possible Scenarios 
To better understand the work performed and the 
results obtained, below we show a series of possible 
scenarios, which allow us to visualize some of the 
emotional reactions of characters in the story of 
Othello [18] in response to certain events. The last is 
based in the emotive macro-structure designed in [6]. 
These scenarios were designed only to exemplify 
possible events, but practically any story can be 
designed differently based on the reader’s (user’s) 
interpretation. The visual design of the characters is 
shown in Figure 10. 
 
ICGST Conference on Computer Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 19-21 December 2011
232

Figure 10.Visual design of characters in Othello 
 
On the other hand, the affective relationships between 
the characters in Othello are shown in Table 1. 
 
Table1. Affective relationships between characters in Othello. 
 
 
Othello 
Desdemona 
Iago 
Rodrigo 
Othello 
 
 
 
 
Desdemona 
 
 
 
 
Iago 
 
 
 
 
Rodrigo 
 
 
 
 
The characters’ emotions evolve as the story 
progresses. Accordingly, these examples assume that 
each character always starts from a neutral value in 
their emotions, as a reference point prior to the 
change triggered by the event, object, or action that 
has appeared. 
 
4.1 Emotions Triggered by Events 
Suppose that we have the following situation: 
Desdemona suffers a misfortune (an event with as 
desirability value of -5), such as her father gets angry 
with her and opposes her marrying Othello. Then, 
after that event, her emotional environment is 
expressed in the system as shown in Figure 11. 
 
 
Figure 11.Desdemona’s emotional map after she suffers a 
misfortune. 
As the image shows, Desdemona’s main emotional 
state is sadness. We can also see that Othello and 
Rodrigo love her unconditionally, and feel sadness 
for her in the same degree, given that, because they 
love her, they have good will toward her. However, 
we can also see that Iago feels happy at Desdemona’s 
misfortune. His happiness can be explained by the 
fact that Iago does not love Desdemona and has ill 
will toward her. 
 
4.2 Emotions Triggered by Objects 
Imagine now a different scenario, in which an object 
of desire is in play, as occurs in the emotional map 
obtained when Rodrigo receives the rank of 
lieutenant (Figure 12). 
 
 
Figure 12.Rodrigo’s emotional map after obtaining a highly 
appealing object 
 
Achieving a goal for Rodrigo means that his primary 
emotional state shown in the system is pride. Also, 
because Othello and Desdemona have a degree of 
admiration for Rodrigo, they respond proportionally 
to their affection toward: happy and proud because of 
his achievement. Iago, who hates Rodrigo, feels 
angry (frustrated) and sad because of the benefit 
Rodrigo has received. 
 
4.3 Emotions 
Triggered 
by 
the 
Characters’ 
Actions (Agents) 
The characters’ actions trigger an emotional reaction 
somewhat more complex than those triggered by 
objects and events. This is because actions involve 
two characters (the character performing the action, 
and the character that action affects). Evidently, in a 
story the character performing an action and the 
character affected may be the same. This is 
exemplified in Figure 13, which shows the result 
obtained after Iago performs highly censurable action 
toward Othello: betrayal. 
Analyzing the emotions depicted in Figure 13, we can 
see that Othello’s primary emotional state is sadness 
at having been the object of a censurable action. Also, 
we can see that Desdemona and Rodrigo also feel a 
certain degree of sadness at Othello’s misfortune, and 
in turn feel anger toward Iago for having harmed a 
loved one. Othello also feels anger toward Iago, but 
also, because he likes him, feels shame because of the 
censurable nature of the action performed by 
someone he admires. 
 
Figure 13.Emotional reactions after Iago’s betrayal of Othello 
 
4.4 The Logic behind the System 
The characters’ reactions in the course of a story are 
kept and intensify as it progresses. To reflect this, a 
new emotional value is added to each character’s 
emotional state, which corresponds to the new event 
that has occurred in the story. This is accomplished 
by merely adding the interpretation of the resulting 
emotion to the current emotion of the character in 
question.  
ICGST Conference on Computer Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 19-21 December 2011
233

A visual interpretation of this is provided by a simple 
example: suppose that Harry Potter has just lost one 
of his loved ones. This leaves him completely 
devastated and, although Gryffindor will win the 
house cup, something that has made him feel 
extremely happy on several occasions, his emotional 
state does not reach extreme happiness, given that in 
the conflicting feelings of losing a loved one and 
winning the house cup, the former outweighs the 
latter. This is shown in Figure 14. 
 
Harry Potter’s 
initial state 
Harry after the 
death of loved 
one
Harry after Gryffindor 
wins the house cup 
Figure 14.Emotional progress of character Harry Potter through a 
sequence of events 
 
The interpretation of the resulting emotion in 
response to an event, object, or action is based on 
matrices of quantitative reactions with interpretative 
values. These matrices have been filled in by the 
development 
team 
based 
on 
their 
personal 
experiences and their own interpretation of emotional 
reactions to the elements in question. 
To better understand this, the Table 2 presents the 
matrix of characters’ quantitative reactions to events. 
For the time being these matrices are equal for all 
characters. In this matrix the rows represent the 
emotional level of the character reacting to the 
character, to whom the event occurs. The columns 
represent the desirability of the event. Thus, the 
quadrant of the matrix shaded light gray represents 
the section of ill will, where a misfortune produces 
the maximum increase in happiness for the person 
who loathes the person affected by that event. In 
contrast, the quadrant shaded dark gray represents 
feelings of good will, meaning that a character is 
cheered by another character’s good fortune. 
 
Table 2. Matrix of quantitative reactions to events.  x axis: 
emotional value. y axis: desirability of the event. 
x   y  
 
-5 
-4 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
-5 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
-1 
-2 
-3 
-4 
-5 
-4 
4 
3 
2 
1 
1 
0 
-1 
-1 
-2 
-3 
-4 
-3 
3 
2 
2 
1 
1 
0 
-1 
-1 
-2 
-2 
-3 
-2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
0 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-2 
-2 
-1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
-2 
-2 
-1 
-1 
-1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
-3 
-2 
-2 
-1 
-1 
0 
1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
4 
-4 
-3 
-2 
-1 
-1 
0 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
-5 
-4 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
We can also see that a character that has no emotional 
value toward another character; equally has no 
reaction to fortunate or unfortunate events affecting 
that character. Similarly, an event that is considered 
neutral (neither fortunate nor unfortunate) produces 
no reaction in the characters. 
In total, eight matrices of quantitative reactions were 
generated: a) One to account for characters’ feelings 
toward events (happiness; shown in Table 2), b) three 
for reactions to objects (shame-pride, sadness-
happiness, and anger), c) one matrix for happiness in 
the person affected by actions, and d) three for 
emotional reactions toward the perpetrator of an 
action (shame-pride, anger, and sadness-happiness). 
 
5. Conclusions and Future Work 
This paper lays the foundation for analysis of 
characters’ emotional reactions in stories, and may 
also help to improve interpretations of users’ 
emotional states or in developing interfaces in which 
stories take place, such as automatic generation of 
stories and development of videogames. 
The OCC cognitive theory of emotions [16], is a 
methodology used to evaluate the possible emotion 
from the cognitive point of view. Because this 
methodology is clear, precise and free of context has 
been used frequently in the synthesis of emotions by 
computer, [1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12] 
This paper is a simplification of the OCC Model, but 
can be enriched with aspects that allow for 
modification of characters’ initial emotional states, 
through interpersonal relationships, in order to 
consider in stories variants of intensity of feelings 
that often change over the course of a story. For 
example, if we assume that two characters hate one 
another (from the outset), the story’s evolution could 
allow them to become great friends due to actions and 
events that take place in the plot (or vice-versa). 
Another possible extension would be to use NLP 
techniques to extract the emotions of textual 
documents in order to enrich the model. We think, 
statistical algorithms for automatically identification 
of opinions from unstructured text documents [20] 
could be adapted and used for this task. 
The system shows the like examples the relationships 
of the protagonists of three stories: Othello, Twilight, 
and Harry Potter [14,18,19]. A pending task involves 
simplifying the graphic display. 
 The game can be found at the following sites:  
• 
http://describe.iingen.unam.mx/%7Elher
nandezd/Interfaces/emulador.html 
• 
http://ce.azc.uam.mx/profesores/clc/ 
(software section). 
 
6. Acknowledgements  
This work is part of the Soft Computing and 
Applications research within the Emotions research 
section, funded by the Universidad Autónoma 
Metropolitana, also recognize the enthusiasm of 
Laura Hernández-Dominguéz (CVU: 328836); in 
software development. Martha Mora-Torres (CVU: 
ICGST Conference on Computer Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 19-21 December 2011
234

167259) and Jaime Cabrera-López (CVU: 268998); 
all students at the Postgrado en Ciencia e Ingeniería 
de 
la 
Computación 
at 
Universidad 
Nacional 
Autónoma de México and supported by Consejo 
Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología-MEXICO). 
 
7. References 
[1] D. 
A. 
Acevedo-Moreno, 
Diseño 
de 
una 
Arquitectura para Incorporar Emociones en un 
Videojuego. 
Master’s 
Thesis. 
Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México. 2009. Retrieved 
from http://ce.azc.uam.mx/profesores/clc/ 
[2] D. 
A. 
Acevedo-Moreno, 
Diseño 
de 
una 
Arquitectura para Incorporar Emociones en un 
Videojuego. (2011). Journal Ciencia, Tecnología 
e Innovación para el Desarrollo de México. 
Section Tesis de Posgrado:  A4-0011-DF-2009-
MT. 
Latindex 
ISSN: 
2007-1310, 
Online: 
http://pcti.mx. 
[3] I. Aleksander. The World in my Mind, My Mind in 
the World. IA Press. 2005. 
[4] D. E. Hernández-González, Influencia de las 
emociones en el proceso de toma de decisiones. 
Master’s Thesis en Ciencias de la Computación. 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://ce.azc.uam.mx/profesores/clc/ 2011. 
[5] D. E. Hernández-González. Influencia de las 
emociones en el proceso de toma de decisiones. 
Journal Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación para el 
Desarrollo de México. Section Tesis de Posgrado:  
A4-0014-DF-2011-MT. Latindex ISSN: 2007-
1310, Online: http://pcti.mx. 2011. 
[6] A. Laureano-Cruces; J. Cabrera-López; M. Mora-
Torres. Simulando el Camino de las Emociones, 
pp. 321-328. In Proceedings en CD, XXII 
Congreso Nacional y VIII Congreso Internacional 
de Informatica y Computacion de la ANIEI. ISBN 
978-607-7854-36-4. 2009. 
[7] A. Laureano-Cruces, C. Guadarrama-Ponce, M. 
Mora-Torres, J. Ramírez-Rodríguez, A Cognitive 
Model for the Red Baron: a Perspective Taking 
into Account Emotions. In ICGST-Artificial 
Intelligence Machine Learning Journal, Volume 
11, Issue 2. pp. 5-13. ISSN: 1687-4846 Print, 
ISSN: 1687-4854 Online. 2011. 
[8] A. Laureano-Cruces, E. Hegmann-Gonzalez. 
Maze Videogame that Adapts to the User’s 
Emotions According to his Behavior. In ICGST-
Artificial Intelligence Machine Learning Journal, 
Volume 11, Issue 2, pp. 21-25. ISSN: 1687-4846 
Print, 1687-4854 Online. 2011.. 
[9] A. 
Laureano-Cruces; 
M. 
Mora-Torres; 
J. 
Ramirez-Rodríguez; 
F. 
Gamboa-Rodríguez. 
Implementation 
of 
an 
affective-motivational 
architecture tied to a teaching-learning process. In 
Proceedings of E-Learn 2010 World Conference 
on 
E-Learning 
in 
Corporate 
Govermment, 
Healthcare, & Higher Education, pp. 1930-1938. 
ISBN: 1-880094-53-5. Orlando, USA. 2010. 
[10] A. 
Laureano-Cruces; 
M. 
Mora-Torres; 
J. 
Ramírez-Rodríguez and Fernando de Arriaga-
Gómez, Operative Strategies Related to an 
Affective Motivational Architecture to Achieve 
Instructional Objectives. In ICGST-Artificial 
Intelligence Machine Learning Journal, Volume 
11, Issue 2, pp. 15-20. ISSN: 1687-4846 Print, 
ISSN: 1687-4854 Online. 2011. 
[11] A. Laureano-Cruces; J. Ramírez-Rodríguez; M. 
Mora-Torres; F. de Arriaga and R. Escarela-Pérez. 
Cognitive-Operative 
Model 
of 
Intelligent 
Learning 
System 
Behavior. 
In 
Interactive 
Learning Environments. Vol.18, No. 1, pp. 11-38. 
2010. 
[12] A. 
Laureano-Cruces, 
A. 
Rodríguez-García. 
Design and implementation of an educational 
virtual pet using the OCC theory. Journal of 
Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing. 
DOI 10.1007/s12652-011-0089-4.  2011 
[13] G. Loewenstein, & J. S. Lerner. The role of affect 
in decision making. R. J. Davidson, H. H. 
Goldsmith & K. R. Scherer, eds., Handbook of 
Affective Science, Series in Affective Science, 
cap. 31, pags. 619–642. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, New York. 2003. 
[14] Meyer, S. Twilight. Retried December, 11th, 2011, 
from: 
http://www.stepheniemeyer.com/twilight.html 
[15] M. Mora-Torres, A. L. Laureano-Cruces, P. 
Velasco-Santos. Estructura de las Emociones 
dentro de un Proceso de Enseñanza-Aprendizaje. 
Revista Perfiles Educativos-UNAM, pp. 64 -79, 
Vol XXXIII: 131, enero – marzo 2011. ISSN: 
0185-2698. 
2011. 
http://www.iisue.unam.mx/seccion/perfiles/ 
[16] A. Ortony; G. L. Clore, and A. Collins, The 
Cognitive Structure of Emotions. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 1988. 
[17] R. W. Picard. Affective Computing. MIT Press. 
1997. 
[18] W. Shakespeare. Otelo. RBA Coleccionables. V. 
2003. 
[19] J.K. 
Rowling. 
Harry 
Potter. 
Retried 
December,11th, 
2011, 
from:http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._K._Rowling 
[20]  J. M. Torres-Moreno, M. El-Bèze, P. Bellot, F. 
Béchet, Peut on voir la détection d’opinions 
comme un problème de classification thématique? 
in 
"Modèles 
statistiques 
pour 
l’accès 
à 
l'information textuelle", E. Gausier, F. Yvon (eds.), 
Hermès Lavoisier, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICGST Conference on Computer Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 19-21 December 2011
235

Biographies 
 
 
Ana 
Lilia 
Laureano-Cruces 
obtained a bachelor’s degree in 
Civil Engineering, a Master’s 
degree in Computer Sciences, and 
a Doctoral degree in Science at 
UNAM. She has been a full-time 
professor 
at 
Universidad 
Autónoma 
Metropolitana 
since 
1987. She has more than 50 publications in the field 
of artificial intelligence. Between 1998 and 2000, she 
was a guest researcher at the Departamento de 
Sistemas del Instituto de Automática Industrial del 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas de 
España in Madrid. Her principal research areas are: 
Interactive Learning Environments, Multi-Agent 
Systems, Intelligent Systems applied to Education, 
Expert Systems and Affective Computing. 
 
Laura E. Hernández-Domínguez 
is a computer engineer from 
Universidad Tecnológica de la 
Mixteca, 
Mexico. 
She 
is 
currently studying a Master in 
Computer 
Engineering 
and 
Sciences at UNAM, specialising 
herself on  Computational Linguistics. She took part 
on the Student Design Competition of the Computer-
Human Interaction 2008 conference, winning the first 
place. She also obtained a scholarship to attend the 
Grace Hopper Conference for Women in Computing 
2007 and has attended to a variety of Mexican and 
international 
conferences 
on 
Information 
Technologies. 
 
Martha Mora-Torres obtained a 
bachelor’s degree in Electronic 
Engineering 
at 
Universidad 
Autónoma Metropolitana, and a 
Master’s degree in Computer 
Sciences, at UNAM. She is 
currently a Doctoral student at 
UNAM. Her research interests are: Multi-Agent 
Systems, Intelligent Systems applied to Education, 
Expert Systems and Affective Computing. 
 
 Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno ob-
tained a bachelor’s degree in 
Electronic 
Engineering 
at 
Univer-sidad 
Autónoma 
Metropolitana, a Master’s degree 
in Computer Sciences at INPG 
Grenoble (Fran-ce) and a PhD in Computer Science 
at INPG Grenoble. He has been a full-time professor 
at Université d’Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse 
since 1993. He has more than 80 publications in the 
fields of Natural Processing Language and Machine 
Learning. He is currently the head of NLP Group at 
Laboratoire Informatique d’Avignon/UAPV (France). 
His research interests are: NLP, Intelligent Systems, 
Expert Systems and Affective Computing. 
 
Jaime-Enrique 
Cabrera-López 
obtained a bachelor’s degree in 
Electronic 
Engineering 
at 
Universidad 
Autónoma 
Metropolitana. He is currently 
studying a Master Sc. degree in 
Computer Engineering and Sciences at UNAM. Her 
research interests are: Multi-Agent Systems and 
Affective Computing. 
 
 
 
ICGST Conference on Computer Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 19-21 December 2011
236
