Learning from Dialogue after Deployment:
Feed Yourself, Chatbot!
Braden Hancock∗
Computer Science Dept.
Stanford University

Antoine Bordes, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazar´e
Jason Weston
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
The majority of conversations a dialogue agent
sees over its lifetime occur after it has already
been trained and deployed, leaving a vast store
of potential training signal untapped. In this
work, we propose the self-feeding chatbot, a
dialogue agent with the ability to extract new
training examples from the conversations it
participates in. As our agent engages in con-
versation, it also estimates user satisfaction in
its responses. When the conversation appears
to be going well, the user’s responses become
new training examples to imitate. When the
agent believes it has made a mistake, it asks for
feedback; learning to predict the feedback that
will be given improves the chatbot’s dialogue
abilities further. On the PERSONACHAT chit-
chat dataset with over 131k training examples,
we ﬁnd that learning from dialogue with a self-
feeding chatbot signiﬁcantly improves perfor-
mance, regardless of the amount of traditional
supervision.
1
Introduction
Training a dialogue agent to converse like a human
requires extensive supervision.
The most com-
mon approach is to train models to imitate hu-
mans in large corpora of crowdsourced or scraped
conversations (Serban et al., 2015). These fully-
supervised conversations tend to be expensive to
collect in sufﬁcient quantity and/or occur in set-
tings with signiﬁcant differences from the deploy-
ment environment (Ross et al., 2009).
Instead,
dialogue agents would ideally learn directly from
dialogue, the conversations they participate in af-
ter deployment, which are usually abundant, task-
speciﬁc, dynamic, and cheap. This corresponds to
the way humans learn to converse—not merely ob-
serving others engaging in “expert-level” conver-
∗*BH completed most of this work at Facebook (FAIR).
Have you been to France?
Yes I have! It’s beautiful.
🤖

Lol. I never eat them!
What are you talking about?
Oops! I messed up. 
What should I have said?
Maybe ask me what I 
thought about French food?
Satisfaction: 0.85
Satisfaction: 0.10
Extracted Training Examples
Context
A
B
C
D
E
F
Have you been to France?
A
Yes, I have! It’s beautiful.
Response
B
Context
Have you been to France?
A
Yes, I have! It’s beautiful.
Feedback
B
Maybe ask me what I 
thought about French food?
F
Figure 1: As the self-feeding chatbot engages in dia-
logue, it estimates user satisfaction to know when to
ask for feedback.
From the satisﬁed responses and
feedback responses, new training examples are ex-
tracted for the DIALOGUE and FEEDBACK tasks, re-
spectively, both of which improve the model’s dialogue
abilities further.
sations, but instead actively adjusting and correct-
ing our speech based on feedback woven through-
out our own conversations (Bassiri, 2011; Werts
et al., 1995). Giving a dialogue agent this ability
would enable it to continuously improve and adapt
over its lifetime, rather than requiring additional
annotation costs for each and every improvement.
However, naively training a dialogue agent on
its own conversations yields poor results. For ex-
ample, training a model on its own output can sim-
ply reinforce its existing failure modes, and mis-
takes by the agent can lead to absurd conversa-
tions that no longer resemble the target domain
(Hashimoto and Sassano, 2018). To combat this,
one approach is to allow the agent to request feed-
arXiv:1901.05415v4  [cs.CL]  13 Jun 2019

back during conversations (Zhang et al., 2018a;
Li et al., 2017b), e.g., when it believes it is about
to make a mistake. This approach, however, falls
victim to the Dunning-Kruger effect (Kruger and
Dunning, 1999), which in this case suggests that a
bad model will also be bad at knowing when it is
doing a bad job. Regardless of when feedback is
requested, existing methods typically require ac-
companying scalar rewards or adherence to partic-
ular templates or structure to ensure that the feed-
back is usable by the model (Rieser and Lemon,
2011; Zhang et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018). These
requirements may be acceptable for paid annota-
tors, but they impose unnatural workﬂows on un-
paid conversation partners in a standard dialogue
environment. Humans are able to request and pro-
vide feedback using only natural language; ideally,
dialogue agents would be able to do the same.
In this work we propose the self-feeding chat-
bot, a dialogue agent with the ability to extract new
examples from the conversations it participates in
after deployment (Figure 1). Concretely, in addi-
tion to being trained on the primary DIALOGUE
task, the agent is trained to predict its speaking
partner’s satisfaction with its responses. When the
conversation seems to be going well, the user’s re-
sponses (but not the bot’s own utterances) become
the targets in new training examples for the DIA-
LOGUE task. When the agent believes it has made
a mistake, it instead requests feedback on what it
could have said instead. Predicting the feedback
that will be provided in a given context becomes
an auxiliary task (FEEDBACK) on which the model
is also trained. Importantly, these new examples
improve the agent’s dialogue abilities while using
only natural responses from the user that do not
require special structure, accompanying numerical
feedback, or additional human intervention in or-
der to be used.
With this approach, the conversations the chat-
bot participates in are sliced into two complemen-
tary datasets—one largely protected from the chat-
bot’s mistakes (DIALOGUE examples), and one
which directly addresses them (FEEDBACK ex-
amples). We validate our approach on the PER-
SONACHAT (Zhang et al., 2018b) dialogue dataset,
ﬁnding empirically that regardless of the num-
ber of available supervised examples, the dia-
logue ability of the chatbot is always improved by
adding the automatically extracted examples of ei-
ther type, and improves the most by adding both.
The main contributions of this work thus in-
clude the following:
• We propose the self-feeding chatbot, a dia-
logue agent with the ability to extract new
training examples for itself from the conver-
sations it participates in during deployment.
• We show that dialogue ability improves by
imitating human responses when the human
is satisﬁed, or by asking for feedback when
they are not, predicting it as an auxiliary task.
• We demonstrate that classifying user satisfac-
tion is a learnable task important for the self-
feeding process, signiﬁcantly outperforming
an approach based on model uncertainty.
• We release three new datasets to further re-
search in this direction: (1) deployment chat
logs (513k messages); (2) ratings of user sat-
isfaction (42k); (3) textual feedback on what
a bot could have said in a given context (62k).
The datasets and models described in this paper
are available via the ParlAI platform (Miller et al.,
2017), along with training code. Hyperparameter
values are included in Appendix G.
2
Related Work
The general concepts of lifelong learning (Silver
et al., 2013) and never-ending (language) learning
(Carlson et al., 2010) are related to the topics dis-
cussed in this work, as is active learning (Tong and
Koller, 2001) and predictive modeling (Schmidhu-
ber and Huber, 1991).
The speciﬁc case of learning actively from
dialogue during deployment was explored for
the question answering (QA) setting in (Weston,
2016) and (Li et al., 2017a), where the authors
examined multiple learning strategies on a suite
of dialogue tasks with varying types of feedback,
such as verbal cues (e.g., “Yes, that’s right!”)
and scalar rewards.
Most relevant to our work
was their use of forward prediction, where the
learner improved in quality by trying to predict the
teacher’s responses without an explicit reward sig-
nal. Our work extends this idea, adding the ability
for the model to recognize its mistakes and request
feedback explicitly, and moving beyond QA to the
more general chit-chat setting where there may be
many valid responses in a given context.
Learning to ask questions is another area that
has been studied (Strub et al., 2017; Wang et al.,

Figure 2: (1) The chatbot is ﬁrst trained with any available supervised data (boxed in red) on the Human-Human
(HH) DIALOGUE (x, y)HH and SATISFACTION (x, s) tasks. (2) During deployment, whenever the predicted
satisfaction score of the current conversation x is above the threshold (ˆs > t), a new Human-Bot (HB) DIALOGUE
example (x, y)HB is extracted and the bot continues the conversation with its own response ˆy. Otherwise, the
chatbot requests feedback with question q and extracts a new FEEDBACK example (x, f). (3) The chatbot is
periodically retrained with the available examples from all four datasets, improving its DIALOGUE performance
without collecting any new supervised examples.
2018; Rao and Daum´e, 2018). While those works
focused on identifying which question to ask in a
given context, in this work we are more interested
in ﬁrst learning when to ask a question. Li et al.
(2017b) considered this question as well, but again
in the context of a QA setting rather than dialogue.
Hashimoto and Sassano (2018) used user re-
sponses to detect mistakes made by a deployed
virtual assistant, showing that model mistakes can
be identiﬁed in chit-chat, weather, or web search
domains. However, they did not explore how to
use these identiﬁed mistakes to improve the model
further; their agent was not equipped to feed itself.
Eskenazi et al. (2018) also found that the correctly
assessing the appropriateness of chatbot responses
is highly dependent on user responses and not pre-
ceding context alone.
There are other, somewhat less related, ways
to use feedback during dialogue for learning, no-
tably for collecting knowledge to answer questions
(Mazumder et al., 2018; Hixon et al., 2015; Pappu
and Rudnicky, 2013), and more commonly in re-
inforcement learning settings, where the feedback
is a scalar rather than the dialogue messages them-
selves (Levin et al., 2000; Schatzmann et al., 2006;
Rieser and Lemon, 2011; Liu et al., 2018; Hong
et al., 2019). In particular (Serban et al., 2017)
employ user sentiment detection for reward shap-
ing in their Alexa prize entry.
Finally, our work improves dialogue quality
by utilizing larger datasets with noisier labels
than traditional supervision.
Other applications
of weak supervision to dialogue (Mallinar et al.,
2019) and relation extraction have observed simi-
lar results (Bunescu and Mooney, 2007; Hancock
et al., 2018; Ratner et al., 2017).
3
The Self-Feeding Chatbot
The lifecycle of a self-feeding chatbot is outlined
in Figure 2. In the initial training phase, the dia-
logue agent is trained on two tasks—DIALOGUE
(next utterance prediction, or what should I say
next?)
and SATISFACTION (how satisﬁed is
my speaking partner with my responses?)—using
whatever supervised training data is available.
We refer to these initial DIALOGUE examples as
Human-Human (HH) examples, since they were
generated in conversations between two humans.
In the deployment phase, the agent engages
in multi-turn conversations with users, extracting
new deployment examples of two types. Each turn,
the agent observes the context x (i.e., the conver-
sation history) and uses it to predict its next utter-
ance ˆy and its partner’s satisfaction ˆs. If the satis-
faction score is above a speciﬁed threshold t, the
agent extracts a new Human-Bot (HB) DIALOGUE
example using the previous context x and the hu-
man’s response y and continues the conversation.

If, however, the user seems unsatisﬁed with its pre-
vious response (ˆs < t), the agent requests feed-
back with a question q, and the resulting feedback
response f is used to create a new example for
the FEEDBACK task (what feedback am I about to
receive?). The agent acknowledges receipt of the
feedback and the conversation continues. The rate
at which new DIALOGUE or FEEDBACK examples
are collected can be adjusted by raising or lower-
ing the satisfaction threshold t (we use t = 0.5).1
Periodically, the agent is retrained using all avail-
able data, thereby improving performance on the
primary DIALOGUE task.
It is important to note that the user’s responses
are always in the form of natural dialogue.
In
particular, at no point are the new FEEDBACK ex-
amples inspected, post-processed, or cleaned. In-
stead, we rely on the fact that the feedback is not
random: regardless of whether it is a verbatim re-
sponse, a description of a response, or a list of pos-
sible responses (see Table 2 for examples), there is
a learnable relationship between conversation con-
texts and their corresponding feedback which re-
quires many of the same language understanding
skills to master as does carrying on a normal con-
versation.
The experiments in this paper are limited to the
setting where the number of supervised and de-
ployment examples are on the same order of mag-
nitude; however, we envision scenarios in which
the number of deployment examples can easily
grow to 100× or more the number of supervised
examples over the chatbot’s deployment lifetime,
effectively providing a massive task-speciﬁc cor-
pus at minimal cost. Table 1 reports the sizes of
each dataset, all of which are available via ParlAI.
3.1
Task 1: DIALOGUE
The chatbot’s primary task (DIALOGUE) is to
carry on a coherent and engaging conversation
with a speaking partner. Training examples take
the form of (x, y) pairs, where x is the context
of the conversation (the concatenation of all re-
sponses so far up to some history length, delim-
ited with tokens marking the speaker), and y is the
appropriate response given by the human.
The Human-Human (HH) portion of the DIA-
LOGUE dataset comes from the PERSONACHAT
dataset (Zhang et al., 2018b), which consists of
1Another option would be to have two thresholds—one
for each example type—to decouple collection their rates.
Task
Train Valid
Test
Total
DIALOGUE
– HH (HUMAN-HUMAN) 131438 7801 6634 145873
– HB (HUMAN-BOT)
60000
0
0
60000
FEEDBACK
60000 1000 1000
62000
SATISFACTION
1000
500 1000
2500
Table 1: The number of examples used in our experi-
ments by task and split. Note that the HH DIALOGUE
examples come from the PERSONACHAT dataset, HB
DIALOGUE and FEEDBACK examples were collected
during deployment, and an additional 40k SATISFAC-
TION training examples were collected for the analysis
in Section 5.1.
short dialogues (6-8 turns) between two crowd-
workers (humans) who have been assigned short
text proﬁles and are instructed to “chat with the
other person naturally and try to get to know each
other.” We chose this dataset because of its size
(over 145k total examples), the breadth of top-
ics it covers, and its focus on promoting engaging
conversations, which we anticipate being a neces-
sary property of a chatbot that people will be will-
ing to chat with voluntarily and repeatedly. We
use the standard splits of the dataset made avail-
able in ParlAI as a part of the ConvAI2 challenge
(Burtsev et al., 2018). Since the question of how
to incorporate external knowledge (such as pro-
ﬁles) in dialogue is an open research question of its
own (Li et al., 2016; Luan et al., 2017; Luo et al.,
2018) and we are primarily interested in the ques-
tion of learning from dialogue, we discard the pro-
ﬁles and simply train and test on the conversations
themselves, making the dataset more challenging
in terms of raw performance scores.
The Human-Bot (HB) portion of the DIA-
LOGUE dataset is extracted during deployment as
described earlier, where the user is again a crowd-
worker instructed to chat naturally. The context
may contain responses from both the human and
the bot, but the target response is always from
the human, as we will see experimentally that tar-
geting bot responses degrades performance. Be-
cause the chit-chat domain is symmetric, both the
HH and HB DIALOGUE examples are used for the
same task. In an asymmetric setting where the bot
has a different role than the human, it is unclear
whether HB examples may still be used as an aux-
iliary task, but FEEDBACK examples will remain
usable.

Category
%
Feedback Examples
Verbatim
53.0 • my favorite food is pizza
• no, i have never been to kansas
• i like when its bright and sunny outside
Suggestion
24.5 • you could say hey, i’m 30. how old are you?
• yes, i play battleﬁeld would have a been a great answer.
• you could have said “yes, I’m happy it’s friday.”
Instructions 14.5 • tell me what your favorite breakfast food is
• answer the question about having children!
• tell me why your mom is baking bread
Options
8.0
• you could have said yes it really helps the environment or no its too costly
• you could have said yes or no, or talked more about your mustang dream.
• you should have said new york, texas or maryland. something like one of those.
Table 2:
Examples of the types of feedback given to the dialogue agent, pulled from a random sample of 200
feedback responses. Verbatim responses could be used directly in conversation, Suggestion responses contain a
potential verbatim response in them somewhere, Instructions describe a response or tell the bot what to do, and
Options make multiple suggestions.
3.2
Task 2: SATISFACTION
The objective of the SATISFACTION auxiliary task
is to predict whether or not a speaking partner is
satisﬁed with the quality of the current conversa-
tion. Examples take the form of (x, s) pairs, where
x is the same context as in the DIALOGUE task,
and s ∈[0, 1], ranging from dissatisﬁed to satis-
ﬁed. Crucially, it is hard to estimate from the bot’s
utterance itself whether the user will be satisﬁed,
but much easier using the human’s response to the
utterance, as they may explicitly say something to
that effect, e.g. “What are you talking about?”.
The dataset for this task was collected via
crowdsourcing. Workers chatted with our base-
line dialogue agent and assigned a rating 1-5 for
the quality of each of the agent’s responses.2 Con-
texts with rating 1 were mapped to the negative
class (dissatisﬁed) and ratings [3, 4, 5] mapped to
the positive class (satisﬁed). Contexts with rat-
ing 2 were discarded to increase the separation be-
tween classes for a cleaner training set. Note that
these numeric ratings were requested only when
collecting the initial training data, not during de-
ployment, where only natural dialogue is used.
3.3
Task 3: FEEDBACK
The objective of the FEEDBACK auxiliary task is
to predict the feedback that will be given by the
speaking partner when the agent believes it has
made a mistake and asks for help. Examples take
the form of (x, f) pairs, where x is the same con-
text as the other two tasks and f is the feedback
utterance.
2A snapshot of the data collection interface and sample
conversations are included in the Appendix.
Training data for this task is collected during de-
ployment. Whenever the user’s estimated satisfac-
tion is below a speciﬁed threshold, the chatbot re-
sponds “Oops! Sorry. What should I have said
instead?”.3
A new example for the FEEDBACK
task is then extracted using the context up to but
not including the turn where the agent made the
poor response as x and the user’s response as f (as
shown in Figure 1). At that point to continue the
conversation during deployment, the bot’s history
is reset, and the bot instructs the user to continue,
asking for a new topic. Examples of FEEDBACK
responses are shown in Table 2.
4
Model and Settings
4.1
Model Architecture
The self-feeding chatbot has two primary compo-
nents: an interface component and a model com-
ponent. The interface component is shared by all
tasks, and includes input/output processing (tok-
enization, vectorization, etc.), conversation history
storage, candidate preparation, and control ﬂow
(e.g., when to ask a question vs. when to give
a normal dialogue response).
The model com-
ponent contains a neural network for each task,
with embeddings, a network body, and a task head,
some of which can be shared. In our case, we ob-
tained maximum performance by sharing all pa-
rameters between the FEEDBACK and DIALOGUE
tasks (prepending FEEDBACK responses with a
special token), and using separate model param-
eters for the SATISFACTION task. Identifying op-
timal task structure in multi-task learning (MTL)
3Future work should examine how to ask different kinds
of questions, depending on the context.

architectures is an open research problem (Ruder,
2017). Regardless of what parameters are shared,
each training batch contains examples from only
one task at a time, candidate sets remain separate,
and each task’s cross-entropy loss is multiplied by
a task-speciﬁc scaling factor tuned on the valida-
tion set to help account for discrepancies in dataset
size, loss magnitude, dataset relevance, etc.
Our dialogue agent’s models are built on the
Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017),
which has been shown to perform well on a variety
of NLP tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al.,
2018), including multiple persona-based chat ap-
plications (Shuster et al., 2018a,b; Rashkin et al.,
2018). For the SATISFACTION task, the context
x is encoded with a Transformer and converted to
the scalar satisfaction prediction ˆs by a ﬁnal lin-
ear layer in the task head. The DIALOGUE and
FEEDBACK tasks are set up as ranking problems,
as in (Zhang et al., 2018b; Mazar´e et al., 2018),
where the model ranks a collection of candidate
responses and returns the top-ranked one as its re-
sponse. The context x is encoded with one Trans-
former and ˆy and ˆf candidates are encoded with
another. The score for each candidate is calculated
as the dot product of the encoded context and en-
coded candidate.
During training, negative candidates are pulled
from the correct responses for the other exam-
ples in the mini-batch. During evaluation, how-
ever, to remain independent of batch size and data
shufﬂing, each example is assigned a static set of
19 other candidates sampled at random from its
split of the data. During deployment, all 127,712
unique HH DIALOGUE candidates from the train
split are encoded once with the trained model and
each turn the model selects the top-ranked one for
the given context.
4.2
Model Settings
Contexts and candidates are tokenized using the
default whitespace and punctuation tokenizer in
ParlAI. We use a maximum dialogue history
length of 2 (i.e., when making a prediction, the
dialogue agent has access to its previous utter-
ance and its partner’s response). Tokens are em-
bedded with fastText (Bojanowski et al., 2017)
300-dimensional embeddings.
We do not limit
the vocabulary size, which varies from 11.5k to
23.5k words in our experiments, depending on the
training set. The Transformer is implemented in
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) within the ParlAI
framework.
We use the AdaMax (Kingma and
Ba, 2014) optimizer with a learning rate sched-
ule that decays based on the inverse square root of
the step number after 500 steps of warmup from
1e-5. We use proportional sampling (Sanh et al.,
2018) to select batches from each task for train-
ing, with batch size 128. Each Transformer layer
has two attention heads and FFN size 32. The ini-
tial learning rate (0.001-0.005), number of Trans-
former layers (1-2), and task-speciﬁc loss factors
(0.5-2.0) are selected on a per-experiment basis
based on a grid search over the validation set aver-
aged over three runs (we use the DIALOGUE val-
idation set whenever multiple tasks are involved).
We use early stopping based on the validation set
to decide when to stop training. The hyperparam-
eter values for the experiments in Section 5 are in-
cluded in Appendix G.
Note that throughout development, a portion of
the DIALOGUE validation split was used as an in-
formal test set. The ofﬁcial hidden test set for the
DIALOGUE task was used only to produce the ﬁnal
numbers included in this paper.
5
Experimental Results
Throughout this section, we use the ranking met-

correct candidate response was ranked in the top
X out of Y available candidates; accuracy is an-

for improvement over baselines is assessed with a
two-sample one-tailed T-test.
5.1
Beneﬁting from Deployment Examples
Our main result, reported in Table 3, is that utiliz-
ing the deployment examples improves accuracy
on the DIALOGUE task regardless of the number of
available supervised (HH) DIALOGUE examples.4
The boost in quality is naturally most pronounced
when the HH DIALOGUE training set is small (i.e.,
where the learning curve is steepest), yielding an
increase of up to 9.4 accuracy points, a 31% im-
provement. However, even when the entire PER-
SONACHAT dataset of 131k examples is used—a
much larger dataset than what is available for most
dialogue tasks—adding deployment examples is
still able to provide an additional 1.6 points of ac-
curacy on what is otherwise a very ﬂat region of
4For comparisons with other models, see Appendix C.
The best existing score reported elsewhere on the PER-
SONACHAT test set without using proﬁles is 34.9.

Human-Bot (HB)
Human-Human (HH) DIALOGUE
DIALOGUE
FEEDBACK
20k
40k
60k
131k
-
-
30.3 (0.6)
36.2 (0.4)
39.1 (0.5)
44.7 (0.4)
20k
-
32.7 (0.5)
37.5 (0.6)
40.2 (0.5)
45.5 (0.7)
40k
-
34.5 (0.5)
37.8 (0.6)
40.6 (0.6)
45.1 (0.6)
60k
-
35.4 (0.4)
37.9 (0.7)
40.2 (0.8)
45.0 (0.7)
-
20k
35.0 (0.5)
38.9 (0.3)
41.1 (0.5)
45.4 (0.8)
-
40k
36.7 (0.7)
39.4 (0.5)
41.8 (0.4)
45.7 (0.6)
-
60k
37.8 (0.6)
40.6 (0.5)
42.2 (0.7)
45.8 (0.7)
60k
60k
39.7 (0.6)
42.0 (0.6)
43.3 (0.7)
46.3 (0.8)

LOGUE, Human-Bot (HB) DIALOGUE, and FEEDBACK examples, averaged over 20 runs, with standard deviations
in parentheses. For each column, the model using all three data types (last row) is signiﬁcantly better than all the
others, and the best model using only one type of self-feeding (FEEDBACK examples or HB DIALOGUE examples)
is better than the supervised baseline in the ﬁrst row (p < 0.05).
the learning curve. It is interesting to note that
the two types of deployment examples appear to
provide complementary signal, with models per-
forming best when they use both example types,
despite them coming from the same conversations.
We also calculated hit rates with 10,000 candidates
(instead of 20), a setup more similar to the inter-
active setting where there may be many candidates
that could be valid responses. In that setting, mod-
els trained with the deployment examples continue
to outperform their HH-only counterparts by sig-
niﬁcant margins (see Appendix B).
On average, we found that adding 20k FEED-
BACK examples beneﬁted the agent about as much
as 60k HB DIALOGUE examples.5 This is some-
what surprising given the fact that nearly half of
the FEEDBACK responses would not even be rea-
sonable responses if used verbatim in a conversa-
tion (instead being a list of options, a description
of a response, etc.) as shown in Table 2. Never-
theless, the tasks are related enough that the DI-
ALOGUE task beneﬁts from the MTL model’s im-
proved skill on the FEEDBACK task. And whereas
HB DIALOGUE examples are based on conversa-
tions where the user appears to already be satis-
ﬁed with the agent’s responses, each FEEDBACK
example corresponds to a mistake made by the
model, giving the latter dataset a more active
5Our baseline chatbot collected approximately one FEED-
BACK example for every two HB DIALOGUE examples, but
this ratio will vary by application based on the task difﬁculty,
satisfaction threshold(s), and current model quality.
role in improving quality. Interestingly, our best-
performing model, which achieves 46.3 accuracy
on DIALOGUE, scores 68.4 on FEEDBACK, sug-
gesting that the auxiliary task is a simpler task
overall.
When extracting HB DIALOGUE examples, we
ignore human responses that the agent classiﬁes
as expressing dissatisfaction, since these turns do
not represent typical conversation ﬂow.
Includ-
ing these responses in the 60k HB dataset de-

when added to 20k and 131k HH DIALOGUE ex-
amples, respectively. We also explored using chat-
bot responses with favorable satisfaction scores
(ˆs > t) as new training examples, but found that
our models performed better without them (see
Appendix D for details).
We also found that “fresher” feedback results in
bigger gains. We compared two models trained
on 20k HH DIALOGUE examples and 40k FEED-
BACK examples—the ﬁrst collected all 40k FEED-
BACK examples at once, whereas the second was
retrained with its ﬁrst 20k FEEDBACK examples
before collecting the remaining 20k. While the ab-
solute improvement of the second model over the
ﬁrst was small (0.4 points), it was statistically sig-
niﬁcant (p =0.027) and reduced the gap to a model
trained on fully supervised (HH) DIALOGUE ex-
amples by 17% while modifying only 33% of the
training data.6
This improvement makes sense
intuitively, since new FEEDBACK examples are
6Additional detail can be found in Appendix E.

Method
Pr.
Re.
F1
Uncertainty Top
0.39
0.99
0.56
(Pr. ≥0.5)
0.50
0.04
0.07
Uncertainty Gap
0.38
1.00
0.55
(Pr. ≥0.5)
0.50
0.04
0.07
Satisfaction Regex
0.91
0.27
0.42
Satisfaction Classiﬁer (1k)
0.84
0.84
0.84
Satisfaction Classiﬁer (2k)
0.89
0.84
0.87
Satisfaction Classiﬁer (5k)
0.94
0.82
0.88
Satisfaction Classiﬁer (20k)
0.96
0.84
0.89
Satisfaction Classiﬁer (40k)
0.96
0.84
0.90
Table 4: The maximum F1 score (with corresponding
precision and recall) obtained on the SATISFACTION
task. For the Uncertainty methods, we also report the
maximum F1 score with the constraint that precision
must be ≥0.5. The Satisfaction Classiﬁer is reported
with varying numbers of SATISFACTION training ex-
amples.
collected based on failure modes of the current
model, making them potentially more efﬁcient in a
manner similar to new training examples selected
via active learning. It also suggests that the gains
we observe in Table 3 might be further improved
by (a) collecting FEEDBACK examples speciﬁc to
each model (rather than using the same 60k FEED-
BACK examples for all models), and (b) more fre-
quently retraining the MTL model (e.g., every 5k
examples instead of every 20k) or updating it in
an online manner. We leave further exploration of
this observation for future work.
The same experiment repeated for HB DIA-
LOGUE examples found that fresher HB examples
were no more valuable than stale ones, matching
our intuition that HB DIALOGUE examples are
less targeted at current model failure modes than
FEEDBACK ones.
5.2
Predicting User Satisfaction
For maximum efﬁciency, we aim to ask for feed-
back when it will most beneﬁt our model. The
approach we chose (classifying the tone of part-
ner responses) takes advantage of the fact that it is
easier to recognize that a mistake has already been
made than it is to avoid making that mistake; or in
other words, sentiment classiﬁcation is generally
an easier task than next utterance prediction.
We compare this to the approach of asking for
feedback whenever the model is most uncertain
what to say next. This approach acts on the as-
sumption that the model will be least conﬁdent
when it is about to make a mistake, which we ﬁnd
very frequently to not be the case. Not only is it
difﬁcult to recognize one’s own mistakes, but also
there are often multiple valid responses to a given
context (e.g., “Yes, I love seafood!” or “Yuck, ﬁsh
is gross.”)—a lack of certainty about which to use
does not necessarily suggest a poor model.
Table 4 reports the maximum F1 scores
achieved by each method on the SATISFACTION
test set. For the model uncertainty approach, we
tested two variants: (a) predict a mistake when the
conﬁdence in the top rated response is below some
threshold t, and (b) predict a mistake when the
gap between the top two rated responses is below
the threshold t. We used the best-performing stan-
dalone DIALOGUE model (one trained on the full
131k training examples) for assessing uncertainty
and tuned the thresholds to achieve maximum F1
score.
For the user satisfaction approach, we
trained our dialogue agent on just the SATISFAC-
TION task. Finally, we also report the performance
of a regular-expression-based method which we
used during development, based on common ways
of expressing dissatisfaction that we observed in
our pilot studies, see Appendix F for details.
As shown by Table 4, even with only 1k training
examples (the amount used for the experiments
in Section 5.1), the trained classiﬁer signiﬁcantly
outperforms both the uncertainty-based methods
and our original regular expression, by as much
as 0.28 and 0.42 F1 points, respectively.
6
Future Work
In this work we learned from dialogue using two
types of self-feeding: imitation of satisﬁed user
messages, and learning from the feedback of un-
satisﬁed users. In actuality, there are even more
ways a model could learn to improve itself—for
example, learning which question to ask in a given
context to receive the most valuable feedback. One
could even use the ﬂexible nature of dialogue to
intermix data collection of more than one type—
sometimes requesting new FEEDBACK examples,
and other times requesting new SATISFACTION
examples (e.g., asking “Did my last response make
sense?”). In this way, a dialogue agent could both
improve its dialogue ability and its potential to im-
prove further. We leave exploration of this meta-
learning theme to future work.
