PCA 4 DCA: The Application Of Principal Component 
Analysis To The Dendritic Cell Algorithm 
 
 
 
Feng Gu, Julie Greensmith, Robert  Oates and Uwe  Aickelin 
School of Computer Science 
University  of Nottingham, NG8 1BB, UK 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
As  one  of  the  newest  members   in  the 
field of artificial  immune  systems  (AIS), 
the  Dendritic Cell  Algorithm   (DCA)  is 
based  on  behavioural   models  of natural 
dendritic cells (DCs).   Unlike other  AIS, 
the  DCA does not  rely on training data, 
instead  domain or expert knowledge is re- 
quired  to  predetermine the  mapping  be- 
tween input  signals from a particular  in- 
stance   to  the  three   categories   used  by 
the  DCA.  This  data  preprocessing  phase 
has received the criticism of having manu- 
ally over-fitted  the data  to the algorithm, 
which  is undesirable.   Therefore,  in this 
paper we have  attempted to  ascertain if 
it is possible to use principal  component 
analysis  (PCA)   techniques  to  automati- 
cally categorise input  data  while still gen- 
erating  useful and  accurate  classification 
results.   The  integrated system  is tested 
with  a  biometrics  dataset for  the  stress 
recognition   of automobile drivers.  The 
experimental  results  have shown the  ap- 
plication  of PCA to the DCA for the pur- 
pose of automated data  preprocessing  is 
successful. 
 
1 
Introduction 
 
The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  (DCA) is an 
emerging  algorithm within  the  field of artificial 
immune systems (AIS) [3]. It is a biologically in- 
spired  population based  algorithm which is de- 
rived  from  behavioural  models of natural  den- 
dritic  cells (DCs)  [13]. It is also underpinned by 
a  recent paradigm in  immunology  termed  the 
danger  theory  [14], which  states   that the  hu- 
man immune system  is activated in response to 
the detection   of ‘danger  signals’.   As an  algo- 
rithm,  the  DCA  performs  fusion of real  valued 
input  signal data  and correlates  this information 
with potentially anomalous  ‘antigen’ data.   The 
resulting   correlation values  are  then  classified 
to form an anomaly  detection  style of two-class 
classification.  For the algorithm to function,  in- 
put signal data is classified into one of three user- 
defined categories.   The  semantics  which define 
the  categories  are  based  on the  types of input 
used by natural DCs, which are currently  termed 
PAMP  signal, danger signal and safe signal.  For 
further  details about the nature of the individual 
signal values, refer to Greensmith et al [6]. 
Unlike other  AIS, the DCA does not rely on 
training data  to define which of the input signals 
are potentially  ‘dangerous’.  Instead, domain  or 
expert  knowledge is required  in order  to prede- 
termine  the mapping  between input  signals from 
a particular instance  to the three categories used 
by the DCA.  This  quirk  of the  algorithm arose 
as the  initial  intention  was to construct a gene 
regulatory network  within  each  DC  to  process 
these  input  signals and  to effect the  production 
of related  output signals.   However  to  develop 
a real-time  algorithm, such processing overhead 
was not deemed necessary and a simple weighted 
sum equation  is employed by each cell to perform 
the data  fusion. 
This rather arbitrary and subjective method 
of assignment has severe limitations for the ease 
of application of the  DCA,  especially  for com- 
plex and noisy datasets. It also leaves one open 
to  the  criticism  of having  manually  over-fitted 
the data  to the algorithm, which is undesirable. 
Therefore,  in this  paper  we have attempted to 
use a basic feature selection method to automat- 
ically categorise input  data  into user-defined sig- 
nal  categories.   The  aim  of this  paper  is to  as- 
certain  if it  is possible to use principal  compo- 
nent analysis  (PCA)  [12] to  automatically cat- 
egorise input  data  while still  generating  useful 
and accurate  classification  results.  This is based 
on the  assumption that variability of attributes 
is equivalent to  importance.   To  test  this  hy- 
pothesis we use a biometrics  dataset which aims 
to measure  driver stress  levels in city and  high- 
way locations.  Section 2 of this paper describes 

 
the  integration of PCA  with  the  DCA.  Section 
3 describes  the  dataset used  and  how  we ap- 
ply it  for our  purpose.   Section  4 describes  the 
experiments  performed,  with  corresponding  re- 
sults presented  in Section 5. Finally,  we present 
our conclusions and describe potential future av- 
enues for this combined  technique. 
 
2 
Integrating PCA with DCA 
 
The DCA is a population based algorithm which 
performs three stages of data  processing, namely 
signal fusion,  correlation and  classification.   To 
achieve  these outcomes,  input   signal  data   are 
categorised into PAMP, danger or safe signal 
categories.   PAMP  signals have the  highest  rel- 
evance to the  system  and  are viewed as ‘signa- 
tures’  of anomaly.   Danger  signals  have  a high 
degree of anomaly associated  and safe signals, as 
the name suggests, have a high degree of normal- 
ity associated  with  them.   The  origins  of these 
categories  are rooted in the biological metaphor 
used initially  to inspire  the  development of the 
algorithm.   The  mapping  between  application 
data  and categories  has previously  arisen due to 
domain  knowledge of the particular application. 
However,  such  mappings  do  not  apply  to  the 
same degree if the algorithm is viewed as a com- 
putational tool. Therefore  we aim to replace the 
subjective mapping  using a systematic approach 
of automated signal categorisation through the 
application of PCA. 
PCA is a mathematical operation  that trans- 
forms a finite number of possibly correlated vec- 
tors  into a smaller  number  of uncorrelated vec- 
tors,  termed  ‘principal  components’.   It reveals 
the internal  structure of given data  with the fo- 
cus on data  variance.    As a result,  PCA  gives 
not only the information of overall data variance, 
but  also its correspondence  to the  variability of 
each vector.   In addition, PCA  is also used for 
the  reduction of data  dimension,  by accumulat- 
ing the  vectors  that can be linearly  represented 
by each other. 
The PCA element is used to rank input  data 
based  on  the  variability of each  attribute.    A 
separate ranking  is also generated for the signal 
categories, and it is performed  by using a sum of 
the  absolute  values of the  weights  used for sig- 
nal transformation by the DCA. Once ranking is 
performed,  the  highest  ranked  signals from the 
application of PCA  can be mapped  to the high- 
est ranked  category  and so forth. 
To  clarify,   the   process  from  raw  data   to 
true/false  positive   rates   is  performed   in  five 
stages as following: 
1.  Normalisation: 
All data  attributes are 
normalised  within  the  same range,  namely 
[0,1], with  the  normalisation function  de- 
pendent upon  the particulars of the  input 
data  used. 
 
2.  PCA ranking and categorisation: 
PCA is performed on selected attributes, 
where attributes are ranked in terms of vari- 
ability.  Attributes are then  categorised  ac- 
cording  to  the  predetermined  ranking   of 
signal categories.   The highest ranked at- 
tribute  forms  the   suspect   ‘antigen’  data 
which   is   subsequently   classified   by   the 
DCA. 
 
3.  DCA application: 
Signals and  antigens 
are input  to the DCA, and the Kα  anomaly 
metric  is generated for each antigen  type. 
 
4.  Prediction  Assessment: 
The  resulting 
Kα  values are divided into segments and an 
anomaly  threshold   is applied.    An  assess- 
ment of all Kα  values within  each segment 
is used  to  determine whether  the  segment 
is anomalous  or not.  A range  of thresholds 
are used to generate  ROC curves [4]. 
 
5.  True/False  Positive  Analysis:   
Across all segments  the true  or false 
positive rates are calculated. 
 
In the  forthcoming  sections  we will describe 
in detail  how each of these  stages  is performed, 
as  well as  the  subsequent performance   of this 
integrated system  when  applied  to  biometrics 
stress data. 
 
3 
Dataset And Preprocessing 
 
The Stress Recognition in Automobile Drivers 
dataset [10] from  the  PhysioBank  database [5] 
contains  a collection of multiparameter data  in- 
stances   from  healthy   volunteers,   taken   while 
they  were driving  on a prescribed route  includ- 
ing  city  streets   and  highways  in  and  around 
Boston,   Massachusetts. The  objective  of the 
study  for which these data  were collected was to 
investigate  the feasibility  of automated recogni- 
tion of stress on the basis of the recorded signals, 
which include electrocardiogram (ECG), elec- 
tromyography (EMG),  galvanic  skin  resistance 
(GSR)  measured  on  the  hand  and  foot,  heart 
rate  (HR)  and respiration. 
The  whole  dataset consists  of the  data   of 
17 drivers,  and  the  ‘driver05’ subset  is used  in 
this  paper.   It  contains  the  data  instances  col- 
lected within a period of 5055 seconds, and each 

 
 
Min 
Max
Median
Mean
StDev
Normality 
ECG 
EMG GSR  
Foot GSR  
Hand HR 
Respiration 
Marker 
-10.00 
4.03
-0.01
-0.59
2.36
no 
0.12 
18.24 
0.63 
1.25 
1.60 
no 
2.10 
11.55 
5.14 
4.83 
1.90 
no 
0.00 
16.70 
5.86 
5.83 
2.52 
no 
0.00 
265.00 
71.33 
68.13 
19.98 
no 
17.69 
50.30 
30.35 
29.39 
5.97 
no 
11.47 
60.70 
14.35 
15.24 
3.10 
no 
 
Table  1: Statistics of the attributes in raw data. 
 
 
 
data   instance   includes  eight  attributes,  which 
are elapsed  time,  ECG,  EMG,  foot GSR,  hand 
GSR,  HR,  respiration  and  marker.  
The  at- 
tribute ‘maker’ is seen as the  indication  of the 
changes of stress level, which is used to create la- 
bels for classification.   The  data  instances  were 
originally collected at an interval  of 60 millisec- 
onds, but according to [11] they are transformed 
into one data  instance  per second, by averaging 
the values of each attribute within every second. 
A summary  of the  statistics of all attributes is 
listed  in  Table  1.   As the  size of the  data  ex- 
ceeds 5000, Quantile-Quantile Plots  [2] are used 
to check the normality of each attribute. 
 
3.1  Data Normalisation 
 
The DCA requires  all input  signals to be in the 
same  range,  this  can  be  achieved  by  perform- 
ing normalisation on selected attributes. All at- 
tributes are  normalised,  including  marker,  into 
[0,1], which is a commonly used range in biomet- 
rics. In order to reduce the probability of gaining 
extra  advantages  through normalisation, a basic 
normalisation method, ‘Min-Max normalisation’ 
is employed.   As the  main  objective  of this  pa- 
per  is to  assess the  effect of applying  PCA  to 
the DCA, advanced  normalisation methods may 
influence the classification results,  making it dif- 
ficult to determine whether performance  changes 
can be contributed to the addition of PCA. 
 
3.2  PCA Implementation 
 
In  order  to  select  appropriate input  signals  of 
the DCA, PCA is performed on all attributes ex- 
cept for elapsed time  and  marker.  A Biplot  be- 
tween the first and second principal  components 
is displayed  in Figure  1.  First  of all, foot GSR 
and  hand  GSR  have  the  same  rotation, which 
implies they  are  linearly  representative to each 
other.  In addition, Wilcoxon test  (p < 0.05) [2] 
indicates  that there  is no significant difference 
between  these  two  attributes.  Therefore,  they 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Biplot between the first and the second 
principal  components. 
 
 
 
can be accumulated into  one attribute,  namely 
‘GSR’, whose value is the mean of the two origi- 
nal attributes. Moreover, the variability of each 
attribute that contributes to  the  scatter of the 
data,   that is,  the  correspondence  between  the 
variance  of each attribute and  the  overall  data 
variance,   can  be  ranked  as  EMG,  GSR,  HR, 
ECG and respiration. This PCA ranking is used 
for antigen generation  and signal categorisation. 
 
Antigen  is derived  from the  elapsed  time  of 
each data  instance.  In order to generate  antigen 
types, a  dynamic  antigen  multiplier   [8] is em- 
ployed to produce multiple  identical  instances of 
an antigen  type per data  instance.  The amount 
of generated instances  (antigen  frequency) is de- 
termined by the attribute on the top of the PCA 
ranking,  EMG.  The  antigen  frequency  is calcu- 
lated  by Equation 1. 
 
F = 15 + 85 × EM G 
(1) 

Signals 
Antigen 
Safe 
Danger 
PAMP 
 
PAMP
Danger 
Safe 
CSM
k 
2
1
2 
2 
1 
-3 
 
Table  2: Weights  for signal transformation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
Time 
 
Figure 2: A plot of all signals and marker against 
time series,  this  figure  does  not  show  vertical 
units  because  each signal is scaled and  offset to 
be shown with an illustrative amount of detail. 
 
 
 
This gives values between 15 and 100. The lower 
bound  results  from the  fact  that each  data  in- 
stance  (per second)  is accumulated from about 
15 data  instances  (per  60 milliseconds)  of the 
original  dataset.  The  upper  bound  is based  on 
the  fact  that there  are 100 DCs in the  popula- 
tion,  in  the  most  extreme  case  where  all  DCs 
sample the  same  antigen  type generated  from 
one data  instance. 
The  rest  of the  attributes are  mapped  into 
the input  signal categories of the DCA, by corre- 
lating  the PCA  ranking  with the ranking  of sig- 
nal categories.  The  ranking  of signal categories 
implies  the  significance  of each  signal  category 
to the signal transformation of the DCA, which 
is in the order Safe, PAMP,  and Danger.  Due to 
the definition of Safe signals, the inverted  values 
of the  selected  attribute are  used.   As a result, 
the input  to the DCA is the following: 
 
•  Antigen  frequency: EMG 
•  PAMP signal: ECG  and HR 
•  Danger  signal: respiration 
•  Safe  signal: inverted  GSR. 
 
 
4 
The Experiments 
 
The  system  implemented is similar  to  the  one 
demonstrated in [9], and it is programmed in C 
with a gcc 4.0.1 compiler.   All experiments  are 
run on an Intel 2.2 GHz MacBook (OS X 10.5.7), 
with the statistical tests  and PCA  performed  in 
R (2.9.0).   The  predefined  weights  used for sig- 
nal transformation of the DCA are displayed in 
Table  2, they are the same as those used in pre- 
vious work [7].  The  size of the  DC population 
is set  as 100, as sensitivity  analyses  of various 
population sizes [6] have  shown  that 100 is an 
appropriate value to use.  The migration thresh- 
old of each DC is equal  to  its  index  multiplied 
by  a  fixed number,  which  produces  a  uniform 
distribution of migration thresholds.  The  fixed 
number is set to ensure the migration thresholds 
of most DCs in the population are greater  than 
the  strength of a single signal instance,  so that 
these DCs can last  longer than  one iteration. 
 
5 
Results And Analysis 
 
In order to evaluate  the detection  performance  of 
the integrated system, the original dataset needs 
to be labelled.  According  to [11], the  whole pe- 
riod being monitored  can be divided  into seven 
segments, which are in the order of ‘Rest’, ‘City’, 
‘Highway’, ‘City’, ‘Highway’, ‘City’, and  ‘Rest’. 
These segments  can be separated by the  peaks 
of  the   attribute,  marker,   which  was  derived 
from  human   examination  of  video  data   cap- 
tured  at  the  same  time  as the  biometric  data. 
The segments  of City are considered as those in 
which  the  driver  is highly  stressed,  conversely 
the  segments  of Rest  or  Highway  are  consid- 
ered as those in which the driver is not stressed. 
This can be interpreted using the terminology  of 
anomaly  detection, so the  segments  of City  are 
defined as ‘anomalous’, whereas the segments of 
Rest  or Highway are defined as ‘normal’. 
As the Kα values produced by the DCA share 
the  same  time  series with  the  original  dataset, 
the whole duration is divided into the same seg- 
ments as suggested above.  The plot of Kα  values 
with the indication  of each segment is shown in 
Figure  3. In order to identify  whether  each seg- 
ment is anomalous  or normal  based  on Kα  val- 
ues, an evaluation function  is used as described 
in Equation 2. Assuming there is a ‘segment’ to 
be classified,  Ki   or Kj   is any Kα   value  
within this  segment,  and  T h  is the  applied  
threshold  for  classification.  
The 
 
true  
positive  rate  and false positive  rate  are  
calculated  by  comparing  the  classification  result  
based  on  Kα   values to the labels of the original 
dataset.  The true  pos- itive rates  and false 
positive rates, when various thresholds  applied,  
are listed in Table 3. To bet- 

 
 
TP Rate FP Rate
Th = -2 
Th = -1.5 
Th = -1 
Th = -0.5 
Th = 0 
1 
0.75
1 
0.25 
1 
0.25 
0.67 
0 
0 
0 
Ka 
-4 
-2 
0 
2 
4 
TP Rate 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
Time 
 
Figure  3:  Plot  of Kα  values against  time  series 
that is divided into seven segments indicated  by 
the peaks of marker. 
 
 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
 
FP  Rate 
 
Figure  4: ROC graph  of TP  rates  and FP  rates 
when various thresholds  are applied,  the dashed 
line is the performance  of random  classifiers. 
 
Table 3: Results with various thresholds  applied. 
 
 
 
 
ter  visualise  the performance  of the  integrated 
system,  a ROC  graph  in which a ROC  curve is 
also included  as shown in Figure  4. 
 
Let Ki   T h and Kj  < T h (i, j ∈ N) 
Let L = X 
| Ki  — T h | — X 
| Kj  — T h |   (2) 
   
anomalous if L    0 
 
 
the  input  of the  DCA.  It  is also  used  for  the 
ranking  of attributes based  on  the  variability, 
which is mapped  to the  ranking  of signal cate- 
gories of the  DCA for signal categorisation. In 
this  way, the  data  preprocessing  of the  DCA is 
performed  by simply using PCA  and basic Min- 
Max  normalisation, without  requiring  any  ex- 
pert  knowledge of the problem  domain.  The re- 
sults suggest that the integrated system of PCA 
and  the  DCA is successful in terms  of anomaly 
segment = 
normal 
otherwise 
detection, as the  system  can produce  relatively 
high  true  positive  rates  and  low false positive 
As indicated  in the  ROC  graph,  most  of the 
points  are located  in the  top-left  corner,  which 
suggests  the  system  shows  high  true   positive 
rates  and  low false positive  rates.   In  terms  of 
anomaly  detection, the  integrated system  pro- 
duces  good  detection  performance.    Therefore, 
the application of PCA to the DCA is successful 
for the  experimented  biometrics  stress  data.   It 
is possible to employ the PCA as a technique  for 
automated data preprocessing of the DCA, with- 
out the requirement of specific expert knowledge 
of the problem  domain. 
 
6 
Conclusions 
 
We have  shown  that it  is possible  to  integrate 
PCA  with  the  DCA  for  the  purpose  of auto- 
mated  data  preprocessing.   The  PCA  facilitates 
the reduction of data  dimension of the raw data, 
to select proper  attributes as the  candidates of 
rates.    As a  result,  the  application of PCA  to 
the DCA makes it possible to automatically cat- 
egorise input  data  into user-defined  signal cate- 
gories, while still generating  useful and accurate 
classification results.  The hypothesis is tested  to 
be true. 
Since the integrated system is automated 
without any  human  intervention during  detec- 
tion,  it  is possible to apply  the  system  to real- 
time   detection   tasks. 
As  the   data   are  col- 
lected during detection, the system can use PCA 
to perform  signal categorisation on the  current 
batch of data,  in order to generate the input data 
of the  DCA.  The  DCA then  performs  anomaly 
detection  on the input  data,  to produce the final 
detection  results  in which anomalies  within  the 
collected data  can be identified.  As new incom- 
ing data  are  collected,  the  system  repeats  the 
process until a termination condition  is reached. 
Therefore,  periodic  detection  can be performed 

 
in such an integrated system,  which is essential 
for a real-time  detection  system. 
The  main  objective  of this  paper  is to  in- 
troduce  the  possibility  of using statistical tech- 
niques to perform automated data  processing of 
the DCA. PCA is one of many available  options, 
but  other  techniques,   such  as  N-Gram  analy- 
sis [1] and  so on, yield beneficial results.  More- 
over, the integrated system is only tested  on one 
particular biometrics  dataset, in order to further 
validate   the  system,  it  needs  to  be  applied  to 
other  biometrics  datasets with similar features.
