arXiv:1103.3949v2  [cs.AI]  1 Nov 2012
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query
Answering for Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases
Ana Soﬁa Gomes, Jos´e J´ulio Alferes and Terrance Swift
CENTRIA, Departamento de Inform´atica
Faculdade Ciˆencias e Tecnologias
Universidade Nova de Lisboa
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal
submitted 1 June 2010; revised 18 October 2010; accepted 25 July 2012
Abstract
Ontologies and rules are usually loosely coupled in knowledge representation formalisms.
In fact, ontologies use open-world reasoning while the leading semantics for rules use
non-monotonic, closed-world reasoning. One exception is the tightly-coupled framework
of Minimal Knowledge and Negation as Failure (MKNF), which allows statements about
individuals to be jointly derived via entailment from an ontology and inferences from rules.
Nonetheless, the practical usefulness of MKNF has not always been clear, although recent
work has formalized a general resolution-based method for querying MKNF when rules
are taken to have the well-founded semantics, and the ontology is modeled by a general
oracle. That work leaves open what algorithms should be used to relate the entailments
of the ontology and the inferences of rules. In this paper we provide such algorithms,
and describe the implementation of a query-driven system, CDF-Rules, for hybrid knowl-
edge bases combining both (non-monotonic) rules under the well-founded semantics and
a (monotonic) ontology, represented by a CDF Type-1 (ALCQ) theory.
KEYWORDS: Knowledge representation, well-founded semantics, description logics, im-
plementation.
1 Introduction
Ontologies and rules oﬀer distinctive strengths for the representation and trans-
mission of knowledge over the Semantic Web. Ontologies oﬀer the deductive ad-
vantages of ﬁrst-order logics with an open domain, while guaranteeing decidability.
Rules employ non-monotonic (closed-world) reasoning that can formalize scenarios
under locally incomplete knowledge; rules also oﬀer the ability to reason about ﬁxed
points (e.g. reachability) which cannot be expressed within ﬁrst-order logic.
Example 1
Consider a scenario application for a Customs Agency where an ontology is used to
assess and classify aspects of imports and exports. An ontology with such charac-
teristics would embrace several thousand axioms. In these axioms, as an example,

2
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
one can deﬁne several axioms about countries (e.g. Scandinavian countries are Eu-
ropean countries; Norway is a Scandinavian country; etc). Moreover, one can also
model in the ontology knowledge that is certain, in the sense that it does not allow
for exception. With such certain knowledge, ﬁrst-order logics deduction is what is
desired. For example, in this scenario, one could state that Scandinavian countries
are always considered safe countries. All of this can be easily represented by an
ontology deﬁned in a Description Logic (DL) language (Baader et al. 2007)1 (1).
ScandinavianCountry ⊑EuropeanCountry
Norway : ScandinavianCountry
ScandinavianCountry ⊑SafeCountry
(1)
Besides these axioms about countries, one may want to specify some additional
knowledge, e.g. for deﬁning conditions about whether or not to inspect entering
shipments based on their country of origin. For example, we may want to state that
one should inspect any vessel containing a shipment coming from a country that is
not guaranteed to be safe. Note here that the closed world assumption is needed
to deﬁne such a statement. In fact, intuitively one wants to assume that, if one is
unsure whether given country is safe, then (at least for the sake of this statement)
the country should be considered unsafe and an inspection performed. When using
description logic with classical negation this behavior would not be obtained, as a
condition ¬SafeCountry(country) would only be true in case one knows for sure
that the country is not safe. However, this statement can be easily expressed by
using a (non-monotonic) rule with default negation2 as in (2).
inspect(X) ←hasShipment(X, Country), not safeCountry(Country).
(2)
Such rules are non-monotonic in the sense that further knowledge – in this case
about safety of countries – can invalidate previous conclusions about inspection.
This kind of non-monotonic rule is quite useful to specify default knowledge that
may be subject to exceptions. In this sense rule (2) can be seen as stating that by
default shipments should be inspected, but an exception to this default rule are
shipments coming from safe countries.
Note that deﬁning some statements about a predicate using default rules does not
necessarily mean that all statements deﬁning that predicate should be default rules.
For example, we may want to state that diplomatic shipments are not subject to
inspection, regardless their country of origin. Here no default reasoning is involved.
Moreover, negation here is not the default negation of logic programming, but rather
classical negation. Such a statement could be modeled using normal logic programs
extended with explicit negation (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1990) with the rule:
¬inspect(X) ←diplomaticShipment(X)
(3)
1 We
write
DL
formulas
with
the
usual
notation
and
the
usual
DL
operators
(see
(Baader et al. 2007)): so that the argument variable of a unary predicate is not displayed and
the ﬁrst letter of the predicate’s name is capitalized.
2 We write rules in the usual notation for logic programming, where predicates names are non-
capitalized (even if common to the ontology, where they are capitalized), and variables are
capitalized and implicitly universally quantiﬁed in the rule head.

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
3
or, having the possibility to use an ontology formalized as a fragment of ﬁrst-order
logic, with a statement:
DiplomaticShipment ⊑¬Inspect
(4)
However, these two representations of the statement above are not equivalent. In
particular, with axiom 4 one can conclude that a given shipment is not diplomatic
whenever one knows, by some other rule, that it should be inspected; this is not
the case with rule 3. The behavior of rules with explicit negation can be easily
modeled by using ontologies; for that it suﬃces to create a new concept standing
for the explicit negation, say NonInspect, replacing the explicitly negated literal in
the rule by this new concept, and adding the axiom NonInspect ≡¬Inspect. On
the contrary, with programs extended with explicit negation one cannot obtain the
full expressivity that is obtained with some of the DL-based languages for ontolo-
gies, simply because some of these languages belong to a higher complexity class.
Another important feature not supported by explicit negation but typically sup-
ported by DL-based ontologies, is the possibility of using existential quantiﬁcation
as illustrated in Example 2 below.
The foregoing example brieﬂy illustrates some advantages of combining features
of ontologies with features of logic programming-like rules, and of doing so in a way
that allows knowledge about instances to be fully inter-deﬁnable between rules and
an ontology (as happens with the predicate inspect/1 above, which is both deﬁned
in the rules and the ontology).
In fact, this combination of ontology and rule languages has gained particular im-
portance in the context of the Semantic Web (Horrocks et al. 2006). In this context,
a family of languages for representing background knowledge in the Web, OWL 2
(Hitzler et al. 2009), has been recommended by the World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C). OWL 2 languages are based on Description Logics (Baader et al. 2007),
which, as in the example above, employ open-world assumption. In addition, the
rule interchange language RIF (Morgenstern et al. 2010) has recently been formally
recommended to the W3C. RIF has many similarities with the logic programming
language used in the example above, and adopts the closed-world assumption.
The existence of both rules and ontology languages should make it possible to
combine open and closed world reasoning, and this combination is indeed im-
portant in several domains related to the Semantic Web. As a further exam-
ple where this combination is desired, consider the large case study described in
(Patel et al. 2007), containing millions of assertions concerning matching patient
records to clinical trials criteria. In this case study, open world reasoning is needed
in deductions about domains such as radiology and laboratory data: unless a lab
or radiology test asserts a negative ﬁnding no arbitrary assumptions about the re-
sults of the test can be made (e.g. we can only be certain that some patient does
not have a speciﬁc kind of cancer if the corresponding test is known to have neg-
ative result). However, as observed in (Patel et al. 2007), closed world reasoning
can and should be used with pharmacy data to infer that a patient is not on a
medication if this is not asserted. The work of (Patel et al. 2007) applies only open

4
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
world reasoning but claims that the usage of closed world reasoning in pharmacy
data would be highly desirable. Similar situations occur e.g. in matchmaking using
Semantic Web Services (cf. (Grimm and Hitzler 2007)), where again a combination
of ontology languages relying on open-world reasoning, with rule languages relying
on closed-world reasoning is considered highly desirable.
Several factors inﬂuence the decision of how to combine rules and ontologies
into a hybrid knowledge base. The choice of semantics for the rules, such as the
answer-set semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1990) or the well-founded semantics
(WFS) (van Gelder et al. 1991), can greatly aﬀect the behavior of the knowledge
base system. The answer-set semantics oﬀers several advantages: for instance, de-
scription logics can be translated into the answer-set semantics providing a solid
basis for combining the two paradigms (Baral 2002; Eiter et al. 2004a; Swift 2004;
Motik 2006). On the other hand, WFS is weaker than the answer-set semantics (in
the sense that it is more skeptical), but has the advantages of lower complexity
and its ability to be evaluated in a query-oriented fashion, which have led to its
integration into Prolog systems. Another possibility of maintaining the complexity
under reasonable bounds for Semantic Web applications, is to limit the expres-
sivity of both the ontological part of the knowledge base, and of the rules. For
instance, (Cal`ı et al. 2012) considers variants of Datalog that allow for existential
quantiﬁcation in rule heads along with other features to support a restricted form
of ontological reasoning, yet restrict the rule syntax to obtain tractability.
Keeping to the general form of logic programming rules, but maintaining the com-
plexity of reasoning under reasonable bounds, several formalisms have concerned
themselves with combining ontologies with general WFS rules (Drabent and Ma luszynski 2007;
Eiter et al. 2004b; Knorr et al. 2008). Among these, the Well-Founded Semantics
for Hybrid MKNF knowledge bases (MKNFWF S), introduced in (Knorr et al. 2008)
and overviewed in Section 2 below, is the only one that allows knowledge about in-
stances to be fully inter-deﬁnable between rules and an ontology that is taken as a
parameter of the formalism. MKNFWF S assigns a well-founded semantics to Hybrid
MKNF knowledge bases, is sound w.r.t. the original semantics of (Motik and Rosati 2007)
and, as in (Motik and Rosati 2007), allows the knowledge base to have both closed-
and open-world (classical) negation. For comparisons of MKNFWF S with the ap-
proaches for combining rules with ontologies mentioned above, see (Knorr et al. 2011).
Example 2
The following fragment, adapted from an example in (Motik and Rosati 2007),
concerning car insurance premiums illustrates several properties of MKNFWF S.
The ontology consists of the following axioms, which state that Married and
NonMarried are complementary concepts, that anyone who is not married is high
risk, and that anyone with a spouse is married:
NonMarried ≡¬Married
¬Married ⊑HighRisk
∃Spouse.⊤⊑Married.
MThe rule base consists of the following rules, which state that anyone who is not

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
5
known to be married is to be assumed to be non-married, that those who are known
to be high-risk should have a surcharge, and that those that have a known spouse
should have a discount:
K nonMarried(X) ←K person(X), not married(X).
K surcharge(X) ←K highRisk(X), K person(X).
K discount(X) ←K spouse(X, Y ), K person(X), K person(Y ).
Note that married and nonMarried are deﬁned both by axioms in the ontology
and by rules. Within the rule bodies, literals with the K or not operators (e.g.
K highRisk(X)) may require information both from the ontology and from other
rules; other literals are proven directly by the other rules (e.g. person(X)). Intu-
itively, Kϕ stands for “ϕ is known to be true”, whereas not ϕ stands for “ϕ is not
known to be true”.
Suppose person(john) were added as a fact (in the rule base). Under closed-
world negation, the ﬁrst rule would derive nonMarried(john). By the ﬁrst ontology
axiom, ¬married(john) would hold, and by the second axiom highRisk(john) would
also hold. By the last rule, surcharge(john) would hold as well. Thus the proof
of surcharge(john) involves interdependencies between the rules with closed-world
negation, and the ontology with open-world negation. At the same time the proof
of surcharge(john) is relevant in the sense that properties of other individuals, not
related to john either through rules nor axioms in the ontology, do not need to be
considered.
Now suppose that one learns that a person named Bill has a spouse, and that
Bob is the spouse of Ann. This can be formalized by adding the corresponding
facts for the predicate person, the fact spouse(bob, ann) and the DL assertion bill :
∃Spouse.⊤. In this case one would expect that neither Bill nor Bob are considered
high risk, and so should not have a surcharge; and that since Bob (contrary to
Bill) has a known spouse, he should have a discount. This is in fact the result of
MKNFWF S. Note that, it is only possible to represent the diﬀerence between the
situations of Bill and Bob by using the existential quantiﬁcation of DL, something
that is not possible in logic programming alone.
In the original deﬁnition of MKNFWF S, the inter-dependencies of the ontology
and rules were captured by a bottom-up ﬁxed-point operator with multiple levels
of iterations. Recently, a query-based approach to hybrid MKNF knowledge bases,
called SLG(O), has been developed using tabled resolution (Alferes et al. 2012).
SLG(O) is sound and complete, as well as terminating for various classes of pro-
grams (e.g. datalog). In addition SLG(O) is relevant in the sense of Example 2,
i.e. in general one does not need to compute the whole model (for every object in
the knowledge base) to answer a speciﬁc query. This relevancy is a critical require-
ment for scalability in numerous practical applications (e.g. in the area of Semantic
Web): without relevance a query about a particular individual I may need to derive
information about other individuals even if those individuals were not connected to
I through rules or axioms. This is also clear e.g. in the above mentioned case study

6
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
about matching patient records for clinical trials criteria (Patel et al. 2007). In this
study one is interested in ﬁnding out whether a given patient matches the criteria
for a given trial or, at most, which patients match a given criteria; for scalability, it
is crucial that such a query does not need to go over all patients and all criteria. In
a similar manner, when assessing a shipment in Example 1, it is infeasible to have
to consider all shipments into a country: the query must be relevant to be useful.
SLG(O) serves as a theoretical framework for query evaluation of MKNFWF S
knowledge bases, but it models the inference mechanisms of an ontology abstractly,
as an oracle. While this abstraction allows the resolution method to be parameter-
ized by diﬀerent ontology formalisms in the same manner as MKNFWF S, it leaves
open details of how the ontology and rules should interact and these details must
be accounted for in an implementation.
This paper describes, in Section 4, the design and implementation of a proto-
type query evaluator3 for MKNFWF S, called CDF-Rules, which ﬁxes the ontology
part to ALCQ theories, and makes use of the prover from XSB’s ontology manage-
ment library, the Coherent Description Framework (CDF) (Swift and Warren 2003)
(overviewed in Section 3). To the best of our knowledge, this implementation is
the ﬁrst working query-driven implementation for Hybrid MKNF knowledge bases,
combining rules and ontology and complete w.r.t. the well-founded semantics.
2 MKNF Well-Founded Semantics
Hybrid MKNF knowledge bases, as introduced in (Motik and Rosati 2007), are
essentially formulas in the logics of minimal knowledge and negation as failure
(MKNF) (Lifschitz 1991), i.e. ﬁrst-order logics with equality represented as the con-
gruence relation ≈, and two modal operators K and not , which allow inspection
of the knowledge base. Intuitively, given a ﬁrst-order formula ϕ, K ϕ asks whether
ϕ is known, while not ϕ checks whether ϕ is not known. A Hybrid MKNF knowl-
edge base consists of two components: a decidable description logic (DL) knowledge
base, translatable into ﬁrst-order logic; and a ﬁnite set of rules of modal atoms.
Deﬁnition 1
Let O be a DL knowledge base built over a language L with distinguished sets of
countably inﬁnitely many variables NV , along with ﬁnitely many individuals NI
and predicates (also called concepts) NC. An atom P(t1, . . . , tn), where P ∈NC
and ti ∈NV ∪NI, is called a DL-atom if P occurs in O, otherwise it is called
non-DL-atom.
An MKNF rule r is of the form
K H ←K A1, . . . , K An, not B1, . . . , not Bm
(5)
where Hi, Ai, and Bi are atoms. H is called the (rule) head and the sets {K Ai},
and {not Bj} form the (rule) body. Atoms of the form K A are also called positive
3 The implementation is available from the XSB CVS repository as part of the CDF package in
the subdirectory packages/altCDF/mknf.

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
7
literals or modal K-atoms while atoms of the form not A are called negative literals
or modal not-atoms. A rule r is positive if m = 0 and a fact if n = m = 0. A program
P is a ﬁnite set of MKNF rules and a hybrid MKNF knowledge base K is a pair
(O, P).
In Deﬁnition 1, the modal operators of MKNF logics are only applied to atoms in
the rules, which might indicate that it would suﬃce to use a simpler logic that does
not deal with the application of the modal operators to complex formulae. However,
for deﬁning the meaning of these hybrid knowledge bases, modal operators do need
to be applied to complex formulas, namely to the whole ontology O (cf. Deﬁnition
7). Intuitively, a hybrid knowledge base speciﬁes that: for each rule of the form (5)
in P, the atom H is known if all the Ai are known and none of the Bj is known; and
that the whole ontology O is known (i.e. K O). As such, using the more general
MKNF logic eases the deﬁnition of the semantics of hybrid knowledge bases, so
similarly to (Motik and Rosati 2007) and (Knorr et al. 2008), we resort to the full
MKNF logic (Lifschitz 1991).
For decidability DL-safety is assumed, which basically constrains the use of
rules to individuals actually appearing in the knowledge base under considera-
tion. Formally, an MKNF rule r is DL-safe if every variable in r occurs in at
least one non-DL-atom K B occurring in the body of r. A hybrid MKNF knowl-
edge base K is DL-safe if all its rules are DL-safe (for more details we refer to
(Motik and Rosati 2007)).
The well-founded MKNF semantics, MKNFWF S, presented in (Knorr et al. 2008),
and further developed in (Knorr et al. 2011), is based on a complete three-valued
extension of the original MKNF semantics. However here, as we are only inter-
ested in querying for literals and conjunctions of literals, we limit ourselves to the
computation of what is called the well-founded partition in (Knorr et al. 2008): ba-
sically the atoms that are true or false. For that reason, and in correspondence to
logic programming, we name this partition the well-founded model. First, we recall
some notions from (Knorr et al. 2008) which will be useful in the deﬁnition of the
operators for obtaining that well-founded model.
Deﬁnition 2
Consider a hybrid MKNF knowledge base K = (O, P). The set of K-atoms of K,
written KA(K), is the smallest set that contains (i) all modal K-atoms occurring in
P, and (ii) a modal atom K ξ for each modal atom not ξ occurring in K.
Furthermore, for a set of modal atoms S, SDL is the subset of DL-atoms of S
(Deﬁnition 1), and bS = {ξ | K ξ ∈S}.
Basically KA(K) collects all modal atoms of predicates appearing in the rules, and
bS just removes K operators from the argument set S.
To guarantee that all atoms that are false in the ontology are also false by default
in the rules, we introduce new positive DL atoms that represent ﬁrst-order false
DL atoms, along with a program transformation making these new modal atoms
available for reasoning with the respective rules.

8
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
Deﬁnition 3
Let K be a DL-safe hybrid MKNF knowledge base. We obtain K+ from K by adding
an axiom ¬P ⊑NP for every DL atom P which occurs as head in at least one rule
in K where NP is a new predicate not already occurring in K. Moreover, we obtain
K∗from K+ by adding not NP(t1, . . . , tn) to the body of each rule with a DL
atom P(t1, . . . , tn) in the head.
In K+, NP represents ¬P (with its corresponding arguments) while K∗introduces
a restriction on each rule with such a DL atom in the head, saying intuitively that
the rule can only be used to conclude the head if the negation of its head cannot
be proved4. For example, to guarantee in Example 1 that proving falsity of Inspect
for some shipment (via the ontology) enforces default negation of Inspect for that
shipment, one would build K+ by adding to the ontology the axiom ¬Inspect ⊑
N Inspect (where N Inspect is a new symbol not appearing elsewhere), and in
K∗all original rules with inspect(X) in the head would be transformed by adding
not n inspec(X) to the body. In this case, the rule in (2) would be transformed to:
K inspect(X) ←K hasShipment(X, Country), not safeCountry(Country),
not n inspect(X).
We continue by recalling the deﬁnition in (Knorr et al. 2008) of an operator TK
to allow conclusions to be drawn from positive hybrid MKNF knowledge bases (i.e.
knowledge bases where rules have no default negation).
Deﬁnition 4
For K a positive DL-safe hybrid MKNF knowledge base, RK, DK, and TK are
deﬁned on subsets of KA(K∗) as follows:
RK(S)
=
S ∪{K H | K contains a rule of the form (1) such that K Ai ∈S
for each 1 ≤i ≤n}
DK(S)
=
{K ξ | K ξ ∈KA(K∗) and O ∪bSDL |= ξ} ∪{K Q(b1, . . . , bn) |
K Q(a1, . . . , an) ∈S \ SDL, K Q(b1, . . . , bn) ∈KA(K∗), and
O ∪bSDL |= ai ≈bi for 1 ≤i ≤n}
TK(S)
=
RK(S) ∪DK(S)
RK derives consequences from the rules in a way similar to the classical TP operator
of deﬁnite logic programs, while DK obtains knowledge from the ontology O, both
from non-DL-atoms and the equalities occurring in O, where the ≈operator deﬁnes
a congruence relation between individuals.
The operator TK is shown to be monotonic in (Knorr et al. 2008) so, by the
Knaster-Tarski theorem, it has a unique least ﬁxed point, denoted lfp(TK), which
is reached after a ﬁnite number of iteration steps.
The computation of the well-founded models follows the alternating ﬁxed point
construction (van Gelder 1989) of the well-founded semantics for logic programs.
This approach requires turning a hybrid MKNF knowledge base into a positive one
to make TK applicable.
4 Note that K+ and K∗are still hybrid MKNF knowledge bases, so we only refer to K+ and K∗
explicitly when it is necessary.

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
9
Deﬁnition 5
Let KG = (O, PG) be a ground DL-safe hybrid MKNF knowledge base and let
S ⊆KA(KG). The MKNF transform KG/S = (O, PG/S) is obtained by PG/S
containing all rules K H ←K A1, . . . , K An for which there exists a rule
K H ←K A1, . . . , K An, not B1, . . . , not Bm
in PG with K Bj ̸∈S for all 1 ≤j ≤m.
The above transformation resembles that used for answer-sets (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1990)
of logic programs and the following two operators are deﬁned.
Deﬁnition 6
Let K = (O, P) be a DL-safe hybrid MKNF knowledge base and S ⊆KA(K∗). We
deﬁne:
ΓK(S) = lfp(TK+
G/S), and Γ′
K(S) = lfp(TK∗
G/S)
Both operators are shown to be antitonic (Knorr et al. 2008), hence their compo-
sition is monotonic and form the basis for deﬁning the well-founded MKNF model.
Here we present its alternating computation.
T0 =
∅
TU0 =
KA(K∗)
Tn+1 =
ΓK(TUn)
TUn+1 =
Γ′
K(Tn)
Tω =
S Tn
TUω =
T TUn
Note that by ﬁniteness of the ground knowledge base (Deﬁnition 1) the iteration
stops before reaching ω. It was shown in (Knorr et al. 2008) that the sequences are
monotonically increasing and decreasing respectively, and that Tω and TUω form
the well-founded model in the following sense:
Deﬁnition 7
Let K = (O, P) be a DL-safe hybrid MKNF knowledge base and let TK, TUK ⊆
KA(K), with TK being Tω and TUK being TUω both restricted to the modal
atoms occurring in KA(K). Then
MWF = {K A | A ∈TK} ∪{K π(O)} ∪{not A | A ∈KA(K) \ TUK}
is the well-founded MKNF model of K, where π(O) denotes the ﬁrst-order logic
formula equivalent to the ontology O (for details on the translation of O into ﬁrst-
order logic see (Motik and Rosati 2007)) .
All modal K-atoms in MWF are true, all modal not-atoms are false and all other
modal atoms from KA(K) are undeﬁned.
As shown in (Knorr et al. 2008), the well-founded model is sound with respect to
the original semantics of (Motik and Rosati 2007), i.e. all atoms true (resp. false) in
the well-founded model are also true (resp. false) in the model of (Motik and Rosati 2007).
In fact, the relation between the semantics of (Knorr et al. 2008) and (Motik and Rosati 2007),
is tantamount to that of the well-founded semantics and the answer-sets semantics
of logic programs. Moreover, this deﬁnition is in fact a generalization of the original
deﬁnition of the well-founded semantics of normal logic programs, in the sense that

10
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
if the ontology is empty then this deﬁnition exactly yields the well-founded models
according to (van Gelder et al. 1991). For more properties, as well as motivation
and intuitions on MKNFWF S, the reader is referred to (Knorr et al. 2008).
3 XSB Prolog and the Coherent Description Framework
Our implementation of MKNFWF S is based on XSB Prolog (xsb.sourceforge.net)
for two reasons. First, XSB’s tabling engine evaluates rules according to WFS, and
ensures rule termination for programs and goals with the bounded term-size prop-
erty 5. Second, the implementation uses the prover from XSB’s ontology manage-
ment system, the Coherent Description Framework (CDF) (Swift and Warren 2003).
CDF has been used in numerous commercial projects, and was originally devel-
oped as a proprietary tool by the company XSB, Inc 6. Since 2003, CDF has been
used to support extraction of information about aircraft parts from free-text data
ﬁelds, about medical supplies and electronic parts from web-sites and electronic cat-
alogs, and about the speciﬁcs of mechanical parts from scanned technical drawings.
Also, CDF is used to maintain screen models for graphical user interfaces that are
driven by XSB and its graphics package, XJ (www.xsb.com/xj.aspx). We discuss
features of CDF that are relevant to the implementation described in Section 4.
Type-0 and Type-1 Ontologies All classes in CDF are represented by terms of
the form cid(Identiﬁer, Namespace), instances by terms of the form oid(Identiﬁer,
Namespace), and relations by terms of the form rid(Identiﬁer, Namespace), where
Identiﬁer and Namespace can themselves be any ground Prolog term.
Commercial use has driven CDF to support eﬃcient query answering from Prolog
for very large knowledge bases. A key to this is that ontologies in CDF can have
a restricted, tractable form. Type-0 ontologies do not allow representation of nega-
tion or disjunction within the ontology itself, and implicitly use the closed-world
assumption. As such, Type-0 ontologies resemble a frame-based representation more
than a description logic, and do not add any complexity to query evaluation beyond
that of WFS. Support for query answering motivates the representation of Type-0
ontologies. The predicate isa/2 is used to state inclusion: whether the inclusion
is a subclass, element of, or subrelation depends on the type of the term (not all
combinations of types of terms are allowed in a CDF program). Relational atoms
in CDF have the form:
• hasAttr(T erm1, Rel1, T erm2) which has the meaning T erm1 ⊑∃Rel1.T erm2;
• allAttr(T erm1, Rel1, T erm2) with the meaning T erm1 ⊑∀Rel1.T erm2;
• along with other forms that designate cardinality constraints on relations.
Figure 1 presents some DL Axioms and their Type-0 counterparts, where names-
pace information has been omitted for readability. The fact that Type-0 ontologies
5 Intuitively, a program P and goal G have the bounded term-size property if there is a ﬁnite
number n such that all subgoals and answers created in the evaluation of the goal G to P have
a size less than n.
6 Most of CDF is open-source, including all features used in this paper. CDF is distributed as a
package in XSB’s standard release, and full details can be found in its accompanying manual.

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
11
Man ⊑Person ⊓Male
isa(cid(man),cid(person))
isa(cid(man),cid(male))
Husband ⊑Man ⊓∃Spouse.Person
isa(cid(husband),cid(man)).
hasAttr(cid(husband),rid(spouse),cid(person)
adam : Husband
isa(oid(adam),cid(husband)
Fig. 1. Some DL Axioms and their Type-0 Counterparts
cannot express negation is crucial to their ability to be directly queried. In other
words, isa/2, hasAttr/3 and other atoms can be called as Prolog goals, with any
instantiation pattern for the call. Query answering for Type-0 goals checks inher-
itance hierarchies and does not rely on uniﬁcation alone. Type-0 ontologies use
tabling to implement inheritance and use tabled negation so that only the most
speciﬁc attribute types for a hasAttr/3 or other query are returned to a user.
Besides the constructs of Type-0 ontologies, Type-1 ontologies further allow
atoms of the form
necessCond(T erm1, CE)
where CE can be any ALCQ class expression over CDF terms. For instance, the
axiom
Woman ⊑Person ⊓¬Man
would be represented by the atom
necessCond(cid(woman),(cid(person),neg(cid(man))))
where the comma represents conjunction, as in Prolog. Because they use open-world
negation, atoms for Type-1 ontologies cannot be directly queried; rather they are
queried through goals such as allModelsEntails(T erm, ClassExpr), succeeding
if T erm ⊑ClassExpr is provable in the current state of the ontology. Type-1
ontologies deduce entailment using a tableau prover written in Prolog.
System Features of CDF Regardless of the type of the ontology, atoms such as
isa/2, hasAttr/2, etc. can be deﬁned extensionaly via Prolog atoms, or intensionaly
via Prolog rules. For instance, evaluation of the goal
hasAttr(Class1,Rel,Class2)
would directly check extensional Prolog facts through a subgoal
hasAttr_ext(Class1,Rel,Class2)
and would also check intensional rules through a subgoal
hasAttr_int(Class1,Rel,Class2)

12
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
Intensional deﬁnitions are used so that atoms can be lazily deﬁned by querying a
database or analyzing a graphical model: their semantics is outside that of CDF.
In fact, using combinations of rules and facts, Type-0 ontologies are commonly
used comprising tens of thousands of classes and relations, and tens of millions of
statments about individuals. At the same time, intensional deﬁnitions in a Type-1
ontology provide a basis for the tableau prover to call rules, as is required to support
the interdependencies of MKNFWF S, and will be further discussed in Section 4.2.
Despite their restrictions, the vast majority of knowledge used by XSB, Inc.
is maintained in Type-0 ontologies. Although Type-0 ontologies have supported
numerous commercial projects, their limitations of course preclude the full use of
information in ontologies. Support of a uniform querying mechanism for individualss
in MKNFWF S as described below is intended as a means to allow commercial
projects to use a more powerful form of knowledge representation.
Related Work
CDF was originally developed in 2002-2003, and Type-0 ontologies were envi-
sioned as a means to represent object-oriented knowledge in Prolog. Unlike Flora-
2 (Yang et al. 2003) CDF was intended to be a Prolog library, and its inheritance
was designed to be entirely monotonic for compatibility with description logics.
Type-1 ontologies were originally evaluated through a translation into ASP (Swift 2004):
this approach pre-dated that of KAON2 (Motik 2006) and was abandoned due to
the diﬃculty of dynamically pruning search in ASP; afterwards the current tableau
approach was developed which attempts to examine as small a portion of the ontol-
ogy as possible when proving entailment (cf. e.g. (Horrocks and Patel-Schneider 1999)
for a discussion of how search may be pruned in tableau provers for ontologies).
CDF’s approach may be distinguished from (Lukacsy et al. 2008), which also com-
bines ontological deduction with Prolog. Type-0 ontologies rely on WFS reasoning
and so achieve good scalability under a weak semantics; theorem proving for Type-1
ontologies is used only when needed; (Lukacsy et al. 2008) takes a more uniform
approach to deduction which relies on WAM-level extensions for eﬃciency; to our
knowledge this approach is research-oriented, and has not been used commercially.
4 Goal-Driven MKNF Implementation
In Section 2 we presented a bottom-up computation that constructs the complete
well-founded model for a given hybrid knowledge base. However, in practical cases,
especially when considering the context of the Semantic Web, this is not what
is intended. In fact, it would make little sense to compute the whole model of
anything that is related to the World Wide Web. Instead, one would like to query
the knowledge base for a given predicate (or propositional atom) and determine
its truth value. As an illustration, recall Example 1 where we wanted to know if
a given shipment should be inspected or not when it arrived, or the case study of
(Patel et al. 2007) where one may want to know whether a given patient matches

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
13
the criteria for a given trial. Deriving all the consequences of a knowledge base to
answer a query about a given shipment or patient would be impractical.
In this section we describe the algorithms and the design of CDF-Rules, a goal-
driven implementation for Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases under the Well-Founded
Semantics that minimizes the computation to the set of individuals that are relevant
to a query. CDF-Rules makes use of XSB’s tabled SLG Resolution (Chen and Warren 1996)
for the evaluation of a query, together with tableaux mechanisms supported by CDF
theorem prover to check entailment on the ontology. CDF-Rules is tuned for Type-1
ontologies, and thereby is also compatible with Type-0 ontologies. For the descrip-
tion of the solution, we assume that the reader has a general knowledge of tabled
logic programs (cf. e.g. (Swift and Warren 2012)).
4.1 A Query-Driven Iterative Fixed Point
At an intuitive level, a query to CDF-Rules is evaluated in a relevant (top-down
like) manner through SLG resolution, until the selected goal is a literal l formed
over a DL-atom. At that point, in addition to further resolution, the ontology also
uses tableau mechanisms to derive l. However, as a tableau proof of l may require
propositions (literals) inferred by other rules, considerable care must be taken to
integrate the tableau proving with rule-based query evaluation.
In its essence, a tableau algorithm decides the entailment of a formula ϕ w.r.t. an
ontology O by trying to construct a common model for ¬ϕ and O, sometimes called
a completion graph (cf. e.g. (Schmidt-Strauss and Smolka 1990)). If such a model
can not be constructed, O |= ϕ; otherwise O does not entail ϕ. Similar to other
description logic provers, the CDF theorem prover attempts to traverse as little of
an ontology as possible when proving ϕ. As a result, when the prover is invoked on
an atom A, the prover attempts to build a model for the underlying individual(s)
to which A refers, and explores additional individuals only as necessary.
For our purposes, given the particular interdependence between the rules and
the ontology in MKNFWF S, the prover must consider the knowledge inferred by
the rules in the program for the entailment proof, as a DL-atom can be derived by
rules, which in turn may rely on other DL-atoms entailed by the ontology. Thus, a
query to a DL-atom p(o), iteratively computes a (sub-)model for o, deriving at each
iteration new information about the roles and classes of o, along with information
about other individuals related to o either in the ontology (via CDF’s tableau
algorithm) or in the rules (via SLG procedures) until a ﬁxed point is reached.
We start by illustrating the special case of positive knowledge bases without
default negation in the rules.
Example 3
Consider the following KB (with the program on the left and the ontology on the

14
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
right7) and the query third(X):
K third(X) ←p(X), K second(X).
K first(callback).
First ⊑Second
p(callback).
The query resolves against the rule for third(X), leading to the goals p(X) and
K second(X). The predicate p, although not a DL-atom, assures DL-safety, restrict-
ing the application of the rules to known individuals. The call p(X) returns true for
X = callback. Accordingly, the next subgoal is K second(callback) which depends
on the DL-atom second(callback), corresponding in the ontology to the proposi-
tion Second. At this point, the computation calls the CDF theorem prover which
starts to derive a model for all the properties of the individual callback. Yet in this
computation, the proposition Second itself depends on a predicate deﬁned in the
rules – First. It can thus be seen that the evaluation of the query third(callback)
must be done iteratively – the (instantiated) goal third(callback) should suspend
(using tabling) until second(callback) is resolved. Furthermore, second(callback)
needs ﬁrst to prove first(callback) from the rules. In general, goals to DL-atoms
may need to suspend in order to compute an iterated ﬁxed point, after which they
may either succeed or fail.
To formalize the actions in Example 3 on the special case of deﬁnite programs,
we start by considering the computation for all individuals (i.e. temporarily disre-
garding the relevance of individuals, as discussed above).
Deﬁnition 8
Let K = (O, P) be a DL-safe hybrid MKNF knowledge base, where P does not con-
tain default negation. Let I be a ﬁxed set of individuals. The function Tableau(O)
computes for a theory O the entailments of O for I, disregarding the rules compo-
nent. The function SLG(P) computes via tabling the set of DL-atoms true in the
minimal model of P for a set of individuals, I, disregarding the ontology component.
The model is obtained as the union of the least ﬁxed point of the sequences:
D0 = T ableau(O)
R0 = SLG(P)
D1 = T ableau(O ∪R0)
R1 = SLG(P ∪D0)
. . .
. . .
Dn = T ableau(O ∪Rn−1)
Rn = SLG(P ∪Dn−1)
Deﬁnition 8 resembles Deﬁnition 4 of the operator TK in Section 2. In fact, the
Ri sequence is similar to the RK(S) operator which collects new conclusions from
the rules, whereas the Di sequence is similar to the DK(S) operator which collects
new conclusions from the ontology. Rather than starting with the empty set of
conclusions from the rules, as is the case for TK of Deﬁnition 4, here the Ri sequence
7 To simplify reading, for rules we omit the K before non-DL atoms. In fact, in the implementation
the ontology must be written according to CDF syntax, and in the rules the modal operators K
and not are replaced by (meta-)predicates known/1 and dlnot/1, respectively (see Section 4.2).

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
15
starts with all conclusions that can be drawn from the program alone 8. Given these
minor diﬀerences, taking the function Tableau(O) as correct w.r.t. the consequence
relation of the description logic in use, and taking the function SLG(P) as correct
w.r.t. the least model semantics of deﬁnite logic programs, it is easy to see that if I
is the set of all individuals in the knowledge base then the union of the Dn and Rn
at the ﬁxed point exactly coincides with the least ﬁxed point of TK. Furthermore,
as long as the program P respects DL-safety, MKNF rules are lazily grounded with
respect to the set of individuals I. In fact, given a DL-safe set of MKNF rules, and
a set of queries grounded with the individuals in I, the evaluation of the queries
results in a complete grounding of the rules, and so the ﬁxed point is guaranteed
in a ﬁnite number of steps.
Deﬁnition 8 captures certain aspects of how the rules and the ontology use each
other to derive new knowledge in CDF-Rules, via an alternating computation be-
tween the rules and the ontology. However it does not capture cases in which the
relevant set of individuals changes (i.e. it does not deal with changes in the set
I), or the presence of default negation in rule bodies. With regard to relevant in-
dividuals, since it is possible both to deﬁne n-ary predicates in rules and roles in
the ontology, a query may depend on several individuals. Therefore, the ﬁxed point
computation must take into account the entire set of individuals that the query
depends on. This is done by tabling information about each individual in the set of
individuals relevant to the query. This set may increase throughout the ﬁxed point
iteration as new dependency relations between individuals (including equality) are
discovered. The iteration stops when it is not possible to derive anything else about
these individuals, i.e., when both the set of individuals and the classes and roles of
those individuals have reached a ﬁxed point. The details of this iterative increase in
the set of considered individuals can be found in the algorithm of Figure 2, which
also addresses default negation and its interplay with ﬁrst-order negation.
The following example considers the presence of default negation in rule bodies.
Example 4
Consider the following knowledge base:
K fourth(X) ←p(X), not third(X).
Fourth ⊑Fifth
K third(X) ←p(X), K second(X).
First ⊑Second
K first(callback).
p(callback).
In this example a predicate fourth(X) is deﬁned as the default negation of
third(X). Since fourth(X) is deﬁned in the rules, the negation is closed world,
that is, fourth(X) should only succeed if it is not possible to prove third(X).
Consequently, if we employed SLG resolution blindly, an iteration where the truth of
second(callback) had not been made available to the rules from the ontology might
mistakenly fail the derivation of third(callback) and so succeed fourth(callback).
8 Since TK is monotonic, it is clear that starting the iteration of this operator with all conclusions
drawn from the rules alone would yield exactly the same (least) ﬁxed point.

16
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
Likewise, the rules may pass to the ontology knowledge, that after some iterations,
no longer applies — in this case if the ontology were told that fourth(callback)
was true, it would mistakenly derive Fifth.
Example 4 illustrates the need to treat default negation carefully, as the truth
of default literals requires re-evaluation when new knowledge is inferred. Recall the
manner in which the operators ΓK and Γ′
K of Deﬁnition 6 address the problem of
closed-world negation. Roughly, one step in ΓK (or Γ′
K) is deﬁned as the application
of TK until reaching a ﬁxed point. Applying Γ′
K followed by ΓK is a monotonic
operation and thus is guaranteed to have a least ﬁxed point. In each dual application
of ΓK and Γ′
K two diﬀerent models follow – a monotonically increasing model of
true atoms (i.e. true predicates and propositions), and a monotonically decreasing
model of non-false atoms.
In a similar way, the implementation of CDF-Rules makes use of two ﬁxed points:
an inner ﬁxed point where we apply Deﬁnition 8 corresponding to TK; and an outer
ﬁxed point for the evaluation of nots, corresponding to ΓK (and Γ′
K). In the outer
iteration, the evaluation of closed-world negation is made by a reference to the
previous model obtained by ΓK. Thus in CDF-Rules, not(A) succeeds if, in the
previous outer iteration, A was not proven.
Example 5
To illustrate the need to apply two ﬁxed points, consider the knowledge base below
and the query c(X):
K c(X) ←p(X), K a(X), not b(X).
A ⊑B
K a(object).
p(object).
When evaluating the query c(X), X is ﬁrst bound to object by p, and then the
nested iteration begins. The inner iteration follows the steps of Deﬁnition 8, and
since these operators are deﬁned only for deﬁnite rules, each negative body literal
in a rule such as p(X) is evaluated according to its value in the previous outer ﬁxed
point, or is simply evaluated as true in the ﬁrst outer iteration. (As we will see,
this is done lazily by CDF-Rules). The ﬁrst stage of the inner iteration computes
R0 = {a(object), p(object), c(object)} (Deﬁnition 8) via the rules; and computes via
the ontology D0 = ∅, as O ̸|= A. In the second inner stage the rules achieve the same
ﬁxed point as in the ﬁrst, so R1 = R0, but the ontology derives object : B in D1.
After sharing this knowledge, there is nothing else to infer by either components,
and we achieve the ﬁrst inner ﬁxed point with:
T1 = {a(object), b(object), c(object), p(object)}
So now, the second outer iteration starts the computation of the inner iteration
again and, in this iteration, negative literals in the rules are evaluated w.r.t. T1. As a
consequence, c(object) fails, since b(object) ∈T1. The ﬁxed point of the second inner
iteration contains p(object), a(object) and b(object), which is in fact the correct
model for object. Afterwards, a ﬁnal outer iteration is needed to to determine that

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
17
an outer ﬁxed point has in fact been reached. Since c(object) is in the model of the
ﬁnal iteration, the query c(X) succeeds for X = object.
The procedure to compute a lazily invoked iterative ﬁxed point over a DL-
safe MKNF Hybrid Knowledge Base is summarized in Figure 2 using predicates
that are described in detail in Section 4.2. In each inner iteration, the tabled
predicate known/3 is used to derive knowledge from the rules component, while
allModelsEntails/3 infers knowledge from the ontology via tableau proofs. Within
rules evaluated by known/3, the default negation of a DL-atom A is obtained by the
predicate dlnot(A), which succeeds if A was not proven in the last outer iteration.
The predicates definedClass/2 and definedRole/3 are used to obtain the relevant
classes and roles deﬁned for a given individual. We assume that these predicates are
deﬁned explicitly by the compiler or programmer, but they can also be inferred via
the DL-safe restriction 9. Regardless of whether inference is used, whenever a role
is encountered for an individual, a check is made to determine whether the related
individual Individual1 is already in the list of individuals in the ﬁxed point, and
Individual1 is added if not.
In order to compute MKNFWF S the algorithm shown in Figure 2 must create two
diﬀerent sets (cf. Deﬁnition 7): a credulous set, T U, containing the atoms that are
true or undeﬁned corresponding to application of the operator Γ′
K ; and a skeptical
set, T , of the atoms that are true corresponding to ΓK (Deﬁnition 6). The itera-
tions in Figure 2 capture the construction of these sets in the following manner. The
ﬁrst iteration of OutIter in known(T erm, OutIter, InIter) (where OutIter = 0)
corresponds to the ﬁrst step of computation of the set T U, whereas the second
iteration corresponds to the second step of computation of the set T . As a conse-
quence, iterations where OutIter is indexed with an even number are monotonically
decreasing T U iterations, while iterations indexed with an odd number are mono-
tonically increasing T iterations. By making use of this property, the algorithm of
Figure 2 ensures that the ﬁxed point will only be achieved in T U iterations. This
way, Query is true if known(Query, OuterF inal −1, InnerF inal) holds. If this is not
the case, then Query is undeﬁned if known(Query, OuterF inal, InnerF inal) holds,
and Query is false otherwise.
4.2 Implementing MKNFWF S Components
We now describe the various predicates in the algorithm of Figure 2, including
the manner in which the rule and ontology components exchange knowledge, and
how the ﬁxed point is checked.
9 Because of DL-safety, every DL-rule must contain a positive literal that is only deﬁned in the
rules. Such a literal limits the evaluation of the rules to known individuals, so that CDF-Rules
can infer the set of individuals that are applicable to a given rule.

18
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
Input: A query Query to a DL-Atom
Output: Value of the input query in MKNFW F S
addIndividuals(Query,IndividualList);
1
foreach Individual in IndividualList do
2
OutIter, InIter = 0;
3
S = S1 = {};
4
P = P1 = {};
5
repeat
6
P = P1;
7
repeat
8
S = S1;
9
foreach Class in deﬁnedClass(Individual,Class) do
10
Term = Class(Individual);
11
S1 = S1∪known(Term, OutIter, InIter);
12
S1 = S1∪allModelsEntails(Term, OutIter, InIter);
13
S1 = S1∪allModelsEntails(neg(Term), OutIter, InIter);
14
end
15
foreach Role in deﬁnedRole(Individual,Individual1,Role) do
16
Term = Role(Individual,Individual1);
17
add Individual1 to IndividualList if necessary
18
S1 = S1∪known(Term, OutIter, InIter);
19
S1 = S1∪allModelsEntails(Term, OutIter, InIter);
20
S1 = S1∪allModelsEntails(neg(Term), OutIter, InIter);
21
end
22
InIter++;
23
until S = S1 ;
24
P = S;
25
OutIter++;
26
until OutIter is even (a TU evaluation) and P = P1 ;
27
end
28
if known(Query,OuterF inal-1,Inner F inal) then
29
return true
30
else
31
if known(Query,OuterF inal,Inner’F inal) then
32
return undeﬁned
33
else
34
return false
35
end
36
end
37
Fig. 2. The Top-Level Algorithm:ComputeFixedPoint(Query)
4.2.1 Rules Component
As mentioned, rules are transformed to use known/1 corresponding to K and
dlnot/1 corresponding to not. As shown in Figure 3, given the goal known(A) with
A = p(O), the code ﬁrst calls computeFixedPoint(p(O)) to perform the ﬁxed point
computation for the object instance O. As in Figure 2, computeFixedPoint(p(O))
calls the lower-level known/3 and dlnot/3 to determine the truth of literals during
the ﬁxed point computation. Once the ﬁxed point has been reached, known/1 uses

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
19
get object iter(p(O),Outer,Inner) to obtain the ﬁnal iteration indices for O from a
global store, and calls known/3 again to determine the ﬁnal truth value of p(O).
Note that known/3 is always called with the iteration indices (arguments 2 and
3) bound, so that they are always contained in the table entries. Thus, the post-
ﬁxed point call to known/3 simply checks the table, and is not computationally
expensive.
Within a given iteration, p(O) may be known in one of two ways. Either it can
be directly derived from the rules; or O ∈P (i.e. o:P) may have been entailed
by the ontology in the previous inner iteration step, as determined by the call
allModelsEntails(p(O), OutIter, PrevIter). In either case, care must be taken so
that that if ¬A holds, then not A holds as well. In the formalism of Deﬁnition 3 this
is guaranteed in two steps. First, an axiom ¬P ⊑NP is added for each DL-atom
that occurs in the head of a rule; in addition, the literal not NP is added the body
of each rule with head P: this rewrite is used by the Γ′
K operator to produce the
T U set. Accordingly in Figure 3, when we try to derive known(A, OutIter, InIter)
and OutIter is even (i.e. corresponding to a T U step via Γ′
K in Deﬁnition 7 ) we
check whether the ontology derived ¬A in the previous inner iteration by the call
no prev neg(A, OutIter, PrevIter). If ¬A was derived, then no prev neg/3 fails via
the call to tnot/1, (which is XSB’s operator for tabled negation), and the top-level
goal also fails.
On the other hand, the predicate dlnot(A) which uses closed world assumption,
succeeds if A fails (Figure 4). As discussed in Example 5, the evaluation of dlnot/2
must take into account the result of the previous outer iteration. Accordingly, in
Figure 4 the call dlnot(A) with A = p(O) gets the current outer iteration for O,
and immediately calls dlnot/2. If the outer iteration index is greater than 1, the
second clause of dlnot/2 simply ﬁnds the index of the (inner) ﬁxed point of the
previous outer iteration, and determines whether A was true in that ﬁxed point.
Since the call to known/3 in tnot/1 is tabled, dlnot/[1,2] do not need to be tabled
themselves. As described before, outer iterations alternately represent iterations of
T and T U sets of Deﬁnition 7, where T sets are monotonically increasing while T U
sets are monotonically decreasing. To assure that the ﬁrst T U set is the largest set
(KA(K∗) following Deﬁnition 6), we compel all calls to dlnot/1 to succeed in the
ﬁrst outer iteration, as represented by the ﬁrst clause of dlnot/2.
4.2.2 Ontology Component
The tabled predicate allModelsEntails/3 provides the interface to CDF’s tableau
theorem prover (Figure 5). It is called with an atom or its classical negation, and
with the its iteration indices bound. Although the iterations are not used in the body
of allModelsEntails/3, representing the iteration information in the head ensures
its availability in table entries for use by known/3. allModelsEntails/3 ﬁrst converts
the atomic form of a proposition to one used by CDF. That is, it translates a 1-
ary DL-atom representing an individual’s class membership to the CDF predicate
isa/2, and a 2-ary DL-atom representing an individual’s role to the CDF predicate
hasAttr/3 (see Section 3). In addition, if Atom is a 2-ary role, the target individual

20
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
known(A):-
computeFixedPoint (A),
get_object_iter (A,OutIter ,InIter),
known(A,OutIter ,InIter).
:- table known /3.
known(A,OutIter ,InIter):-
PrevIter
is InIter - 1,
(
call (A),
;
InIter > 0,
allModelsEntails (A,OutIter ,PrevIter )
),
( OutIter mod 2 =:= 1 ->
true
;
no_prev_neg (A,OutIter , PrevIter )
).
/* Enforce
coherence
of default
negation
with
first -order
negation
*/
no_prev_neg (_A ,_OutIter , PrevIter ) :-
PrevIter
< 0,!.
no_prev_neg (A,OutIter , PrevIter ) :-
tnot (allModelsEntails (neg(A),OutIter ,PrevIter )).
Fig. 3. Prolog Implementation of K for Class Properties
dlnot(A):-
computeFixedPoint (A),
get_object_iter (A,OutIter ,_InIter),
dlnot(A,OutIter ).
/* In first iteration , ensure that TU = KA(K*) */
dlnot(_A ,0):- !.
/* In subsequent
iterations , check previous
outer iteration
*/
dlnot(A,OutIter ):-
PrevIter
is OutIter - 1,
get_final_iter (A,PrevIter ,FinIter ),
tnot (known(A,PrevIter ,FinIter)).
Fig. 4. Prolog Implementation of not for Class Properties
may be added to the ﬁxed point set of individuals. As is usual with tableau provers,
entailment of a formula ϕ by an ontology O is shown if the classical negation of ϕ is
inconsistent with O. Thus, rec alModelsEntails/2 immediately fails if the classical
negation of ϕ is consistent with O in the present iteration; otherwise, ϕ is entailed.

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
21
:- table allModelsEntails /3.
allModelsEntails (neg(Atom ),_OutIter ,_InIter ):- !,
/* transform
Atom to CDF object
identifier
and
class expression */
/* add individuals
to current
fixed point list */
( rec_allModelsEntails (Id ,CE) -> fail ; true ).
allModelsEntails (Atom ,_OutIter ,_InIter ):-
/* transform
Atom to CDF object
identifier
and
class expression */
/* add individuals
to current
fixed point list */
( rec_allModelsEntails (Id ,neg(CE)) -> fail ; true ).
Fig. 5. Prolog Pseudo-code for allmodelsEntails/3
The tableau prover, called by rec allModelsEntails/2, obtains all information
inferred by the rules during the previous inner iteration, in accordance with Deﬁni-
tion 8. This is addressed via the CDF intensional rules. As discussed in Section 3,
the architecture of a CDF instance can be divided into two parts – extensional
facts and intensional rules. Extensional facts deﬁne CDF classes and roles as simple
Prolog facts; intensional rules allow classes and roles to be deﬁned by Prolog rules
that are outside of the MKNFWF S semantics. In our case, the intensional rules
support a programming trick to check rule results from a previous iteration. As
shown in Figure 6 they convert the CDF form of an ontology axiom into a 1-ary or
2-ary predicate, and then check the known/3 table for a previous iteration using
the predicate lastKnown/1 (not shown). If roles or classes are uninstantiated in
the call from the tableau prover, all deﬁned roles and classes for the individual are
instantiated using deﬁnedClass/3 or deﬁnedRole/4 before calling lastKnown/1.
4.2.3 Usage
An MKNF Hybrid Knowledge base is deﬁned over a XSB-Prolog knowledge base
together with an ontology speciﬁed over CDF. In CDF-Rules such a knowledge base
is written into two ﬁles as follows:
• rules.P – containing the set of MKNF rules and facts. A rule is deﬁned as
standard Prolog rules as follows:
Head :- A1, ... Ak,known(B1),. . .,known(Bn),dlnot(C1),. . .,dlnot(Cm).
where k, n, m ≥0, and the Ais are all non-DL predicates (i.e. predicates that
are not deﬁned in the ontology), and the Bis and Cis are predicates that can
be both deﬁned in the rules and in the ontology. If k = n = m = 0 then the
rule is a fact, and it is written as usual in Prolog, omitting the ‘:-’ operator.
Note that the transformation to include the negation N Head in the body of
a rule for Head as speciﬁed in Deﬁnition 3 is not needed: such a check is done
by the call to no prev neg/3 in known/3.
To guarantee correctness, each rule must respect DL-safety. However, in the

22
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
isa_int(oid(Obj ,NS),cid(Class ,NS1)):-
ground(Obj),ground(Class) ,!,
Call
=.. [Class ,Obj],
/* Call = Class(Obj) */
lastKnown (Call ).
/* Find
all possible
classes
for Obj if called with
superclass
argument
uninstantiated
*/
isa_int(oid(Obj ,NS),cid(Class ,NS)):-
ground(Obj),var(Class) ,!,
definedClass (Call ,Class ,Obj),
lastKnown (Call ).
hasAttr_int (oid(Obj1 ,NS),rid(Role ,NS1),oid(Obj2 ,NS2)):-
ground(Obj1 ), ground(Obj2 ), ground(Role ) ,!,
Call
=.. [Role ,Obj1 ,Obj2 ],
/* Call = Role (Obj1 ,Obj2 ) */
last_known (Call ).
/* Find
all possible
rules for Obj if called with
role
argument
uninstantiated
*/
hasAttr_int (oid(Obj1 ,NS),rid(Role ,NS1),oid(Obj2 ,NS2)):-
ground(Obj1 ), ground(Obj2 ), var(Role) ,!,
definedRole (Call ,Role ,Obj1 ,Obj2 ),
last_known (Call ).
Fig. 6. Callbacks from the ontology component to the rules component
current implementation it is the programmer’s responsibility to check for this
condition. The current implementation also does not check that the Ai pred-
icates (i.e. the ones not under known/1 or dlnot/1) are not deﬁned in the
ontology. If a programmer opts to not precede the predicate by known/1 or
dlnot/1, any deﬁnition for the predicate in the ontology is simply ignored.
• cdf extensional.P – comprising ordinary ontology facts and concepts deﬁned
over the CDF syntax.
• cdf intensional.P – containing predicates allowing the ontology to access
information in the rules as in Figure 6. In addition, the ﬁle may contain
other intensional rules to lazily access information from a database, oﬀof the
semanitc web, or from other sources external to CDF-Rules.
Example 6
The knowledge base of Example 1 can be easily coded in CDF-Rules as:
%rules
inspect(X) :- hasShipment (X,C), dlnot( safeCountry (C)).
%cdf_extensional
isa_ext(cid(scandinavianCtr ,ont),cid(safeCountry ,ont)).
isa_ext(cid(scandinavianCtr ,ont),cid(EuropeanCtr ,ont)).
isa_ext(oid(norway ,ont),cid(scandinavianCtr ,ont)).
necesscond_ext (cid(DiplomaticShipt ,ont),neg(cid(inspect ,ont))).
Note that the ontological portion is Type-1, due to the use of necessCond/2.

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
23
4.2.4 Discussion
As described, CDF-Rules implements query answering to hybrid MKNF knowledge
bases, and tries to reduce the amount of relevance required in the ﬁxed point op-
eration. Relevance is a critical concept for query answering in practical systems,
however a poorly designed ontology or rules component can work against one an-
other if numerous individuals depend on one another through DL roles. In such a
case the relevance properties of our approach will be less powerful; however in such
a case, a simple query to an ontology about an individual will be ineﬃcient in itself.
The approach of CDF-Rules cannot solve such problems; but it can make query
answering as relevant as the underlying ontology allows.
We do not present here a formal proof of soundness and completeness for our
algorithm, since this would require the full presentation of the formal derivation
procedures on which both XSB-Prolog and CDF implementations rely. However, we
have given an informal argument along with our description by referring to comple-
mentarity between the implementation and the bottom-up deﬁnition of MKNFWF S.
In particular, there is a close correspondence between the inner ﬁxed points of our
computation represented in Deﬁnition 8 and the RK, DK and TK operators of Def-
inition 4; a correspondance between the the actions of known/3 in Figure 3 and
the transformation of Deﬁnition 5 to ensure the coherency between classical and
default negation; and also a correspondance between our outer ﬁxed points and the
operators ΓK / Γ′
K. As a result, one can view our goal-driven implementation as
an optimization of the bottom-up approach where the computation is limited to
the set of relevant objects, and where the evaluation of positive predicates and the
handling of iterations is performed by the use of SLG resolution.
Further optimizations of the described approach are possible. First is to designate
a set of atoms whose value is deﬁned only in the ontology: such atoms would require
tableau proving, but could avoid the ﬁxed point check of computeFixedPoint/1.
Within computeFixedPoint/1 another optimization would be to maintain depen-
dencies among individuals. Intuitively, if individual I1 depended on individual I2
but not the reverse, a ﬁxed point for I2 could be determined before that of I1.
However, these optimizations are fairly straightforward elaborations of CDF-Rules
as presented.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we have described the implementation of a query-driven system,
CDF-Rules, for hybrid knowledge bases combining both (non-monotonic) rules
and a (monotonic) ontology. The system answers queries according to MKNFWF S
(Knorr et al. 2008) and, as such, is also sound w.r.t. the semantics deﬁned in
(Motik and Rosati 2007) for Hybrid MKNF knowledge bases. The deﬁnition of
MKNFWF S is parametric on a decidable description logic (in which the ontol-
ogy is written), and it is worth noting that, as shown in (Knorr et al. 2008), the
complexity of reasoning in MKNFWF S is in the same class as that in the decidable
description logic; a complexity result that is extended to a query-driven approach

24
A S Gomes, J J Alferes and T Swift
in (Alferes et al. 2012). In particular, if the description logic is tractable then rea-
soning in MKNFWF S is also tractable. Our implementation ﬁxes the description
logic part to CDF ontologies that, in its Type-1 version, supports ALCQ description
logic. CDF Type-0 ontologies are simpler, and tractable and, when using Type-0
ontologies only, our implementation exhibits a polynomial complexity behavior.
This fact derives from the usage of tabling mechanisms, as deﬁned in SLG reso-
lution and implemented in XSB Prolog10 In fact, one of the reasons that highly
inﬂuenced the choice of CDF as the parameter ontology logic in our query-driven
implementation for Hybrid MKNF knowledge bases, was the very existence of an
implementation of CDF relying on tabling, that could be coupled together with
the tabling we needed for MKNFWF S. But the algorithms presented here do not
rely on particularities of CDF, and we believe that, for other choices of parameter
logics, implementations could be made in a way similar to the one described in this
paper. Of course, such an implementation would require ﬁrst an implementation in
XSB-Prolog of a prover for the other description logic of choice, providing at least
a predicate allModelsEntails/3 with the meaning as described above.
Though our choice for the implementation was the Well-Founded Semantics for
Hybrid MKNF knowledge bases, MKNFWF S, (Knorr et al. 2008), there were other
formalisms concerned with combining ontologies with WFS rules (Eiter et al. 2004b;
Drabent and Ma luszynski 2007). The approach of (Eiter et al. 2004b) combines on-
tologies and rules in a modular way, i.e. keeps both parts and their semantics sep-
arate, thus having similarities with MKNFWF S. The interface for this approach
is done by the dlv-hex system (Schindlauer 2006). Though with identical data
complexity to MKNFWF S for a tractable DL, it has a less strong integration,
having limitations in the way the ontology can call back program atoms (see
(Eiter et al. 2004b) for details). Hybrid programs of (Drabent and Ma luszynski 2007)
are even more restrictive: this formalism only allows the transfer of information from
the ontology to the rules and not the other way around. Moreover, the semantics
of this approach diﬀers from MKNF (both the one of (Motik and Rosati 2007) and
MKNFWF S) and also(Eiter et al. 2004b) in that if an ontology expresses B1 ∨B2
then the semantics in (Drabent and Ma luszynski 2007) derives p from rules p ←B1
and p ←B2, p while MKNF and (Eiter et al. 2004b) do not. For further compar-
isons of MKNF with other proposals, including those not based on WFS rules, see
(Motik and Rosati 2007; Knorr et al. 2008), and for a survey on other proposals for
combining rules and ontologies see (Hitzler and Parsia 2009)
CDF-Rules serves as a proof-of-concept for querying MKNFWF S knowledge bases.
As discussed, XSB and tractable CDF ontologies have been used extensively in
commercial semantic web applications; the creation of CDF-Rules is a step to-
wards understanding whether and how MKNFWF S can be used in such applica-
tions. As XSB is multi-threaded, CDF-Rules can be extended to a MKNFWF S
server in a fairly straightforward manner. Since XSB supports CLP, further experi-
ments involve representing temporal or spatial information in a hybrid of ontology,
10 The proof of tractability of the implementation of CDF-Rules with CDF Type-0 ontologies is
beyond the scope of this paper.

A Goal-Directed Implementation of Query Answering for Hybrid MKNF
25
rules, and rule-based constraints. In addition, since the implementation of Flora-
2 (Yang et al. 2003) and Silk (Grosof 2009) are both based on XSB, CDF-Rules
also forms a basis for experimenting with MKNFWF S on these systems.
