Putting Fairness Principles into Practice: Challenges, Metrics, and Improvements
Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Tulsee Doshi, Hai Qian, Allison Woodruff, Christine Luu,
Pierre Kreitmann, Jonathan Bischof, Ed H. Chi

Google
Abstract
As more researchers have become aware of and passionate
about algorithmic fairness, there has been an explosion in pa-
pers laying out new metrics, suggesting algorithms to address
issues, and calling attention to issues in existing applications
of machine learning. This research has greatly expanded our
understanding of the concerns and challenges in deploying
machine learning, but there has been much less work in see-
ing how the rubber meets the road.
In this paper we provide a case-study on the application of
fairness in machine learning research to a production classiﬁ-
cation system, and offer new insights in how to measure and
address algorithmic fairness issues. We discuss open ques-
tions in implementing equality of opportunity and describe
our fairness metric, conditional equality, that takes into ac-
count distributional differences. Further, we provide a new
approach to improve on the fairness metric during model
training and demonstrate its efﬁcacy in improving perfor-
mance for a real-world product.
Introduction
By almost every measure, there has been an explosion in at-
tention and research on machine learning fairness: there is a
quickly growing amount of research on how to deﬁne, mea-
sure, and address machine learning fairness, and products
are evaluated with these concerns in mind. Despite this sig-
niﬁcant attention, there has been much less published work
detailing how fairness concerns are measured and addressed
by product teams in industry. In this paper, we hope to shed
light on the challenges in following these principles and
learnings in an applied production setting, and to offer met-
rics and methods developed in the process.
We focus on a classiﬁcation system where adverse actions
are taken against examples predicted to be in the positive
class. This is similar to not giving a person a mortgage if
a model predicts they will default on it (Hardt et al. 2016),
using recidivism prediction for setting bail (Chouldechova
2017), or removing comments on the web if they are pre-
dicted to be abusive (Dixon et al. 2017). In all of these
cases, each item is associated with a user, and if the classiﬁer
makes a mistake and the adverse action is taken against their
example, that is bad for the user. More generally, if examples
from certain groups of users more often have adverse actions
taken against them, it could effect the health of the service.
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 1
Not Group 1
(a) Before
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 1
Not Group 1
(b) After Improvements
Figure 1: We observe a signiﬁcant improvement in the gap
in false positive rate by training the model with absolute cor-
relation regularization.
As a result, improving group fairness (Hardt et al. 2016) is
both the right thing to do and important to the health of the
product.
We focus on equality of opportunity (Hardt et al. 2016),
in particular comparing false positive rate (FPR) between
groups. While the model being calibrated (Crowson, Atkin-
son, and Therneau 2016) is an important mathematical prop-
erty, it does not reﬂect the experience of users and the im-
plications of representation on the service. However, while
(Hardt et al. 2016) provides great intuition and philosophical
guidance, we ﬁnd that in practice it leaves signiﬁcant wiggle
room in how the metric is calculated based on how the eval-
uation data is sampled or generated. Further, as shown by
Corbett-Davies et al. (2017), distributional differences can
result in unintended side-effects and costs when implement-
ing fairness changes. We address these issues through a gen-
eralized form of the metric, conditional equality, that makes
these decisions more explicit, and we describe how we nav-
igated these challenges in our use case. Figure 1 presents a
summary of our results in an applied production setting1.
Given this metric, we consider how to improve it under
the practical constraints of a product. For example, we are
unable to reliably observe the sensitive attribute at infer-
ence time, preventing approaches like using different thresh-
olds (Lipton, Chouldechova, and McAuley 2017). Further,
as with many engineering systems, simplicity and maintain-
1Due to the sensitive nature of these tests, we must omit the
numerical values on the y-axis of all plots. In all cases, plots that
are juxtaposed keep the same range on the y-axis such that results
can be compared.
arXiv:1901.04562v1  [cs.LG]  14 Jan 2019

ability are core requirements. We begin with exploring the
use of adversarial training techniques (Beutel et al. 2017a;
Zhang, Lemoine, and Mitchell 2018; Madras et al. 2018),
which have been shown to be effective. However, as with
many adversarial training approaches, we ﬁnd these are
sometimes unstable and difﬁcult to reliably train well. As a
result, we offer a new approach, absolute correlation reg-
ularization, which, while not provably optimal at conver-
gence, we ﬁnd empirically can stably improve our algorith-
mic fairness metrics.
Finally, we test these approaches on the production model
to improve the metrics for items from two sensitive groups.
We ﬁnd that adversarial training and absolute correlation
regularization both improve these metrics signiﬁcantly.
The open questions of how to design a practical algorith-
mic fairness metric and how to improve that metric under
the constraints of a production system are crucial to putting
academic learning into practice in industry. While our ap-
proaches are tailored to the application and constraints at
hand, we believe they can offer guidance to ML practition-
ers and call attention to gaps in the current literature that
researchers can work to address and practitioners should be
mindful of. We list below our contributions:
1. Metrics: We demonstrate the challenge in “correctly”
measuring equality of opportunity, and describe our met-
ric, conditional equality, that makes practitioner decisions
explicit and takes into account varying difﬁculty of exam-
ples across groups.
2. Optimization: We offer a new regularization technique,
called absolute correlation regularization, to encourage
equality of opportunity during training.
3. Improvement: We demonstrate improvements to our al-
gorithmic fairness metrics. In particular, we ﬁnd that tra-
ditional modelling, such as through larger models, can
improve algorithmic fairness. Second, we ﬁnd that abso-
lute correlation regularization stably and signiﬁcantly im-
proves algorithmic fairness metrics.
Background and Related Work
We begin with some background material on algorithmic
fairness metrics and relevant related work.
Metrics Many different metrics have been proposed to mea-
sure machine learning fairness, particularly for binary classi-
ﬁcation. One line of work called individual fairness rests on
the view that similar examples should receive similar predic-
tions (Dwork et al. 2012b); but this leaves open the question
of similarity. Another line of work focuses on group fair-
ness, where examples are grouped by a particular sensitive
attribute and statistics about the model predictions are ag-
gregated within the group and compared between groups.
Multiple group fairness metrics have been proposed. Demo-
graphic parity (Calders and Verwer 2010) asserts that the
average prediction for each group should be equal:
P(ˆy = 1|s = 0) = P(ˆy = 1|s = 1),
(1)
where the model prediction is ˆy and the sensitive attribute
(group identity) is given by s. One issue with this view is
that different groups could have very different labels y (often
called different base rates). Equality of opportunity (Hardt
et al. 2016) addresses this by analyzing the accuracy and as-
serting that the model should not mistake y = 0 examples
for y = 1 examples at a higher rate for one group than an-
other:
P(ˆy = 0|s = 0, y = 0) = P(ˆy = 0|s = 1, y = 0)
(2)
Empirically this means that we are comparing the false pos-
itive rate (FPR) for examples from each group, which makes
sense if a false positives result in a high cost to the group. A
symmetric statement can be made for the false negative rate,
and putting these together is deﬁned as equality of odds.
A third popular group fairness metric has been calibration
(Crowson, Atkinson, and Therneau 2016):
E[y|s = 0, ˆy = p] = E[y|s = 1, ˆy = p] ∀p ∈[0, 1]
(3)
Signiﬁcant work has analyzed these metrics and their gaps.
A number of results have shown that achieving all of them
(or even pairs of them) is only possible in limited cases
(Kleinberg, Mullainathan, and Raghavan 2016; Pleiss et al.
2017). Other research has considered expanding them to
more complex combinations of multiple sensitive attributes,
which we refer to as intersectional testing (Kearns et al.
2017; H´ebert-Johnson et al. 2017). Another different line of
work has explored using the language of causality to deﬁne
fairness (Kilbertus et al. 2017), but this has had limited trac-
tion (Garg et al. 2018) due to the difﬁculty of knowing the
causal graph.
Modeling With this wide variety of measures of fairness,
another line of research has explored how to address al-
gorithmic fairness issues in models. One line of work has
built on adversarial training. This approach began for do-
main adaptation (Ajakan et al. 2014; Ganin et al. 2016;
Bousmalis et al. 2016) and was quickly applied to fair-
ness (Zemel et al. 2013; Louizos et al. 2015; Edwards and
Storkey 2015). More recent work has modiﬁed this to align
with different ML fairness metrics (Beutel et al. 2017a;
Zhang, Lemoine, and Mitchell 2018; Madras et al. 2018).
Others have focused on constrained optimization (Agarwal
et al. 2018; Goh et al. 2016), or using a variety of regular-
ization techniques (Kamishima, Akaho, and Sakuma 2011;
Zafar et al. 2015; Bechavod and Ligett 2017). Our regular-
ization approach draws from all of these bodies of work.
Other approaches have been advocated for such as using
different thresholds for each group during binary classiﬁca-
tion (Lipton, Chouldechova, and McAuley 2017), but this is
not feasible without observing the sensitive attribute at infer-
ence. Another approach has been data augmentation (Dixon
et al. 2017), but it is often unclear how to do this in appli-
cations with more complex, arbitrary feature sets, e.g., loan
default prediction over individuals or recommender systems
where domain adaptation is difﬁcult.
Application: Much of the published work on addressing
fairness concerns focuses on public policy applications like
recidivism prediction (Chouldechova 2017; Lum 2017), pre-
dictive policing (Lum and Isaac 2016), and child services
(Chouldechova et al. 2018). These works explore some re-

lated practical difﬁculties, e.g., (Chouldechova 2017) dis-
cusses how metrics could be calculated after conditioning
on other covariates like prior convictions. Recently, Holstein
et al. (2018) surveyed practitioners on the challenges to im-
proving fairness in industry.
Application Setting
We begin with an overview of our application, and the prop-
erties of it that are key to how we deﬁne and address any fair-
ness concerns. We focus on a binary classiﬁcation model that
predicts if each example follows or breaks a pre-determined
product policy. Examples that break the policy have an ad-
verse action taken directly against them; examples that fall
within policy have no action taken against them. This is sim-
ilar to abuse classiﬁcation literature (Dixon et al. 2017), the
common loan-default prediction problem (Hardt et al. 2016),
or recidivism prediction (Chouldechova 2017).
Because of the quantity of data, reviewers cannot rate
all examples on the service. Rather, we use human raters
to score a subsample of the examples. Human raters give a
score y ∈[0, 1] and K raters score each example, producing
an average ground truth score yi = P
k
yi,k
K for example i.
We can choose which examples to get rated, but each rating
is relatively expensive such that we can only have a small
fraction of the data rated. This is particularly exacerbated by
the fact that only a small percentage of the examples break
policy and as such, random sampling of examples produces
relatively little data with high y.
Because most of the examples are unrated, we use a model
f to predict the ground truth score: f(xi) = ˆyi ≈yi where
x ∈Rd are features of the example. We take x to be a
general feature vector; in practice, it contains a wide range
of features including direct features as well as embedding
and signals produced from other models and systems. The
model is trained as a regression model with squared error:
minf
P
i(f(xi) −yi)2. At inference time, adverse action is
taken against all examples with prediction over some thresh-
old: f(xi) = ˆyi > τ.
For evaluating algorithmic fairness, we consider group
fairness (Hardt et al. 2016) over groups of examples or users.
Each example is associated with a user, but features about
the users are not reliably observed, i.e., we consider the case
where users are not associated with demographic informa-
tion. Rather, a small number of users are willing to share
their demographics, which we can use during training and
for ofﬂine evaluation of algorithmic fairness metrics. We
refer to the group membership by feature s. Because most
users do not share their demographic information, we can-
not use those features as input to the model or in any way
at inference time. Further, because the number of examples
with demographic information is relatively small, a more ex-
pansive intersectional evaluation is not feasible (Kearns et al.
2017; H´ebert-Johnson et al. 2017).
Assumptions
We take the product policy as ground truth.
Further, we make the simplifying assumption that the hu-
man raters provide an unbiased estimate of the ground truth
score. At the present, this is difﬁcult to evaluate and fur-
ther research is needed on how to detect and evaluate rater
bias. We offer an expanded discussion of the assumptions
and limitations of our analysis at the end of the paper.
Baseline Model
We consider now how our baseline model performs, in par-
ticular the FPR. This original model is a linear model over
diverse feature set x. We consider the FPR for two impor-
tant sensitive groups, which we will refer to as Group 1 and
Group 2. In each case, we compare the FPR to that of ex-
amples not from that respective user group, i.e., Not-Group
1 and Not-Group 2. Due to the sensitive nature of the mea-
surements, we present all results in relativistic terms. For
example, the FPR Ratio is deﬁned as:
FPR RatioGroup1 =
FPRGroup1
FPRNot−Group1
(4)
We present these measurements of the original system in
Figure 3a and 4a. As observed in the plots, we ﬁnd that
for both Group 1 and Group 2 the FPR Ratio > 1, with
FPR RatioGroup1 = 5.3× and FPR RatioGroup2 = 2.18×.
Both of these numbers indicate a gap in the equality of op-
portunity and that examples from these groups are more
frequently incorrectly having adverse action taken against
them. Although hard to measure due to limited data, we gen-
erally observe lower FNR for subgroups than the majority,
and because adverse actions are taken for predicted posi-
tives, we focus on the FPR in the rest of our analysis.
ML Fairness Metric
While equality of opportunity (Hardt et al. 2016) provides
insight into measuring cost to users of mistakes across
groups, it leaves many open questions that in practice need
to be addressed. In particular, how should the data that the
metric is calculated over be sampled? What if the distribu-
tion of data differs? How do we address these differences?
Data Distribution
One immediate open question in the analysis and practi-
cal implementation is: how should the data be sampled?
FPR and FNR are only meaningful with respect to a given
distribution of evaluation data, and we ﬁnd that different
ways of generating that evaluation data give signiﬁcantly
different results. Further, as pointed out by Corbett-Davies
et al. (2017), examples from different groups may have dif-
ferent distributions of risk, and directly applying equality of
opportunity over these different risks can raise its own is-
sues.
The analysis above is based on a dataset built by sampling
examples proportional to their usage, but ignore many other
differences in the data. Unsurprisingly, different groups of
users are associated with different types of examples, such
as with different use cases or target audiences. For example,
in Figures 2a and 2b we ﬁnd that for one particular demo-
graphic property, the distribution of both use cases of the ex-
amples as well as the target audiences are quite different be-
tween the groups (considered over negative examples from
each group).

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Use Case
0%
20%
40%
60%
Percentage of Examples
Group 1
Not Group 1
(a) Distribution of Use Cases
0
1
2
3
4
5
Target Audience
0%
20%
40%
60%
Percentage of Examples
Group 1
Not Group 1
(b) Distribution of Audience
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2 0.2-0.3 0.3-0.4 0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
0%
20%
40%
60%
Percentage of Examples
Group 1
Not Group 1
(c) Distribution of Ratings y
Figure 2: Different groups have different distribution of examples.
While the data can be stratiﬁed by many of these dimen-
sions, no principled way has been given for how or when
to do so. Here, we take inspiration from Corbett-Davies
et al. (2017), which suggests the importance of address-
ing different risk distributions. However, Corbett-Davies
et al. (2017) analyze risk through the model’s predictions
rather than through some externally observable property.
Here, we deviate in that we observe a real-valued policy y
averaged over multiple human raters. As can be seen in Fig-
ure 2c, we ﬁnd that even within examples that would be con-
sidered negatives (y < τ), there is a notably different distri-
bution between groups. In particular, the sensitive subgroup
has relatively more examples close to the policy threshold
τ, suggesting uncertainty by human raters about how the ex-
amples align with the policy.
Distribution-Dependent Metrics
Understanding and addressing these differences in distribu-
tion is critical to interpreting the results. Therefore, we begin
with laying out a formalization for conditional group fair-
ness metrics and then discuss the reasoning and implications
of our choice of what to condition on.
First we build on (Ritov, Sun, and Zhao 2017) and deﬁne
a conditional group fairness for our case:
Deﬁnition 1. Conditional Equality of Opportunity is deﬁned
for conditioning on feature A that takes values A:
P(ˆy ≥τ|s = 1, y < τ, A = a)
(5)
= P(ˆy ≥τ|s = 0, y < τ, A = a) ∀a ∈A
This deﬁnition does not give a concrete metric and leaves
the question of how to prioritize different a ∈A. We can
make this precise by deﬁning the conditional equality of op-
portunity gap:
Deﬁnition 2. Conditional equality of opportunity gap is de-
ﬁned conditioning over feature A taking values in A, with
each gap weighted by a probability pa for a ∈A:
EOGap =
X
a
pa[P(ˆy ≥τ|s = 1, y < τ, A = a)
(6)
−P(ˆy ≥τ|s = 0, y < τ, A = a)]
By setting pa =
1
|A|, this metric equally weights each
possible value a ∈A. This is generally a good prior absent
a strong reason to deviate. However, if one group has a skew
in A then the uniform prior may not represent the experi-
ence for a user in that group. In this case, another option is
to set pa = P(A = a|s = 0), which aligns with impor-
tance weighting the data from the background distribution
to match the distribution of the focused subgroup2.
Crucially, with this deﬁnition we still must choose a fea-
ture A on which to condition. Conditioning on a particular
property, for example the example use case, would have the
implication that error rates can be different across use cases,
as long as they are the same across groups for the same use
case; but if different groups prefer different use cases, then
this metric would not necessarily support those group pref-
erences. As discussed above, we believe the averaged human
rating addresses a balance of desired properties for our met-
ric. The averaged human rating does not prioritize different
use cases, target audiences, etc., but rather we can interpret
it as giving us a way of observing the inherent difﬁculty (or
risk as in (Corbett-Davies et al. 2017)) of an example. If
humans are uncertain if an example meets a policy, it is un-
derstandable for the model to make a mistake as well. As we
see in Figure 1, we observe that the FPR does increase with
the averaged human rater score, and while we still observe a
gap in FPR between the background data and the subgroup,
it is partially explained by the difference in the distribution
of examples.
Note, these proposals have signiﬁcant connections to re-
lated work. Most related is (Ritov, Sun, and Zhao 2017),
which ﬁrst proposed this generalized fairness metric and in-
cluded conditioning on arbitrary variables. The similarity
function in individual fairness can be thought of as condi-
tioning on different features, and that work grapples with
many of these same issues (Dwork et al. 2012a). Choulde-
chova (2017) and Corbett-Davies et al. (2017) both mention
that metrics can be calculated condition on other variables,
and for recidivism prediction they condition on the num-
ber of prior convictions, but neither give a general frame-
work for when and how to condition. In examining fair-
ness through a causal lens, (Kilbertus et al. 2017) explores
the question of what is a “resolving variable,” but ulti-
mately this is left as a philosophical choice. Further, our
conditional equality metric can be viewed as a special case
of the intersectional fairness analysis (Kearns et al. 2017;
2When reporting ratios, we compute the ratio of average FPRs
to align with this view of data sampling.

H´ebert-Johnson et al. 2017), which conditions on any and
all combination of covariates, but as we discussed, this re-
quires a signiﬁcant amount of data. Ultimately, all of these
approaches leave the question of how to interpret condition-
ing on different terms.
We hope that by forcing the deﬁnition of the fairness met-
ric to specify the conditioned variables, practitioners con-
sider the distribution of their evaluation data, how it was
sampled, and the implications. Unfortunately, this still does
not diminish the importance of considering how the dataset
is sampled or generated, and requires careful consideration
by practitioners in determining this procedure.
Correlation Loss
Although previous work has laid out multiple techniques for
training models with fairness metrics as part of the objective,
these approaches generally come with notable engineering
concerns. Here, we present a new, lightweight approach for
improving the desired fairness metrics more effectively than
previous approaches.
One perspective on group fairness metrics is that the
output distribution should match across groups, possibly
after reweighting or resampling the data (Beutel et al.
2017a; Madras et al. 2018). Notably, (Zhang, Lemoine, and
Mitchell 2018) focuses on the prediction ˆy rather than an in-
termediate layer. One way we could conceptualize this goal
is to compare the distributions of ˆy between groups and en-
courage low mutual information or KL divergence. Here, we
take a simpliﬁed view of that by minimizing the absolute
correlation between ˆy and the group membership s:
min
f


X
(xi,yi)∈X
L(yi, f(xi))

+ λ|CorrX −|
(7)
where
CorrX −= (P
xi∈X −f(xi) −µˆy)(P
si∈X −si −µs)
σˆyσs
µˆy =
1
|X −|
X
xi∈X −
f(xi)
µs =
1
|X −|
X
si∈X −
si
σ2
ˆy =
1
|X −|
X
xi∈X −
(f(xi) −µˆy)2
σ2
s =
1
|X −|
X
si∈X −
(si −µs)2
Following (Beutel et al. 2017a; Madras et al. 2018), we use
X −= {xi ∈X|yi < τ} in order to optimize for equality of
opportunity; this could be extended to other reweighting or
resampling schemes to address other metrics as in (Madras
et al. 2018). In practice, we use ˜
X −⊂X −, which is a mini-
batch of examples sampled from X −. This follows a sim-
ilar pattern as previous adversarial approaches in adding a
penalty based on the distribution of the output, but unlike
all of the adversarial approaches, no training of an adver-
sary is required, which we ﬁnd to greatly improve stability
in practice. While minimizing this term does not provably
minimize the fairness metric, we ﬁnd we get good results in
practice, as we will show below.
Improvements in Practice
In practice, we seek to improve both the general equality of
opportunity metric as well as the conditional equality metric.
All results here build on the description of the application
setting, metrics and methods above. In particular, we explore
the incremental process by which we worked to improve this
classiﬁer, and how each change effects the end metrics. Re-
sults are summarized in Figures 3 and 4 for Group 1 and
Group 2 respectively, but we will walk through each of the
results below. Error bars are based on training the model 10
times and averaging results. We ﬁnd there are a number of
trade-offs and directions for future work.
Model Capacity
As discussed previously, the original
model was a linear model, and we observe a signiﬁcant gap
in FPR between the sensitive subgroup and the rest of the
data for both Group 1 and Group 2, as seen in Figures 3a
and 4a. The ﬁrst step we took was to change from a linear
classiﬁer to a DNN with a single hidden layer. Previous work
(Chen, Johansson, and Sontag 2018) has suggested that the-
oretically model capacity can be a driver of disparities in
accuracy. As can be seen in Figure 3b, the move to DNN de-
creases the FPR for Group 1, as well as decreasing the FPR
gap from 2.62× to 1.44×. While this is good to see, this
does not always hold true: we observe the FPR increases
for Group 2 and Not-Group 2 users3; the FPR gap decreases
from 1.76× to 1.25×. As such, while increasing model ca-
pacity may help in some cases, it does not necessarily im-
prove accuracy everywhere.
Adversarial training
Building on the DNN model, we
next considered how well adversarial training can improve
the FPR gap. We follow an approach similar to Beutel et
al. (2017a) of training an additional head taking as an input
the last hidden layer of the model and trying to predict the
sensitive attribute s while the model tries to learn a represen-
tation that is independent of s; we use only data for which
y < τ, as we are concerned with the FPR. As we see in Fig-
ure 3c, this signiﬁcantly decreases the FPR gap from 1.44×
to 1.04× and simultaneously decreases the FPR for Group
1, despite that not being an explicit objective.
Correlation Loss
As mentioned previously, adversarial
training has been well studied and we see has strong perfor-
mance, but from an engineering perspective is challenging
due to its instability during training. As a result, we pursued
absolute correlation regularization to stabilize training. We
observe in Figure 3d that using absolute correlation regular-
ization keeps the FPR gap approximately the same (1.05×).
The practical beneﬁts of keeping a low FPR gap while im-
proving stability is highly valuable in practice.
Transfer across Groups
One idea that has been debated
in the literature (Madras et al. 2018) is if and when there is
transfer learning of fairness across groups. We consider here
3Note, Not-Group 1 and Not-Group 2 are different in that they
are based on different methods for getting demographic data s.

0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 1
Not Group 1
(a) Linear
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 1
Not Group 1
(b) DNN
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 1
Not Group 1
(c) DNN with Adversary
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 1
Not Group 1
(d) DNN with corr. reg.
Figure 3: Improvements for Group 1 users.
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 2
Not Group 2
(a) Linear
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 2
Not Group 2
(b) DNN
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 2
Not Group 2
(c) DNN + Group 1 corr. reg.
0
0-0.1
0.1-0.2
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
Average Reviewer Rating
False Positive Rate
Group 2
Not Group 2
(d) DNN + Both corr. reg.
Figure 4: Improvements for Group 2 users.
how the application of absolute correlation regularization to
Group 1 effects the FPR gap for Group 2 users. In Figure
4c we observe a very slight improvement in the FPR gap,
bringing it down from 1.37× to 1.31×.
Improving for Multiple Groups
Finally, we look at if we
can simultaneously improve the FPR gap for both Group
1 and Group 2 users simultaneously. To do this, we add
two different absolute correlation regularization terms to the
DNN training, one for each group. As we see in Figure 4d,
we are able to improve the FPR gap for Group 2 to 1.11×.
Unfortunately, we do not ﬁnd that this decreases the FPR
for Group 2; we believe focusing on making the model more
inclusive by improving the accuracy not just decreasing the
gap is an important step for future work (Beutel et al. 2017b;
Chen, Johansson, and Sontag 2018).
Future Directions
We have focused on how to improve an individual model
that directly effects the user experience, but by no means
does every use of machine learning ﬁt into these settings. To
expand the applicability, we believe there are a number of
areas that deserve more research attention.
Human raters: This work, like most of the algorithmic fair-
ness literature, assumes that the labels are unbiased. We be-
lieve more attention is needed to understand if and when
there is bias in crowd-sourced ratings, and how to remove it.
Binary actions: We only consider the case where we are
taking binary actions directly against the examples (at the
known threshold). When the prediction is treated as a con-
tinuous score or used in conjunction with other signals, it
becomes harder to evaluate the effect on the user experience
(Dwork and Ilvento 2018) and further research is needed in
this direction.
Observed Examples: We evaluate our system against the
examples currently in the system. However, that distribution
is of course affected by the system’s previous performance.
Use cases that were previously not well supported may be
underrepresented in our sample. Unfortunately, we do not
know of a way to infer the distribution of examples that
would exist under a different previous system. As a result,
for the time being, we focus on evaluating and improving
metrics for the current state, with the belief that it will im-
prove the performance of the system for the sensitive sub-
groups and we can continue to evaluate the performance as
the subgroup evolves. Further research, along the lines of
(Liu et al. 2018), would be valuable to better understand the
long term evolution of the system.
Discussion
In this work we have offered details on how applying algo-
rithmic fairness principles to a production classiﬁer fares.
In particular, we have explored how equality of opportu-
nity depends on how the data is sampled, and how different
groups can have notably different distributions of data. To
address issues with these distributional differences, we of-
fered a general evaluation approach that takes into account
example difﬁculty. Further, we have offered a new mecha-
nism, absolute correlation regularization, for improving al-
gorithmic fairness metrics that we ﬁnd to be more stable than
adversarial training. We demonstrate the ability of these ap-
proaches to improve the FPR gap for two different groups in
a production classiﬁer and offer analysis of how the model
performance is effected by these different training proce-
dures.
Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Margaret Mitchell
for her valuable feedback on this paper.
