arXiv:1101.6001v1  [cs.AI]  31 Jan 2011
Boolean network robotics: a proof of concept
Andrea Roli∗and Mattia Manfroni
DEIS-Cesena
Alma Mater Studiorum Universit`a di Bologna, Italy
Carlo Pinciroli and Mauro Birattari
IRIDIA
Universit´e libre de Bruxelles, Belgium
March 9, 2022
Abstract
Dynamical systems theory and complexity science provide powerful
tools for analysing artiﬁcial agents and robots. Furthermore, they have
been recently proposed also as a source of design principles and guidelines.
Boolean networks are a prominent example of complex dynamical systems
and they have been shown to eﬀectively capture important phenomena in
gene regulation. From an engineering perspective, these models are very
compelling, because they can exhibit rich and complex behaviours, in spite
of the compactness of their description. In this paper, we propose the use
of Boolean networks for controlling robots’ behaviour.
The network is
designed by means of an automatic procedure based on stochastic local
search techniques. We show that this approach makes it possible to design
a network which enables the robot to accomplish a task that requires the
capability of navigating the space using a light stimulus, as well as the
formation and use of an internal memory.
1
Introduction
Dynamical systems provide metaphors and tools which can be eﬀectively used
for analysing artiﬁcial agents,1 such as robots. For example, gait patterns in
robots can be identiﬁed and classiﬁed by analysing robots as dynamical systems
and associating each gait pattern with a system attractor [10]. The dynamical
systems metaphor has also been advocated as a powerful source of design princi-
ples for robotics [19]. The core idea supporting this viewpoint is that information
processing can be seen as the evolution in time of a dynamical system [25]. In
this paper, we propose the use of Boolean networks, a genetic regulatory net-
work model, as robotic programs.2 Genetic regulatory networks (GRNs) model

1We use the term agent in its broadest general meaning.
2Following Russell & Norvig [23], we call the robot program the computational model of
the system that maps the sensor readings of the robot—or agent—to the actions it takes,
possibly according to an utility function and a goal.
1

the interaction and dynamics among genes. From an engineering and computer
science perspective, GRNs are extremely interesting because they are capable
of producing complex behaviours, notwithstanding the compactness of their de-
scription. For this reason, we believe that GRNs can eﬀectively play the role
of robot programs. The design of GRNs characterised by a given dynamics is
a hard task per se and utilising such systems as robot programs is even harder,
in that the GRN is required to interact with the environment, which possesses
its own dynamics. The complexity of this task, though, can be tamed through
the use of automatic design procedures, such as optimisation algorithms. Au-
tomatic design procedures can make the process more robust and general with
respect to a customised procedure. In addition, automatic design procedures
have been proven to be eﬀective in exploring huge design search spaces and in
ﬁnding innovative design solutions.3 In this work, a Boolean network is designed
so as to serve as a program for a real robot whose goal is to alternate phototaxis
and antiphototaxis behaviours (i.e., going toward the positive or negative gra-
dient of a light stimulus, respectively) depending on an external sound signal.
Despite its simplicity, the robot task is not trivial, because it requires the robot
to ﬁnd and seek or escape from the light, and to have memory of the action
being performed. We selected this task because it is a typical benchmark in
evolutionary robotics [6].
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, Boolean
networks are introduced, and the methodology used for designing such systems
is illustrated in Section 3. The test case is described and discussed in Section 4.
Conclusions and an outlook to future work are given in Section 5.
2
Boolean networks
Boolean networks (BNs) have been introduced by Kauﬀman [11, 14] as a GRN
model. BNs have been proven to reproduce very important phenomena in ge-
netics and they have also received considerable attention in the research com-
munities on complex systems [2, 14]. A BN is a discrete-state and discrete-time
dynamical system whose structure is deﬁned by a directed graph of N nodes,
each associated to a Boolean variable xi, i = 1, . . . , N, and a Boolean function
fi(xi1, . . . , xiKi ), where Ki is the number of inputs of node i. The arguments
of the Boolean function fi are the values of the nodes whose outgoing arcs
are connected to node i (see Figure 1a). The state of the system at time t,
t ∈N, is deﬁned by the array of the N Boolean variable values at time t:
s(t) ≡(x1(t), . . . , xN(t)). The most studied BN models are characterised by
having a synchronous dynamics—i.e., nodes update their states at the same
instant—and deterministic functions (see Figure 1b). However, many variants
exist, including asynchronous and probabilistic update rules [26].
BN models’ dynamics can be studied by means of usual dynamical systems
methods [4, 25], hence the usage of concepts such as state (or phase) space,
trajectories, attractors and basins of attraction. BNs can exhibit complex dy-
namics and some special ensembles have been deeply investigated, such as that
of Random BNs. Recent advances in this research ﬁeld, along with eﬃcient
mathematical and experimental methods and tools for analysing BN dynamics,
3A notable example is that of evolutionary robotics [17].
2

X 1
X 2
X 3
AND
OR
OR
(a) A BN with three nodes
100
011
110
101
111
001
010
000
(b) State space
Figure 1: An example of a BN with three nodes (a) and its corresponding
state space under synchronous and deterministic update (b). The network has
three attractors: two ﬁxed points, (0, 0, 0) and (1, 1, 1), and a cycle of period 2,
{(0, 0, 1), (0, 1, 0)}.
can be mainly found in works addressing issues in GRNs or investigating prop-
erties of BN models [1, 9, 20, 24]. These methods make it possible to analyse
network dynamics and thus have insight into the behaviour of a BN system.
3
Boolean network robotics
In this paper, we advocate and promote the use of BNs—and GRNs in general—
to design robotic and multi-agent systems. We believe that the strengths of this
approach stem from the richness of possible dynamics, along with adaptiveness
and robustness, which BNs exhibit. These properties can be exploited in the
context of robotic systems engineering. Moreover, theoretical and experimental
tools are available for both analysing and designing these systems. We would
like to emphasise that we do not claim the superiority of this approach over any
other, but rather we aim at enriching methods and methodologies for designing
and analysing robotic systems and intelligent systems in general. The approach
we propose consists in using one or more BNs as robot program. In this way,
robot dynamics can be described in terms of trajectories in a state space, making
it possible to design the robot program by directly exploiting the dynamical
characteristics of BNs, such as their attractors, basins of attraction and any
dynamical property in general.
The design of a BN robotic system involves several interrelated tasks, which
depend upon the design goal and which can be combined in several ways. The
discussion of the issues arising in the design of such systems is beyond the scope
of this brief communication and here we just outline the main ones.
The ﬁrst task concerns the coupling of the BN with the robot, i.e., the
deﬁnition of the mapping between sensors and network’s inputs and between
network’s outputs and actuators. BNs are usually considered as isolated sys-
tems, as they are not assumed to have inputs. However, some notable exceptions
exist [3, 7, 13, 18]. We assume that the values of a set of nodes (BN input nodes)
3

      


         


         


         


            



sensors
actuators
Boolean network
output nodes
encoding
input
output
encoding
input nodes
Figure 2: The coupling between BN and robot.
are imposed by sensor readings and the values of another set of nodes (BN out-
put nodes) are observed and used to encode the signals for maneuvering the
robot’s actuators. Figure 2 shows the scheme of the coupling between BN and
robot. The most natural way of deﬁning this mapping is via a direct encoding,
but more elaborated ways are possible; for example, the mapping could also be
deﬁned by a learning process.
Once the input and the output mappings are deﬁned, the BN that forms
the robot program has to be designed. A possible way for achieving this goal
is to design a BN such that its dynamics satisﬁes given requirements.
For
example, we may want to design a BN such that its attractors with largest
basins of attraction correspond to the high-level behaviours the robot must
exhibit and the transitions between attractors would correspond to transitions
between behaviours. In this way, the dynamics of the network is directly mapped
into the behaviour of the robot. Another possibility consists in modelling the
BN design process as a search problem, in which the goal is maximising the
robot’s performance. These two ways are not alternative and can be combined.
For example, once the basic behaviour is obtained with the latter approach,
the former one is followed in order to improve the robot’s behaviour—e.g., by
enlarging the basin of attraction of a relevant attractor or improving network
robustness.
3.1
Design methodology
We propose the use of a design methodology based on metaheuristics. In fact,
the design of a BN that satisﬁes given criteria can be modeled as a constrained
combinatorial optimisation problem by properly deﬁning the set of decision
variables, constraints and the objective function. This approach is illustrated by
the scheme in Figure 3. The metaheuristic algorithm manipulates the decision
variables which encode structure and Boolean functions of a BN. A complete
assignment to those variables deﬁnes an instance of a BN. This network is then
simulated and evaluated according to the speciﬁc target requirements, either on
its dynamics or on the robot’s behaviour, or both. A speciﬁc software component
is devoted to evaluate the BN and returns an objective function value to the
metaheuristic algorithm, that, in turn, proceeds with the search.
4

target
requirements
evaluator
simulation
objective function
Boolean
Network
value
metaheuristic
network model
(structure and
Boolean functions)
Figure 3: BN design by metaheuristics.
Despite the number of analytical studies on the properties of BNs, little eﬀort
has been devoted to their synthesis. The ﬁrst study on the automatic design
of BNs has been presented by Kauﬀman [12]. In that work, an evolutionary
algorithm is applied to evolve BNs with an attractor containing a target state. A
follow-up of that seminal work is that of Lemke at al. [15]. More recently, works
addressing the evolvability of robustness in BNs have been presented [1, 5, 27].
In the same direction is a recent paper, in which the global ﬁtness function
is deﬁned as the sum of single functions, each related to a network parameter
linked to network robustness [8]. Finally, Roli et al. present a study on the
impact of the characteristics of the BNs composing the initial population over
the performance of a genetic algorithm whose goal is to design networks with a
given attractor length [21].
4
Test case: phototaxis and antiphototaxis
The case study presented in this work consists of a robot that selects actions
with respect to a light source and a sound signal. The robot must be able to
perform two diﬀerent behaviours: going towards the light (phototaxis) or moving
away from it (antiphotaxis). In beginning of the experiment, the robot must
perform phototaxis; subsequently, it must switch its behaviour to antiphototaxis
after perceiving a sharp sound (like hand clapping) which is triggered at a
random instant during the experiment. Therefore, the robot needs somehow to
keep memory of the perception of the clap to select the action to be performed
at any instant in time. The robot is ﬁrst designed and tested in simulation;
afterwards, its performance is assessed in a real physical setting by using an e-
puck robot [16]. The robot’s control loop is a cycle that alternates sensing and
acting phases in discrete time steps. Formally, the task environment is deﬁned
as follows:
Environment: it consists of a square arena (1m x 1m) with a light source
positioned in one corner.
Performance measure: in the beginning of the experiment, the robot is lo-
cated in a random position close to the opposite corner of the arena with respect
to the light. Then, given a certain execution time T , the robot must satisfy two
properties to successfully achieve the task: it must go towards the light, until a
clap is perceived; after that, it must move away from the light.4 We deﬁne the
4We have also recently developed a robot behaviour in which phototaxis and antiphototaxis
5

performance as a function of an error E ∈[0, 1], to be minimised. The smaller
is the error, the better is the robot performance. The error function is given
by a weighted mean including the phototaxis contribute and the antiphototaxis
one: at each time step t ∈{1, . . ., T }, the robot is rewarded if it is moving in
the correct direction with respect to the light. Let tc be the time instant at
which the clap is performed. We can write the error function E as follows:
E = α

1 −
Ptc
i=1 si
tc

+

1 −α

1 −
PT
i=tc+1 si
T −tc

,
where:
∀i ∈{1, . . . , tc}, si =
(
1
if the robot goes towards to the light at step i
0
otherwise
∀i ∈{tc+1, . . . , T }, si =
(
1
if the robot moves away from the light at step i
0
otherwise
Sensors: light sensors enable the robot to assess its position with respect to
the light. The robot has a circular body and it is equipped with eight light
sensors whose values are combined in such a way that the robot can perceive
the light in eight diﬀerent sectors with equal angle of π
4 . We denote the eight
possible sensor readings by assigning each of them a numerical identiﬁer, from
1 (North) to 8 (North-West), clockwise. Moreover, the robot is equipped with a
sound sensor whose value is 1, if the clap is perceived in the current time step,
or 0 otherwise.
In this experiment, wheel speeds are either set to zero or to a predeﬁned, con-
stant value, to make it possible to associate a binary value to their control. In
this way, it is possible for the robot to move in any direction by simply setting
the proper combination of two binary values.
4.1
BN setup
The BN implementing the robot program is subject to a synchronous and de-
terministic update; moreover, it is also synchronous with the robot. At each
time step, three operations are performed in order:
1. The sensor readings are encoded into input values.
2. The network’s state is updated.
3. The value of the output nodes is read, encoded and used to operate on
the actuators.
Network size is a design parameter which could be set manually or deﬁned by
an automatic procedure. In this work, we set the number of network nodes to
20, as this size provides a trade-oﬀbetween computation cost in simulating the
network and size of the network state space.
In order to map sensors and actuators onto BN’s inputs and outputs, we use
one input node per sensor. The value of node x1 of the BN is set depending on
are alternated if the clap is emitted more than once. This robot is still under testing.
6

the binary value read on the sound sensor. Four input nodes (x2, x3, x4, x5) are
connected to light sensors whose eight sensor readings are coded by means of a
Gray code of four Boolean variables.5 The values of nodes x6 and x7 (output
nodes) are used to control the wheel actuators.
4.2
Design of BN robot
The local search we implemented is a simple stochastic descent, in which moves
can change one value in a node function’s truth table. While, in principle, it
would be possible to use more elaborated search strategies, as well as moves
involving also the BN topology, this choice is mainly motivated by the goal of
checking whether a simple ‘evolutionary walk’ (single ﬂip ﬁtter mutant) across
the Boolean functions space can produce a BN able to make the robot attain-
ing the desired behaviour. Moreover, this choice makes it possible to study in
detail the error landscape and devise further improved search techniques. The
initial connections among nodes are randomly generated with K = 3 (no self-
connections) and are kept ﬁxed during the search. The initial Boolean functions
are generated by setting the 0/1 values in the truth tables uniformly at random.
A point in the search space is thus a 20-nodes BN with given topology; a move
consists of one ﬂip in one function’s truth table. The search strategy is that
of stochastic descent: a neighbour is chosen at random (random entry in the
truth table of a randomly chosen node) and accepted if the corresponding BN
has an evaluation not worse than the current one. We executed 30 independent
experiments, each corresponding to a diﬀerent initial BN. In each experiment
we trained the robot by means of local search in a simulated environment. The
set of initial conditions form the training set (the same for each experiment),
composed of 30 diﬀerent positions of the robot.
At the end of the training
process, we tested the BNs obtained in a simulated environment on initial con-
ditions diﬀerent from those of the training set. Considering the size of the arena
and the speed of robot wheels, we empirically estimated that 1000 time steps
are enough to let the robot achieve the task. Each item in the training set is
characterised by an initial position and orientation of the robot with respect
to the light, chosen at random. In addition, also the instant the clap is trig-
gered is chosen at random in {500, . . ., 650}. In order to train the BN-robot
so as to make it robust with respect to both sensor and actuator noise, at a
random instant we impose the robot rotation of an angle θ randomly chosen in
[−π, π]. This external change has the eﬀect of forcing the robot to correct its
direction. The local search was run for 25000 iterations. As from preliminary
experiments we made and common experience in evolutionary robotics [17], we
split the design goal into two, subsequent, sub-goals: in the ﬁrst 5000 iterations
of the optimisation algorithm, the simulations last only 500 time steps without
any clap.
The goal is to obtain agent programs able to perform phototaxis
and to gain robustness against noise; in the subsequent 20000 iterations, the
simulations last 1000 time steps and they involve the clap. Thus, the idea is
to train the agent incrementally. The best BN resulting from this process was
then ported into a real robotic platform for assessing its performance.
Results of training and testing are reported in the boxplots of Figures 4(a)
and 4(b), respectively. Boxplots graphically summarise statistics of the results
5The Gray code is a binary numeral system in which two successive code words diﬀer in
only one bit.
7

Error
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(a) Training
Error
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(b) Testing
Figure 4: Results of the BN-robot testing. BNs are ordered by median error in
training.
achieved in each experiment. The bold line of the rectangle denotes the median
value, while its uppermost and lowermost sides denote the 1st and 3rd quartile,
respectively. We can observe that 4 out of 30 runs were successful in the training
phase and they attained a good performance also in testing, three of which with
a median error less than 0.11. In the other runs, the BN-robot was able to
perform correctly only phototaxis, hence a performance with an error around
0.5. It is important to remark that while the design goal is quite hard, somehow
surprisingly the stochastic descent was able to attain a success ratio of 13%. The
best performing BN has also been tested in a real setting with an e-puck robot
and tests conﬁrmed that the robot is able to achieve the task from diﬀerent
initial conditions and clap instants. A further remarkable property we observed
is that the robot is also able to react to external alterations of its position and
correct its trajectory. The analysis of the features of the best performing BN is
omitted for lack of space; further details on the BN used for testing the robot,
along with a movie of a typical run of the e-puck BN-robot can be found as
online supplementary material [22].
5
Conclusion and future work
In this paper we have introduced Boolean network robotics, in which robots and
artiﬁcial agents in general are programmed by means of BN models. We have
shown that a BN can be designed through stochastic local search so as to create
a robot able to alternate phototaxis and antiphototaxis behaviour depending on
a sound signal.
In future work, we plan to study diﬀerent kinds of input/output mappings
and to exploit the complex dynamics of BNs in more challenging robot tasks,
for example in changing environments. In addition, diﬀerent update schemes for
BNs can be explored, as well as other GRN models. Besides this, a principled
theoretical and experimental framework to study the dynamics of BNs interact-
ing with the environment—i.e., an entity with its own dynamics—is subject of
ongoing work.
8
