1 
 
An Approach for Time-aware Domain-based 
Social Influence Prediction 
 
Bilal Abu-Salih*a, Kit Yan Chanb, Omar Al-Kadia,  
Marwan Al-Tawila, Pornpit Wongthongthamb, Tomayess Issaa,  
Heba Saadeha, Malak Al-Hassana, Bushra Bremieb, Abdulaziz Albahlala 

a King Abdullah II School of Information Technology, The University of Jordan, Jordan. 
b Curtin University, Australia 
 
Abstract 
Online Social Networks(OSNs) have established virtual platforms enabling people to express their 
opinions, interests and thoughts in a variety of contexts and domains, allowing legitimate users as well as 
spammers and other untrustworthy users to publish and spread their content. Hence, the concept of social 
trust has attracted an attention of information processors/data scientists and information consumers / 
business firms. One of the main reasons for acquiring the value of Social Big Data (SBD) is to provide 
frameworks and methodologies using which the credibility of OSNs users can be evaluated. These 
approaches should be scalable to accommodate large-scale social data. Hence, there is a need for well 
comprehending of social trust to improve and expand the analysis process and inferring credibility of SBD. 
Given the exposed environment’s settings and fewer limitations related to OSNs, the medium allows 
legitimate and genuine users as well as spammers and other low trustworthy users to publish and spread 
their content. Hence, this paper presents an approach incorporates semantic analysis and machine learning 
modules to measure and predict users’ trustworthiness in numerous domains in different time periods. The 
evaluation of the conducted experiment validates the applicability of the incorporated machine learning 
techniques to predict highly trustworthy domain-based users.  
Keywords: Social Influence, Social Trust, Semantic Analysis, Machine Learning, Online Social Networks.  
Introduction  
With the evolution of web browsers,  users can now exchange contents via several online platforms. The 

Social Networks (OSNs). OSNs cover a broad range of easy-to-use, freely accessible virtual platforms that 
encourage and facilitate speedy communication between groups of people with similar interests. Today, 
interactive dialogues can be conducted regardless of the physical location of users. Moreover, in addition 
to playing an active and distinctive role as an effective media of social interaction, these OSNs allow users 
to become acquainted with and understand the cultures of different people.  

2 
 
Individuals who use OSNs intuitively tend to seek and connect with like-minded people. This is referred in 
the social sciences literature as the principle of “homophily”[1]. Homophily is psychological construct that 
indicates the tendency for people to develop relationships with others who are similar to them [2, 3]. 
Homophily results in building homogenous personal networks in terms of behaviours, interests, feelings, 
etc.[4]. In particular, OSNs provide a medium whereby content makers can express and share their thoughts, 
beliefs, and domains of interest. This gives individuals access to a wider audience which has a positive 
effect on their social status and could assist them to obtain, for instance, political support [5]. Therefore, 
the cornerstone of users’ online social profiles is an accurate understanding of their domains of interest.  
The domain of knowledge can be inferred by examining people’s work, expertise, or specialisation within 
the scope of subject-matter knowledge (e.g. Sports, Politics, Information Technology, Education, Art, 
Entertainments, etc.) [6]. In OSNs, the domains of interest can be determined at the user level and at the 
post level. In other words, the overall published content of the user is analysed, and the domain(s) of interest 
is inferred. Likewise, the user’s posts can be analysed separately to extract the domain(s) of each post. The 
factual grasp of the users’ domain(s) of interest facilitates an understanding of the domain(s) conveyed by 
a short text message such as a tweet [7-11].  
Social Big Data(SBD) is being termed by joining the two domains i.e. social media and big data. Bello-
Orgaz et al. [12] define the concept of social big data as follows: “Those processes and methods that are 
designed to provide sensitive and relevant knowledge from social media data sources to any user or 
company from social media data sources when data source can be characterised by their different formats 
and contents, their very large size, and the online or streamed generation of information.” Such a dramatic 
harness to the online social platforms has established several communication channels between business 
firms with their current and potential customers; Hence, SBD analytics presents an exclusive opportunity 
for businesses to establish a ‘conversation’ between businesses and their customers [13, 14]. However, 
while OSNs provide platforms for legitimate and genuine users, they also enable spammers and other 
untrustworthy users to publish and spread their content, taking advantage of the open environment and 
fewer restrictions which these platforms facilitate 
Data credibility varies according to the reputation of the data producer. For example, in OSNs, all users’ 
posts do not have the same level of reputation; a tweet from a verified user who has established a broad 
audience of followers has more impact than a tweet from a new user or a user with a small number of 
followers. Producers of bad quality social data provide their content via text, sound, image, and video which 
allow them to proliferate, especially since they can do so with anonymity and impunity. Due to the huge 
amount of information flowing to its recipients, in conjunction with the lack of a gatekeeper for those sites, 
it is difficult to verify the content, thereby making it easier for others to disseminate misinformation [15]. 
Thus, OSNs are hijacked, and their otherwise useful tools are misused to create chaos and spread false 
news, and to undermine intellectual convictions, ideological constants, and moral and social factors that 
could cause confusion within the community. The absolute freedom guaranteed by these sites has resulted 
in a threat to social security and social harmony [16];[17-19]. 
On the other hand, the good quality content obtained from SBD has several significant impacts [20-23]. 
The use of social media is an empowering force in the hands of the public and private sectors and can have 
a positive influence on a community’s development. It is an important tool for creating a better future by 
harnessing these platforms to spread (public health) awareness, ensure security, and improve social and 

3 
 
economic practices. OSNs consolidate and strengthen relationships between the users by sharing factual 
information and exchanging views on a variety of topics. This gives individuals considerable experience in 
many domains, in addition to enabling them to acquire knowledge and skills. Furthermore, the extraction 
and examination of quality content can benefit several vital sectors of the community. For example, high-
quality social data leads to a better understanding of customer behaviour and keeps a company’s audience 
updated with the latest developments which improve customers’ experience and increases revenue [24, 25]. 
Last but not least, the quality of data influences the decision-making process of business operators [26, 27]. 
This paper presents an approach for estimating and predicting users’ domain-based credibility in SBD . The 
literature of trust in social media shows a lack of approaches for measuring domain-based trust. Several 
reviews have been carried out to highlight the importance of conducting a fine-grained trustworthiness 
analysis in the context of SBD [28-31] to better understand users’ behaviours in the OSNs. Twitter is a 
microblogging social networking medium for content makers to express and share their thoughts, believes, 
and domains of interest via short text messages (tweets) [32]. The literature review shows that the current 
approaches analyse the trustworthiness of Twitter users only, where a single machine learning approach is 
used. To the best of our knowledge, no numerical comparisons or analyses have been made of the different 
machine learning approaches used to evaluate domain-based Twitter trustworthiness. Hence, the 
undertaking of such tasks may lead to the development of a more convincing machine learning approach. 
Thus, several machine learning algorithms were implemented and integrated with the proposed framework 
in order to evaluate and predict the trustworthiness of Twitter. The experiments conducted to evaluate this 
approach using various machine learning techniques validate the applicability and effectiveness of 
indicating influencer and non-influencer users in the designated domain. The results of our approach prove 
that it is capable of predicting influential domain-based users.  
The key contributions of this paper are summarised as follows: 
• 
An overarching time-aware credibility framework for users of OSNs is introduced which 
comprises domain-based analysis of users’ content incorporating semantic and sentiment 
analyses.  
• 
An advanced set of key attributes is presented to measure users’ credibility in dissimilar domains. 
• 
Various machine learning modules are used and implemented, and a benchmark comparison is 
conducted to determine the optimal techniques that can be used to predict highly domain-based 
influencers.  
• 
The experimental results have proven that our approach is capable of predicting influential 
domain-based users.         
This paper is organised as follows: the review of the literature on previously-developed frameworks is 
given in the following section. The Methods section presents a detailed description of the set of techniques 
and approaches for data analysis used in this study. In particular, the data analysis and features extraction 
section describes the semantic analytical module and the credibility evaluation methodology used for 
feature extraction. The section on Machine-Learning-based Classification Techniques describes the 
various machine learning techniques that are used in this study. The experiments are presented and 
discussed in the Experimental Results section, and the Discussion section demonstrates the significance 
of our research topic. Then, suggestions are offered in regard to future work that can be undertaken to 
extend and improve upon our research endeavours. The Conclusion section revisits the key contributions 

4 
 
of this study. 
Literature Review 
The growing popularity of social media articles and micro-blogging systems has created an enormous 
amount of content and is redefining the way that online information is extracted [33-36]. Usually, 
information is generated and shared by users who tend to have knowledge pertaining to a particular domain.  
Users’ credibility plays an important role in determining whether the information being offered can be 
trusted. Since much of this information has been contributed by strangers with limited or no credible history, 
the task of detecting content trustworthiness is challenging. Information credibility relies on the 
trustworthiness of the source; that is, the likelihood that it  can provide high quality content. Also, estimating 
the informative value of influencer-generated content, and measuring its specificity, would have a 
substantial influence on users’ behaviour and domain-specific awareness. Hence, assessing trustworthiness 
in the context of content relevance and user influence is vital in the realm of domain-specific on-line social 
activities. If users are to obtain trusted information and expert-quality content, then efficient techniques are 
required that can filter irrelevant, low quality and non-verified content. The literature of trust in social media 
shows a lack of approaches for measuring domain-based trust. Several reviews have been carried out to 
highlight the importance of conducting a fine-grained trustworthiness analysis in the context of SBD [28-
31] to better understand users’ behaviours in the OSNs.  
To demonstrate the contribution of our work, this section will review relevant approaches dealing with the 
quantification of trustworthiness. An overview will be presented of previous approaches aimed at 
understanding the contextual content of social medial users in order to measure their social medial 
influence. We establish five main categories to classify these approaches, namely: (i) similarity-based 
approaches, (ii) graphical-based approaches, (iii) sentiment analysis tools, (iv) influencers’ retrieval 
techniques, and (v) machine learning approaches. The strengths and limitations of each approach will be 
discussed. 
Similarity-based Approaches  
In regard to similarity-based approaches which rely on statistical methods and feature correlation, Cheung 
et al. proposed a multimedia big data recommendation mechanism as an alternative to social graphs for 
recommendation [37]. In their study, two million user-shared images from eight online social networks 
were analysed using machine-generated labels from encoded vectors via convolutional neural networks. 
They showed that user similarity based on their shared images has an exponential distribution, and there is 
the strong possibility of users having followers irrespective of the content-sharing mechanism. Jang et al. 
analysed event mentions in microblogs of social media, like Twitter, in order to quantify users’ interests 
using a similarity-based regional network [38].  
Regional user interests are obtained for each topic by applying latent Dirichlet allocation to region-specific 
collections of tweets, and then pairwise similarities among regions are computed. Social similarity based 
on users’ socially important locations was also quantified using Levenshtein distance and evaluated by 
means of a real-life Twitter dataset [39]. Also, similar locations were grouped based on visual components, 
represented by picture content-related tag descriptions, and the grouping was used to determine destination 
similarities based on implicit information shared on Flickr [40]. Others investigated the difference in 

5 
 
similarity of synonyms occurring in microblogs. For instance, Thorne et al. analysed the most commonly-
used concepts in Medline for their semantic similarity to those of Twitter posts [41]. In their work, the 
normalized entropy and cosine similarities based on a simple distributional model were compared.  
It was found that, semantically, diseases were referred to in different ways in both corpora and commonness 
of disease or condition. Authors suggest that query expressions must be carefully chosen when sampling 
social media for disease-related micro-blogs. In their work in a similar domain, He et al. experimented with 
social question-and-answer sites corpora on two disease domains -diabetes and cancer- in order to identify 
new, meaningful consumer terms [42]. Others developed a model comprising an ensemble of classifiers for 
mining social media data streams by combining similarity-based and genetic algorithm classifiers [43].  
A visual perception similarity, based on human visual attention, was proposed as a means of providing new 
users with relevant information (i.e. recommender systems) in social media [44]. In a similar work, video-
sharing patterns were exploited to improve video recommendations for YouTube-like social media [45]. 
Demirsoz et al. proposed a textual similarity-based approach for classifying national news reports tweets, 
and showed that it has a higher significance than Twitter analyses via a hashtag [46]. 
Graph-based Approaches  
The majority of graph-based approaches are intended to calculate a trust value through a trusted graph (or 
trusted network) with trusted paths starting from a trustor (the source entity) and ending with a trustee (the 
target entity) [47]. Graph-based approaches can be classified into two main categories [48]: (i) 
simplification-based approaches which simplify trusted graphs into trusted paths of disjoint nodes or edges, 
and (ii) analogy-based approaches which explore the similarities between graph-based trust models in 
OSNs and other graph-based models in other networking environments.  
SWTrust is simplification-based framework that was proposed by Jiang et al. to identify whether a node 
can trust another node on a particular topic in large OSNs [49]. SWTrust applies the “Weak Ties” theory 
proposed by Granovetter [50] as sources of new information with a breadth-first search algorithm to 
discover capable neighbours who can give effective suggestions at each step towards the targeted entity. 
Besides generating trusted graphs, the SWTrust framework also implements eight trust prediction strategies 
by combining three factors: propagation functions, aggregation functions, and whether or not only the 
shortest paths are being considered..  
A trust-based recommendation approach that uses graph similarity has been proposed in [51] to recommend 
trustworthy agents to a requester in a trust network. The approach uses the similarity scores to identify good 
connections (i.e. with high trust values) that the agents share with the target (i.e. the agent that requests a 
recommendation). In a graph context, an ontology represents the core of the domain where the knowledge 
is shared amongst different entities within the system that may include people or software agents [52]. One 
stream of research has focused on fine-grain trustworthiness analysis [18, 53-58] [59], while an approach 
for microblogging ranking has been proposed by Kuang et al. [60].  
The authors incorporate three dimensions in their ranking technique (i.e. tweet popularity, the closeness 
between the tweet and the owner user, and the topics of interest). Recently (2018), Cheng et al. [61] 
proposed a method for evaluating trust in OSNs using knowledge graphs. The method applies a recurrent 
neural network model to quantify trustworthiness in OSNs which is inspired by relationship prediction in 

6 
 
knowledge graphs, and also applies a path-reliability measuring algorithm to decide the reliability of a path 
from the trustor to the trustee. The results show that the proposed model is efficient for trust relation 
evaluation, especially when the number of users in OSNs is large. Although several graph-based approaches 
have been designed for measuring user trust in OSNs, the approaches do not propagate the users’ credibility 
throughout the entire network.  
Sentiment Analysis Tools  
The aim of sentiment analysis is to develop automatic tools that can extract subjective information from 
text and analyse sentiment contents generally available in social media [62]. A framework for Implicit 
Social Trust and Sentiment (ISTS) has been proposed in [63] to indicate user preferences by exploring the 
user’s OSNs. The framework maps suggested recommendations into numerical rating scales by measuring 
implicit trust between friends based on intercommunication activities and inferring sentiment rating to 
reflect the knowledge behind friends’ short posts, and determining the influence of the level of trust between 
friends and the sentiment rating using machine learning regression algorithms. An approach proposed by 
Alahmadi et al. [64] uses implicit social trust from OSNs to solve new users' recommendation problems 
(i.e. the cold start problem). The approach builds implicit trust based on the relationship between an active 
user and his/her friends in the popular social micro-blogger, Twitter, by considering aspects such as retweet 
actions and followers/ followings lists. The work by Wang et al., [65] proposed a social media analytics 
engine that employs a fuzzy similarity-based classification method to automatically classify text messages 
into sentiment categories (positive, negative, neutral and mixed), with the ability to identify their prevailing 
emotion categories (e.g., satisfaction, happiness, excitement, anger, sadness, and anxiety). Others attempted 
to identify the semantic similarity of very short texts in Twitter and Facebook [66]. Also, a lexical 
similarity-based approach for extracting subjectivity in documents extracted from social media was 
proposed in [67]. Although sentiment analysis approaches have been developed to analyse the 
trustworthiness of users, these did not analyse the sentiment in a post’s replies when evaluating the 
trustworthiness of users and their content. 
Influencers Retrieval Techniques 
In SBD, users should be very knowledgeable and have a certain level of expertise in order to be considered 
as knowledge-based influencers. Fang et al. proposed a topic-sensitive influencer mining framework for 
social media networks, in particular Flickr [68]. Visual-textual content relationships among images, and 
social links between users and images, are captured. The approach relies on topical influential users and 
images, where topic distribution is revealed by leveraging user-contributed images, and then the strength 
of the influence in relation to different topics is determined for each node in a hyper-graph learning 
approach. Another work studied public opinions and sentiments expressed via video-based social media 
channels such as YouTube [69]. An integrated framework was presented to facilitate visual exploratory 
analysis of, for instance, temporal evolution, vocabulary network, authors’ relative popularity and 
influence, categories and user communities and influencers. Others applied a Belief-Propagation variant of 
the collective influence algorithm to find the minimal set of influencers in networks via optimal percolation 
[70]. Big-data social networks of 200 million users (e.g., Twitter users sending 500 million tweets/day) 
were analysed to find influencers in an improved computational time (hours) which would otherwise take 
hundreds of years. However, influencers’ retrieval techniques do not validate the applicability and 

7 
 
effectiveness of indicating influencers and non-influencers users in the designated domain, which is one of 
the main outputs of this research. 
Machine Learning Approaches 
In the context of dedicated machine learning methods for domain-specific social trustworthiness, 
Nabipourshiri et al. proposed a tree-based classification approach for measuring trustworthiness in online 
social networks [71]. Three different machine learning algorithms were used to predict users’ credibility. 
The domain of knowledge focused on a single domain and other common conditions related to noisy and 
sparse data were not considered. Paryani et al. estimated the veracity of topics in micro-blogging sites 
from a truthful vantage point using a bag-of-words, entropy-based model [72]. The measure of the 
uncertainty property of the entropy was used as the basis for the model. The work suggests that in order 
for a veracity model to be effective, it needs to be restricted to a data domain and indicate how veracity 
relates to the discussed topic. The work of Zhang et al. tackled three main challenges related to truth 
discovery in big data social media sensing applications [73]: the spreading of misinformation, data sparsity 
and scalability. Source reliability, report credibility, and source's historical behaviours are considered to 
address the aforementioned challenges. Although a scalable and robust approach to solve the truth-
discovery problem is provided, some issues related to reliance on heuristically-defined scoring functions 
and change over time, unconfirmed claims that cannot be independently verified by a trustworthy source, 
and false claims, are not investigated. Immonen et al. evaluated the quality of social media data in big 
data architecture under unstructured and uncertain conditions [74]. A new architecture solution was 
proposed to manage and evaluate the quality of social media data in each processing phase of the big data 
pipeline; this was validated with an industrial case to determine customer satisfaction with the quality of 
a product. Zhao et al. proposed a model for the evaluation of service quality by improving the overall 
rating of services using the concept of confidence in user ratings, which denotes the trustworthiness of 
user ratings [75]. The entropy is used as a measure of randomness to calculate user ratings' confidence. 
The confidences are constrained by further calculating spatial-temporal and reviewing the sentiment 
features of user ratings; eventually, these are combined into a unified model to calculate an overall 
confidence, which is utilized to perform service quality evaluation. However, a detailed quality evaluation 
that considers, for instance, features such as colour, taste and price, is not reflected in the overall rating of 
services. In another similar work, the understanding of big urban data generated by social users, including 
user rating behaviour study, user sentiment study, spatial-temporal features study, and user social circle 
studies is dealt with [76]. Although several works have focused on machine learning approaches to 
identify OSN users’ trustworthiness, no work has combined together a set of machine learning modules 
to predict highly trustworthy domain-based users.  The major quantification approaches for measuring 
domain-based trust related to different OSNs are summarised in Table 1. 
The aforementioned research attempted to analyse or predict the trustworthiness of Twitters based on a 
single machine learning approach. Although the reasons for using the machine learning approach were 
discussed in general, numerical comparisons of different machine learning approaches have not been 
made when evaluating Twitter trustworthiness. By systematically comparing different methods, a more 
convincing machine learning approach can be advised for evaluating Twitter trustworthiness.  
This section has provided an overall review of relevant approaches in the five main categories, which 
have been developed to understand the contextual content of social medial users and to measure their 

8 
 
social medial influence. Also, the limitations and advantages of the previous approaches have been 
discussed for each category. Given these limitations and advantages, a combination of those approaches 
is necessary. The incorporation attempts to enhance the performance or effectiveness for understanding 
the contextual content of social medial users and measuring their social medial influence. In the following 
section, a framework is proposed that incorporates the approaches in the five categories. The framework 
attempts to improve and to expand the analysis process and inferring credibility of Social Big Data. 
 
Table 1: Major quantification approaches for measuring domain-based trust related to different online social 
networks 
Data source 
Contribution 
Quantification approach 
Advogato 
[40] 
Graph-based 
Dianpin 
[69] 
Machine learning 
Douban 
[68] 
Machine learning 
Epinions 
[40], [42] and [48] 
Graph-based 
Facebook 
[41] 
Graph-based 
FilmTrust 
[40] 
Graph-based 
Flickr 
[30], [33] and [61] 
Similarity-based; Influencer retrieval 
IBM Connections 
[52] 
Graph-based 
Internet Movie database 
[60] 
Sentiment analysis 
LinkedIn 
[41] 
Graph-based 
MEDLINE® 
[34] 
Similarity-based 
MySpace 
[41] 
Graph-based 
Pinterest 
[47] 
Graph-based 
RenRen 
[38] 
Similarity-based 
Skyrock 
[30] 
Similarity-based 
Tencent Weibo 
[30] 
Similarity-based 
Twitter 
[12], [30-32], [39], [46], [49], [51], 
[53-58], [63-67] 
Similarity-based; Graph-based; Sentiment analysis; 
Influencer retrieval; Machine learning 
Weibo 
[30] 
Similarity-based 
Wikipedia 
[59] 
Sentiment analysis 
Yahoo! Answers 
[35] 
Similarity-based 
Yammer 
[52] 
Graph-based 
Yelp 
[48], [68-69] 
Graph-based; Machine learning 
YouKu 
[38] 
Similarity-based 
YouTube 
[62] 
Influencer retrieval 
 
System Architecture Development Framework 
As depicted in Figure 1, the system architecture development framework comprises three main sections: (i) 
Data Collections and Acquisition; (ii) Features Extraction and (iii) Machine Learning Modules. A detailed 
description of each stage of the proposed framework is provided in the following sub-sections. 

9 
 
 
Figure 1: System Architecture Development Framework 
Data Collection and Acquisition  
This section aims to discuss the 1st step of the system architecture. This step contains the following stages, 
namely; data generation; data acquisition and data pre-processing.  
Data Generation: The first step in the system architecture is the data collection of the social networks. 
This step is very important since for the researchers will collect an online raw from various online 
platforms i.e. Twitter, Facebook and others based on their needs.  Big Data (BD) is the technical term for 
the vast quantity of heterogeneous datasets which are created and disseminated rapidly, and for which the 
conventional techniques used to process, analyse, retrieve, store and visualise such massive sets of data 
are now unsuitable and inadequate. This can be seen in many areas such as sensor-generated data, social 
media, uploading and downloading of digital media. BD has several ‘V-features’: Volume, Velocity, 
Variety, Veracity, Variability and Value [77] [78] [79], [77], [80] [81]. This research focuses on SBD of 
Twitter micro-blogging. There are three reasons for selecting only the Twitter platform for this paper: (i) 
it is a rich dataset with over 500 million tweets being generated daily, which is around 200 billion tweets 
Pre-Processing
Machine Learning Techniques
Twitter Social Influence Prediction
API
Data Collection
And Acquisition
Features Extraction
ML Modules
Twitter
Network
Data Generation
Sentiment
Analysis
Domain
Knowledge
User's Tweets
Social Influence
Analysis
Tweets and Replies
Domains &
Sentiments
Semantic Analysis
Users' Features

10 
 
a year; thus, researchers in diverse disciplines apply their frameworks to data generated from Twitter, 
leveraging the vast volume of content; (ii) Twitter facilitates the collection of data through their access to 
the Twitter sphere via Application Programming Interfaces (APIs); and (iii) it is feasible to create a 
prototype for one social media. The developed prototype can then be adapted to other social media 
platforms. 
Data Acquisition & Pre-processing: This step aims to improve the performance and accessibility of 
processing and eliminate the inappropriate and confidential information from social influence analysis to 
protect the privacy of users. Data acquisition is carried out using a PHP script triggered by running a cron 
job which collects all content and metadata of users selected from Twitter graph dataset crawled by Akcora 
et al., [82]. This graph is chosen since it includes the list of users who had fewer than 5,000 friends in 2013. 
This threshold was established by Akcora et al. [82] to discover bots, spammers and robot accounts. This 
threshold is used to measure their credibility as well. This helps to find domain influencers from a dataset 
of general users whose domains of knowledge are not explicitly known. Twitter APIs were utilized to 
extract batches of tweets in a timely fashion. The raw extracted tweets passed through a pre-processing 
phase. This phase addresses the data veracity via data correctness. This phase includes: (i) temporary data 
storage where data is grouped and stored in a temporary location; (ii) data cleansing: data at this stage may 
include many errors, meaningless, irrelevant, redundant data, etc. Thus, data cleansing will remove noisy 
data and ensure data consistency; (iii) data integration done through data reformatting to fit with the 
predefined data structure model that is designed based on the tweet’s metadata.   
Data Storage: This study incorporates a distributed data processing solution to facilitate data storage and 
analysis. Data storage is the third phase of the BD lifecycle  [83]. Volume is an essential dimension to be 
considered when describing BD. The data storage provides a distributed and parallel data processing 
infrastructure based on the Hadoop/MapReduce platform for BD. The BD infrastructure at the School of 
Management, Curtin University, is utilized for data storage. This is a 6-node BD cluster, each with 64 GB 
RAM, 2 TB Storage, and 8 Core Processors. The temporal-temporary data is dumped in this distributed 
environment after the data integration process. Each dump was assigned a timestamp to differentiate it from 
previous batches. Although the size of our data could be stored and managed using one computer, the BD 
cluster is utilized as an infrastructure required for our continuous research in BD analysis incorporating 
large scale, heterogeneous types of data. 
Features Extraction   
Semantic Analysis: this module attempts to use existing ontologies and linked data to provide meaningful 
information to enrich the collected tweets. In particular, the textual contents of tweets are enriched to infer 
their semantics and to link each tweet with a particular domain. To achieve this objective, AlchemyAPI1 is 
utilised to ascertain the domain knowledge of tweets. 
Domain-based Credibility Analysis: users’ credibility is initiated using a sophisticated metric extracted 
from user content analysis. This metric of key attributes is consolidated and formulated to measure the 
credibility of users in each domain of knowledge by considering the temporal factor.  In particular, the 
                                                             
1 AlchemyAPI has been recently acquired by IBM, and it is now part of IBM Watson services:  
https://www.ibm.com/watson/  

11 
 
overarching credibility approach is provided based on three main dimensions: (i) distinguishing OSNs’ 
users in the set of their domains of knowledge; (ii) feature analysis of users’ relation and their contents; and 
(iii) time-aware credibility evaluation.  
Data analysis and feature extraction will be further discussed later in this study. 
Machine learning techniques 
Machine learning applications have been widely implemented to enable real-time predictions leveraging 
high quality and well-proven statistical algorithms, where the utilization of machine-learning techniques in 
particular consolidates the decision-making process and delivers valuable insights from big data [84][85, 
86]. 
The set of machine learning modules, which are used in this study, will be described later.  
Methods  
This section presents a detailed description of the set of techniques used for data analysis in this study. In 
particular, in the data analysis and features extraction sub-section, the approaches used for semantic analysis 
and knowledge inference are discussed, followed by a description of the mechanism used to measure the 
domain-based users’ credibility. This section also introduces the seven machine learning techniques which 
are used to determine the user’s social influence.  
Data analysis and features extraction   
Semantic Analysis  
Deep insights of BD require new data analysis techniques and the continuous improvement of existing 
practices. This mitigates the variability of BD [87, 88], distinguishes users’ domains of interest and infers 
their genuine sentiments.  
In this context, AlchemyAPI is used as a domain knowledge inference tool to infer the content’s 
taxonomies. AlchemyAPI analyses the given text or URL and categorizes the content of the text or webpage 
according to three domains (taxonomies) with the corresponding scores and confident values. Scores are 
calculated using AlchemyAPI, ranging from “0” to “1”, and convey the correctness degree of an assigned 
Taxonomy/Domain to the processed text or webpage. Confident is a flag associated with each response, 
indicating whether AlchemyAPI is confident with the output. AlchemyAPI is used further to identify the 
overall positive or negative sentiment of the content in question. 
A tweet’s content has one or two main components: text and url. Due to the limitation of a tweet’s length, 
a normal or legitimate Twitterer attaches with his/her tweet a URL to a particular webpage, photo, or video 
to help his/her followers obtain further information on the tweet’s topic. Twitter scans URLs against a list 
of potentially harmful websites, then URLs are shortened using t.co service to maximise the use of the 
tweet’s length. Anomalous users such as spammers abuse this feature by hijacking trends, using unsolicited 
mentions, etc., to attach misleading URLs to their tweets. Thus, it is important to study the tweet’s domain 
and the comprised URL’s domain to obtain a better understanding of the user’s domain(s) of knowledge, 
which are then used to measure the user’s domain-based credibility. 

12 
 
AlchemyAPI is used to analyse and determine taxonomies of each user’s tweet and the website content of 
the associated URL rather than analysing the user’s timeline as one block. This is done to obtain a fine-
grained analysis of tweet data. AlchemyAPI may not be able to infer a domain for any particular tweet or 
URL when the tweet is very short, or the content is unclear or nonsensical, or written in a language other 
than English. Likewise, if the URL is invalid, corrupted, or contains non-English content, the domain cannot 
be inferred. Currently, English language contents are the only contents supported by AlchemyAPI in their 
taxonomy inference technique. Hence, we removed a tweet and its metadata from the dataset if the tweet 
was written in another language. 
Analysis of Domain-based Users’ Social Influence  
The key challenge for BD analysis is the mining of enormous amounts of data in the quest for added value. 
Researchers are trying to capture the value of BD in dissimilar contexts. In OSNs, it is important to have 
an understanding of the users’ behaviour due to the dramatic increase in the usage of online social platforms. 
This indicates the importance of measuring the users’ trustworthiness, thereby discovering users' influence 
in a particular domain. In this paper, a domain-based analysis of users’ credibility is proposed in order to 
provide a comprehensive scalable framework. This is achieved by analysing the collection of a user’s tweets 
in order to measure the initial user’s credibility value based on the user’s historical data. This is done 
through the domain-based user credibility ranking approach.  
It is important to have an understanding of the interactions-based attributes of OSN users, as this is a 
significant factor when discovering socially reliable, domain-based users. This involves studying the 
followers’ interest in the users’ content, their positive or negative opinions, etc. In this section, a metric 
incorporating several key attributes is used to build the feature-based ranking model.   
As mentioned previously, AlchemyAPI infers a maximum of three taxonomies for each processed text (i.e. 
tweet’s text or URL’s website content). The tweets’ metadata (such as #likes, #Retweet, #Replies, etc.) 
does not indicate the particular domain in which the follower has valued the tweet. Hence, the user’s scores 
produced by AlchemyAPI for each domain are used to provide a weighting distribution mechanism for all 
metadata items in the inferred domains; we termed this mechanism the domain-base relativeness factor. 
More details will be provided under each feature in the following subsections. 
User retweet (𝑹𝑹), where 𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 represents the frequency of retweets for user’ content in each domain 𝒅𝒅.  
The domain-based relativeness factor is used to calculate 𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖 based on the 𝒖𝒖’s score obtained for each 
domain 𝒅𝒅. In particular, the total count of retweets “retweet_count” is distributed among 𝒖𝒖’s domain(s) 
based on his/her score for each one. For example, suppose the domain-based scores spreading for a tweet 
(𝒕𝒕𝒙𝒙) posted by user 𝒖𝒖 is (1, 0.5, and 0.5) in (“Sports”, “Arts and Entertainment”, and “Education”) domains 
respectively, and the total retweets of 𝒖𝒖’s tweet = 10, then the distribution number of retweets for user 𝒖𝒖 is  
(𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖,𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔 = 5, 𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖,𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂 = 2.5, 𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖,𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆 = 2.5). 𝑹𝑹 is normalized as follows: 
 𝐑𝐑′
𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝= 
𝐑𝐑𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝
𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐱𝐱(𝐑𝐑∗𝐝𝐝)   , 
for each domain d    
      
(1) 
Where  𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝑹𝑹∗𝒅𝒅) is the maximum count of retweets obtained for all users' content in domain d.  
It is evident that the crawled dataset for any user might contain one or more of the following categories: 
original tweets, retweets or replies to other tweets. The content of retweets has been retained and used for 
domain discovery purposes. When a user retweets a certain tweet 𝒕𝒕𝒚𝒚 then supports the context of 𝒕𝒕𝒚𝒚 despite 

13 
 
𝒕𝒕𝒚𝒚 originating with someone else. However, all retweets with the associated metadata have been eliminated, 
and are not counted when ascertaining credibility. This is because metadata such as (retweet_count, 
favorite_count, and replies_count) which are associated with this tweet’s category indicate the original 
tweet and cannot be used to support the credibility of the re-twitterer.  
Table 2: Domain-based User Retweets 𝐑𝐑𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝 
Technology and Computing 
Twitterer 
#Total Tweets 
#Domain Tweets 
𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖 
𝑹𝑹′
𝒖𝒖 
chris_radcliff 
768 
148 
3831 
1 
nfreader 
542 
206 
962 
0.251 
nukeador 
165 
44 
627 
0.164 
IvorCrotty 
1841 
398 
604 
0.158 
LocalJoost 
609 
249 
398 
0.104 

retweets although this user acquired a relatively low weight in the “Tech. and Comp.” domain 
(𝑾𝑾′
𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄_𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓𝒓 = 𝟎𝟎. 𝟎𝟎𝟎𝟎𝟎𝟎). Figure 2 depicts the total count of retweets, favourites, and replies obtained 

reached a peak in Aug-2014; this is due to one of his tweets2  posted that month which has been retweeted 
a relatively high number of times (3603 retweets), and the total retweets count for the user content in Aug-
2014 (3,822). However, the average retweets count for this user’s content in other months equals “8.125” 
retweets.  Tracing retweet counts according to time is important to measure, temporally, the consistent 
interest in a user’s content, and this applies to all other metadata attributes. This accentuates the importance 
of incorporating the temporal factor when measuring the credibility of users. This dimension will be 
addressed in a later section.  
 

User likes (𝑳𝑳), where 𝑳𝑳𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 represents the percentage of likes/favourites count for the users’ content in each 
domain 𝒅𝒅. 𝑳𝑳𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 is measured after allocating the set of tweets for each user in each domain. Then the number 
                                                             
2 The tweet can be viewed through this link: https://twitter.com/chris_radcliff/status/504400669571178496 
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Count
Jun-14 Jul-14 Aug-14 Sep-14 Oct-14 Nov-14 Dec-14 Jan-15 Feb-15
RetCount
3
14
3,822
10
10
1
19
6
2
FavCount
5
39
2,614
15
19
14
34
34
14
RepCount
28
77
50
80
147
107
56
77
53

14 
 
of likes obtained for each chunk of tweets in each domain will indicate the domain-based user likes (i.e. 
𝑳𝑳𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 ). 𝑳𝑳𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 is normalized as follows: 
𝐋𝐋′
𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝= 
𝐋𝐋𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝
𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐱𝐱(𝐋𝐋∗𝐝𝐝) , 
 
for each domain d      
 
 (2) 
Where  𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝑳𝑳∗𝒅𝒅) is the maximum percentage of likes/favourites obtained for all users' content in domain 
𝒅𝒅. “fav_count” metadata value is distributed based on the domain-based relativeness factor mechanism.  
Table 3: Domain-based User Likes 𝐋𝐋𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝 
Technology and Computing 
Twitterer 
#Total Tweets 
#Domain Tweets 
𝑳𝑳𝒖𝒖 
𝑳𝑳′
𝒖𝒖 
chris_radcliff 
768 
148 
2615.6 
1 
tigga7d6 
2560 
1696 
1274.1 
0.251 
nfreader 
542 
206 
816.8 
0.166 
scout2i 
1626 
1005 
659.2 
0.163 
SpnMaisieDaisy 
1836 
212 
585.9 
0.104 
  

the highest value due to the popularity of the aforementioned tweet which was posted in Aug-2014 (2,614 
Total Likes as illustrated in Figure 2). Despite this figure, the high numbers of domain-based retweets or 
likes in a certain domain, do not necessarily indicate an influential user in that domain and vice versa. For 
example, a celebrity might post a tweet about a certain trending topic which is not particularly related to 
his/her main area of interest(s). It stands to reason that this user will receive a high number of retweets, 
replies, or likes due to his or her popularity. This emphasizes the importance of acquiring a thorough 
understanding of the user’s data and metadata, thereby providing a correct indication of the users’ domains 
of knowledge.   
User replies (𝑷𝑷), where 𝑷𝑷𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 indicates the number of replies to the users’ content in each domain 𝒅𝒅. 𝑷𝑷 is 
normalized as follows: 
 
 𝐏𝐏′
𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝= 
𝐏𝐏𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝
𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝐏𝐏∗𝐝𝐝)  ,  
for each domain d  
     
 (3) 
Where  𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝑷𝑷∗𝒅𝒅) is the maximum percentage of replies obtained for all users' contents in domain 𝒅𝒅. 
“replies_count” metadata is distributed based on domain-base relativeness factor mechanism.  Still, the 
domains associated with the content of tweets’ replies can be analysed to extra 
ct 
the 
actual 
domain(s) of each reply. This will be addressed in our future research in order to improve the entries of 𝑷𝑷. 
Table 4 shows the list of highest domain-based replies values in 𝑷𝑷.  

15 
 
Table 4: Domain-based User's Content Replies 𝐏𝐏𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝 
Technology and Computing 
Twitterer 
#Total Tweets 
#Domain Tweets 
𝑷𝑷𝒖𝒖 
𝑷𝑷′
𝒖𝒖 
tigga7d6 
2560 
1696 
1908 
1 
grahamgilbert 
1040 
432 
992 
0.52 
Xantiriad 
2298 
577 
992 
0.52 
Aurynn 
2222 
558 
985 
0.516 
markdrew 
2005 
731 
917 
0.481 
Although Table 4 shows that the top five users who obtained the highest number of replies in the “Tech. 
and Comp” domain, the sentiments expressed in these replies should be considered in order to obtain a 
better understanding of the repliers’ opinions about users’ content. In OSNs, sentiment analysis has been 
utilized in several aspects of research. In the context of social trust, frameworks have been developed to 
analyse the trustworthiness of users’ content, taking into consideration the overall feelings towards users’ 
Twitter content. However, these efforts did not analyse the sentiment in a post’s replies when evaluating 
the trustworthiness of users and their content. The following are the features that are considered when 
analysing the replies in terms of sentiment.  
User positive sentiment replies (𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺), where  𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 refers to the sum of the positive scores of all replies to 
user 𝒖𝒖 in domain 𝒅𝒅. Positive scores are achieved from AlchemyAPI with values greater than “0” and less 
than or equal to “1”. The higher the positive score, the greater is the positive attitude the repliers have to 
the tweeter’s content.  
User negative sentiment replies (𝑺𝑺𝑵𝑵), where 𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 represents the sum of the negative scores of all replies 
to a user 𝒖𝒖 in domain 𝒅𝒅. Negative scores are those values greater than or equal to “-1” and less than “0”. 
The lower the negative score, the greater is the repliers’ negative attitude to the tweeter’s content.  
User sentiments replies (𝑺𝑺), where 𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 embodies the difference between the positive and negative 
sentiments of all replies to user 𝒖𝒖 in the domain 𝒅𝒅. 𝑺𝑺 is normalized as follows:  
𝐒𝐒′
𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝= 
𝐒𝐒𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝−𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝐒𝐒∗𝐝𝐝)
𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦 (𝐒𝐒∗𝐝𝐝)−𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝐒𝐒∗𝐝𝐝)   , where  𝐒𝐒𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝= 𝐒𝐒𝐒𝐒𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝−ห𝐒𝐒𝐒𝐒𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝ห , 
for each domain d  
        (4) 
𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒅𝒅 shows the difference between the positive scores and the negative scores for all replies to user 𝒖𝒖 in 
domain 𝒅𝒅. 𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦 (𝑺𝑺∗𝒅𝒅) represents the maximum differences between the positive and negative replies to all 
users in domain 𝒅𝒅. 𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦 (𝑺𝑺∗𝒅𝒅) represents the minimum differences between the positive and negative replies 
to all collected users in domain 𝒅𝒅. It is evident that the list of replies could include responses from the 
tweet’s initiator as a part of the conversation. All replies posted by the tweet’s owner are eliminated from 
the conversation and are not included in the above equations. This is in order to provide accurate sentiments 
results which reflect the actual positive or negative opinions of the tweet expressed by its followers. The 
entries of 𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺 and 𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺 are computed using the domain-based relativeness factor mechanism. For example, 
suppose replies_count for the tweet (𝒕𝒕𝒙𝒙) of the example mentioned before is equal to 10, and the sum of the 
positive and negative replies for 𝒕𝒕𝒙𝒙 are (15, -10) respectively, then the dispersal of the positive scores 
amongst the extracted domains will be (𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔 = 7.5, 𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂 = 3.75, 𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆 = 3.75), and the 
dispersal of the negative scores is (𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔 = -5, 𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂 = -2.5, 𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖,𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆 = -2.5). Table 5 shows 
the top-5 𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖 scores for the list of users in the dataset. It is worth noting that some users received strongly 
positive sentiments toward their content despite the fact that their domain-based number of tweets was 

16 
 
relatively low. This shows that followers establish their opinion of the user’s content by considering the 
quality rather the quantity of their content. This involves creating new, unique, valuable and domain-related 
content, which is received well by the audience. Furthermore, none of the top five users listed in Table 4 is 
mentioned in Table 5. This implies that if user u received a relatively high number of replies, this does not 
necessarily reflect a positive attitude toward their content. Therefore, studying the sentiment in the content’s 
replies is a significant way of ascertaining the users’ actual feelings. The correlation between all entries of  
𝑺𝑺 and 𝑷𝑷 will be provided later in this paper. 
Table 5: Domain-based user sentiments replies 𝐒𝐒𝐮𝐮,𝐝𝐝 
Technology and Computing 
Twitterer 
#Total 
Tweets 
#Domain 
Tweets 
𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖 
𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖 
𝑺𝑺𝒖𝒖 
 
𝑺𝑺′𝒖𝒖 
scout2i 
1626 
1005 
75.198 
-13.434 
61.764 
1 
agardnahh 
815 
520 
67.483 
-9.570 
57.913 
0.988 
CodrutTurcanu 
2251 
1100 
60.068 
-7.580 
52.488 
0.971 
johnjwall 
1695 
229 
70.107 
-21.318 
48.789 
0.96 
MLanghans410 
840 
632 
63.303 
-16.022 
47.281 
0.955 
The last dimension in the list of user’s key attributes is the relationship between the number of followers 
and friends of each user. This relationship has been incorporated in the literature to measure the credibility 
of the OSNs’ users; Wang [89] used this relationship to provide a measurement of the reputation of the 
user. This measurement tool is improved in this paper as follows: 
User Followers-Friends Relation (𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹), where 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖 refers to the difference between the number of 
followers and friends that user 𝒖𝒖 obtains to the age of user’s profile. 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖 is calculated as follows: 
𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅_𝐑𝐑𝐮𝐮= ቐ
𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐮𝐮−𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐮𝐮 
𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐮𝐮
, 𝐢𝐢𝐢𝐢 𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐮𝐮−𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐮𝐮≠𝟎𝟎
      
𝟏𝟏 
𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐮𝐮     , 𝐢𝐢𝐢𝐢 𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐮𝐮−𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐮𝐮= 𝟎𝟎
  
 
 
      
       (5) 
Where 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝒖𝒖 is the number of 𝒖𝒖‘s followers, 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝒖𝒖 is the number of 𝒖𝒖’s friends, and 𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝒖𝒖 is the age of 
𝒖𝒖’s profile in years. The discrepancy between the numbers of followers and friends could be due to the 
profile’s age. Users who obtained a dramatic positive difference between number of followers and friends 
during a relatively short period have an advantage over those who have achieved the same difference, albeit 
over a long period of time. 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹𝒖𝒖 is normalised as follows: 
𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅_𝐑𝐑′𝐮𝐮=  
𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅_𝐑𝐑𝐮𝐮−𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅_𝐑𝐑)
𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦 (𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅_𝐑𝐑)−𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝐅𝐅𝐅𝐅_𝐑𝐑)   
 
 
 
 
      (6) 
Where 𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭) is the maximum Followers-Friends Ratio value of all users in the network,  𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦(𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭) 
is the minimum Followers-Friends Ratio value of all users in the network. Table 11 shows the list of users 
who achieved the highest 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹′𝒖𝒖 values. It is evident that the 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹′𝒖𝒖 key attribute is not quite a good 
measurement to rank the domain-based users per se; users with high 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹′𝒖𝒖 might obtain a general 
reputable position, and they are highly unlikely to be spammers. However, it is sometimes difficult to 
convey the main topic(s) of interest to those users with high 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹′𝒖𝒖 values by studying the relatively few 

Table 6: Twitter Followers - Friends Ratio, and #Tweets in Technology and Computing domain 
Twitterer 
#Total 
Tweets 
#Domain 
Tweets 
𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝒖𝒖 
𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝒖𝒖 
𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝒖𝒖 
𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭_𝑹𝑹′𝒖𝒖 

17 
 
michaelfrisby 
433 
64 
4150 
29 
7 
1 
roseandgrey 
293 
45 
4686 
733 
7 
0.972 
brettdetar 
535 
54 
4037 
121 
7 
0.966 
captdirectory 
140 
75 
4501 
660 
7 
0.953 
kyriii 
122 
48 
4852 
119 
9 
0.927 
 
Machine Learning based Classification Techniques   
Predictive modelling is a set of machine learning modules that search for patterns in large-scale datasets 
and use those patterns to create estimated predictions for new situations. Those predictions can be definite 
(classification learning) or numerical (regression learning). The following is a list of classification and 
prediction modules incorporated in this study. The 12 Twitter features discussed in the Methods section 
have been used to develop the machine learning algorithms which have already been described in detail. 
Naïve Bayes Classifier  
Naive Bayes [90] is a high-bias and low-variance classifier, capable of building an acceptable model even 
with a small dataset. It is modest and computationally low-cost. Archetypal use cases of Naïve Bayes 
classifier include text classification, spam discovery, opinion mining, and recommender systems, to name 
a few [91]. 
The classifications according to the Naïve Bayes Classifier are based on Bayes’ Theorem of where the 
Twitter features are assumed to be independent of the others. A particular Twitter feature in a class is 
independent of the other Twitter features in that class. One of the advantages of the Naïve Bayes Classifier 
is that the computational cost of developing the classifier is generally not high compared to the other 
machine learning approaches such as the deep neural networks.   
The Naïve Bayes model is easy to develop since the computational cost is not high when huge amount of 
data is used. When the same amount of computational effort is used, Naïve Bayes models are likely to 
achieve better generalization capabilities than the other methods for simple classification problems. The 
posterior probability, 
(
)
P c X
, of the Naïve Bayes model is given in equation (1) when the Twitter 
features, 
[
]
1
2
12
,
,...,
X
x x
x
=
, are given. (
)
P c X
 indicates the likelihood of the user being in a particular 
domain, c .  (
)
i
P x c  indicates the probability of that user having the feature, 
ix , when the user is in the 
domain, c . ( )
P c  is the probability that the user is in c . 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
1
2
12
...
P c X
P x c
P x c
P x
c
P c
=
×
×
×
×
 
 
 
      
         (7) 
Logistic Classifier  
Logistic regression is frequently used for dual classification tasks [92]. In logistic regression, the likelihood 
of predicting the social influence of a user is determined by a logistic function consisting of a linear 
summation of all features, 
1
2
12
,
,..., 
x x
x . The logistic function is given as: 

18 
 
( )
(
)
12
0
1
1
1
1 exp
LR
i
i
i
f
x
P y
x
b
b x
=
=
=
=




+
−
+
⋅








∑
 
 
 
 
          (8) 
where 𝑏𝑏0, 𝑏𝑏1, … , 𝑏𝑏12 are the logistic coefficients which are determined by maximizing the likelihood. When 
y  is large, there is a strong likelihood that the user is in the domain. When 
1
y = , the user is definitely in 
the domain-based social influence category. Unlike linear regression which has normally distributed 
residuals, ordinary least square regression cannot be applied to determine the logistic coefficients. To 
determine 𝑏𝑏0, 𝑏𝑏1, … , 𝑏𝑏12, Newton’s iteration method is used. Newton’s iteration method begins with 
tentative logistic coefficients and it adjusts the coefficients based on the gradient between the classification 
likelihood and the features. Newton’s iteration method attempts to improve the classification accuracy 
through the iterations. The method repeats the iterations until the process converges. A user is classified as 
a social influencer in the IT domain when, for instance, the value of 
( )
LR
f
x  in (2) is greater than 0.5.  
Tree-based Classifiers  
A decision tree is a classifier which can express a recursive partition of the domain space of Twitter users. 
A decision tree can be considered as a flow-chart-like structure. The topmost node in a tree is the root node. 
Each internal (i.e. non-leaf) node denotes a test of the Twitter features, 
1
2
12
,
,...,
x x
x . Each branch represents 
the outcomes which are correlated to 
1
2
12
,
,...,
x x
x  and the user domain, c . Each leaf (i.e. terminal node) 
contains a vote indicating whether the user is in c . The predicted domain is obtained by averaging the votes 
of all leaves. The classification for the user domain is determined based on the majority of domain labels 
which reached this leaf during generation.  
The decision tree continues to expand with new nodes being repeatedly included until the stopping criteria 
are met. The training terminates when the predefined number of iterations is reached or a reasonable 
prediction is obtained. Compared with logistic regression and the support vector machine (SVM), decision 
trees are very intuitive and easy to interpret and explain to executives. Also, the empirical results 
demonstrated that a decision tree outperforms SVM and logistic regression on 11 benchmark problems in 
terms of ten classification metrics [93]. Three commonly-used approaches, namely top-down inducing C4.5 
[94], random forest [95], and gradient boosting [96] are used to develop the decision trees. Therefore, these 
tree-based classifiers are selected for testing. If the classification result is more promising, the approach is 
integrated with the proposed framework for classifying the domain user.  
Deep Learning Classifier   
Deep Learning (DL) is designed based on a multi-layer feed-forward artificial neural network, of which the 
network inputs are the Twitter features, 
1
2
12
,
,...,
x x
x , and the network output is the user domain, c . Each 
neuron is involved with an activation function which is either tanh, rectifier or maxout. The activation 
function attempts to generate a nonlinear relation between Twitter features and the user domain.  
The weights which connect the network neurons are trained by the stochastic gradient descent incorporating 
back-propagation. Advanced features such as adaptive learning rate, rate annealing, momentum training, 
dropout and regularization are implemented in order to further enable a higher classification rate. Each 

19 
 
compute node trains a copy of the global model parameters on its native data with multi-threading 
(asynchronously), and underwrites occasionally to the global model via model averaging across the 
network. Since DL is a popular approach for pattern recognition, it is selected for testing. The approach is 
integrated with the proposed framework if its performance is promising for domain user classification.  
Generalized linear model 
Generalized linear models are similar to the traditional logistic regression which attempts to maximize the 
log-likelihood. The approach is incorporated with an elastic net penalty which attempts to perform the 
training regularization. Overfitting can be avoided since the training regularization is used compared to the 
traditional logistic regression. An elastic net penalty with both L1 and L2 regularizations incorporating 
norm 1 and norm 2 of the regression coefficients is given as 
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
2
1
1
,
2
EN
t
i
i
f
y x
y
b
x
α
β
β
λ
β
α β
−


=
−
+
⋅
+
+




∑
   
 
            (9) 
where 
(
)
1
2
11
,
,...,
b b
b
β =
 and 
0b  are the logistic coefficients and λ is the regularization parameter. If λ=0, 
(2) is the ordinary least square regression. If λ>0, the regularization constraint is included. Whenα  is large, 
the logistic coefficients with large values are restricted since the norm 2 is used. Whenα  is small, the 
logistic coefficients are equally restricted. The approach attempts to minimize (9) by optimizing β  and 
0b
. 
Random forest 
Random forests are a hybrid version of the decision tree which averages multiple decision trees where each 
deep decision tree is developed based on different sub-sets of the same training set. (10) illustrates the 
model developed by random forest 
( )
RF
f
x  which are averaged with the multiple decision trees 
( )
DT
if
x  
which are developed based on different sub-sets of training data. 
( )
DT
if
x  is determined by the decision 
tree approach discussed in the Tree-based Classifiers section. 
( )
( )
1
B
N
RF
DT
i
i
B
f
x
f
x
N
=
∑
  
 
 
 
 
 
         (10) 
In (10), 
( )
RF
f
x  uses all 
( )
DT
if
x with 
1,2,..,
B
i
N
=
 in order to predict the untrained sample. 
( )
RF
f
x  attempts to average all 
( )
DT
if
x . Hence, the prediction generated by 
( )
RF
f
x  is given by the 
majority votes for all 
( )
DT
if
x . Random forests overcome the limitation of the decision trees, which are 
likely to cause overfitting or overlearning with the data noise that keeps learning through the iterations. 
Compared to using only the decision tree, the approach is unlikely to cause a loss of interpretability. 
Generalization capabilities of the final model are generally better than those obtained when using only the 
decision trees.  

20 
 
Gradient boosted tree 
The gradient-boosted tree is an ensemble version of classification tree models. The approach is similar to 
the Random forest. (11) illustrates the gradient boosted tree 
( )
GB
if
x  which are the weighted sum of the 
multiple decision trees, 
( )
DT
if
x  with 
1,2,..,
B
i
N
=
 and 
iw  is the weight corresponding to the 
thi  decision 
tree, 
( )
DT
if
x , where 
1
i
i
w =
∑
. All 
iw  are determined based on the gradient-based method which 
attempts to minimize the discrepancies between the predictions and the actual samples.  
( )
( )
GB
DT
i
i
i
f
x
w
f
x
=
⋅
∑
  
 
 
 
 
 
          (11) 
The approach is similar to the Random forest except that the normalized weights are multiplied to the 
decision tree models rather than averaging all models equally. It attempts to give a large weight to the model 
which can achieve accuracy predictions. 
In this section, the overarching framework used in this study is discussed. This includes the set of 
approaches used for conducting semantic analysis and the proposed mechanism used to determine users’ 
credibility. This section also discusses the machine learning techniques used for social influence prediction. 
In the next section, the set of experiments carried out to evaluate the proposed approaches is presented; this 
is followed by a comparison of the various models used for social influence prediction.  
Experimental Results 
Dataset selection and Ground Truth 
To evaluate the credibility of users in terms of the temporal factor, the cleansed dataset is divided into six 
chunks, each chunk comprising the data and metadata for each particular month. These chunks incorporate 
the chronologically sequential snapshots of recent users’ activities amongst the crawled dataset.  Table 7 
shows the total count of users, tweets and their replies for the determined time. The number of users shown 
in Table 7 (i.e. 6,066) indicates the total number of users who posted tweets during one or more of the 
determined periods. The remaining users posted their tweets before that, as they have been inactive in 
Twitter recently. This shows the importance of studying users’ content from a temporal perspective as well. 
Table 7: Total monthly count of users, tweets and replies 
Month 
Period 1 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Period 6 
Total 
#Users 
4,531 
4,596 
4,718 
4,690 
4,388 
4,309 
6,066 
#Tweets 
119,847 
123,304 
145,768 
147,145 
144,529 
137,567 
818,160 
#Replies 
55,949 
58,956 
76,561 
73,867 
70,135 
61,352 
396,820 
 
Due to space constraints, for this paper we selected the “Technology and Computing” domain and labelled 
more than 4000 extracted users to classify them into two categories, namely Influence and non-Influence in 
the “Technology and Computing” domain.  
Figure 3 shows the number of influencers in IT compared with the number of non-influencers in this 
domain.  

21 
 
 
Figure 3: Number of influencers and Non-influencers in IT domain 
As indicated in Figure 3, the number of influencer users is significantly less than the number of non-
influencer users. This is due to the fact that users might be legitimate and trustworthy in a particular domain 
of knowledge, but this does not indicate their influence in this designated domain. Users should show high 
levels of knowledge acquisition and expertise in order to be classified as knowledge-based influencers.  
From the data analysis phase, a set of features was extracted, namely: domain_favorite_count; 
domain_replies_count; 
domain_retweet_count; 
followers_count; 
friends_count; 
retweet_count; 
favorite_count; 
replies_count; 
count_domain_pos; 
count_domain_neg; 
sum_domain_pos; 
and 
sum_domain_neg. Figure 4 depicts the correlation between each computed feature for each user (influential 
and non-influential) and the corresponding calculated trustworthiness values in the “Technology and 
Computing” domain.  It is evident that the number of users who obtained the high credibility values in IT 
domain have attained high values in each of the designated features depicted in Figure 4. Indeed, this 
supports the facts illustrated in Figure 3 where the number of influencers is significantly less than the 
number of non-influential users.  
 
 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Correlation between the trustworthiness values for each feature in IT domain  
 
System Evaluation 
Hyperparameter Settings 
The experiments for this study were carried out using RapidMiner™ software, one of the top tier design 
science platforms according to Gartner [97]. RapidMiner has been incorporated for conducting large scale 
data analytics leveraging sophisticated embedded modules that can run in-parallel inside big data 
environment[98, 99].  The seven machine learning techniques depicted previously were implemented, 60% 
of the dataset was used to train these models and the performance was computed on 40% of the dataset that 
was unseen for any of the implemented model optimizations. The key parameters were determined from 
those in the optimal models. Table 8 presents a summary of several selected hyperparameters and their 
settings for all of the incorporated machine learning modules.  

23 
 
Table 8: Selected parameter settings for machine learning models  
Parameter 
Description 
Value 
Generalised Linear Model (GLM) 
Family 
Uses binomial for classification 
gaussian 
Solver 
Used for optimisation  
IRLSM 
Standardisation 
Standardisation numerical columns 
Checked  
Maximum number of 
threads 
Controls parallelism level of building model 
1 
Naive Bayes (NB) 
 
 
laplace correction 
Prevents the occurrence of zero values  
 
True 
Logistic Regression (LR) 
 
 
Solver 
Used for optimisation 
IRLSM 
Compute p-values 
Requests p-values computation 
True  
Remove collinear 
columns  
Removes some dependent columns 
True 
Add intercept 
Includes constant term in the model 
Ture 
Deep Learning (DL) 
 
 
No. of Epochs 
Iteration times over dataset 
50 
Adaptive rate 
(ADADELTA) 
Unifies the benefits of momentum training and 
learning rate annealing 
True 
Mean learning rate 
A non-negative scalar indicating step size 
0.003772 
Activation function 
Function used by neurons in the hidden layers  
Rectifier 
No. of hidden layer 
Number of hidden layers in the model 
50 
No. of neurons per 
layer 
Size of each hidden layer 
50 
L1 
Regularization (absolute value of the weights) 
1.0E-5 
L2 
Regularization (sum of the squared weights) 
0.0 
Loss function 
loss (error) function 
Quadratic 
Random Forest Tree (RFT) 
 
 
No. Trees 
Number of random generated trees 
100 
Criterion 
On which attribute will be split 
gain_ratio 
Max_depth 
Depth of the tree 
10 
Gradient Boosted Tree (GBT)  
 
No. Trees 
Number of generated trees 
20 
maximum number of 
threads 
Controls parallelism level of model building. 
1 
Max_depth 
Depth of the tree 
10 
Decision Tree (DT) 
 
 
Criterion 
On which attribute will be split 
gain_ratio 
Max_depth 
Depth of the tree 
20 

24 
 
Confidence 
confidence level used for the pessimistic error 
calculation of pruning 
0.1 
minimal gain 
The gain of a node is calculated before splitting it 
0.05 
 
It is worth noting that RapidMiner implements some of the algorithms embedded in H2O3 open source 
analytical platforms. This includes the algorithmic implementation of DL. DL is implemented in H2O using 
typical multi-layer feedforward ANN that is trained with the stochastic gradient descent method, namely 
the backpropagation. RapidMiner offers the capacity to integrate the developed system with a Keras4 
extension; however, we found this step to be unnecessary due to the good results obtained with the default 
implementation of deep learning using H2O.   
Metrics for Performance Evaluation of Models  
At the user level analysis, the proposed system framework can be used to classify whether or not the user 
has domain-based influence. The experiments carried out on the implemented machine learning modules 
involve four different classification scenarios:  
1. 
True-positives (TP): the number of actual influential users that are classified correctly as 
influential users; 
2. 
False-positives (FR): the number of non- influential users that are classified incorrectly as 
influential users; 
3. 
False-negatives (FN): the actual influential users that are classified incorrectly as non- influential 
users; and 
4. 
True-negatives (TN): the non- influential users that are classified correctly as non- influential 
users. 
This paper incorporates certain evaluation metrics to validate the applicability and efficiency of the 
proposed model. The following metrics are used to compare the performance of each developed machine 
learning model. 
(i) 
Classification error: indicates the percentage of incorrect/ misclassified predictions (i.e. incorrect 
predictions)/ (No. of Examples). It is calculated as:   
 
FP 
 FN
TP+ FP + FN
TN
ClassificationError =
+
+
 
 
 
 
        (12) 
(ii) Accuracy: measures the precision of the implemented model by indicating the percentage of correctly 
classified instances (i.e. (correct predictions)/ (no. of examples). It is computed by: 
TP
TN
FN
TP
FP
TN
Accuracy
+
=
+
+
+
 
 
 
 
 
        (13) 
(iii) Precision, Recall and F-score are commonly used to measure classification performance. Formulas 
used to compute these metrics are (7), (8) and (9) respectively.  
TP
TP
Pr
FP
ecision =
+
  
 
 
 
 
 
         (14) 
T
R
P
TP
FN
ecall =
+
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (15) 
                                                             
3 h2o.ai  
4 keras.io 

25 
 
 Precision  Recall
2
Precision 
 Reca
-
ll
F score
⋅
=
⋅
+
 
 
 
 
 
         (16) 
Precision refers to the ratio between the number of actual influential users that were correctly 
predicted, and the total number of correct and incorrect predictions of influential users. Recall 
indicates the ratio between the number of actual influential users that are classified correctly, and the 
total number of actual influential users. Hence, high precision indicates that the machine learning 
model is capable of generating substantially more relevant predictions for the actual influential users 
than the irrelevant ones. High recall shows that the machine learning model is capable of generating 
most of the relevant classification for actual influential users. Hence, the F-score is used to provide 
the trade-off between precision and recall.  
(iv) ROC Comparisons:  The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is a graphical 
representation showing a comparison of the performance of each classifier by plotting the sensitivity 
(recall) and the fall-out (false positive rate). ROC is commonly used to determine the optimal 
classification model. 
Comparison of Models  
Table 9 shows the evaluation performance metrics of each implemented classifier, where the accuracy, 
classification error, precision, recall and f-measure are shown. As depicted in Table 9 the variance between 
the experimental results of all algorithms are relatively minor and all models perform well on the dataset. 
Nevertheless, of all the implemented algorithms, GLM achieves the best metric means for the five 
classification metrics. The results show that GLM is usually flexible and capable of performing advanced 
analysis and is frequently utilised to analyse categorical predictor variables [100].  
On the other hand, despite the sophisticated design of the DL architectures and the advancements that have 
been made to make it a suitable solution for many real-life problems, DL performs relatively well, yet less 
than GLM. This is because it is known that DL requires relatively large-scale datasets to avoid overfitting 
and to generalise, thus providing better results [101, 102]. This indicates the adequacy of linear models 
such as GLM for classification and prediction tasks that might not require a high level of computational 
resources such as deep learning techniques. Furthermore, NB and LR classifiers show relatively worse 
performance compared to other implemented classifiers. This is mainly due to certain assumptions that 
might lead NB and LR models to perform inadequately. In particular, NB and LR commonly assume the 
independence of features; thus, they are not able to learn about the interactions of these features [103] [104]. 
Therefore, problems where features might have high correlation - such as those discussed in this study - 
indicate that NB and LR classifiers are unable to provide good estimations due to this strong assumption. 
Table 9: Evaluation metrics for all implemented models 
Accuracy 
Classification error 
Precision 
Recall 
F_measure 
NB 
92.917% 
7.083% 
92.917% 
100.000% 
96.328% 
GLM 
99.249% 
0.751% 
99.199% 
100.000% 
99.598% 
LR 
96.077% 
3.923% 
95.952% 
100.000% 
97.934% 
DL 
98.582% 
1.418% 
99.020% 
99.461% 
99.239% 
DT 
96.914% 
3.086% 
96.951% 
99.821% 
98.364% 
RF 
96.660% 
3.340% 
98.122% 
98.294% 
98.206% 

26 
 
GBT 
97.996% 
2.004% 
97.892% 
100.000% 
98.935% 
 
Table 10 depicts the confusion table used to quantify the performance of each prediction module. It can be 
seen that the GLM performs better in the classification task of this research; of the 1198 samples used to 
validate each algorithm, only nine were incorrectly classified by the GLM. However, all other classifiers, 
NB and DT algorithms for example, wrongly classified more samples in the prediction validations. 
Nevertheless, the results show that the classification performance of the incorporated models is acceptable. 
These techniques can generally perform effectively for solving this domain-based classification problem. 
Table 10: Confusion Table 
TRUE 
NB 
Influencer 
Non-Influencer 
pred. 
Influencer 
0 
0 
Non-Influencer 
85 
1115 
GLM 
Influencer 
Non-Influencer 
pred. 
Influencer 
75 
0 
Non-Influencer 
9 
1114 
LR 
Influencer 
Non-Influencer 
pred. 
Influencer 
37 
0 
Non-Influencer 
47 
1114 
DL 
Influencer 
Non-Influencer 
pred. 
Influencer 
74 
6 
Non-Influencer 
11 
1108 
DT 
Influencer 
Non-Influencer 
pred. 
Influencer 
50 
2 
Non-Influencer 
35 
1112 
RF 
Influencer 
Non-Influencer 
pred. 
Influencer 
63 
19 
Non-Influencer 
21 
1095 
GBT 
Influencer 
Non-Influencer 
pred. 
Influencer 
60 
0 
Non-Influencer 
24 
1114 
 
In Figure 5, the values in the target column (label) show the overarching significance of each of the selected 
features. These weights are obtained by computing the correlation of the input features with the target 
column for predictions for all incorporated modules. Figure 5 also shows the attributes sorted according to 
their average impact on the performance of each algorithm. The average correlation between the number 
of followers and the label is the highest. This intuitively shows the importance of this feature in indicating 
the highly influential domain-based users since those who have many followers are generally the most 
influential. Also, it can be seen from the figure that the sentiment analysis of the replies to tweets also shows 
high correlation and emphasises the effect of applying opinion mining to infer and measure the credibility 
of users on OSNs. This involves studying the followers’ interest in the users’ content, their positive or 
negative opinions. Furthermore, Figure 5 indicates that the retweet count has obtained the minimum average 

27 
 
correlation with the target label, since many spammers and low-trustworthy users might hijack popular 
topics and abuse hashtags to retweet unrelated content [104]. Hence, the number of retweets alone cannot 
be used as a reliable indicator of social influence. Tracing retweet counts by time is important when 
measuring, temporally, the consistent interest in a user’s content, and this applies to all other metadata 
attributes. This accentuates the importance of incorporating the temporal factor when measuring the 
credibility of users. 
 
 
Figure 5: Weights by correlation 
 
Figure 6 shows the ROC curves (true positive rate, vs. false positive rate) for all models, together on one 
chart. The closer a curve is to the top left corner, the better is the model. The area under the ROC curve is 
a broadly used measure of performance of supervised classification problems. As depicted in Figure 6, 
GLM, DL, and GBT have shown adequacy in the prediction and classification task.  
 
 
Figure 6: ROC Curve of the incorporated prediction modules 
Periodically Domain-based Credibility Evaluation 
The key attributes used to calculate the users’ influence are computed in each domain for each 
selected period. For example, Table 11 shows the five highest values for four selected normalised features 
of users in the “Technology and Computing” domain. Table 6 lists the values of the  𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑹𝑹
′  matrix. These 

28 
 
values are domain- and time-independent because the number of followers and friends have been captured 
once, and they do not reflect any particular domain or period. The regular updating of the 𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑭𝑹𝑹
′  matrix will 
be addressed in future work.  
The figures shown in Table 11 highlight the following issues: (i) there is a noticeable 
unsteadiness in the Twitterers’ value for each key attribute in each month. For example, 

domain-based likes (𝑳𝑳′) amongst other users in the first period. However, this user did not attain the same 
position in other time chunks, nor did s/he appear amongst the top users in terms of other key attributes 

high values in some attributes and low values in other attributes. In other words, users might have obtained 
more domain-based replies due to their interest in one or few domains; however, their metadata revealed 
a shortfall in the count of domain-based likes, sentiment ratio, and retweets. This accentuates, again, the 
importance of monitoring user behaviour over time which is reflected in their credibility. On the other 
hand, users who obtain low values for some key attributes should not be dismissed, particularly if they 
have obtained high values in other key attributes. To sum up, all key attributes analysed in this research 
should be considered in order to provide an accurate measurement of the user’s credibility in each domain.  
Table 11: Top-5 highest values of four normalised features for users in “Technology and 
Computing” domain 
Period1 
Period2 
Period3 
Period4 
Period5 
Period6 
Twitterer 
Val 
Twitterer 
Val 
Twitterer 
Val 
Twitterer 
Val 
Twitterer 
Val 
Twitterer 
Val 
𝑹𝑹′ 
SpnMaisieDais
y 
1 
arieldiaz 
1 
nukeador 
1 
LocalJoost 
1 
rexguo 
1 
spbivona 
1 
rasputnik 
0.99 
zxombie 
0.966 
LocalJoost 
0.485 
macguitar 
0.69 
edithyeung 
0.512 afigman 
0.658 
wolf_gregor 
0.621 SchwartzTV 
0.898 
Lmotsh 
0.234 
edithyeung 
0.48 
whichwdc 
0.419 IvorCrotty 
0.339 
jehb 
0.303 hazelmist 
0.797 
Zxombie 
0.211 
wolf_gregor 
0.37 
jehb 
0.419 neuecc 
0.208 
barrett 
0.292 keyle 
0.695 
TimKrajcar 
0.176 
JustinCampPhoto 0.37 
jkc137 
0.419 DJTRASE 
0.181 
𝑳𝑳′ 
SpnMaisieDais
y 
1 
hazelmist 
1 
nukeador 
1 
macguitar 
1 
edithyeung 
1 
aevanko 
1 
rasputnik 
0.441 iamWALP 
0.968 
LocalJoost 
0.731 
LocalJoost 
0.95 
rexguo 
0.963 afigman 
0.867 
wolf_gregor 
0.399 arieldiaz 
0.823 
SpnMaisieDaisy 0.69 
JustinCampPhoto 0.882 LauraORourk
e 
0.835 CodrutTurca
nu 
0.682 
iamWALP 
0.283 benjaminedgar 0.79 
edithyeung 
0.472 
zpao 
0.639 rzonmrcury 
0.817 cbroyles 
0.564 
jehb 
0.193 draahwl 
0.645 
Zxombie 
0.426 
edithyeung 
0.563 lennarz 
0.55 
neuecc 
0.441 
𝑷𝑷′ 
mykola 
1 
markdrew 
1 
h0bbel 
1 
LocalJoost 
1 
Xantiriad 
1 
aevanko 
1 
mrbill 
0.818 ade 
0.702 
commadelimited 0.572 
jtrs73 
0.436 LauraORourk
e 
0.901 trdibo23 
0.74 
markdrew 
0.676 GnTrobby1051 0.667 
Dshafik 
0.399 
Perfume_Girl 
0.326 rzonmrcury 
0.721 Xantiriad 
0.597 
trdibo23 
0.581 h0bbel 
0.655 
Peeja 
0.356 
jukesie 
0.257 commadelimit
ed 
0.601 chrisrisner 
0.514 
developit 
0.561 mrbill 
0.625 
Ade 
0.333 
h0bbel 
0.232 pwSociety 
0.511 Elle4DDubO
nlyxx 
0.497 
𝑺𝑺′ 
xeraa 
1 
ade 
1 
samillingworth 
1 
jimhanas 
1 
LauraORourk
e 
1 
CodrutTurca
nu 
1 
mrbill 
0.963 daylemajor 
0.947 
commadelimited 0.994 
grahamgilbert 
0.926 andreaLG 
0.68 
aevanko 
0.989 
johnjohnston 
0.933 johnjohnston 
0.849 
hailpixel 
0.775 
JeremyKendall 
0.924 wolf_gregor 0.631 JeremyKenda
ll 
0.639 
wolf_gregor 
0.854 AlvinNg 
0.849 
BrianPurkiss 
0.614 
bkraft 
0.901 samillingwort
h 
0.562 agardnahh 
0.625 
steveavery 
0.755 macguitar 
0.837 
PDCExeter 
0.607 
LocalJoost 
0.9 
scout2i 
0.561 FinessIHS 
0.614 

29 
 
Discussion 
Since the emergence of OSNs, the propagation of SBD has encouraged researchers to develop state-of-the-
art techniques for social data analytics. Given the unstructured and uncertain nature of massive social data, 
understanding the customers’ needs and responding to their enquiries, comments, feedback or complaints 
is a major purpose of any business firm. However, it is not easy to accomplish all these customer-centric 
tasks. Hence, there is a need to have a thorough understanding of social trust in order to improve and expand 
the analysis process and infer the credibility of social big data. Given the environment’s exposed settings 
and the fewer limitations imposed on OSNs, the medium allows legitimate and genuine users as well as 
spammers and other untrustworthy users to publish and spread their content. Hence, it is vital to measure 
users’ trustworthiness in numerous domains and thereby define domain-based influences and filter out 
untrustworthy users. 
OSNs are a fertile platform by means of which users can express their opinions and share their views, 
thoughts, experiences and knowledge of abundant topics and domains. In OSNs, determining users’ 
influence in an unambiguous domain has been driven by its significance in an extensive range of 
applications such as personalized recommendation systems [105], opinion analysis [106], expertise 
retrieval [107], and computational advertising [108]. Domain of Knowledge is a particular arena of people’s  
expertise, work or specialisation within the scope of subject-matter knowledge such as IT, sports, education, 
politics, etc. [6]. The Semantic Web provides a new vision for the next Web where data is given semantic 
meanings through data enrichment, annotation and manipulation in a machine-readable format [109]. The 
incorporation of semantic analysis in OSNs, in particular, reduces the ambiguity and uncertainty of SBD 
by revealing the actual context of the users’ textual content. This mitigates the variability of big data [87] 
[88], extracts actual sentiments and indicates users’ domains of interest. 
Sentiment analysis has indeed become a core pillar of researchers’ endeavours to create applications that 
are influenced by the massive increase of User Generated Content (UGC) [110, 111]. For example, UGC 
in OSNs has been examined to study their effective data extracted and applied to numerous applications 
[112-114]. In the context of social credibility, several attempts have been made to measure and evaluate 
the credibility of users and their content, leveraging the affective data distilled from their content. These 
researchers have not conducted a sentiment analysis of the textual content of the entire conversation, which 
should include the attitudes derived from the replies to posts. The followers’ replies to the user’s content 
indicate the positive and negative opinions of the followers, which should be considered when measuring 
the user’s credibility. Moreover, most of these efforts focused on the sentiment analysis of the content 
regardless of its context. Hence, sentiment analysis should be combined with semantic analysis to clarify 
the ensuing sentiment. Furthermore, the users’ behaviours may change over time. It follows that credibility 
values may change over time; hence, the temporal factor should be integrated. 
This study presents an effective approach to examining and constructing a domain-based credibility 
framework that computes the trustworthiness of users in OSNs, thus predicting and classifying influential 
domain users. The established framework has proven its ability to address the indicated classification 
problem, evidenced by the good results obtained from almost all the incorporated machine learning 
algorithms. This paper is a report on work in progress as it is an ongoing project intended to develop a 
methodology for Social Business Intelligence (SBI) that incorporates semantic analysis and trust notions to 

30 
 
enrich textual data and determine the trustworthiness of data respectively [7, 10, 22, 34]. The approaches 
developed in this paper have produced optimistic results. However, there are certain limitations that need 
to be addressed and possible improvements to be elucidated and marked as future work: (i) AlchemyAPI 
has been used in this framework as the sole semantics provider. The resultant semantics could be improved 
by utilising an ontology-based approach; (ii) a new graph-based model will be created to promulgate the 
users’ credibility throughout the entire network. Hence, an improved version of Twitterrank [115] is 
anticipated that takes into consideration the semantics of the textual content as well as the temporal factor; 
and (iii) an anomaly detection approach will be developed that incorporates a number of improved features 
into machine learning. (iv) The incorporated approaches in this research will be improved to handle the   
variety feature of BD through the importation of more data sources.  
Conclusions  
The challenge of managing and extracting useful knowledge from SBD has attracted much attention from 
academia and industry. One of the major challenges of SBD analysis is to be able to evaluate the credibility 
of users in OSNs platforms. This problem is exacerbated by: (1) inconsistent user behaviour (a user’s 
interests can evolve and change over time), and (2) the brevity and economy of tweet content. Hence, 
understanding users’ domain(s) of interest is a significant step in addressing their domain-based 
trustworthiness by acquiring an accurate understanding of their content temporally in OSNs. This paper 
presents an approach to estimate and predict the domain-based credibility in OSNs. The experimental task 
conducted to evaluate this approach validates the applicability and effectiveness of indicating influencers 
and non-influencers users in the designated domain. In particular, the key contributions of this paper are as 
follows: (i) an overarching time-aware credibility framework for users of OSNs is introduced which 
comprises a domain-based analysis of users’ content incorporating semantic and sentiment analyses; (ii) an 
advanced set of key attributes are presented to measure users’ credibility in dissimilar domains; (iii) various 
machine learning modules are used and implemented, and benchmark comparison is conducted to provide 
the optimal techniques that can be used to predict highly influential domain-based users; (iv) the 
experimental results have proven that our approach is able to identify influential domain-based users. 
The evaluation performance metrics of each implemented classifier are benchmarked in this study. Of all 
the implemented algorithms, GLM achieves the best metric means for the five classification metrics. 
Further, with a precision over 0.90 obtained for all incorporated classifiers, the experiments conducted to 
evaluate the presented approach validate its applicability and effectiveness in predicting highly influential 
domain-based users.  
List of abbreviations 
OSNs: Online Social Networks, BD: Big Data, SBD: Social Big Data, APIs: Application Programming 
Interfaces, SBI: Social Business Intelligence. 
Authors’ contributions 
BAS has developed the idea of this research.  BAS and KYC have carried out the implementation and the 
experimental results of the embodied framework. KYC, OK, MT, PW and TI have made significant 

31 
 
contributions to the design of this research, the interpretation of results, and the addressing of the reviewer’s 
comments. OK and MT have contributed to the literature review. HS helped to edit the manuscript and all 
authors read and approved the final version.
