Control Theory and Informatics 
 
www.iiste.org 
ISSN 2224-5774 (print) ISSN 2225-0492 (online) 
Vol 1, No.2, 2011 
 
 
1 | P a g e  
www.iiste.org  
 
 
 
Automatic Vehicle Checking Agent (VCA) 
 
Muhammad Zaheer Aslam1 Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 2 Dr. Bashir Ahmad3 
Zafar Abbas4 
 
1. Student of MSCS, Gomal University DlKhan.Pakistan 

 
2. Director (IT), Gomal University Dlkhan,Pakistan 
 
3. Director /Associate Professor, Gomal University Dlkhan,Pakistan 
 
4. Student of MSCS, Gomal University Dlkhan,Pakistan 
 
 
Abstract 
 
A definition of intelligence is given in terms of performance that can be quantitatively measured.  In 
this study, we have presented a conceptual model of Intelligent Agent System for Automatic Vehicle 
Checking Agent (VCA). To achieve this goal, we have introduced several kinds of agents that exhibit 
intelligent features. These are the Management agent, internal agent, External Agent, Watcher agent 
and Report agent.  Metrics and measurements are suggested for evaluating the performance of 
Automatic Vehicle Checking Agent (VCA).  Calibrate data and test facilities are suggested to facilitate 
the development of intelligent systems. 
 
Keywords: VCA, Agents. 
 
1. Introduction 
As the time passes, there is need of intelligent agent system in place of the human agents. This is 
because the automatic agents can do the same job in short time, more accurately and more feasible in 
terms of cost. The agent developed should be intelligent and user-friendly. We have presented a 
conceptual Automatic Vehicle Checking Agent (VCA) system that can act in the place of a human 
being. An agent is an information processing. We have assumed that this is a general introductory 
statement program/model that can be applied to many auto vehicle organizations for producing 
accurate and fast results. Intelligent agents can be classified into several different categories [1]. 
Intelligent agents can be non-cooperative and cooperative intelligent agents, depending on their ability 
to cooperate with each other for the execution of their tasks. The second category is referred to as 
rational intelligent agents and comprises agents that are utilitarian in an economic sense. They act and 
collaborate to maximize their profit and can be applied to automated trading and electronic commerce. 
The third class of intelligent agents comprises adaptive intelligent agents that are able to adapt 
themselves to any type of situation e.g they can be applied to learning personal assistants on the Web. 
Fourth category which are called mobile intelligent agents are a particular category of agents, which 
can travel autonomously through the Internet, and can be applied to such tasks as dynamic load 
balancing among information servers and reducing the volume of data transfers.  
 
The field of intelligent agents has seen rapid growth over the last decade and such agents now 
constitute powerful tools that are utilized in most industrial applications. Some of the intelligent 
applications are intelligent user interfaces [2, 1], autonomous agents [3,4], vision systems [5], 
knowledge discovery and data mining [6], information retrieval [7, 8], electronic commerce [9], 
personal assistants used on the web [10]. 
An intelligent agent is generally considered to be an autonomous system that can obtain 
synergy effects by combining a practical user interface, on the one hand, and an intelligent system 
based on Artificial Intelligence on the other hand. Intelligent agents are providing a user interface. An 
Intelligent agent can do the following i.e. it can establish efficient connections between agents, it can 
also perform job distribution between agents, and the handling of conflicts and errors between agents 
have not yet been solved.  

Control Theory and Informatics 
 
www.iiste.org 
ISSN 2224-5774 (print) ISSN 2225-0492 (online) 
Vol 1, No.2, 2011 
 
 
2 | P a g e  
www.iiste.org  
 
 
In this paper, we have investigated a model and design for an intelligent agent system, which 
helps the user in a user friendly fashion in the auto vehicle industry.  
The paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes our Automatic Vehicle Checking Agent 
System (IAS), section 3 presents the conceptual model of our intelligent agent system i.e. Automatic 
Vehicle Checking Agent (VCA), section 4 describes the working algorithem of VCA, section 5 
presents applications of VCA., section 6 concludes the paper and at the end, section 7 gives the
