TOWARDS EVALUATING PLAN GENERATION APPROACHES WITH
INSTRUCTIONAL TEXTS
DEBAJYOTI PAUL CHOWDHURY1, ARGHYA BISWAS1, TOMASZ SOSNOWSKI1, KRISTINA
YORDANOVA1,2,3
HBM
Text2
1 University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany
2 University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
3 Kurt Lewin Center for Theoretical Psychology
Abstract. Recent research in behavior understanding through language grounding has
shown it is possible to automatically generate behaviour models from textual instruc-
tions. These models usually have goal-oriented structure and are modelled with diﬀerent
formalisms from the planning domain such as the Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language.
One major problem that still remains is that there are no benchmark datasets for com-
paring the diﬀerent model generation approaches, as each approach is usually evaluated
on domain-speciﬁc application. To allow the objective comparison of diﬀerent methods
for model generation from textual instructions, in this report we introduce a dataset
consisting of 83 textual instructions in English language, their reﬁnement in a more
structured form as well as manually developed plans for each of the instructions. The
dataset is publicly available to the community.
Keywords: textual instructions, model generation, planning, knowledge extraction,
benchmark
1. Introduction
Intelligent assistive systems support the daily activities and allow healthy people as well
as people with impairments to continue their independent life [10]. To provide timely and
adequate support, such systems have to recognise the user actions and intentions, track
the user interactions with objects, detect errors in the user behaviour, and ﬁnd the best
way of assisting them [10]. This can be done by activity recognition (AR) approaches
that utilise human behaviour models (HBM) in the form of rules. These rules are used to
generate probabilistic models with which the system can infer the user actions and goals
[12, 21, 9, 20, 2]. This type of models is also known as computational state space models
(CSSM) [12]. CSSMs perform activity recognition by treating it as a plan recognition
problem. In plan recognition given an initial state, a set of possible actions, and a set of
observations, the executed actions and the user goals have to be recognised [19]. CSSMs
use prior knowledge to obtain the context information needed for building the user actions
and the problem domain. The prior knowledge is provided in the form of precondition-
eﬀect rules by a domain expert or by the model designer. This knowledge is then used
to manually build a CSSM. The manual modelling is, however, time consuming and error
prone process [16, 14].
To address this problem, diﬀerent works propose to learn the models from sensor data
[36, 17]. One problem these approaches face is that sensor data is expensive [23]. Another
problem is that sensors are not always able to capture ﬁne-grained activities [8], thus,
they might potentially not be learned.
1
arXiv:2001.04186v1  [cs.AI]  13 Jan 2020

2
CHOWDHURY ET AL.
To reduce the impact of domain experts or sensor data on the model performance, one
can substitute them with textual data [18]. In other words, one can utilise the knowledge
encoded in textual instructions to learn the model structure. Textual instructions specify
tasks for achieving a given goal or performing a certain task without explicitly stating all
the required steps. This omission of certain steps makes them a challenging source for
learning a model [6]. On the positive side, they are usually written in imperative form,
have a simple sentence structure, and are highly organised. Compared to rich texts, this
makes them a better source for identifying the sequence of actions needed for reaching
the goal [35].
There are diﬀerent works that address the problem of learning models from textual in-
structions. Such models are used for constructing plans of human behaviour [15, 4, 26, 28],
for learning an optimal actions’ execution sequence based on natural instructions [5, 6, 22,
7, 1, 3], for constructing machine understandable model from natural language instruc-
tions [35, 11], and for automatically generating semantic annotation for sensor datasets
[27, 30]. Model learning from textual instructions has applications in diﬀerent ﬁelds of
computer science: constructing plans of terrorist attacks [15], improving tasks execution
(such as navigation, computer commands following, games playing) by interpreting natu-
ral language instructions [5, 6, 22, 7, 1, 3], the ability of a robot or machine to interpret
instructions given in natural language [35, 11], or for behaviour analysis tasks based on
sensor observations [26, 32].
According to [4], to learn a model of human behaviour from textual instructions, the
system has to:
(1) extract the actions’ semantics from the text,
(2) learn the model semantics through language grounding,
(3) and, ﬁnally, to translate it into computational model of human behaviour
for planning problems.
In addition to these requirements, [25] introduces 4. the need of learning the domain
ontology that is used to abstract and / or specialise the model.
One general challenge that remains is how to empirically compare the diﬀerent ap-
proaches. Yordanova [26] proposes diﬀerent measures such as correctness of the identiﬁed
elements, complexity of the model, model coverage, and similarity to handcrafted mod-
els. To compare diﬀerent approaches with these metrics, however, one needs a common
dataset1. In this technical report we address the problem by introducing a dataset, con-
sisting of 83 textual instructions on diﬀerent topics from our everyday life, together with
reﬁnements of the instructions and the corresponding plans. The dataset can be used
to compare the ability of approaches for model generation from text to learn a model
structure able to explain the corresponding plans.
2. Procedure for collecting the textual instructions
The dataset was collected within the context of the project Text2HBM2. The goal of
the project is to develop methods for the automatic generation of planning operators and
behaviour models from textual instructions.
To collect the dataset, we ﬁrst decided on diﬀerent topics from our everyday life, for
which the instructions are to be collected. The topics include cooking recipes, buying
1Providing datasets and the corresponding annotation is a problem in the community that is often
underestimated but that could have negative eﬀect on the overall performance of the system [29, 31, 33].
In the case of automatically generated models for behaviour analysis the ground truth is a collection of
plans that correspond to the provided textual instructions.
2https://text2hbm.org/

INSTRUCTIONAL TEXTS FOR PLAN GENERATION
3
movie tickets, changing elements of house appliances, deciding on vacation plan. For each
type of instructions, we attempted to ﬁnd diﬀerent opinions on the execution sequence.
In other words, we collected the descriptions from diﬀerent sources addressing the same
process.
Concretely, we ﬁrst selected a topic (e.g. how to make chocolate cookies, how to make
a cake etc.), then we asked diﬀerent people to provide their way of achieving the objective.
For example, suppose we would like to make chocolate cookies. We took three diﬀerent
opinions about the making process. The three processes are depicted in Figure 1. For each
type of instruction, we have collected between one and 14 instructions to cover diﬀerent
variations of the same activity. The originally collected texts are our starting point or
“raw data”. For example, Figure 2 shows the original description collected for preparing
chocolate cookies.
After initial tests with approaches for model generation we found out that this form
of action sentences is not suitable for generating models as each sentence is too complex.
To address this problem, we performed a reﬁnement step where for each instruction, the
sentence was simpliﬁed. For any sentence, which consists of more than one verb or one
verb with many objects to which the action is applied, we broke it into a single verb-object
per sentence. In other words, we reﬁned the texts so that there is only one action in each
step.
In Figure 2 one can see there are multiple objects, on which the same action is applied
(for example, the action “cream” is applied to the objects “brown sugar”, “white sugar”,
and “butter”). To reﬁne it, for each sentence, we broke down the entire sentence into
one action (verb) per sentence (see Figure 3). We could have created a more structured
representation of the steps by removing the articles “a” and “the”, but by doing so an
approach relying on natural sentences will probably not be able to parse the sentences
correctly.
After reﬁning the texts, we now needed a mechanism for validating the correctness of
the generated models. To achieve that, we manually created plans that represent every
“reﬁned text” instruction. The format for the plans can be seen in Figure 4.
Here the ﬁrst element is the time at which the action starts3, the second element is
the ∗, which tells us whether this is a new action or whether it was transferred from the
previous step4, and the third element shows the concrete step of the plan in the form of
action followed by objects (entities), on which the action is executed.
It can be seen, that we followed a certain structure when deﬁning the plan steps. After
initialising, the next steps are written in a format similar to the structure of the reﬁned
sentences. Each step starts with a verb, followed by the primary object and succeeded
by the secondary object. Usually, the secondary object is the source or destination lo-
cation of the primary object. For example, cream (verb) butter (primary object)
mixer (secondary object). More generally, the form of the steps follows the formula
N,*,(action object1/location1 object2/location2).
3. Dataset
In the following we describe the data format. The dataset is publicly available and can
be downloaded from https://github.com/stenialo/Text2HBM.
3In this case we assume instantaneous actions, such that each action takes one time step. It is however,
also possible to have actions with real durations. For example see [34].
4This parameter is redundant in single agent behaviour, such as in our case. There are, however,
applications where the behaviour of multiple agents is tracked. In such cases, when a new action starts
for one agent, it is possible that the action for another agent is just transferred from the previous one.
For example, see [13, 24].

4
CHOWDHURY ET AL.
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover a sheet 
with parchment 
paper. 
Add the vanilla, 
sugar, brown sugar, 
eggs, and butter to 
a bowl. 
Lightly spoon 
flour into dry 
measuring cup. 
Cream the 
butter, brown 
sugar, and white 
sugar using an 
electric mixer. 
Whisk flour, 
salt, and baking 
soda into 
another bowl. 
Combine flour, 
cocoa, baking 
powder, baking 
soda, and salt, 
stirring with a 
whisk. 
In a separate bowl, 
combine the flour, 
hot cocoa, salt, 
baking soda, and 
baking powder. 
Mix dry and wet 
ingredients until 
fully blended, 
without over-
mixing. 
Place sugar and butter 
in a large bowl; beat 
with a mixer at high 
speed until well 
blended. 
Preheat oven 
to 350F. 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pour in the dry 
ingredients and blend 
on low speed for about 
two minutes, until the 
cookie dough is a dark 
brown and there are no 
flour streaks. 
Apply cooking 
spray to a pan so 
that the cookies 
won't stick to 
the baking pan. 
Add vanilla 
and eggs and 
beat well. 
Fold in the 
chocolate 
chips and 
marshmallows. 
Take a small quantity 
of your cookie dough 
and roll it in your 
hands into a ball 
shape. 
With mixer on 
low speed, 
gradually add 
flour mixture. 
Cover the bowl with 
plastic wrap and 
allow the cookie 
dough to chill for 
about one hour. 
Place the 
cookie balls 
on the baking 
pan. 
Beat just 
until 
combined. 
Using a mini ice 
cream scoop, drop the 
cookie dough onto the 
baking sheet. 
Flatten each 
cookie dough 
ball with a 
fork. 
Fold in 
cherries and 
chocolate 
chips. 
Bake the cookies for 
about 9-11 minutes, 
until the 
marshmallows melt and 
the cookies slightly 
brown. 
Put cookies in 
the oven for 
about 8-10 
minutes. 
Drop by 
tablespoonfuls 2 
inches apart onto 
baking sheets 
coated with 
cooking spray. 
Allow the 
cookies to cool 
on a wire rack 
for about 5-7 
minutes. 
Take the cookies out of 
the oven and let them sit 
on a wire cooling rack 
for about 15 minutes to 
cool. 
Bake at 350F 
for 12 
minutes or 
just until 
set. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Serve 
Store in an airtight 
container or eat the 
cookies once they are 
cooled. 
Remove from 
oven; cool on 
pans for 5 
minutes. 
Cool completely 
on wire racks 
and enjoy. 
Figure 1. Three diﬀerent execution sequences or “recipes” for preparing
chocolate cookies.

INSTRUCTIONAL TEXTS FOR PLAN GENERATION
5
Preheat oven to 350F.
Cover a baking sheet with a parchment paper.
Cream the butter, brown sugar, white sugar using an electric mixer.
In a separate bowl, combine the dry ingredients. Combine the flour, hot cocoa,
salt, baking soda, and baking powder.
Pour in the dry ingredients and blend on low speed for about two minutes, until
the cookie dough is a dark brown and there are no flour streaks.
Fold in the chocolate chips and marshmallows.
Cover the bowl with plastic wrap and allow the cookie dough to chill for about one hour.
Using a mini ice cream scoop, drop the cookie dough onto the baking sheet.
Bake the cookies for about 9-11 minutes, until the marshmallows melt and the
cookies slightly brown.
Allow the cookies to cool on a wire rack for about 5-7 minutes.
Serve.
Figure 2. The originally collected text for preparing chocolate cookies.
Heat the oven to 350F.
Cover the baking sheet with a paper.
Take the electric mixer.
Cream the butter.
Cream the brown sugar.
Cream the white sugar.
Take a separate bowl.
Combine the dry ingredients.
Combine the flour.
Combine the hot cocoa.
Combine the salt.
Combine the baking soda.
Combine the baking powder.
Pour the dry ingredients.
Blend for two minutes.
Fold the chocolate chips.
Fold the marshmallows.
Cover the bowl with plastic wrap.
Chill the cookie dough.
Put the cookie dough on sheet.
Bake the cookies for 10 minutes.
Cool the cookies for 6 minutes.
Serve.
Figure 3. The text for preparing chocolate cookies after reﬁnement.
3.1. Data format. The entire dataset consists of various activities resulting in 83 unique
descriptions. It is separated in eleven categories: Cake, Chicken, Filter system, Movie
Tickets, PC cooler, Portable AC, Vacation Plan, Cookies, French Toasts, Sushi, Washing
Machine.
In each of these activities there are certain types of procedures which are categorised
in terms of diﬀerent names.
• Cookies has fourteen diﬀerent procedures for making some kinds of cookies.
• French Toast has fourteen diﬀerent procedures for making some kinds of French
toasts.
• Sushi has thirteen diﬀerent procedures for making some kinds of sushi.
• Washing Machine has ﬁve diﬀerent procedures for cleaning and other stuﬀs
related to washing machine.
• Vacation Plans has eight diﬀerent procedures for making some kind of trip or
vacation.

6
CHOWDHURY ET AL.
0,*,INITIALIZE
1,*,(heat oven F)
2,*,(cover sheet)
3,*,(take mixer)
4,*,(cream butter)
5,*,(cream sugar)
6,*,(cream sugar)
7,*,(take bowl)
8,*,(combine ingredients)
9,*,(combine flour)
10,*,(combine cocoa)
11,*,(combine salt)
12,*,(combine soda)
13,*,(combine powder)
14,*,(pour ingredients)
15,*,(blend)
16,*,(fold chips)
17,*,(fold marshmallows)
18,*,(cover bowl plastic)
19,*,(chill dough)
20,*,(put dough sheet)
21,*,(bake cookies)
22,*,(cool cookies rack)
23,*,(serve)
24,*,FINISHED
Figure 4. The plan corresponding to the reﬁned instruction for preparing cookies.
• Cake has ten diﬀerent opinions from ten diﬀerent persons for procedures of making
cake.
• Chicken also has ten diﬀerent opinions from ten diﬀerent persons for procedures
of making cake.
• Portable Air Conditioner has four diﬀerent processes for installing.
• Movie Ticket booking has two diﬀerent options.
• House Water-Filter System also has two diﬀerent opinions.
• PC Cooling System has one procedure.
Each of these procedures/opinions/processes has three types of data. These three cat-
egories are:
• Raw Data: As the term suggests, it is the raw texts collected from diﬀerent
people for diﬀerent kind of preparation in each of the activities mentioned. The
sentences can be complex or simple depending on the amount of parts of speech
in the particular context.
• Reﬁned Text: To make the Raw Data easily processable, the sentences of the
steps in Raw Data needed to be simpliﬁed. This form basically starts with a main
verb followed by the main object and ended by the secondary object. Usually,
the last term happens to be the location of the object. But sometimes there can
be cases where the location is not important. But each and every step has to
follow the structure of single verb and single primary object. Also, each sentence
has to be grammatically correct and meaningful. For this reason, all the required
prepositions and articles can not be avoided.
• Plans: To evaluate the generated models we needed particular plan data for each
of the corresponding texts. After initialising the format looks like N,*,(action
object1/location1 object2/location2)
3.2. Folder structure. The dataset has the following folder structure.

INSTRUCTIONAL TEXTS FOR PLAN GENERATION
7
• Textual Descriptions
– Plans
– Raw Data
– Reﬁned Text
– Reﬁned Text2
Folder Plans contains the plans corresponding on the reﬁned text. As the descrip-
tions were collected by two people, in some of the folders there is additional folder Re-
ﬁned Text2. If this folder exists for the given instruction, then the plans are based on
Reﬁned Text2. Each step in a plan has the form Time,*,(action object object) (e.g.
1,*,(take cup table)). The time indicates the start time of the action, * indicates that
the action is a new actions, and the concrete action with the involved elements of the
environment is in brackets.
Folder Raw Data contains the original instructions.
Folder Reﬁned Text contains a reﬁnement of the original instructions from folder
Raw Data. This reﬁnement consists of making the sentences shorter, with only one verb
per sentence. The sentences also start with a verb in imperative form.
Folder Reﬁned Text2 contains a reﬁnement of the texts in folder Reﬁned Text. As
the data was collected by two persons, for some instructions the intermediate reﬁnement
was not kept, thus the ﬁnal reﬁnement is in folder Reﬁned Text.
The dataset can be downloaded from the github repository https://github.com/
stenialo/Text2HBM.
4. Conclusion
In this work we reported a dataset for evaluating automatically generated planning
models. These models are generated from textual instructions and can be used for various
applications.
The aim of the dataset is to provide a benchmark for approaches that
attempt to learn planning operators from instructional texts. The manually built plans
allow to test the validity of each generated model against the corresponding plan or even
against other plans describing the same activity. We hope that this dataset will be the ﬁrst
step towards identifying common metrics and data for evaluating methods for automatic
generation of behaviour models.
