Published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, Sep. 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00116.
Are you still with me? Continuous Engagement Assessment from
a Robot’s Point of View
Francesco Del Duchetto
L-CAS, University of Lincoln
Lincoln, UK

Paul Baxter
L-CAS, University of Lincoln
Lincoln, UK

Marc Hanheide
L-CAS, University of Lincoln
Lincoln, UK

ABSTRACT
Continuously measuring the engagement of users with a robot in
a Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) setting paves the way towards
in-situ reinforcement learning, improve metrics of interaction qual-
ity, and can guide interaction design and behaviour optimisation.
However, engagement is often considered very multi-faceted and
difficult to capture in a workable and generic computational model
that can serve as an overall measure of engagement. Building upon
the intuitive ways humans successfully can assess situation for a
degree of engagement when they see it, we propose a novel regres-
sion model (utilising CNN and LSTM networks) enabling robots
to compute a single scalar engagement during interactions with
humans from standard video streams, obtained from the point of
view of an interacting robot. The model is based on a long-term
dataset from an autonomous tour guide robot deployed in a public
museum, with continuous annotation of a numeric engagement
assessment by three independent coders. We show that this model
not only can predict engagement very well in our own application
domain but show its successful transfer to an entirely different
dataset (with different tasks, environment, camera, robot and peo-
ple). The trained model and the software is available to the HRI
community as a tool to measure engagement in a variety of settings.
KEYWORDS
engagement, machine learning, tools for HRI, long-term autonomy
1
INTRODUCTION
One of the key challenges for long-term interaction in human-robot
interaction (HRI) is to maintain user engagement, and, in particular,
to make a robot aware of the level of engagement humans display
as part of an interactive act. With engagement being an inherently
internal mental state of the human(s) interacting with the robot,
robots (and observing humans for that matter) have to resort to the
analysis of external cues (vision, speech, audio).
In the research program that informed the aims of this paper, we
are working to close the loop between the user perception of the
robot as well as their engagement with it, and our robot’s behavior
during real-world interactions, i.e., to improve the robot’s plan-
ning and action over time using the responses of the interacting
humans. The estimation of users’ engagement is hence considered
an important step in the direction of automatic assessment of the
robot’s own behaviours in terms of its social and communicative
abilities, in order to facilitate in-situ adaptation and learning. In
the context of reinforcement learning, a scalar measure of engage-
ment can directly be interpreted as a reinforcement signal that can
eventually be used to govern the learning of suitable actions in
the robot’s operational situation and environment. As a guiding
Figure 1: Engagement annotated values and our model’s predictions
over a guided tour interaction sequence recorded from our robot’s
head camera.
principle (and indeed a working hypothesis), we anticipate that
higher and sustained engagement with a robot can be interpreted
as a positive reinforcement of the robot’s action, allowing it to
improve its behavior in the long term.
Previous work on robot deployment in museum contexts [7] pro-
vide evidence on how user engagement during robot guided tours
easily degrades with time when employing an open-loop interactive
behavior which does not take into account the engagement state of
the other (human) parties.
However, we argue that the usefulness of a scalar measure of
engagement as presented in the paper stretches far beyond our
primary aim to use it to guide learning. Work in many application
domains of HRI [3, 4, 23] has focused on a measure of engagement
to inform the assessment of the implementation for a specific use-
case, or to guide a robot’s behavior. However, how engagement is
measured and represented varies greatly (see Sec. 2) and there is yet
to be found a generally applicable measure of engagement that read-
ily lends itself to guide the online selection of appropriate behavior,
learning, adaptation, and analysis. Based on the observation that en-
gagement as a concept is implicitly often quite intuitive for humans
to assess, but inherently difficult to formalize into a simple and uni-
versal computational model, we propose to employ a data-driven
machine learning approach, to exploit the implicit awareness of
humans in assessing an interaction situation. Consequently, instead
of aiming to comprehensively model and describe engagement as
a multi-factored analysis, we use end-to-end machine learning to
arXiv:2001.03515v3  [cs.RO]  15 May 2021

Published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, Sep. 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00116.
directly learn a regression model from video frames onto a scalar in
the range of 0% to 100%, and use a rich annotated dataset obtained
from a long-term deployment of a robot tour guide in a museum to
train said model.
For a scalar engagement measure to be useful in actual HRI
scenarios, we postulate that a few requirements have to be fulfilled.
In particular, the proposed solution should
• demonstrably generalize to new unseen people, environ-
ments, and situations;
• operate from a robot’s point of view, forgoing any additional
sensors in the environment;
• employ a sensing modality that is readily available on a
variety of robot platforms;
• have few additional software dependencies to maximize com-
munity uptake; and
• operate with modest computational resources at soft real-
time.
Consequently, we present our novel engagement model, solely
operating on first-person (robot-centric) point of view video of a
robot and prove its applicability not only in our own scenario but
also on a publicly available dataset (UE-HRI) without any transfer
learning or adaptation necessary. We demonstrate that the model
can operate at typical video frame rates on average GPU hardware
typically found on robots. Hence, the core contributions of this
paper can be summarised as
i the appraisal of a scalar engagement score for the purpose of
in-situ learning, adaptation, and behavior generation in HRI;
ii a proposed end-to-end deep learning architecture for the regres-
sion of first-person view video stream onto scalar engagement
factors in real-time;
iii the comprehensive assessment of the proposed model on our
own long-term dataset, and a publicly available HRI dataset
proving the generalizing capabilities of the learned model; and
iv the availability of a implementation and trained model to pro-
vide the community with an easy to use, out of the box method-
ology to quantify engagement from first-person view video of
an interactive robot.
2
ASSESSMENT OF ENGAGEMENT
Recognizing the level of engagement of the humans during the
interactions is an important capability for social robots. In the first
place, we want to recognize the level of engagement as a way to
assess the robot behavior. Feeding this information to a learning
system we can improve the robot behavior to maximize the level
of engagement. In an education scenario, such as a museum, being
able to engage the users is a crucial factor. It is known that higher
level of engagement generates better learning outcomes [21], while
engagement with a robot during a learning activity has also been
shown to have a similar effect [13]. While there is evidence that the
presence of a robot, particularly when novel, is sufficient in itself
for higher engagement in educational STEM activities, e.g. [2], the
focus in the present work is on engagement between individuals
and the robot within a direct (social) interaction, for which there is
not a universally agreed definition [12].
Within interactions, engagement has been characterized as a pro-
cess that can be separated in four stages: point of engagement, pe-
riod of sustained engagement, disengagement, and re-engagement
[20]. Context has also been identified as being of importance, in
terms of the task and environment, as well as the social context [5].
For example, [19] proposes a simple model to infer engagement
for a robot receptionist based on the person spatial position within
some predefined areas around the robot, and [25] studies to what
extent is possible to predict the engagement of an entity relying
solely on the features of the other parties of the interaction, showing
that engagement, and the features needed to detect it, changes with
the context of the interaction [26]. These examples furthermore
suggest that there are multiple, overlapping, and likely interacting
timescales involved in the characterization of engagement, from
the longer term context to short interaction-orientated behaviours
that nevertheless impact social dynamics, and which humans are
particularly receptive to [9].
In the context of the characterization of engagement above, there
are a number of approaches to the automatic assessment of engage-
ment that may be distinguished. On the one hand, there is a focus
on individual behavioral cues, which may be integrated to form a
characterization of engagement. On the other hand, there is a more
holistic perspective of engagement taken, where proxy metrics may
be used or direct measures of engagement estimated. Combinations
of these perspectives are summarised briefly below.
Work on characterizing engagement in both human-human and
human-robot interactions has identified human gaze as being of
particular significance when determining engagement levels in an
interaction, e.g. [16, 22]. Gaze thus forms an important behavioral
cue when assessing engagement, e.g. [3, 27]. For example, Lemaig-
nan et al. [18] do not try to directly define and detect engagement,
recognizing that it is a complex and broad concept. Instead, the
concept of “with-me-ness” is introduced, which is the extent to
which the human is “with” the robot during the interactions, and
which is based on the human gaze behavior.
Beyond only human gaze behavior, Foster et al. [11], for example,
address the task of estimating the engagement state of customers
for a robot bartender based on the data from audiovisual sensors.
They test different approaches reporting that the rule-based clas-
sifier shows competitive performances with the trained ones and
could actually be preferred for their stability (and to overcome
data-scarcity problems).
In addition to these explicitly cue-centred approaches, more re-
cently, attempts have been made to leverage the power of machine
learning to discover the important overtly visible features with min-
imal (or at least sparse) explicit guidance from humans (through cue
identification for example). For example, [29] use an active learn-
ing approach with Deep RL to automatically (and interactively)
learn the engagement level of children interacting with a robot
from raw video sequences. The learning is incremental and allows
for real-time update of the estimates, so that the results can be
adapted to different users or situations. The DQN is initially trained
with videos labeled with engagement values. In other work [24]
investigate the performance of deep learning models in the task
of automated engagement estimation from face images of children
with autism using a novel deep learning model, named CultureNet,

Published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, Sep. 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00116.
which efficiently leverages the multi-cultural data when perform-
ing the adaptation of the proposed deep architecture to the target
culture and child, although this is based on a dataset of static images
rather than real-time data.
These deep learning methods have the advantage that the con-
stituent features of interest do not have to be explicitly defined a
priori by the system designer, rather, only the (hidden) phenome-
non needs to be annotated; engagement in this case. Since social
engagement within interactions is readily recognized by humans
based on visible information (see discussion above), human cod-
ing of engagement provides a promising source of ground-truth
information. Indeed, in this context, [28] employed human coders
to assess the ‘quality’ of observed interactions, demonstrating good
agreement between coder on what was a subjective metric.
Taken together, the literature indicates that while a precise oper-
ational definition of engagement may not be universally agreed, it
seems that more holistic perspectives may be more insightful. It is
likely that while gaze is an important cue involved in making this
assessment, there are other contextual factors that influence the
interpretation of engagement. Given that humans are naturally able
to accurately assess engagement in interactions, it seems that one
promising possibility would be to leverage this to directly inform
automated systems.
3
PRELIMINARIES
This work is embedded in a research program that seeks to employ
online learning and adaptation of an autonomous mobile robot to
deliver tours in a museum context. The robotic platform, described
below, has been operating autonomously in this environment for an
extended period of time, as evidenced by the long term autonomy
metrics (Table 1).
The goal is to facilitate the visitor’s engagement with the mu-
seum’s display of art and archaeology. This project provides an
opportunity to study methodologies to equip the robot with the
ability to interact socially with the visitors. In particular, the re-
search aims to find a good model to allow the robot to do the correct
thing at the right moment, in terms of social interaction. The first
step in doing so is endowing the robot with a means of assessing
its own performance at any given moment to allow adaptation,
learning, and to avoid repeating the same errors.
3.1
Robotic Platform
The robot is a Scitos G5 robot manufactured by MetraLabs GmbH.
It is equipped with a laser scanner with 270◦scan angle on its base
and two depth cameras. An Asus xtion depth camera is mounted
on a pan-tilt unit above his head and a Realsense D415 is mounted
above the touchscreen with an angle of 50◦w.r.t. the horizontal
plane in order to face the people standing in front of the robot.
The interactions with the visitors are mediated through a touch
screen, two speakers, a microphones array and a head with two eyes
that can move with five degrees of freedom to provide human-like
expressions. To ensure safe operations in public environments the
robot is equipped with an array of bumpers around the circular base
with sensors to detect collisions and two easily reachable emergency
buttons that, when activated, cuts the power to the motors. The
software framework is based on ROS and uses STRANDS project
Table 1: Long-Term Autonomy metrics: total system lifetime (TSL -
how long the system is available for autonomous operation), and
autonomy percentage (A% - duration the system was actively per-
forming tasks as a proportion of the time it was allowed to operate
autonomously), following [14].
Days of operation
103 days
Total distance travelled
299 km
Total tasks completed
8423
TSL
26 days, 11 hours
A%
74%
[14] core modules for topological navigation, people tracking, task
scheduling and data collection.
3.2
Long Term Deployment Analysis
The data gathered so far spans the date range between the 24th
January 2019 (day on which we started recording data of the robot
operations) and the 9th May 2019, with data collection remaining
ongoing. The work and data recording exercise has been approved
by the University of Lincoln’s Ethics Board, under approval ID
"COSREC509". The ethical approval does not allow the public release
of any data that can feature identifiable persons, in particular video
data.
During the current deployment the robot performs mainly two
types of interactive task: guided tour and go to exhibit and describe. In
the first task the robot guides the users to 5 or 6 exhibits sequentially
around the museum, describing what they contain when stopping
in front of each. During the second interactive task the robot guides
to users to one of the exhibits and, when arrived at the destination,
describes the content it is showing.
3.3
TOGURO Dataset Collection
The TOur GUide RObot (TOGURO) dataset was collected from
the two cameras mounted on the robot’s body and head, each
providing a stream of rgb and depth frames. These video streams
were collected from the start until the end of each guided tour and
go to exhibit and describe task. Considering the large number of
videos to be stored each we saved the frame streams as compressed
MPEG video files directly from the interaction. Moreover, we store,
in an additional file, the ROS timestamp at the time each frame is
received by the video recorder node. This allows us to reconstruct
afterward the alignment between the different video streams frame
by frame.
The participants were aware that the robot was recording data
during the interactions (by means of visible signs and leaflets),
although they were not informed that the purpose of this data
was for engagement analysis, thus not biasing their behaviours. In
total we collected 703 distinct interactions with a total duration of
40 hours and 17 minutes. As described below (section 3.4), only a
subset of this total data was coded. Given the unconstrained setting,
the interactions varied significantly in duration, with the shortest
at 1.2 seconds and the longest at 2 hours 40 minutes.

Published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, Sep. 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00116.
Figure 2: One frame from a video in the TOGURO dataset recorded
from the robot’s head camera during a guided tour. The red, green
and blue plots at the bottom of the frame represent each a distinct
annotation sequence.
Given that the museum in which the robot is deployed is a public
space openly accessible to anyone, the interactions between the ro-
bot and the museum’s visitors are completely unstructured. People
walking in the gallery are allowed to roam around the collection or
to interact with the robot. When they choose to do so they do not
receive any instruction about how to interact with it explicitly, and
are not observed by experimenters when doing so.
3.4
Dataset Coding
In order to address the primary research goal – the assessment of
robot-centric group engagement – the dataset was manually coded
in order to establish a ground truth. As noted previously, given
that there is not a universally accepted operationalized definition
of engagement, a human observer response method is employed in
the present work, following the prior application of a continuous
audience response method [28].
The annotations were performed over only the rgb stream of
robot’s head camera, and not taking into account all the four video
streams available from the collected data. Similarly to [28], the
annotators were asked to indicate in real time how engaged people
interacting with a robot appeared to be in a video captured by
the robot (e.g. Figure 2). They operated a dial using a game-pad
joystick while watching the interaction videos using the NOVA
annotation tool1 [1]. This procedure allowed the generation of
per-frame annotations of the provided videos, with very little time
spent on software training (around 20 minutes per annotator) and
on the annotation process itself (not more than the duration of the
videos). The annotators were instructed by providing them with
a demonstration, and a set of annotation rules based on a set of
typical examples2.
Three annotators took part in the coding process: each was
familiar with the robot being used and the interaction context. Three
subsets of the overall dataset collected were randomly drawn and
assigned to the annotators. The subsets were partially overlapping.
This was to enable an analysis of inter-rater agreement to assess
1https://github.com/hcmlab/nova
2Available at: https://justpaste.it/6p1tb/pdf
Table 2: Video annotations by annotator (coder): unique indicates
length of video coded by a single coder
Coder
# Videos
Tot Duration
Coder1
66
3h 59m
Coder2
40
2h 55m
Coder3
40
2h 23m
Unique
94
5h 50m
Total
146
9h 17m
reliability of the essentially subjective metric, but also to maximize
annotation coverage of the dataset. As indicated in Table 2, the total
length of the annotated data was over nine hours, with 3 hours
27m of overlap between the annotators (resulting in 5 hours 50m
of unique videos annotated).
The amount of annotated data is depicted in Table 2. 96 unique
videos were coded by the three annotators with a total of 146 videos
(including repeated annotations) for a total duration of 9 hours and
17 minutes. In total the annotated video set features 227 people
(53.74% (122) females and 46.26% (105) males, 60.79% (138) adults
and 39.21% (89) minors). The composition of each group of people
interacting with the robot is very diverse; on average each videos
features 2.41 people (𝑚𝑖𝑛= 0,𝑚𝑎𝑥= 9, 𝜎= 1.56), 1.32 females
(𝑚𝑖𝑛= 0,𝑚𝑎𝑥= 6, 𝜎= 0.89), 1.14 males (𝑚𝑖𝑛= 0,𝑚𝑎𝑥= 5, 𝜎=
1.26), 1.5 adults (𝑚𝑖𝑛= 0,𝑚𝑎𝑥= 5, 𝜎= 0.97) and 0.96 minors
(𝑚𝑖𝑛= 0,𝑚𝑎𝑥= 6, 𝜎= 1.14).
The annotated engagement rating is a continuous scalar for ev-
ery frame of video data. As such, Spearman’s rank correlation (𝜌)
is employed to assess inter-rater agreement. Table 3 shows the
correlation values for each pair of annotators. Since every frame is
annotated (with a frame-rate of 10 frames-per-second), the contin-
uous values were smoothed over time, using different smoothing
constant values, in the range [0.1𝑠, 40𝑠] (Figure 3). Table 3 provides
a summary of these, with overall mean agreement rates at selected
representative values of the smoothing constant. While there is
some variability in the between-coder agreement, mean values of
𝜌vary in strength from moderate to strong (0.56 to 0.72). In this re-
gard, there is a trade-off to be made between the smoothing constant
size and the apparent agreement between the coders: the larger
time window size reduces the real-time relevance of the engage-
ment assessment, even though the agreement over the extended
periods of time is greater than in comparatively shorter windows.
Overall, these results indicate that the use of the independently
coded data can be considered reliable in terms of the highly variable
and subjective metric of engagement.
4
THE ENGAGEMENT REGRESSION MODEL
Given the ground-truth provided by the human-coded engage-
ment levels within interactions with the robot, we propose a deep
learning approach for the estimation of human engagement from
video sequences. The model is trained end-to-end from the raw
images coming from the robot’s head camera to predict a high-level
engagement score of people interacting with the robot. It should

Published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, Sep. 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00116.
Table 3: Spearman’s Correlation 𝜌at different smoothing constant
values 𝑆. The significance 𝑝-value < 0.001 and sample size 𝑛≥89 for
all coder pairs and smoothing constants.
Coders Pair
𝑆(sec)
𝜌
Coder1 ↔Coder2
1
0.71
5
0.77
10
0.79
26
0.78
Coder1 ↔Coder3
1
0.49
5
0.5
10
0.52
26
0.65
Coder2 ↔Coder3
1
0.48
5
0.5
10
0.53
26
0.72
Average
1
0.56
5
0.59
10
0.62
26
0.72
Figure 3: Spearman correlation averaged over coder pairs and
weighted by the overlap rate. Value reported over different smooth-
ing constants 𝑆.
be noted that this model does not model individual humans in the
view of the robot but provides an overall holistic engagement score.
The network architecture, depicted in Figure 4, is composed of
two main modules: a convolutional module which extracts frame-
wise image features and a recurrent module that aggregates the
frame features over a time to produce a temporal feature vector
of the scene. The convolutional module is a ResNetXt-50 Convo-
lutional Neural Network (CNN) [30] pre-trained on the ImageNet
dataset [17]. We obtain the frame features from the activation of
the last fully connected layer of the CNN, with dimension 2048,
before the softmax layer. The recurrent module is a single layer
Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) [15] with 2048 units followed
by a Fully Connected (FC) layer of size 2048 × 1. The LSTM takes
in input a sequence of 𝑤frame features coming from the convolu-
tional module and produces in turn a feature vector that represents
the entire frame sequence, to capture temporal behavior of hu-
mans within the time window 𝑤. The temporal features are passed
through the FC layer with a sigmoid activation function at the end
to produce values 𝑦′ ∈[0, 1] The recurrent module is trained in
our experiments to predict engagement values from the provided
annotation values, while the CNN layer is fixed.
The proposed framework is implemented in Python using the
Keras library [6] and will be freely released as a ready-to-use tool
to the HRI community.
5
EXPERIMENTS
We train and test the model presented in Section 4 on our own
TOGURO dataset, and assess generalization of this model (with-
out modification) on the public UE-HRI dataset in the following
subsections.
5.1
TOGURO Dataset Processing
We used the entire annotated dataset presented in Section 3.4, com-
posed of 94 videos, for a total duration of 5 hours and 50 minutes of
interactions. For each video we randomly choose an annotation, if
multiple are available from the different coders (see table 2), in order
to avoid repetitions in the data and biasing the model toward those
videos that have been annotated multiple times. Each video is then
randomly assigned to either the training, test or validation set with
a corresponding probability of 50%, 30% and 20%, respectively, to
prevent our model to train and test over data that are closely corre-
lated at the video frames level. Sampling for the dataset split hence
operates on full video level, rather than on frame level. Each video
𝑉𝑘is composed of 𝐼𝑉𝑘frames 𝑥𝑖∈𝑉𝑘for 𝑖∈0, . . . , 𝐼𝑉𝑘and has an
associated array of annotations 𝐴𝑘= [𝑦0, . . . ,𝑦𝐼𝑉𝑘], also of dimen-
sion 𝐼𝑉𝑘. From all the videos in each set (training/test/validation)
we extract all the possible sequences of 𝑤consecutive frames
𝑋𝑖= [𝑥𝑖, . . . ,𝑥𝑖+𝑤−1] to be the input sample for our model. There-
fore, each sample 𝑋𝑖has an overlap of 𝑤−1 frames with the con-
secutive sample 𝑋𝑖+1 from the same video. For each sample 𝑋𝑖we
assign the ground truth value 𝑦𝑖+𝑤−1 ∈𝐴𝑘, in order to relate each
sequence of frames with the engagement value set at the end of the
sequence.
After the pre-processing phase over our dataset we obtain 93 271
training samples, 72 146 test samples and 44 581 validation samples.
Each frame is reshaped to 224 × 224 pixel frames, and normalized
before being fed to the network.
5.2
Training and Evaluation
For training and evaluation we decided to set the window size 𝑤
equal to 10 frames in order to have a model that gives evaluations of
the engagement in a relative short times (i.e. after 1 second). Even
though more temporally extended time windows would provide
more coherent ground truth values among the different annotators,
as discussed in Section 3.4, we decide to sacrifice some accuracy in
favour of increase realtimeness of our model predictions.
During training the weights of the Convolutional module, which
is already pre-trained, are kept frozen while the Recurrent module

Published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, Sep. 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00116.
Figure 4: Overview of the proposed model. The input is a video stream of interactions between the robot and humans collected in 𝑤size inter-
vals. The frames 𝑥𝑖are passed through the pre-trained CNN (ResNet) producing a per-frame feature vector which is then passed sequentially
to the LSTM network. After 𝑤steps the LSTM produces a temporal feature vector which is passed to a FC layer with sigmoid activation to
produce an engagement value 𝑦for the temporal window.
is fully trained from scratch. The model is trained to optimize the
Mean Squared Error (MSE) regression loss between the prediction
values 𝑦′
𝑖and the corresponding ground truth values 𝑦𝑖using the
Adagrad optimization algorithm [8] with an initial learning rate
𝑙𝑟= 1𝑒−4. At each training epoch we sample uniformly 20% of the
training set samples to be used for training and we collect them in
batches of size 𝑏𝑠= 16. The uniform data sampling of the training
data is performed in order to reduce training time and limiting
overfitting [10]. The model has been trained for a total of 22 epochs
using early stopping after no improvement on validation loss.
5.3
Assessing generalization
In order to assess the generalization capabilities of our trained
model over different scenarios featuring people interacting with
robots, we propose to test the performance of our trained model
as a detector of the start and end of interactions over the UE-HRI
dataset [4]. Similarly to our dataset, it provides video recordings
from the robots own cameras allowing for engagement estima-
tion from the robot’s point of view. The dataset provides videos
of spontaneous interactions between humans and a Pepper (Soft-
bank Robotics) robot alongside annotations of start/end of interac-
tions and various signs of engagement decrease (Sign of Engage-
ment Decrease (SED), Early sign of future engagement BreakDown
(EBD), engagement BreakDown (BD) and Temporary Disengage-
ment (TD)). The UE-HRI dataset features 54 interactions with 36
males and 18 females, where 32 are mono-users and 22 are multi-
party.
For a fair comparison with our proposed method, we evaluate
the ability of our model to distinguish between the moments during
which an interaction is taking place and those in which there is a
breakdown (TD or BD), the interaction is not yet started or it is al-
ready ended, in line with the UE-HRI coding scheme. Consequently,
we predict engagement values over the RGB image streams from
the Pepper robot’s front camera. By setting a threshold value 𝑡ℎ𝑟we
convert the predictions 𝑦′ into a binary classification of 𝐶= {⊤, ⊥}
Table 4: Model performance on our TOGURO Dataset
GPU
Test loss
Prediction time
Mem. usage
GeForce GTX 1060
0.126 (MSE)
𝑡<= 0.05𝑠𝑒𝑐
5.4GB
(prediction above or below 𝑡ℎ𝑟) which indicates whether there is
engagement or not. The categorical predictions are then compared
with values from the annotations in the dataset. We consider the
ground truth value to be 𝑦𝑡
𝑖𝑛𝑡= ⊤if at time 𝑡there is a annotation
of a Mono or Multi interaction and there are no annotations of BD
or TB in the UE-HRI coding. The ground truth value is 𝑦𝑡
𝑖𝑛𝑡= ⊥
otherwise.
6
RESULTS
With our evaluation we set out to provide evidence that our model
is able to predict engagement through regression on our own
TOGURO dataset by assessing its accuracy in comparison to the
ground-truth annotation, and to assess the generalization ability of
the model on newly encountered situations through the analysis of
the UE-HRI data.
To show the ability of our framework to map short-term human
behavioral features from image sequences into engagement scores,
we compute the Mean Squared Error (MSE) prediction loss on our
test set as 0.126 (in the context of the [0, 1] interval of output
expected), also reported in Table 4. Looking back at section 1, soft
real-time operation is seen as a requirement for the applicability of
our model. Hence, we measured the duration of a forward pass on
our GPU hardware of 10 consecutive frames (1 sample) through the
the convolutional module and the recurrent module taking at most
50𝑚𝑠(worst case), allowing real-time estimation of engagement at
20 frames per second.
Evaluating the power of our approach for binary classification on
the UE-HRI as detailed above in section 5.3, allows us to capture the

Published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, Sep. 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00116.
Figure 5: ROC curve generated using our trained model as a classi-
fier of the interaction sessions for the UE-HRI dataset.
generalization capabilities. In Figure 5 we report the Receiver Oper-
ating Characteristic (ROC) curve obtained by varying the threshold
with values in the range 𝑡ℎ𝑟∈[0, 1] of the binary classification task
on the UE-HRI data. The Area Under the Curve (𝐴𝑈𝐶= 0.88 in our
experiment) reports the probability that our classifier ranks a ran-
domly chosen positive instance 𝑦𝑡
𝑖𝑛𝑡= ⊤higher than a randomly
chosen negative one 𝑦𝑡
𝑖𝑛𝑡= ⊥, i.e., provides a good assessment of
the performance of the model in this completely different dataset.
7
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper has motivated, developed and validated a novel easy-
to-use computational model to assess engagement from a robot’s
perspective. The results presented in the previous sections lead us
to the conclusion that
i a moderate to strong inter-rater agreement (see table 3) in mea-
suring engagement on [0, 1] interval indicates that human can
reasonably and reliably assess the holistic engagement from a
robot’s point of view solely from video;
ii a two-stage deep-learning architecture as presented in figure 4
trained from our TOGURO dataset is a suitable computational
regression model to capture the inherent human interpretation
of engagement provided by the annotators; and that
iii the trained model is generic enough to be successfully applied in
a completely different scenario, here the UE-HRI dataset, show-
ing applicability of the model also in different environments,
on a different robot with a different camera, and with different
tasks and people. The area under the Receiver-Operator Curve
(ROC) of 0.88 in figure 5 evidences that indeed the proposed
regression model can serve as a strong discriminator to iden-
tify situations of loss of engagement (TD or BD in the UE-HRI
coding scheme).
Given these encouraging quantitative results, some qualitative as-
sessment of exemplary frames with the corresponding computed
engagement score are presented in figures 6, 7 and 8. All figures
show examples of the UE-HRI dataset, which was been completely
absent from the training dataset (Section 5.1). Figure 6 presents
two short sequences (roughly 2 seconds apart between frames),
showcasing short-term diversion of attention of subjects resulting
in a temporarily lower engagement score, but not leading to a very
low engagement. Figure 7 exemplifies that our model can cope well
with perception challenges which would forgo a correct assessment
just using gaze or facial feature analysis. While one could in this
context argue that our model has simply learned to detect people,
figure 8 is providing three examples from different videos of the
UE-HRI dataset with people present in the vicinity of the robot,
but not engaging with it. The engagement score in these examples
are significantly lower across all frames. We hypothesize that the
learned model does not solely discriminate only person and/or face
presence, but that the temporal aspects of the humans’ behavior
observable in the video are captured by the LSTM layer in our
architecture well enough to successfully deal with these situations.
These qualitative reflections are evidently supported by the quan-
titative analysis on both datasets, providing us with confidence that
the trained model is broadly applicable and can serve as a very
useful tool to the HRI community with its modest computational
requirements and high response speed in assessing videos from a
robot’s point of view.
