An Adaptive Stigmergy-based System for Evaluating Technological 
Indicator Dynamics in the Context of Smart Specialization 
 
Antonio L. Alfeo1, Francesco P. Appio2, Mario G. C. A. Cimino1, 
Alessandro Lazzeri1, Antonella Martini2, and Gigliola Vaglini1 
1Department of Information Engineering, Università di Pisa, largo Lazzarino 1, Pisa, Italy 
2Department of Energy, System, Territory and Construction Engineering, Università di Pisa, largo Lazzarino 1, Pisa, Italy 

Keywords: 
Smart Specialization, Regional Innovation, Trend Analysis, Patent-based Indicators, Marker-based 
Stigmergy, Parametric Adaptation, Differential Evolution.  
Abstract: 
Regional innovation is more and more considered an important enabler of welfare. It is no coincidence that 
the European Commission has started looking at regional peculiarities and dynamics, in order to focus 
Research and Innovation Strategies for Smart Specialization towards effective investment policies. In this 
context, this work aims to support policy makers in the analysis of innovation-relevant trends. We exploit a 
European database of the regional patent application to determine the dynamics of a set of technological 
innovation indicators. For this purpose, we design and develop a software system for assessing unfolding 
trends in such indicators. In contrast with conventional knowledge-based design, our approach is 
biologically-inspired and based on self-organization of information. This means that a functional structure, 
called track, appears and stays spontaneous at runtime when local dynamism in data occurs. A further 
prototyping of tracks allows a better distinction of the critical phenomena during unfolding events, with a 
better assessment of the progressing levels. The proposed mechanism works if structural parameters are 
correctly tuned for the given historical context. Determining such correct parameters is not a simple task 
since different indicators may have different dynamics. For this purpose, we adopt an adaptation mechanism 
based on differential evolution. The study includes the problem statement and its characterization in the 
literature, as well as the proposed solving approach, experimental setting and results. 
1 INTRODUCTION AND 
MOTIVATION 
After years of economic crisis and the resulting 
reduction of resources available for research and 
development investments, Smart Specialization has 
immediately become a very relevant concept to get 
these two questions answered (Foray, 2013). It 
represents an important chance for a progressive 
economical restart. In order to develop a policy-
prioritization logic to foster regional growth is 
important to have a deep knowledge of the potential 
evolutionary pathways related with the existing 
dynamics and the structures at regional level 
(McCann and Raquel Ortega-Argilès, 2013). In this 
light, each region should start this process using as 
standpoints the knowledge-based sectors in which 
already presents a consistent ‘critical mass’ or, at 
least, capabilities that refer to a future potential 
exploitable with right and focused investments.  
In the last decade, several causes have 
determined the increasing need for rationalization of 
resources within regions. The crucial ones are the 
increased 
globalization, 
mainly 
pursued 
by 
multinational enterprises, the economic crisis 
involving all EU regions with different magnitudes 
and the diffusion of a new wave of general purpose 
technologies. This situation calls for a deep 
rethinking of the overall approach to regional 
development; policy-makers and experts largely 
agree on the fact that the new economic boost should 
originate exploiting and enhancing the specific 
potential and competitive advantage of each region 
through focused innovation policies. On this line, the 
European Commission has established a program 
labelled ‘Smart Specialization’, consisting in a set of 
policies and guidelines aimed to promote the 
Draft version. Cite this work as: 
A.L. Alfeo, F.P. Appio, M.G.C.A. Cimino, A. Lazzeri, A. Martini, G. Vaglini, "An adaptive stigmergy-based system for evaluating technological indicator 
dynamics in the context of smart specialization", in Proc. INSTICC The 5th International Conference on Pattern Recognition Applications and Methods 
(ICPRAM 2016), pp. 497-502, Rome, Italy, 2016

efficient and effective use of public investment in 
research and development (R&D).  
Smart Specialization is defined as “an industrial 
and innovation framework for regional economies 
that aims to illustrate how public policies, 
framework conditions, but especially R&D and 
innovation 
investment 
policies 
can 
influence 
economic, scientific and technological specialization 
of a region and consequently its productivity, 
competitiveness and economic growth path. It is a 
logical continuation in the process of deepening, 
diversifying and specializing of more general 
innovation strategies, taking into account regional 
specificities and inter-regional aspects, and thus a 
possible way to help advanced economies (as well as 
emerging economies) to restart economic growth by 
leveraging 
innovation 
led 
/ 
knowledge-based 
investments in regions” (OECD 2013, p.17). From 
one hand, this approach requires the concentration of 
R&D resources in few domains; from the other 
hand, a consisting part of literature underlines the 
importance of industry diversification in promoting 
innovation. 
In 
this 
light, 
the 
dichotomy 
specialization-diversification has become topical.  
The long term aim of this work is exploring 
whether - and to what extent - different policies of 
‘technological specialization’ and ‘technological 
diversification’ pays off in term of wealth creation at 
regional level. Then, we want to provide policy 
makers with computerized support in the analysis of 
innovation-relevant trends (Jin, 2014). To properly 
move into that direction, we start looking at this 
problem 
by 
analysing 
the 
trends 
of 
the 
aforementioned indicators for 268 EU-27 regions 
over 35 technological domains in the period 1990-
2012, in order to obtain a model that can efficiently 
recognize significant events. For this purpose, we 
have designed and developed a software system. In 
contrast with conventional knowledge-based design, 
our approach is biologically-inspired and based on 
stigmergy as a mechanism of self-organization of 
information. Moreover, the performance of such a 
model is contrasted with a supervised adaptation 
based on the Differential Evolution (DE hereafter). 
2 BIOLOGICALLY-INSPIRED 
DATA ANALYSIS  
In this paper we propose to use the principles of the 
stigmergy for assessing unfolding trends in time 
variant indicators. In biology, stigmergy is an 
indirect 
communication 
mechanism 
between 
individuals of an insect society. In marker-based 
stigmergy (Parunak, 2006) volatile substances, such 
as pheromones, maintain the information locally for 
other individual to perceive. In computer science, 
marker-based stigmergy can be employed as a 
powerful computing paradigm exploiting both 
spatial 
and 
temporal 
dynamics, 
because 
it 
intrinsically embodies the time domain (Cimino, 
2015). Moreover, marker-based stigmergy can be 
considered a computational black box modelling 
approach, because no domain model is assumed at 
design time and then results are not directly 
interpretable. 
In Figure 1 we present the terminology via an 
ontology diagram. Concepts are enclosed in white 
ovals and connected by properties (represented as 
black directed edges). A property that cannot be 
directly sensed (i.e., instantiated) is represented as 
an abstract property, shown by a dashed edge. 
More specifically, it is known that diversification 
and specialization of Patents applied in a Region 
measure the Innovation of the region itself. Thus, it 
is important for a Policy Maker to analyse Trends of 
Innovation, to properly address the investments. 
Such trends cannot be directly sensed nor associated 
to the Innovation. For this purpose, there are three 
important indicators which quantify Innovation: 
specialization (S), related variety (R), and unrelated 
variety (U). The study of such Trends by the Policy 
Maker is fundamental to recognize scenarios of 
interest, i.e., the ways in which special situations 
may develop. Example of scenarios of interest are: 
(i) R or U decreases, while S increases; (ii) R or U 
decreases, while S is stable; (iii) R or U increases, 
while S is stable;(iv) R or U increases, while S 
increases. 
The problem is to detect variations of an 
indicator in terms of increase, decrease or stability. 
In this paper, we adopt an emergent modeling 
perspective. With an emergent approach, the focus is 
on the low level processing. In Figure 1 we also 
present the terminology related to the approach. 
More specifically, an Indicator Value enables the 
release of a Mark. Marks aggregate in Tracks, 
depending on their spatiotemporal local dynamics. 
Emergent paradigms are based on the principle of 
the self-organization of the data, which means that a 
functional structure, the Track, appears and stays 
spontaneous at runtime when local dynamism 
occurs. A particular Track representing only the 
main characteristics of such local dynamics is the 
Prototype. It is the Dissimilarity which compares 
Prototypes generated at different times, in order to 
assess the Trend. Finally, the Evolution process 
adapts Mark, Track, Prototype and Dissimilarity to 
properly fit the temporal dynamics of the indicators. 
The Evolution process represents the application of 
biologically-inspired patterns to adapt parameters. 
The approach iteratively tries to improve a 
population of candidate parameters with regard to a 

given measure of quality, or fitness. Solutions are 
found by means of transformation mechanisms 
inspired by biology, such as reproduction, mutation, 
recombination, selection, in an environment where 
competition is represented by the quality measure. 
 
 
Figure 1: Ontological view of the approach. 
3 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN 
Figure 3 illustrates the system architecture, made of 
four main subsystems, i.e., marking, trailing, 
prototyping, and dissimilarity. At the input/output 
interfaces of each subsystem, an unbiasing module 
is used for a better efficiency and alignment of the 
processing layers. This lets an input signal to reach a 
certain level before a processing layer passes it to 
the next layer, and allows a better distinction of the 
critical phenomena during unfolding events, with a 
better detection of the progressing levels. 
The marking subsystem transforms input data 
into 
marks, 
whereas 
the 
trailing 
subsystem 
aggregates and evaporates marks as a track in the 
stigmergic space. The prototyping subsystem 
provides a simplified version of the track. It is a 
vehicle of abstraction, leading to the emergence of 
high-level information. The dissimilarity subsystem 
evaluates the 
difference 
between 
consecutive 
prototypes in order to extract trend information of 
the indicators. The proposed mechanism works if 
structural parameters are correctly adapted for the 
given application context. Determining such correct 
parameters is not a simple task since different 
indicators may have different dynamics. For this 
purpose, we adopt a tuning mechanism based on the 
DE. In the next subsections each module and 
subsystem is precisely described, by using a pilot 
data sample. 
 
The Unbiasing Module 
Figure 2 shows the U indicator of a region for 4 
years, in dashed line. To unbias the input signal the 
s-shaped function is used, having the following 
behaviour: input values smaller\larger than (β - α)/2 
are lowered\raised; values smaller\larger than α\β 
assume the minimum\maximum value, i.e., 0\1. In 
biologically inspired subsystems, this function 
models the active zone of a signal generated by a 
subsystem (Avvenuti, 2013). Figure 2 shows in thick 
line the unbiasing output, with αM=0.2, βM =0.8. 
 
 
Figure 2: An example of application of unbiasing. 
 
The Marking Subsystem 
The Marking takes an unbiased sample (t) of a 
normalized input time series D, and releases a mark 
in a marking space whose codomain is called 
intensity (Cimino 2015). The mark has four 
structural attributes: the center position (t), the 
intensity I, the mark extension ε, and the mark 
evaporation θ. Figure 4 (a) shows, in thick line, the 
mark released by the sample (2) of our pilot time 
series. The mark shape is an isosceles triangle: its 
center is (2)=0.25, its height I=1, and its base has 
length 2ε=0.5. 
 
The Trailing Subsystem 
The evaporation θ is the temporal decay of the 
mark. After each step the mark intensity decreases 
by a percentage θ. Thus, evaporation leads towards a 
progressive disappearance of the mark. Anyway, 
subsequent marks can reinforce previous mark in the 
environment if their shapes overlap. In Figure 4 (b) 
we also show the mark (2) after an evaporation 
step, in thin line. In Figure 4 (right) we show in thin 
line three consecutive marks, their apex coordinates 
(x, y). We also show the final track, T3 at time t=3, 
in thick line, as the sum of the track intensities 
 
The Prototyping Subsystem 
The Prototyping subsystem takes as input the 
output track of the trailing subsystem, Tt. This input 
is first unbiased, as t. The prototype Pt is then 
generated as a triangular shape, with base width 2ε, 
saturation height Imax=I/(1-θ) (Avvenuti, 2013), and 
center pt. Figure 5 shows in dotted line the track T3 
of Figure 4 (b), the unbiased track 3 in dashed line, 
and the corresponding prototype P3 centered in p3 in 
solid line. The center pt of the prototype is the 
position that maximizes the similarity between the 
unbiased track and the prototype itself. 
 

 
 
Figure 3: Architectural overview of our data analysis system based on Stigmergy. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4: Single mark shape (a) and aggregation of three 
marks (b) in a track. 
 
 
Figure 5: An example of prototyping.  
 
Figure 6: Similarity between two prototypes sampled at 
the 24th and 48th months of the time series, respectively. 
The 
similarity 
between 
two 
shapes 
is 
, 

 =  ∩ 
  ∪ 

⁄
. It is the ratio 
between the intersection and the union of the shapes. 
In Figure 6, , 
 = 0.0097. 
 
The Dissimilarity Subsystem 
This subsystem calculates the complement of the 
similarity between two prototypes generated at two 
instant of times, with a positive (negative) sign if the 
barycenter of the most recent track is larger 
(smaller) than the previous: ∆ = 1 −, 

 ∙
 −

. In Figure 6, ∆ = 0.9903. An 
unbiasing module is finally used, in order to provide 
one of three different classes as output: -1, +1, or 0, 
when the time series decreases, increases, or it is 
otherwise considered stable, respectively. In Figure 
6, ∆
! = +1, meaning that the indicator increases. 
 
The Adapting Subsystem 
The overall system uses 8 structural parameters 
(summarised in Table 1) to be appropriately adapted. 
Since different indicators in different Regions have 
different dynamics, manual adaptation is very time-
consuming, 
human-intensive 
and 
error-prone 
(Ciaramella, 2010). In this section, we first describe 
the role of each parameter in the processing, and 
then we adopt a supervised optimization based on 
DE, an evolutionary technique for numerical 
optimization problems (Cimino, 2015). 
 
Table 1: System Parameters. 
Module 
Params 
Human Expert  
Range 
marking 
αM βM ε 
(0.2; 0.8; 0.2) 
(0, 1) 
trailing 
θ 
(0.65) 
(0, 1) 
prototyping 
αP βP 
(0.15; 0.75) 
(0, Imax) 
dissimilarity 
αD βD 
(0.35; 0.65) 
(0, 1) 
 
The mark extension (ε) controls the distance of 
interaction between marks. If it is close to 0, the 
marks cannot interact with each other, and there is 
no patterns reinforcement. If the mark extension is 
close to 1, all marks reinforce each other without 
distinction between patterns. The mark evaporation 
(θ) affects the lifetime of a mark. Short-life marks 
evaporate to fast preventing aggregation and pattern 
reinforcement. Long-life marks cause an early 
saturation of the track, thus all tracks become similar 

to each other. Finally, α and β affect the system as 
previously described in the unbiasing module. 
The adaptation uses the DE algorithm to 
optimize the parameters of the system with respect 
to the fitness computed using a training set. Let Z be 
the set of Regions in the dataset, Dz(tk) the input 
signal for Region z, cz(tk) ∈ {-1,0,1} the output of 
the system. Let us consider {Dz(tk)*, Cz(tk)*} the 
training set. We compute the average fitness among 
Regions as the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between 
the outputs of the system calculated for the training 
inputs and their corresponding training outputs: 
 
 $%
 = ∑
∑
'()*
∗−'()*


,
*-
.
/-0
1 ∙2
⁄
. 
 
In the DE algorithm, a solution is represented by 
a real n-dimensional vector, where n is the number 
of parameters to tune. The DE starts with a 
population of N candidate solutions, injected or 
randomly generated. In the literature different ranges 
of population are suggested (Mallipeddi, 2011). 
Population size spread can vary from a minimum of 
2n to a maximum of 40n. A higher number increases 
the chance to find an optimal solution but it is more 
time consuming. To balance speed and reliability we 
use N=20. At each iteration and for each member 
(target) of the population, a mutant vector is created 
by mutation of selected members and then a trial 
vector is created by crossover of mutant and target. 
Finally, the best fitting among trial and target 
replaces the target. 
Many strategies of the DE algorithm have been 
designed, by combining different structure and 
parameterization 
of 
mutation 
and 
crossover 
operators (Mezura, 2006 and Zaharie, 2007). We 
adopted the DE/1/rand-to-best/bin version, which 
places the perturbation at a location between a 
randomly chosen population member and the best 
population member. The differential weight F ϵ [0,2] 
mediates the generation of the mutant vector. F is 
usually set in [0.4-1) (Mezura, 2006). There are 
different crossover methods in DE. Results show 
that a competitive approach can be based on 
binomial crossover (Zaharie, 2007). With binomial 
crossover, a component of the offspring is taken 
with probability CR from the mutant vector and with 
probability 1-CR from the target vector. A good 
value for CR is between 0.3 and 0.9 (Mallipeddi, 
2011).  
4 CASE STUDY AND RESULTS 
The case study is based on a data set that contains 
the three annual indicators S, U, R, (described in 
Section 1) monitored for 15 years for 200 European 
Regions. The dataset contains 9000 samples. In 
order to reduce data to a canonical size, the 
following normalization is first applied:  34 =
35 −3654
 3678 −3654

⁄
. Since the original data 
samples are subject to significant sampling error, we 
also performed a granulation process (Cimino, 
2014). More specifically, for each year we grouped 
regions via k-nearest neighbour algorithm. For each 
group we computed the annual mean µ and the 
standard deviation σ. We also determined that the 
resulting indicator samples are well-modelled by a 
normal distribution, using a graphical normality test. 
Finally, monthly samples have been derived 
considering normal distribution with mean and 
variance µ/12 and σ2/12, respectively. 
 To choose the best value of CR and F, we first 
performed trials with CR in [0.3, 0.6, 0.9] and F in 
[0.4, 0.6, 0.8]. For each experiment, 5 trials have 
been carried out, by using the 20% of the dataset as 
a training set, and the remaining 80% as a testing 
set. We also determined that the resulting MSE 
samples are well-modelled by a normal distribution, 
using a graphical normality test. Hence, we 
calculated the 95% confidence intervals. Table 2 
shows the results in the form “mean ± confidence 
interval”. The best performance has been with 
CR=0.6 and F=0.6. In general, we observed that 
fitness function gets stable after 15 generations only. 
 
Table 2: 95% confidence interval of the MSE for the best 
setting of differential weight (F) and crossover rate (CR). 
 
F 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
CR 
0.3 
0.022 ± 
0.0002 
0.012 ± 
0.00002 
0.018 ± 
0.0002 
0.6 
0.019 ± 
0.0002 
0.009± 
0.0001 
0.011 ± 
0.00001 
0.9 
0.014 ± 
0.00006 
0.013 ± 
0.00007 
0.013 ± 
0.00007 
  
In order to assess the effectiveness of the 
approach, we adopted a 5-fold cross-validation. 
Indeed, each evaluation is also dependent on the data 
points, which end up in the training and test sets. For 
each trial, the training and test sets consist, 
respectively, of randomly extracted 20% and 80% of 
the original data. We carried out each trial 5 times. 
Table 3 summarizes, for indicator U, the results in 
terms of mean and standard deviation of the MSE 
for each trial. The low values of the MSE, for all 
trials and for both training and testing sets, highlight 
the effectiveness of the system in terms of both 
performance and generalization properties. We 

replicated the same experiments and achieved 
similar performances for the other indicators. 
Finally, to highlight the great benefits of the 
adaptation subsystem, we also computed the MSE 
for the worst case of Table 2 (i.e., Trial 5), by using 
manual adaptation: this implied an MSE of 0.106, 
which is very higher than 0.022.  
 
Table 3: MSE for each trial extracted via 5-fold cross-
validation, averaged over 5 repetitions. 
 
MSE (mean ± std dev) 
Trial 
Training Set  
Testing Set 
1 
0.011 ± 0.010 
0.018 ± 0.004 
2 
0.010 ± 0.010 
0.020 ± 0.003 
3 
0.009 ± 0.006 
0.020 ± 0.008 
4 
0.008 ± 0.008 
0.020 ± 0.005 
5 
0.010 ± 0.007 
0.022 ± 0.008 
5 CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we designed and developed a software 
system for assessing unfolding trends in innovation 
indicators. The core processing is based on 
stigmergy, a biologically inspired computational 
mechanism. Since the emergent character of 
stigmergy depends on biases and scale factors that 
can vary for different application contexts, an 
essential module is the parametric adaptation. For 
this purpose, we adopted the Differential Evolution. 
Experiments show the effectiveness of the approach 
and the relevant improvements with respect to a 
human parameterization. 
More precisely the proposed system has been 
used to detect the trends of three different patent-
based indicators within 35 technological domains, 
belonging to 268 European regions, in the period 
1990-2012. The experimental results show that using 
20% of the data set as training set to recognize 
trends ranging from -1 to 1, the system achieved an 
MSE of 0.02. Nevertheless, to ensure high-quality 
and robust design, the system should be cross-
validated against other case studies and compared 
with existing approaches suitable for the same 
purpose. An important future development will be to 
adopt benchmark data and to carry out a 
comparative 
analysis 
of 
our 
approach 
with 
alternative techniques available in the literature.
