RANK: AI-assisted End-to-End Architecture for
Detecting Persistent Attacks in Enterprise Networks
Hazem M. Soliman, Geoff Salmon, Dušan Sovilj, Mohan Rao
Arctic Wolf Networks
Waterloo, Canada

Abstract—Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) are sophisti-
cated multi-step attacks, planned and executed by skilled ad-
versaries targeting modern government and enterprise networks.
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) and User and Entity Behavior
Analytics (UEBA) are commonly employed to aid a security
analyst in the detection of APTs. The prolonged nature of APTs,
combined with the granular focus of UEBA and IDS, results
in overwhelming the analyst with an increasingly impractical
number of alerts. Consequent to this abundance of data, and
together with the crucial importance of the problem as well
as the high cost of the skilled personnel involved, the problem
of APT detection becomes a perfect candidate for automation
through Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). In this paper, we provide,
up to our knowledge, the ﬁrst study and implementation of an
end-to-end AI-assisted architecture for detecting APTs – RANK.
The goal of the system is not to replace the analyst, rather,
it is to automate the complete pipeline from data sources to
a ﬁnal set of incidents for analyst review. The architecture is
composed of four consecutive steps: 1) alert templating and
merging, 2) alert graph construction, 3) alert graph partitioning
into incidents, and 4) incident scoring and ordering. We evaluate
our architecture against the 2000 DARPA Intrusion Detection
dataset, as well as a read-world private dataset from a medium-
scale enterprise. Extensive results are provided showing a three
order of magnitude reduction in the amount of data to be
reviewed by the analyst, innovative extraction of incidents and
security-wise scoring of extracted incidents.
Index Terms—Advanced Persistent Threats, Intrusion De-
tection, Security management architecture, Machine learning,
Mathematical optimization, Enterprise networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) form a crucial part
of the attack campaigns targeting enterprise networks [1]. A
combination of stealth actions, sophisticated exploits and long-
term operation marks them as one of the most dangerous and
hardest to detect cybersecurity attacks [2]. As a planned multi-
step attack, APTs do not target a single vulnerability. Instead,
an APT typically starts by gaining access to the network,
exploiting several vulnerabilities, and remaining silent for
extended periods of time [3]. With data exﬁltration as the
common end-goal of these attacks, the economic damage is
particularly severe due to the risk of losing intellectual proper-
ties or sensitive data [4]. Various companies and government
agencies have fallen victim to these attacks [5], [6]. In light
of their severity and impact, detecting APTs has increasingly
become the focus of both academia and industry.
A pattern is emerging in the literature where the detection
of APTs is composed of numerous small and simple detectors
each focused on a single step in the APT chain. Examples of
this methodology are [7], [8]. These small detectors are based
on either signature-based intrusion detection systems (IDS),
user entity behavior analytics (UEBA) [9], or a combination
of both. However, IDS and UEBA have well-documented
problems such as high false-positive ratio, expensive cost of
error, difﬁculty of explainability for anomaly-based detection,
lack of training data and continuously improving intelligent
adversaries [10]. APT-based detection methods attempt to
solve some of those issues in order to signiﬁcantly reduce the
false-positive ratio. The main premise behind these methods
is that an alert is malicious if it is part of a larger group of
correlated alerts that together represent a proper APT plan.
A leading effort to study APT attack plans is the ATT&CK
matrix developed by the MITRE corporation [11]. The study
observed that attacks tend to follow similar patterns, and
provided a taxonomy describing both offensive and defensive
operations. The matrix describes the tactics, commonly known
as the attack phases, the techniques for carrying out a tactic,
and the observed instances of such techniques in known
attacks. Detection and Extraction of ATT&CK-aware security
incidents has been one of our major design goals.
In this paper, we propose RANK, an end-to-end architecture
for detecting persistent attacks by incorporating numerous
alerts in a meaningful and automated approach. The archi-
tecture is composed of several steps:
1) Alert templating and merging: In this step, the aim is
to reduce the number of generated alerts by merging
together the ones pertaining to the same step of the
attack. The new set of merged alerts is referred to as
generalized alerts.
2) Alert graph construction: Once the number of alerts is
reduced, we establish relationships between remaining
alerts according to their MITRE tactics, and form an
alert graph representing those relationships.
3) Alert graph partitioning: The partitioning part focuses
on ﬁnding the smallest subgraphs within the alert graph
that correspond to concise incidents. We refer to these
as incident graphs.
4) Incident scoring: Scores are assigned to each incident
graph found in previous step, utilizing factor graphs
(FG) and alert scores. For each incident graph, we can
compute the likelihood of presence for all MITRE tac-
tics, a useful and important summary. Both the incident
arXiv:2101.02573v1  [cs.CR]  6 Jan 2021

graph and the summary are ﬁnally delivered to the
security analyst.
The proposed architecture is also able to integrate analyst
feedback as part of incident investigation and threat hunting.
This is enabled by the evidence-based queries provided by the
scoring factor graph for each incident.
To summarize, our contributions in this paper are:
• We propose the ﬁrst, up to our knowledge, architecture for
end-to-end detection of persistent attacks from network
and endpoint data.
• We discuss a novel approach for partitioning an alert
graph into separate incidents and how it ﬁts into the
architecture, which is an extension of our previous work
[12].
• We detail various practical aspects of the involved algo-
rithms, such as meaningful clustering of security alerts,
calculating correlation between IP addresses, and building
all the algorithms with minimal manual tweaking effort
due to the lack of labelled datasets.
• The proposed architecture signiﬁcantly reduces the inves-
tigation burden on the security analyst. For example, our
experiments show that more than 70 thousand alerts can
be distilled into only 60 incidents. This is a considerably
more concise, yet equally informative, summary of the
data.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in
Section II we provide a summary of related works in the
literature. Section III provides an overview of the proposed
architecture and its components. These components are then
detailed in the following sections: IV, V, VI and VII. Ex-
perimental results are provided in Section VIII. A discussion
of the related peripheral problems is provided in Section IX.
Section X discusses potential future work, and the paper is
concluded in Section XI.
II. RELATED WORK
In the attempt to detect and reconstruct sophisticated multi-
step APTs, individual intrusion alerts are not deemed as a
sufﬁcient indication of compromise [13]. Instead of individual
alerts, more advanced detection approaches try to reconstruct
the attack plan [14]. In the literature, these approaches can be
divided into two broad categories: the ﬁrst is based on Fisher’s
method for 𝑝-value combination [7]; while the second is based
on the concept of attack graphs [15]. This ﬁrst approach of
detecting APTs assigns a joint score for multiple detections,
and has the advantage of simplicity. However it lacks the
sequencing capabilities of attack graphs. In other words, the
ﬁrst approach only considers the coverage of MITRE tactics
in the detections, and does not consider whether the order
of said detections actually makes sense as an attack plan.
Attack graphs are a more powerful representation of APTs
[15]. Besides their visually attractive properties, the topology
of a directed graph is a representation of the attack plan pro-
gression. In such graphs, each vertex represents an individual
alert, which might come from a variety of security solutions,
and each edge represents the progression between two alerts
[8]. With their vertices comprised of security alerts, attack
graphs are also sometimes called alert graphs, which is the
terminology we use in this work.
Despite its advantageous features, an attack graph con-
taining all alerts is usually overwhelmingly large due to the
high false-positive rate of the individual alert detectors. This
problem can be addressed in two ways. The ﬁrst approach
combines alerts corresponding to the same event together into
a Hyper/Generalized alert [16], while the second approach
works by partitioning the alert graph into smaller sub-graphs.
Both approaches aim at producing smaller alert graphs in order
to reduce the investigation burden on the security analyst. An
example of the second approach is given in [17], where a
community-detection approach is proposed with each resulting
community corresponding to a single attack step. In [18], alert
prerequisites and consequences are deﬁned for each alert to
limit the number of edges. However, this approach requires
heavy manual work, and can not handle cases when multiple
attacks are carried-out simultaneously. Finally, in [8] a separate
graph is deﬁned for each single asset. This approach results in
manageable graphs, but it ignores lateral movement between
assets, a common tactic in APT attacks.
It is worth emphasizing again the difference between the
two main approaches in reducing the size of the graph. The
ﬁrst approach tries to combine together alerts corresponding
to the same step in an APT into a single alert, equivalent to
a node in the graph. The second approach aims at collecting
all steps for a single coherent APT into a separate subgraph
representing the incident. Identifying the difference between
the two approaches and having them work together in the same
architecture is an important contribution of this work.
III. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The goal of RANK is to process tens/hundreds of thousands
of alerts produced by various IDS and UEBA systems into a
much smaller set of proper security incidents representing truly
malicious behavior. The general architecture is shown in Fig.
1. First, we identify the inputs and outputs of the system:
• Input: Alerts coming from sources such as Suricata1 and
Snort2, anomaly detectors and custom user-deﬁned rules.
• Output: A number of tactic-aware security incidents,
where each incident is represented as a directed graph
of related generalized alerts. Each incident also includes
the set of MITRE tactics present as well as a score for
each tactic based on the sequence of alerts and their
individual scores. Throughout the paper, we use incident
and "incident graph" interchangeably.
The mapping between those inputs and outputs is accom-
plished through the following four stages:
A. Alert Templating and Merging
The goal of the ﬁrst module in the architecture is to reduce
the number of alerts by merging together alerts representing
1https://suricata-ids.org/
2https://www.snort.org/

Fig. 1.
Incident Extraction Architecture, with corresponding section labels for each step. The architectures takes as input alerts coming from a variety of
sources such as IDS and custom rules. These alerts are ﬁrst analyzed for common patterns and matching alerts are merged together into generalized alerts.
An alert graph is built from these generalized alerts and then partitioned into independent incident subgraphs. Resulting incident graphs are scored through
their corresponding factor graphs and presented to the analyst for ﬁnal investigation.
the same attack step. A generalized alert is the result of
aggregation over that particular group of alerts. For example, a
port scan alert would include alerts corresponding to all ports
being scanned by a single adversary. The output of this phase
is a set of generalized alerts.
B. Alert Correlation and Attack Graphs
Once similar alerts have been merged together, our next
objective is to establish correlation relationships between
alerts. The outcome of this step is what we refer to as an
alert graph. The correlation between alerts is measured using
the correlation of their attributes, the time interval in-between,
and how each alert ﬁts into the MITRE ATT&CK chain.
C. Alert Graph Partitioning
The previous stage still provides large graphs that do not
necessarily lead to easily identiﬁable incidents. To address this
issue, the alert graph is partitioned into smaller subgraphs –
incident graphs – each representing a distinct, potential APT
attack.
D. Incident Scoring
Finally, once an incident graph has been built, our ﬁnal
goal is to assign a score, or set for scores, to each incident. In
particular, we assign a score for each MITRE tactic present in
the incident. This is achieved through a Factor Graph (FG), a
type of probabilistic graphical models [19]. The FG considers
the scores of all alerts in the incident, their sequence and their
MITRE mapping, and produces a score for each tactic present.
In the next sections, we provide details of each of the stages
above.
IV. ALERT TEMPLATING AND MERGING
The ﬁrst step in the RANK architecture aims at merging
together alerts representing the same attack step. In this
section, we follow the methodology and notation of Julisch
[16].
A. Motivation
Whether the alerts are coming from IDS signature, behav-
ioral anomalies or custom rules, the end result is an over-
whelming ﬂood of alerts [10]. However, it has been observed
that there is a signiﬁcant amount of redundancy in these
alerts. Hence, it is our goal for the ﬁrst step in the detection
architecture to remove such redundancy and merge together
all alerts triggered by the same underlying cause. For exam-
ple, consider the Suricata alert GPL RPC sadmind query
with root credentials. This alert can be triggered
when an external adversary is scanning internal hosts for the
Sadmind exploit. Even when only one external IP is scanning,
the IDS will produce a separate alert for each internal host
scanned. A much more concise but similarly informative alert
would indicate this behavior occurring between the external
adversary and all affected internal hosts. This process of
merging together alerts produced by the same cause is called
alert generalization [16], and is the focus of this section as
explained next.
B. Alert Structure
Mathematically, an alert, a ∈A with A being the set of
alerts, is deﬁned as a tuple of the Cartesian product
a = 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐵a
1 × 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐵a
2 × ... × 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐵a
𝑁a
(1)

where {𝐵a
1, 𝐵a
2, ...𝐵a
𝑁a} is the set of alert attributes, 𝑁a is the
number of attributes in alert a and 𝑑𝑜𝑚is the domain. The
value an attribute 𝐵a
𝑗takes in alert a is denoted as 𝑏a
𝑗. Exam-
ples of alert attributes are sourceIP, destinationIP,
sourcePort, destinationPort.
Each alert has a source, 𝑠a ∈S, with S being the set of
all alerts’ sources. The source of an alert refers to the rule or
analysis generating this alert. For example, for an IDS alert
the source is the rule ID, while for anomaly alerts the source
is the name of UEBA algorithm. The set of alerts coming from
a source 𝑠is denoted as A𝑠, and the set of attributes in all
alerts in A𝑠is denoted as B𝑠. All alerts coming from the same
source have the same set of attributes.
Each alert also has a score 𝑝a ∈[0, 1]. An alert score is
a measure of its severity. For example, a Suricata and Snort
IDS rule has a severity entry, which can be translated into a
numerical score. For UEBA-style alerts, the score is usually
derived from the 𝑝-value of the statistical test employed, as in
[7].
Finally, each alert is also indicative of a set of MITRE
tactics, Ma, and is affecting a set of internal assets/IPs La.
The corresponding MITRE tactics for each alert are manually
assigned based on the alert source.
C. Attribute Hierarchy Trees
Generalizing an attribute 𝐵a
𝑖
refers to the concept of
extending its domain 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐵a
𝑖
with a new set of values,
{𝑡1,𝑖, 𝑡2,𝑖, ..., 𝑡𝑁𝑡,𝑖}, each representing a distinct subset of
𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐵a
𝑖, resulting in the new domain 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝐵a
𝑖= 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐵a
𝑖∪
{𝑡a
1,𝑖, 𝑡a
2,𝑖, ..., 𝑡a
𝑁𝑡,𝑖}. To achieve this goal, for each attribute
𝐵a
𝑖we deﬁne an associated hierarchy tree T𝐵a
𝑖representing
the splitting of its domain. In this case, the number of new
values 𝑁𝑡is the number of non-leaf nodes in the corresponding
hierarchy tree T𝐵a
𝑖.
An attribute 𝐵a
𝑖is generalized by replacing the value it
takes in an alert, 𝑏a
𝑖, with the next value in its hierarchy tree.
This new value represents the subset of the attribute’s domain
containing the original value. Equivalently, the new attribute
value becomes 𝑏a
𝑖= parent of 𝑏a
𝑖𝑖𝑛T𝐵a
𝑖. We show examples
of hierarchy trees for IP and Port attributes in Fig. 2 and 3,
respectively.
D. Generalized Alerts
A generalized alert v ∈V is a tuple in the new Cartesian
product
v =𝐷𝑜𝑚𝐵v
1 × ... × 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝐵v
𝑔𝑙𝑠
× 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐵v
𝑔𝑙𝑠+1 × ... × 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐵v
𝑁v
(2)
where 𝑔𝑙𝑠is the number of attributes to generalize per alert
source and 𝑁v is the number of attributes in the generalized
alert v. Note that generalizing an alert does not change its
number of attributes. In other words, an alert is generalized
when at least one of its attributes is also generalized.
It is worth emphasizing that the alert source 𝑠a plays a
crucial rule in the generalization process. First, only alerts
coming from the same source can be merged together. This is
Fig. 2.
IP Generalization Hierarchy
.
done in order to keep the security context of the generalized
alert meaningful. For example, if an alert is an indication of
port scan for a single target machine, its generalized version
will indicate a port scan for multiple target machines. The
second signiﬁcance of the alert source is that the parameter
𝑔𝑙𝑠is indexed per source not per alert. These values are
manually chosen, and it is easier and more meaningful to
choose the number of attributes to generalize per source. In
our experiments, we have selected 𝑔𝑙= 2 for IDS alerts and
𝑔𝑙= 1 for UEBA alerts.
E. Template Extraction and Merging Algorithm
The high-level steps of the template extraction and alert
merging are as follows:
• Each alert has at least two attributes, which can include
sourceIP, destinationIP, sourcePort,
destinationPort and one or more process related
attributes.
• For every alert source 𝑠∈S and every attribute 𝐵𝑖∈B𝑠,
calculate the number of occurrences of the most common
value 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑠
𝐵𝑖.
• Sort attributes in ascending order according to their
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑠
𝐵𝑖.
• Generalize the sorted attributes each according to its
hierarchy tree until the pre-conﬁgured limit on the number
of generalizable attributes. The score of the merged alert
is the maximum among all the scores of its contributing
individual alerts.
In summary, the attribute to generalize at each step is the
one whose most frequent value has occurred least number of
times across all remaining attributes under consideration. The
algorithm itself is shown in Algorithm 1.
V. ALERT CORRELATION AND ATTACK GRAPHS
The previous step reduces the number of alerts to investigate
by approximately two orders of magnitude. Our next step is to
build an alert graph in which each node represents a general-
ized alert. In particular, we denote the graph G = {V, E} as the

Fig. 3.
Port Generalization Hierarchy
.
Algorithm 1: Template Extraction and Alert Merging
Algorithm
Input : A set of alerts A
Output: A set of merged and generalized alerts V
Initialize
V = A
for 𝑠∈S do
j = 0
while 𝑗< 𝑔𝑙𝑠do
𝑙= 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒(V𝑠, B𝑠)
for v ∈V𝑠do
// Generalize selected
attribute
𝑏v
𝑙= parent of 𝑏v
𝑙𝑖𝑛T𝑙
end
while identical alerts 𝑣, 𝑣′ ∈V exist do
// Merge matching alerts
𝑝v = max(𝑝v, 𝑝v′)
delete 𝑣′ from V
end
𝑗+= 1
end
end
Function SelectAttribute(V𝑠, B𝑠) is
for 𝐵𝑖∈B𝑠do
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑠
𝐵𝑖=
max

count(𝑥)|𝑥∈{𝑏v
𝑖| ∀v ∈V𝑠}
	
end
𝑙= arg min𝐵𝑖∈B𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑠
𝐵𝑖
return 𝑙
end
alert graph, where the set of nodes V is the set of generalized
alerts, and E being the set of directed edges connecting alerts
together.
The main question in this section is when to add edges
between the nodes, and what are the edge weights. In essence,
the question is about measuring correlation between alerts. We
measure correlation using two metrics: 1) correlation between
the alert attributes, and 2) where each alert ﬁts in the MITRE
ATT&CK sequence. For example, if the same external IP
is targeting one or more internal hosts, with each attempted
exploit triggering a different alert, then attribute correlation
between said alerts would be high. Meanwhile, the MITRE
ATT&CK correlation between two alerts will increase if the
second alert’s tactic follows naturally from that of the ﬁrst
alert. For example, if the ﬁrst alert represents lateral movement
and the second alert represents data exﬁltration, then the
correlation is high. On the other hand, the correlation will
be low if the ﬁrst alert represents lateral movement and the
second alert represents initial access. In summary, each alert is
associated with one or more MITRE tactics, and the MITRE
ATT&CK correlation weight represents how likely it is for an
attack to transition from the tactics associated with the ﬁrst
alert to the tactics associated with the second.
After many experiments, we have found the following
expression for the alert correlation measure, 𝐶(·, ·) : V×V →
R≥0, to yield the best results:
𝐶(v, v′) = max
𝑡∈Mv
𝑡′∈Mv′
T𝐾𝐶(𝑡, 𝑡′) ∗
max
𝑖𝑝∈Lv
𝑖𝑝′∈Lv′
𝐶IP(𝑖𝑝, 𝑖𝑝′)
(3)
where 𝐶IP(·, ·) is an IP correlation measure, deﬁned to be
one for matching IPs and zero otherwise
𝐶IP(𝑖𝑝, 𝑖𝑝′) = 𝛿(𝑖𝑝, 𝑖𝑝′)
(4)
where 𝛿is the Kronecker delta function. T𝐾𝐶(., .) is a MITRE
tactic transition matrix deﬁned according to Table I. We have
manually assigned the transition weights and mapping, taking
care to limit the number of parameters needed. The main
reason behind this is the lack of properly labelled datasets
containing real attacks covering many facets of the MITRE
ATT&CK matrix.
An edge v →v′ is added to the graph G between the two
alerts (v, v′) if their correlation measure 𝐶(v, v′) is greater
than a pre-deﬁned threshold. The threshold value has to be
manually tuned and we have found a value of 0.4 to give us
the best results.
VI. ALERT GRAPH PARTITIONING
With the alert graph built, the next step is to partition
said graph into smaller subgraphs each representing a distinct
security incident. In its general form, the graph partitioning
problem is concerned with splitting the vertex set V of the
graph G into a collection of non-empty subsets. The standard
objective in such problems is to minimize the total weight of
the edges connecting any two subsets [20].
We utilize two approaches for graph partitioning: the ego-
splitting overlapping community detection [21], and our pro-
posed optimization approach [12]. The motivation behind
proposing a novel approach is that community detection algo-
rithms focus mainly on the topological properties of graphs,
and fail to incorporate a security context representing the
validity of the resulting sub-graphs as proper attack plans.

TABLE I
TRANSITION MATRIX BETWEEN MITRE TACTICS
TACTIC
Initial
Access
Execu-
tion
Persis-
tence
Privi-
lege
Escala-
tion
De-
fense
Eva-
sion
Cre-
dential
Access
Discov-
ery
Lateral
Move-
ment
Collec-
tion
Com-
mand
and
Con-
trol
Exﬁl-
tration
Impact
Initial
Access
0.1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Execution
0.5
0.1
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Persistence
0.5
0.7
0.1
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Privilege
Escalation
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.1
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Defense
Evasion
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.1
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Credential
Access
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.1
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Discovery
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.1
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
Lateral
Movement
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
Collection
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.1
0.7
0.7
0.7
Command
and Control
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.1
0.7
0.7
Exﬁltration
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.1
0.7
Impact
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.1
0.1
Moreover, existing graph partitioning approaches act as a
black-box and are hard to extend or improve given the security
analyst feedback.
In our previous work [12], we have provided the ﬁrst rig-
orous formulation of the attack partitioning problem enabling
the extraction of security-aware incident graphs. Recognizing
that community detection algorithms approximate the graph
partitioning problem [22], we leveraged the power of convex
optimization to incorporate security context into the problem.
In particular, our objectives when partitioning a graph are:
• To guarantee a proper incident, we would like to maxi-
mize the number of attack phases in each partition.
• To avoid impractical incidents, we would like to minimize
the number of assets involved in a partition.
• To provide the analyst with an easy-to-visualize graph,
we would like to have an upper limit on the number of
alerts included in each partition.
• To balance how many incidents involve a single alert,
our formulation allows having a reasonable and ﬂexible
limit on the number of partitions an alert might appear
in. For example, limiting an alert to a single incident is
overly optimistic while sharing it across many incidents
is overly pessimistic. This is analogous to the concept of
overlapping communities [21].
• Perhaps most importantly, to allow more ﬂexibility in
addressing security analysts feedback, we would like to
have a more tractable formulation of the problem, unlike
black-box community detection algorithms.
Given a graph of alerts, G = (V, E), we deﬁne the decision
matrix X = (𝑥𝑖,𝑘)|V |×𝐾where 𝑥𝑖,𝑘∈Z2 and 𝐾is the number
of partitions. The value 𝑥𝑖,𝑘= 1 indicates vertex 𝑖being part
of partition 𝑘, and 0 otherwise. We also refer to the column
vectors of the matrix X as an incident or an incident vector x𝑘.
Although the number of partitions 𝐾is assumed as input to
our optimization problem, we note that the formulation can be
extended to have 𝐾as an optimization variable as well [20].
In [12], we showed that the overall graph partitioning
optimization problem can be written as
minimize
X,S,T,𝛼,𝜷
𝛾0e𝑇Se + 𝛾1
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝛼𝑘+ 𝛾2
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
1𝑇𝜷𝑘
subject to
X ∈Z|V |×𝐾
2
,
𝑥𝑖,𝑘∈R ∩P,
Lx𝑘−t𝑘−s𝑘+ 𝐶e = 0,
t𝑘≤2𝐶(e −x𝑘),
𝑡𝑖,𝑘, 𝑠𝑖,𝑘≥0,
−𝛼𝑘e ≤ˆm𝑘≤𝛼𝑘e,
−𝜷𝑘≤l𝑘≤𝜷𝑘∀𝑖= 1, ..., |V|, 𝑘= 1, ..., 𝐾
(5)
with
R =
(
𝑥𝑖,𝑘∈Z2 :
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑥𝑖,𝑘≤𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑏
)
(6)
and
P =
(
𝑥𝑖,𝑘∈Z2 :
|V |
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑥𝑖,𝑘≤𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑑
)
(7)

where Z2 is the set of binary numbers, 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑏is an
upper limit on the alert incident membership, 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑑is
the maximum size allowed for a partition, L is the graph
Laplacian matrix, 𝐶= 2 max𝑖=1,...,|V |
Í|V |
𝑗=1 𝑤𝑖, 𝑗where 𝑤𝑖, 𝑗
are the entries of the edge weights matrix W, e is an all-ones
vector. A vector ˆm𝑘has ˆ𝑚𝑖,𝑘> 0 if the tactic 𝑖is missing from
any of the alerts in incident 𝑘, and 0 otherwise. Similarly, a
vector l𝑘has 𝑙𝑖,𝑘> 0 if the asset 𝑖is present in any of the alerts
in incident 𝑘, and 0 otherwise. 𝛾0, 𝛾1, 𝛾2 are tunable weights
for the different parts of the objective function, i.e., graph
cut weight, tactic coverage and number of assets respectively.
The optimization problem given in Eq. (5) belongs to the
class of mixed integer linear programming (MILP) which can
be solved using commercial and open-source solvers such as
CBC3. Solving problem (5) gives us the optimum partition
assignments ˆX, where each partition, ˆx𝑘, now represents a
distinct security incident.
VII. INCIDENT SCORING
With the security incidents now extracted from the bigger
alert graph, the ﬁnal step is to evaluate whether the sequence of
alerts present in each incident represents a proper attack plan.
For example, a sequence of Initial Access →Execution →
Lateral Movement is more valid as an attack plan compared
to Lateral Movement →Execution →Initial Access, since
the ﬁrst follows more closely the order in MITRE ATT&CK.
Even though the way we calculate correlation between alerts
when building the alert graph tries to incorporate these re-
lations, depending on the pair-wise correlation only is not
enough. On one hand, pair-wise correlation does not look
at the graph as a whole, on the other hand a single alert
can be mapped to multiple MITRE tactics. Our solution here
leverages factor graphs [19], a type of probabilistic graphical
model [23], to assign a score for each MITRE tactic present
in the incident. The tactic scores are based on the scores of
the individual alerts and their sequence in the incident graph.
A. Overview of Factor Graphs
A factor graph is a bipartite graph used to factor a global
function into a product of smaller local functions [19]. The
graph has two types of nodes: variable nodes that represent the
arguments of the function being calculated, and factor nodes
deﬁning the relationships between the variable nodes. There
are three main problems under study in any application of
FGs: structure, inference and learning [23]. Structure is about
deﬁning the variable and factor nodes, as well as the overall
topology of the graph. The inference step is concerned with
designing the inference algorithm to calculate the marginal
probabilities of the variable nodes. The choice of an inference
algorithm is a trade-off between accuracy and feasibility, since
in general the inference complexity in FG is NP-hard [23].
Finally, the learning step is about the choice of parameters in
the graph, such as the factor functions and the prior distribution
of the variable nodes. FGs have achieved wide-success in a
3https://github.com/coin-or/Cbc
variety of applications such as decoding of linear codes and
pattern recognition [23].
B. Building a Factor Graph from an Incident Graph
Given an incident graph, i.e. a set of generalized alerts and
their correlations, the question is how can we assign a score
to the different MITRE tactics present in the incident. These
scores should be calculated based not on the individual alerts,
rather, on the incident graph as a whole. This question can be
seen as that of calculating a joint probability distribution for all
alerts and tactics present in the incident. This joint probability
distribution is the global function that the FG is calculating.
There are many challenges here:
• The number of alerts and tactics is different for each inci-
dent, the score calculation capability should be dynamic.
• The exponential growth in the number of states. For a
binary state space of alerts V and tactics M, with each
state either active or inactive, the total number of states
is 2|V |+|M |.
• With the lack of labelled datasets, how can we minimize
the number of parameters in the FG.
In light of these challenges, we build the FG as follows:
• Variables: every MITRE tactic present in the incident is
mapped to a variable node.
• Factors: we have two classes of factor nodes
– Alert-Factors: we also have two types of alert-factors
∗Single tactic alert: if an alert v is mapped to a
single tactic, then the alert becomes a one-variable
factor with 𝑓(𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒) = 𝑝v where 𝑓(.) is the
factor function, as shown in Table II. This factor
node is connected to the corresponding variable
node representing the tactic.
∗Multi-tactic alert: if an alert v is mapped to multi-
ple tactics, then the alert becomes a multi-variable
factor with the same number of variables as the
number of mapped tactics. The factor table entry
for every possible combination of the variables’
values is equal to the minimum between either
the alert score or the maximum transition matrix
entry between every possible pair of active tactics.
The factor table is shown in Table III for the
case when the alert is mapped to two tactics, i.e.,
Mv = {𝑡𝐴, 𝑡𝐵}.
– Transition-Factors: for every pair of tactics present
in the incident, we deﬁne a new factor connecting
the two. The factor function is equal to the transition
matrix entry depending on the temporal order of the
alerts leading to each tactic. This is shown in Table
IV, where 𝑡𝐴≺𝑡𝐵means tactic 𝐴happened before
tactic 𝐵and falseIndication is a parameter indicating
that both tactics are inactive in the incident. We
chose the same value of falseIndication for all pairs
of tactics and set it to 0.2.

TABLE II
FACTOR TABLE FOR SINGLE-MAPPED ALERT
Tactic State
Factor Value
Active
𝑝v
Inactive
1 −𝑝v
TABLE III
FACTOR TABLE FOR MULTI-MAPPED ALERT
Tactic
A State
Tactic
B State
Factor Value
Active
Active
min( 𝑝v, max(T𝐾𝐶(𝑡𝐴, 𝑡𝐵), T𝐾𝐶(𝑡𝐵, 𝑡𝐴)))
Inactive
Active
𝑝v
Active
Inactive
𝑝v
Inactive
Inactive
1 - 𝑝v
This approach to building a FG for an incident has a few
advantages:
• The FG grows dynamically according to the sets of alerts
and tactics present in the incident, circumventing the need
for manual setting of the graph topology for each incident.
• The size of the factor tables is upper bounded by the
number of MITRE tactics, i.e. 12. This limits the compu-
tational complexity of the inference algorithm and avoids
dependence on the relatively larger number of generalized
alerts.
• We use a minimal set of parameters. In particular, the set
of parameters needed to build the FG are:
– The alert scores {𝑝v | ∀v ∈V}.
– The tactics transition matrix T𝐾𝐶.
– The falseIndication parameter.
Once the FG is built, we can then run an inference algorithm
on the graph to get the marginal probabilities for the variable
nodes, i.e., tactics. For our case we have settled on the well-
known sum-product algorithm [19]. The ﬁnal output of the
FG is the set of marginal probabilities for all tactics present
in the incident, {𝑃(𝑡is Active) ∀𝑡∈M𝑘} where M𝑘is the
set of tactics in incident 𝑘. The incident subgraph as well as
the scores of both alerts and tactics are ﬁnally presented to
the security analyst for investigation.
TABLE IV
PAIRWISE TACTIC FACTOR TABLE
Tactic A
State
Tactic B
State
Factor Value
Active
Active
𝜇=
(
T𝐾𝐶(𝑡𝐴, 𝑡𝐵),
𝑡𝐴≺𝑡𝐵
T𝐾𝐶(𝑡𝐵, 𝑡𝐴),
otherwise
Inactive
Active
1 −𝜇
Active
Inactive
1 −𝜇
Inactive
Inactive
falseIndication
VIII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The lack of good APT datasets, as well as the well-
documented challenges of applying algorithmic and machine-
learning approaches in cybersecurity [10], makes evaluating
any work particularly challenging. For evaluation, we use two
main datasets, ﬁrst is the 2000 DARPA intrusion detection
dataset [24], and the ﬁgures included in this paper are for its
ﬁrst scenario, with similar observations holding for the second
scenario. The second dataset is a private one from a medium
enterprise network. This network has around 50 employees
using primarily windows machines, as well as a few internal
servers. Throughout our experiments, we used Suricata with
its open rule-set as our IDS.
A. Templates
First, we study the effect of alert templating and merging
on reducing the number of alerts for the later steps. In Fig. 4,
we show the number of generalized alerts versus the number
of individual alerts from the enterprise network we study. We
can see a pattern where the number of generalized alerts is
almost two orders of magnitude smaller than the number of
individual alerts. This is quite useful by itself, as the merged
alerts still keep track of all the attributes of individual ones.
Meanwhile, the reduced number of alerts greatly simpliﬁes
visualization, as well as the next steps in the architecture for
graph building, partitioning and scoring.
In Table V, we show three examples of templates extracted
from the DARPA dataset. The ﬁrst column is the Suricata
rule signature. The attributes count column means that the
most common sourcePort value was seen only 5 times,
while the most common sourceIP value was seen 70 times
for the same data. This is expected for such an alert as it is
likely that a single external adversary, sourceIP, is trying
to gain root access in any of the enterprise hosts it can ﬁnd.
Hence, the template is chosen for a single sourceIP and
single destinationPort, while the destinationIP
and sourcePort are up-levelled according to their hierarchy
tree, as seen in the second column.
B. Graph partitioning
Here we study the performance of the ego-splitting frame-
work from [21] and our proposed approach (Section VI). The
ego-splitting framework utiltizes non-overlapping algorithms
underneath, for which we use Louvain and Modularity from
the NetworkX package4, as these two have given the best
results in practice. The evaluation metric is ﬁrst and foremost a
manual inspection of the resulting graphs, as well as statistics
on the quality of those graphs, such as the average number of
alerts.
We have used 𝛾0 = 1.0, 𝛾1 = 0.5, 𝛾2 = 0.5, 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑏= 2
and 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑑= 20. For the experiment with the DARPA
dataset we solved the integer version of problem (5) while a
relaxed version without the binary constraint is used for the
experiment with the enterprise network dataset.
4https://networkx.github.io/

TABLE V
ALERT TEMPLATES. NUMBER OF ATTRIBUTES THAT ARE GENERALIZED IS 𝑔𝑙= 2.
Signature
Generalized Form
Attributes Count
Alert Examples
dstIP
dstPort
srcIP
srcPort
GPL RPC
sadmind query
with root
credentials
{dstIP: private-IP,
dstPort: <port number>,
srcIP: <IP address>,
srcPort: Non private -
Port}
(srcPort, 5),
(dstIP, 30),
(dstPort, 50),
(srcIP, 70)
172.16.115.20
32773
202.77.162.213
60251
172.16.112.10
32774
202.77.162.213
60542
172.16.112.50
32773
202.77.162.213
60569
GPL TELNET
Bad Login
{dstIP: <IP address>,
dstPort: Non private - port,
srcIP: private-IP,
srcPort: <Port number>}
(dstPort, 5),
(srcIP, 10),
(dstIP, 20),
(srcPort, 30)
195.115.218.108
43886
172.16.113.50
23
202.77.162.213
46956
172.16.115.20
23
202.77.162.213
46986
172.16.112.10
23
GPL RPC
portmap
sadmind
request UDP
{dstIP: private-IP,
dstPort: <Port number>,
srcIP: <IP address>,
srcPort: Non private -
Port}
(dstIP, 60),
(srcPort, 60),
(srcIP, 450),
(dstPort, 450)
172.16.115.20
111
202.77.162.213
54790
172.16.115.87
111
202.77.162.213
54793
172.16.112.10
111
202.77.162.213
60540
Fig. 4.
Reduction in number of alerts through Alert Templating and Merging
The overall attack graph in the DARPA scenario is shown in
Fig. 5. The goal of the attack is to exploit the Solaris sadmind
vulnerability5 on eligible hosts, install a trojan and launch a
DDoS attack against a remote server. The attack progression
and corresponding Suricata alerts are summarized in Table VI.
The incident extracted through our approach is shown in
Fig. 7, while the ego-splitting community detection is shown
in Fig. 6. Examining the outcomes of both approaches, we
see that our method is able to extract a single path containing
all attack phases which is a desirable result for the security
analyst. On the other hand, the ego-splitting method contains
two potential pathways from the initial to the ﬁnal stage of the
attack, requiring additional effort to identify the correct one.
5https://cve.circl.lu/cve/CVE-1999-0977
For the private dataset, one interesting metric was how
much the size of the incident graph grows as we lengthen
the analysis period, following which the number of alerts
also increases. This expansion of analysis time is necessary
if we aim to discover long-term APTs. In Fig. 8 we show
the average incident size and its standard deviation versus the
length of the analysis period. With the increase in the number
of alerts, the community detection approach results in larger
communities thwarting the ability of the analyst to study them,
a weakness alleviated in our model. Note that we have set
𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑑= 20 which explains the divergence of the two lines
once the incident size extracted by the community detection
exceeds the upper limit set in the optimization approach.
C. Factor Graphs
In Fig. 9 we show an example of an incident detected in
our enterprise network. This incident represents exploiting an
open SQL port to take part in a distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) attack. Running the belief-propagation algorithm on
the FG for this incident yields the scores shown in Table
VII. In short, the FG rejected the Initial Access tactic and
its alert corresponding to the branching off from the main
attack path. The ﬁrst two alerts are much more likely to lead
to a Command and Control and other tactics representing
the advanced progress of attack as opposed to a new attempt
at accessing the network. This example shows the ability of
the FG to take all alerts into consideration when scoring each
individual tactic.
D. Reduction
The major beneﬁt of the proposed architecture is reducing
the amount of investigations to be done by the analyst without
extensive data losses, all while automating as many parts of
the process as possible and giving better representations of the
data for more efﬁcient investigation. In terms of reduction, we
have achieved the following with the DARPA dataset
7000 Alerts →44 Generalized Alerts →3 Incidents
(8)

Fig. 5.
DARPA overall alert graph prior to partitioning. The contents of each node are the source ip(s) (top), destination ip(s) (middle) and signature of the
Suricata rule triggering the alert (bottom). Thick red nodes indicate the real steps of the attack. Some of the edges are omitted for visual clarity.
.
TABLE VI
DARPA ATTACK PROGRESSION AND IDS ALERTS FOR THE CASE SHOWN IN FIG. 5
Attack Step
IDS Alert(s)
An IP sweep of the enterprise hosts.
The IP scan is not reported.
Probing the IPs from step 1 to look for
sadmind hosts.
Detected by rule "GPL RPC portmap sadmind request UDP" .
Exploiting the Solaris Sadmind
vulnerability (CVE-1999-0977).
Detected by rule "GPL RPC sadmind query with root credentials attempt UDP".
Installation of the DDoS trojan on
exploited machines.
Detected by rule "GPL TELNET Bad Login", followed by "GPL RPC sadmind query with
root credentials attempt UDP" and the actual ﬁle download in "ET POLICY Executable and
linking format (ELF) ﬁle download".
Launching the DDoS attack.
Detected but not connected to the other alerts due to the trojans using source IP spooﬁng.
Fig. 6.
DARPA incident graph through community detection.

Fig. 7.
DARPA incident graph through graph optimization.
Fig. 8.
Comparison of average incident size, with vertical bars representing
its standard deviation.
and for the enterprise network, for one month of data
77000 Alerts →1100 Generalized Alerts →60 Incidents
(9)
We observe around two orders of magnitude reduction
through templating and one order of magnitude reduction
through graph partitioning. The end result is a considerably
more concise representation of the alerts, signiﬁcantly easing
the investigation burden on the analyst.
IX. PERIPHERAL PROBLEMS
In this section, we outline a few crucial areas that heavily
inﬂuence the design and implementation of our architecture.
Fig. 9.
Factor Graph Action on an Incident. The contents of each node
are the source ip(s) (top row), destination ip(s) (second row), signature of the
Suricata rule triggering the alert (third row), and the MITRE tactics each alert
is mapped to (bottom row).
TABLE VII
FG SCORES FOR THE TACTICS IN THE INCIDENT IN FIG. 9
Tactic
Score
Initial Access
0.0555
Execution
0.9570
Lateral Movement
0.9995
Collection
0.9924
Command and Control
0.9939
Exﬁltration
0.9924
Impact
0.9924
These areas do not constitute a separate set of stages, instead,
they tie closely to the design of the four stages discussed in
Section III.
A. Scalable Implementation
In terms of implementation, the process of converting alerts
into distinct incidents, each composed of multiple generalized
alerts, is divided into three main steps:
• Learning alert templates from batches of alerts.
• Processing alerts as they are created and merging them
into generalized alerts.
• Constructing alert graphs from batches of generalized
alerts, partitioning them into incident graphs, and scoring
the incidents.
The ﬁrst and second step, being independent for each alert
source, lend themselves naturally to a Map-Reduce imple-

mentation [25]. Spark6 is a popular choice here and is what
we have used internally. The third step, focusing on graph
processing, is best implemented through a message-passing
framework [26]. Together, these solutions enable horizontal-
scaling of our architecture across a dynamic number of com-
puting instances, and have allowed us to process data from
thousands of devices in large enterprise networks.
B. IP Similarity
Measuring similarity between IP addresses is an important
task in the daily operations of any enterprise network. Applica-
tions that depend on an IP similarity measure include measur-
ing correlation between security alerts, building baselines for
behavioral modelling, debugging network failures and tracking
persistent attacks. For example, in our case a novel IP simi-
larity measure 𝐶′
IP(·, ·) can be plugged into Eq. 3 to measure
correlation betwen two alerts. However, IP addresses do not
have a natural similarity measure by deﬁnition. Deep Learning
(DL) architectures are a promising solution here since they
are able to learn numerical representations for IP addresses
directly from data. Given these numerical representations,
various distance functions can be applied to measure similarity
between the corresponding IP addresses. In a recent work [27],
we have leveraged a variant of the word2vec algorithm [28] to
measure similarity between IPs learned from network log data,
with promising results in incident extraction and investigation.
In a follow-up work [29], we have extended [27] by leveraging
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) for IP similarity. GNNs have
the advantage of being inductive models, i.e. they can measure
similarity between new IPs not necessarily encountered during
the training phase. This is a crucial feature for these models
to scale to real-world networks.
C. Security Analyst Feedback
The analyst can interact with the extracted incident as well
as the general process of the extraction architecture in a variety
of ways. These include:
• An analyst can interact with the generated incident by
marking either an alert or a tactic as 𝐼𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒, indicating
a false-positive. This feedback can be handled by the FG
in the form of an evidence-based query [23]. An evidence-
based query is an inference process on the FG with a limit
on the values the conditioned variable can take.
• In case an analyst has marked an alert as false-positive,
then a parallel process can look for similar alerts and
suggest them to the analyst for further evaluation. Mea-
suring similarity between alerts can be partially answered
by measuring similarity between their IP attributes. The
approaches discussed in Section IX-B are of value here.
• The analyst may wish to revisit some of the gener-
ated templates. For example, the template generation
mechanism might choose to generalize sourceIP and
destinationIP. Generalizing on both IPs is not
usually a desired behavior. Re-arranging the order of
6https://spark.apache.org/
attributes for templating can be easily done by the analyst
afterwards.
We have only implemented the ﬁrst point using evidence-
based queries as will be discussed in Appendix A, while the
integration of the other two is part of our future work.
D. Causality
One important observation from discussing the incident
graphs with security analysts is that an analyst expects an edge
connecting two alerts to indicate a causal relationship. The
question of learning causality is much more challenging than
that of learning correlation [30]. We have tried two approaches
to address the problem of causality:
• Protocol-based: This approach would use knowledge of
the internals of different networking protocols to identify
if a previous packet or ﬂow led to the current packet or
ﬂow. As an example, a DNS query for a certain domain
name together with the response containing the domain’s
IP address can be seen as the cause of the next HTTP
trafﬁc to that IP. The main challenge here is handling
all of the possible protocol combinations expected in the
network and all their variants, which is quite a challenging
task.
• Statistical: This approach utilizes some of the established
algorithms for learning a causal relations graph directly
from the data [31]. However, the nature of our data
and its main representation as low-level TCP/UDP ﬂow
logs hinders the applicability of algorithms such as the
PC-algorithm. In particular, the layered structured of the
networking protocol results in layer-3 events being all of
the same type for different applications, and we cannot
build a causality graph from these layer-3 ﬂows. This
approach has more success for other types of data with
more context such as Syslog [32].
X. FUTURE WORK
Our planned future works centers on several lines of poten-
tial improvements:
1) Causality:
Both
statistical
and
protocol-based
ap-
proaches to measure causality between network events
have proved challenging. A potential third avenue built
around leveraging end-point data to determine the uni-
versally unique identiﬁer (UUID) [33] for the software
process generating each event is promising. Once the
network-event to process mapping is done, all subse-
quent events from the same process can be seen as part
of the same causal chain.
2) Scalablity of Graph Partitioning: The main weakness
in the optimization approach proposed for graph parti-
tioning is its scalability, which is limited by the ability of
the solvers to handle growing graph sizes. For example,
we observe around 1000 generalized alerts for a three
week period in a medium enterprise network. Limiting
the size of each incident to 10 alerts, the resulting
decision matrix has 106 variables. The operational limit
of open-source linear-programming solvers is between

hundred thousands to one million variables, and the
integer constraint in the problem quickly renders it
infeasibly-large. We would like to study a more-practical
heuristic that can provide a good approximation to
problem (5).
3) Streaming: In the current implementation, the graph
building, partitioning and incident scoring are all run
as periodic batch jobs. We plan to convert these into
a streaming context, with each incoming new alert
assigned to its proper incident, or dropped, and the
scores of the tactics present updated accordingly.
4) Extending Factor Graphs: Currently, our FG considers
if a sequence of two tactics in an incident is valid from
a MITRE ATT&CK perspective. A further enhancement
here is to build pairwise factors between alerts, checking
if this speciﬁc sequence of alerts is valid. This is a
more granular approach to build FGs, with the added
granularity expected to lead to better scores. On the
other hand, labelled datasets and increased computation
are necessary to build and use these updated FGs.
XI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed RANK, the ﬁrst end-to-
end architecture for detecting APTs in enterprise networks.
The proposed architecture automates many parts of the data
processing pipeline, such as learning alert templates, parti-
tioning an alert graph into separate incidents, and leveraging
factor graphs for automatically scoring these incidents. At the
same time, the architecture is designed around preserving the
analysts’ crucial role in the investigation loop, by providing
a highly-efﬁcient and distilled representation of the data for
easier investigating. Moreover, we have carefully integrated
MITRE ATT&CK into the various stages of our architecture,
including alert correlation, alert graph partitioning and incident
scoring. Our major contribution is reducing the amount of data
to be investigated by the analyst by three orders of magnitude,
from 7000 alerts to 3 incidents in one example. We have also
proposed novel approaches for alert correlation, alert graph
partitioning, incident scoring, scalable implementation and IP
similarity, and how they all tie together into the APT detection
architecture.
APPENDIX A
EVIDENCE-BASED SCORING
In this section we show the effects of analyst feedback on
incident scoring through evidence-based queries to the FG. In
Fig. 10 we show the factor graph for a demo incident com-
posed of three alerts. These three alerts are indicative of Initial
Access (IA), Execution (EX) and Lateral Movement (LM)
respectively. The factor tables are calculated according to
Section VII-B. In particular, a single-variable factor represents
an alert mapped to the connected tactic, while the two-variable
factor represents transitions according to the matrix in Table
I. In this incident, the temporal order of the tactics is Initial
Access (IA) →Lateral Movement (LM) →Execution (EX).
The fact that the Lateral Movement (LM) happened before
Execution (EX) is in contradiction with their order in the
MITRE ATT&CK matrix, as reﬂected in their factor table
which penalizes both being active at the same time.
The marginal scores calculated through the sum-product
algorithm are shown in Table VIII. The column named Score
is the default case before any feedback is given by the analyst.
In such case, the score for Execution (EX) slightly increases
while the score for Lateral Movement (LM) decreases. This
is caused by the stronger reinforcement between Initial Access
(IA) and Execution (EX) as compared to Initial Access
(IA) and Lateral Movement (LM). In essence, the factor
graph favors an attack that progresses one step at a time
over one that jumps from the ﬁrst to the eighth step. The
rest of the columns show the updated scores when the analyst
marks a tactic as either active or inactive, i.e. true-positive or
false-positive. For example, if Execution (EX) is marked as
inactive, the score for Lateral Movement (LM) signiﬁcantly
increases due to the removal of the contradicting factor from
the graph. Similar behavior is observed for Execution (EX)
when Lateral Movement (LM) is the one marked as inactive
instead. The stronger reinforcement between Initial Access
(IA) and Execution (EX) as compared to the one between
Initial Access (IA) and Lateral Movement (LM) can also be
observed in the updated scores. In particular, the updated score
of Initial Access (IA) is higher when Lateral Movement
(LM) is the one marked as inactive compared to the case
when Execution (EX) is marked so.
