Computational Curiosity 
(A Book Draft) 
by 
Qiong Wu 

Nanyang Technological University 
 
 

 
2 
 
Contents 
Preface 
5 
Chapter 1 Psychology Underpinnings of Curiosity 
10 
1.1. 
Categories of Curiosity 
10 
1.2. 
Curiosity-Related Emotions 
11 
1.3. 
Curiosity-Related Behaviors 
12 
1.4. 
Benefits of Curiosity 
13 
Chapter 2 Arousal Theory 
14 
2.1. 
Collative Variables 
14 
2.2. 
Intermediate Arousal Potential 
17 
Chapter 3 Traditional Computaional models of curiosity 
19 
3.1. 
Models based on Novelty 
22 
3.2. 
Models based on Surprise 
25 
3.3. 
Models based on Change 
28 
3.4. 
Models based on Uncertainty 
29 
3.5. 
Models based on Complexity 
30 
3.6. 
Discussion 
32 
Chapter 4 A Novel Generic Computational Model of curiosity 
33 
4.1. 
Standard Agent 
34 
4.1.1. Environment 
34 
4.1.2. Internal Functions 
35 
4.2. 
Memory and Learning 
38 
4.2.1. Memory 
39 

 
3 
 
4.2.2. Learning 
40 
4.3. 
Curious Functions 
42 
4.3.1. Stimulus Detection 
43 
4.3.2. Interest Evaluation 
44 
4.3.3. Meta-level Decision-making 
44 
4.4. 
Summary 
46 
Chapter 5 Promising Applications for Computational Curiosity 
47 
5.1. 
Machine Learning 
47 
5.2. 
Robotics 
48 
5.3. 
Artificial Creativity 
50 
5.4. 
Games 
51 
5.5. 
Affective Computing 
52 
5.6. 
Artificial Companions 
52 
5.7. 
Persuasive Technology 
53 
5.8. 
Agent Negotiation 
53 
5.9. 
Trustworthy Computing 
54 
Chapter 6 A Curious Extreme Learning machine 
55 
6.1. 
Introduction 
55 
6.2. 
Curious Extreme Learning Machine Classifier (C-ELM) 
57 
6.2.1. The Internal Cognitive Component: SLFN 
58 
6.2.2. Curious Functions 
59 
6.3. 
Performance Evaluation of C-ELM 
65 
6.3.1. Performance Measures 
65 

 
4 
 
6.3.2. Performance Study on Multi-category Classification Problems 
66 
6.3.3. Performance Study on Binary Classification Problems 
67 
6.4. 
Summary 
68 
Chapter 7 A Curious Recommender agent 
70 
7.1. 
Introduction 
70 
Chapter 8 a curious virtual peer learner 
72 
8.1. 
Introduction 
72 
Chapter 9 A Curious Virtual Learning Companion 
74 
9.1. 
Introduction 
74 
Chapter 10 Open Problems 
76 
10.1. Evaluation of Simulation 
76 
10.2. Evaluation of Curiosity 
76 
10.3. Interactions between Collative Variables 
76 
10.4. Neuroscience Inspired Modeling Approaches 
77 
10.5. Curiosity-based Decision Making 
78 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
PREFACE 
In recent years, researchers have shown an increasing interest in studying intelligent agents with 
various characteristics, such as affective agents, negotiation agents, trust agents, persuasive 
agents, and pedagogical agents. Each of the characteristics brings a new capability to intelligent 
agents and enhances certain aspect of their performances. These agents, however, still lack the 
capability to direct their attention towards novelty or to seek interestingness. In human beings, 
this capability is commonly observed, which is driven by the natural motivation: curiosity. 
Curiosity has been consistently recognized as the critical motivation that is associated with 
exploratory behaviors such as exploration, investigation, and learning. It has been identified as a 
driving force for child development, scientific research, and educational achievements. 
According to Kashdan, curiosity benefits human beings at two levels: the individual level and the 
social level. At the individual level, curiosity is associated with individual growth, as an ``innate 
love of learning without the lure of any profit". At the social level, curiosity is an ingredient for 
enhancing interpersonal relationships, through infusing energy and passion into social 
interactions. 
The many advantages of curiosity to human beings have inspired researchers to devise 
computational forms of curiosity to endow artificial beings (or agents) with desirable functions. 
For example, a curious design agent can arrange art exhibits to elicit the curiosity of their 
viewers and provide an aesthetically pleasing experience; a curious exploratory agent has been 
shown to achieve higher learning efficiency in unknown environments. From a machine learning 
perspective, curiosity has been proposed as algorithmic principles to focus learning on novel and 
learnable regularities in contrast to irregular noises. These algorithm principles make the agents 
to be ``explorative" and allow them to have ``the desire to improve the model's knowledge about 
the world", which have shown success in speeding up learning and building unsupervised 
developmental robotics. 

 
6 
 
Human beings, unfortunately, is often more complex than what a machine learning model can 
describe. Most machine learning algorithms are strictly utilitarian. The machine always remains 
enthusiastic to learn and mostly assumes that there is something to be learned. On the other hand, 
a person may behave less rationally. For example, a person may lack the will to learn even when 
ample opportunities for learning exist. Alternatively, a person may be curious about a stimulus 
but realize that little can be learnt from it due to a lack of knowledge or adverse environments 
(e.g. information blocked by a firewall). In order to provide a more complete model of human 
cognition and design artificial companions that can elicit curiosity (e.g. for pedagogical 
purposes), we believe it is beneficial to go back to the research in psychology to understand how 
human curiosity can be aroused. 
Psychology studies suggest that curiosity can be externally stimulated by various factors, such as 
novelty, conflict, uncertainty, and complexity, etc. Each of these factors characterizes a different 
condition where curiosity can potentially be elicited. For example, novelty is induced by 
something new, whereas surprisingness occurs when an expectation based on previous 
knowledge is violated by the actual outcome. Several curiosity stimulating factors have been 
considered in computational curiosity and the explicit consideration of different curiosity 
stimulating factors makes the curious agents more human-like, more efficient in exploration, and 
more reactive in collaborative learning environments. Hence, we believe that the explicit 
consideration of various curiosity stimulating factors can enrich the current understanding of 
computational curiosity and open up new directions for future development. 
In this book, we introduce a generic computational model of curiosity for intelligent agents based 
on the psychology of curiosity. This computational model of curiosity consists of abstract 
functions and their interactions between each other. Representing computational models for 
intelligent agents with abstract functions makes them general enough to allow different 
implementations in different application contexts. Based on this generic computational model of 
curiosity, we introduce a curiosity-driven learning algorithm and a curiosity-driven 
recommendation algorithm. The curiosity-driven learning algorithm showcases how curiosity 

 
7 
 
benefits an agent at the individual development level, whereas the curiosity-driven 
recommendation algorithm demonstrates how curiosity benefits an agent at the social 
recommendation level. The curiosity-driven learning algorithm realizes the generic 
computational model of curiosity in a fast neural learning agent: the extreme learning machine, 
and is referred to as the Curious Extreme Learning Machine (C-ELM). Experimental 
comparisons with other popular classifiers on benchmark classification problems show a superior 
learning and generalization performance of C-ELM. In the context of social recommendation, a 
curiosity-driven recommendation algorithm is developed by realizing the generic computational 
model of curiosity in a recommender agent. Experimental studies with large scale real world data 
sets show that curiosity significantly enhances the recommendation coverage and diversity, while 
maintaining a sufficient level of accuracy. 
To further evaluate the practical values of the generic computational model of curiosity, we 
discuss the study of it in the domain of virtual worlds for educational purposes. It has been 
shown in educational studies that curiosity is an important driving force for child development, 
scientific research, and educational achievements. Hence, it can be envisioned that considering 
the concept of curiosity in the design of virtual worlds may enrich their educational potentials. In 
this book, two types of pedagogical agents are chosen for study in virtual world based learning 
environments, a virtual peer learner and a virtual learning companion. The virtual peer learner is 
a Non-player Character that aims to provide a believable virtual environment without direct 
interactions with users, whereas the virtual learning companion directly interacts with users to 
enhance their learning experience. It can be expected that curiosity may allow the virtual peer 
learner to demonstrate more human-like learning behaviors in a virtual learning environment, 
and adds new ingredients into the interactions provided by the virtual learning companion. 
In a word, this book discusses computational curiosity, from the psychology of curiosity to the 
computational models of curiosity, and then showcases several interesting applications of 
computational curiosity. A brief overview of the book is given as follows. 

 
8 
 
 Chapter 1 discusses the underpinnings of curiosity in human beings, including the major 
categories of curiosity, curiosity-related emotions and behaviors, and the benefits of 
curiosity. 
 Chapter 2 reviews the arousal theories of curiosity in psychology and summarizes a 
general two-step process model for computational curiosity. 
 Base on the perspective of the two-step process model, Chapter 3 reviews and analyzes 
some of the traditional computational models of curiosity. 
 In Chapter 4, we introduce a novel generic computational model of curiosity, which is 
developed based on the arousal theories of curiosity. This computational model of 
curiosity consists of abstract functions and their interactions between each other, and 
such a representation method allows different implementations in different application 
contexts. 
 After the discussion of computational models of curiosity, we outline the important 
applications where computational curiosity may bring significant impacts in Chapter 5 
 Chapter 6 discusses an implementation of the generic computational model of curiosity in 
a machine learning algorithm. This algorithm realizes the generic computational model of 
curiosity in an extreme learning machine based classifier, which is referred to as the 
Curious Extreme Learning Machine classifier (C-ELM). The performance of C-ELM is 
evaluated against other popular classifiers in the literature on benchmark data sets. 
 Chapter 7 discusses an implementation of the generic computational model of curiosity in 
a recommender system. This curiosity-driven recommender system realizes the generic 
computational model of curiosity in the popular matrix factorization algorithm, which 
largely enhances recommendation diversity and coverage. The performance of the 
curiosity-driven recommendation algorithm is evaluated using two large scale real world 
datasets. 
 In Chapter 8 and Chapter 9 we study of the generic computational model of curiosity in 
two types of pedagogical agents. In Chapter 8 a curious peer learner is developed. It is a 
non-player character that aims to provide a believable virtual learning environment for 

 
9 
 
users. The effects brought by curiosity to virtual peer learners are studied through 
computer simulations. In 9 a curious learning companion is developed. It aims to enhance 
users' learning experience through providing meaningful interactions with them. The 
curious learning companion realizes the generic computational model of curiosity and is 
carefully evaluated with human users through field studies. 
 Chapter 10 discusses the open questions in the research field of computation curiosity. 

 
10 
 
CHAPTER 1 PSYCHOLOGY UNDERPINNINGS OF 
CURIOSITY 
In human beings, curiosity is closely related to cognition, emotion and behavior. It underlines 
human cognitive development, aesthetic appreciation, and interpersonal relationships. In this 
chapter, we review the literature in psychology on the underpinnings of curiosity and the benefits 
of curiosity for human beings. 
1.1. Categories of Curiosity 
Most psychologists believe that curiosity is an intrinsic motivation driving the cognitive 
development of both humans and animals alike. Berlyne [Berlyne (1960a)] categorized curiosity 
along two spectrums: (1) from perceptual curiosity to epistemic curiosity, and (2) from specific 
curiosity to diversive curiosity. Perceptual curiosity, which resides in the lower level of 
cognition, stems from the senses of both animals and humans (e.g. senses of touch, vision, taste, 
etc.). It is defined as “a drive that is aroused by novel stimuli and reduced by continued exposure 
to these stimuli” [Loewenstein (1994)]. Epistemic curiosity, referred to as “an appetite for 
knowledge”, is related to the higher level of cognition and believed to be a distinctive human 
feature. While perceptual curiosity and epistemic curiosity are defined along the lines of “lower” 
and “higher” levels of cognition, specific curiosity and diversive curiosity are distinguished by 
the possibility of curiosity having a “direction”. Specific curiosity is aroused by a particular 
piece of information. Diversive curiosity is a general drive to seek information with no specific 
direction and is predominantly employed to relieve boredom. 
Berlyne's cognitive account for curiosity has been a theoretical foundation for the majority of 
recent studies. Litman and Speilberger [Litman and Speilberger (2003)] agreed with Berlyne that 
there is a salient difference between diversive curiosity and specific curiosity, and conducted 
experimental analysis to provide scales for measuring both concepts. They further concluded that 

 
11 
 
diversive curiosity and specific curiosity, as well as perceptual curiosity and epistemic curiosity, 
are “substantially correlated”. Speilberger and Starr [Speilberger and Starr (1994)] associated 
diversive curiosity with “low-level” stimuli and specific curiosity with “high-level” stimuli. 
However, Schmitt and Lahroodi [Schmitt and Lahroodi (2008)] disagreed with the notion that 
curiosity can be diversive. They argued that curiosity can only be specific towards its possessor 
and objects that cause the curiosity. Instead of diversive curiosity, they referred to the generic 
desire for knowledge as “inquisitiveness”.  
Nevertheless, a general consensus among the psychologists points to the close relationship 
between curiosity and cognition, as a drive to explore novel stimuli or an appetite for knowledge. 
1.2. Curiosity-Related Emotions 
Curiosity is related to emotional constructs. In an early account of curiosity by James [James 
(1950)], curiosity is viewed as an instinctual or emotional response closely related to fear. He 
believed that curiosity motivates organisms to actively explore their environment, whereas fear 
tends to turn the organisms away from the risks induced by unfamiliarity. Berlyne's branch of 
research, referred to as “drive theory” by Loewenstein [Loewenstein (1994)], is based on the 
assumption that curiosity produces an unpleasant sensation that is reduced by exploratory 
behaviors. Loewenstein believed that rather than serving a purposive end, the primary objective 
of satisfying one's curiosity is to induce pleasure. 
Wundt [Wundt (1874)] introduced the theory of “optimal level of stimulation”, which serves as a 
general rule postulating the relationships between stimulus intensity and the hedonic tone. Based 
on this theory, Berlyne [Berlyne (1960b)] proposed that there is a need of “intermediate arousal 
potential” for curiosity to be aroused. Berlyne's theory demonstrates that too little stimulation 
can result in boredom or inaction, while too much stimulation may result in aversion or 
withdrawal. Only when the level of stimulation is optimal and pleasurable can exploratory 
behaviors occur. 

 
12 
 
From the above discussion, it can be seen that curiosity is closely related to emotional constructs 
such as fear, pleasure, boredom and anxiety. The decision on whether to explore or to avoid a 
stimulus is driven by emotional comfort and results in behaviors that regulate emotional states. 
1.3. Curiosity-Related Behaviors 
The most salient expression of curiosity is through exploratory behaviors, by which curiosity can 
be satisfied. Berlyne [Berlyne (1960b)] defined two levels of exploratory behaviors, one 
associated with the perceptual level of curiosity, and the other associated with the epistemic level 
of curiosity. At each level, the exploratory behaviors can take many forms. At the perceptual 
level of curiosity, Berlyne divided exploratory behaviors into three categories according to the 
nature of responses. He referred to the exploratory behaviors as orienting responses if they 
consist of changes in posture, orientations of sensory organs, or states of sensory organs. The 
second category of exploratory behaviors is associated with locomotion, such as approaching or 
withdrawing from the stimuli. When an exploratory behavior causes changes in external objects, 
through manipulation or otherwise, it is called an investigatory response. 
At the epistemic level of curiosity, Berlyne also defined three categories of exploratory 
behaviors. The first category is observation, which places the subject in contact with external 
situations that can nourish the pertinent learning process. The second category is thinking, which 
refers to “productive” and “creative” thinking, rather than “reproductive thinking” that only calls 
up memories to determine how problems should be handled. The last category is consultation, 
which exposes an individual to verbal stimuli issued from other individuals, including 
questioning and reading, etc. 
In summary, through exploratory behaviors, cognitive growth is achieved by creative thinking 
and emotional states are regulated towards a feeling of “pleasure”. 

 
13 
 
1.4. Benefits of Curiosity 
Current research indicates that curiosity can contribute to human well-beings at two distinct 
levels: individual level and social level. At the individual level, curiosity provides an emotional 
motivation for self-development. It is the driving force for child development as well as an 
important spur for educational achievements [Loewenstein (1994)]. Also, literature in 
psychology indicates a close relationship between curiosity and aesthetics, humor, and fun. 
According to Berlyne [Berlyne (1960b)], these behaviors have common motivational factors and 
are reinforced by common sources of rewards. 
At the social level, curiosity can enhance interpersonal relationships. By studying the role of 
curiosity in conversations, Kashdan et al. [Kashdan et al. (2011)] suggested that curiosity can 
build social bonds by promoting behaviors such as engagement, responsiveness, and flexibility. 
These are desirable behaviors for developing interpersonal relationships and building intimacy. 
Their findings indicate that curiosity is uniquely related to the development of interpersonal 
closeness with strangers [Kashdan et al. (2004)]. 
 
 

 
14 
 
CHAPTER 2 AROUSAL THEORY 
In this chapter, we review the literature in psychology on the arousal mechanisms of curiosity. 
This review will provide insights into possible ways of implementing curiosity in artificial 
beings and is the basis for conducting our research. 
According to Loewenstein [Loewenstein (1994)], existing psychological theories on human 
curiosity can be divided into three categories: incongruity theory, competence theory, and drive 
theory. Incongruity theory holds on to the idea that curiosity is evoked by the violation of 
expectations [Hebb (1949)]. Competence theory views curiosity as an intrinsic motivation to 
master one's environments [White (1959)]. Drive theory believes in the existence of a curious 
drive, either primary (homeostatic generated in a similar way as hunger) or secondary (externally 
generated by stimuli). As commented by Loewenstein, the incongruity theory and the 
competence theory suffer from the same deficiency that both fail to offer a comprehensive 
account of curiosity. Hence, in this work, we focus on the drive theory and adopt Berlyne's 
interpretation of curiosity. 
According to Berlyne [Berlyne (1960b)], traditional psychological research concentrated on 
problems of response selection, which studies what response humans will make to one standard 
stimulus at a time. However, curiosity deals with a different problem from response selection, 
which is referred to as stimulus selection. Stimulus selection discusses when several conspicuous 
stimuli are introduced at once, to which stimulus humans will respond. Berlyne has conducted 
extensive experimental studies to understand the process of stimulus selection and discovered a 
set of collative variables that govern this process. 
2.1. Collative Variables 
Collative variables, according to Berlyne [Berlyne (1960b)], refer to the external factors that 
govern various forms of stimulus selection. There are four major collative variables, viz., 
novelty, uncertainty, conflict and complexity. Berlyne named these factors collative variables 

 
15 
 
because the evaluation of each variable involves an analysis of similarities and differences 
between elements in a stimulus pattern. In the following part of this section, the major collative 
variables are reviewed. 
Novelty denotes something new. In accordance with the time when a stimulus has been 
experienced by an organism, novelty can be divided into short-term, long-term, and complete 
novelty. A stimulus can either be completely new to an organism, or it could have been 
experienced within just the last few minutes. In the former case, it is called complete novelty, 
and in the latter case, it is called short-term novelty. The intermediate case where a stimulus has 
not been experienced for a period of time (usually days) is called long-term novelty. Based on 
whether a stimulus possesses qualities that have been perceived before, it is classified into 
absolute novelty or relative novelty. If the stimulus does not have any previously perceived 
quality, then it is absolute novelty; otherwise, it is relative novelty. 
Based on these observations, Berlyne introduced three criteria to measure novelty, i.e., novelty is 
inversely related to (1) how often the stimuli have been experienced before, (2) how recently the 
stimuli have been experienced, and (3) how similar the stimuli are to previously experienced 
ones. 
Novelty is often accompanied by other properties, each of which may have different influences 
on exploratory behaviors. Berlyne listed them as supplementary variables to novelty, which 
includes change, surprisingness, and incongruity. A change of the stimulus in question may 
induce some priority in exploratory directions. Surprisingness arises when there is a stimulus 
that induces an expectation and a later stimulus that contradicts the expectation. Incongruity is 
somewhat different from surprisingness (e.g., the statement that the Earth is round is a surprise to 
people who are accustomed to the concept that the Earth is _at), and indicates an expectation that 
is not met by the same stimulus (e.g., a person who is used to receiving gifts on his birthday 
before may find the experience incongruent when nobody sends him birthday gifts this year). 

 
16 
 
Uncertainty arises when an organism has difficulty selecting a response to a stimulus. Berlyne 
adopted information theory to quantify uncertainty. He proposed to measure the uncertainty 
caused by a stimulus with the following steps: (1) draw up a list of stimuli that might occur (as a 
response to the stimulus in question), (2) partition them into classes, and (3) assign a probability 
to each class. The probability    of each class denotes the competing strength of each possible 
response, and Shannon's entropy    ∑
             
 
   
 denotes the degree of uncertainty. 
Conflict occurs when a stimulus arouses two or more incompatible responses in an organism. A 
response can be incompatible with one another due to different reasons. Firstly, some responses 
may be innately antagonist to each other. For example, no organism can move forward and 
backward at the same time. Secondly, some responses may initially be capable of performing 
together but become incompatible through learning. For example, we seldom frown when 
shaking hands. Another reason for incompatible responses may be attributed to the limitation of 
an organism's ability to multi-task. For example, it would be considered an outstanding ability if 
a person can read two books at the same time. Berlyne proposed four criteria for measuring 
conflict. Conflict is positively related to (1) the nearness to equality in the strengths of competing 
responses, (2) the absolute strengths of competing responses, (3) the number of competing 
responses, and (4) the degree of incompatibility between competing responses. 
Complexity roughly refers to the variety or diversity in a stimulus pattern. Three most obvious 
properties that determine the degree of complexity are: (1) the number of distinguishable 
elements in a stimulus, (2) the dissimilarity between these elements, and (3) the degree to which 
several elements are perceived and responded to as a unit. 
In summary, collative variables are properties of a stimulus that describe the curiosity 
stimulating conditions. According to Berlyne, they are all eminently quantitative properties that 
exist in varying degrees. This endows them potential candidates for measuring the stimulation 
level of curiosity. Most of the computational models of curiosity have considered at least one of 
the collative variables for the determination of stimulation level. 

 
17 
 
2.2. Intermediate Arousal Potential 
The existence of a stimulus does not necessarily result in curiosity. The arousal of curiosity 
depends on an appropriate level of stimulation induced by a stimulus. In the 1870s, Wundt 
[Wundt (1874)] introduced the concept of “optimal level of stimulation” and postulated an 
inverted U-shape relationship between the stimulation level and the hedonic value, referred to as 
the Wundt curve (Figure 2.1). It is a general rule stating that many forms of stimulation are 
pleasant at medium intensities and become unpleasant when their intensities are too high. Based 
on Wundt's theory and other experimental results from the literature, Berlyne formed the theory 
of “intermediate arousal potential”, where too little stimulation results in boredom, too much 
stimulation results in anxiety and only intermediate stimulation results in curiosity. The two ends 
of the spectrum in the Wundt curve reflect two rules in stimulus selection: Avoidance of 
Boredom (AoB) and Avoidance of Anxiety (AoA). 
 
Figure 2.1 The Wundt Curve (adopted from [Berlyne 1960b]) 
 
To summarize, from the psychological point of view, the arousal process of curiosity can be 
abstracted into a two-step process model, which offers a uniform angle for examining and 
analyzing the computational models of curiosity: 

 
18 
 
 Step 1: evaluation of the stimulation level based on collative variables. 
 Step 2: evaluation of the interest level based on the principle of intermediate arousal 
potential. 
 
 

 
19 
 
CHAPTER 3 TRADITIONAL COMPUTAIONAL MODELS 
OF CURIOSITY 
In this chapter, we review and analyze the traditional computational models of curiosity from the 
perspective of the proposed two-step process model summarized at the end of the previous 
chapter.  
 
Figure 3.1 A general appraisal process of computational curiosity. 
Based on the two-step process model, a general appraisal process for computational curiosity can 
be illustrated as in Figure 3.1. In this figure, the input stimuli are data samples perceived by the 
agent. The input stimuli trigger the agent's computational appraisal process of curiosity. In step 
1, the appraisal process first evaluates the level of stimulation elicited by the stimuli, based on 
collative variables. Some of the existing models adopt a single collative variable to determine the 
stimulation value (e.g., [Saunders and Gero (2001)]), while others aggregate multiple collative 
variables to derive the stimulation value (e.g., [Macedo and Cardoso (2005)]). 
In step 2, the level of curiosity is evaluated through a mapping from the stimulation value to the 
curiosity value. Some of the existing models follow the principle of “intermediate arousal 
potential" by explicitly simulating the Wundt curve, which represents a nonlinear mapping from 
the stimulation value to the curiosity value (e.g., [Saunders and Gero (2001); Merrick et al. 
(2008)]). These models accommodate both AoB and AoA in their stimulus selection approaches. 
In comparison, other models simply use the stimulation value as the curiosity value (e.g., 
[Schmidhuber (1991b); Oudeyer and Kaplan (2004); Macedo and Cardoso (2001)]). Some of 
these models also consider the principle of “intermediate arousal potential" when determining 

 
20 
 
the stimulation value (e.g., [Schmidhuber (1991b); Oudeyer and Kaplan (2004)]), which 
accommodate both AoB and AoA. The rest of these models simply assume a positive correlation 
between the stimulation value and the curiosity value, which only support AoB but not AoA. In 
this case, a high stimulation can lead the agent to anxiety (e.g., [Macedo and Cardoso (2001)]). 
Taxonomy for the existing computational models of curiosity is provided in Table 3.1. The 
models are classified into five categories according to the collative variables used for the 
evaluation of stimulation in Step 1. The five categories include novelty, surprise, uncertainty, 
change, and complexity. Within each category, the models are further classifies into two sub-
categories, according to whether the principle of “intermediate arousal potential” is followed in 
the models. The first sub-category follows this principle and supports both AoB and AoA in 
stimulus selection, while the second sub-category assumes a positive correlation between the 
stimulation value and the curiosity value, which only supports AoB. Next, we will discuss each 
of the models following this taxonomy 
Table 3.1 Taxonomy of the existing computational models of curiosity in literature 
Collative  
Variables 
Avoidance of Boredom & Avoidance 
of Anxiety 
Avoidance of Boredom 
Novelty 
Similarity &  
Stimulation 
of 
the Wundt curve 
Saunders & Gero 
[01] 
Maher et al. [08] 
Similarity 
Macedo & Cardoso 
[99] 
Frequency 
& 
Similarity 
Ogino et al. [06] 
Surprise 
Prediction error 
In 
zero 
sum 
games 
Schmidhuber [99] 
Prediction error 
Schmidhuber [91a] 
Uğur et al. [07] 

 
21 
 
Information 
gain 
Storck et al. [95] 
Improbability 
Macedo & Cardoso 
[99] 
Uncertainty 
- 
 
Entropy 
Macedo & Cardoso 
[95] 
Change 
Spread 
adjustment 
in 
Gaussian 
Karaoguz et al. [11] 
- 
 
Complexity 
Prediction 
improvement 
between 
successive 
situations 
Schmidhuber [91b] 
- 
Prediction 
improvement 
between similar 
situations 
Oudeyer & Kaplan 
[04] 
Compression 
improvement 
Schmidhuber [06] 
Discriminability 
difference 
between 
two 
spaces 
Pang et al. [09] 
 
 

 
22 
 
3.1. Models based on Novelty 
To explore the possibility of artificial creativity, Sanders and Gero [Saunders and Gero (2001)] 
developed a computational model of curiosity for intelligent design agents, focusing on the 
appraisal of novelty. The goal of such an agent is to evaluate the interestingness of creative 
design patterns based on individual experiences, where curiosity is the key for the evaluation of 
interestingness [Saunders and Gero (2001)]. In their model, each creative design pattern 
(generated by a design generator) can be considered as a stimulus and the stimuli experienced in 
the past are stored in a “conceptual design space”. This conceptual design space is modeled by a 
Self-Organizing Map (SOM), representing the forms that the agent has experienced often enough 
to learn.  
If we view their model from the perspective of the two-step process model, in Step 1, the 
evaluation of stimulation is governed by the degree of novelty in a stimulus. The evaluation of 
novelty is achieved by comparing the stimulus (a creative design pattern) with past experiences 
(the SOM representations), and is defined by the complement of the typicality measure. This 
implementation is in line with Berlyne's third criteria for measuring novelty: novelty is inversely 
proportional to similarity (typicality). 
In Step 2, Saunders and Gero adopted the principle of intermediate arousal potential and 
explicitly modeled the Wundt curve as a non-linear function. This function is defined by the 
difference of two sigmoid functions as follows [Saunders (2002)]: 
      
   
    
                     
   
    
                     

 
23 
 
where   is the curiosity value,  , P,     ,      ,   ,   ,     and     are the reward, 
punishment, maximum reward, maximum punishment, slope of the reward sigmoid functions, 
slope of the punishment sigmoid functions, minimum novelty to be rewarded and minimum 
novelty to be punished, respectively. This curiosity value is the evaluation of the interestingness 
of a design pattern or how curious it is about the design pattern. 
Later, Merrick and Maher applied this model of curiosity in Non-Player Characters (NPCs) and 
reconfigurable robots [Merrick et al. (2008); Merrick and Maher (2009); Maher et al. (2008); 
Merrick and Huntington (2008); Merrick (2008a)] to enhance their performances. For NPCs, the 
goal of infusing curiosity is to achieve creative behaviors, namely, behavioral diversity [Merrick 
et al. (2008); Maher et al. (2008)]. These works are rooted in a motivated reinforcement learning 
framework, by which NPCs can learn the state-action policy in a virtual environment. Here, each 
event is regarded as a stimulus and is defined as the change between the current state and the 
previous one. All previously experienced events are stored in an SOM structure. A habituation 
layer of neurons is connected to the clustering layer and a habituation function is used to 
compute novelty. The final curiosity value is obtained by feeding the novelty value into the 
simulated Wundt curve (Equation 3.1). The curiosity value is used as an intrinsic reward to 
update the policy that maps states to actions. This curiosity reward can eventually lead to 
creative behaviors, because each new interesting event results in a perturbation of the existing 
behavioral patterns and form reward signals for the learning process. 
 For reconfigurable robots [Merrick and Huntington (2008)], the role of curiosity is to direct the 
robots' attention to reconfigurations in their structures. This is an important skill for them to learn 
new behaviors in response to structural changes. For robots, an event can be considered as a 
stimulus, which is defined as the change between the current sensation and the previous one. 
Following a similar algorithm in curious NPCs, curiosity rewards are generated for 
reconfigurable robots. With the curiosity rewards, the robots are self-motivated to explore 
changes in their structures and develop new behaviors. 

 
24 
 
In the domain of planetary exploration and map-building of interiors, Macedo and Cardoso 
[Macedo and Cardoso (1999)] proposed a model of curiosity for intelligent agents to simulate 
human-like exploratory behaviors in unknown environments. Along their research, they 
gradually introduced novelty, surprise, and uncertainty into their computational model of 
curiosity. Here, we first look at their model of novelty.  Macedo and Cardoso's model relies on 
graph-based mental representations of objects. Each object can be regarded as a stimulus. In Step 
1, the level of novelty regarding a stimulus (object) is measured based on the error correcting 
code theory of Hamming. Three steps are considered: 1) representing each graph (describing an 
object) in a common shape matrix 2) extracting the numerical code from the matrix 
representation of each graph, and 3) computing the Hamming Distance. Here, novelty is defined 
as the minimum Hamming Distance from the stimulus to the ones that have been experienced 
before, which determines the stimulation value. In Step 2, the stimulation value is directly used 
as the curiosity value. The system only supports AoB because the chance of an object to be 
explored is positively correlated to the level of curiosity, which direct the system away from 
boredom. 
For both the models proposed by Sanders & Gero [Saunders and Gero (2001)] and Macedo & 
Cardoso [Macedo and Cardoso (1999)], regardless of the implementation, i.e., atypicality in 
SOM or hamming distance in graph-based mental representations, novelty reflects a comparison 
between the current stimuli and previous experiences. In other words, similarity. In some later 
models of curiosity, the factor of time, as another dimension in addition to similarity, is 
considered for measuring novelty.  
Ogino et al. [Ogino et al. (2006)] addressed lexical acquisition problems for robots using 
computational curiosity to associate visual features of observed objects with the labels (for 
objects) that are uttered by a caregiver. In their work, each object can be interpreted as a stimulus 
for the robot. Visual features of each object are represented by an SOM. In Step 1, stimulation 
value is determined by novelty. The novelty of each object is calculated based on two types of 
saliency: habituation saliency, reflecting the temporal infrequency; and knowledge-driven 

 
25 
 
saliency, reflecting the level of dissimilarity. The habituation saliency is characterized by 
habituation and inversely related to the frequency of the observation of a visual feature.  
The knowledge-driven saliency is characterized by the acquired knowledge, where more saliency 
is given to visual features that are not associated with other labels. The product of the two 
saliency values represents the overall level of stimulation, which is directed used as curiosity 
value (in Step 2). The robot chooses to learn about the object with maximum curiosity value, 
which drives the system away from boredom and considers the AoB rule in stimulus selection. 
Their experimental results show that the infusion of curiosity helps accelerate the robot's 
learning. 
3.2. Models based on Surprise 
Two interpretations for surprise exist in the literature of computational curiosity. The first one 
interprets surprise as the difference between an expectation and the real outcome. Prediction 
error matches well with this interpretation and has been utilized in many curiosity models to 
measure the level of surprise [Schmidhuber (1991a); Barto et al. (2004a); Schmidhuber (1999); 
Uğur et al. (2007)]. The second interpretation describes surprise as the degree of not expecting 
something. Storck et al. [Storck et al. (1995)] modeled this type of surprise using the information 
gain before and after an observation, while Macedo and Cardoso [Macedo and Cardoso (2001)] 
proposed another measure using improbability. Next, we will discuss each of these models in 
detail. 
Prediction Error-based Models: Schmidhuber [Schmidhuber (1991a)] introduced artificial 
curiosity into model building control systems. The goal of such a control system is to learn the 
input-output mapping in a noisy environment. Curiosity is infused to give the control system an 
intrinsic desire to improve the model's knowledge about the world. This is realized by 
introducing an additional reinforcement unit on top of the controller, which rewards actions that 
cause high prediction errors. The prediction error inherently measures the degree of mismatch 
between belief and reality, which is in line with the first interpretation of surprise. In Step 1, the 

 
26 
 
stimulation value is determined by surprise (prediction error) and it is directly used as the 
curiosity value (in Step 2) to form decisions (on rewarding the system). This mechanism 
(rewarding the system with high surprise/curiosity) encourages certain past actions to be carried 
out again in order to repeat situations similar to the mismatched ones. Hence, the system will 
always direct its attention toward something that is unknown and therefore avoid boredom. This 
working mechanism only supports AoB in stimulus selection. Barto's theory of intrinsically 
motivated reinforcement learning is implemented based on a similar principle [Barto et al. 
(2004a); Singh et al. (2004)].  
In a later variation, Schmidhuber [Schmidhuber (1999, 2002)] worked on exploring the space of 
general algorithms that can automatically create predictable internal abstractions of complex 
spatial-temporal events. In this model, both AoB and AoA are accommodated. Curiosity is 
interpreted as the ability of the system to focus on interesting things by losing interest in the 
overly predictable (boring) or the overly unpredictable (anxiety inducing) aspects of the world. 
To achieve this goal, the system is realized by two intrinsically motivated agents playing zero-
sum games. The two agents can bet in advance on whether a prediction is true or false. If they 
bet on different outcomes, the system will check who is right. The winner gets rewarded by 
receiving the other's bids whereas the loser loses its bids due to surprise (error in prediction). 
Hence, both agents are motivated to lure the opponent into agreeing on computation sequences 
that will surprise the other one. However, a surprised module will eventually adapt and in turn, 
cause the other agent to lose a source of reward. In this way, the system as a whole is motivated 
to shift the exploration focus and reveal the unknown yet predictable regularities. 
Another example of prediction error-based implementation of surprise is given by the work of 
Uğur et al. [Uğur et al. (2007)]. In situations where a robot physically interacts with the 
environment to explore and learn, assuming the traditional reinforcement learning method is 
applied, the robot may require a large number of interactions to learn even simple tasks. This 
could eventually damage the robot. To address this problem, Uğur adopted a Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) to learn the perception and action mapping in the robot, where curiosity is 

 
27 
 
introduced to select interesting training data for SVM to reduce the total number of training data 
required. In Step 1, the stimulation level is determined by surprise, which is measured by a 
sample's distance to the hyper-plane (which separates two classes) in the feature space. In Step 2, 
the stimulation value is directly used as curiosity value for decision making. The system supports 
AoB because it can be driven away from boredom: only if the distance is smaller than a fixed 
threshold (curiosity value is high), the sample is considered interesting and sent for learning. 
Probability-based Models: An extension of Schmidhuber's curiosity principle to non-
deterministic environments was done by Storck et al. [Storck et al. (1995)]. The goal of their 
system is to learn the model of a nondeterministic Markov environment where each state-action 
pair (    ;       may result in different next states            probabilistically. The goal of 
introducing curiosity into this learning system is to actively search for interesting training 
examples that can maximize expected learning improvement. In step 1, the stimulation value is 
determined by surprise, which reflects “the degree of not expecting something". They adopt a 
probabilistic way of measuring surprise, which is the Kullback-Leibler distance between the 
agent's belief distribution before and after making an observation. This value of information gain 
reflects the learnability of the exploration space. Exploration areas where little information gain 
can be achieved are either too predictable (well-learnt) or too unpredictable (inherently 
unlearnable). Hence, the information gain (surprise) accommodates both AoB and AoA in 
stimulus selection. In step 2, the surprise value is directly used as the curiosity value, which acts 
as rewards for the reinforcement learning of state-action pairs. In this way, curiosity drives the 
system away from the exploration space where little information gain can be achieved, i.e., areas 
that are either too boring or anxiety-inducing. 
Macedo and Cardoso [Macedo and Cardoso (1999, 2001, 2004, 2005)], mentioned in Section 
3.1, also modeled human forms of surprise in artificial agents. Surprise serves as an intrinsic 
drive to direct the agent's exploration in unknown environment. Their model relies on graph-
based mental representations of objects, where each object is considered as a stimulus. The 
surprise level is defined by the degree of not expecting a stimulus (object), and is implemented 

 
28 
 
as the improbability of existence of the stimulus. However, surprise in this model is not treated 
as a stimulating factor for curiosity. Hence, the surprise value is not mapped to the curiosity 
value. 
3.3. Models based on Change 
In robot sensory-motor learning, Karaoguz et al. [Karaoguz et al. (2011)] proposed a model of 
curiosity to direct robots' attention to changes in the environment. The aim of the model is not to 
measure the amount (or level) of changes in a stimulus, but rather to focus on how to react when 
changes occur. Hence, the system does not provide evaluation for the level of stimulation or the 
level of curiosity (induced by change), but offers mechanisms to redirect its attention to changes. 
For the robot, the focus of attention is determined by a Gaussian distribution that governs the 
sampling of training examples over the laser motor space. The center of the Gaussian distribution 
is determined by the mean value of the last N samples added to the mapping, and directs the 
attention of the robot to areas where new samples have been recently added. The spread of 
Gaussian distribution is related to the performance (success rate) of the mapping by 
                           
where    is the baseline,    is the number of time steps since the last new sample was added,    
is the boredom coefficient,    is the failure threshold,    is the success rate, and    is the failure 
coefficient. 
It can be seen from Equation 3.3 that the attention spread is inversely correlated to the success 
rate. For example, the attention spread is wide when the success rate is low due to a high value 
of           . When a change happens,   will be reset to 0 and the high past success rate of 
that region will result in a narrow Gaussian distribution of samples. Newly-added links in 
unlearnable areas (noisy region) will fail on retest, which can drive the success rate for that 
region below the failure threshold   and increase the width of sampling distribution, redirecting 

 
29 
 
the system away from that region. Hence, the system has a drive towards regions where the 
existing mappings are not making accurate predictions (AoB) and a drive away from the regions 
where no improvements can be obtained (AoA).  
From the perspective of machine learning, one can argue that this model is a special case of the 
earlier introduced models based on predictors [Schmidhuber (1991a,b)], because a predictor 
always predicts that the next observation is similar to the current observation, which indicates no 
change. Once a change occurs, the predictor makes an error and updates its knowledge about the 
world. 
3.4. Models based on Uncertainty 
Uncertainty arises when there is no clear response to a stimulus [Berlyne (1960b)]. The entropy 
in information theory has been proposed to measure the degree of uncertainty in a stimulus. This 
measure has also been employed very often in computational implementations to realize 
uncertainty-based curiosity [Macedo and Cardoso (2005)]. To improve an agent's exploration in 
unknown environments, Macedo and Cardoso [Macedo and Cardoso (2005)] introduced a 
measure of uncertainty, on top of novelty [Macedo and Cardoso (1999, 2001, 2004)], into their 
model of curiosity. Based on the same system setup as presented in Section 3.1, Macedo and 
Cardoso [Macedo and Cardoso (2005)] argued that the desire to know or learn an object can be 
induced by both novelty and uncertainty. Each object (stimulus) can contain known parts 
(without uncertainty) and uncertain parts. The known parts of an object are used to measure 
novelty through Hamming Distance(introduced in Section 3.1), whereas uncertainty is measured 
by the entropy of all uncertain parts, including analogical and propositional descriptions of the 
physical structure, and functions of the object. In step 1, the stimulation value is determined by 
the aggregation of novelty and uncertainty. In step 2, the stimulation value is directly used as 
curiosity value. The system adopts AoB in stimulus selection and chooses objects with highest 
curiosity value to explore. 

 
30 
 
3.5. Models based on Complexity 
In machine learning models of curiosity, complexity has been associated with the predictive 
power of predictive systems or compressive power of data compression systems [Li and Vitanyi 
(2008); Schmidhuber (1991b, 2006); Oudeyer and Kaplan (2004)]. In this subsection, we review 
these models and their variations.  
In Section 3.2, we introduced Schmidhuber's early ideas on implementing curiosity by rewarding 
the system proportionally to surprise, i.e., prediction error [Schmidhuber (1991a)]. However, this 
implementation only succeeds in guiding the system to avoid boredom (i.e., well learnt area) but 
not anxiety (i.e., inherently unpredictable area caused by noisy). Later, Schmidhuber refined the 
model to accommodate both AoB and AoA. He defined curiosity as a simple principle: to learn a 
mapping from actions to the expectation of future performance improvement [Schmidhuber 
(1991b,c)]. Instead of pure prediction error, reward is now generated according to the controller's 
prediction improvement, i.e., change in prediction error. In step 1, the complexity of a data to be 
learnt by the system (e.g., familiar data that is easy to learn or noises that are too difficult to 
learn) is determined by prediction improvement, which supports both AoB and AoA in stimulus 
selection. The prediction improvement is obtained by a confidence module, which evaluates the 
reliability of a prediction and can be realized by probability-based or error-based methods. In 
step 2, the stimulation value is directly used as curiosity value, which is adopted as intrinsic 
rewards for learning. In this way, the controller will choose actions (based on the delayed 
reward) to deliberately select training examples with easily learnable regularities. Hence, the 
infusion of curiosity can direct the system's attention away from the exploration space that is 
either too predictable or too unpredictable. 
Schmidhuber [Schmidhuber (2006, 2009a,b)] formed his formal theory of creativity, by 
generalizing the simple principle of curiosity from predictors to data compressors. According to 
this theory, a 'beautiful' sensory data is one that is simple yet has not been fully assimilated by 
the adaptive observer, which is still learning to compress data better. The agent's goal is to create 

 
31 
 
action sequences that can extend the observation history to yield previously unpredictable but 
quickly learnable algorithmic regularities. In other words, it is looking for data with high 
compressibility (reflected by curiosity value). 
Schmidhuber's implementation of prediction improvement by nature is a comparison of 
prediction error between situations that are successive in time. This principle allows robots to 
avoid long periods of time in front of a television with white noise (completely unlearnable 
situations) because the prediction error will remain large and the robot will be bored due to little 
prediction improvement. However, this principle is not robust enough in the alternation of 
completely predictable and unpredictable situations, because robots can get stuck here due to 
large prediction improvements. To cope with such problems, Oudeyer and Kaplan [Oudeyer and 
Kaplan (2004); Oudeyer et al. (2005)] refined Schmidhuber's simple principle. Instead of 
comparing the prediction error between situations that are successive in time, they compare the 
prediction error between situations that are similar. They proposed a model of curiosity that 
allows a robot to group similar situations into regions where comparison between situations is 
meaningful. The learning space is divided into regions and each region has an expert to make 
local predictions. Each expert computes the prediction improvement (curiosity value) locally and 
rewards its state-action pairs according to the prediction improvement. This works well in 
practice to handle problems such as robots get stuck in situations with completely predictable 
and unpredictable sample data in alternation. 
Another variation of using prediction improvement as curiosity drive has been proposed by Pang 
et al. [Pang et al. (2009)]. This model is rooted in incremental Linear Discriminant Analysis 
(LDA). Here, curiosity is measured as the discriminability difference (residue) between the LDA 
transformed space and the original space. The infusion of curiosity can help the system actively 
search for informative examples to learn and improve the performance using fewer instances. 

 
32 
 
3.6. Discussion 
An interesting point worth noting is that, from the machine learning perspective, there are certain 
recurring principles underlying curiosity-inspired algorithms. The first group of recurring 
principles includes generating intrinsic curious rewards based on errors [Schmidhuber (1991a); 
Uğur et al. (2007)] or Shannon's information [Scott and Markovitch (1989)]. This group of 
principles can redirect learning to focus on the unknown samples. However, they fail to 
distinguish noise from the novel and learnable regularities. The second group of recurring 
principles include generating intrinsic curious rewards based on error reduction [Schmidhuber 
(1991b); Oudeyer and Kaplan (2004)], information gain [Storck et al. (1995)], or compression 
improvement [Schmidhuber (2006)]. This group of principles effectively addresses the above 
mentioned problem. They are able to guide learning to focus on easily learnable regularities and 
at the same time filter out noise. The second group of principles forms the basis of 
Schmidhuber's theory of artificial curiosity, which shows success in speeding up learning and 
building unsupervised developmental systems [Schmidhuber (1991b)]. Also, Schmidhuber 
believes that these principles make machines “creative" and intrinsically motivate machines to 
create action sequences that make data interesting, which forms the basis of his theory of 
artificial creativity [Schmidhuber (2006)]. 
 

 
33 
 
CHAPTER 4 A NOVEL GENERIC COMPUTATIONAL 
MODEL OF CURIOSITY 
In this chapter, we present a computational model of curiosity for intelligent agents. This 
computational model consists of abstract functions and their interactions between each other, 
which is inspired by Wooldridge's work [Wooldridge (2002)]. Representing agent models with 
abstract functions makes them general enough to allow different implementations in different 
application contexts. 
The proposed computational model of curiosity for intelligent agents is built based on the model 
of a standard agent [Wooldridge (2002)], which is a system situated within an environment and 
consists of basic functions that sense the environment and act on it to achieve goals. However, to 
support the mechanism of curiosity, a standard agent is required to go beyond the basic functions 
and possess other important functions such as memory and learning. Memory stores an agent's 
previous experiences that are the basis for evaluating the novelty of new experiences. Learning 
allows an agent to improve its model of the world and make better predictions of the future 
outcomes, where the accuracy of predictions is the basis for evaluating the surprisingness of new 
experiences. According to Berlyne's theory [Berlyne (1960b)], both novelty and surprisingness 
are important collative variables that govern the curiosity arousal mechanism in human beings. 
Based on these functions, curious functions are introduced by transposing Berlyne's theory 
[Berlyne (1960b)] and Wundt's theory [Wundt (1874)] from psychology. Curious functions are 
the meta-level decision-making functions that regulate other functions such as learning and 
acting of the agent. Next, we will introduce the functions in the proposed computational model 
of curiosity for intelligent agents and their interactions between each other. We start with the 
model of a standard agent and then present the two important functions that are required to 
support curiosity: memory and learning. After that, we will introduce the curious functions in 
detail. 

 
34 
 
4.1. Standard Agent 
This section presents the basic functions that form a standard agent. The description of a standard 
agent begins with the environment with which the agent interacts. The internal components of a 
standard agent consist of a set of internal functions that map from one type of internal states to 
another type of internal states. 
4.1.1. Environment 
According to the classical definition given by Franklin and Graesser [Franklin and Graesser 
(1996)], an agent is a system situated within and a part of an environment that senses that 
environment and acts on it, over time, in pursuit of its own agenda and so as to effect what it 
senses in the future. Hence, an agent must reside in certain environment and act upon it to 
achieve goals. An agent's environment can be characterized as a set of possible environmental 
states, denoted by: 
          
where 
               
Elements in the angle brackets '<>' represent different types of components that constitute the 
composite factor that appearing before '=' (this format will be followed throughout the book). In 
this case, only the environmental state   is highlighted for the environment  , which means 
agents only pay attention to environmental states (e.g., reinforcement learning agents). In other 
cases when agents also pay attention to other components of the environment, such as objects 
(e.g., exploratory robots), the environment can be denoted by             where   represents 
a set of environmental states and   represents a set of objects. This can be customized for 
different types of agents. In this chapter, we focus on the environmental state   for illustration. 

 
35 
 
4.1.2. Internal Functions 
To interact with the environment and achieve goals, a standard agent consists of internal 
functions that observe, deliberate, and then act upon the environment. In this section, the basic 
internal functions that form a standard agent will be presented. 
An agent's ability to effect changes in the environment is determined by the range of actions that 
it can perform, denoted by: 
               
Consequently, an agent can be viewed as an abstract function: 
        
which maps environmental states to actions. 
The behavior of an environment with respect to an agent's actions can be modeled as a function: 
           
which takes the current environmental state     and an agent action      , and maps them to 
a set of environmental states      . If all the sets in the range of     are singletons (i.e., the 
result of performing any action in any state is a set containing a single member that belongs 
to  ), then the environment is deterministic, which means its behavior can be accurately 
predicted. 
The abstract function of an agent     can be decomposed into a set of internal functions, which 
will be discussed next. 

 
36 
 
4.1.2.1. Perceiving 
The function of perceiving captures an agent's ability to understand information about its 
environment. The perceiving function can be implemented in hardware agents (e.g., mobile 

system commands. An agent's ability to perceive the environment is characterized by a set of 
percepts: 
               
Consequently, the perceiving function is described by: 
      
which maps environmental states to the internal percepts of the agent. 
4.1.2.2. Decision-Making 
The function of decision-making encompasses all of the high-level functions of an agent, 
including belief revision, goal setting, and plan setting. An agent's ability to take appropriate 
actions is determined by its ability to make decisions, which can be characterized by a set of 
decision states: 
               
Consequently, an agent's decision-making process can be represented by a function: 
      
which maps percepts to decision states. 

 
37 
 
4.1.2.3. Acting 
Acting is the process of translating high-level goals and plans lower-level commands that can be 
carried out by effectors. The acting process can be represented by a function: 
      
which maps decision states to actions. 
4.1.2.4. An abstract agent 
With all the internal functions described above, a standard agent can be represented abstractly as 
a compound function: 
     
   
   
    
               
The architecture for a standard agent is illustrated in Figure 4.1. The functions described above 
are illustrated by circular nodes. Solid arrows represent the flow of state variables between 
functions. 

 
38 
 
 
Figure 4.1 The architecture of a standard agent. 
4.2. Memory and Learning 
The standard agent described above is a simple reactive agent that acts only on the basis of the 
current percept, ignoring the rest of the percept history. This type of agent only succeeds when 
the environment is fully observable. However, in most cases, the environment is only partially 
observable. For example, a robot's range of perception is limited by the sensors that it possesses. 
To tackle this problem, an agent usually maintains a model of the environment based on the 
previous perceptions. This model of the environment describes the part of the world that cannot 
be seen. However, the initial model may not always succeed when the environment reveals more 
of itself in front of the agent. This phenomenon requires the agent to be adaptive in order to 
become more competent than its initial knowledge alone may allow. 
These requirements are also the important basis for an agent to become curious. For example, 
being able to remember past experiences allows the agent to evaluate the novelty of newly 
encountered stimulus; being able to adapt its initial model of the world allows the agent to make 
more accurate predictions of the future outcomes, which are important basis for evaluating the 

 
39 
 
surprisingness of new experiences. Here, both novelty and surprisingness are key collative 
variables that govern the curiosity arousal process [Berlyne (1960b)]. All these requirements 
point to two important abilities that are desirable by intelligent agents: memory and learning. 
Next, we will present these two functions and their interactions with other internal functions of 
an agent. 
4.2.1. Memory 
Memory stores representations of previous experiences, including a number of percepts, decision 
states, and actions, denoted by: 
             
where   ,   , and    represent the previous percepts, decision states, and actions, respectively. 
These previous experiences, if organized structurally (e.g., neural networks, plan structures, 
concept maps, etc.), can form the agent's model of the environment. This model of the 
environment helps the belief revision, goal setting, and plan setting in the agent's decision-
making process, which can be characterized by the following function: 
         
An agent with memory is illustrated in Figure 4.2. In this figure, * refers to the previously 
experienced percepts, decisions, and actions. It can be seen that memory is located between the 
processes of perceiving, decision-making and acting. 

 
40 
 
 
Figure 4.2 The architecture of an agent with memory. 
4.2.2. Learning 
Learning enables the agents to initially operate in unknown environments and become more 
competent than its initial knowledge may allow. The agent's ability to adapt is determined by its 
ability to update the model of environment stored in its memory and the high level functions in 
the decision-making process, which is represented by a set of learning rules (or states): 
               
The learning rules are triggered depending on the current percepts and the previous decision 
states stored in memory. For example, prediction errors trigger learning, which are obtained by 
the differences between the predictions (previous decision states) and the true facts (current 
percepts). This process can be represented by the following function: 
        
Once the learning rules are triggered (e.g., by newly emerged percepts), they can update the 
model of environment stored in the agent's memory. For example, a planning agent will 

 
41 
 
incorporate a newly encountered event into its plan structure. This process can be represented by 
the following function: 
         
where   is the updated memory. 
When the agent's decision is observed to be not optimal, the agent will trigger the learning rules 
that update the high level functions in the decision-making process to enhance its decision-
making ability. For example, a trend analysis agent implemented by neural networks should 
update its node selection rules when its prediction differs significantly from the true facts. This 
process can be represented by the following function: 
             
which requires the current percepts and the previous decision states stored in memory to trigger 
learning rules and update the decision-making process. 

 
42 
 
A learning agent is illustrated in Figure 4.3. It can be seen that the learning function takes the 
outputs of the perceiving function and the memory function as its inputs. The outputs of the 
learning function in turn influence the memory function and decision-making function. 
 
Figure 4.3 The architecture of a learning agent. 
4.3. Curious Functions 
Curious functions model the agent's curiosity appraisal process. In order to simulate a human-
like curiosity appraisal process, our work is based on Berlyne's [Berlyne (1960b)] and Wundt's 
[Wundt (1874)] theories in psychology. According to Berlyne, curiosity is a process of stimulus 
selection, which is governed by a set of collative variables, such as novelty, surprise, uncertainty, 
conflict, and complexity. Wundt states that the level of curiosity simulation is closely related to 
two other emotions: boredom and anxiety. According to Wundt, only optimal stimulation level 
leads to curiosity whereas too less stimulation results in boredom and too much stimulation 
results in anxiety. Based on these theories, we derived a two-step process model of curiosity 
arousal, which has been discussed at the end of Chapter2. Following the two-step process model, 
we propose two curious functions for intelligent agents: stimulus detection and interest 
evaluation. Stimulus detection is based on Berlyne's theory and corresponds to the first step in 

 
43 
 
the two-step process model, i.e., evaluation of the stimulation level based on collative variables. 
Interest evaluation is based on Wundt's theory and corresponds to the second step in the two-step 
process model, i.e., evaluation of the interest level based on the principle of intermediate arousal 
potential. Next, we will introduce the two curious functions and then discuss their interactions 
with other internal functions of an agent in detail. 
4.3.1. Stimulus Detection 
According to Berlyne's theory [Berlyne (1960b)], curiosity can be viewed as a process of 
stimulus selection. The stimuli are characterized by a set of collative variables, which can be 
represented as follows: 
                 
where            and   represent novelty, surprise, uncertainty, conflict, change, and 
complexity, respectively. The detection of these collative variables relies on several internal 
functions of the agent, including perceiving, memory, and decision-making. For example, 
novelty detection requires a comparison between the current stimuli (obtained by the perceiving 
function) and previous experiences (stored in memory). Surprise detection involves a comparison 
between the agent's prediction (generated by the decision-making function) and the true facts 
(obtained by the perceiving function). Uncertainty is triggered when a stimulus is difficult to 
classify (by the perceiving function). Conflict occurs when a stimulus triggers multiple decision 
states (by the decision-making function). Change happens when the state of a stimulus changes 
(observed by the perceiving function). Complexity is judged by the agent's perceiving function 
of how much variety or diversity in the stimulus pattern. In summary, the stimulus detection 
process can be characterized by an abstract function as follows: 
          

 
44 
 
Note that it is not necessary to model a complete set of collative variables for an agent to be 
curious, as each collative variable can stand alone to trigger a person's curiosity. Hence, a subset 
of collative variables can always be chosen according to the agent's functional requirements. 
4.3.2. Interest Evaluation 
According to Wundt's theory [Wundt (1874)], the arousal of curiosity depends on the appropriate 
level of stimulation that can be induced by a stimulus. Curiosity arouses only if the stimulation is 
optimal, whereas too little stimulation results in boredom and too much stimulation results in 
anxiety. The set of emotions closely related to curiosity is represented by: 
           
where  ,  , and   represent anxiety, curiosity, and boredom, respectively. 
The process of interest evaluation can be represented by an abstract function as follows: 
          
where     returns the stimulation level induced by the collative variables, and the function   
maps the curiosity stimulation level to the interest level (indicated by emotions) based on the 
Wundt curve (Figure 2.1). 
4.3.3. Meta-level Decision-making 
The two curious functions, i.e., stimulus detection and interest evaluation, are meta-level 
decision-making functions that interact with agents' learning function and decision-making 
function to enhance their performances. 
Stimulus detection identifies a set of collative variables, all of which reflect certain knowledge 
gaps between the agent and the environment, which form the motivation for the agents to learn 
[Loewenstein (1994)]. Hence, the stimulus detection function outputs collative variables that can 

 
45 
 
guide the learning function of an agent to improve its model of the environment. This process 
can be characterized by the following functions: 
         
The stimulus detection function can also influence the agent's decision-making function based on 
different collative variables identified. For example, human beings will have different coping 
strategies when facing with novelty and conflict. Novelty often triggers a human being to 
observe the stimulus in order to understand it, whereas conflict often triggers a human being to 
think of some ideas to resolve the conflict. This process can be characterized by the following 
functions: 
         
Interest evaluation determines the agent's emotion states based on the level of stimulation. 
Emotion states often influences a person's learning ability. For example, a human being will 
refuse to learn when he/she is bored but learns much faster when he/she is curious. Hence, 
emotions can influence the agent's learning as follows: 
           
Emotions also influence a person's decision-making ability. For example, during a study in 
gambling decisions and job selection decisions, unhappy subjects were found to prefer high-
risk/high-reward options unlike anxious subjects who preferred low-risk/low-reward options 
[Raghunathan and Pham (1999)]. Hence, emotions can influence the agent's decision-making as 
follows: 
           
Curious agent architecture is illustrated in Figure 4.4. The two functions:   and   highlighted 
with dashed box are the curious functions. It can be observed that stimulus detection requires the 

 
46 
 
outputs of perceiving, memory, and decision-making functions, which outputs detected collative 
variables to trigger interest evaluation and influence the agent's learning and decision-making 
functions. The emotions generated through interest evaluation also influence the agent's learning 
and decision-making functions. 
 
Figure 4.4 The architecture of a curious agent. 
4.4. Summary 
In this chapter, we presented a generic computational model of curiosity for intelligent agents. 
This computational model consists of abstract functions and their interactions between each 
other, which allow different implementations in different types of agents. This computational 
model of curiosity is built based on the model of a standard agent, with two important functions 
introduced that are required to support curiosity appraisal: memory and learning. Based on these 
functions, two curious functions, i.e., stimulus detection and interest evaluation are proposed 
based on Berlyne's and Wundt's theories from psychology. The curious functions serve as meta-
level decision-making functions that enhance an agent's learning ability and decision-making 
ability. 
 

 
47 
 
CHAPTER 5 PROMISING APPLICATIONS FOR 
COMPUTATIONAL CURIOSITY 
5.1. Machine Learning 
The close-knit relationship between curiosity and human learning has inspired many researchers 
to devise computational forms of curiosity for machine learning systems, with the expectation to 
enhance learning capability and potentially drive them to evolve into autonomous intelligent 
agents. The study of computational curiosity in machine learning systems has some overlap with 
other concepts such as “active learning” and “intrinsically motivated learning”. 
Active learning, as the name suggests, attempts to machines “active” by allowing the learning 
system to select actions or make queries that influence what data to be added into its training set 
[Cohn et al. (1996)]. Active learning is especially useful when data are expensive or difficult to 
obtain. Curiosity can play a critical role in active learning by helping the system to determine 
which data are interesting. For example, Scott and Markovitch [Scott and Markovitch (1989)] 
introduced a curiosity drive into supervised learning systems to actively select the most 
informative samples for learning. Here, the system is continually directed towards regions with 
highest uncertainty, which is also a general principle followed by many other active learning 
algorithms [Fedorov (1972)]. Uğur et al. [Uğur et al. (2007)] infused curiosity into an SVM-
based learning system to select interesting training data, which significantly reduces the number 
of training samples required to learn. Similarly, Pang et al. [Pang et al. (2009)] introduced 
curiosity into an LDA-based learning system. 
Intrinsically motivated learning advocates the development of “intrinsic motivations” for 
learning systems to achieve task-independent learning [Barto et al. (2004a); Singh et al. (2004)] 
or autonomous development [Oudeyer and Kaplan (2004)]. These learning approaches are 
gaining increasing popularity among AI researchers [Baldassarre (2011)]. Intrinsically motivated 

 
48 
 
learning often takes root in a reinforcement learning framework, where intrinsic motivations act 
as intrinsically generated rewards that are to be maximized. In human psychology, curiosity is 
known to be one of the most important intrinsic motivations related to learning. Hence, curiosity 
has often been adopted in intrinsically motivated learning algorithms. For example, Barto et al. 
[Barto et al. (2004a)] used Berlyne's theory as the psychological foundations to develop his 
intrinsically motivated learning algorithm. Schmidhuber [Schmidhuber (1991b, 1999, 2009b)] 
introduced artificial curiosity as intrinsic rewards for general learning algorithms. Oudeyer and 
Kaplan [Oudeyer and Kaplan (2004)] proposed an intelligent adaptive curiosity mechanism for 
intrinsically motivated robots. 
5.2. Robotics 
With the attempt to design robots that can autonomously self-develop in a progressive manner, 
Oudeyer and Kaplan [Oudeyer and Kaplan (2004)] devised for them a mechanism that resembles 
human curiosity. This mechanism acts as an intrinsic motivation to motivate robots to explore 
into regions with new knowledge [Oudeyer and Kaplan (2007)], and endows them with the 
ability to adapt to new environments without prior knowledge or manual adjustment. With a 
similar goal of designing robots that can self-develop without an explicit teacher, Ngo et al. [Ngo 
et al. (2012)] applied Schmidhuber's principle of curiosity into a robot arm that enables robots to 
learn skills through playing. Pape et al. [Pape et al. (2012)] applied the same into a biomimetic 
robot finger for learning tactile skills.  
Traversibility affordance refers to the ability of robots to navigate through an environment with 
obstacles. This ability is highly dependent on the robot's current location, orientation, and the 
shape of objects in the environment. In situations where robots physically interact with the 
environment to explore and learn, assuming traditional reinforcement learning methods are 
applied, even simple tasks such as avoiding objects may require a large number of trials. This 
increases the risk of the robot being damaged during the exploration. To address this problem, 
Uğur et al. [Uğur et al. (2007)] simulated curiosity in robots to select informative training 

 
49 
 
samples, which can significantly reduce the number of interactions required with minimal 
degradations in the learning process. 
Another problem in robotics is self-directed reconfiguration. Reconfigurable robots can 
rearrange their modules to achieve different structures, behaviors, and functions. Instead of 
looking into how robots can adapt in an unstructured environment, reconfigurable robots focus 
on adaptation to changes in their own structures and changes of goals when the actuator or 
effector of the robot changes. Merrick and Huntington [Merrick and Huntington (2008)] 
introduced curiosity into reconfigurable robots to select informative samples to learn, so that 
with fewer interactions, robots can still achieve better learning outcomes. 
One of the most important sensory-motor problems for robots when interacting with an 
environment is to learn a mapping from the gaze space (the location of an object) to the reach 
space (the movement of arms to grasp the object) in response to changes in the environment 
(camera replacement or changes in the physical environment) without manual recalibration of the 
hardware. To address this problem, Karaoguz et al. [Karaoguz et al. (2011)] devised a 
mechanism of curiosity that drives the exploration into learning spaces where a proper level of 
complexity is associated with a particular level of capability. With this mechanism, robots can 
concentrate on highly interesting areas that are neither fully explored nor pure noise. In addition, 
the mechanism can successfully direct robots' attention to regions where changes have occurred. 
Exploration in extreme environments can be a dangerous task for humans. Artificial agents, 
especially in the form of robots, have been a good substitute for humans to undertake such tasks. 
Exploration of unknown environments has been an active research field in domains such as 
planetary exploration, meteorite searches in Antarctic, volcano exploration, and map building of 
interiors, etc. [Moorehead et al. (2001); Burgard et al. (2002); Macedo and Cardoso (2005)]. In 
human beings, exploration is often driven by curiosity, a motivating force for attention focus, 
determination of interest, and gathering knowledge. Based on these observations, researchers 
devised artificial forms of curiosity for agent to make proper decisions in unknown 

 
50 
 
environments. For example, Macedo and Cardoso [Macedo and Cardoso (2001, 2002, and 2005)] 
modeled human forms of surprise and curiosity in case-based reasoning frameworks to guide 
agent's exploration in unknown environments populated with objects. Graziano et al. [Graziano 
et al. (2011)] also discussed the application of computational curiosity to solve autonomous 
exploration problems. 
To summarize, computational curiosity has the potential to contribute to various aspects of 
robotic systems, such as selective attention, autonomous learning, and self-direction. Numerous 
studies on computational curiosity are continuously emerging in this field [Stojanov et al. (2006); 
Macedo (2010); Oudeyer (2012)]. 
5.3. Artificial Creativity 
Computational creativity explores the possibility of machines capable of generating creative 
artifacts that are commonly defined as being previously unknown, useful and surprising [Boden 
(2009)]. Computational curiosity has been studied in machines to demonstrate creative 
behaviors. Based on Csikzentmihalyi's system view of creativity, Saunders [Saunders (2007)] 
postulated two levels of creativity: the individual level and the society level. According to 
Saunders, there are two questions to be answered at the individual level of creativity: (1) how to 
evaluate creativity, and (2) how to produce creativity. Saunders and Gero [Saunders and Gero 
(2004)] argued that curiosity can be used to guide problem solving by finding interesting design 
solutions as well as discovering interesting design problems. Curious design agents were 
proposed to evaluate the interestingness (creativity) of designs based on novelty. Research of 
curiosity at the society level looks into the socio-cultural influence of curiosity on creativity and 
the acceptance of creative works by other individuals. Based on previous works, Saunders 
[Saunders (2011)] studied the society level of creativity by creating a virtual society populated 
with curious design agents. Simulation results showed that the artificial society exhibited certain 
similar behaviors as in real human societies. 

 
51 
 
Schmidhuber [Schmidhuber (2006, 2007, 2009b)] explored the relationship between creativity, 
artists, humor and fun. He argued that art and creativity can be seen as the by-products of 
curiosity rewards. He further argued that the optimal curious reward framework can be 
sufficiently formal and precise to allow the implementation on computers and developmental 
robots. Schmidhuber [Schmidhuber (2006)] generalized his simple principle of curiosity to form 
artificial creativity: “the current compressor of a given subjective observer tries to compress his 
history of acoustic and other inputs where possible" and “the compression progress becomes the 
wow-effect or intrinsic reward for the 'creative' action selector, which is thus motivated to create 
more data that allows for more wow-effect". Later, Schmidhuber [Schmidhuber (2013)] 
proposed a greedy but practical implementation of the basic principle of creativity: 
POWERPLAY, which can automatically inventor discover problems to train a general problem 
solver from scratch. In his survey, Schmidhuber [Schmidhuber (2009a)] drew a comparison 
between his formal theory with less formal works in aesthetics theory and psychology. 
5.4. Games 
With the advances in computer technologies for graphics, processing power, and networking, 
virtual worlds are emerging as platforms for massive online games. Merrick and Maher [Merrick 
and Maher (2009)] highlighted the need for new non-player characters to cope with the 
increasing complexity and functionality of multi-user virtual worlds. They argued that the 
behavioral traits of humans and animals generated by curiosity can also advance the performance 
of artificial agents when dealing with complex or dynamic environments, where only limited 
information is available and the information changes over time. To cope with the difficulty of 
predefining task specific rules or environment-specific motivation signals, Merrick et al. 
[Merrick et al. (2008)] introduced a mechanism of curiosity into non-player characters, which 
enables them to direct attention to relevant information and be curious about changes in the 
environment. Simulation results showed that the curious motive led the non-player characters to 
demonstrate higher variety and complexity in behavior patterns [Maher et al. (2008)].  

 
52 
 
While most of the works that apply computational intelligence to games focused on the 
generation of behaviors, strategies, or environments, Togelius and Schmidhuber [Togelius and 
Schmidhuber (2008)] looked at the very heart of games: the rules that define a game. They 
proposed automatic game designs based on Koster's theory of fun and Schmidhuber's theory of 
artificial curiosity, where Schmidhuber's theory of curiosity is a coarse approximation of Koster's 
theory of fun [Koster (2005)], i.e., a game is fun if it is learnable but not trivial. 
5.5. Affective Computing 
Affective computing is computing that relates to, arises from, or deliberately influences emotion 
or other affective phenomena [Picard (1997)]. It requires multidisciplinary knowledge such as 
psychology, cognitive science, computer science, and engineering. Affective computing is 
gaining rapid popularity and has great potential in the next generation of human-computer 
interfaces. Curiosity is closely related to emotional constructs such as “fear", “pleasure", 
“boredom", and “anxiety" [Loewenstein (1994)]. Computational curiosity offers a new 
dimension from which emotions can be appraised, apart from the consequences of events, the 
actions of agent, and the characteristics of objects [Ortony et al. (1988). The consideration of 
computational curiosity in affective modeling is especially interesting in learning contexts and 
social contexts, where curiosity-related emotions significantly influences the believability and 
performance of emotional agents. 
5.6. Artificial Companions 
Artificial companions, designed to develop a close and long-term human computer relationship, 
have emerged in the latter half of the 2000s. Two key words, close and long-term, have been 
guiding the development in this field. Researchers are working on the design of believable 
human-computer interfaces to provide close interactions (e.g. embodied conversational agent) 
and robust memory architectures to sustain long-term relationships [Bickmore and Picard (2005); 
Wilks (2010); Wu et al. (2012b)]. Computational curiosity can be an important dimension to be 
studied in artificial companions for enhancing both the closeness of interactions and the 

 
53 
 
possibility for long-term relationships. The potential for computational curiosity in creating a 
closer human-computer relationship draws evidence from psychological findings that curiosity 
plays an important role in promoting the intimacy of interpersonal relationships in social context. 
A curious artificial companion can be more responsive; may infuse more novel twists of 
excitement into interactions, and might induce a natural flow of engagement between the 
interaction discourses. As for promoting long-term relationships, curiosity can be a motivational 
force to learn more about the partner and develop a historical knowledge base through 
interactions. A curious artificial companion may be more interested to know the partner; may be 
more inquisitive to novel changes of the partner; and may incorporate information of the partner 
into part of the cognitive development of the companion itself. 
5.7. Persuasive Technology 
Persuasive technology deals with the use of computing systems, devices or applications to 
gradually change a person's attitudes or behavior [Fogg (2002)]. This technology has the 
potential to bring constructive changes in health science, safety and education. Examples include 
a digital doll to persuade kids to eat fruit and vegetables, and a virtual coach to persuade the 
elderly to exercise more [Fogg (1999)]. Understanding users' curiosity and properly infusing 
curiosity stimuli into the human-computer interaction process can potentially help intelligent 
agents achieve persuasive goals. For example, if a sales agent can successfully elicit the 
customer's curiosity in a product; there will be a higher chance for this product to be sold. 
Curiosity has been harnessed to “persuade" programmers to increase the correctness in end-user 
programming [Wilson et al. (2003)]. 
5.8. Agent Negotiation 
Negotiation is a process that involves two or more parties to reach an agreement. This 
mechanism has received increasing attention in multi-agent systems for managing inter-agent 
dependencies in real time [Jennings and Wooldridge (2002)]. Traditional implementations of 
negotiation process focused on its rational aspects to build consensus. Recently, [Broekens et al. 

 
54 
 
(2010)] argued that negotiation is a multifaceted process in which affect plays an important role. 
Computational curiosity has the potential to influence the human-agent negotiation process by 
promoting positive emotional states, responsiveness and engagement. Enabling a negotiation 
agent to understand the curiosity exhibited by a user may allow it to notice the unusual, 
surprising, or conflicting information offered by the user and reach agreements that are more 
socially optimal. A negotiation agent that can adapt its decision-making based on the users' 
curiosity may improve its chance of gaining more utility out of the final agreement. 
5.9. Trustworthy Computing 
Another important issue in multi-agent systems is trust management. It is useful in open and 
dynamic systems such as peer-to-peer systems, semantic Web, ad hoc networks, and e-
commerce, etc. [Ramchurn et al. (2004); Yu et al. (2010, 2012)]. Similar to negotiation, trust 
management is also closely related to emotion states [Dunn and Schweitzer (2005); Schoorman 
et al. (2007)]. The motivational role of curiosity in building interpersonal relationships can 
contribute to the trust building between strangers [Kashdan et al. (2011)]. Computational 
curiosity can potentially enhance an agent's judgment by making the agent more sensitive to 
novel, surprising, conflicting, and uncertain information presented in the environment. 

 
55 
 
CHAPTER 6 A CURIOUS EXTREME LEARNING 
MACHINE 
6.1. Introduction 
In this chapter, we focus on realizing the generic computational model of curiosity (Chapter 4) in 
a type of neural learning agent: an extreme learning machine (ELM) based classifier.  
An extremely fast learning neural algorithm referred to as extreme learning machine (ELM) has 
been developed for single-hidden layer feed-forward networks (SLFNs) by Huang et al. [Huang 
et al. (2006a,b)]. The essence of ELM is that the hidden layer of SLFNs need not be tuned 
[Huang et al. (2011)]. ELM randomly assigns hidden neuron parameters and finds the output 
weights analytically. It has been shown to generate good generalization performance at 
extremely high learning speed [Huang et al. (2006a, b, c); Liang et al. (2006b)] and has been 
successfully applied to many real world applications [Huang et al. (2006c); Liang et al. (2006b); 
Xu et al. (2006); Yeu et al. (2006)]. 
Although ELM has shown advanced generalization performance with extremely high learning 
speed, several major issues still remain in ELM:  
1. Manually set the number of hidden neurons: The number of hidden neurons needs to be set a 
priori to training [Feng et al. (2009)]. The number of hidden neurons is usually chosen by trial-
and-error.  
2. Fixed structure: The network structure is fixed once the number of hidden neurons is set 
[Rong et al. (2008)]. It cannot evolve, i.e., add or delete hidden neurons, based on the training 
data.  

 
56 
 
3. Randomization effect: The random assignment of hidden neuron parameters induces high 
randomization effect in the generated results. 
To address issue 1), several algorithms have been proposed, such as incremental ELM (I-ELM) 
[Huang and Chen (2007)], enhanced incremental ELM (EI-ELM) [Huang and Chen (2008)], 
pruning ELM (P-ELM) [Rong et al. (2008)], optimally-pruned ELM(OP-ELM) [Miche et al. 
(2008)], and error minimized ELM (EM-ELM) [Feng et al. (2009)]. However, all these 
algorithms can either add neurons (I-ELM, EI-ELM, EM-ELM) or delete neurons (P-ELM, OP-
ELM) without being able to adjust network structure based on the incoming data. In other words, 
they lack the evolving capability. Recently, a meta-cognitive ELM (McELM) has been proposed 
[Savitha et al. (2014)], which addresses issue 1) and partially issue 2). McELM can decide 
network structure based on the training data, but it can only add neurons without pruning 
capability. To our knowledge, few works have been done towards issue 3).  
To address all the three issues mentioned above, we propose a curious extreme learning machine 
(C-ELM) algorithm for classification problems [Wu and Miao (2015)]. It is a psychologically 
inspired algorithm based on the theory of curiosity [Wu and Miao (2013a)]. In psychology, 
curiosity is commonly known as the important intrinsic motivation that drives human exploration 
and learning [Loewenstein (1994)]. The psychological concept of curiosity has been applied in 
many computational systems to enhance their learning capability (e.g., intrinsically motivated 
reinforcement learning) [Barto et al. (2004a); Schmidhuber (2009a)] and believability (e.g., 
curious companions) [Wu et al. (2012a); Wu and Miao (2013b); Wu et al. (2014)]. This is the 
first attempt to introduce curiosity in an ELM framework. 
C-ELM is inspired by the psychological theory of curiosity proposed by Berlyne [Berlyne 
(1960b)]. Berlyne interpreted curiosity as a process of stimulus selection, i.e., when several 
conspicuous stimuli are introduced at once, to which stimulus will human respond. He identified 
several key collative variables, e.g., novelty, uncertainty, conflict, and surprise that govern the 
stimulus selection process. Based on this theory, C-ELM classifier treats each training data as a 

 
57 
 
stimulus and decides its learning strategy based on the appraisal of collative variables. There are 
three learning strategies for C-ELM classifier: neuron addition, neuron deletion, and parameter 
update.  
When a new neuron is added, conventional incremental ELM algorithms will randomly assign 
the center and impact factor of the RBF kernel (other kernels such as linear kernel can also 
apply) in the new neuron. However, random center selection may require more number of hidden 
neurons to p-proximate the decision function accurately [Suresh et al. (2008)]. Hence, C-ELM 
uses data-driven center selection which adopts the current training data that triggers the neuron 
addition strategy as the center of the new neuron. It removes partially the random effect of the 
traditional ELM algorithms. Data-driven center selection also allows the class label of the new 
neuron to be apparent, which enables further analysis of the hidden neurons. During neuron 
deletion, the most conflicting neuron for the current training data is removed from the network. 
In literature, various neuron deletion schemes for ELM have been proposed such as pruning 
based on relevance [Rong et al. (2008)] or based on leave-one-out cross-validation [Miche et al. 
(2008)]. These techniques, although effective, might render the system slow. Hence, we propose 
the neuron deletion strategy based on conflict resolution, which helps the system attain fast and 
efficient convergence. The parameter update is conducted using recursive least squares method. 
In the rest of this chapter, we will present the detailed definition of the CELM classifier and 
evaluate its performance against other popular classifiers on benchmark data sets. 
6.2. Curious Extreme Learning Machine Classifier (C-ELM) 
In this section, we provide a detailed description of the C-ELM classifier. The goal of C-ELM 
classifier is defined as follows: 
Given: a stream of training data                      , where       
      
   is a M-
dimensional input vector of the  th input data,             is its class label, and   represents 

 
58 
 
the total number of distinct classes. The coded class label       
      
      
   is obtained by 
converting the class label (  ) as follows: 
  
  {   
       
   
                    
Find: a decision function   that maps the input features (  ) to the coded class labels (  ), i.e., 
       , as close as possible. 
To solve this problem, C-ELM employs two major components: an internal cognitive component 
which is a unified single layer feed-forward neural network (SLFN) and a curiosity appraisal 
component that consists of curious functions that regulate the extreme learning process. 
6.2.1. The Internal Cognitive Component: SLFN 
The internal cognitive component of the C-ELM is an SLFN with   input neurons,   hidden 
neurons and   output neurons. For RBF hidden neuron with activation function        
 (e.g., Gaussian), the output of the  th hidden neuron with respect to the input    is given by: 
             (  ||     ||)       
where   and    are the center and impact factor of the  th RBF neuron.   indicates the set of 
all positive real values. 
The predicted output for the input    is given by: 
 ̂    ̂ 
     ̂ 
     ̂ 
   
Here, the output of the  th neuron in the output layer is given by: 
 ̂ 
  ∑
              
 
   
 

 
59 
 
where    is the output weight connecting the  th hidden neuron to the  th output neuron. The 
output for a chunk of t input data can be written by: 
 ̂     
where   is the hidden layer output matrix and   is the weight matrix connecting the hidden 
neurons to the output neurons as shown below: 
  [
           
 
           
 
 
 
           
 
           
]
   
 
and 
  [
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
]
   
 
With the cognitive component of C-ELM described above, next, we will introduce the curious 
functions that regulate the extreme learning process. 
6.2.2. Curious Functions 
C-ELM employs an intrinsically motivated learning paradigm transposed from the psychological 
theory of curiosity proposed by Berlyne [Berlyne (1960b)]. Learning is regulated based on the 
curiosity appraisal of input data. 
6.2.2.1. Stimulus Selection 
For each input data, the stimulus selection is governed by four collative variables, i.e., novelty, 
uncertainty, surprise, and conflict. In this section, we will introduce the definitions of the four 
collative variables in C-ELM.  

 
60 
 
Novelty: Novelty reflects how much the input data differs from the network's current knowledge. 
In kernel methods, spherical potential is often used to determine the novelty of data 
[Subramanian et al. (2013)]. The spherical potential of an input data    is defined by (a detailed 
derivation can be found in [Subramanian et al. (2013)]): 
       
 ∑           
 
   
 
A higher potential indicates that the input data is more similar to the existing knowledge, while a 
smaller potential indicates that the input data is more novel. Hence, the novelty   of an input 
data    is determined by: 
         
 ∑           
 
   
 
Uncertainty: Uncertainty reflects how not confident the network is in its predictions. The 
confidence of a network is often measured by the posterior probability of the prediction. It has 
been proven theoretically that hinge-loss function can accurately estimate the posterior 
probability for a classification problem [Zhang (2004)]. Hence, we use the truncated hinge loss 
error (      
      
      
      ) [Suresh et al. (2008)] to measure the prediction error, 
where each element is defined by: 
  
  {
                                                       ̂ 
   
   
   (   ( ̂ 
    
    )   )            
With the truncated hinge-loss error, the posterior probability of input   belonging to class   is 
given by: 
    |    
  
   
 
           

 
61 
 
Since uncertainty measures how not confident a network is in its predictions, we define 
uncertainty   of the prediction to an input data    by: 
           ̂|    
where  ̂ is the predicted class for   . 
Conflict: In psychology, conflict occurs when a stimulus arouses two or more incompatible 
responses in an organism [Wu and Miao (2013a)]. The degree of conflict depends on the 
competing strengths of those incompatible responses. For a classifier, conflict can be reflected by 
the competing strengths of the most _red two output neurons. 
Given an input   , let  ̂  
  and  ̂  
  be the outputs of the most fired output neuron and the second 
most fired two output neurons, respectively. The more closer  ̂  
  is to  ̂  
 , the higher competing 
strength is between the two output neurons, which indicates a higher conflict between the 
network's decisions. Hence, the conflict F induced by an input    is defined by: 
      {  
| ̂  
   ̂  
 |
| ̂  
   ̂  
 |      ̂  
  ̂  
   
                               
 
Surprise: In psychology, surprise indicates a violation of expectation [Wu and Miao (2013a)]. 
For a classifier, surprise occurs when the predicted output differs from the true class label. The 
degree of surprise is determined by prediction errors for both the true class and the predicted 
class. As we adopt hinge-loss error in this work to measure prediction error, the surprise S 
induced by an input    is defined by: 
      {|  
    ̂
 |    ̂   
             
where  ̂ and   represent the predicted class and the true class, respectively; and   is the hinge-
loss error. It can be analyzed that all the four collative variables are within the range of [0, 1]. 

 
62 
 
The collative variables determine the level of curiosity arousal and the learning strategy 
selection. With the collative variables defined as above, we will introduce the learning strategies 
in the following section. 
6.2.2.2. Learning Strategies 
C-ELM has three learning strategies: neuron addition, neuron deletion, and parameter update. C-
ELM begins with zero hidden neurons, add or delete hidden neurons and update parameters of 
the existing neurons to achieve an optimal network structure with optimal parameters. The 
decision on whether to update network structure or update parameters is made based on the 
appraisal of collative variables. Intuitively, higher values of collative variables induce a higher 
level of curiosity towards the input data, which require more efforts in learning, i.e., updating 
network structure, to incorporate the new knowledge; otherwise, simply update parameters of the 
existing neurons to reinforce the 'familiar' knowledge. Next, we will introduce the three learning 
strategies of C-ELM in detail. 
Neuron Addition Strategy: Intuitively, for an input data, if novelty is high and uncertainty is 
high and surprise is high, it indicates that a misclassification (i.e., surprise high) with high 
uncertainty in its prediction (i.e., uncertainty high) is caused by the newness of the knowledge 
(i.e., novelty high). In this case, the network should add new neurons to capture this new 
knowledge. Hence, given an input   , the neuron addition condition is:  
                                  >   
where      ,    , and    are neuron addition thresholds for novelty, uncertainty, and surprise, 
respectively. If these parameters are chosen close to 1, then very few input data can trigger the 
neuron addition strategy and the network cannot approximate the decision function accurately. If 
these parameters are chosen close to 0, then many input data can trigger the neuron addition 

 
63 
 
strategy, leading to poor generalization ability. In general,       is chosen in the range of [0.1, 
0.5],     is chosen in the range of [0.1, 0.3], and    is chosen in the range of [0.2, 0.9]. 
A typical ELM randomly chooses hidden neuron parameters and finds the output weights 
analytically. However, random exploration of the feature space may need more hidden neurons 
to accurately approximate the decision function. In C-ELM, we propose data-driven center 
selection for the hidden neurons without compromising the extreme learning capability. When a 
new neuron is added, instead of randomly assigning the center   , we assign the input features of 
the current input data as the center, i.e.,    =    . Since the center selection is data-driven, we 
can label the class of the new neuron using the target value of the input data, i.e.,      . Data-
driven center selection allows fast hidden neuron clustering using their class labels and provides 
class specific information when deleting neurons. The values of the impact factors in the hidden 
neurons are randomly assigned. Hence, with the new hidden neuron, the dimension of the hidden 
layer output matrix   increases from            to    . The target values of the   input 
data is represented by: 
  [
  
 
  
]
   
 
The output weight for   can be analytically found by: 
       
where    is the Moore-Penrose generalized inverse of the hidden layer output matrix  . 
Neuron Deletion Strategy: Intuitively, for an input data, if surprise is high and conflict is high 
and novelty is low, it indicates that a misclassification (i.e., surprise high) occurs for a familiar 
stimulus (i.e., novelty low) due to high competing strengths between two decisions (i.e., 
conflict). In this case, the network should adjust its decision-making by strengthening the correct 

 
64 
 
decision and weakening the wrong decision, i.e., deleting the most contributing neuron in the 
wrong class. Hence, given an input   , the neuron deletion condition is: 
     >                                
where   ,    , and       are neuron deletion thresholds for surprise, conflict, and novelty, 
respectively. When    and     are chosen close to 1 and       is chosen close to 0, then very few 
input data can trigger neuron deletion, leading to poor generalization ability. When    and    are 
chosen close to 0 and       is chosen close to 1, then many input data can trigger neuron deletion 
and the network cannot approximate the decision function accurately. In general,     is chosen in 
the range of [0.2, 0.9],     is chosen in the range of [0.1, 0.3], and       is chosen in the range of 
[0.1, 0.8]. When neuron deletion is triggered, C-ELM will remove the most fired hidden neuron 
  belonging to the predicted class: 
  |    (           )            
After the  th neuron is removed, the network will re-calculate the output weight   with the 
  input data.  
Parameter Update Strategy: When both the neuron addition strategy and the neuron deletion 
strategy are not triggered, it indicates that the new input data is a 'familiar' one. Hence, the 
network will update the output weight using recursive least squares to reinforce the familiar 
knowledge. For the new input data   , let the partial hidden layer output be represented by 
                                The output weights are updated according to [Liang et al. 
(2006a)] by: 
                              
where 

 
65 
 
                       
              
6.3. Performance Evaluation of C-ELM 
The performance of C-ELM is evaluated on the benchmark problems described in Table 6.1 
from the UCI machine learning repository, which contains four multi-category classification 
problems (vehicle classification, iris, wine, and glass identification) and four binary classification 
problems (liver disorder, PIMA, breast cancer, and ionosphere). The performance of CELM is 
evaluated in comparison with other popular classifiers such as SVM, ELM and McELM. The 
results of SVM, ELM and McELM are reproduced from [Savitha et al. (2014)]. For simulating 
the results of C-ELM, MATLAB 2014b with 3.2 GHz and 16 GB ram was used. The parameters 
were optimized using grid search. 
Table 6.1 The specification of benchmark datasets on classification problems 
Data set 
# Features 
# Classes 
# Training data 
# Testing data 
Vehicle 
18 
4 
424 
422 
Iris 
4 
4 
45 
105 
Wine 
13 
3 
60 
118 
Glass identification 
9 
6 
109 
105 
Liver disorder 
6 
2 
200 
145 
PIMA 
8 
2 
400 
368 
Breast cancer 
9 
2 
300 
383 
Ionosphere 
34 
2 
100 
251 
6.3.1. Performance Measures 
The performance of C-ELM is measured against other popular classifiers using two types of 
performance measures: average classification accuracy and overall classification accuracy. When 
the number of samples in each class is highly unbalanced, the average classification accuracy 
tends to yield more useful information. 
Average classification accuracy: The average classification accuracy   is defined by: 

 
66 
 
    
 ∑  
  
    
 
 
 
where    is the number of data in class   that have been correctly classified, and   is the total 
number of data in class  . It reflects the average ratio of correctly classified data in each class. 
Overall classification accuracy: The overall classification accuracy    is defined by: 
   ∑  
 
 
  
     
where    is the total number of data in the testing data set. It reflects the overall ratio of 
correctly classified data in the whole testing data set. 
6.3.2. Performance Study on Multi-category Classification Problems 
The performance of the C-ELM on multi-category benchmark classification problems is shown 
in Table 6.2. It can be observed from Table 6.2 that the generalization performance of C-ELM is 
better than other classifiers used for comparison on all the multi-category classification 
problems. Also, the number of hidden neurons added during the evolving process is comparable 
with other algorithms. For example, C-ELM selected 140 hidden neurons with 6 times neuron 
deletion for Vehicle classification problem, 6 hidden neurons for Iris problem, 8 hidden neurons 
for Wine problem, and 52 hidden neurons with 8 times neuron deletion for Glass identification 
problem. Another advantage of C-ELM in comparison with other self-regulated learning 
algorithms such as McELM is that it takes a substantially small amount of time for training. For 
example, McELM takes 40 seconds to train the Vehicle classification problem whereas C-ELM 
only takes 15.2 seconds. Hence, it shows that C-ELM achieves better performance than other 
classifiers on multi-category classification problems due to the intrinsically motivated learning 
mechanism of curiosity. 

 
67 
 
Table 6.2 Performance comparison between C-ELM and other popular classifiers on the multi-category classification 
problems. 
Data set 
Classifier 
# hidden neurons 
Testing 
   
   
Vehicle classification 
SVM 
340a 
70.62 
68.51 
ELM 
150 
77.01 
77.59 
McELM 
120 
81.04 
81.30 
C-ELMb 
140 
81.99 
82.42 
Iris 
SVM 
13a 
96.19 
96.19 
ELM 
10 
96.19 
96.19 
McELM 
6 
98.10 
98.10 
C-ELMc 
6 
99.05 
99.05 
Wine 
SVM 
13a 
97.46 
98.04 
ELM 
10 
97.46 
98.04 
McELM 
9 
98.31 
98.69 
C-ELMd 
8 
99.15 
99.35 
Glass identification 
SVM 
183a 
70.47 
75.61 
ELM 
80 
81.31 
87.43 
McELM 
72 
82.86 
87.40 
C-ELMe 
54 
80.95 
90.81 
# support vectors. Number of neuron deleted: (b) 6 (c) 0 (d) 0 (e) 8. 
 
6.3.3. Performance Study on Binary Classification Problems 
The performance of C-ELM on three binary classification problems is shown in Table 6.3. Table 
6.3 shows that C-ELM achieves better generalization performance than other classifiers used for 
comparison on all the binary classification problems. Also, the total number of hidden neurons 
added during the evolving process is comparable with other algorithms. For example, C-ELM 
requires 31 hidden neurons for Liver disorder problem, 33 hidden neurons for PIMA problem, 9 
hidden neurons for Breast cancer problem, and 17 hidden neurons for the Ionosphere problem. 
For binary classification problems, the training time of C-ELM is comparable with other self-
regulated learning algorithms such as McELM. For example, it requires 0.73 seconds for C-ELM 
and 0.95 seconds for McELM to train the Liver disorder problem. Hence, it shows that C-ELM 
achieves better generalization ability than other classifiers on binary classification problems 

 
68 
 
without compromising the extreme leaning ability of ELM, due to the intrinsically motivated 
learning mechanism of curiosity. 
Table 6.3 Performance comparison between C-ELM and other popular classifiers on the binary classification 
Data set 
Classifier 
# hidden neurons 
Testing 
   
   
Liver disorder 
SVM 
141a 
71.03 
70.21 
ELM 
100 
72.41 
71.41 
McELM 
50 
74.48 
73.83 
C-ELMb 
31 
76.55 
76.50 
PIMA 
SVM 
221a 
77.45 
76.33 
ELM 
400 
76.63 
75.25 
McELM 
25 
80.43 
78.49 
C-ELMc 
33 
81.25 
80.31 
Breast cancer 
SVM 
24a 
96.60 
97.06 
ELM 
66 
96.36 
96.50 
McELM 
10 
97.39 
97.84 
C-ELMd 
9 
97.65 
98.04 
Ionosphere 
SVM 
43a 
91.24 
88.51 
ELM 
32 
89.64 
87.52 
McELM 
18 
94.82 
93.76 
C-ELMe 
17 
95.22 
95.54 
# support vectors. Number of neuron deleted: (b) 0 (c) 0 (d) 0 (e) 0. 
6.4. Summary 
In this chapter, we have presented a curious extreme learning machine (CELM) classifier, which 
is a neural learning agent, based on the generic computational model of curiosity. C-ELM treats 
each input data as a stimulus for curiosity and performs curiosity appraisal towards each input 
data based on four collative variables: novelty, uncertainty, conflict, and surprise. Three learning 
strategies can be chosen from based on the curiosity appraisal results, including neuron addition, 
neuron deletion, and parameter update. C-ELM enhances traditional ELM algorithms with the 
evolving capability, which determines optimal network structure dynamically based on the 
training data. Also, C-ELM reduces partially the random effect of the traditional ELM algorithm 
by selecting RBF centers based on data instead of random assignment. Moreover, C-ELM 

 
69 
 
employs a novel neuron deletion strategy which is based on conflict resolution. Empirical study 
of C-ELM shows that the proposed approach leads to compact network structures and generates 
better generalization performance with fast response, comparing with traditional ELM and other 
popular classifiers. 
 

 
70 
 
CHAPTER 7 A CURIOUS RECOMMENDER AGENT 
7.1. Introduction 
In this chapter, we focus on the domain of recommender systems and present a curiosity-driven 
recommendation algorithm that realizes the generic computational model of curiosity (Chapter 4) 
in another type of intelligent agents: the social recommender agents. 
In the current age of information overload, recommender system has become an indispensable 
technique for filtering and recommending online information. Due to their effectiveness in 
helping users filtering through the enormous number of items and in helping enterprisers 
increasing their sales, recommender systems have been successfully adopted by a number of 
industrial companies, including but not limited to Amazon, Netflix, Yahoo!News, Apple iTunes, 
etc. 
As highlighted in [Resnick and Varian (1997)], the ultimate goal of a recommender system is to 
suggest particularly interesting items, in addition to indicating those that should be filtered out. 
Traditional recommender systems are built based on a general consensus that user preferences 
reflect their underlying interests. Hence, various collaborative filtering techniques [Sarwar et al. 
(2000)] have been proposed to discover items that best match users' preferences. However, 
determining interestingness based on user preferences alone is far from sufficient. According to 
the psychology of interest [Silvia (2008)], the appraisal of interestingness in human beings is 
closely related to curiosity. Instead of focusing on a person's preferences, curiosity is more 
related to the novelty and surprisingness in the environment. In this work, we take a new angle to 
look at the interestingness of recommendation and introduce a novel dimension of social 
information into the traditional recommender systems: social curiosity. 
In real life, it is a commonly observed phenomenon that a person gets curious about the 
surprising behaviors of his/her friends. For example, Alice knows that her friend Bob always 

 
71 
 
hates horror movies, and the incidence that Bob gives a high rating to a horror movie would 
interest Alice. In order to find out why Bob gave this surprising rating, Alice may be driven by 
curiosity to watch this horror movie. This phenomenon is generally known as social curiosity in 
human psychology. It is the desire to acquire new information about how other people behave, 
think, and feel [Renner (2006); Wu and Miao (2013a)]. Based on this theory, an item rated by a 
user's friends can become a recommendation candidate according to how surprising those 
friends' ratings are for this item. 
Motivated as above, we propose a social curiosity inspired recommender system. On top of user 
preferences, the interestingness of an item is evaluated based on user curiosity as well. The major 
contributions of this work are summarized as follows. Firstly, we identify a novel dimension of 
social information for recommender systems: the social curiosity. Secondly, we build a general 
and parameter-free model for measuring user curiosity in the social contexts. This model takes 
into consideration the different responses given by a user to different friends' surprising ratings. 
We also propose and compare three strategies for evaluating user curiosity when multiple friends 
give surprising ratings to the same item. Thirdly, the model is comprehensively studied with two 
large scale real world datasets: Douban and Flixster. 
The experiment results show that social curiosity significantly improves recommendation 
diversity and coverage, while maintaining a sufficient level of accuracy. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first work to explore social information for enhancing recommendation 
diversity and coverage in recommender systems. In the rest of this chapter, we will implement 
the proposed computational model of curiosity in recommender agents and conduct experimental 
studies to analyze the effects brought by curiosity. 
 
 

 
72 
 
CHAPTER 8 A CURIOUS VIRTUAL PEER LEARNER 
8.1. Introduction 
This chapter focuses on developing a curious peer learner that realizes the generic computational 
model of curiosity to enhance believability. With the advances in computer graphics, 
communication technologies and networking, virtual worlds are rapidly becoming part of the 
educational technology landscape [Wiecha et al. (2010); Wu et al. (2013a)]. Dede [Dede (2009)] 
suggests that the immersive interfaces offered by virtual worlds can promote learning, by 
enabling the design of educational experiences that are challenging or even impossible to 
duplicate in real world. In recent years, the usage of virtual worlds within the educational context 
is growing quickly. The New Media Consortium (NMC) Annual Survey on Second Life (SL) 
received 170% increase in response rate between 2007 and 2008. They also found that many of 
the educators, who earlier used the existing SL, have started creating their own virtual worlds in 
less than a year's time [Harris and Rea (2009)]. 
Virtual Singapura is a Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) designed to facilitate the learning of 
plant transport systems in lower secondary school. It has been employed in various studies, such 
as design perspectives for learning in VLE, pre-service teachers' perspectives on VLE in science 
education, productive failure and impact of structure on learning in VLE, slow pedagogy in 
scenario-based VLE, and what students learn in VLE, etc. [Jacobson et al. (2010); Kennedy-
Clark (2011, 2009); Kennedy-Clark and Thompson (2011); Tanti and Kennedy-Clark (2010)]. 
Till date, over 500 students in Singapore and over 300 students in Australia have played Virtual 
Singapura. During the field studies of Virtual Singapura, several issues with learning in VLE 
have been observed. First, students tend to spend more time exploring the landscape of the 
virtual world rather than concentrating on the learning content. Second, some low-functioning 
students studying alone in VLE often get confused or stuck, and require constant guidance from 
teachers or game designers to move forward. 

 
73 
 
Based on these observations, we propose a virtual peer learner to reside in VLE and accompany 
students to learn. The idea is derived from the common educational practice of peer learning, 
where students learn with and from each other without the immediate intervention of a teacher 
[Boud et al. (2001)]. Benefits of a peer learner include: a peer learner can present _learning 
triggers", that are interactions or experiences causing students to try new things or to think in 
novel ways; bi-directional peer relationships can facilitate professional and personal growth; and 
tapping into a learner's own experience can be both affirming and motivating [Eisen (2001)]. 
Hence, a virtual peer learner has the potential to engage students and motivate them to spend 
more time on the learning content. Also, a virtual peer learner can potentially help low-
functioning students to think and learn better in VLE. 
A key design issue for such virtual characters is their believability [Johnson et al. (2000)]: they 
need to give the users an impression of being lifelike and believable, producing behaviors that 
appear to the users as natural and appropriate. In order to design a virtual peer learner that can 
emulate a real student and behave naturally in the learning process, a biologically inspired 
approach is necessary. In human psychology, studies have shown that curiosity is an important 
motivation that links cues reflecting novelty and challenge with natural behaviors such as 
exploration, investigation and learning [Kashdan and Steger (2007)]. In Reiss's [Reiss (2000)] 16 
basic desires that motivate our actions and shape our personalities, curiosity is defined as “the 
need to learn". Attempts to incorporate curiosity into Artificial Intelligence find curious 
machines have advanced behaviors in exploration, autonomous development, creativity and 
adaptation [Macedo and Cardoso (2005); Merrick (2008b); Saunders (2007); Scott and 
Markovitch (1993)]. However, as a basic motivation that drives the learning behaviors of human 
beings [Reiss (2000)], the role of curiosity in a virtual peer learner has not yet been explored. 
This creates a challenge for introducing curiosity into virtual peer learners and studying its 
impact on their learning behaviors. In the rest of this chapter, we will tackle this challenge by 
implementing the proposed computational model of curiosity in virtual peer learners and 
conducting experimental studies to analyze the effects brought by curiosity. 
 

 
74 
 
CHAPTER 9 A CURIOUS VIRTUAL LEARNING 
COMPANION 
9.1. Introduction 
In the previous chapter, we presented a virtual peer learner which realizes the generic 
computational framework of curiosity. Virtual peer learners are background characters to enrich 
the virtual learning environment, which do not directly interact with users. However, many 
educational practices are instantiated through the interactions between teachers and students or 
between peer learners [Brophy and Good (1974); Webb (1989)]. Hence, a virtual learning 
companion that can interact with the users would be interesting to enhance their learning 
experiences. In this chapter, we focus on developing a virtual learning companion which realizes 
the generic computational framework of curiosity to provide more meaningful interactions with 
the users. Teaching and learning are highly social activities [Kim (2004)]. With the goal to bring 
a social context into Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), a growing interest has been shown in 
designing virtual learning companions that adopt a peer metaphor to simulate peer interactions. 
Virtual learning companions allow human learners to take advantage of the cognitive and 
affective gains of human peer-mediated learning in a VLE [Kim (2004)]. 
The general role of a virtual learning companion is illustrated in Figure 9.1. It can be shown from 
this figure that a human learner is the main actor in a VLE, who acts upon the environment and 
learns from it. A virtual learning companion performs as a peer who observes the human 
learner's actions and their effects, i.e., the environmental changes. Based on the observations, the 
virtual learning companion performs cognitive and affective reasoning to provide appropriate 
peer-like interactions with the human learner. Curiosity is an emotional motivation related to 
exploratory behaviors such as learning, investigation, and exploration, which drives human 
beings to ask questions and explore for answers. According to the information gap theory by 

 
75 
 
Loewenstein [Loewenstein (1994)], curiosity can be viewed as arising when attention becomes 
focused on a gap in one's knowledge. Hence, modeling human-like curiosity in a virtual learning 
companion may allow the companion to discover knowledge gaps and ask relevant questions. 
These questions can add new ingredients into the interactions provided by the companion, which 
may help human learners notice the weakness in their knowledge structure and motivate them to 
actively explore the VLE. However, curiosity has not been studied as a key personality trait in 
existing virtual learning companions, which creates a challenge for introducing this novel 
characteristic into such agents and studying the impact brought by it. In the rest of this chapter, 
we will tackle this challenge by implementing the generic computational framework of curiosity 
in virtual learning companions and conducting field studies with human users to analyze how an 
agent with curiosity will impact the human users' learning experience in a human-agent 
interaction context. 
 
Figure 9.1 An illustration of the role of a virtual learning companion in VLE. 
 
 

 
76 
 
CHAPTER 10 OPEN PROBLEMS 
10.1. Evaluation of Simulation 
Most of the current computational models of curiosity adopt a heuristic approach for the 
evaluation of stimulations. This is often done based on algorithmic characteristics and goals in 
machine learning. These models advance the performance of machine learning systems in 
learning and exploration. However, they have difficulties supporting humanoid agents to 
evaluate curiosity stimuli in complex environments such as computer-based education, e-
commerce, and teleconference. Some models have started from a psychological theory and 
evaluated stimulation levels based one collative variable or a subset of collative variables. As of 
yet, how the collative variables affect the level of stimulation, individually or collectively, has 
not been studied. Both qualitative and quantitative analysis of collative variables can help form a 
deeper understanding of the working mechanism of computational curiosity, and provide a clear 
picture of how collative variables are related to performance changes in intelligent agents. 
10.2. Evaluation of Curiosity 
Existing computational models mostly assume a positive correlation between stimulation and 
curiosity, which may not be always true in human beings. Studies have been done on simulating 
the Wundt curve to map the level of stimulation to the level of curiosity, but the understanding of 
how this mapping affects the performance of human-like agents is still unclear. Moreover, in 
psychology, the curiosity zone is right next to the boredom zone and the anxiety zone. Hence, 
deeper studies are necessary to provide more proper mapping methods to allow human-like 
agents to avoid entering the boredom zone or the anxiety zone during exploration. 
10.3. Interactions between Collative Variables 
In the proposed computational model of curiosity, the collative variables are treated as 
independent factors that stimulate curiosity. This model neglects the inter-influences between the 

 
77 
 
collative variables which have been discussed by Berlyne [Berlyne (1960b)] from the field of 
psychology. Berlyne postulated that novel stimuli can lead to conflict when a new pattern of 
stimulus is sufficiently similar to several familiar stimulus patterns, which may induce many 
incompatible responses. Also, novelty has a connection with complexity. For example, a 
stimulus with short-term novelty will have a higher degree of temporal complexity than purely 
repetitive patterns. Alternatively, a higher degree of synchronous complexity may induce a 
higher degree of relative novelty. Moreover, complexity is also associated with uncertainty and 
conflict. For example, complex patterns with more parts can assume a larger amount of 
alternative forms and the degree of uncertainty can be affected by the number of classes in these 
alternative forms; each sub-element of a complex figure may induce different responses that are 
incompatible with each other, leading to a higher level of conflict.  
Modeling the interactions between the collative variables in the stimulus selection function may 
yield a more accurate curiosity model for the intelligent agents. However, the interactions 
between the collative variables are rather vague and complicated. Hence, it is difficult to define 
the interaction weights using expert knowledge. A possible solution is to learn the interaction 
weights between the collative variables from data through a machine learning approach. 
10.4. Neuroscience Inspired Modeling Approaches 
The current computational model of curiosity is mainly inspired by the drive theory and optimal 
arousal theory from the psychological viewpoint. Recently, researchers argued that the 
psychological models failed to reconcile whether the reward of obtaining new knowledge is 
mediated through a feeling of _deprivation", as defined by Loewenstein [Loewenstein (1994)], 
or a feeling of “interest", as defined by Spielberger and Starr [Spielberger and Starr (1994)]. 
Hence, researchers began to integrate the neurological aspects of reward, wanting, and liking into 
a new way to understand curiosity, one that is explained by biological processes. Litman [Litman 
(2005)] developed interest deprivation (I/D) theory of curiosity that incorporates the 
neuroscience of “wanting" and “liking", which are two systems hypothesized to underlie 

 
78 
 
motivation and affective experience for a broad class of appetites. Litman theory can be 
summarized in table 10.1. It can be seen that according to this theory, the different states of 
curiosity are determined by the corresponding levels of the two factors: wanting and liking. This 
theory motivates the modeling of computational curiosity from a neuroscience inspired approach, 
which may be considered in the future works to provide a more comprehensive computational 
model of curiosity. 
 
Wanting 
 
Low level  
High level 
Liking 
High 
Level 
 
Curiosity as a feeling of 
“interest" 
(Aesthetic 
appreciation) 
Curiosity 
as 
a 
feeling 
of 
“deprivation" 
(Perceptual/ 
conceptual/fluency) 
Low 
Level 
 
Ambivalent 
disinterest 
or 
boredom 
(Spontaneous 
alternation or novelty seeking) 
Need for uncertainty 
Clarification (Need for 
cognitive closure; morbid or 
lurid curiosity) 
Figure 10.1 An illustration of the interest deprivation (I/D) theory of curiosity. 
10.5. Curiosity-based Decision Making 
One interesting issue with computational curiosity is the risk management in curiosity-based 
decision making. As curiosity often leads to explorations, sometimes the agent or human being 
may be exposed to the possibility of being harmed or causing undesirable consequences to 

 
79 
 
others. Hence, curious machines should operate under the protection of proper risk management 
systems so that they will not harm themselves. Ethical boundaries should also be defined for 
curious agents so that they will not intrude on the privacy of the users or other agents. 

 
80
