An Investigation of Model-Free Planning
Arthur Guez * 1 Mehdi Mirza * 1 Karol Gregor * 1 Rishabh Kabra * 1 Sébastien Racanière 1 Théophane Weber 1
David Raposo 1 Adam Santoro 1 Laurent Orseau 1 Tom Eccles 1 Greg Wayne 1 David Silver 1
Timothy Lillicrap 1
Abstract
The ﬁeld of reinforcement learning (RL) is facing
increasingly challenging domains with combina-
torial complexity. For an RL agent to address
these challenges, it is essential that it can plan
effectively. Prior work has typically utilized an
explicit model of the environment, combined with
a speciﬁc planning algorithm (such as tree search).
More recently, a new family of methods have been
proposed that learn how to plan, by providing the
structure for planning via an inductive bias in the
function approximator (such as a tree structured
neural network), trained end-to-end by a model-
free RL algorithm. In this paper, we go even fur-
ther, and demonstrate empirically that an entirely
model-free approach, without special structure be-
yond standard neural network components such
as convolutional networks and LSTMs, can learn
to exhibit many of the characteristics typically
associated with a model-based planner. We mea-
sure our agent’s effectiveness at planning in terms
of its ability to generalize across a combinatorial
and irreversible state space, its data efﬁciency, and
its ability to utilize additional thinking time. We
ﬁnd that our agent has many of the characteris-
tics that one might expect to ﬁnd in a planning
algorithm. Furthermore, it exceeds the state-of-
the-art in challenging combinatorial domains such
as Sokoban and outperforms other model-free ap-
proaches that utilize strong inductive biases to-
ward planning.
1. Introduction
One of the aspirations of artiﬁcial intelligence is a cogni-
tive agent that can adaptively and dynamically form plans
*Equal contribution 1DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
to achieve its goal. Traditionally, this role has been ﬁlled
by model-based RL approaches, which ﬁrst learn an ex-
plicit model of the environment’s system dynamics or rules,
and then apply a planning algorithm (such as tree search)
to the learned model. Model-based approaches are poten-
tially powerful but have been challenging to scale with
learned models in complex and high-dimensional environ-
ments (Talvitie, 2014; Asadi et al., 2018), though there has
been recent progress in that direction (Buesing et al., 2018;
Ebert et al., 2018).
More recently, a variety of approaches have been proposed
that learn to plan implicitly, solely by model-free training.
These model-free planning agents utilize a special neural
architecture that mirrors the structure of a particular plan-
ning algorithm. For example the neural network may be
designed to represent search trees (Farquhar et al., 2017;
Oh et al., 2017; Guez et al., 2018), forward simulations
(Racanière et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2016), or dynamic pro-
gramming (Tamar et al., 2016). The main idea is that, given
the appropriate inductive bias for planning, the function
approximator can learn to leverage these structures to learn
its own planning algorithm. This kind of algorithmic func-
tion approximation may be more ﬂexible than an explicit
model-based approach, allowing the agent to customize the
nature of planning to the speciﬁc environment.
In this paper we explore the hypothesis that planning may
occur implicitly, even when the function approximator has
no special inductive bias toward planning. Previous work
(Pang & Werbos, 1998; Wang et al., 2018) has supported the
idea that model-based behavior can be learned with general
recurrent architectures, with planning computation amor-
tized over multiple discrete steps (Schmidhuber, 1990), but
comprehensive demonstrations of its effectiveness are still
missing. Inspired by the successes of deep learning and
the universality of neural representations, our main idea
is simply to furnish a neural network with a high capacity
and ﬂexible representation, rather than mirror any particular
planning structure. Given such ﬂexibility, the network can
in principle learn its own algorithm for approximate plan-
ning. Speciﬁcally, we utilize a family of neural networks
based on a widely used function approximation architec-
ture: the stacked convolutional LSTMs (ConvLSTM by
arXiv:1901.03559v2  [cs.LG]  20 May 2019

An Investigation of Model-free Planning
Xingjian et al. (2015)).
It is perhaps surprising that a purely model-free reinforce-
ment learning approach can be so successful in domains
that would appear to necessitate explicit planning. This
raises a natural question: what is planning? Can a model-
free RL agent be considered to be planning, without any
explicit model of the environment, and without any explicit
simulation of that model?
Indeed, in many deﬁnitions (Sutton et al., 1998), planning re-
quires some explicit deliberation using a model, typically by
considering possible future situations using a forward model
to choose an appropriate sequence of actions. These deﬁni-
tions emphasize the nature of the mechanism (the explicit
look-ahead), rather than the effect it produces (the foresight).
However, what would one say about a deep network that
has been trained from examples in a challenging domain to
emulate such a planning process with near-perfect ﬁdelity?
Should a deﬁnition of planning rule out the resulting agent
as effectively planning?
Instead of tying ourselves to a deﬁnition that depends on
the inner workings of an agent, in this paper we take a
behaviourist approach to measuring planning as a property
of the agent’s interactions. In particular, we consider three
key properties that an agent equipped with planning should
exhibit.
First, an effective planning algorithm should be able to
generalize with relative ease to different situations. The
intuition here is that a simple function approximator will
struggle to predict accurately across a combinatorial space
of possibilities (for example the value of all chess posi-
tions), but a planning algorithm can perform a local search
to dynamically compute predictions (for example by tree
search). We measure this property using procedural envi-
ronments (such as random gridworlds, Sokoban (Racanière
et al., 2017), Boxworld (Zambaldi et al., 2018)) with a mas-
sively combinatorial space of possible layouts. We ﬁnd that
our model-free planning agent achieves state-of-the-art per-
formance, and signiﬁcantly outperforms more specialized
model-free planning architectures. We also investigate ex-
trapolation to a harder class of problems beyond those in the
training set, and again ﬁnd that our architecture performs
effectively – especially with larger network sizes.
Second, a planning agent should be able to learn efﬁciently
from relatively small amounts of data. Model-based RL
is frequently motivated by the intuition that a model (for
example the rules of chess) can often be learned more ef-
ﬁciently than direct predictions (for example the value of
all chess positions). We measure this property by training
our model-free planner on small data-sets, and ﬁnd that our
model-free planning agent still performs well and general-
izes effectively to a held-out test set.
Third, an effective planning algorithm should be able to
make good use of additional thinking time. Put simply, the
more the algorithm thinks, the better its performance should
be. This property is likely to be especially important in
domains with irreversible consequences to wrong decisions
(e.g. death or dead-ends). We measure this property in
Sokoban by adding additional thinking time at the start of
an episode, before the agent commits to a strategy, and ﬁnd
that our model-free planning agent solves considerably more
problems.
Together, our results suggest that a model-free agent, with-
out speciﬁc planning-inspired network structure, can learn
to exhibit many of the behavioural characteristics of plan-
ning. The architecture presented in this paper serves to
illustrate this point, and shows the surprising power of one
simple approach. We hope our ﬁndings broaden the search
for more general architectures that can tackle an even wider
range of planning domains.
2. Methods
We ﬁrst motivate and describe the main network architecture
we use in this paper. Then we brieﬂy explain our training
setup. More details can be found in Appendix 8.
2.1. Model architectures
We desire models that can represent and learn powerful but
unspeciﬁed planning procedures. Rather than encode strong
inductive biases toward particular planning algorithms, we
choose high-capacity neural network architectures that are
capable of representing a very rich class of functions. As in
many works in deep RL, we make use of convolutional neu-
ral networks (known to exploit the spatial structure inherent
in visual domains) and LSTMs (known to be effective in
sequential problems). Aside from these weak but common
inductive biases, we keep our architecture as general and
ﬂexible as possible, and trust in standard model-free rein-
forcement learning algorithms to discover the capacity to
plan.
2.1.1. BASIC ARCHITECTURE
The basic element of the architecture is a ConvLSTM
(Xingjian et al., 2015) – a neural network similar to an
LSTM but with a 3D hidden state and convolutional op-
erations. A recurrent network fθ stacks together ConvL-
STM modules. For a stack depth of D, the state s con-
tains all the cell states cd and outputs hd of each module
d: s = (c1, . . . , cD, h1, . . . , hD). The module weights
θ = (θ1, . . . , θD) are not shared along the stack. Given
a previous state and an input tensor i, the next state is com-
puted as s′ = fθ(s, i). The network fθ is then repeated N
times within each time-step (i.e., multiple internal ticks per

An Investigation of Model-free Planning
xt
e
Vt
⇡t
e
⇡t−1
Vt−1
xt−1
D
N
✓1
✓1
✓1
✓1
✓1
✓1
✓2
✓2
✓2
✓2
✓2
✓2
Figure 1. Illustration of the agent’s network architecture. This
diagram shows DRC(2,3) for two time steps. Square boxes denote
ConvLSTM modules and the rectangle box represents an MLP.
Boxes with the same color share parameters.
real time-step). If st−1 is the state at the end of the previous
time-step, we obtain the new state given the input it as:
st = gθ(st−1, it) = fθ(fθ(. . . fθ(st−1, it), . . . , it), it)
|
{z
}
N times
(1)
The elements of st all preserve the spatial dimensions of
the input it. The ﬁnal output ot of the recurrent network
for a single time-step is hD, the hidden state of the deepest
ConvLSTM module after N ticks, obtained from st. We
describe the ConvLSTM itself and alternative choices for
memory modules in Appendix 8.
The rest of the network is rather generic. An encoder net-
work e composed of convolutional layers processes the input
observation xt into a H ×W ×C tensor it — given as input
to the recurrent module g. The encoded input it is also com-
bined with ot through a skip-connection to produce the ﬁnal
network output. The network output is then ﬂattened and an
action distribution πt and a state-value vt are computed via
a fully-connected MLP. The diagram in Fig 1 illustrates the
full network.
From here on, we refer to this architecture as Deep Repeated
ConvLSTM (DRC) network architecture, and sometimes
followed explicitly by the value of D and N (e.g., DRC(3,
2) has depth D = 3 and N = 2 repeats).
2.1.2. ADDITIONAL DETAILS
Less essential design choices in the architectures are de-
scribed here. Ablation studies show that these are not crucial,
but do marginally improve performance (see Appendix 11).
Encoded observation skip-connection The encoded obser-
vation it is provided as an input to all ConvLSTM modules
in the stack.
Top-down skip connection As described above, the ﬂow of
information in the network only goes up (and right through
time). To allow for more general computation we add feed-
back connection from the last layer at one time step to the
ﬁrst layer of the next step.
Pool-and-inject To allow information to propagate faster
in the spatial dimensions than the size of the convolutional
kernel within the ConvLSTM stack, it is useful to provide a
pooled version of the module’s last output h as an additional
input on lateral connections. We use both max and mean
pooling. Each pooling operation applies pooling spatially
for each channel dimension, followed by a linear transform,
and then tiles the result back into a 2D tensor. This is
operation is related to the pool-and-inject method introduced
by Racanière et al. (2017) and to Squeeze-and-Excitation
blocks (Hu et al., 2017).
Padding The convolutional operator is translation invariant.
To help it understand where the edge of the input image is,
we append a feature map to the input of the convolutional
operators that has ones on the boundary and zeros inside.
2.2. Reinforcement Learning
We consider domains that are formally speciﬁed as RL
problems, where agents must learn via reward feedback
obtained by interacting with the environment (Sutton et al.,
1998). At each time-step t, the agent’s network outputs
a policy πt = πθ(·|ht) which maps the history of obser-
vations ht := (x0, . . . , xt) into a probability distribution
over actions, from which the action at
∼πt, is sam-
pled. In addition, it outputs vt = vθ(ht) ∈R, an esti-
mate of the current policy value, vπ(ht) = E[Gt|ht], where
Gt = P
t′≥t γt′−tRt′ is the return from time t, γ ≤1 is a
discount factor, and Rt the reward at time t.
Both quantities are trained in an actor-critic setup where
the policy (actor) is gradually updated to improve its ex-
pected return, and the value (critic) is used as a baseline to
reduce the variance of the policy update. The update to the
policy parameters have the following form using the score
function estimator (a la REINFORCE (Williams, 1992)):
(gt −vθ(ht))∇θ log πθ(at|ht).
In practice, we use truncated returns with bootstrapping
for gt and we apply importance sampling corrections if the
trajectory data is off-policy. More speciﬁcally, we used
a distributed framework and the IMPALA V-trace actor-
critic algorithm (Espeholt et al., 2018). While we found
this training regime to help for training networks with more
parameters, we also ran experiments which demonstrate that
the DRC architecture can be trained effectively with A3C
(Mnih et al., 2016). More details on the setup can be found
in Appendix 9.2.

An Investigation of Model-free Planning
3. Planning Domains
The RL domains we focus on are combinatorial domains
for which episodes are procedurally generated. The proce-
dural and combinatorial aspects emphasize planning and
generalization since it is not possible to simply memorize
an observation to action mapping. In these domains each
episode is instantiated in a pseudorandom conﬁguration, so
solving an episode typically requires some form of reason-
ing. Most of the environments are fully-observable and have
simple 2D visual features. The domains are illustrated and
explained further in Appendix 6. In addition to the planning
domains listed below, we also run control experiments on a
set of Atari 2600 games (Bellemare et al., 2013).
Gridworld A simple navigation domain following (Tamar
et al., 2016), consisting of a grid ﬁlled with obstacles. The
agent, goal, and obstacles are randomly placed for each
episode.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2. Examples of Sokoban levels from the (a) unﬁltered, (b)
medium test sets, and from the (c) hard set. Our best model is able
to solve all three levels.
Sokoban A difﬁcult puzzle domain requiring an agent to
push a set of boxes onto goal locations (Botea et al., 2003;
Racanière et al., 2017). Irreversible wrong moves can make
the puzzle unsolvable. We describe how we generate a large
number of levels (for the ﬁxed problem size 10x10 with 4
boxes) at multiple difﬁculty levels in Appendix 7, and then
split some into a training and test set. Brieﬂy, problems in
the ﬁrst difﬁculty level are obtained from directly sampling
a source distribution (we call that difﬁculty level unﬁltered).
Then the medium and hard sets are obtained by sequentially
ﬁltering that distribution based on an agent’s success on
each level. We are releasing these levels as datasets in the
standard Sokoban format1. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, we
ran experiments with the easier unﬁltered set of levels.
Boxworld Introduced in (Zambaldi et al., 2018), the aim
is to reach a goal target by collecting coloured keys and
opening colour-matched boxes until a target is reached. The
agent can see the keys (i.e., their colours) locked within
boxes; thus, it must carefully plan the sequence of boxes
that should be opened so that it can collect the keys that will
lead to the target. Keys can only be used once, so opening
1https://github.com/deepmind/boxoban-levels
an incorrect box can lead the agent down a dead-end path
from which it cannot recover.
MiniPacman (Racanière et al., 2017). The player explores
a maze that contains food while being chased by ghosts.
The aim of the player is to collect all the rewarding food.
There are also a few power pills which allow the player to
attack ghosts (for a brief duration) and earn a large reward.
See Appendix 6.2 for more details.
4. Results
Paralleling our behaviourist approach to the question of
planning, we look at three areas of analysis in our results.
We ﬁrst examine the performance of our model and other
approaches across combinatorial domains that emphasize
planning over memorization (Section 4.1).2 We also report
results aimed at understanding how elements of our archi-
tecture contribute to observed performance. Second, we
examine questions of data-efﬁciency and generalization in
Section 4.2. Third, we study evidence of iterative computa-
tion in Section 4.3.
4.1. Performance & Comparisons
In general, across all domains listed in Section 3, the DRC
architecture performed very well with only modest tuning of
hyper-parameters (see Appendix 9). The DRC(3,3) variant
was almost always the best in terms both of data efﬁciency
(early learning) and asymptotic performance.
Gridworld: Many methods efﬁciently learn the Gridworld
domain, especially for small grid sizes. We found that for
larger grid sizes the DRC architecture learns more efﬁciently
than a vanilla Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) archi-
tecture of similar weight and computational capacity. We
also tested Value Iteration Networks (VIN) (Tamar et al.,
2016), which are specially designed to deal with this kind
of problem (i.e. local transitions in a fully-observable 2D
state space). We found that VIN, which has many fewer
parameters and a well-matched inductive bias, starts improv-
ing faster than other methods. It outperformed the CNN
and even the DRC during early-stage training, but the DRC
reached better ﬁnal accuracy (see Table 1 and Figure 14a in
the Appendix). Concurrent to our work, Lee et al. (2018)
observed similar ﬁndings in various path planning settings
when comparing VIN to an architecture with weaker induc-
tive biases.
2Illustrative videos of trained agents and playable demo avail-
able at https://sites.google.com/view/modelfreeplanning/
3This percentage at 1e9 is lower than the 90% reported origi-
nally by I2A (Racanière et al., 2017). This can be explained by
some training differences between this paper and the I2A paper:
train/test dataset vs. procedurally generated levels, co-trained vs.
pre-trained models. See appendix 13.5 for more details.

An Investigation of Model-free Planning
Table 1. Performance comparison in Gridworld, size 32x32, after
10M environment steps. VIN (Tamar et al., 2016) experiments are
detailed in Appendix 13.1.
Model
% solved
at 1e6 steps
% solved
at 1e7 steps
DRC(3, 3)
30
99
VIN
80
97
CNN
3
90
Table 2. Comparison of test performance on (unﬁltered) Sokoban
levels for various methods. I2A (Racanière et al., 2017) results
are re-rerun within our framework. ATreeC (Farquhar et al., 2017)
experiments are detailed in Appendix 13.2. MCTSnets (Guez et al.,
2018) also considered the same Sokoban domain but in an expert
imitation setting (achieving 84% solved levels).
Model
% solved
at 2e7 steps
% solved
at 1e9 steps
DRC(3, 3)
80
99
ResNet
14
96
CNN
25
92
I2A (unroll=15)
21
843
1D LSTM(3,3)
5
74
ATreeC
1
57
VIN
12
56
Sokoban: In Sokoban, we demonstrate state-of-the-art
results versus prior work which targeted similar box-
pushing puzzle domains (ATreeC (Farquhar et al., 2017),
I2A (Racanière et al., 2017)) and other generic networks
(LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), ResNet (He
et al., 2016), CNNs). We also test VIN on Sokoban, adapt-
ing the original approach to our state space by adding an
input encoder to the model and an attention module at the
output to deal with the imperfect state-action mappings. Ta-
ble 2 compares the results for different architectures at the
end of training. Only 1% of test levels remain unsolved by
DRC(3,3) after 1e9 steps, with the second-best architecture
(a large ResNet) failing four times as often.
Boxworld: On this domain several methods obtain near-
perfect ﬁnal performance. Still, the DRC model learned
faster than published methods, achieving ≈80% success
after 2e8 steps. In comparison, the best ResNet achieved
≈50% by this point. The relational method of Zambaldi
et al. (2018) can learn this task well but only solved <10%
of levels after 2e8 steps.
MiniPacman: Here again, we found that the DRC archi-
tecture trained faster and obtained a better score than the
ResNet architectures we tried (see Figure 15a).
Atari 2600 To test the capacity of the DRC model to deal
with richer sensory data, we also examined its performance
on ﬁve planning-focused Atari games (Bellemare et al.,
2013). We obtained state-of-the-art scores on three of ﬁve
games, and competitive scores on the other two (see Ap-
pendix 10.2 and Figure 10 for details).
4.1.1. INFLUENCE OF NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
We studied the inﬂuence of stacking and repeating the Con-
vLSTM modules in the DRC architecture, controlled by the
parameters D (stack length) and N (number of repeats) as
described in Section 2.1. These degrees of freedom allow
our networks to compute its output using shared, iterative,
computation with N > 1, as well as computations at differ-
ent levels of representation and more capacity with D > 1.
We found that the DRC(3,3) (i.e, D = 3, N = 3) worked ro-
bustly across all of the tested domain. We compared this to
using the same number of modules stacked without repeats
(DRC(9,1)) or only repeated without stacking (DRC(1,9)).
In addition, we also look at the same smaller capacity ver-
sions D = 2, N = 2 and D = 1, N = 1 (which reduces
to a standard ConvLSTM). Figure 3a shows the results on
Sokoban for the different network conﬁgurations. In general,
the versions with more capacity performed better. When
trading-off stacking and repeating (with total of 9 modules),
we observed that only repeating without stacking was not
as effective (this has the same number of parameters as the
DRC(1,1) version), and only stacking was slower to train
in the early phase but obtained a similar ﬁnal performance.
We also conﬁrmed that DRC(3,3) performed better than
DRC(1,1) in Boxworld, MiniPacman, and Gridworld.
On harder Sokoban levels (Medium-difﬁculty dataset), we
trained the DRC(3,3) and the larger capacity DRC(9,1)
conﬁgurations and found that, even though DRC(9,1) was
slower to learn at ﬁrst, it ended up reaching a better score
than DRC(3,3) (94% versus 91.5% after 1e9 steps). See
Fig 9 in appendix. We tested the resulting DRC(9,1) agent
on the hardest Sokoban setting (Hard-difﬁculty), and found
that it solved 80% of levels in less than 48 minutes of evalu-
ation time. In comparison, running a powerful tree search
algorithm, Levin Tree Search (Orseau et al., 2018), with a
DRC(1,1) as policy prior solves 94%, but in 10 hours of
evaluation.
In principle, deep feedforward models should support itera-
tive procedures within a single time-step and perhaps match
the performance of our recurrent networks (Jastrzebski et al.,
2017). In practice, deep ResNets did not perform as well
as our best recurrent models (see Figure 3b), and are in any
case incapable of caching implicit iterative planning steps
over time steps. Finally, we note that recurrence by itself
was also not enough: replacing the ConvLSTM modules
with ﬂat 1D LSTMs performed poorly (see Figure 3b).
Across experiments and domains, our results suggests that
both the network capacity and the iterative aspect of a model
drives the agent’s performance. Moreover, in these 2D puz-

An Investigation of Model-free Planning
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Steps
1e8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction of solved levels
DRC (3, 3)
DRC (2, 2)
DRC (1, 1)
DRC (9, 1)
DRC (1, 9)
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
steps
1e9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction of solved levels
DRC (3, 3)
DRC (1, 1)
1D LSTM (3, 3)
1D LSTM (1, 1)
ResNet
(b)
Figure 3. a) Learning curves for various conﬁgurations of DRC in
Sokoban-Unﬁltered. b) Comparison with other network architec-
tures tuned for Sokoban. Results are on test-set levels.
zle domains, spatial recurrent states signiﬁcantly contribute
to the results.
4.2. Data Efﬁciency & Generalization
In combinatorial domains generalization is a central issue.
Given limited exposure to conﬁgurations in an environment,
how well can a model perform on unseen scenarios? In the
supervised setting, large ﬂexible networks are capable of
over-ﬁtting. Thus, one concern when using high-capacity
networks is that they may over-ﬁt to the task, for example
by memorizing, rather than learning a strategy that can
generalize to novel situations. Recent empirical work in SL
(Supervised Learning) has shown that the generalization of
large networks is not well understood (Zhang et al., 2016;
Arpit et al., 2017). Generalization in RL is even less well
studied, though recent work (Zhang et al., 2018a;b; Cobbe
et al., 2018) has begun to explore the effect of training data
diversity.
We explored two main axes in the space of generalization.
We varied both the diversity of the environments as well as
the size of our models. We trained the DRC architecture in
various data regimes, by restricting the number of unique
Sokoban levels — during the training, similar to SL, the
training algorithm iterates on those limited levels many
times. We either train on a Large (900k levels), Medium-
size (10k) or Small (1k) set — all subsets of the Sokoban-
unﬁltered training set. For each dataset size, we compared
a larger version of the network, DRC(3,3), to a smaller
version DRC(1,1).4 Results are shown in Figure 4.
In all cases, the larger DRC(3,3) network generalized better
than its smaller counterpart, both in absolute terms and in
terms of generalization gap. In particular, in the Medium-
size regime, the generalization gap5 is 6.5% for DRC(3,3)
versus 33.5% for DRC(1, 1). Figures 5a-b compare these
same trained models when tested on both the unﬁltered and
on the medium(-difﬁculty) test sets. We performed an analo-
gous experiment in the Boxworld environment and observed
remarkably similar results (see Figure 5c and Appendix Fig-
ure 12).
Looking across these domains and experiments there are two
ﬁndings that are of particular note. First, unlike analogous
SL experiments, reducing the number of training levels
does not necessarily improve performance on the train set.
Networks trained on 1k levels perform worse in terms of
the fraction of levels solved. We believe this is due to the
exploration problem in low-diversity regime: With more
levels, the training agent faces a natural curriculum to help
it progress toward harder levels. Another view of this is that
larger networks can overﬁt the training levels, but only if
they experience success on these levels at some point. While
local minima for the loss in SL are not practically an issue
with large networks, local minima in policy space can be
problematic.
From a classic optimization perspective, a surprising ﬁnding
is that the larger networks in our experiment (both Sokoban
& Boxworld) suffer less from over-ﬁtting in the low-data
regime than their smaller counterparts (see Figure 5). How-
ever, this is in line with recent ﬁndings (Zhang et al., 2016)
in SL that the generalization of a model is driven by the
architecture and nature of the data, rather than simply as
a results of the network capacity and size of the dataset.
Indeed, we also trained the same networks in a purely su-
pervised fashion through imitation learning of an expert
policy.6 We observed a similar result when comparing the
classiﬁcation accuracy of the networks on the test set, with
the DRC(3,3) better able to generalize — even though both
networks had similar training errors on small datasets.
Extrapolation Another facet of generality in the strategy
4DRC(3,3) has around 300K more parameters, and it requires
around 3 times more computation
5We compute the generalization gap by subtracting the perfor-
mance (ratio of levels solved) on the training set from performance
on the test set.
6Data was sampled on-policy from the expert policy executed
on levels from the training datasets.

An Investigation of Model-free Planning
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1e9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Large network - Train Set
Large train set (900k levels)
Medium-size train set (10k levels)
Small train set (1k levels)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1e9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Large network - Test Set
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1e9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Small network - Train Set
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1e9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Small network - Test Set
Steps
Fraction of solved levels
Figure 4. Comparison of DRC(3,3) (Top, Large network) and DRC(1,1) (Bottom, Small network) when trained with RL on various train
set sizes (subsets of the Sokoban-unﬁltered training set). Left column shows the performance on levels from the corresponding train set,
right column shows the performance on the test set (the same set across these experiments).
found by the DRC network is how it performs outside the
training distribution. In Sokoban, we tested the DRC(3,3)
and DRC(1,1) networks on levels with a larger number
of boxes than those seen in the training set. Figure 13a
shows that DRC was able to extrapolate with little loss
in performance to up to 7 boxes (for a a ﬁxed grid size).
The performance degradation for DRC(3,3) on 7 boxes was
3.5% and 18.5% for DRC(1,1). In comparison, the results
from Racanière et al. (2017) report a loss of 34% when
extrapolating to 7 boxes in the same setup.
4.3. Iterative Computation
One desirable property for planning mechanisms is that their
performance scales with additional computation without see-
ing new data. Although RNNs (and more recently ResNets)
can in principle learn a function that can be iterated to ob-
tain a result (Graves, 2016; Jastrzebski et al., 2017; Greff
et al., 2016), it is not clear whether the networks trained in
our RL domains learn to amortize computation over time in
this way. To test this, we took trained networks in Sokoban
(unﬁltered) and tested post hoc their ability to improve their
results with additional steps. We introduced ‘no-op’ actions
at the start of each episode – up to 10 extra computation
steps where the agent’s action is ﬁxed to have no effect
on the environment. The idea behind forced no-ops is to
give the network more computation on the same inputs, intu-
itively akin to increasing its search time. Under these testing
conditions, we observed clear performance improvements
on medium difﬁculty levels of about 5% for DRC networks
(see Figure 6). We did not ﬁnd such improvements for the
simpler fully-connected LSTM architecture. This suggests
that the DRC networks have learned a scalable strategy for
the task which is computed and reﬁned through a series
of identical steps, thereby exhibiting one of the essential
properties of a planning algorithm.
5. Discussion
We aspire to endow agents with the capacity to plan effec-
tively in combinatorial domains where simple memorization
of strategies is not feasible. An overarching question is re-
garding the nature of planning itself. Can the computations
necessary for planning be learned solely using model-free
RL, and can this be achieved by a general-purpose neural
network with weak inductive biases? Or is it necessary
to have dedicated planning machinery — either explicitly
encoding existing planning algorithms, or implicitly mir-
roring their structure? In this paper, we studied a variety
of different neural architectures trained using model-free
RL in procedural planning tasks with combinatorial and
irreversible state spaces. Our results suggest that general-
purpose, high-capacity neural networks based on recurrent
convolutional structure, are particularly efﬁcient at learning
to plan. This approach yielded state-of-the-art results on sev-
eral domains – outperforming all of the specialized planning
architectures that we tested. Our generalization and scaling
analyses, together with the procedural nature of the studied

An Investigation of Model-free Planning
Large
Medium
Small
Number of training levels
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ratio solved
Sokoban unfiltered test set
DRC(3,3)
DRC(1,1)
(a) Sokoban unﬁltered set
Large
Medium
Small
Number of training levels
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ratio solved
Sokoban medium test set
DRC(3,3)
DRC(1,1)
(b) Sokoban medium set
Large
Medium
Small
Number of training levels
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ratio solved
BoxWorld
DRC(3,3)
DRC(1,1)
(c) Boxworld
Figure 5. Generalization results from a trained model on different training set size (Large, Medium and Small subsets of the unﬁltered
training dataset) in Sokoban when evaluated on (a) the unﬁltered test set and (b) the medium-difﬁculty test set. (c) Similar generalization
results for trained models in Boxworld. (These ﬁgures show a summary of results in Figure 4 and Appendix Fig. 12.)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of extra steps
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
+% level solved
DRC(3,3)
DRC(1,1)
LSTM
Figure 6. Forcing extra computation steps after training improves
the performance of DRC on Sokoban medium-difﬁculty set (5
networks, each tested on the same 5000 levels). Steps are per-
formed by overriding the policy with no-op actions at the start of
an episode. The green line is the LSTM(1,1) model.
domains, suggests that these networks learn an algorithm
for approximate planning that is tailored to the domain. The
algorithmic function approximator appears to compute its
plan dynamically, amortised over many steps, and hence
additional thinking time can boost its performance.
There are, of course, many approaches to improving the efﬁ-
cacy of model-free algorithms. For example, DARLA, ICM,
and UNREAL improve performance and transfer in RL by
shaping representations using an unsupervised loss (Hig-
gins et al., 2017; Pathak et al., 2017; Jaderberg et al., 2016).
Our work hints that one of the most important approaches
may be to study which inductive biases allow networks to
learn effective planning-like behaviours. In principle these
approaches are straightforward to combine.
Recent work in the context of supervised learning is pushing
us to rethink how large neural network models generalize
(Zhang et al., 2016; Arpit et al., 2017). Our results further
demonstrate the mismatch between traditional views on gen-
eralisation and model size. The surprising efﬁcacy of our
planning agent, when trained on a small number of scenar-
ios across a combinatorial state space, suggests that any new
theory must take into account the algorithmic function ap-
proximation capabilities of the model rather than simplistic
measures of its complexity. Ultimately, we desire even more
generality and scalability from our agents, and it remains
to be seen whether model-free planning will be effective
in reinforcement learning environments of real-world com-
plexity.
