An Open Source Power System Simulator in Python
for Efﬁcient Prototyping of WAMPAC Applications
Hallvar Haugdal, Kjetil Uhlen
Department of Electrical Power Engineering
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Trondheim, Norway

Abstract—An open source software package for performing
dynamic RMS simulation of small to medium-sized power sys-
tems is presented, written entirely in the Python programming
language. The main objective is to facilitate fast prototyping of
new wide area monitoring, control and protection applications
for the future power system by enabling seamless integration with
other tools available for Python in the open source community,
e.g. for signal processing, artiﬁcial intelligence, communication
protocols etc. The focus is thus transparency and expandability
rather than computational efﬁciency and performance.
The main purpose of this paper, besides presenting the code
and some results, is to share interesting experiences with the
power system community, and thus stimulate wider use and
further development. Two interesting conclusions at the current
stage of development are as follows:
First, the simulation code is fast enough to emulate real-time
simulation for small and medium-size grids with a time step of 5
ms, and allows for interactive feedback from the user during the
simulation. Second, the simulation code can be uploaded to an
online Python interpreter, edited, run and shared with anyone
with a compatible internet browser. Based on this, we believe that
the presented simulation code could be a valuable tool, both for
researchers in early stages of prototyping real-time applications,
and in the educational setting, for students developing intuition
for concepts and phenomena through real-time interaction with
a running power system model.
Index Terms—Dynamic RMS simulation, wide area monitor-
ing, control and protection, real-time simulation, Python
I. INTRODUCTION
Python ranks high among the worlds most popular program-
ming languages. Although very slow compared to many other
alternatives (e.g. C++), it has the advantage of being easy
to learn, read and write. Development of new applications is
therefore generally considered to be much easier and faster in
Python. Furthermore, a rich library of open source packages
is available, making it straightforward to make use of artiﬁcial
intelligence, communication protocols, powerful visualizations
and more.
In this paper, we present an open source package for per-
forming dynamic RMS-simulations, written entirely in Python.
With this, we seek to contribute with a highly transparent,
easily modiﬁable and expandable power system simulator that
allows tight integration with powerful tools that already exist
in the open source community. We believe that open solutions
are essential for developing the wide area monitoring, control
and protection applications of the future power system.
The initial motivation for development of such a package
arose during research towards a controller for damping of
power oscillations. The particular study required a non-linear
dynamic power system simulator with detailed generator mod-
els, capable of incorporating signal processing techniques like
Kalman Filters in the simulation loop, as well as the ability
to perform eigenvalue analysis on linearizations of the model.
This was found to be surprisingly difﬁcult.
Using Python as a scripting language is standard func-
tionality in many commercial tools, for instance DIgSILENT
PowerFactory, and is well described in the documentation
of the software. Including Python in the dynamic simulation
loop is much more difﬁcult, and is not standard functionality.
Interfacing Python with dynamic simulations in PowerFactory
can be achieved with the repository described in [1]. This
functions by making PowerFactory call a dll extension a
number of times during each simulation step. The dll ﬁle,
compiled from C code, calls Python. This potentially expands
the functionality of PowerFactory a great deal, but might to
some appear complicated to use, for instance requiring some
knowledge on compilation C code.
PSS/E is very well interfaced with Python through the
psspy module. However, small signal stability analysis requires
separate modules to be installed. These modules are not that
well interfaced with Python, and potentially complicates the
workﬂow. Also, the full, linearized system matrix, which might
be required in some applications, is not directly available.
Among open source alternatives for dynamic power system
simulations, we have DPsim [2], which is a simulator written
in highly efﬁcient C++ code, speciﬁcally developed for real-
time- and co-simulation. ANDES [3] is a Python software for
symbolic modelling and numerical analysis of power systems.
The Open-Instance Power System Library (OpenIPSL) [4],
[5], written in the Modellica language, speciﬁcally targets
unambiguous model sharing among utilities and researchers.
The above mentioned tools are powerful enough to simulate
systems with thousands of buses. This is necessary for these
tools to be able to perform simulations on detailed models of
real transmission grids. However, for research or educational
purposes, smaller aggregated systems with tens to hundreds
of buses are often used. Frequently used test systems include
the Kundur Two-Area System, the IEEE 9, 14, 39 and 68-bus
systems and the Nordic 32 and 44-test systems. Systems of
arXiv:2101.02937v1  [eess.SY]  8 Jan 2021

this size can be simulated entirely in Python, without strictly
requiring sophisticated performance-boosting techniques that
in some cases compromise transparency and expandability.
Having developed the simulation code, the encouraging
experience obtained this far regarding performance and ease
of use motivates us to present the code in this paper.
The entire code is developed in Python, where the core
functionality relies only on standard packages like NumPy [6]
and SciPy [7]. This comes with the advantage that the software
is cross platform-compatible and easily deployable, and does
not require compilation. Further, the software can easily be
uploaded to an online Python interpreter and shared, edited
and run in the cloud, which could represent a major beneﬁt
for reproducibilty of research.
The code is available in a repository called DynPSSimPy
[8] (Dynamic Power System Simulator in Python) on GitHub,
released under the GPLv3 license. By following links pro-
vided on the GitHub-page, simple examples can be launched
online (using Binder [9]) to demonstrate some of the basic
functionality of the software.
Finally, it should be mentioned that the package is in
its very early stages of development at this point, with a
limited number of dynamic models and somewhat limited
functionality in some areas.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section
II goes into detail on the core functionality; in Section III
simulation results are validated against commercial simula-
tion software; in Section IV we elaborate on the real-time
simulation functionality; ﬁnally, Sections V and VI contain
discussion and conclusions.
II. CORE FUNCTIONALITY
In dynamic analysis of large scale power systems, the
ac electrical variables (voltages and currents) are usually
represented as phasors when the focus is on electromechanical
dynamics and primary control. The relevant models applied
are referred to as RMS-models. The fundamental problem
that needs to be solved by the RMS-model simulator is the
integration of the differential equations of all the dynamic
models in the system, while at the same time making sure that
the algebraic equations representing the network are satisﬁed.
A. Dynamic RMS-simulation
The Differential Algebraic Equations (DAE) describing the
dynamics of the system can be written on the form
˙x = f(x, y)
0 = g(x, y)
(1)
The function f describes the differential equations for all
states, while g describes the algebraic equations representing
the network equations. x is the vector of state variables, while
y is the vector of algebraic variables.
With the dynamic models implemented this far, the alge-
braic variables are constituted solely by the bus voltages of
the simulated system. The set of algebraic equations is linear,
and can be written on the form
YV = Iinj(x)
(2)
where Y is the admittance matrix, Iinj(x) is the vector of
current injections and V = y the vector of bus voltages.
Solving the algebraic equations is very efﬁcient with the
system sizes considered this far (up to 45 buses), allowing
us to convert the DAE system into a system of Ordinary
Differential Equations (ODE) without signiﬁcant deterioration
of performance.
First, we rewrite the algebraic equations as
y = V = Y−1Iinj(x) = h(x)
(3)
(In practice, of course, the admittance matrix is not inverted for
each time step, but rather it is solved by an efﬁcient algorithm
for sparse systems of linear equations, for instance using the
function scipy.sparse.linalg.spsolve.)
Further, we eliminate the algebraic variables:
˙x = f(x, h(x)) = f(x)
(4)
This system of ODEs can now be integrated with any
suitable integration method, for instance the Runge Kutta-
implementation found in scipy.integrate.RK45 [7].
For real-time simulation, it makes sense to use integration
methods with fewer evaluations of the ODE function per step
taken by the solver. This allows the step size to be decreased,
which in turn results in more accurate representation of
continuously changing inputs. The Euler- or Modiﬁed Euler
methods, requiring one or more evaluations, are thus better
alternatives than the fourth order Runge Kutta-method, which
requires four evaluations per time step.
B. Initialization of dynamic simulation
To make sure that the system stays on the initial operating
point after the simulation started (assuming no disturbances
are applied), the system must be initialized such that all
time-derivatives are equal to zero. Essentially, this means
determining the state vector x0 that gives
0 = f(x0)
(5)
Initialization of the simulation can be summarized as fol-
lows:
1) Perform a Newton-Rhapson power ﬂow calculation to
determine the bus voltages and active and reactive power
injections at each bus.
2) From the power ﬂow result, determine the terminal
voltage and the active and reactive power produced by
each generator.
3) Perform Kron-reduction of the dynamic admittance ma-
trix. All other buses than the generator buses can be
eliminated. However, other buses that should not be
eliminated can also be speciﬁed. For instance, line
outages require less computation effort if the buses of

the line in question are present in the reduced system,
which might be interesting when performing real-time
simulation.
4) The number of states is determined, and the ordering of
the state vector is determined. According to the dynamic
model deﬁnitions in the model library and the number
of instances of each model, the appropriate number of
states is added. (For instance, for 10 generators with 6
states each, 60 states is added in the state vector.)
5) The state vector that makes all the differential equations
equal to zero is found. This is done by solving the
algebraic equations resulting from setting the differential
equations equal to zero.
C. Modal Analysis
Modal analysis is performed by numerical linearization of
the system of ODEs. We ﬁnd the linearized system matrix as
the Jacobian of the ODE function, as follows:
A = ∂f(x)
∂x
(6)
Finally, we perform an eigendecomposition of the system
matrix to get the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the sys-
tem at this operating point (for instance using the function
numpy.linalg.eig).
D. Dynamic models
At present, one generator model, one AVR, one GOV and
one PSS model is implemented. Generator controls can be ap-
plied on arbitrary units with varying parameters. Furthermore,
the software is written such that implementation of additional
models is possible.
The formulation of the differential equations representing
the synchronous machine is based on the formulation in [10]:
M∆˙ω =Pm −Pe
˙δ =∆ω
T
′
d0 ˙E
′
q =Ef −E
′
q −Id(Xd −X
′
d)
T
′
q0 ˙E
′
d = −E
′
d + Iq(Xq −X
′
q)
T
′′
d0 ˙
E
′′
q =E
′
q −E
′′
q −Id(X
′
d −X
′′
d )
T
′′
q0 ˙
E
′′
d =E
′
d −E
′′
d + Iq(X
′
q −X
′′
q )
(7)
Subtransient saliency is neglected, i.e. we require X
′′
d =
X
′′
q . Interfacing each generator with the grid is achieved using
the following equations:
E
′′
d
E
′′
q

=
Vd
Vq

+
 R
X
′′
q
X
′′
q
R
 Id
Iq

(8)
Using that X
′′
d = X
′′
q = X
′′, this can be simpliﬁed to
E
′′ = E
′′
d + jE
′′
q
= (Vd + jVq) + (R + jX
′′)(Id + jIq)
= V + (R + jX
′′)I
(9)
Further, we establish the Northon Equivalent of the syn-
chronous machine, where the current source is given by
Ino = E
′′/X
′′
(10)
and the shunt impedance by
Zno = R + jX
′′
(11)
The impedances Zno of each of the synchronous machines
are included in the admittance matrix used during dynamic
simulation, Y in (2), appearing as contributions on the diag-
onal entries. The currents Ino appear as contributions to the
current injection vector Iinj(x).
Finally, the electrical power is given by
Pe = E
′′
d Id + E
′′
q Iq
(12)
For generator controls, the standard models SEXS for
AVR, TGOV1 for turbine/governor and STAB1 for PSS are
implemented.
E. Implementation
Each dynamic model is deﬁned as a class in Python. Within
each class, the function for calculating the state derivatives of
the dynamic model is deﬁned. Functions for initialization and
computing current injections are also implemented for models
where this is required.
Evaluating the complete state derivative vector in (4) is
achieved by looping through the state derivative functions
of all the individual dynamic models included in the power
system model.
For the implemented models described above, the state
derivative functions make use of vectorization, which sig-
niﬁcantly improves the computational efﬁciency. A further
increase in computational efﬁciency can be achieved by lever-
aging Just-In-Time compilation of the derivative functions
of each model, available in Python using Numba [11]. This
introduces some overhead, but speeds up the state derivative
functions signiﬁcantly once the compilation is done.
III. VALIDATION
The simulator is validated by comparing results from
the Kundur Two-Area System, obtained using the presented
Python package, with results obtained when simulating a
model with identical parameters in DigSILENT PowerFac-
tory. The ”Standard/Detailed model 2.2” synchronous machine
model is chosen for all synchronous machines in PowerFac-
tory. This is also a sixth order model, but the differential
equations are formulated using ﬂuxes instead of voltages. Sat-
uration is neglected, and all the loads are constant impedance
loads.
Figure 1 shows results from simulating a short circuit on
Generator 1 in the Kundur Two-Area System, where the results
from the Python simulation are shown alongside reference
results from PowerFactory. The angle, speed and subtransient
d- and q-axis voltages are shown. The results are very similar
in this case, substantiating the validity of the model.

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Angle [rad]
0.9975
1.0000
1.0025
1.0050
Speed [pu]
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Subtransient
q-axis voltage [pu]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time [s]
0.2
0.4
0.6
Subtransient
d-axis voltage [pu]
Python
PowerFactory
G1
G2
G3
G4
Fig. 1. The results from simulating the Kundur Two-Area System in Python
are shown alongside corresponding results from a model with identical param-
eters simulated in PowerFactory. The transient d- and q-axis voltages are not
shown, since these are not directly available from the PowerFactory simulation
(since in PowerFactory the dynamic generator equations are formulated in
terms of ﬂuxes instead of voltages). The results are not identical, but very
similar.
IV. REAL-TIME SIMULATION
For smaller grids, the simulator is fast enough to perform
real-time simulation with a time step of around 5 ms. To
perform real-time simulation, a timer is started at the beginning
of the simulation, which is used to synchronize the simulation
time with the wall clock time. After each step taken by the
solver, the simulator is set on hold until the next time step is
due. Although Python is by no means a language tailored for
real-time simulation, experience shows that the impression of
continuous real-time interaction with the simulated model can
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time in simulation [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time elapsed
pr. step [ms]
Ideal (5 ms)
Actual
Calc. only
Fig. 2. The ﬁgure indicates how the synchronization between exact time and
simulation time is performed during real-time simulation of the IEEE 39-bus
system, with a total of 123 states. The simulation step in this case is 5 ms
(red, dashed line). The actual loop time varies somewhat around the ideal loop
time (blue line). It can also be seen that the time spent only on the calculation
of each step (green line) is on average around 1 to 2 ms, i.e. well below 5
ms.
be achieved.
Fig. 2 shows the amount of time spent on each time step
by the solver during real-time simulation of the IEEE 39-
bus system with a time step of 5 ms. All generators are
modelled using the sixth order model, and all generators
except the largest synchronous machine (which represents the
rest of USA and Canada) are equipped with the AVR, PSS
and turbine-governor models presented in section II-D. The
model has a total of 123 states in this case, and is simulated
using the Modiﬁed Euler method, with constant step size
and one correction iteration. Numba was used for Just-In-
Time compilation of the state derivative functions to increase
computational efﬁciency. The simulation was performed on a
laptop with an Intel i7 CPU with two 2.8 GHz-cores and 16
GB RAM.
It can be seen that the calculation time (shown in green) on
average is around 1 to 2 ms, which is fast enough for a time
step of 5 ms (shown in red). The calculation time surpasses
5 ms in some occasions. Also, the actual time spent on each
time step (shown in blue) varies approximately ±2 ms around
the ideal time step (with some more extreme outliers). Over
time, the simulation time is relatively well synchronized with
the real world time. It should be noted that the calculation time
achieved here is orders of magnitude longer than what can be
achieved with, for instance, DPsim [2], which is speciﬁcally
made to handle real-time simulation.
Most parameters of the power system model can be con-
trolled directly during real-time simulation, and changes can be
made to the admittance matrix. This makes it straight-forward
to, for instance, apply short circuits, line outages etc. at will
during the simulation, or change voltage references or active
power set-points of generators.
For visualization and interaction with the real-time simula-
tion, a simple Graphical User Interface (GUI) is implemented
using the PyQtGraph [12] library. This library allows custom

Fig. 3. The GUI during real-time simulation of the Kundur Two-Area System is shown. The GUI is composed of a phasor plot displaying the rotor angle and
excitation voltage magnitude (Ef∠δ) for each generator (upper left), and curves for generator power angles and speed (right). The controls (lower left) allows
the user to interact with the simulation through a console (allowing commands to be issued to modify the admittance matrix, generator control parameters
etc.), activate/deactivate AVR, governor or PSS of any of the generators, or disconnect or connect one or more of the eight lines. If the AVR is deactivated,
the excitation of the individual generators can be controlled manually by sliders.
GUIs to be implemented easily, with customized live plots and
controls. A screen shot of the GUI is shown in Fig. 3 during
real-time simulation of the Kundur Two-Area system. The
GUI in this case shows live phasors representing the excitation
voltage and rotor angle for each generator, as well as speed
and angle plots. Additionally, the controls in the lower left part
of the ﬁgure allows lines to be disconnected, and generator
controls to be activated/deactivated.
V. DISCUSSION
Based on the presented results, we elaborate on the follow-
ing ideas:
A. Desktop Real-Time Simulator
It is found that real-time simulations of small to medium
sized systems can be performed on an average laptop com-
puter, without requiring specialized operative systems or
hardware. For researchers, this potentially simpliﬁes testing
real-time capability and performing live demonstrations of
WAMPAC applications signiﬁcantly. In the educational set-
ting, interactive real-time simulation and visualization allows
students to get hands on experience with a running simulation
model, which is valuable for developing intuitive understand-
ing of different stability problems, control systems etc.
B. Reproducibilty of research
For researchers, it is often more time consuming than
necessary to reproduce results from other simulation studies.
Even small power system models have hundreds of parameters
that need to be correct for researchers to be able to accurately
reproduce results. Furthermore, the speciﬁc implementation of
dynamic models might differ across simulation tools. If the
entire code for reproducing results for a particular study could
be made available for the community, complete with the power
system model, dynamic models and the simulation code, this
could signiﬁcantly reduce the time spent on establishing the
reference case.
The presented simulation code being developed entirely in
Python (relying only on standard packages for the core func-
tionality) comes with the advantage that it is straightforward
to upload the code to an online Python interpreter. This makes
it easy to share, edit and run simulations in the cloud. This
could make reproducing results even easier, as the simulation
required to produce the published result could be performed
in the internet browser.
VI. CONCLUSION
Dynamic RMS simulations of small to medium sized grids
can be performed efﬁciently in Python using the presented
simulation software. This enables tight integration of power

system simulations with other open source packages available
for Python, which is the main objective. Although transparency
and expandability is prioritized over computational efﬁciency
and performance, it is found that real-time simulation with
a reasonably short time step is possible. The possibility of
uploading the entire code required for reproducing results from
a publication is also emphasized.
Finally, adding that the package is free, easily deployable
and cross-platform compatible, we believe that it could be
a valuable tool, both for researchers prototyping WAMPAC
applications, and in the educational setting.
