Analyzing movies to predict their commercial viability for
producers
Devendra Swami
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California

Yash Phogat
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California

Aadiraj Batlaw
University of California
Berkeley, California

Ashwin Goyal
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California

ABSTRACT
Upon film premiere, a major form of speculation concerns the
relative success of the film. This relativity is in particular regards
to the film’s original budget – as many a time have “big-budget
blockbusters” been met with exceptional success as met with abject
failure. So how does one predict the success of an upcoming film?
In this paper, we explored a vast array of film data in an attempt
to develop a model that could predict the expected return of an
upcoming film. The approach to this development is as follows:
First, we began with the MovieLens dataset [2] having common
movie attributes along with genome tags per each film. Genome tags
give insight into what particular characteristics of the film are most
salient. We then included additional features regarding film content,
cast/crew, audience perception, budget, and earnings from TMDB,
IMDB, and Metacritic websites. Next, we performed exploratory
data analysis and engineered a wide range of new features capturing
historical information for the available features. Thereafter, we used
singular value decomposition (SVD) for dimensionality reduction
of the high dimensional features (ex. genome tags). Finally, we built
a Random Forest Classifier and performed hyper-parameter tuning
to optimize for model accuracy. A future application of our model
could be seen in the film industry, allowing production companies
to better predict the expected return of their projects based on their
envisioned outline for their production procedure, thereby allowing
them to revise their plan in an attempt to achieve optimal returns.
1
INTRODUCTION
The film industry is one that stands out in every aspect. It is a world
of it’s own. For this paper our motivation comes from the desire
to provide a prediction model for producers to get an idea of the
commercial viability of their proposed movie. Joe Swanberg said
in 2016, "The only way you’re ever going to make any money is
if you’re investing in your own movies". Before movie producers
have to finalize their decision, they have to ensure that their in-
vestment is sound and understand how they see a return on that
investment – this is where our model enters the movie world. Our
main contributions in solving this problem can be summarized as
follows:
Second Place, West Coast Regional, Citadel Securities, October 2020, CA, USA
• We investigated a wide range of features that are likely to
be associated with commercial success of a movie. Different
from other available studies, we have incorporated many
novel features such as publicity, release date and movie cast
& crew. We spent considerable time in feature engineering
to better understand what factors make a movie financially
lucrative.
• We extracted 11 different groups of features and built a ran-
dom forest (RF) model to predict whether the return on
investment (ROI) for the movie will be above or below me-
dian. After training RF, we have then identified the relative
importance of each individual feature and groups of features.
The remaining paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we
describe our research methodology. In 3, we present our findings,
followed by section 4, where we discuss the relationship between
few important features and ROI. In Section 5, we identify threats to
validity and finally in section 6, we conclude the paper and suggest
scope for future work.
2
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
2.1
Problem Statement
The current paper investigates the application of using a machine
learning algorithm to provide better understanding of the features
that could potentially affect the commercial success of a movie. The
problem statement can be formally defined as follows
Task: Movie Success Prediction: Given a movie 𝑀, predict
whether 𝑀will be a commercially successful movie.
While achieving this task we try to answer the research questions
mentioned below.
• RQ1: How successful is the random forest algorithm in pre-
dicting whether a movie will be a commercial success in
terms of ROI?
• RQ2: Which individual features and groups of features play
the most important role in predicting ROI from movies?
2.2
Features
In this section, we discuss the features we have considered in this
study. The features were selected based on what features are gen-
erally used for performing analysis of movies industry, and other
arXiv:2101.01697v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2021

Second Place, West Coast Regional, Citadel Securities, October 2020, CA, USA
Swami et al.
novel features that are publicly available and can be extracted easily
using accessible tools.
Table 1 shows the summary of features considered in this study.
We categorized our selected features into 11 groups based on the
characteristics of a feature within the group. Each feature group is
summarized below.
2.2.1
Content. In this group, we consider is_adult, is_english, lan-
guages_count, runtime, genome and genre. The content of the film
is important as film watchers typically have a distinct preference
for these categories (ex. English speakers typically prefer movies
in English), and therefore film content allows us to narrow down
on the target audience.
2.2.2
Publicity. Several features were extracted to measure pub-
licity efforts, like is_collection, is_homepage, is_tagline and key-
words_count. Publicity is an important factor, as the marketing and
accessibility of the film has a direct impact on the number of people
that hear about the movie, and, by extension, the number of people
that watch the movie (today in particular, films part of series tend
to out perform other movies on the box office).
2.2.3
Audience Perception. In this group, we examined the fea-
tures including popularity, vote_average, vote_count, metacritic_score,
imdb_rating, imdb_votes. Naturally, audience perception has a huge
effect on the success of movies. Films with high ratings tend to
outperform movies with lower ratings. However, since this infor-
mation is usually unavailable until after the film is released, we did
not include this in our prediction model.
2.2.4
Release Date. In this group, we examined features like
release_month, movies_per_month, budget_fraction, expense_score.
Several studies have indicated that the competition a film meets at
the time of release has a major impact on the financial success of
the film. This feature group strives to examine this effect.
2.2.5
Finance. This group comprises solely of the feature,
time_discounted_budget, which is the discounted value of the bud-
get used to produce the movie. Typically films with larger budgets
tend to outperform lower budgeted movies in terms of revenue.
2.2.6
Production House. This group only includes the feature
production_house_embedding. This is calculated from average per-
formance of recent movies produced by the same production houses.
Better, more established production houses are usually able to hire
more renowned directors, writers, and stars, which, in addition to
working with larger budgets, are factors that typically lead to box
office success.
2.2.7
Writers. This group comprises solely of the feature writ-
ers_embedding, which was calculated from average performance
of recent movies written by the same writers. Typically, writers
who have written for successful films tend to write more successful
films.
2.2.8
Directors. This group comprises solely of the feature direc-
tors_embedding, which was calculated from average performance
of recent movies made by the same directors. Typically, directors
who have directed successful films tend to direct more successful
films.
2.2.9
Producers. This group comprises solely of the feature pro-
ducers_embedding, which was calculated from average performance
of recent movies made by the same producers. Typically, producers
who have produced successful films tend to produce more success-
ful films.
2.2.10
Main Cast. This group comprises solely of the feature
main_cast_embedding, which is calculated from average perfor-
mance of recent movies where members from the main cast fea-
tured. Several studies have shown that the star(s) of the film have a
major effect on its success.
2.2.11
Support Staff. This group comprises of the features fe-
male_count, male_count, and crew_length. Some studies indicate
the gender and size of the cast of a film can have an effect on its
success.
2.3
Data Collection
We obtained most of the data from the Kaggle dataset "The Movies
Dataset",[3] which provided us with data on the cast, crew, and
general metadata on a large subset of films. In a dataset provided by
the Data Open competition community, we obtained the genome
tags, which we merged with our metadata dataset. We obtained
further features by making API calls to the TMDB (The Movie
Database), as well as scraping Metacritic scores from "IMDB: All U.S.
Released Movies: 1972-2016". Initially, our merged dataset included
slightly over 13K rows as we only had genome information for
these many movies. We then decided to focus on movies after the
color revolution (i.e. after 1965), and got rid of rows that had their
budget values or revenue values set to 0. (There was forethought to
interpolate these errors, however, as budget and revenue were such
an important factor in determining rate of return, we concluded
any method of interpolation would largely bias our model). This
brought our total number of rows to 5,426.
2.4
Machine Learning Algorithm
We first thought of using regression as our machine learning algo-
rithm due to the fact that the ROI values are continuous. However,
our predictions from regression were rather inaccurate in many
cases. Moreover, rather than being interested in knowing exact
values, movie producers might be more inclined to know whether
their movie will potentially perform well or otherwise. Thus, we
have decided to predict above or below median ROI (median cal-
culated on training data) rather than precise ROI values. This way,
we have converted our original hard-to-learn regression problem
into an easy binary classification task.
We have deployed random forest (RF) algorithm to perform our
classification task since it is one of the most successful non-linear
machine learning algorithm. It considers numerous decision trees
trained over random sample of the training data. In addition, for
splitting nodes it randomly selects a subset of features. Finally,
the decision is carried out by taking average of predictions from
each decision tree. As a result, the random forest algorithm is less
prone to over-fitting. Moreover, it can take numerical or categorical
variables as input and even does not require feature scaling. For
these reasons, we chose the random forest algorithm for performing
the classification task. The dataset is split into approx 80% training

Analyzing movies to predict their commercial viability for producers
Second Place, West Coast Regional, Citadel Securities, October 2020, CA, USA
Table 1: Movie features likely to affect the commercial success of a movie
#
Group
Feature
Description
1
Content
is_adult
Whether the movie is only suitable for adults or not.
is_english
Whether the primary language used in the movie is English or not.
languages_count
The total number of languages used in the movie.
movie_runtime
The total length of the movie, in minutes.
genome_tags [6]
Features extracted from movie content.
movie_genres
The different genres under which the movie can be placed into.
2
Publicity
is_collection
Whether the movie is part of a collection or series.
is_homepage
Whether the movie has a homepage or not.
is_tagline
Whether the movie has an associated tagline or not.
keywords_count
Number of frequently used keywords that can be assigned to the movie.
3
Audience Perception†
popularity
The movie popularity score provided by TMDB.
vote_average
The average approval score for the movie, based on total votes at TMDB.
vote_count
The total number of votes provided for the movie at TMDB.
metacritic_score
The average approval movie score at metacritic.
imdb_rating
The average approval movie score at IMDB.
imdb_votes
The total number of votes provided for the movie at IMDB.
4
Release Date
release_month
The month in which the movie is released.
movies_per_month
The total number of movies released in the same month as the given movie.
budget_fraction
The budget of the movie in proportion to the cumulative budget of all movies of that month.
movie_expense_score
The budget of the movie in proportion to the average budget of all movies of that month.
5
Finance
time_discounted_budget
The time discounted value for budget used to produce movie.
6
Production House
production_house_embedding
Calculated from performance of recent movies produced by the same production houses.
7
Writers
writers_embedding
Calculated from performance of recent movies written by the same writers.
8
Directors
directors_embedding
Calculated from performance of recent movies directed by the same directors.
9
Producers
producers_embedding
Calculated from performance of recent movies produced by the same producers.
10
Main Cast
main_cast_embedding
Calculated from performance of recent movies where members from the main cast featured.
11
Support Staff
female_count
The total number of females in the movie cast.
male_count
The total number of males in the movie cast.
crew_length
The total number of people in the movie crew.
†: Not used in prediction model as that information is not available before movie release.
and 20% test data with movies earlier than 2011 are part of train
data and from 2011 and on-wards comprising test set.
Dimensionality reduction: Due to presence of high dimen-
sional sparse features like genome tags and genre information
(after one hot encoding) in the dataset, we have used singular value
decomposition (SVD) to reduce their number of dimensions while
keeping most of the variance in data intact. In addition to that, we
have also removed highly correlated features from our dataset. We
have identified highly correlated pair of features, i.e. pairs having
absolute correlation value of 0.75 or higher from Spearman’s corre-
lation. Among these identified pairs, features having a lower mutual
information [4] are dropped. It is done to remove features that do
not provide any additional information and can help in reducing
size of the dataset to speed up our training process.
Hyperparameters optimization: For obtaining optimal hy-
perparameters for our RF model, we have started by preparing a
grid search space. For n_estimators, we considered values from
100 to 1000 with step size of 100. Similarly, integral multiple of
√︁
#𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠to #features for max_features, values from 10 to 100
with step size of 10 for max_depth is used. Values of 0.01, 0.03,
and 0.05 is considered for min_samples_split, and 1, 3, and 5 for
min_samples_leaf. We have always set bootstrap to True.
Due to grid search space of 12600 (10 · 14 · 10 · 3 · 3) being
computationally expensive, we have performed randomized search
over uniformly drawn samples from it. We have used 100 iterations
through 4−fold cross validation to identify the optimal hyperparam-
eters. We report the hyperparameters obtained from this procedure
in Table 2.
Table 2: Parameters of RF model tuned over validation set
Parameters
Optimal Value
n_estimators
500
max_features
14
max_depth
40
min_samples_split
0.05
min_samples_leaf
5

Second Place, West Coast Regional, Citadel Securities, October 2020, CA, USA
Swami et al.
2.5
Model Evaluation
By virtue of the way we formulate our classification task, our dataset
is perfectly balanced with two classes of equal importance. There-
fore, Accuracy is initially thought to be a suitable evaluation metric.
However, accuracy is sensitive to selection of threshold for convert-
ing predicted probability to the most likely output class. Different
threshold can yield different accuracy score for the same ML pre-
dictions and thus makes it difficult to do performance comparison
across multiple ML algorithms.
In order to overcome this hurdle, we have selected the Area Un-
der the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Curve to evaluate
the performance on our task. We use the acronym AUC to denote
this metric. The ROC curve is a plot between true positive rate and
false positive rate obtained by deploying different thresholds to
assign positives. The area under this curve (AUC) is then used to
compare the performance of a model over our binary classification
task.
Further, we have compared the performance of the random for-
est algorithm with the random baseline approach. In Random
baseline, we randomly assign below or above median ROI to each
movie in the test set. An absence of significant improvement in
performance of RF model over baseline will imply that the selected
features have no association with commercial success of the movie.
A perfect classification model will yield an AUC value of 1.00,
whereas a random model will have value around 0.50. In general, a
higher AUC value indicates a better model.
2.6
Feature Importance Analysis
We have used permutation feature importance technique proposed
by Breiman [1] to measure the importance of an individual fea-
ture and a group of features. The key idea behind this method is
that random permutation of important features should lead to a
substantial deterioration of model performance. This decrease in
performance metric is referred as the Importance Value (IV) and
a higher value indicates that the feature is more important.
Similarly, the group importance is calculated by permuting all
features in a group together. It is important to not here that we can
safely employ the permutation feature importance technique [5]
since none of the features are highly correlated in our dataset as
we have already removed highly correlated features.
3
RESULTS
3.1
RQ1: How successful is the random forest
algorithm in predicting whether a movie
will be a commercial success in terms of
ROI?
Figure 1 shows the ROC curves of the baselines and the random
forest algorithm . The AUC for the random forest algorithms is 0.78.
Regarding the baseline, Random achieved expected AUC scores
of around 0.500. A higher AUC score of RF model suggests that a
solution that uses feature engineering and machine learning would
have the potential to help movie producers and analysts to better
estimate the expected ROI for upcoming movies.
Figure 1: The ROC curve of the random forest algorithm that
uses the selected features, and the baseline for our dataset.
3.2
RQ2: Which individual features and groups
of features play the most important role in
predicting ROI from movies?
Table 3: Importance of top 15 individual features
Feature Name
Information Value (IV)
is_collection
0.010
genome_0
0.005
keywords_count
0.004
genome_2
0.004
genome_13
0.004
movies_per_month
0.003
male_count
0.002
genome_3
0.002
genome_5
0.002
genome_12
0.002
is_homepage
0.001
time_discounted_budget
0.001
female_count
0.001
genome_1
0.001
genome_10
0.001
Table 3 shows the top 15 most important features in predict-
ing movies’ ROI. We also observe that is_collection is among the
most important feature. This makes intuitive sense, as sequels,
spin-offs, and films extensions of a thematic universe tend to out-
perform movies without such characteristics. We also notice that
the genome features (which as one might recall describes a film by
its most salient characteristics) tend to offer valuable information.
key_word_count offers similar information to the genome feature,
and it also having a high information valuable implies that the
characteristics of films are a key insight for determining the success
of a film. The last noticeable observation in this table would be
movies_per_month, which implies that competition upon a film’s re-
lease date is indeed a major contributor in determining the success
of a film.
Table 4 shows the top 5 most important feature groups. Here we
observe that Content has the highest information value. This makes

Analyzing movies to predict their commercial viability for producers
Second Place, West Coast Regional, Citadel Securities, October 2020, CA, USA
Table 4: Importance of top 5 feature groups
Feature Group
Information Value (IV)
Content
0.047
Main Cast
0.031
Publicity
0.021
Writers
0.017
Production House
0.016
sense, as genome_tags is included as a feature in this category. With
Main Cast coming in second in IV, we reaffirm our hypothesis that
the stars of a film have a major impact on its success.
4
DISCUSSION
Rather than solely rely on feature importance values discussed
in previous section, we also want to investigate the causality and
determine the direction of influence of important features on ROI
values. Thus, in this section, we specifically explore the relationship
between the key features and return. However, we note that this is a
uni-variate analysis which has the shortcoming of not considering
multivariate interactions.
Figure 2: Plot between Is_collection and Return
Figure 2 shows that there appears to be a reasonable difference
in the return on investment of films that are a part of a collection
and those that are not. Movies that are part of a collection/series
tend to offer higher ROI than those not part of any collection.
Figure 3 shows that there appears to be a fairly reasonable dif-
ference between the return on investment for movies released with
different ranges of number of other movies released in that month.
It appears that for the most part, the fewer movies released in the
month of the released date of the film of interest, the higher the
rate of return. It is important to note that there are large outliers
for all these categories, signalling that some films across categories
performed exceptionally well regardless of the number of films
released in the same month of the film’s release date.
Figure 4 explores if the existence of a homepage for a particular
film is associated with a high return on investment. From this
figure, it appears there is an association, but it does not seem to
be particularly significant for the univariate case as we see there
confidence intervals over lap.
Figure 3: Plot between Movies per month and Return
Figure 5 compares the return on investment for different cate-
gories of budget. From here we see that there films produced with
larger budgets tend to have a higher return on investment.
5
THREATS TO VALIDITY
We have listed out various threats to the validity and limitations of
our study in this section.
Figure 4: Plot between Is_homepage and Return
Figure 5: Plot between Time Discounted Budget and Return

Second Place, West Coast Regional, Citadel Securities, October 2020, CA, USA
Swami et al.
Feature Selection Bias: The results of current study can be
affected by the features we have considered, limited by our imag-
ination. Thus, others employing a different set of features may
obtain different experimental results. There are few features that
we have considered for our prediction but could not incorporate
yet for example if the movie was nominated for an academy award,
how well connected was the production team with the world? Yes,
we have included popularity features but the broader question re-
mains, how was the budget managed? How much was allocated
to marketing and campaigning?. Thus, including more features in
consultation with industry experts is part of our future plan.
Tool and Method Reliability: Although we have used stan-
dard tools and methods suitable for such studies, it is still possible
that inaccuracies exist in them that we did not take into account.
For example, we assumed that genome tags are perfectly computed
and provide a better representation of the movie content. How-
ever, being derived from ML algorithm, these tags can prove to be
inaccurate in some cases.
External validity: We agree that there are several limitations
that could potentially influence the generalizability of our findings.
First, the movie sampling problem; to elaborate, we realised that
times have changed since early 1920’s and hence we would need
to consider only a limited time-frame before the targeted period,
this led to reduction in data points and hence reduction in validity
checks that we could perform.
Further, only one machine learning algorithm is used, namely
Random Forest. We considered using neural networks but due a
paucity of data points our model would have been flawed.
6
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we sought to answer the question how might pro-
duction companies predict future return of upcoming cinematic
projects, attempting to help filmmakers better understand the com-
mercial viability of their undertakings. To achieve this, we extracted
features in the categories of Content, Publicity, Release Date, Fi-
nance, Production House, Writers, Directors, Producers, Main Cast,
and Support Staff. Finally, we built a random forest classification
model, which, after thorough hyperparameter tuning, was able to
successfully predict the return of the films with an AUC score of
78%.
Future Work: The top priority is adding more features and
expanding our data-set to include more data-points for available
features. This includes web-scrapping social media websites to
find hidden connections and deep networks that were previously
unknown, for example, constructing a social media connectivity
graph to better identify popularity and inner circles of the produc-
tion team which in-turn provides better predictions for our core
problems. (Social circles identify how powerful a single member’s
presence is - better the presence, more the return). Once we have
done that, we would like to concentrate our efforts in employing
other learning algorithms to obtain new models that would com-
pare or ensemble with our current model. One such algorithm can
be neural networks as we may discover additional real world rela-
tionships that are currently unknown. This, of course is possible
once we have expanded our data-set sufficiently.
