arXiv:1202.4144v1  [cs.LO]  19 Feb 2012
Towards an eﬃcient prover for the C1
paraconsistent logic
Adolfo Neto1,2
Informatics Department (DAINF)
Federal University of Technology - Paran´a (UTFPR)
Curitiba, Brazil
Celso A. A. Kaestner3
Informatics Department (DAINF)
Federal University of Technology - Paran´a (UTFPR)
Curitiba, Brazil
Marcelo Finger1,4
Computer Science Department (DCC)
University of S˜ao Paulo (USP)
S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
Abstract
The KE inference system is a tableau method developed by Marco Mondadori which was presented as an
improvement, in the computational eﬃciency sense, over Analytic Tableaux. In the literature, there is no
description of a theorem prover based on the KE method for the C1 paraconsistent logic. Paraconsistent
logics have several applications, such as in robot control and medicine. These applications could beneﬁt
from the existence of such a prover. We present a sound and complete KE system for C1, an informal
speciﬁcation of a strategy for the C1 prover as well as problem families that can be used to evaluate provers
for C1. The C1 KE system and the strategy described in this paper will be used to implement a KE based
prover for C1, which will be useful for those who study and apply paraconsistent logics.
Keywords:
tableaux systems, KE system, C1 logic, paraconsistent logics, problem families.
1
Introduction
Inconsistency is a phenomena that appears naturally in our world. Consider the
following situation: two persons have diﬀerent (contradictory) opinions about a spe-
1 Adolfo Neto and Marcelo Finger acknowledge support from Funda¸cc˜ao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de
S˜ao Paulo (FAPESP), Brazil, through the Thematic Project ConsRel, grant number 2004/14107-2. Marcelo
Finger also acknowledges an individual research grant from the Brazilian Research Council (CNPq).

2009

Neto
ciﬁc statement A: the ﬁrst one considers A true, meanwhile the second one believes
that ¬A is true.
This contradiction, however, should not prevent that common
conclusions which do not involve A – directly or indirectly – can be deduced.
This situation is not adequately managed by classical logic, since it is not
equipped to deal with inconsistency. The reason is the well known “Ex contradic-
tione sequitur quod libet” principle: if a theory Γ is inconsistent, that is, if formulas
A and ¬A are theorems, then every formula B of the language is also a theorem in
Γ; or, shortly, Γ becomes trivial.
Paraconsistent Logics were initially proposed by Da Costa [8] as logical systems
that deal with contradictions in a discriminating way, avoiding the previous principle
and managing inconsistent but non-trivial theories.
Presently automatic proof methods are widely used in several computer applica-
tions, such as in robot control [23], in medicine [14,16], and many others [10]. Most
of the employed methods work on logical formalisms based on classical logic. In this
paper we present the speciﬁcation of an strategy for automatic theorem prover based
on a KE system, an improvement of the well known tableaux deduction method,
for a particular paraconsistent logic called C1.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the axioma-
tization and valuation of the paraconsistent logic C1; in Sections 3 and 4 we present
the KE system for C1 and its inference rules, and the KEMS strategy, respectively;
Section 5 presents a set of problems constructed to evaluate the prover; in Section
6 we present a motivating example, showing that our proposal is adequate to deal
with practical problems; in Section 7 we compare our work with similar ones; ﬁnally
in Section 8 we draw some conclusions and propose future research.
We emphasize the main contributions of this paper: (a) a sound and complete
KE system for C1 (Section 3); (b) an informal speciﬁcation of a KEMS [20] strategy
for the C1 prover (Section 4); and (c) problem families that can be used to evaluate
provers for C1 (Section 5).
1.1
Preliminaries
Let P be a countable set of propositional letters. We concentrate on the propo-
sitional language L formed by the usual boolean connectives →(implication), ∧
(conjunction), ∨(disjunction) and ¬ (negation). We call Σ this set of connectives:
Σ = {¬, ∧, ∨, →} (Σ is called a signature in [6]). Vn
i=1 and Wn
i=1 are, respectively,
iterated conjuntion and iterated disjunction.
Throughout the paper, we use uppercase Latin or lowercase Greek letters to
denote arbitrary formulas, and uppercase Greek letters to denote sets of formulas.
We also work here with signed formulas.
A signed formula is an expression
S A where S is called the sign and A is a propositional formula. The symbols T
and F , respectively representing the ‘true’ and ‘false’ truth-values, can be used as
signs. The conjugate of a signed formula T A (F A) is F A (T A). The subformulas
of a signed formula S A are all the formulas of the form T B or F B where B is a
subformula of A.
The size of a signed formula S A is deﬁned as the size of A. The size s(A) of a
formula A is deﬁned as usual:
2

Neto
• s(A) = 1 if A is a propositional atom;
• s(⊘A) = 1 + s(A), where A is a formula and ⊘is a unary connective;
• s(A ⊘B) = 1 + s(A) + s(B), where ⊘is a binary connective, and A and B are
formulas.
A propositional valuation v is a function v : P →{0, 1}. We extend the deﬁnition
of valuations to signed formulas in the following way: v(T A) = v(A) and v(F A) =
1 −v(A).
2
C1, a paraconsistent logic
C1 is a paraconsistent logic [8], “a logic of the early paraconsistent vintage” [6]. It
is part of the hierarchy of logics Cn, 1 ≤n < ω [10]. C1 is of historical importance
because it was one of the ﬁrst paraconsistent logics to be presented.
Paraconsistent logics are logics in which theories can be inconsistent but non-
trivial [10]. In classical logic, A ∧¬A ⊢B for any formulas A and B. This is not
true in paraconsistent logics.
In C1, a consistency operator (◦) is introduced. The intended meaning of ◦A
is “A is consistent” [6]. According to [6], “da Costa’s intuition was that the ‘con-
sistency’ (which he dubbed ‘good behavior’) of a given formula would not only be
a suﬃcient requisite to guarantee its explosive character, but that it could also be
represented as an ordinary formula of the underlying language.”
In C1, da Costa represented the consistency of a formula A by the formula
¬(A ∧¬A). That is, the consistency connective “◦” is not a primitive connective,
but an abbreviation:
◦A
def
= ¬(A ∧¬A).
2.1
C1’s Axiomatization
Some axiomatizations for C1 were presented in the literature [6,9,15]. The presen-
tation below is based on [6] and [9].
Axiom schemas:
(Ax1) α →(β →α)
(Ax2) (α →β) →((α →(β →γ)) →(α →γ))
(Ax3) α →(β →(α ∧β))
(Ax4) (α ∧β) →α
(Ax5) (α ∧β) →β
(Ax6) α →(α ∨β)
(Ax7) β →(α ∨β)
(Ax8) (α →γ) →((β →γ) →((α ∨β) →γ))
(Ax10) α ∨¬α
(Ax11) ¬¬α →α
(bc1) ◦α →(α →(¬α →β))
3

Neto
(ca1) (◦α ∧◦β) →◦(α ∧β)
(ca2) (◦α ∧◦β) →◦(α ∨β)
(ca3) (◦α ∧◦β) →◦(α →β)
Inference rule:
(MP) α, α →β
β
The diﬀerence from classical propositional logic (CPL) axiomatization is that
to obtain an axiomatization for CPL we must remove the schemas that deal with
the consistency connective ((bc1), (ca1), (ca2) and (ca3)) and add the following
axiom schema (called ‘explosion law’ in [6]):
(exp) α →(¬α →β)
2.2
C1’s Valuation
C1 received a bivaluation semantics in [9] (see also [6]). A set of clauses character-
izing C1-valuations (adapted from the one in [6]) is the following:
• v(α1 ∧α2) = 1 if and only if v(α1) = 1 and v(α2) = 1;
• v(α1 ∨α2) = 1 if and only if v(α1) = 1 or v(α2) = 1;
• v(α1 →α2) = 1 if and only if v(α1) = 0 or v(α2) = 1;
• v(¬α) = 0 implies v(α) = 1;
• v(¬¬α) = 1 implies v(α) = 1;
• v(◦α) = 1 implies v(α) = 0 or v(¬α) = 0.
• v(◦(α ⊘β)) = 0 implies v(◦α) = 0 or v(◦β) = 0, for ⊘∈{∧, ∨, →};
Deﬁnition 2.1 Let Γ be {A1, A2, . . . , An} for n ≥0. Γ ⊢B is a valid sequent in
C1 if and only if, v(B) = 1 whenever v(Ai) = 1 for all i (1 ≤i ≤n). “Γ ⊢B is a
valid sequent in C1” can be abbreviated to Γ ⊢C1 B.
3
The KE System for C1
The KE inference system is a tableau method [13] developed by Marco Mon-
dadori and discussed in detail in several works authored or co-authored by Marcello
D’Agostino [2,11,12]. The KE system was presented as an improvement, in the
computational eﬃciency sense, over Analytic Tableaux [22]. A KE System is a
tableau system in which there is only one branching rule. As branching can lead
to repetition of eﬀorts (i.e. the same work being done in two or more branches),
branching rules lead to less eﬃcient proof systems (and implementations) [12].
We present here a sound and complete KE System we have devised for C1. The
rules in our system are presented in Figure 1. Note that in C1, the set of connectives
is Σ = {¬, ∧, ∨, →} but, to make the rules simpler, we have used the connectives
in Σ◦= Σ ∪{◦}, i.e. including the consistency connective, which is actually an
abbreviation.
In [19,21] (and also in [18]) the ﬁrst and third authors of this paper have pre-
4

Neto
F A →B
T A
F B
(F→)
T A →B
T A
T B
(T→1)
T A →B
F B
F A
(T→2)
T A ∧B
T A
T B
(T∧)
F A ∧B
T A
F B
(F∧1)
F A ∧B
T B
F A
(F∧2)
F A ∨B
F A
F B
(F∨)
T A ∨B
F A
T B
(T∨1)
T A ∨B
F B
T A
(T∨2)
F ¬A
T A
(F¬)
T ¬¬A
T A
(T¬¬)
T ◦A
T ¬A
F A
(T ◦¬)
F ◦(A ⊘B)
T ◦A
F ◦B
(F ◦⊘1)
F ◦(A ⊘B)
T ◦B
F ◦A
(F ◦⊘2)
T A
F A
(PB)
Fig. 1. C1 KE rules.
sented KE Systems for two other paraconsistent logics: mbC and mCi (more
about these two logics can be found in [6]). The KE System for C1 has several
rules in common with the KE Systems for these two logics.
However, in these
logics, consistency (◦) is not a deﬁned connective.
As in classical KE rules [12], rules with “1” (for instance, “F ∧1”) or “2” as
subscript are interchangeable. Only one of each pair is actually essential. By using
the PB rule (Figure 1), the other can be derived.
Note also that F◦⊘1 and F◦⊘2 are actually three rules each, because ⊘can
be any connective in {∧, ∨, →}. In a 2-premiss rule, the main premiss is the ﬁrst
premiss. The second premiss is called minor premiss. The main premiss in F◦⊘1
(or in F◦⊘2) can be “F ◦(A ∧B)”, “F ◦(A ∨B)” or “F ◦(A →B)”. And, as ‘◦’
is a deﬁned connective, “F ◦(A ⊘B)” is actually “F ¬((A ⊘B) ∧¬(A ⊘B)”. For
instance, F◦∧1 is:
5

Neto
F ¬(P ∧(¬P ∧◦P ))
T P ∧(¬P ∧◦P )
T P
T ¬P ∧◦P
T ¬P
T ◦P
F P
×
Fig. 2. A proof of ¬(P ∧(¬P ∧◦P )) using the C1 KE system.
F ¬(P ∧(¬P ∧◦P ))
T P ∧(¬P ∧◦P )
T P
T ¬P ∧◦P
T ¬P
T ◦P
T P →P
T P →¬P
F P
×
F P →¬P
T P
F ¬P
×
F P →P
T P
F P
×
Fig. 3. A proof of ¬(P ∧(¬P ∧◦P )) [6].
F ¬((A ∧B) ∧¬(A ∧B))
T ¬(A ∧¬A)
F ¬(B ∧¬B)
(F◦∧1)
It is easy to see that these rules (F◦⊘1 and F◦⊘2) are not analytic. In F◦∧1,
F¬(B ∧¬B) is not a subformula of any premiss.
Therefore, in our system we have:
• 12 essential linear rules (5 of these rules are 1-premiss rules and 7 rules are 2-
premiss rules);
• 6 derived linear 2-premiss rules;
• 1 (0-premiss) branching rule.
Of these rules, 6 of them (F◦⊘1 and F◦⊘2) are rather complex, far more complex
than any CPL KE rule.
Example 3.1 The formula ¬(P ∧(¬P ∧◦P)) can be proved in C1 KE system as
depicted in Figure 2. The same formula was proved in [6] using the C1 tableau
system presented there (Figure 3). It is easy to see that the C1 KE proof has less
formula nodes and less branches than the C1 tableau [6] proof.
6

Neto
3.1
Soundness and Completeness
Our intention here is to prove that the C1 KE system is sound and complete.
The
proof is very similar to the mCi KE system’s soundness and completeness proof
presented in Section B.2.4 of [18]. We begin with some deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 3.2 [12] A branch of a KE tableau is closed when T A and F A appear
in the branch.
Deﬁnition 3.3 [12] A KE tableau is closed if all its branches are closed.
Deﬁnition 3.4 Γ ⊢C1KE B if there is a closed KE tableau for Γ ⊢B.
Deﬁnition 3.5 The C1 KE system is sound if, for any Γ and B, Γ ⊢C1KE B implies
Γ ⊢C1 B.
Deﬁnition 3.6 The C1 KE system is complete if, for any Γ and B, Γ ⊢C1 B implies
Γ ⊢C1KE B.
Deﬁnition 3.7 A set of C1 signed formulas DS is downward saturated:
(i) whenever a signed formula is in DS, its conjugate is not in DS;
(ii) when all premises of any C1 KE rule (except PB) are in DS, its conclusions
are also in DS;
(iii) when the major premiss of a 2-premiss C1 KE rule is in DS, either its auxiliary
premiss or its conjugate is in DS.
A Hintikka’s Lemma holds for C1 downward saturated sets:
Lemma 3.8 (Hintikka’s Lemma for C1) Every C1 downward saturated set is sat-
isﬁable.
Proof. For any downward saturated set DS, we can easily construct a C1 valuation
v such that for every signed formula SX in the set, v(SX) = 1.
How can we
guarantee this is in fact a valuation?
First, we know that there is no pair T X
and F X in DS. Second, all premised C1 KE rules preserve valuations. That is, if
v(SXi) = 1 for every premiss SXi, then v(SCj) = 1 for all conclusions Cj. And if
v(SX1) = 1 and v(SX2) = 0, where X1 and X2 are, respectively, major and minor
premises of a C1 KE rule, then v(S′X2) = 1, where S′X2 is the conjugate of SX2.
Therefore, DS is satisﬁable.
✷
Theorem 3.9 Let DS’ be a set of signed formulas. DS’ is satisﬁable if and only
if there exists a downward saturated set DS” such that DS’ ⊆DS”.
Proof. (⇐) First, let us prove that if there exists a downward saturated set DS”
such that DS’ ⊆DS”, then DS’ is satisﬁable. This is obvious because from DS”
we can obtain a valuation that satisﬁes all formulas in DS”, and DS’ ⊆DS”.
(⇒) Now, let us prove that if DS’ is satisﬁable, there exists a downward satu-
rated set DS” such that DS’ ⊆DS”.
So, suppose that DS’ is satisﬁable and that there is no downward saturated set
DS” such that DS’ ⊆DS”. Using items (ii) and (iii) of (3.7), we can obtain a
family of sets of signed formulas DS’i (i ≥1) that include DS’. If none of them is
7

Neto
downward saturated, it is because for all i, {T X, F X} ∈DS’i for some X. But all
rules are valuation-preserving, so this can only happen if DS is unsatisﬁable, which
is a contradiction.
✷
Corollary 3.10 DS’ is an unsatisﬁable set of formulas if and only if there is no
downward saturated set DS” such that DS’ ⊆DS”.
Theorem 3.11 The C1 KE system is sound and complete.
Proof. The C1 KE proof search procedure for a set of signed formulas S either
provides one or more downward saturated sets that give a valuation satisfying S
or ﬁnishes with no downward saturated set. The C1 KE system is a refutation
system.
The C1 KE system is sound because if a C1 KE tableau for a set of
formulas S closes, then there is no downward saturated set that includes it, so S is
unsatisﬁable. If the tableau is open and completed, then any of its open branches
can be represented as a downward saturated set and be used to provide a valuation
that satisﬁes S (in other words, S is satisﬁable).
The C1 KE system is complete because if S is satisﬁable, no C1 KE tableau for
a set of formulas S closes. And if S is unsatisﬁable, all completed C1 KE tableaux
for S close.
✷
3.2
Decidability
We do not prove here that the C1 KE system is decidable, i.e., that there is an
algorithm for ﬁnding proofs in the C1 KE system. We only present the sketch of
such a proof that will be detailed in a future paper about the implementation of a
C1 prover.
The idea is to deﬁne a restriction of the C1 KE system which imposes some
conditions on the application the PB rule (Figure 1).
In this restricted C1 KE
system, the PB rule can only be applied in a branch:
• when there is a non-atomic signed formula that can be the main premiss of a
2-premiss rule and that was not yet analysed (i.e. used as main premiss) in the
branch; and
• when either T A or F A can be the minor premiss of a 2-premiss rule, where A is
the PB formula (i.e. the A formula that appears as T A in the new left branch
and F A in the new right branch after PB application).
For all the 2-premiss rules in Figure 1, the minor premiss’s size is smaller than
major premiss’s size. This, alongside with the conditions above, guarantees the the
proof search procedure eventually terminates.
4
A KEMS Strategy for C1
KEMS [18] is a theorem prover that can be used to implement strategies for many
diﬀerent logical systems. For instance, the current version [20] has 6 strategies for
CPL, 2 strategies for mbC and 2 strategies for mCi.
We have to follow some steps to implement a strategy for a logical system in
KEMS. First, one has to know how KEMS implementation is structured (by reading
8

Neto
[18] and the source code available in [20]). Second, one has to implement the classes
that will represent the logical system (such as CPL or C1).
Third, one has to
implement the classes necessary to represent the rules of the KE system (such as
C1 KE system).
Only after these three steps, one can implement one or more
strategies for a given KE system.
KE systems (as well as many logical proof methods) are usually presented by
showing their rules. The rules tells us only what we can do – they do not specify
in which order to use the rules. A strategy is a deterministic algorithm for a given
KE system, as well as a set of data structures used by the algorithm.
4.1
C1 KE Simple Strategy
The C1 KE Simple Strategy resembles mbC and mCi Simple Strategies (see Sec-
tions C.4.4 and C.4.5 of [18]). Let us informally describe the algorithm performed
by this strategy:
(i) the strategy applies all possible linear rules in the current branch (in the begin-
ning, the current branch is the branch containing the formulas obtained from
the problem);
(ii) if the current branch closes (i.e. if a contradiction {T A, F A} is found), then
the strategy tries to remove a branch from its stack of open branches. If it
succeeds, this branch becomes the current branch and the control goes back to
the ﬁrst step. If there is no remaining open branch, the procedure ends and
the result is that the tableau is declared closed;
(iii) if the current branch is linearly saturated (i.e. no more linear rules can be
applied), but not closed, the strategy tries to apply the PB rule.
The PB
rule can be applied when there is at least one non-atomic signed formula in
the branch that can be the main premiss of a 2-premiss rule and this signed
formula was not yet used as the main premiss in an application of a 2-premiss
rule. If the strategy can apply the PB rule, then the (new) right branch is
put in the stack of open branches and the left branch becomes the current
branch. If the strategy cannot apply the PB rule, then the procedure ﬁnishes
by declaring the tableau open.
The order of rule applications is:
(i) C1 KE 1-premiss rules;
(ii) C1 KE 2-premiss rules;
(iii) the PB rule.
See Sections C.2 and C.4 of [18] for more details on how rules are applied in KEMS.
4.1.1
Implementation Remarks
This strategy is a very straightforward strategy for a C1 KE system. The idea is
to use the PB rule only as a last resource (as shown in the canonical procedure
for KE [12]). The diﬀerence is that in the C1 KE system we cannot restrict the
strategy to perform only analytic applications of PB. An analytic application of PB
is an application of PB where the PB formula (i.e. the A formula that appears as
9

Neto
T A in the new left branch and F A in the new right branch after PB application) is
a subformula of some formula in the branch.
Another diﬃculty in the implementation of this strategy (actually in the imple-
mentation of almost any proof system for C1) is how to deal with the consistency
connective.
We have two options:
(i) only accept problems using the connectives in Σ. Therefore, all rules presented
in Figure 1 will have to be implemented using Σ connectives (which makes the
rules and the associated pattern matching more complex). Note that the size
of problems written in Σ◦may grow exponentially (in the worst case) when
translated to Σ;
(ii) accept problems written in Σ◦and, whenever a ¬(A ∧¬A) formula appears
(for any A), treat it as if it was (also) ◦A in the applications of rules that have
formulas with ◦as premisses. Although this option allows the prover to deal
with smaller problems, it makes rule applications more diﬃcult.
C1 Simple Strategy will use option (i) above. Option (ii) will be used on a second
strategy for C1 KE.
5
Problem Families to Evaluate C1 Provers
A problem family is a set of problems that we know, by construction, whether they
are valid, satisﬁable or unsatisﬁable [18]. A problem is a sequent that can be given
as input for a theorem prover. The i-th instance (for i ≥1) of a problem family is
a (valid, satisﬁable or unsatisﬁable) sequent.
In Section D.1.2 of [18], seven families of diﬃcult problems that can be used to
evaluate theorem provers for paraconsistent logics were presented. All these families
were families of valid sequents. To the best of our knowledge, there are no other
families of diﬃcult problems designed with this purpose in mind.
The families
presented there can be used to evaluate provers for two logics: mbC and mCi,
which are part of the class of logics of formal inconsistency (LFIs) [6].
In [6] it is shown that C1 can also be classiﬁed as an LFI and that it extends
mbC. Therefore, the ﬁrst four families created to evaluate mbC provers [18] can
also be used to evaluate provers for C1.
However, these families do not test all C1 KE rules.
That is, to prove the
problems in those families using the C1 KE system, one does not need to use all
its rules. Therefore, to extend what we could call “rule coverage”, i.e. to test more
rules, we present two more families of sequents. These sequents are valid in C1 (but
not in mbC, therefore they can also be used to test mbC provers) and, for proving
them, we have to use rules that are not used in the ﬁrst four families’ proofs.
These families were not developed with any intuitive meaning in sight. As the
objective was to test theorem provers, they were designed to be diﬃcult to prove,
by using as many rules as possible.
The motivation for developing and presenting these problem families before the
actual C1 prover was implemented was, inspired by the Test-Driven Development
technique for software development [1], to use the tests as a guide for the design
10

Neto
and implementation of the sofwtare.
Note: to make it easier to read the problems, we have used the connectives in
Σ◦and we sometimes use “[” and “]” in place of “(” and “)”.
5.1
Fifth family
The sequents in this family (Φ5) demand C1’s T ¬¬ rule to be proven valid. Φ5
n
(the nth instance of Φ5) is:
◦A1,
n
^
i=1
(Ai),
n^
i=1
[An+1 →((Ai ∨Bi) →(◦Ai+1))], (
n
^
i=1
◦Ai) →¬An+1 ⊢¬¬¬An+1
For instance, Φ5
3 in signed tableau notation is:
T ◦A1
T A1 ∧A2 ∧A3
T [A4 →((A1 ∨B1) →(◦A2))]
∧[A4 →((A2 ∨B2) →(◦A3))]
∧[A4 →((A3 ∨B3) →(◦A4))]
T ((◦A1) ∧(◦A2) ∧(◦A3)) →¬A4
F ¬¬¬A4
5.2
Sixth family
In order to prove, using the C1 KE system, that the sequents in this family (Φ6) are
valid, it is necessary to use the two C1 KE rules where “◦” is the main connective
in the main premiss: F ◦⊘1 and F ◦⊘2. Φ6
n (the n-th instance of Φ6) is:
n
^
i=1
(Bi),
n
^
i=1
(◦Ci),
n
^
i=1
((Ai ∨Bi) →(◦Ai+1)), (
n
^
i=1
Ci) →(D ∧¬C1) ⊢[
n
_
i=1
(◦(Ai+1 →Ci))] ∨D
For instance, Φ6
3 is:
T B1 ∧B2 ∧B3
T ◦C1 ∧◦C2 ∧◦C3
T ((A1 ∨B1) →(◦A2)) ∧((A2 ∨B2) →(◦A3)) ∧((A3 ∨B3) →(◦A4))
T (C1 ∧C2 ∧C3) →(D ∧¬C1)
F [◦(A2 →C1)] ∨[◦(A3 →C2)] ∨[◦(A4 →C3)] ∨D
6
A Motivating Example
We present here an example almost completely based on the example shown in [17]:
11

Neto
Consider the construction of a simple medical system aimed at diagnosing three
diseases K, L and M. There are two diﬀerent symptoms, denoted by N and O.
The intended usage of this system is as follows:
• The core part of the system is the knowledge provided by a doctor (DOC1).
• When we intend to apply this knowledge to a speciﬁc patient, other profession-
als conduct medical tests on this patient add the results of these tests to the
knowledge base.
• In order to use the system, we submit a goal to the program in a similar way
as it is done in Prolog.
We assume that the system is written in the form of a ﬁnite set of formulas
over C1. Suppose that DOC1 provided us the following ﬁve rules (formulas):
(F1) K →¬L
(F2) L →¬K
(F3) K →M
(F4) N →K
(F5) O →L
Intuitively, the doctor is telling that:
• An individual cannot have both diseases K and L (F1 and F2).
• If an individual has the disease K, them he has the disease M (F3)
• If an individual has the symptom N, them he has the disease K (F4)
• If an individual has the symptom O, them he has the disease L (F5)
To exemplify the use of this knowledge base, we describe four situations. The
ﬁrst one is similar to a query to a Prolog program, while the other three explore
the capacity of handling inconsistencies:
Case 1: Suppose that the patient has symptom N and we want to know if he
has the disease K but not L.
To answer this query we must verify if
F1, F2, F3, F4, F5, N ⊢C1 K ∧¬L
is valid.
As the KE proof for this sequent is a closed tableau, this sequent is valid.
It is also valid in classical logic.
Case 2: Now suppose that the patient tested positive for symptoms N and O,
and we want to know if he has both diseases K and L.
To answer this query we must verify if
F1, F2, F3, F4, F5, N, O ⊢K ∧L
(1)
is valid.
(1) is valid in C1. In classical propositional logic, (1) is also valid. Actually,
in classical propositional logic:
F1, F2, F3, F4, F5, N, O ⊢B
(2)
is valid for any formula B. However, (2) is not valid in C1 for any formula B .
Case 3: Now suppose that the patient tested positive for symptoms N and O,
and we want to know if he has not the disease M.
12

Neto
To answer this query we must verify if
F1, F2, F3, F4, F5, N, O ⊢C1 ¬M
(3)
is valid.
The KE proof for this sequent (an open tableau, which shows that the
sequent is NOT valid) is the following:
T K →¬L
T L →¬K
T K →M
T N →K
T O →L
T N
T O
F ¬M
T K
T L
T M
T ¬K
T ¬L
However, this sequent is valid in classical logic, because a classical contradiction
is found (T K and T ¬K).
Case 4: Now suppose again that the patient tested positive for symptoms N
and O, but now we want to know if he has the disease K and if this conclusion is
not consistent (¬ ◦K).
To answer this query we must verify if
F1, F2, F3, F4, F5, N, O ⊢C1 K ∧¬ ◦K
(4)
is valid.
The KE proof for this sequent (a closed tableau) is the following:
T K →¬L
T L →¬K
T K →M
T N →K
T O →L
T N
T O
F K ∧¬ ◦K
T K
T L
T ¬L
T ¬K
T M
F ¬ ◦K
T ◦K
F K
×
This query shows that, besides “dealing with inconsistencies in the knowledge
base without every formula becoming derivable” [17], a common feature of para-
consistent logics, C1 allows us to express propositions about the (in)consistency of
formulas.
13

Neto
The sequent (4) is valid in classical logic. Note that, for any formula B, “¬ ◦B”
is a theorem in classical logic. Therefore, in classical logic, Γ ⊢K ∧¬ ◦K if and
only Γ ⊢K.
7
Related Work
A tableau system for C1 was presented in [7]. As this system is based on analytic
tableaux (AT) [22], it has four branching rules: the three ones from AT plus a T ¬
branching rule. Due to this T ¬ rule, inﬁnite loops may occur during the proof
search, postponing indeﬁnitely the analysis of formulas that involve the negation
and consistency operators. Notwithstanding, this system is decidable. This system
has been implemented but the source code is not available.
In [4] two tableau systems for C1 were presented, the second one being a version
of the ﬁrst one considered by the authors more adequate to be implemented. The
ﬁrst system has 12 rules (8 of them are branching rules) while the second has 20
rules (12 of them are branching rules). The rules are rather complex, involving
much more formulas and connectives than C1 KE rules. The second system was
elegantly implemented in LISP (the source code is available in [3]). However it was
written in a LISP dialect (muLISP) which cannot be compiled in modern LISP
compilers.
We have experimented using Buchsbaum’s system with the formulae described
in Section 5. For example, it was not able to prove instance Φ5
27 due to lack of
memory. This conﬁrms that the family Φ5 is a family of diﬃcult problems. We are
translating this prover to a diﬀerent LISP dialect to make it more robust.
Another C1 tableau system appears in [6].
It was obtained by using a gen-
eral method for constructing tableau systems [5]. Although this system has a PB
branching rule, a feature of KE systems, is not a KE system. To be a KE system
it should have only one branching rule, but it has 8 branching rules. Just like the
system in [7], it is based on AT. However, it does not have rules that lead to inﬁnite
loops. We do not know of any implementation of this method.
In [15], tableau systems for several logics of the Cn hierarchy were presented.
The C1 tableau system presented there is also based on AT. While in the previous
systems ◦A
def
= ¬(A ∧¬A) was applied whenever necessary to generate the branches
of the tableau, this system has speciﬁc rules to directly deal with all operators,
including “◦”. However, as it is based on the analytic tableau method, it also has
too many (six) branching rules. We also do not know of any implementation of this
method.
Therefore, the distinctive feature of our C1 KE system is that it has 13 essential
rules and only of them is a branching rule. This feature will allow us to implement
eﬃcient strategies for this system in KEMS [20].
8
Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a sound and complete KE system for Da Costa’s
C1 calculus for paraconsistent logic. We have shown that our system has less branch-
ing rules than other tableau systems for C1 described in the literature [3,4,6,7,15].
14

Neto
Therefore, it is probably more eﬃcient than those systems (see [12] for a discussion
on why branching leads to ineﬃciency).
We have also described a strategy for this KE system that can be implemented
in KEMS. Future work includes implementing this strategy, as well as designing
and implementing other strategies for the C1 KE system.
In order to evaluate C1 KE strategies, we have developed two problem families.
These families and the ﬁrst four problem families described in section D.1.2 of
[18] can also be used to evaluate other theorem provers for C1, such as Arthur
Buchsbaum’s prover for C1 [3].
As further work, we intend to compare the results obtained by our strategies (in
the style of section D.2 of [18]) among themselves as well as with Arthur Buchs-
baum’s prover.
