Quantum synchronization effects induced by strong nonlinearities
Yuan Shen,1 Wai-Keong Mok,2, 3 Changsuk Noh,4 Ai Qun Liu,1, ∗
Leong-Chuan Kwek,2, 5, 6, 7, † Weijun Fan,1, ‡ and Andy Chia2
1School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Block S2.1, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
2Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
4Department of Physics, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea
5MajuLab, CNRS-UNS-NUS-NTU International Joint Research Unit, Singapore UMI 3654, Singapore
6National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637616, Singapore
7Quantum Science and Engineering Centre (QSec), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
A paradigm for quantum synchronization is the quantum analog of the Stuart–Landau oscillator,
which corresponds to a van der Pol oscillator in the limit of weak (i.e. vanishingly small) nonlin-
earity. Due to this limitation, the quantum Stuart–Landau oscillator fails to capture interesting
nonlinearity-induced phenomena such as relaxation oscillations.
To overcome this deficiency we
propose an alternative model which approximates the Duffing–van der Pol oscillator to finitely large
nonlinearities while remaining numerically tractable. This allows us to uncover interesting phenom-
ena in the deep-quantum strongly-nonlinear regime with no classical analog, such as the persistence
of amplitude death on resonance. We also report nonlinearity-induced position correlations in reac-
tively coupled quantum oscillators. Such coupled oscillations become more and more correlated with
increasing nonlinearity before reaching some maximum. Again, this behavior is absent classically.
We also show how strong nonlinearity can enlarge the synchronization bandwidth in both single
and coupled oscillators. This effect can be harnessed to induce mutual synchronization between two
oscillators initially in amplitude death.
Introduction.—Mathematical modelling has shown us
how the immense variety and beauty of nature can be
governed by nonlinear differential equations [1–4]. Such
equations, owing to their nonlinearity, are difficult to an-
alyze and their application to physical processes has come
to be known as nonlinear science [5, 6].
How nonlinear effects play out in quantum-mechanical
systems is a subject of intense investigation.
By far,
chaos has attracted the most attention [7–10]. Nonethe-
less, noise effects, such as stochastic resonance [11–14]
and coherence resonance [12, 15] have also been promi-
nent, while a recent example is Ref. [16]. Another widely
recognized effect is noise-induced transitions [17].
Re-
cent work has extended this effect to quantum mechanics
by using a quantum stochastic differential equation and
its correspondence to nonlinear dissipation [18] (see also
Ref. [19]). There are also promising applications of non-
linear dissipation such as stabilizing bosonic qubits for
fault-tolerant quantum computing [20–22], and enhanc-
ing the sensitivity of quantum sensors [23, 24].
A relative newcomer to the study of nonlinear effects
in quantum systems is synchronization [25]. Its most ele-
mentary form consists of applying a sinusoidal force, say
with amplitude f, and frequency Ωd, to a self-sustained
oscillator.
Synchronization is then the modification of
the oscillator frequency to Ωd. A prototypical model is
the driven van der Pol (vdP) oscillator [26], defined by

phase-space coordinates (x, y) satisfying
x′ = y ,
y′ = f cos(Ωdt) −ω2
0 x −µ (x2 −q2) y ,
(1)
where primes denote differentiation with respect to the
argument (in this case t, representing time). In the ab-
sence of forcing (f = 0) the oscillator is characterized
by ω0, and a nonlinearity parameter µ which controls
how much the oscillator is damped towards an ampli-
tude of order |q|. An important feature of the undriven
vdP system is the existence of a supercritical Hopf bifur-
cation at µ = 0, via which a stable limit cycle appears
for µ > 0 [26].
At µ = 0, (1) is entirely linear. This motivates one to
consider the quasilinear limit of (1), defined by µ −→0+.
In this limit the vdP oscillator is well approximated by
the Stuart–Landau (SL) oscillator, the steady state of
which is rotationally symmetric in phase space (a circular
limit cycle). This makes the SL oscillator much simpler
to analyze, and has thus served as a starting point in the
literature on quantum synchronization for continuous-
variable systems, e.g. Refs. [27–42].
The trade-off of
course, is that effects taking place at finite values of µ
are excluded. A well known example of this is relaxation
oscillations in the undriven vdP oscillator1 [3, 26, 47].
More effects start to appear if driving is included, such
1 In fact, vdP intended for (1) to model relaxation oscillations in
an electrical circuit [43].
To observe relaxation oscillations in
quantum theory one needs to quantize the exact vdP model, and
it is only relatively recently that such efforts have been made [44–
46].
arXiv:2301.02948v2  [quant-ph]  21 Jun 2023

2
as quasiperiodicity and chaos [48–50], both of which are
absent in the driven SL oscillator.
In this work, we investigate the effects of nonlinear-
ity in quantum oscillators by considering a more general
model based on the classical Duffing–van der Pol (DvdP)
oscillator. This adds ζ x3 to y′ where ζ is another nonlin-
earity parameter. To overcome the inadequacy of the SL
model we propose a quantum DvdP oscillator in which
the vdP and Duffing nonlinearities (respectively µ and
ζ) are nonvanishing, but also not arbitrarily large. Our
model is accurate up to order (µ/ω0)2, at which the dis-
tinct signatures of strong nonlinearity appear, such as
relaxation oscillations [45]. Our approach has the bene-
fit of capturing novel nonlinear effects while evading the
large computational cost of simulating quantum systems
with very strong nonlinear dissipations.
We show that for a single oscillator with periodic forc-
ing there exists a critical Duffing nonlinearity, above
which further increases in ζ enlarges the synchroniza-
tion bandwidth (the amount of detuning the forcing can
tolerate from the oscillator and still entrain it). This re-
sult is similar to the synchronization enhancement from
the classical literature [51], but now generalized to quan-
tum oscillators.2 In contrast, the vdP nonlinearity ac-
tivates genuine quantum effects. Coupling two vdP os-
cillators dissipatively may lead to either amplitude death
(the cessation of oscillations), or mutual synchronization.
Classically, amplitude death occurs only when the two
oscillators are sufficiently detuned [53]. Interestingly, we
find this need not be the case for quantum oscillators.
We show that two quantum vdP oscillators possessing
relatively small limit cycles and nonvanishing nonlinear-
ities can exhibit amplitude death even with zero detun-
ing. Larger limit cycles on the other hand can mutually
synchronize from a state of amplitude death if their non-
linearity is increased.
We also consider reactively coupled oscillators. Two
such SL oscillators cannot develop positional correla-
tions, and hence do not synchronize. This is true regard-
less of whether the oscillators are classical or quantum.
We show here that at finitely large nonlinearity, posi-
tion correlations behave rather differently between the
classical and quantum oscillators: Two reactively cou-
pled quantum vdP oscillators can undergo nonlinearity-
induced correlations whereby their position correlation
increases as they become more nonlinear. In contrast, we
find that making the analogous classical oscillators more
nonlinear monotonically reduces their position correla-
tion. The nonlinearity-induced correlations in the quan-
tum vdP oscillators are thus a consequence of both their
quantum nature and strong nonlinearity.
Model.—For simplicity we consider here a dimension-
2 It is also worth mentioning that nonlinear oscillators are of inter-
est to quantum information too, when they are coupled to qubits.
In this context the Duffing nonlinearity has been shown to both
increase and stabilize the oscillator-qubit entanglement [52].
less DvdP model in terms of the nonlinearity parameters
λ ≡µq2/ω0r2 and β ≡ζq2/ω2
0r2 in which r is a dimen-
sionless scale parameter:
˜x′ = ˜y ,
˜y′ = F cos(ωd˜t ) −˜x −λ(˜x −r2)˜x′ −β ˜x3. (2)
Note that ˜x ≡xr/q is now a function of ˜t = ω0t,
and we have also included a dimensionless external force
parameterized by F = fr/ω2
0q and ωd = Ωd/ω0. From
the approximate analysis of (2), the leading contribution
to the oscillator frequency is quadratic in λ, and linear in
β (see Appendix), given by ω ≈1 + r2(3β/2 −λ2r2/16).
This motivates a Bogoliubov–Krylov time-average of the
equations of motion up to these orders, giving [54]
α′ = i F
2 cos(ωdt) −i α −i3β
2 |α|2α + λ
2 (r2 −|α|2)α
+ iλ2
8

r4 −6r2|α|2 + 11
2 |α|4

α,
(3)
where α = (˜x + i ˜y)/2. For F = 0, (3) predicts a limit-
cycle amplitude of 2|α| = 2r with the expected frequency
shifts due to λ and β. Additionally, note the first-order
averaging in λ for β = 0 yields the SL equation. Our
approximate model captures the effects of strong vdP
nonlinearity of order λ2.
We seek a quantum master
equation ρ′ = Lρ such that ⟨ˆa⟩′ = Tr[ˆa Lρ] (with [ˆa, ˆa†] =
ˆ1) agrees with (3) in the mean-field limit [45]. It can then
be shown that this is satisfied by the Lindbladian [55–57]
L = −i [ ˆH,·] + λr2D[ˆa†] + λ
2 D[ˆa2] ,
(4)
where
ˆH =

1 −λ2r4
8

ˆa†ˆa + 3λ2r2
8
ˆa†2ˆa2 −11λ2
48
ˆa†3ˆa3
+ 3β
4 ˆa†2ˆa2 −F
2 cos(ωdt)(ˆa + ˆa†) .
(5)
We have also defined D[ˆc] ≡ˆc· ˆc† −(ˆc†ˆc· + · ˆc†ˆc)/2 for
any ˆc, and a dot denotes the position of ρ when acted
upon by a superoperator.
Detailed derivation can be
found in the Appendix. We remark that both the higher-
order Kerr terms and the nonlinear two-photon dissipa-
tion in our proposed model can be implemented in circuit
QED [21, 58]. The tunability of the limit cycle radius r
allows us to access different parameter regimes of the
quantum oscillator, in particular the quantum (r ≪1),
and semiclassical (r ≈1) regimes.
We have included
the second-order contributions in λ in our model for its
nonlinearity-tuning capability, since the terms linear in λ
neither affect the limit-cycle amplitude nor phase dynam-
ics. The Duffing nonlinearity translates to a Kerr term
in L. This model can be considered as an alternative to
the quantum SL oscillator, but with flexibility in tuning
the nonlinearity.
All our numerical results for a given
parameter set are obtained with a sufficiently large trun-
cation of the Hilbert space by ensuring the corresponding
steady-state power spectrum converge.

3
Nonlinearity-enhanced
synchronization.—We
study
first the frequency locking of the approximate quantum
DvdP oscillator to a periodic force [(4) and (5)]. The syn-
chronization bandwidth is the range of ωd for which the
oscillator frequency is locked to the driving frequency at
steady state. This is achieved when |ωd−˜ω| = 0, where ˜ω
the observed frequency of the driven oscillator, obtained
from the peak of its spectrum averaged over one period
of the drive [45].
Here we find the Duffing nonlinearity to enhance quan-
tum synchronization: For a range of λ and a fixed r,
increasing β past a critical value widens the synchroniza-
tion bandwidth linearly. This is illustrated in Fig. 1(a)
where the synchronization bandwidth is plotted as a con-
tour against ¯β ≡βr2 and F/r. The critical value of ¯β is
indicated by the red dashed line, where the bandwidth
is equal to its corresponding value at ¯β = 0. However,
this enhancement does not occur for all values of the
vdP nonlinearity. In Fig. 1(b) we see that an increase
of ¯λ ≡λr2 from its value in Fig. 1(a) can ruin the gain
in synchronization bandwidth due to ¯β. Noting that the
dissipative terms in L are all proportional to λ, this effect
can be qualitatively attributed to the phase diffusion due
to quantum noise, which is known to inhibit synchroniza-
tion [27, 28, 31]. We can develop some understanding of
the quantum DvdP by examining its classical analog. Us-
ing the method of harmonic balance on x, we are able to
derive the conditions for nonlinearity-enhanced synchro-
nization analytically for the classical DvdP oscillator (see
derivation in Appendix), given by
¯β >
¯λ2
3(1 −¯λ2) ,
0 < ¯λ < 1 .
(6)
This shows clearly the existence of a critical value of ¯β,
and a finite interval of ¯λ over which the synchronization
enhancement occurs. These results are consistent with
Fig. 1 except for the fact that quantum noise makes the
range of λ for synchronization enhancement in the quan-
tum DvdP oscillator smaller compared to the classical
range as seen in Fig. 1(b).
We have also shown in Appendix that increasing the
vdP nonlinearity in the quantum model can only reduce
the synchronization bandwidth. One can thus be certain
that the synchronization enhancement seen in our model
is induced by the Duffing nonlinearity. We shall see next
that the vdP nonlinearity can induce synchronization in
coupled oscillators from a state of amplitude death.
Nonlinearity-induced synchronization and amplitude
death.—Two dissipatively coupled vdP oscillators (i.e. no
Duffing nonlinearity) can be described by the Lindbla-
dian
L = L1 + L2 −i ∆[ˆa†
2ˆa2,·] + η D[ˆa1 −ˆa2] ,
(7)
where Lk (k = 1, 2) is the Lindbladian for oscillator k,
defined by setting ˆa to ˆak and β = F = 0 in (4) and (5).
We have assumed the oscillators to be identical (i.e. same
0.0
0.5
1.0
F/r
0.0
0.1
0.2
(a) = 0.1
0.0
0.5
1.0
F/r
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
(b) = 0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
sync. bandwidth
FIG. 1. Contour plot of the synchronization bandwidth for
the quantum DvdP oscillator as a function of ¯β ≡βr2 (ver-
tical axis) and F/r (horizontal axis) with unit limit-cycle ra-
dius, i.e. r = 1. In this case ¯β = β and ¯λ = λ. The axes
are also indicated in subplot (b). (a) Illustration of synchro-
nization enhancement for ¯λ = 0.1. Above a critical value of
¯β, indicated by a red dashed line (obtained numerically), the
synchronization bandwidth is enlarged as the Duffing nonlin-
earity is increased. (b) Synchronization enhancement disap-
pears if we increase the vdP nonlinearity from ¯λ = 0.1 to
¯λ = 0.5, demonstrating the finite range of ¯λ over which the
enhancement is effective.
λ and r) except for an initial detuning of ∆, and denoted
their coupling strength by η.
In this case, frequency locking occurs when the ob-
served frequencies of the two oscillators become identical
at steady state. As before, the observed frequency of os-
cillator k is given by the location at which its spectrum is
peaked, i.e. where Sk(ω) =
R ∞
−∞dt exp(iωt)⟨ˆa†
k(t)ˆak(0)⟩
is maximized, and where the two-oscillator steady state
is to be used. For a fixed η, we define the synchronization
bandwidth to be the range of ∆for which the two oscil-
lators lock frequencies. It will also be interesting to look
at position correlations in the two oscillators at steady
state, defined by
Σ =
⟨ˆx1ˆx2⟩−⟨ˆx1⟩⟨ˆx2⟩
q
⟨ˆx2
1⟩−⟨ˆx1⟩2  
⟨ˆx2
2⟩−⟨ˆx2⟩2  ,
(8)
where ˆxk = ˆak + ˆa†
k. Note that frequency locking implies
a nonzero Σ, but not vice versa.
In addition to frequency locking, dissipatively coupled
oscillators can also cease to oscillate. If the oscillators
are classical, then this may happen for a range of η pro-
vided that ∆is sufficiently large. And if both oscillators
stabilize to the same phase-space point, which may be
taken to be the origin without loss of generality, then
the effect is termed amplitude death [53, 59]. To define
amplitude death in quantum oscillators we generalize the
notion of P-bifurcations from classical stochastic systems
to the steady-state Wigner function of a reduced state
(see Ref. [18] and other references therein). In this case,
amplitude death is said to occur if the single-oscillator
Wigner functions peak at the origin in quantum phase
space. This approach is consistent with previous stud-
ies on amplitude death in coupled quantum oscillators

4
[36–39].
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
(a)
AMPLITUDE
DEATH
FREQUENCY
LOCKING
r = 1
= 0.2
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
1
2
3
(b)
= 0.2
= 0.5
= 0.7
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.2
0.4
(c)
AMPLITUDE
DEATH
r = 0.3
= 0.18
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(d)
= 0.18
= 0.28
= 0.36
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
FIG. 2. Regions of frequency locking and amplitude death
(as defined in the text by the power spectrum and Wigner
function) for two dissipatively coupled vdP oscillators [sub-
plots (a)–(d)] along with contours of Σ [subplots (a) and (c)].
All subplots have ∆on the vertical axis, and η on horizon-
tal axis which we also indicate in subplot (c). (a) Large r
(semiclassical regime). Note the region on the left does not
correspond to any identifiable effect and is demarcated us-
ing a solid line while the boundary between frequency locking
and amplitude death is a Hopf bifurcation, which we denote
by a dash-dotted line. As r is increased, the classical bound-
ary is recovered. (b) Effect of varying λ on synchronization
for r = 1.
Boundaries of the frequency-locking region and
its corresponding λ are shown (i.e. the frequency-locking re-
gion is the area underneath each curve).
Increasing λ can
enlarge the synchronization bandwidth and induce frequency
locking from a state of amplitude death. (c) Small r (deep
quantum regime). At small r, amplitude death occurs even
at zero initial detuning, which is a quantum effect. Note that
¯λ in (a) and (c) are approximately equal, leaving the dif-
ferences between the two plots only as a result of quantum
effects. (d) Shifts in amplitude-death boundary as ¯λ is in-
creased (quantum-to-semiclassical transition).
In Fig. 2 we work out regions of frequency locking and
amplitude death in the (η, ∆) parameter space for (7),
along with Σ, shown as a contour in Fig. 2(a) and (c).
Two especially interesting scenarios are—when the limit
cycles are relatively large compared to quantum noise
[Fig. 2(a)]; and when they become small, being more sus-
ceptible to quantum noise [Fig. 2(c)].
In Fig. 2(a) we have indicated the boundary between
frequency locking and amplitude death by a dash-dotted
line, while no identifiable phenomenon occurs to the left
of the solid line. Note the dash-dotted line is a Hopf-
bifurcation curve because the transition from amplitude
death to frequency locking is facilitated by a Hopf bifur-
cation. Clearly, Σ is larger inside the frequency-locking
region.
Especially significant here is the effect of the
vdP nonlinearity on synchronization.
Whereas in the
single-oscillator case the vdP nonlinearity had only detri-
(a)
∆= 0.05
r = 0.3
λ
g
g = 0.2
g = 0.4
2NUEJ/gxcPinj1B3nz37hpK6jog4HezPMzAsSzpRG6MqrKyurW8UN0tb2zu7e+X9g7aKU0moR2Iey26AFeVMUE8zWk3kRHAaedYHKd+517KhWLxZ2eJtSP8EiwkBGsjeSNLpHdGJQryEZ1t3bhQmS7yGlUc1J1HYRq0LHRHBWwRGtQfu8PY5JGVGjCsVI9ByXaz7DUjHA6K/VTRNMJnhEe4YKHFHlZ/
NjZ/DEKEMYxtKU0HCufp/IcKTUNApMZ4T1WP32cvEvr5fqsOFnTCSpoIsFoUphzqG+edwyCQlmk8NwUQycyskYywx0Safkgnh61P4P2lXbadu7dnlebVMo4iOALH4BQ4Bw0wQ1oAQ8QwMADeALPlrAerRfrdFasJYzh+AHrLdP/XqOLA=</latexit>g = 0.8
(b)
⌃
λ
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.0
FIG. 3. Positional correlation (8) for two reactively coupled
vdP oscillators. (a) Contour of Σ as a function of λ and g for
r = 0.3 and ∆= 0.05. The bottom gap of zero correlation
agrees with the SL limit.
(b) Correlations along the three
vertical dashed lines at g = 0.2, 0.4, and 0.8 in subplot (a).
mental effects, it now has a constructive role by enlarg-
ing the (mutual) synchronization bandwidth. We illus-
trate this in Fig. 2(b) where additional frequency-locking
boundaries for different values of vdP nonlinearity λ are
plotted.
It can be seen that increasing λ enlarges the
frequency-locking region (see also Appendix for some
classical analysis).
This means that two oscillators in
a state of amplitude death with an (η, ∆) lying above
the Hopf-bifurcation curve in Fig. 2(a) will transit sud-
denly to a state of synchronized oscillations when λ is
sufficiently increased. This may be appropriately called
nonlinearity-induced mutual synchronization.
Turning now to the case of a small limit cycle (r ≪1)
in Fig. 2(c), we find frequency locking to be absent while
position correlations become negligible. The blue solid
line delineates the boundary of amplitude death. Most
striking is the persistence of amplitude death at zero de-
tuning (i.e. ∆= 0).
Classically, some frequency mis-
match between the two oscillators must be present in
order for amplitude death to occur [53]. This signifies
a clear distinction between classical and quantum dy-
namics. A loss of amplitude death at ∆= 0 may then
be expected if we increased either r or λ (while hold-
ing the other constant).
This is indeed what we find,
as illustrated in Fig. 2(d), where such a quantum-to-
semiclassical transition is captured by increasing ¯λ ≡
λr2.
Since we have focused exclusively on the vdP nonlin-
earity here, we note that incorporating a Duffing non-
linearity into our model will not in fact change the
frequency-locking boundary.
We can understand this
from the classical coupled equations of motion, where
we see that β appears only in the phase dynamics of the
oscillators, and that such terms vanish at steady state for
identical oscillators (equal limit cycle radii) [60].
Nonlinearity-induced correlations.—It is known that
two reactively coupled SL oscillators cannot synchronize
nor share position correlations. This is true even in the
quantum case (see Appendix). However, we show here
that positional correlations between two reactively cou-
pled quantum vdP oscillators do develop. Here we must
use the exact vdP Lindbladian [45], because under reac-

5
tive coupling, the approximate model does not produce
any off-diagonal elements in the steady state, and hence
cannot generate correlations in the two oscillators. As
with the dissipatively coupled system, two reactively cou-
pled vdP oscillators can be modelled by considering two
uncoupled vdP oscillators with annihilation operators ˆa1
and ˆa2, coupled by the Hamiltonian g(ˆa1ˆa†
2+ˆa†
1ˆa2), where
g is the reactive coupling strength. As before, we assume
that both oscillators have the same nonlinearity λ.
In Fig. 3(a), we generate a contour plot of Σ as a func-
tion of λ and g at r = 0.3 and ∆= 0.05. From this we
see that for a fixed g, increasing the oscillator nonlinear-
ity beyond the SL regime leads to stronger correlations.
We illustrate this more clearly in Fig. 3(b) by showing
how Σ varies as a function of λ for g = 0.2, 0.4, and
0.8, which are marked in Fig. 3(a) by vertical dashed
lines. Note this also shows the existence of an optimal
λ which maximizes Σ. Such nonlinearity-induced corre-
lations are absent in the corresponding classical model.
At a given coupling strength, the position correlation in
two reactively coupled classical vdP oscillators decreases
monotonically as λ increases (see Appendix).
Conclusion.— Our work goes beyond the well-studied
paradigm of weak nonlinearity in quantum synchroniza-
tion, and provides the first systematic study of quan-
tum synchronization effects for strong nonlinearity. We
introduced a new quantum oscillator model which cap-
tures intriguing effects induced by two strong nonlineari-
ties. We showed that a strong Duffing nonlinearity leads
to a linear enhancement of the synchronization band-
width in driven oscillators.
We also reported genuine
quantum synchronization effects exclusive to strong non-
linearity which are not observed previously: Increasing
the vdP nonlinearity enhances the synchronization band-
width, and revives synchronization between dissipatively-
coupled oscillators in amplitude death. For reactively-
coupled vdP oscillators on the other hand, we find that
strong nonlinearity induces position correlations which
are impossible in the weakly-nonlinear limit. Our model
provides a new paradigm for studying other strongly non-
linear effects such as chaos [7, 26, 61, 62].
