Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 133:86–111, 2021
NeurIPS 2020 Competition and Demonstration Track
NeurIPS 2020 EﬃcientQA Competition:
Systems, Analyses and Lessons Learned
Sewon Min2

Jordan Boyd-Graber3

Chris Alberti1

Danqi Chen4

Eunsol Choi5

Michael Collins1

Kelvin Guu1

Hannaneh Hajishirzi1

Kenton Lee1

Jennimaria Palomaki1

Colin Raﬀel1

Adam Roberts1

Tom Kwiatkowski1

1Google Research, New York City, NY, USA; Mountain View, CA, USA; Seattle, WA, USA
2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
3University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
4Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
5University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Patrick LewisT1, Yuxiang WuT1, Heinrich K¨uttlerT1, Linqing LiuT1,
Pasquale MinerviniT1, Pontus StenetorpT1, Sebastian RiedelT1,3, Sohee YangT2,
Minjoon SeoT2, Gautier IzacardT3,7, Fabio PetroniT3,7, Lucas HosseiniT3,7,
Nicola De CaoT3, Edouard GraveT3,7, Ikuya YamadaT4, Sonse ShimaokaT4,
Masatoshi SuzukiT4, Shumpei MiyawakiT4, Shun SatoT4, Ryo TakahashiT4,
Jun SuzukiT4, Martin FajcikT5, Martin DocekalT5, Karel OndrejT5, Pavel SmrzT5,
Hao ChengT6, Yelong ShenT6, Xiaodong LiuT6, Pengcheng HeT6, Weizhu ChenT6,
Jianfeng GaoT6, Barlas OguzT7, Xilun ChenT7, Vladimir KarpukhinT7,
Stan PeshterlievT7, Dmytro OkhonkoT7, Michael SchlichtkrullT7, Sonal GuptaT7,
Yashar MehdadT7, Wen-tau YihT7
T1UCLNLP & Facebook AI; T2NAVER Clova; T3Facebook AI Paris & London;
T4Studio Ousia, Tohoku University & RIKEN; T5Brno University of Technology;
T6Microsoft Research & Dynamic 365 AI; T7Facebook AI
Editors: Hugo Jair Escalante and Katja Hofmann
© 2021 S. Min et al.
arXiv:2101.00133v2  [cs.CL]  19 Sep 2021

NeurIPS 2020 EfficientQA competition
Abstract
We review the EﬃcientQA competition1 from NeurIPS 20202. The competition focused on
open-domain question answering (QA), where systems take natural language questions as
input and return natural language answers. The aim of the competition was to build sys-
tems that can predict correct answers while also satisfying strict on-disk memory budgets.
These memory budgets were designed to encourage contestants to explore the trade-oﬀ
between storing retrieval corpora or the parameters of learned models. In this report, we
describe the motivation and organization of the competition, review the best submissions,
and analyze system predictions to inform a discussion of evaluation for open-domain QA.
Keywords: Question answering, Memory eﬃciency, Knowledge representation
1. Introduction
Open-domain question answering (QA) is emerging as a benchmark method of measur-
ing computational systems’ abilities to retrieve, represent, and read knowledge (Voorhees
and Tice, 2000; Chen et al., 2017; Seo et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019). Recently, this task
has been addressed by a diverse set of approaches that navigate multiple documents (Min
et al., 2019b; Asai et al., 2019), index large corpora of text (Lee et al., 2019; Guu et al.,
2020; Karpukhin et al., 2020), represent world knowledge in the parameters of a neural
network (Roberts et al., 2020), or consolidate knowledge from multiple passages (Izacard
and Grave, 2020). More comprehensive background is provided in Chen and Yih (2020).
The EﬃcientQA competition, held at NeurIPS 2020, required contestants to build self-
contained systems that contain all of the knowledge required to answer open-domain ques-
tions. There were no constraints on how the knowledge is stored—it could be in documents,
databases, the parameters of a neural network, or any other form. However, the competi-
tion encouraged systems that store and access this knowledge using the smallest number of
bytes, including code, corpora, and model parameters. Speciﬁcally, EﬃcientQA had four
tracks: 1) best accuracy overall (unconstrained); 2) best accuracy, system size under 6GiB;
3) best accuracy, system size under 500MiB; 4) smallest system to get 25% accuracy. These
memory budgets were designed to encourage contestants to explore the trade-oﬀbetween
storing and accessing large, redundant, retrieval corpora, structured data stores, or the
parameters of large learned models.
This paper summarizes the ﬁndings from the competition. Section 2 describes the com-
petition in detail; Section 3 presents a description of the best performing submissions in each
track; Section 4 introduces a new human evaluation of system accuracy, and Section 5 pro-
vides results and an analysis based on automatic and human evaluation. Finally, Section 6
pits the top systems against human trivia experts.
1.1. Key takeaways
The top submissions in each of EﬃcientQA’s four tracks signiﬁcantly outperformed the
provided baselines. All top submissions use a retrieval corpus and a neural network an-
swering module. However, the nature of the retrieval corpus and answering module diﬀers
drastically across the tracks (Table 1).
1. http://eﬃcientqa.github.io/
2. https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2020/CompetitionTrack
87

Min et al.
Track
Model
Aﬃliation
retr
answer
others
REALM
Organizers
p
ext
Unrest-
DPR
Organizers
p
ext
ricted
MS UnitedQA
Microsoft & Dynamics 365
p
ext+gen
FB Hybrid
Facebook AI
p
gen
lists/tables
DPR-subset
Organizers
p (pruned)
ext
T5-XL+SSM
Organizers
X
gen
6GiB
FB system
FAIR-Paris&London
p (pruned)
gen
lists, lrzip compression
Ousia-Tohoku Soseki
Studio Ousia, Tohoku U & RIKEN
p (pruned)
ext
ZPAQ compression
BUT R2-D2
Brno U of Technology
p (pruned)
ext+gen
T5-Small+SSM
Organizers
X
gen
500MiB
UCLNLP-FB system
UCL & FAIR
(q,a)
-
data augmentation
NAVER RDR
NAVER Clova
p (pruned)
ext
single Transformer
25%
T5-XL+SSM
Organizers
X
gen
smallest
UCLNLP-FB system (29M)
UCL & FAIR
(q,a)
-
data augmentation
Table 1: A list of the baselines and systems from participants, along with the team aﬃliation
and key distinction between systems. retr means what the systems retrieves, e.g.,
passages (p), question-answer pairs ((q, a)), or none (X). pruned indicates the
Wikipedia corpus is pruned. answer indicates whether the answer is extracted
(ext) or generated (gen). Other key distinctions are shown in the last column.
Unrestricted and 6GiB tracks
The top submissions to the unrestricted track and
the 6GiB track (Section 3.1; 3.2) outperformed the state-of-the-art baselines from April
2020 by nearly 20%. They achieved this improvement by combining the state-of-the-art
retrieval systems (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Mao et al., 2020) with answer generation (Izacard
and Grave, 2020); leveraging the state-of-the-art in text generation (Raﬀel et al., 2020)
and text encoding (Clark et al., 2020); modeling not only text but also tables and lists
from Wikipedia; and combining the extractive and generative answer prediction. The top
submissions to the 6GiB track additionally massively reduced the size of their indexed corpus
and made use of the state-of-the-art in compression, with minimal impact on accuracy.
500MiB and smallest tracks
To get under 500MB (Section 3.3), the systems made
more drastic changes. The submission from NAVER Clova drastically reduced the size of
their indexed corpus and reused a single Transformer model for the retriever and the reader,
winning the 500MiB track according to the human evaluation. The even smaller UCLNLP-
FB system took a novel approach in generating a large corpus of question-answer pairs,
indexing it, and retrieving the most similar question to the input question. This approach,
with two systems with diﬀerent sizes in question-answer corpus, won both the 500MiB track
and the smallest 25% track according to the automatic evaluation.
Automatic vs.
human evaluation
The human evaluation supports the observation
that automatic metrics often incorrectly penalize correct predictions in the open-domain
setting (Voorhees and Tice, 2000; Roberts et al., 2020). We also investigate the eﬀect of
question ambiguity on evaluation—the questions from NQ are often ambiguous without
the associated evidence document (Min et al., 2020). In Section 4 we deﬁne an annotation
88

NeurIPS 2020 EfficientQA competition
scheme that supports multiple estimations of accuracy, corresponding to diﬀerent deﬁnitions
of correctness for answers to ambiguous questions. Almost all systems’ accuracy increased
by 20%-25% under the strictest deﬁnition of correctness. The increase doubled when we
relaxed the deﬁnition of correctness to permit any semantically valid interpretation of the
question. We present a discussion as well as suggestions for future evaluation (Section 5.2).
2. Competition Overview
Data
The competition uses English questions and answers from the Natural Questions
dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019, NQ): real user questions issued to the Google search
engine, along with reference answers from Wikipedia3.
Real user questions in NQ are
interpretable outside of a document context (unlike SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)), and
less amenable to traditional IR approaches than over-complete trivia questions (Joshi et al.,
2017), as discussed in Lee et al. (2019). While the original NQ task was posed as a reading
comprehension task, in which evidence documents are provided, recent work has adapted
the NQ data to the open-domain setting (Lee et al., 2019; Min et al., 2019a,b; Asai et al.,
2019; Guu et al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2020; Karpukhin et al., 2020) by taking examples with
short answers (up to ﬁve tokens) and discarding evidence documents. In the open-domain
setting, NQ contains 88k one-way annotated training examples and 4k ﬁve-way annotated
development examples.
For EﬃcientQA, we introduce a new test and development set
constructed in the same way as the original NQ, but labeled slightly after (early 2019 rather
than through 2018).4 Our test set was kept hidden from contestants, and submissions were
made by uploading solutions to an automatic leaderboard.
System size
All submissions to the three restricted tracks were submitted as self-contained
Docker5 images. We deﬁned system size to be the on-disk, at-rest size of this image. We
chose this approach to avoid confusion about distinctions between data, model parameters,
and code. However, this choice did lead to a signiﬁcant engineering eﬀorts for the very
smallest systems, which were not able to build on the standard Docker templates for the
predominant deep-learning libraries. While the organizers did provide a small reference sys-
tem based on T5 (Roberts et al., 2020) that used TensorFlow serving6, this did not support
most submissions, and the very smallest systems required clever compilation strategies on
top of their modeling enhancements.
Evaluation metrics
We measured the performance of diﬀerent systems through auto-
matic and human evaluation.
For automatic evaluation, the accuracy of each systems’
predicted answers is judged against reference annotations, annotated by ﬁve human work-
ers. We follow the literature in using exact match between predicted and reference answers
after minor normalization (Lee et al., 2019). Due to the ambiguities inherent in language
and question-answering in general, ﬁve reference answers are often not exhaustive, and sys-
tems predict correct answers that are judged incorrect according to the automatic metrics.
3. NQ was collected over the course of 2017 and 2018. Most solutions to the open-domain variant use a
Wikipedia dump from December 2018. See Lee et al. (2019) for details.
4. This temporal change caused slight degradation in performance for baseline systems.
5. https://www.docker.com
6. https://www.tensorﬂow.org/tfx/serving/docker
89

Min et al.
Figure 1:
Memory footprint of each system component.
To rectify this, we sent predictions from each of the systems for further human rating by
three raters, to get a better estimation of accuracy, as detailed in Section 4.
Competition schedule
The competition was announced in June 2020, along with base-
lines and tutorials. The oﬃcial leaderboard for restricted settings was launched on Septem-
ber 14th, 2020, and participants had two months to submit their systems (November 14th,
2020). Finally, predictions from the top systems from each leaderboard were sent for human
evaluation, which was completed in the end of November. The same set of top systems was
invited to present their systems at the NeurIPS event on December 12th and in this paper.
The human vs. computer competition was held on December 6th (details in Section 6).
In total, we had 39 submissions from 18 unique teams, seven of which were aﬃliated or
co-aﬃliated with universities.
3. Systems
We describe a set of provided baselines and systems from participants. Systems from partic-
ipants include the top 1–3 submissions per track based on automatic measure, considering
margins between the submissions. Table 1 summarizes the key distinctions between the
systems, and Figure 1 shows the memory footprint of each system component.
3.1. Unconstrained track
Both of the top two submissions make use of the previous state-of-the-art system, such as
DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020) and a generative reader (Izacard and Grave, 2020). They are
greatly enhanced by a better training objective, aggregating the answers from the extractive
and generative models, or incorporating lists and tables from Wikipedia.
Baselines:
REALM/DPR
Both REALM (Guu et al., 2020) and DPR (Karpukhin
et al., 2020) use the retrieval-reader framework. They retrieve the top K passages from
Wikipedia by mapping the question and each passage to dense vectors and employing a
maximum inner product search. The top K passages are then fed into an extractive reader
which predicts the start and the end position of the answer. A key distinction between
REALM and DPR is that REALM is trained with a self-supervised, joint objective, while
DPR is trained in a pipeline manner with gold positives and distantly supervised negatives.
90

NeurIPS 2020 EfficientQA competition
MS UnitedQA
The UnitedQA system consists of three components: Retrieval, Reading,
and Re-ranking. First, it uses DPR to fetch top 100 passages from the English Wikipedia
dump for a given question. Second, a hybrid approach, combining both generative and
extractive readers, is used to produce answer candidates from the collection of retrieved
passages. The generative reader is Fusion-in-Decoder (Izacard and Grave, 2020) based on
T5 (Raﬀel et al., 2020), and the extractive reader is based on ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020).
Several techniques are applied to facilitate the training of the readers: posterior diﬀerential
regularization (PDR, Cheng et al. (2020b), improved loss-term (Cheng et al., 2020a) are
explored for the extractive model, and adversarial training (Ju et al., 2019) approach,
attention bias (Lewis et al., 2020a) for the generative model. At the ﬁnal re-ranking stage,
it combines the generative and extractive model predictions with linear interpolation, and
produce the ﬁnal answer. More details of the system can be found in Cheng et al. (2021).
FB Hybrid
This system uses a retriever-reader architecture. The retriever is a combina-
tion of DPR and Generation Augmented Retrieval (GAR) (Mao et al., 2020), where each
of them retrieves 50 passages. The DPR encoders are trained iteratively, where better hard
negatives are mined at each step using the model at the previous step—two iterations are
found to be suﬃcient. Its dense index includes lists and tables, as well as regular text pas-
sages. Speciﬁcally, 455907 tables and infoboxes are processed from the NQ training corpus
using a trivial linearization, which concatanates the text representation of each row with
a newline character.7 Tables are chunked at 100 tokens with the header included in each
chunk. The reader is Fusion-in-Decoder based on T5-large, which is given 100 passages from
the retriever and generates an answer. More details of the system are in Oguz et al. (2020).
3.2. 6GiB track
For this track, we provided two baselines. One retrieval-based, and one generative model.
However, all of the top three submissions are retrieval-based, and reduce the memory foot-
print by drastically pruning the Wikipedia corpus, either by a learned model or based on a
page view. They also made use of model quantization and the state-of-the-art in compression
to limit their system’s footprint. They additionally enhanced the previous state-of-the-art
as done in an unrestricted track.
Retrieval-based baseline:
DPR-subset
We create a variant of DPR with pruned
Wikipedia. Speciﬁcally, we only keep passages from the pages that are paired with the
questions on the training set of NQ, reducing the number of passages from 21M to 1.6M.
Generative baseline: T5-XL+SSM
T5 (Raﬀel et al., 2020) is a text-to-text Trans-
former language model utilizing an encoder-decoder architecture that was pre-trained using
a “span corruption” objective on Common Crawl. This approach is based on Roberts et al.
(2020) which demonstrated a “closed-book” setting where the model was only able to ac-
cess the knowledge stored in its parameters after ﬁne-tuning on the task. Following Roberts
et al. (2020), the model is additionally pre-trained using a “salient span masking” objective
(Guu et al., 2020) before ﬁne-tuning. The XL model has approximately 3B parameters.
7. This linearization is found to be more eﬀective than converting each row to a statement.
91

Min et al.
FB system
This system is based on a retriever-reader approach.
The retriever is an
ensemble of a dense retriever and GAR. The dense retriever is initialized from BERT-base
and is trained by distilling the cross-attention scores of the reader. GAR (Mao et al., 2020)
is a retriever with generative query augmentation, based on BM25. The Lucene8 index is
built on the ﬂy. The reader is Fusion-in-Decoder initialized from T5 large.
The text corpus initially included 26M passages including the plain text and the lists,
but went through an article-level ﬁltering to include 18.8M passages. Speciﬁcally, it uses a
linear classiﬁer where each Wikipedia article is represented by its title and list of categories.
The model weights are stored using ﬂoat16, taking 1.6GB of memory. The dense index
is compressed by relying on three strategies, described in Izacard et al. (2020): 1) the
vector representations go through dimension reduction from 768 to 256, 2) they are further
quantized through product quantization, using 2 bits per dimension, and 3) the text of
Wikipedia is compressed using lrzip9.
Ousia-Tohoku Soseki
Soseki is an open-domain QA system that adopts a two-stage ap-
proach consisting of Retriever for passage retrieval, and Reader for reading comprehension.
Given a question, Retriever obtains top-k candidate passages from Wikipedia. Then, Reader
selects the most relevant passage from them and extracts an answer from the passage.
Retriever is based on a re-implementation of DPR, where two BERT-base-uncased mod-
els are used to embed questions and passages. We also quantize passage embeddings to
reduce the system size. Embeddings of Wikipedia passages are precomputed and stored
using Faiss (Johnson et al., 2017).
Reader is a reading comprehension model based on
ELECTRA-large (Clark et al., 2020). We added one dense layer for selecting the most rele-
vant passage, and two dense layers for detecting the start and end positions of the answer.
All modules are trained on the NQ dataset.
To reduce the system size under 6GB, we compressed the models, passages, and other
data ﬁles using ZPAQ10 and excluded Wikipedia passages with less than 40 monthly page
views, resulting in 18M passages. These tricks do not drop the accuracy.
BUT R2-D2
R2-D2 is composed of a dense retriever, a re-ranker and two readers. The
dense retriever is based on RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) and is trained via an objective
known from DPR. It retrieves K = 400 passages from a pruned version of Wikipedia,
reduced from 21M to 1.6M passages. Pruning is done via a simple binary classiﬁer based
on RoBERTa trained on the data created from the golden passages and negative passages
randomly sampled from the index. This classiﬁer obtains 90.2% accuracy. The re-ranker
(based on Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020)) concatenates retrieved passages, assigns a score
for each passage, and selects V = 20 passages. The extractive reader (based on ELECTRA)
reads V passages in a similar way as in Fajcik et al. (2020). It is trained via the marginal
likelihood objective combined with the compound objective. The generative reader follows
the Fusion-in-Decoder schema and generates the answers. R2-D2 aggregates the output
from these two readers using two fusioning methods. First, it reranks the top spans from
the extractive reader by feeding them to a generative reader and combines its log likelihood
with the log likelihood from the extractive reader through a linear combination.
They
8. https://lucene.apache.org/
9. https://github.com/ckolivas/lrzip
10. http://mattmahoney.net/dc/zpaq.html
92

NeurIPS 2020 EfficientQA competition
are then further aggregated with abstractive answers from the generative reader that are
generated independently, through another linear combination. The parameters are stored
in ﬂoat16 and compressed using ZIP. More details of the system are in Fajcik et al. (2021).
3.3. 500MiB track
The top performing submissions in this track made more drastic changes to get under
500MiB. They have completely diﬀerent approaches from each other.
Baseline: T5-Small+SSM
This is a smaller version of the T5-XL+SSM baseline above,
with 512 hidden dimension instead of 4096, 6 layers instead of 24, and 8 attention heads
instead of 64. It contains 60M parameters in total.
UCLNLP-FB system
This system is based on the approach from Lewis et al. (2020c),
consisting of a database of question-answer pairs and a retriever which returns the answer
of the most similar stored question to an input question. This approach is attractive as it
performs well using low parameter-count models, and less space is needed to store question-
answer pairs than full Wikipedia passages.
The Question-Answer Pair Generator is similar to Alberti et al. (2019); Lewis et al.
(2019). First, a passage selection model P(c) is trained to identify appropriate passages
from Wikipedia. For high-probability passages (w.r.t. P(c)), the system performs Named
Entity Recognition to extract likely answers a, and generates questions q from (c, a) us-
ing a BART (Lewis et al., 2020b) model P(q | a, c) ﬁne-tuned on NQ. Finally, the system
ﬁlters question-answer pairs with a “global consistency ﬁlter”—if an open-domain QA sys-
tem (Izacard and Grave, 2020) is given q and generates an answer that is consistent with a,
the (q, a) pair is added to the database. This is because generated (q, a) pairs are sometimes
incorrect or unanswerable without the passage they were generated from. The ﬁnal database
consists of NQ, the EﬃcientQA development set and 2.3M generated question-answer pairs.
The Retriever consists of TF-IDF and a bi-encoder retriever based on ALBERT-base (Lan
et al., 2020). The Reranker is a cross-encoder module based on ALBERT-large; it reranks
the top-10 question-answer pairs from the retriever, and the answer of the top-1 question-
answer pair is chosen as the ﬁnal answer.
The system is further compressed using TFLite, quantization, and Alpine Linux. More
details can be found from Lewis et al. (2021).
NAVER RDR
RDR is a lightweight retrieve-and-read system, consisting of a single
Transformer (MobileBERT (Sun et al., 2020)) that performs both retrieval and reading, an
index of dense passage vectors and the ﬁltered Wikipedia corpus. The Transformer serves
as a dense retriever as DPR does with two diﬀerences: (1) a single Transformer is used to
encode both the question and the passage, and (2) the embeddings are deﬁned as the ﬁrst
128 out of 512 dimensions of the output vectors from the Transformer that correspond to
the [CLS] token. The same Transformer serves as an extractive reader by producing the
scores of the start and the end of the answer span as well as the passage reranking score.
A distillation technique is used for training, by minimizing the KL divergence between its
start, end, and reranking scores and those of a fully trained DPR reader. The Transformer
is further ﬁnetuned in an iterative manner as a retriever and as a reader.
93

Min et al.
The index consists of 1.2M 128-dimensional INT8 vectors (scalar-quantized and un-
signed), which are the dense embeddings of the subset of the 21M passages in Wikipedia,
ﬁltered by a RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019)-based binary classiﬁer trained with logistic re-
gression to exclude uninformative passages. Positives to train this classiﬁer are the top
200 passages for each question on NQ dataset and EﬃcientQA development set, retrieved
by Yang and Seo (2020), a DPR retriever further ﬁnetuned on hard negatives using knowl-
edge distillation from a DPR reader. Negatives are uniformly drawn from the set of 21M
passages, excluding positives. More details can be found from Yang and Seo (2021).
3.4. 25% smallest track
Baseline: T5-XL+SSM
Among the provided baselines, the smallest system with an
accuracy of over 25% is T5-XL+SSM, the same system described in Section 3.2.
This
system is 5.65GB and achieves an accuracy of 28%.
UCLNLP-FB system (29M)
This system is the same system as UCLNLP-FB system
in the 500MiB track with following minor modiﬁcations, to further decrease the memory:
(1) the retriever is just TF-IDF instead of a combination of TF-IDF and a bi-encoder, (2)
the reranker uses ALBERT-base instead of ALBERT-large, and (3) there are 40k generated
question-answer pairs, instead of 2.3M.
4. Human Annotations of Correctness
The EﬃcientQA development and test sets have up to ﬁve reference answers per question.
Due to the variability of language, these ﬁve answer strings are often not exhaustive, and
systems predict correct answers that are judged incorrect according to the automatic met-
rics. To rectify this, we sent predictions from each of the systems in Section 3 for human
rating to get a better estimation of accuracy.
Each system prediction was sent for rating by three separate annotators: 1) the an-
notator ﬁrst works on understanding the meaning and intent of the question (with a web
search if necessary). 2) The annotator then determines whether the question is ambiguous,
i.e., whether the question can lead to multiple diﬀerent answers depending on factors such
as: when the query was asked; where the query was asked; some unspoken intent of the
questioner; or the opinion of the person giving the answer. 3) Finally, the annotator deter-
mines whether each answer is “deﬁnitely correct” (correct given a usual interpretation of the
question), “possibly correct” (could be correct, given some interpretation of the question),
or “deﬁnitely incorrect”.
Since the original NQ data was collected more than a year before the start of the
EﬃcientQA competition, the denotation of some questions may have changed over time
(e.g. “who won the last season of bake-oﬀ”). Rather than determine a single correct point
in time for these questions, we asked our annotators to assume that the query could have
been asked at any time since the web has existed and choose the “possibly correct” label
for answers that may or may not have been correct when the question was asked.
The ﬁnal rating is an aggregation of ratings from three annotators: if at least 2/3 raters
determined it to be “deﬁnitely correct”, the label is “deﬁnitely correct”. If at least 2/3 raters
determined it to be either “deﬁnitely correct” or “possibly correct”, the label is “possibly
94

NeurIPS 2020 EfficientQA competition
Track
Model
Automatic eval
Human eval
Deﬁnitely
Possibly
Unrestricted
MS UnitedQA
54.00
65.80 (+21.9%)
78.12 (+44.7%)
FB Hybrid
53.89
67.38 (+25.0%)
79.88 (+48.2%)
6GiB
FB system
53.33
65.18 (+22.2%)
76.09 (+42.7%)
Ousia-Tohoku Soseki
50.17
62.01 (+23.6%)
73.83 (+47.2%)
BUT R2-D2
47.28
58.96 (+24.7%)
70.33 (+49.2%)
500MiB
UCLNLP-FB system
33.44
39.40 (+17.8%)
47.37 (+41.7%)
NAVER RDR
32.06
42.23 (+31.7%)
54.95 (+71.4%)
25% smallest
UCLNLP-FB system (29M)
26.78
32.45 (+21.2%)
41.21 (+53.9%)
Table 2: Summary of the result. For human evaluation result, relative improvements over the au-
tomatic evaluation are indicated in parenthesis. Following our analysis of the annotations,
we use ‘Deﬁnitely correct’ human ratings as a primary metric.
correct”. The pairwise agreements of the human ratings are 69.2% (Cohen’s κ = 53.8) for
3-way ratings, 85.7% (Cohen’s κ = 71.4) for whether the prediction is deﬁnitely correct or
not, and 76.7% (Cohen’s κ = 53.4) for whether the prediction is possibly correct or not.11
5. Results & Analyses
5.1. Results
All of the ﬁve systems in the unrestricted track and the 6GiB track signiﬁcantly outper-
form the state-of-the-art (Table 2) at the beginning of the competition—DPR (36.6%) and
REALM (35.9%). Systems in the 6GiB track approach the unrestricted track’s accuracy;
for instance, the accuracy FB system is comparable to the accuracy of the top systems in
the unrestricted track. The improvements in the 500MiB track are also impressive; both
the top two systems signiﬁcantly beat T5-small (17.6%).
Discrepancy between automatic eval and human eval
Human raters ﬁnd 13% and
17% of the predictions that do not match the reference answers to be deﬁnitely correct or
possibly correct, respectively, overall increasing the accuracy of the systems. Most systems
showed 17–25% and 41–54% improvement in accuracy when using deﬁnitely correct and pos-
sibly correct human evaluation respectively, compared to automatic evaluation metric which
only consider exact string match to existing reference answers. An exception is NAVER
RDR, which achieves signiﬁcantly larger improvements (32% and 71%, respectively). We
also found that when the gap in automatic measure between systems is marginal (around
or smaller than 1%), human evaluation may change the rankings between the models.
Agreement between system predictions
Figure 2 (left) shows the agreement between
system predictions, based on exact match in automatic evaluation. The largest agreement is
made between FB Hybrid and FB system, likely because they are both based on DPR and
Fusion-in-Decoder. Agreements between systems in the unrestricted and the 6GiB tracks
11. An agreement in whether the question is ambiguous or not is 61.3% (Cohen’s κ = 22.6). We conjecture
the low agreement is due to an intrinsic diﬃculty in ﬁnding ambiguity (Min et al., 2020), and consider
the question to be ambiguous if at least one annotator rated it as ambiguous.
95

Min et al.
MS UnitedQA
FB Hybrid
FB System
BUT R2-D2
Ousia-Tohoku Soseki
UCLNLP-FB system
FB Hybrid
FB System
BUT R2-D2
Ousia-Tohoku Soseki
UCLNLP-FB system
NAVER RDR
20%
60%
Max: 58.4%
Min: 20.9%
50%
80%
Max: 76.8%
Min: 55.9%
MS UnitedQA
FB Hybrid
FB System
BUT R2-D2
Ousia-Tohoku Soseki
UCLNLP-FB system
FB Hybrid
FB System
BUT R2-D2
Ousia-Tohoku Soseki
UCLNLP-FB system
NAVER RDR
Figure 2: (Left) Agreement between system predictions. (Right) Ensemble oracle accuracy,
which considers a prediction correct if at least one of the system predictions is
correct (based on “deﬁnitely correct” human evaluation).
are generally higher, likely because they are all based on retrieval-reader framework and
pruning Wikipedia does not hurt too much. Two systems in the 500MiB track have smaller
agreement with the other systems, and agree with each other even less.
Ensemble oracle accuracy of the systems
Figure 2 (right) reports the ensemble oracle
accuracy for each system pair, which considers a prediction to be correct if either system
prediction is correct. The FB Hybrid & Ousia-Tohoku Soseki pair achieves the highest
ensemble oracle accuracy, indicating that their system predictions are substantially diﬀerent
from each other compared to other pairs with top performing systems.
5.2. Analyses
We present an analysis of the 50 sample questions where at least one prediction does not
match with the gold answer, but is judged as correct by human raters, with a “deﬁnitely
correct” label or a “possibly correct” label, respectively. The samples are largely divided
into three classes: as valid as gold (judged as either deﬁnitely correct or possibly correct),
valid but not the best (judged as possibly correct), and closer to invalid (judged
as possibly correct). We describe ﬁne-grained categories and their percentage12(deﬁnitely
correct and possibly correct) here, with examples shown in Appendix A (Table 7).
The following describes categories on predictions that are as valid as the gold answers.
• Semantically the same (60%, 22%): The prediction is semantically equivalent to
the gold, e.g., “about 930 BCE” and “around 930 BCE”.13
• Open-ended question (6%, 4%): There is a large set of distinct, plausible answers,
mainly because the question is vague or open-ended.
• Ambiguous entity/event references (20%, 20%): There is a set of distinct answers
because the question contains ambiguous references of entities or events. For instance,
12. The total is over 100%; one question may have multiple predictions that fall into diﬀerent categories.
13. A few cases in this category are due to inconsistent tokenization (e.g., “Mercedes-Benz” and “Mercedes -
Benz”), which could potentially be automatically captured but is not handled by the automatic evaluation
from the literature.
96

NeurIPS 2020 EfficientQA competition
“Gold woman” in the example in Table 7 may refer to the ﬁctional character (“Ayesh”)
or the actress (“Elizabeth Debick”).
• Diﬀerent granularity (14%, 6%): The prediction and the gold answer have diﬀer-
ent granularity, such as the year (1982) vs. the month (October 1982), or the city
(Pawtucket) vs. the state (Rhode Island).
• Incorrect gold (2%, 6%): The gold annotation is incorrect.
The following describes categories on possibly correct predictions that are as valid but
not the best answers.
• Ambiguous answer type (20%): There is a unique entity or event that can be the
answer to the question, but there is ambiguity on which exact text should be presented
as the answer. For instance, both the episode title (“Somber News”) and the air date
(“February 23 2013”) are the valid answer to the question in Table 7.
• Answer is time-dependent (18%): The answer depends on the time of the question
being asked. Questions in this category usually involve recurring events such as sports
games or elections.
Finally, we present categories for predictions that are closer to invalid answers.
• Conﬂicting information in Wikipedia (4%): While the gold is the only valid
answer, the English Wikipedia contains incorrect information that supports that pre-
diction is the answer to the question. Consider the question in Table 7. While “Fort
Hood” is an incorrect answer by a fact, the Wikipedia page14 states “Fort Hood is
the most populous U.S. military installation in the world.”15
• Plausible only in certain conditions (4%): Prediction may be valid in certain
conditions, but is incorrect in general cases. For instance, for the question in the
table, “president of India” may only be valid in India.
• Mismatch with question intent (8%): The prediction is somewhat valid but sup-
posedly not the intended answer to the question. For instance, the example question in
Table 7 is supposedly asking for the answer that is diﬀerent from the great depression.
• Incorrect prediction (2%): The prediction is deﬁnitely incorrect.
Our two main takeaways are as follows. First, the automatic evaluation conﬁrms the
observation of Voorhees and Tice (2000) that it is insuﬃcient in capturing semantically
equivalent answers, which are responsible for 60% of the deﬁnitely correct predictions.
Second, ambiguity arises frequently in the questions in diﬀerent levels, allowing multiple,
semantically diﬀerent answers to be valid. This is a consistent with Min et al. (2020), which
reported that around half of the questions in NQ contain ambiguity, due to ambiguous
references of entities, events or properties, or time-dependency of the answer. Based on
our human evaluation, annotations on ambiguity have low agreement rate (61.3%, Cohen’s
κ = 22.6), and predictions with the same level of plausibility are often marked as “def-
initely correct” or “possibly correct” by diﬀerent human raters. We note the notions of
14. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fort_Hood
15. At the human vs. computer competition, the human team also predicted “Fort Hood”.
97

Min et al.
Model
All
Unambiguous Qs
Deﬁnitely
Possibly
Deﬁnitely
Possibly
MS UnitedQA
65.80
78.12
78.24
81.18
FB Hybrid
67.38
79.88
82.65
85.59
FB system
65.18
76.09
79.12
81.47
Ousia-Tohoku Soseki
62.01
73.83
72.94
75.00
BUT R2-D2
58.96
70.55
69.71
72.06
UCLNLP-FB system
39.40
47.37
42.06
43.24
NAVER RDR
42.23
54.95
49.71
53.24
UCLNLP-FB system (29M)
32.45
41.21
28.53
30.29
Table 3: Human evaluation on the original set and a subset of unambiguous questions.
“correctness” and “plausibility” are not binary, and are instead often dependent on prag-
matic interpretation of the questioner’s intent. For example, the question “who has the
most superbowl rings” could be read as “which person (including coaches) has the most
superbowl rings”, “which player has the most superbowl rings”, “which team has the most
superbowl rings”.
All three annotators identiﬁed this question as being ambiguous but
they disagreed about the validity of the diﬀerent readings. The three raters were split three
ways when rating the correct answer (“Pittsburgh Steelers”) for the last interpretation.
Meanwhile there were no “incorrect” ratings, and 2/3 “deﬁnitely correct” ratings given to
the correct answer (“Tom Brady”) for the second interpretation, despite the fact that two
coaches have more superbowl rings. Clearly, the annotators are applying some personal
interpretation of the questioner’s intent and answer plausibility.
While we believe that many real world questions do require some non-literal assump-
tions about the questioner’s intent, and we believe that the natural language processing
community should not shy away from that task, we also acknowledge that there is work to
be done in creating better, non-binary, deﬁnitions of correctness. Section 6 contrasts these
interpretations of correctness with the more rigid deﬁnition used by the Trivia community.
Performance on unambiguous questions
To better understand the eﬀect of ambigu-
ity on the ranking of diﬀerent solutions, we also evaluate system performance on a subset of
the questions that are unambiguous. We deﬁne unambiguous questions to be those that (1)
have at least three out of ﬁve reference answers contain valid short answers16, and (2) are
not labeled as ambiguous by any of three human raters, resulting in 51.5% of the original
set. Table 3 shows human evaluation on the original set and this subset of unambiguous
questions. Most systems, except UCLNLP-FB system, achieve higher accuracy on unam-
biguous questions, with the ﬁrst three systems achieving over or near 80%. Unsurprisingly,
the gap between “deﬁnitely correct” accuracy and “possibly correct” accuracy is marginal
on unambiguous questions.
Importantly, the overall rankings are unchanged when we restrict our evaluation set
to only unambiguous answers. This suggests that, while question ambiguity may lead to
disagreement between annotators at a per-example level, it is not adversely impacting our
ability to consistently rank solutions. More analyses can be found in Appendix A.
16. This follows the original NQ approach of using annotator agreement to set a threshold for high quality
answers.
98

NeurIPS 2020 EfficientQA competition
0
10
20
30
40
Number Answers
Computer
Type
Right
Wrong
1
2
3
Phase
0
10
20
30
40
Human
Figure 3: (Left) Screenshot from our ﬁnal game between computer systems and trivia experts.
Full videos of the human–computer competition are available at https://go.umd.edu/
2020eqa. (Right) The human–computer competition is broken into three phases, where
each phase allows the participants to use more resources. While most questions were
answered in Phase 1 (where humans had a distinct advantage), in Phase 2 computers
had a slight advantage; there were diminishing returns in Phase 3.
6. Trivia Experts vs Computer Systems
The questions in NQ are posed by humans to computers, and the competition attracted
some of the strongest and most eﬃcient QA systems available today. However, humans also
answer questions for fun and recreation (Jennings, 2006) and the ultimate goal of artiﬁcial
intelligence is to create machines that answer questions as well as humans (Turing, 1995,
known as the Turing test). Moreover, existing comparisons of human question answering
ability often use unskilled humans (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), leading to claims of computers
“putting millions of jobs at risk” (Cuthbertson, 2018).
Or, in competitions with trivia
experts (Ferrucci et al., 2010), arcane rules of competitions can tilt the playing ﬁeld toward
computers (Boyd-Graber and B¨orschinger, 2020) or use unnatural questions (Boyd-Graber
et al., 2012; Rodriguez et al., 2019).
6.1. A Fair Comparison
We advertised our competition to trivia enthusiasts on social media. Teams of up to eight
players applied to be part of the competition. We selected ﬁve teams to participate in the
preliminary competition (results in Section 6.2).
To create a fair competition and to showcases all of the tiers of the eﬃcient QA com-
petition, we oﬀered three ways to answer each question where either humans or computers
have more resources to answer a question (Table 4).
To complement the 500MiB systems, humans had to instantly signal when they knew
the answer to a question. This reﬂects instant recall of a fact by a single individual. In
the next phase in competition with the 6GiB systems, both humans and computers had
more resources: the human team could discuss the answer for thirty seconds, arguing why
they believe their answer is correct and computers had over ten times the memory. Finally,
to focus one reading comprehension, unlimited systems faced oﬀagainst the human teams
who also had access to snippets from search results using the question as a query. As with
the previous phase, they have thirty seconds to discuss their answer.
We selected questions for the human eval based on the following criteria:
99

Min et al.
Phase
Human
Computer Points
1
Single player “buzz in”
500MiB
3
2
Team discussion
6GiB
2
3
Team discussion w/ search results
Unlimited
1
Table 4: Phases of the human–computer competition.
On odd questions the humans go ﬁrst, while
on even questions the computers go ﬁrst. If
neither team has a correct answer in a phase,
we move on to the next phase.
Team
Margin
B
0.4 ppq
C
0.1 ppq
D
-0.1 ppq
A
-0.2 ppq
E
-0.6 ppq
Table 5: Marin per question of
the human teams at
the preliminary com-
petition.
• Diverse over topic, ensuring there were questions about history, literature, philosophy,
sports, and popular culture. This results in fewer questions about sports and popular
culture than the standard NQ distribution.
• Not tied to 2018; we excluded questions that depend on the date being asked.
• Interesting questions.
While not strictly adversarial, we wanted to showcase both
human and computer ability, so we excluded questions that many humans would not
know (e.g., “how many us states are there”) or questions with answers that are diﬃcult
to evaluate in the NQ framework (“how many words are in Les Mis´erables?”).
• To avoid the issues described in Section 4, we avoided questions that were overly
ambiguous (answer changes based on time the question was asked, unclear answer
type, mismatch with question intention, etc).
Thus, for the human competition, we exclude the broader interpretation of correct
adopted in Section 5.2 to a standard we called “actually correct”, consistent with traditional
trivia interpretations Jennings (2006).
A human judge researched all of the answers to
the questions and evaluated whether an answer was correct or not. This allows for more
permissive answers lines such as “to pass away” to be accepted for questions like “what
does it mean to cross over the rainbow bridge” even though the answer line only lists
“heaven”. Again, consistent with trivia best practice, we only required full names in the
case of confusion (e.g., “Theodore Roosevelt” or “Franklin D. Roosevelt” instead of just
“Roosevelt”).
6.2. Preliminary Competition
To select which of the human teams faced oﬀagainst the top computers in the ﬁnal compe-
tition and to let the humans teams practice this unconventional format, we had the human
teams face oﬀagainst the baseline systems: T5 (500MiB), DPR (6GiB), and REALM (Un-
limited).
We set aside an hour for each team. Because better teams can get through more ques-
tions, to normalize comparisons per team, we computed the average margin per question
(Table 5). Only two teams had higher scores than the computer baseline teams. The top
team (Team B), which had multiple professors and trivia champions was clearly the best
human team on this set of questions.
100

NeurIPS 2020 EfficientQA competition
6.3. Final Game
The winning team (Team B) went up against the winning computer systems in a ﬁnal match
with ﬁfty questions. Most questions were answered in Phase 1, and those that were not
were typically answered in Phase 2 (Figure 3 (right)). Only four questions reached Phase 3;
these questions that stumped both humans and computers:
• Kimi no na wa what does it mean
• Who said there are old pilots and there are bold pilots
• What is the second largest city in ethiopia
• Who said i’ll make mincemeat out of you
Of these questions, only the second largest city in Ethiopia was answered correctly (the
humans were working through a list of cities in Ethiopia they knew). The other questions
represent questions that cannot be answered by Wikipedia (“old pilots”), questions that
require language capabilities beyond question answering (“kimi no na wa”), or that have
a more nuanced answer than NQ can provide. For example, on the questions “who said
i’ll make mincemeat out of you”, the human team reasonably thought that the question
meant who originated the phrase, while NQ’s answer was the cartoon character who is
most associated with the phrase (Klondike Kat).
6.4. Reﬂection
For question answering, there are multiple interpretations of the phrase “human evalua-
tion”. Human evaluation of answers are important for exposing problems in the dataset,
revealing ambiguity, and measuring whether the answers are useful. However, for the ul-
timate questions of where we have achieved artiﬁcial intelligence (Turing, 1995), we need
fair comparisons with skilled humans. Moreover, to measure whether question answering
systems are useful for people, we need to create socio-technical systems where humans and
computers can answer questions together (Feng and Boyd-Graber, 2019). More importantly,
trivia games are fun. They help illustrate the strengths and weaknesses of the underlying
dataset and the QA methods with a spoonful of sugar to make otherwise dull evaluations
more interesting.
7. Conclusions and Future Work
The EﬃcientQA competition was held to encourage research in open-domain question an-
swering that focuses on both accuracy and memory footprint. All top performing submis-
sions have a retriever-reader framework.
Submissions to the unrestricted and the 6GiB
track are enhanced over the state-of-the-art that retrieves a subset of Wikipedia passages
and employs the extractive and/or generative answer modules; systems in the 6GiB track
additionally cleverly select a small subset of Wikipedia, only marginally sacriﬁcing accu-
racy when combined with state-of-the-art compression. In more restricted tracks, systems
explore novel approaches and achieve impressive improvements over the baselines. They
either generate a large corpus of question-answer pairs and retrieves the closest question to
the input question, or dramatically ﬁlter Wikipedia and use a single Transformer model for
101

Min et al.
retrieval and answer extraction. Still, they are behind the unrestricted systems in perfor-
mance by 20%, indicating signiﬁcant room for improvements in memory-restricted settings.
A human analysis shows that automatic evaluations of QA systems are not suﬃcient for
thorough evaluations. Human raters ﬁnd 30% of the predictions that do not match reference
answers but are nonetheless correct.
This does not aﬀect all systems equally: relative
accuracy rises using deﬁnitely correct (between 18–32%) and possibly correct (between 42
and a whopping 71%). The rise is mainly due to automatic evaluation failing to capture
semantically equivalent answers, time-dependence of the answers, or underlying ambiguity
in the questions (Min et al., 2020).
Future work in eﬃcient open-domain question answering should continue to explore the
tradeoﬀbetween system size, accuracy, and abstaining (He et al., 2016; Rajpurkar et al.,
2018). Moreover, it is important to continue to reﬁne the quality of QA evaluation: not all
annotation and not all annotators are created equal. Using trivia enthusiasts for annotation
and human benchmarks is a fun and eﬀective evaluation of relative computer QA ability. We
would encourage future leaderboards to use some element of human veriﬁcation in important
evaluations (e.g., an annual bake oﬀ), removing ambiguity in questions (Min et al., 2020),
crafting adversarial examples (Jia and Liang, 2017; Wallace et al., 2019; Dua et al., 2019;
Bartolo et al., 2020), or evaluating whether a response is useful to a user (Fan et al., 2019;
Feng and Boyd-Graber, 2019).
