Factorization of View-Object Manifolds for Joint
Object Recognition and Pose Estimation$
Haopeng Zhanga,b,∗, Tarek El-Gaalyc, Ahmed Elgammalc, Zhiguo Jianga,b
aImage Processing Center, School of Astronautics, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191,
China
bBeijing Key Laboratory of Digital Media, Beijing, 100191, China
cDepartment of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
Abstract
Due to large variations in shape, appearance, and viewing conditions, object
recognition is a key precursory challenge in the ﬁelds of object manipulation
and robotic/AI visual reasoning in general. Recognizing object categories, par-
ticular instances of objects and viewpoints/poses of objects are three critical
subproblems robots must solve in order to accurately grasp/manipulate objects
and reason about their environments. Multi-view images of the same object lie
on intrinsic low-dimensional manifolds in descriptor spaces (e.g. visual/depth
descriptor spaces).
These object manifolds share the same topology despite
being geometrically diﬀerent.
Each object manifold can be represented as a
deformed version of a uniﬁed manifold.
The object manifolds can thus be
parameterized by its homeomorphic mapping/reconstruction from the uniﬁed
manifold. In this work, we develop a novel framework to jointly solve the three
challenging recognition sub-problems, by explicitly modeling the deformations
of object manifolds and factorizing it in a view-invariant space for recognition.
We perform extensive experiments on several challenging datasets and achieve
state-of-the-art results.
$This is an extension of the paper entitled ”Joint Object and Pose Recognition Using
Homeomorphic Manifold Analysis” [1] that was presented at the 27th AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-13) held July 14-18, 2013 in Bellevue, Washington, USA.
∗Corresponding author

Accepted in Computer Vision and Image Understanding 2015
arXiv:1503.06813v2  [cs.CV]  13 Apr 2015

Keywords:
Homeomorphic Manifold Analysis, Object Categorization, Object
Recognition, Instance Recognition, Pose Estimation
1. Introduction
Visual object recognition is a challenging problem with many real-life appli-
cations. The diﬃculty of the problem is due to variations in shape and appear-
ance among objects within the same category, as well as the varying viewing
conditions, such as viewpoint, scale, illumination, etc. Under this perceptual
problem of visual recognition lie three subproblems that are each quite chal-
lenging: category recognition, instance recognition, and pose estimation. Im-
pressive work have been done in the last decade on developing computer vision
systems for generic object recognition. Research has spanned a wide spectrum
of recognition-related issues, however, the problem of multi-view recognition re-
mains one of the most fundamental challenges to the progress of the computer
vision.
The problems of object classiﬁcation from multi-view setting (multi-view
recognition) and pose recovery are coined together, and directly impacted by the
way shape is represented. Inspired by Marr’s 3D object-centric doctrine [2], tra-
ditional 3D pose estimation algorithms often solved the recognition, detection,
and pose estimation problems simultaneously (e.g.[3, 4, 5, 6]), through 3D ob-
ject representations, or through invariants. However, such models were limited
in their ability to capture large within-class variability, and were mainly focused
on recognizing instances of objects. In the last two decades the ﬁeld has shifted
to study 2D representations based on local features and parts, which encode the
geometry loosely (e.g. pictorial structure like methods [7, 8]), or does not encode
the geometry at all (e.g. bag of words methods [9, 10].) Encoding the geometry
and the constraints imposed by objects’ 3D structure are essential for pose es-
timation. Most research on generic object recognition bundle all viewpoints of
a category into one representation; or learn view-speciﬁc classiﬁers from limited
viewpoints, e.g. frontal cars, side-view cars, rear cars, etc. Recently, there has
2

been an increasing interest in object categorization in the multi-view setting, as
well as recovering object pose in 3D, e.g. [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. How-
ever, the representations used in these approaches are mainly category-speciﬁc
representations, which do not support scaling up to a large number of categories.
The fundamental contribution of this paper is the way we address the prob-
lem. We look at the problem of multi-view recognition and pose estimation as a
style and content separation problem, however, in an unconventional and unin-
tuitive way. The intuitive way is to model the category as the content and the
viewpoint as a style variability. Instead, we model the viewpoint as the content
and the category as a style variability. This unintuitive way of looking at the
problem is justiﬁed from the point of view of learning the visual manifold of the
date. The manifold of diﬀerent views of a given object is intrinsically low in di-
mensionality, with known topology. Moreover, we can show that view manifolds
of all objects are deformed version of each other. In contrast, the manifold of
all object categories is hard to model given all within-class variability of objects
and the enormous number of categories. Therefore, we propose to model the
category as a “style” variable over the view manifold of objects. We show that
this leads to models that can untangle the appearance and shape manifold of
objects, and lead to multi-view recognition.
The formulation in this paper is based on the concept of Homeomorphic
Manifold Analysis (HMA) [19]. Given a set of topologically equivalent mani-
folds, HMA models the variation in their geometries in the space of functions
that maps between a topologically-equivalent common representation and each
of them. HMA is based on decomposing the style parameters in the space of
nonlinear functions that map between a uniﬁed embedded representation of the
content manifold and style-dependent visual observations. In this paper, we
adapt a similar approach to the problem of object recognition, where we model
the viewpoint as a continuous content manifold and separate object style vari-
ables as view-invariant descriptors for recognition. This results in a generative
model of object appearance as a function of multiple latent variables, one de-
scribing the viewpoint and lies on a low-dimensional manifold, and the other
3

describing the category/instance and lies on a low-dimensional subspace. A fun-
damental diﬀerent in our proposed framework is the way 3D shape is encoded.
An object’s 3D shapes imposes deformation of its view manifold. Our frame-
work, explicitly models the deformations of object manifolds and factorizes it
in a view-invariant space for recognition. It should be notice that we ignore the
problem of detection/localization in this paper, and only focus on the problem
of recognition and pose estimation assuming that bounding boxes or masks of
the objects are given.
Pose recognition/estimation is fundamentally a six-degree-of-freedom (6DoF)
problem [20], including 3DoF position [x, y, z] and 3DoF orientation [yaw, pitch, roll].
However, in practical computer vision and robotic applications, pose estimation
typically means solving for the some or all of the orientation degrees of freedom,
while solving for the 3DoF position is usually called localization. In this paper,
we focused on the problem of estimating the 3DoF orientation of the object (or
the 3DoF viewing orientation of the camera relatively), i.e. we assumed the
camera looking at the object in a ﬁxed distance. We ﬁrstly considered the case
of 1DoF orientation, i.e. a camera looking at an object on a turntable setting,
which results in a one-dimensional view manifold, and then generalized to 2DoF
and 3DoF orientation. Generalization to recover the full 6DoF of a camera is
not obvious. Recovering the full 6DoF camera pose is possible for a given object
instance, which can be achieved by traditional model-based method. However,
this is a quite challenging task for the case of generic object categories. There
are various reasons why we only consider 3DoF viewing orientation and not full
6DoF. First, it quite hard to have training data that covers the space of poses
in that case; all the state-of-the-art dataset are limited to only a few views, or
at most, multiple views of an object on a turn-table with a couple of diﬀerent
heights. Second, practically, we do not see objects in all possible poses, in many
applications the poses are quite limited to a viewing circle or sphere.
Even
humans will have problems recognizing objects in unfamiliar poses. Third, for
most applications, it is not required to know the 6DoF pose, 1DoF pose is usu-
ally enough. Deﬁnitely for categorization 6DoF is not needed. In this paper we
4

show that we can learn from a viewing circle and generalize very well to a large
range of views around it.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related
work, and Section 3 summarizes our factorized model and its application to
joint object and pose recognition. Separately, Section 4 and Section 5 describe
how to learn the model and how to use this model to infer for category, instance
and pose in detail.
Section 6 evaluates the model and compares it to other
state-of-the-art methods. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.
2. Related Work
2.1. Recognition and Pose Estimation
Traditional 3D pose estimation algorithms often solve the recognition and
pose estimation problems simultaneously using 3D object model-bases, hypoth-
esis and test principles, or through the use of invariants, e.g. [3, 4, 5, 6]. Such
models are incapable of dealing with large within-class variability and have been
mainly focused on recognizing instances previously seen in the model-base. This
limitation led to the development, over the last decade, of very successful cat-
egorization methods mainly based on local features and parts. Such methods
loosely encode the geometry, e.g. methods like pictorial structure [7]; or does
not encode the geometry at all, e.g. bag of words [9, 10].
There is a growing recent interest in developing representations that captures
3D geometric constraints in a ﬂexible way to handle the categorization prob-
lem. The work of Savarese and Fei-Fei [13, 21] was pioneering in that direction.
In [13, 21] a part-based model was proposed where canonical parts are learned
across diﬀerent views, and a graph representation is used to model the object
canonical parts. Successful recent work have proposed learning category-speciﬁc
detection models that is able to estimate object pose (e.g. [18, 17, 22, 23]). This
has an adverse side-eﬀect of not being scalable to a large number of categories
and dealing with high within-class variation. Typically papers on this area fo-
cus on evaluating the detection and pose estimation performance and do not
5

evaluate the categorization performance. In contrast to category-speciﬁc rep-
resentations, we focus on developing a common representation for recognition
and pose estimation. This achieved through learning a view-invariant represen-
tation using a proposed three-phase process that can use images and videos in
a realistic learning scenario.
Almost all the work on pose estimation and multi-view recognition from local
features is based on formulating the problem as a classiﬁcation problem where
view-based classiﬁers and/or viewpoint classiﬁers are trained. These classiﬁca-
tion-based approaches solve pose estimation problem in a discrete way simul-
taneously or not with recognition problem. They use several discrete (4, 8, 16
or more) view-based/pose-based classiﬁers, and take the classiﬁcation results as
the estimated poses. For example, in [24], 93 support vector machine (SVM)
classiﬁers were trained. It is obvious that only discrete poses can be obtained
by these classiﬁcation-based methods, and the accuracy depends on the number
of classiﬁers. On the other hand, there are also works formulate the problem
of pose estimation as a regression problem by learning the regression function
within a speciﬁc category, such as car or head, e.g. [25, 26, 27, 28, 29]. These
regression-based approaches solve pose estimation in a continuous way, and
can provide continuous pose prediction. A previous comparable study in [24]
shows that the regression method (i.e. support vector regression, SVR) per-
forms well in either horizontal or vertical head pose variations comparing to
SVM classiﬁers. More recent regression-based approaches [26, 28] also report
better pose estimation results than classiﬁcation-based methods on some chal-
lenging datasets. Generally, pose estimation is essentially a continuous problem,
since the pose varies continuously in real world. Thus, continuously estimating
the poses is more conformable to the essence of the problem.
In the domain of
modal data, recent work by [30] uses synchronized multi-modal photometric
and depth information (i.e. RGB-D) to achieve signiﬁcant performance in ob-
ject recognition. They build an object-pose tree model from RGBD images and
perform hierarchical inference. Although performance of category and instance
6

recognition is signiﬁcant, object pose recognition performance is less so. The
reason is the same: a classiﬁcation strategy for pose recognition results in coarse
pose estimates and does not fully utilize the information present in the continu-
ous distribution of descriptor spaces. In the work by [27, 31], random regression
forests were used for real time head pose estimation from depth images, and
such a continuous pose estimation method can get 3D orientation errors less
than 10◦respectively.
2.2. Modeling Visual Manifolds for Recognition
Learning image manifolds has been shown to be useful in recognition, for
example for learning appearance manifolds from diﬀerent views [32], learning
activity and pose manifolds for activity recognition and tracking [33, 34], etc.
The seminal work of Murase and Nayar [32] showed how linear dimensionality
reduction using PCA [35] can be used to establish a representation of an ob-
ject’s view and illumination manifolds. Using such representation, recognition
of a query instance can be achieved by searching for the closest manifold. How-
ever, such a model is mainly a projection of the data to a low-dimensional space
and does not provide a way to untangle the visual manifold. The pioneering
work of Tenenbaum and Freeman [36] formulated the separation of style and
content using a bilinear model framework. In that work, a bilinear model was
used to decompose face appearance into two factors: head pose and diﬀerent
people as style and content interchangeably. They presented a computational
framework for model ﬁtting using SVD. A bilinear model is a special case of a
more general multilinear model. In [37], multilinear tensor analysis was used
to decompose face images into orthogonal factors controlling the appearance of
the face including geometry (people), expressions, head pose, and illumination
using High Order Singular Value Decomposition (HOSVD) [38]. N-mode anal-
ysis of higher-order tensors was originally proposed and developed in [39, 40]
and others. A fundamental limitation with bilinear and multilinear models is
that they need an aligned product space of data (all objects × all views × all
illumination etc.).
7

The proposed framework utilizes bilinear and multilinear analysis. However,
we use such type of analysis in a diﬀerent way that avoids their inherent limita-
tion. The content manifold, which is the view manifold in our case, is explicitly
represented using an embedded representation, capitalizing in the knowledge
of its dimensionality and topology.
Given such representation, the style pa-
rameters are factorized in the space of nonlinear mapping functions between a
representation of the content manifold and the observations. The main advan-
tage of this approach is that, unlike bilinear and multilinear models that mainly
discretize the content space, the content in our case is treated as a continuous
domain, and therefore aligning of data is not needed.
The introduction of nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques such as
Local Linear Embedding (LLE) [41], Isometric Feature Mapping (Isomap) [42],
and others [43, 44, 45, 46], provide tools to represent complex manifolds in
low-dimensional embedding spaces, in ways that aim at preserving the mani-
fold geometry. However, in practice, away from toy examples, it is hardly the
case that various orthogonal perceptual aspects can be shown to correspond to
certain directions or clusters in the embedding space. In the context of generic
object recognition, direct dimensionality reduction of visual features was not
shown to provide an eﬀective solution; to the contrast, the state of the art
is dominated by approaches that rely on extremely high-dimensional feature
spaces to achieve class linear separability, and the use of discriminative classi-
ﬁer, typically SVM, in these spaces. By learning the visual manifold, we are
not advocating for a direct dimensionality reduction solution that mainly just
project data aiming at preserving the manifold geometry locally or globally. We
are arguing for a solution that is able to factorize and untangle the complex
visual manifold to achieve multi-view recognition.
8

Truck A 
Truck B 
Car C 
Car D 
A 
B 
C 
D 
Car 
Truck 
View-invariant Style Representation 
Manifold Deformation Space 
3D Space 
Image/Feature Space 
anifold
Factorization 
View manifolds 
k B
k
if ld
Figure 1:
Framework for factorizing the view-object manifold.
3. Framework
3.1. Intuition
The objective of our framework is to learn a manifold representation for
multi-view objects that supports category, instance and viewpoint recognition.
In order to achieve this, given a set of images captured from diﬀerent viewpoints,
we aim to learn a generative model that explicitly factorizes the following:
• Viewpoint variable (within-manifold parameterization): smooth parame-
terization of the viewpoint variations, invariant to the object’s category.
• Object variable (across-manifold parameterization): parameterization at
the level of each manifold that characterizes the object’s instance/category,
invariant to the viewpoint.
Consider collections of images containing instances of diﬀerent object classes
and diﬀerent views of each instance. The shape and appearance of an object
in a given image is a function of its category, style within category, viewpoint,
besides other factors that might be nuisances for recognition. Our discussion do
not assume any speciﬁc feature representation of the input, we just assume that
the images are vectors in some input space. The visual manifold given all these
variability collectively is impossible to model. Let us ﬁrst simplify the problem.
9

Let us assume that the object is detected in the training images (so there is
no 2D translation or in-plane rotation manifold). Let us also assume we are
dealing with rigid objects (to be relaxed), and ignore the illumination variations
(assume using an illumination invariant feature representation). Basically, we
are left with variations due to category, within category, and viewpoint, i.e., we
are dealing with a combined view-object manifold.
The underlying principle is that multiple views of an object lie on an intrinsic
low-dimensional manifolds in the input space (denoted as view manifold). The
view manifolds of diﬀerent objects are distributed in input space. To recover
the category, instance and pose of a test image we need to know which man-
ifold this image belongs to and the intrinsic coordinates of that image within
the manifold. This basic view of object recognition and pose estimation is not
new, and was used in the seminal work of [32]. PCA [35] was used to achieve
linear dimensionality reduction of the visual data, and the manifolds of diﬀer-
ent object were represented as parameterized curves in the embedding space.
However, dimensionality reduction techniques, whether linear or nonlinear, will
just project the data preserving the manifold local or global geometry, and will
not be able to achieve the desired untangled representation.
What is novel in our framework, is that we use the view manifold deformation
as an invariant that can be used for categorization and modeling the within-
class variations. Let us consider the case where diﬀerent views are obtained
from a viewing circle, e.g. camera viewing an object on a turntable. The view
manifold of the object is a 1D closed manifold embedded in the input space.
That simple closed curve deforms in the input space depending on the object
shape and appearance.
The view manifold can be degenerate, e.g.
imaging
a textureless sphere from diﬀerent views results in the same image, i.e.
the
visual manifold in this case is degenerate to a single point. Therefore, capturing
and parameterizing the deformation of a given object’s view manifold tells us
information about the object category and within category variation. If the
views are obtained from a full or part of the view-sphere centered around the
object, it is clear that the resulting visual manifold should be a deformed sphere
10

as well (assuming the cameras are facing toward the object).
Let us denote the view manifold of an object instance s in the input space
by Ds ⊂RD. D is the dimensionality of the input space. Assuming that all
manifolds Ds are not degenerate (we will discuss this issue shortly), then they
are all topologically equivalent, and homeomorphic to each other1. Moreover,
suppose we can achieve a common view manifold representation across all ob-
jects, denoted by M ⊂Re, in an Euclidean embedding space of dimensionality
e. All manifolds Ds are also homeomorphic to M. In fact all these manifolds
are homeomorphic to a unit circle in 2D for the case of a viewing circle, and a
unit sphere in 3D for the case of full view sphere. In general, the dimensionality
of the view manifold of an object is bounded by the dimensionality of viewing
manifold (degrees of freedom imposed by the camera-object relative pose).
3.2. Manifold Parameterization
We can achieve a parameterization of each manifold deformation by learning
object-dependent regularized mapping functions γs(·) : Re →RD that map from
M to each Ds. Given a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) of functions
and its corresponding kernel K(·, ·), from the representer theorem [47, 48] it
follows that such functions admit a representation of the form
γs(x) = Cs · ψ(x) ,
(1)
where Cs is a D × Nψ mapping coeﬃcient matrix, and ψ(·) : Re →RNψ is a
nonlinear kernel map, as will be described in Section 4.
In the mapping (Eq. 1), the geometric deformation of manifold Ds, from the
common manifold M, is encoded in the coeﬃcient matrix Cs. Therefore, the
space of matrices {Cs} encodes the variability between diﬀerent object mani-
folds, and can be used to parameterize such manifolds. We can parameterize
1A function f : X →Y between 2 topological spaces is called a homeomorphism if it is a
bijection, continuous, and its inverse is continuous. In our case the existence of the inverse
is assumed but not required for computation, i.e., we do not need the inverse for recovering
pose. We mainly care about the mapping in a generative manner from M to Ds.
11

the variability across diﬀerent manifolds in a subspace in the space of coeﬃcient
matrices. This results in a generative model in the form
γ(x, s) = A ×2 s ×3 ψ(x).
(2)
In this model s ∈Rds is a parameterization of manifold Ds that signiﬁes the
variation in category/instance of an object. x is a representation of the view-
point that evolves around the common manifold M. A is a third order tensor
of dimensionality D×ds ×Nψ, where ×i is the mode-i tensor product as deﬁned
in [38]. In this model, both the viewpoint and object latent representations, x
and s, are continuous.
There are several reasons why we learn the mapping in a generative manner
from M to each object manifold (not the other way). First, this direction guar-
antees that the mapping is a function, even in the case of degenerate manifolds
(or self intersections) in the input space. Second, mapping from a uniﬁed repre-
sentation as M results in a common RKHS of functions. All the mappings will
be linear combinations of the same ﬁnite set of basis functions. This facilitates
factorizing the manifold geometry variations in the space of coeﬃcients in Eq
2.
Given a test image y recovering the category, instance and pose reduces
to an inference problem where the goal is to ﬁnd s∗and x∗that minimizes a
reconstruction error, i.e.,
arg min
s,x ∥y −A ×2 s ×3 ψ(x)∥2.
(3)
Once s is recovered, an instance classiﬁer and a category classiﬁer can be used
to classify y.
Learning the model is explained in Section 4. Here we discuss and justify our
choice of the common manifold embedded representation. Since we are dealing
with 1D closed view manifolds, an intuitive common representation for these
manifolds is a unit circle in R2.
A unit circle has the same topology as all
object view manifolds (assuming no degenerate manifolds), and hence, we can
establish a homeomorphism between it and each manifold.
12

Dimensionality reductions (DR) approaches, whether linear (such as PCA
[35] and PPCA [49]) or nonlinear (such as isometric feature mapping (Isomap) [42],
Locally linear embedding (LLE) [41], Gaussian Process Latent Variable Mod-
els (GPLVM) [45]) have been widely used for embedding manifolds in low-
dimensional Euclidean spaces. DR approaches ﬁnd an optimal embedding (la-
tent space representation) of a manifold by minimizing an objective function
that preserves local (or global) manifold geometry. Such low-dimensional latent
space is typically used for inferring object pose or body conﬁguration. However,
since each object has its own view manifold, it is expected that the embedding
will be diﬀerent for each object. On the other hand, using DR to embed data
from multiple manifolds together will result in an embedding dominated by the
inter-manifold distance and the resulting representation cannot be used as a
common representation.
Embedding multiple manifolds using DR can be achieved using manifold
alignment, e.g. [50]. If we embed aligned view manifolds for multiple objects
where the views are captured from a viewing circle, we observe that the result-
ing embedding will converge to a circle. Similar results were shown in ([26]),
where a view manifold is learned from local features from multiple instances
with no prior alignment. This is expected since each object view manifold is
a 1D closed curve in the input space, i.e. a deformed circle. Such deforma-
tion depends on object geometry and appearance. Hence it is expected that
the latent representation of multiple aligned manifolds will converge to a circle.
This observation empirically justiﬁes the use of a unit circle as a general model
of object view manifold in our case. Unlike DR where the goal is to ﬁnd an
optimal embedding that preserves the manifold geometry, in our case we only
need to preserve the topology while the geometry is represented in the mapping
space. This facilitates parameterizing the space of manifolds. Therefore, the
unit circle represents an ideal conceptual manifold representation, where each
object manifold is a deformation of that ideal case. In some sense we can think
of a unit circle as a prior model for all 1D view manifolds. If another degree of
freedom is introduced which, for example, varies the pitch angle of the object on
13

the turn-table then a sphere manifold would capture the conceptual geometry
of the pose and be topologically-equivalent.
Dealing with degeneracy. Of course the visual manifold can be degenerate in
some cases or it can be self intersecting, because of the projection from 3D to
2D and lack of visual features, e.g., images of a textureless sphere. In such cases
the homeomorphic assumption does not hold. The key to tackle this challenge is
in learning the mapping in a generative manner from M to Ds, not in the other
direction. By enforcing the known non-degenerate topology on M, the mapping
from M to Ds still exists, still is a function, and still captures the manifold
deformation. In such cases the recovery of object pose might be ambiguous and
ill-posed. In fact, such degenerate cases can be detected by rank-analysis of the
mapping matrix Cs.
4. Learning the Model
The input to the learning algorithm is images of diﬀerent objects from dif-
ferent viewpoint, with viewpoint labels, and category label. For learning the
representation, only the viewpoint labels are needed, while the category labels
are used for learning classiﬁers on top of the learned representation, i.e. learn-
ing the representation is “unsupervised” from category perspective. Images of
the same object from diﬀerent views is dealt with as a set of points sampled
from its view manifold. The number of sampled views do not necessarily be the
same, nor they have to be aligned. We ﬁrst describe constructing a common
“conceptual” view manifold representation M then we describe learning the
model.
4.1. View manifold representation
Let the sets of input images be Y k = {(yk
i ∈RD, pk
i ), i = 1, · · · , Nk} where
D is the dimensionality of the input space (i.e. descriptor space) and p denotes
the pose label. We construct a conceptual uniﬁed embedding space be in Re,
where e is the dimensionality of the conceptual embedding space. Each input
14

image will have a corresponding embedding coordinate deﬁned by construction
using the pose labels. We denote the embedding coordinates by Xk = {xk
i ∈
Re, i = 1, · · · , Nk}.
If we assume the input is captured from a viewing circle with yaw angles
(viewpoints): Θ = {θk
i ∈[0, 2π), i = 1, · · · , Nk}, then the k-th image set is
embedded on a unit circle such that xk
i = [cos θk
i , sin θk
i ] ∈R2, i = 1, · · · , Nk.
By such embedding, multi-view images with 1D pose variation are represented
on a conceptual manifold (unit circle in 2D), i.e. a normalized 1-sphere. For
the case of a full view sphere (2D pose variation represented by yaw and pitch
angles), images are represented on a unit-sphere in 3D, i.e. a normalized 2-
sphere. And for the case of 3D pose variation represented by yaw, pitch and roll
angles, the conceptual manifold will be a normalized 3-sphere in 4D. Generally,
assuming the pose angles of the input are pk
i = {(θk
i , βk
i , ζk
i ), i = 1, · · · , Nk}
where θ, β and ζ indicate yaw angle, pitch angle and roll angle respectively,
then the embedded coordinate of the i-th image yk
i is deﬁned as
xk
i =








































cos θk
i , sin θk
i
T ∈R2 (1D case)


cos θk
i cos βk
i
sin θk
i cos βk
i
sin βk
i

∈R3 (2D case)


cos θk
i cos βk
i cos ζk
i
sin θk
i cos βk
i cos ζk
i
sin βk
i cos ζk
i
sin ζk
i


∈R4 (3D case)
(4)
Notice that by embedding on a conceptual manifold, we just preserve the topol-
ogy of the manifold, not the metric input space. For clarity and without loss of
generality, we only consider 1D case when describing the learning and inferring
procedures in the following parts of this section and the next.
4.2. Homeomorphic Manifold Mapping
Given an input set Y k and its embedding coordinates Xk on a unit circle,
we learn a regularized nonlinear mapping function from the embedding to the
15

input space, i.e. a function γk(·) : Re →RD that maps from embedding space,
with dimensionality e, into the input space with dimensionality D.
To learn such mappings, we learn individual functions γl
k : Re →R for
the l-th dimension in the feature space. Each of these functions minimizes a
regularized loss functional in the form
nk
X
i

yk
il −γl
k(xk
i )

2 + λ Ω[γl
k],
(5)
where ∥·∥is the Euclidean norm, Ωis a regularization function that enforces
the smoothness in the learned function, and λ is the regularizer that balances
between ﬁtting the training data and smoothing the learned function. From
the representer theorem [47] we know that a nonlinear mapping function that
minimizes a regularized risk criteria admits a representation in the form of linear
combination of basis functions around arbitrary points zj ∈Re, j = 1, · · · , M
on the manifold (unit circle). In particular we use a semi-parametric form for
the function γ(·). Therefore, for the l-th dimension of the input, the function
γl
k is an RBF interpolant from Re to R. This takes the form
γl
k(x) = pl(x) +
M
X
j=1
ωl
j · φ(|x −zj|),
(6)
where φ(·) is a real-valued basis function, ωj are real coeﬃcients and | · | is the
2nd norm in the embedding space. pl is a linear polynomial with coeﬃcients cl,
i.e. pl(x) = [1
x] · cl. The polynomial part is needed for positive semi-deﬁnite
kernels to span the null space in the corresponding RKHS. The polynomial
part is essential for regularization with the choice of speciﬁc basis functions
such as Thin-plate spline kernel [51].
The choice of the centers is arbitrary
(not necessarily data points). Therefore, this is a form of Generalized Radial
Basis Function (GRBF) [48]. Typical choices for the basis function include thin-
plate spline, multiquadric, Gaussian2, biharmonic and tri-harmonic splines. The
2A Gaussian kernel does not need a polynomial part.
16

whole mapping can be written in a matrix form
γk(x) = Ck · ψ(x),
(7)
where Ck is a D×(M+e+1) dimensional matrix with the l-th row [ωl
1, · · · , ωl
M, clT ].
The vector ψ(x) = [φ(|x−z1|) · · · φ(|x−zM|), 1, xT ]T represents a nonlinear ker-
nel map from the embedded conceptual representation to a kernel induced space.
To ensure orthogonality and to make the problem well posed, the following con-
dition constraints are imposed: ΣM
i=1ωipj(xi) = 0, j = 1, · · · , m, where pj are
the linear basis of p. Therefore, the solution for Ck can be obtained by directly
solving the linear system:

A
Px
PT
t
0(e+1)×(e+1)


k
CkT =


Yk
0(e+1)×d

,
(8)
A, Px and Pt are deﬁned for the k −th set of object images as: A is a Nk × M
matrix with Aij = φ(|xk
i −zj|), i = 1, · · · , Nk, j = 1, · · · , M, Px is a Nk ×(e+1)
matrix with i-th row [1, xkT
i ], Pt is M × (e + 1) matrix with i-th row [1, zT
i ].
Yk is a Nk × D matrix containing the input images for set of images k, i.e.
Yk = [yk
1, · · · , yk
Nk]. Solution for Ck is guaranteed under certain conditions on
the basic functions used.
4.3. Decomposition
Each coeﬃcient matrix Ck captures the deformation of the view manifold
for object instance k. Given learned coeﬃcients matrices C1, · · · , CK for each
object instance, the category parameters can be factorized by ﬁnding a low-
dimensional subspace that approximates the space of coeﬃcient matrices. We
call the category parameters/factors style factors as they represent the para-
metric description of each object view manifold.
Let the coeﬃcients be arranged as a D × K × (M + e + 1) tensor C. The
form of the decomposition we are looking for is:
C = A ×2 S,
(9)
17

where A is a D × ds × (M + e + 1) tensor containing category bases for the
RBF coeﬃcient space and S = [s1, · · · , sK] is ds ×K. The columns of S contain
the instance/category parameterization. This decomposition can be achieved
by arranging the mapping coeﬃcients as a (D(M + e + 1)) × K matrix:
C =





c1
1
· · ·
cK
1
...
...
...
c1
M+e+1
· · ·
cK
M+e+1,





(10)
[ck
1, · · · , ck
M+e+1] are the columns of Ck. Given C, category vectors and content
bases can be obtained by SVD as C = UΣVT . The bases are the columns
of UΣ and the object instance/category vectors are the rows of V. Usually,
(D(M+e+1)) ≫K, so the dimensionality of instance/category vectors obtained
by SVD will be K, i.e. ds = K. The time complexity of SVD is O(K3) so
here our approach scales cubically with the number of objects, and the space
complexity is not much of a problem as SVD can be done on a large enough
matrix containing tens of thousands of rows.
5. Inference of Category, Instance and Pose
Given a test image y ∈RD represented in a descriptor space, we need
to solve for both the viewpoint parameterization x∗and the object instance
parameterization s∗that minimize Eq. 3.
This is an inference problem and
various inference algorithms can be used. Notice that, if the instance parameters
s is known, Eq. 3 reduces to a nonlinear 1D search for viewpoint x on the
unit circle that minimizes the error. This can be regarded as a solution for
viewpoint estimation, if the object is known. On the other hand, if x is known,
we can obtain a least-square closed-form approximate solution for s∗. An EM-
like iterative procedure was proposed in [52] for alternating between the two
factors. If dense multiple views along a view circle of an object are available,
we can solve for C∗in Eq. 7 and then obtain a closed-form least-square solution
for the instance parameter s∗as
s∗= arg min
s
||C∗−A ×2 s||.
(11)
18

In the case where we need to solve for both x and s, given a test image, we use
a sampling methods similar to particle ﬁlters [53] to solve the inference problem
(with K category/style samples s1, s2, · · · , sK in the category/style factor space
and L viewpoint samples x1, x2, · · · , xL on the unit circle). We use the terms
particle and sample interchangeably in our description of the approach.
To evaluate the performance of each particle we deﬁne the likelihood of a
particle (sk, xl) as
wkl = exp−||y −A ×2 sk ×3 ψ(xl)||2
2σ2
.
(12)
It should be noticed that such a likelihood depends on the reconstruction error
to be minimized in Eq. 3. The less the reconstruction error is, the larger the
likelihood will be.
We marginalize the likelihood to obtain the weights for sk and xl as
Wsk =
PL
l=1 wkl
PK
k=1
PL
l=1 wkl
, Wxl =
PK
k=1 wkl
PK
k=1
PL
l=1 wkl
.
(13)
Style samples are initialized as the K style vectors learned by our model (de-
composed via SVD of matrix C in Eq. 10), and the L viewpoint samples are
randomly selected on the unit circle.
In order to reduce the reconstruction error, we resample style and viewpoint
particles according to Ws and Wx from Normal distributions, i.e. more samples
are generated around samples with high weights in the previous iteration. To
keep the reconstruction error decreasing, we keep the particle with the minimum
error at each iteration. Algorithm 1 summarizes our sampling approach.
In the case of classiﬁcation and instance recognition, once the parameters s∗
are known, typical classiﬁers, such as k-nearest neighbor classiﬁer, SVM classi-
ﬁer, etc., can be used to ﬁnd the category or instance labels. Given x∗on the
unit circle, the exact pose angles can be computed by the inverse trigonometric
function as
θ∗= arctan(x∗
2/x∗
1),
(14)
where x∗
1 and x∗
2 are the ﬁrst and second dimensions of x∗respectively. Similar
solutions can be solved for 2D or 3D case.
19

Algorithm 1 Sampling approach for style and viewpoint inference.
Input:
Testing image or image feature, y;
Core tensor in Eq. 2, A;
Iteration number, IterNo;
Output:
Initialization:
1: Initialize particles (sk, xl) where k = 1, · · · , K, l = 1, · · · , L;
2: Initialize weights of style samples, Wsk = 1/K;
3: Initialize weights of viewpoint samples, Wxl = 1/L;
Iteration:
4: for i = 1; i < IterNo; i + + do
5:
Compute the likelihood of particles wkl = exp −||y−A×2sk×3ψ(xl)||2
2σ2
;
6:
Update the weights of style samples Wsk =
PL
l=1 wkl
PK
k=1
PL
l=1 wkl ;
7:
Update the weights of viewpoint samples Wxl =
PK
k=1 wkl
PK
k=1
PL
l=1 wkl ;
8:
Keep the particle (s∗, x∗) = arg maxk=1,··· ,K, l=1,··· ,L{wkl};
9:
Resample sk and xl according to Wsk and Wxl respectively;
10: end for
11: return (s∗, x∗);
5.1. Multimodal Fusion
For each individual channel (e.g. RGB and depth), a homeomorphic mani-
fold generative model is built. Our model can be extended to include multiple
modalities of information as long as there is smooth variation along the manifold
as the viewpoint/pose changes.
We combine visual information (i.e. RGB) and depth information by using a
combined objective function that encompasses the reconstruction error in each
mapping. This is done by running the training separately on each channel and
combining the objective functions. The combined reconstruction error becomes:
20

Ergbd(srgb, sd, x) = λrgb||yrgb −Argb ×2 srgb ×3 ψ(x)||2
+λd||yd −Ad ×2 sd ×3 ψ(x)||2
(15)
Notice that the two terms share the same viewpoint variable x. λrgb and λd
were selected empirically. Since visual data has less noise than depth (which
commonly exhibits missing depth values, i.e. holes), we bias the visual recon-
struction error term of Eq. 15. When resampling style and viewpoint samples in
our approach (Algorithm 1), we calculate the likelihood of a particle (sk
rgb, sk
d, xl)
as
wkl = exp
−Ergbd(sk
rgb, sk
d, xl)
2σ2
,
(16)
which is a little diﬀerent from Eq. 12.
The formulations of weights of style
and viewpoint samples are the same as 13, where visual style sample sk
rgb and
depth style sample sk
d share the same weight Wsk. This means we use a com-
bined style sample as sk = (sk
rgb, sk
d) for inferring. When the optimal solution
(s∗
rgb, s∗
d, x∗) = arg minsrgb,sd,x Ergbd(srgb, sd, x) is obtained, a combined param-
eters s∗= [λrgbs∗
rgb; λds∗
d] can be used for category and instance recognition.
6. Experiments and Results
6.1. Datasets
To validate our approach we experimented on several challenging datasets:
COIL-20 dataset [54], Multi-View Car dataset [55], 3D Object Category dataset [13],
Table-top Object dataset [56], PASCAL3D+ dataset [57], Biwi Head Pose database [27],
and RGB-D Object dataset [58]. We give a brief introduction of these datasets
in the following subsections. Fig. 2 shows sample images from each dataset.
COIL-20 dataset [54]: Columbia Object Image Library (COIL-20) dataset
contains 20 objects, and each of them has 72 images captured every 5 degrees
along a viewing circle. All images consist of the smallest patch (of size 128×128
) that contains the object, i.e. the background has been discarded. We used
this datset for the task of arbitrary view image synthesis in order to illustrate
the generative nature of our model.
21

Figure 2:
Sample images of diﬀerent datasets.
Rows from top to bottom:
COIL-20
dataset [54], Multi-View Car dataset [55], 3D Object Category dataset [13], Table-top Object
dataset [56], PASCAL3D+ dataset [57], Biwi Head Pose database [27], and RGB-D Object
dataset [58].
22

Multi-View Car dataset [55]: The Multi-View Car dataset contains 20 se-
quences of cars captured as the cars rotate on a rotating platform at a motor
show. The sequences capture full 360 degrees images around each car. Images
have been captured at a constant distance from the cars. There is one image
approximately every 3-4 degrees. Finely discretized viewpoint ground truth can
be calculated by using the time of capture information from the images. This
dataset is suitable for the validation of dense pose estimation.
3D Object Category dataset [13]: This dataset consists of 8 object categories
(bike, shoe, car, iron, mouse, cellphone, stapler and toaster). For each object
category, there are images of 10 individual object instances under 8 viewing
angles, 3 heights and 3 scales, i.e. 24 diﬀerent poses for each object. There
are about 7000 images in total. Mask outlines for each object in the dataset
are provided as well.
The entire dataset can be used for multi-view object
categorization and pose estimation. The car subset of 3D Object Category is
typically used to evaluate the performance of sparse pose estimation.
Table-top Object dataset [56]: This dataset contains table-top object cat-
egories with both annotated 2D image and 3D point clouds. There are two
subsets called Table-Top-Local and Table-Top-Pose. Table-Top-Local subset is
speciﬁc to the task of object detection and localization. We only use Table-Top-
Pose subset for pose estimation task. Table-Top-Pose contains 480 images of 10
object instances for each object categories (mice, mugs and staplers), where each
object instance is captured under 16 diﬀerent poses (8 angles and 2 heights).
Data includes the images, object masks, annotated object categories, annotated
object viewpoints and 3D point clouds of the scene.
PASCAL3D+ dataset [57]: PASCAL3D+ is a novel and challenging dataset
for 3D object detection and pose estimation. It contains 12 rigid categories and
more than 3000 object instances per category on average. The PASCAL3D+
images captured in real-world scenarios exhibit much more variability compared
to the existing 3D datasets, and are suitable to test real-world pose estimation
performance.
Biwi Head Pose database [27]: This database contains 24 sequences of 20
23

diﬀerent people (some recorded twice), captured with a Kinect sensor3. The
subjects were recorded at roughly one meter distance to the sensor. The subjects
move their heads around to try and span all possible yaw/pitch angles they could
perform. There are over 15K images in the dataset. Each frame was annotated
with the center of the head in 3D and the head rotation angles (respectively
pith, yaw, and roll angles) by using the automatic system. For each frame, a
depth image, the corresponding RGB image, and the annotation is provided.
The head pose range covers about ±75◦yaw, ±60◦pitch, and ±50◦roll. It is a
good choice to use Biwi Head Pose database for 3D head pose estimation, as it
provides ﬁne ground truth of 3D rotation angles.
RGB-D Object dataset [58]: This dataset is large and consists of 300 com-
mon household table-top objects. The objects are organized into 51 categories.
Images in the dataset were captured using a Kinect sensor that records syn-
chronized and aligned visual and depth images. Each object was placed on a
turntable and video sequences were captured for one whole rotation. There are
3 video sequences for each object each captured at three diﬀerent heights (30◦,
45◦, and 60◦) so that the object is viewed from diﬀerent elevation angles (with
respect to the horizon). The dataset provides ground truth pose information for
all 300 objects. Included in the RGB-D Object dataset are 8 video sequences of
common indoor environments (oﬃce workspaces, meeting rooms, and kitchen
areas) annotated with objects that belong to the RGB-D Object dataset. The
objects are visible from diﬀerent viewpoints and distances, and may be partially
or completely occluded. These scene sequences are part of the RGB-D Scenes
dataset. As one of the largest and most challenging multi-modal multi-view
datasets available, we used RGB-D Object dataset for joint category, instance
and pose estimation on multi-modal data, and used it to test a near real-time
system we built for category recognition of table-top objects.
3http://www.xbox.com/en-us/kinect
24

6.2. Parameter Determination
As in Subsection 4.2, there is one key parameter in our model that signiﬁ-
cantly aﬀects the performance. This is the number of mapping centers M. This
parameter determines the density of arbitrary points zj on the homeomorphic
manifold when learning the nonlinear mapping function. If M is too small, the
learnt mapping function may be not able to model the relationship between
view manifolds and visual inputs well enough. On the other hand, the com-
putation cost of learning the mapping function will increase in proportion to
M. When M is larger than the number of training data points the learning
problem becomes ill-posed. In addition to M, the image features are also im-
portant for our model. The images features are what represent the objects in
the visual/input space. However our approach is orthogonal to the choice of the
image representation, and any vectorized representation can be used.
To get proper parameters, we performed cross validation within the training
data of each fold. For example, in the 50% split experiment of Subsection 6.4, we
learnt our model on 9 out of the 10 car sequences in the training set and tested
using the 1 left out. We performed 10 rounds of cross validation. Fig. 3 shows
the performance of our model with diﬀerent parameters: the dimensionality of
HOG [59] features we used, and the number of mapping center (M). We used 35
mapping centers along a 2D unit circle to deﬁne the kernel map ψ(·) in Eq 1, and
used HOG features calculated in 7×7 grids with 9 orientation bins to represent
the inputs. The results in Table 2 were obtained using these parameters. Such
cross validation is performed for each experiment in this section.
6.3. Arbitrary View Synthesis
Since our model is a generative model mapping from the manifold represen-
tation to visual inputs, we can perform arbitrary view synthesis if image inten-
sities are used as visual inputs. We did arbitrary view synthesis experiments on
COIL-20 dataset to show the generative nature of our model. We used 54 images
to learn our generative model for each object in COIL-20 dataset, and tested
the rest 18 images (every 4th), i.e. synthesized images from the viewpoints of
25

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
3x3x9
4x4x9
5x5x9
6x6x9
7x7x9
8x8x9
9x9x9
10x10x9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Number of mapping centers
MAE
Dimensionality of HOG features
MAE (°)
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
3x3x9
4x4x9
5x5x9
6x6x9
7x7x9
8x8x9
9x9x9
10x10x9
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of mapping centers
AE < 22.5°
Dimensionality of HOG features
Accuracy
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
3x3x9
4x4x9
5x5x9
6x6x9
7x7x9
8x8x9
9x9x9
10x10x9
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of mapping centers
AE < 45°
Dimensionality of HOG features
Accuracy
Figure 3: Cross validation results on Multi-View Car dataset for parameter determination.
x and y axes are the number of mapping centers and the dimensionality of HOG features, z
axis is the pose estimation performance. Titles are shown on the axes (zoom in to see the
text). From top to bottom: MAE, AE < 22.5◦, and AE < 45◦. The dimensionality of HOG
features is indicated as n × n × 9, meaning that HOG features are computed in n × n grids
with 9 orientation bins.
26

the 18 testing images. We report mean squared error (MSE) to evaluate the
synthesized images, which can be deﬁned as following
MSE =
1
MN
M
X
i=1
N
X
j=1
[Io(i, j) −Is(i, j)]2
(17)
where Io(i, j) is the intensity of the pixel located at (i, j) in the testing image Io
of size M ×N, and Is is the synthesized image from the same viewpoint of image
Io. For comparison, we also used typical manifold learning methods, including
LLE [41], Isomap [42], and Laplacian Eigenmap (LE) [43], to learn a latent
representing of the view manifold, and then learned a similar generative map as
Eq. 7. Notice that diﬀerent from the conceptual manifold used in Subsection 4.1
where the embedded coordinates can be computed according to Eq 4 given the
pose angles, the embedding coordinates of the unseen views (in the testing
set) are obtained by linear interpolation between its neighbors in the training
set with the assumption that the manifold learned by LLE, Isomap, or LE is
locally linear. Results in Table 1 and Fig. 4 show that our model can correctly
generate unseen view of a learned object, and our synthesis results are both
quantitatively and qualitatively better than those obtained by typical manifold
learning methods.
Table 1: Arbitrary view synthesis results on COIL-20 dataset
Method
Mean Squared Error
Isomap [42]
704
LLE [41]
950
LE [43]
7033
Ours
361
6.4. Dense Viewpoint Estimation
We experimented on the Multi-View Car dataset to evaluate our model for
dense pose estimation. Following previous approaches [55, 26], there are two
27

Isomap
LLE
LE
Ours
Testing 
image
Figure 4: Synthesized images of unseen views. The ﬁrst row shows image samples in testing
set, and the rest four rows show synthesized images. Our results are visually better than other
manifold learning methods, and are more robust as well.
28

Table 2: Results on Multi-View Car dataset
Method
MAE (◦)
% of AE < 22.5◦
% of AE < 45◦
[55]
46.48
41.69
71.20
[26] - leave-one-out
35.87
63.73
76.84
[26] - 50% split
33.98
70.31
80.75
Ours - leave-one-out
19.34
90.34
90.69
Ours - 50% split
24.00
87.77
88.48
experimental setups: 50% split and leave-one-out. For the former we take the
ﬁrst 10 cars for training and the rest for testing, resulting a 10-dimensional style
space. For the latter we learn on 19 cars and test on the remaining 1, and the
dimensionality of the style space is 19. Pixels within the bounding box (BBox)
provided by the dataset were used as inputs.
For quantitative evaluation, we use the same evaluation criterion as [55, 26],
i.e. Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between estimated and ground truth view-
points. To compare with classiﬁcation-based viewpoint estimation approaches
(which use discrete bins) we also compute the percentages of test samples
that satisfy AE < 22.5◦and AE < 45◦where the Absolute Error (AE) is
AE = |EstimatedAngle −GroundTruth|). According to [26], the percentage
accuracy in terms of AE < 22.5◦and AE < 45◦can achieve equivalent compar-
ison with classiﬁcation-based pose estimation approaches that use 16-bin and
8-bin viewpoint classiﬁers respectively.
We represented the input using HOG features. Table 2 shows the view esti-
mation results in comparison to the state-of-the-art. Notice that results of [26]
were achieved given bounding boxes of the cars while those of [55] were without
bounding boxes, i.e. simultaneously performed localization. The quantitative
evaluation clearly demonstrates the signiﬁcant improvement we achieve.
29

6.5. Sparse Pose Estimation
To validate our approach for viewpoint estimation using sparse training sam-
ples on the viewing circle we did experiments on the 3D Object Category dataset
and the Table-top Object dataset. Both datasets contain only 8 sparse views
on the viewing circle. We used HOG features as input, calculated within the
BBoxes (obtained from the mask outlines).
For 3D Object Category dataset, we used its car subset and bicycle subset,
and followed the same setup as [13, 60]: 5 training sequences and 5 sequences
for testing (160 training and 160 testing images). The Table-Top-Pose subset
of the Table-top dataset was used for evaluating the viewpoint estimation of
the following classes: staplers, mugs and computer mice. We followed the same
setup as [56, 17]: the ﬁrst 5 object instances are selected for training, and the
remaining 5 for testing. Following the above setups, the dimensionality of the
style space we used are both 5.
For comparison with [13, 60, 61, 17, 26, 56], we report our results in terms of
AE < 45◦(equivalent to an 8-bin classiﬁer). Results are shown in Table 3. Some
of the state-of-the-art algorithms mentioned to jointly do detection and pose
estimation (without BBox) and reported pose estimation only for successfully
detected objects, while we do pose estimation for all objects in the database
given BBoxes. Therefore, the comparisons in Table 3 may be not completely fair.
We indicate the setting for each approach and put results in the corresponding
columns in Table 3. As shown in Table 3, our homeomorphic manifold analysis
framework achieves 93.13% on the car subset of the 3D Objects dataset. This is
far more than the state-of-the-art result of 85.38% in [17] and 77.5% in [26]. On
the bicycle subset of the 3D Objects dataset our accuracy is 94.58%. This is more
than 17% and 25% improvement over the results in [17] and [61], respectively.
We also achieve the best average accuracy of 89.17% on the three classes of
the Table-Top-Pose subset, improving about 26% and 43% over [17] and [56],
respectively. These results show the ability of our framework to model the visual
manifold, even with sparse views.
30

Table 3: Sparse pose estimation results and comparison with the state-of-the-arts
Dataset
Method
Pose estimation
Pose estimation
(without BBox)
(with BBox)
3D Object Category (car)
[13]
52.5%
-
3D Object Category (car)
[60]
66.63%
-
3D Object Category (car)
[61]
69.88%
-
3D Object Category (car)
[26]
-
77.5%
3D Object Category (car)
[17]
-
85.38%
3D Object Category (car)
Ours
-
93.13%
3D Object Category (bike)
[61]
75.5%
-
3D Object Category (bike)
[17]
-
80.75%
3D Object Category (bike)
Ours
-
94.58%
Table-Top-Pose
[56]
-
62.25%
Table-Top-Pose
[17]
-
70.75%
Table-Top-Pose
Ours
-
89.17%
6.6. Pose Estimation on PASCAL3D+ dataset
We performed pose estimation on PASCAL3D+ dataset [57]. Such a novel
and challenging dataset is suitable to test pose estimation performance in real-
world scenarios. We also used HOG features calculated within the BBoxes as
input. We tested our model on 11 categories as the benchmark [57], including
aeroplane, bicycle, boat, bus, car, chair, dining table, motorbike, sofa, train, and
tv monitor, following the same experimental setting as [57]. Results in Table 4
show the power of our model for pose estimation. Noting that the benchmark
results of [57] were performed simultaneously with detection, the comparison in
Table 4 is not completely fair.
6.7. 3D Head Pose Estimation
To test our model for multi-view object pose estimation with 3D pose/viewpoint
variation we performed experiments on the Biwi Head Pose database [27]. In
31

Table 4: Pose performance (%) on PASCAL3D+ dataset. It can be seen that our approach
outperforms VPDM [57]
Class
Ours (% of AE < 45◦)
VDPM-8V
Ours (% of AE < 22.5◦)
VDPM-16V
aeroplane
60.3
23.4
40.2
15.4
bicycle
60.7
36.5
40.3
18.4
boat
39.7
1.0
20.6
0.5
bus
73.0
35.5
68.7
46.9
car
55.4
23.5
46.4
18.1
chair
50.0
5.8
34.1
6.0
diningtable
45.2
3.6
37.5
2.2
motorbike
67.2
25.1
48.9
16.1
sofa
75.9
12.5
59.2
10.0
train
56.0
10.9
48.0
22.1
tvmonitor
80.1
27.4
55.1
16.3
average
59.0
18.7
44.2
15.6
our experiments, we only considered the problem of pose estimation and not
head detection. We assumed that the faces were detected successfully, thus we
just used the depth data within the bounding boxes (obtained from the pro-
vided masks) to compute HOG features.
Head poses were represented on a
3-dimensional conceptual manifold in 4D Euclidean space, i.e. a normalized 3-
sphere. For comparison, we ran a 5-fold and a 4-fold subject-independent cross
validation on the entire dataset, resulting a 16-dimensional and a 15-dimensional
style space respectively. This is the same experimental setup as [27] and [31].
We also reported the mean and standard deviation of the errors for each rota-
tion angles. Results are shown in Table 5. It should be noticed that the pose
results of [27] and
[31] in Table 5 are computed only for correctly detected
heads with 1.0% and 6.6% missed respectively. It can been seen that our model
signiﬁcantly outperforms [27] in 5-fold cross validation. In 4-fold cross valida-
32

tion, our mean errors are a little higher than [31] with respect to yaw and pitch,
but our standard deviations are lower, which means that our estimation results
are more stable. These results show the ability of our model to solve continuous
3D pose estimation robustly.
Table 5: Summary of results on Biwi Head Pose database
Method
Validation
Yaw error
Pitch error
Roll error
Ours (Depth)
5-fold
4.72 ± 4.69◦
3.84 ± 3.90◦
4.78 ± 5.49◦
Ours (RGB)
5-fold
8.09 ± 7.90◦
6.46 ± 6.79◦
6.00 ± 6.49◦
Ours (RGB+D)
5-fold
4.67 ± 4.57◦
3.85 ± 3.68◦
4.59 ± 5.24◦
Baseline [27] (Depth)
5-fold
9.2 ± 13.7◦
8.5 ± 10.1◦
8.0 ± 8.3◦
Ours (Depth)
4-fold
4.84 ± 4.78◦
3.87 ± 4.06◦
4.79 ± 5.61◦
Ours (RGB)
4-fold
8.40 ± 8.31◦
6.60 ± 6.87◦
6.10 ± 6.65◦
Ours (RGB+D)
4-fold
4.81 ± 4.77◦
3.86 ± 3.93◦
4.73 ± 5.49◦
Baseline [31] (Depth)
4-fold
3.8 ± 6.5◦
3.5 ± 5.8◦
5.4 ± 6.0◦
6.8. Categorization and Pose Estimation
We used the entire 3D Objects Category dataset to evaluate the performance
of our framework on both object categorization and viewpoint estimation. Sim-
ilar to [13, 60], we tested our model on an 8-category classiﬁcation task, and
the farthest scale is not considered. We followed the same experimental setting
as [13] by randomly selecting 8/10 object instances for learning and the remain-
ing 2 instances for testing. Since there are totally 64 instances for training,
the dimensionality of the style space used in this experiment is 64. Average
recognition results of 45 rounds are shown in Table 6. We achieve an average
recognition accuracy of 80.07% on 8 classes and an average pose estimation per-
formance of 73.13%4 on the entire test set which satisﬁes AE < 45◦. We achieve
4Notice that only pose results of correctly categorized images were taken for evaluation.
33

Table 6: Category recognition performance (%) on 3D Object Category dataset
Class
Ours
Baseline [13]
[23]
Bicycle
99.79
81.00
98.8
Car
99.03
70.00
99.8
Cellphone
66.74
76.00
62.4
Iron
75.78
77.00
96.0
Mouse
48.60
87.00
72.7
Shoe
81.70
62.00
96.9
Stapler
82.66
77.00
83.7
Toaster
86.24
75.00
97.8
markedly higher accuracy in recognition in 5 of the 8 classes than [13]. However
our performance is not better than [23], which shows the room to improve the
categorization capability of our model. In fact, a follow up paper [62] that uses
our framework with a feed foreword solution (without sampling) achieves much
better results than [23].
6.9. Joint Object and Pose Recognition
We evaluated our model for joint object and pose recognition on multi-modal
data by using the RGB-D Object dataset. Training and testing follows the exact
same procedure as [30]. Training was performed using sequences at heights: 30◦
and 60◦. Testing was performed using the 45◦height sequence. We treated
the images of each instance in the training set as one sequence, thus resulted
a 300-dimensional style space. We used HOG features for both RGB channels
and depth channel. We also experimented with an additional more recent depth
descriptor called Viewpoint Feature Histogram (VFH) [63] computed on the 3D
point cloud data.
Table 7 summarizes the results of our approach and compares to 2 state-
of-the-art baselines. In the case of category and instance recognition (column
2 & 3), we achieve results on par with the state-of-the-art [30]. We ﬁnd that
34

≈57% of the categories exhibit better category recognition performance when
using RGB+D, as opposed to using RGB only (set of these categories shown
in Fig. 5-top). Fig. 5-bottom shows an illustration of sample instances in the
object style latent space. Flatter objects lie more towards the lefthand side and
rounder objects lie more towards the righthand side. Sample correct results for
object and pose recognition are shown in Fig. 6.
Incorrectly classiﬁed objects were assigned pose accuracies of 0. Avg. and
Med. Pose (C) are computed only on test images whose categories were correctly
classiﬁed.
Avg.
and Med.
Pose (I) were computed only using test images
that had their instance correctly recognized. All the object pose estimations
signiﬁcantly out-performs the state-of-the-art [30, 28]. This veriﬁes that the
modeling of the underlying continuous pose distribution is very important in
pose recognition.
Lime and bowl categories were found to have better category recognition
accuracy when using depth only instead of using either visual-only or visual and
depth together. This can be explained by the complete lack of visual features
on their surfaces. Some object instances were classiﬁed with higher accuracy
using depth only also. There were 19 (out of 300) of these instances, including:
lime, bowl, potato, apple and orange. These instances have textureless surfaces
with no distinguishing visual features and so the depth information alone was
able to utilize shape information to achieve higher accuracy.
In Table 7 we see that depth HOG (DHOG) performs quite well in all
the pose estimation experiments except for where misclassiﬁed categories or
instances were assigned 0 (column 3 & 4). DHOG appears to be a simple and
eﬀective descriptor to describe noisy depth images captured by the Kinect in the
dataset. It achieves better accuracy than [30] in the pose estimation. Similar
to [30], recursive median ﬁlters were applied to depth images to ﬁll depth holes.
This validates the modeling of the underlying continuous distribution which our
homeomorphic manifold mapping takes advantage of. VFH is a feature adapted
speciﬁcally to the task of viewpoint estimation from point cloud data. No prior
point cloud smoothing was done to ﬁlter out depth holes and so its performance
35

suﬀered.
Table 7: Summary of results on RGB-D Object dataset using RGB/D and RGB+D (%). Cat.
and Inst. refer to category recognition and Instance recognition respectively
Methods
Cat.
Inst.
Avg
Pose
Med
Pose
Avg
Pose
(C)
Med
Pose
(C)
Avg
Pose
(I)
Med
Pose
(I)
Ours (RGB)
92.00
74.36
61.59
89.46
80.36
93.50
82.83
93.90
Linear SVM (RGB)
75.57
41.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
Ours (Depth - DHOG)
74.49
36.18
26.06
0.00
66.36
86.60
72.04
90.03
Linear SVM (Depth - DHOG)
65.30
18.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
Ours (Depth - VFH)
27.88
13.36
7.99
0.00
57.79
62.75
59.82
67.46
Ours (RGB+D)
93.10
74.79
61.57
89.29
80.01
93.42
82.32
93.80
Baseline (RGB+D) [30]
94.30
78.40
53.30
65.20
56.80
71.40
68.30
83.20
Linear SVM (RGB+D)
86.86
47.42
-
-
-
-
-
-
Baseline (RGB+D) [28]
-
-
-
-
74.76
86.70
-
-
6.10. Table-top Object Category Recognition System
We built a near real-time system for category recognition of table-top ob-
jects based on the homeomorphic manifold analysis framework described. Our
system was trained on a subset of 10 diﬀerent categories from the RGB-D Ob-
ject dataset. The category recognition runtime per object in one frame is less
than 2 seconds. Our MATLAB implementation was not optimized for real-time
processing but despite this, the potential for real-time capability is evident. We
only performed visual-only and depth-only training and testing of the system.
We did not experiment with the combination of both modes as we wanted to
optimize for speed as much as possible.
The system was tested on videos provided in the RGB-D Scenes dataset
that contain cluttered scenes with occlusion, a much larger variation of view-
point and varying scales (e.g. kitchen and desk scenes). Our system achieved
>62% category recognition accuracy using the depth mode only. An interesting
36

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
apple
cell phone
camera
rubber eraser
coffee mug
hand towel
glue stick
keyboard
banana
notebook
Accuracy of Category Recognition
 
 
RGB
Depth
RGB+Depth
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
−0.15
−0.1
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
−0.15
−0.1
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
 
Dimension 2
Dimension 1
 
Dimension 3
food box
food can
hand towel
marker
notebook
scissors
Figure 5: Top: Category recognition using diﬀerent modes for a subset of categories in RGB-
D Object dataset. Bottom: Sampled instances from 6 diﬀerent categories in RGB-D Object
dataset. Notice: ﬂatter objects lie to the left and more rounded shapes to the right
observation was that depth-only recognition outperformed visual-only recog-
nition in these cluttered scenes; intuitively due to the fact that background
texture around objects introduces visual noise. In the depth mode, large depth
discontinuities help to separate objects from background clutter and this aids
recognition. We also tested our system on never-seen-before objects placed on
table-tops without clutter. For this, we used the visual-only mode since there
was no clutter in the scene. Fig. 7 shows results achieved by our system run-
ning on never-seen-before objects and objects from the videos provided in the
37

Figure 6: Sample correct results for object and pose recognition on RGB-D Object dataset.
Black text: category name and instance number.
Red line: estimated pose.
Green line:
ground truth pose.
RGB-D Scenes dataset.
Depth segmentation was performed on point clouds generated using the
Kinect sensor in real-time using the Point Cloud Library [64]. This allows the
table-top object to be segmented away from the table plane. The segmented ob-
jects are then found in the visual and depth images using the segmented object
in the point cloud and then cropped to the size of the object. We then perform
category recognition on these cropped images.
6.11. Computational Complexity
The computation complexity of SVD scales cubically with the number of
objects in our case (O(N 3)). SVD can be done oﬄine on large enough matrices
containing tens of thousands of rows. The running time of our near real-time
system for table-top object category recognition also shows that the computa-
38

Figure 7: Near real-time system running on single table-top objects (ﬁrst 2 rows) and the
RGB-D Scenes dataset (last 3 rows, where green boxes indicate correct results while red
boxes indicate incorrect results).
tional complexity of the estimation phase is acceptable and has the potential
for real-time.
7. Conclusion
In this work we have presented a uniﬁed framework that is based on home-
omorphic mapping between a common manifold and object manifolds in order
to jointly solve the 3 subproblems of object recognition: category, instance and
pose recognition. Extensive experiments on several recent and large datasets
39

validates the robustness and strength of our approach. We signiﬁcantly out-
perform state-of-the-art in pose recognition. For object recognition we achieve
accuracy on par and in some cases better than state-of-the-art. We have also
shown the capability of our approach in estimating full 3D pose. We have also
shown the potential for real-time application to AI and robotic visual reason-
ing by building a working near real-time system that performs table-top object
detection and category recognition using the Kinect sensor.
Acknowledgment
This work was partly supported by the Oﬃce of Navel Research grant
N00014-12-1-0755. This work was also partly supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 61371134 and No. 61071137), the National
Basic Research Program of China (Project No. 2010CB327900), and the Fun-
damental Research Funds for the Central Universities (YWF-14-RSC-115).
