Forecasting Granular Audience Size for Online Advertising
Ritwik Sinha
Adobe Research
Dhruv Singal
Adobe Research
Pranav Maneriker
Adobe Research
Kushal Chawla
Adobe Research
Yash Shrivastava
IIT Kharagpur
Deepak Pai
Adobe Systems
Atanu R Sinha
Adobe Research
ABSTRACT
Orchestration of campaigns for online display advertising requires
marketers to forecast audience size at the granularity of speciﬁc
atributes of web traﬃc, characterized by the categorical nature
of all atributes (e.g. {US, Chrome, Mobile}). With each atribute
taking many values, the very large atribute combination set makes
estimating audience size for any speciﬁc atribute combination
challenging. We modify Eclat, a frequent itemset mining (FIM)
algorithm, to accommodate categorical variables. For consequent
frequent and infrequent itemsets, we then provide forecasts using
time series analysis with conditional probabilities to aid approxi-
mation. An extensive simulation, based on typical characteristics
of audience data, is built to stress test our modiﬁed-FIM approach.
In two real datasets, comparison with baselines including neural
network models, shows that our method lowers computation time
of FIM for categorical data. On hold out samples we show that the
proposed forecasting method outperforms these baselines.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Applied computing →Forecasting; •Mathematics of com-
puting →Time series analysis; •Information systems →Data
mining; Online advertising;
KEYWORDS
Display advertising, forecasting, frequent itemset mining, digital
marketing, time series
ACM Reference format:
Ritwik Sinha, Dhruv Singal, Pranav Maneriker, Kushal Chawla, Yash Shrivas-
tava, Deepak Pai, and Atanu R Sinha. 2018. Forecasting Granular Audience
Size for Online Advertising. In Proceedings of ADKDD’18, London, United
Kingdom, August 20, 2018, 6 pages.
DOI: 10.475/123 4
1
INTRODUCTION
Te online display advertising (hereafer, display ad) ecosystem
has many players that intermediate between publishers and mar-
keters [13]. For targeting ad campaigns to consumers it is impera-
tive for a marketer to estimate the number of visitors satisfying a
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ADKDD’18, London, United Kingdom
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 123-4567-24-567/08/06...$15.00
DOI: 10.475/123 4
set of targeted atribute values in a future time period. Consider
one such target-{Country:US, Browser:Chrome, Device:Mobile}.
Te marketer may be interested in predicting the number of ad-
vertising bid requests for this target ﬂowing into the Demand Side
Platform(DSP) in the following week. Tis helps optimize spend
allocation among various targets in a campaign, as well as helps
manage the marketing budget across campaigns.
Forecasting granular-level audience size poses a considerable
data mining challenge because of the explosion in the number of
possible categorical atribute value combinations. One of our two
real world datasets contains 10 atributes, each taking many values
(even 100 or more), resulting in ∼1020 unique targets. While not all
combinations are observed in the data, it is still infeasible to store
data for all observed combinations and apply time series estimation
methods. Notably, forecasting audience size for web traﬃc is an
under-researched area, although programmatic advertising is the
subject of growing research, with inroads in diverse topics like bid
optimization [23], targeting [5] as well as estimating conversion
rate [11] and click-through rate [24].
In proposing a practicable solution, we develop a three stage
approach: ﬁrst, bringing the problem to a tractable scale using fre-
quent itemset mining (FIM); second, using conditional probability
to extend to unobserved targets and third, leveraging time series
analysis methods to forecast. Our approach is evaluated on two
datasets: ﬁrst, bid requests data received by a DSP and second, web
analytics data of a US publisher. Te DSP receives bid requests from
multiple Ad Exchanges and serves multiple advertisers. Te web an-
alytics data, although from a single publisher, is more feature-rich
than the bid requests data. While the two setings are diﬀerent, the
forecasting problem has important commonalities: both datasets
comprise historical time stamped events of consumers (representing
bid requests and page views in respective setings), where each
event is deﬁned using values for a set of categorical atributes. For
each dataset, we forecast the number of events occurring in a given
time period for a speciﬁc target set deﬁned using values of cate-
gorical atributes. Our solution for the ﬁrst dataset computes and
stores the support for 5 × 105 frequent itemsets out of a possible
3.84 × 1018 and only about 100 time series models, and yet, is more
accurate than baselines.
Online audience estimation requires forecasts (1) be available
for any arbitrary atribute value combination, (2) be frequently
updated, and (3) account for temporal variations. Historical time
stamped events are used to estimate number of events with speci-
ﬁed atribute values in a future time period. Notably, all atributes of
web traﬃc data are categorical and most atributes show long-tailed
arXiv:1901.02412v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jan 2019

ADKDD’18, August 20, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Anonymous et al.
univariate distributions (Figure 1). Under this premise, our contri-
butions are: One, we leverage the categorical nature of atributes
to eﬃciently mine frequent atribute combinations from the event
database (Section 3.1) by modifying a leading FIM algorithm to
include categorical constraints. Tis improves performance time
and helps meet (2). Two, the mined frequent item (atribute) sets
(FIS) are only a small portion of atribute combinations used by
ﬁrms for targeting. For the non-FIS, which is a very large set, we
oﬀer a scalable method for forecasting since the cost of storing all
data is prohibitive. Our solution uses an approximation based on
conditional probability, storing only on relatively few atribute sets.
Tree, given a target set deﬁnition and a time period in the testing
phase, we select an appropriate time series model for predictions
and then use information obtained from FIM to obtain estimates
of audience size, which meet (3). Te approach also estimates for
non-FIS, thereby providing estimates for any arbitrary itemset (Sec-
tion 3.2) and satisﬁes (1). Four, contributing to the FIM literature
concerned with categorical variables, we introduce a simulation
framework to stress test FIM algorithms.
2
RELATED WORK
Te curse of cardinality in web traﬃc atribute combinations mani-
fests in adverse query time and massive cost of storing temporal
data. Websites need forecasts at granular level of atribute combina-
tions and updated ofen. While existing FIM algorithms may handle
the curse by extracting FIS, that fails to meet the website’s needs for
forecasts for most other non-frequent itemsets. We bring tools from
probability and time series to address these issues. Te forecast-
ing problem considered in this work has been explored earlier by
Agarwal et al [1]. However, they use domain knowledge in display
advertising to build time series models for a subset of atribute
combinations; we use FIM to build a generalizable approach.
Te Apriori algorithm [2] has been extended to Eclat [7], FP-
Growth [22], and LCM [21] algorithms. Te later three are con-
sidered beter oﬀ-the-shelf algorithms for association rule mining
problems [3]. In further development, [17, 19] adds category-based
constraints to Apriori [4]. Advancing the work, we add categorical
constraints to Eclat and show beter performance against other
state-of-the-art algorithms.
Time series forecasting is not new [6]. Recent atention to search
through a class of models to provide forecasts based on best per-
forming models includes Exponential Smoothing [9], Automatic
ARIMA models [8] and Prophet [20]. We explore these three and a
Neural Net based approach in our experiments.
Our introduction of a new framework for stress testing FIM
algorithms draws upon statistical copula [14], to capture statisti-
cal dependencies among categorical variables. Existing data sets
for testing FIM algorithms are not built for categorical variables.
Tis approach to the FIM literature is expected to help in testing
and comparing suitability of algorithms for data with categorical
variables, which are common in web traﬃc.
3
APPROACH
Let us deﬁne a set of atributes A = {A1,A2, . . . ,Ak }, where each
Al takes one of a possible set of values, Vl. Let the set of events be
D = {d1,d2, . . . ,dn}, where each event or transaction is deﬁned by
value assignments for each atribute, di = {di1,di2, . . . ,dik} where
dil ∈Vl. Additionally, each transaction has a timestamp associated
with it. We deﬁne a target deﬁnition as T = {t1,t2, . . . ,tk }, where
tl ∈Vl ∪{ul }, whereul is a special marker indicating thattl can take
any value in Vl. Tis marker deﬁnes targets where some atributes
are lef unspeciﬁed. A transaction di satisﬁes the target deﬁnitionT
if for alll,dil = tl wheretl , ul . Te audience estimation problem is
formally stated as: given a historic dataset D, estimate the number
of events di satisfying T, in a future time range.
3.1
Frequent Itemset Mining
In frequent itemset mining(FIM), the events could be transactions,
as in the case of purchase, or occurrences of audience member on
a publisher site, as in our case. Te problem is formally stated as
follows [3]. For the set of transactions D, such that each trans-
action is a set of items, denote the set of all possible items as
I = {ι1,ι2, . . . ,ιm}. Hence, each transaction is an itemset, dp ⊆I.
Te cover K(I) ⊆D of itemset I ⊆I is the set of all transactions
{dp} ∈D such that I ⊆dp. Te support s(I) is the size of K(I),
s(I) = |K(I)|. Te problem is to ﬁnd all itemsets {I1, I2, . . . , Im} in
D with support more than a threshold κ. Additional constraints
allow more eﬃcient enumeration of frequent itemsets [19]. A con-
straint is a mapping from the power set of items to a boolean value,
C : 2I →{True, False}. FIM algorithms exploit properties of the
support constraint (s(I) > κ).
A characteristic of online traﬃc is that the Ath
l atribute of a trans-
action dp takes only one of the values in Vl. Tis implies that any
itemset which has two or more values for the same atribute must
have a zero count, which we encode as the categorical constraint
(CC). We modify Eclat by checking for CC during the candidate set
generation stage. Note that LCM and FP-Growth have both the hor-
izontal and vertical representations of the transactions (explicitly in
case of LCM and as the FP-Tree in FP-Growth) [3], thus cannot ben-
eﬁt from the inclusion of CC. Formally, CC(I) = True iﬀil ∈Vl ∀l,
where I is the transaction (i1,i2, . . . ,ik), and Vl is as deﬁned in
Section 3. Constraints can be characterized by some properties
such as anti-monotone, succinct, and convertible [15]. We state the
deﬁnitions of two such properties here.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Anti Monotone: A constraint C(·) deﬁned on
sets is anti-monotone iﬀfor all itemsets S ⊆S′, C(S) = False =⇒
C(S′) = False.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Succinct: A constraint C(·) deﬁned on sets is
succinct iﬀfor all itemsets I: C(I) can be expressed as ∀e ∈I :
r(e) = True for a predicate r.
CC is anti-monotone and succinct [4]. Anti-monotone con-
straints can be applied to a level-wise algorithm, at each level
successively [4]. Moreover, if a constraint is succinct, it is also
pre-counting pushable. While [4] applied CC to Apriori, we extend
CC to Eclat. Tis is done by pre-counting pruning, that is, CC can be
pushed to the stage post the candidate generation phase and prior to
support related checks, discarding ineligible candidates. For Eclat,
the check is pushed to the stage prior to applying intersections of
transaction lists of generated candidates (see Algorithm 1).

Forecasting Granular Audience Size for Online Advertising
ADKDD’18, August 20, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Algorithm 1: Eclat-CC
// Define t(I): Transaction ID list for itemset I
// Initial call:
F ←∅, P ←{({i},t({i})) : i ∈I, |t({i})| ≥κ}
Function EclatCC(P, κ, F)
Result: F, the set of frequent itemsets
forall (Xa,t(Xa)) ∈P do
// Xa is a frequent itemset
F ←F ∪{(Xa,s(Xa)}, Pa ←∅
forall (Xb,t(Xb)) ∈P, with Xb > Xa do
Xab = Xa ∪Xb
// Pre-counting pruning
if CC(Xab) then
t(Xab) = t(Xa) ∩t(Xb)
if s(Xab) ≥κ then
Pa ←Pa ∪{(Xab, t(Xab)}
end
end
// Recursive call
if Pa , ∅then EclatCC(Pa, κ, F)
end
3.2
Audience Estimation
Te previous section described generation of FIS from Dτ −l,τ con-
taining historical transactions in time (τ −l,τ]. Te mined FIS
provide sτ −l,τ (T), T being a target set satisfying the threshold κ.
Te interest lies in the support ofT in a future time period (τ,τ +m],
that is, sτ,τ +m(T). While FIM obtains sτ −l,τ (T) for many target
sets, forecasting for each requires maintaining highly granular time
series data for each, making this infeasible for arbitrary targets,
including for non-FIS targets. Our approach requires maintaining
a granular time series only for a small number of univariate (single
item) targets, and for these targets performing time series forecast
that captures seasonal and trend paterns.
Denote the univariate time series targets as U. Given Dτ −l,τ ,
T, and a future time period (τ,τ + m], we estimate the expected
number of events in (τ,τ + m]. Te FIS from Dτ −l,τ are stored
along with their support. We compute the best univariate time
series U (see below) to generate predictions for the targetT, subject
to T ⊆U and U ∈U. Te predictions for sτ,τ +m(T) are as follows:
sτ,τ +m(T) = Pτ,τ +m(T | U )×sτ,τ +m(U ) ≈Pτ −l,τ (T | U )×sτ,τ +m(U ),
(1)
where we use the empirical estimate for Pτ −l,τ (T | U ), given by
ˆPτ −l,τ (T | U ) = ˆPτ −l,τ (T ∩U )/ ˆPτ −l,τ (U ) = sτ −l,τ (T)/sτ −l,τ (U ),
(2)
sinceT ⊆U . In equation (1) we make the assumption that Pτ,τ +m(T |
U ) ≈Pτ −l,τ (T | U ), that is, the conditional probability of T given
U remains (almost) constant from the training to the forecasting
period. We tested this assumption on the FIS empirically from the
two real datasets we work with, and get Pearson correlation > 0.99
between these two quantities for both.
We approximate Pτ,τ +m(T | U ) as Îk
i=1 Pτ,τ +m((u1, . . . , ti, . . . ,uk) |
U ) when T is not frequent, where uj denotes that the jth atribute
takes any value in its support. In other words, we assume condi-
tional independence among the atributes and compute the joint
probability as the product of marginal probabilities.
When (u1, . . . , ti, . . . ,uk) is frequent, we can use the formula-
tion described in equation (2). In the other case, we use a threshold
probability estimate κ/sτ −l,τ (U ), where κ is the support threshold
used for FIM. Tis is an upper bound on the empirical estimate for
this itemset (using equation (2)).
To estimate the second term in equation (1), we explore multiple
classes of time series models to generate the forecast ˆsτ,τ +m(U )
along with standard deviation for all elements in U (details in
section 4.2). Te granularity of forecasts depends on the granularity
of the input data. We generate hourly forecasts.
Now, from the set of candidate univariate time series for each
target T, that is, those which satisfy: (1) T ⊆U , (2) sτ −l,τ (U ) ≥κ,
we choose the time series with the least error in prediction. From
this limited set of univariate time series we still generate good pre-
dictions, as shown in our experiments. We preselect the univariates
at the time of computing the frequent itemsets and choose univari-
ates which satisfy (1) and (2). We choose from possible candidate
time series, at prediction time, by minimizing the standard error of
the estimate σ  ˆsτ,τ +m(T) = σ

ˆPτ,τ +m(T | U ) × ˆsDτ,τ +m (U )

.
4
EXPERIMENTS
Statistical Copula for a Simulation Framework: Te current
FIM literature oﬀers synthetic datasets [2] which do not meet the
need of emulating categorical nature of web traﬃc. Our framework
ﬁlls this gap by creating synthetic data with two important prop-
erties: ﬁrst, the marginal distributions follow structure typically
seen in audience data, such as many atributes depicting a long
tailed distribution(Figure 1); second, the strong dependence struc-
ture common in web traﬃc be maintained. For example, a type of
browser is more likely to be used on a certain operating system.
We achieve this by introducing statistical copula [14] into the FIM
literature. A copula is a function that joins the multivariate distri-
bution function to their one-dimensional marginals. Tis approach
allows arbitrary marginal distributions while controlling the level
of dependence between atributes.
We construct a Gaussian copula from a multivariate normal
distribution over Rk, by ﬁrst specifying a correlation matrix R.
We simulate the random vector x = (x1, · · · ,xk)′ with the mul-
tivariate Gaussian cumulative distribution function (CDF) ΦR(·)
(with correlation matrix R). Ten, the vector (Φ(x1), · · · , Φ(xk))′
(where Φ(·) is the univariate normal CDF) has marginal distributions
which are uniform in [0, 1] and a Gaussian copula which captures
the dependence. Finally, to achieve the target distributions Fi(·),
we perform the transformation y = (F−1
1 (Φ(x1)), · · · , F−1
k (Φ(xk)))′,
where F−1
i (·) is the inverse CDF corresponding to Fi(·). Te result-
ing vector y has the desired marginals with a given dependence
structure.
We are still lef with deciding two quantities, R and Fi(·). Ex-
periments with long tailed distributions show a good way to select
Fi(·) - base it on the observed multinomial distribution of atribute
values. We base the marginals on typically observed distributions
in real data (Figure 1). To choose R, we make use of the structure

ADKDD’18, August 20, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Anonymous et al.
Table 1: Distinct values for attributes in the real datasets
BRD
PVD
Atribute
Unique Values
Atribute
Unique Values
ad exchange
8
browser
876
browser
100
color depth
8
country
233
country
233
device family
23141
domain
61684
device
3
language
153
os
55
os
257
region
2598
ref type
7
slot size
693
region
1043
slot visibility
3
resolution
448
visit number
12884
BRD
Browser
BRD
Country
PVD
Browser
PVD
Country
0e+00
2e+07
4e+07
6e+07
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
Count of Events
Figure 1: Attribute value frequencies in BRD and PVD
of the observed data. We ensure that the association matrices for
the real and simulated data follow a similar patern.
With the goal of testing the robustness of FIM approaches and
for comparison among them, we vary the following parameters in
the synthetic data. First, the number of atributes (k) is 8, 16 or
32. Next, the association is either as observed in real data or the
oﬀ-diagonal elements are half of their values (these are referred to
as ‘high’ or ‘low’ correlation). Next, we modify the multinomial
marginal distributions to either be long-tailed (‘steep’) or uniform
(‘ﬂat’).
Bid Request Dataset (BRD): Tis dataset arises in the ecosys-
tem where the publisher seeks competitive bids using Ad Exchanges
and a Real-Time Bidding (RTB) platform. Te publisher delivers
the consumer’s information, comprising atributes, for real time
bidding by marketers seeking consumers matching those atributes.
Te training data comprise logs from 26 March to 31 March 2017,
and the testing data comprise logs for 1 April, 2017. Around 97
million bid request events are present, large enough for valid ex-
periments. We have 86 million and 11 million bid requests in the
training and the testing periods respectively. Each event has 9
atributes (Table 1), a time stamp, and most atributes have a sub-
stantial number of distinct values. Te number of possible atribute
combinations is 3.84 × 1018. Te histogram for two atributes is
presented in Figure 1. A similar long tailed distribution exists across
all atributes.
Page View Dataset (PVD): Tis dataset comes from a publisher,
where the publisher sells the consumer’s information directly to
marketers based on contractual pricing [18]. For each page view,
the publisher matches the consumer’s atributes to those desired by
marketers and then oﬀers it to a matched marketer. Te contractual
mechanism is less studied. Our work applies to both competitive
bidding and contractual pricing. Tis second dataset aﬀords gener-
alization of our approach. Te training data comprise 48 million
page views from 31 March to 5 April 2017, and the testing data
Correlation:high
Distribution:flat
Correlation:high
Distribution:steep
Correlation:low
Distribution:flat
Correlation:low
Distribution:steep
1
10
100
8
16
32
8
16
32
8
16
32
8
16
32
Number of attributes
Computation Time (in seconds)
Algorithm
Apriori−CC
Eclat
Eclat−CC
FP−Growth
LCM
Figure 2: Computation time of FIM algorithms on synthetic
data. Average time from three runs, presented for diﬀerent
number of attributes, correlation across attributes and mar-
ginal distributions, for support of 10% (other support levels
not displayed in the interest of space).
comprise 8 million for 6 April. We refer to this dataset as PVD.
Te dataset has 10 atributes, some with a large number of distinct
values (Table 1), leading to a total 1.67 × 1026 possible itemsets. As
in BRD, atributes display a long-tailed distribution (Figure 1).
4.1
Frequent Itemset Mining
We perform experiments on the synthetic data and two real datasets.
Te experiments are carried out on a machine with 16GB RAM and
3.5GHz CPU running a Linux distribution. Te algorithms included
in our analysis are Apriori-CC [4], Eclat [22], Eclat-CC, LCM [21]
and FP-Growth [7]. We follow or extend the implementation of
Borgelt [3] for these algorithms and record the computation time
averaged over 3 runs.
Te methods are ﬁrst compared on the synthetic data (Figure 2).
We present results for two levels of correlation and two univariate
distribution paterns, across three diﬀerent number of atributes.
For each combination, 10 million events are generated. We make
a few broad observations. First, as expected, a higher number
of atributes makes the problem more challenging, as reﬂected
in increased computation times. Second, lower correlation leads
to a limited decrease in the computation times. Tird, having a
steep distribution in the univariates leads to higher running times
than having ﬂat (equally likely) marginals. Tis happens because
steep distribution and higher correlation lead to higher number of
itemsets meeting the threshold, and hence leading to longer run
times.
In comparing the algorithms, some of the ﬁndings are: one,
Eclat-CC performs beter than unconstrained Eclat, on average;
which itself performs beter than Apriori-CC. Considering average
ranks across diﬀerent scenarios, the performance of algorithms in
decreasing order is – Eclat-CC, Eclat, LCM, FP-Growth, Apriori-
CC. Tus, incorporating CC into Eclat, leads to an algorithm that
performs beter than the other state-of-the-art algorithms.
On the real data BRD, we ﬁnd that (Table 2) Eclat-CC is between
2% and 7% beter than the next best algorithm, and between 30%
and 50% faster than FP-Growth and LCM. On the other real data
PVD, Eclat-CC is the best algorithm on a support of 5%, while being
close to the best algorithm (Eclat) on a support of 10%. Moreover,
in the case of low support (1%), Eclat-CC performs somewhere in
between the best algorithm (Apriori-CC) and Eclat. Tus, using
categorical constraints into FIM algorithms leads to more eﬃcient
implementations in audience size estimation. It is worth noting
that the training data for BRD contains 86 million events, larger

Forecasting Granular Audience Size for Online Advertising
ADKDD’18, August 20, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Table 2: Comparison of FIM algorithms. Te average computation time (in seconds) from three runs of the algorithm.
Dataset
Support
Apriori-CC
Eclat
Eclat-CC
FP-Growth
LCM
PVD
1%
70.7
83.2
76.8
71.7
72.5
5%
75.5
46.6
46.0
66.4
66.2
10%
71.8
41.9
42.1
59.9
59.1
BRD
1%
160.1
112.0
105.4
165.1
167.5
5%
167.9
80.1
78.7
154.3
151.0
10%
155.6
73.7
73.0
135.8
137.6
than the other datasets analyzed, suggesting that the gains for
incorporating CC may be more pronounced for larger datasets. We
test this hypothesis with a simulated dataset of 200 million events
and 8 atributes, and ﬁnd that Eclat-CC is 9% beter than Eclat and
25% beter than FP-Growth.
4.2
Audience Forecasting
To evaluate the accuracy of forecasts, we compare our approach
with a na¨ıve, but feasible baseline (FB), an accurate, but also an
infeasible baseline using individual target time series (TS) and a
machine learning based method. Tis comparison across both BRD
and PVD datasets, is done on two diﬀerent target sets - FIS and
IFIS(Infrequent-FIS). For FIS, the support or threshold value is set
at 0.01% of the dataset size throughout. We ﬁnd 0.5 million and 0.7
million FIS in BRD and PVD, respectively. We sample 500 FIS from
each dataset with a probability proportional to the support of the
itemset, ensuring that itemsets of varying supports are included
in the sample.For IFIS, we sample 500 infrequent itemsets, among
those with less than 0.01% support. We now describe our baseline
approaches.
Individual Target Time Series based infeasible baseline
(TS): Entire time series is stored for all 500 itemsets in FIS and
in IFIS. Forecasts are generated directly by modeling the time se-
ries for each itemset, without using conditional probabilities and
univariate. Tis baseline is not bounded by computation time or
storage requirements for time series for millions of itemsets. We
use it as a boundary condition baseline to compare our approach.
Feasible Baseline (FB): We ﬁnd all univariate itemsets satisfy-
ing a given threshold (of 0.5%). For each of these, we obtain the
hourly counts as a percentage of the global counts for that hour.
For such time series, we train a model, so that we can forecast the
fraction of hourly global count represented by the respective uni-
variate itemset. We also maintain the global time series, for target
G = (u1, · · · ,uk), where ul denotes the lth atribute taking any
value. For a target T = (t1,t2, ...,tk) we predict the hourly count
estimate as {P((t1,u2, . . . ,uk)) × . . . × P((u1,u2, . . . ,tk)) × ˆs(G)}.
Tus, the estimate is obtained by multiplying the global time series
forecast by the estimates of percentages of each univariate, ob-
tained from the time series. For univariate values where we do not
have a time series, we assume that the percentage varies up to the
threshold value used (which in our case corresponds to the interval
[0, 0.005]). Tis gives us a ranged estimate, which we average to
get the point estimate.
Machine Learning Baseline (ML): We modify the datasets to
remodel audience forecasting task as a supervised learning problem.
To achieve this, we create a training set by sampling 5,000 itemsets
from FIS mined at 0.01% from both PVD and BRD, by sampling with
probability proportional to the support, ensuring that itemsets of
varying supports are included in the sample (similar to FIS target
sets). We collect hourly counts for these itemsets, throughout the
training and testing periods. Each row of each data set consists
of the itemset, hour of the day and a count of transactions (page
views/bid requests) satisfying the itemset in that hour. We drop
the day of the week atribute, since our data set is limited to a
single week and capturing weekly seasonality is not possible in
such a situation. Following the construction of this derived dataset,
the forecasting problem is reduced to a regression problem, with
a categorical input (itemset, hour) and the output being count of
transactions. However, since the total number of levels across
various atributes is large (ranging into a few thousands), it is
intractable for machine learning models to capture interactions
among atributes. Hence, we group all atribute values for which
we do not have univariate time series, i.e. present in less than 0.5%
of the dataset, into a new level.
Te model is ﬁrst trained on a subset of sampled FIS, and the
trained model is used to make predictions for the same benchmark
set as other baselines. Te model is a multi-layer fully connected
network, with dropout, and with an additional embedding layer
in the input, implemented in PyTorch [16]. Categorical inputs
are mapped to columns of the embedding layer, and then passed
through the network to make predictions to minimize MAPE. Hy-
perparameters are chosen optimally using hyperopt1 library, by
considering hyperparameter space spanning embedding layer di-
mension ∈{32, 64, . . . , 128}, dropout ∈[0.0, 0.8], and number of
layers ∈{1, 2, 3, 4}.
Each parameter is sampled uniformly from the corresponding
parameter space. We use 6 days of data to train each model, and
optimize the hyperparameters according to the MAPE for the 7th
day using the TPE algorithm for guiding the search over the hyper-
parameter space across 1000 trials, with 10 epochs per trial. Tis
search leads to a 3 layer model, with layer dimensions 384, 192, and
64, a dropout of 0.05 and an embedding dimension of 128. With this
model, we generate predictions for the ML baseline, and the results
are shown in Figure 3. We see that the model obtained by this
process performs worse than our approach across all experiments.
We generate time series forecasts for univariate targets in U
(from Section 3.2) using four methods – Exponential Smoothing
(ETS), Automatic ARIMA (ARIMA), Neural Network Autoregres-
sion (NNAR) and Prophet. We use the respective R packages to
1htps://github.com/hyperopt/hyperopt

ADKDD’18, August 20, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Anonymous et al.
Table 3: MAPEs for univariate time seriesa
Method
BRD
PVD
Method
BRD
PVD
ETS
23.2
13.6
NNAR
24.4
17.2
ARIMA
32.2
17.6
Prophet
23.6
26.5
aWe also explored a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) based time
series model, but this failed to provide acceptable accuracy.
BRD
PVD
0
25
50
75
100
FIS
FIS-TS
FIS-FB
FIS-ML
IFIS
IFIS-TS
IFIS-FB
IFIS-ML
FIS
FIS-TS
FIS-FB
FIS-ML
IFIS
IFIS-TS
IFIS-FB
IFIS-ML
Data Type
FIS
IFIS
Figure 3:
MAPEs (Y-axis) for forecasting:
Solid and
dashed horizontal lines are median and mean. Compari-
son is relevant across boxes of same color.
automatically choose the best hyper parameters for our time series
methods. We use 6 days of hourly data to train and oﬀer hourly
forecasts for the seventh day, capturing daily seasonality. Te meth-
ods are evaluated using average Mean Absolute Percentage Error
(MAPE). Based on superior performance of ETS (Table 3), we decide
to use it as the time series model for all evaluations.
Figure 3 shows the results. In box plots, bars of the same color
denote results on the same target sets, by data set. Mean and
median of MAPE across all itemsets are denoted by dashed and
solid horizontal lines, respectively. Mean MAPEs for FIS in BRD and
PVD, 29% and 25%, are lower than Mean MAPEs for FIS-TS in both
data, although not for medians, reﬂecting higher variability of FIS-
TS (higher spread in box plot). Hence, we claim that the proposed
approach is beter in terms of mean MAPEs, than the infeasible
baseline. Similarly, the proposed approach always performs beter
than the feasible, but na¨ıve baseline (FB), for both FIS and IFIS; the
eﬀect being stronger for FIS. Te bad performance of IFIS-TS for
PVD may be due to fewer data points of page views for infrequent
itemsets. Te higher MAPEs for IFIS vs. FIS is due to IFIS itemsets
having at most 31 events every hour on average, a small sample
to obtain good estimates. Surprisingly, even in small itemsets,
our approach that assumes conditional independence, compares
reasonably with IFIS-TS.
MAPEs are benchmarked against [10] where ETS produces MAPEs
between 10 and 20% for time series in M3 competition [12]. Our
MAPEs for univariate time series targets, tasks comparable to the
competition, are 14 to 23%. Te audience estimation task is more
challenging since forecasts are for thousands of atribute combina-
tions, without recording the time series for each. Our MAPE values
under 30% is likely to be acceptable in practice.
5
CONCLUSION
Knowing the likely size of audience segments for web traﬃc can
help websites beter plan their ad campaign. Audience forecasting
is challenging because of the combinatorial explosion in atribute
values, each of which could be a relevant target audience. We
address this problem with a combination of frequent itemset mining
and time series modeling. We are able to achieve good accuracy
levels on real datasets from two use cases within online display ad
and compare our results with three baseline approaches. We also
give a novel FIM approach, speciﬁc to categorical characteristics
of audience data. We demonstrate the superior performance of
this approach over state of the art algorithms by proposing a new
simulation framework.
