arXiv:1204.3255v2  [cs.AI]  2 May 2013
To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Lower complexity bounds for lifted inference
Manfred Jaeger
Aalborg University

submitted 1 January 2003; revised 1 January 2003; accepted 1 January 2003
Abstract
One of the big challenges in the development of probabilistic relational (or probabilistic
logical) modeling and learning frameworks is the design of inference techniques that op-
erate on the level of the abstract model representation language, rather than on the level
of ground, propositional instances of the model. Numerous approaches for such “lifted in-
ference” techniques have been proposed. While it has been demonstrated that these tech-
niques will lead to signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient inference on some speciﬁc models, there are
only very recent and still quite restricted results that show the feasibility of lifted inference
on certain syntactically deﬁned classes of models. Lower complexity bounds that imply
some limitations for the feasibility of lifted inference on more expressive model classes were
established earlier in (Jaeger 2000). However, it is not immediate that these results also
apply to the type of modeling languages that currently receive the most attention, i.e.,
weighted, quantiﬁer-free formulas. In this paper we extend these earlier results, and show
that under the assumption that NETIME̸=ETIME, there is no polynomial lifted inference
algorithm for knowledge bases of weighted, quantiﬁer- and function-free formulas. Further
strengthening earlier results, this is also shown to hold for approximate inference, and for
knowledge bases not containing the equality predicate.
KEYWORDS: Probabilistic-logic models, lifted inference
1 Introduction
Probabilistic logic models (a.k.a. probabilistic or statistic relational models) pro-
vide high-level representation languages for probabilistic models of structured data
(Breese 1992; Poole 1993; Sato 1995; Ngo et al. 1995; Jaeger 1997; Friedman et al. 1999;
Kersting and Raedt 2001; Milch et al. 2005; Vennekens et al. 2006; Taskar et al. 2002;
Richardson and Domingos 2006). While supporting model speciﬁcations at an ab-
stract, ﬁrst-order logic level, inference is typically performed at the level of con-
crete ground instances of the models, i.e., at the propositional level. This mis-
match between model speciﬁcation and inference methods has been noted early
on (Jaeger 1997), and has given rise to numerous proposals for inference techniques
that operate at the high level of the underlying model speciﬁcations (Poole 2003;
de Salvo Braz et al. 2005; Milch et al. 2008; Kisy´nski and Poole 2009; Jha et al. 2010;
Gogate and Domingos 2011; Van den Broeck et al. 2011; Van den Broeck 2011; Fierens et al. 2011).
Inference methods of this nature have collectively become known as “lifted” infer-
ence techniques.

2
M. Jaeger
Time
propositional
lifted
Domainsize
Fig. 1. A typical performance evaluation
The concept of lifted inference is mostly introduced on an informal level: “...lifted,
that is, deals with groups of random variables at a ﬁrst-order level” (de Salvo Braz et al. 2005);
“The act of exploiting the high level structure in relational models is called lifted in-
ference” (Apsel and Brafman 2011); “The idea behind lifted inference is to carry out
as much inference as possible without propositionalizing (Kisy´nski and Poole 2009);
“lifted inference, which deals with groups of indistinguishable variables, rather than
individual ground atoms (Singla et al. 2010). While, thus, the term lifted inference
emerges as a quite coherent algorithmic metaphor, it is not immediately obvious
what its exact technical meaning should be. Since quite a variety of diﬀerent algo-
rithmic approaches are collected under the label “lifted”, and since most of them
can degenerate for certain models to ground, or propositional, inference, it is dif-
ﬁcult to precisely deﬁne the class of lifted inference techniques in terms of speciﬁc
algorithmic techniques employed.
A more fruitful approach is to make more precise the concept of lifted inference in
terms of its objectives. Here one observes that lifted inference techniques very con-
sistently are evaluated on, and compared against each other, by how well inference
complexity scales as a function of the domain (or population) for which the general
model is instantiated. Thus, empirical evaluations of lifted inference techniques are
usually presented in the form of domainsize vs. inference time plots as shown in
Figure 1.
Van den Broeck (2011), therefore, has proposed a formal deﬁnition of domain
lifted inference in terms of polynomial time complexity in the domainsize param-
eter. Experimental and theoretical analyses of existing lifted inference techniques
then show that they provide domain lifted inference in some cases where basic
propositional inference techniques would exhibit exponential complexity (as illus-
trated in Figure 1). However, until recently, these positive results were mostly lim-
ited to examples of individual models, and little was known about the feasibility
of lifted inference for certain well-deﬁned classes of models. First results that show
the feasibility of lifted inference for whole classes of models are given by Van den
Broeck (2011), and Domingos and Webb (2012).
On the other hand, (Jaeger 2000) has shown that under certain assumptions on
the expressivity of the modeling language, probabilistic inference is not polyno-

Lower complexity bounds for lifted inference
3
mial in the domainsize, thereby demonstrating some inherent limitations in terms
of worst-case complexity for the goals of lifted inference. However, the results of
(Jaeger 2000) are based on types of probabilistic logic models that are somewhat
diﬀerent from the models that presently receive the most attention: ﬁrst, they essen-
tially assume a directed modeling framework, in which the model represents a gen-
erative stochastic process for sampling relational structures. The model is deﬁned
by specifying marginal and conditional probability distributions for random vari-
ables corresponding to ground atoms. Ground instances of the model, then, can be
represented by directed graphical models, i.e., Bayesian networks. While the major-
ity of existing model classes fall into the category of directed models (Breese 1992;
Poole 1993; Sato 1995; Ngo et al. 1995; Jaeger 1997; Friedman et al. 1999; Kersting and Raedt 2001;
Milch et al. 2005; Vennekens et al. 2006), there is currently a lot of interest in
undirected models that are given by a set of soft constraints on relational struc-
tures, speciﬁed in the form of potential functions, and in the ground case giv-
ing rise to undirected graphical models, i.e., Markov networks. Secondly, the re-
sults of (Jaeger 2000) require quite strong assumptions on the expressivity of the
probabilistic-logic modeling language, which is required to allow that conditional
distributions of atoms can be speciﬁed dependent on unrestricted ﬁrst-order prop-
erties. Much current work, in contrast, is concerned with languages that only in-
corporate certain weak fragments of ﬁrst-order logic.
In this paper the general approach of (Jaeger 2000) is extended to obtain lower
complexity bounds for inference in probabilistic-logic model classes that have emer-
ged as the focus of interest for lifted inference techniques, i.e., undirected models
based on quantiﬁer- and function-free fragments of ﬁrst-order logic.
In a sharp contrast with (Jaeger 2000), where a “trivial” constant-time approxi-
mate inference method was described, we show that our lower complexity bounds
also hold for approximate inference. Further sharpening earlier results, we ﬁnally es-
tablish that the lower complexity bounds also hold for models not using the equality
predicate, which in (Jaeger 2000) was conjectured to be the key source of inherent
complexity.
A preliminary version of this paper has been published as (Jaeger 2012). Its main
results were also already included in the survey paper (Jaeger and Van den Broeck 2012),
which contains a systematic overview of known results and open problems related
to the complexity of lifted inference.
In the following section we introduce a general framework in which classes of
undirected probabilistic-logic models, and classes of associated inference problems
can be deﬁned. Section 3 reviews classic results relating ﬁrst-order logic models to
the complexity class NETIME. Section 4 contains our main results, and Section 5
discusses some notable diﬀerences that emerge between the results for directed and
for undirected models.
2 Weighted Feature Models
Similarly as (Richardson and Domingos 2006), (Van den Broeck et al. 2011) and
(Gogate and Domingos 2011) we assume the following framework: a model, or knowl-

4
M. Jaeger
edge base, is given by a set of weighted formulas:
KB :
φ1(v1)
:
w1
φ2(v2)
:
w2
. . .
. . .
φn(vN)
:
wN
(1)
where the φi are formulas in ﬁrst-order predicate logic, wi ∈R are non-negative
weights, and vi = (vi,1, . . . , vi,ki) are the free variables of φi. The case ki = 0, i.e., φi
is a sentence without free variables, is also permitted. The φi use a given signature
S of relation-, function-, and constant symbols.
An interpretation (or possible world) (D, I) for S consists of a domain D, and
an interpretation function I that maps the symbols in S to functions, relations and
elements on D. For a tuple d ∈Dki then the truth value of φi(vi/d) is deﬁned,
and we write (D, I) |= φi(d), or simpler I |= φi(d), if φi(/ vi/d) is true in (D, I).
We use I(D, S) to denote the set of all interpretations for the signature S over the
domain D.
In this paper we are only concerned with ﬁnite domains, and assume without loss
of generality that D = Dn := {1, . . ., n} for some n ∈N.
For I ∈I(Dn, S) let #(i, I) denote the number of elements d in Dki for which
I |= φi(d). The weight of I then is
WKB,n(I) :=
N
Y
i=1
w#(i,I)
i
,
(2)
where 00 = 1. The probability of I is
PKB,n(I) = WKB,n(I)/Z
where Z is the normalizing constant (partition function)
Z =
X
I∈I(Dn,S)
WKB,n(I).
(3)
For a ﬁrst-order sentence φ and n ∈N then
PKB,n(φ) := PKB,n({I ∈I(Dn, S) | I |= φ})
(4)
is the probability of φ in I(Dn, S).
We call a knowledge base (1) together with the semantics given by (2) and (4)
a weighted feature model, since it associates weights wi with model features φi.
Weighted feature models in our sense can be seen as a slight generalization as
weighted model counting (wmc) frameworks (Fierens et al. 2011; Gogate and Domingos 2011)
in which non-zero weights are only associated with literals. Knowledge bases of the
form (1) can be translated into wmc frameworks via an introduction of new rela-
tion symbols R1, . . . , Rn, hard constraints φi(vi) ↔Ri(vi), and weighted formulas
Ri(vi) : wi (Van den Broeck et al. 2011; Gogate and Domingos 2011). Up to an
expansion of the signature, thus, weighted feature models and wmc are equally ex-
pressive. Markov Logic Networks (Richardson and Domingos 2006) also are based
on knowledge bases of the form (1) allowing arbitrary formulas φi. However, the

Lower complexity bounds for lifted inference
5
semantics of the model there depends on a transformation of the formulas into
conjunctive normal form, and therefore does not exactly correspond to (2) and (4),
unless the φi are clauses.
All types of models here discussed, thus, are very similar in nature, and only
diﬀer with respect to certain restrictions on what types of logically deﬁned features
can be associated with a weight. The general deﬁnition of weighted feature models
gives us the ﬂexibility of considering a variety of classes of such restrictions.
A probabilistic inference problem PI(KB, n, χ, η) for a weighted feature model is
given by a knowledge base KB, a domainsize n ∈N, and two ﬁrst-order sentences
χ, η. The solution to the inference problem is the conditional probability PKB,n(χ |
η).
A class of inference problems is deﬁned by allowing arguments KB, χ, and η only
from some restricted classes KB, Q (the query class), and E (the evidence class),
respectively. We use the notation
PI(KB, Q, E) := {PI(KB, n, φ, ψ) | KB ∈KB, n ∈N, χ ∈Q, η ∈E}
for classes of inference problems.
The results of this paper will be given for the case where Q consists of all ground
atoms, denoted AT , and E is empty. Thus, as far as Q and E are concerned, we are
considering the most restrictive class of inference problems. Since we are deriving
lower complexity bounds, this leads to the strongest possible results, which directly
apply also to more general classes Q and E.
Classes KB are deﬁned by various syntactic restrictions on the formulas φi in
the knowledge base. In this paper, we consider the following fragments of ﬁrst-
order logic (FOL): relational FOL (RFOL), i.e. FOL without function and constant
symbols; 0-RFOL, which is the quantiﬁer-free fragment of RFOL, and 0-RFOL̸=,
which is 0-RFOL without the equality relation.
An algorithm solves a class PI(KB, Q, E), if it solves all instances PI(KB, n, χ, η)
in the class. An algorithm ǫ-approximately solves PI(KB, Q, E), if for any
PI(KB, n, χ, η) in the class it returns a number p ∈[PKB,n(χ | η) −ǫ, PKB,n(χ |
η) + ǫ]. An algorithm that solves PI(KB, Q, E) is polynomial in the domainsize, if
for ﬁxed KB, χ, η the computation of PI(KB, n, χ, η) is polynomial in n.
3 Spectra and Complexity
The following deﬁnition introduces the central concept for our analysis.
Deﬁnition 3.1
Let φ be a sentence in ﬁrst-order logic. The spectrum of φ is the set of integers
n ∈N for which φ is satisﬁable by an interpretation of size n.
Example 3.2
Let φ = ψ1 ∧ψ2 ∧ψ3, where
ψ1
≡
∀x, y u(x, y) ⇔u(y, x)
ψ2
≡
∀x ∃y y ̸= x ∧u(x, y)
ψ3
≡
∀x, y, y′ (u(x, y) ∧u(x, y′) ⇒y = y′)

6
M. Jaeger
φ expresses that the binary relation u deﬁnes an undirected graph (ψ1) in which
every node is connected to exactly one other node (ψ2, ψ3). Thus, φ describes a
pairing relation that is satisﬁable exactly over domains of even size: spec(φ) = {n |
n even}.
The complexity class ETIME consists of problems solvable in time O(2cn), for
some constant c. The corresponding nondeterministic class is NETIME. Note that
these classes are distinct from the more commonly studied classes (N)EXPTIME,
which are characterized by complexity bounds O(2nc) (Johnson 1990). For n ∈N
let bin(n) ∈{0, 1}∗denote the binary coding of n, and un(n) ∈{1}∗the unary
coding (i.e., n is represented as a sequence of n 1s). A set S ⊆N is in (N)ETIME,
iﬀ{bin(n) | n ∈S} is in (N)ETIME, which also is equivalent to {un(n) | n ∈S}
being in (N)PTIME.
Like (Jaeger 2000), we use the following connection between spectra and NETIME
as the key tool for our complexity analysis.
Theorem 3.3
(Jones and Selman 1972) A set A ⊆N is in NETIME, iﬀA is the spectrum of a
sentence φ ∈RFOL.
Corollary 3.4
If NETIME ̸= ETIME, then there exists a ﬁrst-order sentence φ, such that {un(n) |
n ∈spec(φ)} is not recognized in deterministic polynomial time.
Thus, by reducing instances n ∈spec(φ)? of the spectrum recognition problem
to probabilistic inference problems PI(KB, n, χ, η), where KB ∈KB, χ ∈Q, η ∈E
are ﬁxed for the given φ, one establishes that the PI(KB, Q, E) is not polynomial
in the domainsize (under the assumption ETIME ̸= NETIME).
4 Complexity Results
This section contains our complexity results. We begin with a result for knowledge
bases using full RFOL. This is rather straightforward, and (for exact inference)
already implied by the results of (Jaeger 2000). We then proceed to extend this
base result to 0-RFOL and 0-RFOL̸=.
4.1 Base Result: the RFOL Case
Theorem 4.1
If NETIME ̸= ETIME, then there does not exist an algorithm that 0.25-approxi-
mately solves PI(RFOL, AT , ∅) in time polynomial in the domainsize.
The proof of this theorem provides the general pattern also for subsequent proofs.
It is therefore here given in full.
Proof: Let φ be a sentence with a non-polynomial spectrum as given by Corol-
lary 3.4. Let S be the relational signature of φ. Let a() be a new relation symbol of

Lower complexity bounds for lifted inference
7
arity zero (i.e., a() represents a propositional variable). The ﬁrst weighted formula
in our knowledge base then is
¬(φ ↔a())
:
0
(5)
We now already have that PKB,n(a()) > 0 iﬀthere exists I ∈I(Dn, S) with I |= φ,
i.e., iﬀn ∈spec(φ). This already reduces the decision problem for spec(φ) to solving
PI(KB, n, a(), ∅) exactly. However, from the 0-1 laws of ﬁrst-order logic (Fagin 1976),
it follows that for our current KB: PKB,n(a()) →n→∞0. Thus, for every ǫ > 0 we
could deﬁne an ǫ-approximate constant-time inference algorithm by returning 0 for
all suﬃciently large n.
In order to obtain our result for approximate inference, we will now ensure that for
all n ∈spec(φ) the probability PKB,n(a()) is greater than 0.5, while it remains zero
for n ̸∈spec(φ). We do this essentially by calibrating the normalization constant Z
in (3). For this we introduce another new relation b(), and add to KB:
¬((
^
R∈S
∀x¬R(x)) ↔b())
:
0
(6)
Thus, for every n there is exactly one interpretation I ∈I(Dn, S) with nonzero
weight in which b() is true (the one in which all relations have empty interpreta-
tions). Finally, we give zero weight to all interpretations except those in which a()
or b() is true:
¬(a() ∨b())
:
0
(7)
Let KB consist of (5),(6),(7). Every I ∈I(Dn, S) then has weight 0 if it satisﬁes
one of the three formulas, and weight 1 otherwise. Consider the case n ̸∈spec(φ).
Then, by (5) WKB,n(a()) = 0. By (7) this then means that in all interpretations of
nonzero weight b() must be true. By (6) there is exactly one such interpretation.
Thus, Z in (3) is 1, and PKB,n(a()) = 0/1 = 0.
If n ∈spec(φ), then WKB,n(a()) ≥1, and Z = WKB,n(a()) (if the interpre-
tation in which all R are empty also is a model of φ), or Z = WKB,n(a()) + 1
(otherwise). Thus, PKB,n(a()) ≥1/2. A 0.25-approximate inference algorithm for
PI(KB, n, a(), ∅), thus, would decide spec(φ).
□
4.2 The 0-RFOL Case
We now proceed towards our main result, which is going from RFOL to 0-RFOL.
If we wanted to allow function and constant symbols in our knowledge base, then
one could go to a quantiﬁer-free fragment in a quite straightforward manner using
Skolemization. Since satisﬁability over a given domain is the same for a formula
φ and its quantiﬁer-free Skolemized version φSkol, the arguments of the proof of
Theorem 4.1 would go through with little change. In order to accomplish the same
using only the relational fragment 0-RFOL, we deﬁne the relational Skolemization
of a formula. The idea is to replace function and constant symbols in the Skolemized
version of a formula with relational representations. For example, the Skolemized

8
M. Jaeger
version of ψ2 from Example 3.2 is
ψSkol
2
≡∀x f(x) ̸= x ∧u(x, f(x))
with a new function symbol f(). Introducing a relational encoding of f() leads to
ψR-Skol
2
≡∀x, y Rf(x, y) →(y ̸= x ∧u(x, y))
with Rf a new binary relation symbol encoding f(). This translation must be
accompanied by axioms that conﬁne the possible interpretations of Rf to relations
that encode functions.
Such relational encodings of functions are well established. However, there does
not seem to be a standard account of this technique that serves our purpose. The
following proposition, therefore, provides the relevant result in a form tailored for
our needs.
Proposition 4.2
Let φ(x) ∈0-FOL(S ∪SF ), where S is a set of relation symbols, and SF a set of
function and constant symbols. Let S+ be a set of new relation symbols that for
every k-ary f ∈SF contains a k + 1-ary Rf (constant symbols are treated as 0-ary
function symbols). Let Func be the set of sentences that for every f ∈SF contains
∀x y y′ (Rf(x, y) ∧Rf(x, y′) →y = y′)
(8)
∀x∃y Rf(x, y).
(9)
Then there exists a formula φ+(x, z) ∈0-RFOL(S ∪S+), such that the following
are equivalent for all n:
i there exists I ∈I(Dn, S ∪SF ) with I |= ∀xφ(x)
ii there exists I+ ∈I(Dn, S ∪S+) with I+ |= Func ∧∀xz φ+(x, z)
If φSkol is the Skolemization of a formula φ ∈RFOL, we then call φSkol+ the
relational Skolemization of φ, written φR-Skol.
Our plan, now, is to prove the analogon of Theorem 4.1 for 0-RFOL by replacing
φ in (5) with φR-Skol. However, this is not enough, since we also need to constrain
the models of our knowledge base (more precisely: those models in which a() is
true) to satisfy the axioms (8) and (9). This poses a problem, because (9) contains
an existential quantiﬁer, and so we cannot add this axiom directly as a constraint
to a knowledge base restricted to 0-RFOL. Indeed, we almost seem to have gone
full circle, since we are back at knowledge bases in a relational vocabulary with
existential quantiﬁcation! However, we now have reduced arbitrary occurrences of
existential quantiﬁers to occurrences only within in the special formulas (9).
Our strategy, now, is to approximate formulas (9) with weighted formulas of the
form
a() ∧Rf(x, y)
:
w
(10)
that reward models of a() in which the existential quantiﬁer of (9) is satisﬁed for
many (all) x. We will no longer be able to ensure that WKB,n(a()) = 0 when
n ̸∈spec(φ). However, by a suitable choice of w, and by a careful calibration of
the weight of models of the alternative proposition b(), we still can ensure that

Lower complexity bounds for lifted inference
9
WKB,n(b()) ≫WKB,n(a()) when n ̸∈spec(φ), and WKB,n(b()) ≈WKB,n(a()) when
n ∈spec(φ). However, the right calibration of the weights of models of a() and b()
within I(Dn, S) will now require that one sets w to a value w(n) depending on n.
This means that we no longer can reduce the decision problem n ∈spec(φ) to the
probabilistic inference problem PI(KB, n, a(), ∅) for a ﬁxed knowledge base KB. We
only achieve a reduction to the inference problem PI(KB(w(n)), n, a(), ∅), where
the logical structure of KB is ﬁxed, but a weight parameter w(n) depends on n.
Generally, for a knowledge base KB containing N weighted formulas, we denote
with KB(w1, . . . , wN) the knowledge base that contains the same formulas as KB,
but with the weights set to values w1, . . . , wN.
To translate the lower complexity bounds of the original spectrum recognition
problem into lower complexity bounds for the resulting inference problem, one now
has to be precise about the representation of the inference problem. To this end,
we assume that weights w are rational numbers, and represented by pairs (u, v) of
integers, so that w = u/v. We then deﬁne the representation size l(w) as log(| u |
+1) + log(| v | +1). The total representation size of the weight parameters w =
(w1, . . . , wN) in a knowledge base is l(w) := PN
i=1 l(wi). An inference algorithm
for probabilistic inference problems in PI(KB, Q, E) is polynomial in the domainsize
and the representation size of the weight parameters, if for any KB ∈KB, χ ∈Q,
η ∈E the class of inference problems PI(KB(w), n, χ, η) can be solved in time that
is bounded by a polynomial Pd
i,j=0 αi,jl(w)inj (αi,j ∈R, d ∈N ). We can now
state the following theorem:
Theorem 4.3
If NETIME ̸= ETIME, then there does not exist an algorithm that 0.2-approximate-
ly solves PI(0-RFOL, AT , ∅) in time polynomial in the domainsize and the repre-
sentation size of the weight parameters.
The full proof of the theorem is given in the appendix. It consists of a polynomial-
time reduction of the n ∈spec(φ) decision problem to a probabilistic inference
problem PI(KB(w(n)), n, a(), ∅), where l(w(n)) is polynomial in n. An inference
algorithm that can solve PI(KB(w(n)), n, a(), ∅) in time polynomial in the domain-
size and l(w(n)), thus, would yield a polynomial decision procedure for spec(φ).
4.3 Polynomiality in l(w)
One may wonder how strong or surprising Theorem 4.3 really is in light of its extra
runtime polynomial in l(w) condition. It has previously been emphasized that lifted
inference procedures should only be expected to be polynomial in the domain size,
but not in other parameters that characterize the complexity of KB (Jaeger 2000;
Van den Broeck 2011). These remarks, however, have mostly been motivated by
considerations of the logical complexity of KB, e.g. in terms of the number and
complexity of its weighted formulas, or the size of the signature. The complexity in
terms of numerical parameters, on the other hand, has not received much attention.
To better understand the nature of the condition of being polynomial in the
domainsize and l(w), we have to look a little closer at how the parameters aﬀect

10
M. Jaeger
the complexity of the computation. We consider algorithms that can be described
as follows: to compute PI(KB(w), n, χ, η) the algorithm performs a number of steps
i = 1, . . . , L, where step i consists either of executing a constant time operation that
does not depend on the numerical model parameters (e.g., a logical operation on
formulas), or of a basic operation on numerical parameters.
We consider the executions the algorithm performs on inputs with ﬁxed logical
structure KB, and ﬁxed χ, η, but varying weight parameters w and domainsizes n.
Let Vw,n(i) denote the set of all numerical variables stored by the algorithm before
performing step i, when it is run on inputs (w, n). Thus, Vw,n(i) comprises the
original weight parameters of the model, as well as computed intermediate results,
etc. We now make two basic assumptions on the algorithm:
(A1) The weight parameters w only inﬂuence the numerical values of the variables
stored in Vw,n(i), but not the sequence of execution steps performed by the algo-
rithm. In particular, the number of execution steps performed by the algorithm
only depends on n: L = L(n).
(A2) The basic operations performed on numerical variables are polynomial time
in the size of their arguments, and they produce an output whose size is linear in
the size of the inputs. This is the case for the basic arithmetic operations addition
and multiplication, for example.
The total representation size of Vw,n(i) then is bounded by cn(i)l(w), where cn(i)
is a coeﬃcient not depending on w. Also, let q() be a polynomial that provides a
common complexity bound for the basic numerical operations that can be performed
at one step. The total execution time of the algorithm on input (w, n) then is
bounded by
L(n)
X
i=1
q(cn(i)l(w)).
(11)
If, now, for ﬁxed weight vectors w the algorithm is polynomial in n (equivalently:
the algorithm is polynomial in n under a computation model where basic numeric
operations are constant time), then L(n) and maxi=1,...,L(n) cn(i) must be polyno-
mially bounded in n. The combined complexity (11) then, in fact, is polynomial
both in n and l(w).
In summary, this shows: an algorithm that for ﬁxed w is polynomial in n, and that
satisﬁes assumptions (A1) and (A2), actually is polynomial in n and l(w). Thus,
for this type of algorithm, the additional restriction of Theorem 4.3 compared to
Theorem 4.1 is insigniﬁcant.
The remaining question, then, is how restrictive or realistic assumptions (A1) and
(A2) actually are. For exact inference algorithms it appears that (A1) and (A2) are
satisﬁed by all existing approaches, with a small qualiﬁcation: algorithms might give
special treatment to special weight parameters, such as w = 0 or w = ∞, which
then can lead to a violation of (A1) in the strict sense. However, our analysis could
also be performed based on a weakened form of (A1) that allows certain special
weights to inﬂuence the computation diﬀerently from proper numerical weights

Lower complexity bounds for lifted inference
11
0 < w < ∞. A slightly more elaborate argument would then arrive at essentially
the same conclusions.
The situation is less clear for approximate inference algorithms. Here the nu-
merical values stored in Vw,n(i) may inﬂuence the algorithm in multiple ways: for
example, they can be used to test a termination condition, or to decided which com-
putations to perform next in order to improve approximation bounds derived so far.
In all such cases, the model weights w can have an impact on the sequence and the
total number of execution steps, and (A1) is not satisﬁed. Thus, even though the
theorem also applies to approximate inference, its implications for the construction
of approximate inference algorithms may be less severe, since there might be rea-
sonable ways to build approximate inference algorithms that are polynomial in n,
without also being polynomial in l(w).
4.4 The 0-RFOL̸= Case
In a ﬁnal strengthening of our results, we now move on to the fragment 0-RFOL̸=.
The availability of the equality predicate for the formulas of KB, so far, has been an
important prerequisite for our arguments, because Theorem 3.3 crucially depends
on equality: spectra for formulas φ ∈RFOL̸= are always of the form N \ {1, . . ., k}
for some k, and, thus, decidable in constant time. For this reason it was suggested
in (Jaeger 2000) that one should focus on logical fragments without equality when
looking for model classes for which lifted inference scales polynomially in the do-
mainsize. As our ﬁnal result shows, however, elimination of equality may not have
such a large impact on complexity, after all.
Theorem 4.4
If NETIME ̸= ETIME, then there does not exist an algorithm that 0.2-approximate-
ly solves PI(0-RFOL̸=, AT , ∅) in time polynomial both in the domainsize, and the
representation size of the weight parameters.
This theorem is a generalization of Theorem 4.3, and, strictly speaking, makes
4.3 redundant. It is only for expository purposes, and greater transparency in the
proof arguments, that we here develop these results in two steps.
The proof of Theorem 4.4 is a reﬁnement of the proof of Theorem 4.3. In addition
to approximating Skolem functions f with relations Rf, we now also approximate
the equality predicate = with a binary relation E(·, ·). Similarly as we could not
impose in 0-RFOL hard constraints that ensure that Rf encodes a function, we also
cannot constrain models to always interpret E as the equality relation. However,
just as with (8) and (10) we rewarded interpretations with functional Rf, we can
penalize interpretations in which E is not true equality by means of the two weighted
formulas
a() ∧¬E(x, x)
:
0
(12)
a() ∧E(x, y)
:
1/w
(13)
where w is a large weight.

12
M. Jaeger
5 Approximate Inference , Convergence, and Evidence
There are some notable diﬀerences with respect to approximate inference between
the results we here obtained for weighted model counting, and the results of (Jaeger 2000).
In (Jaeger 2000) it was shown that due to convergence of query probabilities Pn(a())
as n →∞, in theory a trivial constant time approximation algorithm exists: perform
exact inference for all input domains up to a size n∗, and output the limit proba-
bility for all domains of size > n∗. This “algorithm”, however, has no practical use,
since for a desired accuracy value ǫ one ﬁrst would have to determine a suﬃciently
high threshold value n∗∈N to make the output indeed be an ǫ-approximation.
Nevertheless, the diﬀerence between the existence of an impractical approxima-
tion algorithm on the one hand, and the non-existence of any approximation algo-
rithm on the other hand, is just one consequence of a more fundamental diﬀerence:
while in the models considered in (Jaeger 2000) query probabilities Pn(a()) converge
to a limit, this is not necessarily the case for knowledge bases of weighted formulas –
at least when full RFOL is allowed: in the proof of Theorem 4.1 we have constructed
knowledge bases KB, such that PKB,n(a()) oscillates between zero and values > 1/2
as n oscillates between spec(φ) and its complement. The construction of knowledge
bases with this behavior does not require formulas φ with a non-polynomial spec-
trum as in Corollary 3.4, and is not contingent on NETIME ̸= ETIME. Already a
knowledge base as constructed in the proof of Theorem 4.1 with φ replaced by ψ
of Example 3.2 will show this behavior.
The reason behind these diﬀerent convergence properties lies in a somewhat dif-
ferent role that conditioning on evidence plays in directed and undirected models:
in the former, a conditional probability PM,n(a() | b()) deﬁned by a model M can,
in general, not be deﬁned as an unconditional probability PM′,n(a()) in a modiﬁed
model M ′. As a result, the convergence guarantees and – theoretical – approxima-
bility for certain classes of unconditional queries PM,n(a()), do not carry over to
conditional queries PM,n(a() | b()).
For weighted feature knowledge bases KB, on the other hand, there is no funda-
mental diﬀerence between unconditional and conditional queries PKB′,n(a()) and
PKB,n(a() | b()), respectively. To reduce the conditional to unconditional queries,
one can just add to KB the hard constraint ¬b() : 0 to obtain KB′ with PPKB′,n =
PKB,n | b(). This means that as long as E is not more expressive than KB, the prob-
lem classes PI(KB, Q, E) and PI(KB, Q, ∅) have the same characteristics in terms
of complexity as a function of the domainsize. Note, though, that this is only true
when we consider complexity of PI(KB, n, χ, η) strictly as a function of n for ﬁxed
KB, χ, η. If the evidence is allowed to change with the domainsize, i.e., η = η(n),
then even in cases where restrictions on KB make PI(KB, Q, E) polynomial in n,
one can deﬁne sequences of inference problems PI(KB, n, χ, η(n)) with KB ∈KB,
η(n) ∈E that are no longer polynomial in n (Van den Broeck and Davis 2012).

Lower complexity bounds for lifted inference
13
6 Conclusion
We have shown that for currently quite popular probabilistic-logic models consisting
of collections of weighted, quantiﬁer- and function-free formulas there is likely to be
no general polynomial lifted inference method (contingent on NETIME ̸= ETIME).
Somewhat surprisingly, this even holds for approximate inference. Between this
negative result, and the positive result of (Van den Broeck 2011), there still could
be a lot of room for identifying tractable fragments by restricting 0-RFOL further
via limits on the number of variables, or the richness of the signature S.
Appendix A Proofs
Proof of Proposition 4.2:
We begin by deﬁning the term-depth of a term t in the signature SF as the
maximal nesting depth of function symbols in t. Precisely, we deﬁne inductively:
if t ≡x, then t has term depth 0. If t ≡f() (a constant), or t = f(x1, . . . , xk)
(a function term with only variables as arguments), then t has term depth 1. If
t = f(t1, . . . , tk), then the term depth of t is one plus the maximal term depth of
the ti.
The term depth of a formula φ(x) is the maximal term depth of the terms it
contains.
We now show that every formula φ(x) of term depth l can be transformed into
a formula φl−1(x, z) of term depth l −1 in 0-FOL(S ∪SF ∪S+), such that the
statement for φ+ of the proposition holds for φl−1 (but with S ∪SF ∪S+ instead of
S∪S+ in ii). The proposition then follows by deﬁning φ+ as the result of iteratively
applying l such transformations to φ. Since the term depth of the resulting φ+ is
zero, then actually φ+(x, z) ∈0-RFOL(S ∪S+).
Let {fi(xi) | i = 1, . . . , r} be the set of all distinct terms (including sub-terms)
of depth 1 appearing in φ(x). Let z1, . . . , zr be new variables. Deﬁne φl−1(x, z) as
r^
i=1
Rfi(xi, zi) →φ(x)[z1/f1(x1), . . . , zr/fr(xr)]
To now show i⇒ii let I ∈I(n, S∪SF ) with I |= ∀xφ(x). Deﬁne I+ ∈I(n, S∪SF ∪
S+) as the expansion of I in which each Rf ∈S+ is interpreted as the relational
representation of f, i.e., I+ |= Rf(d, e) iﬀI |= f(d) = e. Clearly, I+ |= Func.
Furthermore, the following are equivalent:
I |= ∀x φ(x)
I |= ∀xz Vr
i=1 fi(xi) = zi
→φ(x)[z1/f1(x1), . . . , zr/fr(xr)]
I+ |= ∀xz Vr
i=1 Rfi(xi, zi)
→φ(x)[z1/f1(x1), . . . , zr/fr(xr)]
For ii⇒i let I+ as in ii be given. Since I+ |= Func, we can turn I+ into an inter-
pretation for S∪SF by deﬁning f(d) as the unique e for which Rf(d, e) holds in I+.
Then, by the same equivalences as above, I+ |= ∀xz φ+(x, z) implies I |= ∀xφ(x).

14
M. Jaeger
□
Proof of Theorem 4.3: Let φ ∈RFOL as given by Corollary 3.4, and ∀x φR-Skol(x)
its relational Skolemization. Let S be the original signature of φ, and S+ the relation
symbols introduced in the relational Skolemization. Furthermore, for each k-ary
R+ ∈S+ we introduce a new (k −1)-ary relation R++. These new symbols will be
used to calibrate the weight of models for the reference proposition b(). Note that the
arity of symbols in S+ is at least 1, and R++, thus, is well-deﬁned, but may contain
relations of arity 0. We denote with S++ the collection of all the introduced R++
symbols. We now reduce the spectrum recognition problem for φ to probabilistic
inference from a knowledge base in the signature S ∪S+ ∪S++ ∪{a(), b()}.
The ﬁrst formula in our knowledge base is
a() ∧¬φR-Skol(x)
:
0
(A1)
We now approximately axiomatize the functional nature of the symbols R+ ∈S+.
The sentence (8) can be directly encoded as a weighted formula:
R+(x, y) ∧R+(x, y′) ∧y ̸= y′
:
0
(A2)
Next, we would like to enforce (9) by means of a weighted formula. However, (9)
encodes the essence of the existential quantiﬁers we are about to eliminate, and,
thus, it is not surprising that this is not possible to enforce strictly. However, we
can reward models in which the existential quantiﬁcation of (9) is satisﬁed via the
weighted formulas
a() ∧R+(x, y)
:
w
(R+ ∈S+)
(A3)
where w > 1 is a weight whose exact value is to be deﬁned later.
We now proceed with constraining models of the reference proposition b(). First,
all symbols in S ∪S+ shall have an empty interpretations in models of b():
b() ∧R(x)
:
0
(R ∈S)
(A4)
b() ∧R+(x, y)
:
0
(R+ ∈S+)
(A5)
In order to allow b()-models to gain some weight, we use the extra symbols in
S++:
b() ∧R++(x)
:
w
(R++ ∈S++)
(A6)
where w is the same weight as in (A3). To further limit the possible interpretations
of b()-models, we also stipulate:
b() ∧¬R++(x)
:
0
(R++ ∈S++)
(A7)
The extra symbols R++ must have empty interpretations in a()-models:
a() ∧R++(x)
:
0
(R++ ∈S++)
(A8)

Lower complexity bounds for lifted inference
15
Finally, we add:
¬(a() ∨b())
:
0
(A9)
We now determine (approximately) WKB,n(a()) and WKB,n(b()) for the cases
n ∈spec(φ) and n ̸∈spec(φ).
First, consider b(): for any n, there exists exactly one interpretation Ib() ∈
I(Dn, S ∪S+ ∪S++ ∪{a(), b()}) with nonzero weight in which b() is true. This
is the interpretation in which all relations in S ∪S+ are empty ((A4),(A5)), all
relations in S++ are maximal (A7), and, in consequence of the latter, because of
(A8), a() is false.
Assume that S+ = {R+
1 , . . . , R+
m}, where R+
i has arity ki + 1. Then R++
i
∈S++
contributes via (A6) a factor of wnki to WKB,n(Ib()), and the total weight is:
WKB,n(Ib()) = WKB,n(b()) = wnk1 +···+nkm = wK(n),
(A10)
using for abbreviation K(n) := nk1 + · · · + nkm.
We next turn to WKB,n(a()) in the case n ∈spec(φ). Then there exists at least
one interpretation I ∈I(Dn, S ∪S+), in which ∀x φR-Skol(x) is true, and in which
the relations from S+ have a functional interpretation. We can expand this interpre-
tation to an interpretation in I(n, S ∪S+ ∪S++ ∪{a(), b()}) by giving all relations
in S++ an empty interpretation, and setting a() to true and b() to false. Then I
does not violate any hard constraint in KB, and collects from (A3) a total weight
of wK(n). Thus
WKB,n(a()) ≥wK(n),
and therefore, when n ∈spec(φ)
PKB,n(a()) ≥WKB,n(a())/(WKB,n(a()) + WKB,n(b())) ≥1/2.
(A11)
Finally, we have to consider WKB,n(a()) in the case n ̸∈spec(φ). For any I with
nonzero weight in which a() is true, because of (A1), also ∀xφR-Skol(x) must be true.
This, now, only is possible when some R+ ∈S+ is not a functional relation, which,
because of (A2) can only mean that for some x there exists no y with R+(x, y).
The total weight of I accrued from (A3) then is at most wK(n)−1. Because of (A8),
I cannot obtain any additional weight from (A6), so that
WKB,n(I) ≤wK(n)−1.
(A12)
The total number of interpretations in I(Dn, S ∪S+ ∪S++ ∪{a(), b()}) is 2L(n) for
a polynomial L(n). Thus
WKB,n(a()) ≤2L(n)wK(n)−1.
(A13)
We now obtain for the case n ̸∈spec(φ)
PKB,n(a()) ≤WKB,n(a())/WKB,n(b()) ≤2L(n)wK(n)−1/wK(n) = 2L(n)/w.
(A14)
Setting w = 10 ·2L(n), we thus have PKB,n(a()) ≤1/10 if n ̸∈spec(φ). The repre-
sentation size of w is polynomial in n. Thus, an algorithm that computes PKB,n(a())
up to an accuracy of 0.2 = (0.5 −0.1)/2 in time polynomial in n and the represen-

16
M. Jaeger
tation size of w would give a polynomial time decision procedure for spec(φ).
□
Proof of Theorem 4.4: The proof is an extension of the proof of Theorem 4.3,
and we here just give the necessary modiﬁcations.
Let E be a new binary relation symbol. We replace equalities x = y in (A1)
and (A2) with E(x, y). To (approximately) axiomatize E as the identity relation in
models of a(), we add to the knowledge base consisting of (A1)-(A9) the weighted
formulas
a() ∧¬E(x, x)
0
(A15)
a() ∧E(x, y)
1/w
(A16)
where w > 1 is the same weight as in (A3) and (A6), and whose exact value is to
be determined later. To calibrate the weight of b()-models, we introduce in analogy
to the R++ relations a unary relation E++, and in analogy to (A6) - (A8) add to
the knowledge base
b() ∧E++(x)
1/w
(A17)
b() ∧¬E++(x)
0
(A18)
a() ∧E++(x)
0
(A19)
We now obtain for all n
WKB,n(b()) = wK(n)(1/w)n = wK(n)−n.
(A20)
If n ∈spec(φ), then there exists an interpretation in which a() is true, the R+
have a functional interpretation, and the interpretation of E is the identity relation.
We can thus lower-bound the weight of a() by the weight of that interpretation:
WKB,n(a()) ≥wK(n)(1/w)n = wK(n)−n.
(A21)
As in (A11), one then obtains PKB,n(a()) ≥1/2.
We now turn to the case n ̸∈spec(φ). Consider any I in which a() is true, and that
has nonzero weight. This now, only is possible when in I there is an R+ ∈S+ which
is not a functional relation, or when E is not the identity relation in I (or both). In
all cases, the weight of I coming from (A3) and (A16) is at most wK(n)−n−1. The
total number of interpretations in I(Dn, S ∪S+ ∪S++ ∪{a(), b(), E}) is 2M(n) for
a polynomial M(n). Thus
WKB,n(a()) ≤2M(n)wK(n)−n−1,
(A22)
from which, as in (A14), then PKB,n(a()) ≤2M(n)/w. Now setting w = 10 · 2M(n)
again yields the bound PKB,n(a()) ≤1/10.
□
