136 
EL-HAY & FRIEDMAN 
UAI2001 
Incorporating Expressive Graphical Models in Variational Approximations: 
Chain-Graphs and Hidden Variables 
Tal El-Hay 
Nir Friedman 
School of Computer Science & Engineering, Hebrew University 

Abstract 
Global variational approximation methods in graphical 
models allow efficient approximate inference of com­
plex posterior distributions by using a simpler model. 
The choice of the approximating model determines a 
tradeoff between the complexity of the approximation 
procedure and the quality of the approximation. In this 
paper, we consider variational approximations based 
on two classes of models that are richer than standard 
Bayesian networks, Markov networks or mixture mod­
els. As such, these classes allow to find better tradeoffs 
in the spectrum of approximations. The first class of 
models are elwin graphs, which capture distributions 
that are partially directed. The second class of mod­
els are directed graphs (Bayesian networks) with addi­
tional latent variables. Both classes allow representa­
tion of multi-variable dependencies that cannot be eas­
ily represented within a Bayesian network. 
1 
Introduction 
A central task in using probabilistic graphical models is in­
ference. Exact inference algorithms exploit the structure 
of the model to decompose the task. In general, although 
the problem is NP-hard, some structures (e.g., these with 
bounded tree width) allow efficient inference. When the 
model is intractable for exact inference, we can still hope 
to perform approximate inference (although that problem 
is also known to be generally intractable). 
One class of 
approximations that received recent attention is the class 
of variational approximation algorithms [6]. These algo­
rithms attempt to approximate the posterior P(T I o), 
where o is an observation of some variable and T are the 
remaining variables, by a distribution Q(T : 0) that has 
tractable structure. Using this approximating distribution, 
we can define a lower bound on the likelihood P(o). The 
parameters e that define Q are adapted by trying to maxi­
mize this lower bound. 
The simplest variational approximation is the mean-field 
approximation [8, 9] that approximates the posterior distri­
bution with a network in which all the random variables are 
independent. As such, it is unsuitable when there are strong 
dependencies in the posterior. Saul and Jordan [ 1 0] sug­
gest to circumvent this problem by using structured varia-
tiona! approximation. This method approximates the pos­
terior by a distribution composed of independent substruc­
tures of random variables. This idea can be generalized for 
various factored forms for Q, such as Bayesian networks 
and Markov networks [1, 11]. Jaakkola and Jordan [5] ex­
plore another direction for improving the mean field ap­
proximation. They propose to use a mixture of mean field 
approximations in order to approximate multi-modal pos­
teriors. Both structured variational approximation and the 
mixture approximation methods allow for a more refined 
trade-off between accuracy and computational complexity. 
In the structured approximations more accuracy is gained 
by adding structure, while in the mixture approximation we 
can increase the number of mixture components. 
In this paper, we generalize and improve on these two 
methods in order to achieve greater accuracy given the 
available computational resources. The resulting approx­
imation results enhance the range of approximating distri­
butions and increase the ability to trade-off accuracy for 
complexity. 
We start by considering extensions of structured approx­
imations. Current structured approximation use Bayesian 
networks or Markov networks as approximating distribu­
tions. These two classes of models have different expres­
sive power. We provide uniform treatment of both classes 
by examining chain graphs - a class of models that is 
more expressive than Bayesian and Markov networks, and 
includes each one of them as a special case. 
We then consider how to add extra hidden variables to the 
approximating model. This method generalizes both the 
structured approximation and the mixture model approxi­
mation. It enables us to control the complexity of the ap­
proximating model both through the structure and through 
the number of values of the hidden variables. The extra hid­
den variables also enable us to maintain the dependency be­
tween different variables but control the level of complex­
ity, thus keeping the dependencies in a compressed man­
ner. As straightforward insertion of extra hidden variables 
to the variational approximation framework results in an 
intractable optimization problem, we need to combine ad­
ditional approximation steps. We present a natural gener­
alization of methods suggested by Jaakkola and Jordan [5] 

UA12001 
EL-HAY & FRIEDMAN 
137 
for mixtures of mean field models. 
2 
Variational Approximation with Directed 
Networks 
Structured approximations approximate a probability dis­
tribution using probability distribution with non-trivial de­
pendency structure. We re-derive standard structured ap­
proximation schemes with Bayesian networks (such as the 
ones in [4, 10, 11]) using tools that will facilitate later de­
velopments. 
Suppose we are given a distribution P over the set of ran­
dom variables X= {X1, ... ,Xn}· Let 0 C X be the 
subset of observed variables. We denote by T = X \ 0 
the set of hidden variables. Our task is to approximate the 
distribution P(T I o) by another distribution Q(T : e), 
where e is the set of parameters for the approximating dis­
tribution Q. 
In this paper, we focus on approximating distributions 
represented by discrete graphical models such as Bayesian 
networks and Markov networks. That is, we assume that 
{X 1 , ... , X n} are discrete random variables and that P has 
a factorized form 
1 
P(x) =-IT 1/Ji{d;) 
Zp . 
t 
(1) 
Where D1, . . •  Dk are subsets of X. This representation can 
be a Bayesian network (in which case, each tPi is a con­
ditional distribution) or a Markov network (in which case, 
each rp; is a potential over some subset of X). 
The approximating distribution will be represented as an­
other graphical model Q(T : e). Once we specify the 
form of this model, we wish to find the set of parameters 
e that minimizes the distance between Q(T : e) and the 
posterior distribution P(T I o). A common measure of 
distance is the KL divergence [2] between Q(T : 8) and 
the posterior distribution P(T I o). This is defined as 
[ 
Q(T) ] 
D(Q(T)IIP(T I o)) = Eq(T) log P(T I o) 
(2) 
Finding the parameters for Q will allow us to compute a 
lower bound for log P( o). To see this, we define a func­
tional F of the general form: 
[ 
I l 
[ P(T, c, o)] 
F Q c = EQ(·Icl log Q(T I c) 
where cis an evidence vector assigned to a subset C <:;:; T, 
and QC I c) is a shorthand for Q(T I c). (The reasons 
for using additional evidence in the definition will be clear 
shortly.) In the special case where C = 0, F becomes 
F[Q] = E [1 P(T,o)] 
Q og Q(T) 
We can easily verify that 
logP(o) = F[Q] + D(QIIP) ñ F[Q] 
The inequality is true because the KL divergence is non­
negative. Hence, F[Q] is a lower bound on the log­
likelihood. The difference between F[ Q] and the true 
log-likelihood is the KL-divergence. Minimizing the KL­
divergence is equivalent to finding the tightest lower bound. 
A simple approximation of this form uses a distribution 
Q that is a Bayesian network 
j 
j 
where U i denotes the parents of Xi in the approximating 
network, and () x 3 1 u; are the parameters of the distribution. 
The computational complexity of calculating the lower 
bound depends on the complexity of inference in Q and 
on the domain size of the factors of P. To see that let us 
rewrite F(Q] in a factorized form. 
Lemma 2.1: /fQ(t) = Tij ()x;lu;• then 
F[Q I c] = 2: Eqclc) [logrp;(D;, o)]-log Zp 
- L EQ(.Ic) [logBx;iuJ)+logQ(c) 
j 
where cPi(Di, o) represents a random variable whose value 
is tPi ( d;) if d; is consistent with o; otherwise it is 0. 
Our goal is to find a set of parameters maximizing F 
while conforming to the local normalization constraints. 
The optimal parameters for Q are found by writing the La­
grangian for this problem and differentiating it with respect 
to them. The Lagrangian is 
To differentiate the Lagrangian we shall use the following 
technical result. 
Lernrna2.2: LetQ(t) = TijBx;lu;• then 
8Eq (!(C)] 
[ 8f(C)] 
80 
= Q(uj)·Eq(·lx;,u;) [/(C)]+Eq -
80 
x;lu; 
x;lu; 
Corollary 2.3: 
Note that logQ(xj, uj) = log Q(uj) +log Bx;lur Equat­
ing the derivative of the Lagrangian to zero and dividing 
both sides by Q(ui) and then rearranging, we get 
(4) 

138 
EL-HAY & FRIEDMAN 
UAI2001 
where Zu; is a normalization constant, and 
EsN(Xj , uJ) = F[Q I Xj,uJ]-logQ(ui) 
(5) 

 
EQ(·I•;,u;) [  )og¢;(D,,o) -ft log0,1,iu1,] 
-logZp 
To better understand this characterization, we examine 
the term F[ Q I xi, Uj ]. It is easy to verify that 
D(Q(T I Xj, uj)IIP(T I Xj, uj, o)) = 
-F[Q I Xj, uj] +log P(xj, Uj, o) 
Thus, F[Q I Xj, Uj] is a lower bound on logP(xj , u1,o). 
This suggests that Eq. 4 can be thought of as approximat­
ing P(xj I uj,o)byBxilui· If we replaceEsN(x;,uj) 
by logP(xj,Uj,o) in this equation, we would get that 
Bx,Ju; = P(xj I Uj, o).1 
In order to find optimal parameters, we can use an iter­
ative procedure that updates the parameters of one family 
on each iteration. An asynchronous update of the parame­
ters according to Eq. 4 guarantees a monotonic increase in 
the lower bound F[Q] and converges to a local maximum. 
This is a consequence of the fact that, for every i and every 
assignment to the parents u1, F is a concave function of 
the set of parameters {Bx;Ju; I Xj E dom(Xj)}. There­
fore, the stationary point is a global maximum with respect 
to those parameters. The concavity ofF follows from the 
fact that the second order partial derivatives are negative 
82F 
1 
--...,.2 = --e -Q(uJ) < o 
8Bxilu; 
x;Ju; 
and the mixed partial derivatives are all zero. 
The complexity of calculating EBN as defined in Eq. 5 is 
determined by the number of variables, the size of the fam­
ilies in P and by the complexity of calculating marginal 
probabilities in Q. It is important to realize that not all the 
terms in this equation need to be computed. To see this 
we need to consider conditional independence properties 
in Q. We say that X is independent of Y given Z in Q, 
denoted Q F Ind(X; Y I Z), if Q(X I y, z) = Q(X I z) 
for all values y and z of Y and Z. If Q is a Bayesian 
network, we can determine such independencies using d­
separation [7]. Now, suppose that Q F Ind(Xj; C I Uj), 
i.e., Q(c I Xj, ui) 
= Q(c I uj). 
Terms of the form 
EQ(c!x;,u;) [/(c)] can be ignored in the update equations 
since they change the new parameters by a constant factor 
which will be absorbed in Zu;. Therefore we can reduce 
the amount of computations by defining the sets of indices 
of the factors that depend on Xj given U j as follows: 
pP 
= 
J 
Fð 
{i: Q < Ind(Xj;Di I Uj)} 
{j' =/; j: Q ß Ind(Xj;Xj', uj' I Uj)} 
-----"'-------" 
1Note that the term log Q(uj) in EsN (xj, Uj) can be ignored, 
since it is absorbed by the normalizing constant. We include it 
above to simplify the decomposition of E BN ( x h Uj). 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 1: (a) A Bayesian network with an observed variable 
(01). (b) A representation of the posterior distribution as a 
chain graph. (c) an approximating chain graph network. 
We can then redefine E BN to be 
EBN(Xj,Uj) 
= L EQ(-!x;,u;) [log(Pi(Di,o)]­
iEFj 
L EQ(lxi,u;) [IogQ(Xj' I Uj')] 
j'EFJ 
Depending on the decomposition of Q, this formula might 
involve much fewer terms then Eq. 5. For example, in mean 
field approximation, FJ includes only potentials that in­
clude X1, and Fl is empty. 
Similar derivation can be made when Q is a Markov net­
work. 
The main difference is that in Markov networks 
there is a global constraint (defined by the partition func­
tion) rather then local ones for each conditional distribu­
tion. Due to space considerations we omit the details, and 
refer the interested reader to [ 11]. 
3 
Chain Graph Approximations 
As is well known, the classes of distributions that can 
be represented by Markov networks and by Bayesian net­
works are not equivalent. Therefore, for some distributions 
the best tractable approximations might be represented by 
Bayesian networks while for other distributions the best ap­
proximation is a Markov network. We can gain more flex­
ibility in choosing an approximating distribution by using 
a more general class of probability models that can cap­
ture the dependency models implied by Bayesian networks, 
Markov networks and dependency models that can be cap­
tured by neither of them. 
To consider a concrete example, suppose that P is a 
Bayesian network. W hat is the form of the posterior P(T I 
o)? For a concrete example, consider the network of Fig­
ure l(a). When, we observe the value of 01, we create de­
pendencies among the variables T1, T2, and T3. The poste­
rior distribution is neither a Bayesian network nor a Markov 
network (because of the v-structure in the parents of T5). 
Instead, we can write this posterior in the form: 
where 'f/I(TI . T2,T3) = P(1)P(ol I Tà,T2,T3) is a poten­
tial that is induced by the observation of o1. 
A natural class of models that has this general form are 
chain graphs [3]. 
Such a model factorizes to a product 
of conditional distributions and potentials. Formally, we 

UAI2001 
EL-HAY & FRIEDMAN 
139 
define a chain graph to have for each variable a (possibly 
empty) set of parents, and in addition to have a set of po­
tentials on some subsets of variables. 
When we represent Q as a chain graph, we will have the 
general form: 
where, as before, U i are the directed parents of Xi. In 
addition, 'lj!k are potential functions on subsets ofT, and 
ZQ = l::t fli Q(xi I Uj) flk 'lj!k(Ck) is a normalizing 
function that ensures that the distribution sums to 1. Fig­
ure l(b) shows the chain graph that represents this factor­
ization. 
It is easy to check that if P is a Bayesian network, then 
P(T I o) can be represented as a chain graph (for each 
variable Xi in 0, add a potential over the parents of Xj). 
In contrast, it is easy to build examples where the posterior 
distribution cannot be represented by a Bayesian network 
without introducing unnecessary dependencies. Thus, this 
class of models is, in some sense, a natural representation 
of conditional distributions in Bayesian networks. 
This argument suggests that by considering chain graphs 
we can represent approximate distributions that are more 
tractable than the original distribution, yet are closer to 
the posterior we want to approximate. For example, Fig­
ure l(c) shows a simple example for a possible approxi­
mate network for representing the posterior of the network 
of Figure l(a). In this network there are two potentials with 
two variables each, rather than one with three variables. 
Given the structure of the approximating chain graph, we 
wish to find the set of parameters that maximizes F[Q], 
the lower bound on the log-likelihood. As usual, we need 
to define a Lagrangian that capture the constraints on the 
model. These constraints contain the constraints that ap­
peared in the Bayesian network case, and, in addition, we 
require that each potential sums up to one: 
To understand this constraint, note that the each potential 
can be scaled without changing Q, since the scaling con­
stant is absorbed in ZQ. Thus, without constraining the 
scale of each potential there is a continuum of solutions, 
and the magnitude of values in the potentials can explode. 
Putting these together, the Lagrangian has the form: 
The main difference from the Bayesian network approxi­
mation is in the form of the analogue of Lemma 2.2. In the 
case of chain graphs, we also have to differentiate ZQ, and 
so we get slightly more complex derivatives. 
Lemma 3.1: IJQ is a chain graph overT, then 
Note that when we differentiate .F[Q] we get two terms. 
The first, is ..F[Q I Xj, Uj)] as before, and the other is :F[Q]. 
However, since .F[Q] does not depend on the value of Xj, 
it is a absorbed in the normalizing constant Zu; . Thus, 
the general structure of the solution remains similar to the 
simpler case of Bayesian networks: 
where 
Ecc(xj, ui) 
Eca(ck) 
= 
_l
_ eE co(x; ,u; ) 
Zu; 
_l
_eEco(co ) 
Zq 
= 
F[Q I Xj, Uj]-logQ(xj, Uj) + logBx;lu; 
:F[Q I ck]-logQ(ck) + log'lj!k(Ck) 
To get an explicit form of these equations, we simply 
write the chain-graph analogue of Lemma 2.1 which has 
similar form but includes additional terms. As in the case 
of Bayesian network, we can easily identify terms that can 
depend on the value of Xj, and focus the computation only 
on these. This is a straightforward extension of the ideas in 
Bayesian networks, and so we omit the details. 
4 
Adding Hidden Variables 
Structured approximations were the first method proposed 
for improving the mean field approximation. Jaakkola and 
Jordan [5] proposed another way of improving the mean 
field approximation: to use mixture distributions, where 
each mixture component is represented by a factorized dis­
tribution. 
The motivation for using mixture distribution 
emerges from the fact that in many cases the posterior dis­
tribution is multi-modal, i.e. there are several distinct re­
gions in the domain of the distribution with relatively high 
probability values. If the location of the different modes of 
the distribution depends on the values of several variables 
than the mean field approximation can not capture more 
than one mode. 
Recal1 that the mean field approximation uses a graphical 
model in which all the variables in T are independent of 
each other. Thus, we can think of it as a Bayesian network 
without edges. The mixture distribution approximation can 

140 
EL-HA Y & FRIEDMAN 
UAI2001 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 2: (a) A simple dynamic Bayesian network that describe a temporal process. Time progresses to the right. Each 
vertical "slice" describe variables that exist in the same instance. (b) and (c) are two approximating networks for the 
distribution represented by the network (a) with extra hidden variables. (b) Edges within a time slice are maintained. 
Correlations between time slice are modeled through the introduction of the hidden variable set {Vn};;'=l· (c) Edges 
between time slices are maintained. Correlations between the three chains are modeled through the hidden variables V1, 
V2 and V3• 
be viewed as one that uses a Bayesian network over the 
variables T and an extra variable V, such that V is the 
parent node of each Xj E T. As before, the parameters 
of the mixture distribution could be found by maximizing 
the lower bound of the log likelihood as presented in Sec­
tion 2. Unfortunately, using this technique in a straightfor­
ward manner would not help us since the extra hidden vari­
ables introduces correlations, which leave us with an opti­
mization problem whose complexity is at least as great as 
this of the original inference problem. Jaakkola and Jordan 
overcame this problem by introducing another variational 
transformation resulting in another lower bound to the log 
likelihood [5]. 
In this section, we generalize the ideas of Jaakkola and 
Jordan, and show a method where we can perform struc­
tured approximation with distributions Q that are defined 
over TUV, where V is a set of hidden variables that did not 
appear in the original distribution. (For clarity, we focus on 
the case of Bayesian networks, although similar extension 
can be applied to chain graphs as well.) 
Given the distribution P(X) and evidence owe shall ap­
proximate the posterior P(T I o) with another distribution 
Q(T) = l:v Q(T, v) . This distribution is defined over 
the variable set T U V where V is a set of extra hidden 
variables. Our task is to find the parameters of Q that will 
maximize the lower bound F[ Q]. 
Figure 2(b) and (c) are two examples of possible approx­
imations for the distribution that is represented by the net­
work in Figure 2(a). Recall the structured approximation 
for this network modeled the approximating distribution by 
a network with three independent chains. In the networks 
presented here, the correlations are maintained through the 
hidden variables. In Figure 2(a) we added an extra hid­
den variable for every time slice. The correlations between 
time slices are maintained through those hidden variables. 
The edges within a time slice are maintained in order to 
preserve intra-time dependencies. In Figure 2(b) we main-
tained the edges between the time slices and added extra 
hidden variables for every chain. Correlations among the 
chains are maintained by the connections between the hid­
den variables. 
Another perspective of the potential of extra hidden vari­
ables was suggested by Jaakkola and Jordan [5]. We can 
easily extend it to our case. This is done by reexamination 
of the lower bound F[Q]. 
Lenuna 4.1: Let Q(T) = l:v Q(T, v), then 
F[Q] = EQ(V) [F[Q I V]] + l(T; V) 
where I(T; V) = EQ [tog QbJ..l] is the mutual informa­
tion between T and V. 
The first term is an average on lower bounds that are gained 
without introducing extra hidden variables. The improve­
ment arises from the second term. Given the structure of 
the approximating network without extra hidden variables, 
the lower bound can be improved if there are several dif­
ferent configurations of the parameters of the sub-network 
defined on T that achieve lower bounds that are near opti­
mal. Using an extra hidden variable set to combine these 
configuration, will improve the lower bound by the amount 
of the mutual information between T and V. 
As described above, in the presence of hidden variable, 
the optimization of the functional F[Q] is more complex. 
The source of these complications is the fact that log Q ( t) 
does not decompose. Therefore we shall relax the lower 
bound. We start by rewriting F[Q] as 
F[Q] = EQ [log(:)]- H(V IT) 
This first term does decompose. The remaining term is the 
conditional entropy 

UAI2001 
EL-HAY & FRIEDMAN 
141 
Instead of decomposing this term, we can calculate a lower 
bound for it by introducing extra variational parameters. 
The new parameters are based on the convexity bound [6) 
- log(x) ï -Ax+ log( ).) + 1 
(6) 
We can use the convexity bound by adding an extra vari­
ational parameter R(t, v) for every assignment toT U V. 
Applying Equation 6 for every term in the summation of 
the conditional entropy, we get a lower bound for the con­
ditional entropy: 
-H(V IT) 
> 
Eq [ -R(t, v) Q) + logR(t, v) + 1] 
= 
-l:R(t, v)Q(t) + Eq[logR(t, v)] + 1 
t,v 
Obviously, if we add a distinct variational parameter for ev­
ery assignment t, v, the conditional entropy can be recov­
ered accurately. Unfortunately, this setting leaves us with 
an intractable computation. In order to reduce the compu­
tational complexity of the lower bound, we assume that R 
has a similar structure to that of Q 
R(t, v) = IJ Px;,u; 
j 
We define the lower bound on F as a new functional: 
g[Q,R I c] 
= 
EQ(·Ic} [log i'0)] 
-2: Eq(Tic) (R(T, v)] 
v 
+EQ(-Ic) [logR(T, V)] + l 
We now can define the Lagrangian with the desired con­
straints: 
JH 
= g[Q,RJ-l:l:Au; l:Ox;lu; 
j u; 
x; 
Using Lemma 2.2, and then applying the constraints, we 
get the update equations for 8 x 11 u; : 
Where 
1 
e I 
=
-. e£H(x;,u;) 
x; u; 
z u; 
£H(Xj, ui) = g[Q, R I Xj, Uj]- log(uj) 
(7) 
As usual, we can decompose this term to a sum of terms: 
2: EQ(·Ix;,u;) [logQ(Xj' I Uj')] 
j'#-j 
+ 2: EQ(·Ix;,u;) [logR(Xj' I uj' )] 
j' 
L Eq(Tix;,u;) [R(T, v)] 
v 
the expression £ H is similar to the one obtained for the sim­
pler structural approximation, except for the last two terms 
that arise from the lower bound on the negative conditional 
entropy. To evaluate the term Lv Eq(Tix;,u;) [R(T, v)] 
we perform variable-elimination like dynamic program­
ming algorithm. 
To complete the story, we need to consider the update 
equations for the parameters of R. Simple differentiation 
results in the equation 
Px;,u; 
Q( . 
) 
(S) 
Px;,u; 
= Lt,vt=x;,u; R(t, v)Q(t) 
XJ, UJ 
Where the term t, v f= 
x 1, u1 denotes assignments to 
{T, V} that are consistent with Xj, Uj. Note that Px;,u; 
does not appear in the right hand side (since it cancels out 
in the fraction). Again, we can efficiently compute such 
equations using dynamic programming. 
The Lagrangian is a convex function of both Bx;lu; and 
Px;, u; . Therefore, asynchronous iterations of Equation 8 
and Equation 7 improve the lower bound and will eventu­
ally converge to a stationary point. 
5 
Examples 
To evaluate our methods we performed a preliminary test 
with synthetic data. We created dynamic Bayesian net­
works with the general architecture shown in Figure 2(a). 
All the variables in these networks are binary. We con­
trolled two parameters: the number of time slices ex­
panded, and the number of variables in each slice. The pa­
rameters of networks were sampled from a Dirichlet prior 
with hyperparameter t. Thus, there was some bias toward 
skewed distributions. Our aim was to compute the like­
lihood of the observation in which all observed variables 
were set to be 0. We repeated these tests for sets of 20 net­
works sampled for each combination of the two parameters 
(number of time slices and number of variables per slice). 
We performed variational approximation to the posterior 
distribution using three types of networks with hidden vari­
ables: The first two types are based on the "vertical" and 
"horizontal" architectures shown in Figure 2(b) and (c). We 
considered networks with 1, 2, and 3 values for the hidden 
variable. (Note that when we consider a hidden variable 
with one value, we essentially apply the Bayesian network 
structured approximation.) The third type are networks that 
represent mixture of mean field approximations. For this 
type we considered networks with 1, 4 and 6 mixture com­
ponents (When there is one mixture component the approx­
imation is simply mean field). We run each procedure for 
10 iterations of asynchronous updates. This seems to con­
verge on most runs. To avoid local maxima, we tried 10 
different random starting points in each run and returned 
the best scoring one. 
The figure of merit for our approximations is the reported 
upper-bound on the KL-divergence between the approxi­
mation and the true posterior. This is simply log P{ o) -

142 
EL-HAY & FRIEDMAN 
UAI2001 
Mixture of mean fields 
"Vertical" approximation 
"Horizontal" approximation 
7 
Figure 3: Comparison of the two approximating structures of Figure 2 and mixture of mean fields. The figures on the left 
column report results for the mixture of mean fields approximation, with 1, 4, and 6 mixture components. The figures 
on the middle column report results for the network structure containing additional hidden variable for each time slice 
(Figure 2(b)) with hidden variables with 1, 2, and 3 values. The figures on the right column report results for the network 
structure containing additional hidden variable for each temporal chain (Figure 2(c)) with hidden variables with 1, 2, and 
3 values. The figures on the top row report on approximation to networks with 3 variables per time slice and the figures 
on the bottom row report on networks with 4 variables per time slice. The x-axis corresponds to the number of time slices 
in the network. They-axis corresponds to the upper-bound on the KL-divergence log P(o) - 9Q [Q, R] normalized by the 
number of time slices in the network. Lines describe to median performance among 20 inference problems, and error bars 
describe 25-75 percentiles. 
9Q[Q, R]. (The examples are sufficiently small, so that we 
can compute log P( o ).) We need to examine this quantity 
since different random networks have different values of 
P( o) and so we cannot compare lower bounds. 
Figure 3 describes the results of these runs. As we can see 
the differences grow with the number of time slices. This 
is expected as the problem becomes harder with additional 
slices. The general trend we see is that runs with more 
hidden values perform better. These differences are mostly 
pronounced in the larger networks. This is probably due to 
the higher complexity of these networks. 
The comparison to mixture of mean fields approximation 
shows that simple mean field ( 1 component) is much worse 
than all the other methods. Second, we see that although 
mixtures of mean field improve with larger number of com­
ponents, they are still worse than the structured approxima­
tions on the network with 3 variables per slices. We believe 
that these toy examples are not sufficiently large to high­
light the differences between the different methods. For 
example, differences start to emerge when we examine 6 
and 7 time slices. 
Our implementation of these variational methods is not 
optimized and thus we do not believe that running times 
are informative on these small examples. Nonetheless, we 
note that running mixtures of mean fields with 6 compo­
nents took roughly the same time as running the structured 
approximations with hidden variables of cardinality 3. 
One caveat of this experiment is that it is based on random 
networks, for which the depenencies between variables is 
often quite weak. As such it is hard to gauge how hard 
is inference in this networks. We are currently starting to 
apply these methods to real-life problems, where we expect 
to improvement over mean field type methods to be more 
pronounced. 
6 
Discussion 
In this paper we presented two extensions of structured 
variational methods-based on chain graphs and additional 
hidden variables. Each extension exploits a representa-

UAI2001 
EL-HAY & FRIEDMAN 
143 
tiona! feature that allows to better match a tractable ap­
proximating network to the posterior. By perusing such 
extensions we hope to find better tradeoffs between net­
work complexity on one hand and the approximation of the 
posterior distribution on the other. 
We demonstrated the effect of using hidden variables in 
synthetic examples and showed that learning non-trivial 
network with hidden variables helps the approximation. 
We are currently starting larger scale experiments on hard 
real-life problems. 
We put emphasis on presenting uniform machinery in the 
derivations of the three variants we considered. This uni­
form presentation allows for better insights into the work­
ings of such approximations and simplifies the process of 
deriving new variants for other representations. 
One issue that we did not address here for lack of space is 
efficient computations on the network Q. The usual analy­
sis focuses on the maximal tree width of the network. How­
ever, much computation (up to a quadratic factor) can be 
saved by conscious planning of order of asynchronous up­
dates and the propagation of messages in Q's join tree. 
The grand challenge for applications of such variational 
methods is to build automatic procedures that can deter­
mine what structure matches best a given network with 
a given query. 
This is a non-trivial problem. 
We hope 
that some of the insights we got from our derivations can 
provide initial clues that will lead to development of such 
methods.
