Evaluating Text-to-Image Matching using Binary Image Selection (BISON)
Hexiang Hu∗
University of Southern California

Ishan Misra
Facebook AI Research

Laurens van der Maaten
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Providing systems the ability to relate linguistic and vi-
sual content is one of the hallmarks of computer vision.
Tasks such as text-based image retrieval and image cap-
tioning were designed to test this ability, but come with
evaluation measures that have high variance or are difﬁ-
cult to interpret. We study an alternative task for systems
that match text and images: given a text query, the system is
asked to select the image that best matches the query from
a pair of semantically similar images. The system’s accu-
racy on this Binary Image SelectiON (BISON) task is in-
terpretable, eliminates the reliability problems of retrieval
evaluations, and focuses on the system’s ability to under-
stand ﬁne-grained visual structure.
We gather a BISON
dataset that complements the COCO dataset and use it to
evaluate modern text-based image retrieval and image cap-
tioning systems. Our results provide novel insights into the
performance of these systems.
1. Introduction
Understanding the relation between linguistic and visual
content is a fundamental goal of computer vision. This goal
has motivated a large body of research focusing on tasks
such as text-based image retrieval [24, 35] and image cap-
tioning [24, 27, 56, 58]. Both these tasks have challenges in
terms of evaluation: in particular, the open-ended nature of
image captioning tasks makes it difﬁcult to develop evalu-
ation measures [3, 55] that reliably and accurately measure
image-text relevance without also considering other abili-
ties, such as ﬂuency in language generation [1]. Text-based
image retrieval does not have these problems, but is unre-
liable because retrieval datasets are only partially labeled:
they incorrectly assume that images that are not positively
labeled for a given text query are negative examples. Our
analysis of the errors of caption-based image retrieval sys-
tems reveals that more than half of these “errors” are due
to errors in the evaluation, that is, due to “negative” images
∗This work was performed while Hexiang Hu was at Facebook.
Text query: Plates ﬁlled with carrots and beets on a white table.
Text query: Yellow shirted tennis player looking for incoming ball.
Negative image
Positive image
Positive image
Negative image
Figure 1: Binary Image SelectiON (BISON): Given a text
query, the system must select which of two images best
matches the caption. This task evaluates ﬁne-grained visual
grounding. The BISON accuracy of a system is the propor-
tion of examples for which the system correctly chooses the
positive image () over the negative image ().
being accurately described by the text query; see Section 2
for a detailed analysis.
Motivated by this issue, we propose an alternative task
to evaluate systems that match textual and visual content,
called Binary Image SelectiON (BISON). In BISON, the
system is provided with two similar images and a ﬁne-
grained text query that describes one image but not the
other. The system needs to select which of the two images
is described in the text query; see Figure 1. The perfor-
mance of the system is measured in terms of its binary clas-
siﬁcation accuracy of selecting the correct image. Indeed,
BISON can be viewed as a variant of text-based image re-
trieval in which positive and negative examples are explic-
itly labeled. BISON can be used as an auxiliary evalua-
1
arXiv:1901.06595v2  [cs.CV]  5 Apr 2019

Human
Number
Percentage
Incorrect
Incorrect
165
43.9%
Incorrect
Correct
211
56.1%

trieval measure. We run SCAN t2i [34] image retrieval on
the COCO captions [12] validation set and ask humans to

retrieval measure. Human annotators mark 56.1% of these
“errors” as correct retrievals.
tion of generative (captioning) and discriminative (retrieval)
vision-language models, which facilitates its use in con-
junction with existing evaluations. BISON accuracy differs
from existing tasks in that it is reliable, easy to interpret,
and focuses on ﬁne-grained visual content.
To facilitate binary image selection experiments, we col-
lected the COCO-BISON dataset using the images and cap-
tions in the existing COCO [12] validation set. By using
both the text and images from the COCO dataset, we en-
sure that COCO-BISON has a similar distribution as COCO
— this allows for the evaluation of COCO-trained models
on the COCO-BISON dataset. We use the COCO-BISON
dataset to evaluate state-of-the-art text-based image re-
trieval and image captioning systems, shedding new light
on the performance of these systems. For example, in con-
trast to prior work, we ﬁnd these systems are not as good as
humans in matching visual and (detailed) linguistic content.
2. Analyzing Retrieval and Captioning Tasks
We performed two experiments to identify the limita-
tions of popular evaluations of vision-and-language systems
via text-based image retrieval and image captioning.
Text-based image retrieval. Evaluations via text-based im-
age retrieval use a single positive image for each text query
and assume all other images in the dataset are negative ex-
amples for that query [24, 35]. This assumption is often
incorrect, in particular, when the image datasets is large. To
assess the severity this problem, we performed an experi-
ment in which we analyzed the “errors” made by the state-
of-the-art SCAN t2i retrieval system [34] on the COCO
captions validation set. We presented each incorrectly re-
trieved image along with the text query to a set of human
annotators, asking them to indicate if the text query appro-
priately describes the content of the image. The results of
this experiment are presented in Table 1 and suggest that
more than half of the “errors” made by the SCAN t2i system
are, in fact, not errors: the retrieved images are erroneously
marked as incorrect due to the lack of explicit negative an-
notations. Figure 2 illustrates the problem by showing two
examples of a text query, an “incorrectly” retrieved image,
Text query: A person wearing a banana headdress and necklace.
Retrieved image
Correct image
Text query: There is a green clock in the street.
Retrieved image
Correct image
Figure 2: Examples of “incorrect” image retrievals given
a text query: Image retrieved from COCO captions vali-
dation set by SCAN t2i [34] (left) given a text query (top),
and the image that should have been retrieved for that query

amples show that in retrieval evaluations, correctly retrieved
images may be counted as incorrect because the retrieval
task erroneously assumes that all but one of the images are
negative examples for the text query.
and the image labeled as positive for the query. Our results
suggest that image retrieval measures are very unreliable.
Image captioning. Captioning evaluation measures such as
BLEU-4 [43], CIDEr-D [55], METEOR [8], and SPICE [3]
compare a generated caption to a collection of reference
captions. As a result, the evaluations may be sensitive to
changes in the reference caption set and incorrectly assess
the semantics of the generated caption. We perform an anal-
ysis designed to study these effects on the COCO captions
validation set by asking human annotators to assess image
captions generated by the state-of-the-art UpDown [4, 50]
captioning system1. Speciﬁcally, we followed the COCO
guidelines for human evaluation [1] and asked annotators to
evaluate the “correctness” of image-caption pairs on a Lik-
ert scale from 1 (low) to 5 (high). We asked a second set of
1We performed the same experiment using other captioning methods.
The results of these experiments were qualitatively similar, and are pre-
sented in the supplemental material.

Generated caption: 
A street with a clock on the side of the street.
CIDEr-D of generated caption: 11.73
Generated caption: 
A person on skis in the air on a snowy slope.
CIDEr-D of generated caption: 4.82
Generated caption: 
A couple of zebra standing next to each other.
CIDEr-D of generated caption: 3.99
Figure 3: CIDEr-D score of correctly generated captions: All pairs have a correctness score of 4.0 (per human annotators)
but a low CIDEr-D score because the generated caption does not match the reference captions in the COCO dataset.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Relative captioning score
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
Correctness (on Likert scale)
Measures
BLEU-4
CIDEr-D
METEOR
SPICE
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Relative captioning score
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
Detailedness (on Likert scale)
Measures
BLEU-4
CIDEr-D
METEOR
SPICE
Figure 4: Correctness (left) and detailedness (right) of
generated captions as a function of their captioning
scores.
Captions were generated using the UpDown [4]
captioning system. Correctness and detailedness of the gen-
erated captions were rated on a Likert scale (from 1 to 5) by
human annotators. The average correctness and detailed-
ness scores are 3.266 and 2.203, respectively.
annotators to evaluate the “detailedness” of captions (with-
out showing them the image) on the same Likert scale.
Figure 4 shows the resulting correctness and detailedness
assessments as a function of four captioning scores (BLEU-
4, CIDEr-D, METEOR, and SPICE) that were normalized
to lie between 0 and 1. The results in the ﬁgure suggest that
captioning scores do not correlate with the correctness of
generated captions very well, and do not encourage gener-
ated captions to provide a detailed description of the image.
Figure 3 shows three examples of generated captions that
have a low CIDEr-D score even though they are correct ac-
cording to human annotators. The examples highlight the
limitations of using a handful of reference captions to eval-
uate captioning systems: the reference captions do not cap-
ture all visual content and all the different ways in which
that content can be described [11, 40]. This leads captioning
measures to reward systems for generating generic captions.
3. The COCO-BISON Dataset
The goal of binary image selection (BISON) is to pro-
vide a reliable and interpretable evaluation task for systems
that relate images and text, with a focus on ﬁne-grained vi-
sual content. To this end, following [21], we collected BI-
SON annotations for the validation split of the COCO cap-
tions dataset [12].
3.1. Collection of BISON Annotations
Figure 5 illustrates the three main stages of our pipeline
for collecting binary image selection annotations.
1.
Collect pairs of semantically similar images.
We
construct a semantic representation for each image in the
COCO validation set by averaging word embeddings (ob-
tained using FastText [26]) of all the words in all captions
associated with the image. We use these representations to
ﬁnd the semantically most similar image for each image in
the dataset via nearest neighbor search. We label the query
image as positive and its nearest neighbor as negative.
2. Identify text queries that distinguish positive and neg-
ative images. We present human annotators with an inter-
face2 that shows: (1) a positive image, (2) the corresponding
negative image, and (3) the ﬁve captions associated with the
positive image in the COCO captions dataset. We ask the
annotators to select a text query from the set of ﬁve cap-
tions that describes the positive image but not the negative
image, or to select “none of the above” if no discriminative
text query exists. Unless annotators select the latter option,
each of their annotations produces a query-positive-negative
triple. We discard all image pairs for which annotators in-
dicated no discriminative text query exists.
3.
Verify correctness of the query-positive-negative
triples.
To ensure the validity of each query-positive-
negative triple, we presented a different set of human an-
notators with trials that contained the positive and negative
2Screenshots of the annotation interface in the supplementary material.

Stage 1: Find similar image pairs
Stage 2: Identify distinctive queries
Stage 3: Verify distinctive queries
FastText space
Red and purple ﬂowers in a vase.
Tennis player in a yellow shirt.
Plates with carrots and beets.
Purple ﬂowers next to a couch.
Potatoes and carrots on a plate.
A backpack with a tennis racket.
Please select a text query that describes the 
left but not the right image?
A blue vase ﬁlled with red ﬂowers sitting on a counter.
None of the above text queries are applicable.
Does the following query describe the left 
or the right image?
The query describes neither of the images.
The query describes both images.
The right image.
The left image.
Query:
A blue vase ﬁlled with red 
ﬂowers sitting on a counter.
Flowers in a vase.
Colored ﬂowers in a vase on a table.
The ﬂowers are very colorful.
A nice bouquet in a vase on a table.
Figure 5: Illustration of COCO-BISON dataset collection: We collect annotations for our binary image selection task on
top of the COCO Captions dataset. We ﬁrst ﬁnd pairs of semantically similar images based on the similarities between their
reference captions. Annotators then select a text query that describes only one of the images in a pair. Finally, we validate
the annotations by asking annotators to select the correct image given the text query. See Section 3 for details.
Flickr-30K COCO val COCO-BISON
Number of examples
5,070
202,654
54,253
Unique images
1,014
40,504
38,680
Unique captions
5,068
197,792
45,218
Table 2: Key statistics of the COCO-BISON dataset: The
statistics of the Flickr-30K [59] and COCO Captions [12]
validation sets are shown for reference.
images and the query selected in stage 2. We asked the an-
notators whether the text query describes3: (1) the positive
image, (2) the negative image, (3) both images, or (4) nei-
ther of the images. Each veriﬁcation trial was performed by
two annotators; we only accepted the corresponding BISON
example if both annotators correctly selected the positive
image given the text query.
The query-positive-negative triples thus collected form
binary image selection (BISON) examples, two of which
are shown in Figure 1.
The COCO-BISON dataset and
corresponding evaluation code is publicly available from
http://hexianghu.com/bison/.
3.2. Dataset Characteristics
Table 2 presents key statistics of our COCO-BISON
dataset; for reference, it also shows the statistics of the val-
idation splits of two popular captioning datasets. As shown
in the table, our three-stage annotation procedure produced
a BISON example for 38, 680 of the 40, 504 the images in
the COCO captions validation set (≈95.5%).
3In the veriﬁcation stage, the annotators do not know which image is
positive and which one is negative.
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Text-query length
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Proportion of captions (in %)
Dataset
COCO Captions
COCO-BISON
Adjective
Verb
Noun
Adverb
Word type
0
20
40
60
80
100
Proportion of words (in %)
17.1
23.0
57.2
 2.7
17.2
21.4
58.9
 2.5
Dataset
COCO Captions
COCO-BISON
Figure 6:
Statistics of COCO Captions and COCO-
BISON: Text-query length distribution (left) and part-of-
speech distribution (right) of captions in the datasets.
To ensure our collection procedure did not substantially
alter the text distribution of the COCO dataset, we compare4
the COCO and the COCO-BISON datasets in terms of cap-
tion / text query length and part-of-speech distribution in
Figure 6. The ﬁgure shows that, on average, COCO-BISON
queries tend to be slightly longer than COCO captions: an-
notators selected the longest captions ∼30% of the time in
the second stage of the dataset collection, presumably, be-
cause longer queries tend to be more detailed. However, the
part-of-speech distribution of the COCO-BISON queries is
very similar to that of COCO captions, facilitating experi-
ments in which image retrieval and captioning systems are
trained on COCO but evaluated on COCO-BISON.
3.3. Deﬁnition of the BISON Task
In the BISON task, the model is given two images and a
text query that describes one of the two images and asked to
4The word distribution and vocabulary overlap of both datasets is
shown in the supplementary material.

select the correct image; see Figure 1. The model’s perfor-
mance is measured in terms of binary classiﬁcation accu-
racy. We report the mean accuracy over the COCO-BISON
data and refer to it as the BISON score.
We only use
COCO-BISON for evaluation, i.e., we do not train systems
on the annotations in the COCO-BISON dataset.
Existing text-based image retrieval and image caption-
ing systems can be used to perform binary image selection.
Doing so requires computing a “compatibility” score be-
tween the text query and the two images, and picking the
image with the highest score. For image captioning sys-
tems, the compatibility score is generally deﬁned as the log-
likelihood of the text query given the image. Image retrieval
systems naturally compute the compatibility score, e.g., via
an inner product of the image and text features.
4. BISON Evaluation of State-of-the-Art
Captioning and Retrieval Systems
We evaluate four state-of-the-art text-based image re-
trieval systems and three recent image captioning systems
on binary image selection using the COCO-BISON dataset.
4.1. Evaluated Retrieval and Captioning Systems
We evaluate four systems for text-based image re-
trieval:
(1) ConvNet+BoW, (2) ConvNet+Bi-GRU, (3)
Obj+Bi-GRU, and (4) SCAN [34]. The ConvNet+BoW sys-
tem represents the text query by averaging word embed-
dings over all words in the query, and represents the im-
age by averaging features produced by a convolutional net-
work over regions (described later). The resulting repre-
sentations are processed separately by two multilayer per-
ceptrons (MLPs). We use the cosine similarity between the
outputs of the two MLPs as the image-text compatibility
score. The ConvNet+Bi-GRU system is identical to the pre-
vious system, but it follows [30] and uses a bi-directional
GRU [14] to construct the text representation. The Obj+Bi-
GRU system is similar to ConvNet+Bi-GRU but uses a Bi-
GRU to aggregate image-region features (spatial ConvNet
features or object proposal features) and construct the im-
age representation. Finally, SCAN [34] is a state-of-the-art
image-text matching system based on image-region features
and stacked cross-attention; we implement two variants of
this system, viz. one that uses image-to-text (i2t) attention
and one that uses text-to-image (t2i) attention. All retrieval
systems are trained to minimize a max-margin loss [17].
We also evaluate three image captioning systems: (1)
the ShowTell captioning system [56]; (2) an extension of
the ShowTell system that can attend to speciﬁc parts of the
image, called ShowAttTell [47, 58]; and (3) the state-of-the-
art UpDown captioning system [4]. Like ShowAttTell, the
UpDown system uses a spatial attention mechanism but it
differs from ShowAttTell in that it uses two LSTMs: one
Dataset →
COCO-1K [27]
COCO-BISON
Task →
Image retrieval Caption retrieval
Measure →

BISON
ConvNet+BoW
45.19
79.26
56.60
85.70
80.48
ConvNet+Bi-GRU [30] 49.34
82.22
61.16
89.02
81.75
Obj+Bi-GRU
53.97
85.26
66.86
91.40
83.90
SCAN i2t [34]
52.35
84.44
67.00
92.62
84.94
SCAN t2i [34]
54.10
85.58
67.50
92.98
85.89
Table 3: Performance of text-based image retrieval sys-

image retrieval and image-based caption retrieval on the
COCO-1K dataset (left) compared to the BISON accuracy
on the COCO-BISON dataset (right). See text for details.
for decoding captions and another one for generating spatial
attention over image features. We train all three captioning
systems on the COCO captions [12] training set by mini-
mizing the cross-entropy loss per word over a vocabulary
of 9, 487 words, and average the loss over all words in the
reference caption. Following common practice [4, 36, 47],
we also ﬁnetune the systems using self-critical sequence
training (SCST; [47]). SCST uses the REINFORCE algo-
rithm [53] to maximize the CIDEr-D score [55] of the cap-
tioning system. We report the performance of the caption-
ing systems both before and after SCST ﬁnetuning.
Implementation details. Following the current state-of-
the-art in image captioning [4, 34], all our systems use
the top 36 object proposal features produced by a Faster
R-CNN model [46] with a ResNet-101 backbone that was
trained on the ImageNet [49] and Visual Genome [32]
datasets. In all systems, word embeddings were initialized
randomly. We refer the reader to the supplementary ma-
terial for a complete overview of the hyperparameters we
used when training the systems.
4.2. Results
Table 7 presents the BISON accuracy of the text-based
image retrieval systems on the COCO-BISON dataset. For

k = 5) of these systems on a caption-based image retrieval
and an image-based caption retrieval task; these results were
obtained on the COCO-1K split of [27]. In line with prior
work [34], we ﬁnd that the SCANt2i system outperforms
the competing systems in terms of all quality measures.
As expected, we observe that the ranking of caption-
based retrieval systems in terms of their BISON accuracy
is similar to their ranking in terms of retrieval measures.
However, the BISON score provides a more reliable error
measure because it does not erroneously consider correct
retrievals to be incorrect just because another image hap-
pened to be labeled as the positive image for that query.
This is reﬂected in the fact that the BISON score of all sys-

Dataset →
COCO validation split
COCO-BISON
Measure →
BLEU-4 CIDEr SPICE METEOR
BISON
Cross-entropy loss
ShowTell [56]
32.35
97.20
18.34
25.51
78.59
ShowAttTell [58]
33.49
101.55
19.16
26.06
82.04
UpDown [4]
34.53
105.40
19.86
26.69
84.04
Self-critical sequence loss [47]
ShowTell [56]
32.38
97.88
18.42
25.68
78.79
ShowAttTell [58]
33.99
103.68
19.53
26.37
82.73
UpDown [4]
34.58
106.30
20.01
26.92
84.27
Human [1]
21.7⋆
85.4⋆
19.8⋆
25.2⋆
100.00
Table 4: Performance of image captioning systems: Four
captioning scores measured on the COCO validation set
(left) compared to the BISON accuracy on the COCO-
BISON dataset (right). Human performances marked with
⋆were measured on the COCO test set. See text for details.
scores are more reliable. We expect that the reliability of
evaluation measures becomes more important as the quality
of text-to-image matching systems increases: as error rates
decrease, measures with both low variance and bias become
essential to reliably compare systems.
Figure 7 displays two correct and two incorrect predic-
tions for BISON examples, obtained using the SCAN t2i
retrieval system. The examples illustrate the strong perfor-
mance of the system, but also highlight how it sometimes
fails to incorporate ﬁne-grained visual content in its predic-
tions, such as the color of the chairs or the presence of fog.
Table 6 presents the BISON accuracy of our three im-
age captioning systems on the COCO-BISON dataset. For
reference, the table also presents the performance of these
systems in terms of four standard captioning scores on the
standard COCO validation set, and the performance of hu-
man annotators on the COCO test set (adopted from [1]).
Again, the results reveal that the ranking of the three sys-
tems is identical across all evaluation scores, even though
BISON measures different aspects of the system than the
captioning scores. In line with prior work [50], we ﬁnd that
the UpDown captioning system outperforms its competitors
in terms of all evaluation measures, including BISON.
The main difference between BISON and existing cap-
tioning scores is in how they rank the ability of humans
to generate captions: all three systems outperform humans
in terms of nearly all captioning scores, but they all per-
form substantially worse than humans in terms of BISON
accuracy5. Unless one believes that current image caption-
ing systems actually exhibit super-human performance, this
suggests that measuring the BISON score of a system pro-
vides a more realistic assessment of the capabilities of mod-
ern image captioning systems compared to humans.
5Please note that the accuracy of humans on the BISON task is 100%
by deﬁnition due to the way the COCO-BISON dataset was collected.
COCO-BISON: Correct predictions
COCO-BISON: Incorrect predictions
Text query: Groups of people sitting at tables talking in blue chairs.
Text query: A woman holds her baby while a man covers them with an umbrella.
Text query: A woman with an umbrella is silhouetted on a foggy road.
Text query: A surfer rides a bright yellow surfboard in the waves.
Figure 7: Examples of COCO-BISON queries for which
correct predictions (top) and incorrect predictions (bot-
tom) were made: Predictions were performed by scoring
both images using the SCAN t2i [34] retrieval system and
selecting the highest-scoring image. The examples illustrate
the strong performance of the system, but also show how it
may fail to consider ﬁne-grained visual content.
5. Related Work
BISON is related to a variety of different tasks and ex-
perimental setups that involve matching visual and linguis-
tic information, including referring expressions [28, 31, 60],
visual story-telling [25], visual question answering [7, 38],
visual question generation [16, 39, 42], and zero-shot learn-
ing [2, 48].
A comprehensive overview of all this prior

work is outside the scope of this paper; we refer the reader
to [19] for a survey. Most of the related tasks are more “AI-
complete” than binary image selection in the sense that they
simultaneously assess a range of system abilities that go be-
yond matching visual content and textual descriptions.
BISON is most closely related to text-based image re-
trieval, image captioning, and referring expression tasks.
We give a brief overview of prior work on these tasks below.
Text-based image retrieval [9, 10, 20, 24, 45, 51] is a task
in which the system is asked to retrieve relevant images
given a text description. Retrieval performance is gener-

SON, caption-based image retrieval evaluates how well a
system can distinguish relevant images from irrelevant ones.
As described above, the key difference between image re-
trieval and BISON is that retrieval evaluations rely on “im-
plicit” negatives: retrieval datasets provide manually anno-
tated positive image-description pairs, but they assume that
every image-description pair that is not in the dataset is a
negative example. In practice, this assumption is often vi-
olated: many such image-description pairs would actually
be labeled positively by a human annotator [35]. In contrast
to retrieval datasets, each example in our COCO-BISON
dataset contains a positive and a genuinely negative image-
description pair, which facilitates more reliable evaluation.
Image captioning [6, 13, 18, 24, 27, 33, 56, 58] is a task in
which the system generates a textual description of an im-
age. The task assesses a system’s ability to ingest visual in-
formation in an image and generate ﬂuent natural language
descriptions of that information [12]. As a result, captioning
gauges not only visual understanding but also the generative
linguistic prowess of systems. In contrast, binary image se-
lection only measures the ability of a system to discriminate
between images based on a text description.
A recent line of work [5, 36, 54] focuses on generating
discriminative text descriptions for images. BISON is re-
lated to this work but it focuses solely on the discriminative
aspect of the task by not considering language generation.
This relates BISON to [52], which centers on predicting
whether or not text correctly describes an image pair.
Referring expressions [15, 28, 31, 41, 60] is a task in
which a system is asked to distinguish objects in a single im-
age based on a text description. BISON can thus be viewed
as a kind of holistic referring-expressions task that involves
between-image rather than within-image comparisons. In
contrast to referring expressions that focus on a single ob-
ject and its attributes, text descriptions in BISON may fo-
cus on groups of objects and their attributes, relationships
between these objects, and even entire scenes.
6. Using BISON to Analyze Systems
We performed experiments to study BISON evaluation
and the differences between text-based image retrieval and
0.00
0.18
0.36
0.55
0.73
0.91
BLEU-4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Proportion of examples (in %)
Correct BISON prediction
Incorrect BISON prediction
0.00
1.18
2.37
3.55
4.74
5.92
CIDEr-D
0
10
20
30
40
50
Correct BISON prediction
Incorrect BISON prediction
0.00
0.18
0.36
0.53
0.71
0.89
METEOR
0
10
20
30
40
50
Proportion of examples (in %)
Correct BISON prediction
Incorrect BISON prediction
0.00
0.13
0.26
0.39
0.52
0.65
SPICE
0
10
20
30
40
50
Correct BISON prediction
Incorrect BISON prediction
Figure 8: Distribution of captioning scores (BLEU-4,
CIDEr, METEOR, and SPICE) for correct and incorrect
BISON predictions: BISON predictions were made using
the UpDown captioning system [4], and captioning scores
were measured using the same system.
The captioning-
score distribution for BISON examples that were correctly
predicted is shown in pink; the distribution for incorrect BI-
SON predictions is shown in purple. The captioning-score
distribution is nearly identical between correct and incorrect
BISON predictions, suggesting that these scores measure
something very different than BISON accuracy.
image-captioning systems in more detail.
Does BISON accuracy predict captioning scores? We
evaluated the UpDown captioning system [4] in terms of
BISON accuracy and in terms of four captioning scores on
the COCO-BISON dataset. Figure 8 shows the distribution
of the captioning scores separately for BISON examples
that were classiﬁed correctly and for examples that were
incorrectly (by the same systems). Speciﬁcally, for each
COCO-BISON example that the model classiﬁes correctly
(or incorrectly), we generated a caption for the positive im-
age and measured the captioning score of the generated cap-
tion. If captioning scores measure the same characteristics
as BISON, one would expect the distribution of captioning
scores to center on higher values for correctly classiﬁed BI-
SON examples than for incorrectly classiﬁed BISON exam-
ples. However, the ﬁgure shows that distribution of all the
captioning scores is nearly identical for BISON examples
that were correctly and incorrectly classiﬁed. This result
suggests that BISON assesses different aspects of matching
visual and linguistic content than image captioning does.
Do caption score differences provide signal for BISON?
We try and classify BISON examples based on captioning

SCAN t2i
UpDown
Systems
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Altered BISON Prediction (in %)
 2.9
 5.3
 7.9
 9.2
 9.2
10.4
 5.3
20.3
 9.4
24.4
Alteration Type
Negation
Synonym
Hypernym
Permutation
Reverse
Figure 9: Changes in BISON prediction under automatic
text-query perturbations.
Percentage of predictions by
the SCAN t2i retrieval and UpDown captioning systems on
COCO-BISON that are changed when words in the query
are permuted or the query is negated etc.
Results show
that the retrieval model largely ignores word order, and both
models largely ignore negations.
scores for the positive and negative images in those exam-
ples.
Speciﬁcally, we compute a captioning score (e.g.,
BLEU-4) between the BISON text query and the COCO
reference captions corresponding to both the positive and
negative BISON images. When computing the score for the
positive image, we remove the text query from the set of ref-
erence captions; for the negative image, we randomly select
four captions from the reference captions (without replace-
ment). Next, we select the image with the highest caption-
ing score as prediction for the BISON example.
The BISON accuracy of this approach is 70.73% for
BLEU-4, 70.78% for CIDEr-D, 74.44% for METEOR, and
62.79% for SPICE. This result shows that predictions based
on captioning scores select the incorrect BISON image at
least 25% of the time, despite relying on access to the
ground-truth reference captions. This low accuracy sug-
gests that BISON and captioning scores are very different
measures for matching textual and visual content.
How do text-query alterations alter BISON predictions?
We performed experiments where we altered the COCO-
BISON text queries by doing the following automatic per-
turbations: (1) negating the query; replacing the words by
(2) synonyms (3) hypernyms; (4) permuting the word order
and (5) reversing the word order in the query (see details
in the supplementary material). We measured the percent-
age of BISON predictions that were changed by these query
perturbations for both the retrieval and captioning systems.
These changes give more insights into the differences be-
tween retrieval and captioning systems. Figure 9 shows that
the BISON predictions of retrieval and captioning systems
do not change much under negation. Retrieval systems are
also more robust to changes in the word order than cap-
tioning systems. This suggests that captioning systems are
more sensitive to the ﬂuency of a text query. We report this
analysis for other systems in the supplementary material.
7. Discussion
This study has developed binary image selection (BI-
SON) as an alternative task for evaluating the performance
of systems that relate visual and linguistic content. Our
study shows that BISON solves the issues of text-based
image retrieval tasks that erroneously assume that all un-
labeled images are negative examples for the text query,
and that it assesses a different set of capabilities than im-
age captioning tasks. Compared to text-based image re-
trieval, BISON has the advantage that the evaluation is more
reliable, easily interpretable, and that it focuses more on
“ﬁne-grained” visual content. This focus on ﬁne-grained
visual information is also in contrast to image captioning
tasks that encourage the generation of “generic” descrip-
tions. In a sense, BISON can be viewed as a variant of
referring-expressions tasks that considers images “holisti-
cally” rather than focusing on image parts. However, the
BISON paradigm also has disadvantages compared to tasks
such as image captioning: for instance, it does not assess
the ﬂuency of the linguistic content. Therefore, we view bi-
nary image selection as an evaluation task that ought to be
used in conjunction with other evaluation tasks, such as the
image retrieval, image captioning, and referring expression
tasks (see Section 5 for an overview).
We observed that the relative ranking of modern systems
in terms of retrieval or captioning scores is nearly identi-
cal to the ranking of those systems in terms of BISON. A
potential explanation for this observation may be that some
systems are unequivocally better than others: for instance, if
system A has an image-recognition component that is sub-
stantially better than the image-recognition component of
system B, it is quite likely that system A will outperform
system B in a very wide range of tasks involving vision
and language. We do emphasize, however, that it is well
possible that the observed rank correlation between cap-
tioning and BISON scores may no longer hold when re-
searchers start designing systems with the BISON evalua-
tion in mind. Results comparing the performance of hu-
mans with that of our systems underline this point: exist-
ing captioning scores suggest that systems possess super-
human capabilities, which contradicts human assessments
of the quality of these systems. By contrast, the BISON
scores of current systems appear to be better aligned with
human assessments of the quality of these systems.
To conclude, we hope that the binary image selection
task will foster research into models that go beyond coarse-
level matching of visual and linguistic content by reward-
ing systems that can perform visual grounding at a detailed

level. The interpretability of BISON makes it easier to de-
bug and analyze this visual grounding. We hope that the
public release of the COCO-BISON dataset will help the
community assess whether we are making progress towards
the goal of developing such systems.
