Onto2Vec: joint vector-based representation of biological entities and
their ontology-based annotations
Fatima Zohra Smaili1, Xin Gao1,*, Robert Hoehndorf1,*,
1 Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division,
Computational Bioscience Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology, Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia.

Abstract
Motivation: Biological knowledge is widely represented in the form of ontology-based annotations:
ontologies describe the phenomena assumed to exist within a domain, and the annotations associate a
(kind of) biological entity with a set of phenomena within the domain. The structure and information
contained in ontologies and their annotations makes them valuable for developing machine learning,
data analysis and knowledge extraction algorithms; notably, semantic similarity is widely used to
identify relations between biological entities, and ontology-based annotations are frequently used as
features in machine learning applications.
Results: We propose the Onto2Vec method, an approach to learn feature vectors for biological
entities based on their annotations to biomedical ontologies. Our method can be applied to a wide
range of bioinformatics research problems such as similarity-based prediction of interactions between
proteins, classification of interaction types using supervised learning, or clustering. To evaluate
Onto2Vec, we use the Gene Ontology (GO) and jointly produce dense vector representations of
proteins, the GO classes to which they are annotated, and the axioms in GO that constrain these
classes. First, we demonstrate that Onto2Vec-generated feature vectors can significantly improve
prediction of protein-protein interactions in human and yeast. We then illustrate how Onto2Vec
representations provide the means for constructing data-driven, trainable semantic similarity measures
that can be used to identify particular relations between proteins. Finally, we use an unsupervised
clustering approach to identify protein families based on their Enzyme Commission numbers. Our
results demonstrate that Onto2Vec can generate high quality feature vectors from biological entities
and ontologies. Onto2Vec has the potential to significantly outperform the state-of-the-art in several
predictive applications in which ontologies are involved.
Availability: https://github.com/bio-ontology-research-group/onto2vec

1
Introduction
Biological knowledge is available across a large number of resources and in several formats. These
resources capture different and often complementary aspects of biological phenomena. Over the
years, researchers have been working on representing this knowledge in a more structured and formal
way by creating biomedical ontologies [6]. Ontologies provide the means to formally structure the
classes and relations within a domain, and are now employed by a wide range of biological databases,
webservices, and file formats to provide semantic metadata [20].
Notably, ontologies are used for the annotation of biological entities such as genomic variants,
genes and gene products, or chemicals, to classify their biological activities and associations [38]. An
1
arXiv:1802.00864v1  [q-bio.QM]  31 Jan 2018

annotation is an association of a biological entity (or a class of biological entities) and one or more
classes from an ontology, usually together with meta-data about the source and evidence for the
association, the author, etc. [17].
Due to the wide-spread use of ontologies, several methods have been developed to utilize the
information in ontologies for data analysis [20]. In particular, a wide range of semantic similarity
measures has been developed [32] and applied to the similarity-based analysis of ontologies and
entities annotated with them. Semantic similarity is a measure defined over an ontology, and can
be used to measure the similarity between two or more ontology classes, sets of classes, or entities
annotated with sets of ontology classes.
Semantic similarity measures can be classified into different types depending on how annotations
(or instances) of ontology classes are incorporated or weighted, and the type of information from an
ontology that is used to determine similarity [16,32]. Most similarity measures treat ontologies as
graphs in which nodes represent classes and edges an axiom involved the connected classes [16,32].
However, not all the axioms in an ontology can naturally be represented as graphs [18,35,37]. A
possible alternative may be to consider all axioms in an ontology when computing semantic; the
challenge is to determine how each axiom should contribute to determine similarity beyond merely
considering their syntactic similarity.
In addition to similarity-based analysis, ontology-based annotations are frequently used in machine
learning approaches. Ontology-based annotations can be encoded as binary vectors representing
whether or not an entity is associated with a particular class, and the semantic content in ontologies
(i.e., the subclass hierarchy) can be used to generate “semantically closed” feature vectors [39].
Alternatively, the output of semantic similarity measures is widely used as features for machine
learning applications, for example in drug repurposing systems [14] or identification of causative
genomic variants [8, 34]. Both of these approaches have in common that the features generated
through them contain no explicit information about the structure of the ontology and therefore of the
dependencies between the different features; these dependencies are therefore no longer available as
features for a machine learning algorithm. In the case of semantic similarity measures, the information
in the ontology is used to define the similarity but the information used to define the similarity is
subsequently reduced to a single point (the similarity value); in the case of binary feature vectors,
the ontology structure is used to generate the values of the feature vector but is subsequently no
longer present or available to a machine learning algorithm. Feature vectors that explicitly encode
for both the ontology structure and an entity’s annotations would contain more information than
either information alone and may perform significantly better in machine learning applications than
alternative approaches.
Finally, semantic similarity measures are generally hand-crafted, i.e., they are designed by an
expert based on a set of assumptions about how an ontology is used and what should constitute a
similarity. However, depending on the application of semantic similarity, different features may be
more or less relevant to define the notion of similarity. It has previously been observed that different
similarity measures perform well on some datasets and tasks, and worse on others [23,24,31,32],
without any measure showing clear superiority across multiple tasks. One possible way to define a
common similarity measure that performs equally well on multiple tasks may be to establish a way
to train a semantic similarity measure in a data-driven way. While this is not always possible due to
the absence of training data, when a set of desired outcomes (i.e., labelled data points) are available,
such an approach may result in better and more intuitive similarity measures than hand-crafted ones.
We develop Onto2Vec, a novel method to jointly produce dense vector representations of biological
entities, their ontology-based annotations, and the ontology structure used for annotations. We apply
our method to the Gene Ontology (GO) [2] and generate dense vector representations of proteins
and their GO annotations. We demonstrate that Onto2Vec generates vectors that can outperform
traditional semantic similarity measures in the task of similarity-based prediction of protein-protein
interactions; we also show how to use Onto2Vec to train a semantic similarity measure in a data-
driven way, and use this to predict protein-protein interactions and distinguish between the types of
interactions. We further apply Onto2Vec-generated vectors to clustering and show that the generated
clusters reproduce Enzyme Commission numbers of proteins. The Onto2Vec method is generic and can
2

be applied to any set of entities and their ontology-based annotations, and we make our implementation
freely available at https://github.com/bio-ontology-research-group/onto2vec.
2
Results
2.1
Onto2Vec
We developed Onto2Vec, a method to learn dense, vector-based representations of classes in ontologies,
and the biological entities annotated with classes from ontologies. To generate the vector represen-
tations, we combined symbolic inference (i.e., automated reasoning) and statistical representation
learning. We first generated vector-based representations of the classes in an ontology, and then
extended our result to generate representations of biological entities annotated with these classes.
The vector-based representations generated by Onto2Vec provide the foundation for machine learning
and data analytics applications, including semantic similarity applications.
Our main contribution with Onto2Vec is a method to learn a representation of individual classes
(and other entities) in an ontology, taking into account all the axioms in an ontology that may
contribute to the semantics of a class, either directly or indirectly. Onto2Vec uses an ontology O
in the OWL format, and applies the HermiT OWL reasoner [36] to infer new logical axioms (i.e.,
equivalent class axioms, subclass axioms, and disjointness axioms)(More technical details on the
automated reasoning can be found in Section 5.2). We call the union of the set of axioms in O
and the set of inferred axioms the deductive closure of O, designated O⊢. In contrast to treating
ontologies as taxonomies or graph-based structures [35], we assume that every axiom in O (and
consequently in O⊢) constitutes a sentence, and the set of axiom in O (and O⊢) a corpus of sentences.
The vocabulary of this corpus consists of the classes and relations that occur in O as well as the
keywords used to formulate the OWL axioms [15,43]. Onto2Vec then uses a skip-gram model to
learn a representation of each word that occurs in the corpus. The representation of a word in the
vocabulary (and therefore of a class or property in O) is a vector that is predictive of words occurring
within a context window [26,27](More technical details on the representation learning can be found
in Section 5.2).
Onto2Vec can also be used to learn vector-based representations of biological entities that use
ontologies for annotation and combine information about the entities’ annotations as well as the
semantics of the classes used in the annotation in a single representation. Trivially, since Onto2Vec
can generate representations of single classes in an ontology, an entity annotated with n classes,
C1, ..., Cn, can be represented as a (linear) combination of the vector representations of these classes.
For example, if an entity e is annotated with C1 and C2, and ν(C1) and ν(C2) are the representations
of C1 and C2 generated through Onto2Vec, we can use ν(C1) + ν(C2) as a representation of e.
Alternatively, we can use Onto2Vec directly to generate a representation of e by extending the axioms
in O with additional axioms that explicitly capture the semantics of the annotation. If O′ is the
ontology generated from annotations of e by adding new axioms capturing the semantics of the
annotation relation to O, then e is a new class or instance in O′ for which Onto2Vec will generate a
representation (since e will become a word in the corpus of axioms generated from O′⊢).
As comprehensive use case, we applied our method to the GO, and to a joint knowledge base
consisting of GO and proteins with manual GO annotations obtained from the UniProt database.
To generate the latter knowledge base, we added proteins as new entities and connected them
using a has-function relation to their functions. We then applied Onto2Vec to generate vector
representations for each class in GO (using a corpus based only on the axioms in GO), and further
generate joint representations of proteins and GO classes (using a corpus based on the axioms in GO
and proteins, and their annotations). We further generated protein representations by combining
(i.e., adding) the GO class vectors of the proteins’ GO annotations (i.e., if a protein p is annotated
to C1, ..., Cn and ν(C1), ..., ν(C2) are the Onto2Vec-vectors generated for C1, ..., Cn, we define the
representation ν(p) of p as ν(p) = ν(C1) + ... + ν(Cn)). In total, we generated 556,388 vectors
representing proteins (each protein is represented three times, either as a set of GO class vectors,
the sum of GO class vectors, or a vector jointly generated from representing has-function relations
3

Figure 1: Onto2Vec Workflow. The blue-shaded part illustrates the steps to obtain vector repre-
sentation for classes from the ontology. The purple-shaded part shows the steps to obtain vector
representations of ontology classes and the entities annotated to these classes.
in our knowledge base), and 43,828 vectors representing GO classes. Figure 1 illustrates the main
Onto2Vec workflow to construct ontology-based vector representations of classes and entities.
2.2
Similarity-based prediction of biological relations
Yeast
Human
Resnik
0.7942
0.7891
Onto2V ec
0.7701
0.7614
Onto2V ec NoReasoner
0.7439
0.7385
Binary GO
0.6912
0.6712
Onto BMA
0.6741
0.6470
Onto AddV ec
0.7139
0.7093
Onto2V ec LR
0.7959
0.7785
Onto2V ec SV M
0.8586
0.8621
Onto2V ec NN
0.8869
0.8931
Binary GO LR
0.7009
0.7785
Binary GO SV M
0.8253
0.8068
Binary GO NN
0.7662
0.7064
Table 1: AUC values of ROC curves for PPI prediction. The best AUC value among all methods is
shown in bold. Resnik is a semantic similarity measure; Onto2Vec is our method in which protein and
ontology class representations are learned jointly from a single knowledgebase which is deductively
closed; Onto2Vec NoReasoner is identical to Onto2Vec but does not use the deductive closure of the
knowledge base; Binary GO represents a protein’s GO annotations as a binary vector (closed against
the GO structure); Onto BMA only generates vector representations for GO classes and compares
proteins by comparing their GO annotations individually using cosine similarity and averaging
individual values using the Best Match Average approach; Onto AddVec sums GO class vectors to
represent a protein. The methods with suffix LR, SVM, and NN use logistic regression, a support vector
machine, and an artificial neural network, respectively, either on the Onto2Vec or the Binary GO
protein representations.
We applied the vectors generated for proteins and GO classes to the prediction of protein-protein
interactions by functional, semantic similarity. As a first experiment, we evaluated the accuracy
4

(a) Human
(b) Yeast
Figure 2: ROC curves for PPI prediction for the unsupervised learning methods
of Onto2Vec in predicting protein-protein interactions. For this purpose, we generated several
representations of proteins: first, we used Onto2Vec to learn representations of proteins jointly
with representations of GO classes by adding proteins and their annotations to the GO using the
has-function relations; second, we represented proteins as the sum of the vectors representing the
classes to which they are annotated; and third, we represented proteins as the set of classes to which
they are annotated.
We used cosine similarity to determine the similarity between vectors. To compare sets of vectors
(representing GO classes) to each other, we used the Best Match Average (BMA) approach [32], where
pairs of vectors are compared using cosine similarity. We term the approach in which we compared
vectors generated from adding proteins to our knowledge base Onto2Vec; Onto AddVec when using
cosine similarity between protein vectors generated by adding the vectors of the GO classes to which
they annotated; and Onto BMA when using the BMA approach to compare sets of GO classes. To
compare the different approaches for using Onto2Vec to the established baseline methods, we further
applied the Resnik’s semantic similarity measure [33] with the BMA approach, and we generated
sparse binary vector representations from proteins’ GO annotations [39] and compared them using
cosine similarity (termed Binary GO) (more technical details on the similarity measures used in
Section 5.4). Furthermore, to evaluate the contribution of using an automated reasoner to infer
axioms, we also included the results of using the Onto2Vec approach without applying a reasoner. We
evaluated the performance of our method using protein-protein interaction datasets in two species,
human (H. sapiens) and baker’s yeast (S. cerevisiae). Figure 2 shows the ROC curves obtained for
each approach on the human and the yeast datasets; the area under the ROC curve (ROCAUC)
values are shown in Table 1. We found that Resnik’s semantic similarity measure performs better
than all other methods we evaluated, and that the Onto2Vec representation based on generating
representations jointly from proteins and GO classes performs second best. These results demonstrate
that Resnik’s semantic similarity measure, which determines similarity based on the information
content of ontology classes as well as the ontology structure, is better suited for this application than
our Onto2Vec representations using cosine similarity.
However, a key feature of Onto2Vec representations is their ability to encode for annotations and
the ontology structure; while cosine similarity (and the derived measures) can determine whether two
5

(a) Human
(b) Yeast
Figure 3: ROC curves for PPI prediction for the supervised learning methods in addition to Resnik
measure
proteins are similar, certain classes and axioms may contribute more to predicting protein-protein
interactions than others. To test whether we can use the information in Onto2Vec representations in
such a way, we used supervised machine learning to train a similarity measure that is predictive of
protein-protein interactions. To this end we used three different machine learning methods, logistic
regression, support vector machines (SVMs), and neural networks (more technical details available
in Section 5.5). To obtain a baseline comparison, we also trained each model using the Binary GO
protein representations.
Each model uses a pair of protein vectors as inputs and is trained to predict whether the proteins
provided as input interact or not. Each supervised model also outputs intermediate confidence
values and can therefore be considered to output a form of similarity. The ROC curves of all trained
models using the Onto2Vec and binary representations of proteins are shown in Figure 3, and
their ROCAUC values are reported in Table 1. We observed that the supervised models (i.e., the
“trained” semantic similarity measures) using Onto2Vec protein representations outperform the use of
pre-defined similarity measures in all experiments; while logistic regression performs comparable to
Resnik semantic similarity, both SVMs and artificial neural networks can learn similarity measures
that predict protein-protein interactions significantly better than any pre-defined similarity measure.
Onto2Vec representations further outperform the sparse binary representations of protein functions,
indicating that the combination of annotations and ontology axioms indeed results in improved
predictive performance. We further tested whether the supervised models (i.e., the trained semantic
similarity measures) can be used as similarity measures so that higher similarity values represent
more confidence in the existence of an interaction. We used the confidence scores associated with
protein-protein interactions in the STRING database and determined the correlation between the
prediction score of our trained models and the confidence score in STRING. Table 2 summarizes the
Spearman correlation coefficients for each of the methods we evaluated. We found that our trained
similarity measures correlate more strongly with the confidence measures provided by STRING than
other methods, thereby providing further evidence that Onto2Vec representations encode useful
information that is predictive of protein-protein interactions. Finally, we trained our models to
separate protein-protein interactions into different interaction types, as classified by the STRING
6

Yeast
Human
Resnik
0.1107
0.1151
Onto2V ec
0.1067
0.1099
Binary GO
0.1021
0.1031
Onto2V ec LR
0.1424
0.1453
Onto2V ec SV M
0.2245
0.2621
Onto2V ec NN
0.2516
0.2951
Binary GO LR
0.1121
0.1208
Binary GO SV M
0.1363
0.1592
Binary GO NN
0.1243
0.1616
Table 2: Spearman correlation coefficients between STRING confidence scores and PPI prediction
scores of different prediction methods.
The highest absolute correlation across all methods is
highlighted in bold.
database: reaction, activation, binding, and catalysis. For comparison, we also reported results when
using sparse binary representations of proteins in the supervised models, and we reported Resnik
semantic similarity and Onto2Vec similarity results (using cosine similarity). Table 3 summarizes
the results. While Resnik semantic similarity and Onto2Vec similarity cannot distinguish between
different types of interaction, we find that the supervised models, in particular the multiclass SVM
and artificial neural network, are capable when using Onto2Vec vector representations to distinguish
between different types of interaction. In addition, the Onto2Vec representations perform better than
sparse binary vectors, indicating further that encoding parts of the ontology structure can improve
predictive performance.
Yeast
Human
Reaction
Activation
Binding
Catalysis
Reaction
Activation
Binding
Catalysis
Resnik
0.5811
0.6023
0.5738
0.5792
0.5341
0.5331
0.5233
0.5810
Onto2V ec
0.5738
0.5988
0.5611
0.5814
0.5153
0.5104
0.5073
0.6012
Onto2V ec LR
0.7103
0.7011
0.6819
0.6912
0.7091
0.6951
0.6722
0.6853
Onto2V ec multiSV M
0.7462
0.7746
0.7311
0.7911
0.7351
0.7583
0.7117
0.7724
Onto2V ec NN
0.7419
0.7737
0.7423
0.7811
0.7265
0.7568
0.7397
0.7713
Binary GO LR
0.6874
0.6611
0.6214
0.6433
0.6151
0.6533
0.6018
0.6189
Binary GO multiSV M
0.7455
0.7346
0.7173
0.7738
0.7246
0.7132
0.6821
0.7422
Binary GO NN
0.7131
0.6934
0.6741
0.6838
0.6895
0.6803
0.6431
0.6752
Table 3: AUC values of the ROC curves for PPI interaction type prediction. The best AUC value for
each action is shown in bold.
2.3
Clustering and visualization
Onto2Vec representations can not only be used to compute semantic similarity or form part of
supervised models, but can also provide the foundation for visualization and unsupervised clustering.
The ability to identify sets of biological entities which are more similar to each other within a dataset
can be used for clustering and identifying groups of related biological entities. We visualized the GO-
based vector representations of proteins generated by Onto2Vec. Since the Onto2Vec representations
are of a high dimensionality, we applied the t-SNE dimensionality reduction [25] to the vectors and
represented 10,000 randomly chosen enzyme proteins in Figure 4 (We refer the readers to section 5.7
for more technical details in t-SNE ).
The visual representation of the enzymes shows that the proteins are separated and form different
functional groups. To explore what kind of information these groups represent, we identified the EC
number for each enzyme and colored the enzymes in six different groups depending on their top-level
EC category. We found that some of the groups that are visually separable represent mainly enzymes
within a single EC top-level category. To quantify whether Onto2Vec similarity is representative
of EC categorization, we applied k-means clustering (k = 6) to the protein representations. We
7

Figure 4: t-SNE visualization of 10,000 enzyme vectors color-coded by their first level EC category
(1,2,3,4,5 or 6).
8

evaluated cluster purity with respect to EC top-level classification and found that the purity is
0.42; when grouping enzymes based on their second-level EC classification (k = 62), cluster purity
increases to 0.60.
3
Discussion
3.1
Ontologies as graphs and axioms
We have developed Onto2Vec, a novel method for learning feature vectors for entities in ontologies.
There have been several recent related efforts that use unsupervised learning to generate dense
feature vectors for structured and semantically represented data. Notably, there is a large amount of
work on knowledge graph embeddings [7,29,30], i.e., a set of feature learning methods applicable to
nodes in heterogeneous graphs, such as those defined by Linked Data [9]. These methods can be
applied to predict new relations between entities in a knowledge graph, perform similarity-based
predictions, reason by analogy, or in clustering [28]. However, while some parts of ontologies, such
as their underlying taxonomy or partonomy, can naturally be expressed as graphs in which edges
represent well-defined axiom patterns [18,37], it is challenging to represent the full semantic content
of ontologies in such a way [35].
It is possible to materialize the implicit, inferred content of formally represented knowledge bases
through automated reasoning, and there is a long history in applying machine learning methods to the
deductive closure of a formalized knowledge base [4,42]. Similar approaches have also been applied
to knowledge graphs that contain references to classes in ontologies [1]. However, these approaches
are still limited to representing only the axioms that have a materialization in a graph-based format.
Onto2Vec is, to the best of our knowledge, the first approach which applies feature learning to
arbitrary OWL axioms in biomedical ontologies and includes a way to incorporate an ontology’s
deductive closure in the feature learning process. While Onto2Vec can be used to learn feature
representations from graph-structures (by representing graph edges as axioms, or triples), the opposite
direction is not true; in particular axioms involving complex class expressions, axioms involving
disjointness, and axioms involving object property restrictions, are naturally included by Onto2Vec
while they are mostly ignored in feature learning methods that rely on graphs alone.
3.2
Towards “trainable” semantic similarity measures
Another related area of research is the use of semantic similarity measures in biology. Onto2Vec
generates feature representations of ontology classes, or entities annotated with several ontology
classes, and we demonstrate how to use vector similarity as a measure of semantic similarity. In our
experiments, we were able to almost match the performance of an established semantic similarity
measure [33] when using cosine similarity to compare proteins. It is traditionally challenging to
evaluate semantic similarity measures, and their performances differ between biological problems
and datasets [23, 24, 31, 32]. The main advantage of Onto2Vec representations is their ability to
be used in trainable similarity measures, i.e., problem- and dataset-specific similarity measures
generated in a supervised way from the available data. The training overcomes a key limitation
in manually created semantic similarity measures: the inability to judge a priori how each class
and relation (i.e., axiom) should contribute to determining similarity. For example, for predicting
protein-protein interactions, it should be more relevant that two proteins are active in the same
(or neighboring) cellular component than that they both have the ability to regulate other proteins.
Trainable similarity measures, such as those based on Onto2Vec, can identify the importance of
certain classes (and combinations of classes) with regard to a particular predictive task and therefore
improve predictive performance significantly.
Furthermore, Onto2Vec does not only determine how classes, or their combinations, should be
weighted in a similarity computation. Semantic similarity measures use an ontology as background
knowledge to determine the similarity between two (sets of) classes; how the ontology is used is pre-
determined and constitutes the main distinguishing feature among semantic similarity measures [32].
9

Since Onto2Vec vectors represent both an entity’s annotations and (parts of) the ontology structure,
the way in which this structure is used to compute similarity can also be determined in a data-driven
way through the use of supervised learning; it may even be different between certain branches of an
ontology. We demonstrate that supervised measures outperform binary representations, which shows
that combining ontology-based annotations and the ontology structure in a single representation has
clear advantages.
4
Conclusions
Onto2Vec is a method that combines neural and symbolic methods in biology, and demonstrates
significant improvement over state-of-the-art methods. There is now an increasing interest in the
integration of neural and symbolic approaches to artificial intelligence [5]. In biology and biomedicine,
where a large amount of symbolic structures (ontologies and knowledge graphs) are in use, there are
many potential applications for neural-symbolic systems [19].
The current set of methods for knowledge-driven analysis (i.e., analysis methods that specifically
incorporate symbolic structures and their semantics) in biology is limited to ontology enrichment
analysis [40], applications of semantic similarity [32], and, to a lesser degree, network-based approaches
[10]. With Onto2Vec, we introduce a new method in the semantic analysis toolbox, specifically
targeted at computational biology and the analysis of datasets in which ontologies are used for
annotation. While we already demonstrate how Onto2Vec representations can be used to improve
predictive models for protein-protein interactions, additional experiments with other ontologies will
likely identify more areas of applications. We expect that future research on neural-symbolic systems
will further extend our results and enable more comprehensive analysis of symbolic representations
in biology and biomedicine.
5
Materials and Methods
5.1
Data set
We downloaded the Gene Ontology (GO) in OWL format from the Gene Ontology Consortium
Website (http://www.geneontology.org/ontology/) on 2017-09-13. We obtained the GO protein
annotations from the UniProt-GOA website (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA) on 2017-09-26.
We
filtered all automatically assigned GO annotations (with evidence code IEA as well as ND) which
results in 5.5 × 106 GO annotations.
We obtained the protein-protein interaction networks for both yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae),
and humans (Homo sapiens) from the STRING database [41] (http://string-db.org/) on 2017-
09-16. The human protein dataset contains 19,577 proteins and 11,353,057 interactions while the
yeast dataset contains 6,392 proteins and 2,007,135 interactions. We extracted Enzyme Commission
(EC) number annotations for 10,000 proteins from Expasy [12] (ftp://ftp.expasy.org/databases/
enzyme/enzyme.dat) on 2017-10-4.
5.2
Automated reasoning
We used the OWL API version 4.2.6 [21] to process the GO in OWL format [13]. Our version of
GO contains 577,454 logical axioms and 43,828 classes. We used the HermiT reasoner (version
1.3.8.413) [36] to infer new logical axioms from the asserted ones. We used HermiT as it supports
all OWL 2 DL axioms and has been optimized for large ontologies [36]. These optimizations make
HermiT relatively fast which is particularly helpful when dealing with ontologies of the size of GO.
We infer three types of axioms: subsumption, equivalence and disjointness, resulting in 80,133 new
logical axioms that are implied by GO’s axioms and materialized through HermiT.
10

5.3
Representation learning using Word2Vec
We treated an ontology as a set of axioms, each of which constitutes a sentence. To process the axioms
syntactically, we used the Word2Vec [26,27] methods. Word2Vec is a set of neural-network based
tools which generate vector representations of words from large corpora. The vector representations
are obtained in such a way that words with similar contexts tend to be close to each other in the
vector space.
Word2Vec can use two distinct models: the continuous bag of word (CBOW), which uses a
context to predict a target word, and the skip-gram model which tries to maximize the classification
of a word based on another word from the same sentence. The main advantage of the CBOW model
is that it smooths over a lot of the distributional information by treating an entire context as one
observation, while the skip-gram model treats each context-target as a new observation, which works
better for larger datasets. The skip-gram model has the added advantage of producing higher quality
representation of rare words in the corpus [26,27]. Here, we chose the skip-gram architecture since it
meets our need to produce high quality representations of all biological entities occurring in our large
corpus, including infrequent ones. Formally, given a sequence of training words ω1, ω2, ..., ωT , the
skip-gram model aims to maximize the following average log likelihood:
1
T
T
X
t=1
X
−c≤j≤c,j̸=0
log p(ωt+j|ωt),
(1)
where c is the size of the training context, T is the size of the set of the training words and ωi is
the i-th training word in the sequence. We identified an optimal set of parameters of the skip-gram
model through limited gridsearch on the following parameters: the size of the output vectors on the
interval [50–250] using a step size of 50, the number of iterations on the interval [3-5] and negative
sampling on the interval [2-5] using a step size of 1. Table 1 shows the parameter values we used for
the skip-gram in our work.
Parameter
Definition
Default value
sg
Choice of training algorithm
sg= 1 skip-gram
sg= 0 CBOW
1
size
Dimension of the obtained vectors
200
min count
Words with frequency lower than this value
will be ignored
1
window
Maximum distance between the current and
the predicted word
10
iter
Number of iterations
5
negative
Whether negative sampling will be used and
how many “noise words” would be drawn
4
Table 4: Parameter we use for training the Word2Vec model.
5.4
Similarity
We used cosine similarity to determine similarity between feature vectors generated by Onto2Vec.
The cosine similarity, cossim, between two vectors A and B is calculated as
cossim(A, B) =
A · B
||A||||B||,
(2)
where A · B is the dot product of A and B.
11

We used Resnik’s semantic similarity measure [33] as the baseline for comparison. Resnik’s
semantic similarity measure is widely used in biology [32]. It is based on the notion of information
content which quantifies the specificity of a given class in the ontology. The information content
of a class c is defined as the negative log likelihood, −log p(c), where p(c) is the probability of
encountering an instance or annotation of class c. Given this definition of information content, Resnik
similarity is formally defined as:
sim(c1, c2) = −log p(cMICA),
(3)
where cMICA is the most informative common ancestor of c1 and c2 in the ontology hierarchy, defined
as the common ancestor of c1 and c2 with the highest information content value. Resnik’s similarity
measure only measures the similarity between two ontology classes. We applied the Best Match
Average (BMA) method [3] to compute the similarity between two sets of classes. For two biological
entities e1 and e2, the BMA is defined as:
BMA(e1, e2) = 1
2

1
n
P
c1∈S1 maxc2∈S2 sim(c1, c2) + 1
m
P
c2∈S2 maxc1∈S1 sim(c1, c2)

,
(4)
where S1 is the set of ontology concepts that e1 is annotated with, S2 is the set of concepts that e2
is annotated with, and sim(c1, c2) is the similarity value between concept c1 and concept c2, which
could have been calculated using Resnik similarity or any other semantic similarity measure (e.g.,
cosine similarity).
5.5
Supervised Learning
We used supervised learning to train a similarity measure between two entities that is predictive
of protein-protein interactions. We applied our method to two datasets, one for protein–protein
interactions in yeast and another in human. We filtered the STRING database and kept only proteins
with experimental annotations which is a total of 18,836 proteins in the human dataset and 6,390
proteins in the yeast dataset. We randomly split each dataset into 70% and 30% for training and
testing respectively . The positive pairs are all those reported in the STRING database, while the
negative pairs are randomly sub-sampled among all the pairs not occurring in STRING, in such a
way that the cardinality of the positive set and that of the negative set are equal for both the testing
and the training datasets.
We used logistic regression, support vector machines (SVMs), and artificial neural networks
(ANNs) to train a classifier for protein-protein interactions. We trained each of these methods by
providing a pair of proteins (represented through their feature vectors) as input and predicting
whether the pair interacts or not. The output of each method varies between 0 and 1, and we used
the prediction output as a similarity measure between the two inputs.
Logistic regression does not require any selection of parameters. We used the SVM with a linear
kernel and sequential minimal optimization. Our ANN structure is a feed-forward network with
four layers: the first layer contains 400 input units; the second and third layers are hidden layers
which contain 800 and 200 neurons, respectively; and the fourth layer contains one output neuron.
We optimized parameters using a limited manual search based on best practice guidelines [22]. We
optimized the ANN using binary cross entropy as the loss function.
In addition to binary classification, we also trained multi-class classifiers to predict the type
of interaction between two types of proteins. We used a multi-class SVM as well as ANNs; the
parameters we used are identical to the binary classification case, except that we used an ANN
architecture with more than one output neuron (one for each class). We implemented all supervised
learning methods in MATLAB.
5.6
Evaluation
The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is a widely used evaluation method to assess
the performance of prediction and classification models. It plots the true-positive rate (TPR or
12

sensitivity) defined as TPR =
T P
T P +F N against the false-positive rate (FPR or 1−specificity) defined
as FPR =
F P
F P +T N , where TP is the number of true positives, FP is the number of false positives and
TNis the number of true negatives [11]. We used ROC curves to evaluate protein-protein interaction
prediction of our method as well as baseline methods, and we reported the area under the ROC
curve (ROCAUC) as a quantitative measure of classifier performance. In our evaluation, the TP
value is the number of protein pairs occurring in STRING regardless of their STRING confidence
score and which have been predicted as interacting. The FP value is the number of protein pairs
which have been predicted as interacting but do not appear in STRING. And the TN is the number
of protein pairs predicted as non-interacting and which do not occur in the STRING database.
5.7
Clustering and Visualization
For visualizing the ontology vectors we generated, we used the t-SNE [25] method to reduce the
dimensionality of the vectors to 2 dimensions, and plotted the vectors in the 2D space. t-SNE is
similar to principal component analysis but uses probability distributions to capture the non-linear
structure of the data points, which linear dimensionality reduction methods, such as PCA, cannot
achieve [25]. We used a perplexity value of 30 when applying t-SNE.
The k-means algorithm is used to cluster the protein vectors, and we quantitatively measured the
quality of these clusters with respect to EC families by using cluster purity. Cluster purity is defined
as:
purity(T, C) = 1
N
k
X
i=0
max
j (ck ∪tj),
(5)
where N is the total number of data points, C = c1, c2, ..., ck is the set of clusters, and T = t1, t2, ..., tJ
is the set of classes which is in this case the set of EC families. Since there are six first-level EC
categories, the number of classes in this case is six and the number of clusters used in k-means is also
set to six.
Funding
The research reported in this publication was supported by the King Abdullah University of Science
and Technology (KAUST) Office of Sponsored Research (OSR) under Award No. URF/1/1976-04,
URF/1/1976-06, URF/1/3450-01-01 and URF/1/3454-01-01.
