1
MVN2VEC: Preservation and Collaboration in
Multi-View Network Embedding
Yu Shi, Member, IEEE, Fangqiu Han, Xinwei He, Xinran He, Carl Yang, Member, IEEE, Roger Jie Luo,
and Jiawei Han, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Multi-view networks are broadly present in real-world applications. In the meantime, network embedding has emerged as
an effective representation learning approach for networked data. Therefore, we are motivated to study the problem of multi-view
network embedding with a focus on the optimization objectives that are speciﬁc and important in embedding this type of network. In our
practice of embedding real-world multi-view networks, we explicitly identify two such objectives, which we refer to as preservation and
collaboration. The in-depth analysis of these two objectives is discussed throughout this paper. In addition, the MVN2VEC algorithms
are proposed to (i) study how varied extent of preservation and collaboration can impact embedding learning and (ii) explore the
feasibility of achieving better embedding quality by modeling them simultaneously. With experiments on a series of synthetic datasets,
a large-scale internal Snapchat dataset, and two public datasets, we conﬁrm the validity and importance of preservation and
collaboration as two objectives for multi-view network embedding. These experiments further demonstrate that better embedding can
be obtained by simultaneously modeling the two objectives, while not over-complicating the model or requiring additional supervision.
The code and the processed datasets are available at http://yushi2.web.engr.illinois.edu/.
Index Terms—Multi-view networks, network embedding, graph mining, representation learning.
!
1
INTRODUCTION
In real-world applications, objects can be associated with
different types of relations. These objects and their relation-
ships can be naturally represented by multi-view networks,
i.e., multiplex networks or multi-view graphs [1], [2], [3],
[4], [5], [6]. Figure 1a gives a toy multi-view network, where
each view corresponds to a type of edge, and all views
share the same set of nodes. As a more concrete example,
a four-view network of users can be used to describe a
social networking service with social relationship and inter-
action including friendship, following, message exchange,
and post viewing. With the vast availability of multi-view
networks, it is of interest to mine such networks.
In the meantime, network embedding has emerged as a
scalable representation learning method for networked data
[7], [8], [9], [10]. Speciﬁcally, network embedding projects
nodes of networks into the embedding spaces. With the
semantic information of each node encoded, the learned
embedding can be directly used as features in various
downstream applications [7], [8], [9]. Motivated by the suc-
cess of network embedding for homogeneous networks [7],
[8], [9], [10], [11], [12], where nodes and edges are untyped,
we believe it is important to better understand multi-view
network embedding.
To design embedding method for multi-view networks,
the primary challenge lies in how to use the type infor-
•
Y. Shi, Xinwei He, C. Yang, and J. Han are with University of Illinois at
Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801. F. Han, Xinran He, and R. J. Luo

This research was partially conducted when the ﬁrst author interned at
Snap Research.
Profession
Friendship
Kinship
(a) A toy multi-view net-
work.
Profession
Friendship
Tilde
Gary
Elton
Harry
(b) A close-up look of pro-
fession view and friendship
view.
Fig. 1: A toy example of multi-view networks where each node
represents a person and the three views correspond to three
types of interpersonal relations. Co-workers are linked in the
profession view, friends are linked in the friendship view, and
relatives are linked in the kinship view.
mation on edges from different views. As a result, we are
interested in investigating the following two questions:
1) With the availability of multiple edge types, what are
the objectives that are speciﬁc and important to multi-
view network embedding?
2) Can we achieve better embedding quality by modeling
these objectives jointly?
To answer the ﬁrst question, we identify two such ob-
jectives, preservation and collaboration, from our practice of
embedding real-world multi-view networks. Collaboration
– In some datasets, edges between the same pair of nodes
may be observed in different views due to shared latent rea-
sons. For instance, in a social network, if we observe an edge
between a user pair in either the message exchange view
or the post viewing view, likely these two users are happy
to be associated with each other. In such scenario, these
arXiv:1801.06597v3  [cs.SI]  3 Nov 2019

2
views may complement each other, and embedding them
jointly may potentially yield better results than embedding
them independently. We call such synergetic effect in jointly
embedding multiple views by collaboration, which is also the
primary intuition behind most existing multi-view network
algorithms [1], [2], [3], [4]. Preservation – On the other hand,
it is possible for different network views to have different
semantic meanings; it is also possible that a portion of nodes
has completely disagreeing edges in different views since
edges in different views are formed due to unrelated latent
reasons. For example, the professional relationship may not
always align well with friendship. If we embed the pro-
fession view and the friendship view in Figure 1b into the
same embedding space, the embedding of Gary will be close
to both Tilde and Elton. As a result, the embedding of Tilde
will also not be too distant from Elton due to transitivity.
However, this is not a desirable result, because Tilde and
Elton are not closely related regarding either profession or
friendship according to the original multi-view network. In
other words, embedding in this way fails to preserve the
unique information carried by different network views. We
refer to such need for preserving unique information carried
by different views as preservation. The detailed discussion of
the validity and importance of preservation and collaboration
is presented in Section 4.
Furthermore, the need for preservation and collaboration
may co-exist in the same multi-view network. Two scenarios
can result in this situation: (i) a pair of views are gener-
ated from very similar latent reason, while another pair of
views carries completely different semantic meanings; and
more subtly (ii) for the same pair of views, one portion of
nodes has consistent edges in different views, while another
portion of nodes have totally disagreeing edges in different
views. One example of the latter scenario is that profes-
sional relationship does not align well with friendship in
some cultures, whereas co-workers often become friends in
certain other cultures [13]. Therefore, we are also interested
in exploring the feasibility of achieving better embedding
quality by modeling preservation and collaboration simultane-
ously, and we address this problem in Section 5 and beyond.
We note that, instead of proposing a sophisticated model
that beats many baselines, this paper focus on the objectives
of interests for multi-view network embedding. In experi-
ments, we compare methods with a highlight on the roles
the two objectives play in different scenarios. For the same
reason, the scenarios where additional supervision is avail-
able are excluded from this paper, while the lessons learned
from the unsupervised scenario can also be applied to
the supervised multi-view network embedding algorithms.
Additionally, node embedding learned by an unsupervised
approach can directly apply to different downstream tasks,
while supervised algorithms yield embedding speciﬁcally
good for tasks where the supervision comes from. We sum-
marize our contributions as follows.
1) We study the objectives that are speciﬁc and important
to multi-view network embedding and identify preser-
vation and collaboration as two such objectives from the
practice of embedding real-world multi-view networks.
2) We explore the feasibility of attaining better embedding
by simultaneously modeling preservation and collabora-
tion, and propose two multi-view network embedding
methods – MVN2VEC-CON and MVN2VEC-REG.
3) We conduct experiments with various downstream ap-
plications on four datasets. These experiments corrob-
orate the validity and importance of preservation and
collaboration and demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed methods.
2
RELATED WORK
Network embedding. Network embedding has emerged as
an efﬁcient and effective approach for learning distributed
node representations. Instead of leveraging spectral prop-
erties of networks as commonly seen in traditional unsu-
pervised feature learning approaches [14], [15], [16], [17],
most network embedding methods are designed atop local
properties of networks that involve links and proximity
among nodes [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [18], [19]. Such
methodology focusing on local properties has been shown
to be more scalable. The designs of many recent network
embedding algorithms are based on local properties of net-
works and can trace to the skip-gram model [20], which are
shown to be scalable and widely applicable. To leverage the
skip-gram model, various strategies have been proposed to
deﬁne the context of a node in the network scenario [7], [8],
[9], [11]. Beyond the skip-gram model, embedding methods
for preserving certain other network properties can also be
found in the literature [10], [21], [22], [23].
Multi-view networks.
The majority of existing methods
for multi-view networks aim to bring performance boost
in traditional tasks, such as clustering [1], [2], classiﬁca-
tion [3], and dense subgraph mining [4]. Another line of
research focuses on measuring and analyzing cross-view
interrelations in multi-view networks [6], [24], [25], [26], but
they do not discuss the objectives of embedding multi-view
networks, nor do they study how their proposed measures
and analyses can relate to the embedding learning of multi-
view networks.
Multi-view network embedding. An attention-based col-
laboration framework is recently proposed for multi-view
network embedding [27]. The problem setting of this work
differs from ours since it requires supervision for its atten-
tion mechanism. Besides, this approach does not directly
model preservation – one of the objectives that we deem
important for multi-view network embedding. Since the
ﬁnal embedding derived via linear combination in this
framework is a trade-off between representations from all
views. A deep learning architecture has also been pro-
posed for embedding multi-networks [28], where the multi-
network is a more general concept than the multi-view
network and allows many-to-many correspondence across
networks. While the proposed model can be applied to the
more speciﬁc multi-view networks, it does not focus on the
study of the objectives of multi-view network embedding.
Another group of related work studies the problem of jointly
modeling multiple network views using latent space models
[29], [30]. These works again do not model preservation.
There exist a few more studies that touches the topic of
multi-view network embedding [31], [32], [33], [34], [35]
They do not model preservation and collaboration or do not
aim to provide in-depth study of these objectives.

3
Besides, the problem of multi-view matrix factorization
[36], [37], [38] is also related to multi-view network em-
bedding. Liu et al. [38] propose a multi-view nonnegative
matrix factorization model, which aims to minimize the
distance between the adjacent matrix of each view and the
consensus matrix. While these methods can generate a vec-
tor for each node; these vectors are modeled to suit certain
tasks such as matrix completion or clustering, instead of
to serve as distributed representations of nodes that can be
used in different downstream applications.
Embedding techniques for other typed networks.
In
a bigger scope, a couple of studies have recently been
conducted in embedding more general networks, such as
heterogeneous information networks (HINs) [39], [40], [41],
[42]. Some of them build the algorithms on top of meta-
paths [41], [42], but meta-paths are usually more meaningful
for HINs with multiple node types than multi-view net-
works. Some other methods are designed for networks with
additional side information [40], [43] or particular struc-
tures [39], [44], which do not apply to multi-view networks.
Most importantly, these methods are designed for networks
they intend to embed, and therefore do not focus on the
study of the particular needs and objectives for embedding
multi-view networks.
Multi-relational
network
embedding
or
knowledge
graph embedding embodies another direction of research
that is relevant to multi-view network embedding [45], [46],
[47], [48]. The study on this direction has a focus different
and does not directly apply to our scenario because the
relationships involved in these networks are often directed
in nature. A popular family of such methods are translation
based, where, in their language, the representation of a head
entity h is associated to that of a tail entity t by that of
a relation r such that h + r is assumed to be similar to
h [45], [46], [47], [48]. Such assumption is invalid for multi-
view networks with undirected network views such as the
friendship view in a social network.
3
PRELIMINARIES
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Multi-View Network). A multi-view net-
work G = (U, {E(v)}v∈V) is a network consisting of
a set U of nodes and a set V of views, where E(v)
consists of all edges in view v ∈V. If a multi-view
network is weighted, then there exists a weight mapping
w : {E(v)}v∈V →R such that w(v)
uu′ := w(e(v)
uu′) is the
weight of the edge e(v)
uu′ ∈E(v), which joints nodes u ∈U
and u′ ∈U in view v ∈V.
Additionally, when context is clear, we use the network
view v of G = (U, {E(v)}v∈V) to denote the network G(v) =
(U, E(v)).
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Network Embedding). Network embedding
aims at learning a (center) embedding fu ∈RD for each
node u ∈U in a network, where D ∈N is the dimension
of the embedding space.
Besides the center embedding fu ∈RD, a family of pop-
ular algorithms [9], [20] also deploy a context embedding
˜fu ∈RD for each node u. Moreover, when the learned
embedding is used as the feature vector for downstream
TABLE 1: Summary of symbols
Symbol
Deﬁnition
V
The set of all network views
U
The set of all nodes
E(v)
The set of all edges in view v ∈V
W(v)
The list of random walk pairs from view v ∈V
fu
The ﬁnal embedding of node u ∈U
f v
u
The center embedding of node u ∈U w.r.t. view v ∈V
˜f v
u
The context embedding of node u ∈U w.r.t. view v ∈V
θ ∈[0, 1]
The hyperparameter on parameter sharing in MVN2VEC-CON
γ ∈R≥0
The hyperparameter on regularization in MVN2VEC-REG
D ∈N
The dimension of the embedding space
applications, we take the center embedding of each node
as feature following the common practice in algorithms
involving context embedding.
4
PRESERVATION
AND
COLLABORATION
IN
MULTI-VIEW NETWORK EMBEDDING
In this section, we elaborate on the intuition and presence of
preservation and collaboration – the two objectives introduced
in Section 1. We ﬁrst describe and investigate the motivating
phenomena observed in our practice of embedding real-
world multi-view networks, and then discuss how they can
be explained by the two proposed objectives.
Two straightforward approaches for embedding multi-
view networks.
To extend untyped network embedding
algorithms to multi-view networks, two straightforward
yet practical approaches exist. We refer to these two ap-
proaches as the independent model and the one-space model.
Speciﬁcally, we denote f v
u ∈RDv the embedding of node
u ∈U achieved by embedding only the view v ∈V of
the multi-view network, where Dv is the dimension of the
embedding space for network view v. With such notation,
the independent model and the one-space model are brieﬂy
introduced as follows, while further details can be found in
Section 6.3.
• The independent model. Embed each view indepen-
dently, and then concatenate to derive the ﬁnal embed-
ding fu:
fu =
M
v∈V
f v
u ∈RD,
(1)
where D = P
v∈V Dv, and L represents concatenation.
In other words, the embedding of each node in the
independent model resides in the direct sum of multiple
embedding spaces. This approach preserves the information
embodied in each view, but do not allow collaboration across
different views in the embedding learning process.
• The one-space model. Let the embedding for different
views share parameters when learning the ﬁnal embed-
ding fu:
fu = f v
u ∈RD, ∀v ∈V.
(2)
Therefore, the ﬁnal embedding space correlates with
all network views. This approach allows different views
to collaborate in learning a uniﬁed embedding, but do not
preserve information speciﬁcally carried by each view. This
property of the one-space model is corroborated by
additional experiment in Section 6.5.
Further details on these models can be found in Sec-
tion 6.3. It should also be noted that the embedding learned

4
TABLE 2: Embedding quality of two real-world multi-view
networks using the independent model and the one-space model.
Dataset
Metric
independent
one-space
YouTube
ROC-AUC
0.931
0.914
PRC-AUC
0.745
0.702
Twitter
ROC-AUC
0.724
0.737
PRC-AUC
0.447
0.466
by the one-space model cannot be obtained by linearly com-
bining {f v
u}v∈V in the independent model. This is because
most network embedding models are non-linear.
Embedding real-world multi-view networks by straight-
forward approaches. Two networks, YouTube and Twitter,
are used in these exploratory experiments with users being
nodes on each network. YouTube has three views represent-
ing common videos (cmn-vid), common subscribers (cmn-
sub), and common friends (cmn-fnd) shared by each user
pair, while Twitter has two views corresponding to replying
(reply) and mentioning (mention) among users. The down-
stream evaluation task is to infer whether two users are
friends, and the results are presented in Table 2.
It can be seen that neither straightforward approach is cat-
egorically better than the other. In particular, the independent
model consistently outperformed the one-space model in
the YouTube experiment, while the one-space model outper-
formed the independent model in Twitter. Furthermore, we
interpret the varying performance of the two approaches by
the varying extent of needs for modeling preservation and
modeling collaboration when embedding different networks.
Speciﬁcally, recall that the independent model only captures
preservation, while one-space only captures collaboration. As
a result, we speculate if a certain dataset craves for more
preservation than collaboration, the independent model will
outperform the one-space model. Otherwise, the one-space
model will win.
To corroborate our interpretation of the results, we ex-
amine the involved datasets and look into the agreement
between information carried by different network views.
We achieve this by a Jaccard coefﬁcient based measurement,
where the Jaccard coefﬁcient is a similarity measure with
range [0, 1], deﬁned as J(S1, S2) = |S1 ∩S2|/|S1 ∪S2| for
set S1 and set S2. For a pair of network views, a node
can be connected to a different set of neighbors in each of
the two views. We calculate the Jaccard coefﬁcient between
these two sets of neighbors. In Figure 2, we apply this
measurement on both datasets and illustrate the proportion
of nodes with the Jaccard coefﬁcient greater than 0.5 for each
view pair.
As presented in Figure 2, little agreement exists between
each pair of different views on YouTube. As a result, it is
not surprising that collaboration among different views is not
as needed as preservation. On the other hand, a substantial
portion of nodes has Jaccard coefﬁcient greater than 0.5 over
different views on Twitter – not surprising to see model-
ing collaboration brings about more beneﬁts than modeling
preservation.
5
THE MVN2VEC MODELS
In the previous section, preservation and collaboration are
identiﬁed as important objectives for multi-view network
1.000
.023
1.000
.045
.049
1.000
cmn-fnd
cmn-sub
cmn-vid
cmn-vid
cmn-sub
cmn-fnd
(a) YouTube.
nodes w/ jac > 0.5
1.000
.023
1.000
mention
reply
mention
reply
nodes w/ jac ≥ 0.5
nodes w/ jac ≤ 0.5
nodes w/ jac > 0.5
(b) Twitter.
Fig. 2: Agreement between information carried by each pair of
network views given by a Jaccard coefﬁcient based measure-
ment.
embedding. In the extreme cases, where only preservation is
needed – each view carries a distinct semantic meaning –
or only collaboration is needed – all views carry the same
semantic meaning – simply choosing between independent
and one-space may be enough to generate satisfactory re-
sults. However, it is of more interest to study the scenario
where both preservation and collaboration co-exist in a multi-
view network. Therefore, we are motivated to (i) study
how varied extent of preservation and collaboration can im-
pact embedding learning and (ii) explore the feasibility of
achieving better embedding by simultaneously modeling
both objectives. To this end, we propose two methods
that capture both objectives, while not over-complicating
the model or requiring additional supervision. These two
approaches are named MVN2VEC-CON and MVN2VEC-REG,
where MVN2VEC is short for multi-view network to vector,
while CON and REG stand for constrained and regularized.
As with the notation convention in Section 4, we denote
f v
u ∈RDv and ˜f v
u ∈RDv the center and context embedding,
respectively, of node u ∈U for view v ∈V. Further given the
network view v, i.e., G(v) = (U, E(v)), we use an intra-view
loss function to measure how well the current embedding
can represent the original network view
l({f v
u,˜f v
u}u∈U|G(v)).
(3)
We defer the detailed deﬁnition of this loss function to a
later point of this section. We let Dv = D/|V| ∈N for
all v ∈V out of convenience for model design. To further
incorporate multiple views with the intention to model both
preservation and collaboration, two approaches are proposed
as follows.
MVN2VEC-CON.
The MVN2VEC-CON model does not en-
force further design on the center embedding {f v
u}u∈U in the
hope of preserving the semantics of each individual view.
To reﬂect collaboration, MVN2VEC-CON enforce constraints
on the context embedding {˜f v
u}u∈U for parameter sharing
across different views, so they are required to have the form
˜f v
u = ϕv
θ({˜gv′
u }v′∈V) := (1 −θ) · ˜gv
u + θ
|V| ·
X
v′∈V
˜gv′
u ,
(4)
where ˜gv
u ∈RDv and θ ∈[0, 1] is a hyperparameter con-
trolling the extend to which model parameters are shared.
The greater the value of θ, the more the model enforces pa-
rameter sharing and thereby encouraging more collaboration

5
Algorithm 1: MVN2VEC-CON and MVN2VEC-REG
Input : the multi-view network G = (U, {E(v)}v∈V)
and the hyperparameters
Output: the ﬁnal embedding {fu}u∈U
begin
for v ∈V do
Sample a list W(v) of random walk pairs
Join and shufﬂe the lists of random walk pairs
from all views to form a new random walk pair
list W
for each epoch do
// The following for-loop is
parallelized
for (u, n) ∈W do
if training MVN2VEC-CON then
Update {f v
u, ˜gv
u}u∈U,v∈V with one step
descent using gradients in Eq. (8)–(10)
if training MVN2VEC-REG then
Update {f v
u,˜f v
u}u∈U,v∈V with one step
descent using gradients in Eq. (11)–(13)
for u ∈U do
Derive the embedding for node u by
fu = L
v∈V f v
u
across different views. The MVN2VEC-CON model solves the
following optimization problem
min
{f v
u,˜gvu}
X
v∈V
l({f v
u, ϕv
θ({˜gv′
u }v′∈V)}u∈U|G(v)).
(5)
After model learning, the ﬁnal embedding for node u is
given by fu = L
v∈V f v
u. We note that in the extreme case
when θ is set to be 0, the model will be identical to the
independent model in Section 4. To further distinguish the
importance of different views, one can replace θ in Eq. (4)
with a view-speciﬁc parameter θv, we defer the study of
which to future work.
MVN2VEC-REG. Instead of setting hard constraints on how
parameters are shared across different views, the MVN2VEC-
REG model regularizes the embedding across different views
and solves the following optimization problem
min
{f v
u,˜f v
u}
X
v∈V
l({f v
u,˜f v
u}u∈U|G(v)) + γ · [Rv + ˜Rv],
(6)
where γ ∈R≥0 is a hyperparameter, Rv = P
u∈U∥f v
u −
1
|V|
P
v′∈V f v′
u ∥2
2, ˜Rv = P
u∈U∥˜f v
u −1
|V|
P
v′∈V ˜f v′
u ∥2
2, and ∥·∥2
is the l-2 norm. This model captures preservation again by
letting {f v
u}u∈U and {˜f v
u}u∈U to reside in the embedding
subspace speciﬁc to view v ∈V, while each of these
subspaces are distorted via cross-view regularization to
model collaboration. Similar to the MVN2VEC-CON model,
the greater the value of the hyperparameter γ, the more the
collaboration is encouraged, and the model is identical to the
independent model when γ = 0. To distinguish the impor-
tance of different views, one can replace (P
v′∈V f v′
u )/|V| in
the formulation of Rv with (P
v′∈V λv′ · f v′
u )/(P
v′∈V λv′|),
and revise ˜Rv similarly. We also defer this study to future
work for simplicity.
Intra-view loss function.
There are many possible ap-
proaches to formulate the intra-view loss function in Eq. (3).
In our framework, we adopt the random walk plus skip-
gram approach, which is one of the most common in the
literature [7], [8], [11]. Speciﬁcally, for each view v ∈V,
multiple rounds of random walks are sampled starting from
each node in G(v) = (U, E(v)). In any random walk, a node
u ∈U and a neighboring node n ∈U constitute one random
walk pair, and a list W(v) of random walk pairs can thereby
be derived. We will describe the detailed description of
the generation of W(v) later in this section. The intra-view
function is then given by
l({f v
u,˜f v
u}u∈U|G(v)) = −
X
(u,n)∈W(v)
log p(v)(n|u),
(7)
where p(v)(n|u) = exp
 f v
u · ˜f v
n
/P
n′∈U exp
 f v
u · ˜f v
n′

.
Model inference.
To optimize the objectives in Eq. (5)
and (6), we opt to asynchronous stochastic gradient de-
scent (ASGD) [49] following existing skip-gram–based al-
gorithms [7], [8], [9], [11], [20]. In this regard, W(v) from all
views are joined and shufﬂed to form a new list W of ran-
dom walk pairs for all views. Then each step of ASGD draws
one random walk pair from W and updates corresponding
model parameters with one-step gradient descent. Negative
sampling is adopted as in other skip-gram–based meth-
ods [7], [8], [9], [11], [20], which approximates log p(v)(n|u)
in Eq. (7) by −log σ(f v
u ·˜f v
n)−PK
i=1 En′
i∼P (v) log σ(−f v
u ·˜f v
n′
i),
where σ(x) = 1/(1+exp(−x)) is the sigmoid function, K is
the negative sampling rate, P (v)(u) ∝
h
D(v)
u
i3/4
is the noise
distribution, and D(v)
u
is the number of occurrences of node
u in W(v) [20].
With negative sampling, the objective function involving
one walk pair (u, n) from view v in MVN2VEC-CON is
OCON = log σ(f v
u · ϕv
θ({˜gv′
n }v′∈V))
+
K
X
i=1
En′
i∼P (v) log σ(−f v
u · ϕv
θ({˜gv′
n′
i}v′∈V)).
On the other hand, the objective function involving
(u, n) from view v in MVN2VEC-REG is
OREG = log σ(f v
u · ˜f v
n) + γ · (Rv
u + ˜Rv
n)
+
K
X
i=1
h
En′
i∼P (v) log σ(−f v
u · ˜f v
n′
i) + γ · (Rv
u + ˜Rv
n′
i)
i
.
The gradients of the above two objective function used
for ASGD are provided as follows.
MVN2VEC-CON :
∂OCON
∂f vu
=

1 −σ(f v
u · ϕv
θ({˜gv′
n }v′∈V))

· ϕv
θ({˜gv′
n }v′∈V)
(8)
−
K
X
i=1
σ(f v
u · ϕv
θ({˜gv′
n′
i}v′∈V)) · ϕv
θ({˜gv′
n′
i}v′∈V),
∂OCON
∂˜gˆvn
=

1 −σ(f v
u · ϕv
θ({˜gv′
n }v′∈V))

· f v
u ·
(
θ + 1−θ
|V| ,
ˆv = v,
θ,
ˆv ̸= v, (9)

6
A
D
C
B
A
D
C
B
A
D
C
B
v1
v2
v1
v2
v1
v2
. . .
G(0)
G(0.1)
G(0.5)
Fig. 3: An illustration of the series of synthetic networks G(p).
∂OCON
∂˜gˆv
n′
i
= −σ(f v
u · ϕv
θ({˜gv′
n′
i}v′∈V)) · f v
u ·
(
θ + 1−θ
|V| ,
ˆv = v,
θ,
ˆv ̸= v.
(10)
MVN2VEC-REG :
∂OREG
∂f vu
=

1 −σ(f v
u · ˜f v
n)

· ˜f v
n −
K
X
i=1
σ(f v
u · ˜f v
n′
i) · ˜f v
n′
i
(11)
+2γ

K + 1

1 −1
|V|

·

f v
u −1
|V|
X
v′∈V
f v′
u

,
∂OREG
∂˜f vn
=

1 −σ(f v
u · ˜f v
n)

· f v
u + 2γ

1 −1
|V|

·

˜f v
n −1
|V|
X
v′∈V
˜f v′
n

,
(12)
∂OREG
∂˜f v
n′
i
= −σ(f v
u · ˜f v
n′
i) · f v
u + 2γ

1 −1
|V|

·

˜f v
n′
i −1
|V|
X
v′∈V
˜f v′
n′
i

.
(13)
Note that in implementation, |V | should be the number of
views in which u is associated with at least one edge.
Random walk pair generation. Without additional supervi-
sion, we assume the equal importance of different network
views and sample the same number N ∈N of random
walks from each view. To determine N, we denote n(v) the
number of nodes that are not isolated from the rest of the
network in view v ∈V, nmax := max{n(v) : v ∈V}, and
let N := M · nmax, where M is a hyperparameter to be
speciﬁed. Given a network view v ∈V, we generate random
walk pairs following existing studies [7], [8], [11], where the
transition probabilities from a node are proportional to the
weights of all its outgoing edges. Speciﬁcally, each random
walk is of length L ∈N, and ⌊N/n(v)⌋or ⌈N/n(v)⌉random
walks are sampled from each non-isolated node in view
v, yielding a total of N random walks. For each node in
any random walk, this node and any other node within a
window of size B ∈N form a random walk pair that is then
added to W(v).
Complexity analysis.
For every view, random walks are
generated independently by existing method [7], [8], [11].
An analysis similar to that in related work [7] can show the
overall complexity is O

|V|·L
B·(L−B)

, which is linear to the
number of views |V|. For model inference, the number of
ASGD steps is |W|, linear to L, B, M and |V|. Each ASGD
step computes gradients provided in Eq. (8)–(13), which
is again linear to |V|. Therefore, the overall complexity of
model inference is quadratic to the number of views |V|.
We summarize both the MVN2VEC-CON algorithm and
the MVN2VEC-REG algorithm in Algorithm 1.
6
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we further corroborate the intuition of preser-
vation and collaboration, and demonstrate the feasibility of si-
multaneously model these two objectives. We ﬁrst perform a
case study on a series of synthetic multi-view networks that
have varied extent of preservation and collaboration. Next, we
introduce the real-world datasets, baselines, and experiment
setting for more comprehensive quantitative evaluations.
Lastly, we analyze the evaluation results and provide further
discussion.
6.1
Case Study – Varied preservation and collaboration
on Synthetic Data
To directly study the relative performance of different mod-
els on networks with varied extent of preservation and
collaboration, we design a series of synthetic networks and
conduct a multi-class classiﬁcation task.
We denote each of these synthetic networks by G(p),
where p ∈[0, 0.5] is referred to as the intrusion probability.
Each G(p) has 4, 000 nodes and 2 views – v1 and v2.
Furthermore, each node is associated to one of the 4 class
labels – A, B, C, or D – and each class has exactly 1, 000
nodes. Before introducing the more general G(p), we ﬁrst
describe the process for generating G(0) as follows:
1) generate one random network over all nodes with label
A or B, and another over all nodes with label C or D;
put all edges in these two random networks into view
v1;
2) generate one random network over all nodes with label
A or C, and another over all nodes with label B or D;
put all edges in these two random networks into view
v2.
To generate each of the four aforementioned random net-
works, we adopt the widely used preferential attachment
process with one edge to attach from a new node to exist-
ing nodes, where the preferential attachment process is a
widely used method for generating networks with power-
law degree distribution. With this design, view v1 carries
the information that nodes labeled A or B should be treated
differently from nodes labeled C or D, while v2 reﬂects that
nodes labeled A or C are different from nodes labeled B or
D. More generally, G(p) are generated with the following

7
Collaboration only
More preservation
Collaboration only
More preservation
Fig. 4: Classiﬁcation results under accuracy and cross entropy
on synthetic networks G(p) with varied intrusion probability p,
corresponding to different extent of preservation and collabora-
tion.
tweak from G(0): when putting an edge into one of the two
views, with probability p, the edge is put into the other view
instead of the view speciﬁed in the G(0) generation process.
It is worth noting that greater p favors more collaboration,
while smaller p favors more preservation. In the extreme case
where p = 0.5, only collaboration is needed in the network
embedding process. This is because every edge has equal
probability to fall into view v1 or view v2 of G(0.5), and
there is hence no information carried speciﬁcally by either
view that should be preserved.
For each G(p), independent, one-space, MVN2VEC-CON,
and MVN2VEC-REG are tested. Atop the embedding learned
by each model, we apply logistic regression with cross-
entropy to carry out the multi-class evaluation tasks. Pa-
rameters are tuned on a validation dataset sampled from the
4, 000 class labels. Classiﬁcation accuracy and cross-entropy
on a different test dataset are reported in Figure 4.
Observations. From Figure 4, we make three observations.
(i) independent performs better than one-space in case p is
small – when preservation is the dominating objective in the
network – and one-space performs better than independent
in case p is large – when collaboration is dominating. (ii)
The two proposed MVN2VEC models perform better than
both independent and one-space except when p is close to 0.5,
which implies it is indeed possible for MVN2VEC to achieve
better performance by simultaneously modeling preservation
and collaboration. (iii) When p is close to 0.5, one-space per-
forms the best. This is expected because no preservation is
needed in G(0.5), and any attempts to additionally model
preservation shall not boost, if not impair, the performance.
6.2
Data Description and Evaluation Tasks
We perform further quantitative evaluations on three real-
world multi-view networks: Snapchat, YouTube, and Twit-
ter. The key statistics are summarized in Table 3, and we
describe these datasets as follows.
YouTube. YouTube is a video-sharing website. We use the
YouTube dataset made publicly available by the Social Com-
puting Data Repository [50]1. From this dataset, a network
with three views is constructed, where each node is a core
user, and the edges in the three views represent the number
of common friends, the number of common subscribers, and
1. http://socialcomputing.asu.edu/datasets/YouTube
the number of common favorite videos, respectively. Note
that the core users are those from which the author of the
dataset crawled the data, and their friends can fall out of the
scope of the set of core users. Without user label available
for classiﬁcation, we perform only link prediction task on
top of the user embedding. This task aims at inferring
whether two core users are friends, which has also been
used for evaluation by existing research [27]. Each core
user forms positive pairs with his or her core friends, and
we randomly select 5 times as many non-friend core users
to form negative examples. Records are split into training,
validation, and test sets as in the link prediction task on
YouTube.
Twitter.
Twitter is an online news and social networking
service. We use the Twitter dataset made publicly available
by the Social Computing Data Repository [51]2. From this
dataset, a network with two views is constructed, where
each node is a user, and the edges in the two views rep-
resent the number of replies and the number of mentions,
respectively. Again, we evaluate using a link prediction task
that infers whether two users are friends as in existing
research [27]. Negative examples generation and training–
validation–test split method are the same as in the YouTube
dataset.
Snapchat.
Snapchat is a multimedia social networking
service. On the Snapchat multi-view social network, each
node is a user, and the three views correspond to friendship,
chatting, and story viewing3. We perform experiments on
the sub-network consisting of all users from Los Angeles.
The data used to construct the network are collected from
two consecutive weeks in the Spring of 2017. Additional
data for downstream evaluation tasks are collected from
the following week (week 3). We perform a multi-label
classiﬁcation task, and a link prediction task on top of the
same user embedding learned from each network. For clas-
siﬁcation, we classify whether or not a user views each of the
10 most popular discover channels4 according to the user
viewing history in week 3, which aims at inferring users’
preference and thereby guide product design in content
serving. For each channel, the users who view this channel
are labeled positive, and we randomly select 5 times as
many users who do not view this channel as negative ex-
amples. These records are then randomly split into training,
validation, and test sets. This is a multi-label classiﬁcation
problem that aims at inferring users’ preference on different
discover channels and can therefore guide product design
in content serving. For link prediction, we predict whether
two users would view the stories posted by each other
in week 3, which aims to estimate the likelihood of story
viewing between friends, so as to re-rank stories accord-
ingly. Negative examples are the users who are friends but
do not have story viewing in the same week. It is worth
noting that this deﬁnition yields more positive examples
than negative examples, which is the cause of a relatively
high AUPRC score observed in experiments. These records
are then randomly split into training, validation, and test
2. https://snap.stanford.edu/data/higgs-twitter.html
3. https://support.snapchat.com/en-US/a/view-stories
4. https://support.snapchat.com/en-US/a/discover-how-to

8
TABLE 3: Basic statistics for the
three real-world networks, where
the number of edges speciﬁes the
total number of edges from all net-
work views.
Dataset
# views
# nodes
# edges
Snapchat
3
7,406,859
131,729,903
YouTube
3
14,900
7,977,881
Twitter
2
116,408
183,341
1.000
.023
1.000
.045
.049
1.000
friend
chat
story
story
chat
friend
Fig. 5: Agreement be-
tween
each
pair
of
views for Snapchat.
sets with the constraint that a user appears as the viewer of
a record in at most one of the three sets. This task aims to
estimate the likelihood of story viewing between friends so
that the application can rank stories accordingly.
We also provide the Jaccard coefﬁcient based measure-
ment on Snapchat in Figure 5. It can be seen that the cross-
view agreement between each pair of views in the Snapchat
network falls in between YouTube and Twitter as presented
previously in Section 2.
For each evaluation task on all three networks, training,
validation, and test sets are derived in a shufﬂe split manner
with an 80%–10%–10% ratio. We split the data and repeat
the experiments 20 times to compute the mean and its
standard error under each metric. Furthermore, a node is
excluded from evaluation if it is isolated from other nodes
in at least one of the multiple views. This processing ensures
every node has a valid representation when embedding only
one network view.
6.3
Baselines and Experimental Setup
In this section, we describe the baselines as well as experi-
mental setup for both embedding learning and downstream
evaluation tasks.
Baselines. Quantitative evaluation results are obtained by
applying downstream learner upon embedding learned by
a given embedding method. Therefore, for fair comparisons,
we use the same downstream learner in the same evaluation
task. We experiment with both in-house baselines and ex-
ternal baselines from related work. Since our study aims at
understanding the objectives of multi-view network embed-
ding, we build the following in-house embedding methods
from the same random work plus skip-gram approach with
the same model inference method as described in Section 5.
Independent – As introduced in Section 4, the independent
model is equivalent to MVN2VEC-CON when θ = 0, and to
MVN2VEC-REG when γ = 0. It preserves the information
embodied in each view, but do not allow collaboration
across different views in the embedding process. One-space
– Also introduced in Section 4, the one-space enables different
views to collaborate in learning a uniﬁed embedding, but do
not preserve information speciﬁcally carried by each view.
View-merging – The view-merging model ﬁrst merges all
network views into one uniﬁed view, and then learn the
embedding of this single uniﬁed view. To comply with the
assumed equal importance of all network views, we rescale
the weights of edges proportionally in each view to the same
total weight. This method serves as an alternate approach to
one-space in modeling collaboration. The difference between
view-merging and one-space essentially lies in whether or
not random walks can cross different views. We note that
just like one-space, view-merging does not model preservation.
Single-view – For each network view, the single-view model
learns embedding from only one view as a sanity check
to verify whether introducing more than one view does
bring in informative signals in each evaluation task. In
other words, it is identical to embedding only one of the
multiple network views using the DeepWalk algorithm [8],
or equivalently node2vec with both return parameter and
in-out parameter set to 0 [7]. This baseline is used to as a
sanity check to verify whether introducing more than one
view does bring in informative signals in each evaluation
task.
We also experiment with two external baselines that
have executable implementation released by the original
authors and can be applied to our experiment setting
with minimal tweaks. Note that the primary observations
and conclusions made in the experiments would still hold
without comparing to these external baselines. MVE [27] –
An attention-based semi-supervised method for multi-view
network embedding. The released implementation supports
supervision from classiﬁcation tasks. For fair comparison,
in our unsupervised link prediction experiments, we assign
the same dummy class label to 1% randomly selected nodes.
We have observed that the percentage of nodes receiving
such dummy supervision does not signiﬁcantly affect the
evaluation results in additional experiments. DMNE [28] –
A deep learning architecture for multi-network embedding,
where the multi-network is a more general concept than the
multi-view network. As a more complex model, the released
DMNE implementation takes signiﬁcantly more time to
train on our datasets, and we hence use only the default
hyperparameters. The authors commented in the original
paper that this implementation can be further sped up with
additional parallelization. We experiment with two external
baselines on the smaller YouTube and Twitter dataset for
scalability reason.
Downstream learners. For fair comparisons, we apply the
same downstream learner onto the features derived from
each embedding method. Speciﬁcally, we use the scikit-
learn5 implementation of logistic regression with l-2 regu-
larization and the SAG solver for both classiﬁcation and link
prediction tasks. Regularization coefﬁcient in the logistic
regression is always tuned to the best on the validation
set. Following existing research [9], each embedding vector
is post-processed by projecting onto the unit l-2 sphere. In
multi-label classiﬁcation tasks, the feature is simply the em-
bedding of each node, and an independent logistic regres-
sion model is trained for for each label. In link prediction
tasks, features of node pairs are derived by the Hadamard
product of the embedding vectors of the two involved node
as suggested by previous work [7].
Hyperparameters.
For independent, MVN2VEC-CON, and
MVN2VEC-REG, we set embedding space dimension D =
128·|V|. For single-view, we set D = 128. For all other meth-
ods, we experiment with both D = 128 and D = 128 · |V|,
5. http://scikit-learn.org/stable/

9
TABLE 4: Mean of link prediction results with standard error
in brackets on YouTube and Twitter.
Dataset
YouTube
Twitter
Metric
ROC-AUC
PRC-AUC
ROC-AUC
PRC-AUC
worst single-view
0.831 (0.002)
0.515 (0.004)
0.597 (0.001)
0.296 (0.001)
best single-view
0.904 (0.002)
0.678 (0.004)
0.715 (0.001)
0.428 (0.001)
independent
0.931 (0.001)
0.745 (0.003)
0.724(0.001)
0.447 (0.001)
one-space
0.914 (0.001)
0.702 (0.004)
0.737 (0.001)
0.466 (0.001)
view-merging
0.912 (0.001)
0.699 (0.004)
0.741 (0.001)
0.469 (0.001)
MVE [27]
0.918 (0.001)
0.714 (0.001)
0.727 (0.001)
0.451 (0.001)
DMNE [28]
0.749 (0.001)
0.311 (0.001)
—
—
MVN2VEC-CON
0.932 (0.001)
0.746 (0.001)
0.727 (0.000)
0.453 (0.001)
MVN2VEC-REG
0.934 (0.001)
0.754 (0.003)
0.754 (0.001)
0.478 (0.001)
TABLE 5: Mean of link prediction results and of classiﬁcation
results with standard error in brackets on Snapchat.
Dataset
Snapchat
Task
Link prediction
Classiﬁcation
Metric
ROC-AUC
PRC-AUC
ROC-AUC
PRC-AUC
worst single-view
0.587 (0.001)
0.675 (0.001)
0.634 (0.001)
0.252 (0.001)
best single-view
0.592 (0.001)
0.677 (0.002)
0.667 (0.002)
0.274 (0.002)
independent
0.617 (0.001)
0.700 (0.001)
0.687 (0.001)
0.293 (0.002)
one-space
0.603 (0.001)
0.688 (0.002)
0.675 (0.001)
0.278 (0.001)
view-merging
0.611 (0.001)
0.693 (0.002)
0.672 (0.001)
0.279 (0.001)
MVN2VEC-CON
0.626 (0.001)
0.709 (0.001)
0.693 (0.001)
0.298 (0.001)
MVN2VEC-REG
0.638 (0.001)
0.712 (0.002)
0.690 (0.001)
0.296 (0.002)
and report the better result. To generate random walk pairs,
we set L = 20 and B = 3. For Snapchat, we set M = 10
due to its large scale and set M = 50 for all other datasets.
The negative sampling rate K is set to be 5 for all models,
and each model is trained for 1 epoch. In Figure 4, Table 4,
Table 5, and Figure 6, θ and γ in the MVN2VEC models are
also tuned on the validation dataset. The impact of θ and γ
on model performance is further discussed in Section 6.5.
Metrics. For link prediction tasks, we use two widely used
metrics: the area under the receiver operating character-
istic curve (ROC-AUC) and the area under the precision-
recall curve (PRC-AUC). The receiver operating characteris-
tic curve (ROC) is derived from plotting true positive rate
against false positive rate as the threshold varies, and the
precision-recall curve (PRC) is created by plotting precision
against recall as the threshold varies. Higher values are
preferable for both metrics. For multi-label classiﬁcation
tasks, we also compute the ROC-AUC and the PRC-AUC
for each label and report the mean value averaged across all
labels.
6.4
Quantitative
Evaluation
Results
on
Real-World
Datasets
The main quantitative evaluation results are presented in
Table 4 and Table 5. Among the in-house baselines and the
proposed MVN2VEC models, all models leveraging multiple
views outperformed those using only one view, which justiﬁes
the necessity of using multi-view networks. Moreover, one-
space and view-merging had comparable performance on each
dataset. This is an expected outcome because they both
only model collaboration and differ from each other merely
in whether random walks are performed across network
views.
In case the need for either collaboration or preservation
prevails.
On YouTube, the proposed MVN2VEC models
perform as good but do not signiﬁcantly exceed the baseline
Fig. 6: Classiﬁcation results under accuracy and cross entropy
on network G(0) with varied embedding dimension D.
independent model. Recall that the need for preservation in
the YouTube network is overwhelmingly dominating as
discussed in Section 4. As a result, it is not surprising to see
that additionally modeling collaboration does not bring about
signiﬁcant performance boost in such extreme case. On
Twitter, collaboration plays a more important role than preser-
vation, as conﬁrmed by the better performance of one-space
than independent. Furthermore, MVN2VEC-REG achieved bet-
ter performance than all baselines, while MVN2VEC-CON
outperformed independent by further modeling collaboration,
but failed to exceed one-space. This phenomenon can be ex-
plained by the fact that {f v
u}v∈V in MVN2VEC-CON are set to
be independent regardless of its hyperparameter θ ∈[0, 1],
and MVN2VEC-CON’s capability of modeling collaboration is
bounded by this design.
In case both collaboration and preservation are indispens-
able. The Snapchat network used in our experiments lies
in between YouTube and Twitter in terms of the need for
preservation and collaboration. The proposed two MVN2VEC
models both outperformed all baselines under all metrics.
In other words, this experiment result shows the feasibility
of gaining performance boost by simultaneously model
preservation and collaboration without over-complicating the
model or adding supervision.
The multi-label classiﬁcation results on Snapchat are
presented in Table 5. As with the previous link prediction re-
sults, the two MVN2VEC model both outperformed all base-
lines under all metrics, with a difference that MVN2VEC-CON
performed better in this classiﬁcation task, while MVN2VEC-
REG outperformed better in the previous link prediction
task. Overall, while MVN2VEC-CON and MVN2VEC-REG may
have different advantages in different tasks, they both out-
performed all baselines by simultaneously modeling preser-
vation and collaboration on the Snapchat network, where both
preservation and collaboration co-exist.
External baeslines. MVE underperformed MVN2VEC mod-
els on YouTube. We interpret this outcome as MVE is a col-
laboration framework that does not explicitly model preser-
vation, which has been shown to be needed in the YouTube
datasets. Meanwhile, MVE did not get performance boost
from its attention mechanism since the experiment setting
forbids it from consuming informative supervision as dis-
cussed in Section 6.3. Without additional optimization, the
released DMNE implementation did not ﬁnish training on
the Twitter dataset after two days on a machine with 40

comparatively worse performance of DMNE on YouTube

10
(a) Varying θ of
MVN2VEC-
CON in Snapchat link predic-
tion.
(b) Varying γ of MVN2VEC-
REG in Snapchat link predic-
tion.
(c) Varying θ of
MVN2VEC-
CON in Snapchat classiﬁca-
tion.
(d) Varying γ of MVN2VEC-
REG in Snapchat classiﬁcation.
(e) Varying θ of
MVN2VEC-
CON in YouTube link predic-
tion.
(f) Varying γ of
MVN2VEC-
REG in YouTube link predic-
tion.
(g) Varying θ of MVN2VEC-
CON in Twitter link prediction.
(h) Varying γ of MVN2VEC-
REG in Twitter link prediction.
Fig. 7: Performance of the MVN2VEC models under varying hyperparameters regarding preservation and collaboration.
should partially attribute to the use of default hyperparam-
eters as described in Section 6.3. Another possible explana-
tion is that DMNE is designed for the more general multi-
networks, not optimized for multi-view networks.
These observations in combine demonstrated the fea-
sibility
of
gaining
performance
boost
by
simultane-
ously modeling preservation and collaboration without over-
complicating the model or requiring additional supervision.
6.5
Hyperparameter Study
Impact of embedding dimension. To rule out the possibil-
ity that one-space could actually preserve the view-speciﬁc
information as long as the embedding dimension were set
to be large enough, we study the impact of embedding
dimension. Particularly, we carry out the multi-class classi-
ﬁcation task on G(0) under varied embedding dimensions.
Note that G(0) is used in this experiment because it has the
need for modeling preservation as discussed in Section 6.1.
As presented in Figure 6, one-space achieves its best per-
formance at D = 256, which is worse than independent at
D = 256, let alone the best performance of independent at
D = 512. Therefore, one cannot expect one-space to preserve
the information carried by different views by employing
embedding space with large enough dimension.
Besides, all four models achieve their best performance
with D around 256∼512. Particularly, one-space uses the
smallest embedding dimension to reach peak performance.
This is expected since one-space does not divide the embed-
ding space to suit multiple views and have more freedom in
exploiting an embedding space with given dimension.
Impact of θ for MVN2VEC-CON and γ for MVN2VEC-REG.
We also study the impact of θ for MVN2VEC-CON and γ
for MVN2VEC-REG, which corroborated the observations
in Section 6.4. With results presented in Figure 7, we ﬁrst
focus on the Snapchat network. Starting from γ = 0, where
only preservation was modeled, MVN2VEC-REG performed
progressively better as more collaboration kicked in by in-
creasing γ. The peak performance was reached between 0.01
and 0.1. On the other hand, the performance of MVN2VEC-
CON improved as θ grew. Recall that even in case θ = 1,
MVN2VEC-CON still have {f v
u}v∈V independent in each
view. This prevented MVN2VEC-CON from promoting more
collaboration.
On YouTube, the MVN2VEC models did not signiﬁcantly
outperform independent no matter how θ and γ varied due to
the dominant need for preservation as discussed in Section 4
and 6.4.
On Twitter, MVN2VEC-REG outperformed one-space when
γ was large, while MVN2VEC-CON could not beat one-
space for reasons discussed in Section 6.4. This also echoed
MVN2VEC-CON’s performance on Snapchat as discussed in
the ﬁrst paragraph of this section.
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We identiﬁed and studied the objectives that are speciﬁc
and important to multi-view network embedding, i.e. preser-
vation and collaboration. We then explored the feasibility of
better embedding by simultaneously modeling both objec-
tives, and proposed two multi-view network embedding
methods. Experiments with various downstream tasks were
conducted on a series of synthetic networks and three real-
world multi-view networks from distinct sources, including
two public datasets and a large-scale internal Snapchat
dataset. The results corroborated the validity and impor-
tance of preservation and collaboration as two optimization
objectives, and demonstrated the effectiveness of the pro-
posed MVN2VEC methods.
Knowing the existence of the identiﬁed objectives, future
works include modeling different extent of preservation and

11
collaboration for different pairs of views in multi-view em-
bedding. It is also rewarding to explore supervised methods
for task-speciﬁc multi-view network embedding that jointly
model preservation and collaboration.
Acknowledgments.
This work was sponsored in part by
U.S. Army Research Lab. under Cooperative Agreement
No. W911NF-09-2-0053 (NSCTA), DARPA under Agree-
ment No. W911NF-17-C-0099, National Science Founda-
tion IIS 16-18481, IIS 17-04532, and IIS-17-41317, DTRA
HDTRA11810026, and grant 1U54GM114838 awarded by
NIGMS through funds provided by the trans-NIH Big Data
to Knowledge (BD2K) initiative (www.bd2k.nih.gov). Any
opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this document are those of the author(s) and
should not be interpreted as the views of any U.S. Govern-
ment. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and
distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstand-
ing any copyright notation hereon.
