Context Matters: Self-Attention for
Sign Language Recognition
Fares Ben Slimane
Department of Computer Science
University of Quebec at Montreal
Montreal, Quebec, Canada

Mohamed Bouguessa
Department of Computer Science
University of Quebec at Montreal
Montreal, Quebec, Canada

Abstract—This paper proposes an attentional network for the
task of Continuous Sign Language Recognition. The proposed
approach exploits co-independent streams of data to model the
sign language modalities. These different channels of information
can share a complex temporal structure between each other.
For that reason, we apply attention to synchronize and help
capture entangled dependencies between the different sign lan-
guage components. Even though Sign Language is multi-channel,
handshapes represent the central entities in sign interpretation.
Seeing handshapes in their correct context deﬁnes the meaning
of a sign. Taking that into account, we utilize the attention
mechanism to efﬁciently aggregate the hand features with their
appropriate spatio-temporal context for better sign recognition.
We found that by doing so the model is able to identify the
essential Sign Language components that revolve around the
dominant hand and the face areas. We test our model on the
benchmark dataset RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather 2014, yielding
competitive results.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sign languages are often deﬁned as manual languages.
However, besides the hand articulations, non-manual com-
ponents like facial expressions, arm, head, body movements
and positions play a crucial part in Sign Languages [1]. Any
change in one of these components can alter the meaning of
a sign. Usually, the handshape performed by the dominant
hand carries most of the meaning of the sign [2]. As for the
other components, they provide a semantic context to it. For
example, the signs for “man” and “woman” are very close
as they both use the same handshape and body movement,
although, as mentioned in [3], male words tend to be signed
close to the forehead while female signs are usually performed
around the chin. Similarly, for the signs “sit” and “chair”,
they both have the same handshape but slightly different hand
movements, in which “chair” is the sign “sit” but twice
[4]. Facial expressions can also greatly affect the meaning
of a handshape, and are mostly used to ask questions or
express emotion. For instance, when signing a “you” sign,
by raising the eyebrows, it becomes a question: “Is it you?”
or by using a different facial expression it turns into “It’s
you?!?!” meaning that “I am surprised that it is you” [5].
These examples highlight the idea that interpreting a sign
often requires recognizing the handshape accompanied by its
contextual information. This context is not limited to the
spatial information that resides around the handshape for a
ﬁxed point in time, but also the temporal information that
consists of hand and body movements.
Much of the current literature in Continuous Sign Lan-
guage Recognition (CSLR) ignores the notion of incorporating
contextual information to the handshape. Instead, they either
exclusively use the handshape features from the cropped hand
images [6], or simply use global features by trying to learn
a complete spatial representation of full-body images [7], [8].
Nevertheless, there have been some works that investigated
the effect of combining information of the handshape with
the other Sign Language modalities. For instance, [9] use
a two-stream 3D-CNN to extract global (full-body) and lo-
cal (hand) features and then fuse the representations in the
last fully connected layers. Another work [10] involves the
use of specialized sub-networks (SubUNets) to learn full-
frame and handshape information and then to synchronize
the modalities through a recurrent BLSTM layer. The authors
found that combining modalities in this manner outperforms
the use of isolated SubUNets. However, it is important to
note that sign language modalities mostly share complex non-
linear relations. Because of that, these approaches may fail
to successfully capture and aggregate the required handshape
dependencies. This is especially true when using recurrent
networks, as they are more biased by close contexts, only
considering short-term dependencies rather than the global
long-term dependencies [11]. In this paper, we propose a
superior method that efﬁciently combines handshape features
with their appropriate global context, and which yields better
recognition results than the latter studies.
Virtually all progress in CSLR has operated under the
assumption that this is a gesture recognition task and that
the main challenge is to simply learn the mapping of signs
to their respective glosses. The authors in [12] argue that this
is not the case, as Sign Language has its own linguistic and
grammatical properties, and that we should take into account
the word orders and grammar. That being the case, they
introduce a new problem setup: Sign Language Translation
(SLT)1, in which they approach it as a machine translation task,
generating spoken language translations from sign language
1We draw the attention of the reader that in this study we tackle the speciﬁc
problem of Continuous Sign Language Recognition (CSLR). The task of Sign
Language Translation (SLT) is beyond the scope of this paper.
arXiv:2101.04632v1  [cs.CV]  12 Jan 2021

videos. And they, accordingly, employ an encoder-decoder
RNN with attention which is commonly used for machine
translation tasks. Alternatively, it has been shown that using
an attention network by itself can also be efﬁcient in machine
translation. The Transformer Network from [13], which is
based solely on attention, has been proven to be very effective
in machine translation tasks. Just recently, Camgoz et al. [14]
proposed a transformer-based encoder-decoder architecture for
the task of SLT which signiﬁcantly exceeds the previous state-
of-the-art performance from [12] and sets a new baseline result
for SLT. This proves the efﬁciency of such architecture for
capturing temporal dependencies.
Unlike spoken languages, sign language is undoubtedly
multi-channel. Information is carried through handshapes,
body movements, and facial expressions. Contrary to [14] and
instead of relying on a unique channel of information from
full-frame representations, we exploit the attention mechanism
to effectively combine different modality information. When
signing, the handshape usually depends on some relevant
contexts, rather than all context information. As a result, the
transformer network is a more suitable choice for our problem
setup, as it can efﬁciently combine hand features with their
appropriate full-body information, since it is explicitly built to
detect important dependencies, as opposed to their recurrent
counterpart.
Accordingly, in this paper, we propose an attention-based
approach for sequence to sequence sign language alignment
and recognition. Unlike previous works, the originality of
our approach lies in explicitly picking up and aggregating
contextual information from the non-manual sign language
components. Without any domain annotation, our approach
is able to exclusively identify the most relevant features
associated with the handshape when predicting a sign. The
main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
• Devising an end-to-end framework for sequence to se-
quence Sign Language Recognition that utilizes self-
attention for temporal modeling.
• Elaborating a more efﬁcient method to incorporate hand-
shapes with their spatiotemporal context for Sign Lan-
guage Recognition.
• Achieving competitive results, in terms of Word Error
Rate, on the RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather 2014 benchmark
dataset.
II. RELATED WORK
Most work in CSLR can be mainly divided into two
stages: the extraction of spatial representations from the in-
put images and then learning the correspondence between
the representations’ sequence and the target sequence. There
exists a fair amount of literature in the ﬁeld that utilizes
handcrafted feature representations [15] and classical models
like HMMs for sequence learning [6]. However, due to the
revolutionary advances in deep learning, recent research has
started to shift interest to using CNNs [6], and 3D-CNNs
[9] as feature extractors, and recurrent networks for temporal
modelling [10]. For instance, the authors in [7] propose a
CNN-RNN-HMM architecture for the task of CSLR. On top
of their CNN-RNN-HMM model, [7] employ an iterative
forced alignment algorithm that reﬁnes the label-to-image
alignment and that broadly outperforms the previous work by
a large margin. Instead of manual labelling, forced alignment
is able to provide useful training targets, which are re-ﬁned
through iterative alignment. The model will be trained on
these new labels and re-align them for the next iteration.
The training process is repeated until the resulting model
stops getting better recognition. A similar work [16] employ
the same forced alignment technique to maximize the target
likelihood estimation. The authors adopt a multi-stream HMM
approach to synchronize and learn from parallel and different
sub-problems (sign language, mouth shape, and hand shape
recognition). Respectively, using a parallel alignment approach
produces better recognition performance than [7] which fol-
lows a similar CNN-LSTM-HMM setup but uses a single
stream input.
As a rule, CSLR is considered a weakly supervised prob-
lem since gloss annotations usually lack the exact temporal
location [17]. Besides HMMs, a common strategy used to
solve this problem is the use of Connectionist Temporal
Classiﬁcation (CTC) loss function [18], since it considers all
possible alignments between input and output sequences. CTC
has been successfully applied for CSLR [10], [17] and also
for various other sequence to sequence problems including
speech recognition [19] and handwriting recognition [20].
Nonetheless, the CTC algorithm is found to be incompatible
for machine translation since it only allows monotonic align-
ment between source and target sequences [21]. Instead, the
encoder-decoder architecture is usually applied for machine
translation. As described in [22], the encoder-decoder network
consists of learning a latent representation that maps the input
sequence to another target sequence. However, this usually
results in having a bottleneck state that fails to capture long-
range dependencies, especially when dealing with long input
sequences. Giving a network an attention mechanism is widely
considered to be a good way to solve this problem, as it allows
the decoder to focus on relevant hidden states, and avoids
squeezing all input information into the last hidden state [23].
The authors in [12] adopt this strategy for Sign Language
Translation. They found that having an attention mechanism
[23] exceptionally improved the translation performance.
Recent machine translation research [13] achieved state of
the art performance by merely using self-attention, entirely
replacing recurrent models. This attention mechanism has
been successfully used in a variety of other tasks like video
captioning [24] in which the authors use an encoder-decoder
framework with the transformer network backbone to generate
a text description of a given video. Another interesting work
in the ﬁeld of reading comprehension [25], utilizes the self-
attention mechanism to compute the similarities between a pair
of context and query words.
A separate study in action recognition [26] proposes a
transformer-based model. They argue that human actions are
recognizable from the state of the environment, apart from

their own pose. For that, they use self-attention to aggregate
features from the spatio-temporal context around the person to
correctly classify a person’s actions. This inspires us to exploit,
in this paper, self-attention to incorporate handshape features
with their spatio-temporal dependencies. Doing so would add
context from the global information to the handshape and
ultimately contribute to improving sign recognition. To the best
of our knowledge, no previous study has considered doing this
for Sign Language Recognition.
The ﬁeld of Continuous Sign Language Recognition only
really took off in recent years, as labeled datasets became
more publicly accessible for researchers. For instance, RWTH-
PHOENIX-Weather 2014 [27] that quickly became a popular
baseline for CSLR. The dataset offers sign language gloss
annotation for a German weather forecast. In this paper, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through the use
of the latter dataset.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
In this section, we describe the approaches that we have
devised for the task of Continuous Sign Language Recognition
(CSLR). First, in Section 3.B, we introduce our proposed
approach which we refer to as Sign Attention Network (SAN).
The considered model is based on the Transformer architecture
that we brieﬂy describe in Section 3.A. Our model ﬁrst extracts
spatial features from the sign clip frames using 2D CNNs.
Then, it employs self-attention for temporal modeling. Finally,
the proposed model learns sequence alignment through a CTC
layer. In Section 3.C, we add a secondary stream for the
cropped handshape sequences and we combine the hand fea-
tures with their spatio-temporal full-body context. In Section
3.D, instead of considering the entire context information,
we merely attend to information from the handshape local
surroundings. This will allow the model to only focus on the
required context, discarding unnecessary distant information.
We explain the motivation behind such an approach and
demonstrate its effectiveness in the experimentation section
through quantitative and qualitative ﬁndings. Implementation
and Training details are given in Sections 3.E and 3.F respec-
tively.
A. Transformer Network
This architecture was ﬁrstly proposed in [13] as an al-
ternative for the traditional recurrent models. It relies on
self-attention to compute sequence representation, entirely
repealing recurrence and convolutional operations, in which
it helped reduce computational cost. Instead of performing
attention on all the feature space, features are ﬁrst linearly
projected to query Q, key K, and value V embeddings with
lower dimensionality, h times. According to the authors [13],
this allows the model to attend to information from different
representation subspaces. The architecture then uses the scaled
dot product (see Equation 1) to calculate the attention scores
(similarity) of each feature with the rest of the features in the
sequence by multiplying Q with K. The output is computed
as the weighted sum of values V conditionally to the attention
weights.
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√dk

V
(1)
Moving away from recurrent and convolutional models, we
end up losing positional information. Accordingly, to preserve
the sequence order, the authors add positional encodings to
the feature representations through the use of a sinusoid-
wave-based function. A detailed explanation of the overall
architecture can be found in the original paper [13].
B. Sequence Alignment with CTC
We propose an attention-based model for Sign Recognition.
Our model is designed to accept a clip as input and accordingly
produce the output words in a spoken language, making it a
sequence to sequence task. Subsequently, our model is trained
to recognize and time-align the target glosses from the sign
language clip.
In recognition tasks, framewise aligning each timestep in
the input sequence X = {x1, x2, ..xT } with its corresponding
ground-truth annotation can be time-consuming and compu-
tationally expensive to train. This is especially true in the
case of CSLR as the input sequence’s length can be much
more superior than that of the target sequence. Connectionist
Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) proposed by [18], is a popular
solution to overcome such a problem. The CTC considers all
possible alignment in each timestep. It introduces an extended
target vocabulary L′ = L ∪{ϵ} where ϵ represents the blank
label that accounts for silence and which is to be removed
from the output while decoding.
The CTC objective loss function is deﬁned as LCT C =
−log P(Y |X) where P(Y |X) is the conditional probability
and can be described as:
P(Y |X) =
X
a∈L′
Y
1≤t≤T
Pt(at|X)
(2)
Computing the score for each alignment can be computa-
tionally intensive; to that end, CTC uses a dynamic program-
ming algorithm to efﬁciently and promptly compute LCT C
[21].
Recurrent networks are usually used to estimate posteriors
Pt(at|X) for each timestep t1≤t≤T . However, RNNs normally
fail to capture global dependencies, especially when dealing
with long sequences. Therefore, for sequence to sequence
modeling, we replace traditional recurrent methods with self-
attention, as they have proven to be more resilient to the
vanishing gradient problem. Similarly, as used in the encoder
side of the Transformer network, we use stacked self-attention
layers to learn temporal dependencies and map the input frame
features viewed as X ∈RT xD to another sequence of equal
length, in which D represents the feature dimensionality. In
summary, our model produces image representations through
a 2D CNN on the clip individual frames of a given sign clip.
The resulting matrix is passed to succeeding Ax Attention

Fig. 1. Overview of our Sign Attention Network that takes a sequence of full-frame images and outputs the target word glosses. The Ax Unit represents the
Attention stack as introduced in [13], which is composed of a multi-head self-attention mechanism followed by a fully connected layer. We apply a layer
Norm [28] and then a residual connection for each as opposed to the original Transformer paper.
units followed by a linear projection and a Softmax to output
the word probabilities and ﬁnally a CTC layer in order to
generate the gloss words, as highlighted in Figure 1.
C. Context-Hand Attention Layer
Although our model may be able to learn all sign language
modalities simply from the full-frame sequences, it would
be of special interest to investigate the impact of fusing
hand and global features. Handshapes require spatio-temporal
information; as a result, each hand feature needs to attend to
context across time and not just the current context frame.
Respectively, we design two-stream sub-networks: a Context
Stream that is trained on the full-frame sequences and a Hand
Stream which is trained on the cropped hand images. This
will allow the ﬁrst to learn to recognize global information
and as a result the overall context of the signs. The second
will be equipped to merely learn the handshape information.
We combine the two through a third module that we refer
to as a Context-Hand Attention Layer, in which the key
and value features of shape (Txdk) are computed as linear
projections of the full-frame sequence representation, while
the Query features Qhand of shape (T ′xdk) are obtained
through the hand sequence projections. We apply the dot-
product to get the attention values of the Qhand features over
the Kcontext features and then a weighted averaging of the
resulting matrix over the Vcontext features to get the updated
hand representations. We apply a Layer-Norm operation on
the hand query and then add it to the original hand features.
The resulting feature is passed to another Norm Layer and a 2
layer Feed-Forward Network, to eventually produce the ﬁnal
hand query. The updated hand features are passed to a linear
layer followed by a Softmax and then to a CTC to generate the
word glosses. Similarly to [10], the overall network is trained
end-to-end using the three loss layers: Lhand, Lcontext and
Lcombine. The described process and the overall architecture
is illustrated in Figure 2.
D. Relative Local Context Masking
Typically, self-attention allows the model to observe the
entire sequence when measuring the attention at each se-
quence step. This can be very helpful for recognition, as Sign
Language possesses a complex temporal structure and having
this type of attention can help capture entangled dependen-
cies. However, while handshapes expect temporal context, it
is unclear to what extent this context may span. Required
information can be limited to a local temporal window. So,
instead of taking information from the entire sequence, we set
a relative window and we only attend to the context around
the current handshape frame. A similar idea has been explored
for Acoustic Models [29]. This can be especially beneﬁcial
when dealing with long sequences where early handshapes
don’t usually require information from distant context frames.
We set a relative window of size r and we apply a mask
Mrel ∈RT ′xT to the attention scores to mask out unwanted
values in which:
Mrel =
(
1
if |j −k| < r
0
else
Having attention restricted to a local region may result in
missing some required long-range dependencies. Therefore,
we avoid using such a mechanism on self-attention layers in
both the context and hand streams as they are responsible
for learning global information from the overall sequences.
And we solely use it in the Context-Hand attention layer to
incorporate handshapes to their local related contexts.
E. Implementation Details
We start by extracting T frames (mostly 64) from the orig-
inal video clip, in order to reduce computational complexity
and discard frame redundancy. We resize the input full-frame
images to a spatial resolution of 224 x 224. We also resize the
hand patches to a lower resolution of 112 x 112. We normalize
both full-frame and hand images by subtracting the dataset’s
image mean. For spatial image embeddings, we utilize the
MobileNetV2 [30] architecture, due to its low-latency and
high efﬁciency as a feature extractor. We drop its last fully
connected layers and use the rest of the layers for feature
embeddings. All our networks use a feature dimensionality of
dk = 128, 10 attention heads, and 2 layers of self-attention.
The rest follow the default recommended setup provided by
[13]: A 2 layer position-wise feed-forward network with a

Fig. 2. Combination of both the full-frame and the handshape streams through a Context-Hand Attention layer.
dimensionality of dff = 2, 048 and a positional encoding
sinusoidal function that encodes relative and absolute infor-
mation. We based our networks’ implementations on [31] and
they are made publicly available2.
F. Training Details
We initialize all of our networks’ layers using Xavier [32],
except for the image embedding layers which have been pre-
trained on ImageNet [33]. We use the Adam [34] optimization
method with its default parameters and a learning rate of 10−4.
We also use gradient clipping with a threshold of 1. We avoid
overﬁtting by employing data augmentation through random
x-y translation and using a dropout probability of 0.3. We
train all our networks using a small batch size of 2. Since
we are performing batch training and considering that input
clips may vary in size, sequences in every batch are padded
to equal lengths (maximum sequence length in the batch).
As a result, we utilize a mask on the input sequences to
avoid attending on padded elements. In the case where we
use relative local masking, we merge both the padding mask
with Mrel. So that, besides the distant elements, we also avoid
looking at the padded elements. We train our networks for 100
epochs or until train perplexity convergence. We evaluate our
model every epoch on the validation set and report the best
performing model.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate our models on the task of
Continuous Sign Language Recognition and we compare our
ﬁndings with state-of-the-art previous works on the RWTH-
PHOENIX-Weather 2014 corpus. The dataset offers sign clips
2https://github.com/faresbs/slrt
(sequence of frames) and their corresponding gloss annotation.
It contains 9 different signers and a train set of 5,672 se-
quences, thereby helping with model generalization. The tex-
tual annotation consists of a vocabulary L of 1,231, with only
410 singletons (words that appear only once in the training
set). The dataset provides full-frames alongside the cropped
dominant hand (right hand), which provide a favourable test
bed for our approach. Accordingly, we empirically demon-
strate the effectiveness of combining the handshape features
with their proper context using our proposed method, and we
show that it signiﬁcantly improves recognition performance.
A. Quantitative Results
As shown in Table I, we start by comparing our approaches’
results for the RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather 2014 dataset on
both the validation and test sets and using the Word Error
Rate:
WER = #deletions + #insertions + #substitutions
#number of reference observations
(3)
Instead of using a greedy approach for decoding, in which
we simply take the word with the highest probability, we
consider using a CTC beam decoder with a beam width of 10
to get our ﬁnal output sequence in both training and evaluation.
We found that having a higher beam value did not improve
performance and rather tremendously increased decoding time.
Taking this into account, we use the same beam search strategy
for all our experiments.
First, we study the effect of incorporating handshape fea-
tures with full-frame context information by adding a hand
stream module and a Context-Hand attention layer. This leads
to a considerable boost in performance as shown in Table I.

Fig. 3. The Word Error Rate learning curve of our SAN variants for the task
of CSLR on the RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather 2014 dataset.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF OUR SIGN ATTENTION NETWORK VARIANTS ON
RWTH-PHOENIX-WEATHER 2014 IN WORD ERROR RATE % (THE
LOWER THE BETTER).
Dev
Test
SAN
35.33
35.45
+ Hand Stream
33.68
34.12
+ Relative Local Masking
32.74
33.29
But more importantly and as manifested in Figure 3, adding
handshape features also improves training and accelerates
model convergence. This empirically showcases the usefulness
of combining the dominant hand with the overall context
derived from the nonmanual components of the sign. Note
that both hand and full-frame sequences have equal lengths
(T = T ′). Next and as demonstrated in Table I, limiting
attention and fusing handshapes with their local related context
leads to a signiﬁcant improvement in performance, surpassing
all our previous approaches. This supports the idea that the
handshape, when accompanied by its proper context, can
notably help in recognition.
In view of the signiﬁcant complexity of our SAN architec-
ture and the training dataset being too limited, our proposed
model may not be able to generalize well for the task in hand
and can as a result perform badly in the evaluation set. One
way to tackle this problem is to provide a better initialization
scheme for our model by ﬁrstly training the spatial feature
extractor (CNN) on the same dataset. The CNN module will
be at ﬁrst initialized on ImageNet and then trained on the
RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather 2014 dataset. As can be seen in
Table II, by pre-training the CNN module of our SAN model
on the same dataset, we signiﬁcantly outperform the equivalent
model when merely pre-trained on ImageNet.
Table 3 shows a comparison of our best performing model
with previous publications. For a fair comparison, we only
compare with competing methods that are trained on ground
truth target glosses and we don’t account for approaches that
rely on forced alignment to train on per-frame labels. Accord-
ingly, we opted to compare in this study with methods that
employ similar training conﬁgurations, in order to showcase
TABLE II
SAN RECOGNITION PERFORMANCE IN WORD ERROR RATE WHEN
PRE-TRAINING ITS CNN MODULE ON IMAGENET AND
RWTH-PHOENIX-WEATHER 2014 DATASET % (THE LOWER THE
BETTER).
Pre-Training
Dev
Test
ImageNet
32.74
33.29
RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather 2014
29.02
29.78
TABLE III
COMPARATIVE RESULTS ON THE RWTH-PHOENIX-WEATHER 2014
DATASET IN WORD ERROR RATE % (THE LOWER THE BETTER).
Dev
Test
SAN
29
29.7
Koller et al. (CNN-2BLSTM) [7]
32.7
32.9
Koller et al. (CNN) [7]
33.7
33.3
Huang et al. [9]
-
38.3
Cui et al. [17]
39.4
38.7
Koller et al. [6]
38.3
38.8
Camgoz et al. (HMM-LM) [10]
40.8
40.7
Camgoz et al. (CTC) [10]
43.1
42.1
Koller et al. [35]
47.1
45.1
Koller et al. [27]
57.3
55.6
the efﬁciency of our proposed approach.
B. Qualitative Analysis
Apart from obtaining promising results, it is of interest
to visualize the areas on which the model focuses for sign
prediction. Accordingly, we use Grad-Cam [36] to produce a
localization heatmap in which bright pixels represent positive
inﬂuence and have great importance on the predicted sign. As
can be seen in Figure 4, our models primarily focus on the
dominant hand (right hand) and the face area which reinforces
the intuition that our model is able to identify the essential
components for sign interpretations.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have proposed a novel method that exploits
attention to effectively combines hand query features with
their respective temporal full-body context without the need
for any additional supervision. We have proven the efﬁciency
of such an approach to the task of Continuous Sign Language
Recognition. For future studies, it will be of interest to
investigate the effect of using a forced alignment algorithm
on top of our architecture, similarly to [7], [16]. Relying
on forced alignment may signiﬁcantly improve recognition
as shown in [7] and it is a popular solution to overcome
weak supervision by iteratively reﬁning and training on label-
to-image prediction. We can also employ HMMs instead of
CTC for sequence alignment, as they have been proven to
be superior in [10]. Another important venue to explore is
to furthermore extend this work by applying our architecture
for the task of Sign Language Translation (SLT) similarly to
[12] and [14] and investigating the effect of combining hand
features with their global non-manual context through the use
of the attention mechanism.

Fig. 4. Heatmap Localization on the frame embedding activations, highlighting important regions which the model uses to predict a particular sign. The top
sequence is the output results of our SAN network. The middle is for SAN with the hand stream and the bottom is for SAN with hand stream and the local
context masking. Note that this example is randomly chosen and not cherry-picked.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully thank the reviewers and the associate
editor for their valuable comments and important suggestions.
This work is supported by research grants from the Natu-
ral Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC).
