Large language model for Bible sentiment analysis: Sermon on the Mount
Mahek Voraa, Tom Blaub, Vansh Kachhwalc, Ashu M. G. Solod, Rohitash Chandra e,f,
a Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Assam, India
bData61, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Sydney, Australia
cIndian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
d Maverick Trailblazers Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, U.S.A.
e Transitional Artificial Intelligence Research Group, School of Mathematics and Statistics, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, Australia
fPingala Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Sydney, Australia
Abstract
The revolution of natural language processing via large language models has motivated its use in multidisciplinary areas that
include social sciences and humanities and more specifically, comparative religion. Sentiment analysis provides a mechanism to
study the emotions expressed in text. Recently, sentiment analysis has been used to study and compare translations of the Bhagavad
Gita, which is a fundamental and sacred Hindu text. In this study, we use sentiment analysis for studying selected chapters of the
Bible. These chapters are known as the Sermon on the Mount. We utilize a pre-trained language model for sentiment analysis
by reviewing five translations of the Sermon on the Mount, which include the King James version, the New International Version,
the New Revised Standard Version, the Lamsa Version, and the Basic English Version. We provide a chapter-by-chapter and
verse-by-verse comparison using sentiment and semantic analysis and review the major sentiments expressed. Our results highlight
the varying sentiments across the chapters and verses. We found that the vocabulary of the respective translations is significantly
different. We detected different levels of humour, optimism, and empathy in the respective chapters that were used by Jesus to
deliver his message.
Keywords: BERT, natural language processing, comparative religion, Bible, sentiment analysis
1. Introduction
Natural language processing (NLP) enables computers to
read, interpret, translate, analyze, and understand written and
oral forms of language [1, 2, 3]. NLP includes tasks such as lan-
guage translation, speech recognition, topic modelling, and se-
mantic and sentiment analysis [2] and is typically implemented
using machine learning and deep learning [4, 5, 6]. Sentiment
analysis of written and oral text provides an understanding of
human emotions and affective states [7, 8, 9]. Semantic analy-
sis has a wide range of applications that mainly include market-
ing with applications in recommender systems in social media
[10, 11]. Semantic analysis has been used in market research
to determine customer viewpoints about products or services
in[12, 13]. Sentiment analysis has a wide range of social me-
dia applications [14] that can guide sociologists, political sci-
entists, and policymakers. Sentiment analysis has been used to
study public behaviour and voting preferences during the 2020
United States presidential elections [15]. There is also research
on sentiment analysis from social media during COVID-19 [16]
and vaccine-related COVID-19 sentiments In a recent study,
Chandra and Kulkarni [17] used sentiment analysis to study
and compare translations of the sacred Hindu text known as the
Bhagavad Gita. The study reported that although the style and

)
vocabulary of the translations differ substantially, the semantic
and sentiment analysis showed similarity in the majority of the
verses. The study also showed how sentiment analysis captures
the changing topics of the conversation between the protago-
nists, Lord Krishna and Arjuna, over time. Chandra et al. [18]
used sentiment analysis to compare the Sanskrit translation of
the Bhagavad Gita with expert (human) translators and reported
major discrepancies in Google Translate. These applications
have motivated us to use sentiment analysis in this study of se-
lected chapters of the Bible.
The Bible is one of the most influential texts in history and
has attracted an immense volume of scholarship. [19, 20, 21]
The field of biblical scholarship also has a history of using non-
computational linguistic tools and theory to study the structure,
meaning, authorship, and authenticity of different parts, ver-
sions, and translations of the Bible [22, 23, 24, 25]. Artifi-
cial intelligence and computational linguistics have also been
applied to the study of the Bible. This began with rule and
grammar-based methods of computational linguistics [26] and
continues with modern deep learning-based NLP [27]. NLP
serves as an ideal resource for the study of the Bible and re-
lated texts because they are large and highly structured and have
been translated into hundreds of languages with most versions
in the public domain. The large and diverse set of English lan-
guage translations raises the need for comparisons between dif-
ferent styles of translations to verify if they feature similarity
in the core meaning [28]. At the same time, the availability
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
January 2, 2024
arXiv:2401.00689v1  [cs.CL]  1 Jan 2024

of the same text in a wide range of languages supports multi-
lingual machine translation and provides a toehold for NLP in
low-resource languages [29]. There are many language pairs
where the Bible is one of the major texts available in both lan-
guages [30].
The use of NLP has the benefit of saving a lot of time that
it would take for humans to do a verse-by-verse comparison.
Although the Bible has been used extensively as a resource for
training and evaluating NLP models, applying NLP for under-
standing biblical scholarship is comparatively less common. In
particular, although some prior works perform semantic anal-
ysis or topic modelling on the Bible, none of them employed
novel deep learning models for NLP such as the sentiment and
semantic analysis of the Bhagavad Gita [17] and topic mod-
elling between the Bhagavad Gita and the Upanishads [31].
These applications demonstrate the effectiveness of deep learning-
based NLP in advancing our understanding of sacred texts. In
spite of this, comparatively little work has been done to apply
these tools to biblical scholarship. We aim to close this gap by
using novel deep learning-based NLP models such as the bidi-
rectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT)
[32, 33], which has been prominently used for language mod-
elling for a wide range of tasks that include sentiment analysis
[17].
In this study, we focus on selected chapters of the Bible,
which are known as the Sermon on the Mount. Our goal is to
use sentiment analysis to compare selected translations of the
Sermon of the Mount including the King James version, the
New International Version, the New Revised Standard Version,
the Lamsa Version, and the Basic English Version. We com-
pare the vocabulary of the different translations using bigrams
and trigrams to give us an understanding of the style used in
the respective translations. We provide a verse-by-verse com-
parison using sentiment and semantic analysis and review the
major sentiments expressed. We visualise the polarity score of
the verses and the chapters and evaluate the similarities and dif-
ferences between the respective translations.
The rest of the research paper is organised as follows: Sec-
tion 2 provides background on related topics, Section 3 presents
the methodology, and Section 4 presents the results. Finally,
Section 5 provides a discussion, and Section 6 concludes the
paper.
2. Background
2.1. The Bible
The Bible is a collection of religious texts by different au-
thors that are considered sacred in Christianity, Judaism, and
other religions. The texts in the Bible include stories, poetry,
parables, instructions, and prophecies [19, 20, 21]. The word
”Bible” can refer to the Hebrew Bible [] and the Christian Bible
[]. The Christian Bible is subdivided into the Old Testament []
and the New Testament []. The contents of the Old Testament
vary between different Christian traditions, but it mostly over-
laps with the Hebrew Bible and differs primarily in the order of
books []. The Old Testament contains the Judeo-Christian cos-
mogony, the history of the Israelites (people from Israel), and
Mosaic law [34] (commandments by Moses). The New Testa-
ment describes the life and teachings of Jesus and the Christian
church. Millions of people around the world were converted
to Christianity.
A significant portion of indigenous popula-
tions were forced to convert through invasions [35] and their
descendants naturally became Christians. According to Guin-
ness World Records, the Christian Bible is the best-selling book
of all time with over 6 billion copies sold [36]. Hence, the Bible
has a profound influence on human history and culture. Thus,
it is the focus of our study.
The Sermon on the Mount is widely regarded as the defini-
tive summation of Jesus’s ethical and spiritual teachings [37]
and has consequently attracted much commentary and analy-
sis [38]. The Sermon on the Mount is a spiritual discourse ap-
pearing in chapters 5-7 of the Book of Matthew of the New
Testament. It was orally delivered by Jesus on an unidenti-
fied mountain commonly associated with the Mount of Beat-
itudes [39]. The Sermon on the Mount is an explanation from
Jesus of how to live a life pleasing to God and what it means to
be a Christian. Jesus taught about subjects including prayer, sal-
vation, justice, helping the poor, religious law, divorce, fasting,
judging other people, etc. The Sermon on the Mount includes
the Lord’s Prayer and Beatitudes. It contains some of the most
familiar Christian homilies and aphorisms.
2.2. Bible Translations
According to Wycliffe Bible Translators [40], the King James
Version of the Bible is available in 717 languages, the New
Testament is available in an additional 1582 languages, and
parts of the Bible are available in an additional 1196 languages.
Although many translations use the original Greek text as the
source language, others are translated from Latin [41], Ara-
maic [42], German [43], and mixtures of sources [44]. How-
ever, within the same source language, different translations
may be based on different variants of the text. For example, the
King James Version [45] and American Standard Version [46]
are both translated from Greek, but the former uses the Textus
Receptus [47] whereas the latter relies on the Westcott & Hort
New Testament [48] and the Tregelles New Testament [49].
2.3. NLP for religious texts
The use of NLP for religious texts is relatively new and
gaining interest among researchers. Christodouloupoulos and
Steedman [50] constructed a corpus of 100 Bible translations
to serve as a resource for NLP applications, which has since
been used extensively in machine translation research. Carlson
et al. [28] evaluated style transfer algorithms on biblical texts.
Garbhapu and Bodapati [51] implemented topic modelling and
evaluated latent Dirichlet allocation and latent semantic analy-
sis on a corpus of biblical texts. Xia et al [52] jointly analysed
27 versions of the English Bible, creating a consensus align-
ment of speech tokens between all versions rather than between
individual pairs. This led to a richer set of features, such as
part-of-speech tags and headwords rather than typical pairwise
analysis. Ebrahimi and Kann [53] evaluated zero-shot learn-
ing of pre-trained language models to low-resource languages
2

where Bible translations were the only data available to use as a
basis for adaptation. Leveraging the Bible as a resource led to a
significant improvement in tasks such as part-of-speech tagging
and named entity recognition.
In contrast, the studies that go the other way and use NLP as
a tool for biblical scholarship are less common. Nakov et al [54]
implemented latent semantic analysis on a dataset of monothe-
isticsacred texts. The statistical method was able to recover the
high level of similarity between texts from the same religion,
between the Old and New Testaments, and between Biblical
and Quranic texts.
Franklin [55] evaluated the emotionality
of different English translations using an association lexicon
method. Putnin¸ˇs et al [56] evaluated a number of authorship
attribution algorithms on a corpus of biblical texts and applied
them to specific chapters of disputed authorship, which added
powerful new evidence to the ongoing debate. Popa et al. [57]
applied ontology learning to identify the most important con-
cepts in the Bible and the relationships between them. Hu [58]
performed topic modelling on the Book of Psalms and Book of
Proverbs, both of which are collections of teachings, prayers,
and poems on various subjects. Yeshurun and Kimelfeld [59]
developed a pipeline for identifying biblical quotations in his-
torical religious texts. Bader et al. [60] performed translation-
free sentiment analysis using Bible data in multiple languages
where only one language had semantic tagging available. Jones
et al. [27] evaluated several supervised learning algorithms on
the task of reconstructing the original text of the Greek New
Testament. They found high agreement between the learning
algorithms and human experts as well as between the different
algorithms. Varghese and Punithavalli [61] used text-mining
techniques to perform lexical and semantic analysis of religious
books used by Jews, Christians, and Muslims. They compute
polarity, subjectivity, and various similarity scores. Mohamed
and Shokry [62] used word embedding to perform information
retrieval on the Quran. By using cosine similarity between the
learned features of both topics and queries, the model was able
to closely match human annotators, retrieving relevant verses
with high precision.
3. Methodology
3.1. Data: Bible - Sermon of Mount
Although there are hundreds of English translations of the
Bible, we focus on selected prominent versions that are mostly
used. According to a study [63] by researchers at Indiana Uni-
versity and Purdue University, among respondents who read the
Bible in the United States, 55% read the King James Version,
19% read the New International Version, 7% read the New Re-
vised Standard Version, 6% read the New American Bible, 5%
read the Living Bible, and 8% read other translations. There-
fore, our analysis includes the three most popular English trans-
lations in the United States.
Hence, we select the King James Version (KJV), the New
International Version (NIV), and the New Revised Standard
Version (NRSV) as our key translations. Apart from these, we
select the Lamsa Version (LV) because it has been translated
from Aramaic rather than from Greek. Finally, we include the
Basic English Version (BEV), which uses a restricted lexicon of
simple English words. In each of these translations, the Sermon
on the Mount consists of three chapters divided into the same
number of verses, but the verses themselves differ significantly.
Table 1 presents a summary of the number of words and verses
in each version of the Sermon of the Mount from the Bible.
3.2. Large language models for sentiment analysis
The long-short-term memory (LSTM) network is a class of
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) that has prominently been
used for processing temporal data and developing language mod-
els due to their capability to model temporal sequences [64].
The LSTM network was developed for addressing model train-
ing that emerges due to learning of long-term dependency prob-
lems in conventional RNNs [65]. Since then, LSTM networks
have been used in a wide range of applications that include pro-
cessing of text, speech, time series and image data [66]. Sev-
eral major advancements in LSTM networks have taken place
that include developing hybrid variants with deep learning mod-
els such as conventional neural networks and bi-directional and
encoder-decoder architectures [67]. To address certain limita-
tions motivated by cognitive science, Wang et al. [68] devel-
oped an attention-based LSTM network. The attention mech-
anism gives more attention to important information, such as
specific words in a sentence, that enables it to provide better
language modelling capabilities as demonstrated by the encoder-
decoder LSTM with attention, which is also known as a trans-
former [69]. The transformer model for language tasks features
millions of trainable parameters, which is a computationally
challenging task. A robust model requires a large corpus of
data. This led to the development of a pre-trained model known
as BERT[32]. Hence, developers and researchers can utilize
and refine the pre-trained BERT model for language modelling
tasks rather than developing a model from nothing. BERT learns
contextual relations between words and sub-words in a corpus.
BERT enables the understanding of ambiguous text by us-
ing surrounding text to establish context. BERT has been ap-
plied in a wide range of NLP tasks that include semantic and
sentiment analysis, text prediction, text generation, text summa-
rization, text responses, and polysemy resolution [70]. A wide
range of implementations of BERT exist that address compu-
tational challenges and domain-specific applications [71] such
as law and medicine [72, 73]. BERT has been widely used for
sentiment analysis tasks for different domains [74]. Hence, it is
suitable for our application. The sentence-BERT (S-BERT)[75]
model improves the BERT model by reducing the computa-
tional time to derive semantically meaningful sentence embed-
ding. Hence, we will use S-BERT in our framework for senti-
ment analysis.
3.3. Framework
We present the framework that compares different English
translations (versions) of the Bible focusing on the Sermon on
the Mount using sentiment analysis. We examine several ver-
sions to evaluate their similarity and differences given differ-
ences in their sources, the translation style, and the time period
3

Chapter
Verses
Words-KJV
Words-NIV
Words-NRSV
Words-LV
Words-BEV
5
48
5221
5392
5105
5586
5584
6
34
3807
4008
3807
4148
4216
7
29
2945
3052
2848
3120
3194
Table 1: Verse and word count for respective translations
of translation. Sentiment analysis refers to the processing of
human emotions in text using an NLP model. For example,
text may be “optimistic,” “pessimistic,” “anxious,” “thankful,”
etc. Sentiment analysis can feature single-label (only one senti-
ment) or multi-label (multiple sentiments) analysis. Our study
focuses on multi-label sentiment analysis where a sentence can
be both ”pessimistic” and ”anxious.” Our framework features
S-BERT model, which is refined using the Senwave dataset for
multi-label sentiment analysis. We also use the same model for
sentiment polarity analysis where we present sentiment scores
rather than sentiment type.
In our framework shown in Figure 1, we first convert the
text files to CSV file format which features contain each chap-
ter with its verses. We then removed stop words (using Natural
Language Toolkit 1) and grouped together inflected forms of a
word to be analyzed as a single item (lemmatisation). We also
normalized to UTF-8[76] and processed split words at punc-
tuation using regular expressions [77]. We implement this for
the selection versions of the Bible’s Sermon on the Mount sum-
marised in Table 1.
Note that we have two types of sentiment analysis that are
evaluated by our framework: sentiment polarity score and multi-
label sentiment classification. We use the AFINN sentiment
analysis [78] for sentiment polarity score. AFINN is a database
that features a set of English words rated for sentiment polar-
ity with an integer between -5 and +5 manually labelled by
Finn Årup Nielsen in 2009-2011 [79]. In the case of sentiment
classification, we fine-tune the S-BERT model using Senwave
data [80], which features 10,000 tweets hand labelled by 50 ex-
perts with 10 different sentiments plus 1 label that refers to the
COVID-19 official report. We limited to 10 sentiments and re-
moved the “official report” in data processing and utilized the
setup of our framework from previous work [17] that was used
for translation analysis of the Bhagavad Gita, the central text of
Hinduism.
In our framework, we pass each version of the Sermon on
the Mount, chapter by chapter, and record the sentiment classi-
fication for every verse along with the polarity score. We then
provide an analysis by comparing the sentiment classification
levels and polarity scores across the different chapters for re-
spective versions of the Sermon on the Mount.
An n-gram [81] is typically used to provide basic statistics
on a document using a continuous sequence of words and ele-
ments. A bi-gram is a sequence of two words and a tri-gram is
a sequence of three words. We also provide a bi-gram and tri-
gram analysis to evaluate the difference in the vocabulary used
1https://www.nltk.org/
by the respective versions.
4. Results
4.1. Data analysis
We begin by analyzing the top 10 bi-grams and tri-grams for
each translation as shown in Figure 2 (KJV, NIV, and NRSV),
Figure 3 (LV and BEV). We observe that the repeated tri-grams
are rare across all versions with most having no tri-grams that
appear more than twice and none having a tri-gram that appears
more than 3 times. This indicates a low degree of repetition
and a significant difference in the vocabulary across the ver-
sions. Among bi-grams, the only one that consistently appears
with high frequency is [’kingdom’, ’heaven’], which is likely
reflecting the construction ”Kingdom of Heaven”, suggesting
that this concept persists regardless of style, source language,
and time period.
4.2. Sentiment Analysis
We use the BERT model from our framework (Figure 1) for
verse-by-verse sentiment analysis of the respective Sermon on
The Mount translations.
We present the cumulative sentiments from the selected chap-
ters of the KJV as it’s the most popular translation. In Figure 4,
surprisingly joking is the sentiment detected the most from the
verses, which is not true as Sermon on the Mount is a religious
text with a serious tone. However, as some of the teachings
are metaphorical, our model detects them as joking. We note
that the joking label does not imply a joke but suggests that the
verses feature some level of humor. We revisit the famous para-
ble of the Mote and the Beam (Chapter 7: verses 1-5) where
Jesus warns his followers of the dangers of judging others and
states that they too would be judged by the same standards. In
Table 2, in Chapter 7 verse 5, we find that KVJ, NIV and NRSV
are classified as annoyed and joking while LV and BEV classi-
fied the verse as joking. As well as the injunction to ”turn the
other cheek” (Chapter 5: verse 39) is also interpreted as joking
in all the translations.
In Figure 7, we observe that ”optimistic” is the second most
expressed sentiment in the teachings followed by ”annoyed”,
”empathetic” and ”pessimistic” in that order. These results com-
port with what we might expect: the text is largely optimistic
and teaches that entrance to heaven is within reach for all peo-
ple (hence optimism and empathy), but also includes verses that
condemn injustice and inequity (reflecting annoyance and pes-
simism). Notable in their absence are sentiments such as thank-
fulness, sadness, and denial. Indeed, since the sermon is a gen-
erous offer or promise being extended to the congregation, there
4

Figure 1: Framework diagram showing major components that include preprocessing and sentiment analysis across translations of Sermon on the Mount.
is no cause for Jesus to be thankful or sad or to deny any accu-
sation.
Figure 8 presents the chapter-wise sentiment analysis for
various translations. We find that ”optimistic,” ”joking,” and
”annoyed” are the top three sentiments expressed in Chapter 5
while Chapter 6 has more optimistic and empathetic sentiments
than annoyed and joking. Chapter 7 has the most joking senti-
ments followed by annoyed and optimistic. It is interesting to
note that KJV has significantly more pessimistic and less op-
timistic sentiments for Chapter 7 when compared to other ver-
sions. In Chapter 5, we find that KJV and NRSV have similar
sentiment counts that differ significantly in Chapters 6 and 7.
We notice that in Chapter 5, none of the versions had a ”sad”
label and in Chapter 6, BEV had no label detected for the same
sentiment. In Chapter 7, only KJV and NRSV detected the
”sad” sentiment label. We find that the ”denial” label is only
present in LV and BEV in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 has not de-
tected this sentiment while in Chapter 7, only BEV detected the
sentiment. We note that ”annoyed” sentiment covers that Je-
sus seems to be annoyed at the things evil and foolish people
do. We also note that the ”thankful” label has not been detected
across all of the chapters and versions. This may imply that
Jesus was not openly being thankful to people for listening to
them as typically done in political speeches. His goal was to
impart spiritual and philosophical ideals and not gain political
support.
We also provide an analysis of how Jesus conveyed his ide-
als in speech based on sentiment polarity (AFINN score) through-
out the 3 chapters (Figure 8). A higher and positive score im-
plies more positive sentiments such as optimism, thankful, and
empathy. The lower and negative score implies negative senti-
ments such as denial, sadness, and pessimism.
We can see in Figure 8 that Jesus speaks with an overall
negative sentiment score in the 5 and 7 Chapters (-2 and -18),
and with a high positive sentiment score (21) in Chapter 6. We
notice a high fluctuation in Chapter 6 verses 21-28 in KJV. This
segment compares material goods with spiritual goods so jumps
in polarity make sense. As we can see, a similar trend is fol-
lowed in all of the three versions. In some cases, the KJV and
the NRSV have very similar scores and the scores for the NIV
are slightly different, but follow the same trend.
5. Discussion
Our study focused on translations of the Bible to English
and sentiment analysis on chapters comprising the Sermon on
the Mount. Our results in general indicate that large language
models for sentiment analysis can help us gain insight into how
the different translations affect the sentiments portrayed in the
resulting text. Our results demonstrate the capabilities of our
framework to explore the similarities and differences between
different translations. In summary, on the one hand, we see a
general agreement among the translations as the variance in any
particular sentiment is not large (Figure 7). On a finer scale,
however, we see that some translations are outliers in certain
sentiments, such as the KJV evincing significantly less opti-
5

King James
New International
New Revised Standard
Lamsa
Basic English
Verse-5
Chapter-7
you hypocrite first take
out the beam out of your
own eye and then shall
you see clearly to take
out the speck out of your
brother s eye.
you hypocrite first take
the plank out of your
own eye and then you
will see clearly to re-
move the speck from
your brother s eye.
you hypocrite first take
the log out of your own
eye and then you will
see clearly to take the
speck out of your neigh-
bour s eye.
o hypocrites first take
out the beam from your
own eye and then you
will see clearly to get out
the splinter from your
brother s eye.
you false one first take
out the bit of wood from
your eye then will you
see clearly to take out
the grain of dust from
your brother s eye.
Sentiments
Annoyed, Joking
Annoyed, Joking
Annoyed, Joking
Joking
Joking
Verse-34
Chapter-6
take therefore no worry
for the tomorrow for
the tomorrow shall take
worry for the things of
itself.
sufficient to the
day is the evil thereof.
therefore do not worry
about
tomorrow
for
tomorrow
will
worry
about itself.
each day
has enough trouble of
its own.
so do not worry about
tomorrow for tomorrow
will bring worries of its
own. today s trouble is
enough for today.
therefore do not worry
for tomorrow for tomor-
row will look after its
own. sufficient for each
day is its own trouble.
then have no care for to-
morrow tomorrow will
take care of itself. take
the trouble of the day as
it comes.
Sentiments
Pessimistic
Pessimistic,
Sad,
An-
noyed
Optimistic, Anxious
Optimistic, Empathetic
Optimistic
Verse-39
Chapter-5
but i say to you that
you resist not evil but
whosoever shall strike
you on your right cheek
turn to him the other
also.
but i tell you do not re-
sist an evil person.
if
anyone slaps you on the
right cheek turn to them
the other cheek also.
but i say to you do not
resist an evildoer.
but
if anyone strikes you on
the right cheek turn the
other also
but i say to you that you
should not resist evil but
whoever strikes you on
your right cheek turn to
him the other also.
but i say to you do
not make use of force
against an evil man but
to him who gives you a
blow on the right side of
your face let the left be
turned.
Sentiments
Joking
Annoyed, Joking
Annoyed, Joking
Joking
Annoyed, Joking
Verse-6
Chapter-7
give not that which is
holy to the dogs neither
cast you your pearls be-
fore pigs lest they tram-
ple them under their feet
and turn again and tear
you.
do not give dogs what is
sacred do not throw your
pearls to pigs. if you do
they may trample them
under their feet and turn
and tear you to pieces.
do
not
give
what
is
holy to dogs and do not
throw your pearls before
swine or they will tram-
ple them under foot and
turn and maul you.
do not give holy things
to the dogs and do not
throw your pearls be-
fore the swine for they
might tread them with
their feet and then turn
and rend you.
do not give that which is
holy to the dogs or put
your jewels before pigs
for fear that they will
be crushed under foot
by the pigs whose at-
tack will then be made
against you.
Sentiments
Annoyed, Joking
Annoyed, Joking
Annoyed, Joking
Joking
Anxious, Annoyed, Jok-
ing
Verse-31
Chapter-6
therefore take no worry
saying what shall we eat
or what shall we drink or
wherewithal shall we be
clothed
so do not worry say-
ing what shall we eat or
what shall we drink or
what shall we wear
therefore do not worry
saying what will we eat
or what will we drink or
what will we wear
therefore do not worry
or say what will we eat
or what will we drink
or with what will we be
clothed
then do not be full of
care saying what are we
to have for food or drink
or with what may we be
clothed
Sentiments
Optimistic, Anxious
Surprise
Surprise
Empathetic
Pessimistic, Annoyed
Verse-31
Chapter-5
it has been said whoso-
ever shall put away his
wife let him give her a
writing of divorcement
it has been said anyone
who divorces his wife
must give her a certifi-
cate of divorce.
it was also said whoever
divorces his wife let him
give her a certificate of
divorce.
it has been said that
whoever
divorces
his
wife must give her the
divorce papers.
again it was said who-
ever puts away his wife
has to give her a state-
ment in writing for this
purpose
Sentiments
Joking
Joking
Joking
Pessimistic,
Anxious,
Annoyed, Joking
Annoyed, Joking
Verse-5
Chapter-6
and when you pray you
shall not be as the hyp-
ocrites are for they love
to pray standing in the
synagogues and in the
corners of the streets
that they may be seen of
men. truly i say to you
they have their reward.
and when you pray do
not be like the hyp-
ocrites
for
they
love
to pray standing in the
synagogues and on the
street corners to be seen
by others. truly i tell you
they have received their
reward in full.
and whenever you pray
do not be like the hyp-
ocrites for they love to
stand and pray in the
synagogues and at the
street corners so that
they may be seen by oth-
ers. truly i tell you they
have received their re-
ward.
and when you pray do
not be like the hyp-
ocrites who like to pray
standing in the syna-
gogues and at the street
corners so that they may
be seen by men.
truly
i say to you that they
have
already
received
their reward.
and
when
you
make
your prayers be not like
the false hearted men
who take pleasure in
getting up and saying
their prayers in the syn-
agogues and at the street
turnings
so
that
they
may be seen by men.
truly i say to you they
have their reward.
Sentiments
Optimistic, Empathetic
Optimistic, Empathetic
Optimistic, Empathetic
Optimistic, Joking
Empathetic, Annoyed
Table 2: Sentiments across versions
6

(a) KJV
(b) NIV
(c) NRSV
Figure 2: Visualisation of top 10 bi-grams and tri-grams for the selected ver-
sions of Sermon on the Mount.
(a) LV
(b) BEV
Figure 3: Visualisation of top 10 bi-grams and tri-grams for the selected ver-
sions of Sermon on the Mount.
Figure 4: Cumulative sentiments of the respective chapters.
Figure 5: Polarity Of Jesus’s Speech
7

Figure 6: Heatmap, King James Version-Chapter5 Verse1
mism and more pessimism than the NRSV. In terms of senti-
ment polarity (Figure 5), Chapter 5 features an overall neutral
polarity, Chapter 6 has the most positive sentiment polarity, and
Chapter 7 has the highest negative polarity.
The parable of the Mote and the Beam as well as the ex-
hortation to turn the other cheek were both identified as jokes
or having some level of humor in all translations.
Further-
more, we note that ”thankful” was not detected in any chap-
ter across those translations, which may imply that Jesus was
not giving a political speech to gain followers, but a sermon
or a spiritual/philosophical discussion that used some humour
while mostly being optimistic (Chapter 5 and 6) and annoyed
and humorous (Chapter 7). This indicated that while being an-
noyed, he tried to ease out the discussion with a humorous tone
to create a less stressful situation arising from the discussions
It is well known that translations can vary in time, loca-
tion, and religious denomination [82]. Hence, the translations
reflect the prejudices of the translator, their agenda, the politi-
cal circumstances of the time, and the broader surrounding cul-
ture [83]. For example, the Luther Bible [84] was intentionally
translated into contemporary vernacular rather than the literary
prose of the original. This reflects Martin Luther’s desire to
weaken the control of the Catholic church by allowing every-
day people to read and understand the Bible without intermedi-
aries [85]. As with the rest of the New Testament, the Sermon
on the Mount was originally written in Koine Greek. However,
some scholars argue that various parts were originally Aramaic
[86] and have since been translated many times. William Cham-
berlin categorized approximately 900 English translations of
the Bible in [87].
In terms of limitations, our study also highlights an impor-
tant shortcoming with modern sentiment analysis techniques:
the tendency to interpret metaphors incorrectly as jokes (hu-
mour). The Bible is often heavily laden with metaphors, and
this is reflected by the high number of verses that were iden-
(a) Chapter 5
(b) Chapter 6
(c) Chapter 7
Figure 7: Chapter-wise Sentiment Analysis for KJV of Sermon On the Mount.
8

(a) Chapter 5
(b) Chapter 6
(c) Chapter 7
Figure 8: Sentiment polarity chapter-wise for KJV of Sermon On the Mount.
tified as joking. We also highlight that a further limitation is
that we reviewed only English translations without reviewing
the source language. Translations, especially metaphors, are
often mistranslated and are prone to be affected by the biases of
the translator, which depend on the time period and cultural set-
tings. Finally, we note that our sentiment classification model
was refined by the Senwave dataset, which was manually la-
belled for COVID-19 tweets worldwide. In our earlier study
[88], we reviewed the bi-grams and tri-grams of the tweets,
which indicate that the vocabulary of the training dataset is sig-
nificantly different from the respective versions of the Sermon
of the Mount in this study (Figures 2 and 3). The difference
in the vocabulary indicates a bias in sentiment labelling. We
also note that the timeline and the nature of COVID-19 and as-
sociated discussions are very different when compared to the
Sermon on the Mount. In future works, we would need to man-
ually label related texts to remove the sentiment labelling bias
in the training data.
In future work, our framework can be straightforwardly ex-
tended to other translations from which we could then identify
outliers in the same way we detected that the KJV is an outlier
for pessimism (Figure 7, Panel c). Future work can focus on
incorporating explicit metaphor detection [89, 90] in the anal-
ysis to capture the full depth of such verses. The study can
also be extended to related Biblical texts along with texts about
interpretations of the Sermon on the Mount [91]. Topic mod-
elling has recently been done in the case of Hindu texts such
as the Bhagavad Gita and the Upanishads [31], which further
motivates extension to the Bible and related texts. Hence, topic
modelling on different translations of the Sermon on the Mount
and other parts of the Bible can be considered. Through topic
modelling, the Sermon on the Mount can be compared with
other earlier texts such as the Dhammapada of Buddha [92],
the Upanishads, and the Bhagavad Gita.
6. Conclusions
We presented a sentiment analysis framework for compar-
ing selected translations of Sermon on the Mount.
Our re-
sults highlighted the varying sentiments across the chapters and
verses associated with different themes that link with varying
tones and styles used by Jesus to convey his teachings. We also
find that the vocabulary of the respective translations was sig-
nificantly different, which may be associated with the timeline
and cultural setting of the translation. We found that a certain
level of humor was detected in all the chapters along with differ-
ent levels of optimism and empathy, which form the core teach-
ings of Sermon on the Mount. Our framework can be extended
to other languages and related texts, which can be helpful in
evaluating the quality of translations.
Code and Data
Code and Data https://github.com/sydney-machine-learnin
sentimentanalysis-Bible
9
