USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT
POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS∗
A PREPRINT
Sven Gronauer†, Matthias Kissel, Luca Sacchetto, Mathias Korte and Klaus Diepold
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany
Arcisstr. 21, 80333 Munich
December 29, 2022
ABSTRACT
In this work, we propose a data-driven approach to optimize the parameters of a simulation such
that control policies can be directly transferred from simulation to a real-world quadrotor. Our
neural network-based policies take only onboard sensor data as input and run entirely on the em-
bedded hardware. In extensive real-world experiments, we compare low-level Pulse-Width Modu-
lated control with higher-level control structures such as Attitude Rate and Attitude, which utilize
Proportional-Integral-Derivative controllers to output motor commands. Our experiments show that
low-level controllers trained with reinforcement learning require a more accurate simulation than
higher-level control policies.
1
INTRODUCTION
Programming intelligent control strategies for complex robot systems is a challenging task. Reinforcement learning
(RL) promises the automated generation of control strategies through a data-driven approach instead of explicitly
designing hand-crafted solutions through expert knowledge. In recent years, the ﬁeld of RL has witnessed outstanding
successes and raised a surge of interest in the control of dynamical systems through such a trial-and-error paradigm.
The combination of RL and deep learning methods excel at problems that can be quickly simulated like robotics [13]
and video games [18] or in domains where the exact model is known but long-horizon planning is not computationally
tractable, e.g. board games like Go and Chess [25].
Despite the signiﬁcant advances in recent years, the applicability of RL algorithms is still limited when the data at test
time differ from those seen during training [10]. Since many real-world systems cannot afford to learn policies from
scratch due to the expense of data, simulations are the preferred approach to build data-driven control policies in the
RL community. Naturally, a gap between the simulation and the real world still exists because modeling of all effects
either requires in-depth expert knowledge or is simply not desirable, e.g. calculating all aero-dynamical effects can
signiﬁcantly increase simulation time. A successful policy transfer thus requires the reality gap to be small.
In this paper, we address the sim-to-real gap in the domain of quadrotor control and investigate three different structures
for quadrotor control. Our contributions are:
1. We apply simulation optimization as a data-driven approach to narrow the reality gap and demonstrate that
zero-shot policy transfers become feasible with minimal tuning effort. The data used for optimization were
collected for approximately one hour on the real-world quadrotor with a pre-implemented Proportional-
Integral-Derivative (PID) controller of the drone platform.
2. We deploy low-level control policies based on Pulse-Width Modulated (PWM) thrust commands trained
entirely in simulation on the quadrotor without ﬁne-tuning the policy. To the best of our knowledge, this
∗Published in IEEE Explore: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9981229 ©IEEE 2022.

arXiv:2201.01369v2  [cs.RO]  28 Dec 2022

USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS
is the ﬁrst work using RL that accomplishes successful zero-shot transfers to a real-world quadrotor based
on low-level control while having access to only onboard sensor data and running all computations on the
embedded hardware.
3. We study three control structures that differ in their level of abstraction: PWM, Attitude Rate and Attitude
control. Through extensive real-world experiments, we investigate the required ﬁdelity of the simulation with
respect to the deployed control structure.
Throughout this work, we focus on the context of zero-shot policy transfer, i.e. we train the agent entirely in simulation
and then deploy the controller on a quadrotor robot without using real-world data to ﬁne-tune the policy.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Quadrotor Control
For attitude control and set-point tracking of quadrotors, a common approach is a hierarchical control that consists
of nested PID controllers [16]. Approaches like the linear quadratic regulator are also suitable methods for the sta-
bilization around the hover conditions under reasonably small roll and pitch angles. However, when more dynamic
ﬂight behaviors are desired, more complex controllers may be required [17]. Due to their highly dynamic movement
capabilities, quadrotors depict an interesting platform to test maneuvers such as landing [11] and perform acrobatic
maneuvers like loopings and rolls [9], multi-ﬂips [15] or ﬂying through narrow vertical gaps [17]. While most of
the aforementioned works rely on highly accurate state estimation, only a few papers have considered quadrotor con-
trol based on lone onboard sensor signals. In [12], model-based RL was used to train a policy from real-world data
while relying solely on onboard sensor measurements to run control with direct motor PWM signals. However, neural
network calculations were executed on a server and then transmitted via radio to the drone. They leveraged 180s of
real-world ﬂights to produce a controller capable of accomplishing at most 6s of ﬂight time.
2.2
Bridging the Reality Gap
To reduce the gap between simulation and real-world, domain randomization has been proposed to augment the di-
versity of data by randomization. One way is to randomize the dynamics where simulation parameters responsible
for the realization of the system are re-sampled at the beginning of every trajectory [21]. Another approach is to
randomize the rendering of image-based observations in the simulation [26]. In [14] it was shown that agile drone
racing is possible with convolutional neural networks when trained on an abundance of image-based data. Besides
domain randomization, another method to narrow the reality gap is simulation optimization [1] which is a data-driven
approach to identify simulation parameters based on real-world data. In [2] a simulation parameter distribution was
learned based on collected data from a physical manipulator robot.
2.3
Zero-shot Policy Transfer
In the area of RL, there have been only a few works that study the zero-shot policy transfer to real-world quadrotors.
[9] showed that Attitude Rate control based on image-based and onboard data could perform highly agile maneuvers
such as rolls and loopings. Most similar to our paper is [19] were it was shown that low-level PWM-based controllers
could stabilize and generalize to multiple sizes of quadrotors while entirely being trained in simulation. In contrast to
our work, they used an external tracking system to accurately estimate the drone state.
3
PRELIMINARIES
3.1
Reinforcement Learning
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is formalized by a tuple (S, A, P, r, µ), where S and A denote the state and action
spaces. P : S × A →P(S) describes the system transition probability, µ denotes the initial state distribution and
r : S × A →R is the reward function. Let τ = (s0, a0, s1, a1, . . . ) be a trajectory generated under the policy π with
st+1 ∼P(·|st, at), at ∼π(·|st) and s0 ∼µ. We apply the shortcut τ ∼π when trajectories are generated under π
and denote the trajectory return by R(τ) = P∞
t=0 γtr(st, at) with the discount factor γ ∈(0, 1). In RL, the goal of
the agent is to learn a control policy π : S →P(A) that maximizes the expected return J(π) = Eτ∼π[R(τ)]. We use
πθ to denote that the policy is parametrized by a neural network with weights θ.
In this work, we sample system parameters ξ from a distribution Ξ at the beginning of each trajectory. This results in
the system transition probability being dependent on the system parameters st+1 ∼P(·|st, at, ξ) which is known as
2

USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS
Figure 1: Overview and coordinates frames of the CrazyFlie quadrotor.
domain randomization. Thus, we seek policy parameters that maximize the expected return
max
θ
J(πθ) = Eξ∼Ξ [Eτ∼πθ[R(τ)]]
(1)
over the dynamics induced by the distribution of simulation parameters.
3.2
Quadrotor
3.2.1
Dynamics Model
The dynamics of the quadrotor are modeled by the differential equation
˙x = f(x, u)
(2)
where the drone state x = [rT , ˙rT , ϕT , ωT ]T ∈R13 encompasses the position r, the linear velocity ˙r, the body angle
ϕ in quaternions and the angular speed ω. The acceleration of the drone’s center of mass is described by Newton’s
equation
m¨r =
"
0
0
−mg
#
+ R
"
0
0
P Fi
#
(3)
in the inertial frame O with gravity g. The quadrotor mass is m and P Fi is the sum of the vertical forces acting on
the rotors. R is the rotation matrix from the body frame B to the inertial frame. The angular acceleration governed by
Euler’s rotation equations in B is
I ˙ω = η −ω × (Iω)
(4)
with the inertia matrix I. The torques η acting in the body frame are determined by
η =


1
√
2L(−F1 −F2 + F3 + F4)
1
√
2L(−F1 + F2 + F3 −F4)
−M1 + M2 −M3 + M4


(5)
with the rotor forces Fi, the corresponding motor torques Mi and the drone’s arm length L. An overview of the
quadrotor setup and the coordinate frames is depicted in Figure 1.
3

USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS
3.2.2
Motor Model
The angular speed νi of rotor i produces a vertical force
Fi = mg
4 kF ν2
i
(6)
that lifts the quadrotor. We use kF ∈R to denote the thrust-to-weight ratio. The rotors also produce a moment
according to
Mi = kM1Fi + kM2
(7)
with kM1 and kM2 being scalars. The motor speeds are normalized νi ∈[0, 1] and are modeled ν = √u as the square
root3 of normalized commanded thrusts ui ∈[0, 1]. For PWM control, the relationship between the action a taken by
the agent and the normalized commanded thrust is ui = 1
2 [min(max(ai, −1), 1) + 1]. We model the motor dynamics
with a differential equation of ﬁrst order
Tm ˙νi = −νi + √ui,
(8)
where Tm ∈R is the motor time constant. A common approach in related work is to neglect the motor dynamics
and assume an instantaneous thrust acting on the rotors. However, as we observed in our experiments, an accurate
actuator model is crucial for a successful sim-to-real transfer. Additionally, we model the overall latency ∆of the
system which should capture all delays emerging in the hardware. Typically, latency arises in the state estimator, in
the actuation of the motors and by propagating data through the neural network policy.
4
METHODS
We aim to ﬁnd a policy that reliably transfers from the simulation to the quadrotor robot without using real-world
data to ﬁne-tune the policy. To render a zero-shot transfer feasible, we optimize the simulation parameters based on
collected real-world measurements.
Besides simulation optimization, we want to ﬁnd an answer to our hypothesis that low-level control structures demand
a higher simulation ﬁdelity. The intuition behind this assumption is that low-level control requires the policy to capture
the mapping from drone state to motor commands and thus to understand to underlying quadrotor dynamics. High-
level control, on the other hand, encourages the agent to learn an abstract understanding of the task since only the
mapping from the drone state to an intermediate space is required. The mapping from the policy output space to the
motor commands is subsequently handled by PID controllers.
The remainder of this section describes the details of our simulation environment including the observation and action
space, the procedure of the simulation optimization using Bayesian optimization and an introduction to the three
control structures that were deployed and evaluated on the real-world quadrotor.
4.1
Simulation Environment
We use the physics simulator PyBullet [3] to calculate the dynamics of the quadrotor akin to the work of [20]. We
run the simulator and the motor dynamics with 200Hz while the agent receives noisy observations with ≤100Hz
depending on the selected control structure.
Observations
The agent perceives the observation st = [xT
t , eT
t , aT
t−1]T ∈R20 containing the drone state vector
x ∈R13, the difference vector e = r −t ∈R3 between the drone’s current position and the set-point position
and the action aT
t−1 ∈R4 taken previously. Note that the agent has not access to all information of the drone state
because the rotor speeds cannot be measured. To cope with partial observability, the agent is equipped with a history
of observations with size H ≥1, i.e. (st−H+1, . . . , st) ∈R20H. We conducted a study about the optimal history size
H ∈[1, 2, 4, 6, 8] in simulation and found that H = 2 performed best.
Actions
Actions represent abstract, possibly high-level commands which are transformed by the control structure to
the corresponding motor command u ∈U. The implementation from A to U differs for each control structure and is
explained in Section 4.3.
3The CrazyFlie ﬁrmware internally uses a quadratic model that considers battery level and the commanded thrust u ∈[0, 1] and
maps it to the corresponding PWM value.
4

USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS
PID
PID
PID
Level of Control
PWM
Attitude Rate
Attitude
Figure 2: Applied control structures from low to high level. (1) PWM: A neural network-based policy directly outputs
the thrust commands. (2) Attitude Rate: The policy commands the desired angle rates and collective thrust which are
subsequently fed into a PID controller. (3) Attitude: The cascaded PID controllers take the desired body angle and
collective thrust as input and output the commanded thrust for each motor.
Domain Randomization
Throughout training, we randomize the following system parameters uniformly in the
range ±10% of the default value: Thrust-to-weight ratio kF , physics time-step, quadrotor mass m, diagonal of inertia
matrix I, motor time constant Tm and yaw-torque factors km1 and km2.
Noise
As sensor noise, we add Gaussian and uniform noise for positions r, velocities ˙r and angles ϕ. For the angle
rates, we apply the sensor model proposed in [5] which adds a Gaussian noise and a time-varying bias to ω. In a
similar vain to [19], we use a discretized Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process to model actuator noise which we add to u.
4.2
Simulation Optimization
Simulation optimization is an approach to tune the parameters of a simulation through data [1]. The aim is to bring
the simulation as close as possible to the real-world and ideally close the reality gap. The objective function which we
want to minimize is
min
ξ∈Ξ F(ξ, D) =
T
X
t
δt∥W
 xsim
t
(ξ) −xreal
t

∥1
+
T
X
t
δt∥W
 xsim
t
(ξ) −xreal
t

∥2
(9)
where T is the mini-trajectory length, D is the data set and δ ∈(0, 1) is a factor to discount later stages of the trajectory
where the divergence increases due to discrepancies between simulation and real-world. We weight the drone state
difference xsim
t
(ξ) −xreal
t
according to the matrix W with the purpose to scale angle errors and angle rate errors
differently. Similar to [2], we use the sum of L1 and L2 norm.
Prior sim-to-real work reported that the accurate modeling of the actuators including dynamics, noise and delays is
crucial for a successful transfer. In [21] it was pointed out that randomizing the latency of the controller and injecting
sensor noise to the simulation are key components for a high success rate. Similarly, it was demonstrated in [8]
that learned actuator dynamics signiﬁcantly helped to reduce the reality gap. Guided by these results, we decided
to optimize those simulation parameters ξ = [kF , Tm, ∆]T that describe the motor behavior as well as the system
latency.
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is our method of choice, as it is regarded as a good option for the optimization in contin-
uous domains with less than 20 dimensions and is robust against stochastic function evaluations [4]. BO is particularly
suited for objective functions that have long evaluation times and can cope with low sample complexity. In contrast to
gradient-based methods, BO is not prone to converge to local optima.
5

USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS
4.3
Control Structures
In this work, we investigate the following three control structures, ordered from low to high-level:
1. PWM Control: The agent is supposed to learn a mapping π : S →U from observation space to thrust
commands. The agent receives noisy observations from the Kalman state estimator with 100Hz.
2. Attitude Rate Control: The policy outputs lie in the space [c, ωT
d ]T ∈V ⊆R4 which consists of the mass-
normalized collective thrust c and the desired body angle rate ωd. The PID controller calculates the thrust
commands u ∈U based on c and the error between the actual ω and the desired ωd. The agent receives noisy
observations with 50Hz and is supposed to learn the mapping π : S →V.
3. Attitude Control: The agent is incentivized to learn the mapping π : S →W where the policy output space
[c, ϕT
d ] ∈W ⊆R4 encompasses the mass-normalized collective thrust c and the desired body angle ϕd.
Subsequently, the mapping W →V →U is handled by two cascaded PID controllers. Noisy observations
are fed into the policy with 25Hz.
These three control structures are illustrated in Figure 2. We test our hypothesis about the ﬁdelity of the simulator
based on the employed control method in the next section.
5
RESULTS
In this section, we describe our experiments and discuss the results. First, we elaborate on the setup of the hardware
and the learning task. Second, we explain our simulation optimization experiments with BO and present our found
simulation parameters. Third and last, we describe our zero-shot transfer experiments that were conducted on the real-
world quadrotor. After training control policies in simulation, we studied the three control structures PWM, Attitude
Rate and Attitude in order to test our control level hypothesis of Section 4.
Table 1: Simulation optimization results found by BO. The mean and standard deviation was calculated over three
trials.
Parameter
T = 10
T = 20
T = 30
T = 40
T = 50
Thrust-weight kF
1.746 ± 0.0050
1.733 ± 0.0093
1.725 ± 0.0018
1.725 ± 0.0081
1.722 ± 0.0027
Time Constant Tm
0.102 ± 0.0110
0.087 ± 0.0087
0.088 ± 0.0006
0.096 ± 0.0035
0.104 ± 0.0012
Latency ∆
0.006 ± 0.0039
0.014 ± 0.0038
0.018 ± 0.0003
0.018 ± 0.0007
0.018 ± 0.0004
5.1
Experimental Setup
As quadrotor robot, we used the CrazyFlie 2.14. Due to its small size with a motor-to-motor diameter of 13cm and
light weight of 28g, the CrazyFlie drone is very agile and demands high control frequencies. Furthermore, due to its
low-cost design, the CrazyFlie exhibits high parameter uncertainties in its building parts which additionally requires
the controller to be robust over a large system parameter range. The drone is equipped with a 3-axis gyroscope, a
3-axis accelerometer and a z-axis LIDAR. The sensor data were fed into an extended Kalman ﬁlter that runs with
100Hz for drone state estimation. For our experiments, we only used onboard sensor measurements and did not use
an external tracking system. For evaluation purposes, we transmitted the ﬂight information via CrazyRadio to a host
computer where we analyzed the logged data.
As learning task, we want the quadrotor to ﬂy a circle ﬁgure with a diameter of 0.5m and with a period of 3s. Each
trajectory starts on a random point of the reference circle at the height of 1m going in clock-wise direction. The
trajectory length in simulation is 500, which is equivalent to 5s of real-world time. To incentivize the drone following
the set-point trajectory t, the reward function is designed as
r(s, a, t) = ∥e∥2 + 0.0001∥at∥2 + 0.001∥at−1
−at∥2 + 0.001∥ω∥2 + rf
(10)
with rf = −100 being the terminal reward if ∥e∥2 > 0.25 else rf = 0.
4https://www.bitcraze.io/products/crazyflie-2-1/
6

USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS
0.04
0.08
0.12
Motor Time Constant Tm [s]
0
5
10
15
20
Mean Flight Time [s]
PWM
AttitudeRate
Attitude
(a) Latency ∆= 0ms
0.04
0.08
0.12
Motor Time Constant Tm [s]
0
5
10
15
20
Mean Flight Time [s]
PWM
AttitudeRate
Attitude
(b) Latency ∆= 15ms
0.04
0.08
0.12
Motor Time Constant Tm [s]
0
5
10
15
20
Mean Flight Time [s]
PWM
AttitudeRate
Attitude
(c) Latency ∆= 20ms
Figure 3: Measured ﬂight times in the zero-shot experiments evaluated for different system parameters and control
structures. Each box represents nine real-world ﬂights with a maximum ﬂight time of 20s after which we manually
stopped the policy execution.
5.2
Simulation Optimization
We used the pre-implemented cascaded PID position controller from the CrazyFlie platform to collect data tuples
(x, u)t while the drone was ﬂying the circle ﬁgure as described in Section 5.1. Data were logged with 100Hz and
we collected approximately one hour of real-world data. We think that less data would be also sufﬁcient but we did
not consider the amount of samples in this work. For building the data set D, we used every tenth data-point from the
collected real-world data as starting state for a mini-trajectory of length T. For instance, for T = 50 we obtained a
data set of size D ∈R37673×50×13.
With BO, we opted to ﬁnd the global optimum over the bounded set of system parameters kF ∈[1.5, 2.5], Tm ∈
[0.01, 0.50] and ∆∈[0.00, 0.05] with respect to D. We ran the experiment for 250 evaluations on the objective from
(9) and averaged the results over three trials. We tested different mini-trajectory lengths T ∈{10, 20, 30, 40, 50}. As
hyper-parameters, we used δ = 0.95 as the discount factor and as function approximator we used a Gaussian process
with the acquisition function uniformly chosen from lower conﬁdence bound, expected improvement and probability
of improvement.
The results obtained by the simulation optimization are shown in Table 1. Contrary to our expectation, the mini-
trajectory length T had only a minor impact on the obtained results. Except for the results for T = 10, the found
parameters ξ lie in a similar range.
5.3
Zero-Shot Experiments
We conducted zero-shot experiments on the real quadrotor where we ﬁrst trained policy networks with different simu-
lation parameters and thereafter measured the transfer performance. We decided on such experimental setup for three
reasons. First, we wanted to evaluate the performance of the parameters found by simulation optimization for an
induced reality gap. Second, we intended to study the robustness of the policies trained in different scenarios. Third
and last, we wanted to test our control level hypothesis as stated in Section 4.
We aligned the hyper-parameters to the ones suggested in [6] and [7]. We applied a distributed learner setup where
the policy gradients were computed and averaged across 64 workers with a batch size of 64000. We trained with the
Proximal Policy Optimization [23] algorithm over 500 epochs and applied as discount factor γ = 0.99. For the neural
network architecture, we used multi-layer perceptrons with two hidden layers. The critic network used 64 neurons
each followed by tanh non-linearities whereas the actor had 50 neurons in each hidden layer with ReLU as activations.
Since the policy network is supposed to run on the drone micro-controller, we reduced the number of hidden neurons
to achieve an inference time of < 1ms for one forward pass. The weights were set according to Kaiming Uniform
and biases were initialized as zero vectors. We did not apply parameter sharing between the actor and the critic.
Both networks were optimized with Adam where the learning rate of the value network was 0.001 and 0.0003 for the
policy. To reduce the variance of critic estimates, we applied Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [22] with the
weighting factor λ = 0.95. Over the training, we used stochastic policies where the policy output is the mean of a
multi-variate Gaussian distribution a ∼N(π(s), ϵI) with I being the identity matrix and ϵ ∈R the exploration noise
that was linearly annealed from 0.5 to 0.01.
After training for each combination of motor time constant Tm
∈
{0.04, 0.08, 0.12}s and latency ∆
∈
{0, 0.015, 0.02}s three policies in simulation, we tested the policies on the real quadrotor robot. We applied this
evaluation procedure for each control structure and determined the ﬂight time of policies over three real-world trials.
Overall, this resulted in 34 = 81 trained neural networks and thus 243 ﬂights. If a policy was able to ﬂy longer than
7

USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS
20s, we manually stopped the execution of the neural network. If the policy was not able to stabilize the quadrotor, the
trial was terminated by a stabilizing backup PID controller, which intervened when the roll or pitch angle was greater
than 30◦or when roll and pitch rates exceeded 800◦/s. We observed that the rollouts also failed when the distance
between the drone and the set-point exceeded the episode termination criterion of ∥e∥2 > 0.25m. The results are
displayed in Figure 3.
The PWM control structure showed good zero-shot performance when trained on the motor time constant Tm = 120ms
with latency ∆≥15ms. The parameter setting Tm = 80ms, ∆= 20ms closest to the parameters suggested by the
simulation optimization resulted in a median ﬂight time of 20s and two outlier ﬂights. However, outside this parameter
setting, PWM fastly dropped in performance and often failed. When the latency was set to ∆= 0ms, PWM yielded
the worst performance compared to the other two control approaches.
Overall, the Attitude Rate control structure showed the most robust results over the tested system parameters. The best
performance was observed for the setting Tm = 120ms and ∆= 20ms. In contrast to the other control structures,
Attitude Rate was also able to stabilize the quadrotor when trained on latency ∆= 0ms, although most ﬂights
terminated early due to the ∥e∥2 > 0.25m termination criterion.
Surprisingly, Attitude control showed the worst performance despite being the highest control level structure. Only
the policies that were trained on settings with Tm = 120ms and latency ∆≥15ms could achieve a ﬂight duration
over 10s.
6
DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss our results from the experiments and draw connections to related work. Further, we point
out important observations that we made during our experiments.
Simulation Optimization
The system parameters closest to the ones found by the simulation optimization showed
a reasonable transfer success for the PWM and Attitude Rate control. This underlines the potential of data-driven
parameter estimation compared to classical methods known from system identiﬁcation. A beneﬁt is the ease of use
since a handful of system parameters can be estimated simultaneously and no isolated measurements of individual
physical properties must be conducted.
Control-level Hypothesis
For low-level PWM control, we found that good zero-shot performance can only be
achieved when the dynamics of the actuator and the latency are accurately estimated. However, if the reality gap
is too large, low-level policy control is prone to fail. The higher-level Attitude rate control, in contrast, shows high
robustness towards the choice of system parameters. This conﬁrms our control level hypothesis that low-level control
requires higher simulation ﬁdelity than higher-level control structures. Merely Attitude control showed disappointing
results in the zero-shot experiments, which we think is due to the small control frequency of 25Hz.
Actuator Model
Related work from quadrupedal robots [8] and robotic manipulators [21] suggested that accurate
modeling of the actuators is a crucial component for reliable zero-shot policy transfers. Our experiments conﬁrmed
that this statement is also valid for quadrotor robots. In addition to that, we observed that adding latency to the
simulation acts as a kind of regularization which helped to improve the zero-shot results.
Robustness
Due to crashes, we frequently changed spare hardware parts like propellers and motors. Although facing
a variety of drone parameters, the zero-shot transfers worked reliably. Moreover, we tested some of the trained policies
also on other CrazyFlie drones which showed similar ﬂight behavior. This indicates that the trained policies are robust
over a large parameter distribution and different drone systems.
Bang-bang behavior
Bang-bang behavior is a known issue in RL where policies prefer an action selection towards
the boundaries of the action space [24]. Without adding penalties to the actions, we observed that agents produced large
changes in the control outputs which caused a severe performance drop in the transfers. By adding penalties for actions
∥at∥2 and action rates ∥at−1 −at∥2, we were able to conduct reliable transfers to the real robot. Similar conclusions
were made in sim-to-sim experiments where penalties for action and action rate improved both the transfer and the
robustness towards disturbances [24]. Further, we noticed that the transfers failed when the action range was selected
too high, e.g. an Attitude rate control with the range [−360, 360]◦/s did not work whereas the range [−60, 60]◦/s
showed the desired results.
8

USING SIMULATION OPTIMIZATION TO IMPROVE ZERO-SHOT POLICY TRANSFER OF QUADROTORS
7
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we demonstrated that low-level control policies entirely trained with reinforcement learning in simulation
can be successfully transferred to a quadrotor robot when the reality gap is small. To render such zero-shot policy
transfers feasible, we narrowed the sim-to-real gap by collecting real-world data with a pre-implemented PID controller
and applying simulation optimization. Our neural network-based policies used only onboard sensor data for inference
and ran on the embedded micro-controller of the drone. Finally, we conducted extensive real-world experiments
and compared three different control structures ranging from low-level PWM motor commands to high-level Attitude
control based on cascaded PID controllers. The experiments conﬁrm our hypothesis that low-level control policies
require a higher simulation ﬁdelity.
APPENDIX
Table 2: Used drone parameters.
Parameter
Value
Physical Unit
Gravitational acceleration g
9.81
m·s−2
Inertial Ixx
1.33 · 10−5
kg·m2
Inertial Iyy
1.33 · 10−5
kg·m2
Inertial Izz
2.64 · 10−5
kg·m2
Length L
0.0396
m
Mass m
0.028
kg
Torque-to-weight ratio kM1
5.96 · 10−3
m
Torque-to-weight ratio kM2
1.56 · 10−5
N·m
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We want to thank Matthias Emde for his support in the implementation of drone ﬁrmware. The project on which
this report is based was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research under grant number
01IS17049. The authors are responsible for the content of this publication.
