H2G2-Net: A Hierarchical Heterogeneous Graph Generative Network Framework
for Discovery of Multi-Modal Physiological Responses
Haidong Gu1, Nathan Gaw2, Yinan Wang3, Chancellor Johnstone2, Christine Beauchene4,
Sophia Yuditskaya4, Hrishikesh Rao4, Chun-An Chou1
1Northeastern University, United States
2Air Force Institute of Technology, United States
3Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, United States
4MIT Lincoln Laboratory, United States

Abstract
Discovering human cognitive and emotional states using
multi-modal physiological signals draws attention across var-
ious research applications. Physiological responses of the hu-
man body are influenced by human cognition and commonly
used to analyze cognitive states. From a network science per-
spective, the interactions of these heterogeneous physiolog-
ical modalities in a graph structure may provide insightful
information to support prediction of cognitive states. How-
ever, there is no clue to derive exact connectivity between het-
erogeneous modalities and there exists a hierarchical struc-
ture of sub-modalities. Existing graph neural networks are
designed to learn on non-hierarchical homogeneous graphs
with pre-defined graph structures; they failed to learn from
hierarchical, multi-modal physiological data without a pre-
defined graph structure. To this end, we propose a hierarchi-
cal heterogeneous graph generative network (H2G2-Net) that
automatically learns a graph structure without domain knowl-
edge, as well as a powerful representation on the hierarchical
heterogeneous graph in an end-to-end fashion. We validate
the proposed method on the CogPilot dataset that consists
of multi-modal physiological signals. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms the state-
of-the-art GNNs by 5%-20% in prediction accuracy.
1
Introduction
Cognition recognition is a rapidly growing research field
that focuses on the development of data-driven and compu-
tational models to infer and interpret human cognitive states,
such as attention, fatigue, perception, etc. Cognition recog-
nition has numerous applications, such as health care, psy-
chological assessment, education, and human-computer in-
teraction (Gu and Chou 2021, 2022; Jia et al. 2021; Zheng
et al. 2018; Caballero et al. 2023). For instance, it can be
used to analyze the cognitive states of pilots during flight
practice, which provides insights on promptly adjusting and
personalizing the teaching strategies to improve learning
outcomes (Caballero et al. 2023).
Physiological data used in cognitive recognition studies
usually include multiple heterogeneous modalities, such as
electromyography (EMG), electrocardiography (ECG), pho-
toplethysmography (PPG), pupil diameter (PD), and eye
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
openness (EO), collected from different organ systems. Each
modality may contain homogeneous sub-modalities. For ex-
ample, the EMG modality includes sub-modalities of wrist
flexor EMG and wrist extensor EMG in the unit mV . Hence,
multi-modal physiological signals inherently have a hierar-
chical heterogeneous data structure. Furthermore, there also
exist intra-modality and inter-modality interactions in the
multi-modal physiological data that can objectively reflect
human cognitive states.
In recent years, Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been
widely applied to graph-structured data such as social net-
works (Chen, Ma, and Xiao 2018; Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017; Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016), citation net-
works (Kipf and Welling 2016; Veliˇckovi´c et al. 2017), or
traffic networks (Mo, Xing, and Lv 2021) and have achieved
state-of-the-art results. GNN operates a convolution on an
underlying graph structure by neighborhood messages pass-
ing and aggregation. However, a major limitation is that ex-
isting GNNs need to pre-define a graph structure that is usu-
ally homogeneous and non-hierarchical (Kipf and Welling
2016; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Veliˇckovi´c et al.
2017). For even more complex network problems includ-
ing multi-modal physiological data, most existing GNNs fail
to learn representative graphs effectively. The physiologi-
cal network has multiple sub-graphs representing modali-
ties (i.e., EMG, ECG, PD, etc.) and these sub-graphs con-
tain multiple types of nodes. For example, EMG sub-graph
includes two nodes of wrist flexor and extensor EMG in
the unit mV , while PD sub-graph involves two nodes of
left and right PD in the unit mm. In addition, there are
no well-defined connections between modalities to form a
physiological network. Therefore, the physiological network
is called a hierarchical heterogeneous graph without a pre-
defined graph structure.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as
follows: (1) we propose a novel framework, H2G2-Net, for
multi-modal data fusion that can automatically learn inter-
actions and information flows among modalities, as well
as model hierarchy and heterogeneity of modalities at the
same time; (2) the generative graph of H2G2-Net is inter-
pretable and provides valuable insights on interactions and
information flows among modalities for prediction; and (3)
we conduct extensive experiments on the benchmark CogPi-
arXiv:2401.02905v2  [cs.LG]  3 Nov 2024

Immersive experience
and eye tracking
Aircraft 
simulation software
6x
Flight controls
Respiration
Electromyogram
Electrocardiogram
Electrodermal Arousal
Torso Accelerometry
Voice recording 
Physiological Sensing
Figure 1: Data collection via physiological measurements
recorded during immersive VR flight training simulations.
lot dataset and our H2G2-Net outperforms the state-of-the-
art heterogeneous GNNs by a large margin of 5%-20% in
classification accuracy of pilot training program difficulty
levels.
2
Dataset
We collected the CogPilot dataset of multi-modal physiolog-
ical recordings from 35 participants as they performed pilot-
ing tasks of varying difficulty in virtual reality as shown in
Figure 1 (Rao et al. 2022). In specific, the CogPilot dataset
contains 9 modalities: (1) electromyography (EMG): mus-
cle activation corresponding to the flexion and extension
of the volunteer’s right wrist (joystick control) in the unit
mV ; (2) photoplethysmography (PPG): changes in blood
volume measured on the left middle finger in the unit mV ;
(3) electrodermal activity (EDA): changes in electrical con-
ductance of the skin, measured on the volunteer’s left hand
in the unit kOhms; (4) electrocardiography (ECG): cardiac
electrical activity, measured with electrodes across the chest
in the unit mV ; (5) respiration (RES): electrical signal of
respiration derived using impedance pneumography in the
unit mV ; (6) accelerometry (ACC): three-axis accelerome-
try, measured on the right forearm as well as on the torso
in the unit m/s2; (7) gaze direction (GD): three-axis nor-
malized gaze direction of the left and right eyes in [0, 1]; (8)
pupil diameter (PD): diameter of the left and pupils in the
unit mm; (9) eye openness (EO): values representing how
open the left and right eyes are in [0, 1]. All recorded signals
were time-synchronized using the Lab Streaming Layer to
support multi-modal analysis. The CogPilot dataset can be
downloaded from PhysioNet1 (Goldberger et al. 2000).
3
Method
The hierarchical heterogeneous graph generative network
(H2G2-Net) has two levels: modality and sub-modality,
as shown in Figure 2. The modality level operates on
a heterogeneous graph defined by (G, R), where G =
(g1, g2, . . . , gm) is a set of subgraphs representing heteroge-
neous modalities, and R = (r1,1, r1,2, . . . , rm,m) is a set of
heterogeneous edges denoting relations among modalities.
On the other hand, the sub-modality level operates on mul-
tiple homogeneous graphs that are each defined by a modal-
1https://physionet.org/content/virtual-reality-piloting/1.0.0/
Figure 2: The architecture of the hierarchical heterogeneous
graph generative network (H2G2-Net). Node denotes fea-
ture vector of modality or sub-modality. Node size measures
amount of information. Node color represents modality. The
feature vector of sub-modality is raw physiological signal.
Edge denotes information flow among modalities or sub-
modalities. Edge color and width indicate importance of in-
formation flow.
ity subgraph gi = (V, E), where V = (v1, v2, . . . , vn) is
a set of homogeneous nodes representing channels of the
same modality, and E = (e1,1, e1,2, . . . , en,n) is a set of ho-
mogeneous edges denoting interactions between channels.
The H2G2-Net processes hierarchically from sub-modality
level to modality level. So the hierarchical structure of multi-
modal data can be well captured by H2G2-Net.
3.1
Sub-modality level
In the sub-modality level, the H2G2-Net applies GCNs
(Kipf and Welling 2016) to the multiple homogeneous
graphs gi denoting modalities to learn graph representations
of modalities. For modality gi = (V, E), let X(l−1) ∈Rn×d
be the input feature matrix of nodes in V for the l-th GCN
layer and A ∈Rn×n be the adjacency matrix defined by
edge set E. The output node feature matrix is given as fol-
lows:
X(l) = σ

ˆD−1
2 ˆA ˆD−1
2 X(l−1)Θ

,
(1)
where ˆA = A + I ∈Rn×n is the adjacency matrix A with
added self-loops, ˆD is the diagonal degree matrix of ˆA with
ˆDii = P
j ˆAij, Θ ∈Rd×d is the parameter matrix, and
σ is an activation function. Assume we set the number of
GCN layers as l, then the graph representation vector h ∈
Rd of modality gi is computed by row summation of node
representation matrix X(l) ∈Rn×d as follows:
h =
n
X
i=1
X(l)
i .
(2)
After the sub-modality level, we obtain feature vector h ∈
Rd of each modality. The modality feature vectors are
stacked into a matrix H ∈Rm×d as the input to the modality
level.
3.2
Modality level
In the modality level, the H2G2 layers learn a sequence of
weighted adjacency matrices that denotes a series of dy-

namic graph structures. The learned dynamic graph struc-
tures show information flows among modalities and iden-
tify useful meta-paths. For the physiological network G =
(G, R), the representation matrix H ∈Rm×d of all modal-
ities in G is learned in the previous sub-modality level, but
the graph structure defined by the edge set R is not given.
Let H(l−1) ∈Rm×d be the input feature matrix of modal-
ities in G for the l-th H2G2 layer and H(0) = H, then the
operation of the l-th H2G2 layer on graph G without pre-
defined graph structure is defined as
A = softmax(Φ)
(3)
H(l) = σ

AH(l−1)Θ

,
(4)
where A ∈Rm×m is the learned adjacency matrix that as-
signs weights to edges (i.e., learns significance of interac-
tions), Φ ∈Rm×m and Θ ∈Rd×d are trainable weight
matrices, softmax denotes the row-wise softmax function,
and σ is an activation function. We can see in Equation (3)
that each H2G2 layer learns a new adjacency matrix and
generates a new graph structure. So by stacking H2G2 lay-
ers together, the H2G2-Net can learn a series of dynamic
graph structures. The learned dynamic series of graph struc-
tures provides valuable insights on information flows among
modalities and identifies significant meta-paths for predic-
tion. The number of H2G2 layers can be considered as the
meta-path length. At each H2G2 layer, every modalities
updates its representation by aggregating messages passed
from other modalities and the importance of messages are
learned by the H2G2 layer as shown in weighted adjacency
matrix. With the increasing of H2G2 layers, the information
of each modality improves rapidly then saturates. Let the
number of H2G2 layers be l, then the representation vec-
tor z ∈Rd of the physiological network G is calculated
by row-wise summation of modality representation matrix
H(l) ∈Rm×d as follows:
z =
m
X
i=1
H(l)
i .
(5)
The representation vector z fuses multi-modal signals and
characterizes information flows among modalities. Finally,
we feed z into two fully-connected layers followed by a soft-
max layer for physiological network classification.
4
Experiments
We conduct extensive experiments on the CogPilot dataset
which consists of multi-modal physiological signals col-
lected during pilot flight training. The flight training pro-
gram has 4 predefined difficulty levels to evoke and induce
cognitive states of pilots. Difficulty levels are defined by en-
vironmental settings such as wind speed, cloudness (visi-
bility), and turbulence. The objective is to predict the dif-
ficulty levels using the multi-modal physiological data col-
lected during the landing process.
Among 35 subjects in the CogPilot dataset, we found
missing modalities in some subjects (e.g., subject #3 does
not have PD signals). After thorough investigation, we se-
lected 20 subjects with complete modalities. Since the origi-
nal physiological signals have high frequencies and different
lengths, we downsample them all into 100 data points.
To evaluate the effectiveness of representation learned by
the H2G2-Net on multi-modal data, we compare it with the
state-of-the-art heterogeneous GNNs. The GNN baselines
include RGAT (Busbridge et al. 2019), RGCN (Schlichtkrull
et al. 2018), FiLM (Brockschmidt 2020), HGT (Hu et al.
2020), HAN (Wang et al. 2019), GTN (Yun et al. 2019) and
HetEmotionNet (Jia et al. 2021). Since all the above GNNs
require a pre-defined graph structure, we construct the graph
of multi-modal physiological data by making connections
between different modalities. Then the baseline GNNs can
operate on the manually defined graph.
We evaluate the model performance using a leave-one-
subject-out (LOSO) cross validation approach. Data of all
but one of the subjects are used for training and data of the
remaining one subject is used for testing. This process is
repeated until all subjects have been used for testing. The
LOSO evaluation method ensures the model is tested on pre-
viously unseen subjects, so that it can provide a realistic as-
sessment of model generalizability, i.e., the performance of
model in real-world application.
4.1
Results analysis
We perform the task of classifying difficulty levels 1, 2 vs 3,
4 on the CogPilot dataset. Table 1 shows the average classi-
fication accuracy and standard deviation for the H2G2-Net
and state-of-the-art GNNs. Our H2G2-Net achieves the best
performance on the CogPilot dataset.
RGAT and RGCN perform the worst because they are,
respectively, simple extensions of GAT and GCN to the
heterogeneous graph. FiLM utilizes a feature-wise linear
modulation to capture interactions between heterogeneous
nodes. Hence, FiLM can extract more heterogeneous infor-
mation and achieve better performance than GAT and GCN.
HGT exploits the self-attention of the transformer architec-
ture to learn relations on heterogeneous graphs and outper-
forms FiLM. Furthermore, HAN transforms the heteroge-
neous graph into homogeneous graphs defined by manu-
ally selected meta-paths and then applies GAT on the trans-
formed homogeneous graph. HAN utilizes meta-paths and
achieves better performance than previous models that do
not consider meta-paths. HetEmotionNet is a hybrid neural
network that consists of a GTN for learning the meta-paths,
a GCN for modeling the interactions, and a GRU for captur-
ing the temporal and spectral dependency. Although HetE-
motionNet achieves relatively good performance, it requires
pre-defined graph structure and does not consider the hierar-
chical information of multi-modal data like other baselines.
In contrast, our H2G2-Net can automatically learn the graph
structure and takes the hierarchical information of multi-
modal data into consideration.
Therefore, our H2G2-Net can adequately learn compre-
hensive information and achieves the highest accuracy of
79%. Meanwhile, the H2G2-Net achieves the lowest stan-
dard deviation of 11%, which demonstrates that the H2G2-
Net is very stable.

Method
Mean Accuracy
Std Accuracy
RGAT (2019)
60%
13%
RGCN (2018)
61%
11%
FiLM (2020)
63%
17%
HGT (2020)
67%
12%
HAN (2019)
69%
12%
HetEmotionNet (2021)
74%
16%
H2G2-Net (2023)
79%
11%
Table 1: Results on the classification task.
4.2
Ablation studies
To verify the effectiveness of multi-modal data fusion, we
perform ablation studies on the classification task of dif-
ficulty levels 1, 2 vs 3, 4. We design two variants of
H2G2-Net, which are described as follows: (1) H2G2-Net
(NoETK): this variant removes three eye tracking (ETK)
modalities PD, EO and GD from the multi-modal data to
verify the effectiveness of using eye tracking modalities; and
(2) H2G2-Net (ETK): this variant removes all the modalities
except three ETK modalities from the multi-modal data to
verify the effectiveness of other modalities excluding three
ETK modalities.
The accuracy of H2G2-Net (ETK) is 72% which is larger
than H2G2-Net (NoETK)’s accuracy of 59%. This result in-
dicates that the three eye tracking modalities PD, EO and
GD are more effective than other modalities. Because eye
tracking signals are more sensitive to cognitive states. Fur-
thermore, H2G2-Net achieves the highest accuracy of 79%
and outperforms H2G2-Net (NoETK) and H2G2-Net (ETK)
by a large margin (10%-20%), which demonstrates that fus-
ing multi-modal data further improves the performance.
4.3
Interpretability of the H2G2-Net
For the CogPilot dataset without a pre-defined graph struc-
ture, our H2G2-Net learns a sequence of adjacency matrices
as shown in Figure 3. The series of adjacency matrices rep-
resents the dynamic graph structures. In specific, the entries
of the adjacency matrices measure the importance of infor-
mation flows among modalities. For example, in the first ad-
jacency matrix, the importance of information flows from
EO and PD to other modalities are all around 0.21 which are
the highest. It makes sense that when pilots perform flight
task, they first observe the environment using eyes and gen-
erate EO and PD signals. Next, the environment information
is transmitted to brain to form the cognition of task diffi-
culty. Then, the cognitive state influences physiological re-
sponses such as EMG, PPG, EDA, ECG, RES and ACC.
What are the next important information flows after {EO,
PD} →{EMG, PPG, EDA, ECG, RES, ACC}? In the sec-
ond adjacency matrix, we discover the information flows
from ECG and PPG to other modalities are most important.
Therefore, the next important information flows after {EO,
PD} →{EMG, PPG, EDA, ECG, RES, ACC} are {ECG,
PPG} →{EMG, EDA, RES, ACC, EO, PD}.
From above interpretation, we can identify significant
meta-paths (i.e., information flows) like {EO} →{PPG} →
Figure 3: The sequence of adjacency matrices (i.e., dynamic
graph structures) learned by the H2G2-Net.
{RES}. It is explainable that when subjects are in a high at-
tention state, a greater tendency of eye openness is captured
in the EO signal, followed by a heart rate acceleration re-
flected in the PPG signal, and then an increase of breath rate
in the RES signal. Hence, the meta-path {EO} →{PPG}
→{RES} is significant for prediction of cognitive states. In
this way, we can interpret the dynamic graph structures by
identifying important meta-paths and information flows. We
believe that the interpretability of H2G2-Net provides valu-
able insights into prediction tasks by learning the importance
of information flows in the network.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a hierarchical heterogeneous graph
generative network (H2G2-Net) for multi-modal data fusion
of physiological signals. Unlike existing GNNs that require
a pre-defined graph structure, the H2G2-Net can automati-
cally learn the graph structure by optimizing the modality-
level adjacency matrix. In addition, existing GNNs do not
consider the hierarchical information of multi-modal data,
while the H2G2-Net can model the hierarchy by its two-level
architecture. Extensive experiments on the benchmark Cog-
Pilot dataset demonstrate that the H2G2-Net outperforms the
state-of-the-art GNNs by a large margin. Furthermore, in-
terpreting the dynamic graph structures learned by H2G2-
Net provides valuable insights on the information flows in
the multi-modal data. Since the H2G2-Net can be combined
with existing GNNs like GCN in our implementation, we ex-
pect that our framework can provide new ways for GNNs to
optimize graph structures by themselves resulting in more
effective representation learning on graphs. In the future,
we will investigate the effectiveness of H2G2-Net combined
with other state-of-the-art GNNs rather than GCN.
