Universal Successor Features for
Transfer Reinforcement Learning
Chen Ma, Dylan R. Ashley, & Junfeng Wen
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta

Yoshua Bengio
MILA, Universit´e de Montr´eal

Abstract
Transfer in Reinforcement Learning (RL) refers to the idea of applying knowl-
edge gained from previous tasks to solving related tasks. Learning a universal
value function (Schaul et al., 2015), which generalizes over goals and states, has
previously been shown to be useful for transfer. However, successor features are
believed to be more suitable than values for transfer (Dayan, 1993; Barreto et al.,
2017), even though they cannot directly generalize to new goals. In this paper,
we propose (1) Universal Successor Features (USFs) to capture the underlying
dynamics of the environment while allowing generalization to unseen goals and
(2) a ﬂexible end-to-end model of USFs that can be trained by interacting with
the environment. We show that learning USFs is compatible with any RL algo-
rithm that learns state values using a temporal difference method. Our experi-
ments in a simple gridworld and with two MuJoCo environments show that USFs
can greatly accelerate training when learning multiple tasks and can effectively
transfer knowledge to new tasks.
1
Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been able to achieve human-level performance in many
domains, such as playing Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015) and controlling robotic arms (Levine
et al., 2016). However, these methods often spend a huge amount of time and resources to train a
deep model to perform a single task. Currently applying knowledge gained from performing a single
task to performing another related task remains a challenging problem. This is the problem Transfer
learning is trying to solve (Taylor & Stone, 2009). Evidently though transferring knowledge from
one task to another would not be possible if the two tasks were completely unrelated. Therefore,
in this work, we focus on one particular transfer scenario, where dynamics among tasks remain the
same while their goals are different. We elaborate on this in Sec.2.
What can we use as knowledge for transfer in RL? One form of model-free knowledge is the goal-
speciﬁc state-values as in general value functions (Sutton et al., 2011). However, the state-values’
dependency on the goal and its corresponding reward structure may be an obstacle when attempting
to use these values for transfer. An alternative form of model-based knowledge is to learn the transi-
tion dynamics1, which are independent of the reward function. However, when performing a rollout
with the estimated transition dynamics prediction error will accumulate over time, which may limit
the utility of this approach in practice. A third form of knowledge that may be suitable for transfer
1the action-contingent probability of transitioning from one state to another
Preprint. Work in progress.
arXiv:2001.04025v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2020

is successor features (SFs) (Dayan, 1993; Barreto et al., 2017, 2018), which can recover state-values
without explicitly performing a rollout. Brieﬂy speaking, SFs provide an action-contingent summary
of the future. This third approach, cannot directly generalize to unseen new goals.
In this paper, we propose Universal Successor Features (USFs). Similar to how a universal value
function (Schaul et al., 2015) learn to generalize values over goals, USFs learn to generalize suc-
cessor features over goals. Since SFs for each goal capture certain knowledge about the underlying
dynamics of the environment, USFs could learn the shared dynamics and exploit their generality
over the goals. Furthermore, USFs are also able to recover values without explicitly performing a
rollout. USFs result from decomposing universal state-values into USFs and reward features. Note
that while we focus on state-action-values (or simply action-values) in this paper in order to tackle
control problems, this idea can apply to state-values as well. Unlike in Schaul et al. (2015), we learn
these two decomposed factors jointly by exploring the environment while bootstrapping.
Our contributions are three-fold. First, we propose USFs and show how they can be applied to any
RL algorithm that learns state-values using a temporal difference method. Second, we propose a
ﬂexible end-to-end architecture that is suitable to learn USFs by interacting with the environment.
Third, our experiments demonstrate that USFs can greatly accelerate training when learning multiple
tasks and can effectively transfer knowledge to new tasks.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec.2, we introduce USFs together with our end-to-end archi-
tecture, training procedure, and we further explain how USFs can be used for transfer Reinforcement
Learning. Then, in Sec.3, we demonstrate the results of applying USFs to a simple gridworld envi-
ronment and two MoJuCo environments. Afterward, in Sec.4, we discuss some of the most relevant
papers in the literature. Finally we conclusions in Sec.5.
2
Universal Successor Features
Consider a Markov decision process (MDP) with state space S, action space A, and transition func-
tion p where p(s′|s, a) is the probability2 of transitioning to s′ ∈S when action a ∈A is taken
in state s ∈S. We borrow the extension of the MDP framework to goals and state-dependent dis-
counting from Schaul et al. (2015). For each goal g ∈G (often G ⊆S but this is not an explicit
requirement of this framework), deﬁne the pseudo-reward function rg(s, a, s′) and pseudo-discount
function γg(s) ∈[0, 1]. To deﬁne an episodic problem in this framework we can deﬁne γg(s) to be
0 if s is a terminal state with respect to g.
For any policy π : S 7→A and ﬁxed goal g, the action-value function is deﬁned as
Qπ
g (s, a) = Eπ
" ∞
X
t=0
rg(St, At, St+1)
tY
k=1
γg(Sk)
S0 = s, A0 = a
#
.
As we now show, we can factorize Qπ
g into successor features and goal-speciﬁc features.
2.1
Transfer via Universal Successor Features
As with Kulkarni et al. (2016) and Barreto et al. (2017), we assume that the reward function
rg(st, at, st+1) can be factorized as
rg(st, at, st+1) = φ(st, at, st+1)⊤wg,
(1)
where φ : S × A × S 7→Rd represents the transitions and wg ∈Rd are goal-speciﬁc features
of the reward. Note that in this factorization only wg depends on the goal. In many situations
φ(st, at, st+1) can be rewritten as φ(st+1). To see why, consider a simple gridworld with d cells.
Here φ(st, at, st+1) = φ(st+1) can be a one-hot vector indicating the position of the agent at time
t + 1, while wg can be a d-dimensional vector whose i-th entry is the immediate reward of reaching
the cell i under the goal g. If φ(st, at, st+1) and wg are deﬁned in this way then whatever the
previous state st and action at are, as long as the agent ends up in st+1, the transition is represented
by φ(st+1) and the agent will receive the corresponding reward from wg for reaching that state.
2or probability density in case of continuous state space
2

In other cases where the reward depends on the whole transition, we can easily modify subsequent
discussion and model architecture to accommodate this.
Using the factorization in Eq.(1), the action-value can be rewritten as
Qπ
g (s, a) = Eπ
" ∞
X
t=0
φ(St, At, St+1)
tY
k=1
γg(Sk)
S0 = s, A0 = a
#⊤
wg = ψπ
g (s, a)⊤wg
where ψπ
g (s, a) are the Universal Successor Features (USFs) of s and a for goal g. In the above
gridworld example, ψπ
g (s, a) would be a d-dimensional vector of discounted expected future state
visitations that results after taking action a in state s and thereafter following policy π.
If wg is given, then the following Bellman equations enable us to learn USFs the same way as we
would learn the action-values:
Qπ
g (s, a) = Eπ[rg(s, a, S′)+γg(S′)Qπ
g (S′, A′)], ψπ
g (s, a) = Eπ[φ(s, a, S′)+γg(S′)ψπ
g (S′, A′)].
We can approximate ψπ(s, a) using a model ψπ(s, a; θψ) parameterized by θψ, so that our method
can be used with any algorithm that learns action-values using a temporal difference method3, in-
cluding on-policy methods like SARSA (Sutton, 1996) and A2C (Mnih et al., 2016) as well as
off-policy methods like DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) and DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016). One remaining
problem is that we need to have wg for a given g. One way to accomplish this is to model wg as
w(g; θw) and learn the parameters θw.
In order to utilize USFs for transfer, we can learn the parameters θ = [θψ,θw] from some “good”
policies and their SFs for a subset of goals, then let the model generalize these learned SFs to the
SFs of “good” policies of unseen goals. In the next section, we describe how one could train θ.
2.2
Training USFs
Suppose that at time t, we obtain a transition4 {g, st, at, st+1, rt+1, γt+1} where rt+1
=
rg(st, at, st+1) and γt+1 = γg(st, at, st+1). This transition can either come directly from the envi-
ronment or may be sampled from a replay buffer. Recall that USFs can be applied to any base RL
algorithm as long as it involves learning action-values using a temporal difference method. In the
case of DQN, which naturally extends to our multi-goal setting (see Appendix A for more details),
we update the parameters θQ of the action-value function using (semi-)gradient descent on
[Q(st, at, g; θQ) −yt]2
where
yt = rt+1 + γt+1 max
a
Q(st+1, a, g; θQ)
(2)
is considered a ﬁxed target action-value (i.e., it is treated as a constant rather than a function of θQ).
Similarly, to learn USFs’ parameters θ for optimal action-values5, the next-state action a∗could be
a∗= argmax
a
ψ(st+1, a, g; θψ)⊤w(g; θw).
Using this, we deﬁne the loss on Q to be
LQ =
h
bQt−ψ(st, at, g; θψ)⊤w(g; θw)
i2
where bQt =rt+1+γt+1ψ(st+1, a∗, g; θψ)⊤w(g; θw) (3)
is the ﬁxed target action-value. Similarly, we deﬁne the loss on SF to be
Lψ =

 b
ψt −ψ(st, at, g; θψ)

2
2
where
b
ψt = φ(st, at, st+1) + γt+1ψ(st+1, a∗, g; θψ)
(4)
is considered the ﬁxed target SF. This loss ensures that the learned SF will satisfy its own Bellman
equation. As we will show in the experiments, this loss is resilient to the reward structure of the
MDP. Although we can separately learn w based on a regression loss from Eq.(1), it is less infor-
mative in terms of guiding the agent compared to regression based on Eq.(3), the actual quantity for
3This method can also be used with any algorithm that learns state-values to learn successor representations.
4Here we illustrate based on a single transition, but very often we use a mini-batch for training.
5Here we focus on optimal control. In case of on-policy evaluation for a given policy π, the next state action
could be a = π(st+1) instead.
3

Algorithm 1 Multi-goal DQN with USFs
1: Initialize θ and replay buffer D
2: for each episode do
3:
Get goal g and initial state s0
4:
for each time step t = 0, · · · , T do
5:
at = Uniform(|A|) if Bernoulli(ϵ) otherwise argmaxa Qg(st, a; θ)
▷ϵ-greedy
6:
Execute at and observe next state st+1 and immediate reward rt+1
7:
Store transition {g, st, at, st+1, rt+1, γt+1} in D
8:
Sample random minibatch of transitions {gi, si, ai, si+1, ri+1, γi+1} from D
9:
Compute target bQi and b
ψi according to Eq. (3) and (4)
▷as opposed to yt in Eq.(2) in case of multi-goal DQN
10:
Perform gradient descent on L w.r.t. θ based on the targets
▷as opposed to Eq.(2)
11:
end for
12: end for
decision making (results in Appendix D). Our ﬁnal loss function is L = LQ + λ · Lψ where λ > 0
is a hyperparameter. With this loss, we can perform updates based on the (semi-)gradient ∇θL.
To see how we can use USFs for transfer, note that because learning is based on the optimal action,
Eq.(3) and (4) learn the ψ that corresponds to the optimal policy of the given goal. As long as the
model is powerful enough, the learned USFs can directly generalize to unseen goals. For each such
goal, USFs can either produce a ψ corresponding to an optimal policy for that goal, or provide a
reasonable approximation.
For the features φ(st, at, st+1), as discussed above, it is often sufﬁcient to model it as φ(st+1).
When there exists meaningful, natural representations for states, for example, one-hot vectors in a
gridworld, we can use them for state representation. If not then we need to learn φ(s). One obvious
way to learn φ(s) would be to regress r on φ, w, but, as we mentioned above, learning based on r
is less informative. Unlike Kulkarni et al. (2016) who learn the state representations separately with
an auto-encoder, we embed the learning of φ into the learning of the USFs, in particular, one hidden
layer in the neural networks as shown in Fig.1.
Figure 1: Model Architecture
Fig.1 shows the neural network structure of our USFs. This version
corresponds to the ﬁnite action case. After going through part of
the USF network, a state s is represented by a d-dimensional vector
φ(s) (Kulkarni et al., 2016). Then it is concatenated with a goal
vector to produce a (|A| × d)-dimensional SF vector ψ(s, a, g) for
all |A| actions. On the right-most part of the network, we have
a model to compute wg given a goal g. The inner product of ψ
and w will be the action-value Q for the corresponding action. As
a concrete example, Algo. 1 shows how DQN can be extended to
Multi-goal DQN and how USFs can be applied to Multi-goal DQN.
There is an easy extension for the continuous action case. The base
RL algorithm (e.g., DDPG, which also naturally extends to a Multi-
goal setting) may have an additional “actor” component for the pol-
icy. In such cases, our model, with some minor modiﬁcations, can
accommodate this. We elaborate on this in Appendix B.
3
Empirical Studies
When evaluating the transfer capability of the USFs framework, we seek to answer two key ques-
tions. Firstly, when learning with multiple goals, can USFs successfully transfer knowledge between
these goals and consequentially speed up training? Secondly, how well can it transfer knowledge
from previous tasks to new, previously unseen tasks? To answer the ﬁrst question, we begin by
training USFs on a set of training tasks (or source tasks) to evaluate its performance under a multi-
task setting. Then, to answer the second question, we switch to a new set of unseen tasks (or target
tasks) and observe how quickly and how well the agent can adapt to the new set of tasks. In practice,
4

this means we use the parameters the model has learned on the source tasks as initialization for the
model on the target tasks. Note that we also carry over the replay buffer from the source tasks.
In order to answer our aforementioned questions, we compare Multi-goal DQN with USFs as de-
scribed in Algo. 1 against Multi-goal DQN. While this is sufﬁcient for the ﬁnite action case, we
would also like to consider the continuous action case. For the continuous action case, we note that
as with DQN, DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016) naturally extends to multiple-goals. We refer to the
resulting algorithm as Multi-goal DDPG, and we similarly compare it to Multi-goal DDPG with
USFs. Note that as both Multi-goal DQN and Multi-goal DDPG can generalize over goals, they are
strong baselines for comparison. We do not compare to UVFA because learning it while exploring
the environment in a Reinforcement Learning fashion is prone to be unstable and may require further
prior knowledge to achieve reasonable performance (Schaul et al., 2015, Sec. 5.3).
In order to deal with this two-stage procedure mentioned above, we have to treat the replay buffer
used in the above algorithms differently during the second stage. In the ﬁrst stage the replay buffer is
treated normally, but during the second stage, we maintain two buffers. The ﬁrst buffer is the buffer
carried over from training on the source tasks. The second buffer is a new buffer where every new
transition is stored. Whenever we sample from the replay buffer in the second stage, we randomly
pick one of the two buffers with equal probabilities.
To evaluate the performance of the above algorithms, we use the done rate, or the percentage of
episodes where the agent reaches the goal. We also include the average number of steps per episode
as a supplementary result in the appendix. We calculate these metrics using the same set of the goals
the agent is learning on.
Additionally, in Sec.3.1, we also evaluate USFs on a set of hold-out goals, which is disjoint from
the set of source and target goals. This set of hold-out goals is used to evaluate the direct transfer
performance (Taylor & Stone, 2009) or the performance on unseen goals without learning from
interacting with them. This is in contrast to the target goals where we evaluate the performance on
unseen goals when learning from interacting with them.
All our results are averages of 20 runs. We smooth our curves with a mean ﬁlter using window
size of 50 in our gridworld experiments and a window size of 25 in our MuJoCo experiments. In
training we use ϵ-greedy when there are ﬁnite actions, but when evaluating we only consider the
greedy policy in both the ﬁnite action and continuous action settings to measure the actual quality
of the learned policy.
3.1
Gridworld
We ﬁrst evaluate USFs on a simple gridworld environment as shown in Fig.2a, where the agent is
trying to reach a speciﬁc goal cell. Within this domain we consider three different reward structures:
constant −0.1 per step, 0 when reaching the goal
room −k/10 per step, 0 when reaching the goal where k is the number of rooms the agent must
still traverse (including the room the goal is in) to reach the goal using the optimal policy
mixed at the start of each episode, randomly pick one of the two reward structures above
The room based reward structure is designed to provide the agent with an approximate distance to
the goal while reducing the likelihood that the agent will get stuck in corners.
In this problem, as shown in Fig.1, the network takes the (x, y) coordinates of the current state and
goal as input. However, φ, which is the target of the USFs can either be a one-hot indicator vector as
discussed in Sec.2.1 or can be learned as described in Sec.2.2. We refer to the former as the one-hot
representation and the latter as the learned representation. We limit each episode to 31 steps, and,
for each episode, the goal is randomly selected from a set of 12 goals. To reduce the variability of
goal sets and subsequently ease analysis, each set of goals is formed by randomly selecting 3 goals
in each room without replacement. After 48k timesteps of training in the ﬁrst stage, the set of 12
goals is swapped out for a new, disjoint set of 12 goals formed by the same method for testing. This
allows us to determine the extent to which USFs can perform transfer learning.
We sweep over hyper-parameter settings and report results from the best performing one. Fig.3 (left)
compares the performance when evaluation is done using the same set of goals while Fig.3 (right)
compares the performance when evaluated on a set of hold-out goals. This helps us analyze the
generality of the algorithms or the ability of the algorithms to transfer knowledge to new, unseen
5

A
↑
←
S
→
G
↓
(a) Gridworld
(b) Reacher
(c) Fetch
6
5
4
2
3
1
(d) Fetch Training
Figure 2: (a) Simple gridworld with the start state denoted by S, the goal state denoted by G and the
agent denoted by A. In each state, the agent can move in any of the four cardinal directions, but if
it attempts to walk into a wall, it will instead remain in the same state. (b) Simulated limb with two
joints that tries to move its tip to a speciﬁc goal. The four red circles indicate the training regions.
(c) Simulated robotic arm that tries to reach the goal position denoted by a red dot. (4) Training
regions for FetchReach-v2.
tasks without learning from them. We provide the corresponding number of steps per episode in
Appendix C.
We make several observations regarding the aforementioned results. (1) During training in the ﬁrst
stage, Multi-goal DQN + USFs performs considerably better than Multi-goal DQN in regards to
both maximizing the done rate and minimizing the number of steps per episode with all three re-
ward structures. The fact that this improvement is consistent across different reward structures
indicates that USFs are robust against different reward structures. (2) For the test stage (second
stage denoted by the shaded region), Multi-goal DQN + USFs can adapt at least as fast and occa-
sionally faster. (3) One would expect that because the one-hot representation accurately describes
the states and perfectly satisfy Eq. (1), Multi-goal DQN + USFs should perform better using the
one-hot representation than with the learned representation. However, this is not always the case.
As seen in the constant reward case, using ﬁxed representations can actually decrease performance
when compared with learned representations. One reason could be that when the reward structure is
more stable/consistent like with the constant reward structure, learning the representations may be a
less noisy process and, as a result, more effective. (4) The performance difference with and without
USFs is especially notable in Fig.3 (right) where the greedy policy learned by Multi-goal DQN is
evaluated on a set of hold-out goals. This difference in performance means that the USFs can, in
fact, generalize better to new goals without even learning them, which may be one reason why it
can achieve faster adaptation. (5) When adding USFs to Multi-goal DQN, the improvement is more
signiﬁcant with the room and mixed reward structures than the constant one. This may suggest that
USFs are learning the factorization as we described in Sec.2 and this factorization may be helping
the agent deal with reward structures that are very different between goals.
3.2
MuJoCo
In order to demonstrate the utility of USFs with continuous state/action spaces, we apply it to two
environments that use the MuJoCo physics engine (Todorov et al., 2012). The ﬁrst, the Reacher-v2
environment (Brockman et al., 2016), is shown in Fig.2b. The second, OpenAI’s Gym FetchReach-
v2 environment (Plappert et al., 2018), is shown in Fig.2c.
For the Reacher-v2 environment, the agent’s objective is to move the joints so that the tip of the limb
reaches a speciﬁc goal location. In this environment, the goal g is speciﬁed by its (x, y) coordinates,
the state fed to the network as input includes the position and velocity of the joints, and the actions
are continuous and provide control of the joints.
In order to build a set of training and test goals for use with the Reacher-v2 environment, we partition
the reachable goal space. We use 4 spots around a 2-D platform as shown in Fig.2b to select training
goals. Training proceeds for 45k steps. In the second stage, we randomly select points from the
remaining reachable areas for testing.
For the FetchReach-v2 environment, the agent moves a simulated robotic arm and tries to make its
gripper reach a speciﬁc goal location. The goal g is speciﬁed as (x, y, z) coordinates, the state fed to
the network as input includes the position and velocity of the hand, and the actions are continuous
6

Figure 3: Done rate on the gridworld domain when evaluating on the current set of goals (left) and
a tertiary set of goals (right). The three rows correspond to the constant (top), room (middle) and
mixed (bottom) reward structures, respectively. Shading denotes standard error.
(a) Done Rate
(b) TD error
Figure 4: Done rate & TD error on the Reacher-v2 environment. Shading denotes standard error.
(a) Done rate
(b) TD error
Figure 5: Done rate & TD error on the FetchReach-v2 environment. Shading denotes standard error.
7

and provide three-dimensional control of the hand and one-dimensional control of the hand’s gripper.
To make the task harder, we lower the threshold for when the gripper has reached the goal to 0.04.
Similarly to the Reacher-v2 environment, to build a set of training and test goals, we partition the
reachable goal space. We ﬁrst place the large sphere shown in Fig. 2d into the reachable area of
the arm. We then select the 6 highlighted spots around the sphere to select training goals. Training
proceeds for 50k steps. As with the FetchReach-v2 environment, we randomly select points from
the remaining reachable areas for testing.
Unlike in the gridworld experiments of Sec. 3.1, in both the Reacher-v2 environment and the
FetchReach-v2 environment φ must be learned. The reward signal for both environments is the
negative distance to the goal.
We show the done rate for the Reacher-v2 environment in Fig. 4a and for the FetchReach-v2 en-
vironment in Fig. 5a. We furthermore provide the corresponding number of steps per episode in
Fig.9a and Fig.9b from Appendix C. For both the Reacher-v2 and the FetchReach-v2 environment,
USFs provide a considerable advantage in the ﬁrst stage, which suggests that USFs are useful when
transferring between multiple tasks even in complicated environments. When solving unseen tasks
in the second stage, Multi-goal DDPG + USFs again offers an advantage over Multi-goal DDPG.
Additionally, in Fig. 4a there is a noticeable gap in the asymptotic performance, which indicates
that USFs may be less subject to bias carrying over from previous tasks. One possible reason why
Multi-goal DDPG + USFs may perform better is that USFs capture the transition dynamics of the
environment, which tend to be stable among tasks. To investigate why there exists such pronounced
difference in performance, we also plot their TD errors (Eq. (3)) in Fig. 4b and Fig. 5b. We can
observe that Multi-goal DDPG + USFs tends to have a more stable temporal difference error. This
may be one of the underlying reasons for more effective learning.
4
Related Work
This work is most closely related to Universal Value Function Approximators (Schaul et al., 2015),
or UVFA. UVFA uses a two-stage procedure to learn this approximator, primarily in a supervised
learning fashion. It begins by constructing a state and goal representation using transitions from
multiple tasks/goals via matrix factorization. Then, in the second stage, it approximates such repre-
sentations using deep neural nets so that it can generalize to unseen goals. One of the key drawbacks
of UVFA is that it relies heavily on the availability of known values for existing goals, whether opti-
mal or estimated by a Horde-like architecture (Sutton et al., 2011). Learning UVFA while exploring
the environment in a Reinforcement Learning fashion is prone to be unstable and may require further
prior knowledge to achieve reasonable performance (Schaul et al., 2015, Sec. 5.3). In contrast, we
demonstrate that our method can successfully learn SFs via direct bootstrapping and can be applied
on top of any algorithm that learns state-action values using a temporal difference method.
This work is also related to Successor Features (SFs) (Barreto et al., 2017, 2018). Barreto et al.
(2017) perform General Policy Improvement (GPI) using previous tasks’ values. However, unlike
with USFs, tasks are learned in a sequential manner (Caruana, 1997) and there is no direct gener-
alization to unseen tasks. The follow-up work by Barreto et al. (2018) showed that using rewards
and action-values from training tasks as state features and successor features respectively is equally
expressive when the training tasks are linearly independent. When facing a new task, however, a
new set of successor features must be learned, which means the model is required to grow linearly
as we encounter more and more goals. In comparison, USFs use a shared successor feature model
to handle a large number or even inﬁnitely many goals, thereby avoiding an excessive memory cost.
Using the related concept of Successor Representations (SRs), Kulkarni et al. (2016) proposed a
deep learning framework to approximate SRs and incorporate Q-learning to learn SRs through in-
teracting with an environment that has a single goal. In comparison, our approach learns the univer-
sal SFs that generalize not only over states but also over goals. This generalization allows USFs to
perform both multi-task learning and transfer learning. Furthermore, while Kulkarni et al.’s method
and USFs both make use of TD error, we additionally use Q-loss on state-action value (Eq. (3))
instead of reward-prediction loss (from Eq. (1)) to learn both USFs and goal-speciﬁc features w.
Appendix D show that this modiﬁcation can lead to a noticeable improvement in performance.
8

In addition to some of the work mentioned above, there exist several other papers that focus on
learning with multiple tasks or goals. Horde (Sutton et al., 2011) learns multiple general value func-
tions simultaneously for preset goals in an off-policy manner. Unlike our method, it cannot handle
an inﬁnite number of goals and cannot generalize to unseen new goals. Hindsight Experience Re-
play (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) maintains a replay buffer with additional goals for each trajectory
to speed up learning and improve sample efﬁciency. It is based on an observation that every failure
trajectory (i.e., every episode where the agent was not able to reach its goal) can be a successful
one if we treat the ﬁnal state of the trajectory as the goal. Exploiting this observation creates a
method that can generalize over goals when the reward signal is sparse. However, unlike with USFs,
HER requires access to the reward function for each additional goal. If such information is indeed
available, USFs can be used in conjunction with HER. We investigate this in Appendix E. Temporal
Difference Models (Pong et al., 2018) learn time-varying value functions for goal-oriented prob-
lems. It is somewhat related to our work in that it is also concerned with using temporal difference
methods to learn the dynamics of the environment. Finally, UNREAL (Jaderberg et al., 2016) uses
auxiliary tasks to facilitate learning in a multi-goal environment. However, they do not explicitly
attempt to generalize over multiple goals or transfer knowledge between tasks.
5
Conclusion
In this work, we proposed Universal Successor Features (USFs) to perform transfer in Reinforce-
ment Learning when tasks share the same underlying dynamics, but their goals differ. We noted
that USFs can be applied on top of any existing algorithms that learn action-values or state-values
using a temporal difference method and subsequently presented an end-to-end architecture that can
learn USFs by interacting with the environment. Finally, we demonstrated that USFs can accelerate
learning and are able to generalize over goals, including unseen ones.
