1
Multimodal Gait Recognition for Neurodegenerative
Diseases
Aite Zhao, Jianbo Li, Junyu Dong, Lin Qi, Qianni Zhang, Ning Li, Xin Wang and Huiyu Zhou
Abstract—In recent years, single modality based gait recog-
nition has been extensively explored in the analysis of medical
images or other sensory data, and it is recognised that each of the
established approaches has different strengths and weaknesses.
As an important motor symptom, gait disturbance is usually
used for diagnosis and evaluation of diseases; moreover, the
use of multi-modality analysis of the patient’s walking pattern
compensates for the one-sidedness of single modality gait recog-
nition methods that only learn gait changes in a single mea-
surement dimension. Fusion of multiple measurement resources
has demonstrated promising performance in the identiﬁcation of
gait patterns associated with individual diseases. In this paper,
as an useful tool, we propose a novel hybrid model to learn
the gait differences between three neurodegenerative diseases,
between patients with different severity levels of Parkinson’s
disease and between healthy individuals and patients, by fusing
and aggregating data from multiple sensors. A spacial feature
extractor (SFE) is applied to generating representative features of
images or signals. In order to capture temporal information from
the two modality data, a new correlative memory neural network
(CorrMNN) architecture is designed for extracting temporal
features. Afterwards, we embed a multi-switch discriminator
to associate the observations with individual state estimations.
Compared with several state of the art techniques, our proposed
framework shows more accurate classiﬁcation results.
Index Terms—Keywords-gait recognition, neurodegenerative
diseases, Parkinson’s disease, correlative memory neural net-
work, multi-switch discriminator.
I. INTRODUCTION
N
EURODEGENERATIVE diseases (NDDs) are described
as disorders with selective loss of neurons and distinct
involvement of functional systems. Since ﬂexion and extension
motions of two lower limbs are regulated by the central
nervous system, the gait of a patient with a neurodegenerative
disorder would become abnormal due to deterioration of
motor neurons. Thus, analysis of gait parameters is invaluable
for better understanding of the mechanisms of movement
disorders and the development of NDDs. Patients with neu-
rodegenerative diseases have their own unique gait patterns
[1]. For example, Parkinson’s disease (PD) and Huntington’s
Aite Zhao and Jianbo Li are with College of Computer Science and

Junyu Dong and Lin Qi are with College of Information Science and Engi-

Qianni
Zhang
is
with
School
of
Electronic
Engineering
and

Ning Li is with College Of Electronic and Information Engineering, Nanjing

Xin Wang is with College of Computer and Information, Hohai University,

Huiyu Zhou is with School of Informatics, University of Leicester, Leices-

(Corresponding authors: Aite Zhao and Huiyu Zhou.)
Fig. 1: The multimodal gait data used in this project: We eval-
uate the proposed approach over three datasets, namely NDDs,
PDgait and SDUgait, each of which consists of bimodal data,
i.e., force-sensing and time intervals, acceleration and VGRF
data, 3D skeleton data and silhouette images, respectively.
disease (HD) are typical disorders of the basal ganglia and
are associated with characteristic changes in gait rhythms,
including those from unstable, festinating, short and freezing
gaits [2, 3]. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a disorder,
primarily affecting the motoneurons of the cerebral cortex,
brain stem, and spinal cord, leading to scissors and spastic
gaits [4]. Moreover, gaits of patients with different severity
degrees of NDDs are of various appearances that can be
quantiﬁed by the uniﬁed Parkinson’s disease rating scale
(UPDRS), uniﬁed Huntington’s disease rating scale (UHDRS),
and Hoehn & Yahr rating scale (H & Y) [2, 5–7]. In this
paper, we design a learning framework to effectively analyse
the gait characteristics and identify individual diseases and
disease severity.
A large amount of studies are based on automated gait
analysis using the data collected by different sensors, such
as Kinect, cameras, accelerators, or force-sensing sensors [8–
11]. Previous studies have reported that using one of these
data resources results in promising detection and diagnosis of
NDDs by gait recognition. For example, using time series data
gathered by chronoscopes, [10] reports the identiﬁcation of
healthy controls and patients with neurodegenerative diseases
via deterministic learning. However, gait recognition requires
rich ﬁne-grained features, as differences between different
gait styles are usually much more subtle than those between
common action categories. To capture the subtle features
without losing other key biomarkers, we use different sensors
to collect data that describe multi-modality gait characteristics.
To obtain more precise recognition results, the gait data
collected by diverse sensors need to be jointly exploited
rather than individually processed. An effective multi-modal
fusion approach is proposed here, which plays the critical
role of fusing data in multiple modalities and generating joint
arXiv:2101.02469v1  [cs.CV]  7 Jan 2021

2
prediction of gait recognition.
Several multi-modal approaches exploit the co-occurrence
relationship between audio, image and video acquired by
different sensors. For example, research studies [12, 13]
have considered the use of heterogeneous data collected
from accelerometers, smartphone or cameras for recognition
tasks, which demonstrated signiﬁcant system improvement
over single-modality approaches. [13] adopts convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) and long short-term memory (LSTM)
to analyse audio, visual, and textual data in the applications
such as conversation, and shows the impact of contextual
and multi-modal information on emotion recognition during
conversation. It does not only extract speciﬁc spacial features
of facial expression instantly, but also capture the temporal
changes of human emotion. However, very few works inves-
tigate the inherent correlation of different data resources, and
use this correlation to recognise the micro-variations of NDDs.
Inspired by recent progress in machine learning, a novel
hybrid gait recognition network is proposed here to discover
relevant and decisive attributes of the input signals or images,
which helps extract and integrate spatial and temporal de-
scriptors selectively. Without loss of generality, in this paper,
we fuse two different data sources to produce comprehensive
knowledge that includes not only data from different views
but also, in some cases, unique foot movement symptoms that
would be otherwise inaccessible to describe gait characteristics
of patients with NDDs being monitored. In the description of
gait, we select two types of gait data, including time intervals
(in seconds), force-sensing data (in Newton), vertical ground
reaction force (VGRF in Newton), acceleration, images and
3D skeleton data (Fig. 1). We will focus on the features of the
gait data and explain their values in the following sections.
As mentioned in [14], power distributions over feet vary
between NDDs and healthy subjects. Force-sensing data mea-
sures the variations of forces whilst stride time intervals illus-
trate the micro changes of gait. Gait images have an overall
representation of human body structure, and acceleration and
3D skeleton data focus on the micro-motion of joints and
the change of gait speeds. Gait cycle ﬂuctuations during the
steady-state of human walking, and variations in a series of
stride intervals between time instants of consecutive ground-
contact events for either foot exhibit subtle changes. The
challenges of our research is to learn and fuse these dynamic
changes.
However, fusing multiple resources is not trivial. For in-
stance, multiple sensor data differ greatly in forms and scales.
In our system, we design a spacial feature extractor (SFE) and
a correlative memory neural network (CorrMNN) scheme to
extract spatio-temporal features, and then use a multi-switch
discriminator to establish a diagnostic model which determines
whether the input gait samples come from NDDs or normal
people.
On the one hand, to highlight unique spacial characteristics
of the ordinal data, we use SFE to undertake feature extraction
and fusion concurrently. It has built-in Fisher vector generators
to map the overall bimodal data onto the same feature space,
encode and aggregate the local features by sum pooling over
the input data. Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is used
to reduce the data dimensionality to obtain a salient yet
light spacial feature vector. On the other hand, CorrMNN
components include an interconnected dual channel memory
neural network (DCMNN) with a correlation computing unit,
which focuses on the temporal and contextual representations
and computes the correlation between the two types of data.
During the training process of CorrMNN, we use an unsuper-
vised method to maximize the correlation of features in the
same class whilst using a supervised method to maximize the
differences of features in different classes to achieve accurate
classiﬁcation. Afterwards, using the spatial-temporal features
of gait, we expect to construct a multi-switch determinator
for NDDs and disease severity classiﬁcation due to its strong
modeling and time-sensitive abilities. Here, hidden Markov
models (HMMs) are employed to simulate the states with
properly deﬁned parameters to distinguish the classes.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as
follows:
• A spacial feature extractor (SFE) is constructed to learn
the spatial information of multi-frame time series data and
output spacial features after dimensionality reduction.
• A correlative memory neural network (CorrMNN) is
designed to measure the correlation in bimodal gait data
and extract the dynamic changes of gait to generate
temporal features. In spite of its use in analysing bimodal
gait data herewith, the proposed CorrMNN can be easily
adapted to deal with the data of over two modalities.
• A multi-switch discriminator is built for classifying the
input gait patterns and rating the disease severity.
• The proposed hybrid model can selectively integrate
multi-modal gait features as well as extract critical spatio-
temporal information of gait for identifying neurodegen-
erative diseases and disease severity.
• The proposed method is comprehensively evaluated over
two challenging neurodegenerative datasets and one nor-
mal gait dataset for multimodal gait recognition.
The state of the art technologies compared in this paper
include single- and multi-modal approaches. The single-modal
methods are:
• LSTM (long-short term memory) is a model with expand-
able nodes, suitable for temporal data.
• BiLSTM (bi-directional long-short term memory) is a
combination of forward and backward LSTMs.
• GRU (gate recurrent unit) is a lightweight variant of
LSTM with fewer variables.
• CNN (convolutional neural network) is a kind of feed-
forward neural network with a deep structure and convo-
lution calculation.
• CapsNet (capsule network) [15] is a neural network
sensitive to spatial structures and relative positions, an
upgraded version of CNN.
• Hand-crafted Method [16] computes static and dynamic
features of gaits.
• LSTM+CNN [5] is a fusion model of LSTM and CNN.
• Meta-classiﬁers [17] fuse random trees and bagging clas-
siﬁers for NDDs classiﬁcation.

3
• HMM (hidden Markov model) [18] is a network with a
chain structure and hidden states, suitable for time series.
• QBC (quadratic Bayes classiﬁer) [19] is a novel classiﬁer
based on the standard Bayes classiﬁer.
• RBF+DL [10] combines a radial basis function (RBF)
neural network with deterministic learning for NDDs
classiﬁcation.
• Q-BTDNN [20] is designed for identifying statistic and
dynamic gait information through a deep convolutional
neural network.
• C-FuzzyEn+SVM [21] calculates cross-fuzzy entropy for
gait symmetry analysis and uses support vector machine
(SVM) for classiﬁcation.
• PE+SVM [22] uses permutation entropy and SVM for
NDDs classiﬁcation.
• 3D-STCNN [23] is designed for identifying statistic and
dynamic gait information through a deep convolutional
neural network
Multi-modal comparison methods consist of:
• DCLSTM [24] is a dual channel LSTM designed for the
fusion of two data sources.
• DCCA (deep canonical correlation analysis) extracts fea-
tures by calculating the correlation between two sets of
data based on a deep neural network.
• KCCA (kernel canonical correlation analysis) extracts
features by calculating the correlation between two sets
of data based on the kernel function.
• MELD-LSTMs [13] adopts CNN and LSTM to analyse
audio, visual, and textual data.
• RC-LSTMs (reservoir computing LSTMs) [12] exploits
the strengths of the reservoir computing approach for
modeling RNNs, appropriate for the identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation of temporal patterns in time series.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Related work
is reviewed in Section II. Section III introduces the proposed
framework and the details of each module. Section IV provides
the results of the system evaluation. Conclusion is given in
Sections V. The source code of our proposed framework will
be published at https://github.com/zhaoaite/CorrMNN.
II. RELATED WORK
We here explore state-of-the-art technologies in the follow-
ing two areas of interests: Single-modal and multi-modal gait
recognition.
a) Single-modal gait recognition: Heterogeneous data can
be obtained from different sensors including force, speed,
vision, inertial sensors and timer, which allow us to extract
features in different dimensions and formats. Single-modal gait
recognition based on any of these sensory readings has been
a popular research topic in the last 20 years.
With the advent of cheap and easy-to-use depth sensors,
such as Kinect, 3D skeleton-based gait recognition has been
successfully used for diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation of
NDDs. For example, Athina et al. presented a two-layer LSTM
to analyze the movement patterns of PD patients in order to
detect statistically signiﬁcant differences between two impair-
ment levels based on motor scores and performance in the
uniﬁed Parkinson’s disease rating scale (UPDRS) [25]. Dawn
et al. used separate multi-variable linear regression models
and proportional odds regression models to evaluate the as-
sociations of various Kinect variables with the UPDRS-motor
outcomes by analyzing the gait of patients with Parkinson’s
disease [26]. Lacramioara et al. built a Kinect-based system
that can distinguish between two PD stages using different
classiﬁcation methods (e.g. decision trees, Bayesian networks,
neural networks and K-nearest neighbours classiﬁers), in an
attempt to identify the most suitable classiﬁcation method [27].
The skeletal data includes 3D coordinates of limbs but does
not supply step intervals or swing duration, which are very
important to describe gaits. For example, slow foot lifting
and walking interval are the key descriptors to discriminate
between normal and abnormal gaits.
To handle the time series data, a number of methods have
been developed for extracting temporal information from data.
For example, Zeng et al. fused a radial basis function (RBF)
neural network and deterministic learning to separate the time
sequences of gaits of healthy controls and patients with three
NDDs [10]. Mikos et al. provided patients certain adaptivity
in real-time through semi-supervised neural networks using
the stream of the unlabeled temporal data generated for the
detection of freezing gaits [28]. On the other hand, generalized
linear regression analysis (GLRA) and support vector machine
(SVM) techniques have been deployed to implement nonlinear
gait pattern classiﬁcation in PD [29], where the temporal
difference in the gait cycle and the ground reﬂection forces
of feet can be fully exploited.
To deal with the gait data gathered by force and inertial
sensors, which can sense subtle changes in the lower ex-
tremities and are mainly used in experimental or real med-
ical scenes, several machine learning approaches have been
designed for NDDs gait recognition. Jane et al. designed
a Q-backpropagated time delay neural network (Q-BTDNN)
for severity prediction of PD using vertical ground reaction
force (VGRF, in Newton) of feet [20]. Another fusion model
developed by Prateek et al. aims to detect the onset and
duration of the freezing of gait (FOG) for the patients with
Parkinson’s disease in real time using inertial sensors [30].
b) Multi-modal gait recognition: Although the methods
described above have achieved promising results, they can
only handle single-modality data, and lack integration of
modes in various conﬁgurations. We will summarise the latest
techniques for multi-modal gait recognition applications in this
subsection.
3-D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and LSTMs
have been utilized to extract spatial and temporal features of
gait data and inertial data [31]. In spite of the use of both
spatiotemporal characteristics and multi-modal information,
it does not consider the correlation between multi-modal
resources. For example, Valentin et al. focused on four variants
of deep neural networks that were based either on fully-
connected deep neural networks or CNNs to interpret the
users’ gait data and other activities captured by multi-sensor
systems [32]. In addition, a comparative study of different
CNN architectures was presented based on three low-level
features including gray pixels, optical ﬂows and depth maps

4
[33].
However, these advanced multi-modal gait recognition
methods are rarely used for NDDs diagnosis. For instance, a
multi-modal assessment was presented to acquire information
from speech, handwriting, and gait to model the transitions
of human movement and to train a CNN to classify between
PD patients and healthy subjects [7]. Alvarez et al. proposed
a system that can continuously monitor patients with Parkin-
son’s and Alzheimer’s diseases by analyzing multi-modal data
collected by innovative imaging sensors and Internet of Things
devices [34].
Moreover, there are also many multi-modal approaches used
in different research ﬁelds, such as gesture recognition [12,
13], activity recognition and emotion recognition. However,
these approaches pay little attention to both spatio-temporal
information and the correlation between data from multiple
sources. In our proposed work, we exploit both spatio-temporal
attributes and correlative information from two different data
sources and thereby increase recognition performance, while
enhancing the capability of our framework for NDDs gait
recognition in multi-sensor environments.
III. PROPOSED METHODS
In order to achieve successful gait recognition for NDDs
patients and healthy people in a less controlled environment,
we here propose a multi-modal framework for spatio-temporal
feature extraction and classiﬁcation. Firstly, we introduce the
new spacial feature extractor (SFE). Then, we describe the
architecture of the correlative memory neural network (Cor-
rMNN) for temporal feature extraction, followed by detailed
discussion on the individual components of CorrMNN. Finally,
we introduce the multi-switch discriminator for learning the
inherent characteristics of the joint spatio-temporal features
before supplying the ﬁnal diagnostic result.
A. The Overall Framework
Our proposed framework is shown in Fig. 2. In this system,
two inputs from different data sources are fed into SFE
and CorrMNN modules. SFE consists of a Fisher vector
generator (direct generator) and a complex data processor
(time- and frequency-domain generators) to handle the two
inputs separately for Fisher vector generation. Afterwards,
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is applied to reducing
the dimensionality of the long Fisher vector for generating
meaningful spacial features of the gait data. For the CorrMNN
module, the same inputs come to a dual channel recurrent
neural network for analyzing the temporal dynamic changes of
the gait data, while a correlation computing unit is designed to
consider the correlation between two channels for better fusion
of the two gait data. After having obtained temporal features
from CorrMNN, we combine the spacial and temporal features
and then send them to the multi-switch discriminator that can
automatically learn the patterns at each state, and also gen-
erate independent models to describe different classiﬁcation
outcomes. As shown in Fig. 2, our system is an end-to-end
discriminant framework with dual-modal inputs and diagnostic
outputs to train the multi-modal gait recognition network.
First, we formulate the problem for multi-modal gait recog-
nition. The two gait sequences are deﬁned as D1 = {xi ∈
RP , i = 1, 2, ..., M} and D2 = {zi ∈RQ, i = 1, 2, ..., N}
with corresponding C-class label sequences L1 and L2, M and
N are the sample numbers of the two sets of data respectively,
P and Q are the feature dimensions of each frame of the
two different gait data. For the task of feature extraction,
our goal is to address two problems at the same time: (1)
Successfully producing spacial features Fsp of the two data
sources, and (2) analyzing the correlation between the data and
obtaining temporal features Ftp. For the task of classiﬁcation,
multi-switch hidden Markov models (HMMs) are utilized to
learn the characteristics of the data and then produce the ﬁnal
classiﬁcation results Clabel.
B. Data Fusion in Feature Level Using Spacial Feature Ex-
tractor
In this section, we aim to design an efﬁcient feature-level
framework, namely SFE, to analyze multi-modal data. The
corresponding bimodal data is processed separately in order to
extract descriptors as the input of the Fisher vector generator.
We reshape multiple frames as a training sample in advance.
Since the connected Fisher vector may contain redundant in-
formation, we intend to produce more signiﬁcant and effective
features by dimensionality reduction. We use LDA to reduce
the dimensionality of the data with the goal of minimizing the
variance within the data class and maximizing the variance
between the classes, resulting in better data separability.
To conduct optimal separation of data, for data type one, we
ﬁrst extract its descriptors and then generate the corresponding
Fisher vectors. For data type two, time- and frequency-domain
analysis is undertaken, leading to two observations. Formally,
given a signal sequence D2 = {zi ∈RQ, i = 1, 2, ..., N},
we employ the two-domain feature generator. The time-
domain generator calculates statistics including mean, root
mean square, skewness, kurtosis, waveform factor, peak factor,
impulse factor and margin factor ( ¯X, Xrms, S, K, W, C, I, M)
as the features of the signals (S2). On the other hand, the
frequency-domain generator uses discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) to extract the frequency characteristics of the signals,
which captures the dynamics of the data sources [35].
After having obtained the descriptors from the two types of
data, ﬁrstly, each sample of the signal D2 = {zi ∈RQ, i =
1, 2, ..., N} is divided into T D-dimensional vectors X = zi =
{xt ∈RD, t = 1, ..., T}, which are learned automatically.
To extract the descriptors of gaits, Wj ∈RD×D(j = 1, 2, 3)
is deﬁned as a description parameter matrix which can be
updated according to different feature types.
We then use a GMM model (a linear combination of K
D-dimensional Gaussian distributions) to ﬁt all the descrip-
tors, which uses several weighted Gaussian density functions
to describe the distribution of data and preserve the most
frequent patterns of the original dataset by taking into ac-
count the multi-modal distribution of the numerical variables
[36]. The probability of each class can be obtained from
the projected samples, which can better describe the signals.
Assuming that the parameter set of the Gaussian distribu-
tion includes λ = {wk, µd
k, σd
k, k = 1, 2, ..., K} (weight,

5
Fig. 2: The structure of the proposed framework. It includes three modules: SFE for spacial feature extraction, CorrMNN
for temporal feature extraction, and multi-switch discriminator for model generation and classiﬁcation. Two input signals are
fed into CorrMNN and SFE. The outputs are fused together and then fed into HMM switches in order to produce scores for
classiﬁcation.
Fig. 3: The SFE model. It includes three modules: Frequency-
and time-domain feature extraction, Fisher vector extraction,
and LDA dimensionality reduction. After several processes of
the input data have been undertaken, we receive three Fisher
vectors (FV1, FV2, FVs) that represent the two-modality data,
and then use LDA to derive the ﬁnal 3-dimensional feature
vector Fsp
.
mean and variance), d = 1, 2, 3, ..., D refers to the dth
dimension of Wjxt. Here, we assume that the covariance
matrix is diagonal, whose diagonal elements reﬂect the degree
of data dispersion in various dimensions. According to the
standard Bayesian model, the probability that descriptor Wjxt
ﬁts the ith Gaussian model is γt(i) = v(i|Wjxt, λ) =
wivi(Wjxt|λ)/(PK
k=1 wkvk(Wjxt|λ)). The probability func-
tion of GMM can be given by:
v(Wjxt|λ) =
K
X
k=1
wk ∗vk(Wjxt|λ)
=
K
X
k=1
wk ∗e−1
2 (Wjxt−µk)′σ(−1)
k
(Wjxt−µk)
(2π)( D
2 ) ∗|σk|
1
2
(1)
To represent the frequency data, we denote W1 = {Wab =
(e−i 2π
D )a×b, a = 1, 2..., D, b = 1, 2..., D}, and use Euler’s
formula (exi = cos x + i sin x, x ∈R) to transform it to
W1 = {Wab = (cos 2π
D −i sin 2π
D )
a×b, a = 1, 2..., D, b =
1, 2..., D} in which the real and imaginary parts are identiﬁed.
Similarly, we can deﬁne W2 ∈RD×D and W3 ∈RD×D as
the corresponding description parameter matrices to represent
the data in the time-domain.
Secondly, it is assumed that each vector Wjxt ∈RD, t =
1, ..., T of the input signal has a distribution p, and when the
sample number T increases, the sample mean converges to the
expectation Ex∼p. In order to reduce or remove the inﬂuence
of weak disturbance and noise onto the signals, we decompose
the Gaussian distribution p into two parts: The sample of the
stronger part of the signal ﬂuctuation has the distribution u.
The sample of the noise of the signal ﬂuctuation obeys the
distribution vλ. Deﬁne 0 <= w <= 1 as the ratio of strong
signal information against the input. We have,
p(x) = wu(x) + (1 −w)vλ(x)
(2)
The likelihood function of the new hybrid distribution is
L(X|λ) = Ex∼p[log v(Wjxt|λ)]. The new Fisher vector
GX
λ is obtained by computing the partial derivatives of the
likelihood function L(X|λ) to wk, µd
k, σd
k to represent the
gradient statistics of the local descriptors.
GX
λ = ∇λEx∼p[logvλ(x)]
= ∇λ
Z
x
p(x)logvλ(x)dx.
= w∇λ
Z
x
u(x)logvλ(x)dx + (1 −w)∇λ
Z
x
vλ(x)logvλ(x)dx
(3)
The parameter λ is obtained by solving the maximum likeli-
hood problem in the GMM modeling, that is to say, it has the
form:
∇λ
Z
x
vλ(x)logvλ(x)dx = ∇λEx∼vλ[logvλ(x)] ≈0.
(4)
So Eq. (3) is expressed as:
GX
λ = w∇λ
Z
x
u(x)logvλ(x)dx
= w∇λEx∼u[logvλ(x)]
(5)
We can see that the information of independent noisy signals
is discarded in the representation of Fisher vectors, and the
representation of the Fisher vectors is still related to strong
signal information w.

6
Finally, the expectations of the diagonal elements of the
Fisher matrix are calculated for three variables respectively
to form Fishier vector GX
λ = {G1, ...G(K∗(2D+1)−1))}
=
F −1/2
λ
GX
λ
, where F −1/2
λ
=
EX(GX
λ GX
λ
′) denotes the
expectation while GX
λ denotes the partial derivatives of the
corresponding variables. Afterwards, we obtain the absolute
value of each element in the three normalized partial derivative
components, shown in Eq. (6), and conduct L2 normalization
again after having merged the vectors.















GX
wk = F −1/2
wk
wEx∼u[logvλ(x)]
∂wk
GX
µk = F −1/2
µk
wEx∼u[logvλ(x)]
∂µd
k
GX
σk = F −1/2
σk
wEx∼u[logvλ(x)]
∂σd
k
(6)
Assuming GX
λ = {GX
w1, ..., GX
wK, GX
µ1, ..., GX
µK, GX
σ1, ..., GX
σK},
we normalize the Fishier vector by L2 group normalization
in order to emphasize the difference of three vectors in the
same space, which is shown in Eq. (7). We divide the three
vectors, the derived gradients for different parameters, into
groups to perform feature augmentation and then apply L2
normalization to the augmented data.
N(GX
λ ) = L2
 
GX
wk|GX
wk|
PK
k=1 |GX
wk|
,
GX
µk|GX
µk|
PK
k=1 |GX
µk|
,
GX
σk|GX
σk|
PK
k=1 |GX
σk|
!
(7)
After having merged three Fisher vectors (FV1, FV2, FVs),
we use LDA to reduce the data dimensionality. The goal
of LDA is to project a sample in a high-dimensional space
onto its counterpart in a low-dimensional space so that the
projection values of all the samples can hold the minimum
intra-class distance and the maximum inter-class distance,
resulting in better data separability.
C. CorrMNN Model
Fig. 4: The structure of CorrMNN. When we train this
model, each memory node of the dual channel memory neural
network (DCMNN) delivers features to a unit to calculate the
correlation so as to maximize the correlation between the two-
channel data.
With respect to temporal feature extraction, we design a net-
work architecture based on the architecture of long short-term
memory (LSTM) [37]. We apply deep canonical correlation
analysis (DCCA) for generating a correlation computing unit
[38], and a dual channel memory neural network (DCMNN)
to build a correlative memory neural network (CorrMNN),
which can process two data sources separately and then
pursue correlation and classiﬁcation simultaneously during the
training process.
LSTM is a gated network specially designed for time
series data, which is continuously collected and well ﬁts the
two input temporal data sequences. Moreover, LSTM has
the advantage of linking the observation with its contextual
information and explicitly describes the characteristics at the
adjacent time to reveal the internal relationship of the entire
sequence. For short-length gait signals, we choose the simplest
GRU of the gated control mechanism, which is suitable for
processing short sequences. Besides, we only use one-layer
LSTM, and three internal gated mechanism to encode the
data. In addition, we add a temporary state path to ensure the
integrity of gait information, making LSTM more suitable for
our input data. Similarly, to handle two types of data, the dual
channel memory neural network (DCMNN) bridges two data
channels by computing their correlation, and fully describes
their characteristics. Furthermore, we redesign the internal
structure of DCCA in order to achieve better performance in
CorrMNN.
The overall architecture of CorrMNN is illustrated in Fig. 4.
The input data reaches the two channels with T time-expanded
nodes in each channel. A deep correlation computing model
is applied to receiving the output of each node in DCMNN,
computing the correlation between them and minimizing the
loss of distinguishing different classes in the single modality
data.
1) The Multi-Gated Memory Cell in DCMNN: Before intro-
ducing our model, we will give a brief review of the standard
LSTM. In order to model nonlinear dynamic processes, long
short-term memory (LSTM) is widely used to describe tempo-
ral dynamic behaviors of time sequences [39]. With memory
cells and three nonlinear gates (input, forget and output) in the
basic LSTM structure, LSTM network is effective in learning
long-term temporal dependence since these memory cells can
keep their states over long time and regulate the information
ﬂows into and out of the cell.
Fig. 5: The original GRU cell.
A variant of LSTM, called the gated recurrent unit (GRU),
combines the input and the forget gates with an update gate,
and mixes the cell and hidden states in each node of the
original LSTM, which is used as the learning model [37].
GRU has fewer gates and parameters than the standard LSTM,
which helps improving system efﬁciency to handle a large

7
dataset. Fig. 5 shows the structure of a GRU cell and illustrates
the operations of the gates. The outputs and inputs in each cell
of GRU is described in Eqs. (8)-(11).
zi = σ(Wz · [O1(i−1), D′
1i])
(8)
ri = σ(Wr · [O1(i−1), D′
1i])
(9)
˜hi = tanh(W · [ri ⊗O1(i−1), D′
1i])
(10)
O1i = (1 −zi) ⊗O1(i−1) + zi ⊗˜hi
(11)
where D′
1i and O1(i−1) are the current and previous hidden
states respectively in the channel 1. σ and tanh are the logistic
functions. zi indicates the output of the update gate at time
step i ∈{1, 2, 3..., T}. ri denotes the reset gate and the actual
activation of the proposed unit O1i are then computed using
Eq. (11).The update gate z determines whether or not the
hidden state will be updated with hidden state ˜h. The reset
gate r determines whether or not the previous hidden state is
ignored. The internal parameters of the GRU nodes in channel
2 are calculated in the same way.
Fig. 6: The multi-gated memory cell in DCMNN.
Because of the poor performance and slow convergence of
the original GRU in gait classiﬁcation, the memory cell in
DCMNN is designed to include a new path and a temporary
state so as to extract more discriminative features. The memory
cell is called multi-gated memory cell as shown in Fig. 6.
ctemp = tanh(Wctemp · [O1(i−1), D′
1i])
(12)
ci = (1 −zi) ⊗˜hi + zi ⊗O1(i−1)
(13)
O1i = ci ⊗σ(ctemp)
(14)
where ctemp represents the temporary state in order to de-
termine D′
1i and O1(i−1) while ci denotes the ﬁnal state
of the original GRU. We then extract features from ci. O1i
indicates the actual activation of the proposed node at time step
i ∈{1, 2, 3..., T}. Empirical results show that the proposed
cell structure has better convergence than the standard LSTM.
We witness that the new path in the multi-gated memory
cell can capture the state of the previous node and the input
of the current node at the same time. ctemp restricts these
two states to [−1, 1], which highlights the difference of feature
changes. Then, these differences are converted to probability
values by a sigmoid function, that is, the more prominent the
difference is, the greater the probability is, where the range
falls between 0 and 1. The ﬁnal output of O1i successfully
expresses the salient feature of the state of ci.
Fig. 7: The correlation computing unit. We design a deep
model including two four-layer MLP Networks, which can
update the weights and other parameters by minimizing the
losses (ltotal, l1, l2, lcorr). For the different settings of the clas-
siﬁcation and correlation analysis in MLP, the ﬁnal output is
set to C-dimension (class number) for classiﬁcation (h2i, h1i)
and 10-dimension for correlation calculation (H2i, H1i). Using
the output of the two MLP networks, we compute the corre-
lation of the two outputs, while the classiﬁcation loss is also
calculated.
2) The Correlation Computing Unit: This section intro-
duces the basic structure of the correlation computation unit
including the transmission mode of dual modal data and the
operating mechanism. In this module, deep canonical corre-
lation analysis (DCCA) [38], a correlation analysis method
focusing on data fusion and multi-modal recognition is in-
volved. It embeds deep neural networks to learn the feature
representation from different modalities.
As shown in Fig. 7, there are three modules in our designed
correlation computing unit, i.e. multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
network, correlation computation and a softmax mapping
function. From the output of a node of DCMNN, we observe
that data source one O1i and data source two O2i are simul-
taneously sent to the four-layer MLP unit. During the period
of training, the correlation coefﬁcient (corr) is calculated by
CCA and its inverse (−corr) is minimized as the ﬁnal result
of the loss function. In other words, the two features extracted
by MLP are relevant. Moreover, the class labels of O1i and
O2i are also fed to this network to identify their corresponding
categories by minimizing the classiﬁcation loss. We use Adam
optimizer to optimize the product of the classiﬁcation and
correlation losses. Eq. (15) illustrates our calculation method
for the losses. In conclusion, we calculate two kinds of losses
to obtain feature vectors from the correlation computing cell
with the best inter-data fusion and intra-data separability.
Finally, the output of units H1 and H2 is adopted by the multi-
switch discriminator.
ltotal = l1 + l2 + lcorr
(15)
D. The Multi-Switch Discriminator
As mentioned above, gaits are represented by a series of
feature vectors through SFE and CorrMNN, each of whose el-
ements is extracted as a spatio-temporal feature. The sequence
is coded into the selective switch, i.e. hidden Markov model

8
(HMM). In practice, each node processes certain features dur-
ing a time period, and establishes a model to describe and code
these features. The discriminator learns the internal rules of the
time series data, convert the data into continuous hidden state
nodes and ﬁt the overall input data with internal parameters.
Our method stems from the one used for Parkinson’s disease
identiﬁcation [18]. Compared with LSTM, our approach is a
fully automated approach, which has considerable advantages
in parameter estimation and computation speeds [40].
To describe each state of a dynamic system, it is not
sufﬁcient to use only one HMM switch to represent different
diseases or disease severity. In our work, we use C switches
(referring to C classes for classiﬁcation) to ﬁt the fused
features, where the temporal sequence is considered as hidden
state nodes. Upon the arrival of a gait sample at this module,
it analyzes the scores of the four HMM switches to determine
which HMM they belong to and subsequently determine the
output category (i.e. PD, HD, ALS or CO) as the ﬁnal result
of the system.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
This section presents our experimental setup and the results
of the proposed method, compared against several state of the
art methods on three challenging gait datasets.
A. Experimental Settings
1) Dataset Speciﬁcations: In this section, we give a brief
description of the three datasets used in our experiment. The
multimodal data used in our experiment is shown in Fig. 1.
NDDs dataset: This is a dual-modal dataset that contains
two different types of gait data, i.e. temporal and force-
sensing data of 48 patients with NDDs (ALS, HD and PD)
and 16 healthy controls (CO) [41]. The dataset was collected
simultaneously using different sensors in a foot-switch system,
which provided accurate estimates of the starting and the ﬁn-
ishing stages of successive steps using commercially available
transducers (this data collection can be easily reproduced in a
laboratory environment). Moreover, the hardware includes two
1.5 in2 force sensing resistors and a 390Ωmeasuring resistor,
which can acquire the stride time intervals by measuring the
variation tendency of the force changes in gait [42–44].
PDgait dataset: This is a reorganized gait dataset of Parkin-
son’s disease (PD), including two sub-dataset, one of which is
the vertical ground reaction force sequence (VGRF) collected
by the force sensor, and the other is the acceleration data
collected by the acceleration sensor. We combine these two
sets of data to form the gaits of PD patients with different
severity degrees, referring to the Hoehn & Yahr standard.
The VGRF database contains the measures of gaits from
93 patients with idiopathic PD as they walked at their usual
and self-selected paces for approximately 2 minutes on level
ground. Underneath each foot were 8 sensors that measure
force (in Newtons) as a function of time. The output of
each of these 16 sensors has been digitized and recorded
at 100 samples per second [45]. This database also includes
demographic information, measures of disease severity and
other related measures.
The acceleration database contains the annotated measures
of 3 acceleration sensors attached to hips and legs of PD
patients that experience gait disorders during walking tasks
[46]. The data was collected in the lab, and the subjects
performed three tasks: straight line walking, walking with
numerous turns, and ﬁnally more realistic activities of daily
living.
SDUgait dataset: The dataset includes 52 subjects, each
of who has 20 sequences with at least 6 ﬁxed walking
directions and 2 arbitrary directions, and totally 1040 se-
quences. Two Kinects were used for simultaneously capturing
the 3D positions of 21 joints and corresponding binarized
silhouette images after people subtracted the foreground from
the background using depth images collected at each frame.
We aim to recognize a normal gait by using 3D skeleton nodes
and 2D gait silhouettes [16].
2) Set-Up: The experiments are conducted with Tensorﬂow
[47] and Python [48] libraries. We will introduce the parameter
settings for the three modules: SFE, CorrMNN and multi-
switch determinator on the three datasets.
In the training process, the computation complexity of the
three modules is O(K(2D + 1)) (SFE), O(4(NM + N 2 +
N)) (CorrMNN) and O(2N 2T) (multi-switch discriminator),
where N is the number of the hidden states and T is the length
of the observation sequence respectively, determined by the
training parameters of each module. In addition, for testing,
the mean execution time for achieving the best experimental
results of the three modules is 0.378min (SFE), 0.718s (Cor-
rMNN), 0.512s (multi-switch discriminator), using the system
of GTX1050Ti GPU, i5-7300HQ CPU and 8G RAM.
For the NDDs dataset, in the SFE module, the number
of the Gaussian distributions of the GMM model K is set
to 15 for the temporal data and 20 for the force-sensing
data due to its high dimensionality. In the CorrMNN mod-
ule, the normalized data enters the DCMNN in the form
of timestep × feature number for each training sample.
timestep and feature number of the time series channel are
10 (10 frames containing the information of 10 seconds and 10
nodes in DCMNN) and 12 (12-dimension feature in one frame)
respectively, while the numbers of the force-sensing channel
are set to 10 (containing the information of 10 seconds) and
60×150 (60-dimension feature in one frame and 150 frames in
one training sample) respectively. In addition, with a learning
rate of 0.01 and a batch size of 256, the DCMNN model is
trained using a hidden output dimensionality of 256 in each
DCMNN node. In the multi-switch discriminator, it includes
four HMM switches (ALS, HD, PD and CO). The settings
include the number of the hidden states N = 10 (to be
associated with the DCMNN internal nodes containing the
temporal and fused feature of 10 seconds), and the number
of the training iterations I = 200.
For the PDgait dataset, in the SFE module, K of the
GMM is deﬁned as 15 for the VGRF data and 10 for the
acceleration data. In the CorrMNN module, timestep and
input dimension of the VGRF channel are 100 and 19
while those of the acceleration channel are set to 100 and 9.
This experiment has 3 switches for 3 different severity levels
(Severity 2, Severity 2.5, Severity 3). We deﬁne the number

9
TABLE I: Performance of the proposed approach in classifying two groups (CO and NDDs), compared with the other methods.
”-” means not applicable.
Single-modal Methods
ALS vs. CO
PD vs. CO
HD vs. CO
NDDs vs. CO
RBF+DL [10]
89.66%
87.10%
83.33%
-
QBC [19]
100%
80.00%
71.43%
-
Meta-classiﬁers [17]
96.13%
90.36%
88.67%
-
HMM [18]
-
90.32%
-
-
C-FuzzyEn+SVM [21]
-
96.77%
-
-
PE+SVM [22]
92.86%
-
-
-
Multi-modal Methods
ALS vs. CO
PD vs. CO
HD vs. CO
NDDs vs. CO
DCLSTM [24]
97.43%
97.33%
94.96%
96.42%
The proposed method
100%
99.86%
99.74%
99.47%
TABLE II: Performance of classifying NDDs (ALS,HD,PD).
Single-modal Methods
Multi-modal Methods
QBC [19]
DCLSTM [24]
The proposed method
86.96%
95.67%
98.88%
TABLE
III:
Performance
of
classifying
four
groups
(ALS,PD,HD,CO) compared with other models.
Single-modal Methods
Accuracy
Multi-modal Methods
Accuracy
CapsNet
88.86%
MELD-LSTMs [13]
88.85%
HMM
83.94%
RC-LSTMs[12]
90.76%
Original LSTM
93.42%
DCLSTM [24]
95.84%
CNN
85.58%
DCCA
68.45%
GRU
93.61%
KCCA
65.78%
BiLSTM
95.59%
The proposed method
99.31%
of the hidden states as N = 100 with 500 training iterations.
For the SDUgait dataset, experimentally, the value of K in
the SFE module is set to 10 for the 3D skeleton data and 20
for the image data. In the CorrMNN module, timestep and
input dimension of the 3D skeleton channel are 10 and 63
respectively while those of the image channel are set to 10 and
2500, respectively. This experiment has 52 switches (Subject
1, Subject 2, Subject 3, ..., Subject 52). We deﬁne the number
of the hidden states as N = 10 with 500 training iterations.
B. The Results on NDDs dataset
There are 63 participants in the dataset after we have
removed one HD patient due to the data confusion and noise,
including 16 healthy controls (CO), 13 ALS patients, 15 PD
patients and 19 HD patients. We divide them into different
groups according to the experimental settings.
1) Classiﬁcation of Patients and Healthy People: The ﬁrst
experiment consists of four comparison groups: ALS vs. CO,
PD vs. CO, HD vs. CO, and NDDs vs. CO, which show
the difference between healthy people and NDDs patients.
Since the data is divided into two categories, only two HMM
switches (one of ALS, HD, PD switches and CO) are used to
model the engaged data. The performance of the proposed
model is shown in Table I. In this work, we use 80% of
the data for training and 20% for testing. The leave-one-
out cross-validation method in sklearn library can also be
applied to verifying the classiﬁcation accuracy of the proposed
model. For ALS detection, we can ﬁnd that all the comparison
methods are more than 90%, except for the deterministic
learning method RBF+DL [10], due to the weakness of using
(a) The training accuracy of deep
models.
(b) The training loss of deep mod-
els.
Fig. 8: The training accuracy and loss of different deep models
on the NDDs dataset. In sub-ﬁgure (a), the ﬁrst three models
with the best convergence rate are DCMNN, DCLSTM and
our proposed model. In addition, our proposed model is the
best one with the highest classiﬁcation accuracy. In sub-ﬁgure
(b), DCMNN and DCLSTM converge faster and tend to be
stable. Our proposed model uses a joint loss function with a
large initial value, but ﬁnally the convergence value is less
than 0.5.
only single modal data. The average performance of deep
models is superior than that of the classiﬁers like PE+SVM
[22] and C-FuzzyEn+SVM [21]. QBC [19] achieves 100%
of the result which beneﬁts for the generated novel feature
of the gait data. For the detection of PD patients, the results
of multi-modal method are much better than that of single-
modal methods. The features extracted by C-FuzzyEn+SVM
[21] are more representative outperforming other single-modal
methods. For HD detection, the compared methods are very
poor due to the similarity between HD and other diseases,
but the multi-modal methods still show their advantages. The
dual channel LSTM (DCLSTM) [24] achieves better result
among these studies by fusing the two types of data and
capture the temporal characteristics. Compared with the four
different groups, we observe that the proposed method can
distinguish the ALS and CO groups effectively while having
worse performance on NDDs vs CO group.
2) Classiﬁcation of Different Diseases: The second exper-
iment is designed to separate 47 patients with NDDs (ALS,
HD and PD) using their gait patterns for identifying the subtle
distinctions of symptoms. We adopt three HMM switches to
classify the fusion correlation features from CorrMNN. Similar

10
(a) ROC curve for Fisher Vector.
(b) ROC curve for LDA.
(c) ROC curve for SFE.
(d) ROC curve for DCMNN.
(e) ROC curve for DCCA.
(f) ROC curve for CorrMNN
(g) ROC curve for HMM.
(h) ROC curve for the whole model.
Fig. 9: ROC curves show that the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR) for the features extracted by
different components: (a) Fisher Vector features in SFE; (b) LDA; (c) SFE; (d) DCLSTM; (e) DCCA; (f) CorrMNN; (g) HMM;
(h) all the combined features.
TABLE IV: Comparison of different components on the NDDs dataset.
Disease Class
Fisher Vector
LDA
SFE
DCMNN
DCCA
CorrMNN
HMM
Combined
Mean
CO
93.59%
91.39%
95.83%
96.23%
70.54%
100%
87.17%
100%
91.84%
ALS
93.21%
87.24%
93.75%
95.56%
69.33%
96.55%
83.72%
100%
89.92%
HD
89.61%
89.58%
95.83%
95.75%
67.44%
98.34%
82.76%
100%
89.91%
PD
90.03%
90.32%
93.75%
95.82%
66.49%
98.46%
82.11%
97.22%
89.28%
All
91.61%
89.63%
94.79%
95.84%
68.45%
98.34%
83.94%
99.31%
(a) Raw data
(b) The extracted feature
Fig. 10: Comparison of t-SNE feature dimensionality reduction
on the NDDs dataset. Sub-ﬁgures (a) and (b) represent the
comparison between the original data and the feature extracted
from our model after dimensionality reduction has been ap-
plied on the NDDs dataset. We have also highlighted some
examples of misclassiﬁcation.
(a) Advanced models.
(b) Constituting components.
Fig. 11: Performance of the advanced models and constituting
components of the proposed model on the PDgait dataset. Sub-
ﬁgures (a) and (b) represent the performance of the advanced
models and constituting components of the proposed model
on the PDgait dataset.

11
TABLE V: Comparison of several state of the art methods in
distinguishing three severity levels (Severity 2, Severity 2.5,
Severity 3) of Parkinson’s disease on the PDgait dataset.
Single-modal Methods
Accuracy
Multi-modal Methods
Accuracy
CapsNet
95.01%
DCCA
94.30%
HMM
92.20%
KCCA
92.48%
Q-BTDNN[20]
93.10%
DCLSTM[24]
96.71%
Original LSTM
91.13%
The proposed method
98.93%
CNN
82.86%
LSTM+CNN[5]
97.48%
GRU
92.53%
BiLSTM
91.58%
to the ﬁrst experiment, we have 20% of the data for testing.
Table II shows the classiﬁcation accuracy of the three studies.
Compared with the ﬁrst experiment, the number of the cate-
gories is increased, leading to a slight decrease in recognition
accuracy. Banaie et al. [19] used QBC to obtain the best result
(86.96%) which did not consider the temporal changes of gaits
and these traditional classiﬁers are not consistent. The dual
channel LSTM (DCLSTM) [24] and our proposed method
are capable of extracting more representative features so the
classiﬁcation results seem better.
3) Classiﬁcation of All the States of Subjects: In this
subsection, we will validate the performance of our proposed
framework in identifying all the states. Given four classes
(ALS,PD,HD,CO), four HMM switches are used to ﬁt the
output data of the CorrMNN and the other settings of the
parameters in the model remain unchanged. Table III shows
the performance of several state of the art methods. Because
the traditional classiﬁers do not take into account complex
temporal and spacial information, we do not compare these
methods here.
A HMM uses the temporal information in its hidden state
when handling continuous streaming signals, and therefore
it is not suitable to distinguish uncorrelated signals with the
accuracy of less than 90%. The results of CNN and CapsNet
are similar, because CapsNet is an upgraded CNN network,
which mainly analyzes spatial information of the gait. The
proposed hybrid model signiﬁcantly outperforms the other
state-of-the-art single-modality methods. In general, the tem-
poral feature extraction model outperforms the spatial feature
extraction model, and the classiﬁcation result of BiLSTM in
LSTM related models reaches 95.59%.
In addition, RC-LSTMs [12] and MELD-LSTMs [13] in-
clude different combinations of LSTMs for feature extraction,
using the previous gait patterns to predict the current pattern.
DCCA and KCCA can not be independently used due to the
limitation of internal simple structure. However, these methods
do not analyze the signals in time and frequency domains at
the same time. In addition, when they extract features from
multi-modal data, the correlation between different data, the
dependence on a large number of preprocessing steps and
speciﬁc settings are ignored.
4) Performance of the Entire Model: In this section, taking
the third experiment as an example (for four groups classi-
ﬁcation), we focus on investigating the effect of the method
described in Section III. Fig. 8 demonstrates the accuracy and
(a) Raw data.
(b) The extracted feature.
Fig. 12: Comparison of t-SNE feature dimensionality reduction
on the PDgait dataset. Sub-ﬁgures (a) and (b) represent the
comparison between the original data and the feature extracted
from our model after dimensionality reduction on the PDgait
dataset.
the cost of the training process per iteration by different deep
models.
In Fig. 8(a), the accuracy of the CapsNet classiﬁcation starts
at a lower rate than the other models, and the convergence
is slower because it takes into account both the logical and
structural information of data. Other deep models aim to learn
the temporal information of the input sequences, which start
from 0.35. The single modality model GRU, bidirectional
LSTM (BiLSTM) and CapsNet do not perform as well as the
three multi-modal methods i.e. DCMNN, DCLSTM and our
proposed model.
Fig. 8(b) illustrates the comparison of the training losses of
these deep models in the recognition process. Our proposed
model and CapsNet result in a ﬁgure larger than those of the
other methods because our proposed model used a joint loss
function, while CapsNet has slow convergence with different
loss functions. Compared to the other four methods, BiLSTM
is of the slowest convergence after the 30th iteration because
of the complex internal structure of its bidirectional computing
nodes, and the DCMNN and DCLSTM are of the lowest cost.
Additionally, we compare the recognition performance of
each part of the hybrid model using receiver operating char-
acteristic curve (ROC). In Fig. 9, we can see that the best
performance and the fastest convergence is (h). When FPR =
0.2, the TPR of the four categories reaches nearly 100%. In
contrast, (e) is the worst model which does not use temporal
features of the gait data. (c) and (g) perform poorly, because
the two models do not take advantage of temporal features, so
the temporal models are more suitable for the gait recognition
task, such as (d) and (f). Although (a) and (b) do not take
into account temporal features, the fusion of Fisher Vector
and LDA for the powerful ability of spatial feature extraction
and classiﬁcation leads to good results in (c). Moreover,
compared with the four classes, CO is the most accurate
class to be identiﬁed with the lowest error rate and the fastest
convergence. Other classes have varying degrees of volatility.
Table IV shows the recognition accuracy of each component
of the hybrid model. The row here represents the recognition
rate of each sub-model for a certain state, and the column
represents the recognition results of a sub-model for different

12
TABLE VI: Comparison of different components on the PDgait dataset.
Severity Level
Fisher Vector
LDA
SFE
DCMNN
DCCA
CorrMNN
HMM
Combined
Mean
Severity 2
91.51%
91.84%
93.49%
97.33%
95.13%
97.93%
92.82%
99.15%
94.92%
Severity 2.5
84.24%
68.47%
92.49%
90.89%
93.26%
95.28%
89.53%
98.46%
89.08%
Severity 3
90.68%
86.15%
94.27%
97.02%
93.98%
95.20%
93.24%
98.99%
93.69%
All
89.53%
84.45%
93.52%
95.08%
94.30%
96.13%
92.20%
98.93%
(a) Advanced models.
(b) Constituting components.
Fig. 13: Performance of several advanced models and the con-
stituting components of the proposed model on the SDUgait
dataset. Sub-ﬁgures (a) and (b) represent the performance of
the advanced models and the constituting components of the
proposed model on the SDUgait dataset.
states. Compared with the performance of sub-models, the
recognition rate of the fusion model is the highest. It is worth
noting that the best testing result is that the hybrid model can
completely recognize the gait of CO, HD and ALS, indicating
that the differences among the three gaits are evident, which
may be affected by the inconsistency of subjects’ biologi-
cal characteristics. Furthermore, by calculating the average
accuracy of all submodels in each class, the results are CO
(91.84%), and the worst is PD (89.28%) while ALS (89.92%)
and HD (89.91%) achieve similar results. It can be seen that
the model needs to be further improved for PD recognition.
Compared with all the components in the proposed model, the
purpose of Fisher Vector is to extract the spatial information
of gait data. LDA reduces the dimension of Fisher Vector
features and classiﬁes them to obtain separable spatial gait
features. The purpose of DCMNN is to analyze the temporal
information of gait. DCCA is used to connect two channels
to calculate their correlation, and a fusion model CorrMNN is
obtained to generate fused temporal features. HMM is used as
a decision-making layer to generate accurate predicted labels
based on spatio-temporal features.
The effect of LDA and Fisher Vector is similar, while SFE
has a slight increase to verify the validity of the model fusion.
So is CorrMNN component, which is more efﬁcient than the
fusion of DCCA and DCMNN. HMM is placed in the last
layer, using the fusion features of CorrMNN and SFE, and
the result is much better than using HMM independently.
Additionally, we can see the CorrMNN module achieves
the best result 98.34%, compared with the other constituting
components in the proposed model, which is only second to
the whole model for NDDs classiﬁcation. Although the results
of SFE and HMM cannot catch up with those of temporal
models such as LSTM, their combination is higher than
(a) Raw data.
(b) The extracted feature.
Fig. 14: Comparison of the t-SNE feature dimensionality
reduction on the SDUgait dataset. Sub-ﬁgures (a) and (b)
represent the comparison between the original data and the
features extracted from our proposed model after dimension-
ality reduction on the SDUgait dataset.
individual accuracy, and also exceeds the results of CorrMNN.
Therefore, the hybrid model of these three modules is selected
for feature extraction and classiﬁcation.
Moreover, with the help of the t-SNE visualization method,
the classiﬁcation ability of our proposed method is shown in
Fig. 10. We can see that the extracted features have very few
errors. The three error cases are caused by the high similarity
between the testing signal sequence and the other signals.
The gait samples with labels 2 and 3 (i.e., HD and PD) are
misclassiﬁed into the classes with labels 0 and 1 (i.e., CO and
ALS). By comparing the gait features of these classes, it is
found that the high similarity of the signals leads to wrong
classiﬁcation results. The same situation also happens on the
other two datasets (i.e., PDgait and SDUgait), which will be
omitted here.
C. The Results on PDgait dataset
1) Classiﬁcation of Different Parkinson’s Severity: This
study includes more than 10 thousand training samples from
the subjects with PD severity levels of 2, 2.5 and 3. The
dataset is re-shaped based on the ratio of 1:1, ignoring other
physiological differences between subjects and only focusing
on the movement changes.
The performance of several state of the art methods are
shown in Table V. First of all, we divide the comparison
studies into multi-modal and single-modal methods. The multi-
modal methods include DCCA, KCCA, DCLSTM and our
proposed method, and the rest are single-modal methods. The
results of the single-modal methods come from the best results
of two groups of single-modal data training respectively.
In multi-modal methods, DCLSTM outperforms DCCA and
KCCA, which shows the superiority of the temporal model.

13
TABLE VII: Comparison of different state of the art methods and the constituting components of our proposed model in
distinguishing the identities of 52 subjects.
Single-modal Methods
Accuracy
Multi-modal Methods
Accuracy
Constituting Components
Accuracy
CapsNet
96.79%
KCCA
94.55%
Fisher Vector
92.81%
3D-STCNN [23]
91.04%
DCCA
96.17%
SFE
95.38%
Original LSTM
94.80%
DCLSTM [24]
94.64%
DCMNN
97.26%
GRU
95.30%
The proposed method
98.79%
DCCA
96.17%
CNN
92.85%
CorrMNN
97.38%
Hand-crafted Method [16]
77.25%
HMM
95.26%
BiLSTM
96.38%
LDA
90.60%
Among the single-modal approaches, CNN is the worst, being
inferior to the temporal model. The fusion model is better, e.g.
the result of the LSTM+CNN fusion model is 97.48%. The
proposed hybrid method has achieved 98.93% accuracy that
is the highest.
ROC curve demonstrates the performance of the constituting
components of the proposed model and the learning models.
AUC (area under curve) value is calculated as the evaluation
criterion, and higher AUC indicates that the model has a
stronger classiﬁcation ability, shown in Fig. 11. By comparing
ROC curves, we can see that the top three are multi-modal
models, i.e. our proposed model, DCLSTM and DCCA. The
performance of CNN is signiﬁcantly lower than that of other
models.
The performance of the constituting components of the
proposed model for each severity level is shown in Table VI.
LDA does not work well for recognizing PD patients with
the severity of 2.5, indicating that LDA is still lacking in
the calculation of maximizing the distance between classes.
The output feature classiﬁcation accuracy of the SFE module
is higher than that of LDA and Fisher Vector, indicating the
high separability of the fusion spatial features. The result of
the CorrMNN module is better than that of DCMNN without
correlation analysis and the spatial analysis module SFE. The
average recognition rates of all the components for PD patients
with severity levels 2, 2.5 and 3 are 94.92%, 89.08% and
93.69%, indicating that the model has certain advantages in
identifying the patients with mild and severe PD.
2) Performance of the Whole Model: Furthermore, we also
utilize the t-SNE visualization method to show the classiﬁca-
tion ability of our proposed method. The experimental results
are shown in Fig. 12. Sub-ﬁgures (a) and (b) represent the
comparison between the features extracted from our model
and the original data after dimensionality reduction. We can
clearly see that the original data is more chaotic than the
extracted features, and the data of the three classes have cross
coverage, while the features extracted by the proposed model
have a distance between different classes and a large degree
of aggregation for the same class, showing better separability.
D. The Results on SDUgait dataset
In this experiment, there are more than 20 thousand samples
from 52 healthy subjects. The sample data comes from two
modalities, i.e. images and 3D skeleton joints. The purpose of
the experiment is to distinguish different identities based on
the bimodal features of gaits.
In this experiment, we analyze the gait differences of
Parkinson’s disease in order to distinguish the severity level
based on the Hoehn & Yahr scale. The experimental data
includes acceleration and VGRF data. On the one hand, the
experiment compares the performance of the state of the art
deep learning algorithms and the constituting components of
our proposed model. On the other hand, we also evaluate the
separability of the features extracted by our proposed model.
1) Classiﬁcation of Different Identities: The performance
of the learning models and the constituting components of the
proposed model is reported in Table VII. Among all the multi-
modal methods, DCCA achieves 96.17% accuracy, only sec-
ond to our proposed method. The results of BiLSTM and GRU
are superior to the other spatial feature recognition techniques.
The classiﬁcation outcome of hand-crafted feature extraction
is poor due to the limitations in the separation capability.
Among the constituting components of the proposed model,
the accuracy of the identifying features obtained by SFE and
CorrMNN respectively is 95.38% and 97.38% respectively,
lower than the performance of the hybrid model. Our proposed
method achieves 98.79% accuracy, which shows the strong
ability of the fusion model.
The ROC curve and the AUC value are presented in Fig. 13.
The AUC of all the models is higher than 95%, indicating that
the gaits of 52 subjects are relatively easy to distinguish, and
the performance of all the models tends to be stable. BiLSTM
and DCCA are the best in the advanced models, and CorrMNN
and DCMNN stand out in the constituting components.
2) Performance of the Whole Model: The t-SNE results
are illustrated in Fig. 14. After dimensionality reduction on
the original data, the boundary between different classes is
not clear and the overlap is still severe. Although there are
52 classes in the dataset, the features extracted by our hybrid
model are highly separable after dimensionality reduction.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a novel learning framework for
distinguishing three NDDs and different severity levels of
Parkinson’s disease, based on human gaits and other sensory
data. The constituting components in the proposed model
delivers individual functionalities, e.g. the SFE model was
used to extract the frequency- and time-domain features of
the heterogeneous data and to encode them as Fisher vector.
CorrMNN helped us to conduct feature extraction of the data
and achieve proper fusion using the correlation between the
signals. Multi-switch discriminator models each category of
the fused features to achieve satisfactory classiﬁcation. In the

14
light of the evaluation of the performance of the three modules
on the three datasets, from high to low are the hybrid model,
CorrMNN, SFE and multi-switch discriminator, justifying the
effectiveness of our hybrid model. Experimental results have
shown that, compared with the other established methods, our
proposed model resulted in better discriminative results of
NDDs and severity levels of PD in an end-to-end form.
