Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 36 (2009) 471-511
Submitted 7/09; published 12/09
The Role of Macros in Tractable Planning
Anders Jonsson

Dept. of Information and Communication Technologies
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Roc Boronat, 138
08018 Barcelona, Spain
Abstract
This paper presents several new tractability results for planning based on macros.
We describe an algorithm that optimally solves planning problems in a class that we call
inverted tree reducible, and is provably tractable for several subclasses of this class. By
using macros to store partial plans that recur frequently in the solution, the algorithm is
polynomial in time and space even for exponentially long plans. We generalize the inverted
tree reducible class in several ways and describe modiﬁcations of the algorithm to deal with
these new classes. Theoretical results are validated in experiments.
1. Introduction
A growing number of researchers in planning are investigating the computational complexity
of solving diﬀerent classes of planning problems. Apart from the theoretical value of such
knowledge, of particular interest are tractable planning problems that can be provably solved
in polynomial time. Many, if not most, state-of-the-art planners are based on heuristic
search. Acquiring an informative heuristic requires quickly solving a relaxed version of the
planning problem. Known tractable classes of planning problems are ideal candidates for
projecting the original problem onto in order to generate heuristics.
This paper introduces the class IR of inverted tree reducible planning problems and
presents an algorithm that uses macros to solve instances of this class.
The algorithm
is provably complete and optimal for IR, and its complexity depends on the size of the
domain transition graph that the algorithm constructs. In the worst case, the size of the
graph is exponential in the number of state variables, but we show that the algorithm runs
in polynomial time for several subclasses of IR, proving that plan generation is tractable
for these classes.
The tractable subclasses of IR include planning problems whose optimal solution has
exponential length in the number of state variables. The reason that our algorithm can solve
these problems in polynomial time is that subsequences of operators are frequently repeated
in the solution. Since the algorithm stores each such subsequence as a macro, it never needs
to generate the subsequence again. The algorithm can be viewed as a compilation scheme
where state variables are compiled away.
The only information kept about each state
variable is the set of macros acting on it.
We extend the class IR in two ways and modify our algorithm so that it solves planning
problems in the new classes. First, we deﬁne the notion of a relaxed causal graph, which
contains less edges than the conventional causal graph, and an associated class RIR of
relaxed inverted tree reducible planning problems. We also deﬁne the notion of reversible
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Jonsson
variables, and deﬁne the class AR of planning problems with acyclic causal graphs and
reversible variables. We show that our algorithm can be modiﬁed to solve planning problems
in this class. Finally, we combine the results for IR and AR to deﬁne the class AOR of
planning problems with acyclic causal graphs and only some of the variables reversible.
The class IR and the algorithm for solving instances of the class previously appeared in
a conference paper (Jonsson, 2007). The present paper includes new tractability results for
the classes IR, AR, and AOR. In addition, the notion of relaxed causal graphs and the
resulting class RIR are novel.
Perhaps the most important contribution of this work is establishing several novel
tractability results for planning. In particular, we present several classes of planning prob-
lems that can be solved in polynomial time. This contribution is particularly signiﬁcant
since the number of known tractable classes of planning problems is very small. In addi-
tion, some of our new classes can be solved optimally. The novel approach taken by the
paper is the use of macros to store solutions to subproblems, making it possible to represent
exponentially long plans in polynomial time and space.
A related contribution is the possibility to use the tractable classes to generate heuristics.
We discuss two possibilities for generating heuristics here. One idea is to project a planning
problem onto IR by removing some pre-conditions and eﬀects of operators to make the
causal graph acyclic and inverted tree reducible.
In fact, this is the strategy used by
Helmert (2006) to compute the causal graph heuristic.
Next, we could duplicate each
operator by introducing pre-conditions on “missing” variables. The resulting problem is
tractable according to Theorem 3.5. Thus, the algorithm could solve the projected problem
in polynomial time to compute an admissible heuristic for the original problem.
Note,
however, that the number of resulting actions is exponential in the number of missing
variables, so the strategy will only be tractable when the number of missing variables is a
small constant.
Another idea is to perform the same reduction until the causal graph is acyclic and each
variable has a constant number of ancestors. Next, we could make the current problem part
of the class AOR by introducing actions to make certain variables reversible. Both types of
changes have the eﬀect of making the problem easier to solve, in the sense that a solution to
the relaxed problem is guaranteed to be no longer than the solution to the original problem.
We could then solve the resulting problem using our algorithm for AOR. Although this
algorithm is not provably optimal, it might be an informative heuristic in some cases.
Another contribution is the possibility of solving some planning problems in polynomial
time, since they fall into one of the classes of planning problems studied in this paper. For
example, we show that this is possible for the Gripper and Logistics domains. Although
these domains were previously known to be polynomial-time solvable, it was not known
whether they could be solved using the type of macro approach taken here. If a planning
problem cannot be solved directly, parts of the causal graph might have the structure
required by our algorithms. In this case, the algorithms could be used to solve part of
the planning problem. Since one feature of the algorithms is compiling away variables and
replacing them with macros, the reduced problem could then be fed to a standard planner
to obtain the ﬁnal solution.
Perhaps a more interesting use of the algorithms is the possibility to reuse macros.
If part of the causal graph structure coincides between two problems, macros generated
472

The Role of Macros in Planning
in one problem could immediately be substituted in the other problem. Since variables
are compiled away and replaced by macros, the resulting problem has fewer variables and
actions. For example, in Tower of Hanoi, the macros generated for the n −1 disc problem
could immediately be substituted in the n disc problem. The resulting problem only includes
the macros for the n −1 disc problem and a single variable corresponding to the n-th disc.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces notation and def-
initions. Section 3 introduces the class IR of inverted tree reducible planning problems,
presents an algorithm for solving problems in this class, and proves several theoretical prop-
erties about the algorithm. Section 4 introduces several extensions of the class IR, as well as
corresponding algorithms. Section 5 presents experimental results validating the theoretical
properties of the algorithms. Section 6 relates the paper to existing work in planning, and
Section 7 concludes with a discussion.
2. Notation
Let V be a set of variables, and let D(v) be the ﬁnite domain of variable v ∈V . We deﬁne
a state s as a function on V that maps each variable v ∈V to a value s(v) ∈D(v) in its
domain. A partial state x is a function on a subset Vx ⊆V of variables that maps each
variable v ∈Vx to x(v) ∈D(v). Sometimes we use the notation (v1 = x1, . . . , vk = xk) to
denote a partial state x deﬁned by Vx = {v1, . . . , vk} and x(vi) = xi for each vi ∈Vx.
We deﬁne several operations on partial states. For a subset W ⊆V of variables, x | W
is the partial state obtained by restricting the scope of x to Vx ∩W. Two partial states x
and y match, which we denote x ∼y, if x | Vy = y | Vx, i.e., x(v) = y(v) for each v ∈Vx∩Vy.
Given two partial states x and y, let x ⊕y, the composition of x and y, be a partial state z
deﬁned by Vz = Vx ∪Vy, z(v) = y(v) for each v ∈Vy, and z(v) = x(v) for each v ∈Vx −Vy.
Note that composition is not symmetric since the right operand overrides the values of the
left operand.
A planning problem is a tuple P = ⟨V, init, goal, A⟩, where V is the set of variables,
init is an initial state, goal is a partial goal state, and A is a set of actions. An action
a = ⟨pre(a); post(a)⟩∈A consists of a partial state pre(a) called the pre-condition and a
partial state post(a) called the post-condition. Action a is applicable in any state s such
that s ∼pre(a) and results in a new state s ⊕post(a).
The causal graph of a planning problem P is a directed graph (V, E) with the variables
as nodes. There is an edge (w, v) ∈E if and only if w ̸= v and there exists an action a ∈A
such that w ∈Vpre(a) ∪Vpost(a) and v ∈Vpost(a). If the causal graph is acyclic, each action
a ∈A is unary, i.e., |Vpost(a)| = 1. For each variable v ∈V , we deﬁne Anc(v) as the set of
ancestors of v in the causal graph, and Desc(v) as the set of descendents of v.
A macro-action, or macro for short, is an ordered sequence of actions. For a macro
to be well-deﬁned, the pre-condition of each action has to coincide with the cumulative
post-condition of the actions that precede it in the sequence. Although an action sequence
implicitly induces a pre- and a post-condition, we explicitly associate a pre- and a post-
condition with each macro. Since a macro is functionally an action, we can deﬁne hierarchies
of macros such that the action sequence of a macro includes other macros, as long as this
does not cause the deﬁnitions of macros to be cyclic.
473

Jonsson
v
v
v
v
v
1
3
2
4
5
v
v
v
v
v
1
3
2
4
5
Figure 1: An acyclic causal graph and its transitive reduction.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A sequence of actions seq = ⟨a1, . . . , ak⟩is well-deﬁned for a state s if
s ∼pre(a1) and s ⊕post(a1) ⊕. . . ⊕post(ai−1) ∼pre(ai) for each i ∈{1, . . . , k}.
We sometimes refer to the post-condition post(seq) of an action sequence, deﬁned as
post(seq) = post(a1) ⊕. . . ⊕post(ak). Given two sequences seq1 and seq2, ⟨seq1, seq2⟩
is the concatenation of the two sequences, and post(⟨seq1, seq2⟩) is the post-condition of
the resulting sequence, deﬁned as post(seq1) ⊕post(seq2). We are now ready to formally
deﬁne macros as we use them in the paper:
Deﬁnition 2.2. A macro m = ⟨pre(m), seq(m), post(m)⟩consists of a pre-condition pre(m),
a sequence seq(m) = ⟨a1, . . . , ak⟩of actions in A and other macros, and a post-condition
post(m). The macro m is well-deﬁned if seq(m) is well-deﬁned for pre(m) and pre(m) ⊕
post(seq(m)) = post(m).
3. The Class IR
Katz and Domshlak (2008a) deﬁned I as the class of planning problems whose causal graphs
are inverted trees, i.e., the outdegree of each variable in the causal graph is less than or equal
to 1, and there is a unique root variable v with outdegree 0. In this section, we study a
class of planning problems that we call IR, which stands for inverted tree reducible:
Deﬁnition 3.1. A planning problem P is inverted tree reducible if and only if the causal
graph of P is acyclic and the transitive reduction of the causal graph is an inverted tree.
The transitive reduction (V, E′) of a graph (V, E) is deﬁned on the same set of nodes
V , while E′ contains the minimal set of edges such that the transitive closure of E′ is equal
to the transitive closure of E. In other words, the transitive reduction only retains edges
necessary to maintain connectivity. For acyclic graphs, the transitive reduction is unique
and can be computed eﬃciently. Figure 1 illustrates the causal graph and its transitive
reduction for a planning problem in the class IR. Here, the root variable is v5.
For a graph G = (V, E) on the variables V of a planning problem P and each variable
v ∈V , let Pa(v) = {w ∈V : (w, v) ∈E} be the set of parents of v in G, i.e., variables on
incoming edges. In this paper, we always refer to the parents of v in the transitive reduction
(V, E′), as opposed to the causal graph itself. For example, in Figure 1 the parents of v5 in
the causal graph are {v1, . . . , v4}, but Pa(v5) = {v3, v4}. Note that the transitive reduction
preserves the set of ancestors Anc(v) and descendants Desc(v) of a variable v.
Without loss of generality, in what follows we assume that the goal state is deﬁned on
the root variable v of the transitive reduction, i.e., v ∈Vgoal. Since there are no outgoing
edges from v, the pre-condition of any action a ∈A that changes the value of a variable
474

The Role of Macros in Planning
w ̸= v is independent of v. If v /∈Vgoal, a plan that solves P never needs to change the value
of v, so we can eliminate v from the problem, resulting in one or several subgraphs of the
causal graph. It is trivial to show that the transitive reductions of the resulting subgraphs
are inverted trees, so the problem can be decomposed into one or several planning problems
in IR that can be solved independently.
For convenience, we add a dummy variable v∗to V , as well as a dummy action a∗=
⟨goal; (v∗= 1)⟩to A. The transitive reduction of the resulting causal graph contains an
additional node v∗and an additional edge (v, v∗), where v is the original root variable (note
that v∗becomes the root variable of the new transitive reduction). Since v ∈Vgoal by
assumption, the causal graph contains the edge (v, v∗), and v∗is reachable from each other
variable in the transitive reduction via v.
The rest of Section 3 is organized as follows. Subsection 3.1 presents MacroPlan-
ner, an algorithm that solves planning problems in the class IR via decomposition into
subproblems. The subsection includes detailed descriptions of how the subproblems are gen-
erated and solved. Subsection 3.2 shows examples of how MacroPlanner solves planning
problems in IR. Subsection 3.3 proves several theoretical properties of MacroPlanner,
and Subsection 3.4 discusses how the algorithm can be improved by pruning the search for
macros.
3.1 Plan Generation for IR
In this section, we present a plan generation algorithm for the class IR called MacroPlan-
ner. For each planning problem P ∈IR, MacroPlanner generates one or several plans
that solve P in the form of macros. The algorithm uses a divide-and-conquer strategy to
deﬁne and solve several subproblems for each variable v ∈V of the problem. It then stores
the solutions to each subproblem as macros, and incorporates these macros into the action
sets of higher-level subproblems.
Algorithm 1 MacroPlanner(P)
1: G ←causal graph of P
2: R ←transitive reduction of G
3: v ←root variable of R
4: M ←GetMacros(v, init, A, R)
5: return M, or “fail” if M = ∅
The main routine of MacroPlanner appears in Algorithm 1. MacroPlanner takes
a planning problem P ∈IR as input and constructs the causal graph G of P, as well
as the transitive reduction R of G. It then identiﬁes the root variable v in the transitive
reduction, and calls GetMacros(v, init, A, R) to solve P. Note that M is a set of macros,
implying that MacroPlanner may return multiple solutions to P. If M does not contain
any solution to P, MacroPlanner returns “fail”. Also note that v refers to the original
root variable of the transitive reduction (excluding the dummy variable v∗). However, in
what follows we still consider v∗a descendant of v.
475

Jonsson
t1
t2
t3
t4
A
B
C
s
Figure 2: Illustration of the macros generated by MacroPlanner.
3.1.1 Defining Subproblems
In this section we describe the subroutine GetMacros which, for each variable v ∈V ,
deﬁnes several subproblems for v. Intuitively, there are only two reasons to change the
values of v and its ancestors: to satisfy the pre-condition of some action a ∈A, or to reach
the goal state. The idea is to exhaustively deﬁne all subproblems for v that may be needed
to achieve this.
Let Pv = ⟨Vv, init′, goal′, O⟩be a subproblem associated with variable v ∈V . The set
of variables Vv = {v} ∪Anc(v) consists of v and its ancestors in the causal graph. The set
of actions O contains each action that changes the value of v and each macro representing
the solution to a subproblem for a parent w ∈Pa(v) of v. Since Vv and O are ﬁxed, two
subproblems for v only diﬀer in their initial and goal states init′ and goal′.
To deﬁne all subproblems that may be needed to change the values of v and its ances-
tors, we project onto Vv the pre-condition of each action that changes the value of some
descendant of v. Let Z = {pre(a) | Vv : a ∈A ∧Vpost(a) ⊆Desc(v)} −{()} be the set
of such projected pre-conditions. We exclude the empty partial state () from Z, implying
|Vz| > 0 for each z ∈Z. Note that Z includes the projected goal state goal | Vv since goal
is a pre-condition of the dummy action a∗that changes the value of v∗, a descendant of v.
For each projected pre-condition z ∈Z, GetMacros deﬁnes a subproblem Pv with
initial state init′ = init | Vv and goal state goal′ = z. GetMacros calls the subroutine
Solve to generate one or several solutions to Pv, each in the form of a sequence seq =
⟨a1, . . . , ak⟩of actions and macros in O. Let s = init′ ⊕post(seq) be the state that results
from applying seq in init′. Then Solve returns the solution to Pv in the form of a macro
m = ⟨init′, seq, s⟩, where init′ and s are fully speciﬁed states for Vv. For each such macro m
and each z ∈Z, GetMacros deﬁnes a new subproblem Pv with initial state init′ = post(m)
and goal state goal′ = z. This process continues until no new subproblems are deﬁned.
The subroutine Solve may generate multiple macros for satisfying the same projected
pre-condition. An intuitive understanding of what macros are generated is provided by
Lemma B.3. The lemma states that for each state u that is reachable from init′ and each
projected pre-condition z ∈Z such that u ∼z, Solve generates a macro ⟨init′, seq, t⟩such
that t ∼z and t is on a shortest path from init′ to u with preﬁx seq. In other words,
Solve generates only the shortest possible macros for satisfying z. However, it might have
to generate multiple such macros to ensure completeness and optimality.
Figure 2 illustrates the macros that MacroPlanner generates. Let s be the current
state, let z be a projected pre-condition, and let A, B, and C be three sets of states that
satisfy z. If t1 is on a shortest path from s to any state in A, MacroPlanner generates a
macro from s to t1 that represents such a shortest path (the same holds for t4 and C). If no
476

The Role of Macros in Planning
state in B is on the shortest path from s to all other states in B, the algorithm generates
several macros to states in B, in this case to t2 and t3, such that either t2 or t3 is on a
shortest path from s to any state in B.
Algorithm 2 GetMacros(v, init, A, G)
1: M ←∅
2: L ←list containing the projected initial state init | Vv
3: Z ←{pre(a) | Vv : a ∈A ∧Vpost(a) ⊆Desc(v)} −{()}
4: O ←{a ∈A : v ∈Vpost(a)}
5: for all w ∈Pa(v) do
6:
O ←O ∪GetMacros(w, init, A, G)
7: end for
8: while there are more elements in L do
9:
s ←next element in L
10:
M ←M ∪Solve(v, s, Z, O, G)
11:
for all m = ⟨pre(m), seq(m), post(m)⟩∈M such that post(m) /∈L do
12:
append post(m) to L
13:
end for
14: end while
15: return M
Algorithm 2 gives pseudo-code for GetMacros. The input of GetMacros is a variable
v ∈V , an initial state init, an action set A, and a graph G = (V, E) on the variables V .
To obtain the action set O, GetMacros recursively calls itself for each parent w ∈Pa(v)
of v. The list L is initialized with the projected initial state init | Vv. The subroutine
Solve, which is described in the following section, simultaneously solves all subproblems
for v with initial state s and returns the corresponding macros. For each distinct post-
condition post(m) of a macro m returned by Solve, GetMacros adds post(m) to the list
L. Consequently, Solve is later called with initial state post(m). Finally, GetMacros
returns all macros generated by Solve.
3.1.2 Solving the Subproblems
In this section we describe the subroutine Solve, which solves the subproblems deﬁned by
GetMacros for a variable v ∈V . The idea is to construct a graph with the states for
Vv as nodes. This graph can be seen as a joint domain transition graph of the variables in
Vv. For each initial state s and each projected pre-condition z ∈Z, Solve computes the
shortest path from s to states that match z using a straightforward application of Dijkstra’s
algorithm. However, the number of states is exponential in the cardinality of Vv, so Solve
constructs the graph implicitly, only adding nodes as needed.
For each state p in the graph, Solve generates two types of successor states. Successor
states of the ﬁrst type are those that change the value of v. To ﬁnd such states, Solve
ﬁnds each action a ∈O such that pre(a) ∼(v = p(v)), i.e., the pre-condition of a is
satisﬁed with respect to the current value of v.
For each parent w ∈Pa(v) such that
(p | Vw) ̸∼(pre(a) | Vw), Solve looks for macros in O from p | Vw to states that satisfy
pre(a) | Vw. For each sequence seq that represents a combination of such macros, Solve
477

Jonsson
adds a successor state p ⊕post(⟨seq, a⟩) of p to the graph. The cost of the corresponding
edge is the length of the sequence ⟨seq, a⟩.
Successor states of the second type are those that match a projected pre-condition z ∈Z.
To ﬁnd such states, Solve ﬁnds each z ∈Z such that z ∼(v = p(v)). For each parent
w ∈Pa(v) such that (p | Vw) ̸∼(z | Vw), Solve looks for macros in O from p | Vw to states
that match z | Vw. For each sequence seq that represents a combination of such macros,
Solve generates a successor state p ⊕post(seq) of p. However, this successor state is not
added to the graph. Instead, it is only used to generate a solution to the corresponding
subproblem by deﬁning a macro from the initial state s to the state p ⊕post(seq).
Algorithm 3 Solve(v, s, Z, O, G)
1: M ←∅
2: Q ←priority queue containing the pair (s, ⟨⟩)
3: while Q is non-empty do
4:
(p, seq) ←remove highest priority state-sequence pair from Q
5:
for all a ∈O such that pre(a) ∼(v = p(v)) do
6:
S ←Compose(v, p, pre(a), O, G)
7:
for all action sequences seq2 ∈S do
8:
insert (p ⊕post(⟨seq2, a⟩), ⟨seq, seq2, a⟩) into Q
9:
end for
10:
end for
11:
for all z ∈Z such that z ∼(v = p(v)) do
12:
S ←Compose(v, p, z, O, G)
13:
for all action sequences seq2 ∈S do
14:
M ←M ∪{⟨s, ⟨seq, seq2⟩, p ⊕post(seq2)⟩}
15:
end for
16:
end for
17: end while
18: return M
Algorithm 3 gives pseudo-code for Solve, which takes as input a variable v ∈V , an
initial state s, a set of projected pre-conditions Z, an action set O, and a graph G = (V, E) on
V . The priority queue Q contains state-sequence pairs, and elements are ordered according
to the total length of the associated sequence. Successor states of the ﬁrst type are generated
on lines 5–10, and successor states of the second type are generated on lines 11–16. Inserting
a state-sequence pair (p, seq) into Q (line 8) only succeeds if seq is the shortest sequence to
p so far, replacing any previous state-sequence pair involving p. Likewise, inserting a macro
⟨s, seq, p⟩into M (line 14) only succeeds if seq is the shortest sequence to p so far, replacing
any previous macro to p.
Algorithm 4 gives pseudo-code for the subroutine Compose called by Solve. The input
of Compose is a variable v ∈V , a state s, a partial state x, an action set O, and a graph
G = (V, E) on V . Compose generates all sequences from s to states that match x that can
be composed using macros for the parents of v. We use the Cartesian product S × T to
denote the set of sequences obtained by appending a macro in T to a sequence in S. If s
478

The Role of Macros in Planning
Algorithm 4 Compose(v, s, x, O, G)
1: S ←{⟨⟩}
2: for all w ∈Pa(v) do
3:
if (s | Vw) ̸∼(x | Vw) then
4:
T ←{⟨s | Vw, seq(m), post(m)⟩∈O : post(m) ∼(x | Vw)}
5:
if T = ∅then
6:
return ∅
7:
end if
8:
S ←S × T
9:
end if
10: end for
11: return S
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
Figure 3: The causal graph and its transitive reduction for P5.
matches x, Compose returns a set containing the empty sequence ⟨⟩. If, for some parent
w ∈Pa(v), there is no macro to a state matching x, Compose returns the empty set.
3.2 Examples
We illustrate MacroPlanner on the well-known Tower of Hanoi problem. An instance
of Tower of Hanoi with n discs and 3 pegs can be represented as a planning problem
Pn = ⟨V, init, goal, A⟩, where V = {v1, . . . , vn} are variables representing the discs (v1
being the smallest and vn the largest), each with domain D(vi) = {A, B, C}. The initial
state is init = (v1 = A, . . . , vn = A) and the goal state is goal = (v1 = C, . . . , vn = C). For
each vi ∈V and each permutation (j, k, l) of (A, B, C), there is an action for moving disc
vi from peg j to peg k, formally deﬁned as aj,k
i
= ⟨(v1 = l, . . . , vi−1 = l, vi = j); (vi = k)⟩.
All discs smaller than vi thus have to be on the third peg l to perform the movement.
Figure 3 shows the causal graph and its transitive reduction for the planning problem
P5, representing the 5-disc instance of Tower of Hanoi.
Each action for moving disc vi
has a pre-condition on each variable vj, j < i. Clearly, the causal graph is acyclic and its
transitive reduction is an inverted tree, implying P5 ∈IR. Since the transitive reduction
is a directed path, the set of parents of variable vi, i > 1, is Pa(vi) = {vi−1}. The root
variable is v5 or, more generally, vn for planning problem Pn.
To solve Tower of Hanoi, MacroPlanner(Pn) calls GetMacros(vn, init, A, G) to
generate the set M of solution macros. In turn, the subroutine GetMacros(vn, init, A, G)
calls GetMacros(vn−1, init, A, G). This recursion continues until the base case is reached
for GetMacros(v1, init, A, G). For each variable vi ∈V , let xd
i = (v1 = d, . . . , vi = d),
d ∈{A, B, C}, be the partial state assigning the same value d to each variable in Vvi.
479

Jonsson
C,...,C,A
A,...,A,B
A,...,A,C
B,...,B,A
C,...,C,C
B,...,B,C
C,...,C,B
B,...,B,B
A,...,A,A
Figure 4: The implicit graph traversed by Solve for variable vi.
The set of projected pre-conditions for vi is Z = {xA
i , xB
i , xC
i }. Since each projected pre-
condition speciﬁes a value for each ancestor of vi, each macro has to end in either of these
three partial states. It is easy to show by induction that the set of macros M returned
by GetMacros(vi, init, A, G) contains precisely 9 macros, corresponding to each pair of
projected pre-conditions (including macros with an empty action sequence from a projected
pre-condition to itself).
Let us study the behavior of GetMacros(vi, init, A, G). Here, we assume that the 9
macros for vi−1 in the set O are those described above. The ﬁrst partial state added to L on
line 2 is the projected initial state xA
i . As a result, GetMacros calls Solve(vi, xA
i , Z, O, G)
on line 10. In the call to Solve, the ﬁrst state-sequence pair added to Q on line 2 is (xA
i , ⟨⟩).
The action aA,B
i
has a pre-condition xC
i−1 ⊕(vi = A) that matches (vi = xA
i (vi)) = (vi = A).
As a result, Solve calls Compose(vi, xA
i , xC
i−1 ⊕(xi = A), O, G) on line 6.
In Compose, there is a single parent of vi, namely vi−1. The projection xA
i | Vvi−1 = xA
i−1
is not equal to xC
i−1. There is a single macro m in the set O from xA
i−1 to xC
i−1, so the set
S returned by Compose contains a single sequence ⟨m⟩. As a result, Solve generates a
successor state xC
i−1 ⊕(vi = B) of the ﬁrst type, which is added to Q on line 8 together with
its associated sequence ⟨m, aA,B
i
⟩.
In the iteration for xC
i−1 ⊕(vi = B), there is a single projected pre-condition which
matches (vi = B), namely xB
i , so Solve calls Compose(vi, xC
i−1 ⊕(vi = B), xB
i , O, G) on
line 12. For the only parent vi−1, the projection xC
i−1 does not match xB
i | Vvi−1 = xB
i−1.
There is a single macro m′ in the set O from xC
i−1 to xB
i−1, so the set S returned by Compose
contains a single sequence ⟨m′⟩. As a result, Solve generates a successor state xB
i of the
second type on line 14, and a macro ⟨xA
i , ⟨m, aA,B
i
, m′⟩, xB
i ⟩is added to M. The other eight
macros are added to M in a similar way. In the next section we prove that MacroPlanner
is guaranteed to generate a solution to Tower of Hanoi in polynomial time.
Figure 4 shows the implicit graph traversed by Solve for a variable vi, i > 1, in Tower
of Hanoi. The path corresponding to the macro from xA
i to xB
i in the example is marked
in bold. Successor states of the ﬁrst type, as well as their incoming edges, are denoted by
solid lines. Successor states of the second type, as well as their incoming edges, are denoted
by dashed lines. Note that the size of the graph is constant and does not depend on i. The
480

The Role of Macros in Planning
only diﬀerence is the cost of each edge (omitted in the ﬁgure), which equals the length of
the corresponding action sequence in Solve and depends on the length of the macros for
vi−1.
Our second example is a planning domain ﬁrst suggested by Jonsson and B¨ackstr¨om
(1998b). Again, we use Pn to denote the instance containing n variables v1, . . . , vn. Each
variable vi ∈V has domain D(vi) = {0, 1}. The initial state is (v1 = 0, . . . , vn = 0) and the
goal state is (v1 = 0, . . . , vn−1 = 0, vn = 1). For each variable vi, there are two actions:
ai
=
⟨(v1 = 0, . . . , vi−2 = 0, vi−1 = 1, vi = 0); (vi = 1)⟩,
a′
i
=
⟨(v1 = 0, . . . , vi−2 = 0, vi−1 = 1, vi = 1); (vi = 0)⟩.
The causal graph and its transitive reduction are identical to Tower of Hanoi, so Figure 3
applies here as well, and it follows that Pn ∈IR.
Jonsson and B¨ackstr¨om (1998b) showed that an optimal plan for Pn has length 2n −1.
To solve Pn we need to change the value of vn from 0 to 1 using the action an. Since the
pre-condition of an is (vn−1 = 1), while the goal state is (vn−1 = 0), we need to insert an−1
before an and a′
n−1 after an, resulting in the sequence ⟨an−1, an, a′
n−1⟩. Actions an−1 and
a′
n−1 specify the pre-condition (vn−2 = 1), while an and the goal state specify (vn−2 = 0),
requiring the value of vn−2 to change four times. It is easy to show that the value of variable
vi has to change 2n−i times, for a minimum of 2n −1 total actions.
For each variable vi ∈V , there are two projected pre-conditions in the set Z, namely
(v1 = 0, . . . , vi = 0) and (v1 = 0, . . . , vi−1 = 0, vi = 1).
Since both specify values for
each ancestor of vi, the set M of macros returned by GetMacros contains precisely four
macros, one for each pair of projected pre-conditions. In spite of the fact that an optimal
solution has exponential length in the number of variables, MacroPlanner is guaranteed
to generate a solution to Pn in polynomial time due to the complexity results in the next
section.
3.3 Theoretical Properties
In this section we prove several theoretical properties of the algorithm MacroPlanner.
For ease of presentation the proofs of several theorems have been moved to the appendix.
The ﬁrst two theorems are related to the correctness and optimality of MacroPlanner.
Theorem 3.2. For each planning problem P ∈IR, each macro m ∈M returned by
MacroPlanner(P) is well-deﬁned and solves P.
The proof of Theorem 3.2 appears in Appendix A. The proof is an induction on variables
v ∈V to show that each macro returned by Compose and Solve is well-deﬁned.
In
addition, each macro returned by Solve satisﬁes a projected pre-condition. For the root
variable, Solve is called for the initial state init, and the only projected pre-condition is
goal. The macros returned by MacroPlanner(P) are precisely those returned by this
call to Solve, and thus solve P.
Theorem 3.3. For each planning problem P ∈IR, if there exists a plan solving P,
MacroPlanner(P) returns an optimal plan for P, else it returns “fail”.
481

Jonsson
The proof of Theorem 3.3 appears in Appendix B. The proof is a double induction on
variables v ∈V and states s for Vv visited during a call to Solve, to show that the macros
returned by Solve represent the shortest solutions to the subproblems corresponding to
this call. Thus some macro returned by Solve for the root variable has to be an optimal
solution for achieving goal starting in init, which is precisely the deﬁnition of an optimal
plan for P.
We also prove two complexity results for MacroPlanner. Speciﬁcally, we study two
subclasses of the class IR and prove that plan generation is polynomial for these classes,
provided that we are allowed to represent the resulting plan using a hierarchy of macros.
For each variable v ∈V and each value d ∈D(v), we deﬁne Ad
v = {a ∈A : post(a)(v) = d}
as the set of actions that change the value of v to d (implying v ∈Vpost(a)). We ﬁrst prove
a lemma that relates the complexity of MacroPlanner to the number of states visited
during calls to Solve.
Lemma 3.4. Let gv be the number of states visited during the various calls to Solve by
GetMacros(v, init, A, G). The complexity of MacroPlanner is O(|A| P
v∈V g3
v).
Proof. Solve is basically a modiﬁed version of Dijkstra’s algorithm, which is quadratic in
the number of nodes of the underlying graph, or O(g2
v). Each state p is only dequeued from
the priority queue Q once. For an action a ∈O, the call to Compose on line 6 returns a
set of distinct action sequences, so a generates at most one edge from p to successor states
of the ﬁrst type. However, two diﬀerent actions in O may generate two edges from p to
the same state. The same is true for projected pre-conditions in Z and successor states
of the second type. Since there are at most |A| actions in O and at most |A| projected
pre-conditions in Z, the worst-case complexity of a single call to Solve is O(|A|g2
v).
The subroutine GetMacros calls Solve for each successor state of the second type.
Since there are at most gv such states, the complexity of GetMacros is O(|A|g3
v), so the
overall complexity of MacroPlanner is O(|A| P
v∈V g3
v).
Note that the complexity of
Compose is included in this analysis. Compose is called by Solve to generate successor
states of either type, so the number gv of states visited by Solve is proportional to the
total number of sequences returned by Compose.
Theorem 3.5. If Vpre(a) = Vv for each variable v ∈V ∪{v∗} and each action a ∈A such
that Vpost(a) = {v}, the complexity of MacroPlanner is O(|V ||A|4).
Theorem 3.6. Assume that for each variable v ∈V , each value d ∈D(v), and each pair of
actions a, a′ ∈Ad
v, Vpre(a) = Vpre(a′) = {v} ∪Pa(v) and pre(a) | Pa(v) = pre(a′) | Pa(v). If
pre(a) | Pa(v) = init | Pa(v) for each action a ∈A with post(a)(v) = init(v), the algorithm
runs in polynomial time with complexity O(|A| P
v∈V |D(v)|3).
The proofs of Theorems 3.5 and 3.6 appear in Appendix C. The proof of Theorem 3.5 is
based on the observation that if the pre-conditions are fully speciﬁed on the ancestors of a
variable v ∈V , the number of states visited during the various calls to Solve is bounded by
the number of actions. The proof of Theorem 3.6 follows from the fact that the algorithm
always achieves a value d ∈D(v) in the domain of v ∈V in the same state, so the number
of states is linear in the size of the variable domains.
482

The Role of Macros in Planning
Two examples of planning problems with the properties established in Theorem 3.5 are
Tower of Hanoi and the domain suggested by Jonsson and B¨ackstr¨om (1998b), both from
the previous example section.
An example of a planning problem with the properties established in Theorem 3.6 is a
domain proposed by Domshlak and Dinitz (2001). The set of variables is V = {v1, . . . , vn},
each with domain D(vi) = {0, 1, 2}, the initial state is init = (v1 = 0, . . . , vn = 0), and the
goal state is goal = (v1 = 2, . . . , vn = 2). For each variable vi ∈V , there are four actions:
a1
i
=
⟨(vi−1 = 2, vi = 0); (vi = 1)⟩,
a2
i
=
⟨(vi−1 = 0, vi = 1); (vi = 2)⟩,
a3
i
=
⟨(vi−1 = 2, vi = 2); (vi = 1)⟩,
a4
i
=
⟨(vi−1 = 0, vi = 1); (vi = 0)⟩,
For v1, the pre-condition on vi−1 is dropped. Domshlak and Dinitz (2001) showed that
the length of an optimal plan solving the planning problem is 2n+1 −2. However, due to
Theorem 3.6, MacroPlanner generates an optimal solution in polynomial time.
3.4 Pruning
To improve the running time, it is possible to prune some states before they are visited.
Speciﬁcally, let (p, seq) be a state-sequence pair visited during a call to Solve(v, s, Z, O, G).
For each state-sequence pair (t, seq2) previously visited during the same call such that
t(v) = p(v), attempt to reach p from t using Compose(v, t, p, O, G). Since p is a fully
speciﬁed state, Compose(v, t, p, O, G) returns at most one action sequence. Call it seq3.
If p is reachable from t and ⟨seq2, seq3⟩is at least as short as seq, there is no need to
visit p, since any state reachable from s via p is also reachable via t on a path of equal or
shorter length. The same reasoning holds for macros to a state p that matches a projected
pre-condition z, under the additional restriction that t also match z.
If it is not possible to reach the projected goal state goal | Vv from s, we can remove all
macros whose pre-condition equals s from the set M of macros in GetMacros(v, init, A, G),
since no plan that solves the original planning problem P could contain such macros. In
addition, we can remove all macros whose post-condition equals s from the set M. If it is
not possible to reach the projected goal state from the projected initial state init | Vv, there
exists no plan that solves the original planning problem P, so we can immediately return
“fail” without generating the remaining set of macros for other variables.
4. Extending MacroPlanner
In this section, we study ways to extend the algorithm MacroPlanner to a broader class
of planning problems. In Subsection 4.1, we propose a relaxed deﬁnition of the causal graph
that, when applied, extends the class IR. We show that MacroPlanner can be modiﬁed
to solve planning problems in the new class. In Subsection 4.2, we extend MacroPlanner
to planning problems with acyclic causal graphs. In Subsection 4.3, we show how to combine
the results for diﬀerent classes to form a more general class of planning problems. Subsection
4.4 illustrates the algorithms for the new classes on two well-known examples: Gripper
and Logistics.
483

Jonsson
4.1 Relaxed Causal Graph
The conventional deﬁnition of the causal graph (V, E) states that there is an edge (w, v) ∈E
if and only if w ̸= v and there exists an action a ∈A such that w ∈Vpre(a) ∪Vpost(a) and
v ∈Vpost(a). Consider an action a ∈A such that Vpost(a) = {w, v}. When applied, a changes
the values of both w and v. Under the conventional deﬁnition, a induces a cycle since the
causal graph includes the two edges (w, v) and (v, w).
In this section, we propose a relaxed deﬁnition of the causal graph. Under the new
deﬁnition, an acyclic causal graph does not necessarily imply that all actions are unary.
Assume that there exists at least one action a ∈A such that Vpost(a) = {w, v}. Further
assume that there are multiple actions for changing the value of w, whose pre- and post-
conditions do not specify values for v.
Finally, assume that there exists no action for
changing the value of v that does not change the value of w.
Under the given assumption, the only way to satisfy the pre-condition of an action that
changes the value of v is to ﬁrst change the value of w. This is not changed by the fact
that such an action might also change the value of w. The opposite is not true of actions
that change the value of w, since the value of w can change independently of v. Under the
relaxed deﬁnition, the causal graph includes the edge (w, v) but excludes the edge (v, w).
4.1.1 Definition of the Class RIR
Deﬁnition 4.1. The relaxed causal graph (V, E′) of a planning problem P is a directed
graph with the variables in V as nodes. There is an edge (w, v) ∈E′ if and only if w ̸= v
and either
1. there exists a ∈A such that w ∈Vpre(a) −Vpost(a) and v ∈Vpost(a), or
2. there exists a ∈A such that w, v ∈Vpost(a) and either
(a) there exists a′ ∈A such that w ∈Vpost(a′) and v /∈Vpost(a′), or
(b) there does not exist a′ ∈A such that w /∈Vpost(a′) and v ∈Vpost(a′).
Edges of type 2(b) ensure that there always is at least one edge between two variables
w, v ∈V that appear in the same post-condition of an action a ∈A. If it is not possible
to change the value of either without changing the value of the other, the relaxed causal
graph contains a cycle just as before. We can now deﬁne the class RIR of relaxed inverted
tree reducible planning problems:
Deﬁnition 4.2. A planning problem P is relaxed inverted tree reducible if and only if its
relaxed causal graph is acyclic and the transitive reduction of the relaxed causal graph is an
inverted tree.
Consider a planning problem P ∈IR.
Since each action is unary, the relaxed causal
graph contains no edges of type 2.
Consequently, the relaxed causal graph is identical
to the conventional causal graph, so any tree-reducible planning problem is also relaxed
tree-reducible, implying IR ⊂RIR.
As an example, consider a planning problem with just two variables v and w.
Let
D(v) = {0, 1, 2, 3}, D(w) = {0, 1}, init = (v = 0, w = 0), and goal = (v = 3, w = 1).
Assume that there are three actions:
484

The Role of Macros in Planning
⟨(v = 0); (v = 1)⟩,
⟨(v = 2); (v = 3)⟩,
⟨(v = 1, w = 0); (v = 2, w = 1)⟩.
The third action is not unary, since it changes the value of both v and w. There are actions
for changing the value of v that do not aﬀect w, while the opposite is not true. Hence the
relaxed causal graph contains a single edge (v, w).
4.1.2 Algorithm
We show that a minor modiﬁcation of MacroPlanner is suﬃcient to solve planning
problems in the class RIR.
Since actions are no longer unary, an action a ∈A that
changes the value of a variable v ∈V may also change the values of other variables. When
generating macros for v, we only consider the set A′ of actions that change the value of v
without changing the value of any descendant of v in the relaxed causal graph. Formally,
A′ = {a ∈A : v ∈Vpost(a) ∧|Vpost(a) ∩Desc(v)| = 0}.
Just as before, we project the pre-conditions of actions that change the value of some
descendant of v onto Vv in order to deﬁne subproblems Pv for v.
Let A′′ = {a ∈A :
|Vpost(a) ∩Desc(v)| > 0 ∧(pre(a) | Vv) ̸= ()} be the set of such actions whose projected
pre-condition onto Vv is non-empty. Let a ∈A′′ be such an action, and let m be a macro
for v that achieves the pre-condition of a, i.e., post(m) ∼pre(a).
The only reason for applying m (unless it also satisﬁes the projected pre-condition of
some other action) is to satisfy the pre-condition of a. If a changes the value of v, we
are no longer in the projected state post(m) as a result of applying a. In other words, we
should not generate macros for v starting in post(m) as before. Rather, we should generate
macros from post(m) ⊕(post(a) | Vv), i.e., the projected state that results from applying a
in post(m).
Algorithm 5 RelaxedPlanner(P)
1: G ←relaxed causal graph of P
2: R ←transitive reduction of G
3: v ←root variable of R
4: M ←RelaxedMacros(v, init, A, R)
5: return M, or “fail” if M = ∅
Algorithm 5 shows the modiﬁed version of MacroPlanner for the class RIR, which
we call RelaxedPlanner. The only diﬀerence with respect to MacroPlanner is that
G now refers to the relaxed causal graph.
Algorithm 6 shows the modiﬁed version of
GetMacros for the class RIR, which we call RelaxedMacros. The modiﬁcations with
respect to GetMacros appear on lines 3–5 and 12–17. The subroutine Solve remains the
same as before.
4.1.3 Theoretical Properties
Theorem 4.3. For each planning problem P ∈RIR, each macro m ∈M returned by
RelaxedPlanner(P) is well-deﬁned and solves P.
485

Jonsson
Algorithm 6 RelaxedMacros(v, init, A, G)
1: M ←∅
2: L ←list containing the projected initial state init | Vv
3: A′′ ←{a ∈A : |Vpost(a) ∩Desc(v)| > 0 ∧(pre(a) | Vv) ̸= ()}
4: Z ←{pre(a) | Vv : a ∈A′′}
5: O ←{a ∈A : v ∈Vpost(a) ∧|Vpost(a) ∩Desc(v)| = 0}
6: for all u ∈Pa(v) do
7:
O ←O ∪RelaxedMacros(u, init, A, G)
8: end for
9: while there are more elements in L do
10:
s ←next element in L
11:
M ←M ∪Solve(v, s, Z, O, G)
12:
for all m = ⟨pre(m), seq(m), post(m)⟩∈M do
13:
for all a ∈A′′ −{a∗} such that post(m) ∼pre(a) do
14:
if post(m) ⊕(post(a) | Vv) /∈L then
15:
append post(m) ⊕(post(a) | Vv) to L
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
end for
19: end while
20: return M
v1
v
v2
3
Figure 5: Transitive reduction graph with outdegree > 1.
Theorem 4.4. For each planning problem P ∈RIR, if there exists a plan solving P,
RelaxedPlanner returns an optimal plan for P, else it returns “fail”.
The proofs of Theorems 4.3 and 4.4 are simple adaptations of the corresponding proofs
for MacroPlanner, and appear in Appendix D.
4.2 Acyclic Causal Graph
In this section we present a second extension of MacroPlanner, this time to the class
of planning problems with acyclic causal graphs. In other words, variables in the causal
graph may have unbounded outdegree, even when considering the transitive reduction.
Unbounded outdegree poses a challenge to the macro compilation approach, as illustrated
by the following example.
Consider a planning problem P with V = {v1, v2, v3}, D(v1) = {0, 1, 2}, and D(v2) =
D(v3) = {0, 1}. The initial state is (v1 = 0, v2 = 0, v3 = 0), the goal state is (v2 = 1, v3 = 1),
486

The Role of Macros in Planning
and A contains the following actions:
a1
1
=
⟨v1 = 0; v1 = 1⟩,
a2
1
=
⟨v1 = 0; v1 = 2⟩,
a1
2
=
⟨v1 = 1, v2 = 0; v2 = 1⟩,
a1
3
=
⟨v1 = 2, v3 = 0; v3 = 1⟩.
Figure 5 shows the causal graph of P, identical to its transitive reduction in this case. Since
variable v1 has outdegree 2, it follows that P /∈IR (implying P /∈RIR since actions are
unary). From the point of view of variable v2, it is possible to set v2 to 1: apply a1
1 to
change v1 from 0 to 1, followed by a1
2 to change v2 from 0 to 1. From the point of view of
v3, it is possible to set v3 to 1 by applying a2
1 followed by a1
3. Nevertheless, there is no valid
plan for solving the planning problem.
The algorithm MacroPlanner solves planning problems by decomposing them into
subproblems for each variable. We have seen that this is eﬃcient for certain subclasses of
IR, and that it guarantees optimality. However, for variables with unbounded outdegree
it is no longer possible to deﬁne subproblems for each state variable in isolation. If we
run MacroPlanner on the example planning problem above, it will generate a macro for
setting v2 to 1, and a macro for setting v3 to 1. This might lead us to believe that P has a
solution, while in fact it does not.
4.2.1 Definition of the Class AR
To extend MacroPlanner to planning problems with acyclic causal graphs, we impose an
additional restriction on planning problems. For each state variable v ∈V with outdegree
greater than 1 in the causal graph, we require v to be reversible.
Deﬁnition 4.5. A state variable v ∈V is reversible if and only if, for each state s for Vv
that is reachable from the projected initial state init | Vv, the projected initial state init | Vv
is reachable from s.
Deﬁnition 4.6. A planning problem P belongs to the class AR if the causal graph of P is
acyclic and each variable is reversible.
4.2.2 Algorithm
In this section we show how to modify the algorithm MacroPlanner so that it solves plan-
ning problems in AR. We ﬁrst describe an algorithm called ReversiblePlanner which
requires all variables to be reversible. ReversiblePlanner, which appears in Algorithm 7,
operates directly on the causal graph of the planning problem P. Thus, it does not compute
the transitive reduction of the causal graph. Another feature is that the subroutine Get-
Macros is omitted. Instead, ReversiblePlanner directly calls ReversibleCompose,
the equivalent of the subroutine Compose.
Algorithm 8 describes the subroutine ReversibleCompose. While Compose returns
a set of sequences for reaching a partial state x, ReversibleCompose only returns a
pair of sequences.
Here, U is the set of variables that appear in the post-condition of
the action whose pre-condition x we wish to satisfy.
The ﬁrst sequence seq satisﬁes x
487

Jonsson
Algorithm 7 ReversiblePlanner(P)
1: G ←[relaxed] causal graph of P
2: (seq, seq2) ←ReversibleCompose(∅, init, goal, A, G)
3: return seq
Algorithm 8 ReversibleCompose(U, s, x, A, G)
1: seq ←⟨⟩, seq2 ←⟨⟩
2: for all w ∈Vx in topological order do
3:
if x(w) ̸= s(w) then
4:
m ←ReversibleSolve(w, s, x(w), A, G)
5:
if m = “fail” then
6:
return (“fail”,“fail”)
7:
else
8:
seq ←⟨m, seq⟩
9:
if w /∈U then
10:
m′ ←ReversibleSolve(w, s ⊕(w = x(w)), s(w), A, G)
11:
seq2 ←⟨seq2, m′⟩
12:
end if
13:
end if
14:
end if
15: end for
16: return (seq, seq2)
starting in the state s. If this fails, ReversibleCompose returns the pair of sequences
(“fail”,“fail”). Otherwise, the second sequence seq2 returns to s from the post-condition of
the ﬁrst sequence when applied in s. An exception occurs for variables in U ⊆V , which
are not returned to their values in s.
ReversibleCompose requires a topological sort of the variables of the causal graph G,
which can be obtained in polynomial time for acyclic graphs. An example of a topological
sort is v1, v2, v3 for the causal graph in Figure 5. The values of x are satisﬁed in reverse
topological order because of the way the sequence seq is constructed, i.e., each new macro
m is inserted ﬁrst. ReversibleCompose calls ReversibleSolve to obtain a macro for
changing the value of a variable w ∈Vx from s(w) to x(w).
If this succeeds and w /∈
U, ReversibleCompose calls ReversibleSolve a second time to obtain a macro for
resetting the value of w from x(w) to s(w). This macro is appended to the sequence seq2,
which resets the values of variables in Vx −U in topological order.
Algorithm 9 describes ReversibleSolve, the equivalent of the subroutine Solve. Un-
like Solve, ReversibleSolve only generates a single macro for changing the value of
v from s(v) to d. Moreover, ReversibleSolve does not invoke Dijkstra’s algorithm; in-
stead, it performs a breadth-ﬁrst search over the values in the joint domain of W. A variable
w ∈Vv belongs to W if there exists an action for changing the value of v or one of its de-
scendants with w in its post-condition. Note that if actions are unary, W = {v}, so the
breadth-ﬁrst search is over values in the domain D(v) of v.
488

The Role of Macros in Planning
Algorithm 9 ReversibleSolve(v, s, d, A, G)
1: W ←{w ∈Vv : ∃a ∈A such that w ∈Vpost(a) and Vpost(a) ∩(Desc(v) ∪{v}) ̸= ∅}
2: A′ ←{a ∈A : v ∈Vpost(a) [∧Desc(v) ∩Vpost(a) = ∅] }
3: L ←list containing the state-sequence pair (s | W, ⟨⟩)
4: while L contains more elements do
5:
(p, seq) ←next element in L
6:
if p = (s | W) ⊕(v = d) then
7:
return ⟨(s | Vv, seq, (s | Vv) ⊕(v = d)⟩
8:
end if
9:
for all a ∈A′ such that pre(a) ∼(v = p(v)) do
10:
(seq2, seq3) ←ReversibleCompose(Vpost(a), s ⊕p, pre(a), A, G)
11:
if seq2 ̸= “fail” and ̸ ∃(p′, seq′) ∈L such that p′ = p ⊕post(a)(v) then
12:
insert (p ⊕post(a)(v), ⟨seq, seq2, a, seq3⟩) into L
13:
end if
14:
end for
15: end while
16: return “fail”
Each partial state p visited during search is associated with a sequence seq used to arrive
at p. If p = (s | W) ⊕(v = d), ReversibleSolve returns a macro corresponding to the
given sequence. Note that this macro only changes the value of v, leaving the values of all
other variables unchanged. Otherwise, ReversibleSolve tries all actions for changing the
value of v whose pre-condition is compatible with (v = p(v)). To satisfy the pre-condition
of an action a from the state s ⊕p, ReversibleSolve calls ReversibleCompose. If
ReversibleCompose returns a legal pair of sequences (seq2, seq3) and the partial state
p ⊕post(v)(a) has not been previously visited, ReversibleSolve generates a new state-
sequence pair (p⊕post(v)(a), ⟨seq, seq2, a, seq3⟩). Since U = Vpost(a), seq3 resets all variables
to their values in s ⊕p except those whose values are changed by a.
Since an equivalent of GetMacros is omitted, ReversibleMacros is goal-driven in
the sense that ReversibleSolve is only called whenever needed by the subroutine Re-
versibleCompose. We use memoization to cache the results of ReversibleCompose
and ReversibleSolve to avoid recomputing the same result more than once. The ex-
pressions within square brackets indicate the changes that are necessary for the algorithm
to work on planning problems with acyclic relaxed causal graphs.
Note, however, that
ReversiblePlanner is incomplete for planning problems in AR with non-unary actions.
4.2.3 Theoretical Properties
Theorem 4.7. For each planning problem P ∈AR, if the sequence seq returned by
ReversiblePlanner(P) is diﬀerent from “fail”, seq is well-deﬁned for init and satis-
ﬁes (init ⊕post(seq)) ∼goal.
Theorem 4.8. For each planning problem P ∈AR with unary actions, if P is solvable,
ReversiblePlanner(P) returns a sequence seq solving P, else it returns “fail”.
489

Jonsson
Theorem 4.9. For each planning problem P ∈AR, the complexity of ReversiblePlan-
ner is O(Dk|A|(Dk+1 + |V |)), where D = maxv∈V D(v) and k = maxv∈V |W|.
The proofs of Theorems 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9 appear in Appendix E. The proofs of Theorems
4.7 and 4.8 are similar to those for MacroPlanner, and show by induction on variables
v ∈V that the macros returned by ReversibleCompose and ReversibleSolve are
well-deﬁned. However, instead of optimal plans, ReversiblePlanner returns a plan if
and only if one exists.
The proof of Theorem 4.9 is based on the fact that in each call to ReversibleSolve,
state variables not in Vv −W always take on their initial values. This bounds the total
number of states in calls to ReversibleSolve. Note that Theorem 4.9 implies that the
complexity of ReversiblePlanner is O(D|A|(D2 + |V |)) for planning problems in AR
with unary actions, since |W| = 1 for each v ∈V in this case. In general, if the size of the
sets W are ﬁxed, the complexity of ReversiblePlanner is polynomial. Also note that
Tower of Hanoi belongs to AR since each variable is reversible, so planning problems in
AR may have exponentially long solutions.
4.3 The Class AOR
We can now combine the two results for the classes IR and AR.
The idea is to use
the original algorithm to exhaustively generate macros for each variable v, as long as the
outdegree of v in the transitive reduction of the causal graph is less than or equal to 1.
Whenever we encounter a variable v with outdegree larger than 1, we switch to the algorithm
for reversible variables from the previous section. This way, we can handle acyclic causal
graphs even when some variables are not reversible. We call the resulting class AOR.
4.3.1 Definition of the Class AOR
Deﬁnition 4.10. A planning problem P belongs to the class AOR if the causal graph of
P is acyclic and each variable v ∈V with outdegree > 1 in the transitive reduction of the
causal graph is reversible.
The example planning problem from the previous section does not belong to the class
AOR, since variable v1 with outdegree 2 is not reversible. However, assume that we add
the following two actions to A:
a3
1
=
⟨v1 = 1; v1 = 0⟩,
a4
1
=
⟨v1 = 2; v1 = 0⟩.
With the new actions, variable v1 is reversible since each value of v1 is reachable from
each other value. Since v1 is the only state variable with outdegree greater than 1 in the
transitive reduction, P ∈AOR.
4.3.2 Algorithm
In this section, we describe AcyclicPlanner, which combines ideas from MacroPlan-
ner and ReversiblePlanner to solve planning problems in the class AOR. Acyclic-
Planner appears in Algorithm 10. Just like MacroPlanner, AcyclicPlanner operates
490

The Role of Macros in Planning
Algorithm 10 AcyclicPlanner(P)
1: G ←[relaxed] causal graph of P
2: R ←transitive reduction of G
3: (S, seq, seq2) ←AcyclicCompose(v∗, init, goal, A, G, R)
4: if S = ∅then
5:
return “fail”
6: else
7:
return S × seq, or ⟨seq′, seq⟩for some seq′ ∈S
8: end if
on the transitive reduction R of the causal graph. However, since ReversiblePlanner
operates on the causal graph G itself, AcyclicPlanner passes on both G and R to the
subroutine AcyclicCompose.
Algorithm 11 AcyclicCompose(v, s, x, A, G, R)
1: S ←{⟨⟩}
2: x′ ←x projected onto non-reversible variables
3: for all w ∈Pa(v) do
4:
if outdegree(R, w) ≤1 and (s | Vw) ̸∼(x′ | Vw) then
5:
M ←AcyclicSolve(w, s | Vw, A, G, R)
6:
T ←{⟨s | Vw, seq(m), post(m)⟩∈M : post(m) ∼(x′ | Vw)}
7:
if T = ∅then
8:
return (∅,“fail”,“fail”)
9:
end if
10:
S ←S × T
11:
end if
12: end for
13: seq ←⟨⟩, seq2 ←⟨⟩
14: for all w ∈Vx in reverse topological order do
15:
if outdegree(R, w) > 1 and (s | Vw) ̸∼(x | Vw) then
16:
(seq3, seq4) ←ReversibleCompose(∅, s | Vw, x, A, G).
17:
if seq3 = “fail” then
18:
return (∅,“fail”,“fail”)
19:
else
20:
seq ←⟨seq, seq3⟩
21:
seq2 ←⟨seq4, seq2⟩
22:
end if
23:
end if
24: end for
25: return (S, seq, seq2)
As can be seen, AcyclicPlanner calls AcyclicCompose with the dummy variable
v∗. Note that, contrary to before, the transitive reduction of the causal graph may contain
several edges to v∗. The reason is that there is not a single root variable of the causal graph.
491

Jonsson
Instead, there may be multiple sink variables in the causal graph, i.e., variables with no
outgoing edges. The transitive reduction contains an edge from each sink variable in Vgoal
to v∗.
Algorithm 11 describes the subroutine AcyclicCompose. Although it looks somewhat
complex, lines 3 through 12 are really just an adaptation of Compose to the class AOR.
The only diﬀerence is that AcyclicSolve does not generate macros for satisfying the
projected pre-condition x; instead, it generates macros for satisfying the projection x′ of x
onto non-reversible variables. The idea is for reversible variables to always remain in their
initial values. This way, we can treat the parents w ∈Pa(v) of v as if they were independent,
since any common ancestors have to have outdegree larger than 1 in the transitive reduction,
and are thus reversible by deﬁnition.
Lines 13 through 24 have the eﬀect of satisfying the values of x for variables in Vx whose
outdegree in the transtitive reduction is larger than 1. This is done simply by calling the
subroutine ReversibleCompose from the previous section. AcyclicCompose returns
three values: a set S of sequences for satisfying the partial state x with respect to non-
reversible variables, a sequence seq for satisfying the partial state x with respect to reversible
variables, and a sequence seq2 for resetting the reversible variables to their initial values.
Note that once ReversibleCompose is called for a variable w, each predecessor of w
is processed using ReversibleSolve and ReversibleCompose as well. For this to work,
the predecessors of w have to be reversible, which is guaranteed by the following lemma:
Lemma 4.11. If v is reversible, so is every predecessor of v.
Proof. By contrapositive. Assume that w is a non-reversible predecessor of v. Then there
exists a state s for Vw that is reachable from the projected initial state init | Vw such that
init | Vw is not reachable from s. Since w is a predecessor of v, Vw is a subset of Vv, so
the state (init | Vv) ⊕s is reachable from init | Vv, but not vice versa. Thus v is not
reversible.
Algorithm 12 describes the subroutine AcyclicSolve. The only diﬀerence between
Solve and AcyclicSolve is that AcyclicSolve calls AcyclicCompose to obtain se-
quences for satisfying a projected pre-condition. Moreover, whenever satisfying the pre-
condition pre(a) of an action, AcyclicCompose applies the sequence seq3 to reset re-
versible variables to their initial values. In addition, AcyclicCompose does not satisfy
a projected pre-condition z for reversible variables, since it does not append the sequence
seq2 to the resulting sequence. Just as before, the expressions within square brackets are
those that need to be added to deal with acyclic relaxed causal graphs.
4.3.3 Theoretical Properties
Theorem 4.12. For each planning problem P ∈AOR with unary actions, if there exists a
plan solving P, each sequence seq in the set S returned by AcyclicPlanner is well-deﬁned
for init and satisﬁes (init ⊕post(seq)) ∼goal.
Proof. To prove Theorem 4.12, it is suﬃcient to combine results for MacroPlanner and
ReversiblePlanner. The subroutines AcyclicCompose and AcyclicSolve are iden-
tical to Compose and Solve for variables with outdegree less than or equal to 1, so Lemmas
492

The Role of Macros in Planning
Algorithm 12 AcyclicSolve(v, s, A, G, R)
1: M ←∅
2: A′ ←{a ∈A : v ∈Vpost(a) [∧Desc(v) ∩Vpost(a) = ∅] }
3: Z ←{pre(a) | Vv : a ∈A ∧|Vpost(a) ∩Desc(v)| > 0} −{()}
4: Q ←priority queue containing the state-sequence pair (s, ⟨⟩)
5: while Q is non-empty do
6:
(p, seq) ←remove highest priority state-sequence pair from Q
7:
for all a ∈A′ such that pre(a) ∼(v = p(v)) do
8:
(S, seq2, seq3) ←AcyclicCompose(v, p, pre(a), A, G, R)
9:
for all sequences seq4 ∈S do
10:
insert (p ⊕post(⟨seq4, seq2, a, seq3⟩), ⟨seq, seq4, seq2, a, seq3⟩) into Q
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
for all z ∈Z such that z ∼(v = p(v)) do
14:
(S, seq2, seq3) ←AcyclicCompose(v, p, z, P, G, R)
15:
for all sequences seq4 ∈S do
16:
M ←M ∪{⟨s, ⟨seq, seq4⟩, p ⊕post(seq4)⟩}
17:
end for
18:
end for
19: end while
20: return M
A.1 and A.2 imply that the resulting sequences and macros have the desired properties. For
variables with outdegree larger than 1, ReversibleCompose returns sequences with the
desired properties due to Lemma E.1.
Theorem 4.13. Assume that there exists a constant k such that for each non-reversible
variable v ∈V , the number of non-reversible ancestors of v is less than or equal to k.
In addition, for each reversible variable v ∈V , |W| ≤k, where W is the set deﬁned in
ReversibleSolve. Then AcyclicPlanner runs in polynomial time.
Proof. Again, we can combine results for MacroPlanner and ReversiblePlanner.
First note that any call to ReversibleCompose is polynomial due to Theorem 4.9. Lemma
3.4 states that the complexity of MacroPlanner is O(|A| P
v∈V g3
v), where gv is the num-
ber of states visited during calls to Solve for v. Since AcyclicCompose and Acyclic-
Solve are identical to Compose and Solve for non-reversible variables, the argument in
the proof of Lemma 3.4 holds for AcyclicSolve as well. The fact that v has at most k
non-reversible predecessors implies gv = O(Dk+1), since reversible predecessors always take
on their initial values.
Note that the argument in Lemma 3.4 does not take into account the external call
to AcyclicCompose by AcyclicPlanner, which may be exponential in the number
|Pa(v∗)| of parents of v∗.
A slight modiﬁcation of the algorithm is necessary to prove
the theorem. We modify the external call so that it only returns a single sequence. In
other words, for each w ∈Pa(v∗), we only keep one of the macros returned by the call to
AcyclicSolve for w. Note that this does not alter the admissibility of the solution.
493

Jonsson
(a)
(b)
(c)
v
v
1
2
vh
lv
v
v
1
2
vh
lv
v
v
1
2
vh
lv
v*
Figure 6: (a) Conventional and (b) relaxed causal graph, and (c) transitive reduction of the
relaxed causal graph for Gripper.
4.4 Examples
In this section, we provide examples of planning problems in AR and AOR, and describe
how ReversiblePlanner and AcyclicPlanner solve them.
4.4.1 Gripper
Our ﬁrst example is the well-known Gripper domain, in which a robot has to transport balls
between two rooms. In Gripper, a planning problem Pn is deﬁned by the number n of balls
that the robot has to transport. The set of variables is V = {vl, vh, v1, . . . , vn} with domains
D(vl) = {0, 1}, D(vh) = {0, 1, 2}, and D(vi) = {0, 1, R} for each 1 ≤i ≤n. The initial state
is init = (vl = 0, vh = 0, v1 = 0 . . . , vn = 0) and the goal state is goal = (v1 = 1, . . . , vn = 1).
The two rooms are denoted 0 and 1. Variable vl represents the location of the robot, i.e.,
either of the two rooms. Variable vh represents the number of balls currently held by the
robot, for a maximum of 2. Finally, variable vi, 1 ≤i ≤n, represents the location of ball
i, i.e., either of the two rooms or held by the robot (R). The set A contains the following
actions:
⟨(vl = a); (vl = 1 −a)⟩,
a ∈{0, 1},
⟨(vl = a, vh = b, vi = a); (vh = b + 1, vi = R)⟩,
a, b ∈{0, 1}, 1 ≤i ≤n,
⟨(vl = a, vh = b + 1, vi = R); (vh = b, vi = a)⟩,
a, b ∈{0, 1}, 1 ≤i ≤n.
Actions of the ﬁrst type move the robot between rooms. Actions of the second type cause
the robot to pick up a ball at its current location, incrementing the number of balls held.
Actions of the third type cause the robot to drop a ball at its current location, decrementing
the number of balls held.
For each 1 ≤i ≤n, there exist actions for changing the value of vi that also change
the value of vh. Consequently, the conventional causal graph contains the edges (vh, vi) and
(vi, vh), inducing cycles. However, there are no actions for changing the value of vi that do
not also change the value of vh. The opposite is not true; there are actions for vh that do
not aﬀect the value of vi (assuming n > 1). Thus, the relaxed causal graph contains the
edge (vh, vi), but not (vi, vh). Figure 6 shows the conventional and relaxed causal graphs,
as well as the transitive reduction of the relaxed causal graph, for Gripper with n = 2.
The transitive reduction includes the dummy variable v∗as well as its incoming edges.
494

The Role of Macros in Planning
The relaxed causal graph is acyclic, and each variable is reversible since we can re-
turn to the initial state from any other state. Thus Gripper belongs to the class AR
when considering the relaxed causal graph. Since actions in Gripper are non-unary, Re-
versiblePlanner is not guaranteed to ﬁnd a solution. However, we show that it does in
fact ﬁnd a solution to Gripper.
ReversiblePlanner calls ReversibleCompose with the initial and goal states. In
turn, ReversibleCompose goes through each variable w ∈Vgoal and calls Reversible-
Solve to obtain a macro for setting the value of w to its goal value. Since there are no
directed paths between any variables representing balls, a topological sort orders these vari-
ables arbitrarily. Without loss of generality, assume that the topological order is v1, . . . , vn.
Thus the ﬁrst variable processed by ReversibleCompose is v1. ReversibleCompose
calls ReversibleSolve with v = v1, s = init and d = 1.
For v1, the set W = {vh, v1} contains variables vh and v1.
The set A′ contains all
actions of the second and third type for picking up and dropping ball 1. The list L initially
contains the partial state (vh = 0, v1 = 0). There are two actions whose pre-conditions
match (v1 = 0): one for picking up ball 1 from room 0 assuming no ball is currently held
(vh = 0), and one for picking up ball 1 assuming one ball is currently held (vh = 1). For
each of these, ReversibleSolve calls ReversibleCompose with U = Vpost(a), s = init,
and x = pre(a) to obtain a sequence for satisfying the pre-condition of the action.
The pre-condition of the ﬁrst action is already satisﬁed in init, so ReversibleCompose
returns a pair of empty sequences. As a result, ReversibleSolve adds the partial state
(vh = 1, v1 = R) to L, corresponding to the post-condition of this action. Note that the
set A′ is empty for variable vh, since there are no actions for changing the value of vh
that do not also change a value of its descendants. Thus it is not possible to satisfy the
pre-condition (vh = 1) of the second action starting in the initial state without changing
the value of v1. Consequently, ReversibleCompose returns (“fail”,“fail”), and no new
partial state is added to L.
From (vh = 1, v1 = R), there are four actions whose pre-conditions match (v1 = R):
two for dropping ball 1 in room 0, and two for dropping ball 1 in room 1. Two of these
have pre-condition (vh = 2) which is impossible to satisfy without changing the value of
v1. Dropping ball 1 in room 0 returns to the initial state, so no new partial states are
added to L. Dropping ball 1 in room 1 requires a pre-condition (vl = 1, vh = 1). Since
(vh = 1) already holds, ReversibleCompose calls ReversibleSolve to change the value
of vl from 0 to 1. This is possible using the action for changing the location of the robot.
ReversibleCompose also returns a sequence for returning the robot to room 0.
As a result, ReversibleSolve adds the partial state (vh = 0, v1 = 1) to L, cor-
responding to the post-condition of this action.
Note that this partial state satisﬁes
(vh = 0, v1 = 1) = (vh = 0, v1 = 0) ⊕(v1 = 1), so ReversibleSolve returns a macro
that changes the value of v1 without changing the values of any other variables. Since Re-
versibleSolve successfully returned a macro, ReversibleCompose calls Reversible-
Solve again to obtain a macro for returning ball 1 to its initial location. This continues
for the other balls. The ﬁnal solution contains macros for changing the location of each ball
from room 0 to room 1 one at a time.
Note that the complexity of ReversibleSolve is polynomial for Gripper due to The-
orem 4.9, since |W| ≤2 for each vi, 1 ≤i ≤n.
Also note that the solution is not
495

Jonsson
p1
pm
t1
tn
u1
uq
v*
Figure 7: Causal graph and transitive reduction for Logistics.
optimal, since the robot could carry two balls at once. We could also solve Gripper using
AcyclicPlanner, which would treat variables vi, 1 ≤i ≤n, as non-reversible since they
have outdegree 0 in the transitive reduction of the relaxed causal graph. The solution is in
fact the same in this case, since there is just a single way to move a ball from room 0 to
room 1.
4.4.2 Logistics
Our second example is the Logistics domain, in which a number of packages have to
be moved to their ﬁnal location using trucks and airplanes. Let m denote the number of
packages, n the number of trucks, and q the number of airplanes. A multi-valued variable
formulation of a planning problem in Logistics is given by V = {p1, . . . , pm} ∪T, where
T = {t1, . . . , tn, u1, . . . , uq}, pi, 1 ≤i ≤m, are packages, tj, 1 ≤j ≤n, are trucks, and uk,
1 ≤k ≤q, are airplanes.
Let L be a set of possible locations of packages. There is a partition L1 ∪. . . ∪Lr of
L such that each Ll, 1 ≤l ≤r, corresponds to locations in the same city. There is also a
subset C of L corresponding to airports, with |C ∩Ll| ≥1 for each 1 ≤l ≤r. For each
pi, the domain D(pi) = L ∪T corresponds to all possible locations plus inside all trucks
and airplanes. For each tj, D(tj) = Ll for some 1 ≤l ≤r. For each uk, D(uk) = C. The
initial state is an assignment of values to all variables, and the goal state is an assignment to
the packages pi among the values L. The set A contains the following three types of actions:
⟨(t = l1); (t = l2)⟩,
t ∈T, l1 ̸= l2 ∈D(t),
⟨(t = l, pi = l); (pi = t)⟩,
t ∈T, l ∈D(t), 1 ≤i ≤m,
⟨(t = l, pi = t); (pi = l)⟩,
t ∈T, l ∈D(t), 1 ≤i ≤m.
The ﬁrst type of action allows a truck or airplane to move between two locations in its
domain. The second type of action loads a package in a truck or airplane at the same
location. The third type of action unloads a package from a truck or airplane.
Figure 7 shows the causal graph and its transitive reduction for a planning problem
in Logistics. The transitive reduction is identical to the causal graph in this case. Just
as for Gripper, the ﬁgure shows the dummy variable v∗as well as its incoming edges.
It is easy to see that the causal graph is acyclic. In addition, all variables are reversible
496

The Role of Macros in Planning
Discs
Time (ms)
Macros
Length
10
31
27/82
> 103
20
84
57/172
> 106
30
161
87/262
> 109
40
279
117/352
> 1012
50
457
147/442
> 1015
60
701
177/532
> 1018
Table 1: Results in Tower of Hanoi.
since it is possible to return to the initial state from any other state. Thus we could apply
ReversiblePlanner to solve planning problems in Logistics.
To solve a planning problem in Logistics, ReversiblePlanner calls Reversible-
Compose with the initial and goal states. Since there are no directed paths between any
variables representing the location of packages, a topological sort orders these variables ar-
bitrarily. Without loss of generality, assume that the topological order is p1, . . . , pn. Thus
the ﬁrst variable processed by ReversibleCompose is p1. ReversibleCompose calls
ReversibleSolve with v = p1, s = init and d equal to the goal location of the package.
For p1, the set W = {p1} just contains p1 since actions are unary. The set A′ contains any
actions for picking up or dropping the package. Although there may be many ways to move
a package from its initial location to its goal location, ReversibleSolve just considers
once such way of moving the package. After moving the package, all trucks and airplanes
are returned to their initial locations. ReversibleCompose also calls ReversibleSolve
to generate a macro for returning the package to its initial location. The ﬁnal solution
consists of macros for moving each package to its ﬁnal location one at a time.
Note that the complexity of ReversibleSolve is polynomial for Logistics due to
Theorem 4.9, since |W| ≤1 for each pi, 1 ≤i ≤m. Also note that the solution is not
optimal, since trucks and airplanes are always returned to their initial locations. We could
also solve Logistics using AcyclicPlanner, which would treat variables pi, 1 ≤i ≤m,
as non-reversible since they have outdegree 0 in the transitive reduction of the relaxed causal
graph. Again, the solution is the same since each ancestor of pi is reversible, so the states
in AcyclicSolve always have trucks and airplanes in their initial locations.
5. Experimental Results
To test our algorithm, we ran experiments in two domains: Tower of Hanoi and an extended
version of Gripper. The results of the experiments in Tower of Hanoi appear in Table
1. We varied the number of discs in increments of 10 and recorded the running time of
MacroPlanner. The table also shows the number of macros generated by our algorithm,
and out of those, how many were used to represent the resulting global plan. For example,
27 out of 82 generated macros formed part of the solution to Tower of Hanoi with 10 discs.
For the second set of experiments, we modiﬁed the version of Gripper from the previ-
ous section. Instead of two rooms, the environment consists of a maze with 967 rooms. To
transport balls, the robot must navigate through the maze from the initial location to the
497

Jonsson
Balls
Time (ms)
Macros
Length
100
1528
3
≈300 × 100
101
1535
14
≈300 × 101
102
1570
104
≈300 × 102
103
2906
1004
≈300 × 103
Table 2: Results in Gripper.
goal location. The robot can only pick up and drop balls at the initial and goal locations.
The results of running ReversiblePlanner on the corresponding planning problems ap-
pear in Table 2. Since ReversiblePlanner only generates macros as necessary, all of
them are used in the solution. The experiments illustrate the beneﬁt of using macros to
store the solution for navigating through the maze. Any algorithm that does not use macros
has to recompute a path through the maze every time it goes to pick up a new ball.
6. Related Work
For ease of presentation, we group related work into three broad categories: complexity
results, macro-based planning, and factored planning. Each of the following subsections
presents related work in one of these categories.
6.1 Complexity Results
Early complexity results for planning focused on establishing the hardness of diﬀerent formu-
lations of the general planning problem. If the STRIPS formalism is used, deciding whether
a solution exists is undecidable in the ﬁrst-order case (Chapman, 1987) and PSPACE-
complete in the propositional case (Bylander, 1994). For PDDL, the representation lan-
guage used at the International Planning Competition, the fragment including delete lists
is EXPSPACE-complete (Erol, Nau, & Subrahmanian, 1995).
Recently, several researchers have studied tractable subclasses of planning problems that
can be provably solved in polynomial time. Most of these subclasses are based on the notion
of a causal graph (Knoblock, 1994), which models the degree of independency between the
problem variables. However, Chen and Gim´enez (2008a) showed that any connected causal
graph causes the problem to be hard (unless established assumptions such as P = NP fail),
so additional restrictions on the problem are necessary.
A common restriction is that the variables of the problem are binary.
Jonsson and
B¨ackstr¨om (1998a) deﬁned the class 3S of planning problems with acyclic causal graphs
and binary variables. In addition, variables are either static, symmetrically reversible, or
splitting. The authors showed that it is possible to determine in polynomial time whether
or not a solution exists, although solution plans may be exponentially long.
Gim´enez and Jonsson (2008) designed a macro-based algorithm that solve planning
problems in 3S in polynomial time. The algorithm works by generating macros that change
the value of a single variable at a time, maintaining the initial values for the ancestors of
the variable. In fact, this is the same strategy used in our algorithm ReversiblePlanner,
498

The Role of Macros in Planning
which can thus be seen as an extension of their algorithm to multi-valued reversible variables
and general acyclic causal graphs.
Brafman and Domshlak (2003) designed a polynomial-time algorithm for solving plan-
ning problems with binary variables and polytree acyclic causal graphs of bounded indegree.
Gim´enez and Jonsson (2008) showed that if the causal graph has unbounded indegree, the
problem becomes NP-complete. Restricting the pre-condition of each action to be on at
most two variables causes the problem class to become tractable again (Katz & Domsh-
lak, 2008a). Since the hardness proof is based on a reduction to planning problems with
inverted tree causal graphs, these results all apply to the class IR if restricting to inverted
tree reducible planning problems.
Another result that applies to the class IR is the hardness of planning problems with
directed path causal graphs (Gim´enez & Jonsson, 2008).
Gim´enez and Jonsson (2009)
extended this result to multi-valued variables with domains of size at most 5. Katz and
Domshlak (2008b) showed that planning problems whose causal graphs are inverted forks
are tractable as long as the root variable has a domain of ﬁxed size. This class is also
a fragment of IR.
In other words, the class IR includes several known tractable and
intractable fragments, although the tractability results proven in the present paper are
novel.
Other tractability results include the work by Haslum (2008), who deﬁned planning
problems in terms of graph grammars, and showed that the resulting class is tractable under
certain restrictions of the grammar. Chen and Gim´enez (2007) deﬁned the width of planning
problems and designed an algorithm for solving planning problems whose complexity is
exponential in the width.
In other words, planning problems with constant width are
tractable.
The idea of using reversible variables is related to the work by Williams and Nayak
(1997), who designed a polynomial-time algorithm for solving planning problems with
acyclic causal graphs and reversible actions. In other words, each action has a symmet-
ric counterpart with the same pre-condition except that it reverses the eﬀect of the former.
In addition, their algorithm requires that no two actions have pre-conditions such that one
is a proper subset of the other. Our deﬁnition of reversible variables is more ﬂexible and
does not require actions to be reversible.
Since the class IR and the associated algorithm were introduced, two other tractability
results based on macros have appeared in the literature. We have already mentioned the
work by Gim´enez and Jonsson (2008) for the class 3S. Also, Chen and Gim´enez (2008b)
presented a polynomial-time algorithm that generates all macros within Hamming distance
k of a state, and deﬁned an associated tractable class of planning problems with constant
Hamming width. Their class also contains Tower of Hanoi, but its relationship to IR has
not been fully established.
6.2 Macro-Based Planning
It is also worth mentioning the relationship to other macro-based algorithms for planning.
Macros have been long used in planning, beginning with the advent of the STRIPS rep-
resentation (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971). Minton (1985) and Korf (1987) developed the idea
further, the latter showing that macros can exponentially reduce the search space if chosen
499

Jonsson
carefully. (Knoblock, 1994) developed an abstraction technique similar to that of macros,
where the problem is treated at diﬀerent levels of abstractions until fully solved. Vidal
(2004) extracted macros from relaxed plans used to generate heuristics.
Methods such as Macro-FF (Botea, Enzenberger, M¨uller, & Schaeﬀer, 2005) automati-
cally generate macros that are experimentally shown to be useful for search, which proved
competitive at the fourth International Planning Competition. Typically, the macros in-
troduced are ﬂat sequences of two or three actions. This stands in stark contrast to our
algorithms, in which macros may be hierarchical and have arbitrarily long sequences. In
other words, the two approaches are very diﬀerent: one tries to augment PDDL with slightly
longer sequences in the hope of speeding up search, while the other attempts to generate
some or all macros that are needed to solve the subproblems associated with a variable.
Recent work on macros admits longer action sequences (Botea, Muller, & Schaeﬀer, 2007;
Newton, Levine, Fox, & Long, 2007).
6.3 Factored Planning
Another related ﬁeld of work is factored planning, which attempts to decompose a planning
problem into one or several subproblems. Typically, a planning problem is factored into
several subdomains, which are organized in a tree structure. Each variable and action of
the problem belongs to one of the subdomains. Amir and Engelhardt (2003) introduced
an algorithm called PartPlan that solves planning problems for which a tree decomposi-
tion already exists. The algorithm is exponential in the maximum number of actions and
variables of a subdomain.
Brafman and Domshlak (2006) introduced an algorithm called LID-GF which decom-
poses planning problems based on the causal graph. LID-GF is polynomial for planning
problems with ﬁxed local depth and causal graphs of ﬁxed tree-width. The local depth of
a variable is deﬁned as the number of times that the value of the variable has to change on
a plan solving the problem. Interestingly, Tower of Hanoi, which is solved in polynomial
time by MacroPlanner, has exponential local depth and a causal graph with unbounded
tree-width. Kelareva, Buﬀet, Huang, and Thi´ebaux (2007) proposed an algorithm for fac-
tored planning that automatically chooses the order of solving subproblems. The algorithm
requires a subproblem clustering to be given, while our algorithms automatically derives a
subproblem order.
7. Conclusion
In this paper, we have introduced the class IR of inverted tree reducible planning problems
and presented an algorithm called MacroPlanner that uses macros to solve planning
problems in this class. The algorithm is provably complete and optimal, and runs in poly-
nomial time for several subclasses of IR.
We also extended the class IR in several ways. The class RIR allows the causal graph to
be relaxed, and an associated algorithm called RelaxedPlanner is able to solve planning
problems in RIR optimally. The class AR allows general acyclic causal graphs as long
as variables are reversible, and an associated algorithm called ReversiblePlanner can
solve planning problems with unary actions in AR non-optimally in polynomial time. For
non-unary actions, ReversiblePlanner is not complete, although it can still solve some
500

The Role of Macros in Planning
problems such as Gripper. Finally, the class AOR allows acyclic causal graphs as long
as each variable with outdegree larger than 1 in the transitive reduction is reversible. The
algorithm AcyclicPlanner combines ideas from the other algorithms to solve planning
problems in the class AOR.
We validated the theoretical properties of the algorithm in two sets of experiments. In
the ﬁrst set, the algorithm was applied to Tower of Hanoi. Although the optimal solution
is exponential, the algorithm is guaranteed to solve problems in the domain in polynomial
time. The reason is that macros obviate the need to solve the same subproblem multiple
times. In the second set of experiments, we applied the algorithm to an extended version of
Gripper. Again, the results demonstrate the power of using macros to store the solution
to subproblems.
A major contribution of the paper is extending the set of known tractable classes of
planning problems. Katz and Domshlak (2008b) suggested projecting planning problems
onto known tractable fragments in order to compute heuristics. This is perfectly possible to
do using our algorithms. In the classes IR and RIR, the resulting heuristic will be admis-
sible since the corresponding solution is optimal. Even if the solution is exponentially long,
computing the solution length can be done in polynomial time using dynamic programming.
If two domains share part of the causal graph structure, macros generated in one domain
could be used in the other. This could save signiﬁcant computational eﬀort since the scheme
compiles away variables and replaces them with macros.
Since macros are functionally
equivalent to standard actions, they can be used in place of the actions and variables they
replace. Macros can also prove useful in domains for which we have to backtrack to ﬁnd
an optimal solution. If macros have already been generated and stored for some variables,
there is no need to recompute partial plans for these variables from scratch.
If the multi-valued representation included a notion of objects, it would be possible to
generate macros for one object and share those macros among identical objects, just like
the parametrized operators of a standard PDDL planning domain. For example, in the
Logistics domain, each truck that operates in the same city is functionally equivalent,
and a macro generated for one truck can be applied to another.
The same is true for
airplanes. Finally, to obtain optimal plans for the classes AR and AOR, one would have
to test all ways to interleave subplans for diﬀerent variables, a process which is not likely
to be tractable unless the number of interleaved subplans is constant.
