Learning Hierarchical Sparse Representations
using Iterative Dictionary Learning and
Dimension Reduction
Mohamad Tariﬁ, Meera Sitharam, Jeﬀery Ho
October 25, 2018
Abstract
This paper introduces an elemental building block which combines
Dictionary Learning and Dimension Reduction (DRDL). We show how
this foundational element can be used to iteratively construct a Hierar-
chical Sparse Representation (HSR) of a sensory stream.
We compare
our approach to existing models showing the generality of our simple
prescription. We then perform preliminary experiments using this frame-
work, illustrating with the example of an object recognition task using
standard datasets. This work introduces the very ﬁrst steps towards an
integrated framework for designing and analyzing various computational
tasks from learning to attention to action. The ultimate goal is building
a mathematically rigorous, integrated theory of intelligence.
Introduction
Working towards a Computational Theory of Intelligence, we develop a compu-
tational framework inspired by ideas from Neuroscience. Speciﬁcally, we inte-
grate notions of columnar organization, hierarchical structure, sparse distributed
representations, and sparse coding.
An integrated view of Intelligence has been proptosed by Karl Friston based
on free-energy [13, 11, 8, 9, 10, 12]. In this framework, Intelligence is viewed
as a surrogate minimization of the entropy of this sensorium.
This work is
intuitively inspired by this view, aiming to provide a computational foundation
for a theory of intelligence from the perspective of theoretical computer science,
thereby connecting to ideas in mathematics.
By building foundations for a
principled approach, the computational essence of problems can be isolated,
formalized, and their relationship to fundamental problems in mathematics and
theoretical computer science can be illuminated and the full power of available
mathematical techniques can be brought to bear.
A computational approach is focused on developing tractable algorithms. ex-
ploring the complexity limits of Intelligence. Thereby improving the quality of
available guarantees for evaluating performance of models, improving compar-
isons among models, and moving towards provable guarantees such as sample
size, time complexity, generalization error, assumptions about prior. This fur-
nishes a solid theoretical foundation which may be used, among other things,
as a basis for building Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
1
arXiv:1106.0357v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jun 2011

0.1
Background Literature In A Glance
Speculation on a cortical micro-circuit element dates back to Mountcastle’s ob-
servation that a cortical column may serve as an algorithmic building block of
the neocortex [18]. Later work by Lee and Mumford [16], Hawkins and George
[14] attempted further investigation of this process.
The bottom-up organization of cortex is generally assumed to be a hetrar-
chical topology of columns. This can be modeled as a directed acyclic graph,
but is usually simpliﬁed to a hierarchical tree. Work by Poggio, Serre, et al
[20, 21, 22, 23], Dean [6, 7], discuss a hierarchical topology. Smale et al at-
tempts to develop a theory accounting for the importance of the hierarchical
structure [24, 3].
Work on modeling early stages of sensory processing by Olshausen [19, 1]
using sparse coding produced results that account for the observed receptive
ﬁelds in early visual processing. This is usually done by learning an overcomplete
dictionary. However it remained unclear how to extend this to higher layers.
Our work can be partially viewed as a progress in this direction.
Computational Learning Theory is the formal study of learning algorithms.
PAC deﬁnes a natural setting for analyzing such algorithms. However, with few
notable exceptions (Boosting, inspiration for SVM, etc) the produced guaran-
tees are divorced from practice. Without tight guarantees Machine Learning
is studied using experimental results on standard benchmarks, which is prob-
lematic. We aim at closing the gap between theory and practice by providing
stronger assumptions on the structures and forms considered by the theory,
through constraints inspired by biology and complex systems.
0.2
A Variety of Hierarchical Models
Several hierarchical models have been introduced in the literature. H-Max is
based on Simple-Complex cell hierarchy of Hubel and Wiesel. It is basically a
hierarchical succession of template matching and a max-operations, correspond-
ing to simple and complex cells respectively [20].
Hierarchical Temporal Memory (HTM) is a learning model composed of a
hierarchy of spatial coincidence detection and temporal pooling. Coincidence
detection involves ﬁnding a spatial clustering of the input, while temporal pool-
ing is about ﬁnding variable order Markov chains describing temporal sequences
in the data.
H-Max can be mapped into HTM in a straightforward manner. In HTM, the
transformations in which the data remains invariant is learned in the temporal
pooling step. H-Max explicitly hard codes translational transformations through
the max operation. This gives H-Max better sample complexity for the speciﬁc
problems where translational invariance is present.
Bouvrie et al [3, 2] introduced a generalization of hierarchical architec-
tures centered around a foundational element involving two steps, Filtering
and Pooling.
Filtering is described through a reproducing Kernel K(x, y),
such as the standard inner product K(x, y) = ⟨x, y⟩, or a Gaussian kernel
K(x, y) = e−γ∥x−y∥2. Pooling then remaps the result to a single value. Ex-
amples of pooling functions include max, mean, and lp norm (such as l1 or
l∞). H-max, Convolutional Neural Nets, and Deep Feedforward Neural Net-
works all belong to this category of hierarchical architectures corresponding to
2

diﬀerent choices of the Kernel and Pooling functions. Our model does not fall
within Bouvrie’s present framework, and can be viewed as a generalization of
hierarchical models in which both HTM and Bouvrie’s framework are a special
case.
Friston proposed Hierarchical Dynamic Models (HDM) which are similar to
the above mentioned architectures but framed in a control theoretic framework
operating in continuous time [8]. A computational formalism of his approach is
thus prohibitively diﬃcult.
0.3
Scope
Our approach to the circuit element is an attempt to abstract the computation-
ally fundamental processes. We conjecture a class of possible circuit elements
for bottom-up processing of the sensory stream.
Feedback processes, mediating action and attention, can be incorporated
into this model, similar to work by Chikkerur et al [5, 4], and more generically
to a theory by Friston [10, 9]. We choose to leave feedback for future work,
allowing us to focus here on basic aspects of this model.
0.4
Contribution and Organization
The following section introduces a novel formulation of an elemental building
block that could serve as a the bottom-up piece in the common cortical al-
gorithm.
This circuit element combines Dictionary Learning and Dimension
Reduction (DLDR). After formally introducing DRDL, we show how it can be
used to iteratively construct a Hierarchical Sparse Representations (HSR) of a
sensory stream. Comparisons to relevant known models are presented. To gain
further insight, the model is applied to standard vision datasets. This immedi-
ately leads to a classiﬁcation algorithm that uses HSR for feature extraction. In
the appendix, we discuss how further assumptions about the prior can naturally
be expressed in our framework.
1
DRDL Circuit Element
Our circuit element is a simple concatenation of a Dictionary Learning (DL)
step followed by a Dimension Reduction (DR) step.
Using an overcomplete
dictionary increase the dimension of the data, but since the data is now sparse,
we can use Compressed Sensing to obtain a dimension reduction.
1.1
Dictionary Learning
Dictionary Learning obtains a sparse representation by learning features on
which the data xi can be written in sparse linear combinations.
Deﬁnition 1. Given an input set X = [x0 . . . xm], xi ∈Rd, Dictionary Learn-
ing ﬁnds D = [v0 . . . vn] and θ = [θi . . . θm], such that xi = Dθi and ∥θi∥0 ≤s.
Where the ∥.∥0 is the L0-norm or sparsity. If all entries of θi are restricted to
be non-negative, we obtain Sparse-Non-negative Matrix Factorization (SNMF).
3

An optimization version of Dictionary Learning can be written as:
min
D∈Rd,n max
xi min ∥θi∥0 : xi = Dθi
In practice, the Dictionary Learning problem is often relaxed to the La-
grangian:
min ∥X −Dθ∥2 + λ∥θ∥1
Where X = [x0...xm] and θ = [θ0...θm]. Several dictionary learning algo-
rithms work by iterating the following two steps.
1. Solve the vector selection problem for all vectors X. This can be done
using your favourite vector selection algorithm, such as basis pursuit.
2. Given X, the optimization problems is now convex in D. Use your favorite
method to ﬁnd D.
Using a maximum likelihood formalism, the Method of Optimal Dictionary
(MOD) uses the psuedoinverse to compute D:
D(i+1) = Xθ(i)T (θnθiT )−1.
The MOD can be extended to Maximum A-Posteriori probability setting
with diﬀerent priors to take into account preferences in the recovered dictionary.
Similarly, k-SVD uses an two step iterative process, with a Truncated Singular
Value Decomposition to update D. This is done by taking every atom in D
and applying SVD to X and θ restricted to only the columns that that have
contribution from that atom.
When D is restricted to be of the form D = [B1, B2 . . . BL] where Bi’s are
orthonormal matrices, then a more eﬃcient pursuit algorithm is obtained for
the sparse coding stage using a block coordinate relaxation.
1.2
Dimension Reduction
The DL step learns a representation θi of the input that lives in a high dimension,
but we can obtain a lower dimensional representation, since θi is now readily seen
as sparse in the standard orthonormal basis of dimension n. We can obtain a
dimension reduction by using applying a linear operator satisfying the Restricted
Isometry Property from Compressed Sensing theory.
Deﬁnition 2. A linear operator A has the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP)
for s, iﬀ∃δs such that:
(1 −δs) ≤∥Ax∥2
2
∥x∥2
2
≤(1 + δs)
(1)
An RIP matrix can compress sparse data while maintaining their approxi-
mate relative distances. This can be seen by considering two s-sparse vectors
x1 and x2, then:
(1 −δ2s) ≤∥Ax1 −Ax2∥2
2
∥x1 −x2∥2
2
≤(1 + δ2s)
(2)
4

Figure 1: Optimal dimension reduction for a s = 1 sparse vectors in d = 3 to
vectors in d = 2.
Given an s-sparse vector of dimension n, RIP reduces the dimension to
O(s log(n)). Since we are using an RIP matrix, eﬃcient decompression is guar-
anteed using L1 approximation. The data can be recovered exactly using L1
minimization algorithms such as Basis Pursuit.
RIP matrices can be obtained probabilistically from matrices with random
Gaussian entries.
Alternatively RIP matrices can be obtained using sparse
random matrices [15]. In this paper we follow the latter approach. The question
of deterministically constructing RIP matrices with similar bounds is still open.
1.3
Illustrating the model with simple examples
Figure 2: Sensory stream data distributed as s = 1 sparse combinations of the
3 shown vectors
Let us consider in more detail the working of a single DRDL node. Figure 2
illustrates a particular distribution that is s = 1-sparse in the 3 drawn vectors.
The Dictionary D1 is

1
0
1
0
1
1

The columns of the dictionary learned correspond to the drawn vectors, and
the data is expressed simply as a vector with one coeﬃcient corresponding to
inner product with the closest vector and zero otherwise.
This produces an
5

Figure 3: Normalized sensory stream data distributed as s = 2 non-negative
sparse combinations of the 4 shown vectors
s = 1 sparse vector in dimension 3. We can then apply a dimension reduction
that preserves distances between those representations.
The representations
correspond to the standard basis in d = 3.
The best dimension reduction
to d = 2 is then simply the projection of the representations onto the plane
perpendicular to (1, 1, 1).
Whereby points on the unit basis project to the
vertices of a triangle as illustrated in Figure 1. This forms the output of the
current node.
A slightly more complicated example is s = 2 in the Dictionary D2 shown
bellow. Figure 3 illustrates this distribution for non-negative coeﬃcients. The
data was normalized for convenience.


1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1


1.4
Relation between DR and DL
There is a symmetry in DRDL due to the fact that DR and DL steps are inti-
mately related. To show their relationship clearly, we rewrite the two problems
with the same variable names. These variables are only relevant for this section.
The two problems can be stated as:
1. DL asks for D and {x1 . . . xm}, given {y1 . . . ym}, for Dxi = yi, such that
the sparsity ∥xi∥0 is minimized for a ﬁxed dimension of yi.
2. DR asks for D and {y1 . . . ym}, given {x1 . . . xm}, for Dxi = yi, such that
the dimension of yi’s is minimized for a ﬁxed sparsity ∥xi∥0.
In practice, both problems use L1 approximation as a proxy for L0 optimiza-
tion. This leads to the following observation
Observation. The inverse of a DRDL is a DRDL.
This means that the space of mappings/functions of our model is the same
as it’s inverse. This property will be useful for incorporating feedback.
6

1.5
Discussion of Trade-oﬀs in DRDL
DRDL can be thought of a memory system (’memory pocket’) or a dimension
reduction technique for data that can be expressed sparsely in a dictionary.
One parameter trade-oﬀis between n, the number of columns in D, and s, the
sparsity of the representation.
On one hand, we note that the DR step puts the data in O(slog(n)) dimen-
sion. Therefore, if we desire to maximize the reduction in dimension, increasing
n by raising it to a constant power k is comparable to multiplying s by k. This
means that we much rather increase the number of columns in the dictionary
than the sparsity. On other hand, increasing the number of columns in D forces
the columns to be highly correlated. Which will become problematic for Basis
Pursuit vector selection.
This trade-oﬀhighlights the importance of investigating approaches to dic-
tionary learning and vector selection that can go beyond current results into
highly coherent dictionaries. We will further discuss this topic in future papers.
2
A Hierarchical Sparse Representation
If we assume a hierarchical architecture modeling the topographic organization
of the visual cortex, a singular DRDL element can be factorized and expressed
as a tree of simpler DRDL elements. With this architecture we can learn a
Hierarchical Sparse Representation by iterating DRDL elements.
2.1
Assumptions of Generative Model
Our models assumes that data is generated by a hierarchy of spatiotemporal
invariants. At any given level i, each node in the generative model is assumed
to be composed of a small number of features si . Generation proceeds by re-
cursively decompressing the pattern from parent nodes then producing patterns
to child nodes. This input is fed to the learning algorithm bellow. In this pa-
per we assume that both the topology of generative model and the spatial and
temporal extent of each node is known. Discussion of algorithms for learning
the topology and internal dimensions is left for future work.
Consider a simple data stream consisting of a spatiotemporal sequences from
a generative model deﬁned above. Figure 1 shows a potential learning hierarchy.
For simple vision problems, we can consider all dictionaries within a layer as
the same. In this paper, processing proceeds bottom-up the hierarchy only.
2.2
Learning Algorithm
Recursively divide the spatiotemporal signal xi to obtain a tree representing
the known topographic hierarchy of spatiotemporal blocks. Let x0
i.j be the jth
block at level 0. Then, starting a the bottom of the tree, do:
1. Learn a Dictionary Dj,k in which the spatiotemporal data xk
i,j can be
represented sparsely. This produces a vector of weights θi,j,k.
2. Apply dimensionality reduction to the sparse representation to obtain
ui,j,k = Aθi,j,k.
7

Figure 4: A simple 3 layer Hierarchy with no cycles
3. Generate xk+1
i,j
by concatenating vectors ui,l,k for all l that is child of j in
at level k in the tree. Replace k = k + 1. And now j ranges over elements
of level k. If k is still less than the depth of the tree, go to Step 1.
Note that in domains such as computer vision, it is reasonable to assume
that all Dictionaries at level i are the same Dj,k = Dk . This algorithm at-
tempts to mirror the generative model. It outputs an inference algorithm that
induces a hierarchy of sparse representations for a given data point. This can be
used to abstract invariant features in the new data. One can then use a super-
vised learning algorithm on top of the invariant features to solve classiﬁcation
problems.
2.3
Representation Inference
For new data points, the representation is obtained, in analogy to the learn-
ing algorithm, recursively dividing the spatiotemporal signal to obtain a tree
representing the known topographic hierarchy of spatiotemporal blocks. The
representation is inferred naturally by iteratively applying Vector Selection
and Compressed Sensing.
For Vector Selection, we employ a common vari-
ational technique called Basis Pursuit De-Noising (BPDN), which minimizes
∥Dθi −xi∥2
2 + λ∥θi∥1. This technique produces optimal results when the spar-
sity
∥θ∥0 < 1
2 + 1
2C .
(3)
Where C is the coherence of the dictionary D.
C = max
k,l (DT D)k,l
(4)
This is a limitation in practice since it is desirable to have highly coherent
dictionaries.
Representation inference proceeded by iteratively applying Ba-
sis Pursuit and compressing the resulting sparse representation using the RIP
matrix.
8

2.4
Mapping between HSR and current models
This simple, yet powerful, toy model is used as a basis investigation tool for our
future work. We abstracted this model out of a need for conceptual simplicity
and generality. Several models inspired by the neocortex have been proposed,
many sharing similar characteristics. We present a few here and compare to our
model.
H-Max is mapped to HSR by replacing Basis Pursuit for Sparse Approxi-
mation with Template Matching. H-Max uses random templates from the data,
whereas HSR uses Dictionary Learning. The ’max’ operation in H-Max can be
understood in terms of the operation of sparse coding, which produces local
competition among features representing slight variations in the data. Alter-
natively, the ’max’ operation can be viewed as a limited form of dimension
reduction.
HTM can be mapped to HSR by considering time as another dimension of
space. This way, bounded variable order markov chains can be written as Sparse
Approximation of spatiotemporal vectors representing sequences of spacial vec-
tors in time. HTM constructs a set of spatial coincidences that is automatically
shared across time. HSR may do the same when fed a moving window of spatial
sequences. Alternatively, HSR will simulate an HTM by alternating between
time-only and space-only spatiotemporally extended blocks. In this view a sin-
gle HTM node is mapped to two layer HSR nodes, one representing time, and
the other representing space. Unlike HTM, treating time and space on equal
footing has the added advantage that the same algorithms used be used for
both. HTM with winner-takes-all policy can then be mapped to our model by
assuming sparsity s = 1. HTM with distribution on belief states can be mapped
to our model with Template Matching instead of Sparse Approximation in the
inference step. Finally, HTM does not leverage RIP dimension reduction step.
HTM uses feedback connections for prediction, which is restricted to predictions
forward in time. Extending HSR with feedback connections, which accounts for
dependency between nodes that are not connected directly, enables feedback to
aﬀect all space-time.
2.5
What does HSR oﬀer beyond current models?
One advantage of our approach is in providing invertibility without a dimension-
ality blow-up for hierarchically sparse data. Models falling under Bouvrie et al’s
framework loose information as you proceed up the hierarchy due to the Pooling
operation. This becomes problematic when extending the models to incorporate
feedback. Moreover, this information loss forces an algorithm designer to hard-
code what invariances a particular model must select for (such as translational
invariance in H-max). On the other hand, invertible models such as HTM suﬀer
from dimensionality blow up, when the number of features learned at a given
level is greater than the input dimension to that level - as is usually the case.
Dimensionality reduction achieves both a savings in computational resources as
well as better noise resilience by avoiding overﬁtting.
Dictionary learning represents the data by sparse combinations of dictionary
columns. This can be viewed as a L0 or L1 regularization, which provides noise
tolerance and better generalization. This type of regularization is intuitive and is
well motivated by neuroscience [19, 1] and the organization of complex systems.
9

Our approach departs from current models that use simple template matching
and leverages the expressive power of Sparse Approximation. This provides a
disciplined prescription for learning features at every level. Finally, HSR is a
conceptually simple model. This elegance lends itself well to analysis.
2.6
Discussion of Trade-oﬀs in HSR
There are several design decisions when constructing an HSR. Informally, the
hierarchy is useful for reducing the sample complexity and dimensionality of the
problem. For instance consider the simpliﬁed case of binary {0, 1} coeﬃcients
and translation invariance (such as vision). An HSR generative model of two
layers will produce
 m2
s2

patterns. Learning this with a single layer HSR would
involve learning a dictionary of m2 columns and s2 sparsity using |X| samples
in dimension d. Using two layers, we have the ﬁrst layer learning a dictionary of
size m1 and sparsity s1 using k ∗|X| samples in dimension d
k, the second layer
learns a dictionary of size m2 columns and s2 with |X| samples in dimension
k ∗O(s1 ∗log m1) < d. In eﬀect, by adding a layer, we have divided the problem
into two simpler problems in terms of dimensionality and sample complexity. A
more formal and complete discussion will be presented in future work.
3
Experiments
In this section we elaborate on preliminary numerical experiments performed
with DRDL and HSR on basic standard Machine Learning datasets. We ap-
plied our model to the MNIST and COIL datasets and subsequently used the
representation as a feature extraction step for a classiﬁcation algorithm such
as Support Vector Machines (SVM) or k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN). In practice,
additional prior assumptions can be included in our model as discussed in the
appendix.
Figure 5: Dictionary of the 1st layer of MNIST (left); natural images (right).
3.1
MNIST Results
We applied our model to all pairs of the MNIST data set. For the RIP step, we
tried random matrices and sparse-random matrices, and tested the eﬃcacy of
the approach by reconstructing the training data with basis pursuit. We used
10

Method
Error %
Reconstructive Dictionary Learning
4.33
Supervised Dictionary Learning
1.05
k-NN , l2
5.0
SVM-Gauss
1.4
One layer of DRDRL
1.24
Two layers of HSR
2.01
Figure 6: A straightforward application of our approach is competitive on the
MNIST dataset
only two layers. After the features are learned we applied a k-NN with k = 3.
We refrained from tweaking the initial parameters since we expect our model to
work oﬀ-shelf. For one layer of DRDL we obtained an error rate of 1.24% with
a standard deviation of 0.011. Using two layers we obtained an error of 2.01%
and standard deviation of 0.016.
3.2
COIL Results
Method
Classiﬁcation %
One layer of DRDRL
87.8
SVM
84.9
Nearest Neighbor
81.8
VTU
89.9
CNN
84.8
Figure 7: A straightforward application of our approach is competitive on the
COIL dataset
We applied our model to all pairs of the COIL-30 (which is a subset of 30
objects out of the entire 100 objects in the COIL datasets). The data set consists
of 72 images for every class. We used only 4 labeled images per class for training.
These are taken at equally spaced angles (0, 90, 180, 270). We used the same
procedure as before for obtaining and checking the RIP matrix. We applied a
single layer DRDRL, then trained a k-NN with k = 3. We also refrained from
tweaking the initial parameters. We obtained a mean error of 12.2%.
4
Discussion
We introduced a novel formulation of an elemental building block that could
serve as a the bottom-up piece in the common cortical algorithm. This model
leads to several interesting theoretical questions. In the appendix, we illustrate
how additional prior assumptions on the generative model can be expressed
within our integrated framework.
Furthermore, this framework can also be
extended to address feedback, attention, action, complimentary learning and
the role of time. In future work, we will closely probe these issues, propose
11

alternative dictionary learning algorithms, dimension reduction techniques, and
incorporate feedback.
