Novel Metaknowledge-based Processing Technique 
for Multimedia Big Data clustering challenges
 
Nima Bari 
Department of Computer 
Science at The George 
Washington University 
Washington DC, USA 

Roman Vichr 
Department of Data 
mining and Engineering 
Exprentis, Inc. 
Fairfax VA, USA 

Kamran Kowsari 
Department of Computer 
Science at The George 
Washington University 
Washington DC, USA 

Simon Y. Berkovich 
Department of Computer 
Science at The George 
Washington University 
Washington DC, USA 

 
 
Abstract—Past research has challenged us with the task of 
showing relational patterns between text-based data and then 
clustering for predictive analysis using Golay Code technique.  
We focus on a novel approach to extract metaknowledge in 
multimedia datasets.  Our collaboration has been an on-going 
task of studying the relational patterns between datapoints based 
on metafeatures extracted from metaknowledge in multimedia 
datasets. Those selected are significant to suit the mining 
technique we applied, Golay Code algorithm.  In this research 
paper we summarize findings in optimization of metaknowledge 
representation for 23-bit representation of structured and 
unstructured multimedia data in order to be processed in 23-bit 
Golay Code for cluster recognition.  
Keywords— Big Multimedia Data Processing and Analytics; 
Information Retrieval Challenges; Content Identification, Meta-
feature Extraction and Selection; Metalearning System; 23-Bit 
Meta-knowledge template; Knowledge Discovery, Golay Code. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The latest focus of Big Data Analytics has been centered on 
content extraction and knowledge discovery [1], [4], [5]. 
We’ve done research developing the 23-bit metaknowledge 
template for Big Data clustering using mining and cluster 
techniques to confront the phenomena of Big Data.  Our 
current research focuses on definition of datacube that is 
representative of data - each dimension of the cube - which 
can exceed 2 and even 3 dimensions - is an attribute of the 
data. This can theoretically allow us to converge specific 
datapoint as a result of an intended analysis.  The 23-question 
Golay code template gives us a multi-dimensional platform for 
convergence towards predictive analysis. 
II. 
BIG MULTIMEDIA  DATA CHALLENGES 
Data retrieval from entities for the purpose of mining and 
analysis can prove difficult and is one of the challenging 
aspects of multimedia data clustering.  Just as Osmar R. 
Zaiane and his collaborators explained utilizing the web to 
obtain data via crawling, such is the case then and now as a 
means for extracting the large amounts of data to create sub-
repositories as a means of testing our hypotheses and theories. 
[1] The authors of the Unified Framework for Representation, 
Analysis of Multimedia Content for Correlation and 
Prediction [3], Paul and Singh, highlighted some general 
challenges, which prove true when approaching any analysis 
of Big Data and especially Multimedia Big Data. First we 
must provide a structure where the multimedia data will be 
housed and represented effectively, i.e. prior to extracting any 
metaknowledge data. Next, given the amorphous nature of the 
data, we must consider both its multi-dimensional nature and 
conclude how to utilize the variety of attributes, have them 
coincide, and then apply methodologies [3]. 
 
 
III. 
METAKNOWLEDGE PROCESSING FOR MULTIMEDIA BIG 
DATA 
In our case selection of a concept benefitting the Golay 
algorithm, building the datacube is critical.  Our task is rather 
simplified by using the proposed 23-questions metadata 
template.  It allows us to determine significant data points 
according to 23 predetermined attributes and then cluster the 
set using Golay Coding [2]. Data is first subjected to our 
method of metafeature extraction in order to formulate an 
ontology.  The ontology [6] allows us to represent inter-
dependencies within one or more entities, therefore allowing 
for an unbroken collaborative approach.  There are several 
challenges.  The first challenge was to determine the specific 
classification algorithms applicable for our proposed ontology 
as noted in [7]. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY OF CONSTRUCTING AN INPUT 
The methodology of extracting and deriving the datacube of 
metaknowledge representation is accomplished through 
statistical approach and methodology applied to structured 
data, while semantic methodology is applied to unstructured 
big data. In both cases, the layer of metaknowledge is 
constructed as the input Golay Code algorithm. This input is 
mapped into a representation of 23 bits (binary attribute 
vector) to create a hash value of index prior to processing by 
the code itself (Figure 1.). The Golay code processing includes 

implementation of fuzzy based on Hamming Distance (HD) 
[17]. The Golay code guarantees linear processing time (O(n)) 
to build a hash table of indices and constant time (O(1)) for 
indices access (Figure1.). The attribute labeling No.1…No.23 
is just a symbolic one and can represent Yes/No question or a 
presence of semantic element. In both cases it is then 
converted into binary representation of 0/1 (Figure 2.). 
 
GOLAY code utilizes 6 indices representing 86.5% of the 
index hash table 
 
Figure 1: Golay Code 23 bit processing [11]. 
 
The result of the Golay code index lookup is represented by 
assigning a cluster label to the media record (the Golay code 
assigns only two label possibilities).  
 
Figure 2: Golay Code 23bit index lookup and label resolution 
of clusters [11]. 
V. 
(MULTIMEDIA) METAKNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION 
AND STRUCTURED DATA 
 
We applied our methodology to improve the extraction of 
metaknowledge representation from structured data, prior to 
applying the same to unstructured multimedia data. The 
classification algorithms we used are summarized in the table 
below, Table 1. 
Decision trees were very effective in the validation of 
selecting metaknowledge attributes used to represent the bits 
of 23-bit record. DMRT was useful to derive threshold in 
metaknowledge single attribute representations.  
 
Num. 
Metaknowledge and meta-feature discovery algorithms 
Algorithm 
Benefits 
1 
Scatter Plots 
(Correlation 
Coefficient) 
> A quick assessment if the “average” pattern is 
linear, curved, or random 
> If the trend is positive or negative association 
> Strength of relationship 
Identification of group of outliers  (X,Y) 
2 
Statistical 
Relationship 
> Statistical relationship in variation of possible 
values of X and X. 
> Regression equation to describe the “best” line 
through the data and to predict Y based on X 
> If linear relationship anticipated then describe the 
strength and direction 
3 
Decision Tree 
> A fast learning curve, easy to test model and 
effective way to find “terminal” nodes. 
> Purposeful test of quasi model by over-fitting to 
evaluate by adding/removing attributes. 
> Assistance in deriving threshold driven questions 
to qualify answer Yes/No [1, 0]. 
4 
DMRT 
> Discriminative classifier making validation of 
threshold setting in questions. 
5 
GLM 
A quick determination of attribute (questions) 
impact and contribution to the binary outcome. 
Table 1.: Applied algorithms for metaknowledge feature 
discovery used in R [12]. 
 
The sequence of algorithms applied provides guidance to 
determine appropriateness and strength of metaknowledge 
[13], [14]. It also helps with assertions about values 
(thresholds of boundaries) of meta-feature template questions. 
These questions (as bits 1–23) are to be used as a foundation 
to represent the extracted metaknowledge in binary 23-bit 
word on the input of Golay Code processing. 
The main advantage of this approach is to embed in 
processing a greedy loopback to minimize the error of given 
algorithms. For example, given GLM, then the AUC ( value 
minimization 
is 
the 
target 
of 
deriving 
subset 
of 
metaknowledge attributes that process can be embedded into 
greedy algorithm processing. 
VI. 
(MULTIMEDIA) METAKNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION - 
SEMANTIC ONTOLOGY (UNSTRUCTURED DATA) 
 
Applying the same methodology (described in V. Section) on 
unstructured data of multimedia file (in our collection html, 
.pdf, .jpg, .tiff) is much less effective as no structured data 
attributes with specific degrees of freedom are represented or 
easily extracted to construct datacubes. As Prof. Wen Gao 
from Peking University described in [17], text mining, which 
contains a lot of semantic information can contribute 
significantly on the retrieval process for content-based 
multimedia data such as video and audio. Therefore, naturally, 
we formulated a process to derive such metaknowledge 
utilizing semantic knowledge, so that multimedia can be 
categorized. In order to do that, a 
more generic 
characterization is done, i.e. not based on specific data value 
representations. It is based on the knowledge contained in the 
media file represented semantically. This turns out to be a 
more effective and accurate way to be useful in Golay Code 

processing when applied to multimedia file, and consequently 
applied to Big Data.  
In order to test a solution to represent metaknowledge using 
semantic characterization of source files (hmtl, ms word, .pdf, 
.jpeg, etc.), we created a sample collection based on files 
obtained from [8], which is focused on the financial industry. 
It was easier to utilize the financial industry definition in terms 
of semantic structure and phrases.  
First the semantic and generic definition was derived (see in 
Figure 3.) with the intent to define each semantic element as a 
[Yes/No] answer (per template for structured data) to be 
represented as binary for Golay Code processing. Therefore 
each file identified as having a semantic element match in its 
content or not in order to construct the datacube of 
metaknowledge. Such semantic element presence is then 
scored as 1 for present and 0 for not present and consequently 
processed with Golay Code. 
The order of attributes within the datacube corresponds to the 
order of the most generic semantic elements to be placed first 
on the 23 bit record, followed by the most important ones to 
distinguish the records in clusters. In this case, we mean the 
first corresponds to the lowest bits of the 23bit input Golay 
Code record.   
 
Figure 3: Derivation of Semantic metaknowledge per media files. 
The semantic metaknowldge is derived and extracted from 
media files and placed on the 23-bit record of Golay Code 
algorithm build using [9]. 
 
Figure 4: Semantic description of unstructured file (sample). 
VII. GOLAY CODE PROCESSING STRUCTURED DATA 
The discovered metaknowledge was applied to the structured 
data of movie IMDB records [16] and those were 
consequently processed with Golay Code algorithm and 
assigned cluster label1 or label2. The best results in terms of 
TPR (True Positive Rate) were obtained at HD=5, in Table 3. 
We then focused on optimization of metaknowledge attributes 
in Golay Code record to improve Specificity (SPC) and 
Positive Predictive Value (PPV), which was accomplished. 
and summarized in Table 4. The Accuracy (ACC) did not 
change dramatically in both cases. 
 
 
Table 2.: Golay Code processig of structured data 
characterized in metaknwoledge datacube. 
 
Based on these result the confusion matrix [10] for structured 
data is represented in Table 3 (Hamming Distance = 5) and 
Table 4 ((Hamming Distance = 6).  
 
 
Table 3.: Golay Code processing with HD=5. 
 
 
Table 4.: Golay Code processing with HD=6. 
 
As Table 4. shows, the focus to enhace metaknowledge 
attributes to increase SPC (Specificity) lead to a drop in TPR 
(True Positive Rate), because of the drop in True Positives 
(TP) , but there was a significantly lower number of False 
Positives (FP).  This was accomplished through the 
optimization of attributes into the metaknowledge datacube by 
placing the most significant metaknowledge attributes on the 
lowest bits of Golay code record input. At the same time we 
removed attributes duplicating the metaknowledge. The 
experiments show that the optimal HD (Hamming Distance) 
to produce the best outcomes of clustering is with HD=4 and 
even better with HD=5. 

VIII. GOLAY CODE PROCESSING UNSTRUCTURED DATA 
As we applied the process depicted in Figure 3 , we produced 
semantic ontology metaknowledge representation of media 
unstructured records. The 23 bit record was constructed in 
such a way, that the lowest bits had generic semantic elements 
followed by the most distinct semantic element values. This is 
reflected in Table 5 (Run1). In this case the results were best 
for Hamming Distance (HD) = 2. An ideal result with True 
Positive Rate (TPR) = 1, i.e. all records were correctly 
clustered. Therefore for HD=2, Specificity (SPC) =1 , Positive 
Predictive Value (PPV) =1 and Accuracy (ACC) also 1. All 
these terms refer to confusion matrix [15]. 
 
Table 5.: Golay Code processig (Expreriment RUN1) 
 
Since the semantic metaknowledge is very concrete and 
specific, we obtained more accurate outcome of Golay Code 
clustering with smaller HD value (in this case HD=2, Run1 
per Table 5.), rather than large HD valule.  
 
In several subsequent runs, the order of the semantic 
metaknowlege attributes in 23-bit input representation was 
changed to understand better the impact  on the final cluster 
assessment.  Inaccurately assessed semantic metaknowledge 
has to be compensated for by increasing HD value. This case 
is demonstrated in results in Table 6. (Especially, the 
comparison of results per HD=2 and HD=4.). However, 
Specificity (SPC) drops to zero.  An increase to HD=6 does 
not bring improvement in results. 
 
 
Table 6.: Golay Code processing (Experiment RUN3) 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our 
experiments 
were 
performed 
with 
extracted 
metaknowledge on structured and unstructured data to which 
we’re applying Golay Code to categorize by label into cluster 
of records. Our approach had to be modified for media files to 
identify a proper metaknowledge, and therefore we introduced 
metaknowledge representation based on semantic ontology.   
 The experiments with unstructured data (media file) results 
show that an approach using ontology based meta-knowledge 
to process multimedia for clustering using Golay Code 
algorithm is a beneficial one. This is very useful in case of big 
data of media collections given the Golay code processing 
properties.  
Our next research will also be focused into looking to utilize 
semantically driven metaknowledge attributes in order to 
dynamically derive processing rules, since the rules outcome 
can be defined as Yes/No (or True/False) outcome.
