Mathematical Language Processing:
Automatic Grading and Feedback
for Open Response Mathematical Questions
Andrew S. Lan, Divyanshu Vats, Andrew E. Waters, Richard G. Baraniuk
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005

ABSTRACT
While computer and communication technologies have pro-
vided effective means to scale up many aspects of education,
the submission and grading of assessments such as homework
assignments and tests remains a weak link. In this paper, we
study the problem of automatically grading the kinds of open
response mathematical questions that ﬁgure prominently in
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
courses. Our data-driven framework for mathematical lan-
guage processing (MLP) leverages solution data from a large
number of learners to evaluate the correctness of their solu-
tions, assign partial-credit scores, and provide feedback to
each learner on the likely locations of any errors. MLP takes
inspiration from the success of natural language processing
for text data and comprises three main steps. First, we con-
vert each solution to an open response mathematical ques-
tion into a series of numerical features. Second, we clus-
ter the features from several solutions to uncover the struc-
tures of correct, partially correct, and incorrect solutions. We
develop two different clustering approaches, one that lever-
ages generic clustering algorithms and one based on Bayesian
nonparametrics. Third, we automatically grade the remain-
ing (potentially large number of) solutions based on their as-
signed cluster and one instructor-provided grade per cluster.
As a bonus, we can track the cluster assignment of each step
of a multistep solution and determine when it departs from a
cluster of correct solutions, which enables us to indicate the
likely locations of errors to learners. We test and validate
MLP on real-world MOOC data to demonstrate how it can
substantially reduce the human effort required in large-scale
educational platforms.
Author Keywords
Automatic grading, Machine learning, Clustering, Bayesian
nonparametrics, Assessment, Feedback, Mathematical
language processing
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc

Copyright © 2015 ACM ISBN/15/03...$15.00.
INTRODUCTION
Large-scale educational platforms have the capability to rev-
olutionize education by providing inexpensive, high-quality
learning opportunities for millions of learners worldwide.
Examples of such platforms include massive open online
courses (MOOCs) [6, 7, 9, 10, 16, 42], intelligent tutoring
systems [43], computer-based homework and testing systems
[1, 31, 38, 40], and personalized learning systems [24]. While
computer and communication technologies have provided ef-
fective means to scale up the number of learners viewing
lectures (via streaming video), reading the textbook (via the
web), interacting with simulations (via a graphical user in-
terface), and engaging in discussions (via online forums), the
submission and grading of assessments such as homework as-
signments and tests remains a weak link.
There is a pressing need to ﬁnd new ways and means to au-
tomate two critical tasks that are typically handled by the in-
structor or course assistants in a small-scale course: (i) grad-
ing of assessments, including allotting partial credit for par-
tially correct solutions, and (ii) providing individualized feed-
back to learners on the locations and types of their errors.
Substantial progress has been made on automated grading
and feedback systems in several restricted domains, including
essay evaluation using natural language processing (NLP) [1,
33], computer program evaluation [12, 15, 29, 32, 34], and
mathematical proof veriﬁcation [8, 19, 21].
In this paper, we study the problem of automatically grading
the kinds of open response mathematical questions that ﬁg-
ure prominently in STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) education. To the best of our knowledge,
there exist no tools to automatically evaluate and allot partial-
credit scores to the solutions of such questions. As a result,
large-scale education platforms have resorted either to over-
simpliﬁed multiple choice input and binary grading schemes
(correct/incorrect), which are known to convey less informa-
tion about the learners’ knowledge than open response ques-
tions [17], or peer-grading schemes [25, 26], which shift the
burden of grading from the course instructor to the learners.1
1While peer grading appears to have some pedagogical value for
learners [30], each learner typically needs to grade several solutions
from other learners for each question they solve, in order to obtain
an accurate grade estimate.
arXiv:1501.04346v1  [stat.ML]  18 Jan 2015

(a) A correct solution that receives 3/3
credits
(d) An incorrect solution that receives
0/3 credits
(b) An incorrect solution that receives
2/3 credits due to an error in the last
expression
(c) An incorrect solution that receives
1/3 credits due to an error in the second
expression
Figure 1: Example solutions to the question “Find the deriva-
tive of (x3 + sin x)/ex” that were assigned scores of 3, 2, 1
and 0 out of 3, respectively, by our MLP-B algorithm.
(a) A correct solution that makes the
simpliﬁcation sin2 x + cos2 x = 1 in
the ﬁrst expression
(b) A correct solution that makes the
the simpliﬁcation sin2 x + cos2 x = 1
in the third expression
(x2 + x + sin2 x + cos2 x)(2x −3)
= 2x3 + 2x2 + 2x sin2 x + 2x cos2 x
−3x2 −3x −3 sin2 x −3 cos2 x
= 2x3 −x2 −3x + 2x(sin2 x + cos2 x)
−3(sin2 x + cos2 x)
= 2x3 −x2 −3x + 2x(1) −3(1)
= 2x3 −x2 −x −3
Figure 2: Examples of two different yet correct paths to solve
the question “Simplify the expression (x2 + x + sin2 x +
cos2 x)(2x −3).”
Main Contributions
In this paper, we develop a data-driven framework for math-
ematical language processing (MLP) that leverages solution
data from a large number of learners to evaluate the correct-
ness of solutions to open response mathematical questions,
assign partial-credit scores, and provide feedback to each
learner on the likely locations of any errors. The scope of our
framework is broad and covers questions whose solution in-
volves one or more mathematical expressions. This includes
not just formal proofs but also the kinds of mathematical cal-
culations that ﬁgure prominently in science and engineering
courses. Examples of solutions to two algebra questions of
various levels of correctness are given in Figures 1 and 2. In
this regard, our work differs signiﬁcantly from that of [8],
which focuses exclusively on evaluating logical proofs.
Our MLP framework, which is inspired by the success of
NLP methods for the analysis of textual solutions (e.g., es-
says and short answer), comprises three main steps.
First, we convert each solution to an open response mathe-
matical question into a series of numerical features. In deriv-
ing these features, we make use of symbolic mathematics to
transform mathematical expressions into a canonical form.
Second, we cluster the features from several solutions to un-
cover the structures of correct, partially correct, and incorrect
solutions. We develop two different clustering approaches.
MLP-S uses the numerical features to deﬁne a similarity score
between pairs of solutions and then applies a generic cluster-
ing algorithm, such as spectral clustering (SC) [22] or afﬁnity
propagation (AP) [11]. We show that MLP-S is also useful
for visualizing mathematical solutions. This can help instruc-
tors identify groups of learners that make similar errors so
that instructors can deliver personalized remediation. MLP-B
deﬁnes a nonparametric Bayesian model for the solutions and
applies a Gibbs sampling algorithm to cluster the solutions.
Third, once a human assigns a grade to at least one solution
in each cluster, we automatically grade the remaining (po-
tentially large number of) solutions based on their assigned
cluster. As a bonus, in MLP-B, we can track the cluster as-
signment of each step in a multistep solution and determine
when it departs from a cluster of correct solutions, which en-
ables us to indicate the likely locations of errors to learners.
In developing MLP, we tackle three main challenges of ana-
lyzing open response mathematical solutions. First, solutions
might contain different notations that refer to the same math-
ematical quantity. For instance, in Figure 1, the learners use
both e−x and
1
ex to refer to the same quantity. Second, some
questions admit more than one path to the correct/incorrect
solution. For instance, in Figure 2 we see two different yet
correct solutions to the same question. It is typically infea-
sible for an instructor to enumerate all of these possibilities
to automate the grading and feedback process. Third, numer-
ically verifying the correctness of the solutions does not al-
ways apply to mathematical questions, especially when sim-
pliﬁcations are required. For example, a question that asks to
simplify the expression sin2 x+cos2 x+x can have both 1+x
and sin2 x+cos2 x+x as numerically correct answers, since
both these expressions output the same value for all values of
x. However, the correct answer is 1+x, since the question ex-
pects the learners to recognize that sin2 x+cos2 x = 1. Thus,
methods developed to check the correctness of computer pro-
grams and formulae by specifying a range of different inputs
and checking for the correct outputs, e.g., [32], cannot always
be applied to accurately grade open response mathematical
questions.
Related Work
Prior work has led to a number of methods for grading and
providing feedback to the solutions of certain kinds of open
response questions. A linear regression-based approach has
been developed to grade essays using features extracted from
a training corpus using Natural Language Processing (NLP)
[1, 33]. Unfortunately, such a simple regression-based model
does not perform well when applied to the features extracted
from mathematical solutions. Several methods have been de-
veloped for automated analysis of computer programs [15,
32]. However, these methods do not apply to the solutions

to open response mathematical questions, since they lack the
structure and compilability of computer programs. Several
methods have also been developed to check the correctness of
the logic in mathematical proofs [8, 19, 21]. However, these
methods apply only to mathematical proofs involving logical
operations and not the kinds of open-ended mathematical cal-
culations that are often involved in science and engineering
courses.
The idea of clustering solutions to open response questions
into groups of similar solutions has been used in a number
of previous endeavors: [2, 5] uses clustering to grade short,
textual answers to simple questions; [23] uses clustering to
visualize a large collection of computer programs; and [28]
uses clustering to grade and provide feedback on computer
programs. Although the high-level concept underlying these
works is resonant with the MLP framework, the feature build-
ing techniques used in MLP are very different, since the struc-
ture of mathematical solutions differs signiﬁcantly from short
textual answers and computer programs.
This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we
develop our approach to convert open response mathemati-
cal solutions to numerical features that can be processed by
machine learning algorithms. We then develop MLP-S and
MLP-B and use real-world MOOC data to showcase their
ability to accurately grade a large number of solutions based
on the instructor’s grades for only a small number of solu-
tions, thus substantially reducing the human effort required
in large-scale educational platforms. We close with a discus-
sion and perspectives on future research directions.
MLP FEATURE EXTRACTION
The ﬁrst step in our MLP framework is to transform a collec-
tion of solutions to an open response mathematical question
into a set of numerical features. In later sections, we show
how the numerical features can be used to cluster and grade
solutions as well as generate informative learner feedback.
A solution to an open response mathematical question will in
general contain a mixture of explanatory text and core math-
ematical expressions. Since the correctness of a solution de-
pends primarily on the mathematical expressions, we will ig-
nore the text when deriving features. However, we recognize
that the text is potentially very useful for automatically gener-
ating explanations for various mathematical expressions. We
leave this avenue for future work.
A workhorse of NLP is the bag-of-words model; it has found
tremendous success in text semantic analysis. This model
treats a text document as a collection of words and uses the
frequencies of the words as numerical features to perform
tasks like topic classiﬁcation and document clustering [4, 5].
A solution to an open response mathematical question con-
sists of a series of mathematical expressions that are chained
together by text, punctuation, or mathematical delimiters in-
cluding =, ≤, >, ∝, ≈, etc.
For example, the solution
in Figure 1(b) contains the expressions ((x3 + sin x)/ex)′,
((3x2 + cos x)ex −(x3 + sin x)ex))/e2x, and (2x2 −x3 +
cos x −sin x)/ex that are all separated by the delimiter “=”.
MLP identiﬁes the unique mathematical expressions con-
tained in the learners’ solutions and uses them as features,
effectively extending the bag-of-words model to use mathe-
matical expressions as features rather than words. To coin a
phrase, MLP uses a novel bag-of-expressions model.
Once the mathematical expressions have been extracted from
a solution, we parse them using SymPy, the open source
Python library for symbolic mathematics [36].2 SymPy has
powerful capability for simplifying expressions. For exam-
ple, x2 + x2 can be simpliﬁed to 2x2, and exx2/e2x can be
simplifed to e−xx2. In this way, we can identify the equiva-
lent terms in expressions that refer to the same mathematical
quantity, resulting in more accurate features. In practice for
some questions, however, it might be necessary to tone down
the level of SymPy’s simpliﬁcation. For instance, the key to
solving the question in Figure 2 is to simplify the expression
using the Pythagorean identity sin2 x+cos2 x = 1. If SymPy
is called on to perform such a simpliﬁcation automatically,
then it will not be possible to verify whether a learner has cor-
rectly navigated the simpliﬁcation in their solution. For such
problems, it is advisable to perform only arithmetic simpliﬁ-
cations.
After extracting the expressions from the solutions, we trans-
form the expressions into numerical features.
We assume
that N learners submit solutions to a particular mathemati-
cal question. Extracting the expressions from each solution
using SymPy yields a total of V unique expressions across
the N solutions.
We encode the solutions in a integer-valued solution feature
matrix Y ∈NV ×N whose rows correspond to different ex-
pressions and whose columns correspond to different solu-
tions; that is, the (i, j)th entry of Y is given by
Yi,j = times expression i appears in solution j.
Each column of Y corresponds to a numerical representation
of a mathematical solution. Note that we do not consider the
ordering of the expressions in this model; such an extension
is an interesting avenue for future work. In this paper, we
indicate in Y only the presence and not the frequency of an
expression, i.e., Y ∈{0, 1}V ×N and
Yi,j =
 1
if expression i appears in solution j
0
otherwise.
(1)
The extension to encoding frequencies is straightforward.
To illustrate how the matrix Y is constructed, consider the
solutions in Figure 2(a) and (b). Across both solutions, there
are 7 unique expressions. Thus, Y is a 7 × 2 matrix, with
each row corresponding to a unique expression. Letting the
ﬁrst four rows of Y correspond to the four expressions in
Figure 2(a) and the remaining three rows to expressions 2–4
in Figure 2(b), we have
Y =

1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
T
.
2In particular, we use the parse expr function.

We end this section with the crucial observation that, for a
wide range of mathematical questions, many expressions will
be shared across learners’ solutions. This is true, for instance,
in Figure 2. This suggests that there are a limited number of
types of solutions to a question (both correct and incorrect)
and that solutions of the same type tend tend to be similar to
each other. This leads us to the conclusion that the N solu-
tions to a particular question can be effectively clustered into
K ≪N clusters. In the next two sections, we will develop
MLP-S and MLP-B, two algorithms to cluster solutions ac-
cording to their numerical features.
MLP-S: SIMILARITY-BASED CLUSTERING
In this section, we outline MLP-S, which clusters and then
grades solutions using a solution similarity-based approach.
The MLP-S Model
We start by using the solution features in Y to deﬁne a notion
of similarity between pairs of solutions. Deﬁne the N × N
similarity matrix S containing the pairwise similarities be-
tween all solutions, with its (i, j)th entry the similarity be-
tween solutions i and j
Si,j =
yT
i yj
min{yT
i yi, yT
j yj} .
(2)
The column vector yi denotes the ith column of Y and corre-
sponds to learner i’s solution. Informally, Si,j is the number
of common expressions between solution i and solution j di-
vided by the minimum of the number of expressions in solu-
tions i and j. A large/small value of Si,j corresponds to the
two solutions being similar/dissimilar. For example, the sim-
ilarity between the solutions in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b)
is 1/3 and the similarity between the solutions in Figure 2(a)
and Figure 2(b) is 1/2. S is symmetric, and 0 ≤Si,j ≤1.
Equation (2) is just one of any possible solution similarity
metrics. We defer the development of other metrics to future
work.
Clustering Solutions in MLP-S
Having deﬁned the similarity Si,j between two solutions i
and j, we now cluster the N solutions into K ≪N clusters
such that the solutions within each cluster have high similarity
score between them and solutions in different clusters have
low similarity score between them.
Given the similarity matrix S, we can use any of the mul-
titude of standard clustering algorithms to cluster solutions.
Two examples of clustering algorithms are spectral cluster-
ing (SC) [22] and afﬁnity propagation (AP) [11]. The SC
algorithm requires specifying the number of clusters K as an
input parameter, while the AP algorithm does not.
Figure 3 illustrates how AP is able to identify clusters of sim-
ilar solutions from solutions to four different mathematical
questions. The ﬁgures on the top correspond to solutions to
the questions in Figures 1 and 2, respectively. The bottom
two ﬁgures correspond to solutions to two signal processing
questions. Each node in the ﬁgure corresponds to a solution,
and nodes with the same color correspond to solutions that
belong to the same cluster. For each ﬁgure, we show a sam-
ple solution from some of these clusters, with the boxed solu-
tions corresponding to correct solutions. We can make three
interesting observations from Figure 3:
• In the top left ﬁgure, we cluster a solution with the ﬁnal
answer 3x2 +cos x−(x3 +sin x))/ex with a solution with
the ﬁnal answer 3x2 + cos x −(x3 + sin x))/ex. Although
the later solution is incorrect, it contained a typographical
error where 3 ∗x ∧2 was typed as 3 ∧x ∧2. MLP-S is
able to identify this typographical error, since the expres-
sion before the ﬁnal solution is contained in several other
correct solutions.
• In the top right ﬁgure, the correct solution requires iden-
tifying the trigonometric identify sin2 x + cos2 x = 1.
The clustering algorithm is able to identify a subset of the
learners who were not able to identify this relationship and
hence could not simplify their ﬁnal expression.
• MLP-S is able to identify solutions that are strongly con-
nected to each other. Such a visualization can be extremely
useful for course instructors. For example, an instructor
can easily identify a group of learners who lack mastery
of a certain skill that results in a common error and adjust
their course plan accordingly to help these learners.
Auto-Grading via MLP-S
Having clustered all solutions into a small number K of clus-
ters, we assign the same grade to all solutions in the same
cluster. If a course instructor assigns a grade to one solution
from each cluster, then MLP-S can automatically grade the
remaining N −K solutions. We construct the index set IS of
solutions that the course instructor needs to grade as
IS =


arg max
i∈Ck
N
X
j=1
Si,j, k = 1, 2, . . . , K


,
where Ck represents the index set of the solutions in cluster
k. In words, in each cluster, we select the solution having
the highest similarity to the other solutions (ties are broken
randomly) to include in IS. We demonstrate the performance
of auto-grading via MLP-S in the experimental results section
below.
MLP-B: BAYESIAN NONPARAMETRIC CLUSTERING
In this section, we outline MLP-B, which clusters and then
grades solutions using a Bayesian nonparameterics-based ap-
proach. The MLP-B model and algorithm can be interpreted
as an extension of the model in [44], where a similar approach
is proposed to cluster short text documents.
The MLP-B Model
Following the key observation that the N solutions can be
effectively clustered into K ≪N clusters, let z be the N × 1
cluster assignment vector, with zj ∈{1, . . . , K} denoting the
cluster assignment of the jth solution with j ∈{1, . . . , N}.
Using this latent variable, we model the probability of the

Figure 3: Illustration of the clusters obtained by MLP-S by applying afﬁnity propagation (AP) on the similarity matrix S corre-
sponding to learners’ solutions to four different mathematical questions (see Table 1 for more details about the datasets and the
Appendix for the question statements). Each node corresponds to a solution. Nodes with the same color correspond to solutions
that are estimated to be in the same cluster. The thickness of the edge between two solutions is proportional to their similarity
score. Boxed solutions are correct; all others are in varying degrees of correctness.
solution of all learners’ solutions to the question as
p(Y) =
N
Y
j=1
 K
X
k=1
p(yj|zj = k)p(zj = k)
!
,
where yj, the jth column of the data matrix Y, corresponds to
learner j’s solution to the question. Here we have implicitly
assumed that the learners’ solutions are independent of each
other. By analogy to topic models [4, 35], we assume that
learner j’s solution to the question, yj, is generated according
to a multinomial distribution given the cluster assignments z
as
p(yj|zj = k) = Mult(yj|φk)
=
(P
i Yi,j)!
Y1,j!Y2,j! . . . YV,j!ΦY1,j
1,k ΦY2,j
2,k . . . ΦYV,j
V,k ,
(3)
where Φ ∈[0, 1]V ×K is a parameter matrix with Φv,k denot-
ing its (v, k)th entry. φk ∈[0, 1]V ×1 denotes the kth column
of Φ and charcterizes the multinomial distribution over all the
V features for cluster k.
In practice, one often has no information regarding the num-
ber of clusters K. Therefore, we consider K as an unknown
parameter and infer it from the solution data. In order to do
so, we impose a Chinese restaurant process (CRP) prior on
the cluster assignments z, parameterized by a parameter α.
The CRP characterizes the random partition of data into clus-
ters, in analogy to the seating process of customers in a Chi-
nese restaurant. It is widely used in Bayesian mixture model-
ing literature [3, 14]. Under the CRP prior, the cluster (table)
assignment of the jth solution (customer), conditioned on the
cluster assignments of all the other solutions, follows the dis-
tribution
p(zj = k|z¬j, α) =

nk,¬j
N−1+α
if cluster k is occupied,
α
N−1+α
if cluster k is empty,
(4)

β
Φ
α
z
K
N
Y
αα
αβ
Figure 4: Graphical model of the generation process of solu-
tions to mathematical questions. αα, αβ and β are hyperpa-
rameters, z and Φ are latent variables to be inferred, and Y is
the observed data deﬁned in (1).
where nk,¬j represents the number of solutions that belong to
cluster k excluding the current solution j, with PK
k=1 nk,¬j =
N −1. The vector z¬j represents the cluster assignments of
the other solutions. The ﬂexibility of allowing any solution to
start a new cluster of its own enables us to automatically in-
fer K from data. It is known [37] that the expected number of
clusters under the CRP prior satisﬁes K ∼O(α logN) ≪N,
so our method scales well as the number of learners N grows
large. We also impose a Gamma prior α ∼Gam(αα, αβ) on
α to help us infer its value.
Since the solution feature data Y is assumed to follow a multi-
nomial distribution parameterized by Φ, we impose a sym-
metric Dirichlet prior over Φ as φk ∼Dir(φk|β) because of
its conjugacy with the multinomial distribution [13].
The graphical model representation of our model is visualized
in Figure 4. Our goal next is to estimate the cluster assign-
ments z for the solution of each learner, the parameters φk of
each cluster, and the number of clusters K, from the binary-
valued solution feature data matrix Y.
Clustering Solutions in MLP-B
We use a Gibbs sampling algorithm for posterior inference
under the MLP-B model, which automatically groups solu-
tions into clusters. We start by applying a generic clustering
algorithm (e.g., K-means, with K = N/10) to initialize z,
and then initialize Φ accordingly. Then, in each iteration of
MLP-B, we perform the following steps:
1. Sample z: For each solution j, we remove it from its cur-
rent cluster and sample its cluster assignment zj from the
posterior p(zj = k|z¬j, α, Y). Using Bayes rule, we have
p(zj = k|z¬j, Φ, α, Y) = p(zj = k|z¬j, φk, α, yj)
∝p(zj =k|z¬j,α)p(yj|zj =k,φk).
The prior probability p(zj = k|z¬j, α) is given by (4). For
non-empty clusters, the observed data likelihood p(yj|zj =
k, φk) is given by (3). However, this does not apply to new
clusters that are previously empty. For a new cluster, we
marginalize out φk, resulting in
p(yj|zj = k, β) =
Z
φk
p(yj|zj = k, φk)p(φk|β)
=
Z
φk
Mult(yj|zj = k, φk)Dir(φk|β)
=
Γ(V β)
Γ(PV
i=1 Yi,j + V β)
VY
i=1
Γ(Yi,j + β)
Γ(β)
,
where Γ(·) is the Gamma function.
If a cluster becomes empty after we remove a solution from
its current cluster, then we remove it from our sampling
process and erase its corresponding multinomial parame-
ter vector φk. If a new cluster is sampled for zj, then we
sample its multinomial parameter vector φk immediately
according to Step 2 below. Otherwise, we do not change
φk until we have ﬁnished sampling z for all solutions.
2. Sample Φ: For each cluster k, sample φk from its pos-
terior Dir(φk|n1,k + β, . . . , nV,k + β), where ni,k is the
number of times feature i occurs in the solutions that be-
long to cluster k.
3. Sample α: Sample α using the approach described in [41].
4. Update β: Update β using the ﬁxed-point procedure de-
scribed in [20].
The output of the Gibbs sampler is a series of samples that
correspond to the approximate posterior distribution of the
various parameters of interest. To make meaningful infer-
ence for these parameters (such as the posterior mean of a pa-
rameter), it is important to appropriately post-process these
samples. For our estimate of the true number of clusters, bK,
we simply take the mode of the posterior distribution on the
number of clusters K. We use only iterations with K = bK to
estimate the posterior statistics [39].
In mixture models, the issue of “label-switching” can cause a
model to be unidentiﬁable, because the cluster labels can be
arbitrarily permuted without affecting the data likelihood. In
order to overcome this issue, we use an approach reported in
[39]. First, we compute the likelihood of the observed data
in each iteration as p(Y|Φℓ, zℓ), where Φℓand zℓrepresent
the samples of these variables at the ℓth iteration. After the
algorithm terminates, we search for the iteration ℓmax with the
largest data likelihood and then permute the labels zℓin the
other iterations to best match Φℓwith Φℓmax. We use bΦ (with
columns ˆφk) to denote the estimate of Φ, which is simply the
posterior mean of Φ. Each solution j is assigned to the cluster
indexed by the mode of the samples from the posterior of zj,
denoted by ˆzj.
Auto-Grading via MLP-B
We now detail how to use MLP-B to automatically grade a
large number N of learners’ solutions to a mathematical ques-
tion, using a small number bK of instructor graded solutions.
First, as in MLP-S, we select the set IB of “typical solutions”
for the instructor to grade. We construct IB by selecting one
solution from each of the bK clusters that is most representa-
tive of the solutions in that cluster:
IB = {arg max
j
p(yj| ˆφk), k = 1, 2, . . . , bK}.
In words, for each cluster, we select the solution with the
largest likelihood of being in that cluster.
The instructor grades the bK solutions in IB to form the set
of instructor grades {gk} for k ∈IB. Using these grades, we

assign grades to the other solutions j /∈IB according to
ˆgj =
P b
K
k=1 p(yj| ˆφk)gk
P b
K
k=1 p(yj| ˆφk)
.
(5)
That is, we grade each solution not in IB as the average of the
instructor grades weighted by the likelihood that the solution
belongs to cluster. We demonstrate the performance of auto-
grading via MLP-B in the experimental results section below.
Feedback Generation via MLP-B
In addition to grading solutions, MLP-B can automatically
provide useful feedback to learners on where they made errors
in their solutions.
For a particular solution j denoted by its column feature
value vector yj with Vj total expressions, let y(v)
j
denote
the feature value vector that corresponds to the ﬁrst v ex-
pressions of this solution, with v = {1, 2, . . . , Vj}.
Un-
der this notation, we evaluate the probability that the ﬁrst v
expressions of solution j belong to each of the bK clusters:
p(y(v)
j | ˆφk), k = {1, 2, . . . , bK}, for all v. Using these proba-
bilities, we can also compute the expected credit of solution
j after the ﬁrst v expressions via
ˆg(v)
j
=
P b
K
k=1 p(y(v)
j | ˆφk)gk
P b
K
k=1 p(y(v)
j | ˆφk)
,
(6)
where {gk} is the set of instructor grades as deﬁned above.
Using these quantities, it is possible to identify that the learner
has likely made an error at the vth expression if it is most
likely to belong to a cluster with credit gk less than the full
credit or, alternatively, if the expected credit ˆg(v)
j
is less than
the full credit.
The ability to automatically locate where an error has been
made in a particular incorrect solution provides many bene-
ﬁts. For instance, MLP-B can inform instructors of the most
common locations of learner errors to help guide their instruc-
tion. It can also enable an automated tutoring system to gen-
erate feedback to a learner as they make an error in the early
steps of a solution, before it propagates to later steps. We
demonstrate the efﬁcacy of MLP-B to automatically locate
learner errors using real-world educational data in the exper-
iments section below.
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we demonstrate how MLP-S and MLP-B can
be used to accurately estimate the grades of roughly 100 open
response solutions to mathematical questions by only asking
the course instructor to grade approximately 10 solutions. We
also demonstrate how MLP-B can be used to automatically
provide feedback to learners on the locations of errors in their
solutions.
Auto-Grading via MLP-S and MLP-B
Datasets
Our dataset that consists of 116 learners solving 4 open re-
sponse mathematical questions in an edX course. The set
Table 1: Datasets consisting of the solutions of 116 learners
to 4 mathematical questions on algebra and signal processing.
See the Appendix for the question statements.
No.of solutions N
No.of features (unique expressions) V
Question 1
108
78
Question 2
113
53
Question 3
90
100
Question 4
110
45
of questions includes 2 high-school level mathematical ques-
tions and 2 college-level signal processing questions (details
about the questions can be found in Table 1, and the question
statements are given in the Appendix). For each question, we
pre-process the solutions to ﬁlter out the blank solutions and
extract features. Using the features, we represent the solu-
tions by the matrix Y in (1). Every solution was graded by the
course instructor with one of the scores in the set {0, 1, 2, 3},
with a full credit of 3.
Baseline: Random sub-sampling
We compare the auto-grading performance of MLP-S and
MLP-B against a baseline method that does not group the so-
lutions into clusters. In this method, we randomly sub-sample
all solutions to form a small set of solutions for the instructor
to grade. Then, each ungraded solution is simply assigned the
grade of the solution in the set of instructor-graded solutions
that is most similar to it as deﬁned by S in (2). Since this
small set is picked randomly, we run the baseline method 10
times and report the best performance.3
Experimental setup
For each question, we apply four different methods for auto-
grading:
• Random sub-sampling (RS) with the number of clusters
K ∈{5, 6, . . . , 40}.
• MLP-S
with
spectral
clustering
(SC)
with
K
∈
{5, 6, . . . , 40}.
• MLP-S with afﬁnity propagation (AP) clustering. This al-
gorithm does not require K as an input.
• MLP-B with hyperparameters set to the non-informative
values αα = αβ = 1 and running the Gibbs sampling al-
gorithm for 10,000 iterations with 2,000 burn-in iterations.
MLP-S with AP and MLP-B both automatically estimate the
number of clusters K. Once the clusters are selected, we as-
sign one solution from each cluster to be graded by the in-
structor using the methods described in earlier sections.
Performance metric
We use mean absolute error (MAE), which measures the “av-
erage absolute error per auto-graded solution”
MAE =
PN−K
j=1
|ˆgj −gj|
N −K
,
3Other baseline methods, such as the linear regression-based method
used in the edX essay grading system [33], are not listed, because
they did not perform as well as random sub-sampling in our experi-
ments.

as our performance metric. Here, N −K equals the num-
ber of solutions that are auto-graded, and ˆgj and gj repre-
sent the estimated grade (for MLP-B, the estimated grades
are rounded to integers) and the actual instructor grades for
the auto-graded solutions, respectively.
Results and discussion
In Figure 5, we plot the MAE versus the number of clusters
K for Questions 1–4. MLP-S with SC consistently outper-
forms the random sampling baseline algorithm for almost all
values of K. This performance gain is likely due to the fact
that the baseline method does not cluster the solutions and
thus does not select a good subset of solutions for the instruc-
tor to grade. MLP-B is more accurate than MLP-S with both
SC and AP and can automatically estimate the value of K, al-
though at the price of signiﬁcantly higher computational com-
plexity (e.g., clustering and auto-grading one question takes
2 minutes for MLP-B compared to only 5 seconds for MLP-S
with AP on a standard laptop computer with a 2.8GHz CPU
and 8GB memory).
Both MLP-S and MLP-B grade the learners’ solutions accu-
rately (e.g., an MAE of 0.04 out of the full grade 3 using only
K = 13 instructor grades to auto-grade all N = 113 solu-
tions to Question 2). Moreover, as we see in Figure 5, the
MAE for MLP-S decreases as K increases, and eventually
reaches 0 when K is large enough that only solutions that are
exactly the same as each other belong to the same cluster. In
practice, one can tune the value of K to achieve a balance be-
tween maximizing grading accuracy and minimizing human
effort. Such a tuning process is not necessary for MLP-B,
since it automatically estimates the value of K and achieves
such a balance.
Feedback Generation via MLP-B
Experimental setup
Since Questions 3–4 require some familiarity with signal pro-
cessing, we demonstrate the efﬁcacy of MLP-B in provid-
ing feedback on mathematical solutions on Questions 1–2.
Among the solutions to each question, there are a few types
of common errors that more than one learner makes. We take
one incorrect solution out of each type and run MLP-B on the
other solutions to estimate the parameter ˆφk for each clus-
ter. Using this information and the instructor grades {gk},
after each expression v in a solution, we compute the proba-
bility that it belongs to a cluster p(y(v)
j | ˆφk) that does not have
full credit (gk < 3), together with the expected credit using
(6). Once the expected grade is calculated to be less than full
credit, we consider that an error has occurred.
Results and discussion
Two sample feedback generation process are shown in Fig-
ure 6. In Figure 6(a), we can provide feedback to the learner
on their error as early as Line 2, before it carries over to later
lines. Thus, MLP-B can potentially become a powerful tool
to generate timely feedback to learners as they are solving
mathematical questions, by analyzing the solutions it gathers
from other learners.
CONCLUSIONS
10
20
30
40
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
No. of clusters K
MAE
 
 
RS
MLP−S−SC
MLP−S−AP
MLP−B
(a) Question 1
10
20
30
40
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
No. of clusters K
MAE
(b) Question 2
10
20
30
40
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
No. of clusters K
MAE
(c) Question 3
10
20
30
40
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
No. of clusters K
MAE
(d) Question 4
Figure 5: Mean absolute error (MAE) versus the number of
instructor graded solutions (clusters) K, for Questions 1–
4, respectively.
For example, on Question 1, MLP-S and
MLP-B estimate the true grade of each solution with an aver-
age error of around 0.1 out of a full credit of 3. “RS” repre-
sents the random sub-sampling baseline. Both MLP-S meth-
ods and MLP-B outperforms the baseline method.
We have developed a framework for mathematical language
processing (MLP) that consists of three main steps: (i) con-
verting each solution to an open response mathematical ques-
tion into a series of numerical features; (ii) clustering the fea-
tures from several solutions to uncover the structures of cor-
rect, partially correct, and incorrect solutions; and (iii) auto-
matically grading the remaining (potentially large number of)
solutions based on their assigned cluster and one instructor-
provided grade per cluster. As our experiments have indi-
cated, our framework can substantially reduce the human ef-
fort required for grading in large-scale courses. As a bonus,
MLP-S enables instructors to visualize the clusters of solu-
tions to help them identify common errors and thus groups of
learners having the same misconceptions. As a further bonus,
MLP-B can track the cluster assignment of each step of a mul-
tistep solution and determine when it departs from a cluster
of correct solutions, which enables us to indicate the locations
of errors to learners in real time. Improved learning outcomes
should result from these innovations.
There are several avenues for continued research. We are cur-
rently planning more extensive experiments on the edX plat-
form involving tens of thousands of learners. We are also
planning to extend the feature extraction step to take into ac-
count both the ordering of expressions and ancillary text in
a solution. Clustering algorithms that allow a solution to be-
long to more than one cluster could make MLP more robust
to outlier solutions and further reduce the number of solutions
that the instructors need to grade. Finally, it would be inter-
esting to explore how the features of solutions could be used

((x3 + sin x)/ex)′
= (ex(x3 + sin x)′ −(x3 + sin x)(ex)′)/e2x
prob.incorrect = 0.11,
exp.grade = 3
= (ex(2x2 + cos x) −(x3 + sin x)ex)/e2x
prob.incorrect = 0.66,
exp.grade = 2
= (2x2 + cos x −x3 −sin x)/ex
prob.incorrect = 0.93,
exp.grade = 2
= (x2(2 −x) + cos x −sin x)/ex
prob.incorrect = 0.99,
exp.grade = 2
(a) A sample feedback generation process where the learner makes an
error in the expression in Line 2 while attempting to solve Question 1.
(x2 + x + sin2 x + cos2 x)(2x −3)
= (x2 + x + 1)(2x −3)
prob.incorrect = 0.09,
exp.grade = 3
= 4x3 + 2x2 + 2x −3x2 −3x −3
prob.incorrect = 0.82,
exp.grade = 2
= 4x3 −x2 −x −3
prob.incorrect = 0.99,
exp.grade = 2
(b) A sample feedback generation process where the learner makes an
error in the expression in Line 3 while attempting to solve Question 2.
Figure 6: Demonstration of real-time feedback generation by
MLP-B while learners enter their solutions. After each ex-
pression, we compute both the probability that the learner’s
solution belongs to a cluster that does not have full credit and
the learner’s expected grade. An alert is generated when the
expected credit is less than full credit.
to build predictive models, as in the Rasch model [27] or item
response theory [18].
APPENDIX: QUESTION STATEMENTS
Question 1: Multiply
(x2 + x + sin2 x + cos2 x)(2x −3)
and simplify your answer as much as possible.
Question 2: Find the derivative of x3 + sin(x)
ex
and simplify
your answer as much as possible.
Question 3: A discrete-time linear time-invariant system has
the impulse response shown in the ﬁgure (omitted). Calculate
H(ejω), the discrete-time Fourier transform of h[n]. Simplify
your answer as much as possible until it has no summations.
Question 4: Evaluate the following summation
∞
X
k=−∞
δ[n −k] x[k −n].
