Reasoning about RoboCup Soccer Narratives
Hannaneh Hajishirzi1, Julia Hockenmaier1, Erik T. Mueller2, and Eyal Amir1

1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2IBM Watson Research Center
Abstract
This paper presents an approach for learning to
translate simple narratives, i.e., texts (sequences
of sentences) describing dynamic systems, into
coherent sequences of events without the need
for labeled training data. Our approach incorpo-
rates domain knowledge in the form of precondi-
tions and effects of events, and we show that it
outperforms state-of-the-art supervised learning
systems on the task of reconstructing RoboCup
soccer games from their commentaries.
1
Introduction
Natural language understanding requires the ability to
translate individual sentences into representations of the
underlying entities, properties, relations, and actions. It
further requires the ability to combine the representations
of individual sentences into a coherent whole. For exam-
ple, determining from a commentary of a soccer game who
has possession of the ball at any given moment requires one
to infer numerous events that may not have been explicitly
mentioned such as unsuccessful passing, kicking the ball,
or stealing the ball.
This paper argues that the coherence of natural language
text provides a strong bias that can be exploited when learn-
ing to understand language. One particularly simple form
of coherence requires that events can only take place when
their preconditions are met. For example, a soccer player
cannot kick the ball unless he is currently in possession of
the ball. We present an approach that incorporates such do-
main knowledge into the process of learning to understand
sports commentaries without annotated data.
We use human commentaries of four championship games
in the RoboCup simulation league [6] and map each narra-
tive to a sequence of events such as pass, kick, steal, offside
along with their arguments. Soccer commentaries differ
from more complex narratives in that they report a linear
sequence of events that unfolds over time. In a soccer com-
mentary, each sentence results in an incremental update of
the overall representation, or discourse model [24, 11, 9],
making it possible to reconstruct the original temporal se-
quence of events.
In this paper we show how a small amount of domain
knowledge and a bias towards coherent discourse models
can be used to learn how to interpret narratives. The do-
main knowledge we exploit encodes the preconditions and
effects of event types using a STRIPS-like framework [8].
The logical representation of knowledge allows structured
modeling of event types rather than modeling propositional
state transitions.
In contrast to other recently proposed
approaches (e.g., [25, 6, 12]), we require neither labeled
training data nor an agent that receives indirect supervision
by interacting with a physical environment (e.g., [3, 23]).
These are often very hard, if not infeasible, to create.
Our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art approach of
[6], which uses annotated data on understanding RoboCup
soccer commentaries, even when extended to incorporate
similar domain knowledge at inference time.
Similar to [6], we formulate language understanding as a
classiﬁcation problem in which we have to predict events
from individual sentences. Given a sentence, our classiﬁer
assigns a score to each possible interpretation.1 We inter-
pret these scores as utilities and use dynamic programming
to ﬁnd the sequence of events that has maximal utility. In
contrast to other approaches, our classiﬁer also receives as
input our guess of the current state of the world. This al-
lows it to penalize events that violate domain constraints
(because their preconditions are not met in what we assume
to be the current state of the world). Our classiﬁer is trained
in an iterative fashion that is reminiscent of self-training or
hard EM [2]. Starting from an initial guess of correct events
for sentences and current states, we iteratively retrain ac-
cording to the current version of the classiﬁer. At test time,
1An alternative approach (to be explored in future work) might
treat this task as a complex sequence labeling problem where each
element of the sequence corresponds to an individual sentence and
the label corresponds to the predicted event.

we use a dynamic programming approach to ﬁnd a coher-
ent sequence of events that has maximal utility according
to the learned scores of events.
1.1
Related Work
There are other approaches that learn to map natural lan-
guage text to meaning representations. Some (e.g., [25])
use annotated labeled data and are focused on texts describ-
ing facts rather than describing the dynamics of a system.
Most similar to our approach are [3, 6], which map nar-
ratives to a sequence of events with applications in under-
standing instructions or generating commentaries. [3] use
reinforcement learning and have access to a physical envi-
ronment to provide supervision for assigning rewards to se-
lecting events. [6] have access to the actual events of soccer
games and use a mapping between commentaries and real
events of the game for training. In contrast, our approach
uses prior knowledge about events, does not have access to
the actual events that occurred in the soccer game, does not
interact with a real physical environment, and uses binary
classiﬁers instead of reinforcement learning.
Several approaches introduce reasoning, learning, or plan-
ning algorithms in a probabilistic logical framework to
model events.
Planning and reasoning approaches, un-
like our approach, assume that the probability distributions
over events are known. Exact reasoning approaches (e.g.,
[1, 18]) are not feasible for our problem, because they usu-
ally consider all possible event sequences. Approximate
reasoning approaches (e.g., sampling event sequences of
narratives [10]) are still too expensive. Probabilistic plan-
ning approaches [22] usually ﬁnd the most likely plan given
initial and goal states. Learning approaches [7, 26] also
compute probability distributions over different events, but,
unlike us, use labeled training data, and train their classiﬁer
to predict single probabilistic events independently rather
than accumulating information from selected events using
an inference subroutine.
Our approach is also related to research in planning and,
to a greater degree, activity recognition. Some approaches
(e.g., [13]) use logical elements and symbolic reasoning,
but are not able to rank multiple plans that are consistent
with the text. Other approaches use probabilistic reasoning
(e.g., Bayesian networks in [5] or Hidden Markov Models
(HMMs) in [4]). Other approaches (e.g., [19, 14]) incor-
porate learning and reasoning in dynamic models such as
HMMs and Markov decision processes. These approaches
are usually augmented with annotated labeled data and do
not use logics to model the domain. Most recently, [20] rec-
ognize activities by applying relational inference and learn-
ing (with noisy GPS information as training labels). They
neither improve initial estimates of labels nor use consis-
tency checking. Moreover, using hard and soft constraints,
they augment their system with richer (more expensive)
prior knowledge compared to our few event descriptions.
2
Problem Deﬁnition
The problem that we address here is to ﬁnd the best se-
quence of interpretations for the sentences of a natural lan-
guage narrative. In our approach, we additionally have ac-
cess to domain knowledge about events in terms of their
preconditions and effects.
2.1
Natural Language Narratives
A narrative is a text that describes the (linear) temporal
evolution of a system as a sequence of sentences in nat-
ural language. Examples of such narratives are commen-
taries, stories, reports, and instructions. In a narrative, each
sentence leads to an incremental update of the overall rep-
resentation, or discourse model. Speciﬁcally, a narrative
is a sequence of length T of sentences ⟨w1, w2, . . . , wT ⟩.
Throughout this paper we work with English commentaries
of ﬁnal games in the RoboCup soccer simulation league,
taken from [6].
Sentences:
Every sentence in the narrative is either an
observation about the state of the system (e.g., “Offside
has been called on the Pink team.”) or a change that hap-
pens in the state of the system (e.g., “Pink9 tries to kick
to Pink10, but was defended by Purple3.”). Because the
meaning representation language deﬁned by [6] provides
a number of event types, the above sentence could be in-
terpreted as passing between players, unsuccessful passing
between players, a player kicking the ball, or a player de-
fending the other player.
State of the world: The state of the world (i.e., the soccer
game) changes over time. For example, after the sentence
“The pink goalie kicks off to Pink2.”, a (partial) description
of the current state of the game would include the fact that
‘Pink2 has possession of the ball’.
2.2
Meaning Representations
Similar to [6], we use a logical language to model meaning
representations in a structured way. Our meaning represen-
tation language consists of a ﬁnite set of state predicates,
events, and their arguments corresponding to the elements
of the domain. Although our domain is ﬁnite, this struc-
tured representation allows us to capture general domain
knowledge about event types.
Representation Language:
We use a logical lan-
guage to represent state predicates, events, and entities.
The language consists of a ﬁnite set of constants
(players
Pink1,
Purple1,
Pink2,
Purple2),
vari-
ables (e.g.,
player1, player2),
state predicates (e.g.,
holding(player,ball), atCorner(), atPenalty()), and event

types
(e.g.,
pass(player1, player2),
kick(player1),
steal(player1)).
Deﬁnition 1. The language L of our meaning representa-
tion framework is a tuple L = (C, V, F, E) consisting of
• C, a ﬁnite set of domain entities,
• V, a ﬁnite set of variables,
• F, a ﬁnite set of state predicates, and
• E, a ﬁnite set of event types.
Event types (e.g., kick(player1)) and state predicates (e.g.,
holding(player,ball)) are syntactically represented with a
name together with a list of arguments. For event types
and state predicates, these arguments are all variables rather
than constants. A ground event is an instantiation of an
event type, meaning that the variables are replaced with
constants. Similarly, a ground predicate is an instantiation
of a state predicate. For example, pass(player1, player2)
is an event type because player1 and player2 are variables,
whereas pass(Pink1, Pink2) is a ground event because
Pink1 and Pink2 are constants.
A (complete) state s in this framework is deﬁned as a full
assignment of {true, false} to all possible groundings of
the predicates in F. However, at any particular time step,
it is generally the case that the values of many state predi-
cates are unknown. A belief state σ is a set of (complete)
states that hold in a particular time step. It can also be in-
terpreted as a conjunction of those ground predicates whose
truth values are known.
Event Semantics: Prior knowledge is provided in the form
of a small number of event type descriptions in a logical
format. Semantically, an event type either describes a be-
lief state (e.g., corner()) or deterministically maps a belief
state to a new belief state (e.g., pass(player1, player2)).
The semantics of an event type is described with STRIPS
preconditions and effects. These semantic descriptions are
in fact the prior knowledge provided to our system.
We use our logical language to describe event types rather
than ground events. Describing event types stands in con-
trast to describing all possible state-to-state transitions.
Hereinafter, for simplicity, we use the terms ‘event’ instead
of ‘ground event’, and ‘state’ instead of ‘belief state’.
Deﬁnition 2. Let e(⃗x) be an event type and ⃗x its argu-
ments. The effect axiom for the event type e(⃗x) is repre-
sented as ⟨e(⃗x), Precond(⃗x), Effect(⃗x)⟩where Precond(⃗x)
and Effect(⃗x) are conjunctions of state predicates or their
negations.
For example, the event axiom ⟨pass(player1, player2),
holding(player1), holding(player2)⟩describes the event
type pass that changes the possession of the ball from
player1 to player2, and the event axiom ⟨kick(player1),
holding(player1), ¬holding(player1)⟩
represents
that
player1 is no longer holding the ball after he shoots. The
holding predicate is exclusive: if one person holds the ball,
!"#$%&'()$*+(,-$+$.+/$0+--$12+1$!+-$0&3(,/$45$.6$%7809,):$
!;#$%7809,)$0+--,-$<48!+8/$14$%7809,=:$

:$:$:$
:$:$:$
,;A"#$0+--$
:$:$:$
,;A;#$(&3($
,;A>#$178'4B,8$
C*,$?$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$C*,$"$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$C*,$;$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$C*,$>$$$$$
Figure 1: An example narrative as a sequence of sentences
and their interpretations in the form of events.
no other person can hold it at the same time.
Here we use the frame assumption that the truth value of a
gound predicate stays the same unless it is changed by an
event.
Most events associated with RoboCup commentaries in-
volve actions with the ball such as kicking and passing.
There are some other events that provide game informa-
tion such as whether the current state is penalty, offside,
or corner. For example the event corner is described as
⟨corner(), ⊤, atCorner()⟩.
The set of event types includes a noise event called
Nothing that has no preconditions and no effects, and
hence does not alter the state of the world. The reason for
including this noise event is that some narratives include
sentences that are not mapped to any actual events. For ex-
ample, the sentence “Today we have a nice match between
the pink and the purple team.” does not map to any of the
described events of the soccer game. In addition, the noise
event helps to ﬁx inconsistencies that exist in the narrative.
For example, a soccer commentary may be inconsistent if
the commentator has missed commenting on some of the
events of the game. Mapping sentences to the noise event
allows some ﬂexibility for mapping other sentences cor-
rectly.
2.3
Sentence Interpretations
Different events can be inferred from a natural language
sentence. We assign a score to all possible events associ-
ated with a sentence. This score also depends on the current
state of the world. The score corresponding to the interpre-
tation of sentence w as event ei in state s represented as
P(ei|w, s) for all the events ei. Figure 1 shows part of
a RoboCup narrative and a possible ranking of events ac-
cording to their scores.
To map a narrative to a sequence of events, we ﬁrst need to
compute P(ei|w, s) for all ground events ei and every sen-

tence w in the narrative. We model this score as a logistic
function [2] and learn it in an iterative learning procedure
(Section 3.1). Each iteration involves estimating the label
for the training examples and modifying the model accord-
ingly.
Following [6], we assume that each sentence can be
mapped to at most one event. For instance, for the sen-
tence “Pink6 tried to pass to Pink10 but was intercepted
by Purple3.” the goal is to map the sentence to a single
event badPass(Pink6, Purple3) rather than a sequence of
events like kick(Pink6), then pass(Pink6, Pink10), and
then badPass(Pink6, Purple3).
3
Mapping Narratives to Event Sequences
Our approach, ITerative Event Mapping (ITEM) (Figure 2)
is built upon two subroutines of inference and iterative
learning. ITEM takes as input a set of training narratives
Tr, a test narrative Ts, and domain knowledge encoded in
terms of the preconditions and effects of event types, EA
(event type axioms), in our logical language. For training,
ITEM uses an iterative learning subroutine, IterTrain (Sec-
tion 3.1, Algorithm 2), to learn the model parameter vec-
tor ⃗Θ from the training narratives. The scores of events
associated with sentences are computed according to the
learned model. At test time, ITEM uses an inference sub-
routine (Section 3.2, Algorithm 3) to ﬁnd the best event
sequence for the test narrative using the learned model and
the computed scores. The domain knowledge is used when
initializing labels, generating training examples, and in the
inference subroutine.
3.1
Training: Iterative Learning
Our iterative learning subroutine, IterTrain, is illustrated in
Figure 3. Inputs to this subroutine are a set of training nar-
ratives Tr and domain knowledge expressed as event type
effect axioms EA in our logical language L. In our experi-
ments (following [6]) we use three RoboCup soccer games
as training data and the fourth as the test narrative. The out-
put of IterTrain is a model parameter vector ⃗Θ estimated on
the training narratives. IterTrain trains a binary classiﬁer to
separate the correct event from the other events for every
sentence and state. To model this problem as a binary clas-
siﬁcation task, we build training examples as triplets (state
s, sentence w, event ei) from the training narratives and as-
sign boolean labels to them. A positive label for a training
example shows that event ei is the correct interpretation of
the sentence w in the state s.
IterTrain
consists
of
different
modules.
The
Example Generator
module
generates
training
exam-
ples (s, w, e) from the training narratives.
Afterwards,
Feature Extractor generates features ⃗Φ(s, w, e) for each
training example. Because the correct labels of training
Algorithm 1. ITEM(Tr, Ts, E, EA)
Input: training narrative Tr, test narrative Ts, event types E, ef-
fect axioms EA
1. ⃗Θ ←IterTrain(Tr, EA)
2. Inference(Ts, ⃗Θ, E, EA)
Algorithm 2. IterTrain(Tr, EA)
Input: training narrative Tr, effect axioms EA
1. k ←0, randomly initialize ⃗Θ0, ⃗Θ1
2. Repeat until ||⃗Θk+1 −⃗Θk|| < ϵ
(a) k ←k + 1
(b) (si, wi, ei)i:1..S ←ExampleGenerator(Tr, EA)
(c) for i : 1 to S
i. ⃗Φi ←FeatureExtractor(si, wi, ei)
ii. if k = 1:
A. li ←InitialLabelGen(si, wi, ei, EA)
iii. else: li ←UpdateLabels(si, wi, ei, EA)
(d) ⃗Θk ←Classiﬁer(⃗Φi:1..S, li:1:S)
3. return ⃗Θ ←⃗Θk
Algorithm 3. Inference(Ts,⃗Θ, E, EA)
Input: test narrative Ts = ⟨w1 . . . wT ⟩, ⃗Θ, E,EA
Output: sequence of events ⟨e1, . . . , eT ⟩
1. if t = 1 initialize V1,ei, S1,ei, Seq1,ei from Eq. 2
2. for t = 2 . . . T
(a) for ei in E:
i. e∗
←
arg maxej∈E P⃗Θ(ei|wt, St−1,ej) +
Vt−1,ej + rSt−1,ej ,ei
ii. Vt,ei
←
P⃗Θ(ei|wt, St−1,e∗) + Vt−1,e∗+
rSt−1,e∗,ei
iii. St,ei ←Progress(St−1,e∗, ei)
iv. Seqt,ei ←Seqt,e∗+ [ei]
3. eT ←arg maxei∈E(VT,ei), e1..T −1 ←Seqet,t
Figure 2: The ITerative Event Mapping (ITEM) algorithm
ﬁnds the best event sequence corresponding to a narrative.
The subroutine IterTrain uses the training narrative to es-
timate the model parameters ⃗Θ, and Inference ﬁnds the
best event sequence for the test narrative given the learned
model parameters and the event type descriptions.
examples are not known, Initial Label Generator estimates
initial training labels using prior knowledge.
Then, in
the ﬁrst iteration the Classiﬁer module learns the model
parameters ⃗Θ1 for the current training examples and the
estimated labels. It uses logistic regression [2] to compute
the binomial probability P⃗Θ(e|w, s) that event e is the
correct interpretation of the sentence w in state s.
At each iteration k
>
1,
the algorithm uses the
learned model parameters ⃗Θk−1 and updates the previ-
ously estimated labels for the training examples using the
UpdateLabels module. Iterations will continue until con-
vergence, i.e., until (||⃗Θk+1 −⃗Θk|| < ϵ).
For testing, we use the ﬁnal learned model ⃗Θ to compute
scores P⃗Θ(ei|w, s) of all events ei associated with every
sentence w and the current state s in the test narrative. In
the following we describe the different subroutines used for
training in more detail.

! "#$%&'()*+,-./-0!"#!$%&'00
1232450"#$%&'()*+,0
! 6#7%8509&:9-0;3$$-0*<-0*=>0

A432B740
C4'4732#70
! DE-.=-()*+,$%-'F00
D"#$%&'()*+,-./-0
!"#!$%&'F0
! G0
?H3IJ$40
C4'4732#70
K$388&L470
!  !"50*+0J388480
M#7.37%02#0*<N0
!  !#50*<09&:980
2"40;3$$02#0*=>N0
14'24':480
! D8E-.=-()*+,$%-'.EF0
! D"#$%&'()*+,-./-0
!"#!$/&'0F0
O'&P3$0Q3;4$0
C4'4732#70
O'M474':40
!  0
0$%&&'()*+,0
0
0*7450"#$%&'()H,0
0?R5"#$%&'()S,0
!  0
0-./%0'(+,0
0
0*7450T"#$%&'()H,00
0?R50"#$%&'()H,0
*7&#70
U'#.$4%(40
V0
W0
X4.0$3;4$80
YJ%3240
Q3;4$80
! 
" 
! 
" k
 
! 
" 
(s,w,e)
(s,w,e)
Figure 3: The architecture of our iterative learning ap-
proach IterTrain (Algorithm 2) to compute the model pa-
rameters ⃗Θ and return the score of every event given the
sentence and the current state.
Training Example Generator: The inputs to this module
are training narratives consisting of a sequence of sentences
⟨w1 . . . wT ⟩and event effect axioms. It generates training
examples of the form (state si,t, sentence wt, event ei,t).
This module ﬁrst samples sequences of event types for the
narrative, grounds the event types, and generates (sentence,
event) pairs. It then updates the state of the world for each
pair. This provides the ﬁnal triplets of training examples.
To build pairs of (wt, ei,t) for each sentence wt, we sample
N (10 in our experiments) event types ei,t uniformly from
the set of event types E of L. For example, we may sam-
ple the event types pass, steal, and kick for the sentence
“P7 passes the ball to P9”(P stands for Pink) in Figure 3.
We then deterministically ground event types by assigning
players as arguments to the event types. For that, we as-
sume that we know the list of players for the soccer game.
We select arguments (players in the soccer domain) for the
event types from those appearing in the sentence or nearby
sentences. For example, arguments for the above sentence
are P7 and P9. To ground the event type, we replace the
variables in the event type pass(player1, player2) with the
constants P7 and P9 (see section 4 for details). For the
above sentence the ground event is pass(P7, P9), where
player1 is replaced with P7 and player2 is replaced with
P9.
We then compute the state of the narrative given the
sequence of ground events evsi
=
⟨ei,1, . . . ei,T ⟩
corresponding
to
sentences
w1...wT
of
the
nar-
rative.
We
build
a
new
sequence
of
the
form
⟨si,0, ei,1, si,1, ei,2, si,2, . . . , ei,T , si,T ⟩.
Every si,t is
the state of the narrative at time t and is computed using
preconditions and effects of event axioms. Initially, any
ground predicate can be true i.e., si,0 = ⊤. Then, at each
time step t, we apply the effects of the event ei,t and update
the state si,t−1 using a Progress subroutine. Therefore, the
triplets (si,t−1, wt, ei,t) are generated given all the events
and the updated states.
For example, one instantiated sequence of event types sam-
pled for the narrative in Figure 3 is ⟨steal(P7), kick(P9)⟩.
We update the state given the event sequence and derive
⟨⊤, steal(P7), holding(P7), kick(P9), ¬holding(P9)⟩:
If
the event steal(P7) happens in s0
=
⊤, the state
s1
is
holding(P7).
From
this
sequence
we
ex-
tract two training examples (⊤, w1, steal(P7), ⊤) and
(holding(P7), w2, kick(P9)).
To update the state of the system with events we use the
Progress subroutine. Progress(st−1, et), takes as input an
event et and the current state st−1 and returns the updated
state st. If the preconditions of the event et are consistent
with st−1, then st is updated by applying the grounded ef-
fect axioms of the event et. Otherwise, st is assigned to ⊤
to show that any predicate state can be true.
Feature Extractor: This module takes an example (sen-
tence w, event e, state s) as input and returns the corre-
sponding feature vector ⃗Φ = (1, ⃗φs, ⃗φw, ⃗φe), where 1 is
a bias term. ⃗φs is a binary vector representing the state s
where each element in the vector represents the value of
the corresponding ground predicate in the state s. Because
we have few ground predicates in the RoboCup domain,
we model states as truth assignments to ground predicates
rather than as state predicates. For larger domains, we can
avoid grounding by modeling predicate names and their ar-
guments separately in the feature vector.
⃗φw is a binary vector representing the sentence w, where
each element in the vector shows the presence of the cor-
responding word of the vocabulary or the player names in
the sentence. ⃗φe is a binary vector representing the type
of the event e, where each element in the vector represents
the presence of the corresponding event type in the training
example. Arguments of the event e are encoded in the ‘sen-
tence’ part, ⃗φw. Our approach learns event types and as-
signs the players extracted from the sentence as arguments
to the event types.
Initial Label Generator:
This module distinguishes us
from learning approaches that use manually labeled data.
We only use automatically generated labels. This module
takes as input an example (state s, sentence w, event e) and
provides an estimate of the actual label. The intuition be-
hind a positive label is that event e is a correct interpretation

of the sentence w given that the state is s.
In the ﬁrst iteration, this module uses the event type ax-
ioms and automatically assigns labels to the training exam-
ples. More speciﬁcally, an example (s, w, e) will be as-
signed a positive label if the preconditions of event e are
consistent with the current state s and if the name of event
e has low edit distance to a word in the sentence w. This
is only a rough estimation because for example the verb
of the sentence “P7 passes the ball to P9.” is kick where
the correct event type is pass, which has a large edit dis-
tance to the words of the sentence. This way, there can
be more than one positive example corresponding to every
sentence. However, most of training examples are assigned
a negative label because for most of the events in training
examples the above conditions are not satisﬁed.
For instance, the training example (⊤, w1, steal(P7))
has been assigned a positive label because steal(P7)
is feasible in s0
=
⊤.
However,
the example
(holding(P7), w2, kick(P9)) has been assigned a negative
label because kick(P9) is not feasible if s=holding(P7).
Update Labels:
In subsequent iterations k > 1, new la-
bels are proposed by applying the current classiﬁer to train-
ing examples. This module uses the learned model parame-
ter vector ⃗Θk−1 from the previous iteration k −1 and com-
putes the score of each training example (s, w, e) using the
logistic function:
P⃗Θ(e|w, s) = 1/(1 + exp(−⃗Θk−1 × ⃗Φ(s, w, e))
(1)
An example (s, w, e) will be assigned a positive label if its
score is higher than the score of (s, w, e′) for every other
event e′.
Classiﬁer:
At each iteration k, the classiﬁer takes train-
ing examples (s, w, e) together with the generated labels
for that iteration and returns the model parameters ⃗Θk.
This module ﬁrst removes some of the negative examples
randomly to balance the number of training examples so
that the number of positive and negative labels is compa-
rable. It then trains a linear classiﬁer (logistic regression
[2]) to compute the binomial probability score P⃗Θ(e|w, s)
for events e given the sentence w and state s. We model
this score as a logistic function (Equation 1) where ⃗Φ is
the feature vector associated with training examples and
⃗Θk is a vector of model parameters that we want to learn.
The output of the classiﬁer is the model parameter vector
⃗Θk = (θ1, ⃗θs, ⃗θw, ⃗θe), which is used to compute the score
of events.
The above steps continue until the model parameters con-
verge, i.e., when ||⃗Θk −⃗Θk−1|| < ϵ. Our iterative learning
approach takes ideas from hard EM. In analogy to the max-
imization step, we use our logistic regression classiﬁer and
optimize to ﬁnd the model parameters. In analogy to the
expectation step, we compute the new scores of training
examples with the logistic function and update the labels
of the training examples. Therefore, similar to EM-like ap-
proaches, our approach converges to a local minimum. We
call the ﬁnal learned model, which will be used for testing,
⃗Θ.
At test time, our approach selects parameters (players in
our example) for the learned event type from those appear-
ing in the sentence or nearby sentences. It grounds all the
possible event types associated with the sentence using the
derived parameters. It uses the ﬁnal learned model ⃗Θ to
compute the score of events ei corresponding to the test
sentence w in the state s using the logistic function. Fi-
nally, P⃗Θ(ei|w, s) is derived by normalizing the scores of
all events ei corresponding to the sentence s and the state
s.
3.2
Testing: Inference with Dynamic Programming
The Inference subroutine (Algorithm 3) takes as input the
test narrative ⟨w1, . . . , wT ⟩, the event effect axioms EA,
and the learned model parameter vector ⃗Θ. It then returns
the best event sequence corresponding to the test narrative
and our model using a Viterbi-like [17] dynamic program-
ming approach.
Intuitively, the inference subroutine selects the event that is
most likely and feasible in the state of the narrative. Our
dynamic programming approach maximizes the utility of
selecting the event ei at time t. It uses following recursive
relations to ﬁnd the best event sequence corresponding to
the narrative.
Here Vt,ei corresponds to the maximum utility of selecting
event ei in time step t. This value is initialized with the
score of events for the ﬁrst sentence and the initial state.
These scores P⃗Θ(ei|w1, s0) are derived using the learned
parameter vector ⃗Θ. If the preconditions of ei are not con-
sistent with the current state s, we penalize the value of
choosing this event using a penalty function rs,ei, which
is a real number between 0 and −1. In our experiments,
we set this penalty function to −1 to penalize events with
higher scores more than the events with lower scores. e∗
is the event selected at previous time step to achieve the
maximum utility at time t by selecting the event ei. The
current state St,ei is derived by Progressing state St−1,e∗
with event ei.
Initialize for all i :
(2)
V1,ei = P⃗Θ(ei|w1, s0)
S1,ei = Progress(s0, ei)
Iterative step for all t ∈2..T, ei :
e∗= arg max
ej
P⃗Θ(ei|wt, St−1,ej) + Vt−1,ej + rSt−1,ej ,ei
Vt,ei = P⃗Θ(ei|wt, St−1,e∗) + Vt−1,e∗+ rSt−1,e∗,ei
St,ei = Progress(St−1,e∗, ei)

where s0 = ⊤and rs,ei =
 −1
Precond(ei) ̸|= s
0
otherwise
is a
function for penalizing infeasible events.
To update the best sequence of events, we use the follow-
ing recursive formulas. Seqt,ei corresponds to the best se-
quence of events if event ei is selected at time t.
Seq1,ei = [ei]
Seqt,ei = Seqt−1,e∗+ [ei]
(3)
The event sequence Seqt,ei is updated by keeping a pointer
to the previously best selected event in the recursive step.
Finally, the best sequence of events is derived by selecting
the event at time T that has the highest value and back-
tracking recursively, i.e., eT = arg maxei∈E(VT,ei) and
e1..T −1 = SeqT,eT .
Please notice that the error of ﬁnding the best sequence
propagates further with time. Exact approaches for this
problem (of ﬁnding the best path) are infeasible compu-
tationally given the length of the narratives.
Therefore,
we use our approximate Viterbi-like approach, which is
more tractable. However, an exact method (considering all
the possible paths) can perform better when feasible (e.g.,
when the narratives are very short).
4
Experiments
In this section we evaluate how well our algorithm, ITEM,
can map narratives to a sequence of events. We work with
RoboCup soccer commentaries [6]. The task is to compute
the accuracy of the mapped event sequence with respect
to a gold standard event sequence. We compare the accu-
racy of our approach with baseline algorithms and a state-
of-the-art approach that uses annotated labeled data. Our
experiments demonstrate that prior knowledge about event
effect axioms alleviates the need for labeled data.
4.1
RoboCup Soccer Commentaries
We use the RoboCup soccer commentaries dataset [6]. The
data is based on commentaries of four championship games
of the RoboCup simulation league that took place from
2001 to 2004. Each game is associated with a sequence
of human comments in English and their meaning repre-
sentations. There are in total of 1872 comments where the
2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004 games have 672, 459, 398, and
343 comments, respectively.
We add a unary predicate, holding, and a noise event,
Nothing, to the meaning representations of [6]. In addi-
tion, we manually describe effect axioms for event types.
Event types for the soccer commentary include actions with
the ball or other game information. In total there are 16
event types among which there are 3 with two arguments,
4 with one argument, and 10 with zero arguments. The
number of state predicates in the domain is 10. We assign
constants as player names. In total there are 24 constants.
In addition to the English comments about the game, the
original dataset includes real events (represented in the
same meaning representation language) that happen in the
original game tagged with time. Our ITEM algorithm does
not use this event log of the game. This makes us differ-
ent from the approach in [6], which uses annotated labeled
data in the form of a mapping between natural language
comments and the real events that occurred within 5 time
steps of when the comments were recorded.
4.2
Mapping Sentences to Events
We use gold-standard labels in the dataset as the correct
event corresponding to the sentence, only for evaluation
purposes. We evaluate the accuracy of the output sequence
of events by computing the proportion of the events that
have been correctly assigned to the sentences. We report
the results for every game using the other games for train-
ing. We also report the micro-averaged accuracy over all
examples. We compare the accuracy of our approach with
[6] and several baselines.
4.2.1
Our approach (ITEM)
Our classiﬁer trains on three RoboCup games (e.g., 2001,
2002, and 2003) and tests on the last game (e.g., 2004). We
run IterTrain, using N = 10 samples for each sentence,
and compute the model parameter vector.
The average
number of training examples per iteration is about 700. To
generate training examples, we use the Example Generator
module to sample event types for sentences, ground event
types based on the arguments of the sentence (player
names), and update the states based on the events. There
are cases where we miss arguments, for example when
the player name is mentioned as “Pink Goalie” rather than
“Pink1”. There are also cases in which the sampled event
type requires more arguments than the player arguments
extracted for the sentence. For example, the sentence “He
kicks the ball to P10” has one player argument P10. In
these cases we use the last argument selected for the previ-
ous sentence as an argument of the event type. Also, there
are cases in which the sentence has more arguments than
the event type. In such cases we consider different pairs
of argument players as arguments of the event types. Cur-
rently, we deterministically assign arguments, but this can
be easily replaced with building a list of candidates among
which our approach has to choose.
After generating examples, we extract features for each ex-
ample. The feature vector ⃗Θ has 250 elements consisting of
16 event types, 195 words, and 38 ground state predicates.
We use Initial Label Generator to generate initial labels us-
ing event effect axioms and computing edit distance of the
event name and words in the sentence. A training example

(s, w, e) gets a positive label if e is feasible in state s and
its name has low edit distance (≤3) to at least a word in
the sentence. The initial labels are later changed in sub-
sequent iterations using the learned classiﬁer. Using the
learned model parameter vector, we compute the score of
every event associated with a sentence in the test narrative.
Finally, we apply our inference subroutine and ﬁnd the best
event sequence for the test narrative.
We ﬁrst show in Graph 4 that our iterative learning ap-
proach converges and improves the accuracy of labels gen-
erated for the training examples. We report the average ac-
curacy of labels at each iteration in terms of an F1 measure
over all four training scenarios.
Table 2 shows some examples of our correctly and incor-
rectly predicted labels. Our approach can identify the in-
terpretation of the sentence “Purple10 kicks to Purple11”
by mapping it correctly to pass rather than kick , show-
ing that the ﬁnal model does not disambiguate based on the
similarity of the event name and the verb name despite the
initialization. Our incorrectly predicted labels show that
distinguishing between turnover and badPass event types
is hard: badPass refers to the event that the agent is try-
ing to pass but the pass mistakenly goes to the next team’s
player, whereas turnover refers to the event that the player
accidentally loses the ball. In addition, Table 1 shows the
accuracy of the mapping derived by our approach.
0.3	
  
0.4	
  
0.5	
  
0.6	
  
1	
  
5	
  
9	
  
13	
  
Training	
  Convergence	
  
Label	
  
Accuracy	
  
Itera6ons	
  
F1	
  
Figure 4: Convergence of the accuracy of estimated labels
vs. number of iterations of training according to F1 mea-
sure.
4.2.2
Comparison to Baselines
We compare our approach with several different baselines.
For each sentence, these baselines select events with spe-
ciﬁc properties that can be candidate interpretations of the
sentences.
Uniform: The ﬁrst baseline, Baseline-0 selects an event
per sentence from a uniform distribution over events. This
baseline shows how difﬁcult the RoboCup soccer commen-
tary is, and as one can see from Table 1 this random selec-
tion performs poorly on the dataset.
Uniform+heuristics: The second group of baselines show
how heuristics for event selection help. Baseline-1a selects
uniformly among event types whose names have a small
Approach
2001
2002
2003
2004
Avg.
uniform
Baseline-0
.062
.062
.062
.062
.062
uniform+heuristics
Baseline-1a
.688
.464
.628
.437
.574
Baseline-1b
.625
.570
.718
.720
.648
prior knowledge+heuristics
Baseline-2a
.693
.455
.640
.454
.579
Baseline-2b
.629
.575
.826
.737
.677
Baseline-3
.687
.474
.658
.478
.590
prior knowledge (no labeled data) + our method
Our ITEM
.799
.681
.867
.769
.779
annotated labeled data + WGIM
WGIM[6]
.721
.664
.683
.746
.703
prior knowledge+ annotated labeled data+WGIM
WGIM[6]-Inference
.767
.721
.638
.798
.734
Table 1:
The micro-average accuracy of different ap-
proaches for mapping RoboCup narratives to event se-
quences.
Our approach ITEM with no annotated data
shows higher accuracy compared to other algorithms. The
results suggest that knowledge about event axioms together
with iterative learning replaces the need for annotated la-
beled data and that prior knowledge improves learning with
annotated data.
edit distance (≤3) to at least one word in the sentence. It
then assigns players from the sentences to the arguments
of the event types. We call these events similar events.
Baseline-1b selects uniformly among event types whose ar-
ity is equal to the number of arguments in the sentence. We
call these events same-arity events. Table 1 shows the re-
sults of these baselines. If no event type has these proper-
ties, we randomly select among all the possible event types.
Although the accuracy of these baselines is signiﬁcantly
lower than our ITEM algorithm, they show a signiﬁcant
improvement over the random selection of Baseline-0.
Prior knowledge + Heuristics: The next baseline ex-
amines the effect of prior knowledge without learning.
Baseline-2a uses event effect axioms over similar events.
This baseline applies the inference subroutine (Algo-
rithm 3) with a uniform distribution over similar events.
Baseline-2b applies the inference subroutine, but with a
uniform distribution over same-arity events to the sentence.
We apply prior knowledge during the inference subroutine
over two previous heuristics. Our results suggest that prior
knowledge helps, but the way in which prior knowledge is
incorporated is important. Applying prior knowledge over
uniform selection of arity events improves the accuracy up
to 3%, but adding prior knowledge over uniform selection
of similar events only improves the accuracy by 0.3%. No-
tice that our ITEM approach still has signiﬁcantly higher
accuracy compared to these baselines. This is because it
uses prior knowledge together with iterative learning.
The last baseline, Baseline-3 uses prior knowledge together
with both heuristics.
It selects similar and same-arity

Correctly Predicted Events
Sentence
Predicted event
Purple10 makes a quick pass to Purple11 on the side.
pass(purple10, purple11)
Purple11 tries to pass back but was picked off by Pink5.
badPass(purple11, pink5)
Pink5 made a bad pass that was intercepted by Purple10.
badPass(pink5, purple10)
Purple10 kicks to Purple11.
pass(purple10, purple11)
Purple11 threads a nice pass to Purple10 near the penalty area.
pass(purple11, purple10)
Incorrectly Predicted Events
Sentence
Correct event
Predicted event
Pink6 steals the ball from Purple6.
steal(pink6)
badPass(pink6, purple6)
Pink6 tries to dribble toward the goal but turns the ball over to Purple3.
turnover(pink6, purple3)
badPass(pink6, purple3)
Purple6’s pass was defended by Pink6.
defense(purple6, pink6)
Pass(purple6, pink6)
Table 2: (top) Some sentences in the 2001 game and our responses that predicted the correct event. (bottom) Some
examples in the dataset that were incorrectly predicted by our approach.
events for a sentence. If no event type is selected it con-
siders all the possible events. It then applies the inference
subroutine with a uniform distribution over selected events.
Surprisingly, the results of table 1 show that the accuracy of
combining both heuristics together with prior knowledge is
lower than the accuracy of arity selection with prior knowl-
edge. This shows that a naive way of incorporating prior
knowledge together with heuristics does not help.
Annotated Labeled data:
We also compare our algo-
rithm with the state-of-the-art approach, WGIM [6]. These
results show that our iterative learning method alleviates
the need for labeled data collection.
In the next experiment, we augment the WGIM approach
with the same event axioms (WGIM-Inference). We apply
inference where the transition model for every sentence is
derived from the WGIM approach. At each step, we select
the event that has the highest score according to WGIM
and is feasible in the current state. The current state is up-
dated according to the prior selected events in the sequence.
The accuracy of WGIM-Inference is still lower than our
ITEM approach. This is because the original WGIM does
not learn the event scores given the current state. However,
our results show that adding prior knowledge to WGIM im-
proves WGIM’s accuracy.
5
Discussion and Future Work
In this paper we have introduced an approach for mapping
RoboCup soccer narratives to sequences of events without
the need for any annotated data. We show that knowledge
about event models together with a careful design of rep-
resentation, inference, and iterative learning alleviates the
need for annotated data. We show that this iterative learn-
ing approach achieves superior accuracy compared to both
heuristics and a state-of-the-art approach that uses labeled
data. The transferable insight of the current paper is that a
small number of partial descriptions of events enables im-
proved understanding with little or no labeled data (still as-
suming a body of examples, only possibly unlabeled). Our
approach takes advantage of a logical structure for event
descriptions that is precise and easy to use because we de-
scribe a small number of event types rather than all the pos-
sible transitions in the system. In addition, our approach
takes advantage of an iterative learning algorithm to build
a precise, strong, easy to use, and easy to engineer model.
We show that by collecting prior knowledge about events
we do not need to annotate every sentence in the domain.
It is usually very hard to scale labeled data because we
need to generate more labels to be able to understand larger
texts. However, if we collect prior knowledge for a speciﬁc
context, we can understand large texts in that context. We
plan to extend our approach to understanding other narra-
tives and answering questions about them. Speciﬁcally, we
would like to work with stories in the Remedia corpus or
Weblog stories [16]. In this setting, we plan to use Verb-
Net [21], a comprehensive verb lexicon that contains se-
mantic information such as preconditions, effects, and ar-
guments of about 5000 verbs. Our current approach uses a
simple bag-of-words model to represent sentences. We do
not use tools from natural language processing literature to
process sentences. The reason is that our domain contains
simple sentences that does not require more complex text
processing. In the general setting, we plan to extend our
simple bag-of-words model with syntactic parsing of the
sentences.
One shortcoming of our approach is that we assume the in-
put narrative corresponds directly to a linear sequence of
events. This may not be the case in genres where rhetori-
cal relations such as explanation or elaboration occur [15].
Even in our domain, it is possible that some events have
been missed or the sentences are represented in partial or-
der. We intend to explore the use of probabilistic and par-
tial order planning approaches to infer the event sequences.
We also plan to investigate multi-class classiﬁcation ap-
proaches instead of binary classiﬁcation, so that the goal
is to learn a multinomial probability distribution over dif-
ferent events corresponding to a sentence and the state, and
to cast the problem as sequence labeling problem where
each element of the sequence corresponds to an individual

sentence and the label to the predicted event.
