Abstract 
Hybrid learning methods use theoretical knowledge 
of a domain and a set of classified examples to 
develop a method for classification. Methods that 
use domain knowledge have been shown to 
perform better than inductive learners. However, 
there is no general method to include domain 
knowledge into all inductive learning algorithms as 
all hybrid methods are highly specialized for a 
particular algorithm. We present an algorithm that 
will take domain knowledge in the form of 
propositional rules, generate artificial examples 
from the rules and also remove instances likely to 
be flawed. This enriched dataset then can be used 
by any learning algorithm. Experimental results of 
different scenarios are shown that demonstrate this 
method to be more effective than simple inductive 
learning.   
1 
Introduction 
The majority of machine learning algorithms learn from 
scratch, training models from examples without considering 
existing domain knowledge. Unlike human learners, these 
systems are not capable of accumulating domain knowledge 
and sequentially improving their ability to learn tasks. These 
algorithms require significant amount of training data and 
training time to perform well [Kearns & Vazirani, 1994]. 
Domain knowledge in learning has been shown to boost 
learning speed and accuracy significantly [Pazzani et al., 
1997]. This is due to the fact that hybrid systems use 
information 
from 
one 
source 
to 
offset 
for 
the 
misinformation in the other source. This is necessary as real 
world learning problems are complex enough that a 
considerable amount of training data is required; but 
training data is quite expensive to acquire and also prone to 
noise. This lack of data can be compensated by domain 
knowledge which is equally expensive and imperfect. Thus 
a balanced system that uses both always performs better. 
There have been many such hybrid systems that use 
different forms of domain knowledge. These include 
propositional rules such as KBANN [Towell & Shavlik, 
1994], FOCL [Pazzani et al., 1991]; certainty factors such as 
RAPTURE [Mahoney & Mooney, 1992]; Invariance 
[Schölkopf et al., 1996]; hints [AbuMostafa, 1995] and so 
on. Ting Yu’s PhD dissertation [Yu, 2007] provides a 
systematic overview of hybrid machine learning algorithms. 
Yu identified four categories or methods of providing 
knowledge in hybrid methods. These methods also follow 
the steps taken by typical inductive learning algorithms. 
These are: 1) Using prior knowledge to preprocess training 
data; 2) using prior knowledge to initiate the hypothesis; 3) 
using prior knowledge to alter the search objective; 4) using 
prior knowledge to augment search operation. 
Only the first method; that is using prior knowledge to 
preprocess training data is not dependent on the underlying 
machine learning algorithm. This method tailors the training 
data by cleaning, selecting and augmenting. The scarcity of 
training data and noise in training data is the major concern 
of inductive algorithms. Domain knowledge preprocessors 
can remove flawed training examples as well add new 
virtual training examples. Most popular machine learning 
algorithms are dependent on training dataset alone. Virtual 
training examples offer a general purpose way of including 
domain knowledge that can be used by any inductive 
algorithm. 
This method of adding virtual examples has gained 
popularity in the recent years. Niyogi used virtual examples 
to add Invariance in Neural Networks [Niyogi et al., 1998], 
Schölkopf [Schölkopf et al., 1996], Decoste [Decoste & 
Schölkopf, 2002], Sassano [Sassano, 2003] all researched 
the use of virtual examples to introduce Invariance in 
Support vector machines. However, these methods have 
been used predominantly to introduce Invariance. Invariance 
is the knowledge that certain transformations of a sample 
are equivalent with each other. Thus invariant learners are 
unaffected by perturbation in the data. 
A 
predominant 
form 
of 
domain 
knowledge 
is 
propositional rules or production rules. Human experts can 
express their knowledge in terms of rules more easily. 
Therefore, having methods that can take domain knowledge 
in the form rules is would be a great improvement. 
A Generalized Method for Integrating Rule-based Knowledge into Inductive 
Methods Through Virtual Sample Creation 
Ridwan Al Iqbal 
American International University-Bangladesh 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 

However, no such method exists that can preprocess training 
data and can be used by any learning algorithm.  
Our research introduces a method called RASCAL (Rule 
Assisted Sample Creation And Deletion) that uses 
propositional rules to preprocess datasets. This method adds 
virtual examples that conform to the provided rule set. This 
is a hybrid method that does not consider either rule set or 
training dataset to be error-free. The rules in the rule set are 
judged by a scoring criterion that includes accuracy, range 
and generality. Training samples are also judged by their 
conformance to the rules and samples considered flawed are 
pruned from the dataset. This way both source can 
compensate for each other’s deficiencies. The resultant 
dataset incorporates the domain knowledge. Then the 
refined dataset can be used by any algorithm. This 
universality makes RASCAL highly robust.  
In this paper we explain RASCAL and analyze the 
performance when applied to real world problems. The real 
world domain of molecular biology specifically the problem 
of recognizing eukaryotic splice junctions, promoter genes 
is used for the experiments. It is shown that RASCAL 
refined datasets perform much better than the original 
dataset even if less data is provided. 
Section 2 describes the algorithm while section 3 shows 
the experimental results. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
The common used notation is as follows: N, size of 
dataset. K, Number of features with A being the feature set. 
R is the ruleset with Ro being the operational ruleset. 
2 
Description of the RASCAL algorithm 
The goal of RASCAL is to have a dataset that conforms to 
the rules. The motivation behind this is straightforward. The 
rules embody domain knowledge and must surely have 
some validity. Virtual examples that conform to the rules 
can be generated simply by having the samples follow the 
conditions and class value of the rules. However, simply 
following this would degrade performance if the rule set is 
misleading. This is why RASCAL follows a method of 
check and balance.  
The RASCAL algorithm works in three steps. First, the 
provided rule set is preprocessed and normalized to conform 
to the specification required by the algorithm. Then the 
normalized rules are evaluated against the data set and a 
score is calculated. Finally, virtual training samples are 
generated based on the score while examples that are likely 
to be error-prone are also removed. 
2.1 
   Preprocessing Rules 
RASCAL only supports rules in the form of antecedents 
followed by consequent. Thus, it is of the following form:  
If Precondition THEN Postcondition 
The antecedents can be a mixture of conjunction and 
disjunction of literals. So, the following is a valid rule set: 
 
 
Example Ruleset 1: 
𝑥𝑥  ∧  ¬𝑦𝑦   ∨  𝑧𝑧      ⊢    𝑘𝑘  
¬𝑎𝑎  ∧  ¬𝑏𝑏              ⊢    𝑗𝑗  
¬𝑗𝑗  ∧  k                  ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶  
In the example ruleset above, the literals j and k are 
implicated by other literals while j and k refers to the actual 
class. Therefore, a hierarchy of rules can be made where 
each successive layer of literals are made up from other 
literals.  However, the algorithm cannot work with rules in 
this form. We must first draw a distinction between two 
kinds of literals that appear in the rule set. We will say a 
literal is atomic if it is not made up of other literals. Thus 
only input features of the dataset are atomic. Any other 
literal that is made up of other literals is called non-atomic. 
The goal of preprocessing step is the conversion of all rules 
into operational form. An operational rule has the class 
variable as post-condition and is made up of a conjunction 
of atomic literals. Hence, logical OR cannot appear in 
operational rules. All non-operational rules can be converted 
into operational form. 
Definition 1.  A rule r in the rule set R is called operational 
iff  its antecedents are a conjunction of atomic literals and 
its consequent is the Class attribute. 
𝑟𝑟 𝜖𝜖 𝑅𝑅𝑜𝑜  𝑖𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓     ∀𝑥𝑥 𝜖𝜖 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴(𝑟𝑟)  𝑥𝑥 𝜖𝜖 𝐴𝐴 & 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶(𝑟𝑟) =  𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶   
The preprocessing step takes all non operational rules and 
converts them into operational form. This is done in a 
backward chaining fashion. The mode of operation of this 
algorithm is summarized below: 
1) The algorithm first selects the rules whose head (post-
condition) matches the target class attribute. The 
preconditions of the selected rule form a logically sufficient 
condition for the target concept. The algorithm takes each 
non-atomic literal and finds the associated rule that has that 
particular literal as post-condition. The non-atomic literal is 
then substituted with its pre-conditions. These substituted 
literals may also contain non-atomic literals which are then 
again substituted by their pre-conditions. This process of 
"unfolding" the domain theory continues until the sufficient 
conditions have been restated in terms of atomic literals. For 
example, the sample ruleset 1 will be unfolded as: 
¬𝑗𝑗  ∧  k                  ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶  
After substitution and applying De Morgan’s law becomes: 
(𝑎𝑎  ∨  𝑏𝑏) ∧((𝑥𝑥  ∧  ¬𝑦𝑦)   ∨  𝑧𝑧)          ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶  
2) After substitution the algorithms checks for the 
disjunctions and generates rules for each of operands of the 
disjunction. Thus,  𝐴𝐴 ∨𝐵𝐵 ⊢  𝐶𝐶 becomes two rules 𝐴𝐴 ⊢𝐶𝐶 
and 𝐵𝐵 ⊢𝐶𝐶. This process continues until all rules are in 
operational form. The example rule set is converted to 
operational form below. 
Substituting 𝑎𝑎  ∨  𝑏𝑏: 
𝑎𝑎  ∧((𝑥𝑥  ∧  ¬𝑦𝑦)   ∨  𝑧𝑧)          ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 

𝑏𝑏  ∧((𝑥𝑥  ∧  ¬𝑦𝑦)   ∨  𝑧𝑧)          ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
Then the final operational form will be: 
Sample Ruleset 1 (Operational) : 
𝑎𝑎  ∧ 𝑥𝑥  ∧  ¬𝑦𝑦          ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
𝑎𝑎  ∧ 𝑧𝑧                         ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
𝑏𝑏  ∧ 𝑥𝑥  ∧  ¬𝑦𝑦          ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
𝑏𝑏  ∧ 𝑧𝑧                         ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
 
As we can see, disjunctions quickly increase the number of 
rules. So, the input rule set should have as small number of 
disjunctions as possible otherwise the number of rules can 
quickly become intractable. 
2.2 
   Score Calculation 
After generating the operational rule set Ro, our algorithm 
would calculate a score that would determine the utility of 
the rule. This utility score would be used for both virtual 
example generation and the existing dataset pruning. As we 
consider both training set and rule set to be imperfect, so the 
scoring criterion cannot put more faith on one of the source. 
Thus our scoring function should be balanced. 
The most obvious evidence of utility is accuracy or 
correctness; which is the ratio of the number of examples 
correctly classified by the rule and the number of examples 
that actually matches the precondition of the rule. To avoid 
the possibility of a division by zero, we add 1 in the divisor.  
Correctness, 𝐶𝐶(𝑟𝑟) =
𝑆𝑆(𝑟𝑟)
𝑀𝑀(𝑟𝑟)+1                                                        (1) 
S(r) = number of examples successfully classified. 
M(r) = number of examples matched 
However, correctness is a ratio, so even rules that only 
match few instances can have very high correctness. For 
instance, a rule that only matches one example and also 
correctly classifies it will have a C(r) of 1 while a rule that 
matches 40 examples and is correct in 35 cases will have a 
C(r) of 0.875. However, the second rule is clearly more 
useful than the first. Thus correctness alone is not a 
sufficient criterion of utility. Instead utility should be 
composed of correctness and the scope or extent of the rule. 
The scope E(r) of a rule defines the ratio between M(r) 
and the number of instances in the dataset N. 
𝐸𝐸(𝑟𝑟) =
𝑀𝑀(𝑟𝑟)
𝑁𝑁  
 
 
 
 
       (2) 
Both of these ratios are in the range of 0 to 1. We combine 
these two values to get the sample utility 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑟𝑟). 
𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑟𝑟) =
1
2 𝐶𝐶(𝑟𝑟) + 
1
2 𝐸𝐸(𝑟𝑟)  
 
 
        
       (3) 
Combining E(r) and C(r) this way provides a balance 
between both criteria. A rule that has high correctness but 
low scope is less useful than a rule with high scope and 
reasonable correctness. On the other hand, we don’t want to 
give more utility to rules that have high scope but perform 
poorly on those rules. This utility function gives such 
reasonable measure. 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑟𝑟) is a good measure of utility in 
terms of sample dataset. 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑟𝑟) would be used for pruning 
training instances.  
However, this function only measures the utility of a rule 
in terms of its influence and compliance with the training 
dataset. But when we want to generate new training 
instances, good generalization is the goal instead of just 
conformance with the dataset. There can be rules that are 
highly specific and the training set can be skewed to that 
particular rule. In such a case, 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑟𝑟) value will be high. 
Generating more samples from such a specific rule is not 
desirable as this can lead to a high concentration of training 
instances in a small region.  
Therefore, 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑟𝑟) must be augmented by a criterion that 
will also measure the generalization capability of a rule. A 
useful observation on the rule set is that an operational rule 
has a precondition that is simply a conjunction of feature 
values. Therefore, there can be at most K literals in the 
precondition where K is the total number of features in 
dataset. Since a rule is only conjunction of literals, a rule 
becomes more and more specific as literals are added 
[Mitchell, 1997]. A rule that has all K features can have 
only one possible match. If we consider all features to be 
binary then an operational rule with j literals can have 2K−j 
possible match. Therefore, a general rule is the one with 
fewer literals. If L(r) is the number of literals in r. then 
Generalization capability,  𝐺𝐺(𝑟𝑟) =
𝐾𝐾−𝐿𝐿(𝑟𝑟)
𝐾𝐾
 
 
      (4) 
Hence, the utility of a rule based on all three criteria: 
𝑈𝑈(𝑟𝑟) =
1
3 𝐶𝐶(𝑟𝑟) + 
1
3 𝐸𝐸(𝑟𝑟) + 
1
3 𝐺𝐺(𝑟𝑟)  
      
      (5) 
This is the scoring function that is used to evaluate rules for 
virtual sample generation. 
2.3 
   Sample Generation 
The final step of RASCAL is to actually generate virtual 
examples from the rules as well as remove examples that 
have been deemed incorrect by the ruleset. 
RASCAL takes two constants D and I as input Along with 
ruleset and dataset. Both of these values would greatly 
affect performance as they denote how many changes will 
take place in the dataset. I denotes the number of virtual 
samples to be generated from rules expressed as percentage 
of the training data set. This value will significantly 
influence performance of the preprocessed dataset. Too 
many virtual examples may hamper performance while less 
virtual examples would not yield noticeable performance 
gain. D is the threshold for pruning an example; thus setting 
a higher value will result in less pruning. D will be 
explained in 2.4. 
The main goal of virtual samples is to match the rule from 
which they are to be created. That is, a virtual sample must 
have the feature values that are present in precondition of 
the rule. This is the necessary condition required for the 

sample to be a valid sample spawned from a rule. The 
features that are not present in the rule can be set arbitrarily 
as that is not the concern of the rule. However, we would 
prefer the virtual examples to be distributed as randomly as 
possible; as this would increase the probability of a good 
generalization. 
The virtual sample generation of RASCAL works by 
generating an initial template for the examples to be 
generated from a Rule r. The preconditions in the rule 
become the value of those features. Finally the attributes 
missing in the rule are set randomly. The class label is taken 
from the rule. This creates a valid example. The sample 
generation of a rule taken from the earlier generated 
operational Ruleset 1 is shown below: 
 𝑎𝑎  ∧ 𝑥𝑥  ∧  ¬𝑦𝑦          ⊢    𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
A complete instance is made of 5 features a, b, x, y, z. There 
are 3 literals present in the rule. Thus the template for 
sample generation will be: 
𝑎𝑎= T,b =? ? , 𝑥𝑥= 𝑇𝑇, 𝑦𝑦= 𝐹𝐹, 𝑧𝑧=? ? 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝑇𝑇          
Now we generate 2 instances by randomly selecting the 
values for b and z. 
𝑎𝑎= T, 𝐛𝐛= 𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑( ) = 𝐓𝐓 , 𝑥𝑥= 𝑇𝑇, 𝑦𝑦= 𝐹𝐹, 𝒛𝒛= 𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹( ) = 𝑭𝑭  𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝑇𝑇     
𝑎𝑎= T, 𝐛𝐛= 𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑( ) = 𝐅𝐅, 𝑥𝑥= 𝑇𝑇, 𝑦𝑦= 𝐹𝐹, 𝒛𝒛= 𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹( ) = 𝑭𝑭  𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝑇𝑇     
This is how Virtual samples are generated for each rule. The 
algorithm now just needs to calculate the number of virtual 
samples to be generated from each rule P(r) and use the 
method described above to generate P(r) instances. 
The score U(r) generated in the earlier step is used to 
calculate P(r). We want higher scoring to generate more 
instances however low scoring rules should not be totally 
left out either. So, we normalize the scores of each rule with 
the total score of all rules. 
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠= ෍𝑈𝑈(𝑖𝑖)
𝑖𝑖 𝜖𝜖 𝑅𝑅
 
𝑃𝑃(𝑟𝑟) =
𝑈𝑈(𝑟𝑟)
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝐼𝐼× 𝑁𝑁                                                                 (6) 
Here  𝐼𝐼× 𝑁𝑁 is the total number of virtual sample to be 
generated. Scaled by the normalized score of a rule, it is the 
number of samples to be generated from that rule. 
Thus the steps of sample generation can be summarized 
below: 
1) For each rule r in the rule set Ro calculate P(r). 
2) Generate P(r) number of virtual examples by first 
creating a template from preconditions and then set up 
other features randomly. 
2.4 
   Dataset pruning 
We can only prune a sample if we can say with sufficient 
confidence that it is not giving the right classification. Just 
as rules can have accuracy based on dataset. A sample can 
also have accuracy based on ruleset. If a sample is deemed 
incorrect by a rule with a high sample utility score, it is 
more probable that it will be misclassified. On the other 
hand, if a high scoring rule agrees with the sample, we can 
have more confidence that the sample is correct. Thus, how 
much confidence we have on a sample can be calculated via 
a voting system. We calculate the total utility score for the 
sample and against the sample.  
Every sample is assumed to have the inherent utility score 
of D 𝜖𝜖 [0,1]. This is the use of D mentioned earlier. If the 
value of D is high than more negative vote is required for 
rejection. We suggest D to be >.51. This ensures that neither 
Accuracy nor Scope of a rule can fully dominate the utility 
value and reject an instance. 
The total utility of Us values is calculated using a system 
similar to the union of probabilities. A sample is rejected if 
it has overall negative utility. 
𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑎𝑎) ∪ 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑎𝑎) = 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑎𝑎) + 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑏𝑏) − 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑎𝑎)𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑏𝑏)                     (7) 
Therefore, the value of Us never exceeds 1. And also it is 
based on the principle that multiple low scoring rules cannot 
reject a sample by over powering D. 
𝑉𝑉+(𝑖𝑖) =  D ∪ራ[𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶(𝑖𝑖, 𝑟𝑟) &  (𝑖𝑖𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐= 𝑟𝑟𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)] 𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑟𝑟)
𝑟𝑟 𝜖𝜖 𝑅𝑅
                (8) 
𝑉𝑉−(𝑖𝑖) = ራ[𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶(𝑖𝑖, 𝑟𝑟) &  (𝑖𝑖𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐≠𝑟𝑟𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)]𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠(𝑟𝑟)
𝑟𝑟 𝜖𝜖 𝑅𝑅
                           (9) 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶(𝑖𝑖, 𝑟𝑟) =  ቄ1 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖       ∀𝑥𝑥 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴(𝑟𝑟) 𝑥𝑥= 𝑖𝑖𝑥𝑥
0                   𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒     
 
If  𝑉𝑉+(𝑖𝑖) − 𝑉𝑉−(𝑖𝑖)   < 0 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 𝑖𝑖 
3 
Experimentation with RASCAL 
This section reports the experimental results of using 
RASCAL to augment datasets. Two real world problems, of 
DNA 
analysis 
[Towell 
& 
Shavlik, 
1994] 
were 
experimented1. We compared the performance with several 
popular  and classic learning algorithms: standard Feed-
forward Neural Network [Mitchell, 1997], C4.5 [Quinlan, 
1993], k-Nearest Neighbour [Aha et al., 1991] and Support 
Vector Machines [Vapnik, 1998] 2
The second dataset is about splice-junction determination. 
This is a 3 class problem; the task is to determine into which 
of the three categories the specified DNA sequence belongs: 
Exon/Intron borders (EI), Intron/Exon borders (IE) or 
. We also compared 
RASCAL with the neural network based theory refine 
system KBANN [Towell & Shavlik, 1994]. 
The first dataset is the promoter recognition dataset. A 
promoter, which is a short DNA sequence that precedes a 
gene sequence, is to be distinguished from a nonpromoter. 
The input is a sequence of 57 nucleotides (one of A, T, G or 
C). The dataset has 936 instances with 236 positive and 702 
negative examples. The associated ruleset had 16 rules from 
which 64 operational rules were generated. 
                                                        
1 The datasets are available at the UCI repository. 
2 Weka 3.6.2 (www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/) implementations of the  
learning algorithms were used in the experiments. 

neither. The input is also a DNA sequence with 60 
nucleotides. The dataset had 1007 instances selected 
randomly from a population of 3190. The percentage split of 
the classes is 25% EI, 25% IE & 50% neither examples. The 
associated ruleset had 65 rules from which 260 operational 
rules were generated. 
We conducted several tests from these datasets. The first 
test used the full dataset for refinement and 43% new virtual 
examples were added therefore I=.43 was chosen. The 
refined dataset and the original dataset performance  was 
compared. We also show how the algorithms fared when 
given only 50% of the original dataset. The first test was 
conducted using 10 fold cross validation while the second 
test with 30% data used the remaining 70% as test set. Thus 
the second test much more difficult than the first. The final 
test was the performance of the algorithms trained only by 
the virtual samples. This is a curious test as this shows the 
knowledge virtual samples contain. The (%) accuracy rates 
we report are simple averages of 20 trials. The results are 
presented in Table 1 & 2. 
Learner 
Original 
data-full 
RASCAL 
Refined 
Orig-
data-
30% 
RASCAL 
refined 
30% 
Virtual 
Samples 
only 
Neu.Net 
92.45 
95.14 
85.33 
91.44 
78.23 
SVM 
89.74 
93.78 
85.25 
89.76 
80.12 
C4.5 
89.95 
92.29 
81.98 
89.87 
86.39 
Near. N. 
87.49 
88.33 
85.64 
84.97 
84.74 
KBANN 
93.70 
95.36 
92.21 
92.45 
77.54 
Table 1: Promoter dataset results. (% correctness) 
Learner 
Original 
data-full 
RASCAL 
Refined 
Orig-
data-
30% 
RASCAL 
refined 
30% 
Virtual 
Samples 
only 
Neu.Net 
91.23 
93.69 
83.85 
89.48 
76.05 
SVM 
88.77 
94.92 
85.53 
92.34 
81.18 
C4.5 
90.86 
93.51 
82.83 
90..32 
83.00 
Near. N. 
80.28 
89.26 
67.76 
81.09 
75.61 
KBANN 
93.70 
93.45 
89.30 
91.31 
75.98 
Table 2: Spice-junction dataset results. (% correctness) 
It is apparent from the results that RASCAL augmented 
datasets outperform the original datasets. This finding is 
statistically significant. Unexpectedly, it even improves the 
performance of KBANN in both datasets which also uses 
the same ruleset as domain knowledge. The performance 
gain is even more pronounced in the test with 30% dataset. 
All of the algorithms show significant performance gains. 
The performance in the 30% dataset shows RASCAL 
speeds up the learning process requiring smaller amount of 
data which is also statistically significant. Interesting result 
comes from learning with virtual samples only which also 
shows a degree of good performance. This is the knowledge 
imbued in the ruleset. Our conclusion is, the performance of 
the virtual samples depend on the strength of the domain 
knowledge. Strong domain knowledge would speed up the 
learning process to a large extent. 
The advantage of RASCAL can be more clearly evident 
by the learning curves in Figure 1 & 2. The test was 
conducted with the full dataset. The training examples were 
selected randomly while the rest became test set. The error 
rates are averaged over all the algorithms. 
RASCAL augmented datasets clearly require less data. 
Another useful insight is the fact that, when very low data is 
given, RASCAL augmented datasets still perform at a good 
level. While using the algorithms with original data suffers 
from poor initial performance. As more data is provided, 
performance on the original data catches up. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An important decision to be made while learning is how 
much virtual samples are to be generated. Generating fewer 
samples will not be beneficial; while too many virtual 
samples will inevitably lead to over-fitting. We conducted 
0
15
30
45
60
0
100
200
300
400
500
RASCAL
Original
Error
Instances
5
9
0
20
40
60
80
100
Error
Virtual sample size(%)
Figure 1: Promoters Dataset Learning curve 
Figure 2:  Splice-junction Dataset Learning curve 
0
15
30
45
60
75
0
100
200
300
400
500
RASCAL
Original
Error
Instances
Figure 3: Performance curve for Virtual sample size. 

experiments on the full Promoters dataset by gradually 
increasing the value of I which controls the amount of 
samples to be generated. The results are shown in Figure 3. 
Increasing virtual samples boost performance. However, 
after increasing the size around 40%-50% , the performance 
declines and the error curves takes an upward trend. 
Therefore, virtual samples increase performance up to 
extent. After that the utility gets diminished. So, the 
conclusion can be made that the value I must be carefully 
chosen through trial. 
4 
Conclusion and Future Research 
The learning process of humans is largely based augmenting 
knowledge previously acquired. This is the only viable way 
to substantially increase learning performance. Current 
inductive algorithms are extremely good at learning from 
training data. Therefore the method we proposed provides a 
generalized method that can be applied to increase the 
performance of any inductive learning algorithm. Refining 
the datasets enables us to use the tried and tested inductive 
algorithms while also having more speedy yet accurate 
learning.  The experimental results also prove our point.  
The use of virtual examples is a new field with many 
research possibilities. Our algorithm currently supports only 
propositional rules. It can be extended to learn from 
association rules as well. Further research could be done to 
enable more powerful knowledge representation techniques 
such as first order logic or Description logics. Even the 
current propositional rule based method can be extended to 
learn from association rules as well. Virtual sample 
generation can be used to incorporate other form knowledge 
as well. Currently no framework exists for hybrid learning 
algorithms. So, having a structured framework standing on 
firm theoretical basis is also a goal for hybrid learning 
research. The possibilities are almost endless.
