Reinforcement Learning with Goal-Distance Gradient
Kai Jiang∗, XiaoLong Qin†
Abstract
Reinforcement learning usually uses the feedback rewards of environmental to train
agents.
But the rewards in the actual environment are sparse, and even some en-
vironments will not rewards. Most of the current methods are diﬃcult to get good
performance in sparse reward or non-reward environments.
Although using shaped
rewards is eﬀective when solving sparse reward tasks, it is limited to speciﬁc problems
and learning is also susceptible to local optima. We propose a model-free method that
does not rely on environmental rewards to solve the problem of sparse rewards in the
general environment. Our method use the minimum number of transitions between
states as the distance to replace the rewards of environmental, and proposes a goal-
distance gradient to achieve policy improvement.
We also introduce a bridge point
planning method based on the characteristics of our method to improve exploration
eﬃciency, thereby solving more complex tasks. Experiments show that our method
performs better on sparse reward and local optimal problems in complex environments
than previous work.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is widely used to train an agent, such as robots, to perform
a task by feedback rewards in environment. For example, train an agent to play FPS and
Card-Based games Song et al. [2019]; Liu et al. [2019], to defeat a champion at the game
of Go Silver et al. [2016], to overtake human scores in 49 Atari games Guo et al. [2016],
as well as learn control manipulator arm screw a cap onto a bottle Levine et al. [2016],
building blocks Nair et al. [2018]. Among the above tasks, perhaps the most central idea of
RL is value functions V (s) that represents overall feedback rewards in any state Sutton et
al. [1998]. The agent is trained to optimize the value function which caches knowledge of
reward in order to learn to perform a single task. However, agents are required to perform
multi-goal tasks in various environments where many rewards are sparse, such as address a
variety of cooperative multi-agent problems Fu et al. [2019]. How can we design a method
that can perform multi-goal tasks well in a sparse reward or non-reward environment?
We consider these problems in a human way of thinking. In fact, when dealing with
complex tasks, humans set goals for themselves and keep approaching them. Therefore,
the agent is supposed to set and achieve new goals during self-supervised process. In order
to ensure the agent can interact with the environment to know how to approach the goal
in training, we must ﬁrst choose a universal distance function.
General value functions
Vg(s) Sutton et al. [2011] represent the rewards of any state s in achieving a potential given
goal g. In the general RL, the value function is represented by a function approximator
V (s, θ), such as a neural network with parameters θ. The function approximator learns
the value of the observed state through the structure in the state space, and expands to
the unobserved value. The goals are usually set to what the agent can achieve, and on
this basis, the goal space usually has the same structure as the state space. Therefore, the
idea of value function approximation can be extended to both states s and goals g by using
general value function approximator V (s, g, θ) Schaul et al. [2015]. If the value function is
related to distance, such as reward is to use the negative Mahalanobis distance in the latent
space Nair et al. [2018], the smaller the distance, the bigger the reward. We can also use a
general function approximation D(s, g, θ) to represent the distance function.

1
arXiv:2001.00127v2  [cs.LG]  10 Jan 2020

In order to solve the tasks in sparse reward or even non-reward environments, we consider
whether the reward can be represented by the distance that exists in any environment. But
it is quite diﬃcult to train a function that can accurately evaluate the distance between
states directly from the raw signals provided by the environment. For instance, in most
visual tasks, the meanings of value function represented by pixel-wise Euclidean distance
are not relevant to the meanings of value function in actual states Ponomarenko et al. [2015];
Zhang et al. [2018]. Therefore, we propose to address this challenges by using the distance
function D(s, g) to represent the minimum transition step from state s to goal g. In any
task, the agent needs to transfer to a new state by constantly choosing actions until the goal
is reached. Therefore, in any sparse reward or even no reward environment, the distance
function can eﬀectively train agents to complete tasks.
In this paper, our main contribution is a general skill technique that perform several dif-
ferent tasks in sparse reward or even non-reward environments. In order to obtain eﬀective
training results, we modiﬁed the previous framework of standard RL algorithm, abandoned
the action-value function, and propose a gradient method to improve policy based on dis-
tance. Although the usual Reward shaping Mataric [1994]; Ng et al. [1999] makes learning
vulnerable to local optimization, our method can make agents reach the optimal goals. In
addition, our method also combines the bridge point theory in SoRB Eysenbach et al. [2019],
which makes our method can gain better experience in unexpected tasks.
Although there are many methods of reinforcement learning that can be used to solve
problems in environments.
But current methods must be based on suﬃcient data and
training to accomplish speciﬁc tasks. Once the environment changes, the previously obtained
models will no longer be applicable. Only by overcoming these barrier can reinforcement
learning be used in more real-world environments instead of staying in the simulator. So
we must let our agents learn to analyze problems, not just judge based on past experience.
Our approach provides an idea for agents to analyze problems and split complex problems
into multiple simple problems.
2
Background
2.1
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning is the control agent interaction with the environment to get the
maximum reward. We model this problem as a Markov decision process(MDP), and consider
this MDP deﬁned by a set of state space S, a set of action space A, a reward function
r : S × A →R, an initial state distribution with density p(s1), and transition probabilities
p(st+1|st, at). The agent’s action is deﬁned by a policy πθ with parameters θ. The goal of
policy is to ﬁnd the parameters θ that maximize the expected sum of future rewards from
the start state, denoted by the performance objective J(π) = E[Rγ|π]. The expected sum of
future rewards is called a return: Rγ
t = Σ∞
k=tγk−tr(sk, ak) where 0 < γ < 1. We can write
the performance objective as an expectation,
J(πθ) =
Z
S
ρπ(s)
Z
A
πθ(s, a)r(s, a)dads
= Es∼ρπ,a∼πθ[r(s, a)].
(1)
Value functions are deﬁned to be the expected sum of future rewards: V π(s) = E[Rγ|S =
s; π] and Qπ(s, a) = E[Rγ|S = s, A = a; π]. These satisﬁes the following equation called the
Bellman equation,
V (st) = Es∼ρ(·|s,a),a∼πθ[r(st, at) + γV (st+1)]
Q(st, at) = Es∼ρ(·|s,a),a∼πθ[r(st, at) + γmax
a∈A Q(st+1, at+1)].
(2)
The actor-critic is a widely used architecture based on the policy gradient theorem Sutton
et al. [1998]; Peters and Schaal [2008]; Degris et al. [2012a]. The actor-critic consists of
two eponymous components. An actor adjusts the parameters θ of the stochastic policy
πθ(s). Instead of the unknown true action-value function Qπ(s, a), an action-value function
Qω(s, a) is used, with parameter vector ω.
A critic estimates the action-value function
2

Qω(s, a) ≈Qπ(s, a) using an appropriate policy evaluation algorithm such as temporal-
diﬀerence learning.
2.2
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients(DDPG) Lillicrap et al. [2016] is an oﬀ-policy actor-
critic algorithm for continuous action spaces. The DDPG mainly includes two parts actor
and critic. The actor is primarily responsible for a deterministic goal policy µ, and the role of
the critic is to approximate the action-value function Q that helps the actor learns the policy.
Compared with ordinary stochastic policy gradients, DDPG uses a deterministic policy
gradient. The generalised policy iteration Sutton et al. [1998] is commonly used in most
model-free reinforcement learning algorithms. Use temporal-diﬀerence learning Bhatnagar
et al. [2007]; Degris et al. [2012b]; Peters and Schaal [2008] or Monte-Carlo evaluation to
estimate the action-value function Qµ(s, a). The policy improvement method is a greedy
maximisation of the estimated action-value function, µk+1 = argmax
a Qµk(s, a).
2.3
Hindsight Experience Replay
Tasks with multiple diﬀerent goals and sparse rewards have always been a huge challenge
in reinforcement learning.
For the challenge of sparse rewards, the standard solution is
to introduce a new informative reward function that can guide the agent to the goal, e.g
rg(s, g) = −∥s −g∥2. While such shape rewards can solve some problems, it is still diﬃcult
to apply to more complex problems. Multiple goals tasks require more training samples
and more eﬃcient samples than single goal tasks from an intuitive perspective. Hindsight
Experience Replay(HER) Andrychowicz et al. [2017] present a technique which eﬀective
learning of samples from sparse reward environment. HER not only improves the sample
eﬃciency, but also makes it possible to learn sparse reward signals. The method is based
on training universal policies Schaul et al. [2015] that takes both the current state and the
goal state as inputs. For any trajectory s0, s1, s2, ......, st, ..., g, the most central idea of HER
is store the transition (st, at, st+1, g∗) in the replay buﬀer, and the g∗is not only with the
original goal g but also with a subset of other goals.
3
Goal Distance Gradient
To realize the use of distance instead of rewards in reinforcement learning, the following
two points must be considered. Firstly, in order to make distance replace reward, it means
that reward function V (s) and action-value function Q(s, a) will be replaced by distance
function D(s, g). How should the distance function be deﬁned and estimated? Can the
previous method of evaluating the action-value function also estimate the distance function?
Secondly, Without an action-value function, how can we use the distance function to improve
the policy? The distance function D(s, g) cannot provide an eﬀective gradient for the policy
to improve. We next describe the estimation of distance function in Section 3.1, and the
method of Goal Distance Gradient in Section 3.2.
3.1
Estimate the Distance Function by TD
The distance function D(s, g) is used to represent the minimum number of transitions from
the state s to the goal g. Compared with the value function V (s), the distance function
has a clear directionality s →g. But in fact, the V (s; g′) also hides a goal g′ that can get
the maximum cumulative reward when it is reached. D(s, g) and V (s, g) are equal if we
set the feedback reward obtained at each step to 1. It means that each step is a transfer,
that is how many transfers have been made from s to g or how many rewards have been
accumulated. In this case, we can use the temporal-diﬀerence learning evaluation to estimate
the distance function, such as Sarsa update Sutton et al. [1998] is used by critic to estimate
the action-value function in the on-policy deterministic actor-critic algorithm,
δt = rt + γQ(st+1, at+1) −Q(st, at)
(3)
3

and Q-learning update is used by critic to estimate the action-value function in the oﬀ-policy
deterministic actor-critic algorithm,
δt = rt + γQ(st+1, µ(st+1)) −Q(st, at).
(4)
Therefore, we only need to replace the reward rt with the distance dt, and then we can
evaluate the distance function without considering oﬀ-policy or on-policy. We can deﬁne dt
as the number of transfers of st →st+1,
δt = dt + D(st+1, g) −D(st, g).
(5)
But there is still a very important problem here, dt is always a positive number, so as
the iteration progresses, the distance function may become larger and larger, and constantly
deviate from the correct estimation. We need to set a ﬁxed transition value as the distance
benchmark between identical states. We denote sg is the state after reaching the goal g,
and the number of transfers dsg is 0,
D(st, g) = dt + D(st+1, g)dt
D(sg, g) = 0.
(6)
The number of transfers is recorded as 0 only when agent remains in its current state
without any transfers. That is, the distance between the same states s is deﬁned as D(s, s) =
0. Therefore, how to keep agent close to the goal g from the start s is equivalent to how to
make D(s, g) function close to 0.
3.2
Gradients of Distance Policies
Policy Gradient algorithm is often used in continuous action space, and improves policy
by the global maximisation at every step. In deterministic policy algorithm, a simple and
eﬃcient way to improve policy is through the gradient of action-value function Q(s, a),
rather than globally maximising. For each state s, the θ of policy parameters are updated
by the negative gradient ▽θQ(s, µθ(s)), and make µθ(s) to output the action a∗to maximize
Q(s, a∗). However, the distance function D(s, g) cannot provide gradient for updating the
parameters θ of µθ like action-value function Q(s, a). Therefore, we propose a new policy
improvement method based on goal-distance gradient.
We deﬁne deterministic policy a = π(s; θ) and a deterministic model s′ = f(s, a). The
form of the deterministic Bellman equation for the action-value function is Q(s, a) = r(s, a)+
γQ(f(s, a), µ(f(s, a))). So, the relationship between action-value function Q(s, a) and value
function V (s) is as follows:
Q(s, a) = r(s, a) + γV (s′)
= r(s, a) + γV (f(s, a)).
(7)
Use value function V (s) instead of action-value function Q(s, a) for policy improvement:
µ(s) = argmax
a∈A Q(s, a)
= argmax
a∈A (r(s, a) + γV (f(s, a)))
≈argmax
a∈A V (f(s, a)).
(8)
Although the value function itself cannot provide gradient for the policy to improve,
through the relationship with the action-value function, the policy is improved indirectly.
The form of Distance Bellman equation is D(s, g) = d + D′(s′, g) where d refers to the
distance or times of transition. The agent aims to obtain a policy which minimizes the
distance between the next state and the goal. Reference Equation 7 and 8, there are the
following formulas:
D(s, g) = d + D(s′, g)
= d + D(f(s, a), g)
= d + D(f(s, µ(s, g)), g)
(9)
4

µ(s, g) = argmin
a∈AD(s′, g)
= argmin
a∈AD(f(s, a), g)
(10)
So, the policy improvement method is to use the gradient ▽θD(f(s, µθ(s, g)), g) to min-
imize the distance function D(s, g). The improved policy µ∗(s, g) can output an action a
that makes the distance D(s′, g) from next state s′ to the goal g suﬃciently small.When
D(s′, g) is close enough to 0, agent can achieve the goal g.
3.3
Algorithms
We summarize the reinforcement learning algorithm of the Goal Distance Gradient (GDG) in
Algorithm 1. Our main idea is to make agent perceive the distance of the whole environment,
which is to estimate the times of transitions required to reach diﬀerent states. By setting
random goal, estimation of the number of agent transfers from diﬀerent states to the goal by
the the temporal-diﬀerence method, and then train it by distance function to move in the
direction of decreasing the number of transfers, so as to reach the goal. At the beginning
of each episode, we judge whether to ﬁnd a bridge point that can connect the start to the
goal and make the start to the goal closer according to a ﬁxed probability. Than, we use
a simple exploration policy to collect enough samples for training and stored in the replay
buﬀer. Finally, we train our policy model based on samples randomly sampled from the
replay buﬀer and ﬁnetune the parameters of model.
We summarize the method of searching for bridge points in Algorithm 2. In many com-
plex tasks, it is often diﬃcult to collect good experiences for learning because of insuﬃcient
exploration. In order to explore and collect more good experience, we can’t be limited by
the experience we have gained. Therefore, we should get out of the dilemma of thinking
and look for new knowledge that has not yet been discovered. When the agent has learned
a policy to reach the goal from the start, we can not give up to ﬁnd out whether there is a
better policy. We use the estimated distance function to ﬁnd out whether there is any state
that can make the distance from the start to the goal shorter than the known distance. If
there is such a speciﬁc state, it shows that there are better policy for agents to learn. We can
set this state as a temporary goal, and then collect the experience that can further improve
the policy. We use the bridge point to represent the temporary goal that connecting the
start and the goal. In Sec.4.2 We introduced in detail how to apply bridge point in our
method.
4
Experiments
Our experiments were designed to address and answer the following questions: 1) Whether
the goal-distance gradient is eﬀective for policy improvement, 2) How does the GDG method
with bridge planning perform in complex tasks, 3) Does local optima aﬀect GDG in single
goal Tasks.
4.1
Can goal-distance gradients improve policy?
The DDPG Lillicrap et al. [2016] is a classic algorithm in deterministic policy reinforcement
learning algorithms. The key of the DDPG is to ﬁnd an action that can reach a state of
as large a reward as possible after execution. The key to our algorithm is to ﬁnd an action
that can reach the goal the fastest. If the reward for each step is set to -1 and the reward
for reaching the goal is set to 0, the value function in DDPG is the same as the distance
function in our method have the same meaning. If the combination of start s and goal g
is regarded as the state, then D(s, g) = −V (s∥g)1. In the above case, the only diﬀerence
between our method and DDPG is how to ﬁnd an ideal action.
In order to exclude the inﬂuence of other factors, we found the environment of the 7-DOF
fetch robotics arm Andrychowicz et al. [2017], in which the distance from the start to the
1∥denotes concatenation
5

Algorithm 1 Goal Distance Gradient(GDG)
1: Initialize critic network D(s, g), actor µ(s, g) and f(s, a) with weights θD, θµ and θf
2: Initialize target network D′ with weight θD′ ←θD
3: Initialize replay buﬀer R and soft replace rate τ
4: Initialize bridge point search exploit rate ε
5: for episode = 1,M do
6:
Sample a goal g and an initial state s0.
7:
if random(0, 1) < ε then
8:
Search a bridge point
9:
end if
10:
for t = 0, T −1 do
11:
Get an action at = µ(st, g)+ noise
12:
Execute at and observe a new state st+1
13:
Store the transition(st, at, st+1, g, d) in R
14:
end for
15:
for i = 0, T −1 do
16:
Sample a random minibatch from Ri
17:
Set xi = di + D′(si+1, gi) and yi = f(si, ai)
18:
Update network by minimizing the loss:
LD = 1
N
X
i
(xi −D(si, gi))2
Lf = 1
N
X
i
(yi −si+1)2
19:
Update the actor policy:
▽θµJ ≈1
N
X
i
▽θµD(f(s, µ(s, g)), g)|si,gi
20:
Update the target networks:
θD′ ←τθD + (1 −τ)θD′
21:
end for
22: end for
end is computable. The states of the start and the goal are represented by the coordinates
in the Euclidean space, and the Euclidean distance can be calculated directly.
In this experiment, we consider the distance from the binary representation state s to
goal g of form d(s, g) = ∥s −g∥2. Therefore, we can directly use the forms D(s, g) = d(s, g)
and V (s∥g) = −d(s, g) to represent the distance function in our method and the value
function in the DDPG. Therefore, we can skip the distance evaluation step and proceed
directly to the policy improvement phase. In theory, our method should be consistent with
the performance of DDPG in this experiment. From Fig.1 it is clear that both methods
can easily accomplish this task, and the convergence eﬀect and the ﬁnal result of the two
methods are consistent, and it means that our method is feasible and eﬀective.
4.2
Application of bridge point in GDG
This experiments will illustrate that accurate distances estimates are crucial to the success of
our method. Eysenbach et al. [2019] deﬁne dsg(s, g) as the expected number of steps to reach
s from g under the optimal policy. But, this method is not suitable for all environments. In
the real-world environment, most of the environments can not estimate the optimal distance
from s to g in advance. Therefore, we try to use our distance function D(s, g) instead of
dsg(s, g) in SoRB to estimate the distance from s to g in advance. So as to help search bridge
point to establish the connection between the start s and the goal g to better complete the
6

Algorithm 2 Search a bridge point
1: while Bridge point not found do
2:
bridge ←Search()
3:
dsg = D(start, goal)
4:
dsb = D(start, bridge)
5:
dbg = D(bridge, goal)
6:
if dsg > dsb + dbg then
7:
Stop searching
8:
else if Number of searches exceeded then
9:
Stop searching
10:
else
11:
Continue searching
12:
end if
13: end while
Figure 1: Success rates for GDG and DDPG in the 7-DOF fetch robotics arm to reach the
goal.
task.
In training, it is diﬃcult for agents to learn how to get around obstacles and reach the
goal. Like Figure 2-a, it usually moves directly in the direction of goal and hits an obstacle
in FourRooms environment. It is more arduous to reach the opposite side of an obstacle, if
the obstacle is wider. Because for a seemingly immediate goal, the agent must stay away
from it before reaching it. It’s complicated for agents to understand why it need to stay
away from the goals before it get close to goal. If we can ﬁnd a bridge point pb that connects
start and goal like a bridge, we can guide the agent to reach pb ﬁrst, then from pb to goal.
Because the task of an agent is no longer to stay away from the goal and then reach the goal,
but to reach bridge point pb and then reach the goal. It’s easier for agent to understand
how to accomplish two simple tasks in succession. As shown in Figure 2-b, We ﬁnd a bridge
point B that agent can reach, and Figure 2-c shows that B can also reach the goal. Figure
2-d shows that with the help of the bridge point B, the agent can complete the task from
the start to the goal. However, more bridge points may be needed in the actual task to
complete the connection between the start and the goal.
4.3
Performance comparison in complex environments
Now we test the performance of our method in a more intricate environment, illustrated
in Figure 5. We use similar methods to build an environment similar to city streets with
more obstacles, more tortuous paths and a larger scope. This environment compared with
that simple FourRooms map, the maximum distance (steps) from the start to the goal is
increased from 120 to 240, and more obstacles need to be bypassed by agents. We found
that is a hard task for the agent to get around multiple obstacles to reach the goal. In
FourRooms environment, the agent can reach the goal only by bypassing two obstacles at
7

Figure 2: Bridge point establishes the connection between the start and the goal: (a)No
bridge points connect the start and the goal, (b)Find a bridge point that can connect to the
start, (c)Find a bridge point that can connect to the goal, (d)With the help of the bridge
point, the path from the start to the goal was found.
most. But in city environment, agents need to bypass up to nine obstacles to reach the
furthest goal.
In this experiment, we should compare with the SoRB Eysenbach et al. [2019] algorithm,
but the distance it uses is obtained directly from the environment in advance. The distance
used in our method is later learned from the environment. Therefore we cannot compare
our method with SoRB in this experiment. So, we evaluated ﬁve methods: Goal-Distance
Gradient, Goal-Distance Gradient with Bridging Planning, Deep Deterministic Policy Gradi-
ents(DDPG) Lillicrap et al. [2016], Hindsight Experience Replay(HER) Andrychowicz et al.
[2017] and stochastic method. We use the same goal sampling distribution when comparing
each method.
During the training of the above method, each method was tested 200 times for every
20,000 episodes of training, and the average success rate of the results was calculated. From
the results in Figure 3, it can be seen that the success rate of DDPG and HER in the
late training period is basically maintained at about 0.2 and cannot continue to increase.
Although the success rate of my method is still unable to continue to increase in the late
training period, it basically remains around 0.5. The success rate of the GDG with bridging
planning has been rising in waves, and ﬁnally maintained at 0.8.
Figure 3: Comparison of our method with DDGP and HER in the city environment over
time with an average success rate.
We calculated the average success rate of each method at six diﬀerent distances tasks
in this environment. For each distance, we randomly generated 100 start and goal, and
recorded whether each success. In each distance, if the goal is reached within 500 steps,
it will be recorded as success, otherwise it will be recorded as failure. We repeated each
experiment with ﬁve diﬀerent random seeds. As shown in Figure 4, we plot the average
results of ﬁve experiments as solid lines, and use translucent areas to represent the upper
and lower limits of the ﬁve results. We can see the GDG with bridging planning can still
maintain a relatively high success rate at longer distances, while other methods can only
complete tasks at short distances.
Figure 5 below shows the navigation results of our method at diﬀerent distances between
the start and the goal in the city environment. From the agent’s path, it almost chooses a
shortest distance to complete the task and achieve the goal as soon as possible.
8

Figure 4: Learning curves: The test is performed every 5 timesteps.
The test uses the
policy obtained to perform 100 times tasks, each task includes 50 diﬀerent goals. Then use
5 diﬀerent random seeds to repeat 5 times, and ﬁnally get the average success rate.
Figure 5: Performance of our method in diﬀerent distances in city environment. From left
to right, the results are displayed at distances of 90, 120, 150, and 180, respectively.
4.4
Is GDG vulnerable to local optima if there is only one goal?
We used a typical map with obstacles as shown in Figure 6 to evaluate the impact of local
optima on our method and the general algorithm. The environment sets an area that is
close to the goal but cannot reach the it as the local optimal solution. However, the actual
optimal path needs to be far away from the local optimal area and get more negativ feedback
before it reach the desired goal. Using distance as an evaluation indicator can easily cause
the agent to fall into the local optimal area, because the local optimal area is close enough
to the goal. At most 10 transfers are needed from the start to the local optimal area, and
more than 80 transfers are needed to reach the desired goal. We evaluate four methods: the
DDPG Lillicrap et al. [2016] with the distance function as negative reward, the DDPG with
the sparse reward, the GDG and the GDG with bridging planning.
Figure 6: Left: environment with only one goal; Right: the ﬁnal distance of the agent from
the goal under four methods of training.
At the same exploration rate, experiments show that GDG and GDG with bridging
planning can avoid the attraction of the local optimal area and reach the goal, while other
two methods cannot complete the task. The performance of GDG and GDG with bridging
planning in this experiment is consistent. By analyzing the distance curve on the right in
Figure 6, we can see that in the initial training period, all methods except DDPG trappend
in the local optimal area. However, in subsequent training, GDG and GDG with bridging
planning trying to leave this. In the end they found the right way to reach the goal. The
DDDPG with distance reward also falls into the local optimal area after training, but it has
9

been trapped in the area since then, unable to reach the target. The DDPG that can only
get rewards after reaching the goal is always exploring, and the minimum distance from the
goal is in the local optimal area.
5
Conclusions
In this paper, We introduce a general method to solve the sparse reward and non-reward
task by distance evaluation. We further propose a gradient algorithm based on goal-distance
to solve the question that how distance evaluation can be used to improve policy. In task
where the actual distance can not be calculated in advance, the distance estimation is used
to assist the bridge planning to increase the exploration rate.
The experimental results
show, our method performs better than previous algorithms in complex sparse reward tasks,
and can avoid the impact of local optimum on learning eﬀectiveness. As future work, We
hope that the agent can learn to set the goal it wants to reach to explore the unknown
environment and decompose complex problems just like ﬁnding bridge points.
