496 
SHELTON 
UAI2001 
Policy Improvement for POMDPs 
using Normalized Importance Sampling 
Christian R. Shelton 
Artificial Intelligence Lab 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
cshelton0ai.mit.edu 
Abstract 
We present a new method for estimating the 
expected return of a POMDP from experi­
ence. 
The estimator does not assume any 
knowledge of the POMDP, can estimate the 
returns for finite state controllers, allows ex­
perience to be gathered from arbitrary se­
quences of policies, and estimates the return 
for any new policy. We motivate the estima­
tor from function-approximation and impor­
tance sampling points-of-view and derive its 
bias and variance. Although the estimator is 
biased, it has low variance and the bias is of­
ten irrelevant when the estimator is used for 
pair-wise comparisons. We conclude by ex­
tending the estimator to policies with mem­
ory and compare its performance in a greedy 
search algorithm to the REINFORCE algo­
rithm showing an order of magnitude reduc­
tion in the number of trials required. 
1 
Introduction 
We assume a standard reinforcement learning setup: 
an agent interacts with an environment modeled as 
a partially-observable Markov decision process. Con­
sider the situation after a sequence of interactions. 
The agent has now accumulated data and would like 
to use that data to select how it will act next. In par­
ticular, it has accumulated a sequence of observations, 
actions, and rewards and it would like to select a pol­
icy, a mapping from observations to actions, for future 
interaction with the world. Ultimately, the goal of the 
agent is to find a policy mapping that maximizes the 
agent's return, the sum of rewards experienced. 
[Kearns et al., 1999] presents a method for estimating 
the return for every policy simultaneously using data 
gathered while executing a fixed policy. 
In this pa­
per we consider the case where the policies used for 
gathering data are unrestricted. 
Either we did not 
have control over the method for data collection, or 
we would like to allow the learning algorithm the free­
dom to pick any policy for any trial and still be able 
to use the data. 
Importance sampling has been studied before in con­
junction with reinforcement learning. 
In particu­
lar, [Precup et al., 2000, Precup et al., 2001] use im­
portance sampling to estimate Q-values for MDPs 
with 
function 
approximation for the 
case where 
all data have been collected using a single pol­
icy. 
[Meuleau et al., 2001] uses 
importance sam­
pling for POMDPs, but to modify the REINFORCE 
algorithm [Williams, 1992] which ignores past tri­
als. [Peshkin and Mukherjee, 2001] considers estima­
tors very similar to the ones developed here and prove 
theoretical PAC bounds for them. This paper differs 
from previous work in that it allows multiple sampling 
policies, uses normalized estimators for POMDP prob­
lems, derives exact bias and variance formulas for nor­
malized and unnormalized estimators, and extends im­
portance sampling from reactive policies to finite state 
controllers. 
In the next section we develop two estimators ( unnor­
malized and normalized). Section 3 shows that while 
the normalized estimator is biased, its variance is much 
lower than the unnormalized (unbiased) estimator re­
sulting in a better estimator for comparisons. 
Sec­
tion 4 demonstrates some results on simulated envi­
ronments. We conclude with a discussion of how to 
improve the estimator further. 
2 
Estimators 
2.1 
Notation 
In this paper we will use s to represent the hidden 
state of the world, x for the observation, a for the ac­
tion, and r for the reward. Subscripts denote the time 
index and superscripts the trial number. We will be 

UAI2001 
SHELTON 
497 
studying episodic tasks of fixed-length, T. The start­
ing distribution over states is fixed (and unknown). 
Let 1r(x, a) be a policy (the probability of picking ac­
tion a upon observing x). For the moment we will 
consider only reactive policies of this form. h repre­
sents a history1 (of T time steps) and therefore is a 
tuple of four sequences: states ( s1 through sT) , o bser­
vations (x1 through XT), actions (a1 through aT) , and 
rewards (r1 through rr ). The state sequence is not 
available to the algorithm and is for theoretical con­
sideration only. Lastly, we let R be the return (or sum 
of r1 through rr ). 
1r1 through 1rn are the n policies tried. 
h 1 through 
hn are the associated n histories with R1 through Rn 
being the returns of those histories. Thus during trial 
i the agent executed policy 1ri resulting in the history 
hi. Ri is used as a shorthand notation for R(hi), the 
return of h'. 
2.2 
Importance Sampling 
Importance sampling is typically presented as a 
method for reducing the variance of the estimate of 
an expectation by carefully choosing a sampling dis­
tribution [Rubinstein, 1981]. For example, the most 
direct method for evaluating J f(x)p(x) dx is to sam­
ple i.i.d. X; 
""' p(x) and use * 2:::; f(x;) as the esti­
mate. 
However, by choosing a different distribution 
q(x) which has higher density in the places where 
lf(x)l is larger, we can get a new estimate which is 
still unbiased and has lower variance. In particular, 
we
_
now draw x; rv q(x) and use * 2:::; f(x;)<::l as our 
estimate. This can be viewed as estimating the expec­
tation of f(x); with respect to q(x) which is like 
approximating J f(x) ;q(x) dx with samples drawn 
from q(x). If q(x) is chosen properly, our new estimate 
has lower variance. It is always unbiased provided that 
the support of p(x) and q(x) are the same. In this pa­
per we only consider stochastic policies that have a 
non-zero probability of taking any action at any time. 
Therefore, our sampling and target distributions will 
always have the same support. 
Instead of choosing q(x) to reduce variance, we will 
be forced to use q(x) because of how our data was 
collected. Unlike the traditional setting where an es­
timator is chosen and then a distribution is derived 
which will achieve minimal variance, we have a distri­
bution chosen and we are trying to find an estimator 
1It might be better to refer to this as a trajectory since 
we will not limit h to represent only sequences that have 
been observed; it can also stand for sequences that might 
be observed. However, the symbol t is over used already. 
Therefore, we have chosen to use h to represent state­
observation-action-reward sequences. 
with low variance. 
2.3 
Sampling Ratios 
We have accumulated a set of histories (h1 through 
hn) each recorded by executing a (possibly different) 
policy ( 1r1 through 1rn) . We would like to use this data 
to find a guess at the best policy. 
A key observation is that we can calculate one fac­
tor in the probability of a history given a policy. In 
particular, that probability has the form 
T 
p(h\1r) = p( s!) IJ p(xt I st)7r(Xt, at)P( St+list, at) 
t=l 
= [v(si) D,p(xtlst)p(st+Iist, at)] [D, 1r(xt, at)] 
= W(h)A(h, 1r) . 
A(h, 1r), the effect of the agent, is computable whereas 
W(h) , the effect of the world, is not because it depends 
on knowledge of the underlying state sequence. How­
ever, W(h) does not depend on 1r. This implies that 
the ratios necessary for importance sampling are ex­
actly the ratios that are computable without knowing 
the state sequence. In particular, if a history h was 
drawn according to the distribution induced by 1r and 
we would like an unbiased estimate of the return of 
1f1, then we can use R(h)W',;? and although neither 
the numerator nor the denominator of the importance 
sampling ratio can be computed, the W(h) term in 
each cancels leaving a ratio of A(h, 1r1) to A(h, 1r) which 
can be calculated. A different statement of the same 
fact has been shown before in [Meuleau et aL, 2001]. 
This fact will be exploited in each of the estimators in 
this paper. 
2.4 
Importance Sampling as Function 
Approximation 
Because each 1ri is potentially different, each hi is 
drawn according to a different distribution and so 
while the data are drawn independently, they are not 
identically distributed. This makes it difficult to apply 
importance sampling directly. The most obvious thing 
to do is to construct n estimators (one from each data 
point) and then average them. This estimator has the 
problem that its variance can be quite high. In par­
ticular, if only one of the sampled policies is close to 
the target policy, then only one of the elements in the 
sum will have a low variance. The other variances will 
be very high and overwhelm the total estimate. We 
might then only use the estimate from the policy that 

498 
SHELTON 
UAI 2001 
is most similar to the target policy. 
Yet, we would 
hope to do better by using all of the data. 
To 
motivate 
the 
estimator of the next section, 
we demonstrate how importance sampling can be 
viewed in terms of function approximation. 
Im­
portance 
sampling 
in 
general 
seeks to estimate 
J f(x)p(x) dx. 
Consider estimating this integral by 
evaluating J }(x)p(x) dx where j and pare approxi­
mations of f and p derived from data. In particular, 
with a bit of foresight we will choose j and p to be 
nearest-neighbor estimates. Let i(x) be the index of 
the data point nearest to x. Then, 
}(x) = f(xi(x)) 
p(x) = p(xi(x)) . 
We now must define the size of the "basin" near sample 
xi. In particular we let oJ be the size of the region of 
the sampling space closest to xi. In the case where the 
sampling space is discrete, this is the number of points 
which are closer to sampled point xi than any other 
sampled point. For continuous sampling spaces, a; is 
the volume of space which is closest to xi. With this 
definition, 
J }(x)p(x) dx = L ti f(xi)p(xi) . 
' 
a; cannot be computed and thus we will need to ap­
proximate it. Let q(x) be the distribution from which 
xi was sampled. On average, we expect the density 
of points to be inversely proportional to the volume 
nearest each point. For instance, if we have sampled 
uniformly from a unit volume and the average den­
sity of points is d, then the average volume nearest 
any given point is K- Extending this principle, we will 
take the estimate of a
i to be inversely proportional to 
the sampling density at xi. This yields the standard 
importance sampling estimator 
More importantly, this derivation gives insight into 
how to merge samples from different distributions, 
q1 (x) through qn(x). Not until the estimation of ai did 
we require knowledge about the sampling density. We 
can use the same approximations for j and p. When 
estimating ai we need only an estimate of the den­
sity of points at ai to estimate the volume near xi. 
We therefore take the mixture density, * 2:::; q;(x) (the 
average of all of the sampling densities) as the distri­
bution of points in sample space. Applying this change 
results in the estimator 
time 
• • • 
Figure 1: Dependency graph for agent-world interac­
tion with memory model 
which, when translated to the POMDP estimation 
problem, becomes 
(1) 
This estimator is unbiased (shown in the full version 
of this paper [Shelton, 2001]) and has a lower variance 
than the sum of n single sample estimators because 
if one of the sampling distributions is near the target 
distribution, then all elements in the sum share the 
benefit. 
2.5 
Normalized Estimates 
We can normalize the importance sampling esti­
mate to obtain a lower variance estimate at the 
cost of adding bias. 
Previous work has used a 
variety of names for this including weighted uni­
form sampling [Rubinstein, 1981], weighted impor­
tance sampling [Precup et al ., 2000], and ratio esti­
mate [Hesterberg , 1995]. In general, such an estimator 
has the form 
ü J( ;)p(x') 
i 
X 
<i(X1) 
 p(x') 
ýi q(x') 
The problem with the previous estimator can be seen 
by noting that the function approximator p(h) does 
not integrate (or sum) to 1. Instead of p = p(xi(x) ) , we 
make sure p integrates (or sums) to 1: p 
= p(xi(xl)jZ 
where Z = 2:::; aip(xi). When recast in terms of our 
POMDP problem the estimator is 
n 
Ri 
p h'lrr) 
i=l 
j'>1 p(h'lrrJ) 
þn 
p(h'lrr) 
ÿi=l Lj'>1 p(h'ln1) 
2.6 
Adding Memory 
(2) 
So far we have only discussed estimators for reactive 
policies (policies that map the immediate observation 

UA12001 
SHELTON 
499 
to an action). We would like to be able to also estimate 
the return for policies with memory. Consider adding 
memory in the style of a finite-state controller. 
At 
each time step, the agent reads the value of the mem­
ory along with the observation and makes a choice 
about which action to take and the new setting for 
the memory. 
The policy now expands to the form 
K(x, m, a, m1) = p(a, m'Jx, m), the probability of pick­
ing action a and new memory state m' given obser­
vation x and old memory state m. Now let us factor 
this distribution, thereby slightly limiting the class of 
policies realizable by a given memory size but mak­
ing the model simpler. In particular we consider an 
agent model where the agent's policy has two parts: 
11'a (x, m, a) and 7rm(x, m, m'). The former is the proba­
bility of choosing action a given that the observation is 
x and the internal memory is m. The latter is the prob­
ability of changing the internal memory to m' given the 
observation is x and the internal memory ism. Thus 
p(a, m'Jx, m) = 7ra(x, m, a)7rm(x, m, m'). By this fac­
toring of the probability distribution of action-memory 
choices, we induce the dependency graph shown in fig­
ure 1. 
If we let M be the sequence mt, m2, .. . , mr, p(hj11') 
can be written as 
I)(h,Mj11') 
M 
T 
= Lp(s1)p(m1) ITp(xt\st)11'a(Xt,mt,at) 
M 
t=l 
1Tm (xt, mt, mt+l )p(st+llst, at) 
[p(sl) gp(xtJst)p(st+llst,at)l 
[Lp(ml) IT 11'a(Xt, mt, at)1Tm(Xt, ffit, ffit+l)l 
M 
t=l 
= W(h)A(h, n) , 
once again splitting the probability into two factors: 
one for the world dynamics and one for the agent dy­
namics. The A(h, n) term involves a sum over all pos­
sible memory sequences. This can easily be computed 
by noting that A(h, 1r) is the probability of the ac­
tion sequence given the observation sequence where 
the memory sequence is unobserved. This is a (slight) 
variation of a hidden Markov model: an input-output 
HMM. The difference is that the HMM transition and 
observation probabilities for a time step (the memory 
policy and the action policy respectively) depend on 
the value of x at that time step. Yet, the x's are visible 
making it possible to compute the probability and its 
derivative by using the forward-backward algorithm. 
unnormalized 
normalized 
Figure 2: Empirical estimates of the means and stan­
dard deviations for the unnormalized and normalized 
estimates of the return differences as a function of the 
number of data points. The data were collected by ex­
ecuting the policy corresponding to the point (0.4, 0.6) 
in figure 3. The estimators were evaluated at the poli­
cies (0.3, 0.9) and (0.4, 0.5). 
Plotted above are the 
means and standard deviations of these estimates av­
eraged over 600 experiments. The horizontal line on 
the plots of the mean represent the true difference in 
returns. The normalized plots fit the theoretical values 
well. The unnormalized plots demonstrate that even 
600 trials are not enough to get a good estimate of the 
bias or variance. The unnormalized mean should be 
constant at the true return difference and the standard 
deviation should decay as Jn· However, because the 
unnormalized estimator is much more asymmetric (it 
relies on a few very heavily weighted unlikely events to 
offset the more common events), the graph does not 
correspond well to the theoretical values. This is in­
dicative of the general problem with the high variance 
unnormalized estimates. 
As such, we can now use the same estimators and al­
low for policies with memory. In particular, the esti­
mator has explicit knowledge of the working of the 
memory. 
This is in direct contrast to the method 
of adding the memory to the action and observation 
spaces and running a standard reinforcement learning 
algorithm where the agent must learn dynamics of its 
own memory. With our explicit memory model, the 
learning algorithm understands that the goal is to pro­
duce the correct action sequence and uses the memory 
state to do so by coordinating the actions in different 
time steps. 
3 
Estimator Properties 
It is well known 
that importance sampling es­
timates 
(both 
normalized 
and 
unnormalized) 
are 
consistent 
[Hesterberg, 1995, 
Geweke, 1989, 

500 
SHELTON 
UAI2001 
Kloek and van Dijk, 1978]. 
Additionally, normalized 
estimators have smaller asymptotic variance if the 
sampling distribution does not exactly match the 
distribution to estimate [Hesterberg, 1995]. However, 
we are more interested in the case of finite sample 
sizes. 
The estimator of equation 1 is unbiased. That is, for a 
set of chosen policies, { n1, n2, ..
. , nn} , the expectation 
over experiences of the estimator evaluated at n is the 
true expected return for executing policy n. Similarly, 
the estimator of section 2.5 (equation 2) is biased. In 
specific, it is biased towards the expected returns of 
{ 1 
2 
n} 
n
,n
,
 .
. . ,n
. 
The goal of constructing these estimators is to use 
them to choose a good policy. This involves compar­
ing the estimates for different values of 1r. Therefore 
instead of considering a single point we will consider 
the difference of the estimator evaluated at two differ­
ent points, 1l"A and ns. In other words, we will use the 
estimators to calculate an estimate of the difference in 
expected returns between two policies. The appendix 
of the full version of this paper [Shelton, 2001] details 
the derivation of the biases and variances. 
We only 
quote the results here. These results are for using the 
same data for both the estimates at 1r A and n B. 
We denote the difference in returns for the unnormal­
ized estimator as Du and the difference for the normal­
ized estimator as D N. First, a few useful definitions 
(allowing Rx = E[RJnx]): 
1 "" 
. 
p(h) = - L._,P(hJ7T') 
n 
. 
p(h,g) =  LP(hJ7Ti)p(gJni) 
bA,B = Jj !R(h)- R(g)]p(h	=:1l'B)p(h,g)dhdg 
2 
= j R2(h)p(hJ7Tx )p(hJ7Ty) dh 
sx,Y 
p(h) 
si-,Y = j(R(h)- Rx)(R(h)- Ry)p(hJ7TlhJ7ry) dh 
ry2 
= jj R(h)R(g)p(hl1rx )p(gJny) p(h ) dhdg 
X,Y 
p(h)p(g) 
,g 
TJ­,Y = J J (R(h)- Rx )(R(g)- Ry) 
p(hl1rx )p(gJ1ry) -(h ) dh d 
p(h)p(g) 
p 
,g 
9 
Note that all of these quantities are invariant to the 
number of samples provided that the relative frequen­
cies of the sampling policies remains fixed. p and p 
are measures of the average distribution over histo­
ries. sky and r!i,v are measures of second moments 
and si- y and TJk y are measures of (approximately) 
centraliŝed second moments. bA,B is the bias of the 
normalized estimate of the return difference. 
The means and variances are2 
E[Du] = RA- RB 
1 
E[DN] = RA- Rs- -bA B 
n 
' 
[ 
l 
1 
2 
2 
2 
varDu =-(sAA-2sA8+s88) 
n 
, 
' 
' 
1 
2 
z 
2 
- -(TJA A-21JA B + TJB B) 
n 
, 
' 
' 
1
-
-
­
var[DN] = -(s® A-2s¯ B + s2B B) 
n 
' 
, 
, 
1----­
- ;;:(TJ°,A-2TJ°,B + 7/±,B) 
1 
1 
- 3-(RA- Rs)bA B + 0(-) . 
n 
' 
n2 
The bias of the normalized return difference estimator 
and the variance of both return differences estimators 
decrease as l. 
It is useful to note that if all of the 
. 
n 
1r"s are the same, then p( h, g) 
= p( h )p(g) and thus 
bA,B:::: RA -Rs. In this case E[DN] = njI (RA -Rs). 
If the estimator is only used for comparisons, this value 
is just as good as the true return difference (of course, 
for small n, the same variance would cause greater 
relative fluctuations). 
In general we expect bA,B to be of the same sign as 
RA - Rs. 
We would also expect s\,y to be less 
than si,Y (and similarly 'IJk,Y to be less than 'IJ.k,v)· 
si y and TJi y depend on the difference of the returns 
froJn the expected return under 7TX and 1ry. si- y 
and TJk y depend on the difference of the returns fro
'
m 
zero. Without any other knowledge of the underlying 
POMDP, we expect that the return from an arbitrary 
history be closer to RA or RB than the arbitrarily cho­
sen value 0. If bA,B is the same sign as the true differ­
ence in returns and the overlined values are less than 
their counterparts, then the variance of the normalized 
estimator is less than the variance of the unnormalized 
estimator. These results are demonstrated empirically 
in figure 2 where we compared the estimates for the 
problem described in section 4.2. 
2For the normalized difference estimator, the expecta­
tions shown are for the numerator of the difference. The 
denominator is a positive quantity and can be scaled to be 
approximately 1. Because the difference is only used for 
comparisons, this scaling makes no difference in its perfor­
mance. See the full version [Shelton, 2001] for more details. 

UAI2001 
SHELTON 
501 
4 
Experiments 
4.1 
Reinforcement Learning Algorithm 
We can turn either of these estimators into a greedy 
learning algorithm. To find a policy by which to act, 
the agent maximizes the value of the estimator by hill­
climbing in the space of policies (using the previous 
policy as a starting point) until it reaches a maximum. 
The agent uses this new policy for the next trial. After 
the trial, it adds the new policy-history-return triple 
to its data and repeats. 
The hill-climbing algorithm must be carefully chosen. 
For many estimates, the derivative of the estimate 
varies greatly in magnitude (as shown below). There­
fore, we have found it best to use the direction of the 
gradient, but not its magnitude to determine the di­
rection in which to climb. In particular, we employ a 
conjugate gradient descent algorithm using a golden­
ratio line search [Press et al., 1992]. 
4.2 
Two-dimensional Problem 
Figure 3 shows a simple world for which the policy 
can be described by two numbers (the probability of 
going left when in the left half and the probability 
of going left when in the right half) and the true ex­
pected return as a function of the policy. 
Figure 4 
com pares the normalized (equation 1) and unnormal­
ized (equation 2) estimators both with the greedy pol­
icy improvement algorithm and under random policy 
choices. We feel this example is illustrative of the rea­
sons that the normalized estimate works much better 
on the problems we have tried. Its bias to observed 
returns works well to smooth out the space. 
The 
estimator is willing to extrapolate to unseen regions 
where the unnormalized estimator is not . 
This also 
causes the greedy algorithm to explore new areas of 
the policy space whereas the unnormalized estimator 
gets trapped in the visited area under greedy explo­
ration and does not successfully maximize the return 
function. 
4.3 
Twenty-dimensional Problem 
Although the left-right problem was nice because the 
estimators could be plotted, it is very simple. 
The 
load-unload problem of figure 5 is more challenging. 
To achieve reasonable performance , the actions must 
depend on the history. We give the agent one memory 
bit as in section 2.6; this results in twenty independent 
policy parameters. 
REINFORCE [Williams, 1992] 
has also been used to attack a very similar problem 
[Peshkin et al., 1999]. We compare the results of the 
normalized estimator with greedy search to REIN-
Figure 5: Diagram of the "load-unload" world. This 
world has nine states. The horizontal axis corresponds 
to the positioning of a cart. The vertical axis indicates 
whether the cart is loaded. The agent only observes 
the position of the cart (five observations denoted by 
boxes) . 
The cart is loaded when it reaches the left­
most state and if it reaches the right-most position 
while loaded, it is unloaded and the agent receives a 
single unit of reward. The agent has two actions at 
each point: move left or move right. Moving left or 
right off the end leaves the cart unmoved. Each trial 
begins in the left-most state and lasts 100 time steps . 
12 
10 
20 
40 
6() 
60 
100 
normalized greedy algorithm 
12 
10 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
REINFORCE 
Figure 6: Comparison of the greedy algorithm with 
a normalized estimator to standard REINFORCE on 
the load-unload problem. Plotted are the returns as a 
function of trial number for ten runs of the algorithm. 
In the case of REINFORCE, the returns have been 
smoothed over ten trials. The center line is the median 
of the returns. The lines on either side are the first 
and third quartiles. The top and bottom lines are the 
minimum and maximum values. 

502 
SHELTON 
I 
I 
UAI2001 
Figure 3: Left: Diagram of the "left-right" world. This world has eight states. The agent receives no reward in 
the outlined states and one unit of reward each time it enters one of the solid states. The agent only observes 
whether it is in the left or right set of boxed states (a single bit of information) . Each trial begins in the fourth 
state from the left and lasts 100 time steps. Right: The true expected return as a function of policy for this 
world. 
0 
..... 
0 
LQ 
' 
. 
I' 
t. 
. 
normalized 
greedy 
random 
' 
' 
' 
p;wtllo'll 
. . · . · 
·; . 
.
. ·
. 
.• 
02 
c.^ 
u 
0.1 
1 
F(loll lollª 
I 
unnormalized 
greedy 
random 
., 
., 
--
0.2 
M 
0.111 
,.,., .... 
' 
.-·-- :  • .. 
: 
. 
' 
. 
.. 
p 
• [3 
i. 
. 
. 
' 
`Ioii i Ioft! 
•··. 
, .. ·· 
' 
· .. ...  
· ·· , ,
. 
p(lotl.... 
ll- O  
' 
. . 
' 
··..,: 
:±1.L1 
 
_1....0 
lloO 
Figure 4: A comparison of the normalized and unnormalized estimators for single set of observations. For each 
estimator, the return estimates are shown plotted after 5, 10, and 50 iterations (samples). The left column is 
for the greedy policy improvement algorithm and the right column is for uniformly sampled policies. The first 
row shows the returns as a function of trial number. 
The second shows the path taken in policy space (or, 
for right columns, the random samples taken). Both estimators were given the same sequence of data for the 
random case. The random sampling of policies produces a better return surface in general, whereas the greedy 
algorithm quickly maximizes the return (within 10 episodes) and provides a better estimate of the surface near 
the maximum. 

UAI2001 
SHELTON 
503 
FORCE in figure 6. The REINFORCE algorithm fre­
quently gets stuck in local minima. The graph shown 
is for the best settings for the step size schedule and 
bias term of REINFORCE. In the best case, REIN­
FORCE converges to a near optimal policy in around 
500 trials The greedy algorithm run with the normal­
ized estimate makes much better use of the data. Not 
only does it reuse old experience, it has an explicit 
model of the memory bit and therefore does not need 
to learn the "dynamics" of the memory. 
Most runs 
converge to the optimal policy in about 50 trials. One 
trial took about twice as long to converge to a slightly 
suboptimal policy. Although not shown here, if we re­
move REINFORCE's memory model disadvantage by 
requiring both algorithms to use "external" memory, 
the importance sampling algorithm's performance de­
grades by approximately a factor of 2. 
5 
Conclusion 
We think this normalized estimator shows promise. It 
makes good use of the data and when combined with a 
greedy algorithm produces quick learning. We would 
like to extend it in two immediate ways. The first is 
to provide error estimates or bounds on the return es­
timate. Although we have a formula for the variance 
of the estimator, we still need a good estimate of this 
variance from the samples (the formula requires full 
knowledge of the POMDP). Such an estimate would 
allow for exploration to be incorporated into the al­
gorithm. 
Second, the estimate needs to be "sparsi­
fied." 
After n trials, computing the estimate (or its 
derivative) for a given policy takes O(n) work. This 
makes the entire algorithm quadratic in the number 
of trails. However, a similar estimate could probably 
be achieved with fewer points. Remembering only the 
important trials would produce a simpler estimate. 
Finally, it may seem disturbing that we must remem­
ber which policies were used on each trail. 
The re­
turn doesn't really depend on the policy that the agent 
wants to execute; it only depends on how the agent ac­
tually does act. In theory we should be able to forget 
which policies were tried; doing so would allow us to 
use data which was not gathered with a specified pol­
icy. The policies are necessary in this paper as proxies 
for the unobserved state sequences. We hope in future 
work to remove this dependence.
