Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning to 
Predict and Improve Efficiency in Manufacturing 
Industry  
 
I. EL HASSANI  
Artificial Intelligence for Engineering 
Sciences Team 
ENSAM-University My ISMAIL 
Meknes, Morocco 

 
C. EL MAZGUALDI 
Artificial Intelligence for Engineering 
Sciences Team 
ENSAM-University My ISMAIL 
Meknes, Morocco 

T. MASROUR  
Artificial Intelligence for Engineering 
Sciences Team 
ENSAM-University My ISMAIL 
Meknes, Morocco 

Abstract—The overall equipment effectiveness 
(OEE) is a performance measurement metric widely 
used. Its calculation provides to the managers the 
possibility to identify the main losses that reduce the 
machine effectiveness and then take the necessary 
decisions in order to improve the situation.  However, 
this calculation is done a-posterior which is often too 
late. In the present research, we implemented differ-
ent Machine Learning algorithms namely; Support 
vector machine, Optimized Support vector Machine 
(using Genetic Algorithm), Random Forest, XGBoost 
and Deep Learning to predict the estimate OEE value. 
The data used to train our models was provided by an 
automotive cable production industry. The results 
show that the Deep Learning and Random Forest are 
more accurate and present better performance for the 
prediction of the overall equipment effectiveness in 
our case study.  
Keywords—Machine Learning, Overall Equipment 
Effectiveness, Support Vector Machine, XGBoost, Deep 
Learning, Ensemble Learning, Artificial Neural Net-
works, Genetic Algorithm 
I. INTRODUCTION  
In order to be competitive in the era of globaliza-
tion, manufacturing companies must improve and 
optimize their productivity while remaining flexible 
and responsive to customer demands. This fact led 
to the necessity of implementing a powerful perfor-
mance measurement system which provides an un-
biased process performance assessment. It consists 
of a set of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) de-
signed to allow managers to see the progress of their 
systems, it reflects the company's strategy and vision 
in term of objectives. So, it allows to follow both the 
targeted results and the actions (corrective or pre-
ventive) that achieve the objectives set. Key Perfor-
mance Indicators are most often the result of a long 
chain of information gathering and aggregation, and 
they generally allow responsiveness and decisions 
are made more and more quickly. 
 The Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE) is 
a performance measurement metric wildly used. Its 
calculation provides to the managers the possibility 
to identify the main losses that reduce the machine 
effectiveness and then take the necessary decisions 
in order to improve the situation. Introduced by 
Seiichi Nakajima [1], OEE was a component of the 
Total Productive Manufacturing (TPM) concept. 
The losses can be divided into six categories ‘’Six 
Big Losses’’ [2]. Fig. 1 shows these losses and some 
given examples of each one of them. One of the 
simplest ways to evaluate the The Overall 
Equipment Effectiveness (OEE), as in [1] and [3], is 
to apply the following formula:  
OEE = A × P × Q                           (1) 
Where: 
A = (Planned production time — Unplanned down-
time) / Planned production time           (2) 
 
P = Actual amount of production / Planned amount 
of production   
 
 
 
       (3) 
 
Q = Actual amount of production — Non-accepted 
amount / Actual amount   
 
       (4) 
 
Fig. 1. Illustration of the Six Big Losses  
The calculation of OEE, provides to the manag-
ers the possibility to monitor their process and iden-
tify the main losses that reduce the machine effec-
tiveness [4]. However, this calculation is often done 
by the end of the production day and then it does not 
offer the possibility to act properly for improving 

 
the situation. The aim of this paper is to develop a 
Machine Learning based-model that predict in ad-
vance the estimate OEE value in order to allow for 
managers the possibility of evaluating the effective-
ness of the equipment and therefore examining the 
inputs to the production process in order to identify 
and eliminate the relative losses. This will forms a 
decision support tool designed in the purpose of 
helping managers to prevent different kinds of loss-
es and then act and react according to the given situ-
ation to improve and maximize the production effec-
tiveness. In this research, four Machine Learning 
Algorithms are used, which are Support Vector Ma-
chine, Random Forest, Extreme Gradient Boosting, 
and Deep Neural Networks. The data used in this 
research is from the Cutting Department of an auto-
motive wiring company.  
II. MACHINE LEARNING METHODS 
Machine Learning algorithms are divided into 
three categories namely; Supervised Learning [5], 
Unsupervised Learning and Reinforcement Learn-
ing. For Supervised Learning, the problem is de-
scribed by a vector X of input variables and a vector 
Y of output variables (Target) and the goal is to find 
a mapping function between X and Y as Y = f(X). 
In case we have only input variables X without any 
target variables, the problem is turned into an unsu-
pervised learning.  Finally, Reinforcement Learning 
is a different type of Machine Learning, where an 
agent learn how to behave and decide in an envi-
ronment by performing actions and receiving re-
wards. In the present study, we will cover a variety 
of Supervised Machine Learning algorithms since 
we are handling labeled data. 
A. Support Vector Machine for Regression 
(SVR) 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) [6-7] is a su-
pervised 
machine 
learning 
algorithm 
mostly 
used in classification, but easily adopted for regres-
sion since it form a generalization of the classifica-
tion problem, in which the model returns a continu-
ous-valued prediction. SVR can be defined as an 
optimization problem that relied on defining a con-
vex ε-insensitive loss function, then trying to mini-
mize this function and find the flattest tube that con-
tains most of the training instances. Based on the 
loss function and the geometrical properties of the 
tube, a multiobjective function is constructed which 
provides a unique solution to the convex optimiza-
tion. The hyperplane is represented in terms of sup-
port vectors, which are training samples that lie out-
side the boundary of the tube. The figure below 
(Fig. 2) shows an example of one-dimensional linear 
regression function with – epsilon insensitive – 
band.  
SVR technique requires certain parameters, 
mostly: the kernel and regularization parameter. 
Kernels are used when we are dealing with non-
linearly separable data, they allow mapping the in-
put data to a high-dimensional space in order to be 
linearly separable. The most used kernels are Radial 
Basis Function Kernel (RBF), Polynomial Kernel 
and Sigmoid Kernel [8]. Regularization parameter 
also known as the soft margin constant C: this hyper 
–parameter controls the trade-off between the slack 
variable penalty and the width of the margin. Final-
ly, the complexity parameter, which is 𝞬 for RBF, 
Poly and Sigmoid kernels and the degree for poly-
nomial kernel, determine the flexibility of the SVM 
model in fitting the data while preventing Over-
fitting. 
 
Fig. 2. One-dimensional SVR example 
B. Ensemble Learning Techniques 
Ensemble methods are a collection of several 
base models working together on a single set of data 
in order to produce one optimal predictive model. 
Ensemble models are known for their higher accura-
cy results against conventional single-machine 
learning models [9]. Ensemble Learning techniques 
are classified into Bagging and Boosting. 
Bagging, short for Bootstrap AGGregatING is a 
simple ensembling technique that consist of creating 
several subsamples of data from training sample 
chosen randomly with replacement. Then, several 
models are trained with the different sub-
sets/bootstraps so that we end up with several pre-
dictions. Finally, these predictions are aggregated by 
using their weighted average, majority voting or 
simply their normal average. Random Forest is a 
bagging technique that we will cover in the present 
study. Boosting is a powerful ensembling technique 
in which the models are made sequentially. At each 
particular iteration, a new weak, base-learner model 
is added to be maximally correlated with the nega-
tive gradient of the loss function. The learning pro-
cedure of this technique is based on the logic that 
the subsequent predictors learn from the mistakes 
committed by the previous predictors.  
Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM), Adaboost 
and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) are the 
most famous boosting algorithms, in our research 
we will cover XGBoost model. 
a) Random Forest [9-10]: Random Forest is a 
supervised Machine Learning algorithm used for 
both prediction and classification problems. It is a 
bagging ensemble learning method based on 
Decision Tree algorithm. The random forest is a 
popular algorithm that can be applied to a wide 
range of prediction and classification problems and 
have few parameters to tune. It is forming by a 

 
multitude of decision trees, and the prediction is 
made 
by 
aggregating 
(majority 
vote 
for 
classification or averaging for regression) the 
predictions of each component tree as shown in 
Fig.3 (Y1, …,Yn are the predictions given by the 
different decision trees). It generally has much 
better predictive accuracy and show a good 
performance than a single decision tree, and it is 
recommended for its ability to deal with small and 
large sample sizes. The Random Forest is proper 
for high dimensional data modeling because it can 
deal with categorical, binary and continuous data 
and it can handle easily the problem of missing 
values.  
         
 
Fig. 3. Bagging/Random Forest Example 
b) eXtreme Gradient Boosting: XGBoost 
(eXtreme Gradient Boosting) is an optimized 
library designed for implementing machine learning 
algorithms under the Gradient Boosting framework 
[11]. It is a boosting ensemble learning method 
based on Decision Tree algorithm. By imposing 
regularization and providing parallel tree boosting, 
XGBoost is able to exploit more computational 
power and get more accurate prediction while 
remaining fast and scalable. 
C. Deep Learning Neural Network 
The core difference between Deep Learning and 
Neural Network is that Deep Learning is a deep 
neural network. In other words, a Deep Learning 
model is created by a multilayers architecture of 
neural nets and is taking advantage of the huge 
amount of accessible data nowadays. Although its 
architecture is more complex and it use more and 
more data for training, Deep Learning remain more 
performing than any other Machine Learning algo-
rithm. Furthermore, its performance keep increasing 
while increasing the number of data. 
The deep learning algorithm consist of feed-
forward and back-propagation process [12]. While 
the feed-forward process, the model associate 
weights from the input layer toward hidden units 
and the output layer. After every iteration through 
the data set, the weights are adjusted toward a 
backward propagation using Gradient Descent to 
maximize the correlation between the output and the 
residual error of the model. The final weights vector 
of a successfully trained neural network represents 
its knowledge about the problem [13].  
III. PROPOSED PREDICTIVE MODELS 
In our study, we attempt to cover the most popu-
lar and famous Machine Learning algorithms. We 
first tried different linear regression models namely; 
Multiple Linear Regression, Polynomial Regression, 
Support Vector Regression (SVR) and Decision 
Tree Regression. Then, we kept SVR because it 
shows better accuracy within the regression models. 
The SVR algorithm is implemented under two con-
figurations, the first model is built using the parame-
ters concluded by trial and error. However, the sec-
ond model used the hyper-parameters resulted by 
the Genetic algorithm. Secondly, we manipulated 
ensemble-learning techniques with tree-based mod-
els. We tested Random forest for Bagging Ensemble 
and XGBoost for Boosting Ensemble. Finally, we 
built a Deep Learning predictor in order to come up 
with a robust model with a high level of perfor-
mance and especially able to deal with the com-
plexity of our data.  
A. Support Vector Regression  
As we discussed in the previous section, we 
chose Support Vector Machine for Regression 
(SVR) based on its accuracy. Furthermore, SVR 
algorithms are depict by their adaptability, flexibility 
to work with linear and non-linear problems, and 
mainly they are non-biased by outliers. Our SVR 
model is implemented under the architecture below: 
Kernel:  Radial Basis Function (RBF), C = 1 and 
gamma = 0.15. In the second part of the SVR meth-
od, we developed a Genetic Algorithm (GA) for 
hyper-parameters tuning, especially C and gamma. 
As a result, we obtain the two optimized values, 
which are: C = 403.47 and gamma = 0.83. Then we 
built our second SVR model with the given parame-
ters. 
B. Random Forest 
Besides its accuracy and interpretability, Ran-
dom Forest (RF) is also an appropriate model for 
high dimensional data, which make it suitable for 
our case study. Our RF model is implemented using 
120 trees, the number of trees was decided by trial 
and error using mean absolute error (MAE) as a 
metric.  
C. eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) 
XGBoost is an ensemble tree-based model, 
which flow the principle of gradient boosting just as 
Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM) and Adaboost. 
However, XGBoost has more customizable parame-
ters that allows it a better flexibility. Additionally, 
XGBoost use more regularized model formalization 
to control over-fitting, which gives it better perfor-
mance. All of the above reasons combined with the 
computational power of the XGBoost algorithm, 
were sufficient for us to choose it over the other 
boosting techniques. Our XGBoost model is devel-
oped using the following hyper-parameters: Number 
of tree boosted: 130; Learning rate (eta) = 0.2; Max-
imum depth= 3. 

 
D. Deep Neural Networks 
Our Deep Learning (DL) model is implemented 
using an input layer of 7 neurons which represent 
our input features and two hidden layers. To esti-
mate the number of neurons in each hidden layer, 
we checked different methods and heuristics [14-15-
16] and finally we adopted Huang’s network 
architecture for two hidden layers feedorward net-
work (TLFN) [17]. It consists, in our case study, of 
125 neurons in the first layer and 25 in the second 
layer. It remains to be noted that an architecture of 
28 nodes in each hidden layer give a comparable 
result. The output layer consist of one node given 
that we are predicted one final value (OEE). The 
architecture used in this research is represented in 
Fig. 4. 
The architecture of our DL used in this section is 
formed by the following structures and parameters: 
Learning rate: 0.001; Epoch number: 3000; Number 
of neuron in hidden layer L1=125 and L2=25; Acti-
vation function: Rectifier Linear Unit; Optimizer: 
Adam optimization algorithm [18]; Loss function: 
Mean Absolute Error. 
 
Fig. 4. Deep Neural Networks topology 
IV. EXPERIMENTS 
A. Industrial Case study 
The data used in this research was provided from the 
cutting and crimping department of an automotive 
wiring harness company. In terms of the production 
process of wire harness it consist of wire cutting and 
terminal crimping, then the wires and components 
are assembled on the pin-board to the desired speci-
fication and then bound together. Finally, electrical 
tests, and visual inspection are highly recommended 
from the quality side, an example of electrical wire 
is shown in Fig. 5 (left). In this study, the cutting 
machines are used as the telltale equipment. The 
cutting workshop is occupied by 22 similar machine 
which are designed to cut a range of wires cross-
sections.  The operations ensured by this equipment 
are as follows: After any required preparation, the 
first step is to cut the wires to the desired length. A 
special machine may also print the wires on during 
the cutting process. After this, the ends of the wires 
are then stripped to expose the core of the wires, 
usually metallic, Fig. 5 (middle) shows an example 
of a stripped wire. The next step is to fit the wires 
with the required terminals and/or connector hous-
ings, which come in many different sizes and speci-
fications. This step is known as crimping. Every 
product is a specific product which has its own spec-
ification.  
The main specifications of a new product are as 
follows: Cable Class (Single wire, …); Wire cross 
section; Wire length; Stripping Length (Right and 
Left); Number of terminals (0, 1, 2); Terminal iden-
tification; Number of Seals (0, 1, 2); Print (Yes/No); 
Print Identification. Fig. 5 (right), represents an ex-
ample of electrical wire with two different terminals. 
 
Fig. 5. Electric Wire Harness (left). Cut and stripped Wire 
(middle), Wire with two different terminals (right) 
A production order is defined by a given quanti-
ty of one product and is launched by the planning 
department and then they are dispatched automati-
cally to the different machines. One machine could 
produce a set of orders per day per shift.  
B. Data Preparation 
We evaluated our model on a dataset that we 
prepare based on the extracted data from the internal 
system of the company.  The raw data was given 
into two tables, the first contains the OEE values per 
shift per machine and the second shows the different 
orders with the associate specifications done by eve-
ry single machine over the days.  
The data preparation process consist of the fol-
lowing stages [19]. 1) Data selection: which means 
selecting appropriate data from the raw data (the 
given two files). 2) Data preprocessing: the data 
preprocessing step consist of cleaning and removing 
fixing or missing data and then transforming the 
data into a structured form suitable to work with. 
Sampling the data is also a data-preprocessing step 
that was accomplished in this level. 3) Data 
transferring: it consist of features scaling that was 
highly recommended in our case  -because our input 
variables did not has the same scale- in order to 
avoid the big-scale variable(s) domination. Finally, 
for augmenting our dataset, it was recommended to 
consider that the whole data was provided by one 
machine since the machines are similar. 
In the first section of this paper, we presented the 
tree core parameters that has an impact on the OEE 
value. These parameters are the availability, the per-
formance and the quality. However, the yields of all 
the machines in every observation of our dataset are 
100%, and then the quality rate will not be taken 
into account. Thereby, we end up with a set of 12 
variables that affect the two retained components of 
the OEE, which are performance and availability. 
By applying features selection approach, and choos-

 
ing the more correlated features to our target, our 
final set of input variables is formed by: 
- 
Setups: This variable represent the sum of the all 
setup values. As the setup for every order is known 
before starting the production, this variable can be 
used as an input for our predictors. 
- 
Breakdown: this variable is substitute by 
planned and unplanned maintenance.  In our study 
this will concerns only planned maintenance, since 
unplanned maintenance cannot be known in ad-
vance.  
- 
Number of orders: This variable act out how 
many orders every single machine has done per day 
per shift. 
- 
Mean Wire Length:  represent the mean of over-
all wire length values produced by the same ma-
chine in one shift. 
- 
Number of Terminals: represent the total number 
of terminals across all orders for the same machine 
in one shift. 
- 
Number of Seals: represent the total number of 
seals across all orders for the same machine in one 
shift. 
- 
Target:  this variable explain the target designed 
for each order regarding its difficulty and other pa-
rameters. 
C. Exploratory Data analysis (EDA)  
Before starting our Machine Learning Modeling, 
a data exploration approach was needed [20]. We 
tried to detect the presence of outliers in our data so 
to drop them or even to remove them, this step was 
performed by graphical techniques. Using the distri-
bution plot Fig. 6 (top-left) and the box plot Fig. 6 
(top-right), we were able to detect the existent outli-
ers.       
 
Fig. 6. Distribution plot of raw data (top-left). Box plot of raw 
data (top-right). Distribution plot of retained data (bottom) 
By analyzing our data set, most of the outliers 
are meaningless aberrations caused by errors (under 
and over values) committed when reporting the dai-
ly information on the system and the rest are due to 
some situations that rarely occur. Hence, we re-
moved all of these outliers from our dataset. Fig. 6 
(bottom) shows the distribution plot of our final 
(retained) data set. 
V. EMPIRICAL ILLUSTRATION 
In this case study, the dataset consist of 7 fea-
tures, 1917 observations and 1 target (OEE value).  
All the models except DL will be implemented, first 
using a simple data split and secondly using cross 
validation technique.  The data was split into train-
ing (85% of the data) and test (15% of the data), 
then we will take 40 items from our test data to 
elaborate the plots for the visualization and compar-
ison purpose. All the models used in this research 
are developed using Python 3.6. 
A. Support vector regression results 
As mentioned before, we implemented three 
SVR models. SVR with simple data split, SVR with 
cross validation (SVRCV) and optimized SVR with 
cross validation using Genetic algorithm (SVRGA). 
a) SVR: Fig. 7 (left) shows the results for the 
40 items. The average error for the test dataset is 
12.12%. In Fig. 7 (left), it is found that the 
prediction values of SVR have the same trend as 
the real values and also they are slightly close to the 
targets. However, this might imply that our model 
tend to over-fit the data and then it will not be 
reliable if we change the data. 
b) SVRCV: Fig. 7 (midle) shows the results 
for the 40 items. The average error for the test 
dataset is 19.99%. As expected, the first SVR 
model was not reliable enough and the error was 
not representative of the model accuracy. In Fig. 7 
(midle), it is found that the prediction values of 
SVR using cross validation only have small 
variation. There is no obvious change for the 40 
items of validation data.  
c) SVRGA: In order to improve the previous 
model, we developed a Genetic algorithm for 
hyper-parameters tuning (C and gamma). Then the 
issued values of C and gamma was used for our 
SVRGA model which provides us a performed 
result. Fig. 7 (right) shows the results for the 40 
items with an average error of 14.26%. The 
predicted values are close to the real ones and have 
more or less the same trend.  
B. Random Forest results 
In the study, we implemented two RF models, a 
first model with simple split data and a second one 
with cross validation. 
a) RF: The first RF model is built with the 
elementary split data.  Fig. 8 (top-left) shows the 
results for the 40 items with an average error of 
13.59%. It is found the trend of the prevision is 
almost the same as the target trend, also the 
predicted OEE values are too close from the real 
ones. But like we discussed for the SVR method, 
the simple split does not allows a functional model 
on unseen data. 

 
b) RFCV: 
In 
order 
to 
improve 
the 
effectiveness of our model, we implemented the 
Random Forest algorithm using cross validation 
split data.   Fig. 8 (bottom-left) shows the results for 
the 40 items. The average error for the test dataset 
(15% of data) is about 12.89%. In Fig. 8 (bottom-
left), it is found that the prediction values of RFCV 
only have small variation compared to the results 
given without cross validation. Unlike for SVR, the 
RFCV keept its accuracy higher (better accuracy 
compared to RF)  
while performing a better fit to the data, it shows 
the robustess and the reliability of the model. 
         
 
Fig. 7. SVR results (left), SVRCV results ( midle), SVRGA (right) 
 
Fig. 8. RF results (top-left), RFCV results (bottom-left). XGB results (top-middle), XGB results (bottom-middle). DL loss curve (top-right), 
DL results (bottom-right)
 
C. eXtreme Gradient Boosting results 
The XGBoost algorithm is implemented under 
two configurations, a first model with simple split 
data (XGB) and a second one with cross validation 
(XGBCV). 
a) XGB: The XGB model is built with the 
elementary split data.  Fig. 8 (top-middle) shows 
the results for the 40 items. The average error for 
the test dataset is about 12.59%. In Fig. 8 (top-
middle), it is found that the prediction values of 
XGB have the same trend as the real values and 
also they are slightly close to the targets. Yet, the 
same remark as for SVR and RF still valid.  
 
b) XGBCV: In order to improve the model 
performance, we implemented it with cross 
validation split data.   Fig. 8 (bottom-middle) shows 
the results for the 40 items of validation data, with 
an average error of 15.37%. In Fig. 8 (bottom-
middle), it is found that the prediction values of 
XGBCV have a good trend regarding the real 
values. Although the average error has slightly 
increased, but like RFCV, XGBCV remain 
accurate, more performed and reliable on unseen 
date. 
D. Deep Learning results 
In the case study, the Deep Learning (DL) model 
implemented consist of two hidden layers with 125 
neurons in the first layer and 25 neurons in the sec-
ond layer. The architecture of the model was de-
scribed in the section 3. Our model is built without 
cross validation, because of the cost associated with 
training K different models. Instead of doing cross 
validation, we used an elementary split of the data 
consisting of 85% of data for training and the re-
mained 15% for testing. Fig. 8 (top-right) shows the 
loss curve for both training and test sets. It is found 
that the two losses have the same decreased trend, 
which reflects the stability and the performance of 
the model. Fig. 8 (bottom-right) shows the results 
for the 40 items with an average error of 11.76%. In 
Fig. 8 (bottom-right), it is found that the prediction 
values of this model have a good trend regarding the 
real values. In addition, it present a good fit to the 
data compared to the others models. 

 
VI. MODELS COMPARISON & DISCUSSION 
A. Model Accuracy 
A quick comparison of our models based on 
their Mean Absolute Errors (MAE) and Mean Abso-
lute Percentage Errors (MAPE) (see TABLE  I.) shows 
that all the models without cross validation have 
good performance, but they are highly exposed to be 
biased and unreliable on future unseen data. DL and 
RF are as we discussed their performance in the 
previous section. We can conclude from the table 
that DL, SVRGA, RFCV and XGBCV show a good 
performance. Moreover, DL is more suitable to deal 
with the complexity of the data compared to the 
other models.to deal with the complexity of the data 
compared to the other models. 
TABLE I.  
DEVELOPPED MODELS AND THEIR 
PERFORMANCE INDICES 
Predictive 
models 
Metrics 
Mean absolute 
error 
Mean absolute per-
centage error (%) 
SVR 
6.16 
12.12 
SVRCV 
9.82 
19.99 
SVRGA 
7.05 
14.26 
RF 
6.83 
13.59 
RFCV 
7.39 
12.89 
XGB 
6.43 
12.59 
XGBCV 
7.55 
15.37 
DL 
6.27 
11.76 
 
Another evaluation is performed using statistical 
tests to compare means, namely with ANOVA test, 
and Standard Deviations Test of the Absolute Value 
Error respectively named : SVRCVGA-e; XGBCV-
e; SVRC V-e; RF-e; RFCV-e; SVR-e; XGB-e; 
DNN-e. 
B. ANOVA test 
We performed the ANOVA test with the follow-
ing hypotheses: The null hypothesis is all means are 
equal. We take Significance level α = 0.05. The P-
value is less than α. Therefore, the null hypothesis is 
not valid, and we can conclude that there is a signif-
icant difference between the means of model errors. 
The models: DNN; XGB; SVR; RFCV and RF have 
lower means compared to SVRCV; XGBCV and 
SVRCVGA. In Fig. 9, we grouped models using the 
Tukey method with 95% Confidence. Fig. 10 shows 
the existence of two significantly different model 
groups A and B.  
C. Standard Deviations Test 
We performed the Standard Deviations Test with 
significance level α = 0.05. The P-value is less than 
α. Therefore, the null hypothesis is not valid, and 
we can conclude that there is a significant differ-
ence between the dispersion of model errors. The 
models: DNN; XGB; SVR; RFCV and RF have 
lower dispersions compared to SVRCV; XGBCV 
and SVRCVGA as shown in Fig. 11. 
                            
 
 
Fig. 9. Tukey Simultaneous 95% CI’s  
 
Fig. 10. Interval Plot of models’ error (left), Boxplot of models’ 
error (right) 
D. Conclusion of Comparison 
If we take into consideration the fact that some 
models can be subject to over fitting, namely: 
XGB; SVR; and RF, we can then only retain 5 
models for comparison, namely: DNN; RFCV; 
SVRCV; XGBCV and SVRCVGA.  
We can conclude that DNN and RFCV have 
significant lower means and dispersions compared 
to SVRCV; XGBCV and SVRCVGA.  
 
 

 
     
 
Fig. 11. Standard Deviations Comparison 
VII. CONCLUSION & PERSPECTIVES 
This paper presented the use of several Machine 
Learning algorithms for the prediction of organiza-
tion KPIs, the application was conducted on the 
OEE (overall equipment effectiveness) where we 
demonstrated how precise prediction could be done 
using artificial intelligence techniques. Based on a 
real dataset provided by the cutting department of 
an automotive wiring company, we experimented 
several machine learning algorithms to predict the 
OEE value. The result exhibit that Deep Learning 
and Random Forest with cross validation shows 
better reliability and performance dealing with giv-
en data. The OEE is only a study case that can be 
generalized to other KPIs.   
It should also be noted that many points remain 
to be explored as future work. We can cite: - The 
validation of the prediction in the real-time case, - 
The combination of optimization techniques with 
the developed models to provide Decision Support 
Tools for managers, - The more detailed study of 
the utility of the hybrid approaches which associate 
the genetic algorithms with those of the machine 
learning.
