What You See is What You GAN:
Rendering Every Pixel for High-Fidelity Geometry in 3D GANs
Alex Trevithick*2, Matthew Chan1, Towaki Takikawa1, Umar Iqbal1, Shalini De Mello1, Manmohan
Chandraker2, Ravi Ramamoorthi2, and Koki Nagano1
1NVIDIA
2University of California, San Diego
Figure 1. Left: Our results. The split view in the middle demonstrates the high degree of agreement between our 2D rendering and
corresponding 3D geometry. Our method can learn fine-grained 3D details (e.g., eyeglass frame and cat’s fur) that are geometrically well-
aligned to 2D images without multiview or 3D scan data. Right: Comparison with EG3D [7]. Our tight SDF prior provides smooth and
detailed surfaces on the face and hat while EG3D exhibits geometry artifacts and discrepancies between geometry and rendering. Please
see Fig. 5 and the accompanying video for more examples, and Fig. 6 for comparison to other baselines.
Abstract
3D-aware Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
have shown remarkable progress in learning to generate
multi-view-consistent images and 3D geometries of scenes
from collections of 2D images via neural volume render-
ing. Yet, the significant memory and computational costs of
dense sampling in volume rendering have forced 3D GANs
to adopt patch-based training or employ low-resolution ren-
dering with post-processing 2D super resolution, which
sacrifices multiview consistency and the quality of resolved
geometry. Consequently, 3D GANs have not yet been able
to fully resolve the rich 3D geometry present in 2D images.
In this work, we propose techniques to scale neural vol-
ume rendering to the much higher resolution of native 2D
images, thereby resolving fine-grained 3D geometry with
*This project was initiated and substantially carried out during an in-
ternship at NVIDIA.
unprecedented detail.
Our approach employs learning-
based samplers for accelerating neural rendering for 3D
GAN training using up to 5 times fewer depth samples.
This enables us to explicitly ”render every pixel” of the
full-resolution image during training and inference without
post-processing superresolution in 2D. Together with our
strategy to learn high-quality surface geometry, our method
synthesizes high-resolution 3D geometry and strictly view-
consistent images while maintaining image quality on par
with baselines relying on post-processing super resolution.
We demonstrate state-of-the-art 3D gemetric quality on
FFHQ and AFHQ, setting a new standard for unsupervised
learning of 3D shapes in 3D GANs.
1. Introduction
Training 3D generative models from the abundance of 2D
images allows the creation of 3D representations of real-
world objects for content creation and novel view synthe-
1
arXiv:2401.02411v1  [cs.CV]  4 Jan 2024

sis [59].
Recently, 3D-aware generative adversarial net-
works (3D GANs) [6, 7, 19, 43, 45, 49, 53, 69, 70, 74, 76]
have emerged as a powerful way to learn 3D representations
from collections of 2D images in an unsupervised fashion.
These methods employ differentiable rendering to compare
rendered 3D scenes with 2D data using adversarial train-
ing [18]. Among the various 3D representations, Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [38] have become a popular choice
among recent successful 3D GANs. However, the signifi-
cant computational and memory cost of volume rendering
has prevented 3D GANs from scaling to high-resolution
output. For instance, generating a single 512x512 image via
volume rendering requires evaluating as many as 25 million
depth samples, if 96 depth samples are used per ray using
importance sampling [7, 10, 38, 53]. Given that GAN train-
ing typically requires rendering tens of millions of images,
the training process could require evaluating hundreds of
trillions of depth samples.
During training, all intermediate operations must be
stored in GPU memory for every depth sample for the back-
ward pass. Therefore, existing methods resort to working
on patches [10, 49, 53] or adopting a low resolution neural
rendering combined with post-processing 2D super resolu-
tion (SR) [7, 19, 43, 45, 70]. However, patch-based methods
have limited receptive fields over scenes, leading to unsatis-
factory results, and the hybrid low-resolution rendering and
SR scheme inevitably sacrifices the multiview consistency
and the accuracy of 3D geometry. While many techniques
have been developed to improve the image quality of 3D
GANs to match that of 2D GANs, the challenge of resolv-
ing the corresponding high-resolution 3D geometry remains
unsolved (see Figs. 1 and 6 for our results and comparison
to the current state-of-the-art).
Scaling 3D GANs to operate natively at the 2D pixel res-
olution requires a novel approach for sampling. Fig. 2 com-
pares the state-of-the-art 3D GAN, EG3D model, trained
with and without1 SR. EG3D employs 96 dense depth sam-
ples in total using two-pass importance sampling [38] dur-
ing training, which requires half a terabyte of GPU memory
at 256 × 256 resolution, making scaling to higher resolu-
tions infeasible. Furthermore, Fig. 2 demonstrates that us-
ing 96 dense samples still results in undersampling, as evi-
denced by the speckle noise patterns visible in the zoomed-
in view, leading to considerably worse FID (inset in Fig. 2).
3D GANs relying on post-processing SR layers can repair
these undersampling artifacts at the cost of a high-fidelity
3D representation.
In this work, we address the challenge of scaling neural
volume rendering to high resolutions by explicitly rendering
every pixel, ensuring that “what you see in 2D, is what you
get in 3D” — generating an unprecedented level of geomet-
ric details as well as strictly multiview-consistent images.
Our contributions are the following:
• We introduce an SDF-based 3D GAN to represent high-
1Triplane resolution is doubled to compensate for the loss of capacity
from removing the SR layers.
Figure 2. Samples from EG3D 256 model. Right: Volume render-
ing with 48 coarse samples and 48 fine samples per ray with two-
pass importance sampling [38] results in undersampling, leading
to noticeable noisy artifacts. Left: These artifacts are repaired by
super resolution (SR). An unsharp mask has been applied to the
zoomed views for presentation purposes.
frequency geometry with spatially-varying surface tight-
ness that increases throughout training (subsection 4.1
and 4.5), in turn facilitating low sample rendering.
• We propose a generalizable learned sampler conditioned
on cheap low-resolution information to enable full-
resolution rendering during training for the first time
(subsection 4.2 and 4.3).
• We show a robust sampling strategy for the learned sam-
pler (subsection 4.4) that produces stable neural rendering
using significantly fewer depth samples (see Fig. 8). Our
sampler can operate with just 20 samples per ray com-
pared to existing 3D GANs which must use at least 96
samples per ray (see Table 3).
• Together, our contributions result in the state-of-the-art
geometry for 3D GANs while rendering with quality on
par with SR baselines (see Fig. 1). For more results, see
Fig. 5 and for comparison to other baselines, see Fig. 6.
2. Related Work
We begin by reviewing the prior-arts of 3D generative mod-
els and their current shortcomings. We then cover founda-
tional techniques for 3D geometry representation and neural
rendering from which we take inspiration. We then discuss
existing methods for accelerating neural volume rendering,
which usually operate per-scene.
2.1. 3D Generative Models
Just like 2D GANs, 3D-aware GANs train from a collection
of 2D images, but employ a 3D representation and differen-
tiable rendering to learn 3D scenes without requiring multi-
view images or ground truth 3D scans. Some of the most
successful works use a neural field [68] in combination with
a feature grid [7] as their 3D representation, and use neural
volume rendering [38] as the differentiable renderer.
2

However, due to the significant memory and compu-
tational cost of neural volume rendering, many previous
works perform rendering at low-resolution and rely on a
2D post-processing CNN [7, 19, 43, 45, 70], which hal-
lucinates the high-frequency details in a view-inconsistent
manner while sacrificing 3D consistency and the quality of
the resolved 3D geometry.
To ensure strict 3D consistency, other previous works
seek to render at high-resolutions and propose techniques
to address the prohibitive computational costs. One line
of work leverages the sparse nature of 3D scenes to speed
up rendering, in particular, structures such as 2D manifolds
[14, 67], multiplane images [75] and sparse voxels [50]. Al-
though they are more efficient, sparse representations pro-
vide only coarse [50] or category-specific [14, 67] accel-
eration structures, which poses constraints on the diversity
and viewing angles of the generated scenes. Our sampling-
based method, on the other hand, generalizes to every new
scene and adaptively accelerates rendering on a per ray
basis. Another line of work enables high-resolution ren-
dering with patch-based training [10, 53].
In particular,
Mimic3D [10] achieves significantly improved 2D image
quality, but the patch-based training limits the receptive
fields, and the generated geometry does not faithfully repre-
sent the 2D data due to the patch-wise perceptual loss. Our
method renders the entire image at once and the resulting
geometry is aligned with the rendering (see Figs. 1 and 6).
Recently, a new family of generative approaches us-
ing diffusion models has been proposed to tackle condi-
tional tasks including novel view synthesis [8, 58] and text-
based 3D generation[63]. Most of these 3D-aware diffu-
sion models combine a 3D inductive bias modeled via neu-
ral field representations and a 2D image denoising objec-
tive to learn 3D scene generation. While these models en-
able unconditional 3D generation, they require multiview
images [24, 55, 63] or 3D data, such as a point cloud [42].
Score Distillation Sampling [47] may be used for distil-
lation from a pre-trained 2D diffusion model when only
monocular 2D data is available, but diffusion models incur
significant computational costs due to their iterative nature
and most of the existing methods require optimization per
scene [9, 20, 33, 61, 66].
2.2. Learning High-Fidelity Geometry
Prior works on 3D GANs have typically represented the ge-
ometry as a radiance field [38], which lacks a concrete defi-
nition for where the surface geometry resides in the field, re-
sulting in bumpy surfaces. A number of works [44, 62, 71]
have proposed alternate representations based on implicit
surfaces (such as signed distance functions, or SDFs) that
can be used with neural volume rendering. In these works,
the implicit surface is typically softened by a parameter for
volume rendering.
Other works [32, 64] improve on these implicit surface
representations by leveraging feature grids for higher com-
putational efficiency and resolution. Adaptive Shells [65]
further improve on quality by making the softness parame-
ter spatially-varying, as many objects have hard boundaries
only in certain parts.
We use an implicit surface repre-
sentation based on VolSDF [72], and leverage a spatially-
varying parameter similar to Adaptive Shells [65] to control
the softness of the surface, as humans and animals benefit
from both hard surfaces (e.g. skin, eyes) and soft, volumet-
ric representations (e.g. hair). Although other works such
as StyleSDF [45] have similarly leveraged implicit surfaces
in a 3D GAN framework, the lack of spatial-variance and
high-resolution rendering led to over-smoothed geometry
not faithful to the rendered images.
2.3. Accelerating Neural Volume Rendering
As mentioned in Section 2.1, accelerating 3D GANs typi-
cally relies on acceleration structures such as octrees [31,
56, 73], which in generative settings [14, 50, 67] are lim-
ited to be coarse or category-specific due to the difficulty
of making them generalize per-scene.
Instead, we look
to a class of methods that do not rely on an acceleration
structure. Some of these works learn a per-scene sampling
prior on a per-ray basis using a binary classifier [41], a den-
sity estimator [30, 46], a coarse proxy from a 3D cost vol-
ume [34], or an interval length estimator [35] on discrete
depth regions along the ray. Other works use importance
sampling [21, 38] to sample additional points. We take in-
spiration from works on density estimators [30] and propose
to learn a scene-conditional proposal network that general-
izes across scenes instead of being category-specific or op-
timized per-scene.
There are also other methods to accelerate rendering by
utilizing more efficient representations, such as gaussian
splats [29] and light field networks [52].
More efficient
feature grids [40, 57] based on hashing can also be used
to accelerate rendering. However, mapping to these repre-
sentations in a GAN framework is not straightforward. In
contrast, our sampling strategy can be used for any NeRF
representation.
3. Background
We begin with background on the methodology of the state-
of-the-art 3D-aware GANs as our method relies on a simi-
lar backbone for mapping to 3D representations. 3D GANs
typically utilize a StyleGAN-like [27] architecture to map
from a simple Gaussian prior to the conditioning of a NeRF,
whether that be an MLP [19, 45], MPI [75], 3D feature
grid [50], manifolds [14, 67] or triplane [7, 10, 53]. We in-
herit the latter triplane conditioning for its high expressivity
and efficiency, in which three axis-aligned 2D feature grids
(fxy, fxz, fyz), provide NeRF conditioning by orthogonal
projection and interpolation. As in the previous methods,
the mapping and synthesis networks from StyleGAN2 can
easily be adapted to create the 2D triplane representation
from noise z ∈R512. Specifically, w = Mapping(z) con-
ditions the creation of the triplane T(w) ∈R3×32×512×512
from a Synthesis network, corresponding to three axis-
3

Figure 3. Here we show our proposed pipeline and its intermediate outputs. Beginning from the triplane T, we trace uniform samples to
probe the scene, yielding low-resolution I128 and weights P128. These are fed to a CNN which produces high-resolution proposal weights
ˆP512 (weights are visualized as uniform level sets). We perform robust sampling and volume render to get the final image I512 and the
surface variance B.
aligned 2D feature grids of spatial resolution 512×512 and
feature size 32.
To create high-fidelity geometry, our method builds upon
VolSDF [72]: Instead of directly outputting the opacity σ of
a point x ∈R3, an SDF value s is output and transformed
to σ using a Laplacian CDF:
σ = 1
β



1
2 exp

s
β

if s ≤0
1 −1
2 exp

−s
β

if s > 0
(1)
where β is the variance of the Laplacian distribution govern-
ing the “tightness” of the representation. One distinct bene-
fit of an SDF-based representation is the ease of extracting
the surface. StyleSDF [45] also utilizes this intermediate
geometry representation without a triplane, enforcing the
usual Eikonal constraint.
Using the triplane conditioning and Eq. 1, we can as-
sign each point in the volume with its opacity σ and radi-
ance c using a lightweight MLP. For a given camera ray
r(t) = o + td, we approximate the volumetric rendering
integral C(r) [36] by sampling ray distances ti with their
corresponding σi and ci before computing
ˆC(r) =
N
X
i=1
wici where wi = Ti(1 −exp(−σiδi)),
Ti = exp

−
i−1
X
j=1
σjδj

and δi = ti+1 −ti.
(2)
Here, Ti denotes the accumulated transmittance and δi is
the distance between adjacent samples along the ray.
It is possible to develop a more efficient estimator for
this sum with fewer samples by using importance sampling
techniques in computer graphics. Typically, one computes
a piecewise constant probability distribution pj =
ˆ
wj
P
j ˆ
wj ,
where j refers to the jth bin or region, and ˆ
wj is an estimate
of wj for that region, for example obtained by explicitly
tracing coarse samples. For a given t, we first find the region
j(t) and then set p(t) = pj. From this, one can compute a
(piecewise linear) cumulative distribution function or CDF
Φ(t) which has a range from 0 to 1. We can then perform
inverse CDF sampling to define the sample points,
ti = Φ−1(ui),
(3)
where ui is a random number from 0 to 1 (sorted to be an
increasing sequence).
Discussion
We improve on previous works such as
NeRF [38] and EG3D [7] by stratifying2 the random num-
bers ui during training; this leads to significantly lower ren-
dering variance, especially at low sample counts N [39].
We also develop a neural method to predict a good distribu-
tion pj (and hence Φ) for importance sampling at high spa-
tial resolution, without needing to exhaustively step through
the ray.
4. Method
In this section, we describe our method beginning with
our SDF-based NeRF parametrization (subsection 4.1). We
then overview how we render at high-resolution in three
stages: first, a low-resolution probe into the 3D scene (sub-
section 4.2); second a high-resolution CNN proposal net-
work (subsection 4.3); and third a robust sampling method
for the resultant proposals (subsection 4.4). Next we de-
scribe regularizations (subsection 4.5) for stable training,
and finally our entire training pipeline (subsection 4.6).
4.1. Mapping to a 3D Representation
Beginning from a noise vector z, we synthesize the initial
triplane T ′ with StyleGAN [25] layers as detailed in Sec. 3.
In contrast to previous methods, we then generate more ex-
pressive triplane features T with an extra synthesis block for
each orthogonal plane: fij = SynthesisBlock(f ′
ij) where
ij ∈{xy, xz, yz} and f ′ are the features of T ′. This de-
sign choice allows disentanglement between the intermedi-
ate triplane features as plane-specific kernels can attend to
the features in each separate plane.
Given the triplane T (the left side of Fig. 3) and a point
x ∈R3, we utilize an MLP to map to the SDF value s,
variance β and geometry features fgeo:
(s, β, fgeo) = MLPSDF(PosEnc(x), Tx)
(4)
2dividing the unit interval into bins and taking a sample from each bin.
4

where PosEnc is the positional encoding from NeRF [38]
and Tx are the features corresponding to x gathered from T
by projecting x to each of the axis-aligned planes and taking
the Hadamard product of the three resultant vectors [16].
We initialize the ReLU MLPSDF as in SAL [4] to ensure an
approximately spherical SDF in the early part of training.
Additionally note that β varies spatially in the volume un-
like [45, 72], allowing us to regularize its values later on.
Using Eq. 1, we transform s and β into opacity σ. We
can now predict the radiance with a separate MLPc condi-
tioned on the geometry features and viewing direction v as
c = MLPc(PosEnc(v), fgeo).
(5)
Note that in contrast to most 3D GANs, we condition
radiance on the viewing direction, allowing a more expres-
sive generator. Thus, given a triplane, we can render any
pixel by computing σ and c for points along the ray to ap-
proximate the volumetric rendering integral as described in
Sec. 3.
4.2. High-Resolution Proposal Network
We now have our mapping from a latent code z to a 3D
NeRF representation.
However, volumetric rendering of
NeRFs at higher resolutions requires extremely large num-
bers of samples, and thus both memory and time. Instead
of naive dense sampling at a high resolution, we propose
to leverage low-resolution renderings to cheaply probe the
3D representation (visualized on the left of Fig. 3) for the
creation of proposal distributions at high-resolution. Given
a target camera and triplane T, we first trace 192 coarse
samples at low-resolution (128 × 128) to compute a low-
resolution RGB image I128 ∈R3×128×128 and a tensor
of weights P128 ∈R192×128×128 (visualized after low-
resolution rendering in Fig. 3). Each 192-dimensional vec-
tor corresponds to a piecewise constant PDF with CDF Φ as
seen in Eq. 3.
Conditioned on the low-resolution probe, we predict a
tensor of proposal volume rendering weights at the high-
resolution (512 × 512):
ˆP512 = Softmax(CNN(P128, I128)) ∈R192×512×512, (6)
where CNN is a lightweight network that up-samples the
low-resolution weights, Softmax produces discrete distribu-
tions along each ray, and the ˆ denotes that this is an esti-
mated quantity. This corresponds to the Proposal in Fig. 3
and the yellow distribution in Fig. 4. Note that allocating
192 samples at 128 × 128 is equivalent to allocating just 12
at 512 × 512.
4.3. Supervising the Proposal Network
Having described the input and output of our high-
resolution proposal network, we now show its supervision.
From the target camera, we can also trace 192 coarse sam-
ples at high resolution for a small 64 × 64 patch, giv-
ing us a ground truth tensor of volume rendering weights
Ppatch ∈R192×64×64. We then prepare this tensor for super-
vision by computing:
¯Ppatch = Normalize(Suppress(Blur(Ppatch)))
(7)
where Blur applies a 1D Gaussian kernel to the input dis-
tributions, Suppress(x) = x if x ≥5e −3 and 0 other-
wise, and Normalize is L1 normalization to create a valid
distribution. This corresponds to the patch loss in Fig. 3
and the purple distribution in Fig. 4. These operations cre-
ate less noisy distributions to facilitate accurate learning of
the high-frequency integrand which may be undersampled
in the coarse pass.
We can then compare the predicted and cleaned ground
truth distributions with a cross-entropy loss:
Lsampler = CrossEntropy( ¯Ppatch, ˆPpatch)
(8)
where ˆPpatch is the corresponding patch of weights in ˆP512
and CrossEntropy denotes the average cross-entropy be-
tween all pairs of pixelwise discrete distributions; for each
pair (¯p, ˆp), we compute P −¯pj log ˆpj. Since we only need
to compute this supervision for a small patch, the overhead
of sampler training is not significant.
4.4. Sampling from the Proposal Network
Having shown how to train and predict high-resolution dis-
tributions, we now overview how to sample the resultant
proposals. As seen in Fig. 4, the proposals are often slightly
off; this is due to the high frequency nature of the underly-
ing integrand in blue.
In order to utilize the information from the sampler,
we propose to filter predicted PDFs for better estimation.
Specifically, for each discrete predicted PDF ˆp, we com-
pute the smallest set of bins whose probability exceeds a
threshold τ = 0.98: We find the smallest subset I ⊆
{1, 2, ..., 192} such that
X
i∈I
ˆpi ≥τ.
(9)
This operation resembles nucleus sampling in NLP [23].
We define our sampling PDF q with probability qi =
1
|I|
if i ∈I and 0 otherwise (the green distribution in Fig. 4).
For each PDF q, we compute its CDF Φ and perform
stratified inverse transform sampling to create the samples
(illustrated as adaptive sampling near the surface in Fig. 3).
In practice, on top of the 12 samples from the coarse probe
(for the high-resolution image), we take an additional 18
samples per pixel adaptively based on the variance of the
predicted distributions. The details are given in the supple-
ment.
4.5. Regularization for High-Resolution Training
In order to render accurately under low sample budget per
ray, we desire the surface to be tight, i.e., the set of points
along the ray, which contribute to the accumulated radiance
5

Figure 4. We visualize the volume rendering PDFs for the green
pixel in the images on the right along with sampling methods. The
ground truth distribution in blue is bimodal due to the discontinu-
ous depth. Without stratification, the samples from the predicted
yellow PDF completely miss the second mode. Stratification re-
duces the variance, yet also misses the second mode. Our robust
stratified samples hit both modes despite the inaccurate predic-
tions. The supervision PDF is visualized in purple as well.
to be small. To accomplish this, we introduce a regular-
ization for the spatially-varying β values. Replacing the ci
with the intermediate βi in Eq. 2, we can volume render
an image of scalars, B ∈R512×512 (seen on the right of
Fig. 3). During training, we regularize B to be small so that
the surface tightens:
Lsurface =
X
hw
(Bhw −Btarget)2,
(10)
where Btarget is a scalar quantity annealed towards ϵ > 0
during optimization. Note that this results in significantly
more pronounced and smooth geometry (see Fig. 7).
During training with the proposal network, the rendering
networks only receive gradients for points very near the sur-
face (which have high density). We find that this can lead to
undesirable density growing from the background into the
foreground. In order to combat this, we leverage the low-
resolution information from I128, which is computed for
uniform samples along the ray, and thus not concentrated
at the surface. Considering the SDF values intermediately
computed for rendering, S = S128 ∈R192×128×128, we
enforce the SDF decision boundary by minimizing the SDF
likelihood under a Laplacian distribution similar to [45, 51]:
Ldec =
X
zhw
exp (−2|Szhw|).
(11)
4.6. The Training Pipeline
In order to begin making use of the learned sampler for
high-resolution rendering, we need a good NeRF represen-
tation from which to train it. Concurrently, we also need a
good sampler in order to allow NeRF to render at 512×512,
the input resolution to the discriminator D.
To solve this issue, in the early stages of training, we
first learn a low-resolution (e.g., 64 × 64) 3D GAN through
the standard NeRF sampling techniques. We bilinearly up-
sample our low-resolution renderings to 512×512 and blur
the real images to the same level. After converging at the
lower resolution, we introduce the sampler training (sub-
section 4.3). Concretely, we not only render low-resolution
images with standard sampling, but also render sampler in-
puts P128 and supervision patches Ppatch. This results in a
good initialization for the sampler.
Having learned an initial low-resolution 3D GAN and
high-resolution sampler, we transition to rendering with the
sampler predictions. The high-resolution proposals ˆP512 are
downsampled to the current rendering resolution, which is
progressively increased to the full 512×512 resolution dur-
ing training. After introducing all losses, we optimize the
parameters of the generator G to minimize the following:
L = Ladv+λsamplerLsampler+λsurfaceLsurface+λdecLdec (12)
where
Ladv
is
the
standard
GAN
loss
[18]
Softplus(−D(G(z)).
Note that we do not enforce the
Eikonal constraint as we did not see a benefit. The discrim-
inator D is trained with R1 gradient regularization [37]
whose weight is adapted as the resolution changes. Gener-
ator and discriminator pose conditioning follow EG3D [7].
The details of all hyperparameters and schedules are
presented in the supplementary material.
5. Results
Datasets.
We benchmark on two standard datasets for 3D
GANs: FFHQ [25] and AFHQv2 Cats [11, 28] both at res-
olution 512 × 512. We use the camera parameters extracted
by EG3D [7] for conditioning and rendering. Our AFHQ
model is finetuned from our FFHQ model using adaptive
data augmentation [26]. For more results, please see the
accompanying video.
5.1. Comparisons
Baselines.
We compare our methods against state-of-
the-art 3D GAN methods including those that use low-
resolution neural rendering and 2D post-processing CNN
super resolution:
EG3D [7],
MVCGAN [74],
and
StyleSDF [45]; and methods that operate entirely based on
neural rendering: Mimic3D [10], Epigraf [53], GMPI [75],
and GramHD [67].
Qualitative results
Fig. 5 shows the curated samples gen-
erated by our method with FFHQ and AFHQ, demonstrat-
ing photorealistic rendering as well as high-resolution de-
tails that align with the 2D images. Fig 6 provides qual-
itative comparisons to baselines. EG3D shows significant
artifacts and cannot resolve high-resolution geometry since
it performs neural rendering at only 128 × 128. Mimic3D
and Epigraf render all pixels with neural rendering, but the
patch-based nature of these methods harm the overall 3D
6

Figure 5. Curated samples on FFHQ and AFHQ. Our method can resolve high-fidelity geometry (e.g., eyeglasses) and fine-grained details
(e.g., stubble hair and cat’s fur) as seen in the geometry and normal map.
Figure 6. Qualitative comparisons on FFHQ with EG3D [7], Mimic3D [10] and Epigraf [53]. EG3D performs neural rendering at resolution
128 × 128 and relies on 4× super resolution to generate images. On the right, Mimic3D and Epigraf directly generate the image via neural
rendering. While all other baselines use up to 192 dense depth samples per ray, our method can operate at 30 samples per ray.
Figure 7. Ablation study on the effect of beta regularization.
geometry (e.g., distorted face and missing ear). Our method
provides both high-fidelity 3D shape (e.g., well-defined ears
and isolated clothing collar) and high-resolution details.
Quantitative results.
Tabs. 1 and 2 provide quantitative
comparisons against baselines. We measure the image qual-
ity with Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) [22]. We assess
the quality of the learned geometry with a face-specific Nor-
mal FID (FID-N) [15].
We render 10.79k normal maps
from the NPHM [17] dataset by solving for the approxi-
mate alignment between the average FFHQ 2D landmarks
and the provided 3D landmarks.
Examples are given in
the supplement. For each mesh, we render two views with
approximately 20 degrees of pitch variation relative to the
front of the face. These views are processed to remove the
background with facer [13]. For each baseline, we render
10k normal maps and remove their background using the
predicted mask from facer on the rendered image. We com-
pute the FID between the two sets of images. Finally, we
also evaluate the flatness of the learned representations with
non-flatness score (NFS) [54].
Our results show the state-of-the-art image quality
7

Method
FID ↓FID-N↓NFS↑
FFHQ-512
w/o SR
Epigraf [7]
9.92†
67.33
33.95
Mimic3D [10]
5.37
64.97
16.76
GRAM-HD [67] 12.2†∗
-
-
Ours
4.97
60.76
29.35
w SR
EG3D [7]
4.70
63.02
17.54
StyleSDF [45]
11.19†
87.42
22.75
MVCGAN [74]
13.4†∗
-
-
Table 1. Quantitative comparison with baselines with and without
super resolution (SR) on the FFHQ dataset.
† as reported in the
previous works. * indicates FID evaluated on 20k images.
Method
FID ↓
NFS↑
AFHQ-512
w/o SR
GRAM-HD [67]
7.67†
-
GMPI [45]
7.79†
-
Mimic3D [10]
4.29
12.67
Ours
4.23
21.89
w SR
EG3D [7]
2.77
14.14
StyleSDF [45]
7.91
33.89
Table 2. Quantitative results on AFHQv2 Cats. † as reported in the
previous works.
among the methods that operate only with neural rendering,
while achieving FID comparable to the state-of-the-art SR-
based method, EG3D. Our geometry quality outperforms all
existing methods as indicated by our state-of-the-art FID-
N. Additionally, our high NFS scores show the 3D aspect
of our geometry. However, since NFS simply measures the
variations of depth as a measure of non-flatness, it does not
quantify the quality of geometry above a certain threshold.
We also compare other methods’ ability to render with
low sample count in Tab. 3. With just 20 samples, the ren-
dering quality of our method drops by only .3 in FID, com-
pared to the precipitous drop for other methods. This vali-
dates our strategy to jointly learn a sampler and ensure tight
SDF surface for operation under a limited sample budget.
5.2. Ablation Study
Without our surface tightness regularization (Eq. 10), the
SDF surface may get fuzzy, resulting in a less clean surface
(see Fig. 7) and worse geometry scores (see Tab. 4). With-
out our sampler or stratification during sampling, the model
cannot learn meaningful 3D geometry with limited depth
budgets, creating degenerated 3D geometry as can be seen
in Fig. 8 and significantly worse FID-N. Without our robust
sampling strategy, the sampling becomes more susceptible
to slight errors in the sampler due to the high-frequency na-
ture of the PDF (see Fig. 4), resulting in a noticeable drop
in FID and occasionally creating floater geometry artifacts
(see Fig. 8), while geometry scores remain similar.
Method
FID (20)↓
FID (50)↓
FID (96)↓
Mimic3D
53.57
13.31
5.37
EG3D
193.75
36.82
4.70
Ours
5.28
4.97
4.97
Table 3. FID comparison on FFHQ using various sample counts.
The samples per pixel are given in the parentheses of the metric.
Method
FID ↓
FID-N ↓
NFS ↑
- Learned Sampler
38.29
93.88
30.95
- Stratification
5.60
86.02
5.97
- Robust Sampling
5.67
60.78
24.79
- Beta Regularization
5.27
64.25
28.88
Ours
4.97
60.76
29.35
Table 4. Ablation study.
Figure 8. Qualitative comparisons for ablation study.
6. Discussion
Limitations and future work.
While our method demon-
strates significant improvements in 3D geometry genera-
tion, it may still exhibit artifacts such as dents in the pres-
ence of specularities, and cannot handle transparent objects
such as lenses well. Future work may incorporate more ad-
vanced material formulations [5] and surface normal reg-
ularization [60]. While 3D GANs can learn 3D represen-
tations from single-view image collections such as FFHQ
and AFHQ with casual camera labels [7], the frontal bias
and inaccurate labels can result in geometry artifacts, espe-
cially on the side of the faces. Fruitful future directions may
include training 3D GANs with large-scale Internet data as
well as incorporating a more advanced form of regulariza-
tion [47] and auto-camera calibration [3] to extend the gen-
erations to 360 degrees. Finally, our sampling-based accel-
eration method may be applied to other NeRFs.
Ethical considerations.
While existing methods have
demonstrated effective capabilities in detecting unseen
GANs [12], our contribution may remove certain charac-
teristics from generated images, potentially making the task
of detection more challenging. Viable solutions include the
authentication of synthetic media [1, 2, 48].
8

Conclusion.
We proposed a sampler-based method to ac-
celerate 3D GANs to resolve 3D representations at the
native resolution of 2D data, creating strictly multi-view-
consistent images as well as highly detailed 3D geometry
learned from a collection of in-the-wild 2D images. We
believe our work opens up new possibilities for generating
high-quality 3D models and synthetic data that capture in-
the-wild variations and for enabling new applications such
as conditional view synthesis.
