AI-FLARES: Artificial Intelligence for the Analysis of Solar Flares
Data
Michele Piana1,2, Federico Benvenuto1, Anna Maria Massone1, Cristina Campi1, Sabrina Guastavino1,
Francesco Marchetti3, Paolo Massa4, Emma Perracchione5, Anna Volpara1
1 MIDA, Dipartimento di Matematica, Universit`a di Genova, Genova, Italy
2 Osservatorio Astrofisico di Torino, Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica, Pino Torinese, Italy
3 Dipartimento di Matematica “Tullio Levi Civita”, Universit`a di Padova, Padova, Italy
4 Department of Physics & Astronomy, Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, KY 42101, USA
5 Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche “Giuseppe Luigi Lagrange”, Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy
Abstract
AI-FLARES (Artificial Intelligence for the Analysis of Solar Flares Data) is a research project funded by the
Agenzia Spaziale Italiana and by the Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica within the framework of the “Attivit`a di
Studio per la Comunit`a Scientifica Nazionale Sole, Sistema Solare ed Esopianeti” program. The topic addressed
by this project was the development and use of computational methods for the analysis of remote sensing space
data associated to solar flare emission. This paper overviews the main results obtained by the project, with
specific focus on solar flare forecasting, reconstruction of morphologies of the flaring sources, and interpretation
of acceleration mechanisms triggered by solar flares.
key words. Sun: flares – Data: EUV, magnetograms, hard X-rays – Methods: artificial intelligence
1
Introduction
Solar flares are the most explosive and energetic events that characterize the active Sun (Tandberg-Hanssen &
Emslie 1988). They may extend for more than 10,000 kilometers, release more than 1032 ergs in less than 100
seconds, accelerate billion of tons of materials to more than one kilometer per hour, and generate electromagnetic
radiation at all wavelengths. From a physical viewpoint, this source of radiation is characterized by very low
resistance and very high inductance, so that the rising phase of a flare should last for an (impossibly) long
time, which is in contrast with respect to empirical observations. This flare paradox, together with the fact
that very little is known about the acceleration and energy release mechanisms within the flaring region, are the
reasons why solar flares are still a hot topic in both experimental and theoretical solar plasma physics. Further,
from a technological viewpoint, flares are the trigger of space weather (Moldwin 2022), i.e., the physical and
phenomenological state of natural space environments, which may notably impact the technological assets at
earth.
Two general investigation issues concerning solar flares are:
1. Are the information contained in the magnetic fields constrained within solar active regions (ARs) and
measured by means of magnetograms accurate enough to allow a reliable flare forecasting process?
2. Which physical mechanisms determine the acceleration of the electrons in coronal plasma, thus triggering
the process that leads to the emission of high energy radiation via bremsstrahlung with the ions of the
ambient plasma?
The “Artificial Intelligence for the analysis of solar FLARES data (AI-FLARES)” project, funded in 2019
by the Agenzia Spaziale Italiana and the Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica under the “Attivit`a di Studio per la
comunit`a scientifica nazionale Sole, Sistema Solare ed Esopianeti” framework, recognized that these issues can
be accomplished by means of two different approaches. From the one hand, magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
equations can be numerically reduced in order to simulate the flaring mechanisms. However, this approach is
significantly hampered by the complexity of these partial differential equations and by the limited accuracy of the
numerical approximation of their solutions. On the other hand, data-driven approaches can exploit the notable
amount of solar, heliophysics, and space weather missions that are currently operating and that can provide an
unprecedented amount of multi-modal measurements concerning essentially all possible manifestations of the
active Sun. Given this available wealth of data, AI-FLARES focused on the formulation and implementation
of computational methods for their interpretation, with applications to the forecasting and modelling of solar
flares. Specifically, AI-FLARES developed computational methods for the prediction of the flaring emission
and the identification of flare precursors, the reconstruction of flare morphologies for intense eruptive events,
and the comprehension of the energy release and acceleration mechanisms for both thermal and non-thermal
electrons. The project’s objectives were to
1
arXiv:2401.01104v1  [astro-ph.SR]  2 Jan 2024

• Reconstruct the saturated EUV signal in the core region of images of flaring storms recorded by the
Atmospheric Imaging Assembly on-board the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO/AIA) (Lemen et al.
2012).
• Provide an imaging-spectroscopy picture of the acceleration mechanisms at the base of solar high-energy
emissions by exploiting visibilities recorded by both the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopy
Imager (RHESSI) (Hurford et al. 2003) and the Spectrometer/Telescope Imaging X-rays (STIX) on-board
Solar Orbiter (Krucker et al. 2020).
• Design flare forecasting processes and identify the most significant precursors of intense flares by applying
machine learning and deep learning algorithms to the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager on-board SDO
(SDO/HMI) magnetograms (Scherrer et al. 2012).
The methodological inspiration of AI-FLARES relied on an extended interpretation of artificial intelligence,
including supervised machine and deep learning, image processing, inverse problems and inverse diffraction the-
ory. From a technological viewpoint, the outcome of this research effort has been a set of computational pipelines
for the interpretation of flare-related physics that can be reached at https://github.com/theMIDAgroup/AI-
FLARES.
The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes AI-FLARES results concerned with flare forecasting.
Section 3 and Section 4 focus on image processing and reconstruction at EUV and hard X-ray wavelengths,
respectively. Our conclusions are offered in Section 5.
2
AI-FLARES and solar flare forecasting from magnetograms
In the last decade a notable amount of scientific literature has been illustrating the results of the application of
data-driven AI-based approaches to flare forecasting (Camporeale et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2018; Florios et al.
2018; Leka et al. 2019; Georgoulis et al. 2021; Ribeiro & Gradvohl 2021; Nishizuka et al. 2021; Sinha et al. 2022).
Most of these studies describes the action of either machine learning tools that process features extracted from
magnetograms, or deep neural networks that directly take as input full disk images of solar active regions (ARs).
On the one hand, a possible objective of feature-based machine learning is to identify which AR descriptors
mostly impact the forecasting process. On the other hand, deep learning aims at improving the predictive
power hidden within the space data by means of black-box approaches that take as input images or videos
of AR magnetograms and provide as output a binary classification based on features that are automatically
computed by the neural networks.
AI-FLARES addressed the first issue by means of sparsity-enhancing regularization methods applied to the
SDO/HMI archive in specific but large time ranges (Benvenuto et al. 2018; Florios et al. 2018; Massone et al.
2018; Piana et al. 2018; Campi et al. 2019; Benvenuto et al. 2020; Cicogna et al. 2021). In a typical pipeline
of analysis, the HMI magnetograms have been grouped into four subsets belonging to the four issuing times
00:00, 06:00, 12:00, and 18:00 UT. For each AR we used the 171 features extracted by means of the algorithms
implemented within the FLARECAST Horizon 2020 project (Georgoulis et al. 2021). For each subset, i.e., for
each issuing time, we generated the training, validation, and test sets and, for each sample in the training set,
the annotation was performed providing label ”1” to an event occurred within 24 hours from the issuing time.
By applying AI-FLARES machine learning algorithms to these data we were able to prove that (see Figure 1):
• Very few AR descriptors are really effective in the forecasting process and these descriptors are very robust,
independently of the regularization method used and of other experimental aspects like the issuing times
considered in the training set (Campi et al. 2019).
• The Ising energy seems to systematically play a notable predictive role, specifically in the case of the
forecasting of particularly intense flaring storms (Benvenuto et al. 2020).
• The computation of innovative topological descriptors can represent a way to improve the skill scores
associated to feature-based machine learning algorithms (Cicogna et al. 2021).
The second AI-FLARES perspective on flare forecasting was the development of deep learning networks able
to provide a notable prediction improvement in the difficult game of space weather prediction. In this context,
the main result of AI-FLARES (see Figure 2) has been the implementation of a pipeline that, for the first
time, utilizes videos of HMI frames as input data and that, again for the first time, accounts for an appropriate
balancing of different data sample types in the training and validation phases of the neural network (Guastavino
et al. 2022).
We implemented the AI-FLARES Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Network (LRCN) and
validated it against the Near Realtime Space Weather HMI Archive Patch (SHARP) data products associated
with the line-of-sight components in the time range between 2012 September 14 and 2017 September 30. More
specifically, we used 24-h-long videos made of 40 SHARP images of an AR, with 36 minutes cadence. These
2

Figure 1: Feature-based machine learning for flare forecasting. Top left panel: very few descriptors (x-axis) are sufficient
to achieve high values of the True Skill Statistic (TSS) score (y-axis) with two machine learning methods (hybrid LASSO, HLA and
Random Forest, RF). Bottom panel: feature-ranking applied to machine learning outcomes show that the Ising energy significantly
increases its rank when the AR producing the flaring event is included in the training set. Top right panel: the TSS notably
increases when the topological feature introduced in Cicogna et al. (2021) is added as first descriptor (red solid line), with respect
to the case wehm the feature is not used in the training set (blue dashed line).
videos have been categorized as C-, M-, and X-class flares and also according to four different null-events classes.
We generated a training set, a validation set and a test set, and we used data augmentation to increase their
cardinality. We repeated this set generation process ten times in order to create ten random realizations of
these three sets. The algorithm for set generation was inspired to two strategic principles: proportionality, i.e.,
use of the same rates of samples for each category; and parsimony, i.e., use of as few ARs as possible so that
samples belonging to the same AR fall into the same set. As shown in Figure 2, the true positive rates provided
by the deep network are significantly high (in particular, both M and X classes are more distinguishable from
ARs associated with NO-class), and in all cases the standard deviations are nicely small.
As a final comment, we point out that AI-FLARES provided contributions also to the methodological field
related to machine and deep learning research. In particular, during this project two theoretical ideas have been
conceived and formulated. The first one is about the use of probabilistic score-oriented loss functions in the
training phase for neural networks (Marchetti et al. 2022); the second one is about the use of value-weighted
skill scores for the performance assessment of both machine and deep learning (Guastavino et al. 2022, 2023).
These two methodological tools have been utilized in most networks designed for the flare forecasting approaches
developed within AI-FLARES.
3
AI-FLARES and EUV image de-saturation
EUV measurements recorded in correspondence with intense solar flares are almost systematically affected by
saturation. After the launch of SDO/AIA, the desaturation of EUV images has become a big data issue, since
AIA has been providing more the 105 frames per year since February 2010 (Schwartz et al. 2014; Torre et al.
2015; ?).
AI-FLARES contribution to image processing at the solar EUV regime is represented by the formulation
and implementation of the Sparsity-Enhancing DESAT (SE-DESAT) method, a novel computational approach
for the analysis of SDO/AIA saturated images able to recover the signal in the primary saturation region in a
rapid fashion without using any other information but the one contained in the image itself (Guastavino et al.
2019). SE-DESAT is a modification of a previous algorithm developed in our group, named DESAT (Schwartz
et al. 2015). As for DESAT, also in SE-DESAT the input data are represented by the diffraction fringes and
therefore this is again an inverse diffraction algorithm. However, unlike for DESAT, this new approach realizes
segmentation between the primary saturation region and blooming, background estimation and desaturation
3

Figure 2: Deep learing for flare forecasting. Left panel: the AI-FLARES neural network is made of a Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network fed by the outcomes of several Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
Right panels: the rates of true positives and true negatives are significantly high thanks to the use of video-based
deep learning.
Figure 3: Desaturation of EUV maps. Left panel: an intense solar flare saturates an extended region of an
image recorded by SDO/AIA. Right panel: AI-FLARES desaturation algorithm is able to restore the signal in
the core of the flaring source.
in the primary saturation region at the same time, without the need of any a priori information on the image
background. Further, an adaptive version of SE-DESAT (adaptive SE-DESAT) introduced weights depending
on the shape of the saturated region (Guastavino & Benvenuto 2021). An example of how SE-DESAT performs
is described in Figure 3, in the case of EUV images recorded by AIA on September 25 2011, in the 193 ˚𝐴
bandwidth, at time point 03:33:31 UT.
We point out that the availability of this desaturation pipeline has currently two important consequences.
First, scientists working in the STIX community are used to integrate the hard X-ray information contained in
the STIX data with the EUV information contained in the AIA data, and to this aim de-saturated AIA images
are needed (Massa et al. 2022). Second, AI-FLARES people are currently involved in a NASA project for
nowcasting solar flares starting from AIA information (Massa & Emslie 2022). Once again, image desaturation
will be a crucial pre-processing step for the realization of a prediction approach that will apply machine learning
4

Figure 4: Image reconstruction from hard X-ray visibilities. A constrained maximum entropy method,
a forward-fit algorithm based on Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), and an automated version of CLEAN
deconvolution metod provided the reconstructions in the left, middle, and right panels, respectively.
to de-saturated EUV maps.
4
AI-FLARES and hard X-ray imaging spectroscopy
AI-FLARES results concerned with hard X-ray imaging spectroscopy (Piana et al. 2022) have been of three
kinds. We formulated the mathematical model for the image formation process of STIX visibilities and con-
tributed to the calibration process for all thirty STIX collimators devoted to imaging (Massa et al. 2019; Krucker
et al. 2020; Massa et al. 2023). We then developed several image reconstruction methods able to represent in
the image space the information contained in the hard X-ray visibilities recorded by either RHESSI or STIX.
Specifically, we have formulated, implemented and validated (see Figure 4):
• A maximum entropy method, in which the solution is constrained to have positive entries and total flux
equal to an a priori estimate (Massa et al. 2020).
• An interpolation/extrapolation method based on feature augmentation and on the use of Variably Scaled
Kernels (Perracchione et al. 2021a,b) that allows the implementation of an automated version of CLEAN
deconvolution (Perracchione et al. 2023).
• A parametric imaging method that works for both a partial information on the visibility set, i.e., when
just the visibility amplitudes are provided by the instrument (Massa et al. 2021) and when visibilities
are recorded by fully calibrated collimators (Volpara et al. 2022) (the algorithm relies on Particle Swarm
Optimization).
Finally, and probably more importantly, as part of the RHESSI legacy (Piana et al. 2007; Prato et al. 2009),
we formulated and implemented a regularization method that is able to reconstruct maps whose pixel content
is proportional to the average flux of the electrons accelerated along the magnetic field lines from the corona
down to the chromosphere. The nicest aspect of this methodological approach (see Figure 5) is that it is able to
provide electron maps that are constrained to vary in a smooth way along the spectral direction and that can
be projected back to the photon domain to produce photon maps that are in turn regularized across energy.
This approach may represent an important step to a full interpretation of STIX data within the framework of
imaging spectroscopy, and may provide a crucial tool for the understanding of electron acceleration mechanisms
during solar flares (Volpara et al. 2023).
5
Conclusions
This paper has reviewed the main results obtained within the framework of the AI-FLARES project. These
results involve the whole workflow concerning the interpretation of solar flare data, starting from the prediction
of flaring events using magnetograms, through the restoration of morphological aspects of the flaring sources in
saturated high-resolution EUV maps, to the realization of an innovative imaging spectroscopy approach in the
case of hard X-ray visibilities.
The legacy of AI-FLARES in the current activity of our research group is two-fold.
On the one hand,
we are developing neural networks for space weather forecasting that encode physical information in the loss
function utilized for the training (Guastavino et al. 2023). On the other hand, we are studying how regularized
5

Figure 5: Regularized imaging spectroscopy from hard X-ray visibilities.
These panels represent
electron flux maps at different electron energies (regularization introduced a smoothing constraint across the
energy direction.)
electron maps can be used to obtain quantitative information about the effectiveness of the electron acceleration
mechanisms triggered by magnetic reconnection high in the solar corona (Volpara et al. 2023).
