The Value of Inferring the Internal State of
Trafﬁc Participants for Autonomous Freeway Driving
Zachary N. Sunberg, Christopher J. Ho, and Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Abstract— Safe interaction with human drivers is one of
the primary challenges for autonomous vehicles. In order to
plan driving maneuvers effectively, the vehicle’s control system
must infer and predict how humans will behave based on
their latent internal state (e.g., intentions and aggressiveness).
This research uses a simple model for human behavior with
unknown parameters that make up the internal states of the
trafﬁc participants and presents a method for quantifying
the value of estimating these states and planning with their
uncertainty explicitly modeled. An upper performance bound
is established by an omniscient Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) planner that has perfect knowledge of the internal
states. A baseline lower bound is established by planning with
MCTS assuming that all drivers have the same internal state.
MCTS variants are then used to solve a partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP) that models the internal
state uncertainty to determine whether inferring the internal
state offers an advantage over the baseline. Applying this
method to a freeway lane changing scenario reveals that there
is a signiﬁcant performance gap between the upper bound and
baseline. POMDP planning techniques come close to closing
this gap, especially when important hidden model parameters
are correlated with measurable parameters.
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the challenges in introducing autonomous automo-
biles is ensuring that they interact safely with human drivers.
In order to navigate complex driving scenarios, human
drivers routinely predict what other drivers will do and make
driving decisions based on these predictions. Autonomous
vehicles typically take an overly conservative approach,
which can result in physical danger, reduced efﬁciency, and
an uncomfortable experience. In a recent study, autonomous
vehicles drove over 1.2 million miles without being legally
responsible for any accidents. However, the autonomous
vehicles actually had a higher accident rate than average
for a conventional vehicle in the United States because
of accidents for which they were not legally responsible
[1]. This result suggests that there is signiﬁcant room for
improvement in autonomous-human vehicle interaction.
One approach to improve interaction would be to program
ad-hoc logic for each situation into the vehicles. However,
this approach is time-consuming and error prone, and edge
cases that the programmers have not foreseen can present
a safety risk. Furthermore, this approach limits the per-
formance of the system to the capability of the human
programmer. In contrast, artiﬁcial intelligence and machine
The authors are with the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Stanford University. Toyota Research Institute (”TRI”) provided funds to
assist the authors with their research but this article solely reﬂects the
opinions and conclusions of its authors and not TRI or any other Toyota

learning techniques have the potential to provide a more
robust approach to such decision-making tasks. This paper
explores techniques based on Markov decision processes
(MDPs) and partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) [2].
POMDPs are particularly well suited for modeling deci-
sions for autonomous vehicles because it explicitly captures
the limitations of the vehicle’s sensors in measuring the
relevant state variables [3]–[5]. Though sensors can accu-
rately measure many of the relevant variables pertaining to
the physical state of the vehicles, the internal state (e.g.,
intentions and aggressiveness) of other drivers and road
users can only be indirectly inferred [4]–[7]. The hypothesis
explored in this paper is that inferring and planning with an
estimate of the internal states of the trafﬁc participants will
improve safety and efﬁciency.
Driving strategies derived from MDPs and POMDPs
depend on several ingredients to be successful. First, an
accurate stochastic model of the environment, including the
behavior of other drivers is necessary. Though this paper
uses a very simple model, there has been signiﬁcant work
on creating better models in recent years [8]–[10], and
the POMDP planning methods that we use can easily be
adapted to use these new models. POMDP methods also
require a reward function. In some cases, constructing the
reward function that balances different objectives (e.g., safety
and efﬁciency) is straightforward. However, in other cases,
human preferences can be difﬁcult to quantify and encode
into a reward function. For these cases, inverse reinforcement
learning can be used to determine a suitable reward function
based on data of how human drivers act [11], [12].
Before investing the effort required to develop and test a
POMDP-based decision making system for real autonomous
vehicles, it is important to quantify the potential perfor-
mance improvement. This paper presents a method that in-
volves comparing solutions obtained from several variations
of Monte Carlo Tree Search [13]. For this research, we
have chosen to investigate these ideas in the context of
making lane changes on a freeway (a situation that has
been anecdotally noted to be difﬁcult [14]). We present a
method for quantifying the performance gains that could
result from perfect estimation of and planning with hidden
behavior model parameters. In addition, we show that when
model parameters are correlated, estimating the parameters
online using physical measurements can greatly improve
performance. Planning using a POMDP problem formulation
that dynamically takes uncertainty into account can further
improve performance.
arXiv:1702.00858v1  [cs.AI]  2 Feb 2017

II. MODEL
The focus of this paper is on freeway driving. We in-
vestigate a scenario in which a vehicle must navigate from
the rightmost to the leftmost lane of a four lane freeway as
quickly as possible while maintaining safety and comfort.
Throughout this section, x denotes position in the lon-
gitudinal direction, that is, the direction that the cars move
along the road in meters, and y denotes position in the lateral
direction, that is, the lane the car occupies in lane units. The
problem can be stated as a discrete-time POMDP deﬁned by
the tuple (S, A, T, R, O, Z), which consists of
• The state space, S: A system state,
s = (q0, {(qi, θi)}i∈1..N) ∈S,
consists of the physical state of the ego vehicle (q0),
and physical state and behavior model for each of the
N other cars in the scene. The physical state,
qi = (xi, yi, ˙xi, ˙yi),
consists of the car’s longitudinal and lateral position and
velocity. The internal state (behavior model parameters),
θi, is drawn from a set of behaviors Θ.
• The action space, A: An action, u = (¨xe, ¨ye) ∈A,
consists of the longitudinal acceleration and lateral
velocity of the ego vehicle. The action space is discrete
and pruned to prevent crashes (see Section II-C).
• The state transition model, T : S × A × S →R: The
value T(s, u, s′) is the probability of transitioning to
state s′ given that action u is taken by the ego at state
s. This function is implicitly deﬁned by a generative
model that consists of a state transition function, F(·),
and a stochastic noise process (see Section II-B).
• The reward model, R : S × S →R: The reward
function, deﬁned in Section II-D, rewards time spent
in the target left lane and penalizes strong braking.
• The observation space, O: An observation, o ∈O
consists of the physical states of all of the vehicles, that
is o = {pi}i∈1..N. No information about the internal
state is directly included in the observation.
• The observation model, Z : S × O →R: The value
Z(s′, o) is the probability of receiving observation o
when the system transitions to state s′. In these exper-
iments, the physical state is assumed to be known ex-
actly, though it is not difﬁcult to relax this assumption.
The remainder of this section elaborates on this model.
A. Driver Modeling
The driver models for each car have two components: an
acceleration model that governs the longitudinal motion and
a lane change model that determines the lateral motion. In
this paper, the acceleration model is the Intelligent Driver
Model (IDM) [15], and the lane change model is the “Mini-
mizing Overall Braking Induced by Lane change” (MOBIL)
model [16]. Both of these models have a small number of
parameters that determine the behavior of the drivers.
1) IDM: The IDM Model was developed as a simple
model for “microscopic” simulations of trafﬁc ﬂows and is
able to reproduce some phenomena observed in real-world
trafﬁc ﬂows. It determines the longitudinal acceleration for
a human-driven car, ¨x, based on the desired distance gap
to the preceding car, g, the absolute velocity, ˙x, and the
velocity relative to the preceding car ∆˙x. The longitudinal
acceleration is governed by the following equation:
¨xIDM = a
"
1 −
 ˙x
˙x0
δ
−
g∗( ˙x, ∆˙x)
g
2#
,
(1)
where g∗is the desired gap given by
g∗( ˙x, ∆˙x) = g0 + T ˙x + ˙x∆˙x
2
√
ab
.
(2)
Brief descriptions and values for the parameters not deﬁned
here are provided later in Table I.
A small amount of noise is also added to the acceleration
¨x = ¨xIDM + σvel
∆t w,
(3)
where w is zero-mean, normally distributed random variable
with unit standard deviation. The w for each car and time
step are independent of all others. Since w can take arbitrarily
large values, crashes can technically occur. However, at each
transition, if the additional noise is sufﬁciently large to cause
a collision, w is artiﬁcially reduced to prevent collision. In
practice this occurs very rarely.
2) MOBIL: The MOBIL model makes the decision to
change lanes based on maximizing the acceleration for the
vehicle and its neighbors. When considering a lane change,
MOBIL ﬁrst ensures that the safety criterion ˜¨xfollow ≥−bsafe,
where ¨xn will be the acceleration of the following car if the
lane change is made and bsafe is the safe braking limit. It
then makes the lane change if the following condition is met
˜¨xc −¨xc + p
 ˜¨xn −¨xn + ˜¨xo −¨xo

> ∆ath
(4)
where the quantities with tildes are calculated assuming that
a lane change is made, the quantities with subscript c are
quantities for the car making the lane change decision, those
with n are for the new follower, and those with o are for
the old follower. The parameter p ∈[0, 1] is the politeness
factor, which represents how much the driver values allowing
other vehicles to increase their acceleration. The parameter
∆ath is the threshold acceleration increase to initiate a lane
changing maneuver. Parameter values are listed in Table I.
B. Physical Dynamics
The physical dynamics are simpliﬁed for the sake of
computational efﬁciency. Time is divided into discrete steps
of length ∆t. The longitudinal dynamics assume constant ac-
celeration, and the lateral dynamics assume constant velocity
over a time step, that is
x′
=
x + ˙x∆t + 1
2 ¨x∆t2
˙x′
=
˙x + ¨x∆t
y′
=
y + ˙y∆t.

There is a physical limit to the braking acceleration, bmax.
Lateral velocity is allowed to change instantly because cars
on a freeway can achieve the lateral velocity needed for a
lane change in time much shorter than ∆t by steering. If
MOBIL determines that a lane change should be made, the
lateral velocity, ˙y, is set to ˙ylc. Lane changes are not allowed
to reverse. Once a lane change has begun, ˙y remains constant
until the lane change is completed (this is the reason that ˙y
is part of the state). When a vehicle passes over the midpoint
of a lane, lateral movement is immediately stopped so that
lane changes always end at exactly the center of a lane.
Since MOBIL only considers cars in adjacent lanes, there
must be a coordination mechanism so that two cars do not
converge into the same lane simultaneously. In order to
accomplish this, if two cars begin changing into the same
lane simultaneously, and the front vehicle is within g∗of the
rear vehicle, the rear vehicle’s lane change is canceled.
In order to reduce the computational demands of decision-
making, only 50 m of road in front of the ego and 50 m
behind are modeled. Thus, a model for vehicle entry into
this section is needed. If there are fewer than Nmax vehicles
on the road, a new vehicle is generated. First, a behavior
for the new vehicle is drawn from Θ, and the initial speed
is set to ˙x0 + σvelw0, where ˙x0 is the desired speed from
the behavior model and w0 is a zero-mean, unit-variance,
normally distributed random variable that is independent for
each car. If this speed is greater than the ego’s speed, the
new vehicle will appear at the back of the road section; if
it is less, it will appear at the front. For each lane, g∗is
calculated, either for the new vehicle if the appearance is at
the back or for the nearest following vehicle if the appearance
is at the front. The new vehicle appears in the lane where
the clearance to the nearest car is greatest. If no clearance is
greater than g∗, the new vehicle does not appear.
For convenience, throughout this paper, the behavior
described so far will be denoted compactly by the state
transition function
s′ = F(s, u, w).
(5)
C. Action Space for Crash-Free Driving
At each time step, the planner for the ego must choose
the longitudinal and lateral acceleration. For simplicity, the
vehicle chooses from up to ten discrete actions. The vehicle
may make an incremental decrease or increase in speed
or maintain speed, and it may begin a left or right lane
change or maintain the current lane. The combination of
these adjustments make up nine of the actions. The ﬁnal
action is a braking action determined dynamically based
on the speed and position of the vehicle ahead. At each
time step, the maximum permitted acceleration, amax, is the
maximum acceleration that the ego could take such that, if
the vehicle ahead immediately begins braking at the physical
limit, bmax, to a stop, the ego will still be able to stop before
hitting it without exceeding physical braking limits itself.
The braking action is (¨xe, ¨ye) = (min{amax, −bnominal}, 0).
The inclusion of the dynamic braking action guarantees
that there will always be an action available to the ego to
avoid a crash. At each step, the action space is pruned so
that if ¨xe > amax or if a lane change leads to a crash,
that action is not considered. Since the IDM and MOBIL
models are both crash-free [17], and actions that lead to
crashes for the ego are not considered, no crashes occur in
the simulation. Eliminating crashes in our model is justiﬁable
because it is likely that in an actual autonomous vehicle
a high-level planning system would be augmented with a
low-level crash prevention system to increase safety and
facilitate certiﬁcation. In addition, it is difﬁcult to model
driver behavior in the extraordinary case of a crash.
D. Reward Function and Objectives
The qualitative objectives in solving this problem are to
reach the target lane as quickly as possible and increase the
comfort and safety of both the ego and the other nearby
vehicles. Thus, the following two metrics will be used to
evaluate planning performance: 1) the average time taken for
the ego to reach the target lane, and 2) the number of hard
braking maneuvers that any vehicle undertakes during the
time that it takes for the ego to reach the target lane. A hard
braking maneuver occurs any time that ¨x < −bhard, where
bhard is chosen to be an uncomfortably abrupt deceleration.
The number of hard braking maneuvers is a proxy for both
safety and comfort.
In order to encourage the planner to choose actions that
will maximize these metrics, the reward function for the
POMDP is deﬁned as follows:
R(s, s′) = 1(ye = ytarget) −λ
N
X
i=1
1( ˙x′
i −˙xi < −bhard∆t).
(6)
Thus, a reward is generated for each step in the target lane,
and a cost is accrued for each braking maneuver. The weight
λ balances the competing goals.
E. Initial Scenes
Initial scenes for the simulations are generated by begin-
ning a simulation with only the ego on the road section. We
then simulate 200 steps with the ego maintaining the current
lane and using the IDM model with typical parameter values.
III. SOLUTION APPROACHES
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) is one of the most
widely used and effective methods for solving decision-
making problems online [13]. MCTS creates a tree consisting
of alternating levels of nodes corresponding to actions and
states. Estimates of the value (expected discounted cumula-
tive rewards) are maintained for each action node. In this
paper, we consider four variants of MCTS to solve different
versions of the problem. All of the variants make use of the
upper conﬁdence tree (UCT) [13] and double progressive
widening (DPW) [18], [19] modiﬁcations to MCTS.
When building the tree, UCT expands the action nodes
that maximize an upper conﬁdence estimate
UCB(s, u) = ˜Q(s, u) + c
s
ln N(s)
N(s, u),

where ˜Q(s, u) is the estimate of the action-value function
obtained through rollout simulations and tree search, N(s, u)
is the number of times action u has been tried from state s,
N(s) = P
u∈A N(s, u), and c is the exploration constant.
This efﬁciently balances exploration of the tree towards
promising regions of the search space.
DPW is used to govern the growth of the tree in large
state spaces. If MCTS is applied to a large state space (such
as the continuous state space of this lane changing problem)
without a widening control mechanism in place, too many
new states will be visited from each action node. This will
result in a shallow tree that does not deﬁne a good policy.
A DPW tree contains state-action nodes corresponding to
each action that has been tried in each state. In order to
control widening, DPW limits the number of children of a
state-action node (s, u) to
k N(s, u)α,
(7)
where k and α are tunable parameters. When there are
fewer children than this limit, a new state is generated by
simulating the dynamics and a child corresponding to the
new state is added. As N(s, u) grows, so does the number
of children, allowing for gradual widening of the tree. DPW
also limits the number of actions that are considered from
each state (“double” in DPW refers to limiting the widening
at both state and action nodes), but this is less important for
this problem because the action space is small.
The remainder of this section discusses three different
approaches for planning with the internal states of the trafﬁc
participants.
A. Approach 1: Static Assumed Behavior (SAB)
A performance baseline is established by planning as if
all cars behave according to a single static “normal” internal
state (see Table I). In this case, the problem is an MDP,
which is solved using the MCTS-DPW algorithm.
B. Approach 2: Most Likely Model Predictive Control
(MLMPC)
Since information about the human’s internal state can be
inferred by observing the car’s physical motion, performance
superior to the SAB baseline can be achieved by estimating
θ online. This is accomplished with a particle ﬁlter [20].
Filtering is independent for each car, but all of the behavior
parameters for a given car are estimated jointly. There are
two versions of the ﬁlter. In the ﬁrst version, the behavior
parameters are assumed to be uncorrelated, so a particle, ˆθ
consists of values of all model parameters. In the second
version, all parameters are assumed perfectly correlated (see
Section IV-A), so a particle consists of only a single value,
the “aggressiveness”.
The belief at a given time consists of the exactly known
physical state, q, and a collection of M particles, {ˆθk}M
k=1
along with associated weights {W k}M
k=1. To update the be-
lief when action u is taken, M new particles are sampled with
probability proportional to the weights, and sampled noise
values { ˆwk}M
k=1 are used to generate new states according
to ˆsk′ = F((q, ˆθk), u, ˆwk). The new weights are determined
by approximating the conditional probability of the particle
given the observation:
W k′ =



exp

−( ˙x′−ˆ˙x′)2
2σ2
vel

if y′ = ˆy′
γlane exp

−( ˙x′−ˆ˙x′)2
2σ2
vel

o.w.



∝∼Pr

ˆθk o

where ˙x′ and y′ are taken from the observation, ˆ˙x′ and ˆ˙y′ are
from ˆsk′, the exponential expression is proportional to the
Gaussian probability density function (from the acceleration
noise), and γlane ∈[0, 1] is a hand-tuned parameter that
penalizes incorrect lane changes.
In order to prevent particle deprivation, during the resam-
pling step, Gaussian noise with standard deviation propor-
tional to the sample standard deviation of the current particle
set is added to 10 % of the new samples.
Model predictive control (MPC) is a widely used family
of control techniques that use an imperfect model and
feedback measurements to choose actions [21]. At each time
step, a model predictive controller calculates a sequence of
control actions that will maximize a reward function of the
states visited up to a future horizon given that the system
behaves according to a model. The ﬁrst control action in this
optimized sequence is executed, and the process is repeated
after a new measurement is received.
In the most likely model predictive control (MLMPC)
approach, we use this particle ﬁlter to estimate the internal
state for each driver. At each step, the model used for MPC
is the MDP that results from assuming that each driver has
the internal state corresponding to the single particle with
the highest weight. Each time a new observation is received,
the particle ﬁlter is updated and MCTS-DPW determines the
best action for the resulting MDP.
C. Approach 3: POMCP with Double Progressive Widening
The MCTS algorithm has been extended to handle do-
mains with state uncertainty in the partially observable
Monte Carlo planning (POMCP) algorithm [22]. The root
node of a POMCP tree corresponds to the current belief
about the state maintained by the particle ﬁlter described
above. In place of the state nodes of MCTS, POMCP uses
history nodes that correspond to the sequence of actions
and observations required to reach the node from the root.
At each history node, POMCP represents the current belief
using a collection of unweighted particles.
In order to address the challenges with the branching factor
when using MCTS with continuous state spaces, we have
adapted POMCP to use DPW. Equation (7) is used to limit
the number of children of each action node. In cases when
a new history node is not generated, a previously generated
history node is selected and the next state is sampled from the
particle collection corresponding to that node. The authors
are not aware of any previous research that uses POMCP
with DPW, so the algorithm’s general properties have not
yet been thoroughly studied.

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.5
1
1.5
Braking actions per episode
30
35
40
1
1.5
2
Scenario 1: ρ = 0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.5
1
1.5
Braking actions per episode
30
35
40
1
1.5
2
Scenario 2: ρ = 1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.5
1
1.5
Time to target lane
Braking actions per episode
Omniscient
SAB
MLMPC
POMCP
30
35
40
1
1.5
2
Scenario 3: ρ = 0.75
Fig. 1.
Performance curves for different solvers. The inset plots illustrate
the parameter correlation. The horizontal axis shows ˙x0 in m/s and the
vertical axis shows T in seconds. Error bars indicate the standard error of
the mean, that is σsample/√n, where σsample is the sample standard deviation
and n is the number of simulations.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The computational results from this study are designed to
meet the two goals of 1) quantifying the size of the gap
between the baseline control algorithm and the maximum
potential lane change performance and 2) showing which
cases internal state estimation and POMDP planning can
approach the upper bound on performance. Experiments
are carried out in three scenarios, each with a different
distribution of internal states. In each of these scenarios,
each of the three solution methods described in Section III
are compared with an approximate upper performance bound
obtained by planning with perfect knowledge of the behavior
models.
A. Driver Model Distribution Scenarios
We studied three internal state distribution scenarios. In all
of these scenarios, drivers behave according to the IDM and
MOBIL models presented in Section II-A, however the IDM
and MOBIL parameter values are distributed differently.
Table I shows typical parameter values for aggressive,
timid, and normal drivers. The values are taken from [17],
but some have been adjusted slightly so that the parameters
for the normal driver are exactly half way between values for
the timid and aggressive drivers. In all three of the scenarios,
the marginal distributions of the parameters are uniformly
distributed between the aggressive and timid values. The
difference between the scenarios is the correlation of the pa-
rameter values. In Scenario 1, all of the parameters are inde-
pendently distributed. In Scenario 2, all of the parameters are
perfectly correlated so that all parameters are deterministic
functions of the aggressiveness of the driver. Scenario 3 uses
a distribution between these two extremes. In this scenario,
values are drawn from a Gaussian copula with covariance
matrix with 1 along the diagonal and a correlation, ρ ∈(0, 1),
elsewhere. The values are then scaled and translated to lie
between the aggressive and normal limits. For Scenario 3,
the value of ρ is 0.75, and Scenarios 1 and 2 can be thought
of as limiting cases where ρ approaches 0 and 1, respectively.
In Scenario 1, the ﬁrst version of the particle ﬁlter, which
estimates all of the model parameters jointly, is used, whereas
in Scenarios 2 and 3, the second version of the particle
ﬁlter that assumes fully correlated parameters is used, that
is, it only estimates a single “aggressiveness” parameter for
each car. The small inset plots in Fig. 1 illustrate the level
of correlation by plotting sampled values of two of the
parameters.
B. Performance Results
Figure 1 shows the performance results from the sim-
ulations. Since the conservativeness of all of the solution
techniques can be adjusted by changing λ in (6), 500
simulations were carried out using a reward function with λ
set to the values in Table II. The average time taken to reach
the target lane and the average number of braking actions
per episode are plotted, and a linear interpolation between
these points yields an approximation of the Pareto-optimal
frontier.

TABLE I
IDM AND MOBIL PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT DRIVER TYPES.
IDM Parameter
Aggressive
Timid
Normal
Desired speed (m/s)
˙x0
38.9
27.8
33.3
Desired time gap (s)
T
1.0
2.0
1.5
Jam distance (m)
g0
0.0
4.0
2.0
Max acceleration (m/s2)
a
2.0
0.8
1.4
Desired deceleration (m/s2)
b
3.0
1.0
2.0
MOBIL Parameter
Aggressive
Timid
Normal
Politeness
p
0.0
1.0
0.5
Safe braking (m/s2)
bsafe
3.0
1.0
2.0
Acceleration threshold (m/s2)
athr
0.0
0.2
0.1
TABLE II
VARIOUS SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Simulation time step
∆t
0.75 s
Max vehicles on road
Nmax
10
Lane change rate
˙ylc
0.67 lanes/s
Velocity noise standard deviation
σvel
0.5 m/s
Physical braking limit
bmax
8.0 m/s2
Penalized hard braking limit
bhard
4.0 m/s2
UCT exploration parameter
c
5
DPW linear parameter
k
4
DPW exponent parameter
α
0.125
MCTS search depth
20
MCTS-DPW iterations per step
500
POMCP iterations per step
2500
Particle ﬁlter wrong lane factor
γlane
0.2
Number of Particles (Joint Parameter Filter)
M
1000
Number of Particles (Aggressiveness Filter)
M
500
Reward ratios for points on Pareto curves
λ
1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32
In all cases, there is a signiﬁcant performance gap between
the upper bound and the baseline planning algorithm that
assumes all cars behave according to the normal values of
the driver model parameters. For example, in Scenario 1,
if it is acceptable to have an average of 0.5 hard braking
actions per episode, then the omniscient planner is able to
reach the lane in an average of 9.0 s (50 %) less time than the
baseline SAB planner. Alternatively, if the vehicle is required
to complete the lane changing task in an average time of
10 s, then the average number of hard brakes per episode
would be decreased by 0.40 (50 %) with perfect internal state
knowledge. The performance gap between the baseline and
the bound decreases slightly as the correlation, ρ, increases.
Perhaps the most important result that can be gleaned from
this data is the relationship between the correlation and the
extent to which more advanced planning methods can close
the gap to the bound. When the parameters are uncorrelated,
POMCP is able to reduce the gap to approximately half its
size, while MLMPC struggles to perform much better than
the baseline. However, in the fully correlated scenario, both
of the approaches that try to estimate the internal state are
able to fully close the gap. The reason for this lies primarily
in the difﬁculty in estimating the behavior parameters. In
these tests, the human-driven cars spend most of their time
near their desired speed, v0. This makes it relatively easy to
estimate v0 using the particle ﬁlter, but difﬁcult to measure
the other parameters that determine how the vehicle will react
to the ego. In the fully correlated case, estimating v0 also
gives the exact values of all other parameters, so POMCP and
the MLMPC approach are essentially planning with known
models. The fully correlated case is rather unrealistic, but the
results from Scenario 3 indicate that even if the parameters
are only partially correlated, most of the losses caused by
not knowing the model can be recovered.
The gap between the POMCP and most likely behavior
approaches also indicates the relative importance of the
two tasks of estimation and planning when accounting for
internal state uncertainty. Since the POMCP approach plans
with the full distribution of possible internal states, it takes
uncertainty and future feedback into account when planning.
The MLMPC approach plans as if the behavior models are
exactly known and does not incorporate possible future feed-
back. It could be called an “open loop” planner. Of course,
when the model is easy to estimate with high certainty in the
fully correlated scenario, there is little difference between the
POMCP and MLMPC performance. However, in Scenario 1,
where there is large uncertainty about the model, POMCP
does show a signiﬁcant improvement.
The Julia source code for the experiments can be found
at https://github.com/sisl/Multilane.jl, and
the solver software is part of the POMDPs.jl package
(https://github.com/JuliaPOMDP/POMDPs.jl).
V. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a method for quantifying the
performance that could be gained by a planner omniscient
to the internal state of other vehicles compared to a baseline.
In the simpliﬁed case that we investigated, this gap proved
to be signiﬁcant. Moreover, we showed that the use of a
simple particle ﬁlter can offer greatly improved performance,
especially when internal state features are highly correlated,
and planning using a POMDP model can further reduce the
gap to the bound.
The method described in this paper is extremely ﬂexible
and adaptable. One only needs to deﬁne a generative model
for states, rewards, and observations and possibly tune some
algorithm parameters to adapt it to a new domain. This makes
it useful as a preliminary analysis tool for deciding which
control approach to implement on an actual vehicle.
For the particular case of freeway lane changing, the most
important result from this research is that the distribution of
behavior models in the driver population is a critical factor
in determining the performance improvement that can be
gained by estimating the internal state online and planning
in a way that takes uncertainty in the model into account. If
internal states that affect the performance goals are highly
correlated with states that are easy to measure (e.g., speed),
then the more advanced planning methods will offer a large
beneﬁt, but if internal states are not correlated, there is
less advantage. This observation motivates the need for
detailed understanding of the actual distribution of behavior
models and internal states in the driver population, especially
correlation between features.

There are many possible extensions to this work. It may
be beneﬁcial to try more advanced POMDP solvers such
as DESPOT [23]. Thus far, only inter-vehicle internal state
heterogeneity has been considered, but real drivers also
change their behavior over time and in response to stimuli
[24], and it may be useful to model this when planning.
Moreover, it may be even more beneﬁcial to take a driver’s
speciﬁc intentions into account when planning [25].
