HawkRover: An Autonomous mmWave Vehicular
Communication Testbed with Multi-sensor Fusion
and Deep Learning
Ethan Zhu∗, Haijian Sun†, Mingyue Ji‡
∗Green Canyon High School, 2960 Wolf Pack Wy North, North Logan, UT USA.
†School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Georgia, Athens, GA USA.
‡Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT USA.

Abstract—Connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) have be-
come a transformative technology that can change our daily life.
Currently, millimeter-wave (mmWave) bands are identified as
the promising CAV connectivity solution. While it can provide
high data rate, their realization faces many challenges such as
high attenuation during mmWave signal propagation and mobility
management. Existing solution has to initiate pilot signal to mea-
sure channel information, then apply signal processing to calculate
the best narrow beam towards the receiver end to guarantee
sufficient signal power. This process takes significant overhead
and time, hence not suitable for CAVs. In this study, we propose
an autonomous and low-cost testbed to collect extensive co-located
mmWave signal and other sensor data such as LiDAR (Light
Detection and Ranging), cameras, ultrasonic, etc, traditionally for
“automated”, to facilitate mmWave vehicular communications.
Intuitively, these sensors can build a 3D map around the vehicle
and signal propagation path can be estimated, eliminating the
iterative process via pilot signals. This multimodal data fusion,
together with AI, is expected to bring significant advances in
“connected” research.
Index Terms—Vehicular communication, mmWave communi-
cation, sensor fusion, machine learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
More than 40,000 people die each year on U.S. highways,
1.3 million worldwide [1]. Efforts from all aspects are needed
to reduce such a high fatality rate. Among them, CAV is the
only solution that can bring the number to nearly 0, hence
it has attracted increasing attentions from industry, academia,
and government. As the name suggests, CAV involves two
interconnected concepts: “connected” and “automated”. Re-
cent years have witnessed significant advances in “automated”
vehicles, creating self-driving capability up to Level 5 (fully
autonomous). Current autonomous control is implemented in
a more isolated way, made possible by sensors, pre-trained
AI algorithms and on-board computer processing within indi-
vidual vehicle. With more testing and deployed CAVs in the
near future, we expect there is a pressing need to provide
capability to exchange, transmit, and collect real-time data
via vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I),
vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communications, i.e., the need for
“connected”.
Dedicated short range communication (DSRC) is the first
standard for vehicle communication that operates on 5.9 GHz
and delivers data rate from 3 to 27 Mb/s [2]. But it soon
encounters bottleneck as V2V and V2I desire higher data
rate and lower latency for assisted driving. Moreover, DSRC
requires the installation of many new devices at the roadside,
which becomes a barrier for wide deployment. State-of-the-
art proposes to utilize 5G cellular millimeter-wave (mmWave)
band (∼28 GHz and above), an evolution from current cellular
V2X (C-V2X), to address these challenges [3]. As a core
innovation for 5G, mmWave will be readily available with
future base station (BS) infrastructures. However, applying it
for vehicle scenario is still in the infancy and faces many
unique challenges [4]. The main reason is that mmWave
requires directional transmission to compensate for high signal
attenuation, but it needs to send pilot signals to obtain precise
propagation information, then calculates the best direction.
This iterative process takes too long time and therefore is
not suitable for high mobility scenario, where timely alerts,
warning, and advice on driving decisions are critical.
Alternatively, some works have proposed a sensor fusion
approach to align mmWave transmissions in nearly real-time.
Specifically, this approach is to utilize “out-of-band” informa-
tion from LiDAR, camera, ultrasonic sensors that are already
mounted on CAVs to establish, maintain, and steer mmWave
transmissions. Moreover, fueled by cutting-edge AI algorithms,
we expect this approach can bring real-time capabilities.
Briefly, LiDAR provides 3-D point cloud for surrounding
objects; cameras give high-definition vision view; ultrasonic
depicts pedestrians and objects in close proximity. These data,
when combined, give “eyes” to automated vehicles. On the
other hand, signal propagation follows fundamental physics law
that reflects, diffracts, or diffuses when encountering objects,
hence its behavior is statistically predictable when precise
perception is available. In fact, similar to video games, wireless
simulators use “ray tracing” to model all possible signal paths.
It is therefore a natural choice to combine sensor data and
vehicle communications.
arXiv:2401.01822v2  [cs.IT]  4 Jan 2024

Along this direction, to date, a few works have explored
to using the out-of-band information for facilitating mmWave
transmission. For example, in [5], the authors used cameras to
localize receiver and then guide the transmitter to use direct
beamforming towards the receiver. This approach, however,
will not likely work well for non-line-of-sight (NLoS) sce-
narios. Then in [6], the proposed multi-sensor fusion that
consists of input from radar and camera has shown an improved
performance even under NLoS. In [7], a field measurement
dataset is constructed, which contains LiDAR, camera, radar,
and mmWave signal directions. The tested scenario is also
versatile, from vehicle (dynamic) to pedestrians (relative static).
However, existing testbeds suffer from high cost and are
difficult to configure and use, which limits their potentials.
To summarize, this paper has the following contributions.
• The proposed HawkRover consists of commercial-off-the-
shelf (COTS) TP-Link Talon AD7200 routers and a RC
car. This provides a cost-effective solution for obtaining
mmWave wireless and co-located multi-sensory data. All
the data are time-synchronized through Internet time.
• A deep learning (DL) algorithm is applied to predict
the mmWave beamforming direction from sensory input,
eliminating the signal-based pilot estimation approach.
• Our results show that the constructed dataset and the DL
algorithm perform well in real-world data, proving their
potential in future V2X mmWave networks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the system architect design, followed by the sensor-
aided mmWave beamforming alignment dataset and algorithm.
We give a case-study in Section IV and conclude this paper in
Section V.
II. SYSTEM ARCHITECT DESIGN AND DATA COLLECTION
A. System overview and implementation
The HawkRover system architect is shown in Fig. 1. This
overall design is versatile, allowing for adding sensors in
a plug-and-play fashion. In particular, we use ROS (Robot
Operating System) as the main software platform. ROS is
a middleware between real operating system (Linux) and
hardware. It contains a set of software libraries that are
optimized to interact with sensor devices and has been widely
adopted in robot community [8]. Docker is a virtualization suite
and can dynamically allocate ROS system resources to each
sensor, hence allowing for better utilization on limited onboard
resources. ROS will collect data from cameras, LiDAR, iner-
tial measurement unit (IMU), and mmWave modules. When
generating data, all sensors retrieve global synchronized time,
which is critical for fusion algorithm. For indoor tests, data
from cameras, LiDAR and IMU will also be used to enable
autonomous driving on RC car, so that this platform can operate
without intervention. Lastly, since a huge amount of data will
be generated, an external storage unit is deployed through
wireless connection. Efficient data transmission between ROS
and storage unit is enabled by message queuing telemetry
transport (MQTT), a lightweight, loss-less, and bi-directional
network layer protocol. Below is a brief list of main tools used
in this HawkRover.
Camera
LiDAR
mmWave
IMU
Sync Time
Docker
ROS
Self driving
(indoor)
Database
(for fusion)
MQTT
Fig. 1: HawkRover system architect
Software: ROS-Melodic on Linux, Python, Docker, MQTT,
sensor APIs.
Hardware: Remote control (RC) car as the indoor vehicle,
Nvidia Jetson (main onboard computing device), several wide-
angle cameras, Slamtec RPLiDAR as the LiDAR, Adafruit
IMU sensor, commercial mmWave router from TP-Link Talon
AD7200 series with 32 analog beamforming antennas, and
several battery packs to power each component.
ROS allows the publisher/subscriber mode, where each
sensor interface acts as a publisher to push the generated data to
the subscriber (Linux). A timestamp is also recorded when data
are admitted. The data will be temporarily stored on an onboard
device before entering the MQTT pipeline, which connects to
a much larger external storage unit. The mmWave device we
choose is not only cost effective and power efficient, but also
has a simple beamforming mechanism (pre-defined codebook
and exhaustive beam sweep), which is likely to be adopted
in future vehicular communication. A complete set of indoor
package costs around $1,300. This is possible with the low-
cost mmWave router and RC car. Our setup is much lower than
existing solutions. For example, one pair of mmWave TX and
RX unit from universal software radio peripheral (USRP), each
equipped with a flexible number of antennas, can easily cost
more than $200,000 [9]. The cost of [7] can exceed $10,000
due to their higher-end mmWave devices.
Fig. 2: HawkRover data collection platform

As mentioned before, the proposed testbed can be operated
autonomously, thanks to the “self-driving” capability enabled
by the Donkey car [10]. It utilizes the front camera to identify
the edges of the road and continuously control the steering
angles and throttles. In the lab, we have setup a large canvas
with dark tapes acting as the “road”. Fig. 2 shows the prototype
of HawkRover.
B. Lab data collection
Following pre-defined trajectory, HawkRover can run up to
3 hours without intervention, and each run session can collect
up to 45 Gb of all sensory data. The cap of the run time is due
to battery limit. As shown in Fig. 3, we place a large canvas
in different locations of the lab room that has random objects
in the scene, including office cubic, chairs, desks. In the setup,
HawkRover moves along the trajectory on the canvas while
another Talon router (as the BS) is placed at the corner of the
room. To create NLoS scenario, computer towers and some
boxes are randomly placed between HawkRover and the BS.
Fig. 3: Lab data collection campaign
TP-Link mmWave router is re-programmed with customized
firmware [11]–[14]. With our script, HawkRover can sequen-
tially scan a total of 36 pre-defined beamformers, which spans
the entire spatial directions. For each beamformer, the BS will
return a signal-to-noise (SNR) value, indicating its quality.
Therefore, the transmitter side will use the beamformer with the
largest SNR values. Due to firmware limitations, one complete
scan takes around 100 ms, resulting a scan frequency of 10
Hz. Both front and rear cameras are able to record images at
30 Hz, each with a resolution of 1280 × 720. The LiDAR
can send 1,600 laser beams at 15 Hz, each laser can be
translated into 3D point cloud. The IMU sensor is used to
record HawkRover relative location and speed information, the
frequency is adjustable. In this setup, we collect data at 100
Hz, each data point consists of acceleration, magnetic field, and
orientation from 3 dimension (x, y, z). Table .I summarizes all
data and their format.
Sensor
Data frequency (Hz)
Data # per sample
camera
30
1280 × 720
LiDAR
15
1600 × (x, y, z)
IMU
100
10
mmWave sensor
∼10
36
location
100
2
TABLE I: Data format from different sensors on HawkRover
III. SENSOR-AIDED MMWAVE BEAM ALIGNMENT
In the previous section, we have introduced the HawkRover
platform and the data format. With HawkRover, enormous
amount of data and be collected in a cost-effective and flexible
way. In the following, we focus on the data processing and DL
algorithm.
A. Dataset pre-processing
From Table I, one can observe that although all sensor
data are synchronized, their events (the time of recording)
are not aligned in the time domain due to different data
frequencies. This phenomenon is also illustrated in Fig. 4.
In fact, mmWave sensor data is very spare, which poses
challenges to create the mapping relationship between beam
directions and propagation environment sensing input. As an
example, consider the mmWave sensor generated one sample
data, while camera and LiDAR may have produced more than
three events that contains excessive information that related to
the mmWave signal.
Fig. 4: Collected time-series data
Therefore, the system may suffer over-fitting issue from vi-
sion sensors when predicting mmWave communication beam-
former. There are many algorithms to handle this challenges,
mostly from autonomous driving field, such as in [15]. Besides,
algorithms with long short-term memory (LSTM) is often uti-
lized to process time-series context information. To reduce the
complexity, we use another simplified approach. Specifically,
the following steps are proceed: 1) the mmWave sensor data
is kept, together with its timestamp. 2) Smooth out camera
and LiDAR data with point-wise interpolation, and then only
keep the data that is closest to mmWave sensor timestamp.
3) Normalize mmWave SNR data since it has a high dynamic
range. 4) Process IMU data and translate into relative positions.
Although the pre-processing techniques used here can sig-
nificantly reduce data amount (by removing excessive vision
data), one drawback is the context information may be lost.
On the other hand, the advantage is the much lower overhead
for data input.

B. Beam prediction with multimodal sensor fusion
The aim is to directly predict the best pair of codebooks
from multisensor input, skipping channel estimation, as well
as exhaustive search stage. Since enormous datasets can be
generated from the HawkRover platform, our specific goal is
to directly find the mapping:
(b∗
UE, b∗
BS) =
max
bUE,bBS f(C, L, I, P),
(1)
where (b∗
UE, b∗
BS) is the optimal beam codebook index pair
(same as mmWave direction). C, L, I, P are camera, LiDAR,
IMU, and position data, respectively. f is the mapping function
to be developed through data-driven DL.
Fig. 5: Multi-sensory data fusion with DL
In Fig. 5, the overall structure of the fusion algorithm is
presented. At the high level, each sensor’s input is processed
through convolutional neural network (CNN) and recurrent
neural network (RNN). The former is usually used to process
image, while the latter is for sequential data, perfectly fit for
numerical wireless and location data. A fusion block is applied
to concatenate each extracted feature, and then all features
are fed into LSTM block for temporal correlations. Lastly, the
softmax-based output layer is utilized to determine the beam
index with highest probability.
In CNN, convolution (Conv), rectified linear unit (ReLU),
and pooling are three fundamental building blocks. Each serves
a distinct function. Conv layers perform a mathematical oper-
ation that takes two inputs, such as an image matrix and a
filter or kernel, and produces a feature map. This operation
involves sliding the filter over the image and computing the
dot product at each position. Convolution preserves the spatial
relationship between pixels by learning image features based on
small squares of input data. The ReLU function applies a non-
linear activation to the output of the convolution operation. It
replaces all negative pixel values in the feature map with zero.
This non-linearity introduces the ability to solve more complex
problems by allowing the network to create complex mappings
from the input to the output, improving the network’s ability to
learn from the data. Pooling reduces the dimensionality of each
feature map while retaining the most important information.
Max pooling, for example, slides a window over the input and
takes the maximum value at each step. By doing so, pooling
layers reduce the number of parameters, lessen computational
complexity, and provide a form of translation invariance. They
help the network to be more robust to the exact location of
features in the input space.
For RNN, it has the ability to maintain a form of memory by
using their internal state (hidden layers) to process sequences
of inputs. RNNs can process inputs of varying lengths because
they process data sequentially and iteratively. This makes them
well-suited for tasks like time series prediction. Besides, RNNs
have a hidden state that captures information about what has
been calculated so far. In essence, the hidden state serves
as the network’s memory, which contains information about
previous inputs, allowing the network to make decisions based
on historical context. This is achieved by having loops in the
network, allowing wireless and location information to persist.
Lastly, the reason for feature fusion, instead of direct data
fusion, is due to the vision data high dimensionality.
IV. A CASE STUDY AND RESULTS
In this section, we provide a case study for one particular
dataset collected. The location is a typical lab space. Note that
during data collection, normal daily activities are not restricted,
for example, people walking in the room, lab furniture move-
ments, etc. This, in turn, shows the robustness and realism of
the dataset.
Fig. 6: Visualization of the collected data
In Fig. 6, the collected sample is visualized. Specifically,
we show the beamforming directions coming from both the
transmitter (HawkRover) side and the BS side. Besides, the
vision data from LiDAR and two camera are also illustrated
simultaneously. These data are perfectly synchronized through

Fig. 7: mmWave beamforming prediction results
network time protocol (NTP) through high-speed local net-
work, with error no more than 1 ms, which is negligible
compared with the sampling rate from these sensors.
The collected data is divided into two parts: training (80%)
and testing (20%). Both training process and testing experi-
ments are implemented in PyTorch. As shown in Fig. 7, the
optimal beamforming prediction result based on sensor fusion
algorithm is presented. In DL, Top-K is often used as an
evaluation metric to assess the performance. For example, in
our case, top-1 accuracy means the model’s most probable pre-
diction must be correct for it to count as a success. Meanwhile,
top-5 accuracy means any of the model’s five most probable
predictions can be correct. We showcase the results from top-
1 to top-5, each with three different settings, namely, LiDAR
only, LiDAR + camera fusion, and LiDAR + Camera + IMU
position fusion.
Top-1 with LiDAR, camera, and IMU fusion provides pre-
diction accuracy of 65.5%, which is comparable to results in
[16]. Note that in their work, line-of-sight (LoS) is dominated
and higher-end devices (both mmWave and sensing) are used.
Besides, it is readily shown that prediction accuracy increases
with higher K values, reaching to 90.6% in top-5. This per-
formance gives confidence of our proposed fusion algorithm,
which suggests that DL can accurately predict beam direction
from “out-of-band” information, skipping the process of signal-
based pilots. Even with only LiDAR, top-5 is close to 80%,
highlighting the strong correlation of propagation environments
and the mmWave spatial characteristics.
We need to note that the mmWave spatial fingerprints of the
lab room may have also contributed to this performance. As
shown in our early works [12]–[14], mmWave signal can have a
spatial resolution to sub-10 cm, and the DL may have learnt this
implicit relationship of location and optimal beam directions.
Nevertheless, sensor fusion approach can significantly reduce
the beam tracking overhead, making it highly desirable feature
for vehicular scenarios.
V. CONCLUSIONS
mmWave bands are emerging as a viable solution for CAV
communication. However, their high attenuation and mobility
management pose considerable challenges. Our study intro-
duces HawkRover, an autonomous and cost-effective testbed
for collecting comprehensive mmWave and sensor data such
as from LiDAR, cameras, and IMUs, to enhance vehicular
communication. By using DL-based sensor fusion, our method
can predict signal paths more efficiently than iterative pilot
signal processes. A case study for indoor scenario is given,
which promises substantial progress in CAV communication
research.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work of H. Sun is partially supported by The University
of Georgia E-Mobility Initiative seed grant. J. Schnor and S.
Flynn also provided support for the prototype development.
