Predicting Relative Depth between Objects from Semantic Features
Stefan Cassar1, Dylan Seychell1
a and Adrian Muscat2
b
1Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Malta, Msida, Malta
2Department of Computer Engineering, University of Malta, Msida, Malta

Keywords:
Relative Depth, Monocular Image, Computer Vision, Image Semantics
Abstract:
Vision and language tasks such as Visual Relation Detection and Visual Question Answering beneﬁt from
semantic features that afford proper grounding of language. The 3D depth of objects depicted in 2D images
is one such feature. However it is very difﬁcult to obtain accurate depth information without learning the
appropriate features, which are scene dependent. The state of the art in this area are complex Neural Network
models trained on stereo image data to predict depth per pixel. Fortunately, in some tasks, its only the rel-
ative depth between objects that is required. In this paper the extent to which semantic features can predict
course relative depth is investigated. The problem is casted as a classiﬁcation one and geometrical features
based on object bounding boxes, object labels and scene attributes are computed and used as inputs to pattern
recognition models to predict relative depth. i.e behind, in-front and neutral. The results are compared to those
obtained from averaging the output of the monodepth neural network model, which represents the state-of-the-
art. An overall increase of 14% in relative depth accuracy over relative depth computed from the monodepth
model derived results is achieved.
1
Introduction
Depth estimation is the result of a process which
yields depth information of pixels, segments or ob-
jects in an image. Extracting information about the
depth of an object is a challenging problem yet plays
an important role in various computer vision tasks,
including semantic labelling (Ladicky et al., 2014),
robotics (Hadsell et al., 2009), pose estimation (Shot-
ton et al., 2013), recognition (Ren et al., 2012),
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) (Fanello et al.,
2014), Virtual Reality (VR) (Li et al., 2017) and scene
modelling (Hoiem et al., 2005; Saxena et al., 2009).
Given the wide use of depth annotations of an ob-
ject in an image in several computer vision applica-
tions, tackling the problem of obtaining depth from a
monocular image is of vital use and importance. Vi-
sion and language tasks such as Visual Relation De-
tection beneﬁts from depth features that afford proper
grounding of language, (Birmingham et al., 2018).
However, the problem of depth estimation of a
monocular image poses some problems since it is dif-
ﬁcult to obtain a good measurement of depth by using
a single image without extracting any feature infor-
a
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2377-9833
b
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9157-2818
mation from it or without matching the scene of the
image with a Three-Dimensional (3D) one (Li et al.,
2015). A coloured image of a particular scene may
have numerous 3D representations that can be used
to obtain its depth (Aﬁﬁand Hellwich, 2016). Thus,
estimating depth by attempting to match the image
to existing 3D scenes composed of the same objects
can prove to be inaccurate. For this reason, the im-
portance of extracting “monocular depth cues such as
line angles and perspective, object sizes, image po-
sition and atmospheric effects” for depth estimation
on single images, is further emphasised (Eigen et al.,
2014).
This work aims to make use of semantic infor-
mation extracted using computer vision techniques
such as object detection, scene detection, perceptual
and quantitative spatial relations in between objects
to detect the relative depth between two objects in a
monocular image using a supervised classiﬁcation ap-
proach. The term relative depth refers to the course
depth of an object relative to another. In classiﬁca-
tion terms relative depth takes one of three categories;
in front of, behind or neutral. To train the model,
a dataset composed of Red Green Blue (RGB) im-
ages labelled with objects with known depth informa-
tion along with other descriptive cues and features is
arXiv:2101.04626v1  [cs.CV]  12 Jan 2021

used. Different combinations of image features are
also used to assess the usefulness and weight of spe-
ciﬁc scene cues when constructing the depth estima-
tion model. The results obtained by the models in this
work are compared with the results derived from the
depth maps obtained from the state-of-the-art mon-
odepth predictor. The rest of the paper is organised
as follows. Section 2 describes related work; section
3 the methodology, including dataset, features and
models used; section 4 describes the results; section
5 evaluates the model against results derived from the
monodepth model; and section 6 concludes the paper.
2
Related Work
The problem of depth estimation has been tackled in
past literature using techniques such as structure from
motion (Crandall et al., 2011), n-view reconstruction
(Wu et al., 2011) and also simultaneous localisation
and mapping (Salas-Moreno et al., 2013). However,
tackling the task of estimating depth using a monocu-
lar image has not been as widely explored. A monoc-
ular image may be considered as ambiguous since it
does not contain any depth information and may be
represented in various 3D representations. Scene spe-
ciﬁc knowledge may aid the depth estimation process
by making assumptions using the geometric proper-
ties of the scene (Li et al., 2015). However, the rele-
vance of this information is limited to how close the
image represents a speciﬁc structure.
(Saxena et al., 2005), use a 3D scanner to collect
images and their corresponding depth maps using a
SICK 1-D laser range ﬁnder. This dataset is com-
posed of 425 images and depth pairs of outdoor and
indoor places. They segment the image into equal
sized patches and calculate a single depth value for
each patch. In their work, texture variations, texture
gradients and haze are features in an image that are
used to calculate depth. The researchers differentiate
between absolute features, which for a patch are used
to approximate the absolute depth. They also con-
sider relative features to estimate the depth relative to
the change in depth between the two patches (Saxena
et al., 2005). Texture information is extracted from
the intensity channel using Laws’ masks. For depth
estimation of a patch, (Saxena et al., 2005) argue that
features relative to the selected patch are insufﬁcient
and therefore consider global properties of the image
at multiple scales since at different depths (and there-
fore scales), objects have different properties, and
thus any variations in the scales can be modelled using
these different scale instances. (Saxena et al., 2005)
report positive results produced by their depth estima-
tion model, yet point out that the model struggles to
produce correct absolute depth values when “irregu-
larly shaped trees” are present in the image (Saxena
et al., 2005).
(Wu et al., 2011) extract the repetition and sym-
metry of patterns and use this information to model
the reconstruction of the shapes in the image. They
enforce constraints using a penalisation scheme on in-
consistencies between the repetition of pairs of pix-
els (Wu et al., 2011). (Fouhey et al., 2014) propose
the use of edges in convex or concave form to inter-
pret the scene and produce a 3D representation of the
input image (Fouhey et al., 2014). In earlier work,
(Zhang et al., 1999) attempt to deduce an object by
processing the shading information of the object in
the image. They implement six shape-from-shading
algorithms and conclude that an ideal case does not al-
ways hold for all input images, since these geographic
attributes may not always be available or cannot be in-
ferred from the image (Li et al., 2015). (Saxena et al.,
2009) also attempted to create accurate 3D models
from an image by using supervised Markov Random
Field (MRF)s in which an image is segmented using
over-segmentation into about 2,000 superpixels. Su-
perpixels are regions that are similar and were used as
information for the depth calculation process. Con-
trary to other work that makes use of shape from shad-
ing (Zhang et al., 1999; Maki et al., 2002) or shape
from texture (Malik and Rosenholtz, 1997; Linde-
berg and Garding, 1993), the researchers developed
a probabilistic model which makes use of MRFs to
extract information of a region in relation to another
region.
Subsequently, each superpixel is enhanced
with features that describe the area in the superpixel.
These cues allow for the construction of meaningful
3D scenes. Using object detection and identiﬁcation
techniques, (Saxena et al., 2009) enhance the MRF
with constraints using objects that appear in the scene
that validate the relationship between objects such as
“on top of” and “attached to”. This method produced
3D models which are 64.9% accurate without assum-
ing any structural features of the scene (Saxena et al.,
2009).
(Li et al., 2015) apply deep learning using a multi-
stage combinatory approach that makes use of Deep
Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) and Condi-
tional Random Field (CRF) for pixel-level depth esti-
mation. They reﬁne superpixels to pixel level rather
than the other way round. Superpixels are acquired
to represent different scale patches around the ori-
gin point of the superpixel center. A deep Convo-
lutional Neural Network (CNN) is used to produce
a relationship between the input superpixel and the
depth. The depth value is reﬁned to pixel level from

super pixel level using a CRF without using geomet-
ric information assumed from the image scene. Fur-
thermore, cues such as occlusion are inferred from the
large amounts of training data, thus displaying a high
level of generalisation (Li et al., 2015).
In their work, (Liu et al., 2014) modelled the prob-
lem as a “discrete-continuous optimisation problem”
and used CRFs to provide depth values by encoding
superpixels and the relationships between them. For
an input image, similar images were retrieved from a
dataset of images with depth information. Each su-
perpixel was rewritten as a value that describes the
depth between the centroid and its plane. Similar to
the work of (Saxena et al., 2009), (Liu et al., 2014)
make use of the relationship between two superpixels.
They use discrete variables to encode the relationship
between adjacent pixels. (Liu et al., 2014) report pos-
itive results on the 3D models generated (Liu et al.,
2014).
(Cao et al., 2018) applied a deep network to obtain
the depth information for each pixel in an image. A
classiﬁcation approach is followed in which multiple
labelled categories were formed by taking into con-
sideration different ranges of the depth values. This
approach is contrary to most of the other approaches
that tackle the problem as a regression problem. The
deep network was then applied to label each pixel
with an estimated depth. The continuous values ob-
tained are separated into several discrete bins. As a
post-processing step, the results obtained were then
enhanced by applying a fully connected CRF. This
allows for the improvement of pixel level depth esti-
mation by using other pixels that are connected to it
(Cao et al., 2018).
(Liu et al., 2010) couple the problem of depth es-
timation with that of semantic segmentation. They
base the depth estimation process on the semantic in-
formation obtained from scene understanding. This
approach is composed of two stages: (1) prediction
of the semantic class for the pixels of the image
through the use of “a learned multi-class image la-
belling MRF”. Each pixel was labelled as either “sky,
tree, road, grass, water, building, mountain or fore-
ground object”. These labels were carefully selected
to cater for backgrounds in outdoor scenes, as well
as for any foreground objects in scenes. (2) The la-
bels were then used as inputs to the depth estimation
model. For each semantic class, a separate depth es-
timator was implemented. Each semantic label has
scene speciﬁc information encoded in the MRF. (Liu
et al., 2010)’s solution is a continuation of the work
of (Saxena et al., 2009) (Saxena et al., 2009) and in-
volves the use of pixel-based and superpixel-based
variations of the constructed model. Their work was
validated against (Saxena et al., 2009)’s work as well
as other state of the art methods and produces better
scene reconstructions (Liu et al., 2010).
(Zeisl et al., 2014) also make use of contextual
cues. Without assuming any cues from the 3D scene,
(Zeisl et al., 2014) utilise previous work conducted
in image labelling tasks and assume that the pixels
located in a detected segment will contain the same
label. The authors note that this notion holds for sur-
faces that are ﬂat.
For curved edges, the cues ex-
tracted at pixel level are combined with those ex-
tracted using detectors for segmentation cues. The
input images are segmented to extract the dense and
discriminating features. When testing, the classiﬁer
is used to predict the probability of the “representa-
tive normals”. (Zeisl et al., 2014) report positive re-
sults obtained using the classiﬁer which “successfully
recognises surface normals for a wide range of differ-
ent scenes” (Zeisl et al., 2014).
In their work, (Lin et al., 2019) presented a hy-
brid convolutional neural network that incorporates
together semantic segmentation and depth estimation.
They ﬁrst estimate depth of the scene at global level
from the input image using ﬁve convolutional layers
and two fully connected layers. A Rectiﬁed Linear
Unit (ReLU) is used as an activation function after
each convolutional layer. To generalise the system, a
Local Response Normalization (LRN) layer was used
to perform local normalization. Maxpooling layers
were then added after the ﬁrst and ﬁnal convolutional
layer to reduce the number of parameters. To extract
any information from any intermediate layers, the two
fully connected layers were added after the ﬁnal con-
volutional layer. The gradient network was used to
produce two depth gradient maps from the input im-
age. The input image and the predicted depth gradi-
ent maps were passed through the reﬁning network
to produce a reﬁned depth map. The output from the
global depth network, the gradient network and the
colour image were used to produce the reﬁned depth
map. In their results, (Lin et al., 2019) conclude that
this implementation shows that when using the split
semantic segmentation task, more relevant informa-
tion was extracted than when using the depth gradient
implementation. Their work was successful in show-
ing that a hybrid architecture of CNNs with modular
tasks leads to better performance. Additionally, by
combining semantic segmentation and depth estima-
tion, performance can be enhanced when compared
to tackling the tasks separately. Quantitatively, the re-
sults show that a uniﬁed hybrid approach outperforms
single task approaches with results surpassing other
quantitative results for other hybrid approaches (Lin
et al., 2019).

Stereovision has provided very good results for
depth estimation in the past years. (Scharstein and
Szeliski, 2002) provide a detailed evaluation of these
stereo systems (Scharstein and Szeliski, 2002). How-
ever, stereovision systems are greatly limited by the
distance between the two cameras. Depths are worked
out using the principle of triangulation between the
two captured images. When the distance between the
capture point of the images is large, any angle of es-
timation errors scale upwards. Stereovision is also
unsuitable for large patches of objects that have no
change in texture. (Saxena et al., 2008) propose a
system for producing accurate depth maps from two
images by rejecting pixels in the images that con-
tain very little texture. They report signiﬁcant im-
provements when monocular and stereo cues are used
in conjunction to build the combined MRF model.
Using this combined model, accurate depth maps
are produced by leveraging the advantages that both
monocular and stereo features offer (Saxena et al.,
2008).
The state of the art is monodepth (Godard
et al., 2017) based on a neural network that learns
from a stereovision labelled dataset.
3
Methodology
3.1
Dataset
The SpatialVOC2K (Belz et al., 2018) dataset is used
to train and test the pattern recognition models. This
dataset consists of 2,026 images with object labels,
bounding boxes annotations extracted from the PAS-
CAL VOC2008 challenge dataset (Everingham et al.,
2007), to which relations between objects and depth
values were added (Belz et al., 2018). Depth anno-
tation for objects is represented with an integer num-
ber between 1 and 100, represent all levels from the
foreground to the background as perceived by hu-
mans. The set of unique objects in the dataset are
“aeroplane, bird, bicycle, boat, bottle, bus, car, cat,
chair, cow, dining table, dog, horse, motorbike, per-
son, potted plant, sheep, sofa, train, TV/monitor” and
there are a total of 9,804 unique object pairs across all
images. The images depict both indoor and outdoor
scenes. For each image object pairs are formed. Ob-
ject combinations exclude matches between the same
object and n(n−1) pairs of objects are extracted from
each image, where n is the number of objects in an im-
age. The images from the SpatialVOC2k (Belz et al.,
2018) dataset yielded 11,996 different object combi-
nations which included object and image information.
This dataset was ﬁltered to exclude tuples where the
object depth was annotated as ’Unspeciﬁed’ to pro-
duce a reduced dataset of 5,244 valid object combina-
tions.
3.2
Features
This section gives a brief description as well as some
examples of the various features used.
Geometric Features - These are mostly real-
valued features that are calculated using the object
bounding boxes, as in (Ramisa et al., 2015; Birm-
ingham and Muscat, 2019). These features are nor-
malised with respect to either the image size, the ob-
ject bounding box or the union bounding box. The ge-
ometric features for each object pair were computed
using the work previously carried out in (Birming-
ham and Muscat, 2019) to include (1) the area of the
objects normalised by the image area and the union
area, (2) area of the object overlap, normalised by
the minimum area, image area, total area and union
area, (3) aspect ratio of both objects, (4) distance be-
tween the centroid of the bounding box of the object
normalised by image diagonal, union bounding box
and union diagonal, (5) distance to size ratio normal-
ized wrt. bounding boxes, (6) euclidian distance be-
tween the bounding boxes of the objects normalised
by the union area and image area, (7) ratio of the ob-
ject bounding box limits, (8) ratio of bounding box
areas by maximum to minimum ratio and trajector to
landmark ratio, (9) trajector centroid position relative
to the landmark centroid, (10) trajector position rela-
tive to the landmark as a Euclidian vector, (11) trajec-
tor centroid position relative to the landmark centroid,
vector and unit vector normalised by the union. Some
of these features are correlated.
Semantic Language Features - These are fea-
tures that are of textual format and are descriptors for
the image or for the objects in the image. In other
work and approaches, these features are generally en-
coded using one-hot encoding to convert the textual
representation into a vector. The size of the vector
depends on the length of the unique samples for the
language feature. To work around the issue of data
sparseness, (Ramisa et al., 2015) employ the use of
word2vec embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) to en-
code terms as vectors that represent the term using
alternative and related terms while (Belz et al., 2018)
use Global Vectors for Word Representation (GloVe)
embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014).
These are
mostly useful for Zero-shot learning (ZSL) problems
where the label of the object is unknown during train-
ing since similar objects with similar properties can
be related to.
Perceptual Features - These can be described
as properties of objects that are identiﬁed by the vi-

sual system (Feldman, 2014).
Studies on humans
have shown that perceptual features are task relevant
(Antonelli and Williams, 2017). These features are
mostly intuitive. In the PASCAL VOC2008 image
dataset, object pose, occlusion, truncation and iden-
tiﬁcation difﬁculty are examples of features that are
of perceptual type (Everingham et al., 2007).
Scene Features - Scene features offer context to
images and the objects contained in them. They are
able to extend the bare object features available to fur-
ther specify the scenario by identifying the scene that
best describes the object’s location. Incorporating the
scene of the image will introduce speciﬁcity to the
’scene’ at hand (Zhou et al., 2017). (Zhou et al., 2017)
present Places-CNNs, scene classiﬁcation CNNs us-
ing state of the art CNNs that outperform previous
scene classiﬁcation approaches (Zhou et al., 2017). In
this work, the places-365 scene classiﬁer was used to
enhance the image data offered by the selected dataset
given the wide scene coverage that is quoted in their
work and the large sample of images used for train-
ing (Zhou et al., 2017). A subset of images from the
PASCAL Visual Objects Classes 2008 Challenge is
used to build an enhanced dataset using relational ob-
ject information, scene classiﬁcation information as
well as image and object geometrical features (Ever-
ingham et al., 2007). The Places365 scene classiﬁca-
tion CNN was used to extract the scene categories for
the images.
3.3
Target Classes
The objects in the SpatialVOC2k dataset are hand an-
notated with a depth value ranging from 0 to 100 for
each object in the images. The objects depth values
were compared to produce the target class labels as in
Table 1. The three-way target classes are in front of,
behind and neutral, i.e at similar depth.
Class
Relation between objects
0
Object 1 is in front of Object 2
1
Objects are within the tolerance threshold
and are thus considered at equal depth
2
Object 2 is in front of Object 1
Table 1: Deﬁnitions of the target classes.
(Dehaene, 2011) study the perception of differ-
ent senses and notions by humans and other animals.
In their ﬁndings on depth along with other perceived
senses, they suggest that humans do not perceive nu-
merical representations of numbers in real world in
a proportionate manner but in a logarithmic manner
(Dehaene, 2011). The human annotations for depth
in the SpatialVOC2K dataset are bound to introduce a
level of noise due to any inconsistencies in the anno-
tations done by the different annotators themselves.
Additionally, as (Dehaene, 2011) have shown, im-
ages which have no background, or are captured from
an angle which portrays a single object as the back-
ground hinder the depth estimation process for the
human annotators. To investigate this matter further
on the dataset, a number of images from the dataset
were selected and the depth annotations of the objects
in the images were evaluated. To mitigate the noise
from the human annotations, a threshold value was
introduced. Four different threshold values were con-
sidered for the scope of this experiment; 0, 2, 5 and
10. In this work, the threshold values are considered
as the acceptable range where the difference in depth
is considered to be within range and thus the objects
would be classiﬁed as at an equal depth. When vary-
ing the threshold, the number of instances per class
also changes. This class imbalance would skew the
dataset. Higher thresholds will produce a skew with
a higher number of neutral classes where the depth
is equal (class 1). This will give a high number of
neutral true positives and thus increasing the model
accuracy. Whilst offering a mitigation for noise in
dataset annotation, this threshold must be used with
care since high threshold values will introduce skew-
ness in the results. In this work, it is hypothesised that
a threshold close or less than 2 needs to be applied as
it is the threshold that offers the best balance between
the classes for this dataset.
3.4
Pattern Recognition Models
Figure 1 shows a high-level architecture diagram de-
picting the dataset feature extraction, target classes
and machine learning model.
Figure 1: High-level Architecture Diagram.
To avoid training and testing on data that has been

co-incidentally split in a manner that favours knowl-
edge of any class, stratiﬁed sampling was used. The
dataset is split into ﬁve folds with each fold contain-
ing an equal distribution of the target class. For the
experiments, the 51 features extracted were divided
into the four feature groups, ﬁg.1. The base feature
groups are the geometric features, semantic language
features, perceptual features and scene features. Four
additional feature groups were formed by concatinat-
ing base feature groups.
All eight feature groups,
ﬁg.2, are used in the experiments.
Figure 2: Graphical representation of feature groups and
feature group combinations.
Four different machine learning models are used
for the experiments in this work; Decision Tree (DT),
Random Forest (RF), Logistic Regressor (LR) and
Neural Network (NN). Each of the machine learn-
ing models is implemented as a separate script us-
ing the Scikit-learn library (Pedregosa et al., 2011).
The features used were normalised and scaled and
feature columns with categorical values were one hot
encoded.
An experimental setup was implemented to eval-
uate and experiment with different models using dif-
ferent feature groups, threshold values and also allow
for hyper-parameter tuning. This setup allows for the
easy running of several models in bulk with different
parameters and conﬁgurations. Using the parameters,
the possible combinations are extracted and iterated
to train, test and evaluate each model.
4
Results
The results are evaluated on the basis of the accuracy
metric. A higher accuracy indicates a better model.
In table 2, the two most accurate models for depth
thresholds 0 and 2 are shown. Depth thresholds 5 and
10 were used to experiment if higher depth thresh-
olds result in a different accuracy. However, results
for depth thresholds higher than 2 are considered to
be inaccurate due to large class imbalance that occurs
when using such a high tolerance. The experiment re-
sults show that the random forest with the geometric,
language and perceptual features is the most accurate
machine learning model for relative depth prediction
when using a depth threshold of 0. Overall, the mod-
Feature Group
Model
T/H
Accuracy
Geometric (Geo)
RF
0
72.214%
Geo
RF
2
71.184%
Sem (Sem)
LR
0
53.836%
Sem
NN
0
53.702%
Perceptual (Per)
NN
0
54.561%
Per
RF
0
53.950%
Scene
NN
2
43.535%
Scene
LR
2
43.077%
Geo & Sem
RF
0
73.130%
Geo & Sem
RF
2
71.069%
Geo, Sem & Per
RF
0
74.828%
Geo, Sem & Per
RF
2
72.500%
Geo, Sem & Scene
RF
0
73.073%
Geo, Sem & Scene
RF
2
71.299%
Geo, Sem, Per & Scene
RF
0
74.466%
Geo, Sem, Per & Scene
NN
0
73.340%
Geo, Sem, Per & Scene
NN
2
72.938%
Table 2: Experiment results for depth thresholds 0 and 2
sorted in descending order by accuracy. Model name ab-
breviations: Random Forest (RF), Neural Network (NN),
Logistic Regressor (LR) and Decision Tree (DT).
els using combined feature groups offered better ac-
curacies over using just single feature groups. The
accuracy trend of the machine learning models fol-
lows this order (descending): random forest, neural
network, logistic regressor and decision tree.
When analysing the results at depth thresholds 0
and 2 for the top two performing machine learning
models, one can notice two salient points; (a) Depth
threshold 0 produces a higher accuracy than depth
threshold 2; (b) these results are obtained using dif-
ferent feature group sets. For depth threshold 0, the
random forest obtains an accuracy of 74.828% using
the geometric, language and perceptual features. On
the other hand, at depth threshold 2, the best perform-
ing model is the neural network using a combination
of all the feature types with a 72.938% accuracy. Fur-
thermore, the second best performing machine learn-
ing model for depth threshold 0 is the neural network
and uses all the feature groups. For depth threshold 2,
the random forest with the geometric, language and
perceptual features achieves the second best model
for this threshold with a margin of 0.4%. The best
accuracies for the separate thresholds are very close.
For depth threshold 0, they differ by 1.489% whilst
for depth threshold 2 the best performing model dif-
fers by 0.438%. Individually, the geometrical features
are most effective at predicting depth and the accura-
cies are close to the best accuracies, whilst the scene
features are the least useful. For the rest of the evalua-
tion, the best performing models for the random forest
and neural network at depth thresholds 0 and 2 will be
considered.

5
Evaluation
In (Birmingham et al., 2018) machine generated depth
features are used to study their usefulness when pre-
dicting prepositions that describe the spatial relation-
ship between two objects depicted in an image. To
obtain the pixel level depth the authors in (Birming-
ham et al., 2018) make use of the monodepth model
(Godard et al., 2017) and process the depthmap pro-
duced by the model to obtain average depth values for
the objects inside the bounding boxes.
To compare the results achieved to those of the
monodepth depth prediction CNN, the images from
the SpatialVOC2K were passed through the mon-
odepth CNN to obtain the pixel level depth values of
each image. The depth map was then segmented us-
ing the object bounding boxes. Following (Birming-
ham et al., 2018), two different object depth values
were computed using these pixels; (a) Average depth
per object - The average of the pixels found in the
enclosing bounding box; (b) Radially weighted depth
per object - When extracting the average depth, the
distance of the pixel from the centroid of the object is
taken as a weight. A greater importance is given to the
predicted depth value for the pixels that are closer to
the center of the object whereas further pixels which
may be incorrectly labelled due to edge errors are
given less importance. The evaluation is subdivided
in two parts to evaluate the monodepth CNN agree-
ment with the SpatialVOC2K dataset and to compare
the best performing relative depth estimation models
produced with the depth produced by the monodepth
CNN.
With reference to comparing monodepth derived
relative depths to SpatialVOC2k human annotations
derived relative depths, table 3 gives the accu-
racy scores obtained for the average and Radially
Weighted Average (RWA) results across the four
thresholds. These results show that for threshold 0,
the monodepth CNN and the SpatialVOC2K dataset
are ≈60.65% in agreement. When using the average
depth, the CNN is in a higher agreement level than
when using the RWA since for all instances, the aver-
age depth accuracy is higher than the RWA accuracy.
When using depth threshold 1, inferior results can be
noted when compared to depth threshold 0. The best
accuracy over all the accuracies can be reported for
threshold 0.
Threshold
0
1
5
Average
0.6065
0.5885
0.5208
RWA
0.5981
0.5824
0.5059
Table 3: Accuracy score comparison between the mon-
odepth CNN depths and the SpatialVOC2k depth results at
different thresholds. Accuracy score is between 0 and 1.
T/H
Model
Accuracy
Mono-Mean
Mono-RWA
0
RF
74.82%
67.50%
67.20%
0
NN
73.40%
55.62%
54.96%
2
RF
72.50%
55.63%
54.96%
2
NN
72.90%
52.53%
52.73%
Table 4: Comparison of model agreement with the mon-
odepth depth prediction CNN for the RF and NN at depth
thresholds 0 and 2.
The percenatge agreement between the best per-
forming models identiﬁed in this work (i.e. the ran-
dom forest and the neural network) for depth thresh-
olds 0 and 2 and the monodeph predictor are com-
puted. Table 4 shows the results obtained for the ran-
dom forest and neural network at depth thresholds 0
and 2. The RF model agrees ≈67% with the mon-
odepth predictor. On the other hand, the monodepth
predictor agrees 60% of the time with the human an-
notations.
The model agreement with the monodepth CNN
shows that the relative depth prediction model (the
random forest) and the CNN seem to struggle to pre-
dict the correct relative depth for the same object pair
instances. This conﬁrms the previous hypothesis with
regards to the noise level in the dataset. Nonetheless,
the random forest using the geometric, language and
perceptual features with the depth threshold set to 0
produces a relative depth prediction model which is
74.82% accurate. This accuracy surpasses the 60.65%
accuracy that the monodepth depth prediction CNN
was able to achieve by an accuracy boost of 14.17%
in relative depth prediction.
6
Conclusion and Future Work
A relative depth estimation model is implemented
from geometric, language and perceptual features
and for some tasks it may be more effective than
more complex models resulting in lower computa-
tional costs.
A maximum of 74.828% accuracy is
achieved with a random forest model, which trans-
lates to a 14% increase in accuracy when compared to
results obtained from the monodepth neural network
model. The next step is to study its use in vision and
language tasks.
