arXiv:2201.01249v1  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2022
ExAID: A Multimodal Explanation Framework
for Computer-Aided Diagnosis of Skin Lesions
Adriano Lucieria,b,∗, Muhammad Naseer Bajwaa,b, Stephan Alexander Braunc,d, Muhammad
Imran Malike,f, Andreas Dengela,b and Sheraz Ahmeda
aGerman Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI) GmbH, Trippstadter Strasse 122, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
bTechnical University Kaiserslautern, Erwin-Schrödinger-Strasse 52, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
cUniversity Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany
dUniversity Hospital of Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
eSchool of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (SEECS), National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan
fDeep Learning Laboratory, National Center of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Islamabad, Pakistan
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Dermatology
Computer-Aided Diagnosis
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Interpretability
Medical Image Processing
Textual Explanations
A B S T R A C T
Background and Objectives: One principal impediment in successful deployment of Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (AI)-based Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) systems in everyday clinical workﬂow is their
lack of transparent decision making. Although commonly used eXplainable AI (XAI) methods pro-
vide some insight into these largely opaque algorithms, yet such explanations are usually convoluted
and not readily comprehensible except by highly trained AI experts. The explanation of decisions
regarding the malignancy of skin lesions from dermoscopic images demands particular clarity, as the
underlying medical problem deﬁnition is itself ambiguous. This work presents and evaluates ExAID
(Explainable AI for Dermatology), a novel XAI framework for biomedical image analysis, providing
multi-modal concept-based explanations consisting of easy-to-understand textual explanations sup-
plemented by visual maps justifying the predictions.
Methods:
Our framework relies on Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs) to map human-
understandable concepts to those learnt by an arbitrary Deep Learning based algorithm in its latent
space, and Concept Localisation Maps (CLMs) to highlight concepts in the input space. This identi-
ﬁcation of relevant concepts is then used to construct ﬁne-grained textual explanations supplemented
by concept-wise location information to provide comprehensive and coherent multi-modal explana-
tions. All decision-related information is comprehensively presented in a diagnostic interface for use
in clinical routines. Moreover, the framework includes an educational mode providing dataset-level
explanation statistics and tools for data and model exploration to aid medical research and education
processes.
Results: Through rigorous quantitative and qualitative evaluation of our framework on a range of
dermoscopic image datasets such as SkinL2, Derm7pt, PH2 and ISIC, we show the utility of multi-
modal explanations for CAD-assisted scenarios even in case of wrong disease predictions.
Conclusions: We present a new multi-modal explanation framework for biomedical image analysis on
the example use-case of Melanoma classiﬁcation from dermoscopic images and evaluate its utility on
a row of datasets. Since comprehensible explanation is one of the cornerstones of any CAD system, we
believe that ExAID will provide dermatologists an eﬀective screening tool that they both understand
and trust. Moreover, ExAID will be the basis for similar applications in other biomedical imaging
ﬁelds.
1. Introduction
In 2016, Ribeiro et al. [36] reported an image classi-
ﬁer that was able to inadvertently classify correctly but for
wrong reasons. They found out that their wolf versus dog
classiﬁer learnt an undesirable correlation between wolf and
background snow and, therefore, would classify a given im-
age as wolf if there was snow in the background. If it were
not due to authors’ vigilance in ﬁnding explanations to the
model’s predictions, it would have been diﬃcult to properly
evaluate trustworthiness of this image classiﬁer. Although
this was an inconsequentialexample of spurious correlations
learnt from a large amount of data, wrong decisions in safety
∗Corresponding author

critical domains resulting from such misunderstandings can
potentially have grave impact on human lives. The applica-
tion of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) methods on medical tasks
has become ubiquitous in the last decade [1, 24, 39]. There-
fore, hesitation of medical practitioners in trusting diagnos-
tic predictions of any automated Computer-Aided Diagno-
sis (CAD) system is understandable since such systems nor-
mally provide little to no cognisance regarding their deci-
sion making process [28]. In addition to evaluating the rea-
sons behind a model’s predictions, explanation methods can
also help in revealing new diagnostic criteria [21] previously
unknown to medical practitioners. The requirement for a
CAD to be explainable arose with early applications of AI
in healthcare and became more relevant with recent ethical
and legal standards [3, 11]. The consequent increase in re-
search activity in the domain of eXplainable AI (XAI) also
reﬂects the growing interest of the community to provide ex-
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
planations for CAD systems [3].
XAI methods for the image-domain come in a variety
of forms and provide explanations using a range of modali-
ties such as feature-relevance visualisations [36, 15, 43, 6],
textual explanations [20, 46], or quantitative relevance mea-
sures for abstract concepts [25, 7]. They diﬀer not only in the
way they are presented to their users but also in their deriva-
tion, resulting in varying levels of insight provided regarding
the decision making of the AI. Furthermore, these methods
can be either ante-hoc (e.g. ProtoPNet [6], MDNet [46]),
with a decision making process that is explainable by design,
or post-hoc, providing explanations for an AI model after
construction and training of the model using model-speciﬁc
(e.g. Score-CAM [43], TCAV [25]) or model-agnostic (e.g.
LIME [36], EP [15]) techniques [34]. Most methods pro-
vide explanations on a local scale (individual data samples)
while some aim at approximating explanations on a global
scale (holistic model behaviour). However, model explana-
tions given by single XAI methods are usually not suﬃcient
to provide plausible and easy-to-understand decision justiﬁ-
cation to end users.
Melanoma is the most dangerous skin cancer, leading
to the majority of skin-related deaths in the US while ac-
counting for only 1% of skin cancers diagnosed [37]. Reg-
ular preventive examinations are conducted by physicians
through naked-eye observation or dermoscopic imaging. In
dermoscopic pattern recognition, experts look for dermo-
scopic criteria and apply manual algorithms like the ABCD-
rule [35] or 7-point checklist [2] to judge the malignancy of
a lesion. Currently, AI-based dermatology focuses mostly
on the analysis of dermoscopic images [31, 41, 32]. How-
ever, ﬁrst approaches towards analysing raw, clinical images
have been proposed as well [5]. The majority of explanation
approaches for dermoscopic skin lesion analysis rely on the
application of visual XAI through saliency maps [44, 45] or
attention mechanisms [17, 4]. Another common approach
is the detection and localisation of dermoscopic criteria as
used by doctors in manual classiﬁcation. Coppola et al. [10],
for instance, train a multi-task CNN predicting dermoscopic
features with information sharing between diﬀerent subnet-
works to increase interpretability. In [27], Lucieri et al. ap-
ply the concept-based TCAV method to predict dermoscopic
criteria from a pre-trained network to explain its predictions.
Dermoscocpiccriterialocalisation has been been approached
by combining TCAV with perturbation-basedsaliency meth-
ods in [29] and through explicit segmentation of criteria in
[38]. For a complete survey on XAI in Dermatology the
reader is referred to [30].
Several frameworks for AI-based medical imaging have
been proposed in recent years [16, 38, 19, 22]. While some
lack proper and comprehensible explainability, others do not
provide an easy-to-use interface for human-machine inter-
action, impeding the utilisation in diagnostic routines or re-
search. Moreover, ﬁrst commercial platforms for biomedical
AI exist [40, 12, 13, 18], claiming to provideexplanationsfor
their algorithms.
In this paper we present a novel XAI framework, namely
ExplainableArtiﬁcial Intelligencefor Dermatology(ExAID)1
which is able to provide easy-to-understand textual, visual
and conceptual explanations for automated analysis of der-
moscopicimages of malignantand benign skin lesions, while
being adaptable to any other biomedical imaging use case.
ExAID is built upon two of our previous works: [27], which
veriﬁes that deep learning models are able to learn and utilise
similar disease-related concepts as described by dermatolo-
gists and employed by them during manual analysis of skin
images; and [29], which localises these concepts, learnt and
embedded in the latent space of the model, on the original
image. ExAID extends the previously proposed explana-
tion modalities by introducing concept-based textual expla-
nations while integrating all modalities in a uniﬁed, intuitive
framework to further enhance intelligibility of AI’s decision
making in a diagnostic setting. In addition to clinical diag-
nosis functionalities, it provides in-depth analysis tools for
medical research and education. Therefore, the framework
oﬀers two distinct interfaces for clinical diagnosis and re-
search purposes, laying the foundation for understandable
and transparent integration of AI in medical workﬂows. In
contrast to existing XAI frameworks, ExAID emphasises in-
tuitive intelligibility for end users by conveying multi-modal
decision justiﬁcation centred around standard concepts com-
monly used in the dermatology domain.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows.
Section 2 covers details of the datasets used for training
and evaluation as well as an introduction to the framework
and its components. Experimental setups for the generation
of explanations and their evaluation are described in Sec-
tion 3. Finally, Section 4 discusses the presented results and
elaborates on current limitations of this particular use case
and framework state, before the work is concluded in Sec-
tion 5.
2. Methods
2.1. Datasets
ExAID contains two types of classiﬁers: Disease-level
classiﬁers for lesion diagnosis and concept-level classiﬁers
for detection of dermatological concepts in a given image.
To train these two classiﬁers, it requires datasets with two
types of labels, namely disease labels (Melanoma and Ne-
vus) and concept annotations (presence or absence of der-
moscopic concepts).
2.1.1. Datasets for Disease-level Classiﬁcation
The training set for disease-level classiﬁcation consists
of Melanoma and Nevi images taken from ISIC 2019 as well
as PH2 [33] and derm7pt [23] datasets. ISIC 2019 dataset
is a public collection of 25,331 images of diﬀerent prove-
nance divided into eight diﬀerent classes. This dataset is a
coalition of three datasets, HAM10000 [42], BCN20000 [9],
and MSK [8]. Since the common denominator of ISIC2019,
PH2, and derm7pt datasets are Melanoma and Nevi classes,
we assembled a subset of the three datasets consisting of im-
1A demo will be soon available under https://exaid.kl.dfki.de/.
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
Table 1
Distribution of data in training, validation and test splits for
disease-level classiﬁcation.
Split
Dataset
Lesions
Melanoma
Nevi
Total
Train
ISIC2019
1250
2894
4144
Derm7pt
158
368
526
PH2
26
102
128
Validate
ISIC2019
313
723
1036
Derm7pt
40
92
132
PH2
6
26
32
Test
ISIC2019
391
904
1295
Derm7pt
50
115
165
PH2
8
32
40
Total
ISIC2019
1954
4521
6475
Derm7pt
248
575
823
PH2
40
160
200
Table 2
Distribution of data in training, validation and test splits for
concept-level classiﬁcation with D7PH2 dataset.
Split
Dataset
Lesions
Melanoma
Nevi
Total
Train
Derm7pt
158
368
526
PH2
26
102
128
Validate
Derm7pt
40
92
132
PH2
6
26
32
Test
Derm7pt
50
115
165
PH2
8
32
40
Total
Derm7pt
248
575
823
PH2
40
160
200
ages from these two classes only, and manually cleansed the
dataset for duplicates and samples with low quality (e.g. sys-
tematic artefacts), resulting in a total of 6,475 images. As
PH2 and derm7pt will be used for training the concept-level
classiﬁers, a custom dataset split is assembled from a combi-
nation of all three stratiﬁed datasets to avoid covariate shifts
between disease-level and concept-level training stages. The
distribution of images in training, validation and test sets for
disease-level classiﬁcation is given in Table 1. The gener-
alisability of the model is moreover evaluated on a range
of other datasets including 2016 and 2017 ISIC challenge
datasets and SKINL2 [14] dataset as shown in Table 3.
2.1.2. Datasets for Concept-level Classiﬁcation
Training of concept classiﬁers requires annotations re-
garding presence or absence of speciﬁc dermoscopic con-
cepts. These annotations are not usually available with der-
moscopic image datasets, which limits our selection of train-
ing and evaluation datasets primarily to PH2 and derm7pt.
The PH2 dataset is a small dataset of only 200 dermoscopic
images containing 80 common nevi, 80 atypical nevi, and
40 melanoma. For each image, the dataset provides colour
and lesion segmentation masks and extensive, well-curated
annotations with respect to presence or absence of various
concepts. The derm7pt dataset contains 1,011 clinical and
dermoscopic images divided into four diagnosis classes and
one miscellaneous class. Two of these diagnosis classes,
Melanoma and Nevi are further divided into 13 sub-classes.
From this dataset, 823 images belonging to only Melanoma
and Nevi samples have been considered. The combination
of derm7pt and PH2 used for concept classiﬁcation is subse-
quently referred to as D7PH2. Table 2 shows the distribution
of images used in the concept-level classiﬁcation task. ISIC
2016 and 2017 challenge datasets are moreover used for the
evaluation of concept classiﬁer generalisability. However,
both datasets only include annotations of two dermoscopic
concepts each, namely Pigment Networks and Streaks as well
as Dots & Globules and Streaks, respectively.
2.2. ExAID Framework
At its core, ExAID is a generictoolboxfor human-centred
post-hocexplanationsable to explain arbitraryDL-based mod-
els even beyond applications in dermatology. In addition to
the DL model to be explained, its computational foundation
consists of three basic components, namely Concept Iden-
tiﬁcation, Concept Localisation and Decision Explanation
modules as depicted in Fig. 1.
2.2.1. Concept Identiﬁer
The ConceptIdentiﬁermaps disease-related dermatolog-
ical concepts to their corresponding representation learnt by
the DL-based model in its latent space using Concept Acti-
vation Vectors [25] (CAVs). For each pre-deﬁned concept a
linear binary classiﬁer is trained on the detection of said con-
cept from the model’s activation space, resulting in a CAV
which represents the main concept direction in this latent
space. CAV training can be executed on arbitrary model lay-
ers, automatically selecting each concept’s best performing
activations for inference.
Once trained, the conceptclassiﬁers allow to predictpres-
ence or absence of single concepts on unseen images, based
on the model’s latent activation patterns. CAVs addition-
ally allow for computation of the global TCAV metric, esti-
mating a concept’s overall contribution to the prediction of
a certain target class. Further details on the Concept Iden-
tiﬁer module and the CAV training procedure can be found
in [27].
2.2.2. Concept Localiser
Concept Localisation Maps (CLMs) [29] extend CAVs
by localising regions pertinent to a learned concept in the
latent space of a trained image classiﬁer. They provide qual-
itative and quantitative assurance of the model’s ability to
learn the right interpretation of a concept by indicating the
exact spatial location that contributed to a concept prediction
and moreover enable the visualisation of other, potentially
abstract concepts.
Given an input image 푥∈푋, a linear concept clas-
siﬁer 푔퐶generates a concept score for a concept 퐶based
on the trained model’s latent vector 푓푙(푥; 휃) at layer 푙with
optimal weights 휃. The Concept Localiser implements the
perturbation-based concept localisation technique from [29]
to generate spatial importance values based on variation of
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
Figure 1: ExAID Framework architecture. The schematic drawing shows the in-, output and ﬂow of information through ExAID
as well as the relationship between its components.
the concept scores 푔퐶(푓푙(푥; 휃)). The resulting map 푚퐶푙cor-
responds to the input region contributing most to concept 퐶.
Instead of occlusion by means of black patches, in this work
a radial Gaussian mask is applied to a blurred image patch
to mitigate distribution shift in perturbed images stemming
from sharp edges and colour gradients in the perturbed im-
ages.
2.2.3. Decision Explainer
The Decision Explainer receives all concept prediction
scores for a given image from the Concept Identiﬁer. A rule-
base is derived from a calibration dataset and applied to the
translation of single concept scores into a textual decision
explanation grounded in human-understandable conceptual
evidence. An explanation sentence conveys graded infor-
mation about the conceptual evidence detected by a given
model, as well as its inﬂuence to the given prediction. An
example for a textual explanation along with the correspond-
ing input image is given in Fig. 2.
The explanationsderivedfromconceptdetection are com-
posed into coherentand easy-to-understandexplanation texts.
An explanation sentence is constructed based on concept
scores and directional derivatives computed during concept
detection under discrimination between absence, moderate
evidence and strong evidence of concepts to reﬂect the fuzzy
nature of concepts’ appearance. Manifestation of a concept
is decided by means of thresholds derived from the con-
cept training data. This is achieved by ﬁrst scaling the un-
bound concept prediction using a two-sided normalisation
scheme to obtain a centred probability of concept presence.
Thresholds are then derived by maximising False Positive
Rate (FPR) and True Positive Rate (TPR) among all positive
predictions on the training dataset for moderate and strong
evidence thresholds, respectively. The directional deriva-
tives of the predicted class along the individual CAV is used
to indicate positive or negative inﬂuence of concept to the
prediction. Conceptual evidence is listed after the key word
“despite” in case of negative class inﬂuence to signalise con-
traindication (see Figure 5).
2.3. Operation Modes
ExAID oﬀers two complementary operation modes that
are meant for diﬀerent use cases. A diagnostic mode pro-
vides functionality meant to support dermatologists during
clinical examination of patient’s skin lesions. For research
and education purposes, ExAID oﬀers an educational mode
including a collection of tools for holistic analysis of the deep
model’s behaviour as well as the collected case data.
2.3.1. Diagnostic Mode
The majority of a dermatologist’s clinical routine con-
sists of visual examination of patients’ skin lesions to reach a
decision regarding further investigation of a potentially ma-
lignant lesion. Provided enough evidence for malignancy,
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
Figure 2: Diagnostic Mode of ExAID can be used as Decision Support System in routine clinical workﬂow.
the suspicious tissue may be excised under local anaesthe-
sia. Physicians with considerable experience in dermoscopy
develop an intuition which enables them to promptly reach
to a conclusion while novices initially need to pay greater
attention to the assessment of a particular skin lesion. This
is among other things owed to the disarray of dermoscopic
terms and concepts and their usage in diﬀerent schools of
thought. Having developed a routineand diagnostic intuition
not only bears the risk of subjective bias in a decision, but it
might also lead to negligence in the identiﬁcation of impor-
tant diagnostic details, which is furthermore aggravated by
emotional stress and time constraints.
ExAID’s diagnostic mode aims at mediating subjectivity
by oﬀering a supplement to the experienced physician’s ﬁrst
impressions, serving as a second opinion which stimulates
physician’s thought and breaks the routine. Through this ad-
ditional information it is made sure that cues vital for suc-
cessful identiﬁcation of malignant conditions are not over-
seen during manual examination. The user interface of the
diagnostic mode is presented in Fig 2. While allowing physi-
cians to examine the dermoscopic image manually, an ini-
tial diagnosis suggestion is provided, supported by concept-
based textual, quantitative and visual explanations. Through
its neutral design, the interface assures that users are not bi-
ased towards the proposed diagnosis but are free to recon-
struct the AI’s decision process by considering and validat-
ing biomarker scores along with their optional localisations
provided in the form of CLMs.
2.3.2. Educational Mode
Explanation of classiﬁers’ decisions has further utility
beyond mere information and guidance of the algorithm’s
users. It is of central importance for the validation of indi-
vidual automated decisions, veriﬁcation of plausibility of a
model’s global generalisation behaviour and can addition-
ally aid the decryption of unintelligible, decision relevant
concepts learned by the AI. With its educational mode, as
presented in Fig. 3, ExAID oﬀers an extensive toolbox for
the investigation of model behaviour and data distribution.
Dataset-level model behaviour analysis is enabled through
a combination of class-wise performance evaluation metrics
and concept-wise global explanation metrics in combination
with tools for facilitated overview of individual decision out-
comes and explanations. Some of the most salient interac-
tive features of ExAID framework are introduced below.
Filtering The ﬁltering option allows to ﬁlter arbitrary sub-
sets of samples by metadata such as age, concept presence,
concept prediction or correct prediction. An adaptive data
distribution plot helps to quickly identify important statisti-
cal characteristics related to biomarker presence as well as
certain failure modes of the model.
Highlighting A highlightingfeature allows to spotlight cer-
tain useful properties of samples to further facilitate review
of model behaviour and data. This feature allows the high-
lighting of not only binary attributes such as the correct tar-
get class prediction,but also morecomplex relationshipssuch
as the presence of classes or concepts in the annotations as
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
Figure 3: Educational Mode of ExAID can help in training of resident dermatologists by allowing them to explore many of its
interactive features.
well as the class and concept prediction by the model. Com-
plex highlighting is always supported by visual cues indicat-
ing the accordance of attribute prediction with expert anno-
tations.
Localisation In addition to individual localisation of con-
cepts in data samples, ExAID allows to visualise concept lo-
calisation simultaneously for all samples of a dataset. This
allows for quick examination of a model’s concept locali-
sation behaviour, aiding the validation of system behaviour
and identiﬁcation of potential systematic errors in dataset or
model by revealing patterns in the localisation process.
Latent Inspection Examinationof the model’slatent space
structure gives further insight into the disentanglement of
data representationsand potential biases capturedby the model
parameters. A latent view functionality based on Tensor-
board’s projector2 allows to intuitively examine the latent
distribution of data samples by means of dimensionality re-
duction techniques.
3. Results
3.1. Classiﬁer Training & Evaluation
To demonstrate the utility of the proposed framework, a
deep network for binary classiﬁcation of Melanomaand Nevi
from dermoscopic skin lesion images is trained. Among var-
ious architecture, learning rate and optimiser combinations3,
2https://projector.tensorﬂow.org/
3Experimentation included VGG16, ResNet, DenseNet, NASNet,
SEResNeXt architectures with Adam, SGD and RMSprop optimisers us-
ing learning rates ranging from 1e-3 to 1e-4
Table 3
Performance evaluation of lesion classiﬁer on various datasets.
Datasets
N
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
AUC
(%)
(%)
(%)
Derm7pt (Test)
165
83.6
81.7
78.0
0.85
PH2 (Test)
40
100.0
100.0
100.0
1.00
ISIC2019 (Test)
1295
88.9
88.2
84.9
0.91
ISIC2017 (Test)
510
78.4
68.5
62.3
0.70
ISIC2016 (Test)
379
89.7
83.7
84.0
0.92
SkinL2
55
90.9
89.9
90.7
0.99
best results have been achieved using SEResNeXt architec-
ture with RMSprop optimiser and a learning rate of 1e-4
trained for 100 epochs. Training images were augmented by
random horizontal and vertical ﬂip as well as random crop-
ping to 85% of the image size, resulting in input images of
size 224 × 224.
Evaluation on a variety of datasets is presented in Ta-
ble 3. It can be observed that the lesion classiﬁer achieved
AUCs above0.85 for ﬁve out of six datasets with two datasets
scoring almost perfectly. ISIC2017 achieved a slightly lower
AUC with 0.70, which is also reﬂected in lower Precision
and Recall.
3.2. Explanation Training & Evaluation
For the explanation of the ﬁnal DL-based classiﬁer’s de-
cisions, the procedure outlined in [27] is followed. To this
end, conceptannotated samples fromD7PH2 have been utilised
to assure generalisation while learning CAVs. In each run,
the data is internally split into folds for concept training and
validation under stratiﬁcation of both concept and disease la-
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
(a) Streaks.
(b) Pigment Network.
Figure 4: Positive and negative examples of visual explanations provided by ExAID along with the corresponding samples and
ground truth concept masks.
Table 4
Performance evaluation of concept classiﬁers
on various
datasets.
Results are given as Macro Average F1-Scores to
account for class imbalance.
Datasets
Streaks
Pigment
Dots &
Regr.
Blue-Whit.
Netw.
Glob.
Struct.
Veils
D7PH2 (Test)
70.91
78.74
63.14
59.41
71.66
ISIC2017
51.75
50.37
-
-
-
ISIC2016
56.53
-
53.03
-
-
bels. For each concept, linear concept classiﬁers are trained
for 200 runs using stochastic gradientdescentwith early stop-
ping.
3.2.1. Concept Detection
The ﬁnal CAV for a concept is chosen based on the av-
erage concept direction over all runs. Due to concept anno-
tation requirements, concept detection performance is eval-
uated only on ISIC2016 and ISIC2017 datasets as well as
D7PH2 test set. Due to the lack of annotation, the two ISIC
datasets allowed evaluation of only two concepts each. Ta-
ble 4 presents Macro Average F1-Scores for concept detec-
tion.
For D7PH2 test set, all concept detectors were able to
discriminateconcepts better than randomguessing, with Pig-
ment Network achieving the best F1-Score of 78.74%. Same
holds for the evaluation on ISIC2016 for concepts Streaks
and Dots & Globules. Similar to the results for lesion clas-
siﬁcation on ISIC2017, concept detectors failed to classify
Streaks and PigmentNetworks, yielding F1-Scoresof 51.75%
and 50.37%, respectively.
3.2.2. Visual Explanation
Fair quantitativeevaluation of a network’s CLMs for skin
lesions poses a number of diﬃculties including the selec-
tion of a suitable binarization scheme, subjectivity of con-
cept annotations as well as lack of representative metrics for
fuzzy localisation tasks. Proper binarization is specially dif-
ﬁcult as it depends on the size of a particular Region of In-
terest (ROI), its signiﬁcance to the prediction score as well
as further noise stemming from the saliency method used.
Moreover, evaluation is limited by the availability of anno-
tated concept segmentation maps. ISIC2016 and ISIC2017
challenge datasets each provide concept segmentation maps
for two concepts which are used to provide a qualitative as-
sessment of the trained model’s concept localisation ability.
CLMs were binarized using variable percentiles, manually
chosen based on the size of the respective ROI in a speciﬁc
image. Figure 4 shows examples of the model’s concept lo-
calisation ability for classes Streaks and Pigment Network
using an adaptation of the method proposed in [29]. Inter-
pretation of the results is provided in Section 4.3.
3.2.3. Textual Explanation
Quantitative evaluation of textual explanation results is
covered by the performanceevaluation for concept detection
presented in table 4. Figure 5 shows qualitative examples of
images along with correct and incorrect textual explanations
provided by ExAID. These results are further discussed in
Section 4.4.
4. Discussion
The results presented in Section 3 show that ExAID is
indeed able to produce theoretically correct explanations for
a classiﬁer’s decisions. In the following, previous insights
are discussed and qualitative results are analysed in detail.
Finally, a detailed discussion about the limitation and future
work is provided.
4.1. Lesion Classiﬁcation
Lesion-level results clearly show the strong generalisa-
tion ability of the model, even on unseen datasets as SKINL2
consisting of 20 Melanomas and 35 Nevi of high quality.
Poor performance on the ISIC2017 test dataset can be ex-
plained by the large fraction of artefacts present in the im-
ages, which have been intentionally left out of the training
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
(a) Correct concept prediction.
(b) Incorrect concept prediction.
Figure 5: Positive and negative examples of textual explanations provided by ExAID along with the corresponding skin lesion
samples. The ground truth class of the sample is given below the image.
procedure(through manual cleansing) to restrict the use case
to a realistic, controlled diagnostic environment based on
an image acquisition procedure speciﬁcally built for AI pro-
cessing.
4.2. Concept Detection
In contrast to the concept detection performance on the
D7PH2 test set, concept generalisation to unseen datasets
such as ISIC2017 and ISIC2016 is worse. This is most likely
a consequence of diverging annotation standards between
derm7pt and PH2 datasets used for CAV training and other
datasets. The distribution shift partially caused by artefacts
present in the challenge test sets aggravates this divergence
further. Moreover, results show the superiority of coarse-
grained biomarkers such as Streaks, Pigment Networks and
Blue-Whitish Veils over more ﬁne-grained ones such as Dots
& Globules.
4.3. Visual Explanation
Whereas in some cases, CLM localisation aligned very
well with the concept annotation, most of the time CLMs
highlighted slightly diﬀerent regions. However, these high-
lights often depict areas that could plausibly count as con-
cept regions, as can be seen in the second row of Figure 4.
Qualitative evaluation conﬁrmed the quantitative results and
showed that the network performed better localising con-
cepts Streaks and PigmentNetworks as comparedto the more
ﬁne-grained Dots & Globules concept. Scattered spots in
CLMs outside the lesion regions highlights noise problems
inherent in perturbation-based CLM computation and the
dependence on a proper binarization scheme.
4.4. Textual Explanation
Examples in Figure 5a depict instances with correct con-
cept predictions, which showcase the simplicity and intel-
ligibility of the generated explanations. Explanation texts
brieﬂy reﬂect the most important criteria necessary for ex-
perts to understand the network’s decision. Interestingly, it
appeared that although correct concept predictions where
given, the network sometimes misclassiﬁed the underlying
disease as seen in the third row of Figure 5a. This could be
due to the presentation of an ambiguous borderline case or
a result of wrong ground truth annotation for either lesion
class or concepts. However, the explanation explicitly ex-
poses Streaks, Irregular Dots & Globules and Blue-Whitish
Veil as contraindications for the prediction of Nevus. In a
clinical setting, such contraindication would raise the sus-
picion of a user, possibly initiating a more thorough review
of the case. This particularly emphasises the utility of such
a system, as a correct explanation will allow physicians to
scrutinise a given prediction, not solely relying on an auto-
mated, opaque categorical output value.
Figure 5b on the contrary shows failure cases where the
network confused diﬀerent visual cues for concepts. While
Irregular Dots & Globules have been correctly detected in
the top right image, the middle right image contains white
blobs which might have been confused as Dots & Globules
by the model. The bottom right case shows a Blue Nevus
which has been confused by the network as a Melanoma
showing signs of Blue-Whitish Veil althoughcontaining Reg-
ular Dots & Globules. It is notable that samples with incor-
rect concept predictions already expose a certain uncertainty
by exhibiting moderate concept detections more frequently
as compared to the samples from Figure 5a as well as their
prevalence of contraindications. This clearly shows that ir-
respective of the model used for prediction, ExAID is able
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
to provide well-founded justiﬁcations which help to express
model uncertainty, encouraging closer examination of rare
and edge cases.
4.5. Limitations
This proof-of-principle study primarily focuses on the
current state of the proposed framework with its comprehen-
sible user interface, conveying textual, visual and concep-
tual explanations for trustworthy computer-aided decision
support in medicine. The development of the framework is
an ongoing Co-Design process which holistically includes a
wide variety of stakeholders with diﬀerent needs to assure
not only practical but also ethical aspects early on [47]. Al-
though, concept classiﬁcation, localisation and textual ex-
planation abilities of ExAID are remarkable given the fact
that the DL model has not explicitly been trained on those
tasks, some challenges must be ﬁrst solved before an appli-
cation in real clinical settings becomes feasible.
Current public datasets often suﬀer from the low sam-
ple quality attributable to a lack of process standardisation4,
missing histological diagnosis conﬁrmation and subjective
annotation. Together with the low number of overall avail-
able images, in particular the ones with detailed concept an-
notation, this results in signiﬁcant shift of data distributions
between diﬀerent datasets, constituting the major reason for
sub-optimal generalisation of the proposed concept classi-
ﬁers to other datasets.
ExAID’s conceptlocalisation ability yet suﬀers fromlim-
itations due to the perturbation-basednature of saliency map
generation which results in noisy heatmaps and high sensi-
tivity to hyperparameters, specially in case of varying sizes
of biomarkers. Futurework applyingoptimisation-basedper-
turbationmethodsfor conceptlocalisation will mitigate those
issues, resulting in more ﬂexible and robust heatmaps. Tex-
tual explanations are generated based on concept predictions
as well as directional derivatives as used in TCAV scores.
Lacking a meaningfulscaling of gradients, only the direction
and not the magnitude of a concept’s inﬂuence is currently
used to improve the explanation text. Incorporation of more
robust concept inﬂuence measures could add another level of
details to the rule-base, making the explanations more diﬀer-
entiated and rendering the system even more useful in prac-
tice.
Quantitative evaluation of concept detection or localisa-
tion is still limited due to lack of similarly and suﬃciently
annotated data from other sources. To solve this issue, an
agreed upon deﬁnition and consensual annotation of a large
number of representative images is required, which will re-
ﬂect in higher quality explanations. Moreover, evaluation
of CLMs is aggravated by noise artefacts emerging during
binarisation and lack of deﬁnite measures for fuzzy localisa-
tion tasks. A qualitative evaluation in real-world setting by
medical experts is of extreme value for the evaluation of the
explanations’ utility to the diagnostic workﬂow and will be
4Diﬀerent camera setups, operators and techniques like polarised and
non-polarised dermoscopy resulting in varying image quality, lighting,
alignment and artefacts.
realised as soon as may be.
The inﬂuence of subjectivity not only reﬂects in the data
annotations, but also in the general uncertainty surrounding
the ﬁeld of dermoscopy. Despite ﬁrst attempts towards stan-
dardisation of dermoscopicterminologiesand concepts [26],
no generalconsensushas yet been broadlyestablished among
physicians. Thus, a variety of diagnostic schools prevail and
interpretationof terms and concepts is still largely depending
on the education, preferenceand experienceof the individual
physician. This work focuses on the 7-point checklist crite-
ria [2] as well as further dermoscopic concepts from [33],
due to the public availability of annotated data. The com-
mitment to a speciﬁc set of concepts prior to the decision
of a standard consensus might hamper the acceptance of the
framework by physicians accustomed to diﬀerent methods
and the mixture of diﬀerent schools and interpretations of
concepts bears the risk of contrasting labelling. Productive
deployment of such a system requires diligent assessment
through medical practitioners in real-world environments,
providing their valuable feedback to evaluate and improve
such a system. Prior to performing clinical trials, the system
should be fed with carefully selected data properly represent-
ing a set of meaningful and unambiguously deﬁned dermo-
scopic concepts as agreed by a committee of dermatology
experts.
5. Conclusion
Since the advent of modern DL-based systems and their
industriousapplications in medical domains, there have been
remarkable strides in the explanation of these complex sys-
tems that, in some cases, already led to correction and veri-
ﬁcation of AI as well as disclosure of new potential diagnos-
tic criteria. However, sensible and comprehensible explana-
tions is still one of the greatest challenges related to medical
image diagnosis, which should be addressed by concerted
eﬀorts from AI researchers, medical practitioners and regu-
latory authorities.
With ExAID, this article presents a framework which
consolidates and builds upon our previous works on detec-
tion of human-deﬁned concepts for skin lesion diagnosis in
DL model’s latent space and their localisation on the input
image to provide intelligible textual explanation of model’s
predictions. We showed that, despite severe limitation in
terms of data and annotation availability, the system already
provides useful insights into DL classiﬁer’s decision mak-
ing, even in case of wrong predictions. When properly ad-
dressing the current limitations, this framework will not only
play a useful assistive role in reliable, eﬃcient and objective
screening of melanoma, which is oneof the most serious skin
cancers, but also help train new dermatologists eﬃciently
and eﬀectively.
The generality of the framework allows its adaptation to
various other image-based domains like radiology or histol-
ogy. In view of future deployment of the system in clini-
cal practice, its under-lying general purpose DL architecture
will be further specialised to the respective domain, includ-
Lucieri et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 12

ExAID: A Multimodal XAI Framework for CAD of Skin Lesions
ing improvements to the processing pipeline such as lesion
segmentation and hair removal.
Acknowledgement
This work is partially funded by National University of
Science and Technology (NUST), Pakistan through Prime
Minister’s Programme for Development of PhDs in Science
and Technologyand BMBF projects ExplAINN(01IS19074)
and DeFuseNN (01IW17002).
