Neural Fitted Q Iteration based Optimal Bidding Strategy in
Real Time Reactive Power Market
JAHNVI PATEL, Department of Computer Science and Engineering & Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science
and AI, IIT Madras
DEVIKA JAY, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras
BALARAMAN RAVINDRAN, Department of Computer Science and Engineering & Robert Bosch Centre
for Data Science and AI, IIT Madras
K. SHANTI SWARUP, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras
In real-time electricity markets, the objective of generation companies (GENCOs) while bidding is to maximise
their profit. The strategies for learning optimal bidding have been formulated through game theoretical
approaches and stochastic optimisation problems. In game theoretical approaches, payoffs of rivals are
assumed to be known, which is unrealistic. In stochastic optimisation methods, a suitable distribution function
for rivals’ bids is assumed. The uncertainty in the network is handled by assuming the process to be a Markov
Decision Process with known state transition probabilities. Similar studies in reactive power markets have
not been reported so far because the network voltage operating conditions have an increased impact on
reactive power markets than on active power markets. Contrary to active power markets, the bids of rivals
are not directly related to fuel costs in reactive power markets. Hence, the assumption of a suitable probability
distribution function is unrealistic, making the strategies adopted in active power markets unsuitable for
learning optimal bids in reactive power market mechanisms. Therefore, a bidding strategy is to be learnt
from market observations and experience in imperfect oligopolistic competition based markets. In this paper,
a pioneer work on learning optimal bidding strategies from observation and experience in a three-stage
reactive power market is reported. Such bidding strategy studies on reactive power markets have not been
studied extensively in the literature. Also, the learning method proposed in this paper does not assume any
probability distribution to model the uncertainties that affect one’s bidding strategy. For learning optimal
bidding strategies, a variant of Neural Fitted Q Iteration (NFQ-TP) with prioritized experience replay and
target network is proposed. The total reactive power requirement is estimated by the learning agent through
a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) network to suitably define the state space for the learning agent. The
learning technique is tested on three-stage reactive power mechanism of IEEE 30-bus Power System test bed
under different scenarios and NFQ network configurations. The simulation results ensure that the technique
is suitable for learning optimal bidding strategies from their own experiences and market observations.
CCS Concepts: • Applied computing →Engineering; • Computing methodologies →Reinforcement
learning; Model development and analysis.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Reactive Power Market, Optimal Bidding Strategy, Deep Reinforcement
Learning, Neural Fitted Q Iteration, Prioritized Experience Replay, LSTM

Madras; Balaraman Ravindran, Department of Computer Science and Engineering & Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science

Madras.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires

© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2021/1-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.
arXiv:2101.02456v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2021

2
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
ACM Reference Format:
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup. 2021. Neural Fitted Q Iteration based
Optimal Bidding Strategy in Real Time Reactive Power Market. 1, 1 (January 2021), 23 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
With the advent of advanced information technology and integration of small-scale renewable
energy sources to power supply systems, significant changes in power supply grid operations and
planning are being implemented worldwide. Deregulation of vertically-integrated-utility based grid
operations is considered as a major revolution in power sector. This has increased the participation
of private companies in maintaining the grid operation levels within permissible limits. The grid
operator functions as an Independent System Operator (ISO) that procures energy from private
producers and schedules generation and demand in real-time. This forms an electricity market.
Ancillary services, like network voltage support through reactive power procurement, spinning
reserve maintenance, etc., are also being achieved through market mechanisms. Among these
services, reactive power procurement has been regarded as one of the most important ancillary
service market [5]. However, implementing a real-time pricing mechanism for reactive power
has been challenging due to the localised nature of reactive power. Reactive power supply is to
be provided locally to support reactive power demand and maintain system-wide bus voltage
magnitudes within permissible limits. However, this local requirement of reactive power results in
the exercise of market power by participants. Under critical operating conditions, participants may
submit high bids resulting in highly volatile price signals in the market. Hence mechanisms that
preserve incentive compatibility and individual rationality is essential for reactive power markets
[8]. Such incentive-compatible markets provide limited information to market participants, and
hence learning optimal bidding strategies is a challenge.
Most of the work so far on optimal bidding strategies for reactive power markets focuses on
game theoretic approaches. Optimal bidding strategy for reactive power market was studied under
conjectured supply function models with multi-leader follower game setting [4]. Estimation of
electricity suppliers’ cost function in day-ahead real power market using inverse optimization
method based on historical bidding data is discussed in [3]. In [10], the behaviour of generation
companies participating in reactive power market is simulated as a multi-leader follower game. In
[7], Q-learning is used to strategize bidding in market models based on DC-OPF. Deep Q Networks
(DQNs) are used to find the optimal bidding strategy for generators in single-sided energy markets
as in [19].
Bidding strategies discussed in the literature so far considered a simple pricing mechanism where,
in most of the cases, uniform price signals were issued to generation companies without considering
the location features and real-time reactive power requirements. However, these bidding strategies
fail when reactive power pricing mechanism issues nodal prices, i.e., prices that vary with the
location of the generation companies. This makes price signals highly correlated with preceding
operating conditions like active power demand from loads, network topology changes, and voltage
magnitude profiles. Also, the actual cost function in the case of reactive power generation of rival
generation companies cannot be estimated directly from fuel costs. The cost of reactive power
generation constitutes only a small percentage of fuel cost, and fuel costs are directly related to
active power generation.
Hence, learning agents, i.e., generation companies, are exposed to an environment that provides
limited access to information regarding market pricing mechanism. Imperfect information setup
in the market and dependency of the current state of the market on the preceding sequence of
states make learning bidding strategies a challenge. Assumption of suitable probability distribution
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
3
function to model system uncertainties and bids of rivals is unrealistic in reactive power markets due
to the inherent features of the market discussed above. Learning bidding strategies in an incentive-
compatible three-stage reactive power market mechanism [8] has not been reported so far. This
paper presents a pioneer work in this regard by proposing a deep reinforcement learning technique
for a single learning agent in an environment (three-stage reactive power market mechanism)
constituting competing generation companies that do not share information. The proposed learning
technique is simplified in Fig.1. The learning agent (GENCOs) acts on the environment (reactive
Fig. 1. Learning optimal bidding strategies in reactive power market
power market mechanism) by submitting its optimal bids. The feedback that it receives from the
environment is the payment, which is the reward signal. The additional inputs that the learning
agent needs to learn an optimal bidding strategy are market observations and experience. This
defines the framework of the learning technique that is detailed in this paper.
The main contributions of this work are summarised below:
(1) Design of an optimal bidding strategy suitable for incentive-compatible reactive power
markets without assuming unrealistic probability distribution function for rivals’ bids and
system uncertainties. The imperfect oligopoly competition among participants adds further
complexity to the market environment. Neural Fitted Q Iteration with Target network and
Prioritized Experience Replay (NFQ-TP) learning algorithm is proposed to achieve optimal
bidding strategy from market observations and experience for a reactive power producer
such that the profit of generator is maximized. The proposed NFQ-TP increases learning
stability using target networks and improves sampling efficiency using prioritized experience
replay.
(2) The market environment that can be formulated as a higher-order Markov Decision Process
is converted to a first-order Markov Decision process, by suitable definition of state space in
which total reactive power requirement in the system is predicted using an LSTM network.
(3) Present an approach using Long Short Term Memory networks (LSTM) to estimate current
state requirement of reactive power based on total quantity generated by GENCOs in past
episodes.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: A review of the application of deep learning
techniques in the electricity market is presented in Section 2. Section 3 provides a brief background
on the reactive power market model in which the bidding strategies are to be learned by the market
participant. The learning environment of the market participant (agent) is proposed in Section 4.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

4
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
Section 5 presents the proposed Neural Fitted Q Iteration with Target Network and Prioritized
Experience Replay algorithm for learning optimal bidding strategies. Experimental results and
observations are discussed in Section 6. In Section 7, brief conclusions are drawn and future work
discussed.
2
RELATED WORK
Participants like generation companies, customers, etc., have been learning bidding strategies since
the implementation of electricity markets based on competitive bidding. The participants aim to
utilise the varying load scenarios to earn profit by submitting optimal bids. Several works related
to optimal bidding strategies were formulated as an optimisation problem that was solved using
heuristic methods [1, 21]. To consider the uncertainty of a rival’s behaviour while determining
bidding strategies, minimisation of normal probability distribution function of the rival’s bid is
generally adopted. This minimisation problem has been solved using gravitational search algorithm
[18]. Determining monthly bidding strategies was formulated as a bi-level problem in [9]. Based on
conditional value at risk, a stochastic bi-level optimization was proposed [14] for coordinated wind
power and gas turbine units in the real-time market.
Day-ahead bidding problem can also be considered as a Markov decision process (MDP). In [22]
a variant of the stochastic dual dynamic programming algorithm was used to solve the MDP. With
advancements in artificial intelligence, reinforcement learning has found significant application in
electricity market modeling [12, 13]. Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient with prioritized experience
replay was proposed for complex energy markets [23]. Asynchronous advantage actor-critic (A3C)
method was proposed in [2] to determine optimal bidding strategies for wind farms in short term
electricity markets.
The aforementioned methodologies that determine the optimal bidding strategies are suitable
for participants in energy markets. There has been no extensive work on the formulation of an
optimal bidding strategy for participants in reactive power markets. This is mainly because of
the complexity associated with reactive power market. These complexities arise with difficulty in
determining the actual requirement of reactive power in the system. In the case of energy markets,
the quantity to be produced by the participant can be directly determined from load forecasting
techniques due to active power load pattern features. Whereas in reactive power markets, the
requirement of reactive power in the system is determined by reactive power loading pattern
and other features like active power loading, network topology, system operating conditions like
voltage, frequency, etc. and the location of the participant. Also, estimating the cost function of
rivals through probability distribution function or supply function methods is not easy in reactive
power markets. This is because the cost function of market participants are not directly related to
fuel, contrary to energy markets.
Hence, the general assumption of modelling system uncertainties and bids of rivals with a suitable
probability distribution function and then, defining optimal bidding strategy as a solution to a
stochastic optimisation problem is unrealistic in reactive power market mechanisms. Assuming
reactive power market as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) is also not valid as state variables
in reactive power market are highly correlated with not only the current state but also the past
sequences of states. Also, incentive compatibility and limited information setup in the market to
mitigate the exercising of market participants make learning optimal bidding strategies a challenge.
Thus, these issues lead to the requirement of formulating a new framework for learning optimal
bidding strategies for participants in reactive power market based on market observation and
experience.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
5
3
REACTIVE POWER MARKET MECHANISM
Design of reactive power markets involves mechanism definition that will effectively coordinate the
interaction between several generating companies (GENCOs) and Independent System Operator
(ISO). In this work, a three-stage reactive power market mechanism is considered [8] in which
GENCOs submit their bids in the format as given below:
• Operation cost ($/MVAr)
• Lost opportunity cost (LOC, $/MVAr2)
Based on the bids received, ISO issues a price signal to each participant. The participants
then respond with their optimal generation schedule. The stages of the market mechanism are
summarised below and depicted in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Three stage reactive power market model
• At the start of every hour, reactive power generators, i.e., market participants, submit their
price bids to the ISO for the next hour. The two dimensional bids have the form (𝑏1𝑖,𝑏2𝑖): 𝑏1𝑖
is the operation cost (or the linear term in the cost function of participant) and 𝑏2𝑖is the lost
opportunity cost (or the quadratic term in the cost function of participant).
• ISO responds with individual price signals to each of the GENCOs such that total payment is
minimized while meeting the demand and other criterion.
• GENCOs respond by submitting the quantities they would generate at the next time step.
The last two steps are repeated till all the market conditions have been satisfied.
As mentioned, each GENCO receives a separate price signal, also known as nodal pricing, and
the generation scheduling is done based on the cost function of each GENCO. The cost function
of each GENCO is private information and is not revealed. Also, estimating the cost function of
rivals from fuel costs, as in energy markets, is not suitable in the reactive power market. This is
because the cost of reactive power is not directly related to fuel costs. These market features pose
challenges in learning due to partial observability. Also, the GENCOs have limited knowledge on
the network topology and system operating conditions that have resulted in different price signals
at different nodes of the network. Reactive power requirement in the system depends on voltage
profile in the system, in addition to network topology and apparent power demand from loads.
Hence, the conditional probability distribution of future states depends on a sequence of preceding
states. Thus, the agents have a partially observable environment with imperfect competition based
market mechanism to learn their optimal bidding strategy.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

6
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
4
REACTIVE POWER MARKET ENVIRONMENT MODEL FOR LEARNING
As described in earlier sections, learning of optimal bidding strategy in reactive power market
becomes practical only when the learning process considers the following features for market
environment:
(1) Higher order Markov Decision Process (MDP)
(2) Imperfect information setup
(3) Imperfect competition
Higher-order MDP formulation and imperfect information in the market are to be handled so
that the market environment translates to a reinforcement learning setup. The feature of imperfect
competition is discussed in detail in IEEE 30-bus system simulation studies.
Modelling of reactive power market environment to suit reinforcement learning setup is presented
in this section. This section describes key definitions crucial to the discussion of methodologies
presented in the paper and formulates a first-order MDP for the optimal bidding problem.
4.1
Handling higher order Markov Decision Process
In a reinforcement learning setting, an MDP is characterized by a set of states 𝑆, a set of actions 𝐴,
transition probability function 𝑝(𝑠𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) satisfying Markov property that describes the prob-
ability of the learning agent being in state 𝑠𝑡+1 on taking action 𝑎𝑡in state 𝑠𝑡and an immediate
reward function 𝑆× 𝐴→𝑅. At any time step, the goal of the learning agent is to choose an action
𝑎𝑡according to a policy 𝜋∗(𝑠𝑡) that maximizes the expected return 𝐺𝑡= 𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾𝑟𝑡+2 + 𝛾2𝑟𝑡+3 + . . .
where 𝛾is the discount factor that determines the trade-off between long term and short term
rewards. This is done by following a policy that maximizes the value of action value function
𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) = 𝐸[𝐺𝑡|𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡, 𝜋] for the given state 𝑠𝑡.
Translating the above to the proposed market setting, the GENCO for which optimal bidding
strategy is to be learnt from market observations constitutes the learning agent. Stages 2 and 3 of
the three-stage market mechanism (Figure 2) can be encapsulated into an optimization model such
that when any GENCO submits its price bids to the model (stage 1), it receives the price signal
and generation schedule for the next hour. This optimization model is the environment in our RL
setting. Next, we analyze the market properties in order to fabricate the state features accurately.
Under the assumption that reactive power requirement at any given time step remains almost the
same irrespective of GENCOs behaviour, we fix the bids of all GENCOs to an arbitrary value and
calculate the total quantity generated by all GENCOs in the market at each time step. Figure 3
shows how total quantity generated by all reactive power producers (a measure of reactive power
requirement) varies with time across an episode. The dotted red lines are separated temporally
by 24 hours. We observe a heavy correlation in loads at time-step 𝑡−48,𝑡−24,𝑡−2,𝑡−1 to the
current load. Therefore, it is possible to evaluate the price signals and generation schedule in a
similar market situation from our experience and use them to predict the optimal behaviour in the
current market scenario.
Utilising signals from preceding time steps to describe the next state vector means that the
probability of transitioning into the next state (time 𝑡) depends not only on the current state (time
𝑡−1), but also on the sequence of states preceding it, specifically 𝑡−2,𝑡−24,𝑡−48 in this case. This
violates the first-order Markov assumption that future is independent of the past given the present
which presents a major hurdle in formulating the problem as an MDP. However, such seemingly
non-Markov cases such as ours when the next step depends on a bounded sequence of steps from
past, i.e. 𝑝(𝑠𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡,𝑠𝑡−1,𝑎𝑡−1, . . .) = 𝑝(𝑠𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡, . . . ,𝑠𝑡−48,𝑎𝑡−48), then such a higher-order Markov
process can be translated to a first-order Markov problem by augmenting the state vector and
embedding the past (48 hours) as an additional feature. Doing so makes the next step depend only
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
7
Fig. 3. Total Quantity generated by all GENCOs across an episode
on the current state and the action taken, thereby making it possible to formulate an MDP for the
problem.
4.2
Handling imperfect information in the market
As mentioned in earlier sections, the reactive power requirement in the system depends on not only
the reactive power loads in the network but also the network topology. This poses an imperfect
information setup in the learning environment. Load prediction techniques and probability based
assumptions will not be a direct input to determine the total quantity of reactive power generation
required in the system. Thus, the reactive power requirement at each time step is to be estimated
from the total quantity of reactive power generated in the network in previous time steps to see
how the reactive power requirement at current time-step correlates to the market experience we
have gained so far.
For this, consider the time series data of total quantity generated by all GENCOs in IEEE 30-bus
system from an earlier episode (month) as the raw training input. From the market analysis in
Section 4.1, it is known that this data is periodic in nature, which makes it suitable for using
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) which is a class of neural networks that allow information to
persist and hence, make it easier to learn sequential data. An unrolled RNN can be thought of as
multiple sequential copies of an Artificial Neural Network. However, this poses an issue when it
comes to long term memory. RNNs consider only recent information while forgetting temporally
separated events that could link to current output. This is where Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
Networks, a special class of Recurrent Neural Networks, come in to learn long term dependencies.
LSTMs accumulate an internal state that is constantly updated using the inputs, a hidden state
that can be used for computing output, forget gate that determines what information to throw
away from the cell state and together, the hidden state, input, and cell state can be used to compute
the next hidden state. Many-to-one LSTM models take a series of recent observations as input and
generate a single output corresponding to prediction for the next time step. Hence, the learning
agent could use LSTMs to forecast load for the next hour as a sequence prediction.
The raw reactive power requirement (total quantity) signal is transformed into the training set
for LSTM by splitting the input into sequence of length 24 corresponding to the reactive power
requirement observations over the past one day. The target is defined as the total quantity for the
next hour. Inputs from the training set are then fed into an LSTM network with 𝑛units followed by
a dense layer. The network is trained by back-propagating the mean squared loss between predicted
reactive power requirement and true reactive power requirement. The pre-trained LSTM network
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

8
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
can be used to estimate the total quantity required in the current state for state representation
of the learning agent. The LSTM reactive power requirement prediction algorithm is outlined in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Reactive Power Requirement Prediction using LSTM
1: Let 𝑆←Total quantity time series data for a month
2: Initialize 𝑋,𝑦←Split 𝑆into sequence of length 24 and reactive power requirement for next
hour as corresponding output
3: Define model 𝑀←[LSTM(n), Dense]
4: for 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛= 1, 2, . . . do
5:
Sample a batch 𝐵from the training set
6:
Use 𝑀to generate the predicted output values ˆ𝑦𝑖for 𝑖= 1..𝐵
7:
Train the network using Adam optimizer on Í
𝑖(𝑦𝑖−ˆ𝑦𝑖)2 for 𝑖= 1..𝐵and update the LSTM
weights
8: end for
4.3
Formulating the Reinforcement Learning problem
Having performed suitable translation of higher order MDP to first order MDP, and handling
imperfect information setup in the market environment, the features of the Reinforcement Learning
based agent is described as an MDP (𝑆,𝐴, 𝑃, 𝑅,𝛾).
State Space: The state features are designed in such a way that the agent can use them to
determine the consequences of its actions while also integrating current market conditions like
the current reactive power requirement estimate. A description of the state features can be found
below:
(1) Previous bids: This considers the past experience of the learning agent in the market to
learn the optimal bidding strategy. We consider the ratio of bids sent to ISO to actual cost
function of the learning agent 𝑖: < 𝑎1𝑖,𝑡′,𝑎2𝑖,𝑡′ > ∀𝑡′ ∈{𝑡−48,𝑡−24,𝑡−2,𝑡−1} timestamps.
(2) Reward signals: The rewards received at {𝑡−48,𝑡−24,𝑡−2,𝑡−1} timesteps act as feedback
signal to the agent and will help the learner to judge the optimality of bids. A lower reward
will indicate that the learner bid too high resulting in lesser payment. This is because the
generation scheduled through stages 2 and 3 of the market mechanism was less due to high
bid.
(3) Total Quantity Estimate: We use the previous quantity signals to estimate the total gener-
ation at the current time-step, which is correlated to the reactive power requirement at that
timestep. LSTM network discussed in Section 4.2 could be utilized to predict this periodic
quantity from time-series data.
Action Space: The bids that we send to the optimization module constitute the action for that
state. For ease of analysis, instead of considering bids as action signals directly, we consider the
action to be bid magnification defined as the ratio of bids sent to ISO to actual production cost.
Thus, for 𝑖𝑡ℎlearner at timestep 𝑡with actual operation cost 𝑐1𝑖and lost opportunity cost 𝑐2𝑖, the
action space is (a1𝑖,𝑡, a2𝑖,𝑡) defined as:
< 𝑎1𝑖,𝑡,𝑎2𝑖,𝑡>=< 𝑏1𝑖,𝑡
𝑐1𝑖
, 𝑏2𝑖,𝑡
𝑐2𝑖
>,
(1)
where𝑏1𝑖,𝑡and𝑏2𝑖,𝑡represent the bid submitted to ISO as the claimed operation and lost opportunity
cost respectively. An advantage of using the ratios over actual bid values is that the actions can
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
9
now remain same across all GENCOs leading to easier analysis. Because our action space is low-
dimensional, it is possible to discretize it at the required granularity and can be effectively considered
as discrete space. In order to bound the action space, we restrict the bid magnification coefficients
to [1, 5] range and discretize the action space using step size of 0.5. This results in a total of 81
discrete actions : (1, 1), (1, 1.5), . . . , (2.5, 2.5), . . . , (5, 4.5), (5, 5).
Reward Function: The reward is measured in terms of profit made by reactive power producer
as compared to bidding its true cost. Let 𝑐1𝑖and 𝑐2𝑖represent the cost coefficients for agent 𝑖, 𝑞𝑔
be the quantity generated by the producer and 𝑏𝑔𝑖be the base generation. Base generation of a
generation company is the amount of reactive power required for the auxillary services within the
plant and also for shipment of base active power produced. Thus, we express the profit of GENCO
as follows:
𝑝𝑖,𝑡= 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡× 𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡−𝑐1𝑖× (𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡−𝑏𝑔𝑖) −𝑐2𝑖× (𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡−𝑏𝑔𝑖)2
(2)
The reward signal is computed as 𝑟𝑖,𝑡= 𝑝𝑖,𝑡−𝑝𝑏
𝑖,𝑡, where 𝑝𝑏
𝑖,𝑡is computed using price and generation
returned from the environment upon sending the bids (𝑏1𝑖,𝑡,𝑏2𝑖,𝑡) = (𝑐1𝑖,𝑐2𝑖) to the ISO optimiza-
tion model. By using a reward measure relative to baseline, the learner would have an incentive to
learn actions that perform better than bidding their true costs and also be penalized by a negative
reward when they receive payment less than baseline.
5
NEURAL FITTED Q ITERATION FOR LEARNING FROM MARKET OBSERVATION
AND EXPERIENCE
In this section, a variant of Neural Fitted Q Iteration (NFQ), i.e., NFQ with Target Network and
Prioritized Experience Replay (NFQ-TP), is proposed for the single learning agent to handle the
imperfect competition and incomplete information of the market environment. Brief background of
classical Q-learning and NFQ is first discussed before presenting the proposed learning workflow
and NFQ-TP algorithm.
5.1
Classical Q-Learning
In order to solve the reinforcement learning problem, the agent should learn the expected return
for each state-action pair. Q-learning [20] is a model-free, off-policy, temporal difference based
learning algorithm that uses Bellman Optimality Equation [3] to recursively update the Q-values
until convergence is reached.
𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) = 𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾max
𝑎′ 𝑄(𝑠𝑡+1,𝑎′)
(3)
Q-learning updates estimates based on learned estimates using bootstrapping. Let learning rate be
𝛼, then the classical Q-learning update rule after 𝑘iterations is given by [4].
𝑄𝑘+1(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) = (1 −𝛼)𝑄𝑘(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) + 𝛼(𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾max
𝑎′ 𝑄𝑘(𝑠𝑡+1,𝑎′))
(4)
The term 𝛿𝑡= 𝑟𝑡+1 +𝛾max𝑎′ 𝑄𝑘(𝑠𝑡+1,𝑎′) −𝑄𝑘(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) is known as the TD-error and it is a measure of
the error in our current estimate of Q-values. In spite of having theoretical convergence properties,
this kind of tabular approach is suitable only for small and finite state spaces. This is because the
algorithm becomes computation and memory intensive as the number of states increases.
However, the 13-dimensional state space defined for the learning agent is continuous, and
discretization of it leads to an exponential increase in state space size. Thus, classical Q-learning
technique is unsuitable for the learning agent in an imperfect, oligopolistic reactive power market.
Hence, deep reinforcement techniques like Neural Fitted Q Iteration are required for learning
optimal bidding strategies.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

10
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
5.2
Neural Fitted Q Iteration
Classical Q-learning algorithm suffers from the curse of dimensionality. Also, updating the Q-
function based on only one point can lead to slower and noisy convergence. The challenges posed
by the classical Q-learning technique can be overcome by using Fitted Q Iteration (FQI) [6], a batch
mode reinforcement learning algorithm suitable for continuous state spaces and is an extension of
the traditional Q-learning approach. Basis functions are needed to map the input states into the
derived features space, which will approximate optimal Q values. We can then use any supervised
learning technique, such as regression or SVM, to fit the training set and generalize this information
to any unseen state. At each step, the learning agent has access to the experience buffer from which
it samples a mini-batch as its training set. The advantage of doing this is that the same experience
tuple can be used for learning multiple times for learning while also breaking temporal correlations
in sequentially generated data, thereby satisfying the i.i.d (independently identically distributed)
assumption. The training set is of the form (< 𝑠,𝑎>,𝑄) with the state-action pairs as input to the
algorithm and the target being defined as the action-value 𝑄(𝑠,𝑎) for the state-action pair.
Neural Fitted Q Iteration (NFQ) [15] is a data-efficient, deep learning based algorithm belonging
to the FQI family. It builds on the FQI algorithm by using the global generalization effects of a
neural network as a regressor to approximate the Q values using offline data. The principle of
NFQ is the same: using a single point to update the weights can create unintended changes in the
weights for other state-action pairs, whereas a batch based approach would stabilise learning. NFQ
uses RPROP as an optimizer to minimize oscillations in back-propagation. The advantage of using
resilient back-propagation [16] is that it adapts the step size for each weight independently based
on the sign of the double derivative of the loss function. Summarizing, if 𝜃are the weights of the
NFQ network, then corresponding to the input state-action pair < 𝑠,𝑎>, the output of the network
would be the action value 𝑄(𝑠,𝑎;𝜃). Since NFQ has been shown to perform well in control problems
with continuous state spaces, it is suitable for learning the Q-value function for the optimal strategy
problem.
5.3
Proposed NFQ-TP based learning algorithm
This section presents a variation of NFQ algorithm, i.e., NFQ with target network and prioritized
experience replay (NFQ-TP) is proposed. The advantage is that the proposed algorithm leads to
faster convergence for the bidding environment.
Prioritized experience replay: The original NFQ algorithm works on a pre-generated offline
training data sample of size 𝑁using random trajectories. However, populating the buffer sufficiently
with all patterns of state-action pairs is difficult while using random actions because of the high-
dimensional state space and large number of actions. Hence, in NFQ-TP, the experiences are
iteratively added to the buffer at each step of training. Initially, the buffer is populated with
𝑁𝐼initial episodes generated using random trajectories. During the training phase, to balance
exploitation with exploration, the agent adds an experience tuple by stepping in the environment
according to an 𝜖-greedy exploration strategy. This means that with (1 −𝜖) probability, the agent
chooses an action that maximizes action-value 𝑄(𝑠,𝑎;𝜃) predicted by NFQ-TP for the given state
and with 𝜖probability chooses an action randomly. The exploration factor 𝜖is initially set to a
large value to encourage taking rare actions and decayed as the algorithm approaches convergence.
The sampling efficiency from experience replay can be further improved compared to uniform
sampling by picking the important transitions with high TD-error more frequently using a Priori-
tized Experience Replay [17]. Higher magnitude of TD-error means the network does not estimate
the Q-value for that experience tuple accurately. Hence, we want to pick such samples more fre-
quently. Each experience in the buffer is stored along with the priority 𝑝𝑖= |𝛿| + 𝜖𝑃where |𝛿| =
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
11
is the magnitude of TD-error and 𝜖𝑃is a constant added to ensure that each experience is picked
with a non zero probability. The sampling probability of a transition 𝑃(𝑖) is defined as:
𝑃(𝑖) =
𝑝𝛽
𝑖
Í𝑁
𝑗=1 𝑝𝛽
𝑗
(5)
where 𝛽controls the amount of prioritization with 0 corresponding to uniform sampling and 1
corresponding to complete priority based sampling.
Updating target network: NFQ uses current Q estimates to predict the target Q value for loss
computation, and since these weights are constantly updated at each step in the learning process,
the target values are prone to oscillations. To stabilize learning further, a target network is used
with the parameters from the target network being updated slowly using parameters from the local
network. Therefore, for each training step, once the local weights 𝜃are updated, the weights for
the target network are updated as:
𝜃𝑇←(1 −𝜏)𝜃𝑇+ 𝜏𝜃
(6)
where 𝜃𝑇and 𝜃are parameters for target and local network respectively and 𝜏<< 1 decides the
rate at which target network changes. The NFQ target would now be computed using the target
network weights as:
𝑦𝑡= 𝑟𝑡+ 𝛾max
𝑎′ 𝑄(𝑠𝑡+1,𝑎′;𝜃𝑇)
(7)
The TD-error 𝛿𝑡for any transition can be defined as:
𝛿𝑡= 𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾max
𝑎′ 𝑄(𝑠𝑡+1,𝑎′;𝜃𝑇) −𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡;𝜃)
(8)
In each learning iteration, the prioritized experience replay is replenished with new experiences
by stepping in the environment in an 𝜖-greedy manner by using the Q-value estimate from the
target network to find the maximizing action. The weights of the local network are updated by
sampling a mini-batch, using the local network to estimate Q-values for each experience tuple in the
batch, and performing back-propagation on mean squared TD loss with TD target computed using
the target network. The weights of the target network are updated slowly based on the updates on
the local network. This process is repeated until convergence is reached. The pseudo-code for the
NFQ-TP implementation is described in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Neural Fitted Q Iteration (NFQ-TP variation)
1: Initialize prioritized replay memory D to capacity N by taking random steps in environment
2: Initialize local network with random weights 𝜃
3: Initialize target network with weights 𝜃𝑇←𝜃
4: Initialize PER parameters 𝛽and initial priority 𝑝𝑚
5: for 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛= 1, 2, . . . do
6:
Step in environment using policy 𝜋𝜃𝑇for 𝐾time steps with 𝜖noise
7:
Add 𝐾experience tuples of the form (𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡,𝑠𝑡+1,𝑟𝑡+1) to D and initialize priorities to 𝑝𝑚
8:
Sample a mini-batch of size 𝑀from PER
9:
Compute 𝑦𝑡= 𝑟𝑡+ 𝛾max𝑎′ 𝑄(𝑠𝑡+1,𝑎′;𝜃𝑇) for each tuple in batch
10:
Train the network using Rprop on (𝑦𝑡−𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡;𝜃))2 and update the local network 𝜃
11:
Update priorities of the sampled experiences in D
12:
Update target network 𝜃𝑇←(1 −𝜏)𝜃𝑇+ 𝜏𝜃
13: end for
The learning workflow for the overall algorithm is described in Figure 4.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

12
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
Fig. 4. Optimal Bidding Strategy Training Flow
6
EXPERIMENTS
6.1
Testing framework
The three stage reactive power model was tested in IEEE 30-bus system [24] as shown in Fig. 5
There are generator buses at nodes 1, 2, 13, 22, 23, 27. The peak load in the system is 189.5MW,
Fig. 5. IEEE 30-bus system
107.2MVAr. Each generator bus is considered as a generation company. Thus, there are 6 GENCOs
in the network, competing with each other in the reactive power market. The operation cost 𝑐1
and lost opportunity cost 𝑐2 of the GENCOs are described in Table 1. In the consecutive stages, a
single leader multi-follower game mechanism results in issuing price signals to GENCOs by ISO so
that the GENCOs respond with their optimal generation schedule. The base generation values for
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
13
these GENCOs are tabulated in 2. Each episode is a maximum of 720 (24 × 30) steps long, where
each step corresponds to an hourly bid in the 30-day window.
Table 1. Actual cost coefficients for all 6 GENCOs
GENCO
c1 ($/100MVAr)
c2($ / (100MVAr)2)
1
0.73
0.30
2
0.68
0.39
3
0.75
0.43
4
0.60
0.5
5
0.75
0.9
6
0.73
0.38
Table 2. Base MVAr generation in IEEE 30-bus system
GENCO
Base MVAr
1
7.5
2
3
3
3.125
4
2.435
5
2
6
2.235
The following studies have been performed to understand the performance of the proposed
NFQ-TP based learning algorithm for optimal bidding in reactive power market of IEEE 30-bus
system.
(1) Single agent NFQ-TP based learning considering two cases of bidding strategies for rivals
• Imperfect competition where GENCOs bid higher than the actual cost (Bidding Strategy-B1)
• Perfect competition where GENCOs bid their actual cost (Bidding Strategy-B2)
The goal is to analyze the robustness of the learning approach in multiple market scenarios
against differing rival bidding strategies.
(2) Comparison of two network configurations of NFQ-TP network:
• NFQ-1: Input- State features concatenated with discrete action. Output- Single Q-value for
state-action pair.
• NFQ-2: Input- State features. Output-81 Q-values corresponding to each action.
Comparison of the two variants gives us insights on how to represent the Q-values effectively
while permitting as much generalization as possible without impacting the representation
strength of the network.
(3) Comparison of learning benefits for low cost, intermediate cost and high cost agents from
proposed NFQ-TP based learning algorithm in order to analyze how the learning approach
provides an improvement over the naive strategy for different learners.
LSTM Reactive Power Requirement Prediction. Before we can generate the experience
tuples for training NFQ-TP network, the LSTM network must be pre-trained to be able to predict
the current state reactive power requirement. We use the algorithm specified in Section 4.2 and feed
the input as the total quantity generation data for a 30-day long episode. We employed a network
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

14
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
with 100 LSTM units followed by a dense layer whose output is a single value corresponding to
the reactive power requirement prediction for the next time step. Since the algorithm splits the
time series data into segments lasting 24 hours, the input to the LSTM network would be of size 24,
corresponding to the total quantities produced by all GENCOs for each hour over the last day.
6.2
Defining bidding strategies for GENCOs other than NFQ-TP learning agent
The bidding strategies adopted by the agents other than learner are described below:
(1) Imperfect competition (Bidding Strategy B-1). Optimal bidding strategies in reactive
power market for producers have not been studied extensively. Hence, for GENCOs other than
the learning agent, we modify the strategies adopted for bidding in active power markets. The
optimal bidding strategy in active power markets is formulated as a stochastic optimisation
problem by assuming suitable probability distribution functions to model uncertainties in the
network and bids of rivals in the market. Such a basic optimisation problem formulation for
active power market discussed in [11] is rewritten in the context of reactive power market as
given below:
max
𝑏1𝑖,𝑡,𝑏2𝑖,𝑡
𝐸[𝜋𝑖,𝑡]
(9)
such that
𝜋𝑖,𝑡= (𝑏1𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑏2𝑖,𝑡· 𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡) · 𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡−(𝑐1𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑐2𝑖,𝑡· 𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡) · 𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡
(10)
𝑞𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑖,𝑡
≤𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡≤𝑞𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑖,𝑡
(11)
𝑅𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑖
≤(𝑏1𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑏2𝑖,𝑡· 𝑞𝑔𝑖,𝑡) ≤𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑖
(12)
Where R𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑖
and R𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑖
are the limits set to the bidding function which can be assumed
based on the capacity of each GENCO. The optimisation problem can be solved through
heuristic methods like Monte Carlo methods, Genetic Algorithm etc provided assumptions
on probability distribution function for system uncertainties and rival’s bids can be validated.
However, as detailed in previous sections, assumption of such probability distribution function
for reactive power markets is unrealistic. Hence, in this work, we consider the results reported
in [11] for IEEE 30-bus system under peak load conditions. The reported results are applied
to reactive power markets by considering demand fluctuations in the bids. For a more
competitive environment, the bids in reactive power market are made higher than optimal
bids in active power market. This is a fair baseline as the chances of exercising market power
in reactive power is higher and the uncertainty in network operating conditions is handled by
utilising demand fluctuation signals instead of assuming a probability distribution function.
Thus, for this bidding strategy, we assume that all the agents except learner send bids equal
to two times actual operation cost and five times lost opportunity cost multiplied with a
step-wise variable 𝑑𝑡between [0, 1] corresponding to the demand fluctuations.
𝑎1𝑖,𝑡= 2 × 𝑑𝑡
𝑎2𝑖,𝑡= 5 × 𝑑𝑡
(13)
Note that we use actual demand and some random noise to generate the multiplier to ensure
that other GENCOs do not have perfect information.
(2) Perfect competition (Bidding Strategy B-2). All the agents except learner send bids equal
to the actual operation and lost opportunity cost.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
15
6.3
Defining variants of NFQ Network
Two variants of NFQ network are considered to study the performance of the proposed NFQ-TP
based learning. Both the variants use ReLU activation, mean squared TD-error for updating the
parameters and RPROP as an optimizer.
(1) NFQ-1 takes the state features along with the discrete action as input and outputs a single
Q-value for the state action pair. Since the state-space is 13-dimensional and action space is
1-dimensional, the input to NFQ-1 network would be a size 14 vector. Figure 6 summarizes
NFQ-1 implementation.
Fig. 6. Visualization of NFQ network used in Variant 1
(2) NFQ-2 takes the state features as input and outputs 81 Q-values corresponding to each
of the actions. Input to NFQ-2 would be a size 13 vector. Figure 7 depicts NFQ-2 network
implementation respectively.
Fig. 7. Visualization of NFQ network used in Variant 2
Adam optimizer is used for learning NFQ network weights with a learning rate of 0.001. A decay
rate of 0.01 is used for decaying the exploration noise and a soft update rate of 𝜏= 10−3 is used for
updating the target network. A mini-batch of size 64 is sampled from the Prioritized Experience
Replay and the prioritization factor 𝛽is set to 0.7. The buffer capacity is set to 𝑁= 105 with number
of initial experiences 𝑁𝐼= 104. A more thorough discussion on choosing the hyper-parameters can
be found in Section A.
6.4
Simulation results, observation and inference
The parameters affecting the experiment are studied in Appendix A, that presents a brief summary
on the technique used to determine the optimal set of hyper-parameters. The experiments are
carried out in accordance with the results obtained from the aforementioned analysis.
6.4.1
LSTM Reactive Power Requirement Prediction. In order to evaluate the model perfor-
mance, we define the baseline model that predicts current quantity as an average of total quantity
generated at 𝑡−1 and 𝑡−24, i.e. ˆ𝑄𝑡= 𝑄𝑡−1+𝑄𝑡−24
2
. On evaluation, the mean squared error between
predicted and actual demand for baseline was found to be 0.019 whereas in case of LSTM model,
the error was 0.01. Thus, it is observed that LSTM outperforms baseline and hence, using an LSTM
leads to more accurate reactive power requirement prediction.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

16
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
6.4.2
Case 1: Rivals adopt bidding strategy B-1. We consider each of the GENCOs as a learner
and the bidding strategies of remaining 5 competing GENCOs are determined by B-1. This section
presents the improvements achieved by each of the implementations of NFQ-TP over the baseline
true cost bidding.
Performance of NFQ-1 variant
Figure 8 and Table 3 show the average and standard deviation of episodic rewards across 10 random
runs of the NFQ-TP algorithm with each of the GENCOs as a learning agent and using NFQ-1
network implementation and B-1 rival bidding. The table values have been computed considering
only the convergence values of episodic returns for each of the runs.
Fig. 8. Learnt episodic rewards averaged across 10 random seeds with each of the GENCOs as a learner using
NFQ-1 model and B-1 rival bidding strategy
Table 3. Mean 𝜇and standard deviation 𝜎over 10 random runs using NFQ-1 model and B-1 rival bidding
strategy
#
1
2
3
4
5
6
𝜇
0.0
9.45
4.06
14.34
0.0
0.002
𝜎
0.005
2.83
0.52
3.22
0.0
0.003
Performance of NFQ-2 variant
Figure 9 and Table 4 show the average and standard deviation of episodic rewards across 10 random
runs of the NFQ-TP algorithm with each of the GENCOs as a learning agent and using NFQ-2
network implementation and B-1 rival bidding.
6.4.3
Case 2: Rivals adopt bidding strategy B-2. We consider each of the GENCOs as a learner
and the bidding strategies of remaining 5 competing GENCOs are determined by B-2. This section
presents the improvements achieved by each of the implementations of NFQ-TP over the baseline
true cost bidding.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
17
Fig. 9. Learnt episodic rewards averaged across 10 random seeds with each of the GENCOs as a learner using
NFQ-2 model and B-1 rival bidding strategy
Table 4. Mean 𝜇and standard deviation 𝜎over 10 random runs using NFQ-2 model and B-1 rival bidding
strategy
#
1
2
3
4
5
6
𝜇
0.0
14.08
7.03
17.47
0.0
0.0
𝜎
0.002
0.52
0.13
0.53
0.25
0.05
Performance of NFQ-1 variant
Figure 10 and Table 5 show the average and standard deviation of episodic rewards across 10
random runs of the NFQ-TP algorithm with each of the GENCOs as a learning agent and using
NFQ-1 network implementation and B-2 rival bidding.
Fig. 10. Learnt episodic rewards averaged across 10 random seeds with each of the GENCOs as a learner
using NFQ-1 model and B-2 rival bidding strategy
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

18
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
Table 5. Mean 𝜇and standard deviation 𝜎over 10 random runs using NFQ-1 model and B-2 rival bidding
strategy
#
1
2
3
4
5
6
𝜇
1.22
25.99
6.01
6.53
0.0
0.0
𝜎
0.19
4.57
0.96
0.71
0.0
0.11
Performance of NFQ-2 variant
Figure 11 and Table 6 show the average and standard deviation of episodic rewards across 10
random runs of the NFQ-TP algorithm with each of the GENCOs as a learning agent and using
NFQ-2 network implementation and B-2 rival bidding.
Fig. 11. Learnt episodic rewards averaged across 10 random seeds with each of the GENCOs as a learner
using NFQ-2 model and B-2 rival bidding strategy
Table 6. Mean 𝜇and standard deviation 𝜎over 10 random runs using NFQ-2 model and B-2 rival bidding
strategy
#
1
2
3
4
5
6
𝜇
1.87
46.31
9.60
9.34
0.0
2.86
𝜎
0.06
1.13
0.31
0.33
0.0
0.44
6.4.4
Comparison of NFQ-1 and NFQ-2. On examining the mean episodic rewards for the two
bidding strategies, we see that both the implementations are able to perform at least as well as the
baseline bidding. However, we achieved far more superior results while using NFQ-2, even by using
a smaller network. This is because of the way the network is structured. NFQ-1 maps a state-action
pair to Q-value; hence, any update to the pair could affect the Q-values for other actions as well
because of spatial locality. This also explains why the variance in episodic rewards is high even
towards convergence while using NFQ-1 implementation.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
19
6.4.5
Comparison of episodic rewards for B1 v/s B2. The mean episodic rewards achieved
for the GENCOs are comparatively higher when the rival bidding strategy is B-2. This is because
B-1 lets competitors follow an adaptive strategy based on the reactive power market requirement.
Hence, it is more difficult for the learner to beat the rivals by a large margin in such a scenario.
6.4.6
Observation and inference. The performance improvement achieved by NFQ-TP algo-
rithm using NFQ-2 network implementation is analysed. The variance in episodic rewards is high
at the start of learning, meaning that the network is learning and exploring to find better bids. After
around 1000 episodes, we see the variance reducing, and the episodic rewards converge, indicating
that the algorithm has learnt the optimal bidding strategy. The episodic reward tables indicate that
the approach is able to achieve significant improvement for intermediate and lower cost GENCOs
while performing at least as well as baseline for the high-cost GENCOs. The use of multiple rival
bidding strategies further shows that the method is suitable in different market scenarios. Therefore,
NFQ-TP provides an effective way for generation companies to improve their bidding strategies.
6.5
Impact of cost category of GENCO on learning benefits
Learning benefits of GENCOs in each of the cost categories are also analysed. For ease of comparison,
the analysis has been performed on NFQ-2 implementation for B-1 bidding strategy.
Fig. 12. Quantity generated for all GENCOs across a 120 timestep window of the optimal bidding trajectory
with GENCO-2 as learner
6.5.1
Case 1: Low Cost GENCO as learner: The generation curve for a 120 timestep window of the
optimal bidding trajectory for GENCO-2 (Figure 12) shows that low cost GENCO-2 not only peaks
in high demand intervals by increasing its bidding cost coefficients but it also adjusts the bidding
cost accordingly when the demand is lower and therefore, its generation does not dip as much in
low demand intervals. The episodic reward plots further show that that NFQ-TP is able to achieve
significant improvements in episodic rewards for such GENCOs.
6.5.2
Case 2: Intermediate Cost GENCO as learner: The generation curve for a 120 timestep window
of the optimal bidding trajectory for GENCO-1 (Figure 13) reveals that the learning is indeed useful
especially in the times when demand is lower as the dips in generation quantity for Learner-1 are
not as much as its competitors when it is learning and predicting the market demand. In such
scenarios, the learner can exploit its knowledge to bid in such a way that the drop in quantity
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

20
Jahnvi Patel, Devika Jay, Balaraman Ravindran, and K. Shanti Swarup
Fig. 13. Quantity generated for all GENCOs across a 120 timestep window of the optimal bidding trajectory
with GENCO-1 as learner
generated because of low demand is not as much as that of others. The episodic reward plots
further show that that NFQ-TP is able to achieve good improvements in episodic rewards for such
GENCOs when the rivals are not as market aware (or optimal) and are able to achieve baseline
bidding rewards in case of strong market-aware competitors.
Fig. 14. Quantity generated for all GENCOs across a 120 timestep window of the optimal bidding trajectory
with GENCO-5 as learner
6.5.3
Case 3: High Cost GENCO as learner: The generation curve for a 120 timestep window of the
optimal bidding trajectory for GENCO-5 (Figure 14) shows that high cost GENCOs try to maximize
their profits by increasing the quantity they can generate. A comparison of quantity generation
curve with the previous curves with other GENCOs as learners shows that the generation changed
from about 0.025 to above 0.2 for GENCO-5 (which is around 10 times improvement). It is observed
that, in general, the higher the actual costs of the GENCOs, closer the bid values are to the actual
costs of generation so as to achieve higher profits. This is justified because higher the cost a GENCO
bids, more is the chance that the ISO might assign higher quantity to competing GENCOs.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

Optimal Bidding Strategy using NFQ
21
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The three-stage reactive power market model is designed to encourage GENCOs to bid closer to
their true cost and prevent any single agent from gaining market power. The invisibility of rival
bids and difficulty in estimating bid magnification from the price signals received by ISO presents
challenges in directly estimating the optimal bid value. The environment that we propose takes
features directly from the market observations such as bids and the corresponding rewards and
learns some using experience, such as the demand. This work showed techniques to successfully
compute optimal bidding strategy for GENCOs in different scenarios: imperfect competition, when
the other agents have a time-dependent strategy vs. perfect competition, when they follow a fairly
regular pattern of bidding their true cost.
It was shown that using a Q-value estimation technique like Neural Fitted Q Iteration coupled
with our own experience and market observations, GENCOs can bid a value which is a magnification
of their actual costs and in some scenarios, can still make more profit than telling the truth. This
is because our learners are more aware about the market behaviour and hence, adapt their costs
according to the market requirements. Because learning becomes more difficult when bid values for
other GENCOs are hidden, this work shows why the restriction on visibility of bid values prevents
GENCOs from exercising market power.
The work presented in the paper considered rivals of the learning agent to follow stochastic
optimisation bidding strategy. This can be further improved by considering similar NFQ-TP learning
algorithms for rivals as well to extend the work to a multi-agent learning environment after a few
relaxations. Another interesting experiment is to analyse how market behaviour and optimal bidding
strategy are affected if market mechanisms are separate for low-cost GENCOs (i.e., renewable
energy sources) and high-cost GENCOs (i.e., conventional or non-renewable sources). This would
help us determine if separate markets led to lower total cost for ISO as the low-cost GENCOs are
free to bid higher in the common market and can take more advantage of the ISO.
