Towards a Foundation Purchasing Model: Pretrained Generative
Autoregression on Transaction Sequences
Piotr Skalski
Innovation Lab
Featurespace
Cambridge, UK

David Sutton
Innovation Lab
Featurespace
Cambridge, UK

Stuart Burrell
Innovation Lab
Featurespace
Cambridge, UK

Iker Perez
Innovation Lab
Featurespace
Cambridge, UK

Jason Wong
Innovation Lab
Featurespace
Cambridge, UK

ABSTRACT
Machine learning models underpin many modern financial systems
for use cases such as fraud detection and churn prediction. Most
are based on supervised learning with hand-engineered features,
which relies heavily on the availability of labelled data. Large self-
supervised generative models have shown tremendous success
in natural language processing and computer vision, yet so far
they haven’t been adapted to multivariate time series of financial
transactions. In this paper, we present a generative pretraining
method that can be used to obtain contextualised embeddings of
financial transactions. Benchmarks on public datasets demonstrate
that it outperforms state-of-the-art self-supervised methods on a
range of downstream tasks. We additionally perform large-scale
pretraining of an embedding model using a corpus of data from 180
issuing banks containing 5.1 billion transactions and apply it to the
card fraud detection problem on hold-out datasets. The embedding
model significantly improves value detection rate at high precision
thresholds and transfers well to out-of-domain distributions.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing →Online banking; • Computing method-
ologies →Unsupervised learning; Learning latent represen-
tations.
KEYWORDS
transaction embeddings, self-supervised learning, generative mod-
elling, multivariate time series, fraud detection
1
INTRODUCTION
Foundation models have seen tremendous success and wide adop-
tion within the past couple of years. They have proven their ability
to leverage large corpora of data and scale to hundreds of billions
of parameters. On textual data, these models can be used not only
to generate human-level text but also to produce contextualised
, ,
2023. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use.
Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in 4th ACM
International Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF ’23), November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn,
NY, USA, https://doi.org/10.1145/3604237.3626850.
embeddings of individual tokens, sentences, and even whole doc-
uments that can be fed as inputs to downstream models. Their
rapid success has been in no small part due to the development of
self-supervised learning (SSL) methods such as autoregressive [27]
and masked [13] language modelling which have allowed models
to learn contextual representations of input tokens without relying
on labels.
While these methods have already been successfully used with
different modalities such as natural language [4, 11, 22, 27, 28],
computer vision [26, 30], audio [3, 12], and tabular data [1, 20, 31]
there has been little work to adapt them to the case of multivariate
time series data. One example of such data modality of particular
interest in this work is streams of financial transactions – sequences
of events representing transfers of funds between two entities. Each
event can be described by a set of numerical or categorical features,
such as the timestamp, card number, transaction amount, merchant
name, or merchant category (in the case of card transactions).
From the perspective of financial institutions, the most impor-
tant modelling problems in this domain include fraud detection,
money laundering detection, credit default prediction, customer
churn prediction, and future expenditure modelling. Most com-
mon approaches to solve these problems are based on supervised
learning and rely on hand-engineered features which take time and
domain expertise to define for specific modelling problems. These
approaches are therefore not amenable to transfer learning and re-
quire redesigning of feature definitions when new fraud typologies
emerge.
Self-supervised learning has the potential to replace the expen-
sive feature engineering process in favour of learnt representations
from a foundation model pretrained on large quantities of unla-
belled data. However, efforts in this space have so far been limited.
Recently, a contrastive learning SSL approach was designed to
generate embeddings of cardholders based on their transaction
history [2]. These embeddings were evaluated on entity-level classi-
fication tasks and shown to perform on par and in some cases better
than hand-engineered features. However, autoregressive language
modelling approaches have not yet been adapted to the domain
of financial transactions, even though the task of predicting fu-
ture events bears a close resemblance to modelling problems in the
financial industry.
arXiv:2401.01641v2  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2024

, ,
Skalski, et al.
The success of generative pretraining methods in NLP and lack
of equivalent approaches in the domain of financial transactions has
motivated our research. In this paper, we present a self-supervised
learning method for pretraining autoregressive models that can
generate transaction embeddings. Our pretraining method NPPR
combines two objectives: next event prediction (NP) and past re-
construction (PR). The next event prediction task, adapted from
language modelling to handle multivariate transaction events, was
motivated by the similarity between generative modelling and the
financial modelling tasks such as churn, credit default and expendi-
ture prediction. All of these tasks aim to predict the future actions
by an entity, and solving them requires the model to encode features
capturing behavioral characteristics of entities. The past reconstruc-
tion task serves the purpose of further encouraging the model to
learn longer-term behavioral features which increase the predictive
performance of the embeddings on downstream problems.
We evaluate our method on four publicly available datasets of
card transactions, showing that the generated embeddings can out-
perform hand-engineered features and other SSL methods on churn
prediction, age group classification, expenditure forecasting, and
credit default prediction. We furthermore use our method to pre-
train a Foundation Purchasing Model on a large corpus of transaction
histories from 180 European issuing banks and use the model to pro-
duce transaction embeddings on three hold-out issuer datasets that
were excluded from the pretraining corpus. The hold-out issuers
operate in a different country to any of the pretraining issuers. We
apply these embeddings to the fraud detection problem, showing
transferability of the model to significantly out-of-domain data and
benefits of pretraining on a large and diversified corpus of transac-
tions. Visualisations of the embedding space show that the model
encodes similarity among different merchant category codes akin
to semantic similarity of word embeddings learnt by large language
models.
To summarise, in this paper we make the following contributions:
(1) propose a self-supervised learning method that combines a
next event prediction task with a past reconstruction task,
both adapted to the domain of multivariate time series of
financial transactions;
(2) show that our method outperforms hand-engineered fea-
tures and other pretraining methods on downstream clas-
sification and regression tasks using evaluations on public
datasets;
(3) demonstrate that pretraining with our method on a large
corpus of card transaction datasets from 180 issuing banks
improves fraud detection at high precision thresholds and
transfers well to out-of-domain data;
(4) illustrate that the resulting embeddings are able to capture
semantic similarity between merchant category codes.
2
RELATED WORK
Many SSL tasks for sequential data were originally designed for the
domain of natural language. Autoregressive language modelling
aims to predict the next token in a sentence based on the previ-
ous ones and has been used to pretrain the GPT family of models
[4, 27, 28]. In masked language modelling (MLM) [13], randomly
sampled tokens are masked with a special mask token and the
network is tasked with predicting the original token. This method
has been successfully adapted to other domains including vision
[26, 30], audio [3, 12], and tabular data [1, 20]. Next sentence predic-
tion [13] has been used together with MLM and works by feeding
the network two sentences A and B and predicting whether B fol-
lows A. Replaced token detection, used by ELECTRA [11], is a
modification of MLM where randomly sampled tokens are replaced
with candidates generated by a different language model and the
task is to predict the original input token.
Another popular class of SSL methods is contrastive learning.
Typically, it learns representations that are invariant to data aug-
mentation. It involves generating positive and negative pairs where
the positive pairs come from two augmented views of the same
sample, while negative pairs come from two different samples. A
contrastive loss function encourages representations to be similar
for positive pairs and dissimilar for negative pairs. Some examples
include SimCLR [8] for images (which uses a composition of stan-
dard image augmentation methods), SAINT [29] for tabular data
(uses CutMix [35] in input space and mixup [37] in latent space),
SimCSE [15] (applies dropout as data augmentation). CPC [34]
is a variation of contrastive learning applicable to autoregressive
models that tries to maximize the mutual information between the
hidden state and future events from the same sequence. In the do-
main of financial transactions, to the best of our knowledge, CoLES
[2] is the only method that has used contrastive learning to obtain
entity embeddings. It uses randomly generated subsequences from
a transaction history belonging to the same entity as positive pairs
and subsequences from different entity histories as negative pairs.
There also exist non-contrastive methods which train represen-
tations invariant to data augmentation using positive examples
only. They avoid representation collapse by using a momentum en-
coder (BYOL [18], TiCo [38]), penalizing cross-correlation between
positive views (Barlow Twins [36]), clustering embeddings with an
equipartition constraint (SwAV [7]), and applying an asymmetrical
stop-gradient operation (SimSiam [9]).
Financial transactions have also been used with graph-based
methods where originators and beneficiaries (and sometimes trans-
actions) form the nodes of a graph. Some early work in this area
involve supervised training for fraud detection [17, 23, 25] and
generating merchant embeddings [5, 16]. More recently, there has
also been progress in inductive representation learning. Graph-
Sage [19] encourages similar representations for nearby nodes and
has been used to create embeddings for credit card fraud detec-
tion [32, 33]. Link prediction between nodes has been used as an
SSL task for detecting anomalous transactions [6] and capturing
inter-company relationships [24]. However, none of these methods
leverages the inherent time-series nature of transactions. They are
typically investigated in the context of money laundering detection,
where patterns of movement of funds across a network are analysed
periodically in a batch process. In contrast, in this work, we are
interested in generating transaction embeddings for applications
that require real-time processing, such as fraud prevention.
Preprint — do not distribute.

Towards a Foundation Purchasing Model: Pretrained Generative Autoregression on Transaction Sequences
, ,
Figure 1: The NPPR generative modelling framework for pretraining a recurrent encoder using a combination of next event
prediction and past reconstruction tasks.
3
GENERATIVE MODELLING ON
TRANSACTION SEQUENCES
3.1
Proposed method
Suppose H = {ℎ𝑒} is a set of transaction histories pertaining to
some entities such as cardholders or account holders. A transac-
tion history is a time-ordered sequence ℎ𝑒= {𝑥𝑡}𝑇𝑒
𝑡=0 of financial
transactions, where each transaction 𝑥𝑡∈X is described by a set of
numerical and categorical features (amount, merchant name, etc.). 1
The goal is to train an encoder network 𝐸: X∗→R𝑑that creates
an embedding vector 𝑒𝑡∈R𝑑of a transaction 𝑥𝑡given past transac-
tions from the same entity up to this one, i.e. 𝑒𝑡= 𝐸(𝑥𝑡,𝑥𝑡−1, ...,𝑥0).
To extend this setup to any multivariate time series data, we will re-
fer to transaction histories as sequences and individual transactions
as events. The proposed self-supervised algorithm is visualised in
Figure 1 and is composed of two tasks.
Next event prediction (NP) is the primary task and adapts au-
toregressive language modelling to the case of multivariate events.
A decoder network 𝐷𝑁𝑃: R𝑑→X takes an embedding 𝑒𝑡of
event 𝑥𝑡to generate predictions of the next event’s features ˜𝑥𝑡+1 =
𝐷𝑁𝑃(𝑒𝑡). For numerical features the predictions are simply real
numbers while for categorical features they are vectors of prob-
abilities over the distinct categories of the feature. The objective
function is defined as
L𝑁𝑃
𝑡
=
∑︁
𝑓
𝑙𝑓
𝑟𝑒𝑐

( ˜𝑥𝑡+1)𝑓, (𝑥𝑡+1)𝑓

(1)
where ()𝑓denotes a slice of a vector corresponding to a particular
feature 𝑓and the reconstruction loss function 𝑙𝑓
𝑟𝑒𝑐for a single
feature 𝑓is mean squared error if 𝑓is a numerical feature and
cross-entropy if 𝑓is a categorical feature.
Past reconstruction (PR) is the secondary task that aims to
guide the encoder towards learning behavioral features with long-
term dependencies. We define a decoder network 𝐷𝑃𝑅: (R𝑑, R) →
X that takes as input an embedding 𝑒𝑡of event 𝑥𝑡and a scalar
time difference 𝛿𝑡𝑡,𝑡−𝑘between this event and an event from the
1For clarity of notation the subscript 𝑒on transactions has been dropped.
past 𝑥𝑡−𝑘and generates a reconstruction of that past event ˜𝑥𝑡−𝑘=
𝐷𝑃𝑅(𝑒𝑡,𝛿𝑡𝑡,𝑡−𝑘). The objective function is a weighted sum of re-
construction losses of past events:
L𝑃𝑅
𝑡
=
𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐾,𝑡)
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝜔𝑡,𝑡−𝑘
∑︁
𝑓
𝑙𝑓
𝑟𝑒𝑐

( ˜𝑥𝑡−𝑘)𝑓, (𝑥𝑡−𝑘)𝑓

(2)
where 𝜔𝑡,𝑡−𝑘= 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝛿𝑡𝑡,𝑡−𝑘/𝜆) is a weight function that decays
exponentially with the time difference between events at a rate
governed by the decay length hyperparameter 𝜆. The summation
over the past events is truncated so that at most 𝐾past events
contribute to the loss.
For a sequence of events ℎ𝑒, we define the total loss as the sum
of event losses that are weighted combinations of the two objective
functions defined above:
L𝑒=
𝑇𝑒
∑︁
𝑡
(1 −𝛼)L𝑁𝑃
𝑡
+ 𝛼L𝑃𝑅
𝑡
(3)
where 𝛼∈(0, 1) is a hyperparameter.
3.2
Model architecture
Although any autoregressive model architecture can be used as an
encoder, we decided to use a recurrent model based on GRUs [10].
Compared to unidirectional transformer models, RNNs are more
efficient in production where new events arrive one at a time since
they only have to store and process hidden state and a new event
rather than a whole sequence of previous events. This considera-
tion is often very important in the financial sector when using a
model for real-time decisioning, where there are often stringent re-
quirements on response latency. The encoder architecture is shown
in Figure 1. An event 𝑥𝑡is first preprocessed into a dense vector.
Numerical features are normalized while categorical features are
encoded through an embedding layer. Additionally, event times-
tamps are used to produce a numerical feature that encodes the
time gap between events 𝑥𝑡and 𝑥𝑡−1 belonging to the same entity.
The resulting vectors for individual features are concatenated to
form a single dense representation of an event. This vector is then
passed through a stack of layers 𝜙𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗◦𝜙𝐺𝑅𝑈◦𝜙𝑀𝐿𝑃that enriches
Preprint — do not distribute.

, ,
Skalski, et al.
it with the representation of past events. The use of MLP before the
GRU layer adds expressivity to the encoder and the projection layer
𝜙𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗allows the size of the hidden state to scale independently of
the final embedding size.
The decoder models in the two modelling heads are simple MLPs.
The output of the last dense layer (with linear activation) in each
decoder is split into multiple vectors, one for each feature in the
encoded events. The vectors corresponding to numerical features
have size one (scalar), while those corresponding to categorical
features have size equal to the number of distinct values the feature
can take. The vectors for categorical features are additionally passed
through a softmax activation to produce probability estimates.
4
EXPERIMENTS ON PUBLIC DATASETS
In this section we evaluate the performance of entity-level embed-
dings generated with our method when used in classification and
regression tasks. We use the embeddings as inputs to downstream
models without fine-tuning the pretrained models. This evaluation
setup is suitable for testing systems where the embeddings server
and downstream modelling setup are decoupled. Code to reproduce
experiments in this section is publicly available on GitHub2. Since
publicly available transaction datasets are very limited and their
schemas are often incompatible, pretraining and evaluation was
performed separately on each dataset. Pretraining on a large cor-
pus of data and out-of-domain evaluation on hold-out datasets is
investigated in the next section using private datasets.
4.1
Datasets
We use publicly available datasets from various data science com-
petitions comprising debit and credit card financial transactions.
These datasets include unlabelled and labelled transactions for four
different tasks: age group prediction3, churn prediction4, future
expenditure (expnd.) forecasting5, and credit default prediction6.
Important statistics of each dataset are shown in Table 1. For the
expenditure forecasting task, we split the original 4-month training
period into a 3-month training period and a 1-month labelling pe-
riod. We then construct one labelled example per entity by taking
its transactions over the 3-month training period as the input and
using its total expenditure over the 1-month labelling period as the
label.
Training and test sets for each dataset were generated by using
80% of entity histories as the training set and the remaining 20% as
the test set. The pretraining set was constructed by concatenating
the unlabelled entity histories and the training set.
4.2
Hyperparameters
For pretraining, we used the same encoder architecture on each
dataset: MLP with 2 hidden layers (512 neurons each) and ReLU
activation followed by a GRU with hidden state size 512, followed by
a dense projection layer (with sigmoid activation) to the embedding
space of size 512. Both the NP and PR decoders in our method are
MLPs with 2 hidden layers (512 neurons each) and ReLU activations.
2https://github.com/Featurespace/foundation-model-paper
3https://ods.ai/competitions/sberbank-sirius-lesson
4https://boosters.pro/championship/rosbank1/
5https://ods.ai/competitions/x5-retailhero-uplift-modeling
6https://boosters.pro/championship/alfabattle2/overview
Table 1: Characteristics of the four publicly available datasets
of financial transactions.
Name
labelled
cards
unlabelled
cards
num.
features
cat.
features
Churn
(Rosbank)
5K
5K
1
4
Age
(SberBank)
30K
20K
1
1
Expnd.
(X5 Group)
400K
0
2
6
Credit
default
(AlphaBank)
960K
510K
1
14
For training, we used the Adam optimiser with learning rate 10−3
and early stopping.
For pretraining with our method, the decay length 𝜆was chosen
to be 2 months based on domain expertise. The hyperparameter 𝛼
controlling the proportion of past reconstruction task in the total
loss was tuned on each dataset separately using cross-validation:
0.1 (churn), 0.001 (age), 0.005 (expenditure), and 0.001 (credit de-
fault). For downstream model training, we used MLPs with 3 hidden
layers (512 neurons each on churn and age prediction, and 1024
neurons each on expenditure and credit default prediction) and
ReLU activations together with dropout and weight decay regulari-
sation. Dropout rate, weight decay, and learning rate were tuned on
each baseline separately using the Optuna framework with 5-fold
cross-validation.
4.3
Baselines
We compare our approach against four baselines.
Hand-engineered features. We use the same hand-crafted fea-
tures as in [2]. For numerical features, we apply aggregate functions
(sum, count, mean, min, max, variance) over all transactions in an
entity history. For categorical features, we compute the above aggre-
gates of numerical features within groups of transactions grouped
by every unique value of each categorical feature.
SimCSE. This uses sequence embeddings pretrained with con-
trastive learning where dropout was used as the data augmentation
strategy for generating positive pairs. The dropout rate was tuned
on each dataset.
Replaced event detection (RED). This is an adaptation of
the replaced token detection task used in ELECTRA [11] where
randomly sampled events are swapped for random events from
other sequences in a batch, and the decoder is tasked with predicting
the sampling mask. We found that a sampling probability of 30%
performed best on downstream tasks.
CoLES. A contrastive learning method where positive samples
are random subsequences coming from the same sequence, and
negative samples are subsequences from two different sequences.
This method is sensitive to the choice of minimum and maximum
subsequence sampling lengths. We adopted the same values of these
hyperparameters as in the original paper [2].
Preprint — do not distribute.

Towards a Foundation Purchasing Model: Pretrained Generative Autoregression on Transaction Sequences
, ,
Table 2: Evaluation of self-supervised embeddings on down-
stream tasks. Average test set performance and standard
deviation values from multiple runs on different training set
folds.
Method
Churn
AUC↑
Age
Accuracy↑
Expnd.
MSLE↓
Default
AUC↑
FeatEng
0.798±0.004
0.626±0.002
0.743±0.001
0.768±0.001
SimCSE
0.650±0.006
0.410±0.002
1.140±0.001
0.630±0.001
RTD
0.827±0.003
0.590±0.001
0.747±0.001
0.765±0.001
CoLES
0.813±0.003
0.633±0.002
0.758±0.001
0.765±0.001
NPPR
0.845±0.003
0.642±0.001
0.723±0.001
0.798±0.001
For each of the methods above, we used the embedding of the
most recent event as the sequence embedding. For the NPPR method,
we used the average of all event embeddings in a sequence as the
sequence embedding, which can improve performance on down-
stream tasks as shown in the next section.
4.4
Results
Below we report results from each of the chosen methods using
tuned hyperparameters. We report the mean and standard deviation
on test sets from multiple training runs on different folds of the
training set.
4.4.1
Comparison with baseline methods. Table 2 compares NPPR
to the different baseline methods. Our method outperforms other
methods on all datasets, including hand-engineered features, which
turns out to be the strongest baseline (outperforming CoLES on two
datasets, RTD on three datasets and SimCSE on all datasets). NPPR
offers significant performance improvements on the churn, expen-
diture, and credit default prediction problems which aim to predict
the future behavior of an entity. This confirms our hypothesis that
generative modelling is particularly suitable for learning behav-
ioral features that are predictive of future events. When predicting
a static attribute of an entity, such as age group prediction, the
contrastive CoLES method is competitive, but our method shows
superior performance even in this case. This is achieved due to
transaction embeddings averaging, which we demonstrate in sec-
tion 4.4.3.
4.4.2
Importance of constituent tasks. Table 3 shows results of ab-
lating the two constituent tasks from our method. In both cases,
an entity embedding was constructed by averaging the transaction
embeddings from the whole entity history as in the NPPR method.
In general, embeddings pretrained with the next event prediction
task perform significantly better than those using just past recon-
struction task, except for churn prediction. In fact, using only the
next event prediction task outperforms the other baselines from
Table 2 on three out of four problems, which demonstrates the
strength of vanilla generative modelling for learning behavioral
features.
Even though the performance gap between the two tasks can be
significant, as in the case of age group prediction, using a combina-
tion of both tasks outperforms pretraining with either of the two
tasks in isolation on all datasets. Adding even a small amount of
Table 3: Ablation study comparing NPPR to next event predic-
tion (NP) and past reconstruction (PR) tasks used in isolation.
Average test set performance and standard deviation values
from multiple runs on different training set folds.
Method
Churn
AUC↑
Age
Accuracy↑
Expnd.
MSLE↓
Default
AUC↑
NPPR
0.845±0.003
0.642±0.001
0.723±0.001
0.798±0.001
PR
0.833±0.004
0.542±0.002
0.747±0.001
0.744±0.001
NP
0.814±0.002
0.630±0.002
0.733±0.001
0.795±0.001
Table 4: Relative performance difference on the test set be-
tween using averaged transaction embedding vs. embedding
of a most recent transaction.
Method
Churn
AUC↑
Age
Accuracy↑
Expnd.
MSLE↓
Default
AUC↑
NPPR
avg vs. last
-0.5%
+6.1%
-0.3%
+0.6%
CoLES
avg vs. last
-1.0%
+0.3%
0.0%
-1.8%
past reconstruction loss to the total loss has a positive effect on the
performance on all downstream problems. This suggests that the
past reconstruction task encourages each transaction embedding
to encode longer-term behavioral patterns which the next event
prediction task doesn’t explicitly do.
Interestingly, the past reconstruction task performed better than
next event prediction on churn prediction. We hypothesize that
reconstructing past events helps embeddings encode information
from further back in time, which in turn allows the churn prediction
model to more accurately model decline in transaction velocity.
Consequently, the best performing value of 𝛼, which controls the
contribution of the past reconstruction task to the total loss, was
larger on churn prediction compared to other datasets.
4.4.3
Effect of averaging transaction embeddings. In this experi-
ment, we evaluated the importance of using the average transaction
embedding as an entity embedding by comparing it to the strategy
adopted in the baseline methods, where the embedding of the most
recent transaction was used instead. Table 4 shows the results of
this evaluation.
We can see that embedding averaging can improve the perfor-
mance of our method on downstream problems, especially in cases
where the task involves predicting a static entity attribute such
as age. However, it can also have a detrimental effect in problems
such as churn prediction, presumably because averaging can over-
smooth the features encoded in the more recent embeddings which
capture a decline in the rate of transacting. By contrast, embed-
ding averaging does not improve CoLES embeddings, which are
designed to be similar across transactions by the same entity.
Preprint — do not distribute.

, ,
Skalski, et al.
Figure 2: Evaluations of fraud detection models trained on datasets from three different issuers. Three models are shown:
baseline hand-engineered features from Jha et al. [21], baseline features with NPPR embeddings trained on the pretraining
corpus, and baseline features with NPPR embeddings finetuned on downstream datasets. Error bars were computed from
multiple independent training runs.
5
APPLICATION TO FRAUD DETECTION AT
SCALE
In this section, we apply our self-supervised NPPR method to pre-
train a Foundation Purchasing Model on transaction data from a
large number of issuing banks. We use it to produce transaction
embeddings for unseen data, specifically transactions from hold-out
issuing banks that operate in different countries to the issuers in
the pretraining dataset. A separate fraud classifier is then trained
on each of the hold-out issuers. We demonstrate that the pretrained
model improves fraud detection performance, transfers well to
significantly out-of-domain data, and learns semantic similarity
between different merchant categories.
5.1
Pretrained embedding model
A single embedding model was pretrained on a corpus of card
transaction datasets from 180 European issuing banks, each of
which conforms to the ISO 8583 messaging format [14]. The cor-
pus contains over 5.1 billion transactions which provide complete
transaction histories covering a period of 12 months for 61 million
cardholders.
The architecture of the embedding model is as described in the
previous sections. It consists of an MLP with 2 hidden layers (2048
neurons each) with ReLU activations, followed by a GRU layer with
state size 1024 and a final projection layer to an embedding space
of size 768. The decay length 𝜆in the NPPR method was 2 months,
and the weight of past reconstruction task 𝛼was 0.001.
5.2
Fraud detection models
5.2.1
Datasets. For the downstream fraud detection task, we used
labelled datasets from three European issuing banks. These datasets
were not part of the pretraining corpus and correspond to issuers
that operate in different countries to any of the issuers from the pre-
training corpus. This presents the opportunity for testing transfer
of the embedding model to significantly out-of-domain data.
The three datasets contain 11 months of transactions from 17 mil-
lion, 3.5 million, and 1.8 million cardholders. We split each dataset
into training, validation, and test sets both temporally and on the
entity level, i.e. they contain transactions from different cardholders
and non-overlapping consecutive time periods.
The fraud rate in each dataset is respectively 0.04%, 0.027%, and
0.11%. Due to the high class imbalance, we downsampled genuine
transactions before training classification models (but no downsam-
pling was performed for pretraining).
5.2.2
Baseline features. As a baseline, we used a representative
traditional fraud prevention model drawn from literature [21]. It
consists of primary transaction attributes and 14 hand-engineered
behavioral features in the form of aggregations over windows of
past transactions by the same entity at different time scales. Ex-
amples of such features include the average amount spent per
transaction over the last month, or the total number of transactions
with the same merchant during last month. We refer readers to the
source paper for a detailed description of the features.
5.2.3
Models. Downstream classification models are MLPs with 3
hidden layers (1024 neurons each) and ReLU activations. They were
trained with learning rate 10−3, batch size 1024 and early stopping.
Dropout was used as regularisation with rate 0.2.
5.2.4
Evaluation metrics. Production fraud prevention systems are
often judged by their performance in reducing fraud losses while
operating at high precision score thresholds. False positive pre-
dictions lead to declined transactions, which cause losses to the
issuing bank and have a detrimental effect on consumer experi-
ence. An appropriate metric should measure the value of fraudulent
transactions that have been prevented at a certain threshold of de-

where value detection rate (VDR) is the true positive rate weighed
by transaction value and the threshold metric false positive ratio
(FP-ratio) is the number of false positives divided by the number
Preprint — do not distribute.

Towards a Foundation Purchasing Model: Pretrained Generative Autoregression on Transaction Sequences
, ,
Figure 3: t-SNE projection of a MCC embedding space. Each
MCC embedding was obtained by averaging transaction em-
beddings corresponding to those MCCs.
of true positives. The classification score threshold is adjusted to
reach a typical value of FP-ratio between 1:1 and 20:1.
5.3
Quantitative results
We evaluated three different classification models comparing base-
line features, baseline features with NPPR embeddings from the
pretrained model, and baseline features with NPPR embeddings
from the pretrained model that has been finetuned on downstream
datasets. Finetuning was performed in a self-supervised way using
our NPPR method and is therefore applicable to the scenario where
embeddings server and downstream modelling setup are decoupled.
Results are shown in Figure 2 where VDR is plotted against different
FP-ratio thresholds.
The addition of NPPR embeddings to the baseline features pro-
vides significant improvements in the value detection rate on all
FP-ratio thresholds. At 5:1 FP-ratio our embeddings can provide
up to 140% uplift over the hand-engineered features. On all hold-
out datasets, embeddings generated by the pretrained model show
comparable performance to embeddings generated by finetuned
models. This demonstrates the effectiveness of pretraining on a
large corpus of diverse datasets and transferability of the pretrained
model to significantly out-of-domain data.
5.4
Visualising the embedding space
To provide insights into the information encoded by embeddings,
we provide visualisations of embeddings of merchant category code
(MCC). These codes classify merchants and businesses by the type
of goods or services provided. Large merchants classified as airlines,
car rental companies and lodging providers typically have their own
MCC. Since the input data does not provide any extra information
relating these codes to each other, any emergent structure in the
embedding space comes entirely from similarities in purchasing be-
haviors learnt by the model. Each MCC embedding was calculated
as the average of all transaction embeddings corresponding to that
Table 5: Nearest neighbours in the embedding space of three
MCC embeddings. For each nearest neighbour MCC we show
cosine distance in the original space between the MCC in the
top row.
Lufthansa
Hilton Hotels
Fast Food
Nearest neighbours
British Airways
(0.23)
Doubletree Hotels
(0.19)
Eating places
(0.14)
Scandinavian
Airlines
(0.32)
Hampton Inns
(0.20)
Convenience
stores
(0.26)
Air France
(0.33)
Fairmount Hotels
(0.28)
Bakeries
(0.27)
Swissair
(0.35)
Penta Hotels
(0.29)
News Dealers
(0.30)
Turkish Airlines
(0.38)
Marriott Hotels
(0.32)
Drug Stores
(0.35)
MCC. Figure 3 shows a t-SNE projection of the MCC embedding
space together with three selected MCCs and their nearest neigh-
bours. Table 5 lists the five nearest neighbours and their distances
(measured by cosine distance) to each selected MCC.
We can see that the nearest neighbours of Lufthansa are all air-
line companies, while those of Hilton Hotels belong to the lodging
industry, i.e. embeddings of merchants in the same industry are
located close to each other in the embedding space. The cluster
of embeddings for hotels is in close proximity to the cluster for
airlines, which is expected since purchases from merchants in these
two clusters are often correlated. This illustrates that generative
modelling allows the embedding space to encode meaningful simi-
larity between different MCCs akin to semantic similarity captured
by word embeddings from large language models. This observation
is consistent with [5], where merchant node embeddings from a
graph neural network were used.
In a similar fashion, aggregations of transaction embeddings
could be used to obtain embeddings of other entities, such as mer-
chants, cardholders, transaction types, and geographical locations.
They can potentially be used as features to support decision-making
in recommendation engines and other financial systems.
6
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we present a self-supervised generative method for
obtaining contextualised embeddings of financial transactions by
combining two pretraining tasks: next event prediction and past
reconstruction. Evaluations on publicly available datasets show that
embeddings produced with this method outperform embeddings
from other self-supervised methods and hand-engineered features
on a range of downstream tasks. We apply our method to the card
fraud detection problem and show that it significantly improves the
value detection rate at high-precision thresholds. By pretraining on
a large corpus of data from multiple issuing banks, we demonstrate
that pretrained models trained with our method generalise well to
significantly out-of-distribution data.
Pretraining generative models on large textual datasets has led
to a class of Foundation Models that abstract away the complexity
Preprint — do not distribute.

, ,
Skalski, et al.
of natural language modelling in modern AI applications. Likewise,
our results on transaction sequences indicate that generative mod-
elling encodes human purchasing behavior in a way that transfers
effectively to diverse tasks and out-of-domain data. These proper-
ties may enable financial modelling applications to homogenize
around a common component - a Foundation Model - which is
trained on a large corpus of unlabelled data and which abstracts
away the complexity of modelling financial behaviors. This moti-
vates further research on questions of privacy, bias and the potential
for few-shot learning, which we defer to future work.
