Work in Progress
RENEG AND BACKSEAT DRIVER: LEARNING FROM
DEMONSTRATION WITH CONTINUOUS HUMAN FEED-
BACK
Jacob Beck
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI, 02906, USA

Zoe Papakipos
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI, 02906, USA

Michael Littman
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI, 02906, USA

ABSTRACT
In autonomous vehicle (AV) control, requiring an agent to make mistakes, or even
allowing mistakes, can be quite dangerous and costly in the real world. For this
reason we investigate methods of training an AV without allowing the agent to
explore and instead having a human explorer collect the data. Supervised learning
has been explored for AV control, but it encounters the issue of the covariate shift.
That is, training data collected from an optimal demonstration consists only of
the states induced by the optimal control policy, but at runtime, the trained agent
may encounter a vastly different state distribution and has seen little relevant train-
ing data. To mitigate this issue, we intentionally have our human explorer make
sub-optimal decisions. In order to have our agent not replicate these suboptimal
decisions, supervised learning requires that we either erase these actions, or re-
place these action with the correct action. Erasing these actions is wasteful and
replacing these actions is difﬁcult, since it is not easy to know the correct ac-
tion without driving the car. Since supervised learning falls short, we introduce
an alternate framework that includes continuous scalar feedback on each action,
marking which actions we should replicate, which we should avoid, and how sure
of this we are. Our framework, called “ReNeg”, learns from human demonstra-
tion and human evaluative feedback, collected entirely before any training begins.
Our agent learns continuous control from sub-optimal behavior, but sub-optimal
behavior that is safely performed by a human. We ﬁnd that a human demonstrator
can explore sub-optimal states in a safe and controlled manner, while still getting
enough gradation in the states to beneﬁt learning. The way we collect data and
the algorithm we use to compute feedback on the data we call “Backseat Driver.”
Backseat Driver gives us state-action pairs matched with scalar values represent-
ing the score for those action in those states. We call the more general learning
framework ReNeg, since it learns a regression from states to actions given nega-
tive as well as positive examples. We empirically validate several models in the
ReNeg framework, testing on lane-following with limited data. We ﬁnd that the
best solution is a generalization of mean-squared error and outperforms supervised
learning on the positive examples alone.
1
PROBLEM FORMULATION
We seek a way learn autonomous vehicle control using only RGB input from a front-facing camera.
(Example input image in the appendix.) Speciﬁcally, we want to produce a policy network to map
1
arXiv:1901.05101v1  [cs.LG]  16 Jan 2019

Work in Progress
states to actions in order to follow a lane as close to center as possible. We would like the agent
to behave optimally in dangerous situations, and recover to safe situations. For this to happen, the
data the agent trains on must include these sub-optimal states. However, we do not want to leave
the safety determination up to any machine. Thus, we require that a human explorer take all the
actions. This is referred to as “Learning from Demonstration” or LfD. An expert human does the
exploration and thus can limit the danger by controlling how dangerous the negative examples are
(i.e. the human can swerve to show suboptimal driving but never drive off the road, as an RL agent
likely would). Still, in order to get into sub-optimal states, the explorer will need to take sub-optimal
actions. Ideally we could replace these sub-optimal actions with labels corresponding to the correct
and optimal actions to take so we could perform supervised learning, which provides the strongest
signal. However, it is notoriously difﬁcult to assign supervised labels to driving data because it is
hard to know the correct steering angle to control a vehicle when your steering has no effect on what
happens to the vehicle (Ross et al., 2012). Instead of trying to enable humans to assign supervised
labels by somehow showing the consequences of their actions, we focus on letting humans assign
feedback that evaluates the sub-optimal actions, without actually representing the optimal action.
Thus our goal is to learn a deterministic continuous control policy from demonstration, including
both good and bad actions and continuous scores representing this valence. Our problem statement
is somewhere in between supervised learning and RL: we focus on a general approach that is ca-
pable of mapping continuous sensor input to an arbitrary (differentiable) continuous policy output
and capable of using feedback for singular predetermined actions. Our problem falls within the
supervised setting since our agent cannot chose want actions to take, in order to avoid the agent
exploring dangerous states, and all data collection is done prior to training. However, we also wish
to incorporate evaluative scalar feedback given to each data point, which traditionally falls under
the RL framework. We refer to this problem setting as the ReNeg framework, since we are essen-
tially performing a regression with scalar weights attached to each data point, that can be positive
and negative. For the demonstration, a human demonstrator drives, yielding state-action pairs the
agent can learn from. In order to teach the agent which actions are good or bad, an expert critic, or
“backseat driver,” labels the actions with a continuous scalar.
For a viable solution to this problem, we need to deﬁne a loss function that induces an effective and
robust policy. We also need to choose what driving data to collect to expose the agent to a variety of
good and bad states, and in particular show the agent how to get out of bad states where an accident
is imminent. What data to collect is non-obvious: we want to explore a range of good and bad states
so the agent learns a reasonable policy for how to act in all kinds of states. However, to make this
feasible in the real world, we want to avoid exploring dangerous states. Finally, we need to carefully
choose a way to collect human feedback that contains signal from which the agent can learn, but is
not too hard to collect. We will discuss the choices we made for these three parts of the problem
in the Loss Function, Driving Data, and Feedback sections respectively. Although we validate in
simulation, speciﬁcally Unity, for the sake of ease, the algorithms we test could be easily trained in
the real world.
2
RELATED WORK
Learning from demonstration has mostly been studied in the supervised learning framework and
the Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework. In the former, it is generally known as imitation
learning (or behavioral cloning in the AV setting), and in the latter, it is generally known as appren-
ticeship learning. There are other relevant RL algorithms, but none for LfD in our problem setting,
as we will show.
The supervised learning in this area has focused on a least squares regression that maps from an
input state to action. The easiest approach to take here is to have an expert perform an optimal
demonstration, and then simply use that as training data. The main issue here is that the runtime and
training distributions can be vastly different. That is, once the trained agent is acting on its own after
training and encounters states it has not seen, it does not know how to act, and strays further from the
intended behavior. This problem is known as the Covariate Shift and the widely accepted solution
generally follow the approach laid out in DAgger Ross et al. (2010). DAgger allows the agent to
explore and then uses the expert to label the new dataset, then training on all of the combined data.
Such an approach has even been improved upon both to address scalar feeddback by incorporating
2

Work in Progress
experts that can label Q values with the AggreVaTeD algorithm (Ross & Bagnell, 2014), and to and
to address deep neural networks by ﬁnding a policy gradient with the Deeply AggreVaTeD algorithm
(Sun et al., 2017). However, these DAgger based policies require the agent to ex-plore and make
mistakes.
The MDP research on apprenticeship learning has largely been on inverse reinforcement learning,
or IRL (Abbeel & Ng, 2004), in which a reward function is estimated given the demonstration
of an expert. However, often in this framework, the reward function is restricted to the class of
linear combinations of the discrete features of the state, and the framework only allows for positive
examples. In addition, there has been work on inverse reinforcement learning from failure (Shiarlis
et al., 2016), which allows for a sequence of positive or a sequence of negative examples. There
is also distance minimization for reward learning from scored trajectories (Burchﬁel et al., 2016),
which allows for gradation in the scores, but does not allow for an arbitrary reward function on
continuous inputs or labels for atomic actions as opposed to a trajectory or sequence of actions.
Moreover, these IRL methods are not a candidate for our problem, since they require an exact MDP
solution with a tractable transition function and exploration to ﬁnd the optimal policy. The issue we
have is not that we don’t have the reward function, but that even with the more informative feedback,
we cannot use exploration to learn the optimal policy.
It is interesting to note that there are off-policy RL algorithms as well, but we would like to highlight
that this is not the same thing as LfD. LfD, as we use it, means that we have collected all of our data
before training. This could be thought of as on-policy only if our policy and start state never changes.
Whereas, off-policy RL (e.g. Off-Policy Actor-Critic(Degris et al., 2012), Q-Learning(Watkins &
Dayan, 1992), Retrace(Munos et al., 2016)) generally requires agents to have a non-zero probability
of choosing any action in any state, in order for the algorithm to converge. (Moreover, it is the
somewhat parenthetical opinion of at least one of authors of this paper that in the off-policy policy
gradient RL framework, using importance sampling to calculate an expectation over a different
action distribution is ﬁne, but changing the objective function from an expectation over the learned
policy state-visitation distribution to an expectation over the behavior (exploratory) state-visitation
distribution, as in (Degris et al., 2012), is an unsatisfactory answer that does not give the optimal
policy for the agent when running on the learned policy, as we will want to do.) Normalized Actor
Critic (NAC) does attempt to bridge the gap between off-policy and LfD, and works with bad as
well as good demonstration, however, NAC does not allow for restricted exploration either, since it
adds entropy to the objective function to encourage exploration (Gao et al., 2018). NAC has also
only been done for discrete action control, not continuous as we want to do.
Finally, there are many RL algorithms that use human evaluative feedback, but none for LfD. One
RL algorithm with human feedback of note is COACH (MacGlashan et al., 2017), which is based
on the stochastic policy gradient. COACH is an on-policy RL algorithm that uses human-feedback
to label the agent’s actions while exploring. COACH’s view on human feedback helps us to draw
connections to RL, as we will discuss later. However, COACH was designed for on-policy explo-
ration and uses discrete feedback values of 1 and -1, whereas we generalize to continuous values in
[−1, 1]. We cannot use a stochastic policy gradient in a justiﬁed manner, since we do not explore
with a stochastic policy.
Out of all the LfD work in the AV context, the most notable has either been on behavioral cloning
(Bojarski et al., 2016) (Pan et al., 2017) or using IRL to solve sub-tasks such as driving preferences
that act on top of a safely functioning trajectory planner (Kuderer et al., 2015). To the best of our
knowledge, no research so far has focused on using any kind of evaluative scalar feedback provided
by a human in the context of AV control with LfD. That is, no one has solved how to take states,
actions, and continuous feedback with respect to those actions, and convert them into a control
policy for an AV, without having the AV explore. We believe that this is a major oversight: many
AV research groups are investing huge amounts of time into collecting driving data; if they used our
model, they could improve performance simply by having an expert labeler sit in the car with the
driver for no additional real time.
3

Work in Progress
3
OUR APPROACH
3.1
LOSS FUNCTION
Let θ be the steering angle in the demonstrated example; ˆθ the steering angle predicted by the policy
network (or PNet); D the absolute difference between θ and ˆθ, |θ - ˆθ|; and fθ, or f, the feedback
for the demonstrated angle. We collect f ∈[−1, 1]. The loss function we choose should have the
following 3 properties:
1. Minimizing the loss should minimize the D for positive examples. That is, when f > 0,
∂Loss
∂D
≥0.
2. Minimizing the loss should maximize the distance between θ and ˆθ for negative examples.
That is, when f < 0, ∂Loss
∂D
≤0.
3. The rate at which the loss is minimized should be determined by the magnitude of the
feedback. That is, when f > 0, ∂|Loss|
∂f
> 0, and when f < 0, ∂|Loss|
∂f
< 0.
These three properties together ensure that the network avoids the worst negative examples as much
as possible, while seeking the best examples. Given an input state s, the ﬁrst loss function that
comes to mind is what we term “scalar loss”:
Lossscalar = fs ∗(θs −ˆθ(s))2
This loss function is notable for several reasons. First, it is a generalization of mean squared error,
the standard behavioral cloning loss function:
LossMSE = (θs −ˆθ(s))2
Mean squared error is a well-principled loss function if you assume Gaussian noise in your training
data. That is, you assume the probability of your data can be given by Gaussian noise around some
mean and you learn to predict ˆθ as that mean. Given this assumption, you can derive MSE as the loss
that produces a maximum likelihood estimate for your parameters. Let the parameters of the model
be represented by p and probability be Pr. ˆθ is parameterized by p and will be used interchangeably
with ˆθp, when clarity is needed. Please note that θ refers to the angle label, and not the model
parameters:
argmaxpPr(data)
argmaxp
Y
θ∈data
Pr(θ|ˆθp)
argmaxp
X
θ∈data
log(Pr(θ|ˆθ))
argmaxp
X
θ∈data
log(Pr(θ|ˆθ))
argminp
X
θ∈data
−log(Pr(θ|ˆθ))
Loss = −log(Pr(θ|ˆθ))
Loss = −log(e−(θ−ˆ
θ)2
2σ2
√
2πσ2 )
Loss = (θ −ˆθ)2
2σ2
−log(
√
2πσ2)
Generally, log(
√
2πσ2) is left out since it is a constant w.r.t. our parameters and so will go away
when the gradient is taken, leaving:
Loss = (θ −ˆθ)2
2σ2
4

Work in Progress
Generally, 2σ2 is also left out, since it only acts to scale the gradient, and can be accounted for by
adjusting the learning rate of gradient descent, leaving:
Loss = (θ −ˆθp)2
However, we note that, if we interpret |f|, the magnitude of our feedback, as
1
2σ2 , we can view
|f| as a measure of certainty. This certainly applies to a Gaussian distribution with a variance of
at least 1
2, since f ∈(0, 1] for positive examples. For negative examples, we generalize further by
removing the magnitude calculation, and allowing our feedback to be negative. This enforces that
we minimize the probability of negative data:
Loss = f ∗(θ −ˆθp)2
To be able to easily recover behavioral cloning, we introduce two hyperparameters. The ﬁrst such
parameter is the ability to threshold feedback values. If we threshold, we simply replace every
f with sign(f). Thresholding eliminates gradations in positive and negative data. Additionally,
we introduced the parameter α, which scales down all our negative examples’ feedback: f :=
max(f, αf). This trades off between behavioral cloning and avoiding negative examples. We apply
max(f, αf) after we threshold, so if we threshold with and set α to 0.0, we recover behavioral
cloning.
Our scalar loss is also notable since it closely resembles a loss that induces a stochastic policy
gradient. In a standard RL policy network such as REINFORCE, the gradient would be ∇p =
∇p(Qπ(θ) ∗−log(Pr(θ))) (Williams, 1992). The loss then, that would induce this gradient is
Loss = Qπ(θ) ∗−log(Pr(θ)). R, the return, or a sample contributing to Qπ(θ), is generally used.
In continuous control, one could instead predict a mean ˆθ for a normal distribution and then sample
your action θ from that normal distribution. As demonstrated above, if you replace log(Pr(θ)) with
the probability density function for a normal distribution, the loss you wind up with is precisely
MSE scaled by R. Substituting this scalar into the derivation above at every step, you get:
Loss = R ∗(θ −ˆθ)2
A full derivation of this loss given the stochastic policy gradient and Gaussian policy can be found
in the appendix. Clearly if we view fθ, our feedback, as Rˆθ and assume a Gaussian policy, we get
our scalar loss function. COACH in fact points out that you can view online feedback given for the
current policy, fˆθ as a sample from Qπ(ˆθ), or Aπ(ˆθ), the advantage function, and empirically veriﬁes
that this works for on-line RL with discrete feedback (MacGlashan et al., 2017). This similarity was
useful for inspiration and ideation, but actually falls short of rigorous justiﬁcation for two reasons.
Since we are training off-policy, and, more speciﬁcally, on a pre-determined policy that does not
explore stochastically and does not vary depending on the current predicted policy, we run into
major issues justifying our loss this way.
First, the main “off-policy” issue here is that for the stochastic policy gradient to hold, the explo-
ration must be stochastic. However, in our case, the data is drawn from a pre-determined, determin-
istic policy. We can illuminate the intuition for why the stochastic policy gradient no longer works
by considering a simple example. Consider the network attempting to learn the correct predicted ˆθ
for a given state. Consider that there is only one demonstrated θ, -1, with a feedback of -1. Now,
no matter what ˆθ the network predicts, the θ action that is taken during training will always be -1,
and the feedback will always be -1. Moreover, consider that the actual optimum is ˆθ = 1, and the
network is currently predicting ˆθ = −2. Using our scalar loss, the network will increase distance
between θ and ˆθ by decreasing ˆθ, making the policy worse and worse. This would not happen when
using a stochastic RL policy, since the network can explore states around the current predicted ˆθ by
choosing appropriate actions.
Using a stochastic RL policy, given enough samples on either side of ˆθ, the network will have larger
and larger gradients, the more negative ˆθ is. But these gradients will not keeping “pushing” the
prediction to the left of -1, but rather will randomly cause ˆθ to move around, gradually moving
to the right as it ﬁnds better feedback, and eventually converging at the optimum of ˆθ = 1. The
network will move less “violently” and more “stably” the closer ˆθ gets to 0. And when the network
eventually reaches the positive numbers, it might get “pulled” to the left a bit when it happens to
5

Work in Progress
sample a worse action, but it will not get pulled as strongly as when it samples a better action to the
right. We can now intuitively see the issue: the neural network cannot not inﬂuence the probability
of seeing an example again, which can lead to problems with learning the policy. In RL, a policy
network can try a bad action, and then move the policy away from that action and not revisit it.
On the other hand, if we have a bad example in our training set for a given state, on every epoch
of training, our neural net will encounter this example and take a step away from it, thus pushing
our network as far away from it as possible. Taking these steps is not necessarily helpful since the
network may not have favored taking the bad action before.
We could use some sort of importance sampling (Silver et al., 2014) (Degris et al., 2012), as is done
with stochastic off-policy exploration, to scale down the loss for examples we are far away from.
However, this would make our update have almost no effect when we are far away from positive
examples, and with the deterministic exploration of ReNeg, the distinction between positive and
negative examples now matters. We can’t have it both ways just by multiplying by the probability of
ˆθ given our model. (This happens since the Gaussian PDF decreases exponentially with difference
|θ −ˆθ|, but the loss only increases quadratically with the difference, due to the logarithm. Thus the
gradient tends toward 0 due to the differing rates of growth, as the difference gets large.) Moreover,
importance sampling consistently reduced performance for learning from demonstration in the NAC
paper (Gao et al., 2018).
Another, perhaps less signiﬁcant issue, is that our feedback represents Q∗, and not Qπ. Even if
the human critic could re-assigned labels as the agent trains, he/she would have no way to sample
the return from Qπ, without letting the agent explore freely. This is signiﬁcant because an action
that is optimal for the expert may be a dangerous and poor decision for a non-optimal policy. This
is perhaps less signiﬁcant than the other issue, since there are no actions in our data that could be
considered both good and risky. What is good for one policy (i.e. steering back to the middle of
the road) is generally good for all policies, and so can act rather greedily with respect to Q∗, even
though it will not always be following the optimal policy.
For these reasons, we ﬁnd the comparison to stochastic policy gradients useful, but ultimately un-
compelling. Applying RL losses to supervised learning does not provide the mathematical justiﬁ-
cation we need. The stochastic policy gradient is no longer computing the gradient of the current
policy at all. Thus, we focus primarily on extending and generalizing MSE. Yet, we can still learn
from the policy gradient comparison. In particular, we acknowledge that the sign of our feedback is
far more signiﬁcant than it was in the RL context (which is one of the reasons we introduce the α
parameter, which scales down the importance of negative examples, in the event that we collect too
many negative examples). In RL, using the stochastic policy gradient, it did not matter if negative
examples “pulled” ˆθ closer to them, so long as the positive examples pulled ˆθ more, since you would
eventually try one of those actions, if it is a nearby optimum. However, since actions are no longer
sampled dependent on the current policy, suddenly the sign matters very much. In fact, even if we
have a positive example for a state, if we have more negative examples than positive examples, we
may wind up ignoring our positive examples entirely in an effort to get away from our negative
examples. This case highlights the trouble inherent in using negative examples: It is hard to know
how and when to take into account the negative examples.
Figure 1: Potential outcomes of regression with negative examples
Now, let us consider negative examples in the ReNeg framework. For example, as shown in Figure
1, if we perform a regression on positive and negative examples with more negative examples than
6

Work in Progress
positive in one state, we may wind up in a case where our loss is minimized by a prediction of
positive or negative inﬁnity, and thus our regression is “overwhelmed” by the negative examples.
This led us to our second “exponential” loss:
Lossexp = |θ(s) −ˆθ(s)|2f
Using this loss, negative examples will have inﬁnite loss at distance 0, and then drop off expo-
nentially with distance. We hope that this will create regressions more akin to the second image
in Figure 1. In this image, adding more negative points will still nudge the regression away more
and more, but one positive point not too close by should be enough to prevent it from diverging
to positive or negative inﬁnity. It should be noted that the loss in a particular state still could only
have negative examples, especially in a continuous state-space like ours where states are unlikely to
be revisited. However, the reduction in loss caused by diverging to inﬁnity would be so small that
it should not happen simply due to continuity with nearby states enforced by the structure of the
network. In addition, one concern with this loss could be that for positive fractional differences, and
negative non-fractional differences, the desired property 3) of loss functions no longer holds. That
is, our positive loss will not grow with f if the difference being exponentiated is a fraction. And for
negative exponents, the loss will only grow if the difference is a fraction that shrinks as it is raised
to increasing powers of f. However, we hope that for negative examples, distances that are more
than 1 unit away will not occur often (since 1 unit is half the distance range). We discuss a potential
future solution in the appendix to patch this loss function.
Our ﬁnal loss function should produce regressions more like the ﬁnal image in Figure 1: We propose
directly modelling the feedback with another neural network (which we call the FNet) for use as a
loss function for our PNet. If this FNet is correctly able to learn to copy how we label data with
feedback, it could be used as a loss function for regression with our PNet. Thus, in order to maximize
feedback, our loss function would be as follows:
LossF Net = −FNet(s, ˆθ)
After learning this FNet, we can either use it as a loss function to train a policy network or, every time
we want to run inference, we can run a computationally expensive gradient descent optimization to
pick the best action. Because the latter does not depend on the training distribution (so we do not
have the issue of the runtime and training distributions being different), and it is more efﬁcient, we
choose an even easier version of the latter: we pick the best action out of a list of discrete options
according to the FNet’s predictions. One feature of the FNet is that adding more negative points will
not “push” our regression further away from this point, but rather just make our FNet more conﬁdent
of the negative feedback there. This may not be the desired effect for all applications. Moreover, the
FNet cannot operate on purely positive points with no gradation. That is, behavioral cloning cannot
be recovered from it.
3.2
DRIVING DATA
We recorded 20 minutes of optimal driving and labeled all of this data with a feedback of 1.0.
Choosing the suboptimal data and how to label it was a bit more tricky. One reason that we are
not using reinforcement learning is that letting the car explore actions is dangerous. In this vein,
we wanted to collect data only on “safe” driving. However, the neural network needs data that will
teach it about bad actions well as good actions that recover the car from bad states. In order to
explore these types of states and actions, we collected two types of bad driving: “swerving” and
“lane changing”. The ﬁrst image in Figure 2 is swerving. In swerving, the car was driving in a “sine
wave” pattern on either side of the road. We collected 10 minutes of this data on the right side of the
road and 10 minutes on the left. The second image is lane changing. For this, we drove to the right
side of the road, straightened out, stayed there, and then returned to the middle. We repeated this for
10 minutes, and then collected 10 minutes on the left-hand side as well.
3.3
“BACKSEAT DRIVER” FEEDBACK
Backseat Driver is the framework we use to compute and collect feedback in the AV context. Our
feedback includes much more information than just a reward (as is used in RL): we take our label
to directly measure how “good” an action is relative to other possible actions. We use this approach
instead of labeling rewards for actions both because we found it an easy way to label data with
7

Work in Progress
feedback, and because it contains more signal. How exactly to label the data with feedback, however,
is non-obvious. At ﬁrst, we considered labeling using a slider from -1 to 1. However, using a slider
can be non-intuitive in many cases and there would be discontinuities in feedback you would want to
give. For example, if the demonstrator is driving straight off the road and then starts to turn left back
onto the road, there would be a large discontinuity in the very negative and then slightly positive
feedback.
Figure 2: Types of driving:
swerving (left), lane change
(right)
In order to circumvent these issues, and to make the labeling process
more intuitive, we decided to collect feedback using the steering
wheel. We found that it is easier for people to focus on the steer-
ing angle, since that is how we are used to controlling cars. Our
ﬁrst thought was to just turn the steering wheel to the correct an-
gle. However, this is very difﬁcult to estimate, especially on turns,
when you cannot see the actual effects your steering is having on
the car. (Note that if we did this, our algorithm would turn into
behavioral cloning.) Instead, we decided to label the differential.
That is, we turned the wheel to the left if the car should steer more
left. This signal shows where the error is (i.e. “You should be turn-
ing more” or “You’re turning the wrong way”). Note that the label
does not need to be the exact correct angle; it just needs to show in
which direction the current action is erring, and proportionally how
much. We call this method of human feedback collection “Backseat
Driver.” In order to process the angle labels into a feedback value
in [−1, 1], we used the equation below:
FEEDBACK(c, θ)
1
if sign(c) == sign(θ) or |c| ≤ϵ
2
return 1 −|c|
3
else
4
return −|c|
Note: We ﬁrst normalize all of our corrections by dividing by the greatest collected correction c, so
all of our c values fall in [−1, 1]. In line 1 above, if we are turning the steering wheel in the same
direction as the car (with some ϵ of error), then the feedback should be positive. (We set epsilon to
5
θmax so that it allows up to 5 degrees of tolerance.) Since c represents a delta in steering, a greater
delta should result in a less positive signal. Therefore, the feedback should be proportional to −|c|.
We add 1 to ensure all c in the same direction as θ are positive. If c is in a different direction than we
were steering (line 3), then the feedback should be negative, so we just return −|c| as the feedback.
Thus the greater the delta, the more negative the feedback will be. If c is in the same direction, on
the other hand, we chose to scale these feedbacks up so that the feedback is positive, but less positive
for a greater differential. This makes sense since if, for example, the car is steering left and we tell it
to steer more left, this is not as bad as if the car is steering the wrong way. Thus, slow actions back
to the center of the road will be rewarded less than quick actions back to the center of the road.
3.4
ARCHITECTURE
We chose to use only an hour of data because we wanted to see how far we could get with limited
data. While our feedback is relatively easy to collect compared to other options, it still takes up
human hours, so we would like to limit its necessity. We sampled states at a rate of approximately
two frames per second, since states that are close in time tend to look very similar. We augmented
our data by ﬂipping it left-right, inverting the angle label, and leaving the feedback the same. After
this augmentation, we had 17,918 training images and 3,162 validation images (a 85:15 split).
We chose to learn our policy with an end-to-end optimization of a neural network to approximate a
continuous control function. Such networks are capable of tackling a wide array of general problems
and end-to-end learning has the potential to better optimize all aspects of the pipeline for the task
at hand. Given the option to use separate (differentiable) modules for sub-tasks such as computer
vision, or to connect these modules in a way that is differentiable for the speciﬁc task, the latter will
8

Work in Progress
Average Time Lasted (sec)
0
2
4
6
8
Scalar
Exponential
Fnet
Figure 3: Initial comparison of loss functions.
Average Time Lasted (sec)
0
50
100
150
α = 1 LR = 1e-6
α = 1 LR = 1e-6 (thresholded)
α = 1 LR = 5e-6
α = 1 LR = 1e-5
α = 0 LR = 1e-6
α = 0 LR = 5e-6
α = 0 LR = 1e-5
Figure 4: Scalar loss function performance in-
cluding negative examples vs. only positive ex-
amples
always perform better, since the end-to-end model always has the ability to simply not update the
sub-module if it will not help training loss.
We used transfer learning to help bootstrap learning with limited data for both the PNet and Fnet. We
decided to start with a pretrained Inception v3 since it has relatively few parameters, but has been
trained to have strong performance on ImageNet, giving us a head start on any related computer
vision task. We kept some early layers of Inception and added several of our own, followed by a
tanh activation for the output. We tried splitting the network at various layers and found that one
about halfway through the network (called mixed 2) worked best. The layers we added after the split
were fully connected layers of sizes 100, 300, and 20. For the FNet, the angle input is concatenated
onto the ﬁrst fully-connected layer. (Find an architecture diagram in the appendix.)
4
EXPERIMENTS
We tested our trained models by running them in our Unity simulator and recording the time until
the car crashed or all four tires left the road. (Note: We designed the ReNeg framework so it need
not be run in a simulator. This would work just as well in the real world. We only used a simulator
because it was all we had access to.) We ﬁrst tested our PNet with the scalar loss, our PNet with
the exponential loss, and our FNet. We plotted their mean times over the eight runs with standard
deviation. See Figure 3 below. (All of these were on the default hyperparameters listed in the
appendix, except for the exponential loss model, for which we set α to 0.1 since otherwise we could
not get it to converge.) Based on the predicted angles, the FNet seemed to primarily predict feedback
based on state, not angle; this makes sense given that the feedback in “bad” states is generally “bad”,
except for the split second when the “good” action takes place.
Given that the scalar loss performed best (and was training correctly), we spent more time tuning
the hyperparameters for this model. This can be seen in Figure 4. We note several interesting things
from ﬁgure 4 exploring the scalar loss. First, the pink group is identical to the solid blue group except
that all the α values are 0, meaning that negative-feedback examples are zeroed out and effectively
ignored in training. The blue bars are much higher than their pink counterparts, indicating that the
negative data is useful. Second, we can see that thresholding the feedback to -1 and 1 (the blue
crosshatch pattern) increased the scalar performance to about 30 seconds (compared to 6 seconds
with the default hyperparameters). At ﬁrst this could be taken to indicate that having gradations in
positive and negative data could be harmful to training. However, we see that the same performance
9

Work in Progress
is achieved (and surpassed) by increasing the learning rate instead of thresholding, by looking to
the 2 rightmost blue bars. The reason for this is likely that we tuned the learning rate to work well
on thresholded data, and so, when we don’t threshold/clone our data, the scalars on the loss drop
signiﬁcantly, forcing the network to take smaller steps, and effectively decreasing the learning rate.
Increasing the learning rate instead of thresholding yields much better performance, indicating that
gradations in the data (with a high learning rate) do help training.
Average Time Lasted (sec)
0
50
100
Scalar
Behavioral Cloning
Figure 5:
Over 3 training
runs, our scalar loss model
performed over 1.5 times as
well as the behavioral cloning
benchmark, with signiﬁcantly
less variance.
Note, α can in fact be in [0, ∞], however we focused on α = 0
and α = 1, since this corresponds to no negative examples and
an equal weighting between positive and negative examples. It it
difﬁcult to tune independently due its relationship with the learning
rate. Moreover, all we are trying to show is that using negative
examples, with some relative importance to the positive examples,
can be beneﬁcial.
After selecting the best learning rate for each model, we then trained
new versions of each network 2 more times, for a total of 3 models
each, to account for stochasticity in SGD. (The best learning rate
for both turned out to be 1e-5; see the appendix for more details on
tuning.) Each time, we let the model drive the car for 8 trials and
calculated the performance as the mean time before crashing over
these 8 trials. We then calculated the mean performance for each
over the 3 training sessions. Figure 5 shows the results.
5
CONCLUSION
We hypothesized that for the task of learning lane following for
autonomous vehicles from demonstration, adding in negative ex-
amples would improve model performance. Our scalar loss model
performed over 1.5 times as well as the behavioral cloning base-
line, showing our hypothesis to be true. The speciﬁc method of
regression with negative examples we used allows for learning de-
terministic continuous control problems from demonstration from
any range of good and bad behavior. Moreover, the loss function that empirically worked the best
in this domain does not require an additional neural network to model it, and it induces a stochas-
tic policy gradient that could be used for ﬁne-tuning with RL. We also introduced a novel way of
collecting continuous human feedback for autonomous vehicles intuitively and efﬁciently, called
Backseat Driver. We thus believe our work could be extremely useful in the autonomous control
industry: with no additional real world time, we can increase performance over supervised learning
by simply having a backseat driver.
10

Work in Progress
