Error Model of Radio Fingerprint and PDR Fusion 
Indoor Localization 
 
Haojun Ai, Kaifeng Tang, Sheng Zhang and Yuhong Yang 
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of 
Education, China 
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China 
 
Abstract: Multi-source fusion positioning is one of the technical frameworks for obtaining 
sufficient indoor positioning accuracy. In order to evaluate the effect of multi-source fusion 
positioning, it is necessary to establish a fusion error model. In this paper, we first use the least 
squares method to fuse the radio fingerprint and the PDR positioning, and then apply the 
variance propagation laws to calculate the error distribution of indoor multi-source localization 
methods. Based on the fusion error model, we developed an indoor positioning simulation 
system. The system can give a better positioning source layout scheme under a given condition, 
and can evaluate the signal strength distribution and the error distribution.  
 
Keywords: fingerprint; PDR; error model; indoor positioning simulation system 
 
 
1.Introduction 
With a increasing demand for Location Based Services (LBS) in both indoor and outdoor 
environments, significant progress in indoor localization technology was made in recent years. 
Researchers have proposed various solutions for indoor positioning of smart phones. Most 
systems are classified into infrastructure-based(e.g., Received Signal Strength (RSS) 
fingerprinting) and non-infrastructure-based ones (e.g., Pedestrian Dead Reckoning (PDR) ) [1]. 
The RSS fingerprinting is a kind of the localization method using the received signal 
strength RSS from the radio beacons, such as WIFI access points [2,3], Bluetooth devices [4], 
and cellular telephone towers [5]. Although the positioning accuracy with the RF fingerprinting 
algorithm was improved in the past years, the stability of poisoning results is still poor due to 
the multipath effect and device heterogeneity [6]. The PDR-based method, also known as an 
Inertial Navigation System (INS), is a self-contained localization system that relies on inertial 
sensors, such as accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer [7,8]. Because the PDR-based 
method in a smartphone relies on an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), whose positioning error 
accumulates over time, it is not suitable for long-term positioning. To achieve better indoor 
localization results, many smartphone-based localization approaches use various filters, such 
as the Kalman Filter (KF), Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) and Particle Filter (PF) to integrate 
PDR and fingerprint methods [9–11]. Among them the PF is the most popular providing the 
best localization results. For the localization scheme based on PF, the location of a user is 
predicted by user motion parameters measured with inertial sensors and then corrected by 
positional information obtained from radio fingerprints [12–14]. 

 
2 of 16 
2 
 
Many indoor LBS applications, require a quick assessment of the radio environment of the 
area to see whether it can meet the positioning accuracy requirements. In order to realize high-
precision and high-availability indoor positioning scheme, it is necessary to establish an 
accurate indoor positioning error model for different environments. The error model can 
provide a technical basis for the optimal layout of the positioning infrastructure and explore 
the factors affecting the positioning accuracy [15-17]. There are many articles about the error 
model of radio fingerprint and the error model of PDR, but very little focus on the theoretical 
analysis of positioning accuracy based on a fusion of radio fingerprint and PDR.  
The deployment of base stations in the past was mainly based on the experiences which 
leads to an extreme deployment cost. So we need an indoor positioning system to give a near-
optimal positioning source laying solution and the corresponding error distribution[18]. The 
system requires an error model to evaluate the quality of the laying solution.  
In this paper, we present an error model based on the least squares method for radio 
fingerprint and PDR fusion scheme, analyze the factors affecting positioning accuracy, and 
evaluate it in a real environment. The evaluation results show that the presented model is 
effective. We propose a method for calculating the spatial error distribution. Then we develop 
an indoor positioning system, and the fusion error model is applied, which is used as the basis 
for the deployment of the positioning sources and help visualize the error distribution. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The second section gives a review on the 
related studies on fingerprint and PDR error models. The third section established error models 
for radio fingerprint, PDR, and their fusion. The fourth section performs some simulations and 
experiments in a situation. The fifth section describes the developed indoor positioning 
simulation system. The last section concludes this research. 
2. Related work 
The errors of radio fingerprint mainly come from multipath effect and device 
heterogeneity [6]. Multipath effect is the interference of radio signals of more than one paths. 
When a signal during its propagation encounters obstacles it will reflect, refract, and diffract, 
resulting in the receiver receiving multipath signals. The device heterogeneity means different 
devices will receive different signal strengths at the same location and from the same source. 
At present, the research on the error model of RF fingerprints is mainly based on the Cramer-
Rao Lower Bound (CRLB). 
Tichavsky et al. [19] provided an expression of the recursive posterior CRLB of a nonlinear 
filter based on Bayesian framework. Qi [20] proposed a generalized CRLB (called G-CRLB) of 
a wireless system for NLOS (no line-of-sight) environment. Having analyzed hybrid line-of-
sight (LOS)/NLOS environment Qi indicated that with a prior knowledge of wireless 
transmission channel the performance can be improved. Hossain et al. [16] analyzed the CRLB 
model with WIFI Signal Strength Difference (SSD) as a fingerprint. When there is a problem of 
device heterogeneity, SSD is a good choice as fingerprint. Zhou et al. [15] studied the CRLB 
model of WIFI fingerprints under different signal distribution conditions and mixed signal 
distribution conditions. Saliha et al. [21] used a log-mixed model, instead of a log-shadow 
model, to calculate the error bound. Ai et al. [22] proposed a CRLB model related to the window 
size of RSS. Lei [23] proposed a CRLB model based on LOS and RSS, which reduces the error 
of distance estimation by distinguishing the LOS and NLOS components in the attenuated 
signal. Elina [17] extended the CRLB model to the situation in a 3D scene, and studied the 

 
3 of 16 
3 
 
impact of the topology of the APs and the deployment density of the APs on the error model. 
Zhao [24] proposed a model of ER-CRLB, which is an extended recursive CRLB. The model can 
be adapted to complex and variable environments, considering a priori information and 
various uncertain factors. Tian et al. [25] proposed a probabilistic model to clarify the indoor 
positioning performance based on RSS fingerprints, analyzed the probability with which users 
are located in a certain area, and revealed the interactions among accuracy, reliability and 
measured valuesduring the positioning process. Li [26] used the method based on the nonlinear 
least squares to derive the closed expression of the positioning error and obtained a new lower 
bound smaller than CRLB. 
The PDR error is mainly caused by the errors of step frequency detection, step length 
estimation and heading estimation. Since the PDR itself cannot correct errors, the positioning 
error will accumulate as the user walks for a longer time. 
Lachapelle et al. [27] proposed three step length error models: Gaussian model, constant 
random model, and Gauss Markov model. Jahn et al. [28] established the error models for four 
methods of measuring step length, and discussed the systematic and random errors with the 
Taylor expansion. The first model is based on the biomechanical model of Alvarez [29], 
measuring acceleration at the user's center of mass. The second model is based on the 4th power 
between the maximum and minimum values of the step size and the single-step internal 
acceleration signal proposed by Weinberg [30]. The last two models are the error analysis of 
the empirical models of Bylemans [31] and Kim [32]. The error in heading estimation is mainly 
due to magnetic field interference and gyroscope drift. In the early days, Lachapelle et al. [26] 
modeled the error of the gyroscope as a random constant deviation when establishing the PDR 
error model, so the heading error was considered to be linear with time. Subsequently, in Chen 
[33], the predictable errors of the magnetic field, including hard and soft iron effects, magnetic 
declination, tilt and misalignment, are derived in detail, and a unified heading error model is 
obtained. 
The multi-source fusion localization methods mainly study how to fuse fingerprint and 
PDR by specific algorithms, such as Particle Filter [34] or Kalman Filter [35], but there has few 
researches on the theoretical error model after their fusion. Zhuo [36] established an error 
model for RFID and WIFI fingerprints and obtained a closed-form solution. Tarrío [37] simply 
derived the error model of RSS and PDR, and analyzed the relationship between positioning 
accuracy and energy consumption. But they did not explored the variance propagation model, 
which is useful for evaluating positioning performance. On the basis of the previous researches, 
this paper combines fingerprint error model and PDR error model by using the least squares 
method, and obtains a new error model of indoor localization with fingerprint and PDR fusion. 
3.Proposed Error model 
In this section, we first summarize RSS error model [15] and PDR error model [26], then 
propose the error model of radio fingerprint and PDR fusion, finally simulate the error 
distribution of PDR integrated with high-precision signal sources. 
3.1 RSS-based localization error 
Usually the log-distance path-loss model is used to establish the connection of the RSS to 
the distance between two nodes: 
                   P(d)=P(d0)-10βlog(
𝑑
𝑑0)+η                      (1) 

 
4 of 16 
4 
 
where P(d) and P(d0) stand for the RSSs recorded at the locations with distances d and d0 from 
the AP, respectively. β is the pass loss exponent, and η is the measurement error. 
Assuming that 𝜃̂= (𝑥̂, 𝑦̂)T is the estimated location of coordinates x and y with respect to its 
true location θ= (x, y)T, then its covariance matrix is 
Covθ(𝜃̂)=E{(𝜃̂ −θ)(𝜃̂ −θ)T}=[
𝜎𝑥̂
2
𝜎𝑥̂𝑦̂
2
𝜎𝑦̂𝑥̂
2
𝜎𝑦̂
2 ]             (2) 
The diagonal elements of (2) represent the variances, and the off-diagonal elements are the 
covariance. According to the definition of the CRLB, it is the inverse of the Fisher Information 
Matrix (FIM):  
Covθ(𝜃̂)≥J(θ)-1                            (3) 
The FIM, J(θ), is the variance of this score function:  
J(θ)=E[(
∂lnf(P;θ)
∂θ
)2]=-E[
𝜕2lnf(P;θ)
𝜕𝜃2
]                   (4) 
where f(P; θ) denotes the probability density function of observations P at point θ. The score 
function is defined as the gradient of its log-likelihood. As the RSSs follow the Gaussian signal 
distribution, the joint probability density function (PDF) of the RSSs from θ is calculated as: 
f(P;θ)=∏
1
√2𝜋𝜎exp⁡(−
ɛ2
2𝜎2)
𝑚
𝑘=1
                     (5) 
where ɛ = P(d) - P(d0) - 10βlog(
𝑑
𝑑0), d=√(𝑥−𝑥𝑘)2 + (𝑦−𝑦𝑘)2, (𝑥𝑘, 𝑦𝑘) represents the coordinates 
of the k-th AP, m is the number of APs, and 𝜎2 is the variance of the RSSs collected by the 
receiver. In addition, J(θ) can be written as 
J(θ)=[
Jxx(θ)
Jxy(θ)
Jyx(θ)
Jyy(θ)]                           (6) 
Combining (4), (5), and (6) gives:  
Jxx(θ)=(
10𝛽
𝜎𝑙𝑛10)2∑
[
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼
𝑑]
𝑚
𝑘=1
2                         (7) 
Jxy(θ)=⁡Jyx(θ)= (
10𝛽
𝜎𝑙𝑛10)2∑
𝑠𝑖𝑛𝛼𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼
𝑑2
𝑚
𝑘=1
                  (8) 
                 Jyy(θ)=(
10𝛽
𝜎𝑙𝑛10)2∑
[
𝑠𝑖𝑛𝛼
𝑑]
𝑚
𝑘=1
2                         (9) 
α is the angle between the line of the AP and the user and the ground, and d is the distance 
between the AP and the user. Therefore, we can calculate J(θ)–1 with 
J(θ)-1=
1
|𝐽(𝜃)| [
Jyy(θ)
−Jyx(θ)
−Jxy(θ)
Jxx(θ) ]                      (10) 
Taking (7), (8), (9), and (10) into (3), the CRLB for the localization estimation can be 
expressed as  
var(𝜃̂)=⁡𝜎𝑥̂
2+𝜎𝑦̂
2≥
Jyy(θ)
|𝐽(𝜃)|+
Jxx(θ)
|𝐽(𝜃)|⁡=⁡
Jxx(θ)+Jyy(θ)
Jxx(θ)∗Jyy(θ)−Jxy(θ)∗Jyx(θ)         (11) 
3.2 PDR localization error 
As known, PDR estimates the trajectory of an object by continuously adding its 
displacement from a given starting point. The PDR error is therefore mainly caused by step 
frequency detection, step length estimation and heading estimation. Integration of the errors 

 
5 of 16 
5 
 
of accelerometers and gyroscopes leads to cumulative errors. Because PDR itself cannot correct 
the error, the positioning error of will continue to accumulate as the user walks for a longer 
time. The accumulation of the error is also called drift, which exists in all relative positioning 
systems.  
Figure 1 shows the error range of the PDR. A pedestrian starts from point S and proceeds 
in the AB direction. The point O is the actual position after the N steps. Let 𝜎𝑆 be the standard 
deviation of the distance error, in the walking direction, and 𝜎𝐺 be the standard deviation of 
the distance error in the perpendicular direction.  
Point A and point B indicate the error range in the straight direction due to the step error 
and the heading error. The calculation formula of 𝜎𝑆 is as follows: 
   𝜎𝑆=∑
𝑆𝑘
𝑁
𝐾=1
·[1-cos(∫
𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑑𝑡
𝑡𝑘
𝑡1
)]+𝜎𝑆𝑁                (12) 
where N is the number of steps, 𝑆𝑘 is the step length of step k, 𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the maximum drift 
speed of the heading, the unit is rad/sec, and 𝜎𝑆𝑁 is one of the three step length error models. 
Here the Gaussian model is selected. 
Points A-, O-, and B- represent the maximum negative drift of heading due to gyroscope 
drift. Points A+, O+, B+ represent the maximum forward drift of the heading due to gyroscope 
drift. The formula for calculating 𝜎𝐺 is as follows: 
   𝜎𝐺=∑
𝑆𝑘
𝑁
𝐾=1
·sin(∫
𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑑𝑡
𝑡𝑘
𝑡1
)                    (13) 
The shaded area in the figure is the PDR error range after the pedestrian walks N steps, 
which can be approximated by the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE): 
RMSE=√𝜎𝑆
2 + 𝜎𝐺
2                           (14) 
 
Figure.1 Error model of PDR 
3.3 Fused localization error 
The positioning accuracy of an indoor positioning system depends on the number of 
observations and their accuracies. Under the same conditions, more observations, more 
accurate the results will be. Compared with a single-sensor positioning system, the multi-
sensor architecture will provide more accurate and reliable results. To best fuse the data of 
different sensors the least squares principle is employed. The main idea of the least squares 
method is to use all the relevant observations to solve for the unknown parameters in such a 
way that the sum of the squared differences between the theoretical values and the 
observations (the error, or the residual) is minimized. Let the observation equations of n sensors 
for a certain performance parameter be: 
Y=Hx+ e                              (15) 

 
6 of 16 
6 
 
Where x is the parameter to be estimated, Y is the vector of n measurement, e is the noise vector, 
and H is a n by 1 matrix. The least squares estimation of x is to minimize the sum of squares of 
the weighted errors 
𝐽𝑤(𝑥̂) = (𝑌−𝐻𝑥̂)𝑊(𝑌−𝐻𝑥̂)                  (16) 
where W is a positive definite diagonal weight matrix, W=diag(𝑤1, 𝑤2 … 𝑤𝑛). Find the partial 
derivatives of 𝐽𝑤(𝑥̂) with respect to x and make them equal to 0. The least squares estimate of 
the estimator 𝑥̂ is 
𝑥̂ = (𝐻𝑇𝑊𝐻)−1𝐻𝑇𝑊𝑌=
∑
𝑤𝑖𝑦𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
∑
𝑤𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
                (17) 
Assuming the multiple independent random variables follow normal distribution, the 
measurement noise is also normal and the variance for i-th sensor reads 
E[𝑒𝑖
2] = E((𝑥−𝑦𝑖)2) = 𝜎𝑖
2                  (18) 
    The variance of the estimated parameter x is 
E[(𝑥−𝑥̂)2] = E[(𝑥−
∑
𝑤𝑖𝑦𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
∑
𝑤𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
)2] 
                           =E[∑
(
𝑤𝑖
∑
𝑤𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
)2(𝑥−𝑦𝑖)2
𝑛
𝑖=1
] 
                           =⁡∑
(
𝑤𝑖
∑
𝑤𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
)2𝜎𝑖
2
𝑛
𝑖=1
                  (19) 
The weight of an observation is normally defined as 
𝑤𝑖=
1
𝜎𝑖2 ⁡⁡⁡⁡⁡⁡𝑖= 1,2, … 𝑛                     (20) 
Substituting (20) in to (19), one get the variance of the estimated parameter derived from 
the two sensor data  
                        𝜎2 = E[(𝑥−𝑥̂)2] =
𝜎12𝜎22
𝜎12+𝜎22                   (21) 
In a system, the RSS-based localization is done periodically and inertial sensors are used 
between the consecutive RSS-localizations to track the position of the user. The total 
localization error will have two components, one from the RSS-localization and the other from 
the PDR localization: 
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸2(𝑡)=𝑓(𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑆
2
, 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑃𝐷𝑅
2
(𝑡))             (22) 
where t is the elapsed time from the last localization reset, and RMSE is Root Mean Square 
Error. The RSS-localization error does not depend on the time t, but on the positions of the 
nodes and the characteristics of the channel. The PDR localization error depends on the 
integration time t, step length, and heading. The maximum localization error appears at the 
end of the integration time. 
Assume that the position 𝜃1=(𝑥1, 𝑦1) derived from the RSS fingerprint, the variances of 
the coordinates x and y are (𝜎𝑥1
2 ，𝜎𝑦1
2 ), and the position 𝜃2=(𝑥2, 𝑦2) derived from the PDR, the 
variance of the coordinates x and y are (𝜎𝑥2
2 ，𝜎𝑦2
2 ). We use a fusion method based on the least 
squares method. The position after the fusion is 𝜃 =( 𝑥𝑅, 𝑦𝑅), and the variances of the 
coordinates x and y are (𝜎𝑥𝑅
2 ，𝜎𝑦𝑅
2 ). Taking them into the above (17) (21) results in: 

 
7 of 16 
7 
 
𝑥𝑅=
∑
𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
∑
𝑤𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
=
𝑥1 · 1
𝜎𝑥1
2 + 𝑥2 · 1
𝜎𝑥2
2
1
𝜎𝑥1
2 + 1
𝜎𝑥2
2
= 𝑥1 · 𝜎𝑥2
2 + 𝑥2 · 𝜎𝑥1
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 + 𝜎𝑥2
2
 
                         ⁡⁡= [
𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2 ] [𝑥1
𝑥2]                   (23) 
𝑦𝑅= [
𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2 ] [𝑦1
𝑦2]                             (24) 
             𝜎𝑥𝑅
2 = [
𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2 ⁡⁡
𝜎𝑥1
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2 ] [𝜎𝑥1
2
𝜎𝑎𝑏
𝜎𝑏𝑎
𝜎𝑥2
2 ] [
𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2
]  
                = [
1
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2 ]2[𝜎𝑥2
2 , 𝜎𝑥1
2 ] [𝜎𝑥1
2
0
0
𝜎𝑥2
2 ] [𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 ] 
                =
𝜎𝑥1
2 𝜎𝑥2
2
𝜎𝑥1
2 +𝜎𝑥2
2                                          (25) 
  𝜎𝑦𝑅
2 =
𝜎𝑦1
2 𝜎𝑦2
2
𝜎𝑦1
2 +𝜎𝑦2
2                                          (26) 
Referring to sections 3.1and 3.2, 𝜎𝑥1
2  is 𝜎𝑥
2 in the RSS-based error model, 𝜎𝑥2
2  is 𝜎𝑆
2 in the 
PDR error model, 𝜎𝑦1
2  is 𝜎𝑦
2 in the RSS-based error model, and⁡⁡𝜎𝑦2
2  is 𝜎𝐺
2 in the PDR error 
model. Considering all these the root mean square error of the estimated position with RSS 
fingerprint and PDR fusion: 
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸= √𝜎𝑥𝑅
2 + 𝜎𝑦𝑅
2 = √
𝜎𝑥2𝜎𝑆
2
𝜎𝑥2+𝜎𝑆
2 +
𝜎𝑦2𝜎𝐺
2
𝜎𝑦2+𝜎𝐺
2                   (27) 
It can be seen from the above equation that the error after data fusion is not greater than 
the errors of the two individual methods. The root mean square error is related to the position 
of the node, the characteristics of the channel, the time t, the step length and the heading. Using 
this model, the error after the fusion can be estimated, and the error distribution in the space 
can be calculated. 
4. Simulation and Experiment 
4.1 Experimental environment and data collection 
The experimental environment is in an underground parking lot with a length of about 
102 meters and a width of about 33 meters. The area is nearly 3,400 square meters. We arranged 
106 iBeacons at intervals of 4 to 5 meters , as shown in Figure 4. The left side is the parking lot 
exit, and the right side is the parking lot entrance. A pedestrian held a nexus5 mobile phone 
and went 50m from start point to collect iBeacon Mac address, RSSI, signal data of 
accelerometer and gyroscope during the walking. 
In order to calculate the relationship between the real-time positioning error and the 
number of walking steps N, it is necessary to record the true position of each step of the 
pedestrian during walking. However, since the GPS signal is unreachable in the indoor 
environment, so this experiment uses the devices shown in Figure 5 below to record the real 
position of the pedestrian. Among them, the No. 1 device is a Nexus5 mobile phone held by 
pedestrians during walking, the No. 2 and No. 3 devices are respectively a measuring tape with 

 
8 of 16 
8 
 
a total length of 50 meters and a label attached to the measuring tape for amplifying the meter 
scale value, the No. 4 device is a high-definition Canon camera that records the user's real-time 
position on the tape measure. 
 
                         Figure.4 Experimental environment 
 
Figure.5 Experimental devices 
 
4.2 Comparison of three error models 
In the above environment, we first simulated the three error models of RSS (Equation 11), 
PDR (Equation 14) and the fusion of the two (Equation 27). The parameters used in the 
simulation are listed in Table 1 and the results are shown in Figure 6. It can be seen that the 
error model of the Bluetooth fingerprint is related to the position of the beacon on the walking 
path. Several obvious turning points in the figure are at the time when the pedestrian walks 
directly under the beacon. At these points the accuracy of Bluetooth positioning is higher. The 
error in PDR is accumulating over time, as expected. The error after data fusion is in the 
beginning smaller, close to the error curve of PDR, due to the smaller error of PDR. As the 
number of steps increases, the error of PDR increases, and the fusion result is similar to the 
error curve of Bluetooth fingerprint. As we can see, the fluctuation after fusion is smaller than 
before, and the error after fusion is also smaller than the errors of two separate positioning 
methods, so the fusion of Bluetooth and PDR can effectively reduce the positioning error. 
 

 
9 of 16 
9 
 
 
Figure.6 Simulation results of three error models 
Table 1. Parameters used in the simulation 
RSS error model 
𝛽=3,⁡𝜎=1.732dBm 
PDR error model 
𝑆𝑘=0.625m,⁡𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥=0.0283 rad/sec,⁡𝜎𝑆𝑁=0.0446m 
4.3 Comparison of fusion error model and experimental results 
In this section we compare the experimental results in the real situation with our fusion 
error model to prove the theoretical analysis. In order to ensure the reliability of the experiment, 
a total of five tests were conducted. We used the particle filter to fuse the fingerprint 
information with the PDR data. The experiment results are calculated on the Matlab2016 
platform, and shown in Figure 7, five straight lines are the result of the experiments and blue 
star line is the fusion error model. 
It can be seen from Figure 7 that due to various uncertain factors in the tests, the 
positioning errors fluctuate somewhat, but the trend is similar, the result of test 1 is very close 
to the model, which shows that the proposed fusion error model can reflect the error 
distribution and trend after fingerprint and PDR fusion. Figure 8 shows the 2D simulation 
results of the spatial error distribution, which are consistent with the fluctuation of the curve 
in Figure 7. 

 
10 of 16 
10 
 
 
Figure.7 Experimental results 
 
Figure.8 2D simulation results  
5. Development of Indoor Positioning Simulation System (IPS) 
    In this section, we will apply the fusion error model introduced in this paper to an indoor 
positioning simulation system we develop, it can be used to evaluate the quality of the signal 
source deployment and visualize the error distribution after the PDR method is integrated.  
5.1 System description 
With the wide applications of indoor positioning services, users have higher and higher 
requirements for positioning accuracy. The deployment of base stations in the past was mainly 
based on the experiences, and no guidelines exist. Therefore, we developed a new indoor 
positioning simulation system. It can provide a near-optimal signal source deployment in a 
given indoor environment. The system can visualize signal strength and positioning accuracy. 
It will improve work efficiency and layout quality, and achieve high-precision positioning in 
different indoor environments. The system is developed with C# language in Windows 10, and 
the platform Visual Studio 2015 and the ArcGIS Engine are used. 
5.2 System structure 
Figure 9 shows the flow chart of the developed indoor positioning simulation system. 
First, you need to load the map file, and then set the layout conditions. Here you can select 
different types and quantities of signal sources. You also need to select the automatic layout 

 
11 of 16 
11 
 
algorithm. These are used as inputs, then the system does calculation using the automatic 
layout algorithm under given conditions and provides the optimal layout. After the simulation 
is completed, you can view the simulation results, including the signal strength map, 
positioning error distribution map and other simulation results. If the user is not satisfied with 
the simulation result, the number and location of the signal sources can be adjusted in the user 
interaction interface. 
Figure 10 is a screenshot of the interface. It can be seen that the upper column is the menu 
and toolbox, the left column is the layer management, the right column is the project 
management, and the middle is the indoor map. 
5.3 Simulation results 
We applied the developed positioning simulation system to an office building, which is 
about 94 meters long and 39 meters wide with a corridor in the middle and a hall below. We 
selected 15 iBeacons as the signal source. The propagation model uses a log-distance path-loss 
model, and the layout algorithm uses a simulated annealing algorithm. 
Figure 11 shows the signal strength map after the simulation. The signal strength map 
reflects the distribution of signal strength in the whole space. The user can judge whether the 
signal source is arranged reasonably from the signal strength map, if there are some places 
where the signal strength is weak, the signal sources can be added or moved using the user 
interaction, and the signal strength map can be dynamically changed as the positioning source 
increases or moves. 
Figure 12 shows the positioning error map after the completion of the layout in the case of 
only Bluetooth. The average error of the whole indoor environment is 3.2 meters. However, 
due to the characteristics of Bluetooth, the accuracy is better only in the area close to a signal 
source. As shown in the figure, most of the area is in the colors of light blue and green, which 
means the error is between 2.25m and 4.75m. The area of the error below 2m is within a circle 
around the beacon. 
Figure 13 is the positioning error map after the PDR is included. We apply the fusion error 
model in this paper to the simulation system. It can be seen that after the PDR is fused, the 
average error in the whole indoor environment is reduced to 1.5 meters, which is almost 
covered by the blue area. This is close to the actual positioning effect. Therefore, PDR can 
improve the positioning accuracy in the areas between high-precision positioning sources. 

 
12 of 16 
12 
 
 
Figure.9 Simulation system flow chart 
 
 
Figure.10 Simulation system interface 
 

 
13 of 16 
13 
 
 
Figure.11 Signal strength map 
 
 
Figure.12 Positioning error distribution map 
 
 
Figure.13 Positioning error distribution map with PDR 
 
6. Conclusion 
In this paper, we first analyze and summarize the classical error models of RSS fingerprint 
and PDR. On these basses we proposed a error model of fusing RSS and PDR. This fusion error 
model is compared with the results in the actual situation, to proves that the model is effective. 
We also proposes a method for calculating the error distribution in space. To facilitate practical 
applications we developed an indoor positioning simulation system, which applies our 
fingerprint positioning and PDR fusion error model. The system can not only complete the 
automatic deployment of signal sources, but also visualize the signal strength distribution and 

 
14 of 16 
14 
 
error distribution. 
In the future, we plan 1) consider the map information of the room structure, walls, ceilings, 
etc. into our error model; 2) continue to study the error model under the condition of multi-
source fusion. This paper only studies the error model of fingerprint localization and PDR 
fusion. Later, various signal sources, such as sound, light, magnetic and visual can be fused to 
study their fusion error models, explore factors that affect the accuracy of multi-source fusion 
positioning.
