Multiclass Semantic Segmentation to Identify Anatomical Sub-Regions of
Brain and Measure Neuronal Health in Parkinson’s Disease
Hosein Barzekara,b, Hai Nguc, Han Hui Lina, Mohsen Hejratib, Steven Ray Valdespinoa, Sarah Chua, Baris
Bingola, Somaye Hashemifarb,∗∗, Soumitra Ghosha,∗∗
aDepartment of Neuroscience, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA
bDepartment of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA
cDepartment of Pathology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA
Abstract
Automated segmentation of anatomical sub-regions with high precision has become a necessity to enable
the quantiﬁcation and characterization of cells/ tissues in histology images. Currently, a machine learning
model to analyze sub-anatomical regions of the brain to analyze 2D histological images is not available.
The scientists rely on manually segmenting anatomical sub-regions of the brain which is extremely time-
consuming and prone to labeler-dependent bias. One of the major challenges in accomplishing such a task is
the lack of high-quality annotated images that can be used to train a generic artiﬁcial intelligence model. In
this study, we employed a UNet-based architecture, compared model performance with various combinations
of encoders, image sizes, and sample selection techniques. Additionally, to increase the sample set we resorted
to data augmentation which provided data diversity and robust learning. In this study, we trained our best
ﬁt model on approximately one thousand annotated 2D brain images stained with Nissl/ Haematoxylin and
Tyrosine Hydroxylase enzyme (TH, indicator of dopaminergic neuron viability). The dataset comprises of
diﬀerent animal studies enabling the model to be trained on diﬀerent datasets. The model eﬀectively is able
to detect two sub-regions compacta (SNCD) and reticulata (SNr) in all the images. In spite of limited training
data, our best model achieves a mean intersection over union (IOU) of 79% and a mean dice coeﬃcient of
87%. In conclusion, the UNet-based model with EﬃecientNet as an encoder outperforms all other encoders,
resulting in a ﬁrst of its kind robust model for multiclass segmentation of sub-brain regions in 2D images.
Keywords:
Digital Pathology, Parkinson’s Disease, Machine Learning, Automated Segmentation,
Convolutional Neural Network
1. Introduction
Deep learning-based image segmentation approaches for medical imaging are gaining interest due to
their self-learning and generalization ability Kayalibay et al. (2017). For instance, deep learning semantic
segmentation models can facilitate robust and fast approaches to detect boundaries between diﬀerent Regions
Of Interest (ROI) in histopathology images, enabling more sensitive analysis of biological experiments in
animals and humansMoshkov et al. (2020). Analysis of medical images to interpret the disease-associated
pathology typically requires the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc regions by an expert pathologist, and followed by
segmentation and annotation that is done manually. It is a tedious and time-consuming task which is also
susceptible to inter- and intra-observer variability.
Although image segmentation of natural images has
attained a high level of performance in the ﬁeld of machine learning, the strict segmentation requirements
for histopathology images are yet to be achieved. Penttinen et al. Penttinen et al. (2018) shows the latest
deep learning model to quantify dopaminergic neurons in the entire mouse brain. Although a step forward
towards automated analysis of dopaminergic (DA) neurons health in Parkinson’s Disease (PD), it lacks the
ability to compartmentalize the sub-anatomical regions of the Substantia Nigra (SN). To measure the ability
of a potential drug in abrogating PD progression, it is very essential to assess the dopaminergic neuronal
health in SNr followed by SNCD. The loss of dopaminergic neurons often starts in the SNr region where most
of the axons for DA neurons reside. The degeneration from the axons extend all the way to the neuronal
cell body and nucleus which is mainly located in the SNCD region Ghosh et al. (2021); Fu et al. (2012).
Thorough analysis of DA neuronal health in these two regions is pivotal to assess the potential of new drugs
in mitigating the disease progression. Despite demand, little progress has been made because of the diﬃcult
design requirements and lack of large-scale high quality datasets.
Over the past few decades, numerous semantic segmentation models have emerged in response to ever-
rising technical demands. These algorithms have become essential in many visual-based applications that
enable a granular understanding of the images including remote sensing Hossain and Chen (2019), automated
drivingKaymak and U¸car (2019), and medical image analysisZhuang et al. (2019); Roth et al. (2018). The
well-known algorithms for semantic segmentation include Fully Convolutional Network (FCN), SegNet, PSP-
Net, UNet, and DeepLab Long et al. (2015); Badrinarayanan et al. (2017); Zhao et al. (2017); Ronneberger
et al. (2015); Chen et al. (2017). FCN uses the fully convolutional neural network for the end-to-end training
of segmentation. It modiﬁes the structure of VGG-16 and other networks by replacing every fully connected
layers with convolutional layers Long et al. (2015). The most important characteristics of FCN are up-
sampling and skip connections which enables the model to expand the convolution image to the size of the
∗Corresponding author
∗∗Corresponding author

Preprint submitted to arXiv
February 2, 2023
arXiv:2301.02925v1  [eess.IV]  7 Jan 2023

original image without restoring the original value. Both SegNet and PSPNet are based on FCN. SegNet
for the ﬁrst time utilizes symmetric network structure Badrinarayanan et al. (2017) and PSPNet introduces
the pyramid pooling module to fuse hierarchical scale features Zhao et al. (2017). To improve on previous
results achieved by FCN, a new architecture called UNet based on an encoder-decoder structure was pro-
posed. Ronneberger et al. (2015). Each encoder module includes a sequence of convolutional layers followed
by a pooling layer and each decoder module includes a concatenation of the output feature maps of the
correspondent encoder module, sequence of convolutions and an upsampling layer Ronneberger et al. (2015).
UNet++ is a nested UNet architecture to improve the eﬃcacy for medical image segmentation. UNet++
borrows the dense connection of DenseNet and re-designs the skip connection structure of UNet to reduce
the semantic gap between the feature maps of the encoder and decoder sub-networks Zhou et al. (2018).
The VNet has a similar structure as UNet and is developed for analyzing 3D images in CT and MRI images
Milletari et al. (2016). DeepLabv1 combines atrous convolution with CNN to explicitly control the resolution
at which feature responses are computed within Deep Convolutional Neural Networks Chen et al. (2017). To
optimize performance, DeepLabv2 introduces atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP), which utilized atrous
convolution to get multi-scale information. DeepLabv3 improved the ASPP model with utilizing one 1×1
convolution and three 3×3 convolution Chen et al. (2018).
In this study, we establish a deep learning-based framework for segmentation and quantiﬁcation of two
sub-regions of the SN in mouse brain tissues..
The SN is the most suseptible region to dopmainergic
neuronal loss in PD. PD is the second most common neurodegenerative disease in the world and currently
aﬀects 100 million people in US. The two speciﬁc sub-regions of SN that are highly sensitive to genetic and
sporadic stressors are Substantia Reticular part (SNr) and Substantia Nigra Compacta, dorsal tier (SNCD).
Accurate and precise segmentation of sub-regions of SN is key to understanding the processes underlying
PD progression Menke et al. (2010). The SNr and SNCD is encompassed with dopaminergic (DA) neurons,
a unique type of neurons that expresses an enzyme Tyrosine Hydroxylase (TH). Loss of these neurons as
indicated by reduced TH signal is associated with motor neuron deﬁcits and symptoms associated with PD.
Every pre-clinical study to understand PD pathology or eﬃcacy of a new potential drug requires careful
analysis of TH signal in SNr and SNCD. It is challenging to analyze the TH signal in SNr and SNCD
due to their small size and absence of visual cues to human eyes. It is mainly detected by TH staining or
other staining that detects dopaminergic neurons in the SN region. There are a few studies available for
the automatic segmentation of SN on MRI images of human brains, which are mostly based on brain atlas,
template, and prior shape model. A model of such sort does-not take into account the age and sex of the
animal which can heavily inﬂuence the size of the brain which in turn aﬀects the size and location of these
sub-regions in the brain Haegelen et al. (2013); Visser et al. (2016); Guo et al. (2018); Garz´on et al. (2018);
Basukala et al. (2021). To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study of developing a deep convolution
neural network on 2D pathology images to segment sub-regions of interest for a granular understanding of
the disease progression.
Given the complexity of digital pathology images, our model employs an encoder-decoder paradigm by
applying a transfer learning-based model to serve as a feature extractor in the encoder phase. Furthermore,
a comprehensive analysis of the performance of several models as feature extractors was conducted. Finally,
experimenting with diﬀerent augmentations and image sizes, the output data clearly shows that the model’s
performance is on par with a human expert while being accomplished in a remarkably short amount of time
using a relatively small amount of data in an unbiased manner.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• This approach is the ﬁrst of its kind to automatically segment regions of interest (ROIs) from histopatho-
logical images of PD.
• Training of the model is conducted across a wide range of encoders, augmenting techniques, and image
sizes.
• Extensive experiments showing that the model can detect ROIs using a relatively small amount of
labeled data.
The ﬁnal model is further tested on a blind test dataset (a separate mouse study
that the model has not been trained on and not part of the train/validation/test set used for model
development).
• The post-processing step to measure the TH staining optical density also provides the health of
dopaminergic neurons in the speciﬁc ROIs which is critical to assess the pathology in PD.
2. Methodology
2.1. Dataset
The dataset used in this study was obtained from diﬀerent pathological studies (multiple internal datasets)
where mouse brains were sectioned at 35 micron thickness and stained with TH and either Haematoxylin or
Nissl as a background tissue stain. The sections were then imaged using a whole slide scanner microscope,
Nanozoomer system (Hamamatsu Corp, San Jose, CA) at 20x resolution (0.46 microns/pixel).
Whole
coronal brain section images containing the SN were exported from the digital scans at 5x resolution (1.84
microns/pixels) and were used to train the model. This procedure helped us to obtain approximately one
thousand 2D mouse brain images that have both SNr and SNCD. The ground truth (GT) for this study
was drawn by biologists who specialize in mouse brain anatomy.
Speciﬁcally, for the blind test dataset
(a separate mouse study in which the model has not been directly trained on) as shown in Figure 5, the
animals in (c) and (d) were injected with a virus (viral over-expression of a protein that causes intentional
dopaminergic neuronal loss in one side of the brain under experimental conditions) in the SN to induce loss
of dopaminergic neurons, as indicated by the decrease in TH signal in SNr and SNCD.
2

Figure 1: Various image augmentation techniques used in by our model
2.2. Preprocessing
Original images come in diﬀerent sizes. First, each image is downsized to 1024 by 1024 pixels. Deep
learning models are notoriously susceptible to overﬁtting; hence, augmentation techniques are applied to the
images to prevent or mitigate this occurrence as shown in Figure 1. The albumentation Buslaev et al. (2020)
library is utilized to reach our objective. The input images have undergone rotation, vertical ﬂip, horizontal
ﬂip, random 90-degree rotation, transposition, elastic transformation, and the addition of gaussian noise.
2.3. Methods
Encoder-decoder architecture is used to deploy the model. This structure has been the source of many
well-known model including the UNet Ronneberger et al. (2015). The encoder is the feature extractor of the
model and generates feature maps from the input images. For deep learning algorithms to work properly,
training and future data should indeed coexist in the same space, and the more data it has access to, the
better it performs. Because of the scarcity of data in many ﬁelds, including medicine, transfer learning is a
useful tool for ﬁlling in the gaps. As a result, pre-trained networks can be used to acquire some of the fun-
damental parameters Pan and Yang (2009). Hence, EﬃcientNet Tan and Le (2019) is used as to serve as the
encoder for feature extraction. A new approach to scaling was introduced by EﬃcientNet, which leveraged a
straightforward but exceedingly practical compound coeﬃcient to equally scale depth, width, and resolution.
EﬃcientNet has diﬀerent models available which also considers multiple parameters into account for each
input. After experimenting with multiple architectures and their performance, EﬃcientNet-B5 is used as
the encoder. Number of parameter and FLOPs for this model are 30M and 9.9B, respectively. UNet is used
as the decoder where feature maps generated by the encoder served as the input to go through upsampling
layers. Since the dataset involves multiclass segmentation, softmax Equation 1 activation function is used
in the ﬁnal layer.
σ(⃗x)i =
exi
PC
j=1 exj
(1)
where ⃗x is the input vector and C is the number of classes.
The loss function for employing the architecture is a Dice Equation 2 function represented as follow:
Dice =
2 ∗PN
i=1 yi ˆyi
PN
i=1 yi + PN
i=1 ˆyi
(2)
where yi is the actual label on ˆyi is the predicted label and N is the number of classes, which in our case
is two, including SNr and SNCD.
2.4. TH Intensity
The TH signal was analyzed using MATLAB v9.12 (MathWorks, Natick, MA). TH positive stain pixel
area was determined using color thresholds and a blue normalization algorithm Brey et al. (2003) at 20x
resolution. The optical density Equation 3 was calculated for the positive pixels according to Beer-Lambert
law:
OD = −log( I
255)
(3)
where I is the pixel 8-bit grayscale intensity (in the range of 1 to 255; in the case of 0, I is estimated to
be 1). The OD of the positive pixels within the region of interest (manual ground truth region or prediction
region generated by the model) was summed and normalized to the region area.
3

Figure 2: Model selection including six diﬀerent networks as backbone
3. Results
3.1. Setup
Here we show the outcomes of the entire study in which approximately a thousand histopathological
images encompassing SNr SNCD stained with TH has been split into training, validation, and a test set at
percentages of 80%, 10%, and 10%, respectively.
3.2. Hyperparameter Tuning
Model parameters are ﬁne-tuned when the encoder is initialized using the pre-trained models. Speciﬁcally,
Adam is used as the optimizer with the learning rate set to 1e−3 and β1, β2 to 0.9 and 0.999, respectively.
As a learning rate decay scheduler, ReduceLROnPlateau is employed. The model is trained for 50 epochs
using a mini-batch gradient descent with diﬀerent batch sizes including 2, 4, and 8. To avoid overﬁtting, an
early stopping mechanism is utilized on the validation set.
Summary of all the parameters and hyperparameters used for the model is shown in Table 1.
Table 1: summary of all the parameters and hyperparameters used in the model
Loss
Optimizers
Learning Rate
Image Sizes
Dice
Adam, SGD
10−3 - 10−6
512, 768, 1024
Jaccard
Adam, SGD
10−3 - 10−6
512, 768, 1024
Categorical cross-entropy
Adam, SGD
10−3 - 10−6
512, 768, 1024
3.3. Model Selection
Initially, we evaluate the performance of two popular architectures UNet and DeepLabv3+ with both
ResNet-50 model as its backbone. Furthur investigation on DeepLabv3+ was stopped due to lower perfor-
mance compare to UNet (10% lower than UNet model using validation set, data not shown). The UNet style
model was selected for our experiments. Six diﬀerent backbones including VGG-19, ResNet-50, ResNet-34,
DenseNet-121, EﬃcientNet, and MobileNet are then employed Iakubovskii (2019). IOU score is the metric
in which the model’s performance is measured. In addition, all the models utilize Dice loss as the loss func-
tion. We consider training the target model using a transfer learning approach from the standard supervised
pre-trained model on ImageNet, which is the de facto transfer learning pipeline in medical imaging.
Figure 2 shows the result of diﬀerent backbones used as the encoder of the UNet model from which we
draw the following conclusion: UNet with EﬃcientNet backbone and transfer learning from the ImageNet
database provides better performance (0.73 IOU) compared with other network backbones. Furthermore,
we investigate image size to choose the proper size for our experiments. Figure 3 shows the result of the
diﬀerent image sizes having Eﬃcientb5 as the encoder and UNet as decoder. An image size of 1024×1024
resulted in better performance.
3.4. Evaluation Metrics
To further evaluate the performance of the model, the following metrics are also employed.
TP, FP, and FN in below equations, are true positive, false positive, and false negative, respectively.
Precision: Precision, Equation 4, indicates of all the pixels inside the predicted segmentation area what
fraction of them are accurately segmented.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(4)
4

Figure 3: Investigating Image size on the model
Recall: Recall, Equation 5, measures the proportion of successfully separated pixels inside the ground truth
area.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(5)
Dice coeﬃcient: The Dice or F1 score, Equation 6, is frequently used to evaluate the performance of
image segmentation models that measure the degree to which two semantic masks are identical. Therefore,
it is the size of the overlap between the two segmentations divided by the combined size of the two segmen-
tations.
Dice coeﬃcient =
2 × TP
2 × TP + FP + FN
(6)
3.5. Quantitative and Qualitative results
Based on our results, the UNet-EﬃcientNet combination was used as the model with an image input size
of 1024×1024.
Table 2: Performance of the model on the test set with & without elastic transformation(ET)
Evaluation Metric
Mean value w/ ET
Mean value w/o ET
IOU Score
79%
78%
Dice Coeﬃcient
87%
86%
Recall
88%
87%
Precision
86%
85%
Table 2 shows the result of the model on the test set. The model achieves a Dice coeﬃcient of 0.87 on
the multiclass segmentation task. Considering the complexity and variability of the staining and diﬀerent
morphologies in diﬀerent mice, the model is considered to be performing well after qualitative review by
expert biologists. Results in Table 2 indicate that including elastic transformation boosted the performance
by 1% on the metrics.
As shown in Figure 4, SN regions with diﬀerent background containing nuclear staining (light blue- Nissl,
Violet- Thionine) was eﬀectively segmented to depict the SNr and SNCD region. In the magniﬁed image
Figure 5, the model was able to detect SNr and SNCD in the right brain hemisphere where TH signal was
decreased (pathological trigger by stereotactic injection into the SN) further proving it’s ability to segment
SNr and SNCD without relying on TH signal. The model segmented both the SNr and SNCD in both brain
hemispheres. A neuropathology expert manually annotated the sections for SNr and SNCD in parallel to
compare with the model segmentation. Figure 6 shows the TH optical density depicting DA neuronal health
measured in both manually annotated and AI model segmented samples in the SNr and SNCD sub-regions.
The R2 for TH intensity between the manual segmentation and model generated segmentation for SNR
is 0.8678 and SNCD is 0.7928 respectively. Considering the diversity and complexity of biological data, a
positive correlation of ≈0.85 holds very high signiﬁcance and conﬁdence on the model. This data clearly
5

(a) Image 1
(b) GT SNr
(c) pred SNr
(d) GT SNCD
(e) pred SNCD
(f) Image 2
(g) GT SNr
(h) pred SNr
(i) GT SNCD
(j) pred SNCD
Figure 4: Two image example from the test set: Including ground truth(GT) SNr & SNCD with their corresponding predic-
tions(pred).
Figure 5: TH optical density measurement examples (b,d-purple color) in SNr and SNCD regions in left (a,b) and right (c,d)
side of the mouse brain. The sections are representative images from blind-test dataset. The red annotation line depicts SNr
and the green annotation line depicts the SNCD region of the SN segmented. The purple color indicates the detection of TH
staining (brown color). Nissl staining in blue indicates tissue area. Scale bar, 100 micron.
Figure 6: Correlation between TH intensity (normalized optical density) from manual segmentation and segmented area by the
model. The data was calculated from random 20 mice hemi-brains stained with TH and segmented by neuroscientist (ground
truth) and model (blind-test dataset).
6

shows a strong correlation between the manual segmentation and model generated segmentation. The p-
value of < 0.0001 also shows how eﬃciently and precisely the model can be used to analyze the DA neuronal
health in animal studies.
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we were able to deploy a convolutional neural network to segment anatomical sub-region
of the brain with a Dice coeﬃcient of 87%. The model is able to detect health status of dopamenergic
neurons in SNr and SNCD which is associated with PD pathology. The model is robust enough to detect
SNr and SNCD in brain sections with various background nuclear staining where the TH signal is lost.
The quantitative and qualitative results together show the potential of the model and how this approach
can be applied to segment other anatomical regions. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the ﬁrst
machine learning based segmentation of deﬁned anatomical sub-regions of the brain in 2D pathological
sections. The fast turnover of the model also would save enormous amount of time for the biologist to make
quicker decisions on drug eﬃcacy. It also solves one of the major problem in medical imaging that arises
from user (neurology expert) based associated bias. Applying this straightforward yet scalable method to
additional anatomical regions or diseases yields remarkably promising results. Overall, this AI model shows
that machine learning-aided read out for measuring the health of dopaminergic neurons in sub anatomical
regions is faster, unbiased and precise compared to manual analysis of 2D histological sections in brain.
