arXiv:1503.01051v1  [cs.AI]  3 Mar 2015
Combining Probabilistic, Causal, and Normative Reasoning in CP-logic
Sander Beckers and Joost Vennekens
KU Leuven – University of Leuven

Abstract
In recent years the search for a proper formal deﬁni-
tion of actual causation – i.e., the relation of cause-
effect as it is instantiated in speciﬁc observations, rather
than general causal relations – has taken on impres-
sive proportions. In part this is due to the insight that
this concept plays a fundamental role in many differ-
ent ﬁelds, such as legal theory, engineering, medicine,
ethics, etc. Because of this diversity in applications,
some researchers have shifted focus from a single ideal-
ized deﬁnition towards a more pragmatic, context-based
account. For instance, recent work by Halpern and
Hitchcock draws on empirical research regarding peo-
ple’s causal judgments, to suggest a graded and context-
sensitive notion of causation. Although we sympathize
with many of their observations, their restriction to a
merely qualitative ordering runs into trouble for more
complex examples. Therefore we aim to improve on
their approach, by using the formal language of CP-
logic (Causal Probabilistic logic), and the framework
for deﬁning actual causation that was developed by the
current authors using it. First we rephrase their ideas
into our quantitative, probabilistic setting, after which
we modify it to accommodate a greater class of exam-
ples. Further, we introduce a formal distinction between
statistical and normative considerations.
1
Introduction
In their forthcoming article Graded Causation and Defaults
Halpern and Hitchcock – HH – quite rightly observe that
not only is there a vast amount of disagreement regarding
actual causation in the literature, but there is also a growing
number of empirical studies which show that people’s intu-
itions are inﬂuenced to a large degree by factors which up to
now have been ignored when dealing with causation. For ex-
ample, our judgments on two similarly modelled cases may
differ depending on whether it takes place in a moral context
or a purely mechanical one, or on whether what we take to
be the default setting, or on whether we take something to be
a background condition or not, etc. (Knobe and Fraser 2008;
Moore 2009; Hitchcock and Knobe 2009). This has led HH
to develop a ﬂexible framework that allows room for in-
corporating different judgments on actual causation. More
speciﬁcally, in their view the difference between cases that
are modelled using similar structural models depends on
which worlds we take to be more normal than others in the
different contexts. Therefore their solution is to extend struc-
tural models with a normality ranking on worlds, and use it
to adapt and order our judgments of actual causation in a
manner suited for the particular context.
We sympathize with many of their observations, and we
agree that normality considerations do inﬂuence our causal
judgments. However, we ﬁnd their representation of normal-
ity lacking for two reasons. First, although they emphasize
the importance of distinguishing between statistical and nor-
mative normality, they use a single ranking for both. Sec-
ond, they refrain from using probabilities to represent sta-
tistical normality, and instead work with a partial preorder
over worlds. In this paper we offer an alternative, in which
statistical normality is represented in the usual way, i.e., by
means of probabilities. As we will show, such a quantita-
tive representation of statistical normality avoids a number
of problems that HH’s ordinal representation runs into. To
cope with normative normality, we introduce a separate no-
tion of norms. As a technical tool for our analysis, we will
use a normative extension of a general framework for the
study of actual causation (Beckers and Vennekens ) that was
deﬁned in the language of CP-logic (Causal Probabilistic
logic) (Vennekens, Denecker, and Bruynooghe 2009). An
important property of our technical approach is that we im-
plement the concept of normality by means of a syntactic
transformation, similar to how previous work has deﬁned the
concept of interventions in CP-logic (Vennekens, Denecker,
and Bruynooghe 2010). This allows us to improve on the
HH approach, by properly accommodating the counterfac-
tual nature of causation. The result will be a more generally
applicable and yet simpler approach.
In Section 2 we shortly present the formal language of
CP-logic and use it to formulate a deﬁnition of actual causa-
tion. The following section presents the extension to actual
causation by HH. We translate their work into the CP-logic
framework in Section 4. Section 5 contains a ﬁrst improve-
ment to this translation, followed by some examples and our
ﬁnal extension to actual causation in Section 6.
We will use the following story from (Knobe and Fraser
2008) as our running example, as it illustrates the inﬂuence
normative considerations can have on our causal attribu-
tions:
The receptionist in the philosophy department keeps

her desk stocked with pens. The administrative assis-
tants are allowed to take pens, but faculty members
are supposed to buy their own. The administrative as-
sistants typically do take the pens. Unfortunately, so
do the faculty members. The receptionist repeatedly

allowed to take the pens. On Monday morning, one
of the administrative assistants encounters professor
Smith walking past the receptionists desk. Both take
pens. Later, that day, the receptionist needs to take an
important message...but she has a problem. There are
no pens left on her desk.
2
Preliminaries: CP-logic
We give a short, informal introduction to CP-logic. A de-
tailed description can be found in (Vennekens, Denecker,
and Bruynooghe 2009; 2010). The basic syntactical unit
of CP-logic is a CP-law, which takes the general form of
Head ←Body. The body can in general consist of any ﬁrst-
order logic formula. However, in this paper, we restrict our
attention to grounded formulas in CNF. The head contains a
disjunction of atoms annotated with probabilities, represent-
ing the possible effects of this law. When the probabilities in
a head do not add up to one, we implicitly assume an empty
disjunct, annotated with the remaining probability.
Each CP-law models a speciﬁc causal mechanism. Infor-
mally, we take this to mean that, if the Body of the law is sat-
isﬁed, then at some point it will be applied, meaning one of
the disjuncts in the Head is chosen, each with their respec-
tive probabilities. If a disjunct is chosen containing an atom
that is not yet true, then this law causes it to become true;
otherwise, the law has no effect. A ﬁnite set of such CP-laws
forms a CP-theory, and represents the causal structure of the
domain at hand. The domain unfolds by laws being applied
one after another, where multiple orders are often possible,
and each law is applied at most once. To illustrate this, we
describe the relevant events on the Monday morning from
our running example. The domain consists of the variables
Pro f and Assistant, which stand for the professor respec-
tively the assistant taking a pen, and NoPens, which is true
when there are no pens left. The causal structure can be rep-
resented by the following CP-theory T:
(Pro f : 0.7) ←.
(1)
(Assistant : 0.8) ←.
(2)
NoPens ←Pro f ∧Assistant.
(3)
The ﬁrst two of these causal laws are vacuous (i.e, they will
be applied in every story) and non-deterministic. The ﬁrst
one results in either the professor taking the pen, or nothing
at all. Since it is stated that professors typically do take pens,
we simply chose some probability above 0.5. Similarly, the
second law describes the possible behaviour of the assistant.
The last law is deterministic, i.e., it only has one possible
outcome (where we leave implicit the probability 1).
The given theory summarizes all possible stories that can
take place in this model. One of those is what in fact did
happen that Monday morning: both the professor and the
assistant take a pen, leaving the receptionist faced with no
•
0.7
Prof takes⑤
}⑤⑤⑤⑤⑤⑤
0.3
does not
❇
!❇
❇
❇
❇
❇
❇
•
0.8
Assistant takes
}⑤⑤⑤⑤⑤⑤⑤
0.2
does not

•
0.8
Assistant takes

0.2
does not
!❇
❇
❇
❇
❇
❇
❇
•
NoPens

•
•
•
◦
Figure 1: Probability tree for the Pen-vignette.
pens. The other stories consist in only the professor taking a
pen, only the assistant doing so, or neither.
To formalize this idea, the semantics of CP-logic uses
probability trees (Shafer 1996). For this example, one such
tree is shown in Figure 1. Here, each node represents a
state of the domain, which is characterized by an assignment
of truth values to the atomic formulas, in this case Pro f,
Assistant and NoPens. In the initial state of the domain (the
root node), all atoms are assigned their default value false.
In this example, initially there are still pens left, and neither
the professor nor the assistant have taken one. The children
of a node x are the result of the application of a law: each
edge (x,y) corresponds to a speciﬁc disjunct that was cho-
sen from the head of the law that was applied in node x. Be-
cause in this particular tree the professor arrives ﬁrst, there
are two child-nodes, corresponding to the law (1) being ap-
plied and resulting in a pen being taken (left child) or not
(right child). In the former case, the assignment is updated
by setting Pro f to true, its deviant value. Similarly, the sub-
sequent nodes represent the possible outcomes of the appli-
cation of law (2), and whether or not this results in the lack
of pens. The leftmost branch is thus the formal counterpart
of the above story. A probability tree of a theory T deﬁnes
an a priori probability distribution PT over all stories that
might happen in this domain, which can be read off the leaf
nodes of the branches by multiplying the probabilities on the
edges. For instance, the probability of our example story is
0.56. We have shown here only one such probability tree, but
we can construct another one as well by applying the laws
in different orders.
An important property however is that all trees deﬁned
by the same theory result in the same probability distribu-
tion. To ensure that this property holds even when there are
bodies containing negative literals, CP-logic makes use of
the well-founded semantics. Simply put, this means the con-
dition for a law to be applied in a node is not merely that
its body is currently satisﬁed, but that this will remain so.
This implies that a negated atom in a body should not only
be currently assigned false, but actually has to have become
impossible, so that it will remain false through to the end-
state. For atoms currently assigned true, it always holds that
they remain true, hence here there is no problem.

2.1
Operations on CP-theories
We specify some operations on CP-logic theories that will
be used throughout this paper. Assume we have a theory T
and a branch b of one of T’s probability trees, such that both
C and E hold in its leaf. To make T deterministic in accor-
dance with the choices made in b, means to transform T into
T b by replacing the heads of the laws that were applied in b
with the disjuncts which were chosen from those heads in b.
For our example story b, T b is:
Pro f ←.
(4)
Assistant ←.
(5)
NoPens ←Pro f ∧Assistant.
(6)
We will use Pearl’s do()-operator to indicate an intervention
(Pearl 2000). The intervention on a theory T that makes vari-
able C false, denoted by do(¬C), removes C from the head
of any law in which it occurs, yielding T|do(¬C). For exam-
ple, to prevent the professor from taking a pen, the resulting
theory T|do(¬Pro f) is given by:
←.
(7)
(Assistant : 0.8) ←.
(8)
NoPens ←Pro f ∧Assistant.
(9)
Laws with an empty head, such as (7), can also simply be
omitted. The analogous operation do(C) on a theory T cor-
responds to adding the deterministic law C ←.
2.2
Actual Causation in CP-logic
In recent years many proposals for deﬁning actual causa-
tion have entered the scene, such as (Hall and Paul 2003;
Hall 2004; 2007; Halpern and Pearl 2005; Vennekens 2011;
Beckers and Vennekens 2012). In (Beckers and Vennekens )
we developed a general deﬁnition, which encompasses sev-
eral of these. The idea behind our general deﬁnition is that
one should ﬁrst modify the theory T into a theory T ∗that
takes into account the inﬂuence of the actual story b, and
then judge causation by using the probabilistic extension of
counterfactual dependence. The available operations to con-
struct T ∗are to make laws deterministic in accordance with
the choices made in b, and to remove laws. A speciﬁc def-
inition is obtained by specifying which laws fall under the
ﬁrst category – called the intrinsic laws and noted as Int
– and those which fall under the second – called the ir-
relevant laws and noted as Irr.1 We then construct T ∗as
T \ (Irr ∪Int)∪Intb.
Deﬁnition 1. [Actual causation] Given a theory T and a
branch b such that both C and E hold in its leaf. We de-
ﬁne that C is an actual cause of E in (T,b) if and only if
PT∗(¬E|do(¬C)) > 0.
If desired, the degree to which different events actually
caused some effect can then be further compared by com-
paring their associated probabilities.
HH use the HP-deﬁnition (Halpern and Pearl 2005) as
their working deﬁnition to illustrate their extension to ac-
tual causation. However, they stress the generality of their
1These speciﬁcations are implicitly parametrized with regard to
a theory, a story, and events C and E.
approach, and mention that one could for example apply it
to Hall’s deﬁnition from (Hall 2007). In (Beckers and Ven-
nekens ), we reformulated Hall’s deﬁnition as an instantation
of the general deﬁnition here presented. We will choose this
reformulation to work with in this paper, because this makes
it easier to apply the current discussion to other instantia-
tions.
By Lea fb we denote the set of true variables in the leaf of a
branch b. For a law r that was applied in b, we call the node
in b that results from its application Nodeb
r. Our working
deﬁnition states that no laws are irrelevant, and determines
the intrinsic laws as follows:
Intrinsic. A non-deterministic law r of T that was applied
in b is intrinsic iff there is no branch d passing through a
sibling of Nodeb
r such that {C,E} ⊆Lea fd ⊆Lea fb.
If we look at the probability tree in Figure 1, we see that
E = NoPens only occurs in Lea fb, and hence both the laws
(1) and (2) are intrinsic. This gives T ∗= T b. As there is
counterfactual dependency of NoPens on both Assistant and
Pro f, they are full causes. However it was shown in (Knobe
and Fraser 2008) that most people do not judge the assistant
to be a cause, or at least far less so than the professor is.
This illustrates how our causal judgment can be inﬂuenced
by normative considerations.
3
The HH Extension to Actual Causation
In this section we succinctly present the graded, context-
dependent approach to actual causation from (Halpern and
Hitchcock ). As with much work on actual causation, HH
frame their ideas using structural models. Such a model con-
sists of a set of equations, one for each endogenous vari-
able, that express the functional dependencies of the endoge-
nous variables on others. These dependencies are acyclic,
and have their roots in the exogenous variables. HH only
consider structural models with two types of (Boolean) en-
dogenous variables: the ones that deterministically depend
on other endogenous variables, and those that depend di-
rectly on exogenous variables.
HH take a world to be an assignment to all endogenous
variables. Given a structural model, each assignment u of
the exogenous variables – a so-called context – determines a
unique world, denoted by su.
An extended structural model (M,⪰) consists of a struc-
tural model M together with a normality ranking ⪰over
worlds. This ranking is a partial pre-order informed by our
– possibly subjective – judgments about what we take to be
normal in this context. It is derived by considering the typ-
icality of the values the variables in a world take. For the
variables that depend only on other endogenous variables,
things are straightforward: it is typical that these variables
take the value dictated by their deterministic equation. For
the other variables, i.e., those that depend only on the ex-
ogenous variables, their possible values are ranked accord-
ing to typicality. A world s is more normal than s′ if there is
at least one variable that takes a more typical value in s than
it does in s′, and no variable takes a less typical value. Typi-
cality and normality are meant to encompass both statistical
and normative judgments. Although HH make no syntactic

distinction between the two kinds of normality, in the ex-
amples discussed they do differentiate between them infor-
mally. We will also make a formal distinction between the
two, because in this manner we can incorporate information
regarding both.
Say we have a story, i.e., an assignment to all variables,
such that C and E happen in it. In order to establish whether
C is a cause of E, any deﬁnition in the counterfactual tra-
dition restricts itself to some particular set of counterfactual
worlds in which ¬C holds and checks whether also ¬E holds
in these worlds. If this set contains a world which serves to
justify that C is indeed a cause of E, then HH call such a
world a witness of this. HH adapt a given deﬁnition of actual
causation using the normality ranking to disallow worlds
that are less normal than the actual world, in order to reﬂect
the inﬂuence of normality on possible causes.
Deﬁnition 2. [HH-extension of actual causation.] Given are
an extended structural model (M,⪰) and context u, such that
both C and E hold in su. C is an HH-actual cause of E in
(M,⪰,u) iff C is an actual cause of E in (M,u) when we
consider only witnesses w such that w ⪰su.
Since we have a ranking on the normality of worlds, this
deﬁnition straightforwardly leads to an ordering between
different causes indicating the strength of the causal rela-
tionship by looking at the highest ranked witness for a cause,
which is called its best witness.
In
case
of
our
example,
we
get
that
{¬Pro f,Assistant,¬NoPens} ≻{Pro f,Assistant,NoPens}
≻{Pro f,¬Assistant,¬NoPens}. Since the actual world is
in the middle, the ﬁrst of these can serve as a witness for
Pro f being a cause, but the last may not be used to judge
Assistant to be a cause.
4
The HH Extension in CP-logic
We proceed with translating the HH-extension of actual cau-
sation into CP-logic. To get there, we will translate one by
one all of the required concepts.
A structural model M in the HH-setting corresponds to
a CP-theory T: a direct dependency on the exogenous vari-
ables results in a non-deterministic, vacuous law (such as (1)
and (2)), while a dependency on only endogenous variables
results in a deterministic law (such as (3)).
A world s described by M then corresponds to a branch
b – or to be more precise, the leaf of a branch – of a proba-
bility tree of T. In Def. 2 we restrict an extended structural
model to those worlds that are at least as normal as the actual
world. The CP-logic-equivalent of this will be the normal re-
ﬁnement of T according to b, which is a theory that describes
those stories which are at least as normal as b.
First we introduce two operations on CP-laws, corre-
sponding to the two different interpretations of normality.
Assume at some point a CP-law r was applied in b, choos-
ing the disjunct rb that occurs in its head.
On a probabilistic reading, an alternative application of r
is at least as normal as the actual one if a disjunct is chosen
which is at least as likely as rb. Therefore the probabilisti-
cally normalized reﬁnement of r according to b – denoted by
rPN(b) – consists in r without all disjuncts that have a strictly
smaller probability than rb. Remain the laws that were not
applied in b. In line with the understanding of normality
from HH, we choose to handle these such that they cannot
have effects which result in a world less normal than the ac-
tual world. Thus we remove those disjuncts which have a
probability lower than 0.5, and are inconsistent with the as-
signment in the leaf of b. Further, say the total probability of
the removed disjuncts in some law is p, then we renormal-
ize the remaining probabilities by dividing by 1 −p (Unless
p = 1, then we simply remove the law.)
Deﬁnition 3. Given a theory T, and a story b, we deﬁne the
probabilistically normalized reﬁnement of T according to b
as T PN(b) := {rPN(b)|r ∈T}.
In case of our example, T PN(b) = T b, shown earlier.
A second reading of normality considers not what did or
could happen, but what ought to happen. To allow such con-
siderations, we extend CP-logic theories with norms. Every-
thing that can possibly happen is described by the CP-laws
of a theory, hence we choose to introduce prescriptive norms
as corrections to descriptive CP-laws. These corrections take
the form of alternative probabilities for the disjuncts in the
head of a law, which represent how the law should behave.
(A more general approach could be imagined, but for the
present purpose this extension will sufﬁce.) These proba-
bilities will be enclosed in curly braces, and have no inﬂu-
ence on the actual behaviour of a theory. However, if we
wish to look at how the world should behave, we can en-
force the norms by replacing the original probabilities of a
theory T with the normative ones. For example, extending
law (1) with the norm that the professor shouldn’t take pens,
even though he often does, gives (Pro f : 0.7{p}) ←, where
1 ≫p. The normatively normalized reﬁnement is then given
by the CP-law (Pro f : p) ←. To properly capture the HH
deﬁnition, our normalized theory should allow all worlds
that are at least as normal as b, including of course b it-
self. For this reason, we here restrict attention to norms with
0 < p < 1, because a norm p = 0 or p = 1 could make the
actual world b impossible. (This restriction is lifted in our
own proposal in Section 6.4).
Deﬁnition 4. Given an extended theory T, i.e., a theory also
containing norms, we deﬁne the normatively normalized re-
ﬁnement of T as T NN := {rNN|r ∈T}, where rNN is the nor-
matively normalized reﬁnement of r.
We can combine both senses of normality, as follows:
Deﬁnition 5. Given an extended theory T, and a story b,
we deﬁne the normal reﬁnement of T according to b as
T Normal(b) := (T NN)PN(b).
The normal reﬁnement according to b is constructed out
of T by eliminating all the disjuncts with values of variables
that are less normal (either probabilistically or normatively)
than the values from b, and thus it allows precisely those
stories which are at least as normal as b.2 In case of our
example, T Normal(b) is given by (Pro f : p) ←and laws (5)
and (6).
2A formal proof of this can be found in the Appendices, as
Lemma 1.

Remains to be explained how we get from a given ex-
tended structural model to an extended CP-theory. The nor-
mality ranking is derived by considering what is typical for
those variables depending directly on the exogenous vari-
ables, i.e., those that we represent by X : p ←. HH use state-
ments that take the form: “it is typical for the variable X to
be true”, or “it is typical for it to be false”. In CP-logic this
becomes: p > 0.5, and p < 0.5 respectively. A statement of
the form: “it is more typical for X to be true than for Y to be
true” translates in an ordering on the respective probabili-
ties. If the typicality statement is of the normative kind, then
it is best represented by norms in CP-logic. Thus if there is
a norm regarding X then the law will take the extended form
X : p{q} ←.
In Def. 2, we have that a world is an acceptable witness
only if it belongs to the set of worlds allowed by the def-
inition of actual causation, and it is at least as normal as
the actual world. Similarly, we need to limit the stories al-
lowed by Def. 1 – which are described by T ∗– to those
stories which are at least as normal as b. We would like to
do this in exactly the same manner as we did for T, i.e., by
looking at (T ∗)Normal(b). Unfortunately we need to treat the
unique law that contains C in its head – denoted by r(C) –
somewhat special. That’s because in Def. 1 the intervention
do(¬C) makes this law deterministic with an empty head.
As we want to take into account the (ab)normality of ¬C,
we work with the normal reﬁnement instead. Hence we de-
note by T ∗∗the theory identical to T ∗except that it contains
the normal reﬁnement of r(C).
Deﬁnition 6. Given an extended theory T, a story b such
that C and E hold in its leaf, and the theory T ∗as described
in Section 2.2. We deﬁne the normal reﬁnement of T ∗ac-
cording to b and C as T Normal(b)∗:= (T ∗∗)Normal(b).
Besides the normality and belonging to T ∗, recall that the
remaining requirement for a story to be a witness, is that ¬C
and ¬E hold in it. This leads us to the following formulation
of the HH-approach in CP-logic.
Deﬁnition 7. [HH-CP-logic-extension of actual causation]
Given an extended theory T, and a branch b such that both
C and E hold in its leaf. We deﬁne that C is an HH-CP-logic-
actual cause of E in (T,b) iff PT Normal(b)∗(¬E ∧¬C) > 0.
For C = Assistant, the probabilistic normalisation of T ∗∗
replaces rC with the deterministic law Assistant ←, lead-
ing to P(¬NoPens ∧¬Assistant) = 0. On the other hand,
for C = Pro fessor, the normative normalisation replaces rC
with (Pro f : p) ←, leading to P(¬NoPens ∧¬Pro f) = q.
Thus Pro f is judged to be a strong cause of NoPens, whereas
Assistant isn’t a cause at all, in line with the empirical re-
sults from (Knobe and Fraser 2008). Note that it is only by
using the normative probabilities rather than the statistical
ones that we get the correct response for Pro f.
We now show that Def. 7 is indeed the correct translation
of the HH approach from structural models to CP-logic.
Theorem 1. C is an HH-actual cause of E in an extended
model and context (M,⪰,u) iff C is an HH-CP-logic-actual
cause of E in (T,b), where (T,b) is derived from (M,⪰,u)
in the sense described above.
Proof. See Appendix.
5
The Importance of Counterfactuals
We mentioned earlier that one criterion for a story to be nor-
mal was that it respects the laws/equations. On the other
hand deﬁnitions of actual causation look at counterfac-
tual stories resulting from an intervention, namely do(¬C),
which violates the laws. Following HH, Def. 7 tries to cir-
cumvent the use of this intervention by simply demanding
that ¬C holds. However this solution is not always avail-
able, and when it isn’t this provides counterintuitive results.
We illustrate what goes wrong by using the following the-
ory:
(A : 0.1) ←.
C ←A.
E ←C.
E ←¬A.
Consider the story where ﬁrst A occurs, followed by C
and E. Intuitively,C is a strong cause of E, also when taking
into account the typicality of C. The law with A in its head
is intrinsic, and thus T Normal(b)∗is:
A ←.
C ←A.
E ←C.
E ←¬A.
Applying the deﬁnition, we get that PTNormal(b)∗(¬E ∧¬C) =
0, giving the absurd result that C is not a cause of E at all.
The problem lies in the fact that in its current form we only
allow stories containing ¬C in the usual, lawful way, rather
than stories which contain ¬C as a result of the intervention
do(¬C). The problem remains if we use the HP-deﬁnition –
as HH does – instead of our working deﬁnition.
We
can
set
this
straight
by
looking
instead
at
PTNormal(b)∗(¬E|do(¬C)), so that we re-establish the coun-
terfactual nature of our deﬁnition. (As T ∗∗|do(¬C) =
T ∗|do(¬C), this is equivalent to P(T∗)Normal(b)(¬E|do(¬C)),
which no longer mentions the artiﬁcial theory T ∗∗.) How-
ever, by making this move we no longer take into account
the (ab)normality of C itself, whereas research shows ex-
tensively that causal judgments regarding an event are of-
ten inﬂuenced by how normal it was (Kahneman 1986;
Knobe and Fraser 2008; Hitchcock and Knobe 2009). (This
effect is not limited to normative contexts. For example,
the lighting of a match is usually judged a cause of a ﬁre,
whereas the presence of oxygen is considered so normal that
it isn’t.) Hence we should factor in this normality, which
is expressed by PTNormal(b)(¬C)). As the following theorem
shows, our new choice only makes a difference in a limited
set of cases.
Theorem
2.
If
r(C)
is
non-deterministic
or
PTNormal(b)(¬C) = 0,
then
PT Normal(b)∗(¬E ∧¬C) =
P(T∗)Normal(b)(¬E|do(¬C))∗PTNormal(b)(¬C).
Proof. See Appendix.
If r(C) is deterministic and PTNormal(b)(¬C) > 0, as in the
example shown, then contrary to the left-hand side of the
equation, the proposed adjustment on the right-hand side of
the equation gives the desired result 1 ∗0.9 = 0.9.

6
The Importance of Probabilities
Because the HH-approach lacks the quantiﬁcation of nor-
mality offered by probabilities, they dismiss entirely all wit-
nesses that are less normal than the actual world. A direct
consequence is that any typical event – i.e., P > 0.5 – is
never a cause, which is quite radical. By using probabilities,
this qualitative criterion is no longer necessary: less normal
witnesses simply inﬂuence our causal judgment less. Fur-
ther, HH order causes solely by looking at the best witnesses.
We now present an example which illustrates the beneﬁt of
both abandoning their criterion, and aggregating the normal-
ity of witnesses to order causes, without sacriﬁcing the in-
ﬂuence of normality.
6.1
Why it is better to use (T ∗)NN in the ﬁrst
factor
Imagine you enter a contest. If a 10-sided die lands 1,
you win a car. If not, you get a 100 more throws. If all
of them land higher than 1, then you also win the car.
The ﬁrst throw lands 1, and you win the car.
It’s hard to imagine anyone objecting to the judgment that
the ﬁrst throw is a cause of you winning the car. Yet that
is exactly what we get when applying the current deﬁni-
tion. The following theory T describes the set-up of the con-
test, where Throw(i, j) means that the i-th throw landed j or
smaller.
(Throw(1,1) : 0.1) ←.
(Throw(2,1) : 0.1) ←¬Throw(1,1).
(Throw(3,1) : 0.1) ←¬Throw(1,1)∧¬Throw(2,1).
...
WinCar ←Throw(1,1).
WinCar ←¬Throw(2,1)∧...∧¬Throw(100,1).
The normal reﬁnement of T according to the story is given
by:
(Throw(1,1) : 0.1) ←.
WinCar ←Throw(1,1).
WinCar ←¬Throw(2,1)∧...∧¬Throw(100,1).
We get that P(T∗)Normal(b)(¬WinCar|do(¬Throws(1,1))) =
0, and thus Throws(1,1) is not a cause of WinCar. In
terms of HH: although ¬Throw(1,1)∧¬Throw(2,1)∧...∧
¬Throw(100,1) ∧WinCar, is very unlikely, it is the only
candidate witness. To see why, recall that a witness needs to
have ¬Throws(1,1), and should be at least as normal as the
actual world. In every other world with ¬Throws(1,1), at
least one of the Throws(i,1) is true, and hence it is less nor-
mal. But in a witness it should hold that ¬WinCar, so there
is no witness for Throws(1,1) being a cause of WinCar.
On the other hand the theory (T ∗)NN in this case is sim-
ply equal to T, but for the ﬁrst law being Throw(1,1) ←.
Hence the probability of not winning the car given that
the ﬁrst throw does not land 1 is pretty much 1, and the
value in the equation becomes approximately 0.9, indicat-
ing Throw(1,1) to be a very strong cause of WinCar.
6.2
Why we should look at all witnesses
The current example also illustrates why it makes sense
to aggregate the strength of all witnesses: the best wit-
ness for Throw(1,1) is the story in which ¬Throw(1,1) ∧
Throw(2,1) ∧¬Throw(3,1) ∧... ∧¬Throw(100,1), with a
probability of 0.09, thus making Throw(1,1) a very minor
cause of WinCar under the HH-approach. Put informally,
the alternative we should be considering is not one particu-
lar outcome – the best witness – of the throwing sequence
that makes you lose the car, but the set of all such sequences
– all witnesses – taken together.
6.3
Why it is better to use T NN in the second
factor
Imagine the same story, with a slight variation to the rules
of the contest: you win the car on the ﬁrst throw if the
die lands anything under 7. Hence the ﬁrst head changes
to Throw(1,6) : 0.6, making it a typical outcome. There-
fore the ﬁrst law becomes deterministic in T PN(b), giving
that PTNormal(b)(¬Throw(1,6)) = 0, which again results in
the counterintuitive judgment that the ﬁrst throw in no way
caused you to win the car.
We therefore suggest to use T NN in the second factor of
the inequality rather than T Normal(b), making use of the grad-
ual measurement offered by probabilities. Applying this idea
to the example, we get the result that Throw(1,6) has causal
strength 0.4. This value is smaller than before, because the
cause is now less atypical.
6.4
The ﬁnal deﬁnition
This brings us to our ﬁnal extension to a deﬁnition of actual
causation.
Deﬁnition 8 (Extension of actual causation). Given an ex-
tended theory T, and a branch b such that both C and E hold
in its leaf. We deﬁne that C is an actual cause of E in (T,b)
if and only if P(T∗)NN(¬E|do(¬C))∗PTNN(¬C) > 0.
7
Conclusion
Our ﬁnal deﬁnition extends our original deﬁnition of actual
causation (Def. 1) by incorporating the main points raised
by HH: (1) it allows normative considerations and (2) is
able to factor in the normality of the cause, which is impor-
tant when we are considering interventions and explanatory
power. In addition, it also improves on the HH account in
several ways:
• CP-logic is more expressive than structural models, hence
it can be applied to more examples (Vennekens, Denecker,
and Bruynooghe 2010).
• Separating normative from statistical normality allows for
a more accurate description of the domain.
• Since we no longer refer to the actual world in the second
factor, we can use strict norms.
• It is able to deal with all of the examples from the HH-
paper equally well as Def. 7.
• It can also handle the previous examples properly, as op-
posed to Def. 7.

8
