An Intelligent Location Management approaches in 
GSM Mobile Network 
                   N. Mallikharjuna Rao1  
 
          Prof M. M Naidu2      
                  P.Seetharam3 
           Department Of MCA,  
 
                  Department of CSE,  
                        
  Systems Engineer 
APGCCS, 
 
                S.V College of Engineering, 
                        AITS 
Rajampet, India  
 
 
             Tirupati, India 
 
 
Rajampet 

 
Abstract - Location management refers to the problem of 
updating and searching the current location of mobile nodes in a 
wireless network. To make it efficient, the sum of update costs of 
location database must be minimized. Previous work relying on 
fixed location databases is unable to fully exploit the knowledge 
of user mobility patterns in the system so as to achieve this 
minimization. The study presents an intelligent location 
management approach which has interacts between intelligent 
information system and knowledge-base technologies, so we can 
dynamically change the user patterns and reduce the transition 
between the VLR and HLR. The study provides algorithms are 
ability to handle location registration and call delivery. 
Key words: Baste Station, MSC, HLR, VLR, IMEI, MT, Fuzzy 
Logic, Fuzzy databases 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Recent advances in communication technology have 
created the opportunity for mobile terminals to receive many 
services that were, until not long ago, only available to 
tethered terminals. This system to support large scale mobility 
was the advanced mobile phone system. A new digital system, 
personal Communication System (PCS) provides voice as well 
as data services to wireless users. PCS works in the GSM 
800/1900 MHz spectrum. There are competitive standards for 
analog, digital, and PCS system throughout the world [1].   
One of the challenging tasks in a PCS environment is to 
efficiently maintain the location of the PCS subscribers in 
GSM who move around freely with their wireless unit. In 
India TRAI (Telephonic Regulatory Authority of India) is 
used for managing location information of the subscribers and 
enabling them to send and receive calls and other services 
such as messaging and data service.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The cells are established as we have shown in figure 1, 
using which mobile subscribers move between them and he 
make calls for transmitting voice/data.  
The 
network 
reference 
model 
of 
a 
Personal 
Communication System in GSM network is shown in figure 2 
we refined for supporting and understanding of my work .It 
consists of the following components [2]. 
Home Location Register (HLR): Maintains the profiles of 
the entire subscribers that are registered with the home 
network. When a mobile subscriber roams to another area, it 
has to register with the Visitor Location Register (VLR) of 
that area. The HLR maintains a pointer to the VLR which 
currently serve the mobile. 
Visitor Location Register (VLR): Supports registration, 
authentication, and call routing to/from a mobile while it is 
away from its home area. Each MSC has a VLR to holds the 
data relevant for handling calls from and to the MSs that are 
currently located in its area.  The relevant data is downloaded 
from the home HLR when the mobile subscriber switches on 
the mobile handset in the area of the visited MSC thereby 
initiating the process of registration.  VLR holds the exact 
location of the MS and keeps on updating the location as the 
mobile move across its area. 
                  
 
     
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Switching Center (MSC): Responsible for 
switching the voice/data connection to the mobile host. GMSC 
is Gate way Mobile Switching center which can route the calls 
from PSTN. 
 
Figure 1: Sample Location Areas  
PSTN 
To other 
MSCs 
MSC
HLR
VLR 
MSC 
HLR 
VLR
Base Stations
Figure 1: Network Reference Model 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Base Station (BS): The base station is the gateway between 
the wireless network and wired network. It provides the 
wireless connection to the mobile subscribers within its 
coverage area (Cell). A set of base stations are connected to 
the MSC through a Base Station controller.  
Authenticating Center (AC or AuC): The Authentication 
Center is a workstation system, which authenticates 
subscribers. AuC needs to access user information for 
authentication process so it is co-located with HLR.   
Equipment Identify Register (EIR): It is a database which 
stores information for the identification of mobile units. 
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN): This 
component refers to the regular wired line telecommunication 
network which is commonly accessed by landline calls. 
Integrated Service Digital Network (ISDN): It is a wired 
line network which provides enhanced digital services to 
subscribers.  
For supporting our work, we studied Nellore District 
BSNL office functionality and we find the existing 
architecture for GSM network as shown in figure 3.   
Every subscriber is registered with a home network, the 
HLR of which maintains the subscriber’s current physical 
location. This physical location is the LAI is the ID of the 
MSC currently serving the subscriber. If the subscriber has 
moved to another region then he/she has to register with the 
VLR that covers the new region. During registration, the VLR 
will contact the subscriber’s HLR, and the HLR will update its 
database to reflect the new location of the subscriber. If the 
mobile has registered with some other VLR before, HLR will 
send a registration cancellation message to it.  
Present system is having the disadvantage in call setup and 
call delivery using the traditional centralized database system. 
One disadvantage is that since every location request as well 
as location registration are serviced through a HLR, in 
addition to the HLR being over loaded with database lookup 
operations [1] [3] [6]; the traffic on the links leading to the 
HLR is heavy. The other disadvantage is that any HLR to be 
unreachable even though mobiles may be roaming and away. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In view of above disadvantages, we are proposing 
intelligent location management approaches for to overcome 
all the disadvantages faced by the system. This effort will 
reduce the transition time between the VLR and HLR 
databases when the common MS roams to that MSC services 
area  
In this paper, fuzzy logic concept is used for supporting 
proposed intelligent location management schemes, fuzzy 
logic deals with vague, doubtful and ambiguous data for 
giving better results for uncertain data in mobile networks. 
Vagueness or doubtfulness means that cannot be defined or 
determined data. In general, vagueness is as associated with 
the difficulty of making sharp or precise distinctions in the 
world. That is some domain of interest is vague if it cannot be 
delimited by sharp boundaries [14].  
Ambiguity is associated with one-to-many relations that 
are situations in which the choice between two or three more 
alternatives is left unspecified. In this is paper we are 
proposing the techniques that can work easily to see that the 
concept of a fuzzy sets provides a base mathematical 
framework for dealing with vagueness.   Section 2 describes 
the existing databases system and approaches, section 3 
describes the proposed intelligent system and concluding 
remarks is presented in section 4.  
II.BACKGROUND AND EXISTING SYSTEM 
Location management includes two major tasks: Location 
registration and call delivery. Location registration procedures 
update the location database (HLR and VLRs) when an MT 
moves into different location area. Call delivery procedure 
locate a Mobile Station (MS) based on the information 
available at HLR and VLRs when a call for the MS is 
initiated. 
In GSM network, there are two kinds of databases:  HLR 
and VLR are used to store the location information of MSs. 
The whole network coverage area is divided into cells as 
shown in figure 1. There is a base station installed in each cell 
and an MS within a cell communicates with the network 
through a base station. These cells are grouped together to 
from a larger area called a registration area (RA)/Location 
Figure 3: GSM Architecture for BSNL service provider  
Wireless 
Wired 
Cells  
Location 
Area  
MS 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
BTS
BSC
MSC/VLR 
IN 
HLR 
EIR 
AuC 
GMSC 
PSTN 
/other 
RNC 
Transcoder 

Area (LA). All the base stations belonging to one LA are 
wired to a mobile switching center (MSC) through BTS and 
BSC which serves as the interface between the wireless and 
the wired networks. In this paper, we assume that one VLR is 
associated with each MSC as we shown in figure3. 
A Location Area (LA) as shown in figure 3 is defined as a 
group of cells. Within the network, a subscriber location is 
known by the location area which they are in and is controlled 
by a Base Station Controller (BSC). The identification of a 
location area in which an MS is currently located is stored in 
the VLR. 
When a MS crosses a boundary from a cell belonging to 
one LA into a cell belonging to another LA, it must report its 
new location to the network. When a MS crosses a cell 
boundary within a location area, it does need to report its new 
location to the network. But when a MS leaves the MSC 
service area, the scenario changes and updating information is 
increased. The VLR is always integrated with the MSC as 
shown in figure 3 and there is one VLR for each MSC service 
area. 
The VLR can be regarded as a distributed HLR as it holds 
a copy of the HLR information stored about the subscriber [5]. 
The data stored includes: 
       1.  Mobile subscriber Roaming number (MSRN) 
       2. Service type (services that the subscriber is allowed 
to access)  
       3. Current location   
       4. HLR address Ciphering keys  
       5. Billing information  
       6. International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) 
       7. Subscribers phone number 
8. Access point subscribed (GPRS) 
9. Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity (TMSI) 
When a subscriber roams into a new MSC service area, the 
following steps occur in figure 4 [5] 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step1: The VLR checks its database to determine whether 
or not it has a record for the MS. And this checking is based 
on the subscribers IMSI. 
Step2: VLR sends a request to the subscribers HLR for a 
copy of the MS‘s subscription when it does not find any 
record for the corresponding MS 
Step3: the HLR passes the information to the VLR and 
updates its location information for the subscriber. 
Step4: the HLR instructs the old VLR to delete the 
information that was stored in the database. 
Step5: the VLR stores its subscription information for MS, 
including the latest location and status (idle). This maintains of 
two databases at HLR and VLR gives a flexible mechanism to 
support call routing and dialing in a roaming situation. 
Two major steps are involved in call delivery: determining 
the serving VLR of called MT, and locating the visiting cell of 
called MT. The following step occurs in call delivery shown in 
figure 5 [5] 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step1: Calling MT sends call initiated signal to its serving 
MSC through the base station. 
Step2: MSC of calling MT, calling MSC, sends the 
location request message to HLR of called MT. 
Step3: HLR of called MT determines the current serving 
VLR of called MT and sends the route request message to the 
associated MSC, called MSC. 
Step4: Called MSC determines the cell location of called 
MT and assigns temporary location directory number (TLDN) 
to called MT. called MT MSC then sends this routing 
information (TLDN) to HLR 
Step5: HLR forwards TLDN to calling MSC 
Step6: calling MSC requests a call setup to called MSC 
through the SS7 network.  
MSC Mobile Switching Center 
HLR Home Location Register 
VLR Visitor Location Register 
LA Boundary 
(4) 
 
 
MSC 
VLR 
MSC 
VLR 
HLR 
BS 
BS 
(1) 
(2) 
(6) 
(5) 
(3) 
Figure 4: Call registration procedure 
MSC Mobile Switching Center 
HLR Home Location Register 
VLR Visitor Location Register 
HLR 
 
 
VLR 
VLR 
MSC 
MSC 
Calling MT 
BTS 
Calling MT 
BTS 
(1) 
(2) 
(5) 
(3) 
(4) 
(6) 
Figure 5: Call delivery procedure 

In the existing system, when subscriber is moved from one 
base station to other base station, subscriber’s details are 
transferred to another base station VLR (data is transferred 
from HLR). If call is disconnected the same record stored at 
VLR is deleted automatically. For solving above problem we 
are proposing new approaches and these approaches are 
motivated from several works which were already done.  In 
past studies [6] they proposed a novel mechanism for the 
VLR interaction methods where it has been given the potential 
to be intelligent to find the common users for the MSC service 
area. This effort will reduce traffic load and also improve 
spectrum efficiency. Moreover they concluded that, it reduces 
transition between VLR and HLR Therefore, it can play a 
significant role to support large number of traffic in the 
future cellular networks. In work [7] similar to [6] but they 
proposed fVLR, registration procedure of a mobile station 
location is described and a call setup procedure. They said to 
store and manage subscriber visits in fVLR database of which 
a mobile user frequently visits location. And then when set up 
the call path between mobile users, the VLR of the caller 
queries callee’s fVLR for searching the location of callee 
instead of requesting to HLR of the callee.  In this work fVLR 
can be well applied to the mobile users that live a well 
regulated life.  In another study [10] proposed intelligent 
approach by taking the User Profile History (UPH); to reduce 
the location update cost. They obtained results the efficiency 
of UPH in significantly reducing the costs of both location 
updates and call delivery. In another study [12] proposed 
fuzzy logic approaches for user location tracking which is 
highly motivated us to work on these approaches for location 
management. In this study [13] demonstrate the sum of update 
and lookup costs of the location database must be minimized. 
Along with these  
As 
per 
intelligent 
database 
system 
for 
location 
management, record will not be removed immediately from 
the VLR even subscribers is changed his/her MS. Proposed 
system will store for few days if any repetitions calls to the 
same base station occurs. Its means that system will act 
intelligently to take the decision, then removes the record from 
the VLR.  
3. PROPOSED SYSTEM 
Usually when the Mobile Station leaves one MSC service 
area to another, all the information related to the Mobile 
Station user is deleted (based on the subscribers IMSI or 
TMSI). Here in the proposed method deletion will be done 
depending on a decision that will be taken after doing some 
analysis during certain amount of time frame: 1) The VLR will 
have been observing the mobile station roaming habit for 
some days , for example  ‘n’ days. 2) The VLR will also 
observe the time when the Mobile station roams into the MSC 
area. Depending on these data, a query will be done and the 
result of the query will help to decide that whether the 
information of mobile station will be stored inside the VLR or 
be dropped.  The goal of the query is to find those mobile 
users who used to visit the MSC service area at least once 
regularly during the observation period. The found regularly 
visiting Mobile station will be termed as common mobile 
station. Some information like account balance, service 
validity and service that subscriber is allowed to access, is 
always needed to be updated. 
A. Proposed Model Scenario 
Let us consider a Mobile Station user travels 115 km daily. 
He lives at ‘Nellore’ and goes to his office at ‘Rajampet’ 
which is 115 km apart from his house. Since he is to drop his 
wife and daughter at ‘Podalakur’ and ‘Rapur’ respectively, he 
is to travel same path daily. Now the VLR1 will find that the 
person leaves this area at 8 am and returns at 8 pm. And the 
VLR2 of MSC service area will find that the person enters this 
service area at 8.30 am and leaves at 8.40 am daily. Similarly 
we assume, the possible roaming time in different MSC 
service area (here in this kadapa area is come MSC1/VLR1 and 
Rajampet comes in MSC2/VLR2 area). The same information 
is used for call delivery strategy.   
In this paper, we are proposing intelligent location 
management scheme for finding the frequently visited mobile 
subscribers in particular location area, as we said above use 
fuzzy logic, the fuzzy sets within the field of decision making 
have for the most part consisted for extensions or 
“fuzzifications” of the classical theories of decision making.  
Classical decision making generally deals with a set of 
alternatives comprising the decision space, a set of states of 
nature comprising the state space, a relation indicating the 
state or outcome to be expected from each alternative action. 
B. Decision making of intelligent database VLR using Fuzzy 
Logic  
Now we consider during the ‘m’ days of observation 
period, the number of roaming users is ‘N’ on all (week) 
working days respectively in Mobile Switching Center service 
area.  Then, the observation set for each day can be considered 
as follows. For example, a mobile subscriber roams from LA1 
to LA2 frequently, intelligent system process the following: 
Subscriber moves from LA1 to LA2, subscriber profile 
reads from HLR and sends to existing VLR for subscriber 
identity to make a call. The subscriber moves from existing 
LA2 to LA3 and then subscriber record will be deleted 
automatically and subscriber’s identity will be send to LA3. 
Suppose, if Subscriber again visits LA2, subscriber profile 
reads from HLR and is send to VLR for identity, which we are 
presented in scenario model. But, here we have to remember 
one thing, that how many times the mobile subscriber visits or 
roams in one particular LA, this is called uncertainty. In this 
paper, we are presenting the fuzzy decision making for 
handling such uncertainties to retrieve subscribers records 
from VLR database.  The fuzzy model of decision making is 
proposed by Belleman and Zadesh [1970] [11], which we are 
illustrating by a simple example. Suppose we choose different 
LA and their VLR sets which are mentioned below in mobile 
switching center: 
 Fuzzy Set= {(LA1, VLR1), (LA2, VLR2)… (LAn, VLRn)} 
The characteristics function of a crisp set assigns a value of 
either 1 or 0 to each individual in the universal set, thereby 
discriminating members and nonmembers of the crisp set 
under consideration. This function can be generalized such 
that the value assigned to the elements of the universal set fall 

within a specific range and indicate the membership grade of 
these elements in the set in question. Larger values denote 
higher degree of set membership. Such a function is called a 
membership function and the set defined by it’s a fuzzy set 
[11].  The range of values of membership functions is the unit 
interval [0, 1]. Here each membership function maps elements 
of a given universal set X, which is always a crisp set, into real 
numbers in [0,1] 
The membership function of fuzzy set A is defined by a,  
A:     X [0, 1] 
Once a fuzzy decision has been arrived at, it may be 
necessary to choose the “best” single crisp alternative from 
this fuzzy set. A fuzzy set may be represented by a meaningful 
fuzzy label. A reasonable expression of these concepts by 
trapezoidal membership S1, S2, S3 these functions are defined 
on the interval [0, 20]. For example, “Low_visits”, 
“Medium_Visits”, “High_Visits” are linguistic variable for 
fuzzy set frequently visited locations maintained in mobile 
VLR databases. The linguistic representation is as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suppose, if we assume three mobile subscribers they are 
visiting and registered at VLR1 database.  
Mobile-subscribers set = {(S1, 5), (S2, 12), (S3, 17)} as we 
shown in table 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this above table, if we observe S1 has visited 5 times on 
the days of 3, 5, and 6 in a 7 day format. That means he/she 
has visited more than one time in day. The decision making 
scenario using fuzzy logic is, so we can calculate maximum 
number of times visited to VLR1 in LA1, the membership 
degree is: 
Subscriber S1 visited to VLR1 5 times 
Subscriber S2 visited to VLR1 12 times 
Subscribers S3 Visited to VLR1 17 times  
Membership degree for subscriber S1 is 8-5/5 = 3/5 =0.6 
Membership degree of subscriber S2 is 14-12/5= 2/5=0.4 
Membership degree of subscriber S3 is 18-17/5=1/5=0.2 
The intersection for fuzzy set is  
μA∩B (x) = Min [μA(x), μB(x)]  
Therefore, to find the frequently visited subscriber is  
= Min [S1/0.6, S2/0.4, S3/0.2] or Min [0.6, 0.4, 0.2] 
= S3 (0.2)  
= Frequently visited Subscriber is S3            
This fuzziness allows the decision maker to frame the 
goals and constraints in vague, linguistic terms; which may 
more accurately reflect the actual state of knowledge. In this 
model, we have shown to stored the linguistic values in fuzzy 
VLR in figure 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As we shown in figure 7 VLR database is divided into two 
tiers one is low-tier and second one is high-tier DBs. They are 
represented as V (Traditional VLR) and V1 (Fuzzy VLR). 
When the subscribers come into LA, MS functions checks in 
V and V will check at V1, if it found that there is no need to 
search the subscriber’s profiles from the Home Location 
Register (HLR). i.e. there are two operations are performed in 
this system. They are VLR traditional (tier1)      VLR fuzzy (tier2).  
Immediately VLR fuzzy (tier 2)        VLR traditional (tier1) transfers the 
old record to VLR. In this scheme, VLR fuzzy is stores the 
information if subscribers are frequently visited subscribers in 
that location area. Record will be deleted after specified period 
automatically from both the VLRs.   In this case, the fuzzy 
constraints may be defined on the set V and fuzzy goals on the 
set V1 such that             
        μC: V        [0, 1] and μG:   V1        [0, 1]  
 function f can then the defined as a mapping from the ser of 
actions V to the set of outcomes V1   f: V      V1 such that a fuzzy 
goal G defined on set V induces a corresponding fuzzy  
ID 
Common 
Visits 
Current 
visits 
S1 
3,5,6 
5 
S2 
2,3,4 
12 
S3 
3,4,5 
17 
MSC Mobile Switching Center 
HLR Home Location Register 
VLR Visitor Location Register 
LA Boundary 
(4) 
 
 
MSC 
VLR 
MSC 
VLR 
HLR 
BS 
BS 
(1) 
(2) 
(6) 
(5) 
(3) 
Figure 7:  Proposed Intelligent Call registration   
 
VLR 
Fuzzy 
 
VLR 
Fuzzy 
1,    No_of_visits ≤ 4 
0,    No_of_visits ≥ 8 
Low_ Visits    = 
(8-No_of_visits)/5, 4< No_of_visits < 8 
(No_of_visits-12)/5, 9< No_of_visits < 12  
0,    No_of_visits ≤ 8  
1,     14 < No_of_visits ≥ 15 
Medium_Visits   =  
(14-No_of_visits/5, 12≤ No_of_visits < 14  
0,     No_of_visits <16  
1,     No_of_visits ≥ 18 
High_ Visits = 
(18-No_of_visits)/5, 16≤ No_of_visits < 18  
Figure 6: Triangular membership functions for Visits   
Table 1: Visitors info in VLR database 

 
 
goal G’ on the set V, thus μG’(x) = μC(x) a fuzzy decision D 
may them be defined as the choice that satisfies both the goals 
G and the Constraints C. if we interpret this as a logical, we 
can model it with the intersection of the fuzzy sets G and C         
D= G∩C the fuzzy decision D is the specified by the 
membership function  
C. Algorithm for Intelligent VLR  
The Location management algorithm makes use of the fact 
that an average mobile user has limited number of frequently 
visited locations. Usually a type of activity such as work, 
school, or shopping, occurring at a particular location. As an 
example, the shopping locations are located at specific sites, 
and for most users, the work, school, and home locations are 
fixed. We are considering ‘m’ days of observation period for a 
VLR to find its common mobile station and the searching must 
be based on IMSI of the visited MS during that time frame. A 
possible algorithm is given below: 
Integer get_common_MS ()  
{  
Integer i=0; k=0; m=0;  
            Interger array AA[m][]; 
           AA[m] AA[m] = days_IMSI_copy(1,2,3,4,5,6,7); 
         b_day = get_busiest_day_user(); 
        Max=max1=maximum_user_in_busy_day (); 
 
// comparing to comparing to get common IMSI; 
         for ( ; i<=max; i is incremented by 1) 
        { 
     
for (; j<=m; j is incremented by 1) 
              for (;k<max1;k is incremented by 1) 
                { 
   
 
If AA[j][k]=b_day[i]) 
                         {   d is incremented by 1 
                          If (d==m) copy _IMSI (A[i]); 
                        } 
                 } } 
Figure 6:  Proposed Intelligent VLR algorithms 
D. Algorithm for Intelligent call delivery using fuzzy Logic  
Frequently visited locations of a user are not pre-defined in 
location management, since this information is not always 
collected from mobile subscriber. whenever a subscriber want 
to make a call, profile identification is required to check 
whether the subscriber identity is verified and accepted by 
HLR or not, but in our proposed system, if subscriber is a 
known visitor of that particular location, call will be registered 
in VLR and will not be deleted immediately by the VLR 
register after subscriber moves out of VLR, as we shown in 
figure 7, the visited records are saved in fuzzy VLR, we will 
fix up time to each and every subscriber for keeping his 
profiles in VLR database, if they do not visit that location with 
in the specified time, the subscriber record then be deleted 
from VLR as well as Fuzzy VLR. Therefore, it is the 
responsibility of the location management algorithm to 
intelligently determine such information.  
The intelligent algorithm determines these frequently 
visited locations of a user at a given time of day based on the 
individual user profile. 
E.  Proposed call delivery algorithm 
In this system, VLR maintains two entries for storing the 
data as we shown in figure 8. One is for the high-tier database 
is called VLR and another is for the low-tier database is called 
Fuzzy VLR for storing fuzzy related values.  Mobile 
subscriber roams in the same area frequently; it not required in 
retrieving the subscriber record from HLR for identity that 
record will be there in fuzzy VLR database up to some period. 
If the subscriber will not visit same location in specified 
period of time record then the record will be deleted 
automatically. Call delivery setup will have two Databases one 
as HLR and another as VLR, in our proposed system the VLR 
database will be divided into two tier architecture database 
which will have High tier database as VLR and Low Tier 
database as VLR Fuzzy. Subscribers make a call data transfer 
in the following way:   
 VLR         VLRFuzzy if subscribers profile is available call will 
be delivering without asking HLR because subscriber is visits 
the same location frequently. If subscriber is new for that 
location that means VLRfuzzy send signal VLR and VLR ask 
subscriber profile from HLR. (i.e. VLRfuzzy         VLR). These 
two tier system as we shown in figure 8 for call delivery 
process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We 
present 
trapezoidal 
membership 
for 
mobile 
subscribers, who are visiting frequently on the interval              
[0, 
7]. 
For 
example, 
“Low_visits”, 
“Medium_visits”, 
“High_Visits” are linguistic variable for fuzzy set frequently 
visited locations maintained in mobile VLR databases. The 
linguistic representation is as follows for identify the 
subscribers are visiting the same location area or not. 
By using fuzzy relations we tested for 7 days and stored it in 
and as we show the proposed fuzzy VLR database values in 
table 2. Intelligent call delivery algorithm is derived basing on 
the values shown in the Table 2. 
μD(x) = Min [μG(x), μC(x)] 
MSC Mobile Switching 
Center 
HLR Home Location 
Register 
HL
R 
 
 
VL
R 
VL
R 
MSC 
MSC 
Calling MT 
BTS 
Calling MT 
BTS 
(1) 
(2) 
(5) 
(3) 
(4) 
(6) 
Figure 8: Proposed Intelligent Call delivery  
 
VLR 
Fuzzy 
 
VLR 
Fuzzy 

Figure 9: Proposed Intelligent Call Delivery algorithm   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Subscribers visiting statistics  
Call delivery setup and deletion of subscriber profile at 
VLR database will be depended upon the algorithm given 
through Fuzzy. For example S1 Subscriber visits are limited to 
1, S2 Subscriber visits are limited 0, in case of S2 Subscriber 
the VLR database will delete S2 profile immediately after 7 
Days (we have considered 7 days for observation). Likewise 
subscriber frequency of visits is defined as Low, Medium and 
High as fuzzy linguistic variables.   A possible algorithm is 
given below: 
               Integer get common_Call ()  
    
{ 
Integer i=0; k=0; n=0; 
Integer array hlr[n][] 
     
 
  ?? n =7  
      
 
 ?? ans = ??; 
      
 
 ?? Test =??; 
    
 
   ?? i = ??; 
    
 
   ?? k =??;  
     
 
  ??[][] hlr = new??[??][??]; 
Test = 1; 
While (test > n) 
   
    { 
ans = get???("specify that a Subscriber is 
arrived or not (0/1)"); 
hlr[i][k] = ans; 
    
   
    k = k + 1; 
Test = test + 1; 
      
 
 } 
   
 }  
 
 
We developed above algorithms by using Raptor, Raptor is 
a simple-to-use problem solving tool that enables the user to 
generate executable flowcharts and algorithm.   
IV. RESULTS 
We felt that we have the following Advantages with the 
proposed location management approaches: 
 As we understand that the proposed schemes are 
reduce the transition between VLR and HLR database 
because search/update/delete operations  of the 
subscriber profiles every time from the HLR database  
whenever the subscribers are reached to same location 
area or if it is already roamed by subscriber earlier. 
However, this proposed mechanism also reduces 
the transition between MS and MSC. 
 
 Call delivery algorithm, which can reduce the call 
delivery latency in the intelligent registration scheme 
because subscriber record is already available at  
VLRFuzzy database hierarchy. It is avoided multiple 
registrations for call delivery. 
 As we said earlier, fuzzy databases are more flexible 
than traditional database to querying the data from 
the databases. Hence, the proposed approaches will 
reduce the retrieval cost also.  
 Moreover, Fuzzy databases are support multi key file 
structures to retrieve the records very fast and 
accurately. 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
Mobile subscriber moves any where in mobile networks, 
and then location registration is need always for making calls. 
In this study, we noticed how these two databases Home 
Location Register (HLR) and Visitors Location Register 
(VLR) reflects when subscribers make call. When subscriber 
makes a call two basic operations are performed. In this paper, 
we proposed intelligent location management schemes; they 
can reduce the cost of maintaining location of mobile users by 
using Fuzzy Logic and Fuzzy databases for call registration 
and call delivery procedure of a mobile station for describing 
location and a call setup. We demonstrate the how to store and 
manage fuzzy data crisp values of which a mobile user 
frequently visits the location. Our proposed fuzzy based VLR 
can be well applied to the mobile subscribers that live a well 
regulated life. In the future we will further research improved 
on mobility management using fuzzy logic and fuzzy 
databases.
