Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
Tong Che * 1 Yanran Li * 2 Ruixiang Zhang * 3 R Devon Hjelm 1 4 Wenjie Li 2 Yangqiu Song 3 Yoshua Bengio 1
Abstract
Despite the successes in capturing continuous
distributions, the application of generative ad-
versarial networks (GANs) to discrete settings,
like natural language tasks, is rather restricted.
The fundamental reason is the difﬁculty of back-
propagation through discrete random variables
combined with the inherent instability of the
GAN training objective. To address these prob-
lems, we propose Maximum-Likelihood Aug-
mented Discrete Generative Adversarial Net-
works. Instead of directly optimizing the GAN
objective, we derive a novel and low-variance ob-
jective using the discriminator’s output that fol-
lows corresponds to the log-likelihood.
Com-
pared with the original, the new objective is
proved to be consistent in theory and beneﬁcial
in practice. The experimental results on various
discrete datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach.
1. Introduction
Generative models are appealing because they provide
ways to obtain insights on the underlying data distribu-
tion and statistics. In particular, these models play a pivot
role in many natural language processing tasks such as lan-
guage modeling, machine translation, and dialogue gener-
ation. However, the generated sentences are often unsatis-
factory (Sordoni et al., 2015; Bowman et al., 2015; Serban
et al., 2017; Wiseman & Rush, 2016). For example, they
often lack of consistency in long-term semantics and have
less coherence in high-level topics and syntactics (Bowman
et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016a).
This is largely attributed to the defect in the dominant train-
ing approach for existing discrete generative models. To
*Equal contribution
1Montreal Institute for Learning Al-
gorithms, Universit´e de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, QC H3T 1J4,
Canada 2Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytech-
nic University, Hong Kong 3The Hong Kong University of Sci-
ence and Technology 4IVADO. Correspondence to: Tong Che

generate discrete sequences, it is popular to adopt auto-
regressive models through teacher forcing (Williams &
Zipser, 1989) which, nevertheless, causes the exposure bias
problem (Ranzato et al., 2016).
The existing approach
trains auto-regressive models to maximize the conditional
probabilities of next tokens based on the ground-truth his-
tories. In other words, during training, auto-regressive gen-
erative models are only exposed to the ground truths from
the data distribution rather than those from the model dis-
tribution, i.e., its own predictions. It prohibits the trained
model to take advantage of learning in the the context of
its previous generated words to make the next prediction,
resulting in a bias and difﬁculty in approaching the true un-
derlying distribution (Ranzato et al., 2016; Bengio et al.,
2015). Another limitation of teacher forcing is that it is in-
applicable to those auto-regressive models with latent ran-
dom variables, which have performed better than autore-
gressive (deterministic state) recurrent neural networks (i.e.
usual RNNs, LSTMs or GRUs) on multiple tasks (Serban
et al., 2017; Miao et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016a).
An alternative and attractive solution to training autore-
gressive models is using generative adversarial networks
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
The above discussed
problem can be prevented if the generative models were
able to visit its own predictions during training and had
an overall view on the generated sequences. We suggest
to facilitate the training of autoregressive models with an
additional discriminator under the GAN setting. With a
discriminator trained to separate real versus generated se-
quences, the generative model is able to make use of the
knowledge of the discriminator to improve itself. Since the
discriminator is trained on the entire sequence, it can in
principle provide the training signal to avoid the problem
of exposure bias.
However, it is nontrivial to apply GANs to discrete data as
it is difﬁcult to optimize of the generator using the signal
provided by the discriminator. In fact, it is usually very
hard to push the generated distribution to the real data dis-
tribution, if not impossible, by moving the generated se-
quence (e.g., a faulty sentence) towards a “true” one (e.g., a
correct sentence) in a high dimensional discrete state space.
As standard back-propagation fails in discrete settings, the
generator can be optimized using the discriminator’s out-
put as a reward via reinforcement learning. Unfortunately,
arXiv:1702.07983v1  [cs.AI]  26 Feb 2017

Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
even with careful pre-training, we found that the policy has
difﬁculties to get positive and stable reward signals from
the discriminator.
To tackle these limitations,
we propose Maximum-
Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial
Networks (MaliGAN). At the core of this model is the
novel GAN training objective which sidesteps the stability
issue happening when using the discriminator output as a
direct reinforcement learning reward. Alternatively, we de-
velop a normalized maximum likelihood optimization tar-
get inspired by (Norouzi et al., 2016b). We use impor-
tance sampling and several variance reduction techniques
in order to successfully optimize this objective. The proce-
dure was discovered independently from us by Hjelm et al.
(2017) in the context of image generation.
The new target brings several attractive properties in the
proposed MaliGAN. First, it is theoretically consistent and
easier to optimize (Section 3.2).
Second, it allows the
model not only to maximize the likelihood of good be-
haviors, but also to minimize the likelihood of bad behav-
iors, with the help of a GAN discriminator. Equipped with
these strengths, the model focuses more on improving it-
self by gaining beneﬁcial knowledge that is not yet well
acquired, and excluding the most probable and harmful be-
haviors. Combined with several proposed variance reduc-
tion techniques, the proposed MaliGAN successfully and
stably models discrete data sequences (Section 4).
2. Preliminaries and Overview
The basic framework for discrete sequence generation is to
ﬁt a set of data {xi}N
i=1 coming from an underlying gen-
erating distribution pd by training a parameterized auto-
regressive probabilistic model pθ.
In this work, we aim to generate discrete data, especially
discrete sequential data, under the GAN setting (Goodfel-
low et al., 2014). GAN deﬁnes a framework for training
generative models by posing it as a minimax game against
a discriminative model. The goal of the generator G is to
match its distribution pg to the real data distribution pd. To
achieve this, the generator transforms noise z sampled from
p(z) to a data sample G(z). Following this, the discrimina-
tor D is trained to distinguish between the samples coming
from pd and pg, and can be used to provide a training signal
to the generator.
When applying the GAN framework to discrete data, the
discontinuity prohibits the update of the generator parame-
ters via standard back-propagation. To tackle this, one way
is to employ a typical reinforcement learning (RL) strat-
egy that directly uses the GAN discriminator’s output, D
or log D as a reward. In practice, the problem is usually
solved by REINFORCE-like algorithms (Williams, 1992),
perhaps with some variance reduction techniques.
Formally, we train a generator G(x) together with a dis-
criminator D(x). In its original form, the discriminator is
trained to distinguish between the generating distribution
pθ and the real data distribution pd. The generator is then
trained to maximize Ex∼pθ[log D(x)]. Namely, the objec-
tive for the generator to optimize is as follows:
LGAN(θ) = −Ex∼pθ[log D(x)]
≈−1
n
n
X
i=1
log D(xi),
xi ∼pθ.
Our work is related to the viewpoint of casting the GAN
training as a reinforcement learning problem with a moving
reward signal monotone in D(x). Deﬁne the normalized
probability distribution q′(x) =
1
Z(D)D(x)1/τ in some
bounded region to guarantee integrability (note that D is
an approximation to
pd
p+pd if D is well trained) and also put
a maximum-entropy regularizer H(pθ) to encourage diver-
sity, yielding the regularized loss:
LGAN(θ) = −Ex∼pθ[log D(x)] −τH(pθ)
= τKL(pθ||q′) + c(D)
(1)
where c(D) is a constant depending only on D. Hence, op-
timizing the traditional GAN is basically equivalent to opti-
mizing the KL-divergence KL(pθ||q′). One major problem
with this approach is that q′ always moves with D, which
is undesirable for both stability and convergence. When we
have some samples xi ∼pθ, we want to change θ a bit in
order to adjust the likelihood of samples xi to improve the
quality of the generator. However, since initially p gener-
ates very bad sequences, it have little chance of generating
good sequences in order to get positive rewards. Though
the dedicated pre-training and variance reduction mecha-
nisms help (Yu et al., 2017), the RL algorithm based on the
moving reward signal still seems very unstable and does
not work on large scale datasets.
We therefore propose to utilize the information of the dis-
criminator as an additional source of training signals, on
top of the maximum-likelihood objective. We employ im-
portance sampling to make the objective trainable.
The
novel training objective has much less variance than that
in vanilla reinforcement learning approaches that directly
adopt D or log D as reward signals. The analysis and dis-
cussions will be presented in more detail in Section 3.2.
3. Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete
Generative Adversarial Networks
In this section, we present the details of the proposed
model. At the heart of this model is a novel training ob-

Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
jective that signiﬁcantly reduces the variance during train-
ing, including the theoretical and practical analysis on the
objective’s equivalence and attractive properties. We also
show how this core algorithm can be combined with several
variance reduction techniques to form the full MaliGAN al-
gorithm for discrete sequence generation.
3.1. Basic Model of MaliGAN
We propose Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete
Generative Adversarial Networks (MaliGAN) to generate
the discrete data. With MaliGAN, we train a discrimina-
tor D(x) with the standard objective that GAN employs.
What is different from GANs is a novel objective for the
generator to optimize, using importance sampling, which
makes the training procedure closer to maximum likelihood
(MLE) training of auto-regressive models, and thus being
more stable and with less variance in the gradients.
To do so, we keep a delayed copy p′(x) of the generator
whose parameters are updated less often in order to stabi-
lize training. From the basic property of GANs, we know
that an optimal D has the property D(x) =
pd
pd+p′ . So
in this case, we have pd =
D
1−Dp′. Therefore, we set the
target distribution q for maximum likelihood training to be
D
1−Dp′. Let rD(x) =
D(x)
1−D(x), we deﬁne the augmented
target distribution as:
q(x) =
1
Z(θ′)
D(x)
1 −D(x)p′(x) = rD(x)
Z(θ′) p′(x)
Regarding q as a ﬁxed probability distribution, then the tar-
get to optimize is:
LG(θ) = KL(q(x)||pθ(x))
This objective has an attractive property that q is a “ﬁxed”
distribution during training, i.e., if D is sufﬁciently trained,
then q is always approximately the data generating dis-
tribution pd.
By deﬁning the gradient as ∇LG
=
Eq[∇θ log pθ(x)], we have the following importance sam-
pling formula:
∇LG = Ep′[ q(x)
p′(x)∇θ log pθ(x)]
= 1
Z Epθ[rD(x)∇θ log pθ(x)]
where we assume that p′ = pθ and the delayed generator is
only one step behind the current update in the experiments.
This importance sampling procedure was discovered inde-
pendently from us by (Hjelm et al., 2017). We propose to
optimize the generator using the following novel gradient
estimator:
∇LG(θ) ≈
m
X
i=1
(
rD(xi)
P
i rD(xi) −b)∇log pθ(xi) = E({xi}m
1 )
(2)
where b is a baseline from reinforcement learning in or-
der to reduce variance. In practice, we let b increase very
slowly from 0 to 1. Combined with the objective of the dis-
criminator in an ordinary GAN, we get the proposed Mali-
GAN algorithm as shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 MaliGAN
Require: A generator p with parameters θ.
A discriminator D(x) with parameters θd.
A baseline b.
1: for number of training iterations do
2:
for k steps do
3:
Sample a minibatch of samples {xi}m
i=1 from pθ.
4:
Sample a minibatch of samples {yi}m
i=1 from pd.
5:
Update the parameter of discriminator by taking gradient
ascend of discriminator loss
X
i
[∇θd log D(yi)] +
X
i
[∇θd log(1 −D(xi))]
6:
end for
7:
Sample a minibatch of samples {xi}m
i=1 from pθ.
8:
Update the generator by applying gradient update
m
X
i=1
(
rD(xi)
P
i rD(xi) −b)∇log pθ(xi)
9: end for
3.2. Analysis
The proposed objective in Eq. 2 is also theoretically guar-
anteed to be sound. In the following theorem, we show
that our training objective approximately optimizes the KL
divergence KL(q(x)||pθ(x)) when D is close to optimal.
What’s more, the objective still makes sense when D is
well trained but far from optimal.
Theorem 3.1. We have the following two theoretical guar-
antees for our new training objective.
(i) If discriminator D(x) is optimal between delayed gener-
ator p′ and real data distribution pd, we have the following
equation.
Epd[log pθ(x)] =
1
Z(θ′)Ep′[rD(x) log pθ(x)]
where Z(θ′) = Ep′[rD(x)] = 1.
(ii) If D(x) is trained well but not sufﬁciently, namely, ∀x,
D(x) lies between 0.5 and
pd
pd+p′ , we have the property that
for m →∞, almost surely
E({xi}m
1 ) · ∇θKL(pd||pθ) > 0
(3)
The above gives us a condition for our objective to still
push the generator in a descent direction even when the
discriminator is not trained to optimality.
In addition to its attractiveness in theory, we now demon-
strate why the gradient estimator in Eq. 2 of ∇LG(θ) prac-
tically can produce better training signal for the generator
than the original GAN objective. Similar discussions can

Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
be found in (Bornschein & Bengio, 2015; Norouzi et al.,
2016a).
In the original GAN setting from a reinforcement learning
perspective, e.g. the inclusive KL in Eq. 1, the free run-
ning auto-regressive model can be viewed as an RL agent
exploring the state space and getting a reward, D or log D,
at the end of the exploration. The model then tries to adjust
the probability of each of its exploration paths according
to this reward. However, this gradient estimator would be
drastically inefﬁcient when almost all generated paths had a
very small discriminator output. Unfortunately, this is very
common in GAN training and cannot even be solved with
a carefully selected baseline.
In the MaliGAN objective, however, the partition function
Z is estimated using the samples from the minibatch, which
helps dealing with the above dilemma. When we choose,
for example, baseline b = 1, we can see that the sum of
the weights on the generated paths are zero, and the proba-
bility of each path is adjusted not according to the absolute
value of the discriminator output, but its relative quality
in that minibatch. This ensures that the model can always
learn something as long as there exist some generations bet-
ter than others in that mini-batch. Furthermore, the previ-
ous theorem ensures the consistency of the mini-batch level
normalization procedure.
From a theoretical point of view, this normalization proce-
dure also helps. Although at the ﬁrst glance, when D is
optimal, one can prove that Z = 1, so estimating Z seems
to only introduce additional variance to the model. How-
ever, using this estimator in fact reduces the variance due to
the following reason: rD(x) is actually a function with sin-
gularity when x is in a region Ωin the data space on which
D(x) ≈1. Even with very careful pre-training, such a re-
gion ΩrD ≫0 and p′(Ω) ≈0, making the ratio blow up.
In our target
1
Z(θ′)Ep′[rD(x) log pθ(x)], since it is almost
impossible to get samples from Ωwith p′ in a reasonable
size mini-batch, the actual distribution we are sampling
from is a “regularized” distribution p\Ωwhere p\Ω(Ω) = 0
and p\Ω≈p′. So when doing importance sampling to
estimate our training objective ∇LG = Epd[∇θ log pθ(x)]
with small mini-batches, we are actually doing normalized-
weights importance sampling based on p\Ω:
∇LG
≈
Ep\Ω[rD(x)∇θ log pθ(x)]/Ep\Ω[rD(x)]. Since the Monte
Carlo estimator has much more variance to estimate
Ep′[rD(x)∇θ log pθ(x)] than Ep\Ω[rD(x)∇θ log pθ(x)],
in practical mini-batch training settings, we can view that
we are doing importance sampling with the distribution
p\Ω, and this objective has much less variance compared
to importance sampling with p′ on rD which has an inﬁnite
singularity. This is why estimating Z = Ep\Ω[rD(x)] is
important in order to reduce the variance in the mini-batch
training setting.
When training auto-regressive models with teacher forcing,
a serious problem is exposure bias (Ranzato et al., 2016;
Norouzi et al., 2016b; Lamb et al., 2016). Namely, the
model is only trained on demonstrated behaviors (real data
samples), but we also want it to be trained on free-running
behaviors. When we set a positive baseline b > 0, the
model ﬁrst generates m samples, and then tries to adjust
the probabilities of each generated samples by trying to re-
inforce the best behaviors and exclude the worse behaviors
relatively to those in the mini-batch.
3.3. Variance Reduction in MaliGAN
The proposed renormalized objective in MaliGAN supports
much more stable training behavior than the RL objective
in a standard GAN. Nevertheless, when the long sequence
generation procedure consists of multiple steps of random
sampling, we ﬁnd it is better to further integrate the follow-
ing advanced variance reduction techniques.
3.3.1. MONTE CARLO TREE SEARCH
Instead of using the same weight for all time steps in one
sample, we use the following formula which is well known
in the RL literature:
Epθ[rD(x)∇p(x)] = Epθ[
L
X
t=1
Q(at, st)∇pθ(at|st)]
where Q(a, s) stands for the “expected total reward” given
by rD =
D
1−D of generating token a given previous gen-
eration s, which can be estimated with, e.g., Monte Carlo
tree search (MCTS, Silver et al. (2016)).
Thus, following the gradient estimator presented in Theo-
rem 3.1, we derive another gradient estimator:
∇LG(θ) ≈
P
i Li
m P Q(ai
t, si
t)
m,Li
X
i,t
Q(ai
t, si
t)∇log pθ(ai
t|si
t)
where m is the size of the mini-batch. Using Monte Carlo
tree search brings in several beneﬁts. First, it allows differ-
ent steps of the generated sample to be adjusted with differ-
ent weights. Second, it gives us a more stable estimator of
the partition function Z. Both of these two properties can
dramatically reduce the variance of our proposed estimator.
3.3.2. MIXED MLE-MALI TRAINING
When dealing with long sequences, the above model may
result in accumulated variance. To alleviate the issue, we
signiﬁcantly reduce the variance by clamping the input us-
ing the training data for N time steps, and switch to free
running mode for the remaining T −N time steps. Then
during our training procedure, inspired from Ranzato et al.
(2016), we slowly move N from T towards 0.
The training objective is equivalent to setting q in the last

Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
section to:
q(x0, x1, · · · xL) = pd(x0, · · · xN)q(xN+1, · · · xL|x0, · · · xN)
We also assume D is trained on the real samples and fake
samples generated by
pf(x0, · · · xL) = pd(x0, · · · xN)pθ(xN+1, · · · xL|x0, · · · xN)
Let x≤N = (x0, x1, · · · xN), x>N = (xN+1, · · · xL), we
have:
∇LG =Eq[∇log pθ(x)]
=Epd[∇log pθ(x≤N)] + Eq[∇log pθ(x>N|x<N)]
=Epd[∇log pθ(x0, x1, · · · xT )]
+ 1
Z Epθ[
L
X
t=N+1
rD(x)∇log pθ(at|st)]
For each sample xi from the real data batch, if it has length
larger than N, we ﬁx the ﬁrst N words of xi, and then
sample n times from our model till the end of the sequence,
and get n samples {xi,j}n
j=1.
We then have the following series of mini-batch estimators
for each 0 ≤N ≤T:
∇LN
G ≈
m,n
X
i=1,j=1
(
rD(xi,j)
P
j rD(xi,j) −b)∇log pθ(x>N
i,j |x≤N
i
)
+ 1
m
m
X
i=1
N
X
t=0
pθ(ai
t|si
t) = EN(xi,j)
(4)
One difference is that in this model, we normalize the co-
efﬁcients rD(xi,j) based only on samples generated from
a single real data sample xi. The reason of using this trick
will be explained in next sub-section.
We have the following theorem which guarantees the theo-
retical property of this estimator.
Theorem 3.2. When D is correctly trained but not optimal
in the sense of Theorem 3.1, when m →∞, we almost
surely have ∀0 ≤N ≤T,
EN(xi,j) · ∇θKL(pd||pθ) > 0
(5)
3.3.3. SINGLE REAL DATA BASED RENORMALIZATION
Many generative models have multiple layers of random-
nesses. For example, in auto-regressive models, the sam-
ples are generated via multiple sampling steps. Other ex-
amples include hierarchical generative models like deep
Boltzmann machines and deep belief networks (Salakhut-
dinov & Hinton, 2009; Hinton, 2009).
In these models, high-level random variables are usually
responsible for modeling high-level decisions or “modes”
of the probability distribution. Changing them can result in
much larger effects than that from changing low-level vari-
ables. Motivated by this observation, in each mini-batch
we ﬁrst draw a mini-batch of samples (e.g. 32) of high-
level latent variables, and then for each high level value
we draw a number of low level data samples (e.g. 32).
Then we re-estimate the partition function Z from the low-
level samples that are generated by each high-level sam-
ples. Because lower-level sampling has a much smaller
variance, the model can receive better gradient signals from
the weights provided by the discriminator.
This sampling principle is corresponding to applying the
mixed MLE-Mali training discussed above in the auto-
regressive settings. In this case we ﬁrst sample a few data
samples, then ﬁx the ﬁrst N words and let the network gen-
erate a lot of samples after N as our next mini-batch. We
refer this full algorithm to sequential MaliGAN with Mixed
MLE Training, which is summarized in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Sequential MaliGAN with Mixed MLE
Training
Require: A generator p with parameters θ.
A discriminator D(x) with parameters θd.
Maximum sequence length T, step size K.
A baseline b, sampling multiplicity m.
1: N = T
2: Optional: Pretrain model using pure MLE with some epochs.
3: for number of training iterations do
4:
N = N - K
5:
for k steps do
6:
Sample a minibatch of sequences {yi}m
i=1 from pd.
7:
While keeping the ﬁrst N steps the same as {yi}m
i=1,
sample a minibatch of sequences {xi}m
i=1 from pθ from
time step N.
8:
Update the discriminator by taking gradient ascend of
discriminator loss.
X
i
[∇θd log D(yi)] +
X
i
[∇θd log(1 −D(xi))]
9:
end for
10:
Sample a minibatch of sequences {xi}m
i=1 from pd.
11:
For each sample xi with length larger than N in the mini-
batch, clamp the generator to the ﬁrst N words of s, and
freely run the model to generate m samples xi,j, j =
1, · · · m till the end of the sequence.
12:
Update the generator by applying the mixed MLE-Mali
gradient update
∇LN
G ≈
m,n
X
i=1,j=1
(
rD(xi,j)
P
j rD(xi,j) −b)∇log pθ(x>N
i,j |x≤N
i
)
+ 1
m
m
X
i=1
N
X
t=0
pθ(ai
t|si
t)
13: end for
The reason why doing this single real sample based renor-
malization is beneﬁcial can be summarized around two el-
ements. First, consider S is a sample from the training
set. The ﬁrst N words S≤N should be completed by our
model. The conditional distribution pd(S′
>N|S≤N) should
be much simpler than the full distribution pd.
Namely,

Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
pd(S′
>N|S≤N) consists of only one or a few “modes”. So
this renormalization technique can be viewed as trying to
train the model on these simpler conditional distributions,
which gives more stable gradients.
Second, this normalization scheme makes our model robust
to mode missing, which is a common failure pattern when
training GANs (Che et al., 2016). Single sample based
renormalization ensures that for every real sample S, the
model can receive a moderately strong training signal for
how to perform better on generating S>N conditioned on
S≤N. However, in batch-wise renormalization as in the
basic MaliGAN, this is not possible because there might
be some completions S′ with rD(S′) very large, so other
training samples in that mini-batch receives very little gra-
dient signals.
4. Experiments
To examine the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms,
we conduct experiments on three discrete sequence genera-
tion tasks. We achieve promising results on all three tasks,
including a standard and challenging language modeling
task. From the empirical results and the following analysis,
we demonstrate the soundness of MaliGAN and show its
robustness to overﬁtting.
4.1. Discrete MNIST
We ﬁrst evaluate MaliGAN on the binarized image genera-
tion task for the MNIST hand-written digits dataset, similar
with Hjelm et al. (2017). The original datasets have 60,000
and 10,000 samples in the training and testing sets, re-
spectively. We split the training set and randomly selected
10,000 samples for validation. We adopted as the generator
a deep convolutional neural network based on the DCGAN
architecture (Radford et al., 2015). To generate the discrete
samples, we sample from the generator’s output binomial
distribution. We adopt Algorithm 1 of MaliGAN for train-
ing and use the single latent variable renormalization tech-
nique for variance reduction.
To compare our proposed MaliGAN with the models
trained using the discriminator’s output as a direct reward,
we also train a generator with the same network architec-
ture, but use the output of the discriminator as the weight of
generated samples. We denote it as the REINFORCE-like
model. The comparison results are shown in Figure 1 and
Figure 2.
The two ﬁgures in the ﬁrst line are training losses of the
generator and discriminator from the proposed MaliGAN.
We can see the training process of MaliGAN with variance
reduction techniques is stable and the loss curve is mean-
ingful. The bottom two ﬁgures in Figure 2 are samples
generated by the REINFORCE-like model and by Mali-
GAN. Clearly, the samples generated by MaliGAN have
much better visual quality and resemble closely the train-
ing data.
Figure 1. The training loss of the generator (left) and the discrim-
inator (right) of MaliGAN on Discrete MNIST task.
Figure 2. Samples generated by REINFORCE-like model (left)
and by MaliGAN (right).
4.2. Poem Generation
We examine the effectiveness of our model on a Chinese
poem generation task. Typically, there are two genres of
Chinese poems. We refer with Poem-5 and Poem-7 to those
consisting of 5 or 7 Chinese characters each in a short sen-
tence, respectively. We use the dataset provided in (Zhang
& Lapata, 2014), and split them in the standard way 1.
The generator is a one-layer LSTM (Hochreiter & J¨urgen
Schmidhuber, 1997) with 32 hidden units for Poem-5 and
100 for Poem-7.
Our discriminators are two-layer Bi-
LSTMs with 32 hidden neurons. We denote our models
trained with Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 as MaliGAN-
basic and MaliGAN-full.
We choose two compared
models, the auto-regressive model with same architecture
but trained with maximum likelihood (MLE), and Seq-
GAN (Yu et al., 2017). Following Yu et al. (2017), we re-
port the BLEU-2 scores in Table 4.2 (Papineni et al., 2002).
MaliGAN-full obtained the best BLEU-2 scores on par
on both tasks, and MaliGAN-basic was the next best.
Clearly, MLE lagged far behind despite the same architec-
ture, which should be attributed to the inherent defect in
the MLE teacher-forcing training framework. As pointed
by previous researchers Wiseman & Rush (2016), BLEU
might not be a proper evaluation metric, we also calculate
the Perplexity of these four models, obtaining qualitatively
1http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/mlap/Data/
EMNLP14/

Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
similar results. The best scores are reported in Table 4.2
and the Perplexity curves are illustrated in Figure 3.
Table 1. Experimental results on Poetry Generation task. The re-
sult of SeqGAN is directly taken from (Yu et al., 2017).
Model
Poem-5
Poem-7
BLEU-2
PPL
BLEU-2
PPL
MLE
0.6934
564.1
0.3186
192.7
SeqGAN
0.7389
-
-
-
MaliGAN-basic
0.7406
548.6
0.4892
182.2
MaliGAN-full
0.7628
542.7
0.5526
180.2
Figure 3. Perplexity curves on Poem-5 (left) and Poem-7 (right).
From the above ﬁgures, we can see how our models
perform during the training procedure.
Although with
some oscillations, both MaliGAN-basic and MaliGAN-full
achieved lower perplexity. Especially on Poem-7 from Fig-
ure 3, our proposed models both prevent overﬁtting when
MLE ended up with that. A comparison between the train-
ing curve of MaliGAN-basic and that of MaliGAN-full,
we can ﬁnd that the latter has less variance. This demon-
strates the effectiveness of the advanced variance reduction
techniques in our full model. The peak in the MLE curve
on Poem-5 in Figure 3 is, however, unlikely to be a re-
sult of overﬁtting because that MLE “recovered” from it
fast and continued to convergence till the end. In fact, we
ﬁnd it harder to train a stable MLE model on Poem-5 than
on Poem-7. We conjecture this resulted from the intricate
mutual inﬂuence between the improper evaluation and the
small training data size.
4.3. Sentence-Level Language Modeling
We also examine the proposed algorithm on a more chal-
lenging task, sentence-level language modeling, which can
be considered as a fundamental task with applications to
various discrete sequence generation tasks.
To explore
the possibilities and limitations of our algorithm, we con-
duct extensive experiments on the standard Penn Tree-
bank (PTB) dataset (Marcus et al., 1993) through param-
eter searching and model ablations. For evaluation we re-
port sentence-level perplexity, which is the averaged per-
plexity on all sentences in the test set.
For simplicity
and efﬁciency, we adopt a 1-layer GRU (Cho et al., 2014)
as our generator, and set the same setting for the base-
line model trained with standard teacher forcing(Williams
& Zipser, 1989).
We use a Bi-directional GRU net-
work as our discriminator. To stabilize training and pro-
vide good initialization for the generator, we ﬁrst pre-train
our generator on the training set using teacher forcing,
then we train two models, MaliGAN-basic and MaliGAN-
full. MaliGAN-basic is trained with Algorithm 1 without
MCTS. MaliGAN-full is trained by Algorithm 2 with all
the variance reduction techniques included.
Note that the computational cost of MCTS is very large, so
we remove all sentences longer than 35 words in the train-
ing set. We set N = 30 and K = 5 at the beginning of the
training and pre-train our discriminator to make it reliable
enough to provide informative and correct signals for the
generator. The perplexity shown in Table 4.3 is achieved
by our best performing model, which has 200 hidden neu-
rons and 200 dimensions for word embeddings.
Table 2. Experimental results on PTB. Note that we evaluate the
models in sentence-level.
MLE
MaliGAN-basic
MaliGAN-full
Valid-Perplexity
141.9
131.6
128.0
Test-Perplexity
138.2
125.3
123.8
From Table 4.3 we can see, the simplest model trained
by MaliGAN reduced the perplexity of the baseline effec-
tively. Both the basic and the full model, i.e., MaliGAN-
basic and MaliGAN-full obtained a notably lower perplex-
ity compared with the MLE model.
Although the PTB
dataset is much more difﬁcult, we obtain results consistent
with Table 4.2. It is encouraging to see that our model is
more robust to overﬁtting in consideration of the relative
small size of the PTB data. These results strengthen our be-
lief to realize our algorithm on even larger datasets, which
we leave as a future work.
The positive result again demonstrates the effectiveness
of MaliGAN, whose primary component is the novel op-
timization objective we propose in Eq. 2.
Besides, we
also gain insights from the model ablation tests about the
advanced variance reduction techniques provided in Sec-
tion 3.3. Combined with the Perplexity curve in Figure 3,
we can see that with advanced techniques, MaliGAN-
full performed in a more stable way during training and
can to some extent achieve lower perplexity scores than
MaliGAN-basic. We believe these fruitful techniques will
be beneﬁcial in other similar problem settings.
5. Related Work
To improve the performance of discrete auto-regressive
models, some researchers aim to tackle the exposure bias
problem, which is discussed detailed in (Ranzato et al.,
2016; Serban et al., 2016; Wiseman & Rush, 2016). The
problem occurs when the training algorithm prohibits mod-
els to be exposed to their own predictions during training.

Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
The second issue is the discrepancy between the objective
during training and the evaluation metric during testing,
which is analyzed in Ranzato et al. (2016) and then sum-
marized as Loss-Evaluation Mismatch by Wiseman & Rush
(2016). Typically, the objectives in training auto-regressive
models are to maximize the word-level probabilities, while
in test-time, we often evaluate the models using sequence-
level metrics, such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002). To
alleviate these two issues, the most straightforward way is
to add the evaluation metrics into the objective in the train-
ing phase. Because these metrics are often discrete which
cannot be utilized through standard back-propagation, re-
searchers generally seek help from reinforcement learn-
ing.
Ranzato et al. (2016) exploits REINFORCE algo-
rithm (Williams, 1992) and proposes several model vari-
ants to well situate the algorithm in text generation applica-
tions. Liu et al. (2016) shares similar idea and directly opti-
mizes image caption metrics through policy gradient meth-
ods (Igel, 2005). There exists a third issue, namely Label
Bias, especially in sequence-to-sequence learning frame-
work, which obstacles the MLE trained models to be op-
timized globally (Andor et al., 2016; Wiseman & Rush,
2016)
To addresses the abovementioned issues in training auto-
regressive models, we propose to formulate the problem
under the setting of generative adversarial networks. Ini-
tially proposed by Goodfellow et al. (2014), generative
adversarial network (GAN) has attracted a lot of atten-
tion because it provides a powerful framework to generate
promising samples through a min-max game. Researchers
have successfully applied GAN to generate promising im-
ages conditionally (Mirza & Osindero, 2014; Reed et al.,
2016; Zhang et al., 2016b) and unconditionally (Radford
et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2016), to realize image manip-
ulation and super-resolution (Zhu et al., 2016; Sønderby
et al., 2017; Ledig et al., 2016), and to produce video se-
quences (Mathieu et al., 2016; Zhou & Berg, 2016; Saito
& Matsumoto, 2016). Despite these successes, the feasibil-
ity and advantage on applying GAN to text generation are
restrictedly explored yet noteworthy.
It is appealing to generate discrete sequences using GAN
as discussed above. The generative models are able to uti-
lize the discriminator’s output to make up the information
of its own distribution, which is inaccessible if trained by
teacher forcing (Williams & Zipser, 1989; Ranzato et al.,
2016). However, it is nontrivial to train GAN on discrete
data due to its discontinuity nature. The instability inher-
ent in GAN training makes things even worse (Salimans
et al., 2016; Che et al., 2016; Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Ar-
jovsky et al., 2017). Lamb et al. (2016) exploits adversar-
ial domain adaption to regularize the training of recurrent
neural networks. Yu et al. (2017) applies GAN to discrete
sequence generation by directly optimizing the discrete dis-
criminator’s rewards. They adopt Monte Carlo tree search
technique (Silver et al., 2016). Similar technique has been
employed in Li et al. (2017) which improves response gen-
eration by using adversarial learning.
In Bornschein & Bengio (2015), which inspired us, the
authors propose a way of doing mini-batch reweighting
when training latent variable models with discrete vari-
ables. However, they make use of inference network which
are infeasible in the GAN setting.
Our work is also closely related to Norouzi et al. (2016b).
In Norouzi et al. (2016b), they propose to work with the
objective KL(pd||pθ) in a conditional generation setting. In
this case, the situation is similar with ours because rewards
such as BLEU scores are available. However, conditional
generation metrics such as BLEU scores are decomposable
to each time steps, so this property can make them able to
directly sample from the augmented distributions, which is
not possible for sequence-level GANs, e.g., language mod-
eling. So we have to use importance sampling to train the
model.
6. Discussions and Future Work
In spite of their great popularity on continuous datasets
such as images, GANs haven’t yet achieved an equivalent
success in discrete domains such as natural language pro-
cessing. We observed that the main cause of this gap is that
while the discriminator can almost perfectly discriminate
the good samples from the bad ones, it is notoriously dif-
ﬁcult to pass this information to the generator due to the
difﬁculty of credit assignment through discrete computa-
tion and inherent instability of RL algorithms applied to
dynamic environments with sparse reward.
In this work, we take a different approach.
We start
ﬁrst from the maximum likelihood training objective
KL(pd||pθ), and then use importance sampling combined
with the discriminator output to derive a novel training ob-
jective. We argue that although this objective looks simi-
lar to the objective used in reinforcement learning, the nor-
malization in fact does reduce the variance of the estimator
by ignoring the region Ωin the data space around the sin-
gularity of rD in which the generator pθ has almost zero
probability to get samples from. Namely, by estimating the
partition function Z using samples, we are approximately
doing normalized importance sampling with another distri-
bution p\Ωwhich has much lower variance c.f. Section 3.2.
Practically, this single real sample normalization process
combined with mixed training (Ranzato et al., 2016) suc-
cessfully avoided the missing mode problem by providing
equivalent training signal for each mode.
Besides successfully reducing the variances of normal re-
inforcement learning algorithms, our algorithm is surpris-

Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative Adversarial Networks
ingly robust to overﬁtting. Teacher forcing is prone to over-
ﬁt, because by maximizing the likelihood of the training
data, the model can easily ﬁt not only the regularities but
also the noise in the data. However in our model, if the
generator tries to ﬁt too much noise in the data, the gener-
ated sample will not look good and hopefully the discrim-
inator will be able to capture the differences between the
generated and the real samples very easily.
As for future work, we are going to train the model on large
datasets such as Google’s one billion words (Chelba et al.,
2014) and on conditional generation cases such as dialogue
generation.
