arXiv:1901.09127v3  [cs.AI]  7 Sep 2021
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Strong Equivalence and Program Structure in Arguing
Essential Equivalence between
Logic Programs
YULIYA LIERLER
6001 Dodge St, Omaha, NE 68182, USA

submitted 1 January 2003; revised 1 January 2003; accepted 1 January 2003
Abstract
Answer set programming is a prominent declarative programming paradigm used in formulating combinato-
rial search problems and implementing different knowledge representation formalisms. Frequently, several
related and yet substantially different answer set programs exist for a given problem. Sometimes these en-
codings may display signiﬁcantly different performance. Uncovering precise formal links between these
programs is often important and yet far from trivial. This paper presents formal results carefully relating a
number of interesting program rewritings. It also provides the proof of correctness of system PROJECTOR
concerned with automatic program rewritings for the sake of efﬁciency. Under consideration in Theory and
Practice of Logic Programming (TPLP)
1 Introduction
Answer set programming (ASP) is a prominent knowledge representation paradigm with roots
in logic programming (Brewka et al. 2011). It is frequently used for addressing combinato-
rial search problems. It has also been used to provide implementations and/or translational se-
mantics to other knowledge representation formalisms such as action languages including lan-
guages B (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1998, Section 5), C (Lifschitz and Turner 1999), BC (Lee
et al. 2013), C + (Giunchiglia et al. 2004; Babb and Lee 2013), and A L (Gelfond and Kahl
2014, Section 8).
In answer set programming, a given computational problem is represented by a declarative
program, also called a problem encoding, that describes the properties of a solution to the prob-
lem. Then, an answer set solver is used to generate answer sets for the program. These answer
sets correspond to solutions to the original problem. As answer set programming evolves, new
language features come to life providing means to reformulations of original problem encod-
ings. Such new formulations often prove to be more intuitive and/or more concise and/or more
efﬁcient. Similarly, when a software engineer tackles a problem domain by means of answer
set programming it is a common practice to ﬁrst develop a/some solution to a problem and
then rewrite this solution iteratively using such techniques, for example, as projection to gain
a better performing encoding (Buddenhagen and Lierler 2015). These common processes bring
a scientiﬁc question to light: what are the formal means to argue the correctness of renewed
formulations of the original encodings to problems? In other words, under the assumption that
the original encoding to a problem is correct, how can we argue that a related and yet different
encoding is also correct? In addition, automated ASP program rewriting systems come to life.

2
Yu. Lierler
Systems LPOPT (Bichler et al. 2016) and PROJECTOR (Hippen and Lierler 2019) exemplify such
a trend. These tools rewrite an original program into a new one with the goal of improving an
ASP solver’s performance. Once again, formal means are necessary to claim the correctness of
such systems. We note that the last section of this work is devoted to the claim of correctness of
system PROJECTOR.
It has been long recognized that studying various notions of equivalence between programs un-
der the answer set semantics is of crucial importance. Researchers proposed and studied strong
equivalence (Lifschitz et al. 2001; Lifschitz et al. 2007), uniform equivalence (Eiter and Fink
2003), relativized strong and uniform equivalences (Woltran 2004). Another related approach
is the study of forgetting (Leite 2017). Also, equivalences relative to speciﬁed signatures were
considered (Erdo˘gan and Lifschitz 2004; Eiter et al. 2005; Woltran 2008; Harrison and Lierler
2016). In most of the cases the programs considered for studying the distinct forms of equiva-
lence are propositional. Works by Eiter et al. (2006), Eiter et al. (2006), Lifschitz et al. (2007),
Oetsch and Tompits (2008), Pearce and Valverde (2012), and Harrison and Lierler (2016) are
exceptions. These authors consider programs with variables (or, ﬁrst-order programs). It is ﬁrst-
order programs that ASP knowledge engineers develop. Thus, theories on equivalence between
programs with variables are especially important as they can lead to more direct arguments about
properties of programs used in practice.
In this paper we show how concepts of strong equivalence and so called conservative extension
are of use in illustrating that two programs over different signatures and with signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent structure are “essentially the same” or “essentially equivalent” in a sense that they capture
solutions to the same problem. Let us make the concept of an essential equivalence between prob-
lem’s encodings precise. We use the same notion of the search problem as Brewka et al. (2011).
Quoting from their work, a search problem P consists of a set of instances with each instance I
assigned a ﬁnite set SP(I) of solutions. We say that logic program ΠP(·) is an encoding of P
when for any instance I of this problem, the solutions to I – the elements of set SP(I) – can be
reconstructed from the answer sets of program ΠP(I). We say that encodings ΠP(·) and Π′
P(·)
are essentially equivalent, when given any instance I of problem P the answer sets of programs
ΠP(I) and Π′
P(I) are in one-to-one correspondence. The paper has two parts. In the ﬁrst part we
consider propositional programs. In the second part, we move to the programs with variables.
These parts can be studied separately. The ﬁrst one is appropriate for researchers who are not
yet deeply familiar with answer set programming theory and are interested in learning formal de-
tails. The second part1 is geared towards answer set programming practitioners providing them
with theoretical grounds and tools to assist them in program analysis and formal claims about
the developed encodings and their relations. In both of these parts we utilize running examples
stemming from the literature. For instance, for the case of propositional programs we study two
distinct ASP formalizations of action language C . In the case of ﬁrst-order programs, we study
two distinct formalizations of planning modules for action language A L given in (Gelfond and
Kahl 2014, Section 9). Namely,
1. a Plan-choice formalization that utilizes choice rules and aggregate expressions,
2. a Plan-disj formalization that utilizes disjunctive rules.
In both cases we identify interesting results.
1 This part of the paper is a substantially extended version of the paper presented at PADL 2019 (Lierler 2019).

3
Paper Outline. The paper is structured as follows. Section 2.1 presents the concepts of (i) a
propositional logic program, (ii) strong equivalence between propositional logic programs, and
(iii) a propositional logic program being a conservative extension of another one. Section 2.2 in-
troduces a rewriting technique frequently used by ASP developers when a new auxiliary proposi-
tion is introduced in order to denote a conjunction of other propositions. Then these conjunctions
are safely renamed by the auxiliary atom. We refer to this process as explicit deﬁnition rewriting
and illustrate its correctness. We continue by reviewing action language C in Section 2.3, which
serves a role of a running example in the ﬁrst part of the paper. In Section 2.4.1, we present
an original, or gold standard, translation of language C to a logic program. Section 2.4.2 states
a modern formalization stemming from the translation of a syntactically restricted fragment of
C +. At last, in Section 2.4.3 we showcase how we can argue on the correctness of a modern
formalization by stating the formal relation between the original and modern translations of lan-
guage C . An interested reader may proceed to the Appendix to ﬁnd the details of the proof of the
claim. There, we utilize reasoning by ”weak” natural deduction and a formal result on explicit
deﬁnition rewriting. (A weak natural deduction system is reviewed in the Appendix.) We also
note that there is an interesting by product of our analysis: we establish that C + can be viewed
as a true generalization of the language C to the case of multi-valued ﬂuents.
We start the second part of the paper by presenting the Plan-choice and Plan-disj programs
at the onset of Section 3. We then introduce the logic program language called RASPL-1 in
Section 3.2. The semantics of this language is given in terms of the SM operator reviewed in
Section 3.2.2. In Section 3.2.3, we review the concept of strong equivalence for ﬁrst order pro-
grams. Section 3.3 is devoted to a sequence of formal results on program rewritings. One of
the ﬁndings of this work is lifting the results by Ben-Eliyahu and Dechter (1994) to the ﬁrst
order case. Earlier work claimed that propositional head-cycle-free disjunctive programs can be
rewritten to nondisjunctive programs by means of simple syntactic transformation. Here we not
only generalize this result to the case of ﬁrst-order programs, but also illustrate that at times we
can remove disjunction from parts of a program even though the program is not head-cycle-free.
Another important contribution of the work is lifting the Completion Lemma and the Lemma
on Explicit Deﬁnitions stated in (Ferraris 2005; Ferraris and Lifschitz 2005) from the case of
propositional theories and propositional logic programs to ﬁrst-order programs. In conclusion, in
Section 3.4 we review a frequently used rewriting technique called projection that often produces
better performing encodings. We illustrate the utility of the presented theoretical results as they
can be used to argue the correctness of distinct versions of projection that also include rules with
aggregates. In particular, the last formal result stated in the paper provides a proof of correctness
of system PROJECTOR. The Lemma on Explicit Deﬁnitions presented here is essential in this
argument.
The Appendix provides the proofs for the formal results presented in the paper.
2 Propositional Programs
2.1 Traditional Logic Programs and their Equivalences
A (traditional logic) program is a ﬁnite set of rules of the form
a0 ←a1,...,al,not al+1,...,not am,not not am+1,...,not not an,
(1)

4
Yu. Lierler
(0 ≤l ≤m ≤n), where each a0 is an atom or ⊥and each ai (1 ≤i ≤n) is an atom, ⊤, or ⊥.
The expression containing atoms a1 through an is called the body of the rule. Atom a0 is called
a head.
We deﬁne the answer sets of a traditional program Π following (Lifschitz et al. 1999). We say
that a program is basic, when it does not contain connective not. In other words a basic program
consists of rules
a0 ←a1,...,al,
(2)
where each a0 is an atom or ⊥and each ai (1 ≤i ≤l) is an atom, ⊤, or ⊥. We say that a set X of
atoms satisﬁes rule (2) if it satisﬁes the implication
a1 ∧···∧al →a0.
We say that a set X of atoms is an answer set of a basic program Π if X is a minimal set among
sets satisfying all rules of Π.
A reduct of a program Π with respect to a set X of atoms, denoted by ΠX, is constructed as
follows. For each rule (1) in Π
1. when not not ai (m+ 1 ≤i ≤n) is such that ai ∈X, replace this expression with ⊤, other-
wise replace it with ⊥,
2. when not ai (l + 1 ≤i ≤m) is such that ai ∈X, replace this expression with ⊥, otherwise
replace it with ⊤.
It is easy to see that a reduct of a program forms a basic program. We say that a set X of atoms is
an answer set of a traditional program if it is an answer set for the reduct ΠX.
In the later part of the paper we present the deﬁnition of an answer set for programs with
variables by means of operator SM (Ferraris et al. 2011). Ferraris et al. (2011) show in which
sense SM operator captures the semantics of answer sets presented here.
According to (Ferraris and Lifschitz 2005) and (Ferraris 2005), rules of the form (1) are sufﬁ-
cient to capture the meaning of the choice rule construct commonly used in answer set program-
ming. For instance, the choice rule {p} ←q is understood as the rule
p ←q, not not p.
We intuitively read this rule as given q atom p may be true. We use choice rule notation in the
sequel.
Strong Equivalence Traditional programs Π1 and Π2 are strongly equivalent (Lifschitz et al.
2001) when for every program Π, programs Π1 ∪Π and Π2 ∪Π have the same answer sets. In
addition to introducing strong equivalence, Lifschitz et al. (2001) also illustrated that traditional
programs can be associated with the propositional formulas and a question whether the programs
are strongly equivalent can be turned into a question whether the respective propositional formu-
las are equivalent in the logic of here-and-there (HT-logic) (Lukasiewicz 1941), an intermediate
logic between classical and intuitionistic logics.
We follow the steps of (Lifschitz et al. 2001) and identify a rule (1) with the propositional
formula
a1 ∧···∧al ∧¬al+1 ∧···∧¬am ∧¬¬am+1 ∧···∧¬¬an →a0.
(3)
Conservative Extensions Harrison and Lierler (2016) deﬁned the notion of a conservative exten-
sion for the case of logic programs. Similarly to strong equivalence, it attempts to capture the

5
conditions under which we can rewrite parts of the program and yet guarantee that the resulting
program is not different in an essential way from the original one. Conservative extensions allow
us to reason about rewritings even when the rules in question have different signatures.
For a program Π, by atoms(Π) we denote the set of atoms occurring in Π. Let Π and Π′ be
programs such that atoms(Π) ⊆atoms(Π′). We say that program Π′ is a conservative extension
of Π if X 7→X ∩atoms(Π) is a 1-1 correspondence between the answer sets of Π′ and the answer
sets of Π. For instance, program
¬q →p
¬p →q
(4)
is a conservative extension of the program containing the single choice rule
{p}.
Furthermore, given program Π such that (i) it contains rule {p} and (ii) q ̸∈atoms(Π), a program
constructed from Π by replacing {p} with (4) is a conservative extension of Π.
2.2 On Explicit Deﬁnition Rewriting
We now turn our attention to a common rewriting technique based on explicit deﬁnitions and
illustrate its correctness. This technique introduces an auxiliary proposition in order to denote a
conjunction of other propositions. Then these conjunctions are safely renamed by the auxiliary
atom in the remainder of the program.
We call a formula basic conjunction when it is of the form
a1 ∧···∧al ∧¬al+1 ∧···∧¬am ∧¬¬am+1 ∧···∧¬¬an,
(5)
where each ai (1 ≤i ≤n) is an atom, ⊤, or ⊥. For example, the body of any rule in a traditional
program is a basic conjunction.
Let Π be a program, Q be a set of atoms that do not occur in Π. For an atom q ∈Q, let def(q)
denote a basic conjunction (5), where ai (1 ≤i ≤n) in atoms(Π). We say that def(q) is an
explicit deﬁnition of q in terms of Π. By def(Q) we denote a set of formulas def(q) for each
atom q ∈Q. We assume that all these formulas are distinct. Program Π[Q,def(Q)] is constructed
from Π as follows:
• all occurrences of all formulas def(q) from def(Q) in some body of Π are replaced by re-
spective q,
• for every atom q ∈Q a rule of the form
def(q) →q
is added to the program.
For instance,let Π be a program
¬q →p
and def(r) be a formula ¬q, then Π[{r},{def(r)}] follows
r →p
¬q →r
The proposition below supports the fact that the latter program is a conservative extension of
the former. It is an important claim as although this kind of rewriting is very frequently used in
practice to the best of our knowledge this is the ﬁrst time it has been formally claimed.

6
Yu. Lierler
Proposition 1
Let Π be a program, Q be a set of atoms that do not occur in Π, and def(Q) be a set composed of
explicit deﬁnitions for each element in Q in terms of Π. Program Π[Q,def(Q)] is a conservative
extension of Π.
2.3 Review of Action Language C
This review of action language C follows (Lifschitz and Turner 1999).
We consider a set σ of propositional symbols partitioned into the ﬂuent names σ fl and the
elementary action names σact. An action is an interpretation of σact. Here we only consider what
Lifschitz and Turner (1999) call deﬁnite action descriptions so that we only deﬁne this special
class of C action descriptions.
Syntactically, a C action description is a set of static and dynamic laws. Static laws are of the
form
caused l0 if l1 ∧···∧lm
(6)
and dynamic laws are of the form
caused l0 if l1 ∧···∧lm after lm+1 ∧···∧ln
(7)
where
• l0 is either a literal over σ fl or the symbol ⊥,
• li (1 ≤i ≤m) is a literal in σ fl,
• li (m+ 1 ≤i ≤n) is a literal in σ , and
• conjunctions l1 ∧··· ∧lm and lm+1 ∧··· ∧ln are possibly empty and understood as ⊤in this
case.
In both laws, the literal l0 is called the head.
Semantically, an action description deﬁnes a graph or a transition system. We call nodes of this
graph states and directed edges transitions. We now deﬁne these concepts precisely. Consider an
action description D. A state is an interpretation of σ fl that satisﬁes implication
l1 ∧···∧lm →l0
for every static law (6) in D. A transition is any triple ⟨s,a,s′⟩, where s, s′ are states and a is an
action; s is the initial state of the transition, and s′ is its resulting state. A literal l is caused in a
transition ⟨s,a,s′⟩if it is
• the head of a static law (6) from D such that s′ satisﬁes l1 ∧···∧lm, or
• the head of a dynamic law (7) from D such that s′ satisﬁes
l1 ∧···∧lm
and s∪a satisﬁes
lm+1 ∧···∧ln.
A transition ⟨s,a,s′⟩is causally explained by D if its resulting state s′ is the set of literals caused
in this transition.
The transition system described by an action description D is the directed graph, which has
the states of D as nodes, and which includes an edge from state s to state s′ labeled a for every
transition ⟨s,a,s′⟩that is causally explained by D.
We now present an example by Lifschitz and Turner (1999) that formalizes the effects of

7
putting an object in water. We use this domain as a running example. It uses the ﬂuent names
inWater and wet and the elementary action name putInnWater. We follow the convention by Lif-
schitz and Turner (1999) and present states (interpretations) as lists of literals. In the notation
introduced by Gelfond and Lifschitz (1998, Section 6), the action description for water domain
follows2
caused wet if inWater
putInWater causes inWater
inertial inWater,¬inWater,wet,¬wet
Written in full this action description contains six laws:
caused wet if inWater
caused inWater if ⊤after putInWater
caused inWater if inWater after inWater
caused ¬inWater if ¬inWater after ¬inWater
caused wet if wet after wet
caused ¬wet if ¬wet after ¬wet
The corresponding transition system has 3 states:
¬inWater ¬wet, ¬inWater wet, inWater wet
and 6 causally explained transitions
⟨¬inWater ¬wet,¬putInWater,¬inWater ¬wet⟩,
⟨¬inWater ¬wet, putInWater,inWater wet⟩,
⟨¬inWater wet,¬putInWater,¬inWater wet⟩,
⟨¬inWater wet, putInWater,inWater wet⟩,
⟨inWater wet,¬putInWater,inWater wet⟩,
⟨inWater wet, putInWater,inWater wet⟩.
(8)
We depict this transition system in Figure 1.
¬inWater
wet
¬inWater
¬wet
inWater
wet
¬putInWater
putInWater
¬putInWater
¬putInWater,
putInWater
putInWater
Figure 1: Transition diagram for Water domain.
2 We remark on the keyword inertial. It intuitively suggests that a ﬂuent declared to be inertial is such that its value can
be changed by actions only. If no actions, which directly or indirectly affect such a ﬂuent, occur then the value of the
inertial ﬂuent remains unchanged.

8
Yu. Lierler
2.4 On Relation between the Original and Modern Formalizations of C
We start this section by reviewing the original formalization of action language C in the language
of logic programs under answer set semantics (Lifschitz and Turner 1999). Speciﬁcally, Lifschitz
and Turner (1999) proposed a translation from an action description D in C to a logic program
lpT(D) so that the answer sets of this program capture all the ”histories” of length T in the
transition system speciﬁed by D.
Since that original work, languages of answer set programming have incorporated new features
such as, for instance, choice rules. At present, these are commonly used by the practitioners of
ASP. It is easy to imagine that in a modern formalization of action language C , given a system
description D a resulting program will be different from the original lpT(D). In fact, Babb and
Lee (2013) present a translation of an action language C + (according to Giunchiglia et al. (2004,
Section 7.3) C is the immediate predecessor of C +) that utilizes modern language features such
as choice rules. In Section 2.4.2, we present this translation for the case of C . In particular, we
restrict the language of C + to Boolean, or two-valued, ﬂuents (in general, C + permits multi-
valued ﬂuents). We call this translation simpT(D). Although, lpT(D) and simpT(D) share a lot
in common they are substantially different. To begin with, the signatures of these programs are
not identical. Also, simpT(D) utilizes choice rules. The programs lpT(D) and simpT (D) are dif-
ferent enough that it is not immediately obvious that their answer sets capture the same entities.
There are two ways to argue that the program simpT(D) is “essentially the same” as program
lpT(D): to illustrate that the answer sets of simpT(D) capture all the ”histories” of length T in
the transition system speciﬁed by D by relying
1. on the deﬁnitions of action language C ;
2. on the properties of programs lpT(D) and simpT(D) that establish a one-to-one correspon-
dence between their answer sets.
Here we take the second way into consideration. We illustrate how the concepts of strong
equivalence and conservative extension together with formal results previously discovered about
these prove to be of essence in this argument. The details of this argument are given in the Ap-
pendix. Thus, we showcase a proof technique for arguing on the correctness of a logic program.
This proof technique assumes the existence of a ”gold standard” logic program formalizing a
problem at hand, in a sense that this gold standard is trusted to produce correct results. It is a
common practice in development of answer set programming solutions to obtain a ﬁnal formal-
ization of a problem by ﬁrst producing such a gold standard program and then applying a number
of rewriting procedures to that program to enhance its performance. The beneﬁts of the proposed
method are twofold. First, this methodology can be used by software engineers during a formal
analysis of their solutions. Second, we trust that this methodology paves a way for a general
framework for arguing correctness of common program rewritings so that they can be automated
for the gain of performance. This is a question for investigation in the future.
2.4.1 Review of Basic Translation
Let D be an action description. Lifschitz and Turner (1999) deﬁned a translation from action
description D to a logic program lpT (D) parametrized with a positive integer T that intuitively
represents a time horizon. The remarkable property of logic program lpT(D) that its answer sets
correspond to ”histories” – path/trajectories of length T in the transition system described by D.

9
Recall that by σ fl we denote ﬂuent names of D and by σact we denote elementary action
names of D. Let us construct ”complementary” vocabularies to σ fl and σact as follows
-σ fl = {-a | a ∈σ fl}
and
-σact = {-a | a ∈σact}.
For a literal l, we deﬁne
bl =
(
a if l is an atom a
-a if l is a literal of the form ¬a
and
l =
(
-a if l is an atom a
a if l is a literal of the form ¬a
The language of lpT(D) has atoms of four kinds:
1. ﬂuent atoms–the ﬂuent names of σ fl followed by (t) where t = 0,...,T,
2. action atoms–the action names of σact followed by (t) where t = 0,...,T −1,
3. complement ﬂuent atoms–the elements of -σ fl followed by (t) where t = 0,...,T,
4. complement action atoms–the elements of -σact followed by (t) where t = 0,...,T −1.
Program lpT(D) consists of the following rules:
1. for every atom a that is a ﬂuent or action atom of the language of lpT (D)
⊥←a,-a
(9)
and
⊥←not a, not -a
(10)
2. for every static law (6) in D, the rules
bl0(t) ←not l1(t),..., not lm(t)
(11)
for all t = 0,...,T (we understand bl0(t) as ⊥if l0 is ⊥),
3. for every dynamic law (7) in D, the rules
bl0(t + 1) ←not l1(t + 1),..., not lm(t + 1), d
lm+1(t),..., bln(t),
(12)
for all t = 0,...,T −1,
4. the rules
-a(0) ←not a(0)
a(0) ←not -a(0),
(13)
for all ﬂuent names a in σ fl and
5. for every atom a that is an action atom of the language of lpT(D) the rules
-a ←not a
a ←not -a.

10
Yu. Lierler
Proposition 2 (Proposition 1 in (Lifschitz and Turner 1999))
For a set X of atoms, X is an answer set for lpT(D) if and only if it has the form
" T−1
[
t=0
{bl(t) | l ∈st ∪at}
#
∪{bl(T) | l ∈sT }
for some path ⟨s0,a0,s1,...,sT−1,aT−1,sT⟩in the transition system described by D.
We note that Lifschitz and Turner (1999) presented lpT translation and Proposition 1 using both
default negation not and classical negation ¬ in the program. Yet, classical negation can always
be eliminated from a program by means of auxiliary atoms and additional constraints as it is
done here. In particular, auxiliary atoms have the form -a(i) (where -a(i) intuitively stands for
literal ¬a(i)), while the additional constraints have the form (9).
To exemplify this translation, consider C action description (8). Its translation consists of all
rules of the form
1.
⊥←inWater(t),-inWater(t)
2.
wet(t) ←not -inWater(t)
⊥←not inWater(t), not -inWater(t)
⊥←wet(t),-wet(t)
⊥←not wet(t), not -wet(t)
⊥←putInWater(t), not -putInWater(t)
⊥←not putInWater(t), not -putInWater(t)
3.
inWater(t + 1) ←putInWater(t)
4.
-inWater(0) ←not inWater(0)
inWater(t + 1) ←not -inWater(t + 1), inWater(t)
inWater(0) ←not -inWater(0)
-inWater(t + 1) ←not inWater(t + 1),-inWater(t)
-wet(0) ←not wet(0)
wet(t + 1) ←not -wet(t + 1), wet(t)
wet(0) ←not -wet(0)
-wet(t + 1) ←not wet(t + 1),-wet(t)
5.
-putInWater(t) ←not putInWater(t)
putInWater(t) ←not -putInWater(t)
2.4.2 Simpliﬁed Modern Translation
As in the previous section, let D be an action description and T a positive integer. In this sec-
tion we deﬁne a translation from action description D to a logic program simpT (D) inspired by
lpT(D) and the advances in answer set programming languages. The main property of logic pro-
gram simpT(D) is as in case of lpT(D) that its answer sets correspond to histories captured by
the transition system described by D. This translation is a special case of a translation by Babb
and Lee (2013) for an action language C + that is limited to two-valued ﬂuents.
The language of simpT (D) has atoms of three kinds that coincide with the three ﬁrst groups (1-
3) of atoms identiﬁed in the language of lpT(D).
For a literal l, we deﬁne
el =
(
not a if l is a literal of the form ¬a, where a ∈σact
bl otherwise
Program simpT(D) consists of the following rules:

11
1. for every ﬂuent atom a the rules of the form (9) and (10),
2. for every static law (6) in D, simpT(D) contains the rules of the form
bl0(t) ←not not bl1(t),..., not not blm(t)
(14)
for all t = 0,...,T 3,
3. for every dynamic law (7) in D, the rules
bl0(t + 1) ←not not bl1(t + 1),..., not not blm(t + 1),
g
lm+1(t),..., eln(t),
for all t = 0,...,T −1,
4. the rules
{-a(0)}
{a(0)}
(15)
for all ﬂuent names a in σ fl and
5. for every atom a that is an action atom of the language of lpT(D), the choice rules {a}.
Here we note that the language C assumes every action to be exogenous, whereas this is
not the case in C +, where it has to be explicitly stated whether an action has this property.
Thus, in (Babb and Lee 2013) rules of this group only appear for the case of actions that
have been stated exogenous.
The simpT translation of C action description (8) consists of all rules of the form
1.
⊥←inWater(t),-inWater(t)
2.
wet(t) ←not not inWater(t)
⊥←not inWater(t), not -inWater(t)
⊥←wet(t),-wet(t)
⊥←not wet(t), not -wet(t)
3.
inWater(t + 1) ←putInWater(t)
4.
{-inWater(0)}
{inWater(t + 1)} ←inWater(t)
{inWater(0)}
{-inWater(t + 1)} ←-inWater(t)
{-wet(0)}
{wet(t + 1)} ←wet(t)
{wet(0)}
{-wet(t + 1)} ←-wet(t)
5.
{putInWater(t)}
2.4.3 On the Relation Between Programs lpT and simpT
Proposition 3 stated in this section is the key result of this part of the paper. Its proof outlines
the essential steps that we take in arguing that two logic programs lpT and simpT formalizing
the action language C are essentially the same. The key claim of the proof is that logic program
lpT(D) is a conservative extension of simpT(D). Here we only outline the proof whereas the
Appendix of the paper provides a complete proof.
3 Babb and Lee (2013) allow rules with arbitrary formulas in their bodies so that in place of (14) they consider rule
bl0(t) ←not not (bl1(t) ∧···∧blm(t)). Yet, it is well known that such a rule is strongly equivalent to (14). Furthermore,
more answer set solvers allow rules of the form (14) than more general rules considered in (Babb and Lee 2013).

12
Yu. Lierler
The argument of this claim requires some close attention to groups of rules in the lpT(D)
program. In particular, we establish by means of weak natural deduction that
• the rules in group 1 and 2 of lpT(D) are strongly equivalent to the rules in group 1 and 2 of
simpT(D) and
• the rules in group 1 and 4 of lpT(D) are strongly equivalent to the rules in group 1 and 4 of
simpT(D).
Similarly, we show that
• the rules in group 1 and 3 of lpT(D) are strongly equivalent to the rules in group 1 of simpT(D)
and the rules structurally similar to rules in group 3 of simpT (D) and yet not the same.
These arguments allow us to construct a program lp′
T(D), whose answer sets are the same as
those of lpT(D). Program lp′
T(D) is a conservative extension of simpT(D) due to explicit deﬁni-
tion rewriting. Proposition 1 helps us to uncover this fact.
Recall that the language of simpT(D) includes the action atoms — the action names of σact
followed by (t) where t = 0,...T −1. We denote the action atoms by σact
T .
Proposition 3
For a set X of atoms, X is an answer set for simpT(D) if and only if the set X ∪{-a | a ∈σact
T
\X}
has the form
" T−1
[
t=0
{bl(t) | l ∈st ∪at}
#
∪{bl(T) | l ∈sT }
for some path ⟨s0,a0,s1,...,sT−1,aT−1,sT⟩in the transition system described by D.
2.4.4 Additional Concluding Remarks: An Interesting Byproduct
Our work, which illustrates that logic programs lpT(D) and simpT(D) are essentially the same,
also uncovers a precise formal link between the action description languages C and C +. The
authors of C + claimed that C is an immediate predecessor of C +. Yet, to the best of our knowl-
edge the exact formal link between the two languages has not been stated. Thus, earlier one could
view C + as a generalization of C only informally alluding to the fact that C + allows the same
intuitive interpretation of syntactic expressions of C , while generalizing these to allow multival-
ued ﬂuents in place of Boolean ones. These languages share the same syntactic constructs such
as, for example, a dynamic law of the form
caused f0 if f1 ∧···∧fm after a1 ∧···∧an.
that we intuitively read as after the concurrent execution of actions a1...an the ﬂuent expres-
sion f0 holds in case if ﬂuents expressions f1 ... fm were the case at the time when aforemen-
tioned actions took place. Both languages provide interpretations for such expressions that meet
our intuitions of this informal reading. Yet, if one studies the semantics of these languages it is
not trivial to establish a speciﬁc formal link between them. For example, the semantics of C +
relies on the concepts of causal theories (Giunchiglia et al. 2004). The semantics of C makes
no reference to these theories. Here we recall the translations of C and C + to logic programs,
whose answer sets correspond to their key semantic objects. We then state the precise relation
between the two by means of relating the relevant translations. In conclusion, C + can be viewed
as a true generalization of the language C to the case of multi-valued ﬂuents.

13
3 Programs with Variables
We now proceed towards the second part of the paper devoted to programs with variables. We
start by presenting its detailed outline, a new running example and then stating the preliminaries.
We conclude with the formal statements on a number of rewriting techniques.
On the one hand, this part of the paper can be seen as a continuation of work by Eiter et al.
(2006), where we consider common program rewritings using a more complex dialect of logic
programs. On the other hand, this part of the paper grounds the concept of program synonymity
studied by Pearce and Valverde (2012) in a number of practical examples. Namely, we illustrate
how formal results on strong equivalence developed earlier and in this work help us to construct
precise claims about programs in practice.
In this part of the paper, we systematically study some common rewritings on ﬁrst-order pro-
grams utilized by ASP practitioners. We use a running example to ground general theoretical
presentation of this work into speciﬁc context. In particular, we consider two formalizations of a
planning module given in (Gelfond and Kahl 2014, Section 9):
1. a Plan-choice formalization that utilizes choice rules and aggregate expressions,
2. a Plan-disj formalization that utilizes disjunctive rules.
Such a planning module is meant to be augmented with an ASP representation of a dynamic
system description expressed in action language A L 4. Gelfond and Kahl (2014) formally state
in Proposition 9.1.1 that the answer sets of program Plan-disj augmented with a given system
description encode all the “histories/plans” of a speciﬁed length in the transition system captured
by the system description. We note that no formal claim is provided for the Plan-choice program.
Although both Plan-choice and Plan-disj programs intuitively encode the same knowledge the
exact connection between them is not immediate. In fact, these programs
• do not share the same signature, and
• use distinct syntactic constructs such as choice, disjunction, aggregates in the speciﬁcation of
a problem.
Here, we establish a one-to-one correspondence between the answer sets of these programs using
their properties. Thus, the aforementioned formal claim about Plan-disj translates into the same
claim for Plan-choice.
Here we use a dialect of the ASP language called RASPL-1 (Lee et al. 2008). Notably, this
language combines choice, aggregate, and disjunction constructs. Its semantics is given in terms
of the SM operator, which exempliﬁes the approach to the semantics of ﬁrst-order programs that
bypasses grounding. Relying on SM-based semantics allows us to refer to earlier work that study
the formal properties of ﬁrst-order programs (Ferraris et al. 2011; Ferraris et al. 2009) using this
operator. We state a sequence of formal results on programs rewritings and/or programs prop-
erties. Some of these results are geared by our running example and may not appear of great
general interest. Yet, we view the proofs of these results as an interesting contribution as they
showcase how arguments of correctness of rewritings can be constructed by the practitioners.
Also, some discussed rewritings are well known and frequently used in practice. Often, their cor-
rectness is an immediate consequence of well known properties about logic programs (e.g., re-
lation between intuitionistically provable ﬁrst-order formulas and strongly equivalent programs
viewed as such formulas). Other discussed rewritings are far less straightforward and require
4 It is due to remark that although Gelfond and Kahl (2014) use the word “module” when encoding a planning domain,
they utilize this term only informally to refer to a collection of rules responsible for formalizing “planning”.

14
Yu. Lierler
elaborations on previous theoretical ﬁndings about the operator SM. It is well known that propo-
sitional head-cycle-free disjunctive programs (Ben-Eliyahu and Dechter 1994) can be rewritten
to nondisjunctive programs by means of a simple syntactic transformation. Here we not only
generalize this result to the case of ﬁrst-order programs, but also illustrate that at times we can
remove disjunction from parts of a program even though the program is not head-cycle-free. This
result is relevant to local shifting and component-wise shifting discussed in (Eiter et al. 2006)
and (Janhunen et al. 2007), respectively. We also generalize so called Completion Lemma and
Lemma on Explicit Deﬁnitions stated in (Ferraris 2005; Ferraris and Lifschitz 2005) for the case
of propositional theories and propositional logic programs. These generalizations are applicable
to ﬁrst-order programs. We conclude by applying the Lemma on Explicit Deﬁnitions proved here
to argue the correctness of program rewriting system PROJECTOR (Hippen and Lierler 2019).
3.1 Running Example and Claims
This section presents two ASP formalizations of a domain independent planning module given
in (Gelfond and Kahl 2014, Section 9). Such planning module is meant to be augmented with a
logic program encoding a system description expressed in action language A L that represents
a domain of interest (in Section 8 of their book (Gelfond and Kahl 2014), Gelfond and Kahl
present a sample Blocks World domain representation). Two formalizations of a planning module
are stated here almost verbatim. Predicate names o and sthHpd intuitively stand for occurs and
something happend, respectively. We eliminate classical negation symbol by
• utilizing auxiliary predicates non o in place of ¬o; and
• introducing rule ←o(A,I),non o(A,I).
This is a standard practice and ASP systems perform the same rewriting when processing clas-
sical negation symbol ¬ occurring in programs (in other words, symbol ¬ is treated as syntactic
sugar).
Let
SG(I)
abbreviate
step(I), not goal(I), I ̸= n,
where n is some integer specifying a limit on a length of an allowed plan. The ﬁrst formalization
called Plan-choice follows:
success ←goal(I), step(I).
←not success.
←o(A,I),non o(A,I)
(16)
non o(A,I) ←action(A), step(I), not o(A,I)
(17)
{o(A,I)} ←action(A), SG(I)
(18)
←2 ≤#count{A : o(A,I)}, SG(I).
(19)
←not 1 ≤#count{A : o(A,I)}, SG(I)
(20)
One more remark is in order. In (Gelfond and Kahl 2014), Gelfond and Kahl list only a single
rule
1{o(A,I) : action(A)}1 ←SG(I)
in place of rules (18-20). Note that this single rule is an abbreviation for rules (18-20) (Gebser
et al. 2015).
The second formalization that we call a Plan-disj encoding is obtained from Plan-choice by

15
replacing rules (18-20) with the following:
o(A,I) | non o(A,I) ←action(A), SG(I)
(21)
←o(A,I), o(A′,I), action(A), action(A′), A ̸= A′
(22)
sthHpd(I) ←o(A,I)
(23)
←not sthHpd(I), SG(I).
(24)
It is important to note several facts about the considered planning module encodings. These
planning modules are meant to be used with logic programs that capture
(i) a domain of interest originally stated as a system description in the action language A L ;
(ii) a speciﬁcation of an initial conﬁguration;
(iii) a speciﬁcation of a goal conﬁguration.
The process of encoding (i-iii) as a logic program, which we call a Plan-instance encoding,
follows a strict procedure. As a consequence, some important properties hold about any Plan-
instance. To state these it is convenient to recall the notion of a simple rule and deﬁne a “terminal”
predicate.
A signature is a set of function and predicate symbols/constants. A function symbol of arity 0
is an object constant. A term is an object constant, an object variable, or an expression of the
form f(t1,...,tm), where f is a function symbol of arity m and each ti is a term. An atom is an
expression of the form p(t1,...,tn) or t1 = t2, where p is an n-ary predicate symbol and each ti is
a term. A simple body has the form
a1,...,am, not am+1,..., not an,
where ai is an atom and n ≥0. Expression a1,...,am forms the positive part of a body. A simple
rule has the form
h1 | ··· | hk ←Body
or
{h1} ←Body
where hi is an atom and Body is a simple body. We now state a recursive deﬁnition of a terminal
predicate with respect to a program. Let i be a nonnegative integer. A predicate that occurs only
in rules whose body is empty is called 0-terminal. We call a predicate i + 1-terminal when it
occurs only in the heads of simple rules (left hand side of an arrow), furthermore
• in these rules all predicates occurring in their positive parts of the bodies must be at most
i-terminal and
• at least one of these rules is such that some predicate occurring in its positive part of the body
is i-terminal .
We call any x-terminal predicate terminal. For example, in program
block(b0). block(b1).
loc(X) ←block(X).
loc(table).
block is a 0-terminal predicate, loc is a 1-terminal predicate; and both predicates are terminal.
We are now ready to state important Facts about any possible Plan-instance and, consequently,
about the considered planning modules
1. Predicate o never occurs in the heads of rules in Plan-instance.

16
Yu. Lierler
2. Predicates action and step are terminal in Plan-instance as well as in Plan-instance aug-
mented by either Plan-choice or Plan-disj.
3. By Facts 1 and 2, predicate o is terminal in Plan-instance augmented by either Plan-choice
or Plan-disj.
4. Predicate sthHpd never occurs in the heads of the rules in Plan-instance.
In the remainder of the paper we use considered theoretical results to illustrate the following
Claims:
1. In the presence of rule (17) it is safe to add a rule
non o(A,I) ←not o(A,I), action(A), SG(I)
(25)
into an arbitrary program. By “safe to add/replace” we understand that the resulting pro-
gram has the same answer sets as the original one.
2. It is safe to replace rule (19) with rule
←o(A,I), o(A′,I), SG(I), A ̸= A′
(26)
within an arbitrary program.
3. In the presence of rules (16) and (17), it is safe to replace rule (18) with rule
o(A,I) ←not non o(A,I), action(A), SG(I)
(27)
within an arbitrary program.
4. Given the syntactic features of the Plan-choice encoding and any Plan-instance encoding,
it is safe to replace rule (18) with rule (21). The argument utilizes Claims 1 and 3. Fact 4
forms an essential syntactic feature.
5. Given the syntactic features of the Plan-choice encoding and any Plan-instance encoding,
it is safe to replace rule (19) with rule (22). The argument utilizes Claim 2, i.e., it is safe
to replace rule (19) with rule (26). An essential syntactic feature relies on Fact 1, and the
facts that (i) rule (18) is the only one in Plan-choice, where predicate o occurs in the head;
and (ii) rule (22) differs from (26) only in atoms that are part of the body of (18).
6. By Fact 4 and the fact that sthHpd does not occur in any other rule but (24) in Plan-disj,
the answer sets of the program obtained by replacing rule (20) with rules (23) and (24) are
in one-to-one correspondence with the answer sets of the program Plan-disj extended with
Plan-instance.
Essential Equivalence Between Two Planning Modules: These Claims are sufﬁcient to state
that the answer sets of the Plan-choice and Plan-disj programs (extended with any Plan-instance)
are in one-to-one correspondence. We can capture the simple relation between the answer sets of
these programs by observing that dropping the atoms whose predicate symbol is sthHpd from an
answer set of the Plan-disj program results in an answer set of the Plan-choice program.
3.2 Preliminaries: RASPL-1 Logic Programs, Operator SM, Strong Equivalence
We now review a logic programming language RASPL-1 (Lee et al. 2008). This language is
sufﬁcient to capture choice, aggregate, and disjunction constructs (as used in Plan-choice and
Plan-disj). There are distinct and not entirely compatible semantics for aggregate expressions in
the literature. We refer the interested reader to the discussion by Lee et al. (2008) on the roots of
semantics of aggregates considered in RASPL-1.

17
An aggregate expression is an expression of the form
b ≤#count{⃗x : L1,...,Lk}
(28)
(k ≥1), where b is a positive integer (bound),⃗x is a list of variables (possibly empty), and each Li
is an atom possibly preceded by not. We call variables in x aggregate variables. This expression
states that there are at least b values of⃗x such that conditions L1,...,Lk hold.
A body is an expression of the form
e1,...,em,not em+1,...,not en
(29)
(n ≥m ≥0) where each ei is an aggregate expression or an atom. A rule is an expression of either
of the forms
a1 | ··· | al ←Body
(30)
{a1} ←Body
(31)
(l ≥0) where each ai is an atom, and Body is the body in the form (29). When l = 0, we identify
the head of (30) with symbol ⊥and call such a rule a denial. When l = 1, we call rule (30) a
deﬁning rule. We call rule (31) a choice rule. A (logic) program is a set of rules. An atom of the
form not t1 = t2 is abbreviated by t1 ̸= t2.
3.2.1 Operator SM
Typically, the semantics of logic programs with variables is given by stating that these rules are an
abbreviation for a possibly inﬁnite set of propositional rules. Then the semantics of propositional
programs is considered. The SM operator introduced by Ferraris et al. (2011) gives a deﬁnition
for the semantics of ﬁrst-order programs bypassing grounding. It is an operator that takes a ﬁrst-
order sentence F and a tuple p of predicate symbols and produces the second order sentence that
we denote by SMp[F].
We now review the operator SM. The symbols ⊥,∧,∨,→, ∀, and ∃are viewed as primitives.
The formulas ¬F and ⊤are abbreviations for F →⊥and ⊥→⊥, respectively. If p and q are
predicate symbols of arity n then p ≤q is an abbreviation for the formula ∀x(p(x) →q(x)),
where x is a tuple of variables of length n. If p and q are tuples p1,..., pn and q1,...,qn of
predicate symbols then p ≤q is an abbreviation for the conjunction (p1 ≤q1)∧···∧(pn ≤qn),
and p < q is an abbreviation for (p ≤q) ∧¬(q ≤p). We apply the same notation to tuples of
predicate variables in second-order logic formulas. If p is a tuple of predicate symbols p1,..., pn
(not including equality), and F is a ﬁrst-order sentence then SMp[F] denotes the second-order
sentence
F ∧¬∃u(u < p)∧F∗(u),
where u is a tuple of distinct predicate variables u1,...,un, and F∗(u) is deﬁned recursively:
• pi(t)∗is ui(t) for any tuple t of terms;
• F∗is F for any atomic formula F that does not contain members of p;5
• (F ∧G)∗is F∗∧G∗;
• (F ∨G)∗is F∗∨G∗;
• (F →G)∗is (F∗→G∗)∧(F →G);
• (∀xF)∗is ∀xF∗;
5 This includes equality statements and the formula ⊥.

18
Yu. Lierler
• (∃xF)∗is ∃xF∗.
Note that if p is the empty tuple then SMp[F] is equivalent to F. For intuitions regarding the
deﬁnition of the SM operator we direct the reader to (Ferraris et al. 2011, Sections 2.3, 2.4).
By σ(F) we denote the set of all function and predicate constants occurring in ﬁrst-order
formula F (not including equality). We will call this the signature of F. An interpretation I over
σ(F) is a p-stable model of F if it satisﬁes SMp[F], where p is a tuple of predicates from σ(F).
We note that a p-stable model of F is also a model of F.
By π(F) we denote the set of all predicate constants (excluding equality) occurring in a for-
mula F. Let F be a ﬁrst-order sentence that contains at least one object constant. We call an
Herbrand interpretation of σ(F) that is a π(F)-stable model of F an answer set.6 Theorem 1
from (Ferraris et al. 2011) illustrates in which sense this deﬁnition can be seen as a general-
ization of a classical deﬁnition of an answer set (via grounding and reduct) for typical logic
programs whose syntax is more restricted than syntax of programs considered here.
3.2.2 Semantics of Logic Programs
From this point on, we view logic program rules as alternative notation for particular types
of ﬁrst-order sentences. We now deﬁne a procedure that turns every aggregate, every rule, and
every program into a formula of ﬁrst-order logic, called its FOL representation. First, we identify
the logical connectives ∧, ∨, and ¬ with their counterparts used in logic programs, namely, the
comma, the disjunction symbol |, and connective not. This allows us to treat L1,...,Lk in (28) as
a conjunction of literals.
For an aggregate expressions of the form
b ≤#count{⃗x : F(⃗x)},
its FOL representation follows
∃⃗x1 ···⃗xb[
^
1≤i≤b
F(⃗xi)∧
^
1≤i< j≤b
¬(xi = xj)]
(32)
where ⃗x1 ···⃗xb are lists of new variables of the same length as⃗x.
The FOL representations of logic rules of the form (30) and (31) are formulas
e∀(Body →a1 ∨···∨al)
and
e∀(¬¬a1 ∧Body →a1),
where each aggregate expression in Body is replaced by its FOL representation. Symbol e∀de-
notes universal closure.
For example, expression SG(I) stands for formula step(I)∧¬goal(I)∧¬I = n and rules (18)
and (20) in the Plan-choice encoding have the FOL representation:
e∀
 ¬¬o(A,I)∧SG(I)∧action(A) →o(A,I)

(33)
∀I
 ¬∃A[o(A,I)]∧SG(I) →⊥

(34)
The FOL representation of rule (19) is the universal closure of the following implication
(∃AA′ o(A,I)∧o(A′,I)∧¬A = A′
∧SG(I)) →⊥.
6 An Herbrand interpretation of a signature σ (containing at least one object constant) is such that its universe is the set
of all ground terms of σ, and every ground term represents itself. An Herbrand interpretation can be identiﬁed with
the set of ground atoms (not containing equality) to which it assigns the value true.

19
We deﬁne a concept of an answer set for logic programs that contain at least one object con-
stant. This is inessential restriction as typical logic programs without object constants are in a
sense trivial. In such programs, whose semantics is given via grounding, rules with variables are
eliminated during grounding. Let Π be a logic program with at least one object constant. (In the
sequel we often omit expression “with at least one object constant”.) By bΠ we denote its FOL
representation. (Similarly, for a head H, a body Body, or a rule R, by bH, [
Body, or bR we denote
their FOL representations.) An answer set of Π is an answer set of its FOL representation bΠ. In
other words, an answer set of Π is an Herbrand interpretation of bΠ that is a π(bΠ)-stable model
of bΠ, i.e., a model of
SM
π(bΠ)[bΠ].
(35)
Sometimes, it is convenient to identify a logic program Π with its semantic counterpart (35) so
that formal results stated in terms of SM operator immediately translate into the results for logic
programs.
3.2.3 Review: Strong Equivalence
We restate the deﬁnition of strong equivalence for ﬁrst-order formulas given in (Ferraris et al.
2011) and recall some of its properties. First-order formulas F and G are strongly equivalent if
for any formula H, any occurrence of F in H, and any tuple p of distinct predicate constants,
SMp[H] is equivalent to SMp[H′], where H′ is obtained from H by replacing F by G. Trivially,
any strongly equivalent formulas are such that their stable models coincide (relative to any tuple
of predicate constants). Lifschitz et al. (2007) show that ﬁrst-order formulas F and G are strongly
equivalent if they are equivalent in SQHT= logic — an intermediate logic between classical and
intuitionistic logics. Every formula provable using natural deduction, where the axiom of the law
of the excluded middle (F ∨¬F) is replaced by the weak law of the excluded middle (¬F ∨¬¬F),
is a theorem of SQHT=.
The deﬁnition of strong equivalence between ﬁrst-order formulas paves the way to a deﬁnition
of strong equivalence for logic programs. A logic program Π1 is strongly equivalent to logic
program Π2 when for any program Π,
SM
π( \
Π∪Π1)[ \
Π∪Π1] is equivalent to SM
π( \
Π∪Π2)[ \
Π∪Π2].
It immediately follows that logic programs Π1 and Π2 are strongly equivalent if ﬁrst-order for-
mulas c
Π1 and c
Π2 are equivalent in logic of SQHT=.
We now review an important result about properties of denials.
Theorem 1 (Theorem 3 (Ferraris et al. 2011))
For any ﬁrst-order formulas F and G and arbitrary tuple p of predicate constants, SMp[F ∧¬G]
is equivalent to SMp[F]∧¬G.
As a consequence, p-stable models of F ∧¬G can be characterized as the p-stable models of F
that satisfy ﬁrst-order logic formula ¬G. Consider any denial ←Body. Its FOL representation has
the form e∀(Body →⊥) that is intuitionistically equivalent to formula ¬e∃Body. Thus, Theorem 1
tells us that given any denial of a program it is safe to compute answer sets of a program without
this denial and a posteriori verify that the FOL representation of a denial is satisﬁed.
Corollary 1
Two denials are strongly equivalent if their FOL representations are classically equivalent.

20
Yu. Lierler
This corollary is also an immediate consequence of the Replacement Theorem for intuitionistic
logic for ﬁrst-order formulas (Mints 2000) stated below.
Proposition 4 (Replacement Theorem II (Mints 2000), Section 13.1)
If F is a ﬁrst-order formula containing a subformula G and F′ is the result of replacing that
subformula by G′ then e∀(G ↔G′) intuitionistically implies F ↔F′.
3.3 Rewritings
3.3.1 Rewritings via Pure Strong Equivalence
Strong equivalence can be used to argue the correctness of some program rewritings practiced
by ASP software engineers. Here we state several theorems about strong equivalence between
programs. Claims 1, 2, and 3 are consequences of these results.
We say that body Body subsumes body Body′ when Body′ has the form Body,Body′′ (note
that an order of expressions in a body is immaterial) . We say that a rule R subsumes rule R′
when heads of R and R′ coincide while body of R subsumes body of R′. For example, rule (17)
subsumes rule (25).
Subsumption Rewriting: Let R′ denote a set of rules subsumed by rule R. It is easy to see
that formulas bR and bR ∧bR′ are intuitionistically equivalent. Thus, program composed of rule R
and program {R}∪R′ are strongly equivalent. It immediately follows that Claim 1 holds. Indeed,
rule (17) is strongly equivalent to the set of rules composed of itself and (25). Indeed, rule (17)
subsumes rule (25).
Removing Aggregates: The following theorem is an immediate consequence of the Replace-
ment Theorem II.
Theorem 2
Program
H ←b ≤#count{⃗x : F(⃗x)}, G
(36)
is strongly equivalent to program
H ←,
1≤i≤b
F(⃗xi) ,
1≤i< j≤b
xi ̸= xj, G
(37)
where G and H have no occurrences of variables in ⃗xi (1 ≤i ≤b).
Theorem 2 shows us that Claim 2 is a special case of a more general fact. Indeed, take rules (19)
and (26) to be the instances of rules (36) and (37) respectively.
We note that the Replacement Theorem II also allows us to immediately conclude the follow-
ing.
Corollary 2
Program H ←G is strongly equivalent to program H ←G′ when e∀( bG ↔bG′).
Corollary 2 equips us with a general semantic condition that can be utilized in proving the syn-
tactic properties of programs in spirit of Theorem 2.
Replacing Choice Rule by Deﬁning Rule: Theorem 3 shows us that Claim 3 is an instance
of a more general fact.

21
Theorem 3
Program
←p(⃗x), q(⃗x)
(38)
q(⃗x) ←not p(⃗x),F1
(39)
{p(⃗x)} ←F1, F2
(40)
is strongly equivalent to program composed of rules (38), (39) and rule
p(⃗x) ←not q(⃗x), F1, F2,
(41)
where F1 and F2 are the expressions of the form (29).
To illustrate the correctness of Claim 3 by Theorem 3: (i) take rules (16), (17), (18) be the
instances of rules (38), (39), (40) respectively, and (ii) rule (27) be the instance of rule (41).
3.3.2 Useful Rewritings using Structure
In this subsection, we study rewritings on a program that rely on its structure. We review the
concept of a dependency graph used in posing structural conditions on rewritings.
Review: Predicate Dependency Graph We present the concept of the predicate dependency
graph of a formula following the lines of (Ferraris et al. 2009). An occurrence of a predicate
constant, or any other subexpression, in a formula is called positive if the number of implications
containing that occurrence in the antecedent is even, and strictly positive if that number is 0. We
say that an occurrence of a predicate constant is negated if it belongs to a subformula of the form
¬F (an abbreviation for F →⊥), and nonnegated otherwise.
For instance, in formula (33), predicate constant o has a strictly positive occurrence in the
consequence of the implication; whereas the same symbol o has a negated positive occurrence in
the antecedent
¬¬o(A,I)∧step(I)∧¬goal(I)∧¬I = n ∧action(A)
(42)
of (33). Predicate symbol action has a strictly positive non-negated occurrence in (42). The oc-
currence of predicate symbol goal is negated and not positive in (42). The occurrence of predicate
symbol goal is negated and positive in (33).
An FOL rule of a ﬁrst-order formula F is a strictly positive occurrence of an implication in F.
For instance, in a conjunction of two formulas (33) and (34) the FOL rules are as follows
¬¬o(A,I)∧SG(I)∧action(A) →o(A,I)
(43)
¬∃A[o(A,I)]∧SG(I) →⊥.
(44)
For any ﬁrst-order formula F, the (predicate) dependency graph of F relative to the tuple p
of predicate symbols (excluding =) is the directed graph that (i) has all predicates in p as its
vertices, and (ii) has an edge from p to q if for some FOL rule G →H of F
• p has a strictly positive occurrence in H, and
• q has a positive nonnegated occurrence in G.
We denote such a graph by DGp[F]. For instance, Figure 2 presents the dependence graph of
a conjunction of formulas (33) and (34) relative to all its predicate symbols. It contains four
vertices, namely, o, action, step, and goal, and two edges: one from vertex o to vertex action and
the other one from o to step. Indeed, consider the only two FOL rules (43) and (44) stemming

22
Yu. Lierler
action
o
step
goal
Figure 2: The predicate dependency graph of a conjunction of formulas (33) and (34).
from this conjunction. Predicate constant o has a strictly positive occurrence in the consequent
o(A,I) of the implication (43), whereas action and step are the only predicate constants in the
antecedent ¬¬o(A,I)∧SG(I)∧action(A) of (43) that have positive and nonnegated occurrence
in this antecedent. It is easy to see that a FOL rule of the form G →⊥, e.g., FOL rule (44), does
not contribute edges to any dependency graph.
For any logic program Π, the dependency graph of Π, denoted DG[Π], is a directed graph
of bΠ relative to the predicates occurring in Π. For example, let Π be composed of two rules (18)
and (20). The conjunction of formulas (33) and (34) forms its FOL representation. Thus, Figure 2
captures its dependency graph DG[Π].
Shifting We call a logic program disjunctive if all its rules have the form (30), where Body only
contains atoms possibly preceded by not. We say that a disjunctive program is normal when it
does not contain disjunction connective |. Gelfond et al. (1991) deﬁned a mapping from a propo-
sitional disjunctive program Π to a propositional normal program by replacing each rule (30)
with l > 1 in Π by l new rules
ai ←Body, not a1,...not ai−1,not ai+1,...not al.
They showed that every answer set of the constructed program is also an answer set of Π. Al-
though the converse does not hold in general, Ben-Eliyahu and Dechter (1994) showed that the
converse holds if Π is “head-cycle-free”. Linke et al. (2004) illustrated how this property holds
about programs with nested expressions that capture choice rules, for instance. Here we general-
ize these ﬁndings further. First, we show that shifting is applicable to ﬁrst-order programs (which
also may contain choice rules and aggregates in addition to disjunction). Second, we illustrate
that under certain syntactic/structural conditions on a program we may apply shifting “locally”
to some rules with disjunction and not others.
For an atom a, by a0 we denote its predicate constant. For example o(A,I)0 = o. Let R be a
rule of the form (30) with l > 1. By shiftp(R) (where p is a tuple of distinct predicates) we denote
the rule
|
1 ≤i ≤l, a0
i ∈p
ai ←Body,
,
1 ≤j ≤l, a0
j ̸∈p
not a j.
(45)
Let PR be a partition of the set composed of the distinct predicate symbols occurring in the
head of rule R. By shiftPR(R) we denote the set of rules composed of rule shiftp(R) for every
member p of the partition PR (order of the elements in p is immaterial).
For instance, if R1 denotes a rule
a | b | c | d | e(1) ←
(46)
then P1R1 = {{a,b},{c,d,e}} and P2R1 = {{a,b},{c},{d,e}} form sample partitions of the

23
described kind. Set shiftPR1
1 (R1) consists of rules
a | b ←not c, not d, not e(1)
c | d | e(1) ←not a, not b,
whereas set shiftPR1
2 (R1) consists of rules
a | b ←not c, not d, not e(1)
c ←not a, not b, not d, not e(1)
d | e(1) ←not a, not b, not c.
Theorem 4
Let Π be a logic program, R be a set of rules in Π of the form (30) with l > 1, and C be the set of
strongly connected components in the dependency graph of Π. A program constructed from Π by
replacing each rule R ∈R with shiftPR(R) has the same answer sets as Π if any partition PR is
such that there are no two distinct members p1 and p2 in PR so that for some strongly connected
component c in C, c∩p1 ̸= /0 and c∩p2 ̸= /0.7
Consider a sample program Πsamp composed of rule (46), which we denote as R1, and rules
a ←b
b ←a.
(47)
The strongly connected components of program Πsamp are {{a,b},{c},{d},{e(1)}}.Theorem 4
tells us, for instance, that the answer sets of program Πsamp coincide with the answer sets of two
distinct programs:
1. a program composed of rules shiftPR1
1 (R1) and rules (47);
2. a program composed of rules shiftPR1
2 (R1) and rules (47).
We now use Theorem 4 to argue the correctness of Claim 4. Let Plan-choice′ denote a program
constructed from the Plan-choice encoding by replacing (18) with (21). Let Plan-choice′′ denote
a program constructed from the Plan-choice, by (i) replacing (18) with (27) and (ii) adding
rule (25). Theorem 4 tells us that programs Plan-choice′ and Plan-choice′′ have the same answer
sets. Indeed,
1. take R to consist of rule (21) and
2. recall Facts 1, 2, and 3. Given any Plan-instance intended to use with Plan-choice a pro-
gram obtained from the union of Plan-instance and Plan-choice′ is such that o is terminal.
It is easy to see that any terminal predicate in a program occurs only in the singleton
strongly connected components of a program dependency graph.
Due to Claims 1 and 3, the Plan-choice encoding has the same answer sets as Plan-choice′′
and consequently the same answer sets as Plan-choice′. This argument accounts for the proof of
Claim 4.
7 The statement of this theorem was suggested by Pedro Cabalar and Jorge Fandinno in personal communication on
January 17, 2019.

24
Yu. Lierler
Completion We now proceed at stating formal results about ﬁrst-order formulas and their stable
models. The fact that we identify logic programs with their FOL representations translates these
results to the case of the RASPL-1 programs.
About a ﬁrst-order formula F we say that it is in Clark normal form (Ferraris et al. 2011)
relative to the tuple/set p of predicate symbols if it is a conjunction of formulas of the form
∀⃗x(G →p(⃗x))
(48)
one for each predicate p ∈p, where⃗x is a tuple of distinct object variables. We refer the reader to
Section 6.1 in (Ferraris et al. 2011) for the description of the intuitionistically equivalent trans-
formations that can convert a ﬁrst-order formula, which is a FOL representation for a RASPL-1
program (without disjunction and denials), into Clark normal form.
The completion of a formula F in Clark normal form relative to predicate symbols p, denoted
by Compp[F], is obtained from F by replacing each conjunctive term of the form (48) with
∀⃗x(G ↔p(⃗x)).
We now review an important result about properties of completion.
Theorem 5 (Theorem 10 (Ferraris et al. 2011))
For any formula F in Clark normal form and arbitrary tuple p of predicate constants, formula
SMp[F] →Compp[F]
is logically valid.
The following Corollary is an immediate consequence of this theorem, Theorem 1, and the
fact that formula of the form e∀(Body →⊥) is intuitionistically equivalent to formula ¬e∃Body.
Corollary 3
For any formula G ∧H such that (i) formula G is in Clark normal form relative to p and H is a
conjunction of formulas of the form e∀(K →⊥), the implication
SMp[G∧H] →Compp[G]∧H
is logically valid.
To illustrate the utility of this result we now construct an argument for the correctness of
Claim 5. This argument ﬁnds one more formal result of use:
Theorem 6
For a program Π, a ﬁrst-order formula F such that every answer set of Π satisﬁes F, and any two
denials R and R′ such that F →(bR ↔bR′), the answer sets of programs Π ∪{R} and Π ∪{R′}
coincide.
Theorem 1 provides grounds for a straightforward argument for this statement.
Consider the Plan-choice encoding without denial (19) extended with any Plan-instance. We
can partition it into two parts: one that contains the denials, denoted by ΠH, and the remainder,
denoted by ΠG. Recall Fact 1. Following the steps described by Ferraris et al. (2011, Section
6.1), formula c
ΠG turned into Clark normal form relative to the predicate symbols occurring in
ΠH ∪ΠG contains implication (33). The completion of this formula contains equivalence
e∀
 ¬¬o(A,I)∧SG(I)∧action(A) ↔o(A,I)

.
(49)

25
By Corollary 3 it follows that any answer set of ΠH ∪ΠG satisﬁes formula (49). It is easy to
see that an interpretation satisﬁes (49) and the FOL representation of (26) if and only if it sat-
isﬁes (49) and the FOL representation of denial (22). Thus, by Theorem 6 program ΠH ∪ΠG
extended with (26) and program ΠH ∪ΠG extended with (22) have the same answer sets. Recall
Claim 2 claiming that it is safe to replace denial (19) with denial (26) within an arbitrary pro-
gram. It follows that program ΠH ∪ΠG extended with (22) have the same answer sets ΠH ∪ΠG
extended with (19). This concludes the argument for the claim of Claim 5.
We now state the main formal results of the second part of the paper. The Completion Lemma
for ﬁrst-order programs stated next is essential in proving the Lemma on Explicit Deﬁnitions for
ﬁrst-order programs. Claim 6 follows immediately from the latter lemma.
Theorem 7 (Completion Lemma)
Let F be a ﬁrst-order formula and q be a set of predicate constants that do not have positive,
nonnegated occurrences in any FOL rule of F. Let p be a set of predicates in F disjoint from q.
Let D be a formula in Clark normal form relative to q so that in every conjunctive term (48) of D
no occurrence of an element in q occurs in G as positive and nonnegated. Formula
SMpq[F ∧D]
(50)
is equivalent to formulas
SMpq[F ∧D]∧Comp[D],
(51)
SMp[F]∧Comp[D], and
(52)
SMpq[F ∧
^
q∈{q}
∀⃗x
 ¬¬q(⃗x) →q(⃗x)

]∧Comp[D].
(53)
This result tells us that pq-stable models of F ∧D are such that they satisfy the classical ﬁrst-
order formula Comp[D]. These models also can be characterized as (i) the p-stable models of F
that satisfy Comp[D], and (ii) the pq-stable models of F extended with the counterpart of choice
rules for member of q that satisfy Comp[D].
For an interpretation I over signature Σ, by I|σ we denote the interpretation over σ ⊆Σ con-
structed from I so that every function or predicate symbol in σ is assigned the same value in
both I and I|σ. We call formula G in (48) a deﬁnition of p(⃗x).
Theorem 8 (Lemma on Explicit Deﬁnitions)
Let F be a ﬁrst-order formula, q be a set of predicate constants that do not occur in F, and p be
an arbitrary set of predicate constants in F. Let D be a formula in Clark normal form relative to q
so that in every conjunctive term (48) of D there is no occurrence of an element in q in G. Then
i M 7→M|σ(F) is a 1-1 correspondence between the models of SMpq[F ∧D] and the models
SMp[F], and
ii SMpq[F ∧D] and SMpq[Fq ∧D] are equivalent, where we understand Fq as a formula obtained
from F by replacing occurrences of the deﬁnitions of q(⃗x) in D with q(⃗x).
iii SMpq[F ∧D] and SMpq[F′q ∧D] are equivalent, where we understand F′q as a formula ob-
tained from F by replacing occurrences of any subformula of the deﬁnitions of q(⃗x) in D
with q(⃗x).
It is easy to see that the program composed of the single rule
p(⃗y) ←1 ≤#count{⃗x : F(⃗x,⃗y)}

26
Yu. Lierler
and the program p(⃗y) ←F(⃗x,⃗y) are strongly equivalent. Thus, we can identify rule (23) in the
Plan-disj encoding with the rule
sthHpd(I) ←1 ≤#count{A : o(A,I)}.
(54)
Using this fact and Theorem 8 allows us to support Claim 6. Take F to be the FOL representa-
tion of Plan-choice encoding extended with any Plan-instance and D be the FOL representation
of (54), q be composed of a single predicate sthHpd and p be composed of all the predicates in
Plan-choice and Plan-instance.
3.4 Projection
Harrison and Lierler (2016) considered a rewriting technique called projection. We start by re-
viewing their results. We then illustrate how the theory developed here is applicable in their
settings. Furthermore, it allows us to generalize their results to more complex programs. In addi-
tion, our results give us a proof of correctness for system PROJECTOR (Hippen and Lierler 2019)
that implements so called α and β-projections.
Harrison and Lierler (2016) considered programs to be ﬁrst-order sentence formed as a con-
junction of formulas of the form
e∀(ak+1 ∧···∧al ∧¬al+1 ∧···∧¬am ∧¬¬am+1 ∧···∧¬¬an →a1 ∨···∨ak).
It is easy to see that the FOL-representation of RASPL-1 rule without aggregate expressions
comply with this form. We will now generalize the main result by Harrison and Lierler (2016) to
the case of RASPL-1 programs.
Recall how in Section 3.2.2 we identify the logical connective ¬ with its counterpart used in
logic programs, namely, not. This allows us to call an expression not a, where a is an atom, a
literal. To simplify the presentation of rewriting in this section we will treat L1,...,Lk in (28) as
a set of literals. We will also identify body (29) with the set {e1,...,em,not em+1,not en} of its
elements.
Let R be a RASPL-1 rule in a program Π, and let x be a non-empty tuple of variables occurring
only in body of R outside of any aggregate expression. By α(x,y) we denote a set of literals in
the body of R so that it includes all literals in the body of R that contain at least one variable
from x. Tuple y denotes all the variables occurring in the literals of α(x,y) different from x. By
α′ we denote any subset of α(x,y) whose literals do not contain any variables occurring in x. By
Body and H we denote the body and the head of R respectively. Let u be a predicate symbol that
does not occur in Π. Then a result of projecting variables x out of R using predicate symbol u
consists of the following two rules
H ←(Body\ α(x,y))∪α′ ∪{u(y)}
u(y) ←α(x,y).
For example, one possible result of projecting Y out of
s(X,Z) ←p(Z),q(X,Y),r(X,Y),t(X)
(55)
using predicate symbol u is
s(X,Z) ←u(X), p(Z),t(X)
(56)
u(X) ←q(X,Y),r(X,Y).
(57)

27
Another possible result of projecting Y out of rule (55) using predicate symbol u consists of
rule (56) and rule
u(X) ←q(X,Y),r(X,Y),t(X).
(58)
Yet, another possible result of projecting Y out of rule (55) using predicate symbol u consists of
rule
s(X,Z) ←u(X), p(Z)
(59)
and rule (58).
We are now ready to state a formal result about projecting that is a generalization of Theorem 6
in (Harrison and Lierler 2016).
Theorem 9
Let R be a RASPL-1 rule in a program Π, and let x be a non-empty tuple of variables occurring
only in body of R outside of any aggregate expression and not in the head. If Π′ is constructed
from Π by replacing R in Π with a result of projecting variables x out of R using a predicate
symbol u that is not in the signature of Π, then M 7→M
|σ(bΠ) is a 1-1 correspondence between
the models of SMp,u[c
Π′] and the models of SMp[bΠ].
This result on correctness of projection is immediate consequences of Lemma on Explicit
Deﬁnitions presented here. We note that the proof of a more restricted statement by Harrison and
Lierler (2016) is rather complex relying directly on the deﬁnition of SM operator. This illustrates
the utility of presented theory, e.g., Lemma on Explicit Deﬁnitions, as it equips ASP practitioners
with a formal result that eases a construction of proofs of correctness of their rewritings.
Hippen and Lierler (2019) considered rewritings that they call α and β-projections. They also
implement these rewritings in system PROJECTOR. Both α and β-projections are instances of
the projection deﬁned here. As a result, Theorem 9 provides a proof of correctness for the α and
β-projections.
Here we reproduce the deﬁnition of α-projection by Hippen and Lierler (2019, Section 2) for
the case of positive rules of the form
a0 ←a1,...,am,
where a0 is an atom or ⊥and a1,...,am are atoms (we use the notation of this paper to reproduce
the deﬁnition). Expression (55) exempliﬁes a positive rule. For a positive rule ρ and a set x of
variables, by alpha(ρ,x) we denote the set of all atoms in the body of ρ such that they contain
some variable in x. For instance, let ρ1 be rule (55). Then,
alpha(ρ1,{Y}) = {q(X,Y),r(X,Y)}
alpha(ρ1,{X,Y}) = {q(X,Y),r(X,Y),t(X)}
For a set x of variables and a positive rule ρ of the form H ←Body, where no variable in x
occurs in H, the process of α-projecting x out of this rule will result in replacing it by two rules:
1. a rule
u(y) ←alpha(ρ,x).
so that
• u is a fresh predicate symbol with respect to original program, and
• y is composed of the variables that occur in alpha(ρ,x), but not in x;

28
Yu. Lierler
2. a rule
H ←(Body\ alpha(ρ,x))∪{u(y)}.
For instance, replacing rule (55) with rules (56) and (57) exempliﬁes α-projection of Y. It is easy
to see that α-projection on positive programs is an instance of projection rewriting studied here.
The deﬁnitions of α and β-projections for general programs require substantially more notation.
Thus, we refer an interested reader to the paper by Hippen and Lierler (2019, Section 2) for the
details. Yet, it is still easy to see that these rewritings are instances of projection as deﬁned here.
For example, replacing rule (55) with rules (59) and (58) exempliﬁes β-projection.
4 Conclusions
We illustrated how the concepts of strong equivalence and conservative extensions can be used
jointly to argue the correctness of a newly designed program or correctness of program rewrit-
ings. This work outlines a methodology for such arguments. Also, this paper lifts several im-
portant theoretical results for propositional programs to the case of ﬁrst-order logic programs.
These new formal ﬁndings allow us to argue a number of ﬁrst-order program rewritings to be
safe. We illustrate the usefulness of these ﬁndings by utilizing them in constructing an argument
which shows that the sample programs Plan-choice and Plan-disj are essentially the same. We
believe that these results provide a strong building block for a portfolio of safe rewritings that can
be used in creating an automatic tool for carrying these rewritings during program performance
optimization phase. For example, system PROJECTOR discussed in the last section implements
projection rewritings for the sake of performance. In this work we utilized the presented formal
results to argue the correctness of this system.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to Pedro Cabalar, Jorge Fandinno, Nicholas Hippen, Vladimir
Lifschitz, Miroslaw Truszczynski for valuable discussions on the subject of this paper. We are
also thankful to the anonymous reviewers for their help to improve the presentation of the mate-
rial in the paper. Yuliya Lierler was partially supported by the NSF 1707371 grant.
Appendix A ”Weak” Natural Deduction System
Recall that in addition to introducing the strong equivalence, Lifschitz et al. (2001) also illus-
trated that traditional programs can be associated with the propositional formulas and a question
whether the programs are strongly equivalent can be turned into a question whether the respec-
tive propositional formulas are equivalent in the HT logic. The authors also state that every
formula provable in the natural deduction system, where the axiom of the law of the excluded
middle (F ∨¬F) is replaced by the weak law of the excluded middle (¬F ∨¬¬F), is a theorem
of logic HT. We call this system weak natural deduction system. Since we use this observation
in providing formal arguments stated in Section 2, we review the weak natural deduction system
here. We denote this system by N. Its review follows the lines of (Lifschitz 2016) to a large ex-
tent. For another reference to natural deductions system we refer the reader to (Lifschitz et al.
2008). We note that Mints (2010) introduced an alternative sequent calculus for logic of HT that
was further generalized to ﬁrst-order case.
A sequent is an expression of the form
G ⇒F
(A1)

29
(“F under assumptions G ”), where F is a propositional formula that allows connectives
⊥,⊤,¬,∧,∨,→
and G is a ﬁnite set of formulas. If G is written as {G1,...,Gn}, we drop the braces and write (A1)
as G1,...,Gn ⇒F. Intuitively, this sequent is understood as the formula (G1 ∧··· ∧Gn) →F if
n > 0, and as F if n = 0.
The axioms of N are sequents of the forms
F ⇒F,
⇒⊤,
and
⇒¬F ∨¬¬F.
In the list of inference rules presented in Figure A 1, G , ∆, Σ are ﬁnite sets of formulas,
and F,G,H are formulas. The inference rules of N except for the two rules at the last row are clas-
siﬁed into introduction rules (·I) and elimination rules (·E); the exceptions are the contradiction
rule (C) and the weakening rule (W).
(∧I) G ⇒F
∆⇒G
G ,∆⇒F ∧G
(∧E) G ⇒F ∧G
G ⇒F
G ⇒F ∧G
G ⇒G
(∨I)
G ⇒F
G ⇒F ∨G
G ⇒G
G ⇒F ∨G
(∨E) G ⇒F ∨G
∆,F ⇒H
Σ,G ⇒H
G ,∆,Σ ⇒H
(→I)
G ,F ⇒G
G ⇒F →G
(→E) G ⇒F
∆⇒F →G
G ,∆⇒G
(¬I) G ,F ⇒⊥
G ⇒¬F
(¬E) G ⇒F
∆⇒¬F
G ,∆⇒⊥
(C) G ⇒⊥
G ⇒F
(W)
G ⇒H
G ,∆⇒H
Figure A 1: Inference rules of system N.
A proof/derivation is a list of sequents S1,...,Sn such that each Si is either an axiom or can
be derived from some of the sequents in S1,...,Si−1 by one of the inference rules. To prove a
sequent S means to ﬁnd a proof with the last sequent S. To prove a formula F means to prove the
sequent ⇒F.
The De Morgan’s law
¬(F ∨G) ↔¬F ∧¬G
is provable intuitionistically (where we understand formula H ↔H′ as an abbreviation for (H →
H′) ∧(H′ →H)). Thus, formulas ¬(F ∨G) and ¬F ∧¬G are intuitionistically equivalent. The
other De Morgan’s law
¬(F ∧G) ↔¬F ∨¬G
is such that its one half is provable intuitionistically, while the other one is provable in HT (thus,
formulas ¬(F ∧G) and ¬F ∨¬G are equivalent in HT-logic). We illustrate the latter fact in
Figure A 2 using system N. In other words, we prove sequent ⇒¬(F ∧G) →¬F ∨¬G in N.
It is convenient to introduce abbreviations for the assumptions used in the proofs so that A1
abbreviates assumption ¬(F ∧G) in Figure A 2.
It is easy to show that the propositional formulas F →⊥and ¬F are equivalent using N, so

30
Yu. Lierler
1.
⇒¬F ∨¬¬F
axiom
8.
¬¬F ⇒¬¬F
axiom
A1.
¬(F ∧G)
9.
A1,G,¬¬F ⇒⊥
(¬E) 7,8
2.
A1 ⇒¬(F ∧G)
axiom
10.
A1,¬¬F ⇒¬G
(¬I) 9
3.
G ⇒G
axiom
11.
A1,¬¬F ⇒¬F ∨¬G
(∨I) 10
4.
F ⇒F
axiom
12.
¬F ⇒¬F
axiom
5.
F,G ⇒F ∧G
(∧I) 3,4
13.
¬F ⇒¬F ∨¬G
(∨I) 12
6.
A1,F,G ⇒⊥
(¬E) 2,5
14.
A1 ⇒¬F ∨¬G
(∨E) 1, 11, 13
7.
A1,G ⇒¬F
(¬I) 6
15.
⇒¬(F ∧G) →(¬F ∨¬G)
(→I) 14
Figure A 2: Proof of sequent ⇒¬(F ∧G) →¬F ∨¬G in system N.
that in the sequel we often identify rules of the form
a1 ∧···∧al ∧¬al+1 ∧···∧¬am ∧¬¬am+1 ∧···∧¬¬an →⊥
with the propositional formula
¬(a1 ∧···∧al ∧al+1 ∧···∧¬am ∧¬¬am+1 ∧···∧¬¬an).
Appendix B Proofs
B.1 Proofs for Section 2
To prove Proposition 1 several earlier results from the literature are of use.
Proposition 5 (Replacement Theorem I in (Mints 2000), Section 2.8)
If F is a formula containing a subformula G and F′ is the result of replacing that subformula
by G′ then G ↔G′ intuitionistically implies F ↔F′.
To rely on formal results stated earlier in the literature, we now consider the case of programs
that are more general than traditional logic programs. We call such programs deﬁnitional. In
other words, traditional programs are their special case. A deﬁnitional program consists of rules
of the form (3) (recall that we identify rule (1) with the propositional formula (3)) and rules of
the form a →F, where a is an atom and F is a basic conjunction. If a program contains two rules
F →a and a →F we abbreviate that by a single expression F ↔a. A deﬁnitional program is a
special case of propositional theories presented in (Ferraris 2005). We understand answer sets for
deﬁnitional programs as presented there. Ferraris (2005, Section 2) illustrates that in application
to any traditional program the deﬁnition from (Lifschitz et al. 1999), presented here, and their
deﬁnition are equivalent.
We now restate the results that immediately follow from Lemma on Explicit Deﬁnitions and
Completion Lemma presented in (Ferraris 2005) for the case of deﬁnitional programs.
Proposition 6 (Proposition 4 (Ferraris 2005))
Let Π be a deﬁnitional program and Q be a set of atoms that do not occur in Π. For each q ∈Q,
let Def(q) be a basic conjunction that does not contain any atom in Q. Then, X 7→X \Q is a 1-1
correspondence between the answer sets if Π∪{Def(q) →q | q ∈Q} and the answer sets of Π.
Proposition 7 (Proposition 5 (Ferraris 2005))
Let Π be a deﬁnitional program and Q be a set of atoms that do not occur in Π. For each q ∈Q,
let Def(q) be a basic conjunction that does not contain any atom in Q. Then, Π∪{Def(q) →q |
q ∈Q} and Π∪{Def(q) ↔q | q ∈Q} have the same answer sets.

31
Proof of Proposition 1
By Π′ we denote a program constructed from Π by adding a rule def(q) →q for every atom
q ∈Q. By Proposition 6, Π′ is a conservative extension of Π. By Proposition 7, traditional pro-
gram Π′ has the same answer sets as the deﬁnitional program Π′′ constructed from Π′ by replac-
ing a rule def(q) →q with a rule def(q) ↔q . Similarly, traditional program Π[Q,def(Q)] has
the same answer sets as the deﬁnitional program Π[Q,def(Q)]′ constructed from it by replacing
a rule def(q) →q with a rule def(q) ↔q. By Replacement Theorem I, Π′′ and Π[Q,def(Q)]′
are strongly equivalent.
We now state auxiliary lemmas that are useful in the argument of Proposition 3. It is con-
structed by uncovering the formal link between logic programs simpT(D) and lpT(D), where
lpT(D) serves the role of a gold standard by the virtue of Proposition 2.
Lemma 1
If F is a formula containing a subformula G and F′ is the result of replacing that subformula
by G′ then the sequent
Γ ⇒(G ↔G′) →(F ↔F′)
is provable in N, where Γ is arbitrary set of assumptions.
Proof
Trivially follows from the Replacement Theorem I stated as Proposition 5 here.
Lemma 2
The sequent
¬(F ∧G),¬(¬F ∧¬G) ⇒¬F ↔¬¬G∧¬G ↔¬¬F
is provable in N.
Proof
We illustrate the proof in N for the sequent
¬(F ∧G) ⇒¬¬F →¬G.
We allow ourselves a freedom to use De Morgan’s Laws as if they were given to us as additional
inference rules in N.
A1.
¬(F ∧G)
1.
A1 ⇒¬(F ∧G)
axiom
2.
A1 ⇒¬F ∨¬G
De Morgan’s Law 1
3.
¬F ⇒¬F
axiom
4.
¬G ⇒¬G
axiom
5.
¬¬F ⇒¬¬F
axiom
6.
¬¬F,¬F ⇒⊥
(¬ E) 3,5
7.
¬¬F,¬F ⇒¬G
(C) 6
8.
A1,¬¬F ⇒¬G
(∨E) 2,4,7
9.
A1 ⇒¬¬F →¬G
(→I) 8

32
Yu. Lierler
Sequent 1
Γ ⇒
(¬l1(t +1)∧··· ∧¬lm(t +1)∧d
lm+1(t)∧···∧bln(t) →bl0(t +1)) ↔
(¬¬bl1(t +1)∧··· ∧¬¬ blm(t +1)∧d
lm+1(t)∧··· ∧bln(t) →bl0(t +1))
Sequent 2
⇒
Γ∧(¬l1(t +1)∧··· ∧¬lm(t +1)∧d
lm+1(t)∧··· ∧bln(t) →bl0(t +1)) ↔
Γ∧(¬¬bl1(t +1)∧··· ∧¬¬ blm(t +1)∧d
lm+1(t)∧···∧bln(t) →bl0(t +1)).
Figure B 1: Sequents in the proof of Proposition 3
Similar proofs in structure are available for the sequents
¬(F ∧G) ⇒¬¬G →¬F,
¬(¬F ∧¬G) ⇒¬F →¬¬G, and
¬(¬F ∧¬G) ⇒¬G →¬¬F.
Several applications of (∧I) will allow us to conclude the proof in N for the sequent in the
statement of this lemma.
Proof of Proposition 3
It is easy to see that the signatures of simpT(D) and lpT(D) differ by complement action atoms
present in lpT(D). What we show next is the fact that lpT(D) is a conservative extension of
simpT(D). Then the claim of this proposition follows from Proposition 2.
Claim 1: The set of rules from groups 1 and 3 of lpT(D) are strongly equivalent to the set of
rules from group 1 of lpT(D) and the rules
bl0(t + 1) ←not not bl1(t + 1),...,not not blm(t + 1),
d
lm+1(t),..., bln(t),
(B1)
for all t = 0,...,T −1, for every dynamic law (7) in D.
It is easy to see that these sets of rules only differ in structure of rules (12) and (B1) so that
the atoms of the form li(t + 1) (1 ≤i ≤m) in (12) are replaced by the expressions of the form
not bli(t + 1) in (B1).
Let Γ denote the set of rules from group 1 of lpT(D). Using Lemmas 1 and 2 it is easy to see
that the sequent 1 presented in Figure B 1 is provable in N. It is easy to construct a proof in N
from this sequent 1 to the sequent 2 in the same ﬁgure. This immediately concludes the proof of
Claim 1.
Claim 2: The set of rules from groups 1 and 2 of lpT(D) are strongly equivalent to the set of
rules from group 1 and 2 of simpT (D).
The proof for this claim follows the lines of a proof for Claim 1.
Claim 3: The set of rules from groups 1 and 4 of lpT(D) are strongly equivalent to the set of
rules from group 1 and 4 of simpT (D).
The proof for this claim is similar to that of a proof of Claim 1.
Due to Claims 1, 2, and 3, it follows that lpT (D) has the same answer sets as the program
lp′
T(D) constructed from lpT(D) by replacing (i) the rules from group 3 with rules (B1) for all
t = 0,...,T −1, for every dynamic law (7) in D, and (ii) the rules from groups 2 and 4 in lpT(D)
by the rules from groups 2 and 4 in simpT(D).

33
Let def(-a) denote formula ¬a for every elementary action a in σact
T . It is easy to see that
lp′
T(D) coincides with the program
simpT(D)[ {-a | a ∈σact
T }, {def(-a) | a ∈σact
T } ].
By Proposition 1, program lp′
T (D) is a conservative extension of simpT(D). Consequently,
lpT(D) is a conservative extension of simpT(D).
B.2 Proofs for Section 3
Proof of Theorem 2
Consider the case when H is a disjunction of atoms then FOL representation of rule (36) is the
universal closure of formula

∃⃗x1 ···⃗xb  ^
1≤i≤b
F(⃗xi)∧
^
1≤i< j≤b
¬(xi = xj)

∧G

→H.
(B2)
The FOL representation of rule (37) is the universal closure of formula
  ^
1≤i≤b
F(⃗xi)∧
^
1≤i< j≤b
¬(xi = xj)∧G

→H.
Given that formula ∀⃗z(H →H′) where H′ has no free occurrences of variables in⃗z is intuition-
istically equivalent to ∃⃗z(H) →H′, the FOL representation of rule (37) can be written as the
universal closure of formula

∃⃗x1 ···⃗xb  ^
1≤i≤b
F(⃗xi)∧
^
1≤i< j≤b
¬(xi = xj)∧G

→H.
It is easy to see that the left hand sides of the implications in this formula and formula (B2) are
classically equivalent. And thus by Replacement Theorem II these formulas are intuitionistically
equivalent. Similarly we can argue for the case when H is of the form {a}.
Outline of the Proof of Theorem 3
We can derive the former program given in the theorem statement (its FOL representation) from
the latter intuitionistically; and we can derive the later from the former in logic SQHT=. For the
second direction, De Morgan’s law ¬(F ∧G) →¬F ∨¬G (provable in logic SQHT=, but not
valid intuitionistically) is essential.
To prove Theorem 4 we recall the Splitting Lemma from (Ferraris et al. 2009) (this Splitting
Lemma is the generalization of the Splitting Set Theorem (Lifschitz and Turner 1994)).
Splitting Lemma. Let F be a ﬁrst-order sentence.
Version 1: Let p, q be disjoint tuples of distinct predicate constants. If each strongly con-
nected component of DGpq[F] is a subset of p or a subset of q, then SMpq[F] is equivalent to
SMp[F]∧SMq[F].
Version 2: Let p be a tuple of distinct predicate constants. If c1,...,cn are all the strongly
connected components of DGp[F], then SMp[F] is equivalent to SMc1[F]∧···∧SMcn[F].
Proof of Theorem 4
We start by partitioning C into two sets Q and r so that
• any element in Q is such that at least one of its predicate symbols occurs in a head of some
rule in R,

34
Yu. Lierler
• any element in r is such that none of its predicate symbols occurs in a head of some rule in R.
We identify set r with a tuple (order is immaterial) composed of the predicate symbols occurring
in its elements. For set Q we identify every strongly connected component q ∈Q, with a tuple of
predicate symbols in this component.
By Πsh we denote a program constructed from Π by replacing each rule R ∈R with shiftPR(R).
By deﬁnition, an answer set of Π is an Herbrand model of formula (35). Similarly, an answer
set of Πsh is an Herbrand model of
SM
π(d
Πsh)[d
Πsh].
(B3)
We now show that formulas (35) and (B3) are equivalent.
By the Splitting Lemma, formula (35) is equivalent to
SMr[bΠ]∧
^
q∈Q
SMq[bΠ]
(B4)
Theorem 5 from (Ferraris et al. 2011) shows that given formulas SMp[F] and SMp[G] so that
π(F) = π(G) if the equivalence between F and G can be derived intuitionistically from the law
of excluded middle formulas for all predicates in π(F)\p, then they have the same stable models.
Following claims are the consequences of that theorem
• SMr[bΠ] is equivalent to SMr[d
Πsh],
• for every q in Q, SMq[bΠ] is equivalent to SMq[d
Πsh].
Consequently, formula (B4) is equivalent to formula
SMr[d
Πsh]∧
^
q∈Q
SMq[d
Πsh]
(B5)
It is easy to see that π(bΠ) = π(d
Πsh). By the Splitting Lemma, formula (B5) is equivalent to (B3).
In order to state a proof for Completion Lemma, we recall several important theorems from (Fer-
raris et al. 2009; Ferraris et al. 2011).
Theorem 10 (Splitting Theorem (Ferraris et al. 2009))
Let F and D be ﬁrst-order sentences, and let p,q be disjoint tuples of distinct predicate constants.
If
• each strongly connected component of DGp,q[F ∧D] is a subset of p or q,
• members of p have no strictly positive occurrences in D, and
• members of q have no strictly positive occurrences in F
then
SMpq[F ∧D] is equivalent to SMp[F]∧SMq[D].
Theorem 11 (Theorem 2 (Ferraris et al. 2011))
Let F be ﬁrst-order sentences, and let p,q be disjoint tuples of distinct predicate constants. Then
SMpq[F ∧
^
q∈{q}
∀⃗x
 ¬¬q(⃗x) →q(⃗x)

] is equivalent to SMp[F].
We say that formula SMp[F] is tight if the graph DGp[F] is acyclic.

35
Theorem 12 (Theorem 11 (Ferraris et al. 2009))
For any tight formula SMp[F] where F is in Clark normal form relative to p, SMp[F] is equivalent
to the completion of F.
Proof of Theorem 7
Recall that D and Comp[D] denote
V
q in q ∀x
 G →q(˜x)

and
V
q in q ∀x
 G ↔q(˜x)

,
respectively. From the conditions posed on the occurrence of elements in q in F and D it is easy
to see that every element in q forms a singleton strongly connected component in DGp,q[F ∧D]
and in DGq[D]. Consequently, each strongly connected component of DGp,q[F ∧D] is a subset
of p or q and D is tight. Furthermore, by the assumptions of the theorem, members of p have
no strictly positive occurrences in D, and members of q have no strictly positive occurrences
in F. By Theorem 10, formula (50) is equivalent to SMp[F]∧SMq[D]. By Theorem 12, SMq[D]
is equivalent to Comp[D]. Consequently, formula (50) is equivalent to (51) and (52). By Theo-
rem 11, formula (52) is equivalent to formula (53).
Proof of Theorem 8
By Theorem 8, SMpq[F ∧D] is equivalent to SMp[F]∧Comp[D]. FormulaComp[D] corresponds
to so called explicit deﬁnitions of predicates in q. There is an obvious 1-1 correspondence be-
tween the models of SMp[F] and the models of the same formula extended with explicit deﬁni-
tions (for predicates that do not occur in F). In particular, if M is a model of SMp[F]∧Comp[D]
then M|σ(F) is a model of SMp[F]. This concludes the proof of statement (i). By the Replace-
ment Theorem for intuitionistic logic, we conclude that SMp[F] ∧Comp[D] is equivalent to
SMp[Fq] ∧Comp[D] and hence to SMpq[Fq ∧D] by Theorem 8. This concludes the proof of
statement (ii). Statement (iii) is proved similarly.
