AI visualization in Nanoscale Microscopy 
A. Rajagopal1 [0000-0002-5602-6416] , V. Nirmala2[0000-0001-7370-2490] ,  Andrew.J3 [0000-0003-3592-6543] ,                
Arun Muthuraj Vedamanickam4[0000-0001-5361-9438] 
1 Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India 
2 Queen Marys College, Chennai, India (corresponance) 
3 Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences, India 
4National Institute of Technology, Trichy, India 

Abstract. Artificial Intelligence (AI) & Nanotechnology are promising areas for 
the future of humanity. While Deep Learning based Computer Vision has found 
applications in many fields from medicine to automotive, its application in nan-
otechnology can open doors for new scientific discoveries. Can we apply AI to 
explore objects that our eyes can’t see such as nano scale sized objects? An AI 
platform to visualize nanoscale patterns learnt by a Deep Learning neural net-
work can open new frontiers for nanotechnology.  The objective of this paper is 
to develop a Deep Learning based visualization system on images of nanomateri-
als obtained by scanning electron microscope (SEM).  This paper contributes an 
AI platform to enable any nanoscience researcher to use AI in visual exploration 
of nanoscale morphologies of nanomaterials. This AI is developed by a technique 
of visualizing intermediate activations of a Convolutional AutoEncoder (CAE).   
In this method, a nano scale specimen image is transformed into its feature rep-
resentations by a Convolution Neural Network (CNN). The Convolutional Auto-
Encoder is trained on 100% SEM dataset from NFFA-EUROPE, and then CNN 
visualization is applied. This AI generates various conceptual feature representa-
tions of the nanomaterial.    
While Deep Learning based image classification of SEM images are widely pub-
lished in literature, there are not much publications that have visualized Deep 
neural networks of nanomaterials. There is a significant opportunity to gain in-
sights from the learnings extracted by machine learning. This paper unlocks the 
potential of applying Deep Learning based Visualization on electron microscopy 
to offer AI extracted features and architectural patterns of various nanomaterials. 
This is a contribution in Explainable AI in nano scale objects, and to learn from 
otherwise black box neural networks. This paper contributes an open source AI 
with reproducible results at URL (https://sites.google.com/view/aifornanotech-
nology) 
Keywords:      Explainable AI, Deep Learning in Microscopy, Convolutional 
AutoEncoder,   CNN visualization,  Nanomaterials   

2 
1 
Introduction  
1.1 
The opportunity: Applications of AI to new fields  
 Artificial Intelligence (AI) & Nanotechnology are transforming science & technol-
ogy.  The potential to apply AI is immense and rapidly progressing across many fields, 
but this potential is not widely used today by nanoscience. An editorial in highly re-
puted nature methods journal highlighted the potential of Deep Learning in Micros-
copy.  Deep Learning Computer Vision approaches have established broad set of ap-
plications in many industries such as healthcare to Self-driving cars. There is an un-
tapped opportunity for application of AI to nano-scale objects.  To unlock this potential, 
this paper explores AI visualization techniques in nano scale objects.  
 
1.2 
Research gap    
Deep Learning in microscopy has a significant potential as per the editorial of Nature 
Methods (Editorial, “Deep learning gets scope time”, 2019). As per methods to watch 
in Nature Methods (Strack, 2018), an astonishing use of Deep Learning is not image 
analysis, but “image transformation” (Moen et al., 2019).  As per Mar 2021 topic review 
of Deep Learning in microscopy (Ede, 2021), the current literature is limited to tasks 
such as image classification, image segmentation, image reconstruction. But tasks such 
as image visualization of CNN feature maps of nanomaterials is not well published. 
This paper contributes into this gap. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first 
in literature to develop an AI visualization toolkit on nanomaterials. Specifically, this 
is the first work to apply Deep Learning visualization techniques presented by (Zeiler 
& Fergus, 2014) and (Chollet, 2018) on nanoscale materials. While CNN feature visu-
alization proposed by Zeiler & Fergus (2014) is widely popular in Machine Learning 
literature, its applications on nanomaterial dataset is not well published so far. 
 
1.3 
Contributions    
The significance of the contribution is towards democratizing access to Deep learn-
ing for the benefit of the research community by contributing an Open Access AI based 
visualization toolkit, NanoAID.  This paper contributes this AI in open source software.  
All results are reproducible at https://sites.google.com/view/aifornanotechnology.   As 
summarized in Table 1, the contributions are   
1. The Open Source AI platform for enabling nanoscience community, NanoAID.  
2. The AI equips nano scientists to study nanostructures as CNN filters transform 
a SEM image of a nanomaterial to its feature representation (Example in Fig 1). 
An intuitive concept of “AI lens” is proposed in Fig 1 & demonstrated in Fig 3.  
3. In addition, this AI equips the community to visualize the CNN extracted archi-
tectural characteristics for a class of nanomaterial.  (Example in Fig 2).  
4. Future extensions of NanoAID could include domain applications as shown in 
Fig 5 and Fig 6.   
 

3 
 
Figure 1: NanoAID.#1.IP module offers a AI based nanoscale imaging method. This 
method uses gradient ascent in input space to visualize intermediate activations of fil-
ters of a Convolutional AutoEncoder. The intuition of proposed “AI lens” based idea 
for intelligent imaging is illustrated in (G) in comparison with classical Scanning Elec-
tron Microscopy (F). Using visualizing intermediate activations of a Convolutional Au-
toEncoder (P)-(Q)-(R), it is possible to re-represent a nano scale specimen such as (A) 
into feature representations such as (B), (C), (D).     
 
 

4 
 
Figure 2: NanoAID.#2 module explores the potential of AI to visualize patterns that a 
neural network has learnt that is common to thousands of SEM images of a particular 
class of nanomaterial. By visualizing the patterns a convolutional filter would respond 
to maximally, this AI demonstrates it is possible to gain understanding of the common 

5 
features of a class of nanomaterials. The top section of picture shows the general idea 
of using CNNs to learn common patterns. Next the middle section shows the output of 
NanoAID. The bottom section of the picture describes the neural network architecture 
used to generate the output. This output was generated by performing these two steps. 
In Step 1, a CNN classifier (R) is trained on SEM dataset as shown in (P). In Step 2, 
convolutional filters are visualized as shown in (Q).   
 
 
 
1.4 
Literature review & Novelty  
There is amazing progress in Deep Learning in microscopy of biological images 
obtained with electron microscope. As per recent article in Nature Communications, 
researchers have developed AI toolkit for nanoscale bio images (Von Chamier et al., 
2021). Neural network based Morphological analysis of nanometer objects are less es-
tablished as per Nature Communications article (Schubert et al., 2019), yet this paper 
contributes in this aspect. While user friendly AI tools are developed & reported in 
reputed Nature journals by (Berg et al., 2019) and (von Chamier et al., 2021), these are 
on nanoscale images of biological organisms. This paper also contributes to AI tool, 
but the special thing about this tool is CNN visualization on many nanomaterial classes 
such MEMS devices, Tips,  Patterned surfaces, Particles, Fibers.  
A Convolution Neural Network (CNN) based image classification task is reported 
in Nature Scientific Reports (Modarres et al., 2017).  While Modarres et al. (2017) 
develop an image classification by “black box” CNN classifier,  this paper utilizes the 
same dataset, but performs a different task of CNN based visualization to understand 
what the Deep Learning “black box” is learning. As per 2019 (Editorial, “Deep learning 
gets scope time”, 2019), understanding the deep learning “black box” is an active area 
of research. The dataset utilized in this paper is 100% SEM dataset, a publicly available 
dataset of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), published in Nature Scientific Data 
by NFFA–EUROPE project (Aversa et al., 2018).   
The contribution is in paper assumes significance in the context of Explainable AI 
for advancing nanotechnology. The recent paper by (Borowski et al., 2021) at Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2021) discuss why CNN feature 
visualizations are valuable technique for Explainable AI.  Many researchers support the 
view that the feature maps such as one presented in Figure 2 are meaningful (Olah et 
al., 2020). The “AI microscope” developed by leading AI research lab at https://micro-
scope.openai.com/models, OpenAI (Schubert 2020) demonstrate the potential of Ex-
plainable AI, and this paper extends this idea to nanomaterials. 
While electron microscopy has advanced nanotechnology research, the capability to 
view nanomaterials through an “AI lens” (illustrated in Figure 1) is pioneered by this 
research paper. While Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) opened the doors for us 
to see previously unseen structures, this paper proposes an “AI lens”, that opens the 
doors for the community to see previously unseen abstract structural features of nano-
materials. 
 

6 
2 
Methods & Results   
 
2.1 
Open Source AI framework to enable discoveries in Nanotechnology    
Deep Learning has been established in representing objects at human scale such as 
the common day objects found in IMAGENET dataset. Is it possible to extend this 
success of Deep Learning methods to explore nano-scale objects? 
 Nanotechnology deals with objects with nanoscale structures with a length scale 
usually cited in nanometers. One nanometer is one-billionth of a meter. A sheet of paper 
is about 100,000 nanometers thick! The goal of this paper is to enable every scientist to 
apply AI visualization to advance the nanoscience domain and help succeed in future 
applications of AI in nano. With this design goal, we created Nano scientist’s AI Dis-
covery services, NanoAID, and bestowing this effort as an Open Source AI platform. 
All the results are reproducible online, and shared in the form of Google colab URLs 
for ease of reproducing results.  
2.2 
Seeing a nanomaterial through a “AI lens”   
Result: This technique enables a researcher to view any given SEM image through 
the eyes of a neural network, specifically through the feature maps of an AutoEncoder. 
The Autoencoder neural network will learn the most essential features of a nanomaterial 
given the training objective is to minimize the reconstruction loss function, thus by 
visualizing the intermediate activations of a Convolutional AutoEncoder, it is possible 
to highlight the essential features of an nanomaterial specimen. As illustrated in Fig No 
1, this method is able to transform any SEM image (A) into feature maps shown in (B), 
(C), (D). This transformed image is now visualised (R) and presented to the user. Es-
sentially the Encoder neural network performed information distillation, and thus re-
represented the input image (A) into newer perspectives (B), (C), (D). Given AI based 
visualization is the primary output, key results of this paper are in visual format, hence 
the figures are best viewed in digital format. 
Reproducible Results 
URLs 
1) Contributed an AI 
platform for benefit of 
the community 
NanoAID opens doors the opportunity to 
apply CNN visualization on nano-
material.  
NanoAID 
website 
2) Demonstrated novel 
imaging technique in 
SEM by applying AI 
“AI lens”:  Nanomaterials are seen 
through CNN filters to visualize features. 
(Fig 1, Fig 3)    
URL#1 
(click) 
3) Explored  patterns 
learnt by machine  
  
Visualize common patterns of nano-
materials by learning patterns from thou-
sands of SEM images  (Fig 2, Fig 4) 
URL#2 
4) Future applications 
Patterns discovered by AI in MEMS and 
Patterned Surfaces (Fig 5, Fig 6)  
URL#3 
URL#4 
Table 1 : Summary of results  

7 
 
 
Figure 3:    The intuition of “AI lens” is illustrated. A Tensorflow computation graph 
consisting of CNN layers and pooling/ upsampling layers of a CAE is presented on the 
right side of this figure. By visualizing output of intermediate Convnet layers, the input 
SEM image is transformed into its feature representations, shown in green color images 
in the left.     
 
 

8 
Method: The method is illustrated in Fig No 1 in the neural network architecture. In 
this method, first a Convolutional AutoEncoder is trained on 100% SEM dataset 
(Aversa et al., 2018) to minimize the pixel wise Mean Square Error (MSE) reconstruc-
tion loss between the input image(X) and the reconstructed image (Y) in Fig No 1. An 
appropriate bottleneck size for the latent vector (Z) was choosen to ensure the recon-
struction loss was at reasonable level by observing the reconstructed image. Then the 
Encoder part(P) of the Autoencoder is picked up and saved as a neural network model. 
The User Interface (UI) in the URL allows the researcher to select the number of layers 
in the Encoder to transform an input image. Based on the selection in the UI, a neural 
network model is dynamically created with the selected depth. The neural network 
model is created on the fly using the TensorFlow/Keras Functional API (Chollet, 2018). 
Using this dynamically created model, the input SEM image is transformed by the var-
ious activation functions of this dynamically created model.  This CNN visualization 
method was introduced by Zeiler & Fergus (2014) and implemented in Keras by Chollet 
(2018). Researchers are beginning to apply this CNN visualization method in other 
fields such as MRI as per nature scientific reports (Oh Chung at al., 2019).     
2.3 
Visualizing nano scale patterns learnt by CNN 
 Result: As articulated in Table 1, the second result is an AI to see commonly occurring 
patterns in a class of nanomaterials. This AI module allows nanotechnologists to extract 
common structural of MEMS and nanoparticles, by coherent analysis of thousands of 
SEM images. This is demonstrated in Fig 2. This problem was approached by learning 
the common features into a Convolutional Neural Network by training to learn the com-
mon patterns, and then visualizing its convent layers to visualize the learnings.  
This AI equips nano scientists to comprehend structural patterns that are typically to a 
class of nanomaterial. This helps in explainable classification in contrast to black box 
approach used in the nature journal (Modarres et al. 2017). The NanoAID website 
https://sites.google.com/view/aifornanotechnology/ displays the patterns learnt by AI. 
This has the potential to open up the science of understanding of morphology of various 
nano scale objects in nanotechnology. As depicted in Fig 2, (A) and (B) shows the 
patterns of NanoParticles and MEMS respectively. These patterns were learnt by the 
CNN classifier (R) as the CNN learns from thousands of representative SEM images of 
NanoParticles and MEMS from the 100% SEM Dataset (Aversa et al., 2018). With a 
close examination of Fig 2, it can be noticed that the activations for MEMS happen in 
(K1, K3, K6) due to CNN filters (N1, N3, N6), while for Nanoparticles are activated 
by CNN filters (N2, N4, N5). This deep insight can be valuable for future applications 
that base upon Explainable AI for nanoscience.  
Method: The paper also explored three different methods to train the neural network & 
visualize the learnings.  As seen in Fig 4, the patterns were visualized by experimenting 
3 different training methods: classical transfer learning based training (A1), transfer 
learning with fine tuning all layers (A2), train a randomly initiated network (A3).  The 
work by researchers at OpenAI demonstrate patterns learnt from IMAGENET at 
https://microscope.openai.com/models, and this paper tailor develops this concept for 
NanoMaterials. 

9 
 
 

10 
Figure 4: Methods of training before visualization of architectural patterns. The paper 
experimented with 3 different methods as explained in this figure. The patterns learnt 
from IMAGENET were retained by transfer learning method (A2), while patterns of 
MEMS and NanoParticles were directly learnt in method (A3).  The patterns (P2) and 
(P3) look very different although both the networks were trained on the same dataset 
of MEMS and Particles. 
 
 
Figure 5:    Nanotechnology community can utilize NanoAID to explore the world of 
nano. Any researcher can tap into the power of AI. For instance, looking an MEMS 
reveals new structures such as circuits, structures as shown in this AI generated feature 
maps.  

11 
 
Figure 6:    Nanotechnology researchers can extend the Open Source NanoAID. For 
instance, insights such as count of patterns and its orientation can be extracted from 
SEM images of Pattern Surfaces.  
 
 

12 
3 
Conclusion    
For the benefit of community, this work contributed an open source AI platform at 
the intersection of AI & nanotechnology.  NanoAID democratized the power of AI in 
one of the less published areas of neural net based image transformation in the trending 
field of Deep Learning in microscopy.  This contribution is democratizing access to 
Deep learning visualization of nano scale materials. The paper provided Google colab 
URLs to support reproducibility of results and enable community in the potential at the 
intersection of CNN visualization and nano scale microscopy.  
The paper demonstrated how to apply Deep Learning visualization techniques to a 
public dataset of electron microscopy images of nanomaterials. Novel concepts like “AI 
lens” was proposed and demonstrated in this work, thus enabling progress in the field 
of Deep Learning in Microscopy. This paper demonstrated the power of Deep Learning 
to re-represent a nanomaterial by its features.  It was demonstrated that a nanomaterial 
SEM image could be transformed into its feature representation by computing through 
a CNN filters of an AutoEncoder. Further, the paper demonstrated experimentally that 
it is possible to represent a nanomaterial at various levels of abstractions. The “AI lens” 
also highlighted never seen before patterns.   
Extracting nanoscale architecture structural patterns by manual effort from on thou-
sands of images is a challenging science, and this paper also demonstrated a novel ap-
proach to do the same using the power of Machine Learning techniques. Three different 
training techniques were experimented for visualizing the patterns learnt by the model. 
There is future potential research direction in exploring nanoscience using the power 
of advances in visualization in representation learning such as the ICLR 2021 research 
by (Borowski et al., 2021).    
 
The future of AI infused electron microscopy could be in areas such as intelligent 
visualization to automatically highlight regions and patterns of interest. The paper 
opened doors to gain new perspectives on nanoscale features by visualizing CNN acti-
vation maps of Convolutional AutoEncoders (CAE). The paper demonstrated how Cov-
net filters in CAE can transform electron microscopy images of nanomaterials, thus 
helping uncover nanoscale morphologies of different nanomaterials.   The visual results 
generated by this paper show that essentials features can be distilled by an AutoEncoder 
that is trained to optimize for reconstruction loss by adjusting the dimensions of latent 
space. Experimenting with the dimensions of latent space can control hierarchical in-
formation distillation of various Convolutional layers in an AutoEncoder, thus enabling 
multiple abstract visual re-representation of the input electron microscopy image.   
 
In short, the potential of AI based visualization in nanotechnology is unlocked in this 
work and open sourced. The supplementary website of the paper and the source code 
can be accessed at  https://sites.google.com/view/aifornanotechnology . 
 

13
