arXiv:1503.01707v2  [cs.DB]  12 Jan 2016
Mapping-equivalence and oid-equivalence of
single-function object-creating conjunctive queries
Angela Bonifati
Werner Nutt
Riccardo Torlone
Jan Van den Bussche
September 24, 2018
Abstract
Conjunctive database queries have been extended with a mechanism
for object creation to capture important applications such as data ex-
change, data integration, and ontology-based data access. Object creation
generates new object identiﬁers in the result, that do not belong to the
set of constants in the source database. The new object identiﬁers can be
also seen as Skolem terms. Hence, object-creating conjunctive queries can
also be regarded as restricted second-order tuple-generating dependencies
(SO tgds), considered in the data exchange literature.
In this paper, we focus on the class of single-function object-creating
conjunctive queries, or sifo CQs for short. The single function symbol can
be used only once in the head of the query. We give a new characterization
for oid-equivalence of sifo CQs that is simpler than the one given by Hull
and Yoshikawa and places the problem in the complexity class NP. Our
characterization is based on Cohen’s equivalence notions for conjunctive
queries with multiplicities. We also solve the logical entailment problem
for sifo CQs, showing that also this problem belongs to NP.
Results
by Pichler et al. have shown that logical equivalence for more general
classes of SO tgds is either undecidable or decidable with as yet unknown
complexity upper bounds.
1
Introduction
Conjunctive queries form a natural class of database queries, which can be
deﬁned by combinations of selection, renaming, natural join, and projection.
Much of the research on database query processing is focused on conjunctive
queries; moreover, these queries are amenable to advanced optimizations be-
cause containment of conjunctive queries is decidable (though NP-complete).
In this paper, we are interested in conjunctive queries extended with a facility
for object creation.
Object creation, also called oid generation or value invention, has been re-
peatedly proposed and investigated as a feature of query languages. This has
happened in several contexts: high expressiveness [4, 5, 11]; object orientation
1

[3, 10, 22, 24, 29]; data integration [21]; semi-structured data and XML [1]; and
data exchange [8, 16, 18]. In a logic-based approach, object creation is typically
achieved through the use of Skolem functions [22, 24, 29].
In the present paper, we consider conjunctive queries (CQs) extended with
object creation through the use of a single Skolem function, which can be used
only once in the head of the query. We refer to such a query as a ‘sifo CQ’
(for single-function object-creating). The following example of a sifo CQ uses a
Skolem function f:
Q : Family(c, f(x, y)) ←Mother(c, x), Father(c, y).
The query introduces a new oid f(x, y) for every pair (x, y) of a woman x
and a man y who have at least one child together; all children c of x and y
are linked to the new oid in the result of the query (a relation called Family).
As an example, if Mother(beth, anne) and Father(beth, adam) are two facts
in the underlying database, then the result of the query includes the fact
Family(beth, f (anne, adam)), where f (anne, adam) is the newly created oid.
This oid will be shared by all the children having anne and adam as parents.
In this paper, we ﬁrst revisit the problem of checking oid-equivalence of sifo
CQs. Oid-equivalence has its origins in the theory of object-creating queries
introduced by Abiteboul and Kanellakis [3]; it is the natural generalization of
query equivalence in the presence of object creation.
Consider for instance the following sifo CQ:
Q′ : Family(c, g(x, y, x)) ←Mother(c, x), Father(c, y).
It is not hard to see that the result of Q′ has the same structure as the result of
the query Q above. The query Q′ links all children c of the parents x and y to
the oid g(x, y, x) that depends exactly on x and y. That is, two children in the
result of Q are connected to the same oid if and only if they are connected to
same oid in Q′, although the oids will be syntactically diﬀerent. Therefore, we
can conclude that Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent, which means that their results
are identical on any input up to a simple isomorphism mapping the oids in one
result to those in the other.
Hull and Yoshikawa [23] studied oid-equivalence (they called it ‘obscured
equivalence’) for nonrecursive ILOG programs; the decidability of this problem
is a long-standing open question.
Nevertheless, for the case of ‘isolated oid
creation’, to which sifo CQs belong, they have given a decidable characterization.
We give a new result relating oid-equivalence to equivalence of classical con-
junctive queries under ‘combined’ bag-set semantics [14], which models the eval-
uation of CQs when query results and relations may contain duplicates of tuples.
As a corollary, we obtain that oid-equivalence for sifo CQs belongs to NP, which
does not follow from the Hull-Yoshikawa test. Obviously, then, oid-equivalence
for sifo CQs is NP-complete, since equivalence of classical CQs without object
creation is already NP-complete.
Object creation is receiving renewed interest in the context of schema map-
pings [8, 18], which are formalisms describing how data structured under a
2

source schema are to be transformed into data structured under a target schema.
Hence, it is instructive to view sifo CQs as schema mappings, simply by inter-
preting them as implicational statements. As an example, we may view query Q
above as an implicational statement that relates a query over relations Mother
and Father in the source schema to the relation Family in the target schema.
For standard CQs without object creation, two queries are equivalent if and
only if they are logically equivalent as schema mappings [17]. For sifo CQs, we
show that oid-equivalence implies logical equivalence, while the converse is not
true.
Sifo CQs viewed as schema mappings belong to the class of so-called ‘nested
dependencies’ [8], which belong in turn to the class of formulas called second-
order tuple-generating dependencies (SO-tgds [18]). For instance, consider again
the sifo CQ Q above: it can be rewritten into the following SO-tgd:
∃f∀x∀y∀c(Mother(c, x) ∧Father(c, y) →Family(c, f(x, y))),
which is of second order because the function f is existentially quantiﬁed.
Although logical equivalence of SO-tgds is undecidable [19], logical implica-
tion of nested dependencies has recently been shown to be decidable [26]. We
give a novel and elegant characterization of logical implication for sifo CQs which
is simpler than the general implication test for nested dependencies. It turns
out that the problem belongs to NP. Hence, logical implication for sifo CQs
has no worse complexity than containment for standard CQs without object
creation.
Summarizing, in this paper we provide the following contributions in the
area of query languages with object creation:
1. We clarify the relationship between sifo CQs and other formalisms in the
literature, notably, the language ILOG [22], second-order tuple-generating
dependencies [18], and nested tuple-generating dependencies [8].
2. We relate the problem of oid-equivalence for sifo CQs to the equivalence
of classical conjunctive queries under combined bag-set semantics, which
implies its NP-completeness.
3. We show that when sifo CQs are interpreted as schema mappings, oid-
equivalence implies logical equivalence but not vice versa.
4. We provide a new characterization of logical implication for sifo CQs as
object-creating queries showing that this problem has the same complexity
as deciding containment for classical CQs.
This paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2 we review some practi-
cal applications of sifo CQs. In Section 3 we formally deﬁne object-creating
conjunctive queries. Section 4 is devoted to the results on oid equivalence. Sec-
tion 5 is devoted to the results on logical entailment. In Section 6 we conclude
by discussing related work and topics for further research.
3

2
Applications of sifo CQs
In this section, we discuss further applications of sifo CQs, which may consti-
tute important components of many advanced database systems, spanning from
information integration and schema mapping engines along with their bench-
marks, to several Semantic Web tools. We believe this shows that the results in
this article on equivalence and logical implication of sifo CQs are relevant and
contribute to our understanding of how solutions for these applications can be
optimized.
GAV (global-as-view) schema mappings [20, 27, 33] relate a query over the
source schema, represented by a body B of a CQ, to an atomic element of the
global schema, represented by a head atom H of a CQ. More precisely, a GAV
mapping can be written as follows:
T (¯x) ←B
where we use a relation symbol T as the atomic head predicate.
GAV schema mappings have been used already in the 1990s in mediator
systems like Tsimmis [30, 33] or Information Manifold [28] for the integration
of heterogeneous data sources. In both systems, source facts are related to facts
over the global schema by means of queries.
Sifo CQs can naturally be seen as extensions of GAV mappings, when one
of the attributes of the global schema carries newly created identiﬁers.
For
instance, the sifo CQ Q from Section 1 can express a mapping from a source
schema containing two relations Mother and Father to one relation Family of
a global schema, with created identiﬁers for families appearing in the tuples in
the result of the mapping. Thus, we can also interpret Q as an extended GAV
schema mapping.
Another important application of sifo CQs are schema mapping benchmarks
allowing the users to compare and evaluate schema mapping systems. In par-
ticular, the ﬂexibility of the arguments of the Skolem functions used for object
creation has been advocated as one of the desirable features in recent bench-
marks for schema mapping and information integration, such as STBenchmark
[6] and iBench [9].
More precisely, in the mapping primitives of iBench [9], an extension of
STBenchmark [6] that supports SO-tgds, the users can choose among two dif-
ferent skolemization strategies to ﬁll the arguments of the Skolem functions:
ﬁxed, where the arguments of the function are pre-deﬁned in a native mapping
primitive, or variable, where one can further choose among the options All, Key,
and Random, which generate mappings where all variables, the variables in the
positions of the primary key, or a random set of variables, respectively, are used
as arguments of the function.
These skolemization strategies can be captured by sifo CQs as follows. In
the query below:
T (x, y, f(x, y, z, w)) ←B(x, y, z, w)
we can observe that the Skolem term uses all the source variables in the body
B (option All). If the attribute in the position of x is a primary key for B, then
4

the application of the option Key generates a mapping that can be expressed
by the sifo CQ
T (x, y, f(x)) ←B(x, y, z, w).
Alternatively, choosing the option Random may lead the iBench to randomly
select the attributes in the positions of x and z, and then to generate the map-
ping represented by
T (x, y, f(x, z)) ←B(x, y, z, w).
It is also worth highlighting that three out of the seven mapping primitives
in iBench that are novel with respect to STBenchmark, namely ADD (copy
a relation and ADD new attributes), ADL (copy a relation, Add and DeLete
attributes in tandem) and MA (Merge and Add new attributes) contain single
Skolem functions. They correspond to the following sifo CQs, respectively:
T (x, y, f(x, y)) ←B(x, y)
T (x, f(x)) ←B(x, y)
T (x, y, z, f(x, y, z)) ←B(x, y), T (y, z).
A third signiﬁcant application of sifo CQs is the Semantic Web, where sifo
CQs can be envisioned in at least two scenarios, namely in systems for ontology-
based data access (OBDA) and in direct mappings from the relational to the
RDF data format, under development at W3C.1 Indeed, newly created identi-
ﬁers in the head of a sifo CQ can serve as generated keys, or simply as newly
invented values needed to ﬁll an attribute of a relation in the global schema.
As such, sifo CQs can be seen as examples of mapping assertions from source
schemas to a global ontology in OBDA [31]. Typically, OBDA mapping asser-
tions relate facts in relational source schemas to RDF triples in a global ontology.
The newly generated IRIs2 in the RDF triples can be interpreted as skolemized
values in the global ontology.
A related application is the direct translation of a relational schema into
OWL, which uses as an important building block the creation of IRIs [32]. In
contrast to the previous application, this application handles relational schemas
that are not known in advance.
For each relation r in a database schema,
Datalog-like rules can be used to generate an IRI for the relation r and an IRI
for each attribute a in r. We take an example of a translation from a relational
schema into OWL and we show that, actually, these Datalog-like rules can be
viewed as sifo CQs, since they employ a single concatenation function to obtain
such IRIs (exempliﬁed as f). The corresponding sifo CQs are reported below:
T1(r, f(b, r)) ←B1(r)
T2(a, r, f(b, r, a)) ←B2(r, a),
1http://www.w3.org/TR/rdb-direct-mapping/
2IRIs stand for Internationalized Resource Identiﬁers and extend the syntax of URIs (Uni-
form Resource Identiﬁers) to a much wider repertoire of characters. They naturally embody
global identiﬁers that refer to the same resource on the Web and can be used across diﬀerent
mapping assertions to refer to that resource.
5

where B1 and B2 are conjunctive query bodies retrieving relation names r
and attribute names a from the data dictionary of an underlying relational
database, and where b is a string representing a given IRI base (e.g., the string
‘http://example.edu/db’) for the same database to be translated. Thus, the ﬁrst
query creates a new IRI for the relation r, by concatenating b with the relation
symbol r, while the second query returns the set of IRIs of the attributes a of
r, by concatenating b with the relation symbol r and its attribute symbols a.
3
Preliminaries
In this section we introduce our formalism for dealing with conjunctive queries
and introduce the notion of object-creating conjunctive query, adapted from the
language ILOG [22].
3.1
Databases and conjunctive queries
From the outset we assume a supply of relation names, where each relation
name R has an associated arity ar(R). We also assume an inﬁnite domain dom
of atomic data elements called constants. A fact is of the form R(a1, . . . , ak)
where a1, . . . , ak are constants and R is a k-ary relation name. We call R the
predicate of the fact.
A database schema S is a ﬁnite set of relation names. An instance of S is a
ﬁnite set of facts with predicates from S. The set of all constants appearing in
an instance I is called the active domain of I and denoted by adom(I).
We further assume an inﬁnite supply of variables, disjoint from dom. An
atom is of the form R(x1, . . . , xk) where x1, . . . , xk are variables and R is a k-ary
relation name. As with facts, we call R the predicate of the atom.
We can now recall the classical notion of conjunctive query (CQ) [2, 13].
Syntactically, a CQ over a database schema S is of the form
H ←B,
where B is a ﬁnite set of atoms with predicates from S, and H is an atom with
a predicate not in S. The set B is called the body and H is called the head. It is
required that every variable occurring in the head also occurs in the body. We
denote the set of variables occurring in a set of atoms B (or a single atom A)
by var(B) (or var(A)).
The semantics of CQs is deﬁned in terms of valuations. A valuation is a
mapping α : X →dom on some ﬁnite set of variables X. When A is an atom
with var(A) ⊆X, we can apply α to A simply by applying α to every variable
in A. This results in a fact and is denoted by α(A). When B is a set of atoms
and α is a valuation on var(B), we can apply α to B by applying α to every
atom in B. Formally, α(B) is deﬁned as the instance {α(A) | A ∈B}.
When I is an instance and α is a valuation on var(B) such that α(B) ⊆I,
we say that α is a matching of B in I, and denote this by α : B →I. Now when
6

Q is a CQ H ←B and I is an instance, the result of Q on I is deﬁned as
Q(I) := {α(H) | α : B →I}.
3.2
Object-creating conjunctive queries
Assume a ﬁnite vocabulary of function symbols of various arities.
As with
relation names, the arity of a function symbol f is denoted by ar(f).
Data terms are syntactical expressions built up from constants using function
symbols. Formally, data terms are inductively deﬁned as follows:
1. Every constant is a data term;
2. If f is a k-ary function symbol and d1, . . . , dk are data terms, then the
expression f(d1, . . . , dk) is also a data term.3
An extended fact is deﬁned just like a fact, except that it may contain data
terms rather than only constants. Formally, an extended fact is of the form
R(d1, . . . , dk), where d1, . . . , dk are data terms and R is a k-ary relation name.
The active domain of an extended fact e = R(d1, . . . , dk) is deﬁned as
adom(e) := {d1, . . . , dk}.
An extended instance is a ﬁnite set of extended facts. The active domain of an
extended instance J is deﬁned as
adom(J) :=
[
e∈J
adom(e).
Formula terms are deﬁned in the same way as data terms, but are built up
from variables rather than constants. Extended atoms are deﬁned like atoms,
but can contain formula terms in addition to variables. If t is a formula term
and α is a valuation deﬁned on all variables occurring in t, we can apply α to
every variable occurrence in t, obtaining a data term α(t). Likewise, we can
apply a valuation to an extended atom, resulting in an extended fact.
We are now ready to deﬁne the syntax and semantics of object-creating con-
junctive queries (oCQ). Like a classical CQ, an oCQ is of the form H ←B.
The only diﬀerence with a classical CQ is that H can be an extended atom;
in particular, B is still a ﬁnite set of “ﬂat” atoms, not extended atoms. It is
still required that var(H) ⊆var(B). The result of an oCQ Q = H ←B on an
instance I is now an extended instance, deﬁned as
Q(I) := {α(H) | α : B →I}.
3Since constants are atomic data elements, no constant is allowed to be of the form
f(d1, . . . , dk).
7

Mother
beth
anne
ben
anne
eric
claire
emma
diana
dave
diana
Father
beth
adam
ben
adam
eric
carl
emma
carl
Family
beth
f(anne, adam)
ben
f(anne, adam)
eric
f(claire, carl)
emma
f(diana, carl)
Table 1: Instances used in Example 3.1.
R
a
b
c
a
b
d
c
b
d
d
c
a
T
a
f(b)
c
f(b)
d
f(c)
Table 2: Instances used in Example 3.2.
Example 3.1. Recall the oCQ Q from the Introduction:
Family(c, f(x, y)) ←Mother(c, x), Father(c, y).
If I is the instance consisting of the Mother and Father facts listed in Table 1,
then Q(I) is the extended instance consisting of the extended Family facts listed
in the same table.
Example 3.2. For a more abstract example, consider the following oCQ Q:
T (x, f(y)) ←R(x, y, z).
If I is the instance consisting of the R-facts listed in Table 2, then Q(I) consists
of the extended T -facts listed in the same table.
3.3
The single-function case
In this paper, we focus on single-function oCQs (sifo CQs), that have exactly
one occurrence of a function symbol in the head. Without loss of generality we
always place the function term in the last position of the head.
Deﬁnition 3.3. A sifo CQ over a database schema S is an oCQ over S of the
form
T (¯x, f(¯z)) ←B,
where
• T is the head predicate;
• f is a function symbol;
• B is the body;
8

Family
beth
g(anne, adam, anne)
ben
g(anne, adam, anne)
eric
g(claire, carl, claire)
emma
g(diane, carl, diane)
Table 3: Instance used in Example 4.1.
• ¯x is a tuple of (not necessarily distinct) variables from var(B), called the
distinguished variables;
• ¯z is a tuple of (not necessarily distinct) variables from var(B), called the
creation variables; some creation variables may be distinguished;
• The elements of var(B) that are not distinguished are called the non-
distinguished variables.
Example 3.4. The queries in Examples 3.1 and 3.2 are both examples of sifo
CQs.
3.4
Comparison with ILOG
Object-creating CQs can be considered to be the conjunctive-query fragment
of nonrecursive ILOG [22]; our syntax exposes the Skolem functions, which are
normally obscured in the standard ILOG syntax, and our semantics corresponds
to what is called the ‘exposed semantics’ by Hull and Yoshikawa. Nevertheless,
in the following section, we will consider oid-equivalence of sifo CQs, which does
correspond to what has been called ‘obscured equivalence’ [23].
4
Characterization of oid-equivalence for sifo CQs
4.1
Oid-equivalence of oCQs
The result Q(I) of an oCQ Q applied to an instance I is an extended instance.
The data terms in adom(Q(I)) that are not constants play the role of created
oids (also called invented values). Intuitively it is clear that the actual form of
the created oids does not matter.
Example 4.1. Recall the query Q from Example 3.1:
Family(c, f(x, y)) ←Mother(c, x), Father(c, y).
As mentioned in the Introduction, we could have used equivalently the following
query Q′:
Family(c, g(x, y, x)) ←Mother(c, x), Father(c, y).
Applying the above query to the Mother and Father facts from Table 1 results
in the instance shown in Table 3. Intuitively, this instance has exactly the same
9

I
a
b
c
d
b
e
Q(I)
a
f(b)
d
f(b)
Q′(I)
a
f(a, b)
d
f(d, b)
Table 4: Instances used in Example 4.7.
relevant properties as the Family-instance from Table 1: beth and ben are linked
to the same family-oid; eric is linked to another oid; and emma to still another
one.
We formalize this intuition in the following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 4.2. Let J be an extended instance.
• The set adom(J) −dom is denoted by oids(J);
• The set adom(J) ∩dom is denoted by consts(J).
Deﬁnition 4.3. Let J be an extended instance and let ρ be a mapping from
adom(J) to the set of data terms. For any extended fact e = R(d1, . . . , dk) in
J, we deﬁne ρ(e) to be the extended fact R(ρ(d1), . . . , ρ(dk)). We then deﬁne
ρ(J) := {ρ(e) | e ∈J}.
Deﬁnition 4.4. Let J1 and J2 be extended instances. Then J1 and J2 are
called oid-isomorphic if there exists a bijection ρ : adom(J1) →adom(J2) such
that
• ρ is the identity on consts(J1);
• ρ maps oids(J1) to oids(J2);
• ρ(J1) = J2.
Such a bijection ρ is called an oid-isomorphism from J1 to J2.
The above deﬁnition implies that oid-isomorphic instances have the same
constants. Formally, if J1 and J2 are oid-isomorphic then consts(J1) = consts(J2).
Deﬁnition 4.5. Let Q and Q′ be two oCQs with the same head predicate, and
over the same database schema S. Then Q and Q′ are called oid-equivalent if
for every instance I over S, the results Q(I) and Q′(I) are oid-isomorphic.
Example 4.6. The queries in Example 4.1 are oid-equivalent. For example, for
the instance I of Table 1, the oid-isomorphism from Q(I) to Q′(I) is as follows:
f(anne, adam)
7→
g(anne, adam, anne)
f(claire, carl)
7→
g(claire, carl, claire)
f(diane, carl)
7→
g(diane, carl, diane).
10

I
a
b
c
a
d
e
Q(I)
a
f(a)
Q′(I)
a
f(a, b, c)
a
f(a, d, e)
Table 5: Instances used in Example 4.8.
Example 4.7. Recall the query Q from Example 3.2:
T (x, f(y)) ←R(x, y, z)
Also consider the following variation Q′ of Q:
T (x, f(x, y)) ←R(x, y, z)
Then Q and Q′ are not oid-equivalent, as shown by the simple instances in
Table 4. Indeed, there cannot be an oid-isomorphism from Q(I) to Q′(I) because
Q(I) contains only one distinct oid while Q′(I) contains two distinct oids.
Example 4.8. As a variant of Example 4.7, consider the following two oCQs:
Q = T (x, f(x)) ←R(x, y, z)
Q′ = T (x, f(x, y, z)) ←R(x, y, z)
Again these two oCQs are not oid-equivalent, as shown by the counterexample
instances in Table 5.
4.2
Homomorphisms and containment of conjunctive queries
The characterizations we will give for oid-equivalence of sifo CQs depend on
the classical notions of homomorphism and containment between conjunctive
queries. Let us brieﬂy recall these notions now [13, 2].
A variable mapping is a mapping h from a ﬁnite set X of variables to another
ﬁnite set Y of variables. If A is an atom with variables in X, then we can apply
h to each variable occurrence in A to obtain an atom with variables in Y , which
we denote by h(A). If B is a set of atoms with var(B) ⊆X, then we naturally
deﬁne h(B) := {h(A) | A ∈B}.
For two sets B and B′ of atoms, a variable mapping h : var(B) →var(B′)
is called a homomorphism from B to B′ if h(B) ⊆B′.
This is denoted by
h : B →B′. The notion of homomorphism is extended to conjunctive queries
Q = H ←B and Q′ = H′ ←B′ as follows. A homomorphism from Q to Q′
is a homomorphism h : B →B′ such that h(H) = H′. This is denoted by
h : Q →Q′.
A classical result relates homomorphisms between conjunctive queries to
containment. Let Q and Q′ be two conjunctive queries over a common database
schema S. We say that Q′ is contained in Q if for every instance I of S, we
11

have Q′(I) ⊆Q(I). The classical result states that Q′ is contained in Q if and
only if there exists a homomorphism h : Q →Q′.
Two queries Q and Q′ are equivalent if for every instance I of S, we have
Q(I) = Q′(I). Since equivalence amounts to containment in both directions,
two conjunctive queries are equivalent if and only if there exist homomorphisms
between them in both directions.
4.3
A normal form for oid-equivalence problems
In this subsection we consider two arbitrary sifo CQs Q, Q′ with the same head
predicate:
Q = T (¯x, f(¯z)) ←B
Q′ = T (¯x′, f ′(¯z′)) ←B′.
Then ¯x and ¯x′ have equal length. Note that ¯x and ¯z as well as ¯x′ and ¯z′ may
have variables in common.
Our aim is to show that oid-equivalence between arbitrary sifo CQs Q and
Q′ can be reduced to the case where the heads
T (¯x, f(¯z))
and
T (¯x′, f ′(¯z′))
have identical arguments, that is, where ¯x = ¯x′ and ¯z = ¯z′.
As a ﬁrst lemma we state that rearranging the creation variables of a query
does not aﬀect oid-equivalence.
Lemma 4.9 (Rearranging creation variables). Let Q be a sifo CQ written as
above. Let ¯u be a tuple with exactly the same variables as ¯z, but possibly with
diﬀerent repetitions and a diﬀerent ordering, and let g be a function symbol
whose arity is equal to the length of ¯u. Then the sifo CQ P = T (¯x, g(¯u)) ←B
is oid-equivalent to Q.
Proof. Let I be an instance. We deﬁne an oid isomorphism from Q(I) to P(I) as
follows. Any oid o in Q(I) is of the form f(α(¯z)) for some matching α: B →I;
we deﬁne ρ(o) := g(α(¯u)). This is well-deﬁned, i.e., independent of the choice
of α. Indeed, if the data terms f(α1(¯z)) and f(α2(¯z)) are equal, then the tuples
α1(¯z) and α2(¯z) are equal, which implies that α1 and α2 agree on every variable
appearing in ¯z. Since exactly the same variables appear in ¯u, also the tuples
α1(¯u) and α2(¯u) are equal, whence g(α1(¯u)) = g(α2(¯u)).
That ρ : oids(Q(I)) →oids(P(I)) is injective is shown by an analogous
argument. The surjectivity of ρ, as well as the equality ρ(Q(I)) = P(I), are
clear.
By the above lemma, we can remove all duplicates from ¯z and ¯z′ in the heads
of Q and Q′, respectively. So, from now on we may assume ¯z and ¯z′ have no
duplicates.
In the following, let Z equal the set of variables occurring in ¯z, let X equal
the set of variables occurring in ¯x, and let Z′ and X′ be deﬁned similarly.
12

We next show that two sifo CQs can only be oid-equivalent if they have
identical patterns of distinguished variables, up to renaming.
Lemma 4.10 (Renaming distinguished variables). If Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent,
then there exists a bijective variable mapping σ : X →X′ such that σ(¯x) = ¯x′.
Proof. Certainly, if Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent, then the conjunctive queries
Q0 = T0(¯x) ←B and Q′
0 = T0(¯x′) ←B′, where T0 is a new predicate symbol,
are equivalent. So, there are homomorphisms h: Q0 →Q′
0 and h′ : Q′
0 →Q0.
In particular, h(¯x) = ¯x′ and h′(¯x′) = ¯x. We deﬁne σ to be the restriction of h to
X. The claim σ(¯x) = ¯x′ and the surjectivity of σ are then clear. So it remains
to show that σ is injective. Thereto, consider h′(σ(¯x)) = h′(h(¯x)) = h′(¯x′) = ¯x.
We see that h′ ◦σ is the identity on X and thus injective. Hence, σ must be
injective as well.
By the above lemma, if there does not exist a renaming σ as in the lemma,
certainly Q and Q′ are not oid-equivalent. If there exists such a renaming, then
by renaming the variables in one of the two queries, we can now assume without
loss of generality that ¯x = ¯x′ and in particular that X = X′.
The next step is to show that oid-equivalent queries must have the same
distinguished variables among the creation variables, that is, X ∩Z = X ∩Z′.
Lemma 4.11 (Distinguished creation variables). If X ∩Z ̸= X ∩Z′, then Q
and Q′ are not oid-equivalent.
Proof. Either there exists some x ∈X ∩Z but not in Z′ or vice versa. By
symmetry we may assume the ﬁrst possibility.
We construct an instance I from B′. In doing this, to keep our notation
simple, we consider the variables in B′ to be constants. The instance I is ob-
tained from B′ by duplicating x to some new element x2. Formally, consider the
mapping d on var(B′) that is the identity everywhere except that x is mapped
to x2; then I = B′ ∪d(B′).
First, let us look at Q′(I). Using the identity matching that maps every
variable to itself, we obtain the extended fact T (¯x, f ′(¯z′)) ∈Q′(I). Using the
matching d deﬁned above, we obtain the extended fact T (¯x2, f ′(d(¯z′))) in Q′(I).
Here, ¯x2 denotes d(¯x), i.e., ¯x2 is obtained from ¯x by replacing x with x2. Since
x does not belong to Z′, we have d(¯z′) = ¯z′, so T (¯x2, f ′(¯z′)) ∈Q′(I).
On the other hand, in Q(I) consider any two extended facts T (α1(¯x), f(α1(¯z)))
and T (α2(¯x), f(α2(¯z))), with matchings α1 : B →I and α2 : B →I, such that
α1(¯x) = ¯x and α2(¯x) = ¯x2. Then in particular α1(x) = x and α2(x) = x2. Since
α1 and α2 diﬀer on x, and x is in Z, also α1(¯z) and α2(¯z) are diﬀerent. Hence,
the two last components f(α1(¯z)) and f(α2(¯z)) are diﬀerent. Thus, we see that
in Q(I) it is impossible to have two extended atoms T (¯x, o) and T (¯x2, o) with
the same oid o. But we have seen this is possible in Q′(I), so Q(I) and Q′(I)
are not oid-isomorphic and Q and Q′ cannot be oid-equivalent.
By the above Lemma we now assume X ∩Z = X ∩Z′. The last step is to
show that Z −X and Z′ −X, the sets of non-distinguished creation variables,
need to have the same cardinality.
13

Lemma 4.12 (Non-distinguished creation variables). If Z −X and Z′−X have
diﬀerent cardinality then Q and Q′ are not oid-equivalent.
Proof. As in the proof of Lemma 4.11, we consider B as an instance, viewing
variables as constants.
Let k and k′ be the cardinalities of Z −X and Z −X′, respectively. By
symmetry we may assume that k > k′. Now, for any natural number n, let
In be the instance obtained from B by independently multiplying each variable
z ∈Z −X into n fresh copies z(1), . . . , z(n). Formally, for any function d :
Z −X →{1, . . ., n}, let ˆd be the valuation on var(B) that maps each z ∈Z −X
to z(d(z)) and that is the identity on all other variables. Then
In =
[
d:Z−X→{1,...,n}
ˆd(B).
There are nk diﬀerent functions d : Z −X →{1, . . . , n}. Each corresponding
valuation ˆd is a matching of B in In; all these matchings are the identity on ¯x
but are pairwise diﬀerent on ¯z. Thus there are at least nk diﬀerent extended
facts in Q(In) of the form T (¯x, o).
On the other hand, consider any set S of valuations from X ∪Z′ to adom(In)
that are pairwise diﬀerent on Z′ −X but that all agree on X. The cardinality
of Z′ −X is k′. The cardinality of adom(In) is O(n) (although the cardinality
of In itself is larger). Hence, such a set S can be of cardinality at most O(nk′).
Consequently, since k > k′, for n large enough, Q′(In) cannot possibly contain
nk diﬀerent extended facts of the form T (¯x, o). But we saw that this is possible
in Q(In). So, Q(In) and Q′(In) are not oid-isomorphic and Q and Q′ cannot be
oid-equivalent.
By the above lemma, and after renaming the variables in Z′−X and reorder-
ing the variables in ¯z′, we may now indeed assume that ¯z and ¯z′ are identical.
4.4
Characterization of oid-equivalence
According to the results of the preceding subsection, we are now given two sifo
CQs as follows:
Q = T (¯x, f(¯z)) ←B
(1)
Q′ = T (¯x, f ′(¯z)) ←B′.
(2)
Note that Q and Q′ have identical tuples ¯x and ¯z of distinguished and creation
variables; moreover, ¯z contains no variable more than once. As before, we denote
the sets of distinguished and creation variables as X and Z, respectively.
We will show that Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent if and only if there are
homomorphisms between B and B′ in both directions that (i) keep ¯x ﬁxed and
(ii) possibly permute the variables in ¯z. To make this formal, we associate to
each query a classical CQ without function symbols.
14

Deﬁnition 4.13. Fix a new relation symbol ˚
T of arity the sum of the lengths
of ¯x and ¯z. The ﬂattening of Q is the query ˚
Q = ˚
T(¯x, ¯z) ←B. The query ˚
Q′ is
deﬁned similarly.
Let π be a permutation of the set Z −X. We extend π to var(B) by deﬁning
it to be the identity outside Z −X. We now deﬁne ˚
Qπ to be the conjunctive
query obtained from ˚
Q by permuting the variables in ¯z, that is
˚
Qπ = ˚
T(¯x, π(¯z)) ←B.
This notion allows us to formulate the following natural suﬃcient condition
for oid-equivalence.
Proposition 4.14. If there exists a permutation π of Z −X such that ˚
Qπ and
˚
Q′ are equivalent, then Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent.
Proof. Let I be an instance. We deﬁne an oid isomorphism ρ from Q(I) to
Q′(I) as follows. Any oid o in Q(I) is of the form f(α(¯z)) for some matching
α: B →I; we deﬁne ρ(o) := f ′(α(π(¯z))). This is well-deﬁned, i.e., independent
of the choice of α. Indeed, if the data terms f(α1(¯z)) and f(α2(¯z)) are equal,
then the tuples α1(¯z) and α2(¯z) are equal, and consequently the permuted tuples
α1(π(¯z)) and α2(π(¯z)) are equal. Hence, f ′(α1(π(¯z))) = f ′(α2(π(¯z))).
The injectivity of ρ : oids(Q(I)) →oids(Q′(I)) is shown by an analogous
argument.
The surjectivity of ρ, and the equality ρ(Q(I)) = Q′(I), follow
readily from the equality ˚
Qπ(I) = ˚
Q′(I).
We next prove that the suﬃcient condition given by the above Proposition
is actually also necessary for oid-equivalence. The key idea for proving this is
to show that oid-equivalence of sifo CQs depends only on the number of oids
generated for any binding of the distinguished variables.
Formally, for any instance I and any tuple ¯c of elements from adom(I), we
deﬁne
#¯c(Q, I) := #{ o | T (¯c, o) ∈Q(I) },
that is, #¯c(Q, I) denotes the number of distinct oids o that occur together
with ¯c in Q(I). We will show that Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent if and only if
#¯c(Q, I) = #¯c(Q′, I) for all instances I and tuples ¯c. The only-if direction of
this statement is obvious, but the if-direction is not so obvious.
For our proof, we rely on work by Cohen [14] who studied queries with multi-
set variables that are evaluated under so-called combined semantics, a semantics
that combines set and multiset semantics. Cohen characterized equivalence of
such queries in terms of homomorphisms.
Queries with multiset variables (MV queries) have the form Q0, M where Q0
is a standard CQ and M is some set of variables of Q0 that do not appear in the
head of Q0. The elements of M are called the multiset variables. Evaluating
an MV query Q0, M on an instance I results in a multiset (bag) of facts, where
the number of times a fact occurs is related to the number of diﬀerent possible
assignments of values to the multiset variables.
15

Let us deﬁne the combined semantics formally. Let Q0 be of the form H0 ←
B0 and let I be an input instance. Recall that Q0(I) according to the classical
semantics equals
{α(H0) | α : B0 →I}.
Let W be the set of variables appearing in H0. Then the result of evaluating
the MV query Q0, M on instance I is deﬁned to be the multiset with ground
set Q0(I), where for each fact e ∈Q0(I), the multiplicity of e in the multiset is
deﬁned to be
#{γ|M | γ : B0 →I and γ(H0) = e}.
That is, given a fact α(H0) ∈Q0(I), there may be many diﬀerent matchings
γ that agree with α on H0. The multiplicity of α(H0) is deﬁned to be not the
total number of diﬀerent such matchings γ, but rather the number of diﬀerent
restrictions one obtains when restricting these matchings γ to M.4
Two MV queries are equivalent if they evaluate to the same multiset on
every input instance. Equivalence of MV queries can be characterized using the
notion of multiset-homomorphism [14]. A multiset-homomorphism from MV
query Q0, M to MV query Q′
0, M ′ is a homomorphism h : Q0 →Q′
0 such that
h is injective on M and h(M) ⊆M ′. Cohen showed the following:
Theorem 4.15 ([14], Thm 5.3). Two MV queries are equivalent if and only if
there are multiset homomorphisms between them in both directions.
To leverage this result on MV equivalence, we associate two MV queries to
our given sifo CQs in the following way.
Deﬁnition 4.16. Fix a new relation symbol T0 of arity the length of ¯x. The
MV queries ˜Q and ˜Q′ are deﬁned as Q0, (Z −X) and Q′
0, (Z −X) respectively,
where
Q0 = T0(¯x) ←B
Q′
0 = T0(¯x) ←B′
The following proposition now relates oid-equivalence to MV-equivalence:
Proposition 4.17. If Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent, then the MV queries ˜Q and
˜Q′ are equivalent.
Proof. Let I be an instance. We must show that the multisets ˜Q(I) and ˜Q′(I)
are equal. Since Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent, the ground sets Q0(I) and Q′
0(I) of
˜Q(I) and ˜Q′(I) are already equal. We must show that the element multiplicities
are the same as well.
4The motivation for MV queries was to model the semantics of positive SQL queries with
nested EXISTS subqueries. While queries under standard SQL semantics return multisets of
tuples, only the relations mentioned in the top level SQL block contribute to the multiplicities
of answers, whereas relations mentioned in the subquery do not.
16

Let T0(¯c) be an arbitrary element of Q0(I). By the semantics of oCQs, we
have the following equalities:
#¯c(Q, I) = #{γ|X∪Z | γ : B →I and γ(¯x) = ¯c}
#¯c(Q′, I) = #{γ|X∪Z | γ : B′ →I and γ(¯x) = ¯c}
Since Q(I) and Q′(I) are oid-isomorphic, the left-hand sides of the above two
equalities are equal. Hence, the right-hand sides are equal as well. But these
are precisely the multiplicities of T0(¯c) in ˜Q(I) and ˜Q′(I) respectively.
The following proposition further relates MV equivalence to equivalence of
the ﬂattenings up to permutation:
Proposition 4.18. If the MV queries ˜Q and ˜Q′ are equivalent then there exists
a permutation π of Z −X such that ˚
Qπ and ˚
Q′ are equivalent.
Proof. By Theorem 4.15, there exist a multiset homomorphism h from ˜Q to ˜Q′,
and a multiset homomorphism h′ from ˜Q′ to ˜Q. Since Theorem 4.15 also implies
that h is injective on Z −X and that h(Z −X) ⊆Z −X, we can conclude that
h acts as a permutation on Z −X. Moreover, h is the identity on X. The same
two properties hold for h′.
Now put π = (h|Z−X)−1.
Then h : ˚
Qπ →˚
Q′.
So it remains to ﬁnd a
homomorphism h′′ : ˚
Q′ →˚
Qπ. Thereto, note that h′h acts as a permutation on
Z −X. Since Z −X is ﬁnite, there exists a nonzero natural number m such that
(h′h)m is the identity on Z −X. Equivalently, (h′h)m−1h′ equals π on Z −X.
We conclude that (h′h)m−1h′ is the desired homomorphism h′′.
We summarize the three preceding Propositions in the following.
Theorem 4.19. Consider two sifo CQs
Q = T (¯x, f(¯z)) ←B
Q′ = T (¯x, f ′(¯z)) ←B′
where Q and Q′ have identical tuples ¯x and ¯z of distinguished and creation
variables, and where ¯z contains no variable more than once. Denote the sets of
distinguished and creation variables by X and Z, respectively.
The following are equivalent:
1. The sifo CQs Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent;
2. The MV queries ˜Q and ˜Q′ are equivalent;
3. There is a permutation π of Z −X such that the classical CQs ˚
Qπ and ˚
Q′
are equivalent.
17

4.5
Computational complexity
The results of this section imply the following:
Corollary 4.20. Testing oid-equivalence of sifo CQs is NP-complete.
Proof. Assume given sifo CQs Q and Q′ with the same head predicate:
Q = T (¯x, f(¯z)) ←B
Q′ = T (¯x′, f ′(¯z′)) ←B′.
Let X, X′, Z and Z′ denote the sets of variables occurring in ¯x, ¯x′, ¯z and ¯z′,
respectively.
To test oid-equivalence, we begin by removing duplicates in ¯z and ¯z′, as
justiﬁed by Lemma 4.9. Note that ¯x and ¯x′ have the same length k, because
of the ﬁxed arity of T . So we can write ¯x = x1, . . . , xk and ¯x′ = x′
1, . . . , x′
k.
Consider the mapping σ = {(x1, x′
1), . . . , (xk, x′
k)}. We test if σ is a bijection
from X to X′; if not, then Q and Q′ are not oid-equivalent by Lemma 4.10.
If σ is a bijection, we can safely replace every variable x′ in X′ by σ−1(x′),
which yields a sifo CQ that is oid-equivalent to Q′. Hence, from now on we may
assume that ¯x = ¯x′ and in particular X = X′.
Next, we test whether X ∩Z = X ∩Z′ and whether Z −X and Z′ −X have
the same cardinality; if one of the two tests fails then Q and Q′ are not oid-
equivalent by Lemmas 4.11 and 4.12. Otherwise, we can rename the variables
in Z′ −X, so that we may assume that ¯z = ¯z′.
We are now left in the situation where Q and Q′ are in the general forms
(1) and (2) from Subsection 4.4, to which Theorem 4.19 applies. By the third
statement of this theorem we can test oid-equivalence of Q and Q′ in NP by
guessing a permutation π and two homomorphisms between ˚
Qπ and ˚
Q′ in both
directions.
NP-hardness follows immediately because the problem has equivalence of
classical CQs as a special case, which is well known to be NP-hard. Indeed, oid
equivalence of sifo CQs Q and Q′ in the special case where the creation functions
are nullary, amounts to classical equivalence when we ignore the function terms
in the heads.
5
Logical entailment of sifo CQs interpreted as
schema mappings
Object-creating CQs, and sifo CQs in particular, can also be interpreted alter-
natively as schema mappings rather than as queries. Speciﬁcally, consider a sifo
CQ Q of the general form T (¯x, f(¯z)) ←B over the database schema S. Let ¯v be
the sequence of all variables used in B. Then we may view Q as a second-order
implicational statement over the augmented schema S ∪{T }, as follows:
∃f∀¯v(B →H)
18

Family
beth
jones
ben
jones
eric
simpson
emma
smith
Family
beth
jones
ben
jones
eric
jones
emma
jones
Table 6: Instances J1 and J2 from Example 5.1.
Family
beth
jones
ben
murphy
eric
simpson
emma
smith
Table 7: Instance J3 from Example 5.1.
Here, H is the head and B is conveniently used to stand for the conjunction
of its elements. Note that this formula is second-order because it existentially
quantiﬁes a function f; we denote the above formula by sotgd(Q). This formula
belongs to the well-known class of second-order tuple-generating dependencies
(SO-tgds). More speciﬁcally, it is a plain SO-tgd [7].
Syntactically, the plain SO-tgds coming from sifo CQs in this manner form
a restricted class of SO-tgds, deﬁned by the following restrictions:
• Plain SO-tgd may consist of multiple rules; sifo CQs consist of a single
rule.
• The head of a plain SO-tgd may consist of multiple atoms; the head of a
sifo CQ consists of a single atom. (This is similar to GAV mappings [27,
12], although the classical notion of GAV mapping does not use function
symbols.)
• There is only one function symbol, which moreover can be applied only
once in the head.
When interpreting a sifo CQ Q as an SO-tgd, the semantics becomes that of a
schema mapping. Speciﬁcally, let I be an instance over S, considered as a source
instance, and let J be an instance over {T }, considered as a target instance.
Then (I, J) together form an instance over the augmented schema S ∪{T }.
Now we say that (I, J) satisﬁes Q, denoted by (I, J) |= Q, if the structure
(adom(I) ∪adom(J), I, J) satisﬁes sotgd(Q) under the standard semantics of
second-order logic, using adom(I) ∪adom(J) as the universe of the structure.
The following example and remark illustrate that the semantics of sifo CQs
as SO-tgds is quite diﬀerent from their semantics as object-creating queries.
Example 5.1. Let us consider again our query from Example 1. As we have
mentioned in the Introduction, we can now write it as an SO-tgd as follows:
∃f∀x∀y∀c(Mother(c, x) ∧Father(c, y) →Family(c, f(x, y)))
19

Take the instance I consisting of the Mother and Father facts listed in Ta-
ble 3.1, and take the instances J1 and J2 consisting of the Family facts listed in
Table 6 left and right respectively. Then both pairs (I, J1) and (I, J2) satisfy
the SO-tgd. For J1 this is witnessed by the following function f:
x
y
f(x, y)
anne
adam
jones
claire
carl
simpson
diana
carl
smith
For J2 this is witnessed by the function that simply maps everything to jones.
In contrast, for J3 consisting of the Family facts listed in Table 7, the pair
(I, J3) does not satisfy the SO-tgd. Indeed, suppose there would exist a function
f witnessing the truth of the formula on (I, J3). Since beth has anne as mother
and adam as father, the fact
Family(beth, f(anne, adam))
must belong to J3. The only Family-fact with beth in the ﬁrst position is
Family(beth, jones),
so we conclude
f(anne, adam) = jones.
Furthermore, since ben also has anne as mother and adam as father, the fact
Family(ben, f(anne, adam))
must be in J3. The only Family-fact with ben in the ﬁrst position is
Family(ben, murphy),
however, so we must conclude that
f(anne, adam) = murphy,
which is in contradiction with the previous conclusion.
Remark 5.2. Note that, by the purely implicational nature of SO-tgds, if (I, J)
satisﬁes an SO-tgd and J ⊆J′, then also (I, J′) satisﬁes the SO-tgd. Hence,
continuing the previous example, for any instance J′ obtained by J1 or J2 by
adding some more Family-facts, the pair (I, J′) would still satisfy the SO-tgd
from the example.
The above example and remark show that given a source instance I, there
are in general multiple possible target instances J such that (I, J) |= Q. This is
in contrast to the semantics of Q as an oCQ, where Q(I) is an extended instance
that is uniquely deﬁned. Still, there is a connection between the oCQ semantics
and the SO-tgd semantics. Speciﬁcally, Q(I) can be viewed as a target instance
in a canonical manner, using oid-to-constant assignments (oc-assignments for
short) deﬁned as follows.
20

Deﬁnition 5.3. Let I be a source instance and let J be an extended instance
over {T } such that consts(J) ⊆adom(I). An oc-assignment for J with respect
to I is an injective mapping ρ : oids(J) →dom so that the image of ρ is disjoint
from adom(I).
Thus, ρ assigns to each non-constant data term from J a diﬀerent constant
that is not in adom(I).
We now observe the following obvious property giving a connection between
the oCQ semantics and the SO-tgd semantics:
Proposition 5.4. Let I be a source instance and let ρ be an oc-assignment for
Q(I) with respect to I. Then (I, ρ(Q(I))) |= Q.
In fact, Q(I) corresponds to what Fagin et al. [18] call the chase of I with
sotgd(Q).
5.1
Nested dependencies
We have introduced sifo CQs as a restricted class of plain SO-tgds. But actually,
sifo CQs can also be considered as a restricted form of so-called nested tgds [8].
Thereto, consider again a sifo CQ of the general form T (¯x, f(¯z)) ←B. Let ¯u
be the sequence of all variables from B, except for the creation variables (the
variables from ¯z). Furthermore, let w be a fresh variable not occurring in B,
and let H′ be the atom T (¯x, w).
We can now associate to Q the following
implicational statement, denoted by ntgd(Q):
∀¯z∃w∀¯u(B →H′)
Note that ntgd(Q) is now a ﬁrst-order formula, but it is clear that ntgd(Q) is
logically equivalent to sotgd(Q). Hence, the schema mappings arising from sifo
CQs are not essentially second-order in nature.
5.2
Logical entailment
In Section 4 we have shown that equivalence of sifo CQs as object-creating
queries is decidable. Now that we have seen that sifo CQs can also be given a
semantics as schema mappings, we may again ask if equivalence under this al-
ternative semantics is decidable. The answer is aﬃrmative; we have seen in the
previous subsection that sifo CQ mappings belong to the class of nested depen-
dencies, and logical implication of nested dependencies has recently been shown
to be decidable [26]. When this general implication test for nested dependencies
is applied speciﬁcally to sifo CQ schema mappings, it can be implemented in
non-deterministic polynomial time. Hence, logical entailment (and also logical
equivalence) of sifo CQ schema mappings is NP-complete.
In the present section, we present a specialized logical entailment test for sifo
CQ schema mappings which is much simpler and more elegant, and provides
more insight in the problem by relating it to testing implication of a join depen-
dency by a conjunctive query (Theorem 5.10). Interestingly, there is a striking
21

I
a1
b
c
a2
b
c
J
a1
d1
a2
d2
Table 8: Instances used in Example 5.6.
correspondence between the general implication test when applied to sifo CQs,
and the strategy we use to prove our theorem. An in-depth comparison will be
given in Section 6, after we have stated the Theorem formally and have seen its
proof.
Formally, given two schema mappings M and M′ from a source schema S
to a target schema {T }, we say that M logically entails M′ if the following
implication holds for every instance I over S and every instance J over {T }:
(I, J) satisﬁes M
⇒
(I, J) satisﬁes M′.
Referring to the view of sifo CQs as SO-tgds introduced above, we now
deﬁne:
Deﬁnition 5.5. Let Q and Q′ be two sifo CQs with the same head predicate,
and over the same database schema.
We say that Q logically entails Q′ if
sotgd(Q) logically entails sotgd(Q′).
Example 5.6. Recall the sifo CQs Q and Q′ from Example 4.7:
Q = T (x, f(y)) ←R(x, y, z)
Q′ = T (x, f ′(x, y)) ←R(x, y, z)
It is clear that Q logically entails Q′. Indeed, if there exists a function f wit-
nessing the truth of sotgd(Q), then we can easily deﬁne a function f ′ witnessing
the truth of sotgd(Q′) by deﬁning f ′(x, y) := f(y).
Conversely, however, Q′ does not logically entail Q. Indeed, Table 8 shows
(I, J) where (I, J) |= Q′ but (I, J) ̸|= Q.
Example 5.7. Recall the sifo CQs Q and Q′ from Example 4.8:
Q = T (x, f(x)) ←R(x, y, z)
Q′ = T (x, f ′(x, y, z)) ←R(x, y, z)
Although Q and Q′ are not oid-equivalent, they are logically equivalent: they
logical entail each other. The logical entailment of Q′ by Q is again clear. To
see the converse direction, assume f ′ witnesses the truth of sotgd(Q′). Then we
deﬁne f(x) for any x as follows: if there exists a pair (y, z) such that R(x, y, z)
holds, we ﬁx one such pair (y, z) arbitrarily and deﬁne f(x) := f ′(x, y, z). If no
such y and z exist, we may deﬁne f(x) arbitrarily. It is now clear that this f
witnesses the truth of sotgd(Q).
22

Example 5.8. Consider the sifo CQs:
Q = T (x, f(z1)) ←R(z1, x), R(z1, z2)
Q′ = T (x, f ′(z1, z2)) ←R(z1, x), R(z1, z2)
Also here, Q and Q′ logically entail each other. The logical entailment of Q′ by
Q is again clear. To see the converse direction, we can use a reasoning similar
to that used in Example 5.7. Assume f ′ witnesses the truth of sotgd(Q′). Then
we deﬁne f(z1) for any z1 as follows: if there exists z2 such that R(z1, z2) holds,
we ﬁx one such z2 arbitrarily and deﬁne f(z1) := f ′(z1, z2). If no such z2 exists,
we may deﬁne f(z1) arbitrarily. The function f thus deﬁned witnesses the truth
of sotgd(Q).
Note that the kind of reasoning used here and in Example 5.7 does not work
in the case of Example 5.6. In Theorem 5.10 we will characterize formally when
this kind of reasoning is correct.
Example 5.7 shows that logical equivalence (logical entailment in both direc-
tions) does not imply oid-equivalence of sifo CQs. We will see in Theorem 5.12
that the other direction does hold.
5.3
Join dependencies and tableau queries
In our characterization of sifo CQ logical entailment we use a number of concepts
from classical relational database theory [2], which we recall here brieﬂy.
Recall that a relation scheme is a ﬁnite set of elements called attributes. It
is customary to denote the union of two relation schemes X and Y by juxtapo-
sition, thus writing XY for X ∪Y .
A tuple over a relation scheme U is a function from U to dom. A relation
over U is a ﬁnite set of tuples over U.
Let t be a tuple over U and let X ⊆U. The restriction of t to X is denoted
by t[X]. The projection πX(r) of a relation r over U equals { t[X] | t ∈r }.
We now turn to tableau queries, which are an alternative formalization of
conjunctive queries so that the result of a query is a set of tuples rather than a
set of facts. Let S be a database schema, and let B be a ﬁnite set of atoms with
predicates from S, as would be the body of a conjunctive query over S. Let
V = var(B). For any U ⊆V , the pair (B, U) is called a tableau query over S.
When applied to an instance I over S, this tableau query returns a relation over
U in the following manner. Let Mat(B, I) be the set of all matchings of B in I.
Using variables for attributes, V can be viewed as a relation scheme. Under this
view, every valuation on V is a tuple over V , and thus Mat(B, I) is a relation
over V . We now deﬁne the result of (B, U) on input I to be πU(Mat(B, I)).
This result is denoted by (B, U)(I).
We ﬁnally recall join dependencies. Let t1 and t2 be tuples over the relation
schemes U1 and U2, respectively.
If t1 and t2 agree on U1 ∩U2, the union
t1 ∪t2 (where we take the union of two functions, viewed as sets of pairs) is a
well-deﬁned tuple over the relation scheme U1U2. The natural join r1 ⋊⋉r2, for
23

relations r1 and r2 over U1 and U2, respectively, then equals
{t1 ∪t2 | t1 ∈r1 & t2 ∈r2 & t1[U1 ∩U2] = t2[U1 ∩U2]}.
Consider now any relation r over some relation scheme U.
Let U1 and
U2 be subsets of U (not necessarily disjoint) such that U = U1U2.
Then r
satisﬁes the join dependency (JD) U1 ⋊⋉U2 if r = πU1(r) ⋊⋉πU2(r). Note that
the containment from left to right is trivial, so one only needs to verify the
containment πU1(r) ⋊⋉πU2(r) ⊆r.
The logical implication of JDs by tableau queries is well understood and
can be solved by the chase procedure with NP complexity [25, 2]. Formally,
a tableau query Q = (B, U) over S is said to imply a JD over U if for every
instance I over S, the relation Q(I) satisﬁes this JD.
5.4
Decidability of sifo CQ logical entailment
We consider two sifo CQs Q and Q′ with the same head predicate:
Q = T (¯x, f(¯z)) ←B
Q′ = T (¯x′, f ′(¯z′)) ←B′
Remark 5.9. We assume Q and Q′ to have their function symbol in the same
position in the head (here taken to be the last position). This is justiﬁed because
otherwise Q could never logically entail Q′.
In proof, suppose the function
symbol in the head of Q′ would not be in the last position. Then we have a
variable x′ from B′ in the last position. Now consider an instance I such that
both Q(I) and Q′(I) are nonempty. (Such an instance could be constructed by
taking the disjoint union of B and B′ and substituting constants for variables.)
Let ρ by an oc-assignment for Q(I) with respect to I. By Proposition 5.4, we
have (I, ρ(Q(I))) |= Q. In ρ(Q(I)), none of the elements in the last position of
a T -fact belongs to adom(I). But then (I, ρ(Q(I))) cannot satisfy Q′. Indeed,
since Q′(I) is nonempty, there is a matching α′ : B′ →I. In any J′ such that
(I, J′) |= Q′, there needs to be a T -fact with α′(x′) in the last position, and
α′(x′) ∈adom(I). We conclude that Q does not logically entail Q′.
In what follows we use X, Z and Z′ to denote the sets of variables appearing
in the tuples ¯x, ¯z and ¯z′, respectively.
We establish:
Theorem 5.10. Q logically entails Q′ if and only if there exists a homomor-
phism h : B →B′ satisfying the following conditions:
1. h(¯x) = ¯x′;
2. h(X ∩Z) ⊆Z′;
3. Let Yh := h−1(Z′), i.e., Yh = {y ∈var(B) | h(y) ∈Z′}. Then the tableau
query (B, XYhZ) implies the join dependency XYh ⋊⋉YhZ.
24

Proof of suﬃciency.
Let (I, J) |= Q, witnessed by the function f. We must
show (I, J) |= Q′. This means ﬁnding a function f ′ witnessing the truth of
sotgd(Q′) in (I, J).
Call any two matchings α1, α2 ∈Mat(B, I) equivalent if they agree on Yh.
This is denoted by α1 ≡α2. Let ρ be any function from Mat(B, I) to Mat(B, I)
with the two properties, ﬁrst, that ρ(α) ≡α and, second, that α1 ≡α2 implies
ρ(α1) = ρ(α2).
Thus, ρ amounts to choosing a representative out of each
equivalence class. We denote the application of ρ by subscripting, writing ρ(α)
as ρα.
Let us deﬁne f ′ as follows. Take any matching β : B′ →I. Then we put
f ′(β(¯z′)) := f(ρβ◦h(¯z)). To see that this is well-deﬁned, recall that h(Yh) ⊆Z′.
Hence, β1(¯z′) = β2(¯z′) implies that β1 ◦h ≡β2 ◦h, so ρβ1◦h = ρβ2◦h.
We now show that this interpretation of f ′ satisﬁes the requirements. Specif-
ically, let β : B′ →I be a matching. We must show that T (β(¯x′), f ′(β(¯z′))) ∈J.
Consider the valuations β1 = β ◦h and β2 = ρβ◦h, both belonging to Mat(B, I),
and viewed as tuples over the relation scheme var(B).
Since these two tu-
ples agree on Yh, also the two restrictions β1[YhX] and β2[YhZ] agree on Yh.
Since X ∩Z ⊆Yh, the union β1[YhX] ∪β2[YhZ] is a well-deﬁned tuple over
XYhZ. Since πXYhZ(Mat(B, I)) satisﬁes the JD YhX ⋊⋉YhZ, the union be-
longs to πXYhZ(Mat(B, I)).
Hence, there exists a valuation γ ∈Mat(B, I)
that agrees with β ◦h on X, and with ρβ◦h on Z. Since (I, J) |= Q, we have
T (γ(¯x), f(γ(¯z))) ∈J. By the preceding, γ(¯x) = β(h(¯x)) and γ(¯z) = ρβ◦h(¯z) =
g(β(¯z′)). We conclude that T (β(¯x′), g(β(¯z′))) ∈J as desired.
Proof of necessity.
Let V ′ = var(B′), and let n be the arity of f. For each
l ∈{0, 1, . . ., n} and each u ∈V ′ −Z′ we introduce a fresh copy of u, denoted
by ul. We say that this fresh copy is “colored” with color l. For each variable
u ∈Z′, we simply deﬁne ul to be u itself. We say that the variables in Z′ are
“colored white”.
For any tuple of variables ¯u = (u1, . . . , up) in V ′, we denote the tuple
(ul
1, . . . , ul
p) by ¯ul. In this tuple, all variables are colored l or white. We then
deﬁne B′l = { R(¯ul) | R(¯u) ∈B′ } and view it as an instance, i.e., the variables
ul are considered to be constants.
Now deﬁne the instance I = Sn
l=0 B′l, and construct the instance J = Q(I).
By Proposition 5.4, (I, J) |= Q, where we omit the oc-assignment for the sake
of clarity. Since Q logically entails Q′, also (I, J) |= Q′. Hence, there exists a
function f ′ such that for each color l, using the matching idl : B′ →I, u 7→ul,
the fact T (¯x′l, f ′(¯z′l)) = T (¯x′l, f ′(¯z′)) belongs to J.
Since J = Q(I), we have f ′(¯z′) = f( ¯w) for some tuple ¯w of colored variables
in V ′. Since the arity of f is n and there are n + 1 distinct colors, some color
does not appear in ¯w. Without loss of generality we may assume that this is
the color 0.
Let us now focus on the fact T (¯x′0, f( ¯w)) in J. Like any T -fact in J, this
fact has been produced by some matching k: B →I such that T (¯x′0, f( ¯w)) =
k(T (¯x, f(¯z))), so
25

(a) k(¯x) = ¯x′0 and
(b) k(¯z) = ¯w.
Let s denote the mapping that removes colors, i.e., s(ul) = u for every
u ∈V ′ and every l ∈{0, 1, . . ., n}. Since s(I) ⊆B′, we have a homomorphism
s◦k: B →B′. We now deﬁne h := s◦k and show that it satisﬁes the conditions
required by the Theorem. The ﬁrst condition is clear since h(¯x) = s(k(¯x)) =
s(¯x′0) = ¯x′.
For the second condition, let x ∈X ∩Z. By (a), k(x) is colored 0 or white.
By (b), k(x) is colored non-zero or white. Hence, k(x) is colored white, i.e.,
k(x) ∈Z′, so h(x) = s(k(x)) = k(x) ∈Z′ as desired.
Finally, to show that (B, XYhZ) implies XYh ⋊⋉YhZ we must establish the
query containment
(B, XYh) ⋊⋉(B, YhZ) ⊆(B, XYhZ).
Treating tableau queries as conjunctive queries, and using the well-known con-
tainment criterion for conjunctive queries, this amounts to showing the ex-
istence of a certain homomorphism. More speciﬁcally, we express the query
(B, XYh) ⋊⋉(B, YhZ) by the conjunctive query with the body B2 = B0 ∪B1
deﬁned as follows. The body B0 is obtained from B by replacing each variable
u not in Yh by a fresh copy u0. For each u ∈Yh we deﬁne u0 simply as u
itself. The body B1 is obtained from B by replacing each variable not in Yh
by a fresh copy u1. Again, for each u ∈Yh we deﬁne u1 simply as u itself. To
show the containment, we now must ﬁnd a homomorphism m from B to B2
such that each u ∈X −Yh is mapped to u0; each u ∈Yh is mapped to u; and
each u ∈Z −Yh is mapped to u1.
Thereto, we deﬁne the following mapping m:
• if k(u) is colored 0, then m(u) := u0;
• if k(u) is colored l for some l > 0, then m(u) := u1;
• if k(u) is colored white, then m(u) := u.
Let us verify that m: B →B2 is a homomorphism. Consider an atom R(¯u) in
B; we must show R(m(¯u)) ∈B2. Since k: B →I, we know that R(k(¯u)) ∈I.
By deﬁnition of I, this means that R(k(¯u)) = R(¯vl) for some atom R(¯v) in B′
and some color l. So, for each variable u in ¯u, the color of k(u) is either l or
white. We now distinguish two cases.
• If k(u) is colored white, then h(u) = k(u) ∈Z′ so u ∈Yh. Hence, in this
case, m(u) = u = u0 = u1.
• If k(u) is colored l, then by deﬁnition m(u) = u0 when l = 0, and m(u) =
u1 when l > 0.
26

We conclude that R(m(¯u)) = R(¯u0) ∈B0 when l = 0, and R(m(¯u)) = R(¯u1) ∈
B1 when l > 0. Hence, since B2 = B0 ∪B1, we always have R(m(¯u)) ∈B2 as
desired.
It remains to verify that m maps the variables in XYhZ correctly. If u ∈Yh,
then h(u) = k(u) ∈Z′ so k(u) is colored white and m(u) = u as desired. If
u ∈X −Yh, then by (a), k(u) is colored 0 so m(u) = u0 as desired. Finally, if
u ∈Z −Yh, then by (b), k(u) is colored l > 0 so m(u) = u1 as desired.
As a corollary, we obtain that the complexity of deciding logical entailment
for sifo CQs is not worse than that of deciding containment for classical CQs:
Corollary 5.11. Testing logical entailment of sifo CQs is NP-complete.
Proof. Membership in NP follows from Theorem 5.10; as a witness for logical
entailment we can use a homomorphism h satisfying the ﬁrst two conditions of
the theorem, together with a homomorphism h0 from the query (B, XYhZ) to
the query (B, XYh) ⋊⋉(B, YhZ) witnessing the third condition of the theorem.
NP-hardness follows because the problem has containment of classical CQs as a
special case, which is well known to be NP-hard. Indeed, logical entailment of
a sifo Q′ by a sifo Q, in the special case where the creation functions of Q and
Q′ are nullary, amounts to classical containment of Q in Q′ when we ignore the
function terms in the heads.
5.5
From oid-equivalence to logical entailment
Let Q and Q′ be sifo CQs of the general forms (1) and (2) from Subsection 4.4.
From our main Theorems 4.19 and 5.10, we can conclude the following.
Theorem 5.12. If Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent, then Q logically entails Q′.
Proof. By Theorem 4.19, there exists a permutation π of Z −X such that ˚
Qπ
and ˚
Q′ are equivalent. Hence there is a homomorphism h : ˚
Qπ →˚
Q′. Clearly
h : B →B′. We verify that h satisﬁes the conditions of Theorem 5.10, thus
showing that Q logically entails Q′.
1. Since h maps the head of ˚
Qπ to the head of ˚
Q′, we have h(¯x) = ¯x and
h(π(¯z)) = ¯z. Since ¯x′ = ¯x, we have h(¯x) = ¯x′ as desired.
2. Since h is the identity on X, we have h(X ∩Z) = X ∩Z ⊆Z = Z′ as
desired.
3. Since h(π(¯z)) = ¯z and π(Z) = Z, we have h(Z) = Z = Z′. Hence Z ⊆Yh.
But then the join dependency XYh ⋊⋉YhZ becomes XYh ⋊⋉Yh which
trivially holds.
27

6
Discussion
The results in this paper provide an understanding of the notions of oid-equivalence
and logical entailment for sifo CQs. Sifo CQs, however, form a very simple sub-
class of oCQs. Moreover, oCQs themselves are rather limited, for example, they
consist of a single rule and the rule can have only one atom in the head. Thus
there are at least three natural directions for further research: (i) allowing more
than one function in the head; (ii) allowing more than one atom in the head;
(iii) allowing more than one rule.
Containment
Furthermore, in addition to oid equivalence of oCQs, it would
be natural to also investigate a notion of oid-containment. There are actually
at least two reasonable ways to deﬁne such a notion. The situation is similar
to that in research on CQs with counting or bag semantics [15, 14]. Most of
the known results are for equivalence only, with the extension to containment
typically an open problem. Indeed, our characterization of oid-equivalence for
sifo CQs relies on equivalence of CQs with bag semantics. An extension to oid-
containment will likely need a similar advance on containment of CQs with bag
semantics.
Sifo CQs and ILOG
In the introduction we mentioned that sifo CQs, and
oCQs in general, are a fragment of ILOG without recursion [22].
Sifo CQs
belong to the subclass of the class of recursion-free ILOG programs “with iso-
lated oid creation” [23]. For this class, oid-equivalence was already known to
be decidable. This was shown by checking all ﬁnite instances up to some ex-
ponential size. Hence, our NP-completeness result for oid-equivalence of sifo
CQs does not follow from the previous work. More generally, the decidability of
oid-equivalence for general recursion-free ILOG programs, or already of oCQs
for that matter, is a long-standing open question. Various interesting examples
showing the intricacies of this problem have already been given by Hull and
Yoshikawa [23].
Sifo CQs and nested dependencies
In Section 5.1 we also presented sifo
CQs, now viewed as schema mappings, as a very simple subclass of nested tgds.
The implication problem for general nested tgds was shown to be decidable by
Kolaitis et al. [26] in work done independently from the present paper. Never-
theless our characterization of implication for sifo CQs, given by Theorem 5.10,
does not follow from the general decision procedure for nested tgds. Instead,
the general procedure, when applied to two sifo CQs, is strikingly similar to
our proof of necessity of our Theorem. Using the notation from that proof, the
general procedure applied to test implication of sifo CQ Q′ by sifo CQ Q would
amount to testing for the existence of a homomorphism h from {T (¯x′l, f ′(¯z′)) |
l = 0, . . . , n} to Q(I).
Since Q(I) = {T (α(¯x), f(α(¯z))) | α : B →I}, this
can be implemented by guessing h and n + 1 matchings αl : B →I such that
(h(¯x′l), f ′(h(¯z′))) = (αl(¯x), f(αl(¯z))) for l = 0, . . . , n. In contrast, as explained
28

R
2
1
2
2
2
1
3
1
3
3
3
1
S
1
4
2
5
3
6
T
2
7
8
2
8
7
3
7
9
3
9
7
Table 9: Instances used to illustrate logical entailment in the presence of multiple
functions.
in Corollary 5.11, our characterization involves guessing just two homomor-
phisms.
Sifo CQs and plain SO-tgds
As described in Section 5, sifo CQs are a very
simple subclass of plain SO-tgds. For plain SO-tgds, deciding logical equivalence
is again an open problem. Also, the notion of oid-equivalence, deﬁned in this
paper for oCQs, can be readily extended to plain SO-tgds. We illustrate some
diﬃculties involved in allowing multiple functions in the head, which is indeed
allowed in plain SO-tgds. First, consider the oid-equivalence problem. For sifo
CQs we have shown in Section 4.4 of this paper that, as far as oid-equivalence
is concerned, only the counts of generated oids per tuple are important. Now
consider the following pair of oCQs:
Q = T (x, f(y), g(x, z)) ←R(x, y), R(x, z)
Q′ = T (x, f(y), g(x, y)) ←R(x, y), R(x, z)
Both queries create the same number of new f-oids and g-oids per x-value, but
now it also becomes important how these oids are paired. In Q more pairs are
generated for each x, and the two queries are not oid-equivalent. So, in the case
of multiple functions, also the interaction between the multiple terms needs to
be taken into account in some way.
A similar comment applies to the problem of logical equivalence. It is not
immediately clear how the join dependency condition of Theorem 5.10 should
be generalized in the presence of multiple functions. Consider, for example, the
following:
Q = T (x, f1(z1, y1), f2(z2, y2)) ←R(x, z1, z2), S(z1, y1), S(z2, y2)
Q′ = T (x, g1(u), g2(u)) ←R(x, u, x), R(x, x, u), S(u, v1), S(x, v2)
The f1-part of Q (ignoring the third component in the head) logically entails
the g1-part of Q′, and likewise the f2-part of Q (ignoring the second component
in the head) logically entails the g2-part of Q′. Globally, however, Q does not
logically entail Q′; this can be seen by the instances shown in Table 9, which
satisfy Q but not Q′.
A related interesting question then is whether Theorem 5.12, that oid-
equivalence implies logical entailment, still holds for plain SO-tgds. When we
29

allow nested function terms in the head (which goes beyond plain SO-tgds) the
implication breaks down, as shown by the following example [17, Example 3.8]:
Q = T (x, f(x), g(f(x))) ←S(x)
Q′ = T (x, f(x), g(x)) ←S(x)
Here Q and Q′ are oid-equivalent, and Q logically entails Q′, but Q′ does not
logically entail Q.
Acknowledgment
We thank the anonymous referees for their careful comments which helped im-
prove the presentation of the paper.
