Low Precision Constant Parameter CNN on FPGA
Hah, Thiam Khean; Liew, Yeong Tat; Jason Ong
Intel PSG

Abstract—We report FPGA implementation results of low
precision CNN convolution layers optimized for sparse and
constant parameters. We describe techniques that amortizes the
cost of common factor multiplication and automatically leverage
dense hand tuned LUT structures. We apply this method to
corner case residual blocks of Resnet on a sparse Resnet50 model
to assess achievable utilization and frequency and demonstrate
an effective performance of 131 and 23 TOP/chip for the corner
case blocks. The projected performance on a multichip persistent
implementation of all Resnet50 convolution layers is 10k im/s/chip
at batch size 2. This is 1.37x higher than V100 GPU upper bound
at the same batch size after normalizing for sparsity.
I. INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORKS
In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN) have
demonstrated great efﬁcacy on computer vision tasks such
as classiﬁcation[1], localization[2], and SRGAN[3]. Together
with Recurrent Neural Networks(RNN), it has motivated the
development of custom silicon for Deep Learning(DL). For
example, GPU Tensor Core[4], TPU[5] and Graphcore[6].
There has also been work to optimize DL on programmable
logic. Notably, Song Han et al.[7] proposed software-hardware
co-design. While silicon implementations must customize for
a range of DL applications, an FPGA can customize to a single
DL application. This enables application speciﬁc customiza-
tion of precision, sparsity and network structure. However,
this is not the limit of FPGA customization. FPGAs can be
further customized to a speciﬁc instance of a DL application
by implementing post training parameters as constants. We
call this a Compiled CNN or RNN.
This paper reports the results of an early investigation into
Compiled CNNs for sparse low precision models. We also
automate the process of converting quantized caffemodels into
an equivalent hardware design built using efﬁcient hand tuned
Intel FPGA WYSIWYGS. In this early work, we implemen-
tation only the predicted corner case blocks of Resnet50.
II. COMPILED CNN IMPLEMENTATION
A. Resnet50 Model Sparsity and Precision
An advantage of Compiled CNNs is its ability to exploit
ﬁne grained parameter sparsity without overhead. Multiply-
Accumulates (MAC) associated with constant zeros are simply
dropped. AMC[8] showed 80% sparse Resnet50 with no
accuracy loss. We use an 80% sparse model from Movidius[9]
to us as a proxy. We received a pre-quantized model obtained
using a modiﬁed version of TRN[10] as our starting point.
In version of TRN, each output channel has one independent
scaling factor and 6 residual terms (equivalent to INT7) are
used to obtain an accuracy loss of just 0.22% vs FP32.
B. Selection of Resnet Layers for Implementation
Table I shows that the key design parameters of conv3 x
and conv4 x are bounded by those of conv2 x and conv5 x.
The design corners are therefore represented by conv2 x and
conv5 x. We focus our efforts on these 2 layers to as a way to
quickly assess the potential of Low Precision Compiled CNNs.
TABLE I
KEY DESIGN PARAMETERS
Layer
conv2 x
conv3 x
conv4 x
conv5 x
Channel Count
64/256
128/512
256/1024
512/2048
Channel Height/Width
56x56
28x28
14x14
7x7
Parameter Count(k)
69
279
1114
4456
Total MACs(M)
218
218
218
218
Total MAC/Parameter
3136
784
196
49
C. Top Level
Fig. 1. Resnet Residual Block Implementation
The basic unit of design is the Resnet Residual Block(Fig 1).
We require that this ﬁts on a single chip to keep residual short-
cut data on chip. The top level is divided into 2 modules. The
Kernel implements the CNN Multiply-Accumulates(MAC).
Everything else is part of the Non Kernel(NK). The beneﬁts
of constant parameter optimization is found mostly in the
Kernel and we focus our efforts there. The NK is, at present,
modestly optimized. Where needed we ﬁll the GX280 with
several slightly modiﬁed Residual Blocks to evaluate resource
use, frequency and routability at high utilization.
Compiling post training parameters into FPGAs yields a
persistent network. Therefore, we expect a multichip im-
plementation with suitable interchip links, like, Ethernet or
PCIE. To minimize the number of chips needed, we use bit
serial math in the Kernel. While bit serial operations are
slower they are also smaller and consequently more numerous.
In theory, bit serial math does not reduce performance per
arXiv:1901.04969v1  [cs.DC]  11 Jan 2019

Logic Element(LE). In practice, it is lower because typical
implementations are unable to use the hard adders and carry
chains built into modern FPGAs. We will present a solution
to overcome inefﬁciency.
D. Non Kernel Design
The NK module includes everything that is not part of a
single convolutional step. This includes buffers for intermedi-
ate feature maps, data movement between Kernels and other
operations such as bias add, activation functions, normalization
and rounding. It also performs the partial result accumulation
across convolutional steps for ﬁlter sizes greater than 1x1.
We intend to automatically generate the NK RTL in the
future but it is currently hand coded. We have also set
aside resources for implementing the interchip Ethernet/PCIE
channels but have not yet done so.
1) Buffers: The Buffers are constructed using FPGA block
RAMs as either (a) streaming FIFOs or (b) double buffers.
Buffer type is selected based on layer dataﬂow, FPGA resource
allocation and time division multiplexing (TDM) of the kernel
operation. In all cases, interchip buffers are double buffers.
The residual shortcut shown on top of the Fig 1 may have
an additional buffer and 1x1 kernel if needed. The buffers at
the input and output boundary of a Residual Block is shared
with the prior and next Residual Block respectively if they are
on the same chip. Otherwise, the buffers also serve as the chip
level input and output buffer.
2) Feeder: The feeder fetches parallel data stored in the
Buffer and serializes it to feed the bit serial Kernel as well as
the residual shortcuts. Deserialization is not needed because
the bit serial Kernel generates a parallel output.
3) Accumulator: The Accumulator block adds the partial
sums across multiple convolutional steps and is not required
for layers with 1x1 ﬁlters. When the ﬁnal sum is ready, it
streams the sum to the Collector block.
4) Collector: The collector performs miscellaneous opera-
tions such as bias addition, scaling (normalization) and ReLU.
The last collector within each Residual block also adds the
shortcut data. The activations are also saturated and rounded
to 8 bits here. The design uses as many bit as necessary at other
stages to avoid rounding/saturation elsewhere and we make use
of constant parameter and ReLU properties to minimize the
number of bits needed at every stage. DSP blocks used for
scaling are shared by multiple Output Feature Maps(OFM).
This is possible because bit serial math requires multiple
clocks per operation while DSPs require only one.
E. Kernel Design Compilation and Flow
We developed a tool to automatically convert the constant
parameters of a single convolution layer stored in a caffemodel
into the Kernel RTL optimized for Intel Stratix 10. The
NK consumes the RTL as a blackbox and is unaffected by
the changes in parameter values and retraining. The Kernel
design shown in Fig 2 is composed of the module inputs and
outputs (Xm and Yn), the Common Factor Mass Multiplication
(CFMM) blocks, bit serial adder tree (Add Yn) and shift right
accumulator (Shr Acc Yn).
Fig. 2. Kernel implementation
1) Common Factor Mass Multiplication (CFMM) Blocks:
We reduce the cost of multiplication by amortizing it across
multiple operations sharing the same Common Factor(CF). To
enable this, we refactor the computation to take a set of inputs
from an input feature map (IFM) and perform all computations
for it in a single pass. This turns the inputs values into a CF.
Fig 3 shows an example, where a single input value acts as
the CF for 2304 multiplications (3x3 ﬁlter with 256 OFM).
Fig. 3. CFMM Common Factor
If the multiplier values are well distributed and numerous
relative to the number of unique products, then every product
is likely needed and the optimal CFMM design is trivial. The
will show that the number of unique multiplications required
for an INT7 parameter is 32 for Compiled CNNs. This is small
relative to the typical number of CF multiplications in CNNs
even at 80% sparsity. We optimize the design for this case
and allow the vendor tools to remove unused output products
during synthesis, should they exist.
To minimize the number of unique products to compute,
we move the sign bit of the parameter into the adder tree.
This equivalence classes positive and negative values and
reduces the number of unique INT7 products to 64. Also, even
products can be produced with a shift left of an odd product
and constant shift lefts are free on FPGAs (costs 1 ﬂop for bit
serial math). Thus a INT7 CFMM block only has 32 unique
products and multiplication by 0 and 1 is free. Now note that,
(a) when generating all products each incremental product can
be generated using one add/sub and (b) the cost of a bit serial
adder is about 1 ALM. Therefore, the ﬁrst order cost of a
CFMM block only about 30 ALMs plus ﬂops. This renders
the ALM cost of multiplication trivial. However, each product
must still be routed to the an adder tree. This makes FPGA
routablity a fundamental limiter on the efﬁciency of CFMM
based multiplication.

2) Adder Tree and Shift Right Accumulator: Each CFMM
block computes a product for all OFMs for one IFM. However,
each OFM output is a sum of the products from multiple IFMs.
Therefore, the design requires one CFMM per IFM and one
adder tree for each OFM to sum the products from all CFMM
blocks. A simple example is shown in Fig 4.
Fig. 4. OFM Adder Trees add selected constant products from CFMM Blocks
With cheap CFMM multipliers, adder trees become the
main consumer of ALMs. However, bit serial math is poorly
supported by current FPGA architecture and tools. We ﬁnd
that vendor tools implement 3:2 reduction and bit serial math
at half the efﬁciency of parallel adds. To resolve this, we
introduce (a) a hand tuned WYSIWYG design for Intel Stratix
10 with (b) carry hiding. It performs a 6:3 reduction in one
ALM stage and asymptotically uses only 3 ALMs. This is
double the efﬁciency of vendor tools and brings the efﬁciency
of bit serial adders back inline with parallel adders. Fig 5
describes a 5 ALM variant of this structure for adding 12
bits. Several variants of this design were built as hand coded
WYSIWYG modules which are automatically instantiated
by tools converting caffemodels to RTL. This leverages the
efﬁciency of hand tuned designs while hiding its complexity.
The largest variants uses 10 ALMs and add up to 27
bits. While denser variants uses of fewer ALMs it may
negatively impact routability and frequency. To determine the
optimal variant, we sweep the variants with parameters such
as pipelining and accumulator reset strategy. We ﬁnd that the
variant in Fig 5 with one pipeline stage for every 2nd adder
stage best meet our frequency and routability requirements.
Also, the adder tree adds a single bit in a bit serial value ev-
ery clock. To get the ﬁnal sum, a shift right accumulator(SRA)
is added to the end of the adder tree. The SRA simply shifts
right the sum of bit N and accumulates it with the sum for bit
N+1. For efﬁciency, the adder trees perform 1’s complement
math. A constant modiﬁer in the NK module’s bias adder
converts the ﬁnal sum into 2’s complement for free.
3) Multi Instance Kernels and Folding: Compiled CNNs
requires that every parameter be hardened into the FPGA.
Table I shows that the amount of compute per parameter differ
by up to 64x between conv2 x and conv5 x. To maintain the
same throughput at every layer we may need to fold (TDM)
the kernels or use multiple instances as appropriate.
Kernel folding is implemented using muxes. As a result, the
almost free CFMM multiplication now requires a mux each.
In multi instance kernels, each instance corresponds to one
convolutional step. For efﬁciency, the multi instance Kernels
directly sum the partial products across multiple convolutional
steps. Fig 6 illustrates this for a 4 instance kernel with a 3x3
ﬁlter summed into a 3x6 output slice.
Fig. 5. 6:3 Reduction with Carry Hiding.
This contains 2 6:3 reduction blocks(blue and yellow) and a 3 bit adder(red). Each 6:3
reduction block adds 6 bits(A to F). E+F are simple adds. The addition of A,B,C,D
results in 2 Carry bits (encodes the value 4) and 1 Sum bit. The half ALM to the left
of E+F computes the 2 Carry bits and adds them. The half ALM to the right computes
0.5*(Sum bit) and adds 2 of them to yield the Sum bit. The 3 bit adder adds the outputs
from the 2 6:3 reduction blocks into a 4 bit sum. Subsequent stages in the adder tree uses
parallel adders. The red lines indicate hidden carries. Here, a single half ALM performs
2 orthogonal functions. It (a) computes the Sum bit of A+B+C+D and transmits it on
the ALM Carry Out and (b) transmits the carry in from the previous adder on the ALM
Sum Out. This hides the carry of a previous adder in the shadow of another computation,
making it free. Quartus implements this verbatim and reports timing loops on false paths.
Fig. 6. Multi-instance Kernel with 4 3x3 ﬁlters summed into a 3x6 output
III. IMPLEMENTATION TARGETS AND RESULTS
1) Residual Block on GX280: We implement conv2 2 and
conv5 2 using the techniques described above. As noted, we
require that Residual Blocks be fully contained within one
chip. Initial experiments show that conv5 2 must be folded
by 4x to ﬁt on GX280. Also, 8 instances of conv2 2 kernels
at 2x the frequency of the conv5 2 layer is required to match
their inference throughput. This is implemented as 2 conv2 2
Kernel modules with 4 instances arranged as in Fig 6.
The design targets and implementation results are sum-
marized in Table II. To simulate high chip utilization we
duplicated the conv2 2 Kernels 5 times. This is not needed
for conv5 2. However, conv5 2 Kernels contains duplicates
of each CFMM block to alleviate routing congestion. The
effective TOP/Chip reports the number of effective TOPs
which includes the beneﬁts of sparsity.
2) Projections and Comparisons: TOP/chip of GX280 is
an inaccurate measure of the fundamental FPGA capability.
Compiled CNNs are DSP light and use ¡20% of the DSPs on
DSP heavy GX280. At the same performance density, the DSP
light GX550 would yield 131 and 23 TOP/chip for conv2 2
and conv5 2 respectively.

TABLE II
DESIGN TARGETS AND IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
Target
Actual
Layer
conv2
conv5
conv2
conv5
Instances/Kernel
4
1
4
1
Folding
1
4
1
4
Frequency(MHz)
400
200
353
156
Chip Utilization
76%
67%
ALM/Kernel(k)
127
620
DSP/Kernel
96
256
M20K/Kernel
1852
1100
CFMM Dupe
1
1
1
2 or 4
Effective MOPs/ALM
80
16
70
12
GX280 Effective TOPs/Chip
74
15
66
12
GX550 Effective TOPs/Chip*
149
30
131
23
* : Projection
Comparing the largest monolithic FPGA against the largest
monolithic GPU, we see that the conv2 2 performance of
131 TOP/chip compares favorably with NVidia V100[4] with
a peak performance of 125 TOP/chip . Poor conv5 2 per-
formance is the result of Kernel folding. An FPGA with
sufﬁciently numerous ALMs would avoid the need for folding
and result in higher TOP/chip which would likely be closer
to those seen on conv2 2. Additionally, it should be noted
that the use of Compiled CNNs is not all or nothing. A
CNN partitioned into multiple chips can be implemented partly
as Compiled CNN and partly through other means. Where
practical, a hybrid solution may yield the optimal solution.
Finally, we use the demonstrated implementation results to
estimate the resource requirements for the remaining convo-
lution layers. This was used to create a reasonable multichip
partitioning of Resnet50(Fig 7). It is throughput balanced and
requires at most 75Gbps links. At frequencies demonstrated
its throughput is
53061 image/second at batch 2. This
corresponds to 5896 and 10612 im/s/chip on GX280 and
GX550 respectively. The throughput of a V100 in a DGX-1
system[11] at batch 2 is 1544 im/s/chip. If V100 can extract a
5x efﬁciency from the 80% unstructured sparsity in the model,
its upper bound performance would be 7720 im/s/chip. Our
implementation is 1.37x faster than that bound.
Fig. 7. Multi Chip Partitioning of Resnet50 (Projection)
At submission time, the full system performance is an
estimate and has not been validated. Additionally, it does not
include the FC layer which we intend to ofﬂoad to the CPU.
However, we feel that the optimistic V100 assumptions more
than make up for it and the ability of Compiled CNNs to
naturally exploit unstructured sparsity without overhead is a
fundamental beneﬁt of this approach. Similarly, the ability
to use INT7 with similar accuracy to INT8 and FP32 is a
legitimate strength of FPGAs in general.
IV. FUTURE WORK
Future work may include full network implementation plus
power and latency measurements which should account for
inter chip link power and latency. We note that the low
clock frequency is a positive for power. A more complete
comparison of our work against sparse persistent GPU and
FPGA implementations would also be useful. Finally, addi-
tional improvements to Compiled CNNs performance through
tools, IP design or FPGA architecture may be explored.
V. CONCLUSION
We proposed the use of Compiled CNNs to improve FPGA
efﬁciency and exploit parameter sparsity during CNN inferenc-
ing. We introduced techniques to amortize multiplication cost
and automated tools that exploit the efﬁciency of hand tuned
designs. We then demonstrated these techniques on sample
corner case residual blocks of Resnet50 and use the results to
estimate performance for all Resnet50 convolution layers. The
projected performance on GX550 is 10612 im/s/chip which is
1.37x higher than the V100 upper bound at the same batch
size after normalizing for sparsity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Authors of [9] and [10] for sparsifying and quantizing the
Resnet50 model respectively.
