arXiv:1005.1684v12  [cs.IT]  7 Jul 2011
c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
On Macroscopic Complexity and Perceptual
Coding
John Scoville
July 6, 2019
Abstract
The theoretical limits of ’lossy’ data compression algorithms are con-
sidered. The complexity of an object as seen by a macroscopic observer
is the size of the perceptual code which discards all information that can
be lost without altering the perception of the speciﬁed observer.
The
complexity of this macroscopically observed state is the simplest descrip-
tion of any microstate comprising that macrostate. Inference and pattern
recognition based on macrostate rather than microstate complexities will
take advantage of the complexity of the macroscopic observer to ignore
irrelevant noise.
The quantiﬁcation of information
Information theory in its modern form originated from Claude Shannon’s[22]
usage of Gibbs’ entropy formula to describe communication channels:
S = −k
X
Pi log Pi
(1)
This formula originally applied to an ensemble of microscopic states[8], and
the analytic form of expected log-probability describes the entropy of systems
and their representations whether classical or quantum in nature. In the context
of quantum mechanics, it becomes the von Neumann entropy of the state density
matrix, S = −trace(p log p). The story goes that it was actually von Neumann
who suggested the term ’entropy’ to Shannon for his information function, for
two reasons: ’In the ﬁrst place your uncertainty function has been used in
statistical mechanics under that name, so it already has a name. In the second
place, and more important, nobody knows what entropy really is, so in a debate
you will always have the advantage.’
Entropy has the units of the logarithm of action[13] Shannon showed that,
in the absence of Boltzmann’s constant, k, entropy quantiﬁes the number of bits
of data needed to identify a sample from some distribution. It quantiﬁes the
amount of choice or uncertainty that must be overcome in order to invoke the
axiom of choice and select a speciﬁc element from a set. The Shannon Entropy,
1

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
H, limits the information capacity of a signal communicated using an alphabet
or codebook with known distribution, P.
H = −
X
Pi log Pi
(2)
Or, in the case of a continuous pdf, H = −
R
p(x) log p(x)dx. The functional
form of information entropy has the properties that one expects from a linear
measure of choice[22] and, as such, establishes a theoretical bound for the aver-
age information capacity of a string of symbols sent from an ergodic source to a
receiver. The base of the logarithm is equal to the cardinality of the symbol set.
When the base is two, the units of entropy are bits, in base e they are ’nats’,
etc.
Shannon entropy represents choice or uncertainty in the space of possible
states; it is synonymous with the development of information theory[3]. How-
ever, the deﬁnition of entropy due to Boltzmann is still more widely known for
its role in the thermodynamics of physical systems[8, 19, 12, 4, 16, 17, 13] than
its role in the theory of information[5, 26, 15]. The deﬁnition of microscopic
entropy (originally referred to by Boltzmann as ’molecular chaos’) is
S = k log n
(3)
For a set having n discrete elements. This deﬁnition may be extended to
continuous spaces by considering n as a volume V of phase space, having some
measure, µ, in such a case the entropy becomes S = k log µ(V ).
Boltzmann’s thermodynamic entropy and Gibbs’s statistical mechanical en-
tropy are closely related. The Gibbs entropy of an ensemble reduces to the
Boltzmann entropy in the case of an ensemble of n equally likely microscopic
states (or a volume n of state space) corresponding to a single maximum-entropy
equilibrium state. Alternately, Gibbs’ entropy function may be shown to emerge
from Boltzmann’s entropy as the increase in phase space volume corresponds to
the expected value of the log-probability.[13]
The Boltzmann entropy of a non-equilibrium system (which could have any
number of partial equilibrium macrostates) is proportional to the sum of the
entropies of each macrostate.[13] The Boltzmann entropy of such a macrostate
is the logarithm of the number of microscopic states consistent with the observed
macroscopic state of the ensemble, or, equivalently, the volume of phase space
occupied by that macroscopic state.
Rather than Boltzmann’s entropy function, which includes a constant to de-
scribe the phase spaces of physical systems, we will refer to an abstract Boltz-
mann entropy function on a discrete state space, S = log n which is simply the
logarithm of the set cardinality n. If the set is continuous the form S = log µ(V )
is implied. A discrete version of this abstract Boltzmann entropy takes the form
of the Hartley information function log p. [10]
Shannon entropy is deﬁned for ergodic sources[22], not particular instances
of data. If a source is not ergodic then the results of classical information theory
may hold only approximately, on average, or asymptotically.[15]. Colloquially,
2

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
this means that a series is statistically uniform throughout, which is related to
the notion of a stationary stochastic process. For example, for a memoryless
source such as a coin, 01101001111010101101 may seem like a typical sequence,
but 11111111111100000000 seems, oﬀhand, highly unlikely to have been pro-
duced by the same random process. However, these sequences have the same
number of 1s and 0s, so when viewed as an unordered set (rather than, for in-
stance, a Markov chain) they have identical distributions with the same Shannon
entropy.
Kolmogorov Complexity resolves this diﬃculty by describing any type of
binary symbolic information, regardless of the source. It is deﬁned as the min-
imum amount of information needed to completely reconstruct some object,
represented as a binary string of symbols, X[3, 15].
Cf(X) =
min
f(p)=X |p|
(4)
In the parlance of computer science, f is a computer and p is a program
running on that computer. The Kolmogorov Complexity is the length of the
shortest computer program which terminates with X as output. In the example
of the binary sequences above, the second clearly has a simpler algorithmic
representation, whereas the ﬁrst is nearly random.
The Turing equivalence of diﬀerent computers[24] relates Kolmogorov com-
plexities by a equivalence constant[15, 3]:
Cf(X) = Cg(X) + C
(5)
Since optimal speciﬁcation does not depend on the particular computer used,
we will assume a standard computer f unless otherwise speciﬁed.
The properties of C(X) are sometimes more natural when the set of possible
X are constrained to be preﬁx-free, that is, no X is a preﬁx of another X, so
programs are self-delimiting rather than being demarcated by stop symbols. In
this case, we refer to Chaitin’s algorithmic preﬁx complexity K(X). We won’t
delve into the details of K(X), but we note that a program can be made self-
delimiting by recursively preﬁxing the value of its length, and the length of this
preﬁx, and so forth, so K(X) = C(X) + C(C(X) + O(C(C(C(X))))[15]. K(X)
gains some important attributes[15, 2] that C(X) lacks. One is convergence of
the universal probability:
U(x) =
X
f(p)=X
2−|p|
(6)
This probability measure may be interpreted as the probability that a ran-
domly selected preﬁx-free program terminates with x as its output. Convergence
is assured by the use of a self-delimiting preﬁx code, as the Kraft inequality[3]
states that the lengths of codewords x in a preﬁx code satisfy P 2l(x) ≤1.
Though convergence to the limit is in general very slow[15], this series is often
3

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
dominated by the shortest program, and U(x) ≈2−K(x) constitutes a reason-
able ﬁrst-order approximation[3, 15] to the universal probability for these typi-
cal objects which are said to be ’shallow’, whereas certain special ’deep’ objects
converge more slowly.
Performing complexity-based inference requires that we have a notion of
the information that one object contains about another, or vice versa. In the
theory of Kolmogorov complexity[2, 15], this is achieved by the conditional preﬁx
complexity:
K(A|B) = K(AB) −K(B)
(7)
Where the combination AB is the concatenation of strings A and B. Al-
gorithmic preﬁx complexity characterizes measurements at ﬁnite precision and
may also be deﬁned via algorithmic entropy, which we will consider shortly.
The notion of splitting complexity into a ’regular’ (low prior probability)
part and a ’random’ (high prior probability) part is also originally due to Kol-
mogorov. The Kolmologorov Minimal Suﬃcient Statistic identiﬁes the smallest
superset of x which may be described with less than k bits. This is closely re-
lated to the notion of stochastic processes used earlier by Langevin to separate
dynamical systems into deterministic and random components.
The Kolmogorov complexity may be used to deﬁne stochastic sequences in
general, as such, is fundamental to the notion of a statistical probability. [15]
For natural numbers k and δ, we say that a string x is (k, δ)-stochastic if and
only if there exists a ﬁnite set A such that:
x ∈A, C(A) ≤k, C(x|A) ≥log|A| −δ
(8)
The deviation from randomness, δ, indicates whether x is a typical or atypical
member of A. The Kolmologorov Minimal Suﬃcient Statistic for x, given n =
|x|, is the set of minimum cardinality subject to the ﬁrst two constraints of
stochasticity. This is deﬁned through the Kolmologorov Structure Function,
Ck(x|n):
Ck(x|n) = min {log |A| : x ∈A, C(A|n) ≤k}
(9)
The minimal set A0 minimizes the randomness deﬁciency, δ, and is referred
to as the Kolmologorov Minimal Suﬃcient Statistic for x given n. This gen-
eralizes the notion of ﬁtting a distribution to x. The Kolmogorov Structure
Function Ck(x|n) measures the amount of randomness in the string x. For n
coin tosses, it is nearly n, for a number such as π, it is O(1).
Another fundamental partitioning of random and nonrandom data is pro-
vided by the Algorithmic Entropy function[26], introduced by Zurek as physical
entropy as it generalizes classical thermodynamics to a physical theory of in-
formation. Algorithmic Entropy[26, 15] combines Kolmogorov complexity and
Boltzmann entropy to measure the macroscopic complexity of certain types of
measurements. It relates computation and the informatic content of real-valued
measurements to statistical mechanics.
The algorithmic entropy of a string,
H(Z) (not to be confused with the Shannon Information, H, of a source) is
deﬁned in its most basic form as:
H(Z) = K(Z) + S
(10)
4

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
In this context, Z = X1:n is a description of a macroscopic observation
constructed by truncating a microscopic state X to a bit string of length n.
K(X) is the algorithmic preﬁx complexity[2, 15] of this representation of the
macrostate. In the case of algorithmic entropy, the Boltzmann entropy S is seen
to be the additional complexity needed to specify a microstate given knowledge
of its macrostate.
Since all the microstates comprising a partition of macrostate share a com-
mon preﬁx in their string representation, K(X) is constructed as the preﬁx
complexity of these microstates. The microstates are contained in a volume of
state space sharing a common preﬁx. Relaxing this constraint leads to a more
general functional, the eﬀective complexity.
Gell-Mann and Lloyd[6] describe a procedure for determining ’Eﬀective Com-
plexity’ which extends the principles of of maximum entropy[11] to complexity
theory. The total information functional Σ is deﬁned as the sum of the Shannon
information of an ensemble Z, of which the string X is a member, and another
argument, the eﬀective complexity, Y, the K-complexity of this ensemble. By
minimizing total information subject to arbitrary constraints f(X) = c, which
incorporate any prior information known about the system, the most likely con-
ﬁguration of the ensemble may be determined.
Σ = Y + H(Z) = K(Z) + H(Z)
(11)
This expression minimizes complexity and maximizes uncertainty. Typically,
the total information is minimized by the Kolmogorov complexity[6] and these
quantities are within a few bits of K = Y + H[7]. The relationship between
K, Y, and H may be characterized in terms of input to a computer program.
The eﬀective complexity Y represents a ﬁxed deterministic algorithm, and the
entropy H represents the information content of an arbitrary initial condition
chosen as input for that algorithm[7]. Together, these represent the minimal
total information content needed for the output of the program. In the absence
of any additional constraints, this is tyically the Kolmogorov complexity K.
When macrostates are cylinder sets, which are coarse-grained partitions of
phase space, the eﬀective complexity becomes identical to the algorithmic en-
tropy. In contrast to algorithmic entropy, eﬀective complexity applies generally
to any macrostates, which need not be compact volumes of state space and their
string representations don’t generally share a common preﬁx. Such macrostates
may represent any set of objects equivalent under an arbitrary relation; how-
ever, coarse-grained macrostates are a very special case which lead to algorithmic
entropy and an alternative deﬁnition of the preﬁx complexity. Note that when
algorithmic entropy is generalized to ensembles of arbitrary measure, it becomes
equivalent to the eﬀective complexity.
Finally, we note that the Kolmogorov complexity is not generally calculable
due to non-halting programs[2], and, moreover, a binary computation system
is only optimal for representing powers of two. Though non-constructive, Kol-
mogorov complexity is a useful conceptual device which simpliﬁes the reasoning
of many proofs, e.g. demonstrating the incompleteness of axiomatic systems or
the limits of inductive reasoning[15].
5

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
1
Macroscopic Equivalence of Microstates
Macrostates may be described using the simplest representation of an equivalent
microstate. This measure has an important application to ’lossy’ data compres-
sion, as its objective is to ﬁnd the simplest representation which is equivalent to
a more complex datum. This is a function of the particular observer or classiﬁer
involved, which we may characterize by an equivalence relation, P.
The simplest string capable of reconstructing an object equivalent to X is
the simplest deﬁnition of an object belonging to the equivalence class X/P;
since no shorter string appears equivalent to the observer, this code is optimal.
This establishes a formal theoretical limit for the performance of the so-called
lossy data compression algorithms prevalent in digital media. Beyond this level,
information about microscopic state constitutes irrelevant noise.
Discarding
this irrelevant microscopic data boosts the signal-to-noise ratio perceived by
the macroscopic observer, which facilitates the inference and machine learning
of macroscopic signals. Macroscopic equivalence relations arise naturally in the
lossy compression of perceptual data - images, audio, and video - as the objective
of such algorithms may be phrased as a search for shorter representations which
are indistinguishable to an observer represented by class P.
The observer or classiﬁer P groups indistinguishable objects into equivalence
classes, with a ﬁnite but large number of objects falling into each equivalence
class. Consider the equivalence relation P on the set of strings as a function
which maps string representations of microstates to observable macrostates.
X is indistinguishable from Y if and only if microscopic states X and Y are
congruent modulo the equivalence class P.
A string X represents the microstate of an object or ensemble, and its equiv-
alence class X/P is the macrostate of the object/ensemble as observed under
P. For the purposes of this paper, set membership in class X/P is formally
presumed to be determinable by an Oracle for P - a Turing machine may ask
the Oracle a true/false question to determine set membership in X/P in a sin-
gle operation. In general, P may take any form. The equivalence relation may
be endowed with arbitrary criteria so long as these criteria provide consistent
classiﬁcation. The canonical example of classical thermodynamics involves mea-
surement at a particular scale, resulting in P which partitions the phase space
of the system at a characteristic length scale. P may specify, for example, a
neural net or other classiﬁer, time scales, statistics from human observations, or
other factors.
2
The Complexity of an Equivalence Class
We introduce a new complexity metric for an object X, the Kolmolgorov com-
plexity of the simplest object equivalent to X under the relation P(). Sf(X/P)
is a measure of the descriptive complexity of an equivalence class of macroscopic
objects.
Sf(X/P) ≡
min
Y ∈P (X) Kf(Y )
(12)
6

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
We refer to Sf(X/P) as the complexity of a macroscopic state P, the macrostate
complexity, or simply the macrocomplexity. These are macrostates in the sense
of classical thermodynamics; as such, the logarithm of their cardinality is the
Boltzmann entropy S. Sf(X/P) is the minimum Kolmolgorov complexity of
any string equivalent to X, the length of the shortest computer program which
terminates with output in the class P(X). K(Y), then, could also be used as a
minimal description of the macroscopic equivalence class P(X). K(Y) represents
the shortest description macroscopically equivalent to X, which is the optimal
information-losing (’lossy’) data compression of string X (on computer f).
In contrast to the Kolmolgorov Structure Function, which produces the min-
imal Suﬃcient Statistic as a superset of x given the desired complexity of this
set, the macrocomplexity is a function of x and its superset P(X).
To simplify the expression, we substitute the deﬁnition of Kf(X) into the
deﬁnition of S(X/P), which reduces to:
Sf(X/P) ≡
min
f(p)∈P (X) |p|
(13)
This looks similar to the deﬁnition of the Kolmogorov complexity, but the
equality in the argument has been replaced by an equivalence. The macrocom-
plexity Sf(X/P) is a function of the microstate X and equivalence relation P,
in contrast to Kolmogorov’s C-complexity, which depends only on X. Clearly,
S ≤C. In fact, the diﬀerence between the macrocomplexity Sf(X/P) and the
C-Complexity of a typical state is close to Boltzmann’s entropy function.
3
Boltzmann Entropy and Optimal Information-
Losing Codes
The entropy of multimedia data is typically high, its string representations
are irregular and nearly incompressible by universal (lossless) data compression
algorithms[23, 18, 20, 21], so the output of such algorithms is not signiﬁcantly
shorter than the original data. An eﬀective lossy compression algorithm, on
the other hand, minimizes description length within an equivalence class whose
elements are indistinguishable to a macroscopic observer or other equivalence
class P, which may allow signiﬁcant savings.
As a concrete example, consider lossy MPEG Level 3 (MP3) audio com-
pression, which typically provides higher levels of compression of music than
the universal Lempel-Ziv [14, 25] compression algorithm. MP3 frequently com-
presses music recordings 90%, whereas Lempel-Ziv’s compression ratio of raw
music data is often close to zero. The reason such an improvement is possible,
given entropic coding limits, is that the human nervous system discards large
amounts of irrelevant perceptual data[21, 9]. As a result, the classes of objects
which are indistinguishable to humans often have many members, which, in
turn, leads to the existence of shorter descriptions. By reﬁning this notion, we
will elucidate the role of Boltzmann entropy functions in macroscopic observa-
tion and lossy data compression.
7

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
For media such as audio or video which mimic the sensory channels of a
macroscopic human observer, the amount of regularity or redundancy is often
low in comparison to the length of the string. Not much compression is possible,
so Cf(X) ≈|X|. In this case, X is regarded as mostly random or chaotic[3,
15].
Regardless of the string X, the size of the class X/P naturally aﬀects
the existence of simpler equivalent descriptions. If the criteria for P are very
restrictive, then it may be that
Sf(X/P) ≈C(X)
(14)
That is, any description of a macrostate requires speciﬁcation of nearly the
entire microstate. We will focus our attention on the more interesting case,
when X/P contains simpler microstates equivalent to a typical element X:
Sf(X/P) < C(X)
(15)
This is the case when lossy compression is practical, for example, with many
digital audio and video recordings. In such cases, the Boltzmann entropy of X/P
is comparable to the diﬀerence between the macrocomplexity and K-complexity.
This may be demonstrated via the universal probability measure. Let us deﬁne
the universal probability of an equivalence class:
U(X, P) =
X
f(p)∈X/P
2−|p|
(16)
Here the programs p are implied to be self-delimiting preﬁx codes, and hence
the relation involves K-complexity rather than C-complexity.
This may be
rewritten as the sum of the individual universal probabilities U(Xi) for each
string Xi belonging to the class X/P:
U(X, P) =
|X/P |
X
i=1
U(Xi)
(17)
To ﬁrst order, the universal probability of programs having X as output is
dominated by the shortest program and may be approximated by
U(X) ≈2−K(X)
(18)
The universal probability of programs congruent to X/P may be expressed
as
U(X, P) ≈2−S(X/P )
(19)
The relative frequency of programs with output in the class X/P over pro-
grams whose output is X, then, is the ratio of these two measures. The universal
probability of microstate X given that X is in X/P becomes
U(X|X/P) =
U(X)
U(X, P) =
U(X)
P|X/P |
u=1
U(Xi)
(20)
8

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
or, taking the leading terms in each series, we have, to ﬁrst order,
U(X|X/P) ≈2S(X/P )−K(X)
(21)
In a classical statistical ensemble, each of the |X/P| microstates of the system
are equally likely, with probability
1
|X/P |. These probabilities do not directly
correspond to the universal probabilities. The latter are the probabilities of
obtaining a string as the output of a random program on a certain Turing ma-
chine, and the former are simply the probabilities directly implied by the length
of the string. Directly equating the universal probability and the likelihood is
not appropriate.
However, we may characterize an typical element X whose universal proba-
bility is close to its mean value of
1
|X/P |. For such a typical element:
U(X|X/P) =
U(X)
U(X, P) =
U(X)
P|X/P |
u=1
U(Xi)
≈
1
|X/P|
(22)
Substituting, we see that the cardinality of the macrostate obeys, to ﬁrst
order,
U(X|X/P) =
1
|X/P| ≈2S(X/P )−K(X)
(23)
After taking logarithms and inverting the sign, we obtain a relation involving
the the Boltzmann entropy of the macrostate, which is the logarithm of the set
cardinality:
S = log |X/P| ≈K(X) −S(X/P)
(24)
The Boltzmann entropy of the macrostate is seen to be the diﬀerence be-
tween the preﬁx complexity K and the macrocomplexity S(X/P) for a typical
element of X/P which occurs with approximately average probability. Entropy
represents the additional information needed to specify a typical microstate, of
complexity K(X), provided the description of its macrostate having complexity
S(X/P). This holds for ’shallow’ objects, where the universal probability is
dominated by the shortest program, but need not be the case for ’deep’ objects
which reveal their structure in a slow convergence to the universal probability.
If the system has multiple macrostates, rather than a single equilibrium
macrostate, then a diﬀerent probability measure may apply. The uniform re-
cursive probability measure for strings of length |X|, µ = 2−|X|, implies:
|X/P|
2|X|
≈2K(X)−S(X/P )−|X|
(25)
This measure eﬀectively shifts the discrete Boltzmann entropy by a normal-
ization constant |X|:
S = log |X/P|
2|X|
≈K(X) −S(X/P) −|X|
(26)
This form is related to universal randomness tests[5, 15]. To ﬁrst order, the
sum of the macrocomplexity and Boltzmann entropy (which is also the total
9

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
information Σ) may be expressed as the Martin-L¨of universal randomness test
K(X) −|X|:
Σ = S + S(X/P) ≈K(X) −|X|
(27)
Such relationships are known to relate algorithmic entropy[15] and preﬁx
complexity, which may be expressed as a special case of macrocomplexity. The
macrocomplexity provides statistical and thermodynamic bounds for the opti-
mal performance of lossy data compression, just as Shannon information limits
exact universal compression. Furthermore, since the macrocomplexity is the
Kolmogorov complexity of an equivalent element, it may be used (or approxi-
mated) for minimum description length inference in problems of pattern recog-
nition and artiﬁcial intelligence.
4
Eﬀective Complexity and Algorithmic Entropy
of Macrostates
Like many complexity measures[7], macrocomplexity is closely related to ef-
fective complexity and algorithmic entropy[15]. These measures agree, under
appropriate conditions, with macrocomplexity as the best information-losing
data compression of a string X as judged by a classiﬁer P.
The entropy of an unconstrained, discrete set is the logarithm or Boltzmann
entropy function S = log |X/P| of the macrostate, so the total information
becomes:
Σ = Y + H(X/P) = Y + log |X/P|
(28)
Where Y is the K-complexity of the macrostate X/P. For the case of a
typical element X, the total information Σ is close (within a few bits[7]) to the
K-complexity X.
K(X) ≈Y + log |X/P|
(29)
This level of eﬀective complexity is typical of the equivalence class X/P.
Hence, for typical elements, the eﬀective complexity is:
Y ≈K(X) −log |X/P|
(30)
This is approximately equal to the ﬁrst-order approximation to the macrostate
complexity obtained in the previous section:
S(X/P) ≈K(X) −log |X/P|
(31)
So, Y ≈S(X/P) is the complexity typically perceived by an observer or
some other classiﬁer described by the macrostate P. The correspondence may
be seen to hold more generally by considering macroscopic equivalence in terms
of Turing equivalence. The S-complexity may be alternately deﬁned using the
complexity of a computer-observer system. In this context, the entropy plays
the role of a constant which relates the complexity of programs on computer
f to those of a Turing-equivalent computer-observer system, g. Speciﬁcally, g
10

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
applies to its input program the instructions of computer f followed by the
mapping to the equivalence class P(X), that is, g() = P(f()). This mapping
loses information, so the complexities obey:
Kf(X) = Kg(P(X)) + C
(32)
As we have seen, for typical elements, the additive Turing equivalence con-
stant, C, is approximately the Boltzmann entropy S. It represents the amount
of Kolmolgorov complexity lost by the computer-observer system, g = P(f), as
compared to the standard computer, f. This allows an alternative deﬁnition of
macrocomplexity - the K-complexity of a macroscopic equivalence class P(X)
on the computer-observer system g:
Sf(X, P) ≡Kg(P(X))
(33)
The macrostate complexity, originally deﬁned in terms of a standard com-
puter and an observer, is now the complexity of the macrostate on a computer
system which incorporates the observer. This is an eﬀective complexity, the
K-complexity of P(X). In this way, we split the total information Kf(X) into
an eﬀective complexity Kg(X) and a Turing equivalence constant C, a function
of P which plays the role of the entropy.
Equivalently, macrocomplexity may be regarded as a generalization of algo-
rithmic entropy. Endowing the algorithmic entropy with an arbitrary metric
generalizes the preﬁx complexity[15] to macrostates which do not necessarily
share common preﬁxes; in this case, macrocomplexity arises from the algorith-
mic entropy of arbitrary sets having uniform metrics.
5
Calculating the Complexity of a Macrostate
The ﬁrst step in a consideration of macrocomplexity is to specify the observer
or classiﬁer P. Once this is done, a calculation or estimate of complexity may be
desired. Kolmogorov complexities are not generally calculable[2], so unless the
class X/P contains objects with short string representations, exact calculation
of Sf(X/P) could be impossible. Even if one discounts the halting problem
and uses the ﬁnitely calculable resource-limited complexities[15], the number of
enumerable strings to consider is potentially daunting.
Practical approximation of Sf(X/P), however, may be fairly simple, given
one or more lossy compression algorithms oﬀering good performance as judged
by the classiﬁer P. Estimation of Sf(X/P) in this case amounts to tuning the
lossy algorithms to minimize length without perceptible loss, as determined by
the relation P. Just as universal data compression algorithms such as Lempel-
Ziv[14] may be used to estimate the algorithmic preﬁx complexity, K, existing
lossy data compression algorithms allow a quick estimate of certain macrostate
complexities. These macrostate complexities may then be used to construct a
mutual information function, universal probabilities, or other statistics.
Of course, if the cardinality of the macrostate, |X/P|, is known or es-
timable, then Sf(X/P) may be approximated using results obtained relating the
11

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
macrocomplexity to the Boltzmann entropy. Conversely, knowledge of Sf(X/P)
may be used to estimate the cardinality or Boltzmann entropy of an unknown
macrostate (with a known equivalence relation) whose cardinality might other-
wise be diﬃcult or impossible to count.
6
Classiﬁcation of Macrostates
Given the ability to calculate or approximate Sf(X/P), the minimal descriptive
complexity of an element of the equivalence class X/P, we may use it for the
purpose of classiﬁcation. We may deﬁne a conditional complexity by directly
substituting macrocomplexity in place of K-complexity:
S((A|B)/P) = S(AB/P) −S(B/P)
(34)
Eﬀectively, this is K(A|B) modulo P, and it represents the complexity of
diﬀerences between A and B which persist even after passing through the clas-
siﬁer P. The combination AB is typically chosen in a way that preserves locality
under P. For practical resource-limited estimation, AB should be constructed
such that corresponding structural elements of the objects A and B are ’close’
in some sense of the resulting representation.
Ideally, a similarity measure D(x, y) would have the properties of a distance
metric: D(x, y) > 0, D(x, y) = D(y, x), and D(x, y) + D(y, z) < D(x, z). One
way to accomplish this would be to symmetrize by addition[15] to S((A|B)/P)+
S((B|A)/P) which results in the macroscopic complexity’s equivalent of a mu-
tual information function[3, 15] modulo the relation P.
However, this com-
bination is not necessarily the desired minimal distance function, as there is
generally some redundancy between these two quantities. On the other hand,
the ’max-distance’ E1 = max(C(A|B), C(B|A)) is minimal among all such
distances[15], up to an additive constant. In terms of macrocomplexity, this
is: D(A, B) = max{S((A|B)/P), S((B|A)/P)}
This is the minimum amount of additional data that must be speciﬁed to
transform A into an element of P(B) or B into an element of P(A), with the
optimal transformation being in one of these two directions. This quantiﬁes
the similarity of any two macroscopic objects and provides a natural framework
for the classiﬁcation of macrostates. In this framework, classiﬁcation problems
reduce to minimizing a sort of universal invariant distance from X to the class
Pi,
DPi(X) = min
Y ∈Pi D(X, Y )
(35)
This is evaluated against all macrostates in P to identify the closest macrostate,
Pi, to a string whose equivalence class X/P is undeﬁned or unknown:
Class(X) = arg min
Pi∈P DPi(X)
(36)
For example, the recognition of recorded speech as particular words might
evaluate an unknown audio sample against recordings indexed in a dictionary.
12

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
Such patterns may be speciﬁed, as would typically be the case with a dictionary,
or they may be deﬁned based on proximity in equivalence distance.
7
Comments and Discussion
The extraction of meaningful information has always been a problem in the ma-
chine recognition of human sensory input. Prior to ﬁltering by neural perceptual
classiﬁers, such input is mostly random, incompressible, noisy and chaotic. The
perception of useful information in such a signal involves removal of irrelevant
noise in order to recognize compressible and learnable patterns.
Lossy data
compression schemes, by their nature, do this, and, coupled with a macro-
scopic equivalence relation, allow the practical estimation of macrocomplexity
in some cases. As lossy compression algorithms improve, so will approximations
of macrocomplexity, which will improve the quality of pattern recognition.
As evidenced by the success of lossy perceptual audio encoding, psychoacou-
sics has become a relatively mature science. When perceptual equivalence under
P amounts to indistinguishability to a typical human ear, these psychoacoustic
models provide eﬀective lossy data compression. The resulting macrocomplexity
may be used to perform auditory inference by proximity in equivalence distance.
Spoken language is richer in information than text, but the diﬃculty of
extracting this information has historically limited its utility in analysis. For
example, in the case of written human language, the transcription of audio data
to symbolic data obviously loses large amounts of information about cues such
as inﬂection, tone, and timing. One could deﬁne macroscopic perceptual classes
based on some semantic equivalence, e.g. X/P could represent recordings of a
particular word. Psychoacoustics models, however, properly describe indistin-
guishability of sounds to the ear of a hypothetical listener rather than this sort
of higher-order linguistic processing.
As a trivial example of how macrocomplexity is relevant to inference, con-
sider the ﬁltering of human speech recorded in a noisy environment.
If the
original recording is, for example, a 48kHz channel recorded on an idealized
microphone, then most of its data points are irrelevant to the capture of the hu-
man voice, whose frequency response does not exceed some maximum frequency
threshold, typically around 3kHz. The speech frequency band constitutes a psy-
choacoustic model for an observer, P, ignorant of the higher frequencies. As
such, a crude perceptual coding might simply perform a Fourier transform and
discard all frequencies in the spectrum above (or below) the audible threshold.
Entropic compression may then be used to estimate complexities or information
distances using either the ﬁltered spectrum or it’s inverse Fourier transform, the
ﬁltered signal. In addition to reconstructing the signal using less information,
this improves inference regarding speech, as higher frequency components are
not germane to speech analysis. The result is an estimate of macrocomplexity
for the speciﬁed P.
The lossy compression of images and video is a more diﬃcult problem than
audio, as visual processing by humans is not so well understood as psychoacous-
13

c⃝Copyright 2011 - John Scoville
tics, and because images often represent more information than audio record-
ings.
Modern image compression is largely based on wavelets through the
JPEG2000 standard[1], which remains the dominant medium for transmitted
image data. Recent video codecs such as h.264 video and MPEG-7 audio have
been developed using more realistic psychological models[9][20].
These algo-
rithms oﬀer more eﬀective perceptual coding, greater compression, and hence
more accurate estimates of macrocomplexity as compared to their predeces-
sors. As one might expect based on the discussion here, such algorithms have
improved utility in indexing and retrieval applications[9].
Due to the breadth of other deﬁnitions of equivalence classes, the notion of
splitting microscopic complexity into a macroscopic observer and a macroscopic
observation has many possible implications. Macrostate complexity may only
be rigorously deﬁned insofar as the macroscopic equivalence relation P may
be well-posed. A rigorous and exact calculation of macrocomplexity, like the
Kolmogorov complexity of its microstate, is not possible beyond trivial cases.
However, for observers similar to those modeled by existing lossy data compres-
sion algorithms, the use of such a measure enables pattern recognition which
can exceed the limits posed by classical information theory.
