arXiv:2401.01835v1  [cs.IT]  3 Jan 2024
1
Concurrent Brainstorming & Hypothesis Satisfying:
An Iterative Framework for Enhanced
Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(R2CBR3H-SR)
Arash Shahmansoori∗
Abstract—Addressing the complexity of comprehensive infor-
mation retrieval, this study introduces an innovative, iterative
retrieval-augmented generation system. Our approach uniquely
integrates a vector-space driven re-ranking mechanism with
concurrent brainstorming to expedite the retrieval of highly
relevant documents, thereby streamlining the generation of
potential queries. This sets the stage for our novel hybrid
process, which synergistically combines hypothesis formulation
with satisfying decision-making strategy to determine content
adequacy—leveraging a chain of thought-based prompting tech-
nique. This uniﬁed hypothesize-satisﬁed phase intelligently distills
information to ascertain whether user queries have been sat-
isfactorily addressed. Upon reaching this criterion, the system
reﬁnes its output into a concise representation, maximizing
conceptual density with minimal verbosity. The iterative nature
of the workﬂow—Retrieve →Rerank →Concurrent Brainstorm
→Retrieve →Rerank →Reﬁne →Hypothesize-Satisfying
→Reﬁne—enhances process efﬁciency and accuracy. Crucially,
the concurrency within the brainstorming phase signiﬁcantly
accelerates recursive operations, facilitating rapid convergence
to solution satisfaction. Compared to conventional methods, our
system demonstrates a marked improvement in computational
time and cost-effectiveness. This research advances the state-of-
the-art in intelligent retrieval systems, setting a new benchmark
for resource-efﬁcient information extraction and abstraction in
knowledge-intensive applications.
Index
Terms—Retrieval-augmented
generation,
concurrent
brainstorming, hybrid hypothesize-satisfying, reranking, reﬁne-
ment.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE incessant growth of information on the web has
placed unprecedented demands on artiﬁcial intelligence
systems to not only understand complex queries but to
also engage in meaningful information retrieval and genera-
tion tasks that satisfy users’ informational needs effectively.
The paradigm of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has
emerged as a critical approach to bridge the gap between vast
repositories of knowledge and the succinct, relevant answers
desired by users [1]. In this work, we introduce a novel system
designed to navigate this landscape through an agile iterative
process that encompasses retrieval, reranking, brainstorming,
hypothesizing, satisfying, and reﬁning—each step a cog in the
machinery of an intelligent question-answering model.

Grounded in the RAG framework, our system initiates the
process with a robust retrieval phase, employing a vector
space model to extract documents with the highest semantic
relevance to a user’s initial query. It then engages in an
innovative concurrent brainstorming stage, where potential
inquiries and lines of investigation are generated, setting the
stage for a dynamic and contextually enriched reranking of
information sources.
One of the hallmark features of our system is its capac-
ity to concurrently generate relevant questions during the
brainstorming phase. This concurrency not merely accelerates
the retrieval process, but embodies a recursive depth as the
system iteratively reﬁnes its understanding and response to the
user’s query. It enhances the efﬁciency of the retrieval loop
by preemptively addressing possible follow-up queries and
contextual angles that may otherwise necessitate additional
search iterations.
The subsequent stage marks a pivotal advancement in RAG
systems: the hybridization of hypothesizing and satisﬁcing
through a chain of thought based prompting mechanism. Here,
the system not only formulates comprehensive hypotheses
to address the user’s need but simultaneously evaluates the
satisfaction level of the response. By blending these two
functions, our approach drastically shortens the feedback loop,
propelling towards an expedited yet accurate provision of
information.
Following the innovative hypothesize-satisfying phase is
the reﬁne step, wherein the system produces a condensed,
prime representation of content. This representation embodies
a sparse collection of statements and conceptual associations
crafted for maximal informational value with minimal ver-
bosity—aiming at the essence of user query fulﬁllment.
Lastly, another iteration occurs, providing a rigorous re-
assessment of the query’s satisfaction level, ensuring precision
and comprehensiveness in the ﬁnal output. This recursive
nature ensures that the system adaptively hones its ability
to satisfy user queries with a continually reﬁned quality of
response, underscoring the system’s learning capabilities.
Main Contributions:
• We propose an initial phase of retrieval and sophisticated
reranking based on semantic alignment with the user’s
initial query, leveraging advancements in vector space
models for precise initial document retrieval.

2
• Our system introduces concurrent brainstorming to ex-
pedite the retrieval process and imbue it with depth by
preempting further possible user inquiries.
• A hybrid hypothesize-satisfying step utilizing a chain of
thought based prompting, streamlines the satisfaction as-
sessment and hypothesis generation process into a uniﬁed,
efﬁcient step.
• The reﬁnement phase encapsulates the essence of the
user’s informational need in a concise, yet rich, repre-
sentation by distilling the breadth of the retrieved data
into its most salient points.
II. THE METHOD
This paper introduces an innovative approach to RAG for
question-answering systems. Our proposed method employs
an iterative process that integrates the latest advancements
in natural language processing and information retrieval. The
primary components of our framework are:
1) Concurrent Brainstorming: This stage utilizes the user’s
inquiry to prompt the generation of semantically similar
questions through concurrent processing against a vector
database of documents.
2) Iterative Reranking: Following the brainstorming epoch,
we rerank the top candidates from the vector database,
which feeds the subsequent hypothesizing stage.
3) Hybrid Hypothesize-Satisfying: Leveraging a chain-of-
thought prompting mechanism, this step amalgamates
hypothesizing with satisfying to assess and satisfy the
user’s information need in a cost-effective manner.
4) Reﬁnement: The ﬁnal succinct representation captures
the essence of the brainstormed hypotheses and ques-
tions in sparse prime form, eschewing verbosity for
conceptual density.
The process follows an iterative pattern as depicted in the
provided pseudocode (R2CBR3H-SR): Retrieve →Rerank →
Concurrent Brainstorm →Retrieve →Rerank →Reﬁne →
Hypothesize-Satisfying →Reﬁne →... Iterate Until Satisﬁed.
Below, we detail our algorithm in LaTeX pseudocode format
for clarity and ease of comprehension, capturing the adap-
tational nuances and streamlined efﬁciency of the system’s
workﬂow.
In the algorithm. 1, the brainstormconcurr(.) function
concurrently generates relevant questions and notes, accel-
erating the iterative retrieval process. The hyp sathybrid(.)
function assesses whether the generated hypothesis fulﬁlls the
information need, combining two stages into one by using
a chain of thought based prompting. Finally, the refine(.)
function distills the output into a prime sparse representation.
The code base contains the open source versions of the detailed
implementations for the previously mentioned functions.
By employing this methodology, our system brings forth a
robust and scalable solution for answering complex queries
with minimal verbosity and maximal pertinence, integrating
the latest AI techniques in a cohesive algorithm.
Algorithm 1 Concurrent Brainstorming and Hybrid Hypothe-
sis Satisfying (R2BR3H-SR)
Require: query, vector store vecstore containing document
embeddings emb
Ensure: Satisﬁed, reﬁned response to the user query
1: notes ←“ ”
2: queries ←“ ”
3: iteration ←0
4: while True do
5:
iteration ←iteration + 1
6:
argsbs ←{query, notes, queries, vecstore, emb}
7:
[queriesnew, notes] ←brainstormconcurr(argsbs)
8:
queries ←queries + queriesnew
9:
argshs ←{query, notes, queries}
10:
[satisfied, feedback] ←hyp sathybrid(argshs)
11:
if satisﬁed then break
12:
end if
13:
notes ←refine(notes)
14: end while
III. RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
The code for the simulations and supplementary materials
are available at [2].
Data: We used “gpt-4-1106-preview” model to create a
set of questions and corresponding answers according to pro-
vided documents to evaluate the performance of the proposed
method and the baseline.
Model Selection: The experimental framework utilized a
uniﬁed approach across all its phases. The “gpt-3.5-turbo-
1106” model served as the backbone for each stage of the RAG
process. Its parameters were standardized with the temperature
set to 0 to ensure consistency and determinism, and the
maxtokens parameter was ﬁxed at 2000 to balance the trade-
off between comprehensive output and computational load.
Response Format: To enhance interpretability and pro-
vide structured feedback, both brainstorming and hypothesis-
satisfying phases employed a jsonobject response format. This
choice facilitated the extraction of actionable insights and
eased the integration of outputs in subsequent stages of the
process.
Vector Store: ChromaDB constituted the vector storage
system, holding the vetted corpus against which retrieval
operations were conducted. This repository enabled efﬁcient
similarity searches and supported the iterative reranking pro-
cedures intrinsic to the proposed framework.
B. Baseline Comparison
Benchmark Technique: The study incorporated the method
from an existing code-base as comparative baseline [3]. The
benchmark was primarily characterized by sequential process-
ing of the retrieval and generation phases, lacking the “concur-
rency” in brainstorming, reranking, setting initial documents
according to user query to start the iterative process, and
“hybridity” in hypothesis-satisfying that delineate our method.

3
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED METHOD AND
THE BENCHMARK
Method
Information Need
Cost ($)
Delay (seconds)
[3]
satisﬁed
0.00527
24.31
ours
satisﬁed
0.00355
10.21
C. Empirical Results
The system’s performance under the concurrent brainstorm-
ing paradigm demonstrated notable acceleration in the gen-
erational throughput. Comparatively, against non-concurrent
baseline counterparts, our method exhibited a reduction in cy-
cle completion time substantiating the efﬁcacy of parallelizing
the brainstorming function. Moreover, integrating satisfying
within the hypothesis loop via chain of thought-based prompt-
ing led to a leaner and more cost-effective solution. Lastly,
the integrated system was subject to a holistic examination.
Collective consideration of the concurrency in brainstorming,
the hybrid hypothesis-satisfying, and the reﬁnement phases
evinced a coherent and accelerated process for satisfying user
information needs.
The comparison between the proposed approach and the
benchmark is summarized in the accompanying Table I. Both
methods address the information need effectively. However,
the proposed approach achieves a relative reduction in the
average cost by approximately 32.64 percent and a relative
reduction in the average elapsed time by about 58 percent
compared to the benchmark. This translates to an absolute
decrease in average cost per query of roughly $0.0017 and an
absolute decrease in average elapsed time per query of approx-
imately 14.1 seconds against the benchmark. In conclusion, the
assessments manifest that the proposed system outpaces the
benchmark in speed and cost through its innovative concurrent
and hybrid approach.
IV. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, our RAG framework demonstrates a signif-
icant leap in information processing efﬁciency by integrating
a recursive, iterative approach grounded in a novel sequence
R2CBR3H-SR. Our method leverages concurrency within the
brainstorming phase, markedly accelerating the retrieval pro-
cess and enhancing the depth of query understanding. The
hybridization of hypothesizing and satisfying—achieved via
a chain of thought based prompting—constitutes a pivotal
innovation, enabling rapid, cost-effective convergence upon a
satisﬁed result without compromising the quality of output.
This methodology not only streamlines the pathway to ade-
quate answers but also distills complex information into prime,
succinct representations, effectively capturing broad concepts
with minimal verbosity. Our system’s agility in navigating
the iterative loop until reaching a satisﬁed state showcases its
potential as a leading tool in the realm of information retrieval
and generation. The empirical results reinforce the prowess of
our system, offering promise for future applications and setting
a benchmark for top-tier research in intelligent information
retrieval systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Sections of this manuscript were drafted with the assistance
of the GPT-4-1106-preview model and underwent prompt
engineering to reﬁne research suggestions and textual content.
The prompts and code utilized in generating this content
have been made transparent and are available for review
alongside the supplementary materials provided with this
submission. It is imperative to highlight that the GPT-4 model
acted under the explicit guidance of the main author, Arash
Shahmansoori, functioning in a capacity akin to that of a
research assistant. Its role was to aid in editing, rephrasing,
and suggesting corrections to improve the English language
usage and paper structuring per the contributions supplied by
the human author. Every scientiﬁc claim, hypothesis, method,
result, and conclusion were originated and vetted by Arash
Shahmansoori to ensure authenticity, scientiﬁc integrity, and
adherence to arXiv’s guidelines pertaining to AI-generated
content. Ultimately, the responsibility for the content and any
inadvertent errors remains with the human author.
Arash Shahmansoori conceived and designed the study,
executed the research, and provided the initial content. The
AI system was employed as a tool for suggesting editorial
changes, reﬁning the paper’s structure, and ensuring language
clarity under the supervision of Arash Shahmansoori. Arash
Shahmansoori also evaluated the AI’s output for accuracy and
relevancy to the scientiﬁc narrative, retaining full authorial
responsibility for the ﬁnal manuscript.
