Auditing and Debugging Deep Learning Models via Decision
Boundaries: Individual-level and Group-level Analysis
Roozbeh Yousefzadeh
Departments of Genetics and Computer Science
Yale University

Dianne P. O’Leary
Department of Computer Science
and Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland, College Park

ABSTRACT
Deep learning models have been criticized for their lack of easy
interpretation, which undermines confidence in their use for im-
portant applications. Nevertheless, they are consistently utilized in
many applications, consequential to humans’ lives, mostly because
of their better performance. Therefore, there is a great need for
computational methods that can explain, audit, and debug such
models. Here, we use flip points to accomplish these goals for deep
learning models with continuous output scores (e.g., computed
by softmax), used in social applications. A flip point is any point
that lies on the boundary between two output classes: e.g. for a
model with a binary yes/no output, a flip point is any input that
generates equal scores for “yes" and “no". The flip point closest to a
given input is of particular importance because it reveals the least
changes in the input that would change a model’s classification,
and we show that it is the solution to a well-posed optimization
problem. Flip points also enable us to systematically study the deci-
sion boundaries of a deep learning classifier. The resulting insight
into the decision boundaries of a deep model can clearly explain the
model’s output on the individual-level, via an explanation report
that is understandable by non-experts. We also develop a procedure
to understand and audit model behavior towards groups of people.
Flip points can also be used to alter the decision boundaries in order
to improve undesirable behaviors. We demonstrate our methods
by investigating several models trained on standard datasets used
in social applications of machine learning. We also identify the
features that are most responsible for particular classifications and
misclassifications.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Machine learning; • Human-
centered computing →Social recommendation.
KEYWORDS
Explainable machine learning, neural networks, deep learning, in-
terpretable AI
1
INTRODUCTION
Our focus in this paper is auditing and debugging deep learning
models in social applications of machine learning. In these applica-
tions, deep learning models are usually trained for a specific task
and then used, for example to make decisions or to make predic-
tions. Despite their unprecedented success in performing machine
learning tasks accurately and fast, these trained models are often
described as black-boxes because they are so complex that their
Figure 1: Example of the kind of information that can be
obtained by calculating flip points. We answer questions
such as, “For a particular input to a deep learning model,
what is the smallest change in a single continuous feature
that changes the output of the model? What is the smallest
change in a particular set of features that changes the out-
put?"
output is not easily explainable in terms of their inputs. As a result,
in many cases, no explanation of decisions based on these models
can be provided to those affected by them [38].
This inexplainability becomes problematic when deep learning
models are utilized in tasks consequential to human lives, such as
in criminal justice, medicine, and business. Independent studies
have revealed that many of these black-box models have unac-
ceptable behavior, for example towards features such as race, age,
etc. of individuals [24]. Because of this, there have been calls for
avoiding deep learning models in high-stakes decision making [21].
Additionally, laws and regulations have been proposed to require
decisions made by the machine learning models to be accompanied
with clear explanations for the individuals affected by the decisions
[31]. Several methods have been developed to explain the outputs
of models simpler than deep learning models to non-expert users
such as administrators or clinicians [13, 18, 22, 38]. In contrast,
existing interpretation methods for deep learning models either
arXiv:2001.00682v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2020

Yousefzadeh and O’Leary
lack the ability to directly communicate with non-expert users or
have limitations in their scope, computational ability, or accuracy,
as we will explain in the next section.
In the meantime, deep learning is ever more widely used on
important applications in order to achieve high accuracy, scalability,
etc. Sometimes, deep learning models are utilized even when they
do not have a clear advantage over simple models, perhaps to avoid
transparency or to preserve the models as proprietary [23]. While
it is not easy to draw the line as to where their use is advantageous,
it is important to have the computational tools to thoroughly audit
the models, provide the required explanations for their outputs,
and/or to expose their flaws and biases. It would also be useful to
have the tools to change their undesirable behavior.
We provide tools for two levels of auditing: individual-level and
group-level. The type of feedback that our methods provide on the
individual-level is illustrated in Figure 1 and discussed in Section 4.1;
in particular, we identify sets of features that have no effect on the
model’s decision and sets that change the decision, and we find the
closest input with a different decision. For group-level analysis, we
develop methods to audit the behavior of models towards groups
of individuals, for example, people with certain race or certain
education.
In Section 2, we review the literature and explain the advan-
tages of our method compared to other popular methods such as
LIME [19]. In Section 4, we present our computational approach
to perform the above tasks, based on investigating and altering
the decision boundaries of deep learning models by computing
flip points, certain interesting points on those boundaries, defined
in Section 3, where we also introduce the concept of constrained
flip points. In Section 5, we present our numerical results on three
different datasets with societal context. Section 6 compares our
methods with other applicable methods in the literature. Finally,
in Section 7, we present our conclusions and directions for future
work.
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
There have been several approaches proposed for interpreting deep
learning models and other black-box models. Here we mention a
few papers representative of the field.
Spangher et al. [27] have (independently) defined a flip set as the
set of changes in the input that can flip the prediction of a classifier.
However, their method is only applicable to linear classifiers such
as linear regression models and logistic regression. They use flip
sets to explain the least changes in individual inputs but do not go
further to interpret the overall behavior of the model or to debug it.
Wachter et al. [32] define counterfactuals as the possible changes
in the input that can produce a different output label and use them
to explain the decision of a model. However, their closest coun-
terfactual is mathematically ill-defined; for deep learning models
with continuous output, there is no "closest point" with a differ-
ent output label because there are points arbitrarily close to the
decision boundary. Moreover, their proposed algorithm uses enu-
meration, applicable only to a small number of features. Russell [25]
later suggested integer programming to solve such optimization
problems, but the models used as examples are linear with small
dimensionality, and the closest counterfactual in their formulation
is ill-defined.
Some studies have taken a model-agnostic approach to interpret-
ing black-box models. For example, the approach taken by Ribeiro
et al. [19], known as LIME, randomly perturbs an input until it ob-
tains points on two sides of a decision boundary and then performs
linear regression to estimate the location of the boundary in that
vicinity. The simplifying assumption to approximate the decision
boundary with hyperplanes can be misleading for deep learning
models, as shown by [5, 36]. Hence, the output of the LIME model
and its corresponding explanation may actually contradict the out-
put of the original model, as empirically shown by [33]. Another
issue in LIME’s approach is the reliance on random perturbations of
inputs, which has computational limitations. Lakkaraju et al. [16]
have also shown via surveys that such explanations may not be
effective in communicating with non-expert users. Our method has
an accuracy advantage over LIME, because we find a point exactly
on the decision boundary instead of estimating its location via a
surrogate linear regression model. Additionally, our explanation
report can directly communicate with non-expert users such as
credit applicants or clinicians.
There are approaches that create rule-lists based on the classifi-
cations of a deep learning model, and then use the obtained rules
to explain the outputs [15, 16, 20]. These approaches have serious
limitations in terms of scalability and accuracy, mostly because a
deep learning model is usually too complex to be emulated via a
simple set of if-then rules. For example, the outputs of the if-then
rules obtained by [16] are different than the outputs of their neural
network for more than 10% of the data points, even though the
feature space has only 7 dimensions. The computation time to ob-
tain the rule-list is also in the order of few hours for the 7-feature
model, while we provide the explanation report for an input with
88 features in a few seconds.
Koh and Liang [12] and Koh et al. [11] have used influence func-
tions to reveal the importance of individual training data in forming
the trained model, but their method cannot be used to explain out-
puts of the models or to investigate the decision boundaries.
There are studies in deep learning that consider the decision
boundaries from other perspectives. For example, Elsayed et al. [3]
and Jiang et al. [9] use first-order Taylor series approximation to
estimate the distance to decision boundaries for individual inputs,
and study the distance in relation to generalization error in deep
learning. However, those approximation methods have been shown
to be unreliable for nonlinear models [36]. Methods to generate
adversarial inputs, for example Fawzi et al. [4], Jetley et al. [8],
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [17], apply small perturbations to an input
until its classification changes, but those methods do not seek the
closest point on the decision boundaries. and therefore cannot find
the least changes required to change the model’s output. Most
recent methods for computing adversarial inputs, such as Ilyas et al.
[7] and Tsipras et al. [29], also do not seek points on or near the
decision boundaries.
3
DEFINING AND COMPUTING FLIP POINTS
For ease of exposition, in this section we consider a model with two
continuous outputs. Extensions to models with multi-class outputs

Auditing and Debugging Deep Learning Models via Decision Boundaries: Individual-level and Group-level Analysis
or quantified output is straightforward. We first review the work
on flip points in [35] and then define constrained flip points.
3.1
Flip points
Consider a model N that has two continuous outputs z1 and z2. For
convenience, we assume that they are normalized to sum to 1 (e.g.,
by softmax) and write z = N(x). An output with z1(x) > 1
2 corre-
sponds to one class, for example, “cancerous". Similarly, z1(x) < 1
2
might be a prediction of “noncancerous", and the prediction for
z1(x) = 1
2 is undefined.
We refer to points on the decision boundary z1(x) = 1
2 as flip
points, and we are particularly interested in the smallest change in
a given input x that changes the decision of the model. We can find
this closest flip point ˆxc by solving an optimization problem
min
ˆx
∥ˆx −x∥,
z1(ˆx) = 1/2.
where ∥.∥is a norm appropriate to the data. Specific problems
might require additional constraints, for example, upper and lower
bounds on image data, or integer constraints on features such as
gender. It is possible that the solution ˆxc is not unique, but the
minimal distance is always unique.
Our optimization problem can be solved by off-the-shelf or spe-
cialized algorithms that determine local minimizers for nonconvex
problems. For a neural network, the cost of each iteration in deter-
mining a flip point is less than the marginal cost of including one
point in one iteration of training the model. For the examples we
provide in this paper, computing a closest flip point just takes less
than a second on a 2017 Macbook.
Another way of looking at the cost is to observe that the cost
of computing a flip point is proportional (with a constant factor in
complexity) to the cost of evaluating the output of the model for
that input. So, assuming that we want to audit a particular model
that is already in use on a computer, that computer would be able
to compute the flip point and the explanation report as well. If the
auditor wants the closest flip points for an entire dataset, they can
be computed in parallel.
See [34] for more details on defining and computing flip points
for 2-class, multi-class and quantified output.
3.2
Constrained flip points
Suppose, for a particular input, we are interested in the influence
of a single feature on the output of our model. If the feature has
discrete values (e.g., “owns home", “rents", “no fixed address"), then,
as is well known, we simply evaluate the model for the same input
but different values for that feature. If the feature has continuous
values, though, we might be interested in the smallest change in that
feature that changes the decision of the model. Then to compute
this closest constrained flip point we solve the optimization problem
of Section 3.1 allowing only that feature to vary. This is a 1-variable
optimization problem that can be solved by standard algorithms
such as bisection and other methods used for linesearch.
If we want to allow k (continuous or discrete) features to vary,
then we find the closest constrained flip point by solving the op-
timization problem of Section 3.1 but with only these k variables,
keeping the other features constant. We solve this problem using
the same approaches discussed for computing unconstrained flip
points.
Finally, if we allow all features to vary, we solve our original
optimization problem, obtaining an unconstrained flip point.
3.3
Two notes on defining flip points
Sometimes datasets have redundant features, e.g., features that
are linearly dependent or features that are not related to outputs.
Redundant features may not contribute to the predictive power of
the model, and including them in training may even lead to over-
fitting [28]. In our numerical examples, we show that excluding
nearly linearly dependent features may improve the generalization
of models. So, it can be helpful to study the dependencies prior to
training.
Moreover, knowing the dependencies among the features can
help in choosing meaningful subsets of features for computing
constrained flip points. for example, “income" and “net worth" may
be correlated in a dataset. If we choose to vary a subset of features
that contains “income" while holding “net worth" constant, the
constrained flip point might not be very meaningful.
So for many reasons, it can be desirable to identify the dependen-
cies among the features in a dataset. In our computational examples,
we do this using the pivoted QR decomposition [6, Chap. 5] of a
data matrix D whose rows are the training data points and whose
columns are features. This decomposition reorders the columns,
pushing linearly dependent columns (redundant features) to the
right and forming
DP = QR,
where P is the permutation matrix, Q has orthogonal columns, and
R is zero below its main diagonal. The degree of independence of
the features can be determined by measuring the matrix condition
number of leading principal submatrices of R, or by taking the
matrix norm of trailing sets of columns. The numerical rank of D is
the dimension of the largest leading principal submatrix of R with
a sufficiently small condition number or, equivalently, the smallest
number of leading columns that yields a small norm for the trailing
columns.
Alternatively, the singular value decomposition (SVD) of D can
be used in a similar way [6, Chap. 2]. In this case, the numerical rank
is the number of sufficiently large singular values. The SVD will
identify principal components (i.e., linear combinations of features
in decreasing order of importance), and unimportant ones can be
omitted. The most significant combinations of features can be used
as training inputs, instead of the original features.
The underlying metric of these matrix decompositions is the
Euclidean norm, so they are most easily justified for continuous
features measured on a single scale, for example, pixel values in an
image. For disparate features, the scale factors used by practitioners
to define an appropriate norm for the optimization problem in
Section 3.1 can be used to renormalize features before forming D.
Leaving the choice of scale factor to practitioners is suggested by
Spangher et al. [27] and Wachter et al. [32], too.

Yousefzadeh and O’Leary
4
USING FLIP POINTS TO EXPLAIN, AUDIT
AND DEBUG MODELS
4.1
Individual-level auditing: Providing
explanations and feedback to users of a
model
To generate a report like that in Figure 1, we need to compute
flip points and constrained flip points in order to determine the
smallest changes in the features that change the model’s output.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the use of constrained flip points in gen-
erating such a report, giving a user precise information on how
individual features and combinations of features influenced the
model’s recommendation for a given input. This has not previously
been possible.
Algorithm 1 Using constrained flip points to generate an explana-
tion for a model’s output for a specific input x
Given: a trained model N, a specific input x, and desired subsets
of features to be investigated
Produce: an explanation report, giving various insights about the
model’s output for x
1: Compute the closest flip point to x
2: Compute constrained flip points for x, allowing one feature to
change at a time
3: Group the features that have the same measurement scale and
compute the constrained flip points for x in subspaces defined
by each feature group
4: Compute the constrained flip point for x allowing any desired
subset of features to change
5: Generate an explanation report based on the computed flip
point and constrained flip points
4.2
Group-level auditing: Studying the
behavior of a model towards groups of
individuals
It is important to audit and explain the behavior of models, not only
on the individual-level, but also towards groups. Groups of interest
can be an entire dataset or specific subsets within it, such as people
with certain age, gender, education, etc. The information obtained
from the group-level analysis can reveal systematic traits or biases
in model’s behavior. It can also reveal the role of individual features
or combinations of features on the overall behavior of model.
Algorithm 2 presents some of the ways that flip points can yield
insight into these matters. By computing the closest flip points for
a group of individuals, we obtain the vectors of directions to the
decision boundary for them. We call these directions flip directions.
Using pivoted QR decomposition or principal component analy-
sis (PCA) on the vectors of directions, we can identify important
patterns and traits in a model’s decision making for the group of
individuals under study.
For example, consider auditing a cancer prediction model for
group of individuals with cancerous tumors. After computing the
flip directions, we can study the patterns of change for that popula-
tion, e.g., which features have changed most significantly and in
which direction.
We can also study the effect of specific features on a model’s
decision making for specific groups. For this type of analysis, we
compute constrained flip points for the individuals in the group,
allowing only the feature(s) of interest to change. We then study
patterns in the directions of change. For example, when auditing a
model trained to evaluate loan applications, we might examine the
effect of age for people who have been denied. We can compute
constrained flip points for those individuals, allowing only the fea-
ture of age to change, and then study the patterns in flip directions,
i.e., in which direction “age" should change and to what extent in
order to change the decisions for that population.
We might also want to examine the effect of gender for the same
loan application model. To do this, we pair each data point with
an identical one but of opposite gender. We compute flip points
for all of the inputs and look for patterns: For the paired points
whose classification did not change, did the mean/median distance
to the decision boundary change significantly? For the points whose
classification changed, do the directions to the boundary have any
commonalities, as revealed by pivoted QR or principal component
analysis (PCA)?
4.3
Debugging a model
If we determine that the model’s behavior is undesirable for a par-
ticular set of inputs, we would like to alter the decision boundaries
to change that behavior. For example, when there is bias towards a
certain feature, it usually means data points are close to decision
boundaries in that feature dimension. By computing constrained
flip points in that dimension, adding them to the training set with
the same label, and retraining, we can push the decision boundaries
away from the inputs in that dimension. This tends to change the
behavior of models, as we show in our numerical results.
Moving the decision boundaries away from the training data
also tends to improve the generalization of deep learning models
as reported by Elsayed et al. [3] and Yousefzadeh and O’Leary [35].
It is also possible to create flip points and teach them to the
model with a flip label (i.e., z1 = z2 = 1/2), in order to define a
decision boundary in certain locations.
5
RESULTS
Here, we demonstrate our techniques for explaining, auditing, and
debugging deep learning models on three different datasets with
societal themes. We use three software packages, NLopt [10], IPOPT
[30], and the Optimization Toolbox of MATLAB, as well as our own
custom-designed homotopy algorithm [35], to solve the optimiza-
tion problems. The algorithms almost always converge to the same
point. The variety and abundance of global and local optimization
algorithms in the above optimization packages give us confidence
that we have indeed usually found the closest flip point.
For the two first examples, the FICO challenge and the Credit
dataset, we compare our results with two recent papers that have
used those datasets. To make the comparison fair and easy, for each
dataset we make the same choices about the data (such as cross
validation, portion of testing set, etc.) as each of those papers.

Auditing and Debugging Deep Learning Models via Decision Boundaries: Individual-level and Group-level Analysis
Algorithm 2 Auditing a model’s behavior on training or testing
data
Given: a trained model N and a data matrix D
Produce: various insights into the behavior of the model
1: Compute the pivoted QR decomposition of D to identify redun-
dant features. If appropriate, consider training a model with a
smaller number of data features.
2: Compute the closest (or constrained) flip points for all the data
in D, forming a matrix B.
3: For correctly classified points (and then again for incorrectly
classified ones), form F = B −D, the matrix of directions from
data points to flip points
4: Perform pivoted QR on F to identify features that are most and
least influential in flipping the decisions of the model.
5: If F is close to rank deficient, then the set of directions to the
decision boundary is of lower dimension than the number of
features and it would be insightful to investigate the source of
rank deficiency, i.e., zero columns and/or linearly dependent
columns and their corresponding features.
6: Compute the principal components of F to identify commonal-
ities among the directions to the boundary from the training
points.
7: Study the frequency of change between points and their flip
points for each feature to gain insight about influence of fea-
tures. Some features may change rarely among the population
while some features may change frequently, indicating traits
about the model.
8: For a (binary) feature that should not affect the output classifi-
cation, consider the dataset ˆD that has the opposite value for
that feature. Compute the resulting classifications. For points
whose classification did not change, compute the mean change
in distance to the boundary; ideally, this will be small. For
points whose classification changed, pivoted QR or PCA analy-
sis on the direction matrix will identify possible sources of the
model’s rationale.
5.1
FICO Explainable ML Challenge
This dataset has 10,459 observations with 23 features, and each
data point is labeled as “Good" or “Bad" risk. We randomly pick
20% of the data as the testing set and keep the rest as the training
set. We regard all features as continuous, since even “months" can
be measured that way. The description of features is provided in
Appendix A.
5.1.1
Eliminating redundant features. The condition number
of the matrix formed from the training set is 653. Pivoted QR factor-
ization finds that features “MSinceMostRecentTradeOpen", “Num-
Trades90Ever2DerogPubRec", and “NumInqLast6Mexcl7days" are
the most dependent columns; discarding them leads to a training set
with condition number 59. Using the data with 20 features, we train
a neural network with 5 layers, achieving 72.90% accuracy on the
testing set. A similar network trained with all 23 features achieved
70.79% accuracy, confirming the effectiveness of our decision to
discard three features.
5.1.2
Individual-level explanations. As an example, consider
the first datapoint, corresponding to a person with “Bad" risk per-
formance. The feature values for this data point are provided in
Appendix A. The closest (unconstrained) flip point is virtually iden-
tical to the data point except in five features, shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Difference in features for data point # 1 in the FICO
dataset and its closest flip point.
Feature
Input
#1
Closest
flip point
(relaxed)
Closest
flip point
(integer)
AverageMInFile
84
105.6
111.2
NumSatisfactoryTrades
20
24.1
24
MSinceMostRecentDelq
2
0.6
0
NumTradesOpeninLast12M
1
1.7
2
NetFractionRevolvingBurden
33
19.4
8.5
Next, we allow only a subset of the features to change and com-
pute constrained flip points. We explore the following subspaces:
(1) Only one feature is allowed to change at a time. None of the
20 features is individually capable of flipping the decision of
the model.
(2) Pairs of features are allowed to change at a time. Only a few
of the pairs (29 out of 190) can flip the output. 13 of these
pairs involve the feature “MSinceMostRecentInqexcl7days"
as partially reflected in the explanation report of Figure 2.
(3) Combinations of features that share the same measurement
scale are allowed to change at a time. We have five distinct
groups: features that are measured in “percentage", “number
of months", “number of trades", “delinquency measure", and
“net fraction burden". The last two feature groups are not
capable of flipping the prediction of the model by themselves.
The explanation summary report resulting from these computations
is shown in Figure 2. The top two sections show the results of com-
puting constrained flip points, first, points where no constrained
flip point exists and the label does not change, and then points with
different label. The bottom section displays the unconstrained flip
point. This shows that the output of a deep learning model can be
explained clearly and accurately to the user to any desired level
of detail. The answer to other specific questions can also be found
easily by modifying the optimization problem.
We note that the time it takes to find each flip point is only a
few milliseconds using a 2017 MacBook, hence this report can be
generated in real-time.
5.1.3
Group-level explanations. Using pivoted QR on the ma-
trix of directions between data points labeled “Bad" and their flip
points, we find that, individually, the three most influential fea-
tures are “AverageMInFile", “NumInqLast6M", and “NumBank2 Natl-
TradesWHighUtilization". Similarly, for the directions that flip a
“Good" to a “Bad", the three most influential features are “AverageM-
InFile", “NumInqLast6M", and “NetFractionRevolvingBurden". In
both cases, “ExternalRiskEstimate" has no influence.

Yousefzadeh and O’Leary
Figure 2: A sample explanation report for data point #1 in
the FICO dataset, classified by a deep learning model.
We perform PCA analysis on the subset of directions that flip
a “Bad" to “Good" risk performance. The first principal compo-
nent reveals that, for this model, the most prominent features
with positive impact are “PercentTradesNeverDelq" and “Percent-
TradesWBalance", while the features with most negative impact are
“MaxDelqEver" and “MSinceMostRecentDelq". These conclusions
are similar to the influential features reported by [1], however, our
method gives more detailed insights, since it includes an individual-
level explanation report and also analysis of the group effects.
5.1.4
Effects of redundant variables. Interestingly, for the model
trained on all 23 features, the three most significant individual fea-
tures in flipping its decisions are “MSinceMostRecentTradeOpen",
“NumTrades90Ever2DerogPubRec" and “NumInqLast6Mexcl7days",
exactly the three dependent features that we discarded for the
reduced model. Thus, the decision of the trained model is more sus-
ceptible to changes in the dependent features, compared to changes
in the independent features.
This reveals an important vulnerability of machine learning mod-
els regarding their training sets. For this dataset, when dependent
features are included in the training set, the accuracy on the training
set remains the same, but it adversely affects the accuracy on the
testing set, i.e., generalization. Additionally, when those redundant
features are included, they become the most influential features in
flipping the decisions of the model, making the model vulnerable.
5.1.5
Auditing the model using flip directions. Figure 3 shows
the directions of change to move from the inputs to the closest
flip points for features “NumInqLast6M" and “NetFractionRevolv-
ingBurden", which are the most influential features given by the
pivoted QR algorithm. Even though flip points are unconstrained,
directions of change for these two features are distinctly clustered
for flipping a “Bad" label to “Good" and vice versa.
Figure 3: Directions between the inputs and their closest flip
point for two influential features. Points are distinctly clus-
tered based on the direction of the flip.
Furthermore, Figure 4 shows the directions in coordinates of the
first two principal components. We can see that the flip directions
are clearly clustered into two convex cones, exactly in opposite
directions. Also, we see that misclassified inputs are relatively close
to their flip points while correct predictions can be close or far.
Figure 4: Change between the inputs and their uncon-
strained flip points in the first two principal components.
Directions are clustered into two convex cones, exactly in
opposite directions.

Auditing and Debugging Deep Learning Models via Decision Boundaries: Individual-level and Group-level Analysis
5.1.6
Comparison. The interpretable model developed by Chen
et al. [1] reports the most influential features which are similar to
our findings above, e.g., “PercentTradesNeverDelq" and “AverageM-
InFile". However, their model is inherently interpretable, and their
auditing method is not applicable to deep learning models. They
also do not provide an explanation report on the individual-level,
like the one we provided in Figure 2.
We note that our goal, here, is to show how a deep learning model
utilized for this application can be audited. We do not necessarily
advocate for use of deep learning models over other models.
5.2
Default of credit card clients
This dataset from the UCI Machine Learning Repository [2] has
30,000 observations, 24 features, and a binary label predicting
whether or not the person will default on the next payment.
We binarize the categorical variables “Gender", “Education", and
“Marital status"; the categories that are active for a data point have
binary value of 1 in their corresponding features, while the other
features are set to zero. When searching for a flip point, we allow
exactly one binary feature to be equal to 1 for each of the categorical
variables. The condition number of the training set is 129 which
implies linear independence of features. Using a 10-fold cross vali-
dation on the data, we train a neural network with 5 layers (details
in Appendix C), to achieve accuracy of 81.8% on the testing set,
slightly higher than the accuracy of around 80.6% reported by [27].
When calculating the closest flip points, we require the categorical
variables to remain discrete.
5.2.1
Individual-level explanations. We consider the data point
#1 in this dataset which is classified as “default", and compose the
explanation report shown in Figure 5. When we examine the effect
of features, we see that any of 4 features can flip the prediction of
the model, individually.
When examining this report for input #1, we find some flaws in
the model. For example, in order to flip the prediction of the model
to non-default, one option is to reduce the amount of the current
bill to -$2,310,000, while reducing the bill to any number larger
than that would not flip the prediction.
Requiring any negative balance on the bill is irrational, because
as long as the bill is zero, there would be no chance of default. In fact,
one would expect the prediction of non-default if the current bill is
changed to zero, for any datapoint. But, the training set does not
include such examples, and clearly, our model has not learned such
an axiom. Requiring the large payment of $24,750 (for 2 months ago)
in order to flip the prediction seems questionable, too, considering
that the current bill is $3,913.
Therefore, despite the model’s good accuracy on the testing data,
the explanation for its prediction reveals flaws in its behavior for
data point #1. These flaws would not have been noticed without
investigating the decision boundaries. Fortunately, because of our
auditing, we know that the model needs to be improved before it is
deployed.
5.2.2
Group-level auditing using flip points. Examining the
flip points for the training data reveals model characteristics that
should be understood by the users. Here is one example.
Figure 5: A sample explanation report for data point #1 in
the Credit dataset, predicted to default on the next payment.
The deep learning predicts the labels for the testing data,
well. But, what it takes to change the prediction of model
sometimes does not seem rational.
Gender does not have much influence in the decisions of the
model, as only about 0.5% of inputs have a different gender than
their flip points. Hence, gender is not an influential feature for this
model. This kind of analysis can be performed for all the features,
in more detail.
5.2.3
Group-level auditing using flip directions. We perform
pivoted QR decomposition on the directions to the closest flip points.
The results show that “BILL-AMT3"1 and “BILL-AMT5" are the most
influential features, and “Age" has the least influence in changing
the predictions. In fact, there is no significant change between the
age of any of the inputs and their closest flip points.
5.2.4
Debugging the model using flip points. In both our train-
ing and testing sets, about 52% of individuals have age less than 35.
Following [27], we remove 70% of the young individuals from the
training set, so that they are under-sampled. We keep the testing
set as before and obtain 80.83% accuracy on the original testing
set. We observe that now, “Age" is the 3rd most influential feature
in flipping its decisions. Moreover, PCA analysis shows that lower
Age has a negative impact on the “no default" prediction and vice
versa.
1“BILL-AMTx" stands for the Amount of Bill in $, x month(s) ago.

Yousefzadeh and O’Leary
We consider all the data points in the training set labelled as
“default" that have closest flip point with older age, and all the points
labelled “no default" that have closest flip point with younger age.
We add all those flip points to the training set, with the same label
as their corresponding data point, and train a new model. Now Age
has become the 11th most influential feature and it is no longer
significant in the first principal component of the flip directions;
hence, the bias against Age has been reduced. Also, testing accuracy
slightly increases to 80.9%.
Adding synthetic data to the training set has great potential to
change the behavior of a model, but we cannot rule out unintended
consequences. By investigating the influential features and PCA
analysis, we see that the model has been altered only with respect to
the Age feature, and the overall behavior of model has not changed.
5.2.5
Comparison. Spangher et al. [27] has used a logistic regres-
sion model for this dataset, achieving 80.6% accuracy on testing, less
than our 81.8% accuracy. Their method for computing flip points is
limited to linear models and not applicable to deep learning. They
also do not provide an explanation report like the one in Figure 5.
They have reported that under-sampling young individuals from
the training set makes their model biased towards young age, similar
to ours. However, they do not use flip points to reduce the bias,
which we successfully did.
5.3
Adult Income dataset
The Adult dataset from the UCI Machine Learning Repository [2]
has a combination of discrete and continuous variables. Each of the
32,561 data points in the training set and 16,281 in the testing set are
labeled, indicating whether the individual’s income is greater than
50K annually. There are 6 continuous variables including Age, Years
of education, Capital-gain, Capital-loss, and Hours-per-week of
work. We binarize the discrete variables: Work-class, Marital status,
Occupation, Relationship, Race, Gender, and Native country. Our
trained model considers 88 features and achieves accuracy 86.08%
on the testing sets comparable to best results in the literature [2].
Our aim here is to show how a trained model can be audited.
5.3.1
Individual-level auditing. As an example, consider the
first data point in the testing set, corresponding to a 25-year-old
Black Male, with 11th grade education and native country of United
States, working 40 hours per week in the Private sector as Machine-
operator-inspector and income “≤50K", correctly classified by the
model. He has never married and has a child/children.
We compute the closest flip point for this individual, allowing
all the features to change. Table 2 shows the features that have
changed for this person in order to flip the model’s classification
for him to the high income bracket. Other features such as gender,
race, work-class have not changed and are not shown in the table.
Directions of change in the features are generally sensible: e.g.,
working more hours, getting a higher education, working in the
Tech-sector, and being older generally have a direct relationship
with higher income. Being married instead of being a single parent
is also known to have a relationship with higher income.
We further observe that none of the features individually can flip
the classification, but certain constrained flip points can provide
additional insights about the behavior of the model.
Table 2: Difference in features for Adult dataset testing point
#1 and its closest flip point.
Data
Input #1 in testing set
Closest flip point
Age
25
30.3
Years of education
7 (11th grade)
8 (12th grade)
Marital status
Never-married
Married-
ArmedForcesSpouse
Relationship
Own-child
Husband
Occupation
Machine-operation-
inspection
Tech-support
Hours-per-week of
work
40
41.8
Let’s consider the effect of race. The softmax score for this in-
dividual is 0.9989 for income “≤50K". Changing the race does not
affect the softmax score more than 0.0007. This observation about
softmax score might lead one to believe that the model is neutral
about race, at least for this individual. However, that would not be
completely accurate in all circumstances, as we will explain. If we
keep all features of this individual the same and only change his
race to Asian, the closest flip point for him would be the same as
before, except for Age of 29.9 and Hours-per-week of 42.3. The dif-
ferences in flip points for the Black and Asian are not large enough
to draw a conclusion.
Let’s now take one step further and fix his education to remain
11th grade and re-examine the effect of race. The resulting closest
flip points are shown in Table 3 for two cases: where his race is
kept Black and where it is changed to Asian. Clearly, being Asian
requires considerably smaller changes in other features in order
to reach the decision boundary of the model and flip to the high
income class. This shows that race can be an influential feature
in model’s classifications of people with low education. Having
education above the 12th grade for this individual makes the effect
of race negligible.
Table 3: Race can be an influential feature for individuals
with low education. Closest flip points for testing point #1
in Adult dataset when education is fixed to 7th grade and
race is changed from Black to Asian.
Data
Closest
flip
point
(Black)
Closest
flip
point
(Asian)
Age
41.9
32.4
Years of education
7 (11th grade)
7 (11th grade)
Marital status
Married-
ArmedForcesSpouse
Married-
ArmedForcesSpouse
Relationship
Husband
Husband
Occupation
Tech-support
Tech-support
Hours-per-week of
work
44.3
42.4

Auditing and Debugging Deep Learning Models via Decision Boundaries: Individual-level and Group-level Analysis
We further observe that gender does not have an effect on the
model’s classification for this individual, whether the education is
high or low. The effect of other features related to occupation and
family can also be studied.
5.3.2
Group-level auditing using flip points. As an example,
we consider the group of people with native country of Mexico.
About 95% of this population have income “≤50K" and 77% of them
are Male. We compute the closest flip point for this population and
investigate the patterns in them and how frequently features have
changed from data points to flip points, and in what way.
Let’s consider the effect of gender. 99% of the females in this
group have income “≤50K" and for 40% of them, their closest
flip point is Male. Among the Males, however, less than 1% have
a Female flip point; some of these are high-income individuals for
whom the change in gender flips them to low-income.
Let’s now consider the patterns in flip points that change low
income males and females to high-income. For occupation, the
most common change is entering into the Tech-sector and the
most common exit is from the Farming-fishing occupation. For
relationship, the most common change is to being married and the
most common exit is from being Not-in-family and Never-married.
Among the continuous features, Years of education and Capital-gain
have changed most frequently.
5.3.3
Group-level auditing using flip directions. Consider the
subset of directions that flip a “≤50K" income to “> 50K" for the
population with native country of Mexico. The first principal com-
ponent reveals that, for this model and this population, the most
prominent features with positive impact are having a higher educa-
tion, having Capital-gain, and working in the Tech-sector, while the
features with most negative impact are being Never-married, being
Female, and having Capital-loss. Looking more deeply at the data,
pivoted QR decomposition of the matrix of flip directions reveals
that some features, such as being Black and native country of Peru
have no impact on this flip.
5.3.4
Group-level analysis of flip directions for misclassifi-
cations. Besides studying specific groups of individuals, we can
also study the misclassifications of the model. PCA on the flip di-
rections for all the misclassified points in the training set shows
that Age has the largest coefficient in the first principal component,
followed by Hours-per-week of work. The most significant feature
with negative coefficient is having Capital-gain. These features can
be considered the most influential in confusing and de-confusing
the model. PCA on the flip directions explains how our model is
influenced by various features and its vulnerabilities for misclas-
sification. It thus enables us to create inputs that are mistakenly
classified for adversarial purposes, as explained by Lakkaraju and
Bastani [14] and Slack et al. [26].
6
COMPARISON WITH OTHER
INTERPRETATION APPROACHES FOR
DEEP LEARNING
Our use of flip points for interpretation and debugging builds on
existing methods in the literature but provides more comprehensive
capabilities. For example, Spangher et al. [27] compute flip sets
only for linear classifiers and do not use them to explain the overall
behavior of the model, identify influential features, or debug.
LIME [19] and Anchors [20] rely on sampling around an input
in order to investigate decision boundaries, inefficient and less ac-
curate than our approach, and the authors do not propose using
their results as we do. LIME provides a coefficient for each feature
(representing a hyperplane) which may not be easily understand-
able by non-experts (e.g., a loan applicant or a clinician), especially
when dealing with a combination of discrete and continuous fea-
tures. LIME’s approach also relies on simplifying assumptions, such
as the ability to approximate decision boundaries by hyperplanes,
which leads to contradictions between the LIME output and the
model output [33], a.k.a. infidelity. So, our method has an accuracy
advantage over their method, too. Moreover, their reliance on ran-
dom perturbations of data points can be considered a computational
limitation when applying their method to deep learning models.
The interpretation we provide for nonlinear deep learning mod-
els is comparable in quality and extent to the interpretations pro-
vided in the literature for simple models. For example, the model
suggested by [1] for the FICO Explainable ML dataset reports the
most influential features in decision making of their model, similar
to our findings in Section 5.1, and investigates the overall behav-
ior of the model, similar to our results for the Adult dataset. But,
their methods are not applicable for auditing deep learning models.
Moreover, they do not provide a detailed explanation report.
We also show how decision boundaries can be altered to change
the behavior of models, an approach not explored for deep learning
models.
7
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have proposed the computation of flip points in order to explain,
debug, and audit deep learning models with continuous output. We
demonstrated that computation of the closest flip point for an input
to a continuous model provides useful information to the user, ex-
plaining why a model produced a particular output and identifying
any small changes in the input that would change the output. Flip
points also provide useful information to model auditors, exposing
bias and revealing patterns in misclassifications. We provide an
algorithm to formalize the auditing procedure. Finally, model devel-
opers can use flip points in order to alter the decision boundaries
and eliminate undesirable behavior of a model.
Our proposed method has accuracy advantages over existing
methods in the literature, and it also has practical advantages such
as fast interpretation for individual inputs and the ability to commu-
nicate with non-expert users (such a loan applicant or a clinician)
via an explanation report.
For future work, we would consider models with continuous
outputs other than classification models, for example, a model that
recommends the dose of a drug for patients. Other directions of
research include auditing image classification models, expanding on
work in [35], and text analysis models that have a societal impact.
Our methods can promote fairness, accountability and transparency
in deep learning models.

Yousefzadeh and O’Leary
A
DESCRIPTION OF VARIABLES FOR THE
FICO DATASET
Table A1: Variable descriptions for the FICO dataset.
Variable name
Description
data
point
#1
ExternalRiskEstimate
Consolidated version of
risk markers
55
MSinceOldestTradeOpen
Months
Since
Oldest
Trade Open
144
MSinceMostRecentTradeOpen
Months Since Most Recent
Trade Open
4
AverageMInFile
Average Months in File
84
NumSatisfactoryTrades
Number of Satisfactory
Trades
20
NumTrades60Ever2DerogPubRec
Number of Trades 60+ Ever
3
NumTrades90Ever2DerogPubRec
Number of Trades 90+ Ever
0
PercentTradesNeverDelq
Percentage
of
Trades
Never Delinqent
83
MSinceMostRecentDelq
Months Since Most Recent
Delinqency
2
MaxDelq2PublicRecLast12M
Max Delinqency/Public
Records in the Last 12
Months
3
MaxDelqEver
Max Delinqency Ever
5
NumTotalTrades
Number of Total Trades
(total number of credit ac-
counts)
23
NumTradesOpeninLast12M
Number of Trades Open in
the Last 12 Months
1
PercentInstallTrades
Percentage of Installment
Trades
43
MSinceMostRecentInqexcl7days
Months Since Most Recent
Inqiry (excluding last 7
days)
0
NumInqLast6M
Number of Inqiries in the
Last 6 Months
0
NumInqLast6Mexcl7days
Number of Inqiries in the
Last 6 Months (excluding
last 7 days)
0
NetFractionRevolvingBurden
Net Fraction Revolving
Burden
33
NetFractionInstallBurden
Net Fraction Installment
Burden
-8
NumRevolvingTradesWBalance
Number
of
Revolving
Trades with Balance
8
NumInstallTradesWBalance
Number
of
Installment
Trades with Balance
1
NumBank2NatlTradesWHighUtil
Number of Bank/National
Trades with High Utiliza-
tion Ratio
1
PercentTradesWBalance
Percentage of Trades with
Balance
69
The name of each variable for the FICO dataset can be viewed
in the first column of Table A1. The second column shows the
corresponding description for each variable as provided by FICO.
Additionally, the third column of this table shows the value of each
variable for data point #1. Detailed information about the chal-
lenge can be found here: https://community.fico.com/s/explainable-
machine-learning-challenge.
B
CODE
The code along with a readme file and an example procedure are
available at https://github.com/roozbeh-yz/auditing.
C
INFORMATION ABOUT THE MODELS
Here, we provide more information about the models we have
trained and used in Section 5. We have used fully connected feed-
forward neural networks with up to 6 hidden layers. The number
of nodes for the models used for each data set is shown in Table
C1. The activation function we have used in the nodes is the error
function, as defined in [35]. We have also used softmax on the
output layer, and cross entropy for the loss function.
Models are designed using the method described by Yousefzadeh
and O’Leary [37].
Table C1: Number of nodes in neural network used for each
data set.
Data set
FICO
Credit
Adult
Input layer
20
28
88
Layer 1
13
14
40
Layer 2
9
9
32
Layer 3
6
8
24
Layer 4
5
8
20
Layer 5
4
7
16
Layer 6
-
-
14
Output layer
2
2
2

Auditing and Debugging Deep Learning Models via Decision Boundaries: Individual-level and Group-level Analysis
