arXiv:1104.5069v1  [cs.AI]  27 Apr 2011
Synthesizing Robust Plans under Incomplete Domain Models
Tuan A. Nguyen ∗and Subbarao Kambhampati ∗and Minh B. Do †

Abstract
Most current planners assume complete domain models
and focus on generating correct plans. Unfortunately,
domain modeling is a laborious and error-prone task.
While domain experts cannot guarantee completeness,
often they are able to circumscribe the incompleteness
of the model by providing annotations as to which parts
of the domain model may be incomplete. In such cases,
the goal should be to generate plans that are robust with
respect to any known incompleteness of the domain. In
this paper, we ﬁrst introduce annotations expressing the
knowledge of the domain incompleteness, and formal-
ize the notion of plan robustness with respect to an in-
complete domain model. We then propose an approach
to compiling the problem of ﬁnding robust plans to the
conformant probabilistic planning problem. We present
experimental results with Probabilistic-FF, a state-of-
the-art planner, showing the promise of our approach.
1. Introduction
In the past several years, signiﬁcant strides have been
made in scaling up plan synthesis techniques.
We now
have technology to routinely generate plans with hun-
dreds of actions.
All this work, however, makes a
crucial assumption–that a complete model of the do-
main is speciﬁed in advance.
While there are do-
mains where knowledge-engineering such detailed mod-
els is necessary and feasible (e.g., mission planning do-
mains in NASA and factory-ﬂoor planning), it is increas-
ingly recognized (c.f. (Hoffmann, Weber, and Kraft 2010;
Kambhampati 2007)) that there are also many scenarios
where insistence on correct and complete models renders
the current planning technology unusable. What we need
to handle such cases is a planning technology that can get
by with partially speciﬁed domain models, and yet generate
plans that are “robust” in the sense that they are likely to
execute successfully in the real world.
This paper addresses the problem of formalizing the
notion of plan robustness with respect to an incomplete
domain model, and connects the problem of generating
a robust plan under such model to conformant prob-
abilistic
planning
(Kushmerick, Hanks, and Weld 1995;
Hyaﬁl and Bacchus 2003; Bryce, Kambhampati, and Smith 2006;
Domshlak and Hoffmann 2007).
Following Garland &
Lesh (2002), we shall assume that although the domain
modelers cannot provide complete models, often they
are able to provide annotations on the partial model cir-
cumscribing the places where it is incomplete.
In our
framework, these annotations consist of allowing actions to
have possible preconditions and effects (in addition to the
standard necessary preconditions and effects).
As an example, consider a variation of the Gripper do-
main, a well-known planning benchmark domain. The robot
has one gripper that can be used to pick up balls, which are
of two types light and heavy, from one room and move them
to another room. The modeler suspects that the gripper may
have an internal problem, but this cannot be conﬁrmed until
the robot actually executes the plan. If it actually has the
problem, the execution of the pick-up action succeeds only
with balls that are not heavy, but if it has no problem, it can
always pickup all types of balls. The modeler can express
this partial knowledge about the domain by annotating the
action with a statement representing the possible precondi-
tion that balls should be light.
Incomplete domain models with such possible precondi-
tions/effects implicitly deﬁne an exponential set of complete
domain models, with the semantics that the real domain
model is guaranteed to be one of these. The robustness of a
plan can now be formalized in terms of the cumulative prob-
ability mass of the complete domain models under which it
succeeds. We propose an approach that compiles the prob-
lem of ﬁnding robust plans into the conformant probabilistic
planning problem. We present experimental results showing
scenarios where the approach works well, and also discuss
aspects of the compilation that cause scalability issues.
2. Related Work
Although there has been some work on reducing the “faults”
in plan execution (e.g. the work on k-fault plans for non-
deterministic planning (Jensen, Veloso, and Bryant 2004)),
it is based in the context of stochastic/non-deterministic ac-
tions rather than incompletely speciﬁed ones. The seman-
tics of the possible preconditions/effects in our incomplete
domain models differ fundamentally from non-deterministic
and stochastic effects. Executing different instances of the
same pick-up action in the Gripper example above would
either all fail or all succeed, since there is no uncertainty but
the information is unknown at the time the model is built. In

contrast, if the pick-up action’s effects are stochastic, then
trying the same picking action multiple times increases the
chances of success.
Garland & Lesh (2002) share the same objective with us
on generating robust plans under incomplete domain mod-
els. However, their notion of robustness, which is deﬁned
in terms of four different types of risks, only has tenuous
heuristic connections with the likelihood of successful ex-
ecution of plans. Robertson & Bryce (2009) focuses on
the plan generation in Garland & Lesh model, but their ap-
proach still relies on the same unsatisfactory formulation of
robustness. The work by Fox et al (2006) also explores ro-
bustness of plans, but their focus is on temporal plans under
unforeseen execution-time variations rather than on incom-
pletely speciﬁed domains. Our work can also be categorized
as one particular instance of the general model-lite planning
problem, as deﬁned in (Kambhampati 2007), in which the
author points out a large class of applications where han-
dling incomplete models is unavoidable due to the difﬁculty
in getting a complete model.
3. Problem Formulation
We deﬁne an incomplete domain model eD as eD = ⟨F, A⟩,
where F = {p1, p2, ..., pn} is a set of propositions, A is a set
of actions that might be incompletely speciﬁed. We denote
T and F as the true and false truth values of propositions.
A state s ⊆F is a set of propositions. In addition to propo-
sition sets that are known as its preconditions Pre(a) ⊆F,
add effects Add(a) ⊆F and delete effects Del(a) ⊆F,
each action a ∈A also contains:
• Possible precondition set g
Pre(a) ⊆F contains proposi-
tions that action a might need as its preconditions.
• Possible add (delete) effect set g
Add(a) ⊆F (g
Del(a) ⊆
F) contains propositions that the action a might add
(delete, respectively) after its execution.
In addition, each possible precondition, add and delete ef-
fect p of the action a is associated with a weight wpre
a
(p),
wadd
a
(p) and wdel
a (p) (0 < wpre
a
(p), wadd
a
(p), wdel
a (p) < 1)
representing the domain modeler’s assessment of the likeli-
hood that p will actually be realized as a precondition, add
and delete effect of a (respectively) during plan execution.
Possible preconditions and effects whose likelihood of real-
ization is not given are assumed to have weights of 1
2.
Given an incomplete domain model eD, we deﬁne its
completion set ⟨⟨eD⟩⟩as the set of complete domain mod-
els whose actions have all the necessary preconditions,
adds and deletes, and a subset of the possible precondi-
tions, possible adds and possible deletes. Since any sub-
set of g
Pre(a), g
Add(a) and g
Del(a) can be realized as pre-
conditions and effects of action a, there are exponentially
large number of possible complete domain models Di ∈
⟨⟨eD⟩⟩= {D1, D2, ..., D2K}, where K = P
a∈A(|g
Pre(a)| +
| g
Add(a)| + |g
Del(a)|). For each complete model Di, we de-
note the corresponding sets of realized preconditions and ef-
fects for each action a as Prei(a), Addi(a) and Deli(a);
equivalently, its complete sets of preconditions and effects
are Pre(a) ∪Prei(a), Add(a) ∪Addi(a) and Del(a) ∪
Deli(a).
The projection of a sequence of actions π from an initial
state I according to an incomplete domain model eD is de-
ﬁned in terms of the projections of π from I according to
each complete domain model Di ∈⟨⟨eD⟩⟩:
γ(π, I, eD) =
[
Di∈⟨⟨e
D⟩⟩
γ(π, I, Di)
(1)
where the projection over complete models is deﬁned in the
usual STRIPS way, with one important difference. The re-
sult of applying an action a in a state s where the precondi-
tions of a are not satisﬁed is taken to be s (rather than as an
undeﬁned state).1
A planning problem with incomplete domain
is eP =
⟨eD, I, G⟩where I ⊆F is the set of propositions that are
true in the initial state, and G is the set of goal proposi-
tions. An action sequence π is considered a valid plan for
eP if π solves the problem in at least one completion of ⟨⟨eD⟩⟩.
Speciﬁcally, ∃Di∈⟨⟨e
D⟩⟩γ(π, I, Di) |= G.
Modeling Issues in Annotating Incompleteness: From the
modeling point of view, the possible precondition and effect
sets can be modeled at either the grounded action or action
schema level (and thus applicable to all grounded actions
sharing the same action schema). From a practical point of
view, however, incompleteness annotations at ground level
hugely increase the burden on the domain modeler. To offer
a ﬂexible way in modeling the domain incompleteness, we
allow annotations that are restricted to either speciﬁc vari-
ables or value assignment to variables of an action schema.
In particular:
• Restriction on value assignment to variables:
Given
variables xi
with
domains Xi,
one
can
indicate
that p(xi1, ..., xik) is a possible precondition/effect of
an action schema a(x1, ..., xn) when some variables
xj1, ..., xjl have values cj1
∈
Xj1, ..., cjl
∈
Xjl
({i1, ..., ik}, {j1, ..., jl} ⊆{1, ..., n}).
Those possible
preconditions/effects can be speciﬁed with the annotation
p(xi1, ..., xik) : when (xj1 = c1 ∧... ∧xjl = cl) for
the action schema a(x1, ..., xn). More generally, we al-
low the domain writer to express a constraint C on the
variables xj1, ..., xjl in the : when construct. The annota-
tion p(xi1, ..., xik) : when (C) means that p(ci1, ..., cik)
is a possible precondition/effect of an instantiated action
a(c1, ..., cn) (ci ∈Xi) if and only if the assignment
(xj1 := cj1, ..., xjl := cjl) satisﬁes the constraint C. This
syntax subsumes both the annotations at the ground level
when l = n, and at the schema level if l = 0 (or the
: when construct is not speciﬁed).
• Restriction on variables: Instead of constraints on ex-
plicit values of variables, we also allow the possible
preconditions/effects p(xi1, ..., xik) of an action schema
1We shall see that this change is necessary so that we can talk
about increasing the robustness of a plan by adding additional ac-
tions.

a(x1, ..., xn) to be dependent on some speciﬁc variables
xj1, ..., xjl without any knowledge of their restricted val-
ues.
This annotation essentially requires less amount
of knowledge of the domain incompleteness from the
domain writer.
Semantically, the possible precondi-
tion/effect p(xi1, ..., xik) : depends (xj1, ..., xjl) of an
action schema a(x1, ..., xn) means that (1) there is at least
one instantiated action a(c1, ..., cn) (ci ∈Xi) having
p(ci1, ..., cik) as its precondition, and (2) for any two as-
signments (x1 := c1, ..., xn := cn), (x1 := c′
1, ..., xn :=
c′
n) such that cjt
= c′
jt (1 ≤t ≤l), either both
p(ci1, ..., cik) and p(c′
i1, ..., c′
ik) are preconditions of the
corresponding actions, or they are not.
Similar to the
: when above, the : depend construct also subsumes the
annotations at the ground level when l = n, and at the
schema level if l = 0 (or the : depend ﬁeld is not speci-
ﬁed).
Another interesting modeling issue is the correlation
among the possible preconditions and effects across actions.
In particular, the domain writer might want to say that two
actions (or action schemas) will have speciﬁc possible pre-
conditions and effects in tandem. For example, we might say
that the second action will have a particular possible precon-
dition whenever the ﬁrst one has a particular possible effect.
We note that annotations at the lifted level introduce correla-
tions among possible preconditions and effects at the ground
level.
Although our notion of plan robustness and approach to
generating robust plans (see below) can be adapted to allow
such ﬂexible annotations and correlated incompleteness, for
ease of exposition we limit our discussion to uncorrelated
possible precondition and effect annotations speciﬁed at the
schema level (i.e. without using the : when and : depend
constructs).
4. A Robustness Measure for Plans
Given an incomplete domain planning problem eP
=
⟨eD, I, G⟩, a valid plan (by our deﬁnition above) need only
to succeed in at least one completion of eD. Given that ⟨⟨eD⟩⟩
can be exponentially large in terms of possible preconditions
and effects, validity is too weak to guarantee on the quality
of the plan. What we need is a notion that π succeeds in
most of the highly likely completions of eD. We do this in
terms of a robustness measure.
The robustness of a plan π for the problem eP is deﬁned
as the cumulative probability mass of the completions of eD
under which π succeeds (in achieving the goals). More for-
mally, let Pr(Di) be the probability distribution represent-
ing the modeler’s estimate of the probability that a given
model in ⟨⟨eD⟩⟩is the real model of the world (such that
P
Di∈⟨⟨e
D⟩⟩Pr(Di) = 1). The robustness of π is deﬁned
as follows:
R(π, eP : ⟨eD, I, G⟩)
def
≡
X
Di∈⟨⟨e
D⟩⟩,γ(π,I,Di)|=G
Pr(Di) (2)
It is easy to see that if R(π, eP) > 0, then π is a valid plan
for eP.
Figure 1: An example of different complete domain models,
and the corresponding plan status. Circles with solid and
dash boundary are propositions that are known to be T and
may be F (respectively) when the plan executes. (See text.)
Note that given the uncorrelated incompleteness assump-
tion, the probability Pr(Di) for a model Di ∈⟨⟨eD⟩⟩can be
computed as the product of the weights wpre
a
(p), wadd
a
(p),
and wdel
a (p) for all a ∈A and its possible precondi-
tions/effects p if p is realized in the model (or the prod-
uct of their “complement” 1 −wpre
a
(p), 1 −wadd
a
(p), and
1 −wdel
a (p) if p is not realized).
Example: Figure 1 shows an example with an incomplete
domain model eD = ⟨F, A⟩with F = {p1, p2, p3} and
A = {a1, a2} and a solution plan π = (a1, a2) for the prob-
lem eP = ⟨eD, I = {p2}, G = {p3}⟩. The incomplete model
is: Pre(a1) = ∅, g
Pre(a1) = {p1}, Add(a1) = {p2, p3},
g
Add(a1) = ∅, Del(a1) = ∅, g
Del(a1) = ∅; Pre(a2) =
{p2}, g
Pre(a2) = ∅, Add(a2) = ∅, g
Add(a2) = {p3},
Del(a2) = ∅, g
Del(a2) = {p1}. Given that the total number
of possible preconditions and effects is 3, the total number
of completions (|⟨⟨eD⟩⟩|) is 23 = 8, for each of which the plan
π may succeed or fail to achieve G, as shown in the table.
The robustness value of the plan is R(π) =
3
4 if Pr(Di)
is the uniform distribution. However, if the domain writer
thinks that p1 is very likely to be a precondition of a1 and
provides wpre
a1 (p1) = 0.9, the robustness of π decreases to
R(π) = 2×(0.9×0.5×0.5)+4×(0.1×0.5×0.5) = 0.55
(as intutively, the last four models with which π succeeds
are very unlikely to be the real one). Note that under the
STRIPS model where action failure causes plan failure, the
plan π would considered failing to achieve G in the ﬁrst two
complete models, since a2 is prevented from execution.
4.1 A Spectrum of Robust Planning Problems
Given this set up, we can now talk about a spectrum of prob-
lems related to planning under incomplete domain models:
Robustness Assessment (RA): Given a plan π for the
problem eP, assess the robustness of π.

Maximally Robust Plan Generation (RG∗): Given
a
problem eP, generate the maximally robust plan π∗.
Generating Plan with Desired Level of Robustness (RGρ):
Given a problem
eP and a robustness threshold ρ
(0 < ρ ≤1), generate a plan π with robustness greater
than or equal to ρ.
Cost-sensitive Robust Plan Generation (RG∗
c): Given
a problem eP and a cost bound c, generate a plan π of
maximal robustness subject to cost bound c (where the
cost of a plan π is deﬁned as the cumulative costs of the
actions in π).
Incremental Robustiﬁcation (RIc): Given a plan π for the
problem eP, improve the robustness of π, subject to a cost
budget c.
The problem of assessing robustness of plans, RA, can
be tackled by compiling it into a weighted model-counting
problem. For plan synthesis problems, we can talk about
either generating a maximally robust plan, RG∗, or ﬁnding a
plan with a robustness value above the given threshold, RGρ.
A related issue is that of the interaction between plan cost
and robustness. Often, increasing robustness involves using
additional (or costlier) actions to support the desired goals,
and thus comes at the expense of increased plan cost. We
can also talk about cost-constrained robust plan generation
problem RG∗
c. Finally, in practice, we are often interested
in increasing the robustness of a given plan (either during
iterative search, or during mixed-initiative planning). We
thus also have the incremental variant RIc.
In this paper, we will focus on RGρ, the problem of syn-
thesizing plan with at least a robustness value of ρ.
5. Compilation to Conformant Probabilistic
Planning
In this section, we will show that the problem of generating
plan with at least ρ robustness, RGρ, can be compiled into an
equivalent conformant probabilistic planning problem. The
most robust plan can then be found with a sequence of in-
creasing threshold values.
5.1 Conformant Probabilistic Planning
Following
the
formalism
in
(Domshlak and Hoffmann 2007),
a
domain
in
confor-
mant probabilistic planning (CPP) is a tuple D′ = ⟨F ′, A′⟩,
where F ′ and A′ are the sets of propositions and proba-
bilistic actions, respectively. A belief state b : 2F ′ →[0, 1]
is a distribution of states s ⊆F ′ (we denote s ∈b if
b(s) > 0). Each action a′ ∈A′ is speciﬁed by a set of
preconditions Pre(a′) ⊆F ′ and conditional effects E(a′).
For each e = (cons(e), O(e)) ∈E(a′), cons(e) ⊆F ′
is the condition set and O(e) determines the set of out-
comes ε
=
(Pr(ε), add(ε), del(ε)) that will add and
delete proposition sets add(ε), del(ε) into and from the
resulting state with the probability Pr(ε) (0 ≤Pr(ε) ≤1
, P
ε∈O(e) Pr(ε) = 1). All condition sets of the effects in
E(a′) are assumed to be mutually exclusive and exhaustive.
The action a′ is applicable in a belief state b if Pre(a′) ⊆s
for all s ∈b, and the probability of a state s′ in the resulting
belief state is ba′(s′) = P
s⊇P re(a′) b(s) P
ε∈O′(e) Pr(ε),
where e
∈
E(a′) is the conditional effect such that
cons(e) ⊆s, and O′(e) ⊆O(e) is the set of outcomes ε
such that s′ = s ∪add(ε) \ del(ε).
Given the domain D′, a problem P′ is a quadruple P′ =
⟨D′, bI, G′, ρ′⟩, where bI is an initial belief state, G′ is a set
of goal propositions and ρ′ is the acceptable goal satisfaction
probability. A sequence of actions π′ = (a′
1, ..., a′
n) is a
solution plan for P′ if a′
i is applicable in the belief state bi
(assuming b1 ≡bI), which results in bi+1 (1 ≤i ≤n), and
it achieves all goal propositions with at least ρ′ probability.
5.2 Compilation
Given an incomplete domain model eD = ⟨F, A⟩and a plan-
ning problem eP = ⟨eD, I, G⟩, we now describe a compila-
tion that translates the problem of synthesizing a solution
plan π for eP such that R(π, eP) ≥ρ to a CPP problem
P′. At a high level, the realization of possible precondi-
tions p ∈g
Pre(a) and effects q ∈g
Add(a), r ∈g
Del(a)
of an action a ∈A can be understood as being determined
by the truth values of hidden propositions ppre
a , qadd
a
and
rdel
a
that are certain (i.e. unchanged in any world state) but
unknown. Speciﬁcally, the applicability of the action in a
state s ⊆F depends on possible preconditions p that are
realized (i.e. ppre
a
= T), and their truth values in s. Simi-
larly, the values of q and r are affected by a in the resulting
state only if they are realized as add and delete effects of
the action (i.e., qadd
a
= T, rdel
a
= T). There are totally
2| g
P re(a)|+| g
Add(a)|+|g
Del(a)| realizations of the action a, and
all of them should be considered simultaneously in checking
the applicability of the action and in deﬁning corresponding
resulting states.
With those observations, we use multiple conditional ef-
fects to compile away incomplete knowledge on precondi-
tions and effects of the action a. Each conditional effect
corresponds to one realization of the action, and can be ﬁred
only if p = T whenever ppre
a
= T, and adding (removing)
an effect q (r) into (from) the resulting state depending on
the values of qadd
a
(rdel
a , respectively) in the realization.
While the partial knowledge can be removed, the hidden
propositions introduce uncertainty into the initial state, and
therefore making it a belief state. Since the action a may
be applicable in some but rarely all states of a belief state,
certain preconditions Pre(a) should be modeled as condi-
tions of all conditional effects. We are now ready to formally
specify the resulting domain D′ and problem P′.
For each action a ∈A, we introduce new propositions
ppre
a , qadd
a
, rdel
a
and their negations nppre
a
, nqadd
a
, nrdel
a
for
each p ∈g
Pre(a), q ∈g
Add(a) and r ∈g
Del(a) to deter-
mine whether they are realized as preconditions and effects
of a in the real domain.2 Let Fnew be the set of those new
propositions, then F ′ = F ∪Fnew is the proposition set of
D′.
2These propositions are introduced once, and re-used for all ac-
tions sharing the same schema with a.

Each action a′ ∈A′ is made from one action a ∈
A such that Pre(a′)
=
∅, and E(a′) consists of
2| g
P re(a)|+| g
Add(a)|+|g
Del(a)| conditional effects e. For each
conditional effect e:
• cons(e) is the union of the following sets:
– the certain preconditions Pre(a),
– the set of possible preconditions of a that are realized,
and hidden propositions representing their realization:
Pre(a) ∪{ppre
a |p ∈Pre(a)} ∪{nppre
a |p ∈g
Pre(a) \
Pre(a)},
– the set of hidden propositions corresponding to the real-
ization of possible add (delete) effects of a: {qadd
a
|q ∈
Add(a)} ∪{nqadd
a
|q ∈g
Add(a) \ Add(a)} ({rdel
a |r ∈
Del(a)}∪{nrdel
a |r ∈g
Del(a)\Del(a)}, respectively);
• the single outcome ε of e is deﬁned as add(ε) = Add(a)∪
Add(a), del(ε) = Del(a) ∪Del(a), and Pr(ε) = 1,
where Pre(a) ⊆g
Pre(a), Add(a) ⊆g
Add(a) and Del(a) ⊆
g
Del(a) represent the sets of realized preconditions and ef-
fects of the action. In other words, we create a conditional
effect for each subset of the union of the possible precondi-
tion and effect sets of the action a. Note that the inclusion of
new propositions derived from Pre(a), Add(a), Del(a) and
their “complement” sets g
Pre(a)\Pre(a), g
Add(a)\Add(a),
g
Del(a) \ Del(a) makes all condition sets of the action a′
mutually exclusive. As for other cases (including those in
which some precondition in Pre(a) is excluded), the action
has no effect on the resulting state, they can be ignored. The
condition sets, therefore, are also exhaustive.
The initial belief state bI consists of 2|Fnew| states s′ ⊆F ′
such that p ∈s′ iff p ∈I (∀p ∈F), each represents a com-
plete domain model Di ∈⟨⟨eD⟩⟩and with the probability
Pr(Di). The goal is G′ = G, and the acceptable goal satis-
faction probability is ρ′ = ρ.
Theorem 1. Given a plan π = (a1, ..., an) for the problem
eP, and π′ = (a′
1, ..., a′
n) where a′
k is the compiled version
of ak (1 ≤k ≤n) in P′. Then R(π, eP) ≥ρ iff π′ achieves
all goals with at least ρ probability in P′.
Proof (sketch). According to the compilation, there is one-
to-one mapping between each complete model Di ∈⟨⟨eD⟩⟩
in eP and a (complete) state s′
i0 ∈bI in P′. Moreover, if Di
has a probability of Pr(Di) to be the real model, then s′
i0
also has a probability of Pr(Di) in the belief state bI of P′.
Given our projection over complete model Di, executing
π from the state I with respect to Di results in a sequence
of complete state (si1, ..., si(n+1)). On the other hand, exe-
cuting π′ from {s′
i0} in P′ results in a sequence of belief
states ({s′
i1}, ..., {s′
i(n+1)}).
With the note that p ∈s′
i0
iff p ∈I (∀p ∈F), by induction it can be shown that
p ∈s′
ij iff p ∈sij (∀j ∈{1, ..., n + 1}, p ∈F). There-
fore, si(n+1) |= G iff s′
i(n+1) |= G = G′.
Since all actions a′
i are deterministic and s′
i0 has a proba-
bility of Pr(Di) in the belief state bI of P′, the probability
Figure 2: An example of compiling the action pick-up in an
incomplete domain model (top) into CPP domain (bottom).
The hidden propositions ppre
pick−up, qadd
pick−up and their nega-
tions can be interpreted as whether the action requires light
balls and makes balls dirty. Newly introduced and relevant
propositions are marked in bold.
that π′ achieves G′ is P
s′
i(n+1)|=G Pr(Di), which is equal
to R(π, eP) as deﬁned in Equation 2. This proves the theo-
rem.
Example: Consider the action pick-up(?b - ball,?r - room)
in the Gripper domain as described above. In addition to the
possible precondition (light ?b) on the weight of the ball ?b,
we also assume that since the modeler is unsure if the gripper
has been cleaned or not, she models it with a possible add
effect (dirty ?b) indicating that the action might make the
ball dirty. Figure 2 shows both the original and the compiled
speciﬁcation of the action.
6. Experimental Results
We tested the compilation with Probabilistic-FF (PFF), a
state-of-the-art planner, on a range of domains in the Inter-
national Planning Competition.We ﬁrst discuss the results
on the variants of the Logistics and Satellite domains, where
domain incompleteness is deliberately modeled on the pre-
conditions and effects of actions (respectively). Our purpose
here is to observe how generated plans are robustiﬁed to sat-
isfy a given robustness threshold, and how the amount of
incompleteness in the domains affects the plan generation
phase. We then describe the second experimental setting

in which we randomly introduce incompleteness into IPC
domains, and discuss the feasibility of our approach in this
setting.3
Domains with deliberate incompleteness
Logistics: In this domain, each of the two cities C1 and
C2 has an airport and a downtown area. The transporta-
tion between the two distant cities can only be done by
two airplanes A1 and A2.
In the downtown area of Ci
(i ∈{1, 2}), there are three heavy containers Pi1, ..., Pi3 that
can be moved to the airport by a truck Ti. Loading those
containers onto the truck in the city Ci, however, requires
moving a team of m robots Ri1, ..., Rim (m ≥1), initially
located in the airport, to the downtown area. The source
of incompleteness in this domain comes from the assump-
tion that each pair of robots R1j and R2j (1 ≤j ≤m) are
made by the same manufacturer Mj, both therefore might
fail to load a heavy container.4 The actions loading contain-
ers onto trucks using robots made by a particular manufac-
turer (e.g., the action schema load-truck-with-robots-of-M1
using robots of manufacturer M1), therefore, have a possible
precondition requiring that containers should not be heavy.
To simplify discussion (see below), we assume that robots
of different manufacturers may fail to load heavy contain-
ers, though independently, with the same probability of 0.7.
The goal is to transport all three containers in the city C1 to
C2, and vice versa. For this domain, a plan to ship a con-
tainer to another city involves a step of loading it onto the
truck, which can be done by a robot (after moving it from
the airport to the downtown). Plans can be made more ro-
bust by using additional robots of different manufacturer af-
ter moving them into the downtown areas, with the cost of
increasing plan length.
Satellite: In this domain, there are two satellites S1 and S2
orbiting the planet Earth, on each of which there are m in-
struments Li1, ..., Lim (i ∈{1, 2}, m ≥1) used to take im-
ages of interested modes at some direction in the space. For
each j ∈{1, ..., m}, the lenses of instruments Lij’s were
made from a type of material Mj, which might have an er-
ror affecting the quality of images that they take. If the ma-
terial Mj actually has error, all instruments Lij’s produce
mangled images. The knowledge of this incompleteness is
modeled as a possible add effect of the action taking images
using instruments made from Mj (for instance, the action
schema take-image-with-instruments-M1 using instruments
of type M1) with a probability of pj, asserting that images
taken might be in a bad condition. A typical plan to take
an image using an instrument, e.g. L14 of type M4 on the
satellite S1, is ﬁrst to switch on L14, turning the satellite S1
to a ground direction from which L14 can be calibrated, and
then taking image. Plans can be made more robust by using
additional instruments, which might be on a different satel-
3The experiments were conducted using an Intel Core2 Duo
3.16GHz machine with 4Gb of RAM, and the time limit is 15 min-
utes.
4The uncorrelated incompleteness assumption applies for pos-
sible preconditions of action schemas speciﬁed for different manu-
facturers. It should not be confused here that robots R1j and R2j
of the same manufacturer Mj can independently have fault.
ρ
m = 1
m = 2
m = 3
m = 4
m = 5
0.1
32/10.9
36/26.2
40/57.8
44/121.8
48/245.6
0.2
32/10.9
36/25.9
40/57.8
44/121.8
48/245.6
0.3
32/10.9
36/26.2
40/57.7
44/122.2
48/245.6
0.4
⊥
42/42.1
50/107.9
58/252.8
66/551.4
0.5
⊥
42/42.0
50/107.9
58/253.1
66/551.1
0.6
⊥
⊥
50/108.2
58/252.8
66/551.1
0.7
⊥
⊥
⊥
58/253.1
66/551.6
0.8
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
66/550.9
0.9
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
Table 1: The results of generating robust plans in Logistics
domain (see text).
ρ
m = 1
m = 2
m = 3
m = 4
m = 5
0.1
10/0.1
10/0.1
10/0.2
10/0.2
10/0.2
0.2
10/0.1
10/0.1
10/0.1
10/0.2
10/0.2
0.3
⊥
10/0.1
10/0.1
10/0.2
10/0.2
0.4
⊥
37/17.7
37/25.1
10/0.2
10/0.3
0.5
⊥
⊥
37/25.5
37/79.2
37/199.2
0.6
⊥
⊥
53/216.7
37/94.1
37/216.7
0.7
⊥
⊥
⊥
53/462.0
–
0.8
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
–
0.9
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
Table 2: The results of generating robust plans in Satellite
domain (see text).
lite, but should be of different type of materials and can also
take an image of the interested mode at the same direction.
Table 1 and 2 shows respectively the results in the Logis-
tics and Satellite domains with ρ ∈{0.1, 0.2, ..., 0.9} and
m = {1, 2, ..., 5}. The number of complete domain models
in the two domains is 2m. For Satellite domain, the probabil-
ities pj’s range from 0.25, 0.3,... to 0.45 when m increases
from 1, 2, ... to 5. For each speciﬁc value of ρ and m, we
report l/t where l is the length of plan and t is the running
time (in seconds). Cases in which no plan is found within the
time limit are denoted by “–”, and those where it is provable
that no plan with the desired robustness exists are denoted
by “⊥”.
Observations on ﬁxed value of m: In both domains, for a
ﬁxed value of m we observe that the solution plans tend to
be longer with higher robustness threshold ρ, and the time
to synthesize plans is also larger. For instance, in Logistics
with m = 5, the plan returned has 48 actions if ρ = 0.3,
whereas 66-length plan is needed if ρ increases to 0.4. Since
loading containers using the same robot multiple times does
not increase the chance of success, more robots of differ-
ent manufacturers need to move into the downtown area for
loading containers, which causes an increase in plan length.
In the Satellite domain with m = 3, similarly, the returned
plan has 37 actions when ρ = 0.5, but requires 53 actions
if ρ = 0.6—more actions need to calibrate an instrument
of different material types in order to increase the chance of
having a good image of interested mode at the same direc-
tion.
Since the cost of actions is currently ignored in the compi-
lation approach, we also observe that more than the needed
number of actions have been used in many solution plans. In

the Logistics domain, speciﬁcally, it is easy to see that the
probability of successfully loading a container onto a truck
using robots of k (1 ≤k ≤m) different manufacturers is
(1 −0.7k). As an example, however, robots of all ﬁve man-
ufacturers are used in a plan when ρ = 0.4, whereas using
those of three manufacturers is enough.
Observations on ﬁxed value of ρ: In both domains, we
observe that the maximal robustness value of plans that can
be returned increases with higher number of manufacturers
(though the higher the value of m is, the higher number of
complete models is). For instance, when m = 2 there is not
any plan returned with at least ρ = 0.6 in the Logistics do-
main, and with ρ = 0.4 in the Satellite domain. Intuitively,
more robots of different manufacturers offer higher prob-
ability of successfully loading a container in the Logistics
domain (and similarly for instruments of different materials
in the Satellite domain).
Finally, it may take longer time to synthesize plans with
the same length when m is higher—in other words, the in-
creasing amount of incompleteness of the domain makes the
plan generation phase harder. As an example, in the Satellite
domain, with ρ = 0.6 it takes 216.7 seconds to synthesize
a 37-length plan when there are m = 5 possible add effects
at the schema level of the domain, whereas the search time
is only 94.1 seconds when m = 4. With ρ = 0.7, no plan
is found within the time limit when m = 5, although a plan
with robustness of 0.7075 exists in the solution space. It is
the increase of the branching factors and the time spent on
satisﬁability test and weighted model-counting used inside
the planner that affect the search efﬁciency.
Domains with random incompleteness
We built a program to generate an incomplete domain model
from a deterministic one by introducing M new propositions
into each domain (all are initially T). Some of those new
propositions were randomly added into the sets of possible
preconditions/effects of actions. Some of them were also
randomly made certain add/delete effects of actions. With
this strategy, each solution plan in an original deterministic
domain is also a valid plan, as deﬁned earlier, in the cor-
responding incomplete domain. Our experiments with the
Depots, Driverlog, Satellite and ZenoTravel domains indi-
cate that because the annotations are random, there are often
fewer opportunities for the PFF planner to increase the ro-
bustness of a plan preﬁx during the search. This makes it
hard to generate plans with a desired level of robustness un-
der given time constraint.
In summary, our experiments on the two settings above
suggest that the compilation approach based on the PFF
planner would be a reasonable method for generating robust
plans in domains and problems where there are chances for
robustifying existing action sequences in the search space.
7. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we motivated the need for synthesizing robust
plans under incomplete domain models. We introduced an-
notations for expressing domain incompleteness, formalized
the notion of plan robustness, and showed an approach to
compile the problem of generating robust plans into confor-
mant probabilistic planning. We presented empirical results
showing the promise of our approach. For future work, we
are developing a planning approach that directly takes the
incompleteness annotations into account during the search,
and compare it with our current compilation method. We
also plan to consider the problem of robustifying a given
plan subject to a provided cost bound.
Acknowledgement: This research is supported in part by
ONR grants N00014-09-1-0017and N00014-07-1-1049,the
NSF grant IIS-0905672, and by DARPA and the U.S. Army
Research Laboratory under contract W911NF-11-C-0037.
The content of the information does not necessarily reﬂect
the position or the policy of the Government, and no ofﬁcial
endorsement should be inferred. We thank William Cushing
for several helpful discussions.
