A Multi-Level Framework for the AI Alignment
Problem
Betty Li Hou1, 2, Brian Patrick Green1
1 Markkula Center for Applied Ethics
2 New York University

Abstract
AI alignment considers how we can encode AI systems in a way that is compatible
with human values. The normative side of this problem asks what moral values or
principles, if any, we should encode in AI. To this end, we present a framework
to consider the question at four levels: Individual, Organizational, National, and
Global. We aim to illustrate how AI alignment is made up of value alignment
problems at each of these levels, where values at each level affect the others and
effects can ﬂow in either direction. We outline key questions and considerations
of each level and demonstrate an application of this framework to the topic of AI
content moderation.
1
Introduction
AI is used on a global scale in a multitude of ways, from social media algorithms and cybersecurity
to smart home devices and increasingly-more-autonomous vehicles. This poses risks of both direct
and indirect negative effects on our political, economic, and social structures. With this new realm of
technology, we must thoroughly understand and work to address the risks in order to navigate the
space and use the technology wisely. This is the ﬁeld of AI ethics, and here, speciﬁcally, AI safety.
1.1
AI Alignment
The AI alignment problem considers how we can encode AI systems in a way that is compatible
with human moral values. The problem becomes complex when there are multiple values that we
want to prioritize in a system. For example, we might want both speed and accuracy out of a system
performing a morally relevant task, such as online content moderation. If these values are conﬂicting
to any extent, then it is impossible to maximize for both. AI alignment becomes even more important
when the systems operate at a scale where humans cannot feasibly evaluate every decision made to
check whether it was performed in a responsible and ethical manner.
The alignment problem has two parts [1]. The ﬁrst is the technical aspect which focuses on how
to formally encode values and principles into AI so that it does what it ought to do in a reliable
manner. Cases of unintended negative side effects and reward hacking can result if this is not done
properly [2]. The second part of the alignment problem is normative, which asks what moral values
or principles, if any, we should encode in AI. To this end, we present a framework to consider the
question at four levels.1 While other notable recent papers have focused more on the content of the
1For another take on the problem, see the “multiscale alignment” section of Max Tegmark’s interview with
the 80,000 Hours Podcast [3]. Tegmark’s framework does not yet seem to be published, so we cannot know in
exactly what ways his and our frameworks are similar or different.
ML Safety Workshop, 36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
arXiv:2301.03740v1  [cs.CY]  10 Jan 2023

problem solution (e.g. Hendrycks et al., 2021, [4] and Hendrycks et al., 2022, [5]), this framework
focuses on the social context in which those content-focused solutions must exist, and how that
context has multiple layers across which solutions should be integrated and coherent.
2
Breaking Down the Alignment Problem
AI alignment is made up of value alignment problems at multiple different levels, not just in the
technology itself, how it is built, and the design methods. In order for AI to truly be aligned
with human moral values, all levels must be aligned with each other as well. The following is an
approach to AI alignment in which the values at each level affect the others, with effects ﬂowing both
downwards and upwards. At each level, there are key questions that need to be answered.
Figure 1: Four Levels of Alignment
Individual & Familial
On the individual level, the framework invites individuals and families
to ask questions about values and ﬂourishing. In our everyday actions, we are shaping our own
deﬁnitions of individual ﬂourishing—what makes life fulﬁlling and brings contentment. We must
consider what role models and lifestyles we seek to emulate, how we deﬁne success for ourselves,
what sacriﬁces we are willing to make, and what ethical values we prioritize.
Organizational
The organizational level refers to corporations, state and local governments, uni-
versities, churches, social movements, and various other groups in civil society. When considering
alignment at this level, we must determine what values the organization operates on, what values
are instilled in its products and services, and what role the organization plays within society. For
institutions, important considerations are what constitutes success, what metrics are used to evaluate
success, and how they are involved in the broader movements for AI alignment.
National
The next level is the national level. Each nation has either implicitly or explicitly deﬁned
values that determine the country’s goals and objectives pertaining to AI. A country aiming to assert
itself as a global power may invest resources into building a domestic AI industry, as well as regulate
the usage of AI to moderate and nudge users’ behaviors towards particular views. On the other hand,
a country aiming to promote freedom may follow a decentralized approach to AI production, giving
ﬁrms freedom and privacy while allowing for competition amongst ﬁrms. Alternatively, countries
may try to build an AI initiative in a way that not only ensures that they are aligned with moral values,
but also encourages or requires other countries to do so.
Global
Globally, humankind must think about the kind of future we want to have. The recently
articulated United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) offer a good starting point, but
these goals are merely the preconditions necessary for survival and ﬂourishing, so they are not
enough [6]. A further step is needed to determine our common goals as a civilization, and more
philosophically, the purpose of human existence, and how AI will ﬁt into it. Is it to survive, raise
2

children, live in society, seek the truth, etc.? Related to this are the end goals of economic and
political structures, as well as what powerful nations and corporations need to give up in order to
attend to the needs of the poor and the earth.
2.1
Putting the Levels Together
All of these levels interact with each other. Because AI typically originates from the organizational
level, often in proﬁt driven corporations, the primary motivation is often simply to make money.
However, when put in the context of these other levels, further goals should become visible: 1) AI
development should be aligned to individual and familial needs, 2) AI development should align with
national interests, and 3) AI development should contribute to human survival and ﬂourishing on the
global level.
But other layers in the framework also interact with each other, through inputs and outputs. For
example, looking at the same organizational layer from the inbound perspective, individuals can
choose whether or not to buy certain kinds of technologies, nations can pass laws and regulations
to control what technology companies can do, and at the global level, international pressure (for
example from the UN through ideas such as the Sustainable Development Goals) can also inﬂuence
technology company behavior. Of note, these levels can have intermediate levels too, such as the
European Union, which is above national but below global, and which has, through the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [7], had a major inﬂuence on the internet, data, and through those, AI.
Examining the individual level, we have already seen how it inﬂuences and is inﬂuenced by the
organizational level. The individual level can inﬂuence the national through elections, and the global
through organizations such as the UN, although these inﬂuences are quite underdeveloped. Similarly,
the global can inﬂuence individuals through international treaties, while nations obviously exert
signiﬁcant control over their citizens through laws and other behavioral expectations.
Lastly, the national and global levels interact. Nations inﬂuence the global state of the Earth, for
example through war and other national policies with global effects (such as energy policies which
can drive or mitigate climate change.) The global level can exert power back, whether through the
UN or other international expectations of national behavior.
To get a more practical view of the framework, we look at the problem of social media content
moderation.
3
Content Moderation as an Example
A global debate has emerged on the risks posed by certain types of content on the internet. User
generated content is not subject to the same editorial controls as traditional media, which enables
users to post content that could harm others, particularly children or vulnerable people. This includes
but is not limited to content promoting terrorism, child abuse material, hate speech, sexual content,
and violent or extremist content. Yet at the same time, attempts to restrict this content can seem to
some like it violates user freedom of expression and freedom to hear certain kinds of expression.
Organizations and governments have grappled with the feasibility and ethics of mitigating these
potential harms through content moderation, while at the same time trying not to lose users who feel
that their freedoms are being curtailed.
AI-assisted content moderation brings a level of speed and scale unmatched by manual moderation. A
transparency report from Google shows that over 90% of videos removed on YouTube between April
and June 2022 were reviewed as a result of automatic ﬂagging [8]. However, these approaches have
implications for people’s future uses and attitudes towards online content sharing, so it is important
that the AI employed in these processes aligns with human values at multiple levels.
3.1
Using the Framework
Organizational ⇒Individual
The ﬁrst issue comes from the organizational level, where there is a
major misalignment between businesses and individuals. Businesses that employ content moderation
are incentivized to maximize shareholder value, which leads to prioritizing proﬁt over social good.
For example, companies often base their algorithm on “engagement”—the more likes, comments and
shares a topic or post receives, the more it will appear on people’s newsfeeds. Per proﬁle as well,
3

companies then keep track of the user’s behavior and habits based on engagement to feed them what
they want to see. This way, users will spend more time on the site and generate more ad revenue for
the business to boost shareholder value. This however leads to echo chambers and polarization, as
users are not exposed to opinions that differ from theirs, ultimately affecting not only individuals and
families, but also entire nations, and even global discourse. The misalignment between organization
and individuals has already proven to be dangerous with cases like Myanmar’s attack on minorities
illustrating the potential consequences [9].
National ⇒Organizational ⇒Individual
National regulations shape how organizations mod-
erate content, as organizations must build AI within the bounds of these regulations. A country’s
content moderation legislation is typically an expression of the cultural values of the majority of
its citizens, which is often similar to the cultural values of its leadership, though not always. While
these regulations are made by individual lawmakers and may express the values of many individual
citizens, these regulations also will affect both organizations and other individuals. For example, a
common good perspective might lean towards high content moderation for the sake of minimizing
social harm, but at the expense of individual freedom of expression.
The question then arises regarding the alignment of cultural values with AI content moderation.
We may be able to recognize where there are mis-alignments between national and organizational
values, which in turn affects individuals. For example, in the US, where individual freedoms is a
priority, there is very little content moderation regulation and it requires companies to only moderate
things such as illegally sharing copyrighted content and criminal activity such as sharing child sexual
abuse materials. Therefore, while companies may comply with every relevant government regulation,
there have nevertheless been harmful effects on society, showing how the US government content
moderation legislation is not aligned with societal needs. Cases like Myanmar also suggest that this
American legislation may not be aligned with global needs, as other countries are subject to these
same problems and are facing the repercussions of it.
Based on the above, it might seem that the ﬁrst goal for AI alignment would be to align the national
and organizational levels (assuming that the organization is also aligned with individual well-being).
However, this is not enough—we must also consider whether these national values are aligned on
the global level, that is, whether they support global human ﬂourishing. Content which promotes
division, subversion of governments, extremism, conspiracy theories, and other socially destructive
and anti-social behaviors can result in not only local or national problems, but, if these groups become
broadly empowered, global problems. And yet governing content moderation at the international level
is simply not feasible in our pluralistic world. However, this framework at least helps to diagnose the
problem, even if the problem cannot yet be solved.
Individual ⇒Organizational ⇒National ⇒Global
The effects ﬂow in both directions. Organi-
zations doing content moderation sometimes respond most to individual user feedback, a powerful
enough organization can have a hand in swaying national interests, and a nation or group of nations
can potentially change the international order, for example, as with the EU’s GDPR.
All in all, content moderation is a prime example of how value alignment is at work right now in
society. It may not be feasible to align all four levels quickly or easily, but with this framework we
can identify some causes of the complex mis-alignments that we are seeing now—and will see more
of in the future—and consider some possible beginnings of solutions.
4
Conclusion
If we are to make good progress on the normative side of AI alignment, we must consider all levels:
Individual, Organizational, National, and Global, and understand how each works together, rather
than only aligning one or a few of the parts. Here we have presented a framework for considering
these issues. In Appendix A, we have provided an analysis of how this work relates to AI x-risk.
The versatility of the framework means that it can be applied to many other topics, including but
not limited to autonomous vehicles, AI-assisted clinical decision support systems, surveillance, and
criminal justice tools. In these hotly contested spaces with no clear answers, by analysing these
problems at four levels, we are able to see the many interacting parts at play, in order to create more
ethical and aligned AI.
4
