Proceedings of eNTERFACE’15 
The 11th Summer Workshop  
on Multimodal Interfaces 
August 10th - September 4th, 2015  
Numediart Institute, University of Mons 
Mons, Belgium 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
Overview 
 
Preface 
 
Project #1: 
Prototyping a New Audio-Visual Instrument Based on Extraction of High-
Level Features on Full-Body Motion 
 
Jo•elle Tilmanne, Nicolas d'Alessandro, Petr Barborka, Furkan Bayansar, Francisco Bernard, Rebecca Fiebrink, 
Alexis Heloir, Edgar Hemery, Sohaib Laraba, Alexis Moinet, Fabrizio Nunnari5, Thierry Ravet, Loïc Reboursière, 
Alvaro Sarasua, Mickaël Tits, Noé Tits, and François Zajéga 
 
 
Project #2: 
Analysis of the qualities of human movement in individual action 
 
Paolo Alborno, Ksenia Kolykhalova, Emma Frid, Damiano Malafronte, and Lisanne Huis in't Veld 
 
 
Project #3: 
EASA : Environment Aware Social Agent 
Hüseyin Cakmak, Kevin El Haddad, Nicolas Riche, Julien Leroy, Pierre Marighetto, Bekir Berker Türker, Hossein 
Khaki, Roberto Pulisci, Emer Gilmartin, Fasih Haider, Kübra Cengiz, Martin Sulir, Ilaria Torre, Shabbir Marzban, 
Ramazan Yazıcı, Furkan Burak Bâgcı, Vedat Gazi Kılı, Hilal Sezer, Sena Büsra Yenge. 
 
 
Project #4: 
MOMMA: Museum MOtion & Mood MApping 
Charles-Alexandre Delestage, Sylvie Leleu-Merviel, Muriel Meyer-Chemenska, Daniel Schmitt, Willy Yvart 
 
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
Project #5: 
VideoSketcher: Innovative Query Modes for Searching Videos through 
Sketches, Motion and Sound  
 
Stéphane Dupont, Ozan Can Altiok, Aysegül Bumin, Ceren Dikmen, Ivan Giangreco, Silvan Heller, Emre Külah, 
Gueorgui Pironkov, Luca Rossetto, Yusuf Sahillioglu, Heiko Schuldt, Omar Seddati, Yusuf Setinkaya, Metin Sezgin, 
Claudiu Tanase, Emre Toyan, Sean Wood, Doguhan Yeke 
 
 
Project #6: 
Enter the ROBiGAME: Serious game for stroke patients with upper limbs 
rehabilitation 
 
Françcois Rocca, Pierre-Henri De Deken, Alessandra Bandrabur, and Matei Mancas 
 
 
Project #7: 
BigDatArt: Browsing and using big data in a creative way 
 
Fabien Grisard, Axel Jean-Caurant, Vincent Courboulay, and Matei Mancas 
 
 
Project #8: 
Automatic detection of planar surfaces from uv maps 
 
Radhwan Ben Madhkour, Ambroise Moreau 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
Preface 
The 11th Summer Workshop on Multimodal Interfaces eNTERFACE’15 was hosted by 
the Numediart Institute of Creative Technologies of the University of Mons from August 
10th to September 2015. During the four weeks, students and researchers from all 
over the world came together in the Numediart Institute of the University of Mons to 
work on eight selected projects structured around “multimodal interfaces”.  
The eNTERFACE workshops aim at establishing a tradition of collaborative, localized 
research and development work by gathering, in a single place, a team of leading 
professionals in multimodal human-machine interfaces together with students (both 
graduate and undergraduate), to work on a prespecified list of challenges, for four 
complete weeks. In this respect, it is an innovative and intensive collaboration scheme, 
designed to allow researchers to integrate their software tools, deploy demonstrators, 
collect novel databases, and work side by side with a great number of experts. It brings 
together dozens of researchers for a whole month, subsequently it is the largest 
workshop on multimodal interfaces. 
The eNTERFACE was initiated by the FP6 Network of Excellence SIMILAR. It was 
organized by Faculté Polytechnique de Mons (Belgium) in 2005, University of Zagreb 
(Croatia) in 2006, Bogaziçi University (Turkey) in 2007, CNRS-LIMSI (France) in 2008, 
University of Genova (Italy) in 2009, University of Amsterdam (The Netherlands) in 
2010, University of West Bohemia (Czech Republic) in 2011, Metz Supélec (France) 
in 2012, New University of Lisbon (Portugal) in 2013, and University of Basque Country 
(Spain) in 2014. 
eNTERFACE’15 returned to Mons in 2015, exactly ten years after the first workshop 
held in the same place. This years was also a special year for the city of Mons which 
was European Cultural Capital.  
We would really like to thank the entire local organizing committee which made this 
event a great success both from a professional and personal point of view.  
And finally, we would like to thank to all the participants to this workshop for coming in 
Mons!  
 
Matei Mancas and Christian Frisson 
Publication chairs 
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project #1: 
Prototyping a New Audio-Visual Instrument Based on Extraction of High-
Level Features on Full-Body Motion 
 
Jo•elle Tilmanne, Nicolas d'Alessandro, Petr Barborka, Furkan Bayansar, Francisco Bernard, Rebecca Fiebrink, 
Alexis Heloir, Edgar Hemery, Sohaib Laraba, Alexis Moinet, Fabrizio Nunnari5, Thierry Ravet, Loïc Reboursière, 
Alvaro Sarasua, Mickaël Tits, Noé Tits, and François Zajéga 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Prototyping a New Audio-Visual Instrument
Based on Extraction of High-Level Features
on Full-Body Motion
Jo¨elle Tilmanne1, Nicolas d’Alessandro1, Petr Barborka2, Furkan Bayansar3,
Francisco Bernardo4, Rebecca Fiebrink4, Alexis Heloir8,5, Edgar Hemery6,
Sohaib Laraba1, Alexis Moinet1, Fabrizio Nunnari5, Thierry Ravet1, Lo¨ıc
Reboursi`ere1, Alvaro Sarasua7, Micka¨el Tits1, No´e Tits1, and Fran¸cois Zaj´ega
1 Numediart Institute, University of Mons, Belgium
2 Cybernetics, University of West Bohemia, Czech Republic
3 Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
4 Goldsmiths University, London, United Kingdom
5 German Research Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Germany
6 MINES ParisTech, Paris, France
7 MTG, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain
8 LAMIH UMR CNRS/UVHC 8201, Valenciennes, France
Abstract. Skeletal data acquisition generates a huge amount of high-
dimensionality data. In many ﬁelds where motion capture techniques
are now used, practitioners would greatly beneﬁt from high-level repre-
sentations of these motion sequences. However meaningful motion data
dimensionality reduction is not a trivial task and the selection of the
best set of features will largely depend on the considered use case, hence
enhancing the need for a fast customization and prototyping tool. In this
work, we present a prototyping tool for motion representation and in-
teraction design based on the MotionMachine framework, as well as use
cases of new audio-visual instruments that use full-body motion to drive
sound and visuals. These instruments have been developed using the pro-
posed prototyping environment. The development of these instruments
is a proof of concept and demonstrates the potential of an elaborate
choice of higher-level feature extraction techniques in improving the hu-
man/computer interaction and leading to more expressive experiences.
Keywords: motion capture, feature extraction, fast prototyping, cre-
ative coding, new musical instrument, interactive audiovisuals
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
Over the last ten years, an important amount of motion capture techniques
have emerged. However most of these techniques – such as inertial suits or opti-
cal markers tracking – did remain expensive and cumbersome. More recently, the

democratization of depth cameras like the Microsoft Kinect has considerably
changed the scope of markerless mocap research. Indeed the massive dissemina-
tion of these sensors gave many new research groups the chance to jump in the
ﬁeld and provide various resources (databases, software, results) to the scientiﬁc
community [1]. This technological breakthrough has brought motion capture into
new application domains, like health [2], education or arts [3].
Skeletal data acquisition generates a huge amount of high-dimensionality
data. Such raw data is neither very readable, nor very reusable. The design of
interesting mapping strategies for gesture-controlled interaction is often ham-
pered by these considerations and very basic gestures are usually selected for
such interaction because of the lack of existing or readily-available higher-level
motion features. In many ﬁelds where motion capture techniques are now used,
practitioners would greatly beneﬁt from high-level representations of these mo-
tion sequences. Such features could be understood by sight or highly related to
the studied phenomenon (expertise, style, etc.), so that they could be mapped
with soniﬁcation, visualization or used in machine learning. In literature, we can
ﬁnd e.g. top-down description of full-body motion [4], geometrical descriptors of
the 3D skeleton [5] or application of dimension-reduction techniques to extract
higher-level aspects of gestures. Our perspective on this situation is that there
is no generic solution to motion high-level feature extraction. The optimal so-
lution will be highly dependent on the use case. There is therefore a need for a
very intuitive prototyping platform, where a set of feature extraction modules
can quickly be plugged in and their eﬃciency evaluated in real-time, both from
oﬄine and online skeletal data. The Numediart institute has developed such a
tool for real-time prototyping of motion data processing, called MotionMachine
[6]. It is used as an independent feature extraction layer, taking OSC data from
various sensors and streaming OSC features in real-time. It is a C++ library and
it currently has bindings with openFrameworks for the visualization module.
Some of our previous works on gesture recognition, mapping and synthesis
[7] have demonstrated the need for high level motion feature extraction in order
to reduce the dimensionality of the motion data and hence reduce the com-
plexity and improve the performances of motion recognition models, especially
when the training data is scarce. These approaches drew the lines of a combined
optimization of both motion representation and motion recognition models.
1.2
Related Works
Several tools exist to manipulate and visualize motion capture data with the
goal of creating motion-enabled applications. The MOCAP toolbox [8] is among
these tools, giving access to many high-level processing functions, but it is only
available for Matlab and therefore not very suitable for real-time, iterative and
interactive testing and performance. When it comes to performance-driven tools,
we ﬁnd software like the RAMToolkit [9] with the opposite issue: the tool is not
generic and rather very speciﬁc to a single use case (Kinect-captured dancers
or speciﬁc mocap markers placement). In the ﬁeld of mapping software for new
interface design, the complexity of motion capture data is still not properly

faced. For instance, tools like Max or LibMapper [10] lack of serious mocap
toolkits with high-level feature extraction mechanisms. Most of the time, such
abstraction of raw data is achieved and ﬁne-tuned for a speciﬁc use case.
1.3
Outline of the Paper
In this paper, we will ﬁrst present the MotionMachine framework, a new C++
environment for the rapid prototyping of motion capture based interaction (see
Section 2). In Section 3, we further develop our approach towards motion fea-
ture extraction within MotionMachine and give an overview of motion feature
extraction categories and processors that have been implemented in this project.
Section 4 highlights the diﬀerent mapping and synthesis use cases that have been
developed as proofs of concept. Finally we drive some conclusions on the project
and highlight key perspectives that will lead to further research in Section 5.
2
MotionMachine Framework
MotionMachine is an open source C++ library that enables the rapid proto-
typing of motion features, their extraction on standardized motion capture data
structures coming from typical motion capture ﬁle formats and live OSC streams
and their selection so as to represent motion in the considered use case. It has
ﬁrst been introduced in [6]. In this Section, we ﬁrst give an overview of the main
structure of MotionMachine and then focus on what has been reﬁned in this
project: timed containers, i.e. the underlying data-encoding backbone enabling
for both oﬄine batch and real-time processing.
2.1
General Structure
The overall data ﬂow used in MotionMachine is presented in Figure 1. The library
is built from two independent modules: one for data representation and feature
extraction (built on the top of the Armadillo C++ library [11]), the other to
take care of 2D and 3D scenes visualization and general user interaction aspects
(built on the top of the openFrameworks C++ library [13]).
Four important core features are available in the MotionMachine framework:
1. Skeletal Model Independent Motion Data: Nowadays the number of available
motion capture sensors is signiﬁcantly growing. Most of these devices pro-
vide skeletal data, i.e. changes in the position and/or orientation of 3D joints
and/or segments. For the moment, most of the achieved motion processing is
model-speciﬁc and the corresponding know-how is not directly transferable
to another model, though the underlying morphology is similar. In Motion-
Machine, we have developed a model-independent formalism for storing and
accessing such skeletal data through APIs. The back-end is based on timed
containers, which are further explained in the next Section. The front-end
gives an easy-to-understand access to a few nested data structures [6].

Fig. 1. Overall data ﬂow used in MotionMachine: modular structure to process mocap
data ﬁles and/or streams into features ﬁles and streams, labels ﬁles and visualization.
2. Collections of Motion Feature Extractors: MotionMachine is built around
the idea that developers can write custom code to be inserted in the mo-
tion capture data processing pipeline, while still preserving the intuitiveness
and eﬃciency of the overall environment. The design principle underlying
the available collection of feature extractors is essentially container-driven
and based on the idea that oﬄine batch and windowed real-time processing
should both be available by default for any built-in or third-party feature.
We give an in-depth description of this idea in Subsection 2.2.
3. Interactive 2D/3D Scene View: In MotionMachine, we wanted to improve
the aﬀordance of motion capture data processing by solving several visu-
alization issues and bring the user faster to his/her valuable work. Such
improvements were achieved by balancing the apparent complexity of the
environment. As a result, the library comes with an integrated 2D/3D scene
viewer for displaying mocap data on screen and interacting with the contents
[6]. On the one hand, many visualization aspects are automatically deter-
mined from data types, included the so-called “degraded” modes where not
all the information is available. On the other hand, 3D and 2D time lines
are automatically synchronized (embedded app time handlers), helping to
observe available motion capture data from diﬀerent viewpoints.
4. Annotation Layer: In MotionMachine, we have integrated a lightweight an-
notation scheme. It allows the programmatic and UI-based insertion of Labels
alongside the motion capture data. It means that the time tag of these Labels
can be automatically derived from signal properties in the feature extraction
code or added manually by the user. Moreover these Labels get properly ren-
dered in the 2D view and can then be rearranged manually. Labels can also
be imported from and exported to label text ﬁles (.lab extension).

2.2
Timed Containers
Time management can be a serious issue in motion capture based interactive
applications: the application has its own life cycle and time line, input ﬁles
may have their own frame rate, time stamps or nothing, input streams may have
their own frame rate, time stamps or nothing, and any piece of data might reveal
opportunities to be processed as one batch (oﬄine), frame by frame or within a
sliding window. Moreover, as MotionMachine is intended to be open-ended, i.e.
with third-party feature extractors, we aim at optimizing the modularity of the
code base, e.g. not duplicate code for oﬄine vs. real-time scenarios.
In this project, we have decided to foster the role of underlying data contain-
ers in the process of framing the way time and skeletal structures are handled
in MotionMachine, as well as how the feature extractors should be developed.
Our timed containers aim at providing all the logic that enables the processing
of motion capture data ﬁles and streams. The two main behaviors are:
1. Hierarchical structure of data is transparent: Motion capture data and more
generally 3D animation data are described by using a hierarchical structure.
On one hand, the position and the orientation of a 6 DOF limb can be
encoded with absolute values in a global world coordinate system. On the
other hand these data can be computed in local coordinate system linked
to a parent object, e.g. foot orientation is given relatively to the data of the
leg. Following the aimed application, local or global values are the most ap-
propriate description. The timed containers implement this kinematic chain
and allow the user to choose between global or local motion descriptors.
2. Time management within data is transparent: In order to enable the process-
ing of data extracted from diﬀerent sources, MotionMachine provides a time
modeling that respects two main constraints. Firstly the timed container ac-
cepts data with a ﬁxed frame rate or frames with time stamps, if they have
not been recorded with a unique temporally stable device. Secondly the con-
tainers are able to store data from a real-time streams and data from oﬄine
prerecorded ﬁles. To do that, the container can switch between a ring buﬀer
mode and a regular buﬀer mode, i.e. with a directly indexed-timed relation
as showed in Figure 2. Series of APIs are provided to the developer so as to
access the data at a given time, no matter the underlying time metric.
3
Motion Feature Extraction
One very transversal aspect of this project was to grow an amount of motion
feature extractors that can be applied on various kinds of input data (ﬁles or
streams). In this Section, we give an overview of what we aimed at keeping
common among all the implemented features and then we give a list of feature
categories and implementations that have been achieved.

Fig. 2. Representation of the four modes to store the motion capture data in memory
buﬀer. Position of each node is encoded by 3 Cartesian coordinates; rotation of each
bone is encoded with 4 components of a unit quaternion. (A) Example of a track
working in an oﬄine mode. (B) Example of a track in real-time mode. In each case, the
time can be modeled with a ﬁxed frame rate or a time stamp vector. All time-related
parameters are updated to insure a transparent management for the developer.
We acknowledged this idea that feature extractor developers should not be
“forced” to follow a DSP chain format. Indeed the variability within motion
capture based use cases is quite signiﬁcant and we do not want to load Motion-
Machine with a complex and cumbersome patching environment, nor preventing
developers to design their software following their scenario-driven constrains.
The one constraint that we put onto the development of motion feature ex-
tractors within MotionMachine is to take timed containers as inputs and outputs
arguments and work with their APIs for accessing structural and time-handling
information. This design choice also has another implication: it makes a lot of
sense to work with Armadillo for the vector and matrix operations vs. transfer-
ring data into another format then back. This choice is motivated by the ability
of Armadillo to do parallel computation on arrays using CPU optimization.
Ten diﬀerent feature categories have been implemented and are presented
here under. Six are high level motion feature categories, for each of which several
feature extraction functions have been implemented inside the MotionMachine
framework. Three are gesture recognition algorithms, either fully implemented
within MotionMachine (relation features and DTW), based on external libraries
(HMM-based gestures recognition based on the HTK library), or communicating
with external modules (e.g. Wekinator). The last feature category consists in
parsing data extracted oﬄine in the OpenSIM software.
3.1
Balance
The balance/weight category represents the idea of stability, balance and equi-
librium, which can be perceived when looking at a skeleton with a given posture.
It encapsulates concepts such as center of mass (CoM), ﬂoor contact points and
base of support, in both continuous and binary ways: continuous features give an
evolving metrics about the studied property, binary features represent a state.

To compute these high level balance features, some intermediate features and
geometrical operations are required and presented further in this Subsection.
Center of Mass (CoM)
Description The center of mass (CoM) of a body is the point at which the whole
mass may be considered as concentrated [15]. The center of mass of the whole
body can be computed as the weighed average of the center of mass of each body
segment in 3D space. The “center of mass” feature is tridimensional since it is
computed as the 3D-coordinates (xyz position) of the center of mass of either
one of the body segments or of the whole body.
Computation The position of the center of mass of a body depends on the
distribution of the mass in the considered body. For the human body, several
tables can be found in the literature and give an estimation of the position of
the center of mass for each of the human body segments under the form of a
ratio between the extremities of the considered segment. We have based our
implementation of the center of mass computation on de Leva’s work [16].
For each body segment, the COM is computed as the ratio between the
position of both extremities of the considered segment, using the ratios found in
[16]. The global center of mass is computed as a weighted sum of the position of
the center of mass of each one of the body segments, the weight being deﬁned by
the relative weight of each segment of the body as presented in de Leva’s paper.
CoMglobal =
N
X
i=1
wi ∗CoMi
(1)
with N= number of body segment considered, wi the weighted mass of body
segment i and CoMi the center of mass of segment i.
Visualization A visualization of the center of mass of each segment as well as
of the global center of mass has been implemented. The center of mass of each
body segment is represented by a green sphere whose center is located at the xyz
coordinates of the center of mass of the considered segment and whose diameter
is proportional to the weighted mass of the segment. The global center of mass
of the body is represented by a red sphere, as illustrated in Figure 3.
Floor Contact Points
Description When considering motion sequences performed on a standard planar
ground, the equilibrium or balance of the body is highly dependent on the contact
points of the body with the ground. This feature calculates which joints of the
body can be considered as in contact with the ground.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the Balance feature elements: body center of mass (with xyz
position in 2D), segment center of mass, ﬂoor contact points, support base (convex
hull), center of support base and projected body center of mass.
Computation For each joint, this feature calculates if it is touching the ground
or not. The binary decision is based on the height of each joint, using a threshold
which can be adjusted for each joint, since the physical position of the mocap
markers on the actor’s body will change the height of the marker when the
considered segment is actually touching the ground. By default, the threshold
is set to 5cm, except for foot and ankle, for which it is computed as the mean
height of the ﬁrst ten frames of the motion sequence + 1.5cm).
Visualization Each ﬂoor contact point is displayed as a blue circle on the ground,
using for its center position the x and y position of the corresponding joint.
Convex Hull of Support Base
Description The convex hull of a set of points is the smallest convex envelope
that contains all of the points in the set. This geometrical feature is used in our
case for instance to compute the contact base area based on the set of contact
points with the ground. It can also be used to compute the area corresponding to
the space occupation of the body on the ground at any given time, or to compute
the area covered by a subject during a given motion sequence by computing the
convex hull of the positions of the center of the body over time.

Computation The computation of the convex hull is and iterative process. From
a set of points in a plane (deﬁned by xy positions), it computes the set of points
deﬁning the convex hull containing all the points. Our implementation of the
convex hull computation is based on [17]. From the deﬁned convex hull, typical
metrics can be determined such as contact base perimeter or area.
Visualization The implemented convex hull visualization consists in drawing the
lines between the points deﬁning the convex envelope, so as to show the area.
Binary Balance Value
Description In MotionMachine, the discrete value of the balance feature is named
isInsideCOMSupport. This feature calculates if the projection of the body
center of mass on the ground is inside the support base or not. The feature can
take one of three values at each frame: 1 if the CoMglobal is inside the support
base, 0 if it is outside, and −2 if there is no support base (for instance when the
subject is jumping). This feature can be seen as a ternary balance feature since
it represents the equilibrium of the posture at each frame.
Computation This discrete balance feature is computed by testing if the pro-
jection of the CoMglobal on the ground is inside the convex hull deﬁned by the
support base. This test of being inside is achieved by testing if the projected
point is on the right of each of the successive segments of the hull.
Visualization The projection of the global center of mass on the ground is repre-
sented as a green sphere if the CoMglobal is inside the support base, a red sphere
if it is outside, and an orange one if there is no support base.
Continuous Balance Value
Description This continuous representation of the balance of the body is com-
puted as the distance between the center of the support base and the projection
of the body center of mass on the ground. When used in combination with the
discrete value of the balance (isInsideCoMSupport), it illustrates how far from
the equilibrium the current body posture is. The higher the feature is, the poorer
the balance is. Another implementation that should be considered in the future
would be to compute the distance from the border of the support base area
(inside or outside) rather than the distance from the center of that area.
Computation The center of the support base is computed as the mean of the
support joints positions. The continuous balance feature is then computed as the
distance between the center of support base and the projection of the CoMglobal
on the ground. Small distance means that the CoMglobal and the center of the
support based are more aligned vertically, large distance the opposite.

Visualization The visualization of the continuous balance value has been done
in the 2D view. Indeed peaks and valleys in the graph would inform quite clearly
about moments where the body was particularly (un)balanced.
3.2
Rhythm and Periodicity
This Section describes our work in implementing a ﬁrst set of periodicity-related
features. It goes from low-level analysis to fundamental frequency estimation.
Auto-correlation
Description For a given signal, its auto-correlation is the cross-correlation of
the signal with itself. The cross-correlation between two signals of length N
measures their correlation for all possible delays 0, . . . , N −1. In the case of a
pseudo-periodic signal, the auto-correlation would present a peak for each delay
that is a multiple of the fundamental period, thus providing a way to detect
whether a signal is periodic and to measure its period, if any. This feature takes
as input a 1D signal whose values correspond to a temporal sequence of either
node positions, angles or any feature described in Section 3.
Computation The input signal of length L is split into blocks, or analysis win-
dows, of length N with a shift of H samples between the ﬁrst samples of two
successive blocks. For each analysis window xh(n) – with h = 0, 1, . . . L−N
H
– its
auto-correlation Rh(m) is computed as:
Rh(m) = F−1(|F(xh(n) w(n))|2)
(2)
where w(n) is a weighting window and F and F−1 represent the Discrete
Fourier Transform (DFT) and its Inverse transform (IDFT) respectively. The
DFT and IDFT are computed over 2N points but only the ﬁrst N +1 points are
stored in the ﬁnal result as RH(m) is symmetrical. Optionally, the average value
of xh(n) can be removed before computing the DFT. The Equation becomes:
Rh(m) = F−1(|F((xh(n) −¯xh(n)) w(n))|2)
(3)
This latter approach gives better results, especially when applied to node
positions with a non-zero long-term average (typically, the vertical position of
the head). Finally, the auto-correlation vectors Rh(m) are stored in an array R
with L−N
H
columns and N + 1 lines.
Visualization The auto-correlation array R can be displayed as a 2D curve chang-
ing over time. Shortly, the hth column Rh(m) can be shown on screen for all time
stamps corresponding to frame indices f such that: h × H ≤f < (h + 1) × H.
Power Spectral Density

Description The Power Spectral Density (PSD) is a measure of how the power
of a given signal is distributed across the frequency domain. Random signals
tend to have a continuous PSD and periodic signals exhibit some peaks.
Computation The computation is similar to that of the auto-correlation. An
input signal is split into analysis windows xh(n) and a PSD Sh(m) is computed
for each xh(n) and stored in an array S. The computation is made by means of
the squared absolute value of the DFT of xh(n) over N points:
Sh(m) = |F(xh(n) w(n))|2
(4)
Note that a weighting window w(n) is applied before computing the DFT.
Since the result is symmetrical, we store only N/2 + 1 points in S. Also note
that the average value ¯xh(n) can be subtracted before computation:
Sh(m) = |F((xh(n) −¯xh(n)) w(n))|2
(5)
Visualization Likewise, the visualization for S is similar to R, except that values
in S are always positive and better represented on a logarithmic scale (dB).
Periodicity from Peak
Computation This feature takes as input the array resulting from one of the
two periodicity-related features here above (Auto-correlation or PSD). For each
frame of the input, it looks for a peak in a region that corresponds to acceptable
values of periodicity (e.g. a human being cannot jump repeatedly at 100Hz but
2Hz would be reasonable). A peak is deﬁned as a value in a frame that is larger
than its 2K direct neighbors and above a given threshold. Results using the
auto-correlation function were much better and smoother than with the PSD.
Visualization As presented in Figure 4, the periodicity can be visualized as a
dot superimposed on the peak detected in the graph of the auto-correlation/PSD
function, accompanied by an overlay text with the value of the periodicity (or
the indication “no period” when no peak is found in the look-up region).
3.3
Ergonomics
Ergonomic features are related to bio-mechanical aspects of the movement. They
are based on musculo-skeletal modeling of the body, aiming to describe the
quality of movement in terms of comfort, robustness, or load.
Postural Load

Fig. 4. The recorded movement is that of a body hopping repeatedly, as we can see in
the trajectory of the head (shown attached to the head on graph). The auto-correlation
function (black curve) of the Z position of the head presents a peak (black dot) at a
position corresponding to the periodicity of the hops (0.27 s or 3.7Hz in this case).
Description The postural load of a body joint is an indication of the perceived
stressfulness of a joint, according to its orientation, taking into account each
degree of freedom (DoF) of the joint. The postural load of the whole body
provides information on the comfort of a posture, and on the risk of injury. The
postural load allows assessment of the comfort of a posture, and is widely used
in industrial ergonomics, but it can also be used in performance assessment.
Computation The computation of the postural load requires mocap data contain-
ing joints orientations. The algorithm deﬁned below is inspired from Andreoni
et al. (2009) [22]. For each DoF of a joint, a relation exists between the per-
ceived discomfort and the orientation of the joint. Tables of average perceived
discomforts according to the orientation of a joint on a DoF have been set in the
ergonomics literature to report these relations in [20] and [21].
The load, or stress of a joint Sj can be deﬁned as the sum of independent
perceived discomforts associated with each DOF of the joint Sij. In our case, the
perceived discomforts Sij were spline-interpolated from the tables, as proposed
in [22], in order to have continued values:
Sij = fij(θij)
(6)
where θij is the orientation of the joint j on the axis i, and the function fij
represents its relation based on spline functions and the aforementioned tables:

Sj =
mj
X
i=1
Sij
(7)
where mj is the number of DoF of the joint j. The postural load results from
the sum of each joint stress, as described in the previous Equation:
PosturalLoad =
n
X
j=1
Sj
(8)
Andreoni et al. (2009) [22] proposed to deﬁne the postural load as a weighted
sum of each joint stress, where the weight for each joint is proportional to the
mass of the corresponding distal body district. However, as the perceived dis-
comforts, i.e. feelings of pain, are supposed to inherently depend on the mass of
the distal body district, we omitted these weights in the current study.
Visualization Figure 5 shows an example of the postural load analysis on a
contemporary dance performance. In the 3D scene, the dancer is rendered at
the most constraining pose. The 2D curve shows the computed postural load,
and the peak corresponding to the maximal postural load. The colored sliders
in the canvas view on the left display the stresses of each joint. In the case of
this speciﬁc pose, the most stressed joints are the hips and the shoulders.
Fig. 5. An illustration of the postural load visualization in MotionMachine.

Sphereness
Description The sphereness is a novel exploratory feature inspired from a con-
cept of Taijiquan. In the philosophy of Taijiquan, the body and the movements
are represented through mental images, to enhance the transmission of the sen-
sations of the art of Taijiquan from the teacher to the pupil. The sphere of the
body is one of these images. The body is surrounded by an imaginary sphere,
and controls the sphere with its movements. This image fosters the idea of mov-
ing the body as a whole rather than individuated segments. Empirical principles
of Taijiquan rule the way the body interacts with the sphere: the body must ﬁt
the shape of the sphere, and the sphere must not be too wide nor too small.
These empirical concepts can be linked to more concrete physical principles.
The spherical shape of the body can be related to robustness, or to notions of
balance, and the restrictions on the sphere expansion may be linked to Hill’s
muscle model (the force-length relationship), explaining that the muscles have
less power when they are too expanded or too crouched. The sphereness feature
tends to describe these relations between the body and the sphere.
Computation The sphereness is computed through three steps:
1. the body center of mass (CoM) is computed and is deﬁned as the center of
the sphere. See Equation 1 of Section 3.1) for its computation details;
2. the euclidean distance (dJ is calculated between the each one of the ﬁve
end-eﬀectors of the body (head, hands and feet) and the body CoM:
dJ = |−→
pJ −−−−→
pCOM|
(9)
for J = {head, left hand, right hand, left foot, right foot};
3. the mean and the standard deviation of these distances are processed:
r =
5P
J=1
dJ
5
(10)
σ =
v
u
u
u
t
5P
J=1
(dj −r)2
5
(11)
The radius r of the sphere is deﬁned as the mean of these distances, and
indicates if the body is expanded or crouched. The standard deviation σ indicates
the deviation of the body from the spherical shape, i.e. its sphereness.

Visualization Figure 6 shows an example of sphereness visualization on a Tai-
jiquan exercise. The pose shown on the left is a rest pose, and the pose shown
on the right is the basic Taijiquan posture, also called the ”Tree posture”. The
3D scene shows two spheres. The big one is the aforementioned sphere, whose
radius is the mean of the ﬁve distances of the ﬁve end-eﬀectors to the CoM. The
radius of the small sphere is the radius of the ﬁrst one minus the deviation. In
the 2D scene, the upper curve displays the radius of the sphere, and the lower
curve displays the deviation. We can observe that the Taijiquan posture is as
expanded as the rest pose, but is much closer to a spherical shape.
Fig. 6. An illustration of the sphereness visualization in MotionMachine.
3.4
Eﬀort (Laban)
Eﬀort features, derived from the Laban Movement Analysis (LMA) [4], describe
the quality of the motion in various dimensions: dynamics, shape, space, ex-
pression, etc. Diﬀerent categorizations can be found in literature but we focused
on three of them for the implementation: weight, time and space. Several eﬀort
features take the kinetic energy feature as their starting point.
Kinetic Energy
Computation We compute an estimation of the kinetic energy Ek of a body part
k (we can have one value per skeletal joint) as the square of its velocity:
Ek(ti) = vk(ti)2
(12)
with vk(ti), the velocity of the body part k at time ti. The kinetic energy of
the whole body is determined as a weighted sum for all the body parts:

E(t) =
X
k∈K
αk.Ek(ti)
(13)
with αk, the the normalized weight associated to body part k [16]. Figure 7
shows the whole kinetic energy of the body during one performance, and kinetic
energies corresponding to all the joints of a given skeletal model.
Fig. 7. Kinetic energy: Blue: Whole body. Other colors: diﬀerent body parts.
Weight Eﬀort
Description The weight eﬀort refers to physical properties of the motion. In
LMA, the two opposite weights for a motion can be strong or light.
Computation The weight eﬀort is estimated by computing the maximum of
kinetic energy over a deﬁned time interval [24], as shown in Equation below:
WeightEffort(T) = max
i=1:T(E(ti))
(14)
with T, the size of the analysis window. Figure 8 shows the weight eﬀort
values computed for diﬀerent window sizes: 0.1s, 0.5s, 1s and 5s.
Time Eﬀort
Description The time eﬀort represents the sense of abruptness and change over
time. A motion having a high time eﬀort is deﬁned as sudden or urgent. A motion
having less time eﬀort is sustained or steady.

Fig. 8. Weight Eﬀort: blue: T=0.1s, purple: T=0.5s, pink: T=1s, orange: T=5s.
Computation The time eﬀort is estimated by computing the weighted sum of
the accelerations over time for a given body part (can be skeletal joint):
TimeEffortk(T) = 1/T
T
X
i=1
ak.(ti)
(15)
where ak(ti) is the acceleration of the body part k at time ti. The time eﬀort
for the whole body is computed as a weighted sum of time eﬀorts of body parts:
TimeEffort(T) =
X
k∈K
αk.TimeEffortk(T)
(16)
Figure 9 shows the time eﬀort values computed, for the diﬀerent body parts
and the whole body, for diﬀerent window sizes: 0.1s, 0.5s, 1s and 5s.
Fig. 9. Time Eﬀort: blue: T=0.1s, purple: T=0.5s, pink: T=1s, orange: T=5s.

Space Eﬀort
Description The space eﬀort deﬁnes the directness of the movement. By comput-
ing the space eﬀort we can say that a movement is considered as direct (focused
and toward a particular spot) or indirect (multi-focused and ﬂexible).
Computation For one body part k, we compute the space eﬀort as follows:
SpaceEffortk(T) =
T
X
i=2
||xk(ti) −xk(ti −1)||
||xk(T) −xk(1)||
(17)
Similarly to other metrics, the space eﬀort for the whole body is computed
as a weighted sum of space eﬀorts on the diﬀerent body parts:
SpaceEffort(T) =
X
k∈K
αk.SpaceEffortk(T)
(18)
Figure 10 shows the space eﬀort computed, for the diﬀerent body parts and
the whole body, for diﬀerent window sizes: 0.1s, 0.5s, 1s and 5s.
Fig. 10. Space Eﬀort: blue: T=0.1s, purple: T=0.5s, pink: T=1s, orange: T=5s.
3.5
Space (Laban)
Space features of Laban Movement Analysis [4] describe the relation between
the body and the environment. In the scope of this research, two features were
developed: the covered distance, and the covered area.
Covered Distance
Description This feature refers to the accumulated distance that is covered on
the ground over a period of time by a given body part or the whole body.

Computation The covered distance can be processed on any node of the body,
though the pelvis is used by default, in order to analyze global displacement
of the body on the scene. The body CoM could also be used. The node is ﬁrst
projected on the ground. The cumulative sum is then processed on the lengths
of the segments linking two successive positions of the projected node:
−→
pi = (xi, yi)
di = |−→
pi −−−→
pi−1|
(19)
Di =
i
X
j=1
di
where −→
pi is the projection on the ground of the node, di the distance between
two successive frames, and Di the accumulated distance at frame i.
Visualization Figure 11 shows a visualization of the Laban space component
in MotionMachine. In the 3D scene, the trace of the pelvis on the ground is
displayed in gray, and its convex hull (covered area), in red. In the 2D scene, the
upper curve is the covered distance, the lower curve the covered area.
Fig. 11. Laban space component visualization in MotionMachine.
Covered Area

Description This feature refers to the area that is covered on the ground over a
period of time. It describes how widely the scene is explored by the body.
Computation The covered area is based on the convex hull, presented in Sec-
tion 3.1. The convex hull is calculated on the trace of the pelvis projected on the
ground. The area is then computed on the points of the resulting convex hull,
with an algorithm derived from Findley’s polygon area algorithm [18].
Visualization The covered area is represented in Figure 11, by the lower curve
in the 2D scene, and the red convex hull on the ground in the 3D scene.
3.6
Smoothness/Jerk
The jerk is a kinematic descriptor corresponding to the rate of change of the
movement acceleration. Low values of jerk correspond to smooth movements,
while high values appear for complex, discontinuous movements.
Jerk Vector
Description For each frame, a jerk vector can be determined. It corresponds to
the evaluation of the rate of change in each of the xyz coordinates of each joint.
Computation For one joint k, it can be computed as:
jk(ti) = xk(ti+2) −2 · xk(ti+1) + 2 · xk(ti−1) −xk(ti−2)
2 · δt3
(20)
Jerk Magnitude
Description From the jerk computed on each joint and each dimension – there-
fore a jerk vector –, we will preferably compute a scalar value for each joint.
This value represents the overall jerkiness of a given joint.
Computation The jerk magnitude is the length of the jerk vector:
jkti =
q
jk
x(ti)2 + jk
y(ti)2 + jk
z(ti)2
(21)
Flow Eﬀort
Description The ﬂow eﬀort describes the continuity of the movement over time.
Low values describe ﬂuid movement, high values for restrained movement [19].

Computation For one joint k and a time window of length T, it is computed as:
Flowk(T) = 1
T
T
X
i=1
jk(ti)
(22)
For a set of joints K, we just aggregate the ﬂow eﬀorts of all joints k ∈K:
Flow(T) =
X
k∈K
αk · Flowk(T)
(23)
3.7
HMM Decoding with HTK
Description In previous works, we detailed how it is possible to implement a
gesture decoding system based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [23]. The
HMMs represent the gesture with a succession of states. At each state, local
statistics of the observations apply and both local statistics and state transition
probabilities are determined by training. Hence it is possible to identify the most
likely gesture corresponding to new observations and compute an approximation
of the current state, which reﬂects the progression in the executed gesture.
Computation The HMMs used for gesture recognition are trained using HTK
(Hidden Markov Model Toolkit [14]). Each input data frame contains the body
skeleton pose data. We can choose to describe this pose with the position of
skeleton nodes or the orientation of the bones. The gesture recognition is per-
formed by using a Viterbi algorithm. We used an implementation proposed by
the MLPack library [12]. The Viterbi algorithm is applied on the whole temporal
window of data stored in a MotionMachine Track data type.
3.8
DTW/Muller Gesture Recognition
This method of gesture recognition has been initially proposed by M¨uller [5]
who decomposes a movement into a set of relational characteristics between
joints of a skeleton, reﬂecting simple human body motions. Binary features are
then converted from one value per frame to one value per segment. Forty features
are extracted and can be interpreted as a summary of the mocap data under the
form of characteristics understandable from an anatomical point of view.
For each gesture to recognize, we hence know which characteristics are ac-
tive/inactive and their evolution over time. A motion template is deﬁned by
computing the mean of the relational features based on several executions of the
same gesture. This motion template hence highlights the zones where the rela-
tional features diﬀer between several occurrences of the same gesture (in black
in the Figure 13) and the zones where they are the same (in white in the Fig-
ure 13), which can be considered as a deﬁnition of the gesture to be recognized.
Zones in orange in Figure 13 are considered are zones of uncertainty.
The last step consists in measuring the similarity between the template X
of size K and the motion to be compared, Y of size L (with L > K) or a

Fig. 12. HMM-based gesture decoding of a dance step sample. Four HMMs for four
diﬀerent dance steps were trained with HTK. Each gesture was modeled with 10 states.
On the top of the Figure, we can see the decoded gesture and the most likely current
state. The cursor is pointing at a frame decoded as gesture 2 and state 5.
continuous movement sequence. A distance between the motions is measured
based on features outside of the uncertainty zone of the motion template.





D(k, l) = c(k, l) + min(Dk−1,l−1, Dk−2,l−2, Dk−1,l−2), k ∈[3 : K], l ∈[3 : L]
D(k, l) = c(k, l) + min(Dk−1,l−1, Dk−1,l−2), k ∈[1 : 2], l ∈[3 : L]
D(k, l) = c(k, l) + min(Dk−1,l−1, Dk−2,l−1), k ∈[3 : K], l ∈[1 : 2]
(24)
where c(k, l) is the normalized Manhattan distance:
c(k, l) =
1
I(k)
X
i∈I(k)
|X(k)i −Y (l)i|
(25)
I(k) is a vector containing the indices i of the features outside the uncertainty
zone. Figure 14 shows the distance between the motion template and a full
dance motion sequence (in blue) and intervals recognized as corresponding to
the motion template (highlighted in green).

Fig. 13. Example of the motion template of a dance sequence.
3.9
Wekinator
Wekinator is a standalone, user-facing software tool for applying supervised ma-
chine learning algorithms interactively to real-time applications. It was originally
developed by Fiebrink [25] to support system builders in analyzing data from
real-time audio and sensors, and in creating real-time systems that are data-
controlled. One of the most common applications of Wekinator to date has been
the creation of new digital musical instruments, in which the actions of a mu-
sician are captured using bespoke sensing interfaces (on-body sensors, sensors
within tangible objects, etc.) and mapped to control over sound synthesis.
Wekinator provides supervised learning algorithms for classiﬁcation (apply-
ing a category label to incoming data), regression (mapping incoming data to
a real number) and temporal modeling (identifying temporal patterns within a
stream of data). At this time, Wekinator’s algorithms for classiﬁcation include k-
nearest neighbors, support vector machines, decision trees, AdaBoost and Naive
Bayes; regression algorithms include multilayer perceptron neural networks and
linear and polynomial regression; and temporal modeling is achieved using dy-
namic time warping. These are general-purpose algorithms with wide applica-
bility to diverse types of sensor inputs and diverse modeling goals.
Whereas many popular machine learning toolkits (e.g., Weka) support users
in modeling a ﬁxed data set (e.g., comparing many algorithms or feature rep-
resentations on the same data set in order to choose the best conﬁguration),
Wekinator supports an interactive approach in which users are able and encour-
aged to change the training data set in order to alter model performance. For
instance, a user who wishes to build a gesture classiﬁer for a bespoke gesture
vocabulary can provide an initial training set consisting of a few examples of

Fig. 14. DTW-based gesture recognition in MotionMachine. The similarity score be-
tween the considered motion template (forward dance step) and a dance motion se-
quence is represented as a blue line, the threshold is represented as a purple line and
the time intervals recognized as similar to the motion template are shown in green.
each gesture type, train a model on the data set, and evaluate the model by
testing it on new gestures in real-time. If the model makes mistakes on a par-
ticular gesture, the user can augment the old training set with new examples of
that gesture, and retrain the model with a reasonable expectation that is per-
formance on the gesture will improve. The training data set eﬀectively becomes
a user interface through which users can communicate their intentions for the
trained model. This type of interactive editing of the training set is appropriate
in scenarios where the user is capable of generating or curating appropriate new
training examples. It can enable eﬃcient learning on small data sets, and it leaves
ﬂexibility for users to explore many variations of modeling goals as they discover
what can accurately be modeled. For instance, a user building a bespoke gesture
classiﬁer may iteratively increase or decrease the number of gesture classes until
he or she is satisﬁed with both the degree of model accuracy and the granularity
of classiﬁcation [26]. Such human-in-the-loop approaches to building machine
learning systems, also called interactive machine learning, are an active topic of
research within human-computer interaction.
Wekinator is a standalone application that does not perform feature extrac-
tion, sound synthesis, or animation itself. Rather, it receives streams of feature
vectors (e.g., raw or processed data from sensors) from any other application
via Open Sound Control (OSC) protocol [27]. OSC is a lightweight, UDP-based
communication protocol for sending data between applications, which may reside
on the same or diﬀerent physical machines.) When Wekinator has one or more

trained models, it also sends out model outputs to any other application using
OSC. For example, a simple webcam-based controller could be constructed with
the following pipeline: a C++ program using OpenCV extracts 10 computer vi-
sion features from a webcam and sends them to Wekinator via OSC; Wekinator
passes these features as inputs to a set of 3 neural networks, each of which com-
putes a real-valued output; these outputs are sent via OSC to the Max/MSP
sound synthesis environment where they drive 3 sound synthesis parameters.
Integrating Wekinator into MotionMachine Wekinator’s on-the-ﬂy, inter-
active machine learning capabilities were integrated with the MotionMachine
framework by implementing user interface control for machine learning within
the MotionMachine interface, and by implementing mechanisms for Wekinator
and MotionMachine to pass data and machine learning results to each other in
batch and real-time modes. This architecture, shown in Figure 15, provides a
light-weight coupling between MotionMachine and Wekinator; the two applica-
tions are run in parallel and communicate using OSC messages (which are sent
via UDP) for real-time control and the local ﬁle system for large data transfers.
Fig. 15. MoMa - Wekinator Integration architecture
The new user interface elements for interacting with Wekinator within Mo-
tionMachine are shown in Figure 16. Once a Track object has been ﬁlled with
mocap data in MotionMachine, a user can select any sub-sequence of the stream
and send it to Wekinator as a set of labeled training examples. The labels for
these examples are supplied using the integrated annotation system of Motion-
Machine. Training can be triggered from MotionMachine too.
Once Wekinator’s model(s) have been trained, they can be run in two modes.
To run in batch mode, the user ﬁrst employs the mouse to select a sub-sequence
(see Figure 16, ”Batch selection” label in red) of MotionMachine data, then
clicks on ”Send selected data for class”. The sub-sequence is sent to Wekinator
as a batch, and Wekinator computes model outputs for each example in this

Fig. 16. Integration with Wekinator
sub-sequence and returns the batch of outputs to Motion Machine where they
are plotted on screen (Figure 16). To run in real-time mode, the user can scrub
or play back the MotionMachine sequence in real-time. Each new data point is
sent from MotionMachine to Wekinator using OSC in real-time, and Wekina-
tor’s models compute their output values for this next data point. These output
values may be simultaneously sent to any other environment to drive soniﬁca-
tion, animation, or visualization from the real-time data. The MotionMachine
user interface also allows the user to reﬁne model behaviors by adding additional
training examples and re-train the model(s). The user can also delete models.
The integration of Wekinator with MotionMachine was accomplished through
a self-contained structure, and it’s design is inspired by the Proxy pattern and
Model-View-Controller design patterns (ref?). That structure is comprised of
three classes (Controller, View and Proxy), implemented in Motion Machine’s
Core library. The Proxy class implements all the communication protocol with
Wekinator over OSC through a UDP connection. This protocol, which is wrapped
in public methods of the class, implements operations such as sending atomic
data and bundles, setting the classiﬁers, and starting and stopping the essential
Wekinator operations (recording, training and running). The WekinatorView

class implements all the necessary UI controls for the user to interact with and
trigger commands that will action the protocol exchange with Wekinator. The
user is presented controls that enable the selection of data interactively through
drag operation, buttons to select the learning algorithms types (between Re-
gression, Classiﬁcation and DTW), selecting and sending data to classes. The
WekinatorController class contains the previous two classes as components, in-
tegrating them with the track and feature data from MotionMachine’s general
scene, and manipulating the proxy according to the user control events.
This loose coupling between Wekinator and MotionMachine will enable both
software projects to evolve independently without concern for breaking depen-
dencies, which is critical given that the two code bases are managed by organi-
zationally and geographically distinct teams. Furthermore, because MotionMa-
chine is coupled to Wekinator only through its WekinatorController class, the
implementation of this class could be easily changed to encapsulate native C++
machine learning code, or to reference other machine learning frameworks. Like-
wise, Wekinator’s mechanisms for exchanging data and control with an external
application now allow it to serve as a machine learning back-end for other user
interfaces, whether alternative user interfaces within MotionMachine or other
user-facing systems such as the RepoVizz online data repository. Another simi-
lar proxy implementation has been created with [28], a cloud based system for
storage and visualization of synchronous multi-modal, time-aligned data.
3.10
Parsing OpenSIM Data
A better knowledge of the various muscle activation patterns which occur while
subjects perform expressive movement or use gesture-based interface has the
potential to help interaction designers and choreographers improving the er-
gonomics of their creations [29]. It is now possible to infer such muscle acti-
vation patterns from a set of captured kinematic trajectories using bio-medical
simulation techniques. OpenSim9 oﬀers an implementation of these techniques.
By analyzing motion captured data, OpenSim outputs the simulated time-
varying values for the toque moment exerted at each joint and muscle activation
data. The torque moment exerted at a joint is a measure of the quantity of
torsion resulting from the weight of the body and the dynamic of the movement.
The magnitude of the torque is strictly related to the quantity of the eﬀort which
is put by the muscles connected to the joint.
The muscle activation is a measure of the energy consumed by a subject to
contract the muscle. It can be used to predict muscle strain and fatigue. The
software developed so far focuses on the visualization of the torque moment at
each joint. The visualization of muscle activation is planned for future work.
OpenSim and MotionMachine address two diﬀerent tasks: bio-mechanical
simulation vs. visualization of motion capture data. Motion Machine is tuned
to displays kinematic information of entities along trajectories described using 3
9 https://simtk.org/home/opensim

degrees of freedom in an absolute Cartesian space. As such, a conversion of the
data format provided by OpenSim is needed (See Figure 17).
Markers'
Posi4on'
Mo4on'
Capture'
Biomechanical'
Simula4on'
(OpenSim)'
Torques'+'
Muscles'
Ac4va4on'
Conversion'
Bone'4ps'
Absolute'
Posi4on'
Mo4on'
Visualiza4on'
(Mo4on'Machine)'
Fig. 17. The conversion process from OpenSim to MotionMachine.
The conversion software developed for this module performs the conversion
through two main steps. First, it converts the motion model of OpenSim (set of
interconnected joints) into a hierarchical bone structure. Second, it converts the
motion information of OpenSim, which is expressed as rotation of joints around
speciﬁc axes, into absolute movement of bone tips in the Cartesian space.
One of the most challenging parts of the development consisted of parsing the
skeletal description system used by OpenSim. OpenSim associates each joint to
a set of coordinates. Each coordinate is then associated to a rotational or a trans-
lational transformation. Each rotation simulates one of the degrees of freedom of
a joint. The translations are used to improve the simulation of some joints (such
as the knees) where two connected bones shift on each other while rotating. To
comply with the needs of Motion Machine, the conversion process approximate
the translation to a ﬁxed averaged value and accumulates the diﬀerent rotational
components into a single quaternion associated to a bone.
Finally, the software performs some minor tasks, such as the alignment of the
coordinate systems and the creation of a ﬁle describing the mapping between
the coordinate names and the associated joint, which is later needed to represent
the joint moments as visual cues to the joints.
4
Mapping and Synthesis
In this Section, we give an overview of the audiovisual use cases that have been
developed during the project. It covers four scenarios grouped into two cate-
gories: visualization and soniﬁcation works. The extend of the use cases illus-
trates the versatility and intuitiveness of the environment that we have devel-
oped.
4.1
Visualization
Bloom MotionMachine already had a UI that displays the skeleton and the
curves of the features. A new paradigm was to be found to propose something
interesting and aside of the scientiﬁc approach. Based on former studies (har-
monic plants and followers10), the idea of seeds ﬂoating in a volume around the
10 http://lab.frankiezafe.org

skeleton quickly arouse. Each seed is placed randomly in the space and moves
slowly, generally towards the center of the space, where the skeleton tends to
be. When a seed enters the attraction radius of a skeleton’s node, it starts to
accelerate towards it (pull phase). When it is close enough, the node pushes the
seed away (push phase). By a careful tuning of the pull and push radius, the
seed is never stuck around a node, and keeps moving around the whole skeleton.
The model has many advantages:
– autonomous: seeds are not depending on a skeleton;
– rich paradigm: seeds can grow into many forms, perfect for OOP;
– fast to setup: points moving in a 3d space is easy to monitor.
BNode structure The approach taken from the start was to work outside of
the main MotionMachine environment, that already contains a set of methods
to draw. A ofxMoMa add-on has been built to make all the important classes
accessible in a standard openFrameworks project. To make nodes information
accessible to the seeds, we have implemented a BNode structure containing:
– position (ofVec3f );
– orientation (ofQuaternion);
– relation to parent BNode (if some);
– relations to BNode children;
– features - for each of them:
• a Boolean if the feature is enabled;
• one or several ﬂoat(s) for the feature value(s).
BNodes are updated at each update by a specialized class called BNodeMan-
ager. The manager extracts the relevant info from the track and other objects
(TimedMat mainly) and updates the BNode. All the BNodes are stored in a pivot
structure shared upon all the objects, called SeedExchange. Therefore, when a
Seed is created, it receives a pointer to the SeedExchange structure and is able
to read the BNodes parameters. So we make them accessible through the nodes.
Normalization Normalization is a key point when you want to use data to con-
trol other data. Typically, the possible range is scaled between 0 and 1. The
feature Postural Load (cf. Subsection 3.3) was one of the ﬁrst to be ready. It was
computed on the node’s level, making it a perfect candidate to feed the seeds.
The main issue was that it was not normalised. A generic FeatureNormaliser,
separated from the other features availble, has been developped for that purpose.
The results of the normaliser are available in the BNodes.
Attaching the seed The ﬁrst problem was where to stop the seed? Some 3d
geometry has been required to solve this issue. At each frame, the seed knows
which nodes inﬂuence it. Using the same information, an attach point can be
processed. The idea was to attach it as close as possible from its actual position,
meaning that if it is above a bone (a segment between 2 BNode), the attachment
must be located between them. The procedure deals with 2 diﬀerent cases:

– seed is outside the bone: the attach point equal to the closest BNode;
– seed is above the bone: the attach point between start and end of the bone.
The second problem was how and when to stop the seed? Deciding when
to attach the seed it is a not trivial. A parameter satisfaction in each seed is
a container that rises or shrinks. This parameter is bounded by an arbitrary
minimum and maximum. As it rises or shrinks continuously and gradually, it
can be used as a dampener and delay the actions by waiting for it to reach
one of the bounds. Because we wanted the satisfaction to behave diﬀerently
depending on the kind of seed, we needed a way to describe how the seed reacts
to the feature and how much of satisfaction is added or removed at each update.
Aﬃnity The way satisfaction evolves is managed by this class. An aﬃnity in-
stance represents the reaction to a value. It can be attached to any kind of
normalized value. It has few parameters and a main method called process():
– minimum and maximum input value, each of them between 0 and 1, allowing
to narrow the range of response;
– low and high response, representing the normalised output when value is high
(at maximum or above) and when it is low (minimum or below), between -1
and 1;
– increase and decrease, two multipliers applied on low and high responses,
that represent the amount of satisfaction to add, both being above 0 but not
bounded to 1;
– power allowing to curve the response range and increase the response at the
bounds;
– and other minor parameters.
This concept is crucial. It allows to deﬁne at a high level and in a centralised
way the reactions of the seeds in constant interaction with nodes.
Life cycle
– Rooting: When satisfaction reaches the maximum for the ﬁrst time, the at-
tachment process happens. At that moment, its behaviour changes radically.
It stops moving freely and stays close to the skeleton and follows the evolu-
tion feature of closest BNode;
– Grow and decay: The satisfaction is used to decide when to add a new part
to the plant (growing process) or when to remove a part (decay process).
This part of the life cycle does not happen in the Seed class and is managed
in the sub-classes.
– Death: If the feature is perceived as too negative by the seed, it will even-
tually die and detach from the skeleton. The death process has not been
ﬁnished in the current version of the code, due to time constraints.

Weed and salpetre Two sub-classes of Seed have been implemented: Weed (green
leaves) and Salpetre (a mycelium and white corollas). Each of these sub-classes
have a diﬀerent Aﬃnity conﬁguration related to Postural Load feature. Weed
likes the Postural Load to be high. Meaning that, when the Postural Load of the
closest BNode is high, the satisfaction of the plant increases. Salpetre has the
opposite reaction. When the Postural Load is low, its satisfaction increases.
As they both feed on the same feature, the importance of the Aﬃnity con-
ﬁguration is clearly highlighted. Due to the feature process, Salpetre tends to
appear at the extremities of the skeleton, where it is generally low, and weed
concentrates around the hips where it is generally high.
Graphics The graphical objects include a damping eﬀect, motion being as im-
portant as pure shape part in the aesthetics. We have implemented a base class
that groups all required parameters such as positions, color and a simple phys-
ical model. This base object is called Position. The Salpetre’s mycelium is a
growing tree of positions, rendered as transparent lines. The Weed’s leaves re-
quire a more complex object. They both use Branch objects, that inherits from
Position. Branches render 4 points that describe the corners of a quad. UV’s
coordinates can be set on each of these points, enabling texturing.
Distributed Eﬀort When analyzing a huge amount of high-dimensionality
data, scientists need visualization techniques which can present the data in a
way that foster exploration. In traditional exploratory data analysis, scientists
rely of static charts in order to have visual cues about the nature of the data.
Such visualization techniques are inappropriate for data like real-time streams
of sensor data. In the biomechanical simulation context, the data is a set of
animation curves reporting the value of torque moments applied at each joint of
the skeleton, as well as information about the activation of muscles.
The software developed in this module focuses on the visualization of torque
moments at joints. The information about a torque moment is characterized
by a spatial information (on which joint the moment is exerted), a temporal
information (at which time the moment is exerted), and a scalar information
which is the magnitude of the moment.
The visualization technique represents the amount of torque exerted on each
joint as a 2D circular semi-transparent disk displayed using the billboard tech-
nique over each joint. The magnitude of the torque moment modulates both the
transparency and the size of the disk. The modulation of the disk area guaran-
tees for the perception of the magnitude. The modulation of the transparency
helps the perception of localized eﬀort when the cue of several moments overlap
in the screen. Figure 18 shows a screenshot.
This visualization technique helps the data analyzer to quickly spot concen-
trations and peaks of muscular eﬀort in all areas of the body at a glance. At
its maximum extent, the disk has a maximum ﬁxed size and no transparency
(full opacity). The maximum extent of the disk is reached when the magnitude
reaches, or overtake, a value of three times the standard deviation of the signal

Fig. 18. A screen shot of the torque moments visualization in Motion Machine.
over the whole animation. The magnitude is linearly mapped to the transparency
factor (in the range [0, 1]) and to the area of the disk. As the magnitude of the
moment decreases, the transparency is brought to 1 and the disk area to 0. Both
eﬀects bring the disk to invisibility.
The implementation allows for an interactive exploration of the information.
It is possible to cycle through the joints and (de)activate the visualization of the
visual cue (the disk) as well as the whole animation curve for that joint. It is also
possible to toggle the visualization of the disks for all joints at once. However, in
order to avoid cluttering the screen with too much information, the animation
curve is visualized only for the currently selected joint. As a commodity, it is also
possible to save the list of joints for which the moment torque cue is visualized,
and re-load it in further analysis sessions.
4.2
Soniﬁcation
CataRT Soniﬁcation of high-level features extracted from gestural data opens
the way for an inﬁnity of possibilities in terms of mapping strategies and choice
of sound synthesis engines. However one can recognize two main trends in the use
of soniﬁcation: as an end result in the ﬁeld of art installations or performances
and as a feedback in the even broader ﬁeld of human-computer interaction. In
our case, we allowed ourselves the freedom to go in the artistic direction, which
at ﬁrst seems tentative but leaves us a wide choice and few guidelines.
Depending on the type of gestures to sonify, one can favour one type of
feature and one type of sound category. As there is no science behind, all the
mappings between the gesture and the sound will inevitably be subjective and
highly dependent on the material that is being used. Hence, by thinking in terms
of what is available and what makes sense, one can start making connections
between sounds and gestures.

We decided to work mostly with Taijiquan gestures – recorded previously
in the interest of working with the Sphereness feature (see Section 3.3). These
recordings where our best candidates for soniﬁcation as they are smooth, slow
and sometimes reveal symmetrical patterns. These attributes are convenient as
they are revealed in the soniﬁcation more clearly than noisy and quirky input
signals. As a criteria for success, we aim at making the link between the gesture
and the sound obvious and plausible for the observer/listener.
From this gestural data, we have tried several sound synthesis engines. One
that drew our attention the most is the the corpus-based concatenative sound
synthesis engine CaraRT provided as a library for Max/MSP by the IMTR team
of the Ircam [30]. The principle of Corpus-based sound synthesis is the following:
one creates a corpus of source sounds, picked up from sound samples of diﬀerent
durations. The engine segments the sound samples into units, computes some
audio features such as the fundamental frequency, energy, periodicity and the
ﬁrst-order autocorrelation coeﬃcient that describes the spectral tilt [30]. The
CataRT GUI displays a two dimensional matrix in which one can place the
sound units according to any combination of the four sound features mentioned
above. Once two features have been assigned to the x and y axis one can see the
sound units scattered as coloured circles in the matrix (see ﬁgure 19).
Fig. 19. CataRT sound containers for Motion Machine
CatarRT allows to retrieve these sound units by navigating in the sound
containers. A nearest neighbor algorithm ﬁnds the closest circle that is on one
trajectory and plays back the corresponding sound unit. The most basic tool
to navigate in these containers is the mouse. Hence, the xy coordinates of the
cursor are mapped onto the xy axis of the matrix. A basic gestural control using
the body position can be easily implemented: the xy position of the body center
of mass can be directly mapped to the xy axis of the matrix.

However, a more meaningful approach would be to map gesture features and
sound features which have higher level connections to our perception. Hence, we
have chosen the x-axis of the sound matrix to represent the periodicity dimension
and the y-axis the energy dimension. In terms of gesture features, we use the
Periodicity feature (see Section 3.2) to control the sound periodicity and the
Sphereness feature (Section 3.3) to control the energy of the sound. The periodic
patterns of the gestures have a straight correlation with the periodicity of the
sound. The periodicity of the sound signal ranges from periodic signals such
as pure sine waves to aperiodic signals which are often percussive and noisy.
Finally, the y-axis of the sound matrix, attributed to the energy of the signal is
controlled by the Sphereness feature.
The phenomenon is as described here: as the body limbs contract themselves
in a smaller spherical volume, the sonic energy gets fainter and on the contrary,
as the limbs open themselves and expands in the physical space, the sonic energy
gets larger. This mapping and the resulting soniﬁcation yet sounds quite myste-
rious, grainy but quiet and have a certain smoothness thanks to the ﬂuidity of
the Tai chi gestures. The sounds following closely the sequence of movements,
stimulate both visual and sonic modalities into a uniﬁed experience after several
seconds of observation and listening. Highly dependent on the material used,
namely the sound samples and the gestural data, the outcome is encouraging in
pursuing more explorations of gesture to sound mappings using this approach.
Blotar Blotar is a physical modeling synthesizer that is part of PeRColate,
an open-source distribution containing a set of synthesis and signal processing
algorithms for Max/MSP [31] based oﬀthe Synthesis Toolkit [32]. We used a
Blotar in a Max/MSP patch bound to Wekinator, which was itself bound to our
application, all through OSC, to build a realtime soniﬁcation setup that could
provide meaningful aural feedback for the body motion data (see Figure 20).
We used Wekinator to learn from the ﬂuctuations of the Sphereness feature
extracted from the data (see Section 3.3). Our graphical user interface allows the
user to select variable sized segments from the plotting and send it to diﬀerent
classiﬁers in Wekinator. For instance, by selecting the peaks and troughs in the
plot, the user is selecting data that corresponds to the extremes of the range
of movement that is achieved between arms-closed and arms-wide-open stances.
We fed this data to Wekinator as training samples for nine regression models,
which were mapped to nine parameters of the Blotar synthesizer. A previous
study of the control space of Blotar had revealed its immense control and sound
spaces, and we chose to parameterise it to sound thin and ﬂuty, or metallic and
more energetic. We achieved an interesting result with regression. The troughs
in the Sphereness plot were mapped to the ﬂuty sound parameters, while the
peaks where mapped to the distorted sound parameters. The ﬁnal result could
be experienced as a gradual morphing between these two diﬀerent sounds.

Fig. 20. Sphereness - Blotar - Wekinator setup
5
Conclusion
In this work, we have adressed the issue of fast prototyping of new audiovisual
instruments as well as the implementation of new features and the interconnec-
tion with external modules using the MotionMachine framework as a common
backbone. This project enabled us to validate and further reﬁne the core of the
framework as well as to further expand its capabilities by implementing new
features (balance, weight, periodicity, etc.), enabling the parsing of data coming
from OpenSim and its visualization, and implementing the communication of
the MotionMachine framework with external modules such as Wekinator. The
whole framework and the approach of using it for fast prototyping was ﬁnally
tested and validated on speciﬁc use cases, each one corresponding to diﬀerent
constraints (realtime or oﬄine, analysis purposes vs interactive audiovisual in-
strument, etc.). The validation of the framework by a group of people outside
of the original development team enabled us to release a stable version of the
framework and to disseminate it in the open source community.
Further work will include the addition of new motion analysis features in the
platform, as well as its use and validation in longer term projects and use cases.
