Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
Luis A. P´erez Rey * 1 Vlado Menkovski * 1 Jacobus W. Portegies * 1
Abstract
A standard Variational Autoencoder, with a Eu-
clidean latent space, is structurally incapable
of capturing topological properties of certain
datasets.
To remove topological obstructions,
we introduce Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
with arbitrary manifolds as a latent space. A
Diffusion Variational Autoencoder uses transition
kernels of Brownian motion on the manifold. In
particular, it uses properties of the Brownian mo-
tion to implement the reparametrization trick and
fast approximations to the KL divergence.
We show that the Diffusion Variational Autoen-
coder is capable of capturing topological prop-
erties of synthetic datasets.
Additionally, we
train MNIST on spheres, tori, projective spaces,
SO(3), and a torus embedded in R3. Although a
natural dataset like MNIST does not have latent
variables with a clear-cut topological structure,
training it on a manifold can still highlight topo-
logical and geometrical properties.
1. Introduction
A large part of unsupervised learning is devoted to the ex-
traction of meaningful latent factors that explain a certain
data set. The terminology around Variational Autoencoders
suggests that they are a good tool for this task.
A Variational Autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014) consists of a “latent space” Z (of-
ten just Euclidean space), a probability measure PZ on Z,
an encoder from the data space X to Z and a decoder from
Z to X. The term “latent space” suggests that an element
in z captures semantic information about its decoded data
point x = Dec(z). But is this interpretation actually war-
ranted? Especially considering that in practice, a Variational
Autoencoder is often trained without any knowledge about
*Equal contribution
1Eindhoven University of Technol-
ogy, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Correspondence to: Luis

Jacobus W. Portegies

Figure 1. MNIST trained on a sphere and on a torus
an underlying generative process. The only available in-
formation is the dataset itself. Nonetheless, one may train
a Variational Autoencoder with any “latent space” Z and
purely based on this terminology, one could be tempted
to think of elements in Z as latent variables and factors
explaining the data.
Certainly, there is a heuristic argument that gives a partial
justiﬁcation of this interpretation. The starting point and
guiding principle is that of Occam’s razor, that such latent
factors might arise from the construction of simple, low-
complexity models that explain the data (Portegies, 2018).
Strict formalizations of Occam’s razor exist, through Kol-
mogorov complexity and inductive inference (Solomonoff,
1964; Schmidhuber, 1997), but are often computationally
intractable. A more practical approach leads to the principle
of minimum description length (Rissanen, 1978; Hinton &
Zemel, 1994) and variational inference (Honkela & Valpola,
2004).
From a different angle, part of the interpretation as latent
space is warranted by the loss function of the Variational
Autoencoder, which stimulates a continuous dependence
between the latent variables and the corresponding data
points. Close-by points in data space should also be close-by
in latent space. This suggests that a Variational Autoencoder
could capture topological and geometrical properties of a
data set.
However, a standard Variational Autoencoder (with a Eu-
clidean latent space) is at times structurally incapable of
arXiv:1901.08991v2  [cs.LG]  28 Mar 2019

Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
accurately capturing topological properties of a data set.
Take for example the case of a spinning object placed on
a turntable and being recorded by a camera from a ﬁxed
position. The data set for this example is the collection
of all frames. The true latent factor is the angle of the
turntable. However, the space of angles is topologically and
geometrically different from Euclidean space. In an extreme
example, if we train a Variational Autoencoder with a one-
dimensional latent space on the pictures from the object on
the turntable, there will be pictures taken from almost the
same angle ending up at completely different parts of the
latent space.
This phenomenon has been called manifold mismatch
(Davidson et al., 2018; Falorsi et al., 2018). To match the
latent space with the data structure, Davidson et al. im-
plemented spheres as latent spaces, whereas Falorsi et al.
implemented the special orthogonal group SO(3).
As further examples of datasets with topologically nontrivial
latent factors, we can think of many translations of the same
periodic picture, where the translation is the latent variable,
or many pictures of the same object which has been rotated
arbitrarily. In these cases, there are still clear latent variables,
but their topological and geometrical structure is neither that
of Euclidean space nor that of a sphere, but rather that of a
torus and that of the SO(3) respectively.
To address the problem of manifold mismatch, we devel-
oped the Diffusion Variational Autoencoder (∆VAE) which
allows for an arbitrary manifold as a latent space. Our im-
plementation includes a version of the reparametrization
trick, and a fast approximation of the evaluation of the KL
divergence in the loss.
We implemented ∆VAEs with latent spaces of d-
dimensional spheres, a two-dimensional ﬂat torus, an em-
bedded torus in R3, the special orthogonal group SO(3)
and the real projective spaces RPd.
We trained a synthetic data set of translated images on a
ﬂat torus. Our results show that the ∆VAE can capture the
topological properties of the data. We further observed that
the success rate of the ∆VAE in capturing global topological
properties depends on the weight of higher Fourier com-
ponents in the image. In data sets with more pronounced
lower Fourier components the ∆VAE is more successful in
capturing the topology.
Mainly as a proof of concept, we trained on MNIST using
the manifolds mentioned above.
2. Related work
Our work originated out of the search for algorithms that
ﬁnd semantically meaningful latent factors of data. The use
of VAEs and their extensions to this end has mostly taken
place in the context of disentanglement of latent factors
(Higgins et al., 2017; 2018; Burgess et al., 2018). Examples
of extensions that aim at disentangling latent factors are the
β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017), the factor-VAE (Kim & Mnih,
2018), the β-TCVAE (Chen et al., 2018) and the DIP-VAE
(Kumar et al., 2018).
However, the examples in the introduction already show that
in some situations, the topological structure of the latent
space makes it practically impossible to disentangle latent
factors. The latent factors are inherently, topologically en-
tangled: in the case of a 3d rotation of an object, one cannot
assign globally linearly independent angles of rotation.
Still, it is exactly global topological properties that we feel
a VAE has a chance of capturing. What do we mean by
this? One instance of ‘capturing’ topological structure is
when the encoder and decoder of the VAE provide bijective,
continuous maps between data and latent space, also called
homeomorphic auto-encoding (Falorsi et al., 2018; de Haan
& Falorsi, 2018). This can only be done when the latent
space has a particular topological structure, for instance that
of a particular manifold.
One of the main challenges when implementing a mani-
fold as a latent space is the design of the reparametrization
trick. In (Davidson et al., 2018), a VAE was implemented
with a hyperspherical latent space. To our understanding,
they implemented a reparametrization function which was
discontinuous; see also Section 3.5 below.
If a manifold has the additional structure of a Lie group, this
structure allows for a more straightforward implementation
of the reparametrization trick (Falorsi et al., 2018). In our
work, we do not assume the additional structure of a Lie
group, but develop a reparametrization trick that works for
general submanifolds of Euclidean space, and therefore by
the Whitney (respectively Nash) embedding theorem, for
general closed (Riemannian) manifolds.
The method that we use has similarities with the approach
of Hamiltonian Variational Inference (Salimans et al., 2015).
Moreover, the implementation of a manifold as a latent
space can be seen as enabling a particular, informative,
prior distribution. In that sense, our work relates to (Dilok-
thanakul et al., 2016; Tomczak & Welling, 2017). The prior
distribution we implement is very degenerate, in that it is
does not assign weight to points outside of the manifold.
There are also other ways to implement approximate
Bayesian inference on Riemannian manifolds. For instance,
Liu and Zhu adapted the Stein variational gradient method
to enable training on a Riemannian manifold (Liu & Zhu,
2017). However, their proposed method is rather expensive
computationally.
The family of approximate posteriors that we implement is a

Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
direct generalization of the standard choice for a Euclidean
VAE. Indeed, the Gaussian distributions are solutions to the
heat equations, i.e. they are transition kernels of Brownian
motion. One may want to increase the ﬂexibility of the
family of approximate posterior distributions, for instance
by applying normalizing ﬂows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015;
Kingma et al., 2016; Gemici et al., 2016).
3. Methods
3.1. Variational autoencoders
A VAE has generally the following ingredients:
• a latent space Z,
• a prior probability distribution PZ on Z,
• a
family
of
encoder
distributions
Qα
Z
on
Z,
parametrized by α in a parameter space A,
• a family of decoder distributions Pβ
X on data space
X, parametrized by β in a parameter space B; in the
usual setup, and in our paper, in fact B corresponds to
the data space, and refers to the mean of a Gaussian
distribution with identity covariance,
• an encoder neural network α which maps from data
space X to the parameter space A,
• a decoder neural network β which maps from latent
space Z to parameter space B.
The weights of these neural networks are optimized as to
minimize the negated evidence lower bound (ELBO)
L(x) = −Ez∼Qα(x)
Z
h
log pβ(z)
X
(x)
i
+ DKL

Qα(x)
Z
||PZ

.
The ﬁrst term is called reconstruction error (RE); up to
additive and multiplicative constants it equals the mean
squared error (MSE). The second term is called the KL-loss.
In a very common implementation, both latent space Z and
data space X are Euclidean, and the families of decoder
and encoder distributions are multivariate Gaussian. The
encoder and decoder networks then assign to a datapoint or
a latent variable a mean and a variance respectively.
When we implement Z as a Riemannian manifold, we need
to ﬁnd an appropriate prior distribution, for which we will
choose the normalized Riemannian volume measure, a fam-
ily of encoder distributions Qα
Z, for which we will take
transition kernels of Brownian motion, and an encoder net-
work mapping to the correct parameters.
3.2. Brownian motion on a Riemannian manifold
We will brieﬂy discuss Brownian motion on a Riemannian
manifold, recommending lecture notes by Hsu (Hsu, 2008)
as a more extensive introduction.
In the paper, we always assume that Z is a smooth Rieman-
nian submanifold of Euclidean space, which is closed, i.e.
it is compact and has no boundary.
There are many different, equivalent deﬁnitions of Brownian
motion. We present here the deﬁnition that is closest to our
eventual approximation and implementation.
ϵ1
ϵ2
ϵ3
ϵ4
z
z1
z2
z3
z4
Z
Figure 2. Random walk on a (one-dimensional) submanifold Z of
R2, with time step τ = 1.
We will construct Brownian motion out of random walks
on a manifold. We ﬁrst ﬁx a small time step τ > 0. We
will imagine a particle, jumping from point to point on the
manifold after each time step, see also Fig. 2. It will start
off at a point z ∈Z. We describe the ﬁrst jump, after
which the process just repeats. After time τ, the particle
makes a random jump √τϵ1 from its current position, into
the surrounding space, where ϵ1 is distributed according
to a radially symmetric distribution in Rn with identity
covariance matrix. The position of the particle after the
jump, z + √τϵ1, will therefore in general not be on the
manifold, so we project the particle back: The particle’s
new position will be
z1 = P(z + √τϵ1)
where the closest-point-projection P : Rn →Z assigns
to every point x ∈Rn the point in Z that is closest
to x.
After another time τ > 0 the particle makes a
new, independent, jump ϵ2 according to the same radi-
ally symmetric distribution, and its new position will be
z2 = P(P(z + √τϵ1) + √τϵ2). This process just repeats.
Key to this construction, and also to our implementation,
is the projection map P. It has nice properties, that follow
from general theory of smooth manifolds. In particular,
P(x) smoothly depends on x, as long as x is not too far
away from Z.
This way, for τ > 0 ﬁxed, we have constructed a random
walk, a random path on the manifold. We can think of this
path as a discretized version of Brownian motion. Let now
τN be a sequence converging to 0 as N →∞. For ﬁxed

Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
N ∈N, we can construct a random walk with time step τN,
and get a random path W N : [0, ∞) →Z.
The random paths W N converge as N →∞to a random
path W (in distribution). This random path W is called
Brownian motion. The convergence statement can be made
precise by for instance combining powerful, general results
by (Jørgensen, 1975) with standard facts from Riemannian
geometry. But, because Riemannian manifolds are locally,
i.e. when you zoom in far enough, very similar to Euclidean
space, the convergence result essentially comes down to the
central limit theorem and its upgraded version, Donsker’s
invariance theorem.
In fact, W can be interpreted as a Markov process, and even
as a diffusion process. If A is a subset of Z, the probability
that the Brownian motion W(t) started at z is in the set A at
time t is measured by a probability measure Qt,z
Z applied to
the set A. We denote the density of this measure with respect
to the standard Riemannian volume measure by qZ(t; z, ·).
The function qZ is sometimes referred to as the heat kernel.
Let us close this subsection with an alternative description
of the function qZ. It is also characterized by the fact that
for every function u0 : Z →R, the solution to the partial
differential equation
(
∂tu = 1
2∆u
on (0, ∞) × Z
u(t = 0, ·) = u0
on Z
is given by
u(t, z) =
Z
Z
u0(y)qZ(t; z, y)dy.
3.3. Riemannian manifold as latent space
A ∆VAE is a VAE with a Riemannian submanifold of Eu-
clidean space as a latent space, and the transition probability
measures of Brownian motion Qt,z
Z as a parametric family
of encoder distributions. We propose the uniform distri-
bution for PZ, which is the normalized standard measure
on a Riemannian manifold (although the choice of prior
distribution could easily be generalized).
As in the standard VAE, we then implement functions z :
X →Z and t : X →(0, ∞) as neural networks.
3.4. ELBO
We optimize the weights in the network, aiming to minimize
the average loss for the loss function
−Ez∼Qt(x),z(x)
Z
h
log pβ(z)
X
(x)
i
+ DKL

Qt(x),z(x)
Z
∥PZ

.
The ﬁrst integral can often only be approached by sampling,
and in that case it is often advantageous to perform a change
of variables, commonly known as the reparametrization
trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014).
3.5. Reparametrization trick
The reparametrization trick requires a space Γ of noise
variables, distributed according to PΓ, and a function g :
Γ × (0, ∞) × Z such that g(γ, t, z) is approximated accord-
ing to Qt,z
Z .
The following example illustrates that ﬁnding such a func-
tion g can be a nontrivial task, even for a relatively simple
case where Z = S2, the two-dimensional unit sphere in
R3. In an attempt to construct a random variable distributed
according to Qt,z
S2, we may ﬁrst sample a random tangent
vector γ at the south pole according to an appropriate distri-
bution, and then walk along the great circle in that direction
for a distance according to the length of the vector. In other
words, the new point is obtained from applying the exponen-
tial map at the south pole to the random sample. Next, we
compose with a rotation of the sphere that brings the south
pole to the point z on the sphere. More precisely, we select
a map of rotations T : S2 →SO(3) such that every y ∈S2
is the image of the south pole under the rotation T(y). Then,
a proposed reparametrization g is given by
g(γ, z) = T(z)

expSP(γ)

.
In some sense, this reparametrization works: One could ﬁnd
a distribution PΓ on the tangent space at the south pole such
that the distribution of g(γ, z) is Qt,z
S2. However, for topo-
logical reasons, in particular by the hairy ball theorem, it is
impossible to ﬁnd a continuous map T with this property.
3.6. Approximate reparametrization by random walk
Instead, we construct an approximate reparametrization map
by approximating Brownian motion by a random walk, sim-
ilar to how we deﬁned it in this paper. Starting from a point
z on the manifold, we set a random step in ambient space
Rn. We then project back to the manifold and repeat: we
take a new step and project back to the manifold. In total,
we take N steps, see Fig. 2.
We deﬁne the function g : EN × (0, ∞) × Z →Z by
g(ϵ1, . . . , ϵN, t, z) =
P

· · · P

P

z +
q
t
N ϵ1

+
q
t
N ϵ2

· · · +
q
t
N ϵN

.
If we take ϵ1, . . . , ϵN as i.i.d. random variables, distributed
according to a radially symmetric distribution, then y =
g(ϵ1, . . . , ϵN, z) is approximately distributed as a random
variable with density qZ(t; z, ·). This approximation is very
accurate for small times t, even for small values of N, if we
take ϵ1, . . . , ϵN approximately Gaussian. The observation
that for small times, the diffusion kernel qZ is approximately
Gaussian, is also very helpful in approximating the KL term
in the loss.

Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
3.7. Approximation of the KL-divergence
Unlike the standard VAE, or the hyperspherical VAE with
the Von-Mises distribution, the KL-term cannot be com-
puted exactly for the ∆VAE. There are several techniques
one could use to get, nonetheless, a good approximation of
the KL divergence. We have implemented an asymptotic
approximation, which we will describe ﬁrst.
ASYMPTOTIC APPROXIMATION
We can use short-term asymptotics, i.e. a parametrix expan-
sion, of the heat kernel on Riemannian manifolds to obtain
asymptotic expansions of the entropy.
For a d-dimensional sphere of radius R, the scalar curvature
Sc equals d(d −1)/R2. By using a parametrix expansion
of the heat kernel, see for instance (Zhao & Song, 2017),
we ﬁnd that
qSd(t; z, y) =
1
(2πt)d/2 exp

−r2
2t

×

r
sin r
 d−1
2

1 + Sc t
8dr2 [3 −d + (d −1)r2 + (d −3)r cot r] + O(t2)

where r is the geodesic distance between y and z.
In Appendix B, we derive the following asymptotic behavior
for the KL divergence for arbitrary Riemannian manifolds
DKL(Qt,z∥PZ) =
Z
Z
qZ(t; z, y) log qZ(t; z, y)dy
+ log Vol(Z)
= −d
2 log(2πt) −d
2 + log Vol(Z)
+ 1
4Sc t + o(t).
In our implementation, we restrict t so that it cannot become
too large, thus ensuring a certain accuracy of the asymptotic
expansion.
NUMERICAL APPROXIMATION AND INTEGRATION
For some manifolds such as spheres or ﬂat tori, exact so-
lutions to the heat kernel are available, usually in terms
of inﬁnite series and special functions. For other, small-
dimensional, Riemannian manifolds, the heat kernel may
be accurately computed numerically. In both cases, the inte-
gration in the KL-term may be performed numerically. If
the dimensionality of the underlying manifold gets to large,
one may have to resort to Monte Carlo approximation of the
integral.
4. Experiments
We have implemented ∆VAEs with latent spaces of d-
dimensional spheres, a ﬂat two-dimensional torus, a torus
embedded in R3, the SO(3) and real projective spaces RPd.
For all our experiments we used multi-layer perceptrons for
the encoder and decoder with three and two hidden layers
respectively. Recall that the encoder needs to produce both
a point z on the manifold and a time t for the transition
kernel. These functions share all layers, except for the ﬁnal
step where we project, with the projection map P, from the
last hidden layer to the manifold to get z, and use an output
layer with a tanh activation function to obtain t.
The encoder and decoder are connected by a sampling layer,
in which we approximate sampling from the transition ker-
nel of Brownian motion according to the reparametrization
trick described in Section 3.6.
4.1. ∆VAEs for MNIST
We then trained ∆VAEs on MNIST. We show the manifolds
as latent space with encoded MNIST digits in Figs. 1 and 3.
When MNIST is trained on different latent spaces, different
adjacency structures between digits may become apparent,
providing topological information.
Figure 3. Latent space representation of MNIST for SO(3) ∼=
RP3 (top-left), RP2 (bottom-left), ﬂat torus (top-right), and R3
(bottom-right). The ﬂat torus is represented as a square with peri-
odic boundary conditions. The projective spaces are represented
by a 3- and 2-dimensional ball respectively, for which every point
on the boundary is identiﬁed with its reﬂection through the center.
The effect of this identiﬁcation can be seen, since the same digits
that map close to a point on the boundary also map close to the
reﬂected point.

Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
Table 1. Numerical results for ∆VAEs trained on (non-binarized) MNIST. The values indicate mean and standard deviation over 10 runs.
The columns represent the (data-averaged) log-likelihood estimate (LL), Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), KL-divergence (KL) and mean
squared error (MSE).
MANIFOLD
LL
ELBO
KL
MSE (×10−2)
S2
-738.76±0.08
-739.25±0.09
5.16±0.13
3.48±0.05
EMBEDDED TORUS
-738.58±0.08
-740.97±0.10
6.57±0.01
3.55±0.02
FLAT TORUS
-738.97±0.08
-741.37±0.11
6.42±0.00
3.70±0.02
RP3
-738.81±0.02
-739.32±0.03
5.65±0.08
3.37±0.02
RP2
-740.17±0.35
-741.19±0.53
3.15±0.56
4.49±0.02
R3
-738.27±0.03
-738.85±0.04
5.74±0.05
3.23±0.02
R2
-738.83±0.08
-739.35±0.11
4.95±0.04
3.56±0.04
Table 2. Numerical results for ∆VAEs trained on a simple picture consisting of the lowest non-trivial Fourier components. The values
indicate mean and standard deviation over 10 runs. The columns represent the (data-averaged) log-likelihood estimate (LL), Evidence
Lower Bound (ELBO), KL-divergence (KL) and mean squared error (MSE).
MANIFOLD
LL
ELBO
KL
MSE (×10−2)
S2
-3779.75±2.25
-3825.11± 4.21
3.45±0.01
2.82±0.21
EMBEDDED TORUS
-3787.34±11.8
-3809.33±23.0
11.2±1.20
1.85±1.18
FLAT TORUS
-3773.99±1.70
-3813.00±5.16
6.42±0.00
0.90±0.25
RP3
-3774.61±0.53
-3821.25±2.44
3.70±0.00
2.62±0.12
RP2
-3789.13±8.36
-3850.19±33.7
3.92±1.97
4.02±1.74
R3
-3779.67±4.06
-3783.03±5.71
9.73±0.45
0.46±0.26
R2
-3785.64±5.26
-3789.60±6.19
8.26±0.53
0.85±0.28
The SO(3) is isometric to a scaling of the RP3 (with nat-
ural choices of Riemannian metrics). Although we have
implemented an embedding and projection map for this
embedding for the SO(3) directly based on an SVD decom-
position to ﬁnd the nearest orthogonal matrix, training on
the RP3 with the following trick was faster and we only
present these results.
For training the projective spaces, we used an additional
trick, where instead of embedding RPd in a Euclidean space,
we embed Sd in Rd+1, and make the decoder neural network
even by construction (i.e. the decoder applied to a point s on
the sphere equals the decoder applied to a point −s). Then,
an encoder and decoder to and from the RP3 are deﬁned
implicitly. However, it must be noted that this setup does
not allow for a homeomorphic encoding (because RPd does
not embed in Sd).
The numerically computed ELBO, reconstruction error, KL-
divergence and mean-squared-error are shown in Table 1
together with the estimated log-likelihood for a test dataset
of MNIST.
ESTIMATION OF LOG-LIKELIHOOD
For the evaluation of the proposed methods we have esti-
mated the log-likelihood of the test dataset according to
the importance sampling presented in (Burda et al., 2016).
The approximate log-likelihood of datapoint x is calculated
by sampling L latent variables z(1), . . . , z(L) according to
the approximate posterior Qt(x),z(x)
Z
. The estimated log-
likelihood for datapoint x is given by
log pβ
X(x) ≈log
 
1
L
L
X
l=1
pβ(z(l))
X
(x)pZ(z(l))
qZ(t(x); z(x), z(l))
!
.
The log-likelihood estimates presented in Table 1 are ob-
tained with L = 100 samples for each datapoint, averaged
over all datapoints.
4.2. Translations of periodic pictures
To test whether a ∆VAE can capture topological properties,
we trained it on synthetic datasets consisting of translations
of the same periodic picture.
Our input pictures were discretized to 64×64 pixels, but to
ease presentation, we discuss them below as if they were
continuous. Note that with the choice of multi-layer percep-
trons as encoder and decoder networks, the network has no
information about which pixels are contiguous.
SIMPLE PICTURE
To illustrate the idea, we start with a very simple picture
pic : [−π, π]2 →R, which only consists of the lowest

Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
(a) Latent space ﬂat torus
(b) Reconstruction ﬂat torus
(c) Latent space sphere
(d) Reconstruction sphere
Figure 4. Results of training ∆VAEs on a simple picture consisting
only of the lowest non-trivial Fourier components. The ﬁgures on
the left show the latent space manifolds of a ﬂat torus and a sphere,
with encoded images of translated original pictures, color-coded
according to translation following the color scheme presented in
Fig. 5. The ﬁgures on the right are reconstructions: they are
placed on a grid in latent space and show the decoded images for
the gridpoints. The reconstruction of the sphere is in spherical
coordinates, with the left and right side of Fig. 4d corresponding
to the black arc on the sphere in Fig. 4c.
Fourier components in each direction
pic(θ, φ) = cos(θ) + cos(φ).
By translating the picture, i.e. by considering different
phases, we obtain a submanifold of the space of all pic-
tures. When we interpret this space as L2([−π, π]2), we get
an embedding of the ﬂat torus which is isometric up to a
scaling. In other words, if we train the ∆VAE with a ﬂat
torus as latent space, we essentially try to ﬁnd the identity
map.
Figs. 4a and 4b illustrate that for this simple case, the ∆VAE
with a ﬂat torus as latent space indeed captures the transla-
tion of the picture as a latent variable. The fact that Fig. 4a
is practically a reﬂection and translation of the legend in
Fig. 5, shows that there is an almost isometric correspon-
dence between the translation of the original picture and the
encoded latent variable.
Although the ﬁgure does not provide a proof that the embed-
ding is homeomorphic, it is in principle possible to give a
Figure 5. Colors used to color
encoded pictures in latent space.
The horizontal direction repre-
sents horizontal translation, the
vertical direction represents ver-
tical translation of the original,
periodic picture. The boundary
conditions are periodic.
guarantee that the encoder map is surjective (more precisely,
that it has degree 1 or −1).
We contrast this to when we train the same dataset on a
∆VAE with a sphere as a latent space. Fig. 4c displays
typical results, showing that large parts of the sphere are not
covered.
We present further numerical results in Table 2. We note that
of all the closed manifolds, the MSE is by far the lowest for
the ﬂat torus. The KL divergence is lower for the positively-
curved spaces S2, RP2 and RP3, but the MSE for those is
about a factor three higher. For R3 as latent space the MSE
is even lower, but it is hard to compare because the KL term
is not directly comparable, and it is the combination of the
two that is optimized.
MORE COMPLICATED PICTURES
As an exploratory analysis of the extent to which the ∆VAE
can capture the topological structure, we trained on ﬁxed
datasets, each consisting of translations of a ﬁxed random
picture. These random pictures, viewed as functions pic :
[−π, π]2 →R, are created by randomly drawing complex
Fourier coefﬁcients ak,ℓfrom a Gaussian distribution:
pic(θ, φ) = Re


N
X
k,ℓ=−N
γ|k|+|ℓ|−1ak,ℓexp(ikθ + iℓφ)


where γ ∈(0, 1] is a discounting factor. The ∆VAE with
a ﬂat torus as latent space is also capable of capturing the
translations when the picture is generate this way, as long as
the higher Fourier components carry not too much weight,
see Fig. 6.
TOO COMPLICATED PICTURES
Generically, we see that when there is too much weight on
the higher Fourier components in the picture (N ≳10 with
γ ≳0.3), the ∆VAE is no longer capable of capturing the
translations, see Fig. 7.
We only tested a very simple setup. It is likely that convo-
lutional neural networks would signiﬁcantly improve the
performance in capturing the translations, since implicit

Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
Figure 6. Latent space and reconstruction for a ∆VAE with a ﬂat
torus as latent space, trained on a picture consisting of several
Fourier components.
Figure 7. Flat torus latent space and reconstruction for a ∆VAE
trained on a picture with too much weight on higher Fourier com-
ponents for the ∆VAE to capture the topological structure.
information is added to the network about the underlying
geometry of the pictures.
Initial experiments with pretraining the network on sim-
ple Fourier images also show an increased success rate of
capturing the topological structure.
INTERESTING PATTERNS
For moderate weights on Fourier components, the data man-
ifold is often mapped to the latent space in very interesting
ways, see Fig. 8. The patterns that occur in this manner are
very structured, suggesting that it may be possible to ﬁnd un-
derlying mathematical reasons for this structure. Moreover,
it gives some indication that we may understand how the
network arrives at such patterns, and how we may control
them.
5. Conclusion
We developed and implemented Diffusion Variational Au-
toencoders, which allow for arbitrary manifolds as a latent
space 1. Our original motivation was to investigate to which
extent VAEs ﬁnd semantically meaningful latent variables,
1https://github.com/LuisArmandoPerez/
DiffusionVAE
Figure 8. Interesting patterns may occur when translations of a
picture with not too much weight on higher Fourier components
are encoded into the latent space of a ﬂat torus.
and more speciﬁcally, whether they can capture topological
and geometrical structure in datasets. By allowing for an
arbitrary manifold as a latent space, ∆VAEs can remove
obstructions to capturing such structure.
Indeed, our experiments with translations of periodic images
show that a simple implementation of a ∆VAE with a ﬂat
torus as latent space is capable of capturing topological
properties.
However, we have also observed that when we use peri-
odic images with signiﬁcant high Fourier components, it is
more challenging for the ∆VAE to capture the topological
structure. We will investigate further whether this can be
resolved by better network design, by pretraining, different
loss functions, or even more intensive extensions of the VAE
algorithm.
Our exploratory analysis shows that we can ask well-deﬁned
questions about whether a VAE can capture topological
structure, and that such questions are amenable to a statis-
tical approach. Moreover, the patterns observed in latent
space in Fig. 6 and Fig. 8, suggest that it may be possible to
capture in mathematical theorems what the image of a data
manifold in latent space would look like, when the networks
are (almost) minimizing the loss. Combining these different
perspectives, we may eventually develop more understand-
ing on how to develop algorithms that capture semantically
meaningful latent variables.

Diffusion Variational Autoencoders
