arXiv:1602.07064v1  [cs.DB]  23 Feb 2016
SIFT: An Algorithm for Extracting Structural Information
From Taxonomies
Jorge Martinez-Gil,

Keywords: Algorithms; Knowledge Engineering; Knowledge Integration; Taxonomy Analysis
Abstract
In this work we present SIFT, a 3-step algorithm for the analysis of the structural information repre-
sented by means of a taxonomy. The major advantage of this algorithm is the capability to leverage the
information inherent to the hierarchical structures of taxonomies to infer correspondences which can
allow to merge them in a later step. This method is particular relevant in scenarios where taxonomy
alignment techniques exploiting textual information from taxonomy nodes cannot operate success-
fully.
1
Introduction
The problem of aligning taxonomies is one of the most interesting and relevant issues for knowledge
engineers, since it has implications in a wide range of computational problems including ﬁle system
merging, creation of operating systems distributions, catalog integration, distributed taxonomy search,
and so on. The non-deterministic nature of the problem is given by the fact that not even humans
are able to identify optimal alignments [6], so the process is highly subjective. This means that its
boundaries often go further than the category of an engineering problem what makes difﬁcult to ﬁnd
closed solutions in this area. However, the large amount of people, research groups and resources
dedicated to provide solutions in this ﬁeld, tells us that we are facing a key challenge in order for a
convincing way to automatically integrate taxonomic knowledge to become real.
In the last years, the need for methods to integrate knowledge has increased. Note that the need
for aligning taxonomies comes from the old ﬁeld of database schema integration [16]. This ﬁeld was
born to work in a uniﬁed way with databases which had been developed independently. Nowadays
researchers aim to make the techniques for aligning knowledge models ﬂexible and powerful enough
1

to work with all kind of database schemas, XML schemas, taxonomies, E/R models, dictionaries, and
so on. Therefore, the problem we are facing consists of providing a set of correspondences between
the nodes of two taxonomies about the same domain but which have been developed separately [18].
The major contribution of this work is the proposal of a 3-step algorithm that is able to analyze
the structural information represented by means of a taxonomy. The major advantage of this analysis
is that it can allow us to leverage the information inherent to the hierarchical structure of taxonomies
to infer correspondences which can allow to automatically merging them in a later step. This is
particular relevant in scenarios where taxonomy matching techniques exploiting textual information
from the taxonomy nodes cannot operate successfully.
From now on, this work is structured in the following way: The second section describes the
state-of-the-art on taxonomy alignment. The third section describes the design and development of
the algorithm. Case studies section provides some scenarios where our algorithm can help to solve
real problems, including a brief discussion on the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal. Finally,
we outline the key points of our contribution and propose future research tasks.
2
Related Work
The problem of aligning taxonomies have received much attention by the research community since
various knowledge based applications, including clustering algorithms, browsing support interfaces,
and recommendation systems, perform more effectively when they are supported with domain de-
scribing taxonomies, which help to resolve ambiguities and provide context [3]. Furthermore, this
problem is of great interest on a number of application areas, especially in scientiﬁc [6], business [1]
[14], and web data integration [4] [15].
Taxonomy alignment techniques are able to detect taxonomy concepts that are equivalent. But,
when can we say that two concepts are equivalent? If we attend only to the text label for representing
the concepts, we can ﬁnd many examples in everyday life, for instance, lift and elevator or car and
automobile seem to be equivalent concepts since they represent the same real idea or object. However,
it is well known that when taxonomies are used as knowledge sources, the way users perceive the
degree of likeness between pairs of concepts is highly dependent on the domain being explored [3].
Therefore, synonymy between text labels is not always an equivalence indicator, so it is necessary to
2

focus in the context the concepts are being considered.
Existing taxonomy alignment techniques focus on different dimensions of the problem, including
whether data instances are used for matching [10], whether linguistic information and other auxiliary
information are available [11], and whether the match is performed for complex structures [13]. Our
algorithm ﬁts in this last category.
Algorithms implementing techniques for matching complex structures are mostly based on heuris-
tics. Heuristics consider, for example, that elements of two distinct taxonomies are similar if their
direct sub-concepts, and/or their direct super-concepts and/or their brother concepts are similar [17].
These structural techniques can be based on a ﬁxed point like that proposed in [8], or can be viewed as
a satisﬁability problem of a set of propositional formulas [2]. There are also some proposals to align
taxonomies supposed to be asymmetric from a structural point of view [5], or to create matching func-
tions by means of a composition of various techniques designed to make best use of the characteristics
of the taxonomies [17].
Despite such advances in matching technologies, taxonomy alignments using linguistic informa-
tion and other auxiliary information are rarely perfect [9]. In particular, imperfection can be due to
homonyms (i.e., nodes with identical concept-names, but possibly different semantics) and synonyms
(concepts with different names but same semantics). However, the major advantage of pure structural
matching techniques is that ﬁnding perfect alignments is possible in many cases.
3
Contribution
We approach the problem from the classic perspective, that it is to say, a taxonomy can be deﬁned as a
set of concepts that have been hierarchically organized to control the terms belonging to a vocabulary.
The goal is to facilitate a number of operations on items from a repository. However, a problem occurs
when two item repositories have to be merged, since it is also necessary to merge the two taxonomies
which describe them.
Our contribution to face this problem is the proposal of an efﬁcient 3-step algorithm for the analy-
sis of taxonomies describing such repositories. This analysis could be helpful for solving the problem
of heterogeneity between the given taxonomies from a strictly structural point of view in a later step.
As a collateral effect, the output data from our algorithm could be also used for exploiting any kind
3

of solution involving the use of information from the structure of the given taxonomies. Use cases
section will explore this in more detail.
More formally, we can deﬁne a mapping as an expression that can be written in the form (c, c’, n,
R). Where c and c’ are concepts belonging to different taxonomies, R is the relation of correspondence
and n is a real number between 0 and 1. n represents the degree of conﬁdence for R. In our work, c and
c’ will be concepts represented by means of taxonomy nodes (a.k.a. taxons) which are assigned a rank
and can be placed at a particular level in a systematic hierarchy reﬂecting relationships. Moreover, the
relation R which describe how c and c’ are related is going to be of similarity.
The algorithm that we propose is divided into three high level steps. The ﬁrst step is optional since
it is only necessary when the given knowledge model is not a taxonomy yet, but another kind of more
general model like an graph or an ontology [19].
1. To convert the knowledge model into a taxonomy (See Algorithm 1).
2. To store the taxonomy in some parts of a special data structure (See Algorithm 2).
3. To order and ﬁll the data structure with complementary calculations (See Algorithm 3).
Finally, it is necessary to call the algorithm (See Algorithm 4). The philosophy of the algorithm
consists of detecting the changes in the depths of each taxon in the hierarchy. In this way, it is possible
to count the different kinds of neighbors that a concept may have.
Before designing the algorithm, it is also necessary to deﬁne a data structure (DS) to store the
data calculated by the algorithm. The data structure is a linked list with six records in each node:
depth, children, brothers, brothers left, same level and name. Table 1 tells us the data type and a brief
description of each of these records. In the next subsections, we are going to describe more in depth
each of the main steps of the proposed algorithm.
3.1
Converting a knowledge model into a taxonomy
This is the ﬁrst step which consists of converting the model into a taxonomy which will allow us to
compute more easily the data related to the neighborhood of each concept into the knowledge model.
This step is optional and it is only necessary when the input is not a perfect hierarchy but contains
some cycles. This is the usual case when working with graph models or ontologies, for example. The
4

Attribute
Type
Description
depth
integer
Level of the current taxon (begins with 0)
children
integer
Number of children of the current taxon
brothers
integer
Number of brothers of the current taxon
brothersLeft
integer
Number of brother taxons that are above this
sameLevel
integer
Number of taxons with the same depth
name
string
ID of the taxon
Table 1: A node of the linked list which stores the information
procedure is inspired by one proposed in [12] to visit all the concepts in an ontology. Algorithm 1
shows the related portion of pseudocode.
Algorithm 1 ont2tax: Procedure for converting a generic knowledge model into a taxonomy
Require: cls: class, occurs: list, depth: integer
1: storingInTax(cls, depth); Step 2
2: if (cls.canAs( model.class ) AND (NOT occurs.contains( cls ))) then
3:
while iterator = cls.SubClasses do
4:
class sub := (class) iterator.next
5:
occurs.add(cls)
6:
ont2tax (sub, occurs, depth + 1)
7:
occurs.remove(cls)
8:
end while
9: end if
10: return true
3.2
Storing the taxonomy in the data structure
In this second step, we only know the depth (number of indents for the taxon) and the name of each
concept, so we can only partially ﬁll the data structure, thus, we can only invoke the procedure with
the arguments depth and concept name.
Algorithm 2 storingInTax: Storing the taxonomy in the data structure
Require: cls: ontology, depth: integer
1: Element e := new Element (depth, 0, 0, 0, 0, cls.getName)
2: DS.add (e)
3: return true
5

3.3
Ordering and ﬁlling the data structure
With data stored in the DS, we can now detect the changes in the depth of the entries in the taxonomy
to compute the number of children, brothers and, so on. It is necessary to take into account the
following rules:
1. All taxons with the same depth are same level taxons.
2. A chain of brothers is a chain of taxons at the same level.
3. A change to an outer taxon breaks a chain of brothers.
4. All brothers with a previous position are on the left.
5. Given a taxon, if the following concept has an inner depth, it is a child.
6. A chain of children can only be broken by a change to an outer taxon.
7. An inner taxon (grandson taxon) does not break a chain of children.
Algorithm 3 shows us the procedural implementation for this set of rules. The computational
complexity of this procedure is low, even in the worst of cases we would have O(n2), since the
most complex portion of code can be implemented by means of two simple loops. This means that
our solution presents a great scalability regardless of the platform on which the algorithm could be
implemented and executed.
3.4
Calling to the algorithm
Now, it is necessary to invoke the algorithm. At this point it is necessary to deﬁne the taxonomy
model and to locate the concepts without ancestors, in order to begin to visit all the concepts. This is
particular relevant in forest models1. Note that the ArrayList is necessary to store the visited concepts.
Algorithm 4 shows the related portion of pseudocode.
1Forest model is that kind of graph model where there is no connection between some graph components
6

Algorithm 3 ﬁnalStep: Ordering and ﬁlling the data structure
Require: children, brothers, brothers left: integer
Require: same level, i, j, k, t: integer
Require: ag: boolean
1: for i := 0 to DS.size do
2:
children, brothers, brothers left := 0
3:
for j := 0 to DS.size do
4:
if if (j < i) then
5:
if if (DS[i].depth = DS[j].depth) then
6:
brothers++
7:
brothers left++
8:
end if
9:
if (DS[i].depth < DS[j].depth) then
10:
brothers := 0
11:
brothers left := 0
12:
end if
13:
end if
14:
if (j > i) then
15:
if (DS[i].depth = DS[j].depth) then
16:
brothers++
17:
end if
18:
if (DS[i].depth < DS[j].depth) then
19:
break
20:
end if
21:
end if
22:
if ((j = i+1) AND (DS[i].depth = DS[j].depth - 1) AND (NOT ag)) then
23:
for for k := j to DS[j].depth < DS[k].depth do
24:
if (DS[j].depth = DS[k].depth) then
25:
child++
26:
ag := true
27:
end if
28:
end for
29:
end if
30:
end for
31:
for for t := 0 to DS.size do
32:
if if (NOT t=i) AND (DS[i].depth = DS[t].depth) then
33:
same level++
34:
end if
35:
end for
36:
DS[i].addNumChildren (children)
37:
DS[i].addNumBrothers (brothers)
38:
DS[i].addNumBrothersOnTheLeft (brother left)
39:
DS[i].addNumSameLevel (same level)
40: end for
41: return true
7

Algorithm 4 calling to the 3-step algorithm
1: Model m := createModel
2: Iterator i := m.listHierarchyRootClasses()
3: while i.hasNext() do
4:
onto2tax((Class) i.next(), new ArrayList(), 0)
5: end while
6: ﬁnalStep ()
4
Case studies
The purpose of this section is to show the relative ease with which a taxonomy analysis can be per-
formed or a new taxonomy matcher can be developed, based on the data obtained from the algorithm.
In the next subsections we are going to show three use cases: how to use the algorithm to compute
the leaves in a taxonomy, how to use it to obtain the structural index of a taxonomy, and ﬁnally how
to use it to align taxonomies automatically.
4.1
Computing the number of leaves in a taxonomy
There are techniques that compute the leaves in a graph for performing a graph analysis. In this sense,
our algorithm is easy to extend in order to compute the number of leaves in a taxonomy. To do so, it
is only necessary to compute the number of the deepest taxons. We are going to see how to compute
the leaves of the taxonomy for an example but, it is possible to compute other features such as paths.
Algorithm 5 shows us how to compute the leaves (i.e. terminal nodes) of a given taxonomy.
Algorithm 5 leaves: computing the leaves of a taxonomy
Require: var max, leaves: integer
1: max := leaves := 0
2: for i := 0 to DS.size do
3:
if (DS[i].depth > max) then
4:
max := DS[i].depth
5:
end if
6: end for
7: for for j := 0 to DS.size do
8:
if (DS[j].depth = max) then
9:
leaves++
10:
end if
11: end for
12: return leaves
8

4.2
Comparing structural similarities
It is possible to use our algorithm for extracting structural indexes of taxonomies in order to compare
its structural similarity. The structural index of a taxonomy is a kind of hash function that tells global
information about the total number of children, brothers and so on.
As we show in the state-of-the-art, some techniques use statistical methods for obtaining the struc-
tural similarity. It can be useful for adjusting the quality of the generated mappings, for example.
Algorithm 6 shows how to automatically compute one possible structural index from a taxonomy.
Algorithm 6 structuralIndex: extract a structural index of the ontology
Require: var acum : integer
1: acum := 0
2: for i := 0 to DS.size do
3:
acum := acum + DS[i].depth
4:
acum := acum + DS[i].children
5:
acum := acum + DS[i].brothers
6:
acum := acum + DS[i].leftbrothers
7:
acum := acum + DS[i].samelevel
8: end for
9: return acum
Obviously, when comparing two structural indexes, the higher percentage, the higher the structural
similarity of the compared taxonomies. This means that if two taxonomies share the same structural
index, we can state that its structural organization is equivalent.
4.3
Real alignment situations
Our algorithm also allows that information to be obtained from the analysis phase can be helpful in
order to take decisions in taxonomy alignment scenarios. Output data from SIFT allow us to easily
create customized rule-based matchers to obtain more accurate taxonomy alignments. For example,
the similarity between two taxonomy concepts or taxons could be given by certain rules concerning
ancestors, brothers, and so on.
Moreover, it is possible to combine our proposal with other basic matching algorithms. This can
be done by designing a formula that may allow us to align taxonomies from the point of view of
the elements, and from the taxonomy structure. This is possible due to the fact one of the attributes
(name) contains information at the element level, so it is possible to exploit this kind of information by
9

using some kind of computational method like the Levenshtein algorithm [7] which is able to calculate
similarity between two text strings. In this way, if many attributes (whether structural or textual) are
similar, the concepts are also supposed to be similar.
5
Conclusions & Future Work
In this work, we have designed and implemented, SIFT that is a 3-step algorithm that allows us to
analyze the structural information inherent to the hierarchical structures of taxonomies. This can be
useful when solving problems concerning heterogeneity between taxonomies describing a same do-
main but which have been developed separately. Therefore, the algorithm that we propose is valid for
taxonomy alignment, but also for aligning ontologies, directory listings, ﬁle systems, operating sys-
tem distributions, and in general whatever kind of model which can be transformed into a taxonomy.
Our algorithm tries to leverage the inherent characteristics from taxonomies to infer correspondences
which can allow us to merge them in a later step, even without text labels describing each of the nodes
from the taxonomy.
As future work, we should work to leverage the good performance of our algorithm by designing a
combined alignment strategy. In this work, we have proposed to use each of the attributes with similar
weights. However, this strategy could not be optimal in some speciﬁc cases. We aim to redeﬁne this
strategy so that a preliminary study should try to automatically determine the kind of problem we
are facing at a given moment, and dynamically assign higher weights to the most promising taxon
attributes.
Source Code
An implementation of this algorithm can be found at https://github.com/jorgemartinezgil/sift
