arXiv:1401.2474v1  [cs.AI]  10 Jan 2014
Transformation-based Feature
Computation for Algorithm Portfolios
Barry Hurley1, Serdar Kadioglu2, Yuri Malitsky1, and Barry O’Sullivan1
1 Insight Centre for Data Analytics
Department of Computer Science, University College Cork, Ireland

2 Oracle America Inc., Burlington, MA 01803, USA

Abstract. Instance-speciﬁc algorithm conﬁguration and algorithm port-
folios have been shown to oﬀer signiﬁcant improvements over single algo-
rithm approaches in a variety of application domains. In the sat and csp
domains algorithm portfolios have consistently dominated the main com-
petitions in these ﬁelds for the past ﬁve years. For a portfolio approach to
be eﬀective there are two crucial conditions that must be met. First, there
needs to be a collection of complementary solvers with which to make a
portfolio. Second, there must be a collection of problem features that can
accurately identify structural diﬀerences between instances. This paper
focuses on the latter issue: feature representation, because, unlike sat,
not every problem has well-studied features. We employ the well-known
SATzilla feature set, but compute alternative sets on diﬀerent sat en-
codings of csps. We show that regardless of what encoding is used to
convert the instances, adequate structural information is maintained to
diﬀerentiate between problem instances, and that this can be exploited
to make an eﬀective portfolio-based csp solver.
1
Introduction
Signiﬁcant strides have recently been made in the application of portfolio-based
algorithms in the ﬁelds of constraint satisfaction [15], quantiﬁed boolean formu-
lae [17], and most notably in sat [23,6]. Having a collection of solvers, these
approaches compute a set of representative features about a problem instance
and then use this information to decide what is the most eﬀective solver to em-
ploy. These decisions can be made based on regression techniques [23], in which
a classiﬁer is trained to predict expected runtime of each solver and choosing the
one with best predicted performance. Alternatively, a ranking algorithm can be
trained to directly predict the best solver for each instance [5]. The features can
also be used for clustering [7], where the best solver is chosen for each cluster
of instances. In practice, regardless of the approach, portfolio algorithms have
been shown to be dramatically better than using a single solver.
Algorithm portfolios also rely on a good set of features to describe the prob-
lem instance being solved. This can be seen as a major drawback since one needs

to use speciﬁc features for each problem at hand, or worse, has to come up with a
set of features if none exists. If there are not enough informative features present,
it is impossible to train a classiﬁer to diﬀerentiate between classes of instances.
On the other hand, if there are too many features it is possible to over ﬁt the
classiﬁer to the training data. Furthermore, a large feature set is likely to have
noisy features, which could be detrimental to the quality of the learned classiﬁer.
In the sat domain, the features used by the solvers dominating the competitions
have been thoroughly analyzed and studied over the last decade. Unfortunately,
many other ﬁelds do not have such well established feature set. Even in the
case of constraint satisfaction problems, where a feature set has been proposed,
careful ﬁltering can dramatically improve the quality of portfolios [9].
However, while there might not be an existing feature set, for NP-complete
problems there exist polynomial-time transformations to any other NP-complete
problem. In this paper we propose to take advantage of this by transforming
csp instances to sat as a pre-processing step before computing its features. We
show that such a transformation retains the necessary information needed to
diﬀerentiate the classes of instances. In particular we show the eﬀectiveness of
this approach on constraint satisfaction problems. We choose the csp domain
for two reasons. First, it has a large number of solvers that can be used to
make a diversiﬁed portfolio. Second, because a feature set exists for csps, we
can compare the quality of a portfolio trained on sat features to the domain
speciﬁc csp features.
There has been a lot of work exploring the eﬀect of transforming csp in-
stances into sat. Perhaps the most relevant work is by Ansótegui and Manyà
which evaluated the performance of sat solvers on six sat-encodings on graph
colouring, random binary csps, pigeon hole, and all interval series problems [1].
Solvers such as sugar [19], azucar [20], and CSP4SAT4J [11] have similarly tackled
csp problems by encoding them into sat and then solving them with a prede-
ﬁned sat solver. However, as far as we are aware, this paper represents the ﬁrst
time that a portfolio has been created using features gained after transforming
a problem from one domain to another.
2
Encodings
There are a number of known polynomial-time transformations, or encodings,
from constraint satisfaction problems to sat [16]. In this paper we focus on three
commonly used encodings: the direct, order and support encodings.
2.1
Direct Encoding
In the direct encoding [22] for each csp variable X, with domain {1, . . . , d}, a
sat variable is created for each domain value, i.e. x1, x2, . . . , xd. If x1 is true in
the resulting sat formula, then the csp variable X is assigned the value 1 in
the csp solution. Therefore, in order to represent a solution to the csp exactly

one of x1, x2, . . . , xd must be assigned true. We add an at-least-one clause and
at-most-one clauses to the sat formula for each csp variable X:
(x1 ∨x2 ∨. . . ∨xd)
∀v, w ∈D(X) : (¬xv ∨¬xw)
At Least One
At Most One
Constraints between csp variables are represented in the direct encoding by
enumerating the conﬂicting tuples. For a binary constraint between the pair of
variables X and Y , if the tuple ⟨X = v, Y = w⟩is forbidden, then we add the
conﬂict clause (¬xv ∨¬yw).
2.2
Support Encoding
The support encoding [8,3] uses the same mechanism as the direct encoding
to translate a csp variable’s domain into sat. However, the support encoding
diﬀers on how the constraints between variables are encoded. Given a constraint
between two variables X and Y , for each value v in the domain of X, let SY,X=v ⊂
D(Y ) be the subset of the values in the domain of Y which are consistent with
assigning X = v. Either xv is false or one of the consistent assignments from
y1 . . . yd must be true, represented by the clause:
¬xv ∨


_
i∈SY,X=v
yi


This must be repeated by adding clauses for each value in the domain of Y and
listing the values in X which are consistent with each assignment.
2.3
Order Encoding
Unlike the direct and support encoding which model X = v as a sat variable,
the order encoding creates sat variables to represent X ≤v. If X is less than
or equal to v, then X must also be less than or equal to v + 1. To enforce this
across the domain we add the clauses:
∀d−1
v
: (¬x≤v ∨x≤v+1)
The order encoding is naturally suited to modelling inequality constraints.
To state X ≤3, we would just post the unit clause (x≤3). If we want to model
the constraint X = v, we could rewrite it as (X ≤v ∧X ≥v). X ≥v can then
be rewritten as ¬X ≤(v −1). To state that X = v under the order encoding,
we would encode (x≤v ∧¬x≤v−1). A conﬂicting tuple between two variables, for
example ⟨X = v, Y = w⟩can be written in propositional logic and simpliﬁed to
a cnf clause using De Morgan’s Law:
¬((x≤v ∧x≥v) ∧(y≤w ∧y≥w))
¬((x≤v ∧¬x≤v−1) ∧(y≤w ∧¬y≤w−1))
¬(x≤v ∧¬x≤v−1) ∨¬(y≤w ∧¬y≤w−1)
(¬x≤v ∨x≤v−1 ∨¬y≤w ∨y≤w−1)

3
Feature Computation
In addition to the pure direct, support and order encodings discussed in the
previous section, we also consider variants of these encodings in which the clauses
that encode the domains of the variables are not included. We omit the domains
in order to test whether focusing only on the constraints present in a csp is
enough to diﬀerentiate the instances. We now brieﬂy describe the features used
for CSP and SAT.
CSP Features. We compute features for each of the original csp instances, plus
for each of the six encodings. We record 36 features directly from the csp instance
using mistral [4]. This includes static features such as statistics about the types
of constraints used, average and maximum domain size; and dynamic statistics
recorded by running mistral for 2 seconds: average and standard deviation of
variable weights, number of nodes, number of propagations and a few others.
SAT Features. We use the 54 features computed using the newest feature com-
putation tool from UBC [13]. These features include problem size features, graph-
based features, balance features, proximity to horn formula features, DPLL prob-
ing features, and local search probing features.
4
Numerical Results
We implemented a tool to translate a csp instance speciﬁed in XCSP format [18]
into sat (cnf). At present, it is capable of encoding inequality and binary ex-
tensional constraints using the direct, support and order encoding.
Benchmarks. For our evaluation, we consider csp problem instances from the
csp solver competition.1 Of these, we consider the instances that contain ei-
ther inequality or binary extensional constraints. This presents a pool of 2,433
instances, containing Graph Colouring, Random, Quasi-random, Black Hole,
Quasi-group Completion, Quasi-group With Holes, Langford, Towers of Hanoi
and Pigeon Hole problems.
Portfolio Approach. To train our portfolios we used the ISAC methodology [7]
which has been shown to work better than a regression based approaches [14].
ISAC uses the computed features to cluster the instances. Then for each clus-
ter, the best solver in the portfolio is selected. When a new instance needs to
be solved, its features are computed, it is assigned to the nearest cluster, and
subsequently solved using the appropriate solver.
For our csp solver portfolio we used: abscon [12], csp4j [11], sat4j [10],
pcs [21], gecode [2], and sugar [19]. Each instance was run for 3,600 seconds.
It is important to note that we include the time required for encoding the in-
stances and computing the features as part of the computation time.
1 csp solver competition instances
http://www.cril.univ-artois.fr/~lecoutre/benchmarks.html

Table 1. Comparison of number of solved instances and PAR 10 score between the
virtual best solver (VBS), the portfolio approach, the random cluster approach and
the best single solver based on csp and sat features for clustering.
PAR 10
Approach
CSP
Direct
Direct
Order
Order
Support
Support
ND
ND
ND
VBS
1792
1887
1793
1806
1806
1810
1811
Portfolio
2066
3312
3221
2689
2077
2084
2022
Random Cluster
3806
3705
3424
3725
3797
3867
3902
Best Single
4776
4870
4777
4789
4789
4792
4792
Number Solved
Approach
CSP
Direct
Direct
Order
Order
Support
Support
ND
ND
ND
VBS
2315
2310
2315
2315
2315
2315
2315
Portfolio
2297
2215
2220
2256
2297
2297
2301
Random Cluster
2180
2188
2206
2187
2182
2177
2175
Best Single
2115
2110
2115
2115
2115
2115
2115
We perform our experiments using stratiﬁed 10-fold cross validation. In Ta-
ble 1, we present the performance for both the number of solved instances and
the penalized runtime average PAR 10 which counts each time-out as taking
10 times the time-out to complete for each problem representation. The SAT
encodings without the variable domains are marked with ND. We compare the
portfolio performance to the best single solver as well as to the oracle Virtual
Best Solver (VBS) which for every instance always selects the fastest solver. As
we can see, using a portfolio approach for csp instances is always preferable to
just choosing to run a single solver. We also compare to a random clustering
approach, which randomly groups the instances of the test set into the same
number of clusters as the portfolio method and ﬁnds the best solver to run on
each group. Note that the random clustering is trained on the same data it is
evaluated on, and further that in practice one would not know to which cluster
to assign a new instance. The random clustering approach is included to show
that the clusters found by ISAC are indeed capturing important information
about the instances. We observe this because in all cases Portfolio is better than
the Random Clustering approach.
Table 1 also shows that regardless of the encoding we use, we can always
close at least 50% of the performance gap between the best single solver and
the virtual best one. Furthermore, we see that if we use particularly accurate
encoding, which in our case is the support encoding without domain clauses, we
can even achieve slightly better performance than using features that have been
speciﬁcally designed for the problem domain.

5
Conclusion
In this paper we show that it is possible to encode an instance from one problem
domain to another as a preprocessing step for feature computation. In particu-
lar, we show that even with the overhead of converting csp instances to sat, a
csp portfolio trained on well established sat features can perform just as well
as if it was trained on csp speciﬁc features. These ﬁndings show that encoding
techniques can retain enough information about the original instance to accu-
rately diﬀerentiate diﬀerent classes of instances. Our results serves as a proof of
concept for an automated feature generation approach for NP-complete prob-
lems that do not have a well studied feature vector. We consider this as a step
toward problem independent feature computation for algorithm portfolios, and
we plan to analyze it further and extend its applications in the future.
