370 
MORRIS 
UAI2001 
Recognition Networks for Approximate Inference in BN20 Networks 
Quaid Morris* 
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit 
University College London 
17 Queen Square, London, WCIN 3AR. England 

Abstract 
A recognition network is a multilayer per­
ception (MLP) trained to predict posterior 
marginals given observed evidence in a par­
ticular Bayesian network. The input to the 
MLP is a vector of the states of the eviden­
tial nodes. The activity of an output unit is 
interpreted as a prediction of the posterior 
marginal of the corresponding variable. The 
MLP is trained using samples generated from 
the corresponding Bayesian network. 
We evaluate a recognition network that was 
trained to do inference in a large Bayesian 
network, similar in structure and complex­
ity to the Quick Medical Reference, Decision 
Theoretic (QMR-DT) network. Our network 
is a binary, two-layer, noisy-OR (BN20) net­
work containing over 4000 potentially observ­
able nodes and over 600 unobservable, hidden 
nodes. In real medical diagnosis, most ob­
servables are unavailable, and there is a com­
plex and unknown process that selects which 
ones are provided. We incorporate a very ba­
sic type of selection bias in our network: a 
known preference that available observables 
are positive rather than negative. Even this 
simple bias has a significant effect on the pos­
terior. 
We compare the performance of our recogni­
tion network to state-of-the-art approximate 
inference algorithms on a large set of test 
cases. In order to evaluate the effect of our 
simplistic model of the selection bias, we eval­
uate algorithms using a variety of incorrectly 
modelled selection biases. Recognition net­
works perform well using both correct and 
incorrect selection biases. 
• also affiliated with Department of Brain and Cogni­
tive Sciences at MIT 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
We are interested in approximate inference in large 
discrete-valued Bayesian networks (BN s). Inference 
is the process of calculating posterior probability dis­
tributions over sets of unobserved variables given the 
states of the observed variables (ie the evidence). In 
large networks containing loops exact inference is often 
intractable. However, one can gain tractability at the 
expense of accuracy by doing approximate inference. 
Two major classes of approximate inference methods 
are variational methods and Monte Carlo methods. 
Variational methods approximate the posterior using 
a member of a parameterised family of distributions. 
The approximating distribution is chosen by a deter­
ministic algorithm that attempts to maximise a mea­
sure (or a bound thereof) of the goodness of fit to the 
true posterior. It is often difficult, however, to find 
goodness of fit measures and parameterised families 
which are both easily optimised and lead to accurate 
approximations. Furthermore, since the true posterior 
typically doesn't reside in the parameterised family, 
the accuracy of the approximation is limited. On the 
other hand, Monte Carlo methods can, in principle, 
approximate the posterior to arbitrary accuracy us­
ing samples from the Bayesian network. However, in 
practice, accurate approximations can require a pro­
hibitively large number of samples. 
In this paper, we propose recognition networks as an 
alternative method which has the potential to be both 
fast and accurate. Recognition networks, like vari­
ational methods, approximate the posterior with a 
member of a family of parameterised distributions. 
However the variational parameters are reoptimised 
for each new set of evidence whereas in recognition net­
works the parameters are only optimised once. The 
recogGition network parameters define a deterministic 
mapping from the evidence to the network's approxi­
mation of the posterior. If the deterministic mapping 
is sufficiently flexible, the posterior can be approxi-

UAI 2001 
MORRIS 
371 
mated to arbitrary accuracy. Inference in a recognition 
network is done with a single feedforward pass. 
We compare recognition networks to other approxi­
mate inference algorithms using a large binary, two 
layer, noisy-OR network (BN20). This network was 
designed using published statistics to be similar to the 
Quick Medical Reference, Decision Theoretic (QMR­
DT). The QMR-DT is a large Bayesian network 
that models medical diagnosis and has been widely 
used as a benchmark for approximate inference al­
gorithms [Shwe and Cooper, 1991, D'Ambrosio, 1994, 
Murphy et al., 1999, Ng and Jordan, 2000]. The set of 
observable nodes in the QMR-DT are called findings1 
and the unobservable nodes are diseases. 
W hen evaluating inference algorithms on the QMR­
DT, one must be careful in one's choice of benchmarks. 
There is a difference between benchmarks which are 
externally defined, ie those that use realistic medical 
data, or internally defined, ie those that are defined by 
the QMR-DT without any reference to the medical do­
main. The difference arises partially because of invalid 
conditional independence assumptions encoded in the 
structure of the QMR-DT (see [Shwe et al., 1991] for 
a discussion of the effect of these simplifying assump­
tions). 
Externally defined benchmarks unfairly pe­
nalise [reward] particular inference algorithms for their 
failure [success] at overcoming these simplifications. 
On the other hand, internally defined benchmarks risk 
irrelevance to the medical domain. 
The 
most 
commonly 
used 
benchmarks 
for the 
QMR-DT combine both internal and external ele­
ments. 
Though other benchmarks exist that are 
either fully internal [Frey et al., 2001] or external 
[Middleton et al., 1991], they have been less widely 
adopted. The internal/external benchmarks use sets of 
positive and negative findings from real patient cases 
(CPC cases) or pedagogical diagnostic problems man­
ufactured by experts (SAM cases). 
However these 
benchmarks use the exact posterior marginals gen­
erated by Quickscore [Heckerman, 1989] as the gold 
standard rather than the reference diagnosis provided 
with the finding sets. Though the QMR-DT defined 
standard is more fair, one hopes that it isn't very dif­
ferent from what an externally defined gold standard 
would be. 
There is, however, a potentially serious problem with 
using the Quickscore/CPC benchmark that, to our 
knowledge, has been previously overlooked. Gener­
ating the gold standard using the QMR-DT makes 
1 A finding is something that a physician may discover 
about a patient and could include a patient's medical his­
tory, symptoms, physical signs or laboratory test results 
[Miller et al., 1982] 
a strong and incorrect assumption about the process 
that selects the observed subset of finding nodes. Dur­
ing the diagnostic procedure, a series of decisions is 
made that determine what laboratory tests are or­
dered, what physical examinations are performed, and 
how the patient is interviewed. Clearly each decision 
is based, in part, upon the results of previously made 
investigations (ie the states of other finding nodes). 
However, Quickscore implicitly assumes that each of 
the decisions was made independently of the states of 
other findings. 
This difference is important because 
the diagnostic procedure introduces a selection bias. 
One aggregate effect of this bias is that a much larger 
proportion of the reported findings are positive than 
one should expect if there were no selection bias. We 
call this effect an observation bias toward positive find­
ings. W ith this observation bias, unobserved finding 
nodes are more likely to be negative than they would 
be without the bias. This effect introduces an addi­
tional, and potentially large, source of variation be­
tween the QMR-DT gold standard and the reference 
diagnosis. Unfortunately the effect cannot be captured 
within the QMR-DT itself. 
One can, however, augment the QMR-DT to model the 
observation bias. This augmentation adds an extra set 
of nodes that indicate whether or not the correspond­
ing finding node was observed. The conditional prob­
ability tables associated with these new nodes define 
the level of observation bias assumed to be present. 
The posterior calculated over the disease nodes in the 
augmented network includes the effect of the assumed 
observation bias.2 Unfortunately, due to the extra set 
of nodes, Quickscore can no longer be used to calcu­
late exact posterior marginals. This requires us to in­
troduce a new method of evaluating the approximate 
posteriors. 
We evaluate approximate inference algorithms using 
purely internally defined benchmarks. Since neither 
the QMR-DT nor the associated CPC and SAM cases 
are publicly available, we generate our own BN20 with 
similar structure and statistics to the QMR-DT. We 
augment our BN20 network the same way we sug­
gest doing for the QMR-DT. In our benchmark we 
use finding sets generated by forward sampling from 
our augmented network. Since we are generating our 
own finding sets, we can vary the level of observation 
bias present in the finding sets and measure the sen­
sitivity of the performance of each approximate infer­
ence method to these variations. Ideally, an approxi­
mate inference method should be fairly insensitive to 
changes in the observation bias. 
In the following section, we describe the QMR-DT 
2Note that the actual level of observation bias present 
in a real medical case will not generally be available 

372 
MORRIS 
UAI2001 
Diseases 
Findings 
Figure 1: The graphical structure of the QMR-DT. 
There are approximately 600 (hidden) disease nodes 
and 4,000 (possibly visible) finding nodes. 
and our BN20 network in greater detail. In section 
three, we describe our model of the observation pro­
cess. In section four, we introduce recognition net­
works and describe how we implement them using mul­
tilayer perceptrons. In section five, we will describe a 
new method of comparing approximate inference al­
gorithms on the QMR-DT. The final section of this 
paper is the experimental section in which we com­
pare approximate inference algorithms using different 
observation biases. 
2 
QMR-DT 
The QMR-DT network has a bipartite graph struc­
ture as shown in figure 1. Both the top-level disease 
nodes and the bottom-level finding nodes are binary 
valued. A positive finding almost always represents an 
abnormal state of the corresponding feature. 
The probability distribution, P(d,f), represented by 
the QMR-DT factors as 
K 
I 
P(d, f) = !IT P(dk)HII P(f; 111";)] 
k=l 
i=l 
where 1r; are the parents of finding i. All parent nodes 
are diseases. The diseases are marginally indepen­
dent and the findings are conditionally independent 
from one another given the states of the diseases. The 
conditional distribution of a finding is parameterised 
using the noisy-OR function. In this parameterisa­
tion, the conditional probability of a negative finding, 
P(fi = - I d), has the form 
P(f; = - I d)= (1- qw) II (1- q;k)dk 
(1) 
dkE1Ti 
= e-9,o-L:k 9,,dk 
(2) 
The parameters Qik are the probabilities that disease 
k will cause finding i by itself. The leak term qw is the 
Diseases 
Findings 
Observations 
Figure 2: Augmented QMR-DT 
probability that a leak event will occur at finding i, ie 
the finding will be positive when none of its parents 
are on. Equation (2) is a useful reparameterisation of 
(1), using B;i = -log(1- q;j)· 
We use published QMR-DT statistics to both build our 
BN20 network and to make some inferences about a 
real QMR-DT. From Shwe et a1 (1991) we know the 
following facts: 
1. Disease configurations are sparse since 
P(dk = 1) E [2 X 10-5,2 X 10-2]. 
2. Leak events are rare since qw E [5.8 x 10-8, 0.153]. 
3. q;k E {0.025, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 0.985}. 
4. Average number of findings connected to a disease 
node is 70. 
Using fact 4 we can predict that each disease will cause 
roughly 35 positive findings.3 Using this and facts 1 
and 2, we can estimate that in fully observed samples 
from the QMR-DT, the number of positive findings 
will be a few hundred or less. This means that there 
are at least an order of magnitude more negative find­
ings than positive ones. 
On the other hand, in the CPC and SAM cases, the 
reported numbers of positive findings and negative 
findings are typically of the same order of magnitude 
(see [Middleton et al., 1991, Shwe and Cooper, 1991, 
Jaakkola and Jordan, 1999] for examples). This dis­
crepancy suggests that the observation process reveals 
a much larger proportion of the positive findings than 
the negative findings. We will discuss the effect of this 
bias in the following section. 
3 
OBSERVATION BIAS 
In realistic diagnostic problems, only a small subset of 
the finding nodes are observed. The selection of the 
31£ we assume that the average Qik for disease k is 0.5 

UAI2001 
MORRIS 
373 
observed nodes depends on a number of factors includ­
ing patient's initial complaint, the internist's beliefs, 
and cost and morbidity of each test. This observation 
process is complex and difficult to model. 
We model the observation process by adding an extra 
layer of observation nodes onto the QMR-DT, one for 
each finding node. The augmented network is shown in 
figure 2. Each observation node o; is the unique child 
of the corresponding finding node /;. In any diagnos­
tic problem, all of the observation nodes are assigned 
a value. If F+ is the set of indices of the positive find­
ings in a given case and F- contains the indices of 
the negative findings, then each observation node Oi is 
assigned a value as follows: {+ i E p+ 
Oj = 
-
i E p-
? 
otherwise 
The value? (unknown) indicates that finding i wasn't 
observed. 
We use the same conditional probability table for each 
node Oi· 
We can fully specify this table using two 
parameters, p+ and p-, as follows: 
P(oi =? I /; = +) = p+ 
P(oi =? I f; = -) = P-
(3) 
Roughly speaking, for a particular case, p+ [p-] is the 
proportion of all the possible positive [negative] find­
ings that remain unobserved. 
Under this observation process, the fact that a find­
ing is unobserved can be informative about its hidden 
state. Using equation (3) and the structure of the aug­
mented QMR-DT, we can write the probability that 
finding i is unobserved given disease vector d as 
P(o; =? I d)= 
p+ P(/; = + I d) + p-P(fi = - I d) 
( 4) 
Using equation (4), we can write the posterior distri­
bution over d given oi =?as 
P(d I Oj =?) 0:: 
P(d) [p+ jp-P(f; =+I d)+ P(fi =
- I d)] 
(5) 
Equation (5) demonstrates that the observation pro­
cess influences the posterior only through the ratio 
p+ /p-. We call this ratio the observation bias ratio. 
If there are any unobserved findings then the posterior 
for the unaugmented QMR-DT will be different than 
the posterior for the augmented QMR-DT.4 
4except in the unlikely case where p+ /p-
= 1 
.-----ğ 
: + - l ǂ X 
1 
ǁ 
Z 
ǃ - - - - - - - - .. -Ǆ 
0 J. 
.I g ,_...., Q(dk=l;o):::zk ,ĠQ(d;o) 
: ; - 0 : 
Ğ--I 
'_--------- -K 
·---.... --I 
observation 
rerepre:s.entation 
deterministic 
ve<:tor 
!NippUlg 
parameterisation 
.appr-o-:<.i0ie 
postenor 
Figure 3: Process by which a recognition network gen­
erates an approximate posterior from an observation 
vector. 
The observation bias ratio has a nice interpretation. 
Since in realistic cases almost all possible negative find­
ings are hidden (ie p-
H 1), therefore p+jp-
H p+. 
The observation bias ratio is roughly equal the pro­
portion of the possible positive findings that remain 
hidden. 
As this interpretation makes clear, the observation 
bias ratio will change from problem to problem and 
even during the process of the diagnostic procedure. 
As such, approximate inference algorithms which can 
make use of information about the observation pro­
cess should be robust to slightly inaccurate informa­
tion. Our experiments test the sensitivity of inference 
algorithms to changes in the assumed values of p+ and 
p-. 
Recognition networks incorporate the observation pro­
cess in a natural way. The network parameters are op­
timised using samples from the augmented version of 
the BN20 network. These samples include the effect 
of the observation process. Therefore, the network is 
trained to do inference assuming a particular observa­
tion bias ratio. In the following section, we describe 
recognition networks in greater detail. 
4 RECOGNITION NETWORKS 
A recognition network is a deterministic function that 
maps an observation vector o to an approximate pos­
terior distribution over the disease nodes d. Figure 3 
shows the whole process. First, the observation vec­
tor o is rerepresented as a binary vector x. The input 
vector has elements Xi = 1 only if Oi = + otherwise 
Xi = 0. In other words, our current implementation of 
recognition networks doesn't distinguish between neg­
ative and unobserved findings. 
A parameter vector 
z is then generated by evaluating the parameterised, 
vector-valued function g(x; fl:). 
The tunable param­
eters, fl:, of this function determine the behaviour of 
the recognition network. Each element Zk of the pa­
rameter vector is interpreted as the marginal posterior 
probability that disease k is present, ie 
Q(dk = l;o) = Zk 

374 
MORRIS 
UAI2001 
The distribution over all the diseases Q(d; o) can be 
written as 
Q(d;o) =II Q(dk;o) =II zF"(1- z.:)(l-d•) 
k 
k 
We use two styles of parameterisations of the vector­
valued functions: logistic regression (LR) networks 
and multilayer perceptrons (MLP). The following 
equations specify the activities of the units in the hid­
den (y) and output (z) layers of the MLP given the 
vector of input activities (x): 
Yi 
a(ak + L Wk;X; + L ukiYi) 
j 
(6) 
(7) 
where a(z) = (1 + exp(-z))-1 is the logistic function 
and a and b are vectors of bias terms. The param­
eter set n = {U, V, W, a, b} contains all three weight 
matrices and the two vectors of biases. 
The LR networks are MLPs without a hidden layer, ie 
the activity of the k-th output unit, Zk. is 
Zk = a(ak + L Wk;x;) 
We use samples, (d(n), oCnl), from our augmented 
BN20 network to train the recognition network. The 
reference diagnosis, d(n), is used as the target vector. 
The error function we minimise, E(O), where z(n) is 
the parameter vector generated using o(n), is: 
E(O) is the cross-entropy between the set of reference 
diagnoses and the approximate posterior Q(d; o(nl). 
In the large sample limit, equation (8) is minimised 
when 
Zkn) = P(dk = 1 I o(n)) 
Since 
MLPs 
are 
universal 
approx­
imators [Lapedes and Farber, 1988], it is possible, in 
principle, given enough hidden units and incorporat­
ing negative evidence to train the MLP to predict the 
exact posterior marginals. 
5 
EVALUATION 
Inference methods for the QMR-DT are typically 
evaluated by comparing their approximate posteriors 
against the exact posterior marginals calculated using 
the Quickscore algorithm [Heckerman, 1989]. How­
ever, since Quickscore ignores unobserved findings, it 
generates incorrect posterior marginals when the ob­
servation bias ratio isn't one. This section describes 
how to compare approximate posteriors using lists of 
diagnoses. 
5.1 
D-LISTS 
A diagnosis list (D-list) is an ordered set of disease 
configurations (aka diagnoses) {dl,d2, . . . ,dM}. The 
order of the D-list is important since in a clinical set­
ting only diagnoses near the top of the list will ever be 
considered. 
In this paper, the D-list assigned to an approximate 
posterior is the N most probable diagnoses under that 
posterior. Since we only use fully factorised posteriors, 
we can use best-first search to generate this list. 
5.2 
EVALUATING D-LISTS 
We score a diagnosis, d, using its joint probability, 
P(dm,o(n)), with the observation vector o(n). Since 
this score is equal to the posterior times a factor that 
doesn't depend upon d, ie 
we can use it to rank all diagnoses generated for the 
same evidence vector. The score of the reference di­
agnosis, P( d(n), oCn)) provides a good benchmark to 
compare other diagnoses against. 
We use the average cumulative ratio curve to measure 
the expected quality of a D-list over a distribution of 
observation vectors. The cumulative ratio curve of a 
D-list for o(n) is defined for ranks 1 up to the length of 
the list. The value C(r, oCnl) of the cumulative ratio 
curve at rank r is 
r 
C(r, o(n)) = Z(o(n))-1 L P(dm, o(n)) 
m=l 
where Z(o<nl) is a normalising factor. This factor en­
sures that the curves for different observation vectors 
all have the same scale. We set Z(oCnl) to be 
where d* is the diagnosis with the highest joint prob­
ability with o(n) among all of the D-lists generated by 
the different algorithms being compared. Note that 
this ensures 
C(l, o(n)) S 1 
A good cumulative ratio curve starts near 1 and grows 
quickly. The average cumulative ratio curve is the av­
erage across the observation vectors within a test set 
of the individual cumulative ratio curves. 

UA12001 
MORRIS 
375 
6 
EXPERIMENTS 
6.1 
METHODS 
We compare recognition networks against one vari­
ational method and one Monte Carlo method. We 
only run the competing methods on the unaug­
mented BN20 network. The variational method, JJ99 
[Jaakkola and Jordan, 1999] has no obvious extension 
to the augmented network. The Monte Carlo method, 
AIS-BN [Cheng and Druzdzel, 2000], could be run on 
an augmented QMR-DT, how doing so would drasti­
cally increase its time complexity. 
6.1.1 
JJ99 
Jaakkola and Jordan (1999) proposed the following 
method for approximate inference in the QMR-DT. 
They approximate the log posterior marginal odds of 
disease k, 
with 
P(dk = 1\ o) 
lk =log P(dk = 0 I o) 
4 = Pk - 6i0 - L 6jk + L 6ikĀi 
jEF-
iEF+ 
where Pk = log[P(dk = 1)/P(dk = 0)] is the log prior 
odds and the 8 parameters are defined as in equation 
(2). The ƽi values are strictly positive variational pa­
rameters chosen to globally minimise a convex upper 
bound on the probability of o. We use a standard non­
linear optimisation routine to do the minimisation. 
6.1.2 
AIS-BN 
AIS-BN is an importance sampling method with an 
adaptive proposal distribution. Following Cheng and 
Druzdzel's (2000) empirical tests, we use a two phase 
version of AIS-BN. In the initial phase the proposal 
distribution adapts and in the second phase the pro­
posal distribution is fixed and samples from it are 
used in the estimation of the posterior marginals. We 
used the parameter settings suggested by Cheng and 
Druzdzel, however we only use one of the two sug­
gested initialisation heuristics for the proposal distri­
bution. The initial proposal distribution, P, before 
any adaptation, is set as follows: 
F(d = 1) = {P(dk = 1) 
k 
0.04 
if P(dk = 1) > 0.04 
otherwise 
Cheng and Druzdzel also suggest setting F(dk = 1) = 
0.5 in some cases, however initial tests showed that 
using this heuristic results in significantly worse per­
formance. For each test case, we use 25, 000 samples 
SO% 
'"L------1 
... :.::;•"':'' .. 
-······ 
" 
... 
FGo-' , 
•• 
-
···" 
ƾƿǀ,'-c-.---,.,--, --...,.="
""""",.. 
rank 
· L----ā-----1 
--··········· 
... 
,. 
.. 
... 
Figure 4: Average cumulative ratio curves for the eight 
test sets. There is one column for each value of p- and 
one row for each p+. Notice the different scales. 
in the initial training phase and 75, 000 samples in the 
second phase. The same samples are used to estimate 
both P(dk, o) and P(o). 
6.1.3 
MLP 
We train our recognition networks using stochastic 
gradient descent to minimise equation (8). Our train­
ing algorithm incorporates an adaptive global learning 
rate 1'/(t), a momentum term /J = 0.95, and error cen­
tering [Schraudolph, 1998]. The update rule for an 
arbitrary, non-bias weight w from n is 
where (b..w) (t) is an estimate at the t-th mini-batch 
of the mean value of b..w. For bias weights, the up­
date rule is the samĜ except the (b..w)(t) term isn't 
subtracted off. 
We trained both an LR network and an MLP on 

376 
MORRIS 
UAI2001 
samples from our augmented BN20 network using 
p+ 
= 0.5 and p-
= 1.0. 
We first trained the LR 
network first using 107 samples. The weight matrix, 
W, of the LR network became the fixed input-output 
weights for the MLP. Our MLP contains 1000 hidden 
units, The weights to the hidden units were trained 
using 107 samples. 
6.2 
R ESULTS 
6.2.1 
Benchmark Diagnostic Problems 
In this section, we describe how we generate the bench­
marks we use to compare the inference algorithms. We 
generate eight benchmark test sets by forward sam­
pling from our augmented BN20 network with differ­
ent values of p+ and p-. 
Each benchmark test set 
contains exactly 1000 test cases. 
We attempt to generate benchmarks of similar diffi­
cult as the CPC cases. To this end we only generate 
reference diagnoses containing exactly five diseases by 
sampling from P(d I Lk dk = 5), ie the disease prior 
conditioned on there being exactly five diseases in the 
reference diagnosis. We generate the observation vec­
tor o<n) by clamping the disease nodes in configuration 
d(n) and forward sampling from our augmented BN20 
network. 
We generate the eight different benchmarks by using 
all combinations of four different values of p+ and two 
different values of p-. The value of p+ is chosen from 
{0, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9}. There are 100 positive findings on 
average in the test cases for which all positive findings 
are observed. 
The value of p- is either 0.5 or 1. The p- = 1 bench­
mark is designed to model realistic diagnostic prob­
lems. 
However, these benchmarks give recognition 
networks an unfair advantage since neither JJ99 nor 
AIS-BN incorporate information about the observa­
tion process. As we have no other convenient method 
to provide JJ99 and AIS-BN with this information, 
we use p-
= 0.5 benchmarks to ensure that there is 
at least one benchmark where the observation process 
doesn't effect the posterior (ie p+ fp-
= 1). However, 
the p-
= 0.5 benchmarks are extremely unrealistic 
since each test case contains over 2000 negative find­
ings. 
6.2.2 
Results 
Figure 4 shows the average cumulative ratio curves for 
test set. Bad performance on some test sets could ei­
ther be due to an incorrect observation bias ratio or 
because the inference problem is particularly difficult. 
To distinguish between these two explanations, we in­
clude benchmark curves when p+ f:. 0.5. These curves 
were generated by other logistic regression networks 
trained on samples from the augmented BN20 net­
work with the same value of p+ as the test cases. 
Both the LR and MLP networks perform very well on 
all but one of the test sets. The MLP performs the 
best of all the methods when the assumed observation 
bias equals the actual observation bias and is com­
petitive with the benchmark curve on the p+ = 0 and 
p+ = . 75 cases. Surprisingly, the LR network performs 
almost as well as the MLP in all cases despite using 
only one third as many parameters as the MLP. Most 
importantly, both recognition networks have good cu­
mulative ratio curves for low ranks, ie they place good 
diagnoses high up in their D-lists. AIS-BN seems par­
ticularly suited for approximate inference when only a 
few positive findings are available. 
7 
DISCUSSION 
In summary, we have made two main contributions 
which include introducing MLPs for approximate in­
ference. We are however, not the first to use recogni­
tion networks for approximate inference. 
Recognition networks are a type of recognition model. 
Our logistic regression network is exactly the same as 
the single layer recognition model in the Helmholtz 
machine [Dayan et al., 1995, Hinton et al., 1995] and 
is trained using a similar algorithm. Our contribution 
to this earlier work is the addition of a hidden layer to 
the recognition model. 
Our second contribution lies in identifying the impor­
tance of the observation process. 
Observation pro­
cesses are important in any inference problem where 
some of the potentially observable variables are hid­
den. We've showed that ignoring or incorrectly mod­
elling even a very basic type of selection bias can affect 
the accuracy of approximate inference. In particular, 
we have shown a non-trivial and algorithmȔspecific ef­
fect of observation bias. 
One obvious extension of this work would be to incor­
porate negative evidence into the recognition network. 
This would require using 1-of-N coding for the input 
units. Recognition networks could be used for infer­
ence in arbitrary Bayesian networks. 
However, this 
may require 1-of-N coding for both the input and out­
put units. 
ACKNOWL EDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Peter Dayan and Geoffrey Hin­
ton for their significant contributions. 
Additionally 
I would like to thank Brendan Frey, Kevin Murphy, 
Relu Patrascu, Sam Roweis, and especially Yee Whye 

UAI2001 
MORRIS 
377 
Teh for helpful discussions. This work was generously 
funded by the Gatsby Charitable Foundation.
