1
Data-Driven Permanent Magnet Temperature
Estimation in Synchronous Motors with
Supervised Machine Learning
Wilhelm Kirchg¨assner, Member, IEEE, Oliver Wallscheid, Member, IEEE
and Joachim B¨ocker, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Monitoring the magnet temperature in permanent
magnet synchronous motors (PMSMs) for automotive applica-
tions is a challenging task for several decades now, as sig-
nal injection or sensor-based methods still prove unfeasible
in a commercial context. Overheating results in severe motor
deterioration and is thus of high concern for the machine’s
control strategy and its design. Lack of precise temperature
estimations leads to lesser device utilization and higher material
cost. In this work, several machine learning (ML) models are
empirically evaluated on their estimation accuracy for the task
of predicting latent high-dynamic magnet temperature proﬁles.
The range of selected algorithms covers as diverse approaches
as possible with ordinary and weighted least squares, support
vector regression, k-nearest neighbors, randomized trees and
neural networks. Having test bench data available, it is shown
that ML approaches relying merely on collected data meet the
estimation performance of classical thermal models built on
thermodynamic theory, yet not all kinds of models render efﬁcient
use of large datasets or sufﬁcient modeling capacities. Especially
linear regression and simple feed-forward neural networks with
optimized hyperparameters mark strong predictive quality at low
to moderate model sizes.
Index Terms—Machine learning, deep learning, thermal man-
agement, permanent magnet synchronous motor, neural net-
works, temperature estimation, functional safety.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE permanent magnet synchronous motor (PMSM) is
the preferred choice in many industry applications due to
its high power and torque densities along its high efﬁciency
[1]. In order to exploit the motor’s maximum utilization, high
thermal stress on the motor’s potentially failing components
must be taken into account when designing the motor or
determining its control strategy. Especially in the automotive
sector, competitive pressure and high manufacturing costs
drive engineers to ﬁnd more and more ways to reduce the
safety margin in embedded materials. Being able to exploit the
motor’s full capabilities makes precise temperature informa-
tion at runtime necessary since overheating will result in severe
motor deterioration. Among the typical important components
that are sensitive to excessive heat, e.g. stator end windings
This work is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
under grant BO 2535/15-1.
W. Kirchg¨assner, O. Wallscheid and J. B¨ocker are with the De-
partment
Power
Electronics
and
Electrical
Drives,
Paderborn
Univer-

and bearings, the permanent magnets in the rotor constitute
especially failure prone parts of the motor. Cooling of the rotor
is an intricate endeavor compared to stator cooling, which adds
to the risk of permanent magnets irreversibly demagnetize due
to overheating [2]. While sensor-based measurements would
yield fast and accurate knowledge about the machine’s thermal
state, assessing the rotor temperature in this manner is usually
not within economic and technically feasible boundaries yet. In
particular, direct rotor monitoring techniques such as infrared
thermography [3], [4] or classic thermocouples with shaft-
mounted slip-rings [5] fall short of entering industrial series
production.
Consequently, research focus centers on estimating rotor
temperatures, and those of permanent magnets in particular,
on a model basis. Although computational ﬂuid dynamics
(CFD) and heat equation ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) enjoy
good reputation for their rigorous modeling capacities [6],
their high computational demand excludes them from real-time
monitoring upfront. An alternative real-time capable thermal
model, called lumped-parameter thermal network (LPTN), ap-
proximates the heat transfer process with equivalent circuit di-
agrams. Being partly based on basic formulations of heat trans-
fer theory, they are computationally lightweight if reduced to a
low-order structure and provide good estimation performance
[7]. However, LPTNs must forfeit physical interpretability of
its structure and parameter values by signiﬁcantly curtailing
degrees of freedom in favor of the real-time requirement.
Moreover, expert domain knowledge is mandatory for the
correct choice of not only their parameter values, but also
for their structural design [7].
In the last decades, research efforts have also been made
that deviate from thermodynamic theory: Typical lightweight
approaches from this domain encompass the setup of electric
machine models that provide information about temperature-
sensitive electrical model parameters indirectly. There are
methods that work with current injection [9] or voltage injec-
tion [10] to obtain the stator winding resistance or the magneti-
zation level of the magnets, respectively, as thermal indicators
at the cost of additional losses. Moreover, fundamental wave
ﬂux observers [11] can be contemplated to assess the reversible
demagnetization of the embedded magnets. However, these
methods suffer from high electric model parameter sensitivity,
such that inaccurate modeling (potentially in the range of
manufacturing tolerances) leads to excessive estimation errors
arXiv:2001.06246v1  [cs.LG]  17 Jan 2020

2
[12].
In an effort to combine the advantages from both domains,
[13] fused an LPTN and a ﬂux-based temperature observer
with a Kalman ﬁlter. They report increased robustness and
estimation accuracy for the full motor speed range, and an
additional system failure detection feature.
In contrast to these physically-motivated estimation ap-
proaches, machine learning (ML) models that detach from
any classic fundamental heat theory approximation will be
examined empirically on the task of estimating the magnet
temperature in a PMSM in this work. No a priori knowledge
will be incorporated, and computational demand at runtime
(during inference) scales less drastically with model com-
plexity. Model parameters are ﬁtted on observational data
only, making domain knowledge less relevant. Leveraging
this generalizability, one can easily transfer insights from this
work into neighboring ﬁelds of interest, e.g. heating in power
electronics, batteries’ state-of-health, etc.
A scheme depicting the idea of ﬁtting a ML model on
collected testbench data and having it eventually inform an
arbitrary controller is shown in Fig. 1. The more accurate the
control is informed of the thermal state, the better it can watch
for critical operation and apply power derating [14].
Although the magnet temperature is the only contemplated
target value in this work, all considered ML models are also
trivially applicable to other continuous or discrete valued
quantities of interest, such as torque or stator temperatures
[15]–[17]. Furthermore, incorporating an increasing amount of
spatially targeted temperature regions poses a virtually minor
design overhead.
Related Work
Certain ML approaches for the task of temperature proﬁle
estimation in a PMSM were studied before: Recurrent neural
networks with memory units, in particular, long short-term
memory (LSTM) or gated recurrent units (GRU) were evalu-
ated on low-dynamic temperature proﬁles with a hyperparam-
eter optimization via particle swarm optimization (PSO) in
[15]. In [16], temporal convolutional neural networks (TCN)
were applied on also high-dynamic data and a comparison
with recurrent architectures were compiled after tuning hy-
perparameters with Bayesian optimization. Far simpler ML
models like linear regression were also shown to be effective
as long as data has been preprocessed with low-pass ﬁlters in
[17].
This paper extends the related work in so far that the broader
ﬁeld of supervised learning in regression tasks is illuminated.
All previous publications fall into the regime of either fast
and simple least-squares regression, or computation-heavy and
sophisticated deep learning, albeit there is a rich set of tools
in between. This gap is characterized by models of interme-
diate complexity and expressive power, and is systematically
evaluated in this work with real-time capability and achievable
estimation accuracy in mind.
All experiments are conducted on the dataset1 from [16],
[17].
1Publicly available at www.kaggle.com/wkirgsn/electric-motor-temperature
Fig. 1. Simpliﬁed scheme of the whole process from data acquisition at the
test bench over model training up to the integrated temperature monitoring in
an automotive application (cf. [16]).
II. REGRESSION ALGORITHMS
The range of ML models can be categorized by e.g. their
modeling capacities, prior assumptions over the data, amount
of model parameters and their update rules, or simply their
runtime in terms of the big-O notation. Representative classes
for the regression task are linear models like ordinary least
squares and its regularized derivatives; feed-forward neural
networks as non-linear function approximators; decision trees
that learn splits in the feature co-domain; support vector
machines; k-nearest-neighbors; as well as the diverse ensem-
ble of those (cf. [18]). All contemplated models are brieﬂy
illuminated in this section.
A. Ordinary Least Squares
The model family of linear approximators assume a linear
relationship between a multi-dimensional input of vectors
X = (x1, x2, ..., xp) ∈Rn×p and the real-valued (possibly
multi-dimensional) output vector y with p denoting the amount
of input features, and n being the amount of obervations. See
[18] for a comprehensive overview.
Rearranging the minimization of the residual sum of squares
gives a closed solution form for inferring the model coefﬁ-
cients ˆβ from the data:
ˆy = X ˆβ = X(XTX)−1XTy,
(1)

3
which is known as ordinary least squares (OLS). Popular
regularized versions of OLS are called ridge regression [19] for
an additional ℓ2 penalty term in the cost function or LASSO
[20] for the ℓ1 addition. Here, these are not considered as they
have been shown to be inefﬁcient for this dataset [17].
B. Weighted Least Squares
A variation of OLS where all observations are weighted by
a weight matrix W ∈Rn×n:
ˆβ = (XTW X)−1XTW y,
(2)
Weighted least squares (WLS) is often used to account for
heteroscedasticity in the data and increase robustness of the
estimator. Especially in this work, there is another industry-
driven incentive to weight observed data: Since the ultimate
goal is to avoid overheating, it is of reasonably higher interest
to estimate high temperatures more accurately than lower
thermal states. When deviating from the analytical solution of
the least squares method to gradient-descent-based optimiza-
tion, one can also penalize under-estimates more than over-
estimates, which is not covered here. WLS will be compared
to OLS in Sec. IV-C.
C. Epsilon-Support Vector Regression
Although observations x ∈Rp are usually projected into
higher dimensions through a kernel function K(x, x′) =
⟨φ(x), φ(x′)⟩, epsilon-support vector regression (ϵ-SVR) still
constructs a regularized linear model with coefﬁcients β on the
new feature space [18]. Here, regularization means penalizing
model complexity by minimizing the quadratic weights. More
speciﬁcally, the linear cost function is ϵ-insensitive i.e. cost is
accumulated only if the prediction error exceeds a threshold
ϵ. Those observations with errors beyond ϵ are called support
vectors in the regression context. In order to allow for support
vector deviation from the ϵ-band one can encompass non-
negative slack-variables ξ and ξ′ in the minimization formu-
lation:
arg min
β
βTβ
2
+ C
N
X
i=1
(ξi + ξ′
i)

,
(3)
s.t.
yi −ˆyi ≤ϵ + ξ′
i,
ˆyi −yi ≤ϵ + ξi,
ξi, ξ′
i ≥0
∀
i ∈{1 .. N},
where C balances coefﬁcient regularization and ϵ-band allevia-
tion. Solving the dual problem gives the following approximate
solution:
ˆy =
M
X
i=1
(αi −α′
i)K(xi, x)
s.t.
0 ≤α′
i ≤C, 0 ≤αi ≤C,
with M being the number of support vectors, and (αi −α′
i)
denoting the weight for support vector i.
D. K-Nearest Neighbors
In the regression context, k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) is a
method where all training observations are stored, while new
samples are estimated by taking the mean of stored points in
the vicinity of that new observation [18]. The design parameter
k is the number of neighbors to consider when evaluating the
mean. Neighborhood is determined by the euclidean norm, and
can be weighted optionally by the distance of each neighbor
to the new sample. The k-NNs denote a so-called lazy learn
algorithm, since all computation is deferred to the inference
phase. This counteracts real-time capability but might be
bought for superior accuracy.
E. Randomized Trees
Two methods based on ensembling of randomly grown
decision trees are included: Random forests (RF) [21] and ex-
tremely randomized trees (ET) [22]. Single decision trees tend
to overﬁt on the data and, therefore, suffer from high variance.
This is mitigated by building an ensemble of decision trees
that are ﬁt on random subsets of the given observations with
replacement (bootstrapping) and random subsets of features.
Both measures lead to diverse predictions that are partially
decorrelated from each other, such that averaging over them
reduces variance signiﬁcantly at the cost of additional bias.
ETs differ from RFs in so far that, during training, ETs draw
random thresholds in each feature out of the considered set
in order to determine the next split, whereas RFs search for
the most discriminative thresholds. This additional random
component in ETs further ampliﬁes the effect of variance
reduction and bias increase.
F. Neural Network Architectures
Neural networks are known to be universal generalizers
[23], with gradual degrees of complexity that can be adapted
to the capacities of the application platform. The vanilla form
of a neural network is the multi-layer perceptron (MLP),
where regressors are non-linearly transformed over several
layers and eventually conclude to a prediction through (1).
The transformed vector h(l) after layer l is computed from
the preceding transformed vectors of layer l −1 by
h(l) = g(l)(W (l)h(l−1) + b(l));
l ∈{1 .. L}
(4)
with g(l) being an activation function at layer l and W (l) ∈
Rr×s denoting the trainable weights between the r and s
neurons of layer l and l −1, respectively. Popular choices
for the activation function are the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU)
[24] or the exponentially linear unit [25] as they have shown to
converge faster with similar accuracy compared to the original
sigmoid or tangens hyperbolicus. Despite the high non-linear
structure in MLPs, they are end-to-end differentiable through
the backpropagation rule [23], making them optimizable by
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and derivations from that.
A standard regularization scheme, next to weight decay [26]
and dropout [27], is batch normalization [28], which scales
each new batch of training data after every layer according
to the ℓ2 norm but has no effect during inference [31]. Even

4
TABLE I
MEASURED INPUT AND TARGET PARAMETERS
Parameter name
Symbol
Inputs
Ambient temperature
ϑa
Liquid coolant temperature
ϑc
Actual voltage d-axis component
ud
Actual voltage q-axis component
uq
Actual current d-axis component
id
Actual current q-axis component
iq
Motor speed
nmech
Derived inputs
Voltage magnitude
q
u2
d + u2q
us
Current magnitude
q
i2
d + i2q
is
Electric apparent power 1.5 ∗us ∗is
Sel
Motor speed and current interaction
is · ω
Motor speed and power interaction
Sel · ω
Target
Permanent magnet temperature
ϑP M
though this and alternative normalization schemes, such as
weight and layer norm [29], [30], gained popularity in recent
years [31], there was also a new type of activation and dropout
functions proposed that circumvent additional layers: Self-
normalizing NNs (SNNs) [32]. Here, the idea is to normalize
neuron activations implicitly through scaled ELUs (SELU) and
a new variant of dropout.
In contrast to the MLP architecture, recurrent topologies
with long short-term memory (LSTM) [33] or temporal con-
volutional neural networks (TCN) [34] can utilize time de-
pendency between neighboring observations in a temperature
proﬁle without explicit feature engineering. However, these
variants come with many more model parameters, and were
extensively optimized in [16], such that their performance will
be merely reported for comparison with the benchmarks in the
end of this paper.
III. BLACK-BOX THERMAL MODELING
Similar to [7], a three-phase PMSM of 50 kW mounted
on a test bench yielded the available data with a consistent
sampling frequency of fs = 2 Hz. The data aggregates 139
hours of recordings in total or around one million multi-
dimensional samples. Obviously, supervised learning requires
data measured on enhanced motor test equipment. Coolant,
ambient, and magnet temperatures are recorded with standard
thermocouples. The rotor temperature information, represented
by the permanent magnets’ surface temperature, is transmitted
wirelessly over a telemetry unit. Tab. I compiles the considered
quantities that represent the input and output of the following
ML models. Denoted input signals are commonly accessible in
real-world traction drive systems, hence, tuned ML models can
be plugged into commercial vehicle controls without further
sensor upgrades. Fig. 2 depicts a two-dimensional principal
component analysis (PCA) representation of the input features
colored according to the target’s thermal state. It becomes
evident that no trivial relationship between data with high and
low temperatures is inferable.
A. Data Preprocessing and Feature Engineering
All representations of the data are standardized on their
sample mean and sample unit variance exhibited in the training
set. The exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA) and
standard deviation (EWMS) are taken into account so that
for every timestep t the following terms are computed for
each input parameter X and adhered to the models’ input (see
Tab. I):
µt =
Pt
i=0 wixt−i
Pt
i=0 wi
and
σt =
Pt
i=0 wi(xi −µt)2
Pt
i=0 wi
,
(5)
where wi = (1 −α)i with α = 2/(s + 1) and s being
the span that is to be chosen. Multiple values for the span
can be applied leading to different frequency-ﬁltered versions
of the raw time-series data. The weights of the preceding s
observations describe around 86.5 % of all weights’ total sum.
Consecutive calculations of the EWMA can be derived from
a more computationally efﬁcient form of (5),
µt = (1 −α)µt−1 + αxt,
(6)
which is highly relevant especially for automotive applications
where embedded systems run on cost-optimized hardware. A
computing-efﬁcient form of the EWMS exists likewise.
Incorporating these additional features is inevitable for the
ML approaches considered in this work, as they all assume
independent and identically distributed data. This assumption
is in conﬂict with a PMSM’s thermal behavior representing a
dynamic system. Nonetheless, adding trend to the actual input
space gives rise to overcoming this discrepancy and ﬁnding
approximating functions with sufﬁcient accuracy.
B. Analogy to LPTN RC Circuits
Examining LPTNs that are well-deﬁned for the temperature
estimation task from [7], reveals that these are characterized
by low-pass ﬁlters or, equivalently, RC circuits smoothing the
raw input data. From signal theory, it is known that RC circuits
are inﬁnite impulse response (IIR) ﬁlters of the form
x = y + RC dy
dt ,
(7)
which can be discretized to
xt = yt + RC yt −yt−1
h
,
(8)
with h being the step size. Rearranging (8) gives
yt =
RC
RC + hyt−1 +
h
RC + hxt,
(9)
which resembles (6) with α = (RC + h)−1h.
Consequently, it is reasonable to directly apply EWMAs on
the sensor time-series recordings in order to obtain regressors
exhibiting patterns similar to those in LPTNs. This observation
was empirically conﬁrmed in [17].

5
Fig. 2. Two-dimensional PCA of the data projected on the ﬁrst two principal components, that is, the highest sample variance. Several recording sessions are
depicted with increasingly random excitation from left to right. Those measurements with high PM temperature are colored red and those with low temperature
blue. No clear trend is visibly inferrable especially in the middle region.
C. Cross-Validation
Generalization error is reported by evaluating the prediction
error on a test set of seven hours unseen during training. In
case of MLPs, further 10 % of the training set is withheld
from training, and acts as validation set. That portion is used to
apply early stopping [35] i.e. mitigating overﬁtting by stopping
training after the cost function on this set is not improving
anymore for a certain delta after a given number of iterations
(epochs).
Scores are reported upon the mean squared error (MSE),
mean absolute error (MAE), and the coefﬁcient of determi-
nation (R²) between predicted sequence and ground truth.
Moreover, the maximum deviation occuring in the testset (ℓ∞
norm) is an important indicator for the quality of temperature
estimations.
D. Cross-Validation for Hyperparameter Tuning
For a fair comparison of the different models, all design-
parameters or hyperparameters are tuned systematically with
the same approach: Bayesian optimization [36]. During this
sequential optimization technique, a surrogate model (here, a
Gaussian process) is trained to ﬁnd a mapping from the hy-
perparameter space to the test set error. The surrogate model’s
capability to yield uncertainty estimates in the hyperparameter
space can be used to trade exploration off for exploitation
when determining the next hyperparameter set to evaluate.
More speciﬁcally, the chosen objective is the average
MSE over all folds during stratiﬁed group-three-fold cross-
validation (CV). Here, stratiﬁcation refers to distributing
recording sessions with same-level maximum temperatures
evenly over the three folds. Such homogeneous folds reduce
test error, following the heuristic of avoiding outlier samples
concentrated in just few folds. Grouping denotes that no
samples from the same measurement session appear in more
than one fold in order to mitigate overﬁtting. In addition,
feature value normalization was conducted for every fold with
respect to observations in the training set. Note that the test
set from Sec. III-C is not part of this CV strategy, and thus
does not leak into the optimization of hyperparameters.
E. Hyperparameters and Intervals
The certain choice of four span values s = (s1, s2, s3, s4)
was always part of the optimization resulting in an independent
TABLE II
HYPERPARAMETER INTERVALS AND OPTIMUM
Hyperparameter
Interval
Optimum
SVR
C
10−3 . . . 10 (log)
1.56
ϵ
10−2 . . . 1
0.11
k-NN
neighbors
1 . . . 2048
2048
weighting
uniform or distance
distance
RF / ET
estimators
10 . . . 600
93 / 600
max. depth
10 . . . 60
60 / 53
min. samples for split
2 . . . 20
15 / 20
min. samples per leaf
1 . . . 10
2 / 7
bootstrap
yes or no
yes / yes
MLP
layers
1 . . . 3
1
units
4 . . . 32
16
activation
SELU or ReLU
ReLu
dropout
0 . . . 0.3
0.13
ℓ2-regularization
10−9 . . . 0.1 (log)
1.7·10−8
learnrate
10−6 . . . 0.1 (log)
5.8·10−3
optimizer
RAdam, Adam, NAdam,
Adamax, RMSProp, SGD
Adam
span set for each model. The amount of span values could
also be made a hyperparameter, but was deliberately set to
four in order to maintain comparability with previous work
[16], [17], where it was found to balance modeling accuracy
with computational demand. Model-speciﬁc hyperparameters
are compiled in Tab. II. All hyperparameter interval bounds
are chosen manually to a range where modeling performance
is likely to converge while constraining runtime.
RFs and ET come with the same hyperparameters: The num-
ber of trees denotes the ensemble size, while the maximum
tree depth constraints growth. A higher minimum amount of
samples for a split help make more robust splits, and increasing
the minimum amount of samples per tree-leaf can mitigate
overﬁtting.
The MLP model family also offers a wide variety of hy-
perparameters: The low upper bounds for the number of units
and layers curtail the amount of model parameters and, thus,
the modeling ﬂexibility for each MLP, yet it has been shown
in [16] that also smaller neural networks reach satisfactory

6
prediction accuracy.
The particular optimization algorithm was either one of
Adam, Adamax, Nesterov Adam (NAdam), rectiﬁed Adam
(RAdam), RMSprop, or vanilla SGD [37]–[39]. During train-
ing, the learning rate of the optimizer is divided by two after
there is no improvement in training set loss for 10 consecutive
epochs anymore. Reducing the learning rate on such loss
plateaus is a common heuristic in MLP training for improving
convergence and local minima exploration [35]. In addition to
this learning rate decay schedule, mini-batch size is doubled
after 33 epochs from 32 to 64 and then again to 128, such
that each training lasts 99 epochs if no early stopping applies.
Increasing the batch size has been shown to beneﬁt training
convergence similar to learning rate decay [40].
Hyperparameters of SVR and k-NN are described in Sec. II.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
For all hyperparameter optimizations, the scikit-optimize
framework [41] is utilized. The acquisition function is ei-
ther of upper conﬁdence bound, expected improvement or
probability of improvement, which calculate new candidate
points independently, and where the most promising proposal
serves as next evaluation point in every iteration. Each model’s
hyperparameter space was searched for at least 100 iterations
with 30 initial random selections.
The Tensorﬂow-toolbox with its high-level API Keras [42]
is used for neural network training, while all other regression
algorithms are computed with the scikit-learn toolbox [43].
The libsvm package [44] and the radial basis function-kernel
are used for the SVR.
The found optima are also organized in Tab. II.
A. Model Performance
An overview of the individual predictive performance of
each model with optimized hyperparameters is compiled in
Tab. III. For models with stochastic optimization, the best
experiment out of 10 repetitions with different random number
generator seeds is reported in order to alleviate scatter of the
training process. Among the usual performance metrics, the
model size is also highlighted. This quantity represents the
amount of parameters that are to be stored for each model in
order to make a prediction on a new observation after training.
Note, however, that these numbers do not include memory that
must be reserved for saving the moving averages of the sensor
data.
Black-box CNNs show the overall best performance in
terms of the MSE, while grey-box LPTNs have the lowest
ℓ∞norm and merely 46 parameters, which is substantially
less than for the other models. Only OLS is worth mentioning
to be in between those two extrema, with a strong MSE,
low maximum deviation and also few model parameters of
109. This should make OLS the preferrable approach among
machine learning models in case there are no resources to
hand-design an LPTN. Though deep learning models are the
most precise, the model size of over 67 thousand parameters
might be difﬁcult to justify while facing the marginal increase
in accuracy especially in automotive systems. The test set
TABLE III
BENCHMARK VALUES FOR DIFFERENT ML METHODS ON THE TEST SET
Model
MSE
in ◦C2
MAE
in ◦C
R²
ℓ∞norm
in ◦C
model size
k-NN
26.10
4.24
0.87
12.86
221k
RF
16.26
3.09
0.92
10.9
1.1M
SVR
13.42
2.75
0.93
31.99
209k
ET
6.51
1.77
0.97
8.29
5.5M
LPTN [45]
5.73
1.98
0.97
6.45
46
RNN [16]
3.26
1.29
0.98
9.1
1.9k
MLP
3.20
1.32
0.98
8.34
1.8k
OLS
3.10
1.46
0.98
7.47
109
CNN [16]
1.52
0.85
0.99
7.04
67k
predictions of OLS, ET and MLP are shown in Fig. 3.
They can be utilized as intermediate approaches to intelligent
temperature estimation before automotive hardware becomes
as strong as it is necessary for deep learning.
It becomes evident that k-NN, RF and SVR could not
ﬁnd a sufﬁcient function approximation, even though their
hyperparameter optimization seeked to maximize modeling
capacity by increasing the model size up to the upper bound of
the hyperparameter intervals, yet without comparable success.
B. Learn Curves
Besides the total test error of each model, scalability with
more training data is often of equal interest. Fig. 4 illustrates
the learn curves of all models. The test set is constant and the
same as in the previous experiments while the training set is
increased successively.
It can be seen that all models plateau out at half the
training set size except for SVR, whose performance seems
to diminish. An explanation might be a limited modeling
capacity for the SVR, which struggles to map all operation
points observed in the data.
It can be summarized that the better performing algorithms
(OLS, MLP, and ET) achieve high performance already with
lesser training set sizes of around 70 hours and no signiﬁcant
performance gains for more data. This naturally suggests
their use in applications where a limited amount of data is
collectable.
C. Error Residuals
In the following the error residuals along the value range of
the ground truth permanent magnet temperature is illuminated.
In terms of an industrial application, robust and accurate
estimation of high temperatures is of signiﬁcantly higher
interest than that of low temperatures. This is due to the
purpose of avoiding overheating and the material destruction
implied by that. There are several ways to opt for this more
specialized use case:
• subsample data such that more high temperatures occur
in the data,
• adjust the cost function to penalize under-estimates, and
increase costs for deviations at high temperatures.
While the ﬁrst point is a general approach to the certain
method of data collection and should be studied on its own,

7
40
60
80
Temp.  n °C
MSE: 2.28 (°C)²
OLS
Mea(ured and e() ma)ed magne) )empera)ure
ϑPM
.ϑPM
−5
0
5
Temp.  n °C
||e||0: 5.85 °C
Est mat on error magnet temperature
40
60
80
Temp.  n °C
MSE: 6.37 (°C)²
ET
−10
−5
0
5
Temp.  n °C
||e||0: 8.29 °C
40
60
80
Temp.  n °C
MSE: 1.84 (°C)−
MLP
−5
0
5
Temp.  n °C
||e||0: 6.48 °C
0
2000
4000
6000
Mo)or (peed
 n 1/min
motor speed
−200
0
200
Torque  n Nm
torque
0
1
2
3
4
5
T me  n h
25
26
27
28
Temp.  n °C
amb ent temperature
0
1
2
3
4
5
T me  n h
20
40
60
80
Temp.  n °C
coolant temperature
Fig. 3. The three best models evaluated on the ﬁrst test set proﬁle (out of two). Ground truth in green, prediction in blue, and the residual in red. The bottom
four plots show selected input variables to highlight the high dynamics of the drive cycle.
9
28
47
65
84
103
122
Training set size in hours
0
10
20
30
40
MSE in K2
Model Learn Curves
ET 
OLS 
RF 
MLP 
SVR 
kNN 
Fig. 4. MSE on a ﬁxed test set and an increasing training set size. Lines denote
mean MSE among 10 random subsets and transparent area marks standard
deviation.
the latter point is trivially done for most ML models. One
example could be WLS: their performance and corresponding
error residuals are opposed to those of OLS in Fig. 5. All
obervations are linearly weighted from 0.33 to 1 according
to their closeness to the total minimum and maximum PM
temperature, respectively, occuring in the data set. The effect
is subtle, but it can be seen that for WLS outlying predictions
are often settled in lower regions of the temperature value
range, while higher temperatures come with less variance.
In order to evaluate the advantage of WLS over OLS on a
signiﬁcant scale, additional load proﬁles need to be recorded
that expose more temperature variance. Speciﬁcally, deviations
at low temperatures are inversely, linearly weighted from a
maximum weight at the maximum allowed temperature, and
under-estimates are additionally weighted by a factor of
√
10.
V. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
It has been shown that if rich datasets are recorded at a
test bench or in production, which is likely in the automotive
industry, then engineers can rely on them to model temperature
estimators. The utilization of special domain expertise and
motor sheet speciﬁcations is circumvented, while monitoring
important component temperatures inside a PMSM is still
real-time processible for certain classical supervised learning
algorithms. Through autonomously conducted hyperparameter

8
Fig. 5. OLS and WLS error residuals on the test set.
searches, it was possible to demonstrate that classical super-
vised learning algorithms achieve state-of-the-art estimation
accuracy also during high dynamic drive cycles. Ordinary least
squares stands out with one of the best accuracies and by far
the lowest amount of model parameters among ML methods,
making it the ﬁrst choice after having found optimal moving
average factors during feature engineering for this certain
application. In the long run, however, deep neural networks
are expected to be prevalent in the temperature estimation
domain, due to their excellent scalability, the rising availability
of measurement data, and increasing computing capabilities
ﬁnding their way into series production for the sake of (hybrid)
electric vehicles.
It is still an open question how well supervised learning
algorithms may generalize across different motors from the
same manufacturer or even among different manufacturers.
This can be answered only with a dataset exhibiting this
diversity, and is yet to be recorded. Moreover, incorporating
domain knowledge at a lesser scale is an auspicious option.
Eventually, assessing the uncertainty of predictions in order
to enable probabilistic estimations could leverage reliability
on data-driven temperature estimators.
