c⃝2017 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists,
or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. DOI: http://dx.doi.org[DOI Number].
Small Boxes Big Data: A Deep Learning Approach to Optimize Variable Sized Bin
Packing
Feng Mao ∗Edgar Blanco ∗† Mingang Fu ∗Rohit Jain ∗Anurag Gupta∗Sebastien Mancel ∗
Rong Yuan ∗Stephen Guo ∗Sai Kumar ∗Yayang Tian∗
∗Warlmart Labs & Walmart Global eCommerce
Sunnyvale, CA, 94086 & San Bruno, CA 94066 USA

† MIT Center for Transportation & Logistics
Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Abstract—Bin Packing problems have been widely studied
because of their broad applications in different domains.
Known as a set of NP-hard problems, they have different vari-
ations and many heuristics have been proposed for obtaining
approximate solutions. Speciﬁcally, for the 1D variable sized
bin packing problem, the two key sets of optimization heuristics
are the bin assignment and the bin allocation. Usually the
performance of a single static optimization heuristic can not
beat that of a dynamic one which is tailored for each bin
packing instance. Building such an adaptive system requires
modeling the relationship between bin features and packing
perform proﬁles. The primary drawbacks of traditional AI
machine learnings for this task are the natural limitations
of feature engineering, such as the curse of dimensionality
and feature selection quality. We introduce a deep learning
approach to overcome the drawbacks by applying a large
training data set, auto feature selection and fast, accurate
labeling. We show in this paper how to build such a system
by both theoretical formulation and engineering practices. Our
prediction system achieves up to 89% training accuracy and
72% validation accuracy to select the best heuristic that can
generate a better quality bin packing solution.
Keywords-1D bin packing, deep learning, big data and
optimization
I. INTRODUCTION
Bin packing problems have been widely studied [1]
among many application domains including logistics trans-
portation, job scheduling, manufacturing, ﬁnancial stock de-
cisions, computer memory management [2], cloud resource
assigment [3], network optimization like WiMax, etc. As
a set of NP hard problems [4], they have many variations
dependent upon the constraints for the speciﬁc problem. A
typical 1D bin packing problem [2] packs a set of segments
into another set of segments. A 3D bin packing ﬁnds a
solution to pack a set of boxes into a set of boxes. According
to the number of different candidate bin types, bin packing
problems are divided into single sized bin packing and
variable sized bin packing [5], which is commonly seen in
logistics delivery packing.
Many approximation algorithms [1] have been proposed
to ﬁnd sub-optimal solutions in a short response time. In
most cases, it is a trade off between the solution quality and
the time to solve it. Adapting to different problem instances
by different algorithms has been studied by traditional AI
machine learning approaches [6] [7] [8] [9]. These works
initially optimize the packing algorithm end-to-end and later
to a ﬁner granularity, state-to-state. To apply traditional
machine learning, these works apply certain ad-hoc feature
engineering to derive bin packing features for their learning
algorithms.
The limitation of these approaches is that they heavily rely
on feature engineering. In most cases, better quality data is
more important than the model itself. To traditional machine
learning, reliance on the feature engineering has two conse-
quences: limitations from the curse of dimensionality [10]
and the incompleteness and inaccuracy of extracted features.
Deep learning [11] can mitigate these issues, although it
is initially limited by the amount of available training data
and the computation power required. In the current era of
big data and multi-core computing, the amount of data
we collect is large and the commodity computer power
is sufﬁcient enough for supporting the deep learning. This
work proposes a deep learning approach for solving the bin
packing problem. In this paper, we limit our scope to the
1D variable sized bin packing.
The challenges of the deep learning approach to the
1D variable sized bin packing lie in three folds. The ﬁrst
challenge comes from the problem deﬁnition itself. We need
to explore and represent the optimization heuristic space for
the algorithm formally. Second, from the data perspective,
it is hard to label a large set of instance performance
proﬁles which overlap with each other within a practical time
constraint. Third, in terms of model building, it is difﬁcult
arXiv:1702.04415v1  [cs.LG]  14 Feb 2017

to determine the optimal neural network structure and its
parameters, such as depth applied and activation function to
use. All these factors need to cooperate to cancel noises but
keep signals from a large set of raw features.
In this study, we formally deﬁne 1D variable sized bin
packing problem and the heuristic space for its optimization.
The key parts of the approximation algorithm are how to
assign the opened bins to the incoming item and how to
choose what type of bins to open when it is required. We
formally construct a set of heuristics for the assignment and
allocation operation. We treat the optimization problem as
a supervised learning procedure. To build a classiﬁcation
model, we need to label the performance proﬁle. Instead of
using the statistical signiﬁcance of the performance proﬁle
classiﬁcation [12], we propose the performance signature, a
binary vector and a fast preﬁx based clustering algorithm.
We further optimize the clustering by minimizing clustering
entropy via Monte Carlo simulation [13]. We explored
different neural network structures and parameters to tune
the prediction model. We explored different depths of 2 to
16 levels and widths of 16 nodes to 512 nodes. We also
explored 8 types of different activation functions from the
traditional sigmoid to rectiﬁer. Our experiments show that
our system can achieve up to 89% training accuracy and
72% validating accuracy when choosing the best heuristic
that generates a better quality bin packing solution.
The contributions of our work are listed as follows. First,
we formalize and deﬁne the optimization space for 1D
variable sized bin packing. Second, we propose a labeling
procedure which balances the clustering time complexity
and quality. Third, we mitigate feature engineering issues
by exploring a deep learning approach and constructing the
bin packing optimization prediction model.
The layout of this study is as follows. Section 2 describes
the scope of the work through a brief survey of bin packing
problems and a formal deﬁnition of 1D variable sized bin
packing. Section 3 deﬁnes the heuristic space for 1D variable
sized bin packing and the procedure of optimization. Section
4 presents the prediction model we use to predict the opti-
mization decision, including the aspects of data collection,
feature deﬁnition and instance labeling. Section 5 describes
the predictive system as a high level, then illustrates how
each component interacts with each other. Section 6 presents
the structure of the neural network for deep learning and
the engineering aspects such as over-ﬁtting and speed-
up. Section 7 contains the experiment results. Section 8
discusses related work. Section 9 concludes the paper with
a short summary.
II. BIN PACKING
The deﬁnition of the canonical bin packing problem is as
follows: pack a ﬁnite set of items into a ﬁnite number of bins
such that dimension constraints hold, while optimizing a cost
function. Examples of common cost functions optimized
include: minimization of number of bins and minimization
of wasted bin space. In computational complexity theory, it
is a combinatorial NP-hard problem [4]. As the search space
is exponentially large, most practical solutions consider
trade-offs between computational complexity and solution
quality by ﬁnding a sub-optimal solution in a relatively short
time using approximate heuristics.
A. Bin Packing Classiﬁcation
There are many variations of this problem and all of
them are NP-hard. These problems have a wide range
of applications such as optimization of logistics networks,
semiconductor chip design, storage software optimization,
manufacturer cost and ﬁnancial stock decisions. They can
be classiﬁed by different criteria [1].
The number of dimensions for the bins and items can
be 1D, 2D or 3D. The memory management problem is
a typical 1D bin packing problem [2]. Unlike the multi-
dimension bin packing problem whose dimensions have
dependency on the others, the vector bin pack packing
has a vector of independent dimensions [3]. The cluster
resource management is a typical application in this domain.
Depending on whether the algorithm can see all the items
beforehand, there are on-line [14] and off-line [15] bin
packing problems. The number of different candidate bin
types divides the bin packing problems into the single sized
bin packing and the variable sized bin packing [5]. They are
commonly seen in the pick-up cabinets and logistics delivery
boxing. We summarize these variations in Table I.
Table I
BIN PACKING CLASSIFICATION
Classiﬁcation Criteria
Set of Types
Item/Bin Dimension
1D, 2D and 3D
Vector
1D and multiple D
Items Visibility
on-line/off-line
Number of Bin Types
single sized, variable sized
In this work, we focus on the off-line one dimensional
variable sized bin packing problem.
B. 1D Variable Sized Bin Packing
Formally, given two sets of positive real numbers, T =
{Ti | 1 ≤i ≤m} and B = {Bi | 1 ≤i ≤n} representing
an item set and a bin set, we want to ﬁnd a partition of
T, set TP = {TPi | 1 ≤i ≤k ≤m} and a mapping
M ⊂TP × B, M = {< TPi, Bj >| (TPi ∈TP) ∧(Bj ∈
B) ∧(P|T Pi|
l=1
Tl ≤Bj, Tl ∈TPi)}, such that under the
partition and mapping, the cost function C = Cost(TP, M)
can be minimized.
The cost function can be as simple as the size of a
mapping. In this case, the cost function represents the
total number of bins used. A more complex cost function
can associate different costs with different bin types. One
commonly used cost function is to deﬁne a unit space cost

for each bin type and evaluate the waste of the bin space for
a particular packing result. In this paper, we give each bin a
ﬁxed cost 1 and calculate each unit space cost by dividing
its volume. The cost of a packing is deﬁned as the wasted
space cost C = P|M|
m=1 1 −volume(TPi)/volume(Bj).
III. HEURISTICS AND OPTIMIZATION DECISION
Two important decisions for the variable sized bin packing
are bin assignment and allocation. Bin assignment deter-
mines how the item gets assigned to the existing allocated
bins. Bin allocation determines what type of bin will get
allocated when the item can not ﬁnd a ﬁt in the existing bins.
We in this paper deﬁne a set of heuristics to make those
decisions. Different assignment and allocation heuristics
result in different costs, as deﬁned by the cost function
chosen. The set of heuristics form the search space where the
optimization decision is made during a bin packing instance
execution. The bin allocation heuristics are only applicable
to the variable sized bin packing.
1) Assignment: Bin assignment is independent of bin
allocation. Well known bin assigment heuristics also known
as ﬁtting include best ﬁt, ﬁrst ﬁt, next ﬁt and worst ﬁt [16].
• Best Fit. The algorithm keeps bins open even if the
next item in the list does not ﬁt in previously opened
bins, with the expectation that a later smaller item will
ﬁt. The criterion for assignment is the placement of the
next item.
• First Fit. The algorithm places the next item in the list
into the ﬁrst bin which has space to accommodate the
item. When bins are ﬁlled completely they are closed
and if an item can not ﬁt into any currently open bin,
a new bin is opened.
• Next Fit. The algorithm opens a bin and places the
items into it in the order they appear in the list. If an
item on the list does not ﬁt into the open bin, we close
this bin permanently, open a new one, and continue
packing the remaining items on the list.
• Worst Fit. The algorithm places the item into a currently
opened bin with the most room remaining. If there is
no such a bin, a new bin is opened for the item.
2) Allocation: The bin allocation can be lazy or aggres-
sive, depending upon where the allocation occurs in the
context of the algorithm. The heuristics we introduce here
are aggressive and allocations are determined during packing
run time execution. This differs from the lazy allocation
strategy in [5], in which all allocations are defaulted to the
largest bin and re-allocations happen after the single sized
bin packing ﬁnishes.
• Best Fit. Given the current item, the algorithm opens
the bin that best ﬁts the item with least space wasted.
The probability of packing smaller items together later
is low.
• Expect Fit. The algorithm looks at all the items that
have not been packed and allocates a bin that can ﬁt
all of them with the least space wasted. If the size of
all these items is larger than the largest bin, it allocates
the largest bin to the current item. It is highly possible
that smaller items can be packed into larger bins that
were allocated earlier.
Table II
HEURISTICS SPACE
Assignment \Allocation
Best Fit
Expect Fit
Best
0
1
First
2
3
Next
4
5
Worst
6
7
We list the heuristics in Table II and label them by an ID
number from 0 to 7. There are more heuristics, such as sum
of subsets and a generic algorithm [17] that can be added
into the heuristics set. In this paper, the size of the heuristic
set is enough to demonstrate how we explore the relationship
between optimization decisions and the bin packing features
to achieve high quality bin packing dynamically.
In this work, we build a prediction model to map bin
packing features to the heuristic which yields a better quality
solution deﬁned by the cost function. The optimization
decision is made by the observation of the features of bin
packing from both bins and items and the learned relation
model. We list the procedure in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Optimization Decision
1: < i, b >←features(Items, Bins)
2: s ←predict(M, < i, b >)
3: < assignment, allocation >←Heuristic Space(s)
4: if < i, b >/∈DataSet then
5:
⃗P ←offline Profiling(< i, b >)
6:
s ←Labeling(⃗P)
7:
M ←< s, < i, b >>
8: end if
9: RBins = ∅
10: while Items ̸= ∅do
11:
item ∈Items
12:
Items = Items −{item}
13:
bin = Assign(item, RBins, assignment)
14:
if bin ̸= ∅then
15:
bin ←item
16:
else
17:
bin = Allocate(item, Bins, allocation)
18:
RBins = RBins ∪{bin}
19:
end if
20: end while
21: return RBins
The algorithm ﬁrst extract the features < i, b > from
the bins and items for the packing instance. Then it applies
the learned prediction model M to predict the best packing

strategy s. The strategy is mapped to a pair of heuristics,
< assignment, allocation > deﬁned in Table
II. The
packing algorithm will pack the item using the selected
packing strategy. It assigns bins and allocates a proper bin
from the available bin set Bins when necessary. DataSet
contains the item/box dimension data and the performance
data for different packing heuristics.The algorithm will mea-
sure whether the new instance is close to those inside the
DataSet. If not, it triggers a proﬁling run and adds its
feature and label into the data set. This way we can keep
the DataSet up to date.
IV. PREDICTION MODEL
The purpose of the prediction model is to catch the
internal connections between the bin packing features and
the selection of heuristics. This task can be achieved by tra-
ditional AI classiﬁcation algorithms such as decision trees,
neural nets, bayesian classiﬁers, support vector machines,
and cased-based learning. There are advantages of using
these algorithms. The models are simple and in most cases
they are easy to interpret and explain.
However, these shallow structures heavily rely on the
quality of data engineering to extract features. Better data
often beats better algorithms. On one hand, the learning
complexity grows exponentially with linear increase in the
dimensionality of the data which leads to the curse of
dimensionality [10]. On the other hand, if incomplete or
erroneous features are extracted, the classiﬁcation process
is inherently limited in performance [11]. Deep learning
structure can mitigate these issues by letting the raw input
data with noise propagated and ﬁltered in the multi-level
deep structure.
A. Deep Learning
In big data era, deep learning [11] [18] is widely applied
to solve artiﬁcial intelligence machine learning problems.
It demonstrates impressive performance to handle large
scale data in computer vision, speech recognition, natural
language processing, ﬁnance and advertisement etc.
Deep learning is deﬁned by a multiple layered artiﬁcial
neural network structure and a set of algorithms to train
the parameters of the network. The network essentially
is cascades of parameterized non-linear modules at each
network layer. The training process is to ﬁnd the parameters
of non-linear modules that can minimize a speciﬁc loss
function computed on the training data set.
A non-linear module is deﬁned by a non-linear function
called activation function. The non-linear modules give the
network the ability to ﬁt a complex non-linear relation. A
typical non-linear function is sigmoid which map numbers
in the range of (−∞, +∞) to numbers in the range of (0, 1).
The loss function could be as simple as the mean square
error function for regression. For classiﬁcation, categorical
cross entropy function has better performance. Backward
propagation of errors from the loss function, called back-
propagation [11] [18] algorithm, is commonly used to train
artiﬁcial neural networks. An optimization method such
as gradient descent is used to search for the parameter
values. We will formally deﬁne the network structure for
our experiment later.
B. Data Collection
To evaluate our proposed approach, we collect a 4 million
data set by randomly sampling real world customer produced
logistics orders of Walmart e-Commerce. It has totally
4, 278, 645 instances of the item and box dimension data.
Each instance contains a set of items and a set of boxes to
construct a pack. We keep only instances containing more
than one items per order and having with multiple box
options to construct the learning model. For each instance,
we have an off-line proﬁling run across all the heuristics
which are listed in Table II. We label each instance with the
heuristic label using our labeling algorithm.
C. Features Extraction
We incorporate prior knowledge to speed up the learn-
ing procedure and increase the prediction accuracy by the
predeﬁned features. Instead of applying dimension reduction
processing like PCA [6], Factor Analysis [7] and NMF [19],
we use all the raw features listed in Table III. The ﬁrst seven
features are from the items and the next six features are
from the bins. The last three features describe the interaction
between the items and bins.
Table III
FEATURES
feature type
features
Item features
number of items
sum of the item volumes
min item volume
max item volume
average item volume
standard deviation of item volumes
variance of item volumes
Box features
number of boxes
min box size
max box size
average box size
standard deviation of box sizes
variance of box sizes
Cross features
average ﬁll in ratio
average min ﬁll in ratio
average max ﬁll in ratio
D. Performance Signature and Instance Labeling
The raw performance for each packing instance is a
vector of packing cost results, RP. Each element of the
vector represents the packing cost using a different heuristic.
We ﬁrst normalize each raw performance vector to NP
(Normalize Performance vector) using equation 1. From the
normalized performance vector, we derive the performance

signature, SP using equations 2, 3 and 4. The performance
signature vector is a binary indicator vector. The non zero
elements indicate the top performers within the candidate
heuristic set. The ∆give some tolerance to extract top
performers. Smaller value will lead to a larger number of
different signatures.
NP =
RP
pP (RPi)2
(1)
NPmin = min(NP0, NP1, ..., NP7)
(2)
SP = [sp0, sp1, ...sp7]
(3)
spi =
(
1,
if NPi ≤NPmin + ∆
0,
otherwise
(4)
The performance signature, SP is generated by locating
the lowest cost heuristics in the normalized cost vector with a
tolerance factor ∆. The labeling is to map a signature vector
which might contain multiple ones or top performers to an
indicator vector which contains only one top performer. The
reason why we do not measure the raw vector distance is
because we care about the right decision to choose the best
performers instead of knowing their actual distance.
The challenge of labeling a large set of binary vector lies
in two folds: the large overlap of vector indicators between
vectors and the computational complexity to label them.
In most cases a performance signature vector is not
an indicator vector with a single indicator. The true top
performer for a speciﬁc instance is either buried in the
noises or there are multiple heuristics generating the same
result. It will lead to low accuracy when we build the
prediction model, if we mislabel the instance. To overcome
this challenge, we need to ﬁrst identify the clusters from the
data set. Then, given a cluster, identify the indicator that this
cluster represents.
There are many ways to cluster the binary vector. The
essential of the clustering is the deﬁnition of the distance
measurement [20]. One recent approach is entropy based
clustering [13], which actually measures the KullbackLeibler
(KL) distance and minimize the average KL distances among
clusters. The drawback of this approach is its time complex-
ity. It is Monte Carlo based random algorithm to split the
original data set into multiple clusters. Given a large binary
set, it takes too many iterations or a long time to generate
the clusters. A proper initialization of clusters can reduce
the complexity of this problem.
Instead of using entropy based clustering directly to
cluster the original large binary vector set, we in this work
ﬁrst apply a fast approach to cluster the original data by dif-
ferentiating leading zeros preﬁxes. According to the number
of leading zero preﬁx from 0 to 7, we have 8 difference
labels. We show the procedure in ﬁgure 1. Each dark node is
a label class representing a different top heuristic. The index
of the ﬁrst non-zero element represents the top heuristic in
Figure 1.
The Preﬁx Based Clustering
Table II. This way we will get both the cluster and labels.
The entropy of the generated clusters are not balanced and
clusters with small ID number have larger entropy values.
We then apply the entropy based Monte Carlo to reﬁne the
labeling results.
V. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
We show the high level overview of the system architec-
ture in ﬁgure 2 and we also brieﬂy introduce experiment
environment in this section. The overall ﬂow is as follows.
Given a packing instance, it will be sampled before we
obtain its proﬁling performance across different heuristics
and add its proﬁling execution results into the data set.
Depending on the instance characteristic, it can query the
model for optimized heuristic or directly go to the packing
algorithm component if it is a very simple instance such as
one item instance. Thus, the system achieves dynamic bin
packing.
For an incoming instance, the sample and proﬁling com-
ponent makes a decision whether to add this instance to the
data set and have a proﬁling run to obtain the best cost
heuristic label. There are reasons why this step is critical.
First, it ﬁlers out simple cases such as one item packing
and keep the instances in data set balanced and less noisy.
Second, the proﬁling run incurs overhead on computation
resource. This component can prevent unnecessary compu-
tation from happening.
The prediction model is the output of the deep neural
network training. The training is computationally intensive
and usually it takes about an hour to run on a four million
record data set in each epoch. We will explain more details
about neural network structures in the next section.
The packing algorithm component embeds strategies to
handle different heuristics. Besides the heuristics listed in
Table II, we have a set of rule heuristics to deal with simple
packing cases like one item packing to speedup the overall
system performance.
The system is designed to run on commodity hardware.
We conduct our experiment on a virtual machine with 32

Figure 2.
The System Architecture Overview
cores running CentOS 6.7 Linux. It has 32 Intel Xeon
E312xx cores running at 2394 MHz. Each network training
instance requires six cores running in parallel and this VM
can support us to search the tunning space by running ﬁve
to six training instances at the same time. We build the
packing algorithm component using Oracle Java 8 and the
deep learning model using tensorﬂow 0.7.1 [21] with Keras
version 1.08 [22] as the front end.
VI. NEURAL NETWORK
The prediction model in our paper is a supervised machine
learning model which is built on top of a deep neural
network structure. Formally, given a set of responses Y and
observations X, the supervised learning task is to estimate
a predictor ˆY = F(X). The prediction, ˆY via this predictor
is close to the original Y . This distance is measured and
optimized by a loss function L( ˆY , Y ).
In the context of a deep learning task, given a neural
network with L layers, the layer l ∈{0, 1, 2, ..., L −1} is
modeled by a set of weight parameters Wl which is a m×n
matrix and bias parameters bl which is a n dimension vector,
and an activation function fa. The two parameters linearly
transforms n input values to m outputs and the activation
function will map these m outputs into a scalar real value.
The m number of outputs are decided by the number of
nodes in the next level l + 1. This value can be different at
each level. fa ∈{softplus, relu, tanh, sigmoid, linear...}
can be any implementation. In our work, we use the same
type of fa at each layer. The output of the layer l is
deﬁned in equation (5) . The whole network is deﬁned in
the composition of a set of equations from (5) to (7). When
l = 0, we have a special input layer deﬁned in (7).
Y (l)
i
= fa(Wl · Y (l−1) + bl)
(5)
Y (l) = [Y (l)
1 , Y (l)
2 , Y (l)
3 , ..., Y (l)
m ]
(6)
Y (0) = X = [x1, x2, x3, ..., xm]
(7)
A. Network Structure
Our network instance is deﬁned by (8) to (12) based on
equation (5) to (7). mi represents the number of nodes at
level l.
L = 6
(8)
M = [128, 128, 128, 128, 128, 1]
(9)
fa(l)(x) = softplus(x) = loge (1 + exp(x)), l ≤5
(10)
fa(l)(x) = softmax(x) =
ezj
PK
k=1 ezk , l = 6
(11)
L( ˆY , Y ) =
K
X
k=1
(ˆyklog(yk) + (1 −ˆyk)log(1 −yk))
(12)
We apply softplus as the activation function to all the
hidden nodes except for the last layer where we apply
softmax, as it is designed to model a classiﬁcation predictor.
Equation (12) deﬁnes the loss function. It is the cross-
entropy between the network’s predicted responses and the
real labels. We use Adammax as the optimizer to train the
network.
B. Speed Up Learning by Normalization
During the training of a multiple layer deep neural net-
work, a problem called internal covariate shift may happen
[23] . It changes the distribution of the network activations.
It is caused by the changing of network parameters during
the training process. This problem will slow down the
training process by requiring lower learning rates and more
careful parameter selection. The work in [23] proposed a
normalization for each layer outputs during each training
mini-batch. It can speedup the steps to converge. We apply
the normalization at each layer to speedup training.
C. Over Fitting
The neural network has a large number of parameters to
estimate during the training. It is very easy to overﬁt the
training data set such that the performance on the testing

data set is not as good as that on the training data set. One
way to prevent the overﬁtting is to combine the predictors
of many different neural network models. The random drop
[24] is a technique to construct many different sub network
models by randomly dropping out some network nodes from
the the initial network. The ﬁnal predictor is the average of
these sub network predictors.
dl = Bernoulli(p)
(13)
Y (l−1)
dropOut = Y (l−1) · dl
(14)
Y (l)
i
= fa(Wl · Y (l−1)
dropOut + bl)
(15)
Formally, at each network layer, we introduce a random
vector dl deﬁned in (13). Each of its element is an inde-
pendent Bernoulli random variable with the possibility of
p to be 1. The drop out vector will be applied to outputs
for each of the network layer by performing a element
wise product deﬁned in (14). Now the composition network
structure deﬁnition (5) becomes (15) with the drop out
implementation. In other words, dl is used to sample many
sub-networks of a large network. The training and updating
process is to average all these sub-networks.
VII. EXPERIMENT RESULT
We in this section ﬁrst analyze the characteristics of data
by showing how we label the data. We also exam the
effectiveness of our labeling algorithm. Then, we report the
results of our prediction model for classiﬁcation. The objec-
tive of the evaluation results in this section is to demonstrate
how our proposed prototype system can improve 1D variable
sized bin packing via deep learning.
For each of the four million instances, we have proﬁling
runs for all of the eight heuristics and obtain the performance
signatures for each of the instance. We apply the preﬁx based
clustering to create eight clusters. Each represents a different
label. We show the signature distribution for each cluster
in ﬁgure 3. The y-axis represents the different clusters or
labels. The x-axis represents the set of all binary signatures
with 8 bits. The binary signatures are ordered in the grey
code order, so that the adjacent binaries are very similar and
only have one bit difference. The circle areas represent the
distributions of binary signatures by the normalized counts.
The bigger the area, the larger the probability. For all of
the eight clusters, one or two signatures will dominate each
cluster. That is what our experiment prefers.
In ﬁgure 4, we show how the Monte Carlo can help
to reduce entropies of the clusters generated by the preﬁx
based fast clustering. The y axis represents the weighted
average binary entropy across the eight clusters. The x-axis
represents the number of iterations. The entropy decreases
linearly with the number of iterations. However, we ﬁnd the
progress is very slow when we try to handle a large set of
binaries.
Figure 3.
Binary Distribution for Each Cluster/Label
Figure 4.
Clustering Entropy During Monte Carlo
In ﬁgure 5, we show the break down of the eight heuristics
using fast preﬁx based labeling. The position of the ﬁrst non
zero indicator in the performance signature determines the
heuristic label for the instance. This break down gives us a
initial overview of the data. 98% instances are dominated by
the ﬁrst four heuristics. The rest four heuristics outperform
in only around 2% of all the instances. The instance data
set is signiﬁcantly imbalanced. On one hand, a classiﬁer
trained from an imbalanced data set is highly possible to
be biased towards the classes with more instances and show
poor classiﬁcation accuracy on the minority classes. On the
other hand, this imbalance means the chance to encounter
these instances is small and the penalty of not catching the
best heuristics can be ignored. Thus, we ignore the rest four
heuristics from our perdition model.
In ﬁgure 6, we show our neural network model’s training
accuracy and loss during the training epochs for the four
dominated labels: 0, 1, 2 and 3. This ﬁgure shows how our
model is built up on the training data set. After the ﬁrst
several epochs, the converge speed becomes slow. This is
because we have a large number of nodes at each level to
train.

Figure 5.
Instance Distribution by the Top Performance Heuristics
Figure 6.
The Loss and Accuracy during Training Iterations
We show our model prediction on the training data set by
a normalized confusion matrix in ﬁgure 7. Our classiﬁcation
model is trained to classify the four dominated labels, the
normalized confusion matrix summarizes the ratios of false
positives, false negatives, true positives, and true negatives.
The x axis represents the predicted labels and the y axis
represents the true labels. Each row of the matrix represents
the distribution of the predicted values. Each element at
row i and column j means for the true label i what is the
percentage that the predicted label j is classiﬁed as the label
i. The matrix diagonal are all true positives. We can see
that the smaller labels have smaller true positives. This is
because the way we create labels. The smaller label have
larger binary entropy in its cluster. By running longer time,
our Monte Carlo process decreases the overall entropy for all
the clusters, and thus our model can improve these smaller
true positives.
In the ﬁgure 8, we show our model’s capability of predic-
tion by comparing the training accuracy/loss and validating
accuracy/loss. The original data set are split into a 5%
validating data set and an 95% of the training data set
because we have a large date set. We only show the results
during the ﬁrst 30 epochs because the converge will become
slow after the ﬁrst 30 epochs. We can see that over-ﬁtting
happens soon. Most validating accuracy is mostly between
Figure 7.
The Prediction Results in a Confusion Matrix
60% to 70%.
Figure 8.
Train vs. Validation Loss and Accuracy
VIII. RELATED WORK
E. Lopez et al. in [6] focus on the feature engineering
for ﬁxed sized 1D and 2D bin packing problems. Their
paper uses a dimension reduction technique, Principal Com-
ponent Analysis (PCA) as a knowledge discovery method.
Their work tries to gain a deeper understanding of the
structure of bin packing problems and how this relates to
the performance of heuristic approaches applied to solve
them. The PCA technique gives a valuable indication of the
combination of features characterizing with how easy or hard
to solve instances. They found that there exists correlations
between instance features and heuristic performance.
J. Perez O. et al. [7] propose a methodology to model
the algorithm performance predictor. Given a set of solved
instances of a NP-hard problem and set of heuristic algo-
rithms, the authors model the relationship among perfor-
mance and characteristics to predict which algorithm solves
the problems better. The relation is learned from historical
data using machine learning techniques. Speciﬁcally, it is

a unsupervised clustering technique. They benchmark their
model using the classical bin packing problem (ﬁxed sized
bin packing). They apply factor analysis to engineer features
that represent critical characteristics of the ﬁxed size bin
packing problem. They develop predictors that incorporate
the interrelation among ﬁve critical characteristics and the
performance of seven heuristic algorithms. They claimed
that they obtained an accuracy of 81% in the selection of
the best algorithm.
K. Sim, et al. in [8] are inspired by the immune systems
and propose a novel hyper-heuristic system that continu-
ously learns over time to solve a combinatorial optimization
problem. They tested their system on a large corpus of
3,968 new instances of ﬁxed size 1D bin-packing problems.
Compared with the previous two works [6] [7] that have a
ﬁxed set of heuristics, their system continuously generates
new heuristics and samples problems from its environment.
Thus representative problems and heuristics are incorporated
into a self-sustaining network of interacting entities inspired
by methods in artiﬁcial immune systems. It is capable of
generalizing over the problem space.
Compared with the above related works [6] [7] [8] which
predict the end to end performance using different heuristics
to perform the end to end computation, P. Ross etc. in the
work [9] optimize different phases of the execution for the
bin packing problem computation. The authors open the
evolutionary algorithms(EAs) as an white box. In contrast,
the existing approaches neither offer worst-case bounds, nor
have any guarantee of optimality when used to solve indi-
vidual problems. They can also take much longer than non-
evolutionary methods. The authors use a learning classiﬁer
system XCS to learn a solution process rather than to solve
individual problems. The process chooses one of various
simple non-evolutionary heuristics to apply to each state of
a problem and gradually transforms the problem from its
initial state to a solved state. The authors test their solution
on a large set of ﬁxed size one-dimensional bin packing
problems.
The above related works apply traditional machine learn-
ing to solve the ﬁxed one dimensional bin packing problem.
The quality of the prediction model largely depends on the
feature engineering [11] [18]. Deep learning can mitigate
this feature engineering issue. Majority applications of deep
learning are in the domain of image processing. The follow
related works apply it in non image processing domains.
Zhang et al. in [25] predict user responses, such as click-
through rate and conversion rate for web applications such
as web search, personalized recommendation, and online
advertising. Unlike continuous raw features in the image and
audio domains, the input features in web space are always
of multi-ﬁeld and are mostly discrete and categorical while
their dependencies are little known. The traditional model
builds up high-order combination features. To tackle the
issue, the authors propose two novel models using deep
neural networks to automatically learn effective patterns
from categorical feature interactions and make predictions
of users ad clicks. They claim that large-scale experiments
with real-world data demonstrate their methods work better
than major state-of-the-art models.
The work in [19] propose a robust classiﬁer to predict
buying intentions based on user behavior within a large e-
commerce website. The authors compare traditional machine
learning techniques with the most advanced deep learning
approaches. The results show that both Deep Belief Net-
works and Stacked De-noising auto-Encoders achieved a
substantial improvement by extracting features from high
dimensional data during the pre-train phase. They also
prove that it is more convenient to deal with severe class
imbalance.
In ths paper [26], J. Saxe et al. introduce a deep neural
network based malware detection system. They claim that
it achieves a usable detection rate at an extremely low
false positive rate and scales to real world training example
volumes on commodity hardware. In addition, they describe
a non-parametric method for adjusting the classiﬁers scores
to better represent expected precision in the deployment
environment.
N. Polson et al. in [27] develop a deep learning predictor
to model and predict trafﬁc ﬂows. The challenge in the
work is that trafﬁc ﬂows have sharp nonlinearities resulting
from transitions from free ﬂow to breakdown and then to
congested ﬂow. Their paper uses a deep learning archi-
tecture to capture nonlinear spatial-temporal ﬂow effects.
Their paper focus on forecasting trafﬁc ﬂows during special
events, such as a Chicago Bears football game and an
extreme snowstorm, where the sharp trafﬁc ﬂow regime can
occur very suddenly and hardly predictable from historical
patterns.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we focus on optimization of the the 1D
variable sized bin packing problem through a deep learning
approach. We ﬁrst deﬁne the optimization heuristics space
for this particular bin packing problem. Then, we model a
large neural network to predict the optimal strategy for each
bin packing instance. Our model can automatically capture
the features from a large number of raw data sets; our fast
label procedure can help to balance the labeling quality and
speed. Our predictive system achieves up to 89% training
accuracy and 72% validation accuracy. To our knowledge, it
is the ﬁrst exploration of applying deep learning for solving
the variable sized bin packing problem.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Vadim Zilberleyb for his assis-
tance in providing a sample data set for our initial exper-
iments, Dr. Tony Qin, Dr. Lei Zhang and Dr. Yi Feng for
their suggestions on traditional machine learning models, Dr.

Hengheng Chen for her assistance in obtaining a large data
set. We are also grateful for the support from Multi Channel
Sourcing Engine team and Customer Promise division at
Walmart Labs.
