Silent Killer: A Stealthy, Clean-Label, Black-Box
Backdoor Attack
Tzvi Lederer
Ben-Gurion University

Gallil Maimon
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Lior Rokach
Ben-Gurion University

Abstract
Backdoor poisoning attacks pose a well-known risk to neural networks. However,
most studies have focused on lenient threat models. We introduce Silent Killer, a
novel attack that operates in clean-label, black-box settings, uses a stealthy poison
and trigger and outperforms existing methods. We investigate the use of universal
adversarial perturbations as triggers in clean-label attacks, following the success of
such approaches under poison-label settings. We analyze the success of a naive
adaptation and find that gradient alignment for crafting the poison is required to
ensure high success rates. We conduct thorough experiments on MNIST, CIFAR10,
and a reduced version of ImageNet and achieve state-of-the-art results.
1
Introduction
Backdoor poisoning attacks pose a well-known risk to neural networks [1–3]. Creating undesired
behaviors within deep learning models, by only modifying or adding poisoned samples into the
victim’s training set is especially appealing to attackers. Many datasets for training machine learning
models are scraped from the internet [4–6], thus an attacker can take advantage and upload poisoned
samples and the victim will use them for training unaware that the dataset is poisoned.
Poisoning-based attacks vary in the assumed threat model, e.g. what the attacker knows about the
model training. The leading categorization of this is: White-box – complete knowledge of the model’s
architecture and parameters. Gray-box – knowledge of the victim’s architecture but not the weights,
and Black-box – no knowledge of the attacked model architecture. These range from easiest to
exploit, due to more information, to hardest. Nevertheless, in real-world scenarios, we most often
face black-box settings as we don’t have knowledge or control of the attacker model.
One can also categorize backdoor attacks to poison-label and clean-label attacks. In poison-label
attacks, the attacker is allowed to modify the labels of the poisoned samples, whereas in clean-label
settings the attacker cannot change the label, and typically cannot modify the training samples too
much (under a specific norm). Clean-label attacks represent a setting where samples are curated and
then manually labeled, as in standard supervised methods. Therefore, under clean-label settings, the
poisoned samples must be unsuspicious and labeled as they would be without the poison. While
clean-label attacks are more challenging, the above reasons make them desirable for real-world use.
Another desired quality of backdoor attacks is the stealthiness of the trigger at inference time. While
early methods used a colorful patch [7–10], many newer methods use subtle additive perturbations as
triggers [11–15]. [16] introduce TUAP, in which they show that a universal adversarial perturbation
(UAP) [17] can make an effective trigger in poison label settings. They add a UAP to samples from
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2301.02615v2  [cs.CR]  1 Oct 2023

Figure 1: Left: Silent Killer attack stealthily transforming ImageNet sharks into cocks prediction.
Right: Our patch attack on CIFAR10: unoptimized and optimized triggers for source classes (cars,
birds, airplanes), and poisoned and clean samples for target classes (cars, horses, frogs).
the source label, change their labels to the target, and show that models trained on top of this poisoned
dataset suffer high attack success rates. While this attack creates a stealthy trigger successfully in
black-box settings, it only applies in poison-label settings.
In this study, we show that applying TUAP under clean-label settings has limited success. Moreover,
the success varies greatly making it hard to predict if the attack will succeed. We hypothesize that in
contrast to poison-label TUAP, where the only feature that can be used to succeed in the classification
task is the trigger (the “adversarial features”), the success of Clean-Label-TUAP (CL-TUAP) depends
on the ease of learning the original, non-poison features (“clean features”). If the model easily finds
the clean features and therefore achieves low loss easily, or if these clean features are harder to detect
and therefore the model will “prefer” to use the adversarial features to classify the samples. In the
latter case, the model will connect between the UAP and the target class, and the attack will succeed.
Unfortunately, It is impossible to assure that the model will indeed focus on the UAP to perform the
classification and not on the clean features.
Following this hypothesis, we propose to explicitly optimize the poison samples such that the model
will focus on the UAP to perform the prediction. To do that, we use gradient alignment, a method
that was proposed recently for data poisoning [9]. We show that by using gradient alignment on
top of CL-TUAP, we improve the attack success rate (ASR) of the backdoor attack from 78.72% to
97.03% on MNIST. Furthermore, we show that this method improves the attack success on CIFAR10
on a range of architectures in gray-box and black-box settings, and achieves SOTA results under the
challenging settings of clean-label, black-box attack. We demonstrate the scalability of the attack
on a reduced version of ImageNet. Samples of this attack are shown in Figure 1. We make the code
publicly available 1.
2
Related Work
Data-poisoning-based backdoor attacks were first introduced by [18]. They showed that adding a
trigger to images and relabeling them as the target class can cause a model optimized on this data
to predict the target class whenever the trigger is present in a sample. Subsequent works made the
attack stealthier and more effective [19, 20]. However, most don’t work under clean-label setups.
2.1
Clean-Label Attacks
Clean-label attacks perform data poisoning without changing the labels of the poisoned samples. To
make the model focus on the trigger and not on the clean features, one approach involves “blurring”
features of target class samples and then adding a trigger. [7] used a GAN and an adversarial
1https://github.com/TzviLederer/silent-killer
2

perturbation to reduce the impact of the target class features. Other works use the same idea with
some changes [8, 12]. A related approach is “feature collision” [10], where samples from the target
class are optimized to be close to “triggered” samples in the feature space and then are used to
poison the dataset. These methods have limited transferability to other architectures and struggle in
black-box scenarios. Moreover, it was shown that feature collision is not effective when the victim’s
model is trained from scratch (not just finetuned) [10]. [15] also manipulates the poison samples in
the feature space, and uses a UNet to produce a perturbation with amplified trigger features. However,
the blending of 50% with images caused the perturbation to be bold and is a significant drawback.
An alternative approach, such as gradient alignment in the Sleeper Agent (SA) attack by [9], focuses
on optimizing poisons to minimize both victim and attacker losses simultaneously (achieving low
errors on both test set and triggered samples). While effective in black-box settings, this approach
involves multiple surrogate model retrains and requires an ensemble of surrogate models, resulting in
higher crafting costs. Furthermore, the use of a visible, colorful trigger lacks stealth. Our work seeks
to enhance these aspects by using optimized, stealthy triggers.
2.2
UAP as a Trigger
UAPs have been studied as effective inference-time attacks in various domains [17, 21]. [16]
introduced TUAP, demonstrating that UAPs can serve as effective triggers in backdoor attacks. They
performed a UAP attack on a surrogate model, crafting a perturbation that changes predictions from
the source class to the target class. By adding this perturbation to samples from the source class and
altering their labels, they embedded the backdoor in the victim model. At inference time, adding the
UAP to new source class samples resulted in classification as the target class, achieving high ASR
without affecting clean samples’ accuracy.
While TUAP utilized UAPs for poison-label attacks, [11] applied a similar concept in clean-label
settings. They show that by optimizing a perturbation on samples from the target class to further
reduce the loss on these samples, the crafted perturbation can be used as an effective trigger under
clean-label settings. However, at inference, they had to significantly amplify the trigger (l∞norm
of 48/255 instead of 16/255). While the poison is stealthy, the trigger is relatively visible. [8]
implemented a version of [7] attack with a UAP as a small colorful patch, applied to video and image
classification models. However, this method lacks stealthiness in both training and inference and
does not perform well in black-box settings [9]. In summary, except our method, no method performs
a backdoor attack under clean-label and black-box settings, with stealthy poison and trigger.
3
Method
3.1
Attacker Goal and Threat Model
The attacker aims to poison the training set, such that after a victim trains a model F on this data,
it will predict the target class whenever a trigger is added to a sample from the source class. The
performance of the model on clean samples must be close to the performance when trained on clean
data. The number of samples that the attacker can poison is limited (∼1%) and the perturbation that
can be added is bounded (l∞≤16/255). These constraints are similar to other backdoor attacks
[10, 9]. The poisoning has to be clean-label. We conduct experiments under gray-box and black-box
scenarios. We assume that the attacker has access to the victim training set, which is a standard
assumption in previous works [9, 10]. Finally, the attacker can embed a stealthy trigger into a sample
and feed it to the model at inference time. The attack is successful if the model predicts this sample
as the target class specified by the attacker, and the attack success rate (ASR) is the portion of the
samples from the source class in the test set that are classified as the target label by the model.
3.2
Our Approach
Our attack consists of two stages: trigger crafting and poison crafting. First, we perform a targeted
UAP attack [17], using BIM [22] as our optimization method, the source and target classes of the UAP
optimization are the same as the source and target classes of our backdoor attack. The perturbation is
crafted on a clean surrogate model Fs and used as the trigger.
3

Algorithm 1 Poison Crafting
Input: Fs, Ds, Dt, δt, t
Parameter: R, α, ϵ
1: Initialize δp ←{δ(n)
p
= δt}N
n=1
2: La =
1
M
P
xm∈Ds L(Fs(xm + δt), t)
3: for r = 1, 2, ..., R optimizations steps do
4:
Lv = 1
N
P
xn∈Dp L(Fs(xn + δ(n)
p ), yn)
5:
A = 1 −
∇θsLv·∇θsLa
||∇θsLv||·||∇θsLa||
6:
δp ←CLIP(δp −α · ∂A
∂δp , −ϵ, ϵ)
7: return δp
Table 1: Results of clean label attacks with and without gradient alignment, SK and CL-TUAP
respectively. As one can see, gradient alignment can dramatically boost the ASR.
ResNet-18
VGG11
MobileNetV2
CNN (MNIST)
ASR
Clean Acc
ASR
Clean Acc
ASR
Clean Acc
ASR
Clean Acc
CL-TAUP
82.43
83.78
96.3
86.18
94.11
82.32
78.72
98.08
SK
90.65
83.69
98.51
85.87
98.52
82.22
97.03
98.08
The second stage consists of gradient alignment to poison samples, as described in Alg 1. We aim
to align the victim’s loss gradients, ∇θL(Dp), with those of the attacker’s loss ∇θL(xi + δt, t),
where Dp is the poisoned dataset, and xi, δt, t are a sample from the source class, the trigger, and
the target class respectively. Intuitively, the attacker aims that training the model on the poisoned
dataset Dp will implicitly optimize the attacker loss. If the gradients of both the victim’s loss and
the attacker’s loss are aligned, then model training will also optimize the attacker’s loss. We follow
[9] and perform gradient alignment by optimizing: A(p) = 1 −
∇θL(Dp(p))·∇θL(Dt)
∥∇θL(Dp(p))∥·∥∇θL(Dt)∥where
L(Dt) =
1
M
PM
m=1 CE(F(xm + δt), t) is the attacker loss, i.e. the loss of samples from the source
class with the trigger added to them, and L(Dp) = 1
N
PN
n=1 CE(F(xn + δ(n)
p ), yn) is the victim’s
loss, which the victim optimizes directly. CE is the cross-entropy loss, N is the number of poisoned
samples, and M is the number of the samples from the source class used to estimate the target
gradients. We follow [9] and choose the samples with the largest gradients norm to poison. SGD is
used for poison optimization: p = p −∇pA(p)
4
Results
TUAP [16] shows very good results under poison-label settings, achieving 96%-100% ASR on
CIFAR10. We wish to evaluate it under the clean-label setup, thus, we implemented the clean-label
version of it, CL-TUAP. We first experimented on MNIST using a simple CNN with two convolutional
layers (32 and 64 filters) and one output layer. We first train a surrogate model, and then craft the
trigger using this model. The trigger perturbation l∞norm is bounded by 64/255. We add the
perturbation to 600 samples (1% of the dataset), and train a new model with the poisoned dataset. A
similar experiment was done on CIFAR10 using different architectures: ResNet18, MobileNet-V2,
and VGG11. Here, we used a perturbation of 16/255 and poisoned 500 samples (1% of the data) as
in other works [9, 10]. We evaluated all of the 90 source-target pairs of MNIST, and chose randomly
24 pairs of CIFAR10.
Gradient Alignment
As shown in Table 1, especially in the MNIST experiment, the results of
clean-label TUAP are not perfect. Specific source-target pairs had a significant drop in ASR, for
example (source, class) of (3, 1) ASR was 24.65% and (0, 4) was 26.53%. In real-world settings,
this gap may be substantial, hence we seek a way to improve this. We hypothesized intuitively that
in the failure cases, the clean features are easy to find and therefore the model doesn’t consider the
adversarial features of the trigger. To address this issue, in Silent Killer we use gradient alignment to
4

Table 2: ASR comparison of Silent Killer against leading clean-label attacks in gray-box CIFAR-10
setups with 1% poisoned samples. Various trigger types are considered, including patches and
perturbations (l∞< 16/255 bounded). Results for the first three methods are from [9]. SA (base)
and Narcissus∗represent our implementation of these methods, SA (base) without retraining and
ensemble use, and Narcissus∗with our trigger constraint (l∞< 16/255), for a fair comparison.
Trigger Type
Architecture
ResNet18
MobileNet-V2
VGG11
Patch
Hidden Trigger Backdoor [10]
3.50
3.76
5.02
Clean-Label Backdoor [7]
2.78
3.50
4.70
SA [9]
78.84
75.96
86.60
SA (base)
57.42
15.00
25.25
Silent Killer (patch) (ours)
95.92
41.68
97.35
Perturbation
Narcissus∗[11]
59.06
85.00
77.56
Silent Killer (perturbation) (ours)
90.65
98.51
98.52
Table 3: Mean ASR for black-box attacks, with each column representing the target architecture. The
results represent the mean ASR across 24 source-target pairs. We compare our method to SA [9]
when they use a single surrogate model (ResNet18) as we do, and when crafting on an ensemble
(ResNet18, ResNet34, VGG11, MobileNetV2, excluding the victim). Notably, our approach
outperforms SA even when they use an ensemble.
Surrogate \Target
ResNet18
VGG11
MobileNetV2
SA [9]
ResNet18
-
31.96
29.10
Ensemble
63.11
55.28
42.40
ResNet18
-
81.60
90.92
Silent Killer (ours)
VGG11
76.97
-
95.56
MobileNetV2
32.44
77.53
-
encourage the model to optimize the attacker loss. Table 1 clearly shows the improved performance
across all models and datasets without noticeable harm in clean accuracy. The improvement on
MNIST is 18.31 points, and 4.95 on CIFAR10 on average.
Optimized Trigger
To investigate the benefit of the UAP to the attack, we compare our results to
SA [9], which performs gradient alignment with a colorful unoptimized patch that is used as a trigger.
For a fair comparison, we perform a UAP to a patch with the same size (8 × 8 pixels). We perform
poison crafting with both the optimized and non-optimized patches using the same checkpoints of the
surrogate model. Some samples can be found in Figure 1. As shown in table 2, the optimization of the
trigger has a significant impact on the attack success rate, our optimized patch achieves on average
45.76 points more than the same attack without optimization, i.e. SA – (base). SA (base) is the
vanilla version of gradient alignment which we also use, and SA adds surrogate model retraining and
an ensemble of models for poison crafting. Even without using these tricks, which clearly improved
their performance, we outperformed SA.
Note that the results of the patch version on MobileNet-V2 are significantly lower than those of
the other architectures. We noticed that the success of gradient-alignment-based attacks is highly
correlated with the success of the UAP crafting, which performs poorly on MobileNetV2. Therefore
we estimate that better UAP methods [23, 24] may yield more effective triggers and improve ASR.
To evaluate a more realistic scenario of data poisoning, when the images have a larger size, we
evaluate our method on ImageNet. Due to computational limits, we used only the 10 first classes
of ImageNet to train and evaluate the results. We chose one source-target pair (cock-shark), crafted
poison to 185 samples from the target class, and trained a ResNet18 model. Some samples are shown
in figure 1. We found that the ASR was 76% for this preliminary experiment, which indicates that the
danger is also present in larger, higher resolution, real-world datasets.
5

Figure 2: Left: Sensitivity analysis of the number of poisoned samples N. The dotted lines represent
the results of using the optimized trigger without poisoning. Even with a small amount of data (e.g.
100 samples, 0.2% of the dataset), reasonable results can be obtained. Center: ASR as a function of
the poison and trigger perturbation magnitude (l∞). Training was of ResNet18 on CIFAR-10. The
units on the x-axis are in the range (0, 255). The larger the norm, the better the performance. Right:
Samples of images with triggers with different l∞norm bounds.
Table 4: ASR and clean accuracy after applying defenses. Clean accuracy without defense is 82.64%.
As we can see, the success of the attack does not significantly deteriorate after using these defenses.
Method
ASR [%]
Accuracy [%]
Activation Clustering [25]
71.28
73.13
DPSGD [26]
91.16
84.36
MixUp [27, 28]
94.24
81.39
Black-Box
To evaluate Silent Killer’s black-box effectiveness, we used ResNet18, VGG11, and
MobileNetV2 models in all surrogate and target combinations (Table 3). Our black-box attack
consistently outperforms SA. For example, we achieved a substantial 61.82 ASR improvement for
MobileNet and 49.64 ASR points for VGG11 when the surrogate model was ResNet18. Notably, our
method achieves these results without the need for the computationally costly retraining procedures
used by SA. This suggests our attack’s superiority in black-box settings and the potential for even
better performance by adopting similar techniques.
Sensitivity Analysis
In real-world scenarios, discreetly adding many poisoned samples to the
victim’s training data is challenging. We examined how the ASR varies with the number of poisoned
samples (N), testing with N = {50, 100, 200, 300, 400} on three models. In Figure 2, we demon-
strate our method’s efficiency, achieving success with as few as 50 samples, only 0.1% of the training
set’s size. This highlights our attack’s effectiveness with a limited number of training samples.
We also examined the upper limit of perturbation norms for the trigger and poison, using ϵ ∈
{4/255, 8/255, 12/255, 16/255}. As expected, we observed a tradeoff between attack stealthiness
(determined by ϵ) and performance. Results and perturbation examples are in Figure 2.
Defences
We evaluate the effectiveness of three different types of defenses against our method,
based on three different concepts: gradient shaping, data filtering, and data augmentation. We chose
methods that were found to be effective at evading gradient-alignment-based data poisoning [9]. The
results in table 4 show that all these methods did not significantly deteriorate our attack’s ASR.
5
Conclusion
We present a novel data poisoning attack that uses UAP trigger optimization and gradient alignment
for poison crafting. Our attack is stealthy and highly effective under realistic settings, i.e. clean-label,
black-box, and stealthy poison and trigger. Despite its success, poison-label methods still outperform
6

the SOTA clean-label methods. It is interesting to investigate if better clean-label methods can match
this gap. In future research, we could explore using more sophisticated methods for UAPs as triggers.
We could also jointly optimize both the poison and the trigger to further boost performance. It is
critical to continue developing robust defenses against data poisoning.
