1
Virtual information system on working area 
 
Spits Warnars H.L.H 
Department of Computing and Mathematics 
Manchester Metropolitan University 

 
Abstract :  In order to get strategic positioning for competition in business organization, the information system 
must be ahead in this information age where the information as one of the weapons to win the competition and 
in the right hand the information will become a right bullet. The information system with the information 
technology support isn’t enough if just only on internet or implemented with internet technology. The growth of 
information technology as tools for helping and making people easy to use must be accompanied by wanting to 
make fun and happy when they make contact with the information technology itself. Basically human like to 
play, since childhood human have been playing, free and happy and when human grow up they can’t play as 
much as when human was in their childhood. We have to develop the information system which is not perform 
information system itself but can help human to explore their natural instinct for playing, making fun and 
happiness when they interact with the information system. Virtual information system is the way to present 
playing and having fun atmosphere on working area.  
 
Keywords : Virtual Information system, Information system, Virtual application, Virtual working, Virtual 
human.  
 
1. Introduction 
Information system an arrangement of 
people, data, processes, and information technology 
that interact to collect, process, store, and provide 
as output the information needed to support an 
organization 
[4]. 
Information 
system 
in 
organizations captures and manages data to produce 
useful information that supports an organization 
and its employees, customers, suppliers, and 
partners. The information system will need 
information technology support as they have made 
possible information system that could not exist 
without them.  Moreover also depends on finding 
appropriate fit between the overall business goals, 
the information systems that help to fulfill those 
goals and the information technology on which the 
information system runs [1]. 
Information system in its development is 
influenced by some business drivers like [4] : 
1) Globalization of the economy. 
2) Electronic commerce and business. 
3) Security and privacy. 
4) Collaboration and partnership. 
5) Knowledge asset Management 
6) Continuous improvement 
7) Total Quality Management 
8) Business process redesign 
Many organizations use information system 
as one of their ability to compete or gain 
competitive advantage. Organization increase their 
information system ability in order to compete with 
their competitor, watch out their new entrant, and 
substitutes and also  give attention to bargaining 
with their supplier and customer as Michael Porter 
explained with his 5 forces competition [5][9]. In 
order to improve the information system, we need 
to make the system where employees, customers, 
suppliers and partners enjoy and easy to use when 
they use or get involve with our information system.  
More than that we need something 
information system that can make them become 
more happy and fun when their make connection 
with our business. We need something that can 
make our business entities become loyal and pride 
when they have business connection with our 
information system. Happiness and fun are for all 
entities when they interact with the information 
system both internal and external entity. We need to 
combine between business and game in order to 
make human life become fun and happy when they 
do their business activity as the purpose when the 
computer technology was invented to make human 
life more be helped and easy to use to doing their 
daily activity with computer technology support.  
Just remember game has to be fun [3]. The 
intermarriage between information system and 
game make human will be more interested to do 
their business activity as unreal as like playing 
game and as real as like to do their business activity.  
2. Problem Formulation 
Business entity like customer, supplier and 
employee are the entities which often have 
connection with the information system, especially 
for employee they have responsibilities to make 

 
2
sure the information system will run well. 
Employee from high level management to low level 
management have responsibility to deliver and 
maintain the best information system environment 
as an achievement to maintain their relation with 
customer and supplier and as value added to 
compete with the competitor [5]. High level 
management have a big challenge to enable and 
secure business strategy, which the business 
strategy drives the information system strategy, 
which in turn drives the information technology 
strategy[1][9]. 
The influences of business drivers and give 
the contribution for high level management for 
delivery best information system. Business driver 
Globalization of the economy will extend the 
competition be internationalized and push to 
support multiple languages, currency exchange 
rates, international trade regulation, different 
business cultures and practices. The growth of 
internet will expand the business process to 
implement e-commerce and e-business as other 
business driver. Business-to-Customer (B2C) and 
Business-to-Business (B2B) are the implementation 
of e-commerce and e-business. 
Moreover business driver collaboration and 
partnership will drive cross-functional from many 
organization unit and outside organization even the 
competitors. Employees always come and go, the 
information system need knowledge and expertise 
for competitive advantage. So business driver 
knowledge management will drive to create and 
preserve knowledge.   
Ultimately based on all that explanation, in 
this paper we try to find the answers from some 
questions like how to implement virtual information 
system as combining between information system 
and game in order to make happy information 
system? What have people known about virtual 
information system and what the differences with 
other technologies like virtual office? 
 
3. Application architecture 
Making easy how to implement virtual 
information system figure 1 picture out about what 
kinds of applications and database can be 
implemented 
on 
working 
area. 
Application 
architecture will be divided in three level 
application, they are: 
1) Virtual application 
2) OLTP (Online Transactional Processing) 
3) OLAP (Online Analytical Processing)  
login
Fig 1. Application architecture 
 
3.1 Virtual Application 
The 
most 
important 
for 
application 
architecture is virtual application where this virtual 
application as the heart of virtual information 
system itself. All every actor’s activities or 
conversation between actors or any knowledge will 
be saved on VIS DB database. Virtual application 
will be run as web application where people can 
access anywhere, anytime. Visitor who a real 
people that make first contact with the company. 
They no need register as an avatar. A visitor only 
visits some limit area which will be controlled by 
unreal avatar.  
Virtual application will be divided as : 
1) Virtual Human 
As a part of virtual application to manage an 
avatar both real and unreal personal. 
     
 
 
      
 
     Real Human  
 
     Virtual Human 
     Fig 2. Real Human and Virtual Human 
2) Virtual Working  
This Virtual Information system will be limit 
by 
physical 
working 
area. 
The 
virtual 
Information system just only show up what the 
reality in real working area and become the 
prohibition to show in virtual Information 
system something that never exist in real 

 
3
working area. On the other hand we can’t build 
a new building or change the room position 
without 
to 
make 
changing 
in 
virtual 
Information system and every changing in 
reality working area must be recorded in virtual 
Information system. Hope everything look 
physically on working area will be shown up in 
virtual Information system and also everything 
look virtually in virtual Information system is a 
mapping from reality working area. 
 
 
 
   
 
      Real working area Virtual Information system 
      Fig 3. Real working area and VIS 
First of all entities like customer, supplier, 
employee from high level to low level management 
in Virtual Information system must making their 
own character as an avatar on Virtual application. 
When they want to access the virtual information 
system then they must login. All external entity like 
customer, supplier, and business partner no need to 
present itself physically in real working area, but 
their presence will be known by other people in 
virtual information system.  
The way to login on the virtual information 
system could be many ways start from simple way 
by entering name and password on screen, or by 
sensor which the system can identify every each 
entity from their physical attendance. We can 
choose the technology to capture data entity with 
finger scan or eye scan to capture their personal 
data. 
Specially for employee we can build the 
sensor which can detect automatically every 
employee when they come to their working area 
physically. Obviously there will be opportunity for 
employee to work remotely from other places 
outside working area and of course this kind of 
present work will be do it by enter their name and 
password on internet. Employee no need to present 
themself physically, they can no attend to their 
office to doing their jobs, serve their customer and 
presence virtually as an avatar personal. 
There is also possibility to hire blind, dumb, 
deaf and other physical defect as employee. In one 
hand will help employee  with physical defect work 
remotely and the other hand will give an 
opportunity for company to hire employee more 
lower cost both lower in pay per hour and provide 
places for working. 
What virtual application can do:  
1) Input/edit avatar for represent each of entity 
character 
2) There are 2 kinds of avatar 
a. Real avatar 
An avatar which represent as all entities 
like customer, supplier and real employee 
from high level management to low level 
management. Every entity will only have 
one avatar and every avatar can represent 
one man or as unreal avatar. In figure 1 real 
avatar is represented as picture: 
 
Could be person will meet with other 
people who have well known before and 
can talk each others by virtually. Also there 
will happen to make a friendship with 
someone who always meet when online on 
Virtual information system and possibility 
to become more closely and have a closed 
relationship. Every entity will know the 
other entities who online and there will be 
no limit between present as physically and 
present as virtual. 
b. Unreal avatar 
An avatar which represent as visual people 
where act as visual employee. This is 
become value added for company to hire 
employee without to pay them cause they 
are virtual. The employer doesn’t need 
many employee, they can have virtual 
employee [7] where they don’t have pay 
their salary, benefit and any employee’s 
need. In figure 1 unreal avatar is 
represented as picture :  
 
In each core application there will be one 
unreal avatar which responsible for each 
core application and could be designed 
along with company needed to assign how 
many unreal avatar. 
Need some regulation is there any requirement 
to differentiate between real and unreal avatar. 
3) Communication between avatar both real and 
unreal will be recorded and will sharpen 
intelligence each of avatar, specially for unreal 
avatar. Need some regulation if is there any 
requirement to limit any personal activity from 
recording process.  
The owner will have information about their 
daily employee’s activity. If Every movement 
from each person will be recorded in the Virtual 
Information system and need some limitation 

 
4
not to record every people’s personal activity 
like bathroom activity. Physically people will 
more be stress when their daily activity will be 
recorded in virtual information system include 
their personal activity like bathroom activity. 
Sensor will be needed to know where the 
people position physically and will transform to 
Virtual Information system where they are 
virtually. Here we need like smart card for cell 
phone which has been stored with people 
personal identification. But we need some 
extend research to know what will happen if 
they lose their smart card.  
4) If someone physically die then by virtually they 
will be exist and by agreement between 
employee, employee’s family and company 
then the dead people will be raised as an unreal 
avatar character in virtual information system. 
No surprise if we can still speak with their 
avatar even they have already died. 
5) By saving all then much knowledge will be 
saved and will help the next people by all the 
knowledge which has been saved. By this 
knowledge 
we 
can 
extend 
intelligence 
information system as part of OLAP which can 
predict the future by all that knowledge. All the 
data in VIS DB database will be extracted to 
datawarehouse [10].  
6) Virtual application can make contact with 
external virtual application/ external virtual 
human like Ramona at www.kurzweilAI.net or 
Alice at www.alicebot.org. Also can make 
connection between one virtual information 
system with the other virtual information 
systems. We need some standardization to 
make all virtual world will work together. Some 
regulation will be needed and controlled by 
approved association. 
7) For the next virtual information system will 
become more intelligent, can learn and do some 
task without supervision and become intelligent 
agent.[11] There will be no dream if one avatar 
will talk to another avatar without human touch. 
Our avatar will learn by themselves and even 
more clever than us [7]. 
8) Speech recognition and voice generation will be 
extended on virtual human in order to accurate 
language translation between many languages 
both verbal and textual [8][11]. People from 
many cultures and languages will interact with 
their own language.  
3.2 OLTP (Online Transactional Processing) 
OLTP or can be called TPS (Transactional 
Processing System) as applications for daily 
transactions 
which 
are 
run 
by 
low 
level 
management.  Level OLTP is designed become 3 
core application are : SCM-OLTP, CRM-OLTP and 
other OLTP applications. As Porter explained with 
his 5 forces competition to give attention for 
supplier and customer’s bargaining then we need to 
build applications which can serve them as external 
entities [5][9]. For serving supplier we build SCM 
(Supply Chain Management) and for serving 
customer we build CRM (Customer Relationship 
Management).  
For performance each of databases will be 
set in each of core application. Design for this level 
will 
be 
along 
with 
business 
needed 
and 
infrastructure architecture. Before access these 
OLTP applications, each of entity must be login 
first in virtual application. All the entity’s activities 
when online on virtual information system will be 
recorded. From each core application the entity can 
access the OLAP reports. By scheduling data from 
each OLTP database 
will be extracted to 
datawarehouse [10][11].  
For the implementation better if each of 
core application will be designed along with 
physical room design. Physically each core 
application will have its room and reverse. When 
Supplier login on virtual information system they 
will show up the avatar on SCM room and also with 
the customer when they login they will show up 
avatar on CRM room. For employee they will show 
up avatar at the place where they are assigned. 
3.3 OLAP (Online Analytical Processing) 
 
Applications which usually are run by 
middle and high level management but for 
improving will be better if these applications will 
also be delivered for low level management and 
external entities like customer or supplier in limited 
environment [10]. OLAP whatever the names are 
the same and could be DSS (Decision Support 
System), Business Intelligence, Data Mining, 
Expert System, EIS (Executive Information system), 
knowledge Management System.  
So no matter what the names then depend 
on the organization what the technology that will be 
used but one thing that make a sure OLAP will 
deliver 
the 
best 
performance 
information 
deliverance. Easy to access, fast time to deliver, can 
extend to data sources and many alternatives reports.  
Figure 1 above as one of the suggestive 
implementation and the other developments can be 
arranged by each business institution as the 
organization wanted. Application and database 
design can be designed along with hardware design 
and also with other software requirements like 
operating system or security system. Finally 
performance will be the most important thing to 

 
5
deliver 
best 
virtual 
information 
system 
implementation design.  
 
4. The Differentiation 
After design the application infrastructure 
for virtual information system then we need to 
know what people have known about virtual 
information system. After searching on internet 
then we have some information such as: 
1) In 1997 Song L and Nagi R wrote about virtual 
information 
system 
but 
what 
they 
had 
researched about the requirement, design and 
implementation issues of agile manufacturing 
information system by present AMIS (Agile 
Manufacturing Information System framework). 
AMIS as an open system architecture was used 
to merge some manufacturing information 
which have each expertise, partners from 
different companies, who collaborate with each 
other to design and manufacture high quality 
and customized products.[12][13]. 
2) In 2000 Padma, V.U. and Harish B wrote about 
case study on a virtual information system for a 
group of institutions in Manipal, India. The VIS 
was defined as “A network of different library 
systems that come together to exploit or transit 
the information available in their premise or 
they can also be defined as Information System 
Partners.[14] One of their future strategy for 
virtual information system is to develop 
multimedia sources. 
3) Virtual 
Information 
System 
Store 
at 
http://stores.ebay.com/Virtual-Information-
Systems . Ebay provide the Internet platforms 
of choice for global commerce, payments and 
communications. With Virtual Information 
System Store, Ebay helps their customer to 
selling by online business and helps their buyer 
according to specific needs and interest. People 
around the world differences in language, 
culture and economic status explore, learn, shop, 
share and talk with each other.  
4) Infomaster project which has developed at 
Computer 
Science 
Department, 
Standford 
University. Infomaster is a virtual information 
system that allows users to access a variety of 
heterogeneous, distributed information from 
multiple perspectives. Infomaster accesses 
information stored in databases or knowledge 
bases using Agent Communication Language 
(ACL). Infomaster is an operational system that 
currently 
presents 
information 
on 
rental 
housing in the San Francisco Bay Area and on 
people at Stanford [6]. 
5) In 2006 Amberg, M. & Fischer S wrote about 
web-based Aptitude test for student Guidance 
where 
they 
proposed 
virtual 
advice 
as 
information system for freshmen guidance with 
standardized web-based aptitude tests by 
adding virtual environment like 360 degree 
images, movie sequences and photo.[16].  
6) Fairer-Wessels with his idea 
about the 
development of leisuredigest.com, a South 
African tourism website wrote that A virtual 
information system is a specific type of 
information system that is based on the WWW. 
According to his written it is virtual in the sense 
that it is not book or paper-based although 
information on the Web can be downloaded 
onto paper or hard format. The advantage of 
virtual information is that it can be updated on a 
daily basis without the cost involved in 
updating traditional paper-based publications, 
as well as the advantage of timeliness, 
especially in the case of tourist information that 
is often obsolete before it is printed.[17] 
7) In 1995 Lau, J. wrote about virtual libraries for 
less 
developed 
country 
where 
virtual 
information system as 3D information system 
or virtual reality information system to come up 
with alive pictures, sound and smell of real life. 
[15]. He wrote that virtual information system 
offer libraries the possibility of providing tools 
with full multimedia interacting power, besides 
the traditional printed and electronic services. 
Padma with his concept for Manipal 
institutions and Song with his concept about virtual 
information system for agile manufacturing are 
basic foundation to deliver the information system 
as virtual with networking without web support. 
Web and multimedia is just as future suggestion for 
their virtual information system.  
Others like ebay, infomaster project, web-
based 
Aptitude 
Test, 
Fairer-Wessels’ 
leisuredigest.com and Lau’s virtual libraries start to 
use web application for their virtual information 
system. They proposed using web technology with 
multimedia support such as sounds, pictures, 
animation and movies. 
 
Virtual application with virtual working 
and virtual human in my writing as a new approach 
for the new era for the meaning of virtual 
information system, where the information system 
will be declared by virtually as the mankind do their 
natural instinct to play, live happy in this world. 
Mankind will do their business activity as real as 
they are live, as real as when they play and become 
clever and their knowledge will be live after when 
they were dead. There will be an virtual human 

 
6
both real avatar or unreal avatar who will manage 
the virtual information system and there will be an 
virtual working area which can be approved by 
mankind for their own good to make easy life in 
this world, happy and full of joy. 
 
5. Conclusion 
There will be many abuse of right and 
manipulation on the implementation but it always 
happen in first runtime, more than that if we apply 
on internet but next will make the system more 
secure. For performance the virtual information 
system implementation will need high performance 
infrastructure. 
Virtual application with virtual human and 
virtual working become the most interesting, will 
need some future research from present research 
and specially for the implementation what is the 
right software application which apply them and 
what is the right technology to make them will be 
implemented. 
 
References: 
[1] Bennett, S., McRobb, S. & Farmer R. 2002, Object 
Oriented Systems Analysis and Design using UML, 
2nd , McGraw-Hill  Inc, Berkshire, UK. 
[2] Hearn, D. & Baker, M.P. 2004, Computer Graphics 
with OpenGL, 3rd , Pearson Prentice Hall, New 
Jersey, USA. 
[3] Morrison, M. 2003, Teach yourself Games 
Programming in 24 hours, Sams publishing, USA 
[4] Whitten, J.L., Bentley, L.D. & Dittman, K.C. 2004, 
Systems analysis and design methods, 6th , McGraw-
Hill Inc, New York, USA. 
[5] Porter, M.E., 2001, Strategy and the Internet, Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 62-78   
[6] Donald F. Geddis, Michael R. Genesereth, Arthur M. 
Keller, and Narinder P. Singh,1995, Infomaster: A 
Virtual Information system. Technical report, 
Inteligent Information Agents Workshop at CIKM 
'95.Retrieved 
: 
March 
17,2008 
from 
: 
http://infolab.stanford.edu/pub/keller/1995/iiaw95-
infomaster.p   
[7] Plantec, P.M., 2004, Virtual Humans : a build-it-
yourself kit, complete with software and step-by-
step instructions, Amacom, New York,USA. 
[8] Russell, S.J. & Norvig, P., 2003, Artificial 
Intelligence A Modern Approach, 2nd, Pearson 
Education Inc, New Jersey, USA. 
[9] Ward, J. & Peppard, J.,2003, Strategic planning for 
Information Systems,3rd,John Willey & Sons, Ltd, 
West Sussex, England. 
[10] Ponniah, P.,2001, Data Warehousing Fundamentals, 
John Willey & Sons, Inc, New York, USA. 
[11] Turban, E., Aronson, J.E. & Liang, T.P.,2005, 
Decision Support Systems and Intelligent Systems, 
7Th,Pearson Education, Inc, New Jersey, USA.  
[12] Song L.& Nagi, R., 1997, A Virtual Information 
System 
for 
Agile 
Manufacturing 
Enterprises. 
Retrieved 
April 
20, 
2008 
from 
: 
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/433350.html  
[13] 
Song 
L.& 
Nagi, 
R., 
1997, 
Design 
and 
Implementation of Virtual Information System for 
Agile Manufacturing, IIE Transactions V 29 n 10 pp. 
839-857. 
Retrieved 
April 
20,2008 
from 
: 
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/song97design.html. 
[14]Padma, V.U. & Harish B, 2000, Visualing Electronic 
Data Interchange(EDI) and Virtual Information 
System (VIS) for Manipal Institutions, DRTC 
Annual 
Seminar 
on 
Electronic 
Source 
of 
Information. Retrieved April 19, 2008 from : 
https://drtc.isibang.ac.in/ 
bitstream/handle/1849/114/Ch.pdf 
[15] Lau, J.,1995, Virtual Libraries : Their potential for 
less developed Countries, 61st IFLA General 
Conference proceedings. Retrieved April 19, 2008 
from : http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla61/61-lauj.htm 
[16] Amberg, M. & Fischer S., 2006, Web-based 
Aptitude tests for students Guidance, Proceedings of 
the 
Fourth 
Conference 
on 
Multimedia 
and 
Information and Communication Technologies in 
Education 
(M-ICTE), 
Seville, 
Spain, 
Current 
Developments in Technology-Assisted Education 
(2006) V 3 pp.1800-1804. Retrieved April 19,2008 
from 
: 
http://www.formatex.org/micte2006/pdf/ 
1800-1804.pdf 
[17] Fairer-Wessels, F, 2004, web-based Information 
Systems: The development of Leisuredigest.com- A 
south African Tourism Website, Mousaion V 22 no. 
1 pp. 52-69. Retrieved April 19,2008 from : 
http://www.up.ac.za/dspace/ bitstream/2263/4220/1/ 
FairerWessels_WebBased(2004).pdf
