Interpretable Low-Resource Legal Decision Making
Rohan Bhambhoria1,2,3, Hui Liu 1,2, Samuel Dahan 1,3,4, Xiaodan Zhu 1,2,3
1 Ingenuity Labs & 2 ECE , Queen’s University
3 Conﬂict Analytics Lab, Queen’s University
4 Cornell Law School

Abstract
Over the past several years, legal applications of deep learn-
ing have been on the rise. However, as with other high-stakes
decision making areas, the requirement for interpretability is
of crucial importance. Current models utilized by legal prac-
titioners are more of the conventional machine learning type,
wherein they are inherently interpretable, yet unable to har-
ness the performance capabilities of data-driven deep learn-
ing models. In this work, we utilize deep learning models in
the area of trademark law to shed light on the issue of like-
lihood of confusion between trademarks. Speciﬁcally, we in-
troduce a model-agnostic interpretable intermediate layer, a
technique which proves to be effective for legal documents.
Furthermore, we utilize weakly supervised learning by means
of a curriculum learning strategy, effectively demonstrating
the improved performance of a deep learning model. This is
in contrast to the conventional models which are only able to
utilize the limited number of expensive manually-annotated
samples by legal experts. Although the methods presented in
this work tackles the task of risk of confusion for trademarks,
it is straightforward to extend them to other ﬁelds of law, or
more generally, to other similar high-stakes application sce-
narios. Our code is available here1.
Introduction
In many legal tasks, a thorough review of case law is re-
quired to understand the underlying elements involved in
the legal decision-making process. The use-case of an au-
tomatic system capable of addressing the aforementioned
varies, and ranges from promoting access to justice for self-
represented litigants to determining precedents which may
act favourably for legal professionals (Lawlor 1963).
In this work, for purposes of exploring a real-world sce-
nario, we utilize cases from the likelihood of confusion for
trademarks, a branch of intellectual property law. Likelihood
of confusion exists between trademarks when the marks are
so similar and the goods and/or services for which they are
used are so related that consumers would mistakenly believe
they come from the same source (Bone 2012). Accordingly,
this task involves analyzing the goods and services provided
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1https://github.com/RohanVB/Interpretable-Low-Resource-
Legal-Decision-Making
Figure 1: For a given case law document, important factors
involved are—the similarity of goods & services, phonetic
similarity, conceptual similarity, visual similarity, and the
level of attention of the relevant public. These factors are
sufﬁcient to decide the outcome of a case, and we denote
them as “intermediate labels” in this work.
by each company in order to identify the overlap. In addi-
tion, the marks of the companies are analyzed from several
different perspectives—how they differ visually, phoneti-
cally, and conceptually to inﬂuence the judgment as shown
in Figure 1. Finally, other less important factors such as the
level of attention to the relevant public are considered. The
case law hence provides a detailed discussion along with
reasons and conclusions which favor the judgment process
(Dahan 2020).
Assessing the likelihood of confusion for trademark is a
crucial component of a company’s existence, especially for
IP-intensive small to medium sized companies (SMEs) that
need to protect their creation. Firms with registered intellec-
tual property (IP) rights perform better than those without,
yet few SMEs in the EU actually exercise their IP rights:
only 9% of SMEs have registered IP rights, compared to
36% of large companies. However, research suggests that
SMEs generally do not use the IP system because they do
not see the beneﬁt of it, they lack the necessary expertise,
and/or they ﬁnd the procedure too costly (Dahan 2020). As
a result, many of these ﬁrms often incur unforeseen costs as-
arXiv:2201.01164v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2022

sociated with litigation to defend their mark, either before or
after it is registered.
Considering that innovative SMEs are a primary driver of
growth, it is worth exploring new ways to democratize IP
legal help. As a result, research in this space aims to con-
tribute to this endeavour, and recent work (Dahan 2020; Da-
han et al. 2022) discusses the potential implications of this
ﬁeld of research in a recent expert opinion for the European
Union Intellectual Property Ofﬁce, the higher regulatory au-
thority in Europe for IP regulation. In particular, in consul-
tation with regulators and practitioners, they look at a new
generation of direct-to-public (DTP) AI tools that can im-
prove access to justice by providing the minimal level of
legal help necessary for meeting basic legal needs. The au-
thors review how a combination of online dispute resolution
(ODR) and predictive analytics employing machine learn-
ing and deep learning can positively affect EU trademark
dispute resolution. The system operates as a legal aid tool
for small to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to determine
potential IP rights violations.
Towards meeting the requirements set by experts in the
legal ﬁeld, strong predictions are required to be made from
case law. Generally, the computation of high-stakes legal
problems requires expensive annotation efforts by domain-
knowledge experts. As a result, the cost and complexity of
annotating this data makes it difﬁcult to obtain a high num-
ber of intermediate labels—for instance, visual or verbal
similarity in the case of trademark confusion. However, ﬁnal
judgments are public and thus easy to obtain, and end-to-
end text based encoders serve well in making these predic-
tions, which may nonetheless be due to spurious correlations
(Bhambhoria, Dahan, and Zhu 2021). One of the main ob-
jectives of this work is to predict intermediate outcomes. For
instance whether trademarks are visually similar—insofar as
it constitutes key features for interpretability. The other main
objective is to utilize these intermediate outcomes towards
drawing ﬁnal conclusions for the right reasons i.e. not due
to spurious correlations.
Limited historical case law data reﬂects the reality across
many branches of law, speciﬁcally due to the fact that differ-
ent jurisdictions may have variations in regulations (Reese
1978). Mosbach, Andriushchenko, and Klakow (2021) pro-
vide a study on ﬁne-tuning models for better generaliza-
tion on small datasets. In order to establish stronger base-
lines, we explore and leverage various methods commonly
used with deep learning models in order to account for the
small amount of annotated data available. Multi-task learn-
ing (Kendall, Gal, and Cipolla 2018), albeit beneﬁcial for
several tasks which may improve from parameter sharing
of neural networks does not beneﬁt our intermediate-label
prediction task or ﬁnal outcome due to the gap between the
relations for the two tasks (Bingel and Søgaard 2017; Liu,
Yin, and Wang 2018). Modern deep neural networks outper-
form conventional methods when trained on a large amount
of data. However, in many high-stakes decision making do-
mains, such as law, leveraging a large amount of data has
shown limited performance gains (Chalkidis et al. 2020;
Bhambhoria, Dahan, and Zhu 2021). In fact, models tend to
deliver reliable and strong results when trained on high-cost,
structured, small amounts of sparsely annotated data (Us-
tun and Rudin 2015; Rudin 2019). In order to maximize the
capabilities of deep learning models, we must use methods
such as transfer learning (Yosinski et al. 2014), and perform
some careful ﬁne-tuning due to a sensitive hyperparameter
optimization process. Weak or distant supervision of models
is another method by which we can introduce supervision
from a large number of noisily labelled data (Go, Bhayani,
and Huang 2009) obtained from heuristics and rules. In this
work, we create an augmented dataset which is utilized to
provide weak supervision for our models. Unfortunately,
naively introducing these noisy samples leads to poor perfor-
mance. For this reason, we explore adopting strategies such
as curriculum learning (Bengio et al. 2009; Wang, Chen, and
Zhu 2020) to achieve performance gains, while maintaining
ﬁdelity to the original model.
The contributions of this work are three-fold:
• We are the ﬁrst to tackle the challenge of risk of confu-
sion for trademark by predicting interpretable interme-
diate scores which can be utilized to improve the ﬁnal
outcome, i.e. whether there is an infringement of IP law.
• We empirically show the effects of utilizing curriculum
learning with weakly supervised learning to ensure gen-
eralizability, robustness, and stability of our model which
can be used for other similar legal decision-making tasks.
• We release the ﬁrst trademark case law dataset for tack-
ling the challenge of assessing risk of confusion.
Related Work
Recent research has explored blanket terms of explainabil-
ity and interpretability in great detail. Some works use these
terms interchangeably (Jain and Wallace 2019; Wiegreffe
and Pinter 2019), whilst others highlight their intricate dif-
ferences (Gilpin et al. 2018). In this work, we opt to use the
deﬁnitions of “interpretability” as per Gilpin et al. (2018)
to highlight the fact that our model as a function is in-
terpretable, and the explanations produced have high ﬁ-
delity aswell as transparency. Previous work dealt with in-
terpretability by means of introducing post-hoc methods
which are model agnostic and may be reliant on perturba-
tions (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016, 2018) or grounded
deeper in axioms (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Srini-
vas and Fleuret 2021). Other methods explored interpretabil-
ity on various degrees, i.e. on the level of individual neurons
(Dhamdhere, Sundararajan, and Yan 2018; Bau et al. 2020),
or based on the role of layers (Binder et al. 2016). Another
method of providing interpretability is by means of counter-
factuals (Mothilal, Sharma, and Tan 2020). As these meth-
ods involve providing explanations for black boxes, they
have been met with criticism (Rudin 2019), in favor of in-
herently interpretable models (Rudin et al. 2021).
Several papers focus on interpretability, with a narrower
focus on the task of legal judgment prediction trained on
large annotated datasets (Ye et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2018;
Zhong et al. 2020). Unlike the present study, past work
did not rely on costly and time-consuming annotations by
subject-matter experts. For these reasons, these studies do

Figure 2: Augmented dataset labels (Board of Appeal/Opposition Decisions) are assigned the intermediate labels from the
clean dataset (General Court) which was used for extracting the relevant sentences based on cosine similarity. The outcome of
the ﬁnal judgment (shown as 0 for “No Confusion” and 1 for “Confusion”) is assigned by taking the majority of the publicly
available labels from the board of appeal/opposition decision cases.
Subset
Num. Cases
Avg. Char/S
Clean
525
1081
Augmented
2852
941
Table 1: Clean subset represents cases annotated by lawyers,
obtained from the CJEU. Augmented subset represents cases
which are extracted from the Board of Appeal/Opposition
Decisions. S denotes the input text comprising of factors
which inﬂuence the likelihood of confusion.
not adequately reﬂect the real-world scenario for the appli-
cation of deep learning towards high-stakes decision mak-
ing. Phang, F´evry, and Bowman (2019) utilized intermediate
predictions in order to predict outcomes, although the main
motive is not towards providing interpretability, and again,
these intermediate predictions do not reﬂect real-world chal-
lenges. Moreover, intermediate labels in the aforementioned
work are abundantly available in contrast to the main task.
Wei and Zou (2019) explored simple methods to augment
data for text classiﬁcation tasks. However, in high-stakes de-
cision making we must take into consideration data augmen-
tation methods which enables generalization of our model,
especially in the legal domain wherein data from different
levels of courts may be available. Naively introducing these
noisy augmented samples will lead to a reduction in per-
formance. (Wang, Chen, and Zhu 2020) provides a detailed
overview of various curriculum learning strategies through
which augmented samples can be introduced. In this work
we opt for a modiﬁed self-paced learning strategy. Wu, Dyer,
and Neyshabur (2021); Zhou, Wang, and Bilmes (2021) de-
tailed the scenarios in which noisy samples of data provide
beneﬁts towards the training process. In this work, we uti-
lize the traditional method of curriculum learning which in-
troduces noisy samples from easy-to-hard for training.
Dataset
The datasets we created for the purpose of this study are
comprised of two parts—ﬁrstly, cases obtained from the
General Court, a constituent of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU)2. The CJEU is the highest judicial
authority in the ﬁeld of trademark in the European Union.
The size of the data sample is signiﬁcant from a legal stand-
point insofar as we were able to extract a large pool of
decisions related to trademark confusion. As a result, the
CJEU body of case law constitutes a meaningful and rele-
vant source of training data for our models. The cases ob-
tained from the CJEU were annotated by a team of lawyers
with a training in trademark law. An annotation guideline
was designed by legal professionals, taking into considera-
tion the various factors which are involved in deciding the
outcome of a case. Despite the guideline comprising of 32
ﬁelds, a condensed set of 5 factors were deemed important
towards analyzing the risk of confusion for the likelihood
of trademarks, shown in Table 5 of the Appendix. These
factors are “Similarity of Goods & Services”, “Visual Simi-
larity”, “Conceptual Similarity”, “Phonetic Similarity”, and
“Level of Attention”. Few cases are more nuanced and re-
quire “split decisions” to be made for annotations. We ex-
clude the consideration of these outlier cases in this work.
Due to the presence of missing values in our annotated cases
under the selected important features, we have a set of 426
cases, from which 213 samples are reserved for training, 53
for validation, and 160 for testing. All cases are extracted
from 2008 onwards, as major changes3 in trademark law
have been made since. The resulting cases are hence com-
prised of 525 annotated documents in its entirety. Secondly,
we weakly labelled an additional 2852 cases from a larger
pool of “Opposition decisions”, and “Board of Appeal deci-
sions” 4. The average length of these document are compa-
rable, as shown in Table 1. These additional cases are similar
in terms of semantics to our expert-annotated cases, with the
exception that from a legal perspective, they were decided by
a lower authority and thus do not bear the same legal value
as the cases of the CJEU. We refer to these cases as “aug-
2https://curia.europa.eu/
3For the sake of consistency, we have annotated cases decided
after Regulation (EC) No. 207/2009, which brought forward vari-
ous changes in trademark law.
4https://euipo.europa.eu/eSearchCLW/

mented data”, the entirety of which is utilized for training
under different settings. The detailled construction process
of these datasets will be elaborated below.
Obtaining Expert-Annotations
Factors that are relevant to determine the existence of con-
fusion among trademarks were drawn from the Regulation
(EC) No 207/2009), the foundational legislation in the ﬁeld
of trademark. Lawyers were trained on identifying these fac-
tors. Sentences were extracted corresponding to these im-
portant features, and were labelled on a predeﬁned scale.
In this work, the resulting dataset is regarded as a “clean
dataset”. Next, a control-group study was created, wherein
the independent variable was set to be the ﬁnal outcome i.e.
confusion or no confusion. Factors inﬂuencing the judgment
were presented to the control group consisting of lawyers.
The participants were asked to determine the outcome when
presented with only the labelled factors. A human-annotated
Macro F1 score of ≈86% was achieved in determining con-
fusion for this task. The factors responsible for the inabil-
ity in obtaining perfect assessment are as follows—1) minor
concluding statements by courts may shift the judgment, 2)
courts may have paid more attention to speciﬁc features in a
few cases, 3) human annotator error, 4) case contained vary-
ing claims, 5) split-decisions in cases. Participants involved
in this control group were also asked to identify rules in-
volved in assessing the likelihood of confusion. These rules
were utilized to establish the labels for the cases from “Op-
position Decisions”, and “Board of Appeal Decisions”, and
are detailed in Table 6 of the Appendix.
Obtaining Augmented Cases
The capability of a simple process to obtain augmentation
for this task is possible due to the repetitiveness in trade-
mark case law. We ﬁrst retrieve ≈52000 cases from the
“Opposition Decisions”, and “Board of Appeal Decisions”
dating from 1998 to 2020. This serves as a large pool of
initial cases, from which we follow the extraction, random-
ization, ﬁltering, and assigning steps, shown in Figure 2 de-
tailed as follows:
1. Extraction: We utilize cases from our annotated clean
training dataset and create TF-IDF matrices for all sen-
tences. We also repeat this process for the lower court
(augmented, pre-ﬁltered) cases, of which we have a
larger pool of cases. Then, we calculate cosine similarity
and extract the top sentences corresponding to the sen-
tences obtained from our training set.
2. Randomization: As extracted sentences may correspond
to one of ﬁve features (Similarity of Goods & Services,
Visual Similarity, Conceptual Similarity, Phonetic Simi-
larity, or Level of Attention), we randomly concatenate
sentences corresponding to these features to create con-
cluding paragraphs, which albeit noisy, contain a large
number of samples.
3. Filtering: By utilizing a few basic keywords which are
known to be present in sentences attributing to confusion
(e.g. ‘conceptually‘ for ‘Conceptual Similarity‘), we ob-
tain basic ﬁltered textual inputs. We then utilize the rules
Figure 3: Our proposed model which takes into consider-
ation intermediate labels for interpretability, and addresses
the challenge of decision-making due to spurious correla-
tions. S denotes the input excerpts extracted from case law.
f1 and f2 are initialized by ﬁne-tuning on independent loss
functions. Vinterm is produced by ﬁrst calculating interme-
diate labels, after which an encoder denoted by Einterm en-
ables us to fuse it with the representation obtained from f1.
Vtext and Vinterm are fused to create Vfusion.
devised by the control group study to further ﬁlter our
augmented samples.
4. Assigning: We utilize the annotated (clean) samples to
assign pseudo-labels to these augmented samples by
maintaining the original labels from which they were ex-
tracted for intermediate labels. We also make use of the
ﬁnal outcome to assign a label for the ﬁnal judgment of
the case by consideration of the majority number of sam-
ples attributing to a label of “Confusion” or “No Confu-
sion”. For example, if a majority of the cases from which
the statements are derived from consist of the ﬁnal judg-
ment of confusion, the pseudo-label for the document
will also be confusion. In this work, the resulting cases
obtained from this stage will be referred to as our “aug-
mented dataset”.
Methodology
The motivation for designing the model in this work is to
introduce interpretability in a model-agnostic setting which
can be utilized for legal decision-making tasks. As shown
in Figure 3, this is done by introducing an abstracted layer
derived from text, which we call the components of as “inter-
mediate labels”. By predicting these labels, we are able to in-
duce interpretability in our model. Furthermore, by utilizing
these intermediate labels to make judgments of the ﬁnal out-
come, we enable the model to make decisions for the right
reasons. In other words, we tackle the challenge of spurious
correlations wherein decisions may be made correctly due
to incorrect reasons by introducing these intermediate labels

for producing the outcome. As our “clean dataset” contains
only a few samples, we utilize our “augmented dataset” to
promote generalization of our model through a curriculum
learning strategy which is detailed in Figure 4.
Baselines
End-to-End
Transformer-based models such as BERT
(Devlin et al. 2019) have shown strong performance on var-
ious text classiﬁcation tasks. We utilize RoBERTa (Liu et al.
2019) for the task of predicting the likelihood of confusion
for trademarks. This model is tested on the various splits of
training data—1) clean data, 2) augmented data, and 3) mix
data which is simply a combination of the shufﬂed clean,
and augmented data. The experiments under these settings
are performed separately for both, likelihood of confusion
classiﬁcation task, and for intermediate-label prediction re-
gression task as detailed in Figure 6 of the Appendix. As a
consequence of this disjoint training, the two tasks are un-
able to beneﬁt each other, and hence decisions for ﬁnal labels
may be made due to spurious correlations.
Multi-Task
As our task is targeted to tackle the optimiza-
tion of intermediate labels, and the prediction of likelihood
of confusion, it is reasonable to consider a multi-task struc-
ture wherein parameters are shared across two identical en-
coders as shown in Figure 7 of the Appendix. As with our
end-to-end model, we use RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) for
the multi-task setting in order to ensure consistency across
our results. However, we still face the challenge of spuri-
ous correlations due to the inability of this method to build
a connection between the two tasks.
Fusion Model
To overcome the aforementioned weaknesses in the baseline
methods, wherein decisions may be made due to spurious
correlations, and to address the need for interpretability, we
propose a fusion model shown in Figure 3.
For a given set, S = {s1, s2, ..., sn} ∀si ∈S′ we have S′
which corresponds to factors in the form of text inﬂuencing
the likelihood of confusion either extracted manually in the
case of the clean dataset, or automatically obained in the
case of the augmented dataset.
We utilize an encoder, f1 which is initialized from the best
performing checkpoint of the end-to-end model for the bi-
nary prediction task to determine the likelihood of confusion
in a case. This is done by utilizing cross entropy loss shown
in Equation 1 wherein m are the number of samples, yi is
the target label, and ˆyi is the output obtained from f1(S).
L = −1
m
m
X
i=1
yi · log (ˆyi)
(1)
For the intermediate task, encoder f2 is initialized by a
similar method after being ﬁne-tuned by optimizing Equa-
tion 2, for the value of variables detailed in Equation 3. We
use Smooth L1 Loss here as it accounts for outliers, and
leads to better performance in lieu of utilizing mean abso-
lute error, or mean standard error loss. The unreduced loss
is given by:
L = {l1, . . . , lI}T ,
(2)
where li can be formatted as:
li =

0.5 (ˆyi −yi)2 /β,
if |ˆyi −yi| < β
|ˆyi −yi| −0.5 ∗β,
otherwise
(3)
where ˆyi and yi denote the output of f2(S) and the target re-
spectively. β is a hyperparameter, wherein if β →0, smooth
L1 Loss will converge to L1 Loss, and if β →+∞, will
converge to a constant 0 loss. We set β to 1, to account for
outliers.
A feedforward layer which applies a linear transformation
is utilized to obtain the label values, after which we utilize
an embedding layer. A transformer block made up of self-
attention as shown in Equation 4 and a feedforward network
is then utilized as an encoder. A ﬁnal feedforward connec-
tion is used to obtain the representation for the intermediate
labels. We do not directly consider the hidden representa-
tion of f2 here due to the fact that we require our model
to produce the intermediate labels, a property which is not
obtainable otherwise.
Attention = softmax
QKT
√dk

V
(4)
where Q is a query matrix, i.e. embedding of si. K are the
keys, i.e. the embedding of all words in S. V are values, and
√dk is the dimension of K, by which scaling is performed
as per Vaswani et al. (2017).
The fusion layer is a modiﬁed version of Cai et al. (2019)
and is detailed in Equation 5.
VF usion = s1 ∗Vtext + s2 ∗Vinterm
(5)
where s1 and s2 are scores calculated by using hyperbolic
tangent function denoted in Equation 6 after a feedforward
layer stemming from the concatenated vector representation
of Vtext with Vinterm, and conversely Vinterm with Vtext
respectively:
tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(6)
where x can be set to the concatenated vector representations
to obtain s1, and s2 respectively.
Curriculum learning
As our augmented dataset contains several noisy samples,
it is natural to consider a structured method of introducing
samples in order of easy-to-difﬁcult for training our model.
We adopt a curriculum learning strategy to be utilized in
introduction of samples wherein the base classiﬁer is uti-
lized to set a threshold for difﬁculty on the basis of softmax
probabilities as detailed in Figure 4. The model, Minit is
trained on only clean data. Mbase is an untrained encoder
with the same architecture as Minit. By dividing the aug-
mented training dataset into bins, B = {b1, b2, ..., bn}, we
select the bins containing conﬁdent samples to be introduced
as training samples with clean data for Mbase. The updated
M ′
base is further trained on only clean data and serves as our
model for the curriculum learning strategy.

Figure 4: Curriculum learning strategy by which augmented
data is utilized to improve predictive capabilities of a model.
Experimental Setup
In all experiments, the f1 and f2 architectures utilized are
RoBERTa-base models. In our model, the embedding layer
in Einterm has a dimension of 300, and is arbitrarily set.
The transformer block in Einterm for the intermediate la-
bels consists of 6 layers with 6 heads, and a feedforward di-
mension of 512. In our experiments, we utilize a batch size
of 8 for all experiments on a single RTX 2080Ti machine
with 11 GB of memory, taking into consideration the limited
computational resources practioners in the legal ﬁeld may
have. For curriculum learning, we arbitrarily set the num-
ber of bins to be 3 wherein the ﬁrst bin contains the most
conﬁdent samples with a probability threshold of ≥0.99,
the second bin contains the remaining correct samples, and
the ﬁnal bin contains all samples from the mixed dataset for
training which were not contained within the previous bins.
For the calibration experiments, we arbitrarily set the num-
ber of bins to be 5. PyTorch-based libraries are utilized for
all experiments.
Results and Discussion
Our objective with the experiments is to demonstrate with
strong empirical evidence that our model is capable of pro-
ducing stable, reliable results with excerpts obtained from
case law. The results are shown on our carefully curated
dataset for the likelihood of confusion for trademarks in Ta-
ble 2. However, the ﬁndings in this work can easily be uti-
lized for other similar legal decision-making tasks.
End-to-end models may suffer from issues such as making
decisions due to spurious correlation, as they are in no way
constrained by the intermediate labels. On the other hand,
the multi-task baseline, and our model is capable of utiliz-
ing the intermediate labels to make decisions. As shown in
Table 2, there is no beneﬁt in utilizing the end-to-end model
as a predictive solution for this task. Firstly, the performance
is much worse than our model, and the multi-task model for
the clean dataset. For the mixed dataset, it is unable to bene-
ﬁt from training on the larger number of noisy samples. Sec-
ondly, the standard deviation between different runs is very
high for random starts of the model for training. The use-
case of the end-to-end model is only as initializing Mbase
for the curriculum learning strategy.
The multi-task model, despite incorporating the interme-
diate labels during training, is unable to take advantage of
Model
Data Split
Clean
Mix
Multi-Task
75.52 ± 6.13
60.51 ± 7.34
End-to-End
75.22 ± 6.89
62.47 ± 7.47
Ours
79.16 ± 2.34
65.60 ± 3.01
Ours + curric.
-
83.05 ± 2.54
Table 2: Macro F1 scores reported for the binary predic-
tion task of likelihood of confusion (± standard devia-
tion). Multi-task denotes ﬁne-tuned jointly-trained roberta-
base encoders. End-to-End denotes a ﬁne-tuned roberta-base
model. Results shown are averaged across 5 runs. The data
split “Mix” is the randomly shufﬂed concatenation of the
clean and augmented datasets. “Curric.” is an abbreviation
for our curriculum learning straegy shown in Figure 4.
Model
MAE
MSE
Random
1.81 ± 0.03
5.09 ± 0.12
Clean
Multi-Task
0.75 ± 0.03
1.05 ± 0.06
Ours
0.75 ± 0.03
0.99 ± 0.07
Mix
Multi-Task
0.84 ± 0.04
1.27 ± 0.13
Ours
0.83 ± 0.05
1.24 ± 0.13
Table 3: Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Standard
Error(MSE) reported for regression task of predicting inter-
mediate labels (lower value is better). The loss function uti-
lized for training is Smooth L1 Loss which is more stable
for training on lesser number of samples.
these labels in improving the performance of likelihood of
confusion. For the clean dataset, the performance is compa-
rable to that of the end-to-end model. On the other hand, for
the mixed dataset, the performance is slightly worse than the
end-to-end model. Results from both data splits show high
standard deviation, and hence unstable results between runs.
However, as this model utilizes a shared encoder wherein
the weights are updated from both, intermediate, and ﬁnal
outcome prediction tasks, it is a step in the right direction
towards making decisions for the correct reasons, and not
due to spurious correlations.
Our model is able to incorporate the intermediate labels,
much like the multi-task model, and hence also tackles the
challenge of decisions being made due to spurious correla-
tions. However, the major beneﬁt is seen on both splits of
data, wherein the standard deviation is drastically reduced
between runs, hence delivering stable results. Furthermore,
the performance shows great improvement under the clean
dataset data split when compared with the end-to-end, and
multi-task models. Nonetheless, the beneﬁts of utilizing the
augmented dataset are only apparent when we utilize our
curriculum learning strategy to introduce these samples from
the order of easy-to-difﬁcult. Here, we observe a drastic
improvement over the previous “Mix” data splits, and bet-
ter performance than our previously best-performing clean
data-split from our model.

Figure 5: Stability and improved performance of our model
is showcased when utilizing curriculum learning. Naively
utilizing the mixed dataset leads to poor performance.
As computational resources available to legal decision-
makers may be limited, it is crucial that stability of mod-
els is obtained from deep neural network architectures with-
out excessive efforts for ﬁne-tuning. From Figure 5, we ob-
serve that the results when utilizing the clean dataset are un-
stable, and requires multiple runs to achieve desirable per-
formance. For the augmented dataset alone, due to dataset
shift between the augmented dataset and clean dataset, very
poor performance is showcased. This poor performance is
expected, and accentuates the requirement of a few clean
samples during the training process. The beneﬁt of utiliza-
tion of the mixed dataset is only apparent when we introduce
it by means of curriculum learning, from which we are able
to achieve stable and strong performance.
For the intermediate task, we utilize Smooth L1 Loss, as it
leads to stable training with small batches which is a product
of our small datasets for training. We report both MAE and
MSE as metrics to showcase the best performing model for
intermediate-label predictions in Table 3. Expectedly, ran-
domly setting these intermediate labels shows poor perfor-
mance. As with our models for prediction of likelihood of
confusion as the ground truth, we observe no beneﬁt in uti-
lizing the multi-task model for predicting the intermediate
labels. Furthermore, we omit the results of curriculum learn-
ing strategies in predicting the intermediate labels as they
did not provide any beneﬁt for intermediate-label prediction
performance due to the synthetic nature of the augmented
dataset. Utilizing the mixed dataset also did not show any
improvement in performance.
Through experimental results, we observe no beneﬁt in
initializing our fusion-based model from models which are
not ﬁnetuned. Instead, we utilize the best ﬁne-tuned check-
points for each respective data split. Inclusion of these in-
termediate labels provide transparency of the fusion model,
wherein results are explainable to a degree that they can be
utilized by lawyers to assess the risk of confusion for trade-
marks.
Model
ECE
End-to-End
0.1452
Multi-task
0.1520
Ours
0.0733
Table 4: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) of our fusion
model out-performs the baselines (lower values are better).
Calibration
As ﬁrst shown in Naeini, Cooper, and Hauskrecht (2015),
and later compared in Guo et al. (2017) for neural networks,
we utilize Expected Calibration Error (ECE) to showcase a
statistic regarding the calibration comparison of our models
on making the ﬁnal conclusions for assessment of likelihood
of confusion. The importance of calibration metrics of mod-
els in high-stakes decision making is to ensure that the con-
ﬁdence is taken into consideration for the choice of a model,
and this selection is not dependant only on the predictions.
By creating M bins, where Bm are samples belonging to
bins in conﬁdence intervals Im =
  m−1
M , m
M

, we can cal-
culate the ECE value from Equation 7 which are dependent
on the predictions as in Equation 8 and conﬁdence of these
values shown in Equation 9.
ECE =
M
X
m=1
|Bm|
n
|acc (Bm) −conf (Bm)|
(7)
acc (Bm) =
1
|Bm|
X
i∈Bm
1 (ˆyi = yi)
(8)
where ˆyi denotes the model output, and yi denotes the
ground truth.
conf (Bm) =
1
|Bm|
X
i∈Bm
ˆpi
(9)
where ˆpi denotes the probabilities of the predictions.
The results shown in Table 4 suggest that our model is
signiﬁcantly well-calibrated in constrast to end-to-end, and
multi-task models.
Conclusion
In this work, we explore the application of deep learning to-
wards the task of predicting the likelihood of confusion for
trademarks which can easily be extended to other branches
of law. We address the data limitations by creation of an
expertly-tailored augmented dataset. We observe that train-
ing on these cases produces stable results only when cou-
pled with a curriculum learning strategy. We also address
the challenge of interpretability by introducing intermediate
labels—such as predicting whether trademarks are visually
similar, which in turn acts as an interpretable mechanism
to constrain decisions being made due to spurious correla-
tions. We show that our fusion model outperforms baseline
methods by not only producing improvement in the macro-
F1 metric, but by also improving on the ability to predict
intermediate labels. Finally, we show a drastic improvement
of calibration of our model in comparison to the baselines
by reporting the Expected Calibration Error.
