Integrating multiple sources to answer questions
in Algebraic Topology.⋆
J´onathan Heras, Vico Pascual, Ana Romero, and Julio Rubio
Departamento de Matem´aticas y Computaci´on, Universidad de La Rioja,
Ediﬁcio Vives, Luis de Ulloa s/n, E-26004 Logro˜no (La Rioja, Spain).

Abstract. We present in this paper an evolution of a tool from a user
interface for a concrete Computer Algebra system for Algebraic Topology
(the Kenzo system), to a front-end allowing the interoperability among
diﬀerent sources for computation and deduction. The architecture allows
the system not only to interface several systems, but also to make them
cooperate in shared calculations.
1
Diﬀerent questions, diﬀerent sources
When working in Mathematics, usually the researcher uses diﬀerent sources of
information. Typically, he can consult some papers or textbooks, make some
computations with a Computer Algebra system, check the results against some
known tables or, more rarely, verify some conjectures with a proof assistant tool.
That is to say, Mathematical Knowledge is dispersed among several sources.
Our aim in this work is to mechanize, in some particular cases, the man-
agement of these multiple-source information systems. Since it would be too
pretentious to try to solve fully this problem, we work in a very speciﬁc context.
Thematically, we restrict ourselves to (a subset of) Algebraic Topology. With
respect to the sources, in order to have a representation wide enough, we have
chosen two Computer Algebra systems (Kenzo and GAP), a theorem prover
(ACL2) and a small expert system developed by us. The objective of the expert
system is computing homotopy groups. Kenzo and GAP can compute homology
groups of diﬀerent spaces, but the calculation of homotopy is in general much
harder. Our homotopy expert system tries to take proﬁt of theoretical knowl-
edge contained in theorems (tables have been excluded up to now, since they
are considered less diﬃcult to integrate, from a technological point of view), and
can ask computational results to Kenzo, if needed.
This paper is a natural continuation of [17] and [18]. There are three main
contributions in the paper: an architecture based on the Broker pattern [8]
(proven as an open, ﬂexible and adaptable tool); an Homotopy Expert System
(HES) that allows non-trivial computations (and explanations) interacting with
Kenzo; and the automation of the interoperability between Kenzo and GAP.
⋆Partially supported by Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovaci´on, project MTM2009-13842-
C02-01. The ﬁnal publication of this paper is available at www.springerlink.com
arXiv:1005.0749v1  [cs.SC]  27 Apr 2010

From the symbolic computation literature, we looked for inspiration in diﬀer-
ent projects and frameworks such as the MathWeb software bus [5], its successor
the MathServe Framework [4], the MoNET project [9,6] or the MathBroker [2]
and MathBroker II [3] projects, as well as in other works as [13] or [22].
2
General view of the system
The Broker architectural pattern [8] can be used to structure software systems
with decoupled components that interact through service invocations. The Bro-
ker pattern deﬁnes three kinds of participants: clients, components, and the bro-
ker itself. A scheme of our architecture based on this pattern is depicted in
Figure 1. The mediator (broker) component embeds an Internal Memory where
a strategy of memoization has been systematically implemented (based on the
same idea used in GAP for attributes, see [16]). The system stores the results
in the internal memory when a computation is executed for the ﬁrst time, and
if the same computation is asked again later, the result is simply looked up and
returned, without further computation.
Mediator
Internal Memory
front-end
HES
Kenzo
GAP
ACL2
Fig. 1. Broker architectural pattern
The decorator pattern [8] is used to wrap objects of our system with infor-
mation, like the type of the object (simplicial set, group,. . . ) or the reduction de-
gree [17] if the object is a topological space. This information guides the mediator
to decide which component to use. Namely, Kenzo [11] (a Symbolic Computation
system devoted to Algebraic Topology) is the core for computations related to
homology groups of spaces, GAP [1] (a Computer Algebra system in the area
of Computational Group Theory) and HAP [12] (a GAP homological algebra
library) are the core for computations related to group homology, ACL2 [19]
(a ﬁrst order logic theorem prover) is the kernel for verifying the correctness of
statements and, ﬁnally, the Homotopy Expert System (a small module devel-
oped by us described in the next paragraph and from now on called HES) is in
charge of computing homotopy groups.
HES is a rule-based expert system. The structure of a rule-based expert sys-
tem, see [15], consists of, and the HES is no exception, the following components:
the Working memory (the facts), the Knowledge base (the rules), the Inference
engine, a Knowledge acquisition module and an Explanation facility module. In
the scope of the HES, the facts are properties associated with the objects (for
instance, “∀n ∈N : ∆n is a contractible space”). The current knowledge base is

made up of 23 rules (such as, “if X is contractible and n ≥1 then πn(X) = 0”).
The inference engine uses the forward chaining method for reasoning, see [15].
To grapple with the knowledge acquisition aspects, the HES takes proﬁt from
both the RuleML markup language [7] and the OMDoc format [20], the former
one is used to specify rules in a declarative way and the second one to store
concrete functionalities. Last but not least, gathering the applied rules and the
facts that decorate each object, our HES is able to provide a trace containing
the reasoning followed by it in order to reach a conclusion.
However, the power of our system does not lie in gathering several computer
algebra systems and theorem provers and use them separately with the same
front end, but interconnecting them to reach new results. The communication
among modules is performed by means of the OpenMath language [10], used to
represent the objects in a common language for all the systems.
In [21] an approach to coordinate GAP and Kenzo was presented. In that
work GAP and Kenzo cooperate in order to compute homology groups of some
spaces. These spaces with their homology can then be used in other construc-
tions and applications. Some enhancements of that tool provided by our system
are: avoidance of the installation of several programs and packages, automation
of communication steps (here the SCSCP protocol [14] plays a key role) and
concealment of the details to mix the systems.
The general procedure and technology to connect with the ACL2 system
explained in [18] is now applied to the context of group homology. The Common
Lisp code used in Kenzo to represent a group is sent to ACL2 as an instance
of an ACL2 encapsulate (a mechanism to introduce new functions symbols by
axioms constraining them to have certain properties) by means of our broker,
which is also in charge of invoking ACL2 in a way transparent for the user.
In another line, Kenzo and the HES cooperate to compute homotopy groups
of spaces. In this case, the HES requests Kenzo to compute homology groups
which can be used to obtain homotopy groups. Whereas Kenzo communicates
with the HES in order to send it results. The idea consists of gathering the
knowledge stored in the HES and chaining several tools available in Kenzo to
get results which are not reachable by anyone of them working in an independent
way.
3
Putting all together
Our current front-end has evolved from the user interface for Kenzo presented
in [17]. Its presentation layer is kept, but its internal mediator has been enriched
to support diﬀerent sources of information. Figure 2 displays some computations
which took proﬁt of the following interactions: H4(Ω2(S4)) = Z (computed with
Kenzo), H5(C5) = Z/5Z (computed with GAP), π4(∆4×∆5) = 0 (obtained with
the Homotopy Expert System), H5(K(C5, 1)) = Z/5Z (computed with Kenzo +
GAP), π4(S4) = Z (obtained with the Homotopy Expert System + Kenzo).
It is worth noting that all results are shown to the user in a unique screen and
that the computations are asked from a sole menu, then the user does not know

Fig. 2. The front end for computations
the system in charge of computing neither the collaboration among computer
algebra systems, he only receives the desired result. The technical details are
hidden to the user. The results related to ACL2 are shown in a diﬀerent tab to
split the computations from the deductions.
4
Conclusions and Further Work
In this paper an architecture to integrate diﬀerent tools for computing and log-
ical reasoning in Algebraic Topology is presented. Even if our proposal has a
limited extend, both thematically and from the point of view of the core sys-
tems, we think it shows a solid line of research that could be exported to other
areas of mathematical knowledge management. OpenMath technologies are the
essential tool ensuring the interoperability among systems (even integration in
some cases). This interoperability has a vertical dimension (from the mediator
to the kernel systems) as well as a horizontal axis (allowing direct interconnec-
tion of kernel systems). The modules can be taken from their sources (as in the
cases of Kenzo and ACL2), invoked in a remote manner (like the GAP server,
connected via the SCSCP protocol) or even developed in an ad-hoc way (as our
Homotopy Expert System).
Several research lines are still open. The most important ones are related to
giving more resources to the user to manage the interaction. Moreover, it would
be also necessary to improve the interaction with the ACL2 system. At this
moment the queries must be pre-processed; a comfortable way of introducing
questions about the truth of properties of intermediary objects, dynamically
generated during a computing session, should be provided. Last, and the most
diﬃcult one, a meta-language should be designed to specify how and when a
new kernel system can be plugged in the framework. This capability and the
necessity of orchestrating the diﬀerent services suppose a real challenge, which
will be explored by means of OpenMath technologies.
