Dendritic Cells for Real-Time  Anomaly Detection 
 
Julie Greensmith* and Uwe Aickelin* 
* School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK 

 
Abstract 
 
Dendritic Cells (DCs) are innate immune system cells which have the power to activate or suppress the 
immune system. The behaviour of human DCs is abstracted to form an algorithm suitable for anomaly 
detection. We test this algorithm on the real-time problem of port scan detection. Our results show a 
significant difference in artificial DC behaviour for an outgoing portscan when compared to behaviour 
for normal processes. 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Intrusion detection systems (IDS) are a method used 
in computer security for detection of unauthorised use 
of machines. The Danger Project proposed by Aick- 
elin et al. (2003) aims to improve on results previ- 
ously seen with artificial immune systems (AIS) by 
applying concepts from the Danger Theory to IDS. 
Danger theory proposes that exposure to danger sig- 
nals or pathogenic bacteria causes the activation of 
the immune system, not pattern matching of antigen. 
The cells responsible for combining these various sig- 
nals are Dendritic cells. We use the ‘signals plus con- 
text’ processing power of Dendritic Cells (DCs) to 
perform anomaly detection. 
Abstraction of certain properties thought key to 
DC function was performed, with algorithmic de- 
tails and sources of biological inspiration detailed in 
Greensmith et al. (2005) . The properties we abstract 
from DC behaviour include their existence in differ- 
ent states, depending on their environmental condi- 
tions.  As immature DCs, they collect multiple an- 
tigens and are exposed to signals, derived from dy- 
ing cells in the tissue (safe or danger signals).  DCs 
can combine these signals with bacterial signatures 
(PAMPs) to generate different output concentrations 
of costimulatory molecules, semi-mature cytokines 
and mature cytokines. Exposure to signals generates 
an increase in co-stimulatory molecules and causes 
the maturation of a DC to two different states: mature 
and semi-mature. DCs process a multitude of signals 
generated by the presence of bacteria or generated by 
damage to the tissue. PAMPs, based on a pre-defined 
signature, and danger signals (released on damage to 
the tissue) cause an increase in mature DC cytokines. 
Safe signals cause an increase in semi-mature DC cy- 
tokines and have a suppressive effect on both PAMPs 
and danger signals. 
A key feature of the DCs is an ability to combine 
signals with antigen. In order to provide an environ- 
ment suitable for the collection of signals and anti- 
gen, we use a system developed for the Danger Pro- 
ject (Aickelin et al. (2003)) known as libtissue. 
Using libtissue we can create a tissue compart- 
ment, to house a population of DCs.  This compart- 
ment, known as a tissue server, is used to update the 
DCs on exposure to signals and antigen. A tissue cli- 
ent transforms raw values into normalised signal con- 
centrations.  A weighted signal processing function 
(described in detail in Greensmith et al. (2005)) is 
used to combine these signals to determine the out- 
put signal concentration of a DC. The exposure of a 
DC to PAMPs, danger or safe signals causes an in- 
crease in co-stimulatory molecules (CSM) on the DC. 
Once the CSM value exceeds a given threshold, the 
DC ‘matures’ and is removed from the sampling pop- 
ulation. The concentrations of mature or semi-mature 
cytokines expressed by the DCs are calculated. An- 
tigen is collected during the period of signal expos- 
ure in the sampling pool.  Once a DC has matured, 
any antigen collected is labelled with presented DC 
context (mature or semi-mature) for each antigen. A 
mean percentage mature antigen value can be calcu- 
lated, indicating the number of times an antigen was 
presented in a mature context. 
 
 
2 Port  Scan Experiment 
 
For this experiment an ICMP (ping) scan is used to 
provide an example of malicious behaviour. System 
calls for a monitored secure shell (ssh) session are 
captured using a tissue client.  This includes normal 
processes such as the controlling shell, x-forwarding 

 
 
agent and ssh demons. The process IDs of these sys- 
tem calls form the antigen. Signals are captured from 
different aspects of system behaviour.   PAMPs are 
signature based and are derived from the number of 
ICMP errors received per second. Danger signals are 
derived from the number of packets per second sent 
by the machine.  Safe signals are represented as the 
rate of change of packets per second, based over a 2 
second moving average. 
These incoming signals are used to convert DCs to 
either semi-mature or mature, measured by the relat- 
ive concentrations of their output cytokines. For the 
duration of the experiment, the IDs of running pro- 
cesses, the output cytokines and the presented antigen 
are recorded. Post-hoc analysis allows us to measure 
the mean % mature context antigen for each process. 
Each experiment is repeated 10 times and an average 
value for the mean % mature context antigen is cal- 
culated, per process. 
Three experiments are performed, using different 
combinations of signals and variations on the weight 
of the suppressive safe signal.   Experiment 1 uses 
danger and safe signals alone, with a -1 value for the 
suppression by safe signals; experiment 2 uses danger 
and safe signals in combination with PAMPs; and 
finally, experiment 3 uses PAMPS, danger and safe 
signals, but with an increased value of suppression, 
a value of -2, to allow for exploration between this 
value and the detection of normal processes. 
 
 
2.1 Results and Analysis 
 
 
 
1 
detection of the nmap was significantly greater than 
the value derived for the normal file transfer, espe- 
cially in experiment 3. The addition of signals did not 
significantly alter the mean % mature antigens of the 
nmap process. Conversely, the mean % mature anti- 
gens for the normal file transfer was significantly re- 
duced when the safe signal weight was changed to -2 
(all significance assessed through paired t-tests, with 
95% confidence demonstrated). 
In each experiment the nmap process generated 
significantly more mature context antigen than any 
other process.  The addition of PAMPs did not sig- 
nificantly increase the detection of the ‘anomalous’ 
nmap but combined with a higher safe signal weight, 
lowered the detection of the normal processes. In fu- 
ture experiments, a much higher level of safe signal 
could be used without reducing the detection of the 
misbehaving process (lower rate of false positives). 
 
 
3 Conclusions 
 
In this paper we have demonstrated the use of a Dend- 
ritic cell inspired algorithm on a small-scale, real- 
time problem.  The promising results shown in the 
port scan experiments imply that the DC algorithm 
plus libtissue framework can be used for the pur- 
pose of anomaly detection under real-time conditions. 
Future work involves the use of a replay client, so 
data from real-time experiments can be captured for 
the purpose of testing the parameters and limitations 
of the system in a controlled manner.
