Learn by Guessing: Multi-Step Pseudo-Label Reﬁnement for
Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Tiago de C. G. Pereira, Teoﬁlo E. de Campos
Universidade de Bras´ılia - UnB
Bras´ılia-DF, Brazil

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) methods for
person Re-Identiﬁcation (Re-ID) rely on target domain sam-
ples to model the marginal distribution of the data.
To
deal with the lack of target domain labels, UDA methods
leverage information from labeled source samples and un-
labeled target samples.
A promising approach relies on
the use of unsupervised learning as part of the pipeline,
such as clustering methods.
The quality of the clusters
clearly plays a major role in methods performance, but
this point has been overlooked.
In this work, we pro-
pose a multi-step pseudo-label reﬁnement method to se-
lect the best possible clusters and keep improving them
so that these clusters become closer to the class divi-
sions without knowledge of the class labels.
Our re-
ﬁnement method includes a cluster selection strategy and
a camera-based normalization method which reduces the
within-domain variations caused by the use of multiple
cameras in person Re-ID. This allows our method to reach
state-of-the-art UDA results on DukeMTMC→Market1501
(source→target). We surpass state-of-the-art for UDA Re-
ID by 3.4% on Market1501→DukeMTMC datasets, which
is a more challenging adaptation setup because the target
domain (DukeMTMC) has eight distinct cameras. Further-
more, the camera-based normalization method causes a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in the number of iterations required for
training convergence.
1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) aims at matching per-
son images from different non-overlapping cameras views.
This is an essential feature for diverse real word challenges,
such as smart cities [37], intelligent video surveillance [30],
suspicious action recognition [32] and pedestrian retrieval
[28].
With all these popular possible applications, there is a
clear demand for robust Re-ID systems in the industry.
Academic research groups have achieved remarkable in-
domain results on popular person Re-ID datasets such as
Market1501 [39] and DukeMTMC-reID [41]. Despite these
advances, there is still a dichotomy between the success in
academic results versus the industrial application. This is
because the best academic results e.g. [29, 21, 46] are based
on supervised methods that require a huge amount of anno-
tated data for their training. Gathering data is not a problem
nowadays, as CCTV systems are omnipresent. However,
annotating images is a very expensive and tedious task that
requires a lot of manual work.
The use of pre-trained state-of-the-art Re-ID models usu-
ally leads to disappointing results because each group of
cameras has distinct characteristics, such as illumination,
resolution, noise level, orientation, pose, distance, focal
length, amount of people’s motion as well as factors that
inﬂuence the appearance of people, such as ethnicity, type
of location (e.g. leisure vs work places) and weather condi-
tions.
Some methods have been proposed to reduce this gap
and unlock Re-ID systems for real world problems. That
is the case of domain invariant models [15, 26, 14], which
have the ambitious goal of being applicable to any domain
even if no samples are given from some of the potential tar-
get domains. Although domain invariance is indeed the key
to creating a widely applicable method, such methods usu-
ally do not outperform methods in which unlabeled target
domain samples are given. Since gathering unlabeled sam-
ples is a virtually effortless task, the need for domain in-
variant methods is not so urgent. A common alternative
is the use of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to
align domains, allowing the model to perform well in a tar-
get domain even if supervised training is only performed in
the source domain [36, 45, 3, 19]. In addition, there are
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) methods which
have been achieving notable results in cross-domain person
Re-ID. These methods typically rely on a process of tar-
get domain pseudo-labels generation. This allows them to
1
arXiv:2101.01215v1  [cs.CV]  4 Jan 2021

use actual target domain images without previous annota-
tion [18, 9, 35, 48, 24, 6, 8].
In this work, we dive deep in the UDA Re-ID setup
utilizing pseudo-labels to enhance models performance in
target domain. The quality of pseudo-labels clearly is es-
sential for the performance of this kind of method. How-
ever, pseudo-labels are expected to be noisy in this scenario.
Many methods have use soft cost functions to deal with
this noise, however we believe that cleaning and improv-
ing pseudo-labels is key to achieve high performance. We
therefore focus our work in two main points: camera-based
normalization, which we observed to be key to reduce do-
main variance; and a novel clusters selection strategy. The
latter removes outlying clusters and generate pseudo-labels
with important characteristics to help model convergence.
This strategy aims to generate clusters which are dense and
each contain samples of one person captured from the view
of multiple cameras.
Enhancing cluster quality has been overlooked by meth-
ods based on pseudo-labels and this has certainly held back
many methods.
To evaluate our proposal we work with
the most popular cross-domain dataset in unsupervised Re-
ID works: Market1501 and DukeMTMC. Our main con-
tribution is a multi-step pseudo-label reﬁnement that keeps
cleaning and improving the predicted target domain label
space to enhance model performance without the burden of
annotating data. Further to proposing a new pipeline, we
introduce strategies to build and select clusters in a way that
maximizes the model’s generalization ability and its poten-
tial to transfer learning to new Re-ID datasets where the la-
bels are unknown. Our method achieves UDA Re-ID state-
of-art for DukeMTMC →Market1501 and signiﬁcantly
pushes state-of-the-art for Market1501 →DukeMTMC, im-
proving results in 3.4% w.r.t. the best results we are aware
of. We achieve state-of-the-art results without any post-
processing methods, however we are aware that re-ranking
algorithms are helpful for metric learning tasks. We thus
evaluate our model using k-reciprocal encoding re-ranking
[42] and improve our results by further 2.1% and 2.9% for
DukeMTMC and Market1501, respectively.
2. Related works
Person Re-ID has been a trending computer vision re-
search topic.
There are two main directions for person
Re-ID research: a) supervised person Re-ID, that aims at
creating the best possible models for in-domain Re-ID and
b) unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) Re-ID focusing
on the Re-ID task in which a model trained in a source
dataset is adapted to another dataset, where the labels are
not known. The latter is sometimes referred to as cross-
domain Re-ID. In this ﬁeld, each person Re-ID dataset has
images captured from multiple cameras and the dataset as
a whole is assumed to be one domain. Although domain
adaptation techniques can be applied within a single dataset,
i.e., to adapt samples from one camera view to another, we
focus on the problem of adapting between different datasets.
This setting is more related to a real system deploying set-
ting because training can be done using a dataset containing
several viewpoints, but the deployment scenario is a differ-
ent set of data where it is easy to capture unlabeled samples
but labeled samples are not available.
Generalizable person Re-ID [15, 26, 14, 47] pursue
models that are domain invariant, so they can perform well
in diverse Re-ID datasets without the need of any adapta-
tion. That is an interesting approach for real world Re-ID
challenges, although it still does not perform as well as in-
domain person Re-ID. To achieve a domain invariant model,
Zhuang et al. [47] propose to replace all batch normaliza-
tion layers of a deep CNN by camera batch normalization
layers. These layers learn to apply batch normalization for
each camera reducing the within-domain camera variance,
this also helps the model to learn camera invariant features
that are more robust to domain changes.
Jin et al. [15]
propose a Style Normalization and Restitution (SNR) mod-
ule that ﬁrstly alleviates camera style variations and then
restores identity relevant features that may have been dis-
carded in the style normalization step, reducing the inﬂu-
ence of camera style change on feature vectors.
GAN-based person Re-ID [36, 45, 3, 19, 31, 48] have
been widely used to reduce the domain gap in Re-ID
datasets. Deng et al. [3] use cycleGAN to transfer the style
from an unlabeled target domain to a labeled source do-
main, so they leverage source domain annotations to apply
their trained model to images that are more similar to the
source domain ones. Zhai et al. [36] used GANs to augment
the target domain training data, so they could create images
that preserved the person ID and that simulates other cam-
era views at the same time.
Pseudo-Labels Generation for Person Re-ID [24, 9,
35, 8, 48, 36, 6, 18] predict the label space for an unlabeled
target domain, assume those predictions are correct and use
then to ﬁne-tune a model previously trained on source do-
main. This approach has shown remarkable results and is
the idea behind current state-of-the-art UDA Re-ID meth-
ods. The drawback with pseudo-labels is that if the do-
mains are not similar enough, they can lead to negative
transfer, because the labeling noise might be too high. To
deal with that, Ge et al. [9] propose a soft softmax-triplet
loss to leverage from pseudo-labels without overﬁtting their
model. Zeng et al. [35] propose a hierarchical clustering
method to reduce the inﬂuence of outliers and use a batch
hard triplet loss to bring outliers closer to interesting regions
so they could be used later on.
We believe that a generalize-able Re-ID model is pre-
requisite for a strong UDA method.
For this reason we
adopt IBN-Net50-a as our backbone and apply a camera
2

guided feature normalization in target domain to reduce the
domain gap. We also understand the importance of cleaning
the pseudo-labels, which is what motivate us to a clustering
algorithm with outlier detection and to propose a cluster-
ing selection step to feed our model only with data that is
predicted to be more reliable. Next section details our meth-
ods.
3. Methodology
In this Section we present and discuss all steps that
compose our method in deep details. In §3.1 we discuss
the commonly used backbones for Re-ID and in §3.2 we
present the concept of progressive learning. Then, we re-
view some clustering techniques in §3.3 and how to gener-
ate robust clusters in §3.4 and 3.5. Finally, in §3.6 we ex-
plain how to effectively combine all techniques in our train-
ing protocol.
3.1. Backbone
When working in cross domain tasks, the model general-
ization ability is key to success. Normalization techniques
have a very important role for that.
Nowadays,
the
typical
Re-ID
system
relies
on
ResNet [11] as their backbone (usually the ResNet-50
model),which is a safe choice, because Re-ID is a task
that requires multiple semantic levels to produce robust
embeddings and the residual blocks help to propagate these
multiple semantic levels to deeper layers.
Also, ResNet
is a well studied CNN that lead to a step change in the
performance on the ImageNet dataset [2].
However, the vanilla ResNet has its generalization com-
promised because it does not include instance-batch nor-
malization.
In [23], the authors proposed IBN-Net50,
which replaces batch normalization (BN) layers with in-
stance batch normalization (IBN) layers.
The IBN-Net
carefully integrates IN and BN as building blocks, signif-
icantly increasing its generalization ability. For this rea-
son, we choose it as our backbone. More speciﬁcally, we
use IBN-Net50-a, which offers a good compromise between
model size and performance.
3.2. Progressive Learning
Progressive learning is an iterative technique proposed
by Hehe et al. [6] composed of three parts: a) generating
target domain pseudo-labels to train the model without la-
beled data, b) ﬁne-tuning the model with the previous gen-
erated pseudo-labels and c) evaluating the model. This set
of steps is iterated until convergence. This approach relates
to some classical UDN and Transductive Transfer Learning
techniques, such as [7] and [20] for standard classiﬁcation
tasks.
To get full advantage of progressive learning it is impor-
tant to generate new pseudo-labels at each iteration, so the
model will have new stimulus to keep learning. Therefore
it is important that in each step the new pseudo-labels get
closer of the real labels. However, if the initial model is
not good enough, this leads to negative transfer [22] and the
performance of the system actually degrades as it iterates.
However, since target labels are unknown, it is not possible
to predict negative transfer.
For this reason, we argue that progressive learning must
be coupled with other techniques, such as the method we
describe in the next sections, particularly in §3.4 and 3.5. In
those sections, we propose to evaluate the reliability of sam-
ples and their pseudo-labels based on the conﬁdence of the
model. If only reliable samples and their pseudo-labels are
used, the model should progressively improve and generate
more robust pseudo-labels in the consecutive iterations.
3.3. Clustering techniques
For standard classiﬁcation tasks, pseudo-labels genera-
tion is direct: it is assumed that the predictions obtained are
usually correct and these predictions on the target set are
used as pseudo class labels. However, due to the lack of
control on the number of classes, person Re-ID is usually
approached as a metric learning task. The model predic-
tion is therefore not a label, but a feature vector in a space
where samples of the same person are expected to lie closer
to each other (and further to samples of different people).
Therefore, it is necessary to use clustering algorithms and
deﬁne each cluster as a pseudo-label (or pseudo person ID).
Therefore, given a target domain Dt with N images
{xi}N
i=1 we need to predict their labels {yi}N
i=1. Then, we
use a model pre-trained on source domain Ds to extract the
features for each image {xi}N
i=1 from Dt and use a cluster-
ing algorithm to group/predict each image label1.
3.3.1
K-means
As a ﬁrst choice, we used the k-means [10] algorithm to
cluster our data. The only parameter k-means need is the
number of clusters k. For our experiments, we choose k
using this heuristic:
k =
 N
15

,
(1)
where N is the total number of training images in target do-
main Dt. If all clusters have a balanced number of features
(images) this would mean that we are assuming that each
person ID in the target domain contains about 15 samples.
There are two problems with k-means for Re-ID: a) how
to deﬁne k without information about Dt and b) as stated by
Zeng et al. [35] k-means does not have an outlier detector,
so the outliers may drag the centroids away from denser
1We use bold math symbols for vectors.
3

Unlabeled target domain images
Model
Feature
extraction
Camera-based
normalization
Clustering with 
outlier removal, 
cluster selection 
and pseudo-labels 
prediction
Model
fine-tuning
Figure 1: Our Multi-Step Pseudo-Label Reﬁnement pipeline. The proposed method consists of four components: extraction
of features from unlabeled target domain images, camera-based normalization, prediction of pseudo-labels with a density-
based clustering algorithm, selection of reliable clusters and ﬁne-tuning of the model. The pipeline is cyclical, because at
each step it predicts more robust pseudo-labels that offer new information for the model. In the feature space panels, each
shape (e.g. triangle, plus signal and circle) represent a camera view and each color represent a person ID.
regions, causing the decision boundaries to shift, potentially
cutting through sets of samples that actually belong to the
same people.
3.3.2
DBSCAN
As discussed above, k-means is not recommended to gener-
ate robust pseudo-labels for UDA Re-ID methods. There-
fore, we propose the usage of DBSCAN [5] which is a
density-based clustering algorithm designed to deal with
large and noisy databases.
In a Domain Adaptation Re-ID scenario we can say that
the hard samples are actually noise, so a clustering algo-
rithm that itentify then as outliers is fundamental to improve
results. Furthermore, when applying Progressive Learning
we can leave hard samples out for some iterations and bring
then to the pseudo-labeled dataset in later iterations where
our model is stronger and the level of conﬁdence in those
hard samples is higher.
One important point is that DBSCAN does not require
a pre-deﬁned number of clusters (as in k-means), but it re-
quires two parameters: the maximum distance between two
samples to determine them as neighbors (ϵ) and the min-
imum number of samples to consider a region as dense
(min s).
In our experiments, we set min s = 4. As for the pa-
rameter ϵ, its value depends on the spread of the data. We
performed a simple search in an early training step deter-
mine a value that would balance the number of clusters se-
lected and the number of outliers. This lead to ϵ = 0.35
when DukeMTMC is the target domain and ϵ = 0.42 when
Market1501 is the target domain.
3.4. Cluster Selection
Re-ID datasets have disjoint label spaces, that is given a
source domain Ds and a target domain Dt their labels space
do not share the same classes, i.e.
{yi}s ̸= {yj}t ∀i,j.
(2)
As mentioned before, the usual way to deal with this is by
approaching Re-ID as a metric-learning task.
Therefore, Re-ID methods typically use triplet loss with
batch hard [12] and PK sampling. The PK sampling method
consist in selecting P identities with K samples from each
identity to form a mini-batch in training stage, which leads
to the following:
batch size = P × K.
(3)
In this work we used the triplet loss and PK sampling
to train our models, so we expect that every person ID has
at least K images. This clustering step therefore ignores
clusters with less than K images.
An important factor for Re-ID models is to learn fea-
tures that are robust to camera view variations. For that we
guarantee that, in the training stage, our model is fed with
samples of the same person ID in different cameras. There-
fore, we also prune clusters that had images from only one
camera view.
3.5. Camera-Guided Feature Normalization
The high variance present in Re-ID datasets is mainly
caused by the different camera views, as each view has
4

its own characteristics. This is why a model trained in a
source dataset presents poor results when evaluated in a tar-
get dataset (or domain). Normally, Re-ID models learn ro-
bust features for known views, but lack the ability to gener-
alize for new unseen views.
Pereira and de Campos [24] realize that this lack of gen-
eralization power has a negative impact in pseudo-labels
generation. They point that the main reason for that is the
fact that, in new unseen cameras, the model tends to clus-
ter images by cameras rather than clustering images from
the same person in different views. The majority of clusters
would therefore be ignored in the Cluster Selection step.
Zhuang et al. [47] replaced all batch normalization lay-
ers by camera batch normalization layers. Although this
helped them to reduce the data variance between camera
views, they normalize the data only on the source domain.
We propose to run this camera feature normalization step
before the pseudo-labels step on the target domain train-
ing set. By generating pseudo-labels that are normalized by
camera information, our method guides the model to learn
robust features in the target domain space without the need
of changing the model architecture or having additional cost
functions.
Camera-guided feature normalization therefore aims to
reduce the target domain variance, enhance the model ca-
pacity in the target domain and create better pseudo-labels
that further will result in a more robust model.
To apply camera guided feature normalization, we ﬁrst
divide all target domain training images {xi}t in c groups
where c is the number of cameras views in the dataset. Then
we extract their features f (c)
i
with our model and calculate,
for each camera c, its mean µ(c) and its standard deviation
σ(c). Finally, each feature is normalized by
f
(c)
i
= f (c)
i
−µ(c)
σ(c)
.
(4)
The normalized features f
(c)
i
are then used to generate the
pseudo-labels.
3.6. Our Training protocol
3.6.1
Baseline
First of all, we train our model in the source domain Ds as a
baseline. All our models use the IBN-Net50-a as backbone
and outputs feature vectors f with 2048 dimensions and a
logit prediction vectors p.
Our loss function has three components: a) a batch hard
triplet loss (Ltri) [12] that maps f in an Euclidean vector
space, b) a center loss (Lc) [33] to guarantee cluster com-
pactness and c) and a cross entropy label smooth loss (LID)
[40] that uses the logit vectors p to learn a person ID clas-
siﬁer. The smoothed person ID component has been proved
to help Re-ID systems [21] even though the training IDs are
disjoint from the testing IDs. Furthermore, its soft labels
has shown interesting features for UDA Re-ID [9]. Our loss
function is thus given by Equation 5.
L = Ltri + LID + 0.005Lc
(5)
The weight given to the cross entropy loss is the same that
was used in [21].
We start our training with pre-trained weights from Im-
ageNet [4] and use the Adam optimizer for 90 epochs with
a warm-up learning rate scheduler deﬁned by Equation 6,
which is based on [21].
lr =









3.5 × 10−5 × epoch
10
, epoch ≤10
3.5 × 10−4
, 10 < epoch ≤40
3.5 × 10−5
, 40 < epoch ≤70
3.5 × 10−6
, epoch > 70
(6)
For data augmentation we use random erase [43], resize im-
ages to 256 × 128 and apply a random color transformation
that could be a 20% brightness variation or a 15% contrast
variation. We also use random horizontal ﬂipping.
3.6.2
Usupervised Domain Adaptation
For unsupervised domain adaptation, we start with the
model pre-trained in Ds and use it to extract all the features
f from Dt training images. Once we have all these features
extracted, we separate them by camera and use Equation 4
to normalize them. Then, we use DBSCAN to create gen-
eral clusters in Dt and ﬁnally apply our cluster selection
strategy to keep only the clusters which are potentially the
the most reliable ones.
From the selected clusters we create our pseudo-labeled
dataset and use it to ﬁne-tune our previous model. Since
the domains are different datasets, the person IDs on the
pseudo-labeled dataset are always different from those of
the source dataset. Additionally, as our progressive learn-
ing strategy iterates, pseudo-labels are expected to change.
Therefore, it is expected that the cross-entropy loss LID
spikes in ﬁrst iterations, which can destabilize the training
process and lead to catastrophic forgetting. To prevent that,
we follow the transfer learning strategy of freezing the body
of our model for 20 epochs and let the last fully connected
layer learn a good enough p. Then, we unfreeze our model
and complete the ﬁne-tuning following the procedure de-
scribed in 3.6.1.
After the ﬁne-tuning we evaluate our model on Dt and it-
erate the whole process, according to the progressive learn-
ing strategy.
5

4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets
We performed our experiments on the Market1501 and
DukeMTMC datasets, interchanging then as source and
target domains to analyze our domain adaptation method.
Following the standard in this ﬁeld, we used cumulative
matches curve (CMC) and mean average precision (mAP)
as evaluation metrics.
Market1501 is an outdoors dataset containing images
across 6 cameras views where each person appears in at
least 2 different cameras. In total there are 32668 images
being 12936 images from 751 identities for training and
19732 images from 750 identities for testing.
DukeMTMC was also built using outdoor cameras. It
contains 36411 images from 1404 identities. Those images
were split as 16522 for training, 2228 for query and 17661
for test gallery.
4.2. Comparison with Supervised Learning and Di-
rect Transfer
In Table 1 we compare our baseline results to the direct
transfer and to our proposed method. The supervised learn-
ing was done using samples and labels from the target do-
main training samples. Since samples and labels are from
the same domain as the test set, this is expected to give re-
sults that are better than those of domain adaptation settings.
The aim of the supervised learning experiments is to under-
stand the capacity of the model in each dataset.
The Direct transfer method is used to evaluate the do-
main shift and the model generalization power. It is ex-
pected that this setting gives resutls that are worse than the
domain adaptation setting, because no knowledge of the tar-
get set is used in the training process. Our method does not
focus on being generalizable, we aim to use the source do-
main knowledge as start and enhance the model’s perfor-
mance in target domain without any labels. We found it
important to present direct transfer results in order to show
how much our method enhances over it.
As one can see, our method reaches remarkable results
for DukeMTMC as a target dataset. It can be surprising to
see that we even surpass the supervised result in 0.3% and
0.5% for CMC rank-1 and mAP, respectively. DukeMTMC
is a dataset with a high intra-variance caused by its eight
distinct camera views. We believe that the camera-guided
normalization applied before the clustering step provided
pseudo-labels that were more robust to camera view varia-
tions. Therefore, the method was able to learn camera in-
variant features. It is also likely that by transferring from
one dataset to another, our method was less prone to over-
ﬁtting than the supervised learning setting.
For Market1501 as a target, our method performed
equally well enhancing the direct transfer result in 30.2%
and 44.6% for CMC rank-1 and mAP, respectively. How-
ever, with lower intra-variance in Market1501 the super-
vised result is already saturated. Therefore, even tough la-
bels from the target set were not used, our methods gives
results which are not far below those of the supervised set-
ting.
4.3. Comparison with state-of-art UDA results
In Table 2 we compare our multi-step pseudo-label re-
ﬁnement method with multiple state-of-the-art Re-ID UDA
methods. As one can see, we beat all other methods in
DukeMTMC target dataset and push the state-of-the-art by
3.4% and 3.6% for CMC rank-1 and mAP, respectively. For
Market1501 we are able to reach second place with a notice-
able gap to the third place with an improvement of 2.4% and
4.9% for CMC rank-1 and mAP, respectively.
In addition, our framework have a lightweight architec-
ture when compared to other frameworks that achieve state-
of-the-art. MMT [9] uses two CNNs so that one generates
soft labels for the other. DG-Net++ [48] uses a extremely
complex framework with GANs and multiple encoders and
decoders.
As we approach Re-ID as a metric learning task, re-
ranking algorithms have a great impact in the results. Then,
we evaluated our model using k-reciprocal encoding re-
ranking [42] which combines the original distance with
the Jaccard distance in an unsupervised manner. The im-
portance to use a ranking system is shown with an CMC
Rank-1 improvement of 2.1% for DukeMTMC and 2.9%
in Market1501 when compared to our raw method. Also,
re-ranking signiﬁcantly pushes the mAP performance in
11.9% for DukeMTMC and 14.5% for Market1501.
4.4. Ablation studies
Table 3 shows how each technique contributes to our ﬁ-
nal method performance.
IBN-Net50-a:
the difference between the original
Resnet-50 and the IBN-Net50-a is that the IBN-Net50-a
modiﬁes all batch normalization layers so they also take ad-
vantage of an instance normalization. This modiﬁcation en-
hances the model normalization capacity and generalization
power, leading to an improvement on the CMC rank-1 per-
formance improvement of 3.3% in DukeMTMC and 4.6%
in Market1501.
Domain Adaptation:
in Table 3 we call as domain
adaptation the use of pseudo-labels from target domain for
training. This clustering guided domain adaptation allows
our model to train using actual images from target domain,
which facilitates the model to learn various aspects of the
domain, such as illumination, camera angles, person pose.
Learning the characteristics from target domain is a ma-
jor factor for domain adaptation which becomes evident by
the CMC rank-1 improvement of 7.5% in DukeMTMC and
6

Methods
Market1501 →DukeMTMC
DukeMTMC →Market1501
Rank-1
Rank-5
Rank-10
mAP
Rank-1
Rank-5
Rank-10
mAP
Supervised
82.4
92.0
94.5
68.8
91.2
92.0
98.4
79.2
Direct Transfer
44.7
60.7
66.4
27.3
58.9
74.3
80.1
29.0
Ours
82.7
90.5
93.5
69.3
89.1
95.8
97.2
73.6
Table 1: Comparison of our results with results using supervised learning on the target domain (which is expected to give the
best results) and direct transfer results, i.e. the use of a model trained on source directly applied to the target domain, without
domain adaptation (which is expected to be a lower bound).
Methods
Market1501 →DukeMTMC
DukeMTMC →Market1501
Rank-1
Rank-5
Rank-10
mAP
Rank-1
Rank-5
Rank-10
mAP
SPGAN [3]
46.9
62.6
68.5
26.4
58.1
76.0
82.7
26.9
UCDA-CCE [25]
55.4
-
-
36.7
64.3
-
-
34.5
ARN [17]
60.2
73.9
79.5
33.4
70.3
80.4
86.3
39.4
MAR [34]
67.1
79.8
-
48.0
67.7
81.9
-
40.0
ECN [44]
63.3
75.8
80.4
40.4
75.1
87.6
91.6
43.0
PDA-Net [16]
63.2
77.0
82.5
45.1
75.2
86.3
90.2
47.6
EANet [13]
67.7
-
-
48.0
78.0
-
-
51.6
CBN [47] + ECN
68.0
80.0
83.9
44.9
81.7
91.9
94.7
52.0
Theory [27]
68.4
80.1
83.5
49.0
75.8
89.5
93.2
53.7
CR-GAN [1]
68.9
80.2
84.7
48.6
77.7
89.7
92.7
54.0
PCB-PAST [38]
72.4
-
-
54.3
78.4
-
-
54.6
AD Cluster [36]
72.6
82.5
85.5
54.1
86.7
94.4
96.5
68.3
SSG [8]
76.0
85.8
89.3
60.3
86.2
94.6
96.5
68.7
DG-Net++ [48]
78.9
87.8
90.4
63.8
82.1
90.2
92.7
61.7
MMT [9]
79.3
89.1
92.4
65.7
90.9
96.4
97.9
76.5
Ours
82.7
90.5
93.5
69.3
89.1
95.8
97.2
73.6
Ours + Re-Ranking [42]
84.8
90.8
93.2
81.2
92.0
95.3
96.6
88.1
Table 2: Comparison of our results with state-of-art methods in UDA. We highlighted in bold, underline and italic the ﬁrst,
second and third best results, respectively.
Methods
M →D
D →M
Rank-1
mAP
Rank-1
mAP
ResNet 50 [21]
41.4
25.7
54.3
25.5
+ IBN-Net50-a
44.7
27.3
58.9
29.0
+ DA
52.2
37.1
60.1
34.8
+ PL
52.2
37.1
61.4
35.5
+ Cluster Selection
77.2
61.8
86.5
66.0
+ CN
82.7
69.3
89.1
73.6
Table 3: The contribution of each method in the model per-
formance evaluated on Market1501 and DukeMTMC-reID
datasets. PL means Progressive Learning, CN stands for
Camera Guided Normalization and DA for Domain Adap-
tation
1.2% in Market1501.
Progressive Learning:
this technique has a great po-
tential to keep improving the model’s performance with new
pseudo-labels. However, as we said in Section 3.2 to get full
advantage of this technique ones need to guarantee that the
pseudo-labels are close to the class divisions. Therefore,
this step only gives a signiﬁcant improvement if associated
with the proposed cluster selection technique. In Table 3
results, the progressive learning results were obtained using
the raw clusters deﬁned by the clustering algorithm. Then,
the model used all the available information in target do-
main and overﬁtted to these pseudo-labels. In the next step
these clusters tend to be the same and the model does not
have a stimulus to learn better features. This is why the pro-
gressive learning results on their own do not seem to help.
Cluster Selection:
this method relies on a continu-
ous improvement on the pseudo-labels. for that, we remove
clusters that are unlikely to help improve the model, such as
small clusters with less than 4 images and clusters that had
images from only one camera view. Using this strategy we
can get full advantage of progressive learning and push the
model to learn camera view invariant features, since all our
pseudo-labels have samples from multiple camera views.
The real contribution of the progressive learning tech-
nique is shown alongside the contribution of the cluster
selection strategy, because they are complementary tech-
niques.
This is certainly the most relevant element of
our pipeline, as it leads to a step change in our perfor-
mance, enhancing the rank-1 CMC performance in 25.0%
7

for DukeMTMC and 25.1% for Market1501.
Camera Guided Normalization:
learning camera in-
variant features is essential for person Re-ID, because the
person appearance may vary for different cameras and the
model has to deal with all types of variations. Since target
labels are unknown, when the model extracts features from
the target domain, instead of grouping images by the per-
son that appears in them, the feature vectors tend to cluster
camera viewpoints. The camera guided normalization helps
to reduce this camera shift and align the features from dif-
ferent cameras. This camera alignment allows the cluster
method to create better clusters with samples from different
cameras. Our cluster selection method thus selects more
clusters to be part of the pseudo-label dataset. With this
richer and camera invariant pseudo-label dataset, our model
has better samples to learn from and its mAP is improved
by 7.5% for DukeMTMC and 7.6% for Market1501.
Training efﬁciency:
the better pseudo-labels which
are obtained when applying camera guided normalization
speeds up the model convergence.
Figure 2 shows how
many progressive learning steps were needed to reach con-
vergence with or without camera guided normalization.
Method
M →D
Rank-1
Rank-5
Rank-10
mAP
Portion
k-means
77.7
87.5
90.8
63.1
85.5
DBSCAN
82.7
90.5
93.5
69.3
69.7
Method
D →M
k-means
87.0
94.7
96.9
65.9
95.9
DBSCAN
89.1
95.8
97.2
73.6
79.9
Table 4: Comparison between DBSCAN and k-means as
the clustering algorithm.
After cluster selection, differ-
ent amounts of samples were removed for each clustering
method. This portion (in %) is shown in the last columns.
Clustering methods: we ran our multi-step pseudo-
label reﬁnement method with two different clustering al-
gorithms in its pipeline: k-means and DBSCAN. Table 4
presents the results achieved using each of them and also
the portion of training data that was selected for use as
pseudo-labels after the cluster selection phases. DBSCAN
does not need a ﬁxed number of clusters and has an built-
in outlier detector, so it can deal with hard samples better
than k-means. For k-means, all samples count, then the hard
samples have a negative impact in the quality of the pseudo-
labels. The results in Table 4 conﬁrms our hypothesis that
it is better to use fewer and less noisy samples.
5. Conclusions
In this work we propose a multi-step pseudo-label re-
ﬁnement method to improve results on Unsupervised Do-
main Adaptation for Person Re-Identiﬁcation. We focus on
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Progressive Learning Steps
30
40
50
60
70
80
Mean Average Precision (%)
Model Peak
DukeMTMC as Target Domain
Normalized
Not Normalized
0
5
10
15
20
25
Progressive Learning Steps
30
40
50
60
70
80
Mean Average Precision (%)
Model Peak
Market1501 as Target Domain
Normalized
Not Normalized
Figure 2: Comparison of progressive learning steps that
take for model convergence when using or not camera
guided normalization. The black arrow indicates when the
model using normalization reached convergence, the points
after the black arrow repeat the best model result. The “not
normalized” curves reach their peak at the right end of these
plots.
tackling the problem of having noisy pseudo-labels in this
task and proposed a pipeline that reduces the shift caused
by camera changes as well as techniques for outlier removal
and cluster selection. Our method includes DBSCAN clus-
tering algorithm that was designed to perform well in large
and noisy databases; a camera-guided normalization step to
align features from multiple camera views and allow them
to be part of the same clusters; and a smart cluster selection
method that creates optimal pseudo-labels for our training
setup and keep improving the pseudo-labels at each pro-
gressive learning step.
Our method generates a strong label space for target do-
main without any supervision.
We reach state-of-the-art
performance on Market1501 as a target dataset and push
the state-of-the-art on the challenging DukeMTMC target
dataset by 5.5% (or 3.4% without re-ranking). Our work
8

hightlights the importance of pseudo-labels reﬁnement with
strong normalization techniques. It also takes advantage of
a metric learning process and re-ranking [46, 42]. This com-
bination has clearly proven successul.
One possibility for future work is to investigate the use
of re-ranking as part of the clustering step.
