1
Deep Learning Methods for Vessel Trajectory
Prediction based on Recurrent Neural Networks
Samuele Capobianco, Leonardo M. Milleﬁori, Member, IEEE, Nicola Forti, Paolo Braca, Senior Member, IEEE
and Peter Willett, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Data-driven methods open up unprecedented possi-
bilities for maritime surveillance using Automatic Identiﬁcation
System (AIS) data. In this work, we explore deep learning
strategies using historical AIS observations to address the
problem of predicting future vessel trajectories with a predic-
tion horizon of several hours. We propose novel sequence-to-
sequence vessel trajectory prediction models based on encoder-
decoder recurrent neural networks (RNNs) that are trained on
historical trajectory data to predict future trajectory samples
given previous observations. The proposed architecture combines
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) RNNs for sequence modeling
to encode the observed data and generate future predictions
with different intermediate aggregation layers to capture space-
time dependencies in sequential data. Experimental results on
vessel trajectories from an AIS dataset made freely available by
the Danish Maritime Authority show the effectiveness of deep-
learning methods for trajectory prediction based on sequence-
to-sequence neural networks, which achieve better performance
than baseline approaches based on linear regression or on the
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) architecture. The comparative
evaluation of results shows: i) the superiority of attention pooling
over static pooling for the speciﬁc application, and ii) the
remarkable performance improvement that can be obtained with
labeled trajectories, i.e., when predictions are conditioned on a
low-level context representation encoded from the sequence of
past observations, as well as on additional inputs (e.g., port of
departure or arrival) about the vessel’s high-level intention which
may be available from AIS.
Index Terms—Vessel trajectory prediction, recurrent neural
networks, sequence-to-sequence models, Long Short-Term Mem-
ory, Multi-Layer Perceptron, Automatic Identiﬁcation System.
I. INTRODUCTION
Technology adoption of intelligent integrated maritime
safety systems in the near future is expected to reduce the
number of vessel accidents and improve safety in the maritime
environment, especially as autonomous shipping is being
proactively explored in the maritime industry. A key capability
©2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
S. Capobianco was with the NATO Science and Technology Organization
(STO) Centre for Maritime Research and Experimentation (CMRE), 19126

L. M. Milleﬁori, N. Forti and P. Braca are with the NATO Science and Tech-
nology Organization (STO) Centre for Maritime Research and Experimentation

P. Willett is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,

This work is supported by the NATO Allied Command Transformation
(ACT) via the project “Data Knowledge Operational Effectiveness” (DKOE).
observation
vessel
ground-truth
prediction
Fig. 1: Selected trajectories from the dataset used in this paper.
The last observed vessel position is marked with a black star;
the predicted and actual trajectory are depicted in pink and
blue, respectively. Contains data from the Danish Maritime
Authority that is used in accordance with the conditions for
the use of Danish public data [1].
of such systems is to predict the future positions of vessels,
even over extended prediction horizons, and also anticipate
ships’ future behavior to enhance awareness of imminent
hazards. Such capability is not only needed for future intelligent
integrated maritime safety systems, where autonomous and non-
autonomous, commercial and recreational, large- and small-
sized ship trafﬁc will have to coexist, but it is also essential
in other applications, e.g., early emergency response1 or
1For example, in search and rescue operations and man-overboard situations,
where vessels closest to the accident might have not updated their position in
hours.
arXiv:2101.02486v2  [cs.CV]  4 Jun 2021

2
prevention of piracy attacks2. Furthermore, advanced predictive
techniques enable the association of ship observations from
heterogeneous, non-synchronized sensors and support the
capability of intercepting vessels of interest from satellite
platforms. Satellite acquisitions need to be scheduled in
advance, and, if the vessel of interest is in motion, a prediction
capability is required to deﬁne the acquisition area around the
probable location of the vessel when the satellite will pass over
it.
Maritime surveillance systems are increasingly relying on the
vast amount of data made available by terrestrial and satellite
networks of Automatic Identiﬁcation System (AIS) stations
designed to receive radio messages broadcast by ships with
their position, identity, and other voyage-related information.
Systems similar to the AIS are also acutely needed in
the automotive ﬁeld to monitor road trafﬁc in support of
autonomous vehicle technology. The research community
has recently devoted signiﬁcant attention to the problem of
behavior prediction for autonomous driving applications; a
recent and comprehensive review of the state of the art
is presented in [2]. However, while vehicles have a very
constrained motion, governed by road lanes, driving rules,
and environmental conditions [2], in the maritime domain
vessel trajectories are constrained by sea lanes only in speciﬁc
areas where trafﬁc separation schemes are enforced. Even
when it comes to voyage planning, the actual trajectory of a
vessel might differ signiﬁcantly from the planned one, due to
sea current, weather and trafﬁc conditions along the way. All
these factors, and the fact that the AIS still has non-negligible
limitations in coverage, latency and reliability, make vessel
trajectory prediction a challenging task, quite distinctive from
the automotive application.
At the same time, apart from an ubiquitous monitoring
capability, the availability of maritime trafﬁc data in such
large volumes also creates the opportunity to systematically
extract useful knowledge to improve the security and safety
of maritime operations and enhance the overall situational
awareness. The use of massive historical AIS data for vessel
trajectory prediction remains, however, an open problem, and a
challenging one. This is not only because of AIS technological
limitations, such as the highly irregular time sampling, poor data
quality and integrity, but also because the variety of behaviors
exhibited by ships (depending on, e.g., their size, navigational
status, trafﬁc regulations, etc.).
To deal with this complexity and address the vessel prediction
problem, in this paper we propose a fully data-driven approach,
as opposed to a model-based one, able to implement a
prediction capability that is effective even in complex and
elaborated trafﬁc scenarios.
A. Related work
Among the model-based prediction tools, the easiest and
maybe most common is probably the linear Nearly Constant
2In areas at high risk of piracy, ship masters have the option of turning off
safety systems, such as the AIS, if they believe the safety or security of the
ship could be compromised. In these situations, the position of a vessel can be
established using predictive techniques, even if it is temporarily unobservable.
Velocity (NCV) model [3]. The NCV model’s strengths are
the ability to perform short-term predictions of straight-
line trajectories, and its inherent robustness with respect to
the quality of input data. However, the NCV model is not
appropriate for medium- and long-term forecasting, as it tends
to overestimate the actual uncertainty of the prediction, as the
time horizon increases. An only slightly more complex model
for ship prediction, based on the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU)
stochastic process, has been recently proposed and shown to be
particularly well-suited for non-maneuvering motion and long
prediction time windows [4]–[6]. The OU model has also been
adopted for maritime anomaly detection [7] and, in combination
to data-driven methods, to develop unsupervised procedures
that automatically extract knowledge about maritime trafﬁc
patterns [8]–[10].
Additional works approached the AIS-based vessel trajectory
prediction problem from a more data-driven perspective,
exploring adaptive kernel density estimation [11], nearest-
neighbor search methods [12], nonlinear ﬁltering [13], Gaussian
Processes [14], and machine learning techniques [15]. A
comprehensive survey on the recent efforts of vessel trajectory
prediction using AIS data can be found in [16] and [17].
More recently, advances in deep learning and the combined
availability of massive volumes of AIS data are paving the
way to enhance vessel trajectory prediction and maritime
surveillance. The main motivation is that neural architectures
have the capability to learn complex motion patterns directly
from the data, making it possible to predict future vessel
kinematic states even in complex trafﬁc scenarios where
conventional statistical techniques would struggle to achieve
satisfactory performance. Recent examples of deep learning
techniques applied to vessel trajectory prediction include [18]–
[24]. In [18], a variational Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
architecture (named GeoTrackNet) is proposed to extract
knowledge on the hidden behavior of ships from AIS data
streams for track reconstruction and anomaly detection. The
prediction of ship behavior is addressed in [19], by directly
using bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) RNNs
for online forecasting, and in [20], where recurrent neural
models are adopted to process sequential AIS data with the
ﬁnal goal of associating incoming messages with existing tracks.
Moreover, in [21] the authors present an auto-encoder approach
to predict entire vessel trajectories (with prediction horizons
up to 30 minutes), instead of sequential states, based on
previous clustering and classiﬁcation steps, which are required
for proper trajectory extraction. In the target tracking literature,
a recent work [25] proposes a neural network architecture
based on LSTM with uncertainty modeling to incorporate non-
Markovian dynamic models in the prediction step of a standard
Kalman ﬁlter for target tracking. Some other works divided a
surveillance area into spatial grids and applied deep-learning
tools to predict vessel inﬂow and outﬂow [22], or maritime
trajectories with estimated destination and arrival time [23].
Using a spatial grid-based approach, in [23] the transition
of vessel states is deﬁned between cells on the grid, rather
than between time intervals of AIS observations. This permits
assignment of a unique code to each cell and represent a vessel
trajectory as a text sequence, which can be used to train a

3
sequence-to-sequence model similar to those widely used for
neural machine translation problems [26], [27].
Indeed, neural encoder-decoder models have recently become
a standard approach for sequence-to-sequence tasks such as
machine translation [26], [27] and speech recognition [28].
Such models ﬁrst use a RNN to encode the input sequence
as a set of vector representations, which are then decoded by
a second RNN to generate the output sequence step-by-step,
conditioned on the encodings.
The ﬁrst work addressing vessel trajectory prediction from
AIS data through sequence-to-sequence models based on the
LSTM encoder-decoder architecture is documented in [24],
where future trajectory states of a vessel are generated given a
sequence of past AIS observations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we describe the speciﬁc contribution of this
work. In Section III, we present a method to prepare an
AIS dataset to train the proposed neural networks for vessel
trajectory prediction. In Section IV, we formalize the problem
and formulate the sequence-to-sequence learning approach to
vessel trajectory prediction. Section V describes the encoder-
decoder neural architecture used to address the prediction task.
Experimental results using the proposed dataset are presented
and discussed in Section VI. Finally, we discuss the limitations
and possible future extensions of the proposed approach in
Section VII and conclude the paper in Section VIII.
II. CONTRIBUTION
Building upon [24], we propose a vessel trajectory learning
and prediction framework to generate future trajectory samples
of a vessel given a sequence of past AIS observations. The idea
is to build an end-to-end prediction system able to learn the
mapping between sequences of past and future vessel states.
Inspired by the recent success of deep-learning approaches
for sequence-to-sequence applications, the proposed method is
based on the LSTM encoder-decoder architecture, which has
emerged as an effective and scalable model for sequence-to-
sequence learning.
This work goes beyond [24] in several regards. We employ
a different dataset of vessel trajectories, which is not only
larger, but also signiﬁcantly more complex. Moreover, we
investigate here the use of several intermediate aggregation
layers (including, but not limited to, the attention mechanism)
and the exploitation of high-level intention information (i.e.,
ship destination). Finally, the architecture described here
features several other improvements with respect to [24] as, for
example, the use of a bidirectional encoder recurrent network
and a custom initialization of the decoder network’s hidden
state (24). Finally, the model hyper-parameters are chosen with
an optimization procedure that aims at ﬁnding the most suitable
conﬁguration.
We adopt LSTM RNNs [29] for sequence modeling to
encode context representation from past data and generate
future predictions. The ability to learn from data with long-
range temporal dependencies makes LSTM RNNs a natural
choice for trajectory prediction tasks, given the time lag existing
between the input samples and the outputs to be predicted. In
addition, we study how encoder and decoder networks can be
effectively connected through intermediate aggregation layers
capturing space-time dependencies in sequential data. Different
from standard vessel prediction systems, our solution is
designed to deal with maneuvering motion and long prediction
time windows in complex dynamics of maritime trafﬁc.
A conventional approach for predicting the behavior of a
vessel is usually based exclusively on the information contained
in the track history of vessel states (e.g., position, velocity) or
summarized in the current state without any information related
to the ship’s intended journey. This work explores how it is also
possible to extend the input information of the deep-learning
model by considering, in addition to a sequence of past vessel
states, the prior ship’s long-term intention (e.g., departure and
arrival port) which is commonly available in the received AIS
messages. A similar extension can be found in [11], where
the authors showed that better results in terms of prediction
accuracy can be obtained by labelling a vessel trajectory based
on its long-term intention. Using the labeled trajectories, we
cope with the uncertainty in the problem, realizing a system
able to forecast future trajectories at long time horizons in
complex maritime trafﬁc environments.
To summarize, we propose a comprehensive deep-learning
approach for the task of vessel trajectory prediction based on:
i) extracting vessel motion patterns from large volumes of AIS
data, and ii) training RNNs to sequentially predict a vessel
trajectory, given a sequence of AIS observations. In particular,
our work focuses on:
1) Extracting vessel routes from AIS data: Historical AIS
data usually comes in the form of a collection of messages for
a given time window and area of interest. However, the set
of available AIS data does not contain information about the
speciﬁc motion pattern each message is associated with. We
propose a simple and effective solution to aggregate trajectories
in sets, so that the components of each set all belong to the
same motion pattern.
2) Establishing a novel deep-learning framework: We
propose a novel architecture for sequence-to-sequence vessel
trajectory prediction based on encoder-decoder LSTM RNNs
with different aggregation layers able to capture complex
space-time dependencies in sequential AIS data. The proposed
framework can also exploit non-kinematic information (e.g.,
destination) to further improve the prediction performance.
3) Comparing different deep learning methods: We explore
different deep-learning methods to perform vessel trajectory pre-
diction and compare the performance of sequence-to-sequence
models based on RNNs against feed-forward architectures.
Moreover, we show how it is possible to exploit external
pattern knowledge (e.g., destination information) by using
additional features in the predictive model. We show the effect
of such non-kinematic features on trajectory prediction for
different architectures. In the following, we will refer to the
models that use external features as labeled models; conversely,
with unlabeled models we will refer to models that use only
kinematic features.

4
(a) EMODnet
(b) Extracted data
Fig. 2: Vessel density maps in Denmark waters. (a) Vessel
density map from EMODnet with the deﬁned PGAs. (b) AIS
messages belonging to two predeﬁned vessel motion patterns—
(O, A) in blue, (O, B) in red—selected using the method
described in Section III. Contains data from the Danish
Maritime Authority that is used in accordance with the
conditions for the use of Danish public data [1].
III. MARITIME TRAFFIC PATTERNS
The analysis of spatial trafﬁc patterns is of interest for
several applications in many domains, from transportation
and surveillance, to wireless mobile networks, where mobility
modeling is needed to properly address the complexity of the
agents’ motion within the system. In the maritime domain,
historical ship mobility data, e.g., from the AIS, reveals, for
instance, commercial maritime routes and how shipping lanes
articulate in national and international waters.
An intuitive tool to visualize the spatial distribution of AIS
data, and hence ship trafﬁc, are density maps. The simplest
way to create a density map is building a grid over an
area of interest (AOI) and compute, for each grid cell, the
number of AIS messages that ships broadcast from it in a
given time frame. More advanced methods to create density
maps, such as those freely available on the “Human Activities”
portal of the European Marine Observation and Data Network
(EMODnet), a network of organizations supported by the EU’s
integrated maritime policy, use a ﬁrst stage that aggregates AIS
positions in ship trajectories. Then, they rely on the number of
intersections between ship trajectories and the grid to estimate
the trafﬁc density [30]. An example of AIS density map is
illustrated in Fig. 2a, made with data taken from the EMODnet
Human Activities portal [31], and shows the vessel trafﬁc
density map in Danish waters in March 2019.
Figure 2a conveys an important message: unsurprisingly,
vessel trafﬁc is inherently regular; in other words, vessels
are not randomly distributed in the water space, but rather
tend to follow seemingly regular paths, driven by, e.g., trafﬁc
regulations and minimization of fuel consumption. Moreover,
typically vessels plan their voyage from the starting point to
the destination by identifying intermediate positions, namely
waypoints, where changes of course will occur; once decided on
their navigational plan, vessels then follow these predetermined
courses from waypoint to waypoint until they reach their
ﬁnal destination. The aim of our effort is to capitalize on
this regularity to learn vessel trajectory patterns in order
to compute future vessels’ behavior ahead of time, even in
complex maritime environments.
Let us deﬁne a vessel trajectory as the ordered temporal
sequence of positions of a vessel; in practice, the construction
of vessel trajectories amounts to aggregating and ordering in
time AIS positions by the reported Maritime Mobility Service
Identity (MMSI) number. For the scope of this work, we are
not interested in building a dataset of generic vessel trajectories,
but one of trajectories sharing a common pattern, for instance
a journey, i.e., the origin and destination of the voyage. To
this aim, a simple and effective way to select, among all the
trajectories in a dataset, only those satisfying such a requirement
is to deﬁne a set of polygonal geographical areas (PGAs) and
select only the trajectories that intersect two PGAs in a given
order. In this way, we can isolate sets of trajectories with
homogeneous (in space) origin and destination.
Figure 2b illustrates an example of a dataset created using
this approach, where, starting from a historical dataset of
AIS messages [1] freely available from the Danish Maritime
Authority (DMA), we selected only the vessel trajectories
belonging to two motion patterns: (O, A), in blue, and (O, B),
in red. In Section VI we will describe how this dataset can
be used to train deep-learning models for the task of vessel
trajectory prediction. Note that the one above is not the only
possible approach to obtain sets of homogeneous trajectories;
one could use other information to build a set of homogeneous
trajectories, for instance the ports of departure and arrival, or
could opt for a grid-based approach.
At this stage it is also possible to assign each trajectory
with a pattern description that represents the speciﬁc motion
pattern the trajectory belongs to. In the following, we will use
as pattern descriptor the destination PGA, but in a practical
application may be the vessel’s destination (e.g., as declared
in the AIS), the port of departure, or the vessel category.
IV. TRAJECTORY PREDICTION
In this section, we formally introduce the problem of vessel
trajectory prediction and a probabilistic formulation of the
sequence-to-sequence learning approach used to address the
prediction task. We present a data-driven approach to ﬁnd an
approximate solution based on recurrent networks for sequence
modeling in order to encode information from past data and
generate future predictions.
A. Problem deﬁnition
A dataset of N space-time trajectories can be represented
by a set of temporally-ordered sequences of tuples C =

5
{Si, T i, Ψi}N
i=1. Each tuple in the sequence is formed by
concatenating a sequence Si of states, i.e., a trajectory
Si = {si
k; k = 1, . . . , Ti},
(1)
a list T i = {t1, . . . , tTi}, t1 < · · · < tTi of time points, and
a categorical feature Ψi ∈{ψ1, . . . , ψP } expressing the class
label of the speciﬁc motion pattern to which the trajectory
i belongs. The categorical feature is an optional input of
the predictive model, depending on whether this information
is available (labeled data) or not (unlabeled data). We can
represent it with a P-way categorical feature, where P is
the cardinality of the set of all possible motion patterns. A
common choice to represent categorical features is one-hot
encoding [32], by which categorical variables are converted
into a 1-of-P binary vector ψi ∈{0, 1}1×P . However, more
sophisticated techniques are also available [33]. Note that Ti
in (1) is the length (number of samples) of trajectory i, and each
sequence element si
k ≜si(tk) ∈Rd represents the state on
trajectory Si at time tk. The state usually consists of kinematic
real-valued features of dimension d, including positional and
velocity information. In our experiments, we populated sk
with geographical coordinate pairs (longitude, latitude) of the
vessel at time tk, but other choices are possible. Based on the
class label P, the resulting collection C ≜∪P
j=1Cj of N = |C|
historical trajectories can be deﬁned as the union of all P sets
of motion patterns Cj, each containing Nj training vessel paths
such that N = PP
j=1 Nj.
Given a training dataset C of historical trajectories from
different motion patterns, the problem of pattern learning and
trajectory prediction is then to learn, from this training set,
the underlying spatio-temporal mapping that enables to predict
future kinematic states based on previous observations, with a
prediction horizon generally in the order of hours.
In the following we will show how we can formulate the
trajectory prediction problem as a supervised learning process
from sequential data by following a sequence-to-sequence
modeling approach to directly generate an output sequence of
future states given an input sequence of observations. To this
end, a data segmentation procedure is ﬁrst required in order to
obtain batches of input/output sequences.
B. Data segmentation
The original collection C of historical trajectories contains
sequences with variable length of irregularly-sampled vessel
kinematic states Si in (1). The kinematic states are irregularly-
sampled due to the fact that AIS messages are received at
irregular time intervals. The ﬁrst step is therefore to obtain
regularly-sampled trajectories using a ﬁxed sampling time ∆;
in other words, we interpolate the original trajectories at times
tk = k ∆, k = 1, . . . , Ti. The second step is to use a ﬁxed-size
sliding window (windowing) approach to reduce the data to
arbitrary ﬁxed-length input and output sequences; this allows
performing trajectory prediction given a ﬁxed-length sequence
of past observations, and translates our problem to a ﬁxed-
length input/output mapping learning one. In this way, the
segmentation procedure re-structures the available temporal
sequences in C into a new dataset of input/output sequences that
can be directly used for supervised learning. Otherwise stated,
segmentation is the process of splitting whole trajectories (i.e.,
multivariate time series) into smaller, ﬁxed-length sequences.
The sliding window method is a simple and widely employed
segmentation procedure for time series [34], where previous
time steps (input variables) are used to predict the next time
steps (output variables). Here, the sliding window procedure
produces an input sequence of ℓsamples, an output sequence of
h samples and has a sliding size of one step. Figure 3 depicts
the sliding window procedure applied to two trajectories at a
single time instant.
In summary, the windowing procedure rearranges the
interpolated version of C into a new data representation
D = {X i, Yi, Ψi}N
i=1 by extracting from each trajectory i:
a set X i = {Xi
k,ℓ}Ti−h
k=ℓ
of ni = Ti −(ℓ+ h) + 1 sequences
such that Xi
k,ℓ≜{xi
τ}k
τ=k−ℓ+1 = {si
τ}k
τ=k−ℓ+1 ⊆Si is
the input sequence of ℓ≥1 observed states up to time k;
a set Yi = {Yi
k,h}Ti−h
k=ℓ
such that Yi
k,h ≜{yi
τ}k+h
τ=k+1 =
{si
τ}k+h
τ=k+1 ⊆Si is the output sequence of at time k of h ≥1
future states; a categorical variable Ψi expressing the class
label of trajectory i. Note that, as usually done in sequence-
learning problems, we denote the observed and future states
with different symbols (i.e., x and y) even if they belong to the
same state space, in order to better distinguish the input from
the output states. After applying the windowing procedure to
all the trajectories, the new dataset D for sequence-to-sequence
trajectory prediction contains N ×n tuples, with n = PN
i=1 ni,
of input sequences Xi
k,ℓ∈Rd×ℓ, with pattern descriptors
ψi ∈{0, 1}1×P and output sequences Yi
k,h ∈Rd×h.
C. Sequence-to-sequence modeling approach
We propose a sequence-to-sequence deep-learning approach
to the problem of trajectory prediction introduced in Sec-
tion IV-A. A sequence-to-sequence model aims to map a ﬁxed-
length input sequence with a ﬁxed-length output sequence,
where the length of the input and output may differ. From a
probabilistic perspective, the objective is to learn the following
predictive distribution at time step k
p(yk+1, . . . , yk+h|xk−ℓ+1, . . . , xk, ψ),
(2)
which represents the probability of a target sequence Yk,h of
h future states of the vessel given the input sequence Xk,ℓof
ℓobserved states, and the possibly available journey descriptor
feature ψ. Once the predictive distribution is learned from the
available training data, the neural network architecture can
be used to directly sample a target sequence given an input
sequence of observed states.
The supervised learning task can be recast as a sequence
regression problem [35], which aims at training a neural
network model Fℓ,h to predict, given an input sequence Xk,ℓ
of length ℓand the possibly available pattern descriptor ψ,
the output sequence ˆYk,h of length h that maximizes the
conditional probability (2), i.e.,
ˆYk,h = Fℓ,h(Xk,ℓ, ψ) = arg max
Y
p(Yk,h|Xk,ℓ, ψ).
(3)
The parameterized function Fℓ,h(Xk,ℓ, ψ; θ) can be directly
trained from the given dataset D in order to ﬁnd the set of

6
A
O
Bs2
T2
s2
0
s2
k
+ 1
s2
k
s2
k
1
s2
k + 1
s2
k + h
s1
T1
s1
0
s1
k
+ 1
s1
k
s1
k
1
s1
k + 1
s1
k + h
2
X2
k,
Y2
k, h
1
X1
k,
Y1
k, h
Fig. 3: Two examples of observed (input) and future (target)
sequences starting at time step k for a prediction task of vessel
trajectories S1 and S2. For each sample, the full trajectory
is illustrated with plus markers representing the input to the
windowing procedure, which, for each sample in the trajectory,
produces an input/output ﬁxed-length sequence pair, depicted in
the ﬁgure with darker and lighter colors, respectively. Contains
data from the Danish Maritime Authority that is used in
accordance with the conditions for the use of Danish public
data [1].
parameters ˆθ that best approximate the mapping function in (3)
over all the input-output training samples, i.e., that minimize
some task-dependent error measure L:
ˆθ = arg min
θ
1
N
N
X
i=1
L

Fℓ,h(Xi
k,ℓ, ψi; θ), Yi
k,h

,
(4)
where N is the number of training samples, Xi
k,ℓ, Yi
k,h, and
ψi are, respectively, the input sequence, target sequence, and
pattern descriptor of the i-th sample. L is the loss function
used to measure the prediction error which is minimized to
train the neural network model.
In the following we will see a neural network architecture
designed to approximate (3), which is capable of generating, in
a recursive way, a sequence of future trajectories after having
captured the underlying motion patterns from historical data.
Moreover, we will see that the neural architecture can use the
ground-truth label ψ (e.g., destination information) to extend
the context information used to perform predictions. In the case
that the label ψ is not available, the neural architecture will
perform unlabeled predictions based only on the past observed
vessel states.
Next, we will brieﬂy review the basic principles of LSTM
RNNs, as they are an important element for sequence-to-
sequence modeling. For readers already familiar with this
concept, we recommend moving on to Section V.
D. Recurrent networks for sequence modeling
RNNs are natural extensions of feedforward networks
with cyclical connections to facilitate pattern recognition in
sequential data. This structure enables RNNs to effectively
model temporal dynamic behavior by summarizing inputs
into internal hidden states, used as a memory mechanism to
capture dependencies throughout a temporal sequence. Such
a property makes RNNs ideal for sequence modelling. RNNs
have achieved outstanding results in speech recognition [36],
machine translation [26], [27], [37], and image captioning [38].
For simplicity, let us denote by Xℓ= {xt}ℓ
t=1 a generic
input sequence of length ℓwhere the time index k has been
dropped, and t now denotes the element position in the sequence
such that xt = xk−t+1. Then, a generic RNN sequentially reads
each element xt of the input sequence and updates its internal
hidden state ht ∈Rq according to:
ht = g(xt, ht−1; θ),
(5)
where g is a nonlinear activation function with θ learnable
parameters. RNNs are usually trained with additional networks,
such as output layers, that accept as input the hidden state ht
in (5) to make predictions sequentially.
While in theory RNNs are simple and powerful models
for sequence modelling, in practice they are challenging to
train via gradient-based methods, due to the difﬁculty of
learning long-range temporal dependencies [39]. The two major
reasons behind this behavior are the problems of exploding and
vanishing gradients when backpropagating errors across many
time steps, meaning gradients that either increase or decrease
exponentially fast, respectively, making the optimization task
either diverge or extremely slow.
LSTM networks [29] are a special kind of RNN architecture
capable of learning long-term dependencies; they have been
successfully applied to language modeling and other applica-
tions to overcome the vanishing gradient problem [39]. The
LSTM architecture consists of a set of memory blocks, each
containing a cell state and three gates (sigmoidal units): an
input gate to control how the input can alter the cell state, an
output gate to set what part of the cell state to output, and a
forget gate [40] to decide how much memory to keep. The input
sequence Xℓis passed through the LSTM network to compute
sequentially the hidden vector sequence Hℓ≜{ht}ℓ
t=1. In
particular, the memory cell takes the input vector at the current
time step xt and the hidden state at the previous time step ht−1
to update the internal hidden state ht by using the following
equations:
it = σ(Uixt + Wiht−1 + bi)
ft = σ(Ufxt + Wfht−1 + bf)
ot = σ(Uoxt + Woht−1 + bo)
˜ct = tanh(Ucxt + Wcht−1 + bc)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙˜ct
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct),
(6)
where ⊙denotes the element-wise product, σ is the sigmoid
function, tanh is the hyperbolic tangent function, i, f, o, ˜c and
c ∈Rq denote, respectively, the input gate, forget gate, output

7
gate, cell input activation and cell state vector; the Ws and
Us are the weight matrices, and the bs are the bias terms. The
weight matrix subscript denotes the input-output connection,
e.g., Wf is the hidden-forget gate matrix, while Uf is the
input-forget matrix.
V. ENCODER-DECODER ARCHITECTURE
Following the recent success of deep learning in sequence-
to-sequence applications, we propose an encoder-decoder
architecture to address the input-output mapping function (3)
to predict a future trajectory given a sequence of observed
states and its related journey descriptor. A neural network
architecture based on the encoder–decoder framework consists
of three key components: an encoder, an aggregation function
and a decoder. The encoder reads a sequence of kinematic
states Xℓone state at a time and encodes this information into
a sequence of hidden states. Then, an aggregation function
takes the hidden states computed by the encoder and produces
a continuous-space representation z of the input sequence.
Finally, the decoder generates an output sequence Yh of future
states step-by-step conditioned on the context representation z
and the motion pattern descriptor ψ. The design of the encoder
and decoder may vary based on the considered task in terms
of the types of neural networks employed for modelling data
(e.g., CNNs, RNNs), the types of recurrent units for RNNs,
the depth of the networks, etc.
In particular, we address the sequence-to-sequence prediction
problem by deﬁning an encoder-decoder architecture to learn
the mapping Fℓ,h in (3).
The initial encoding function E in (7), i.e.
Hℓ= E(Xℓ; θE),
(7)
is a neural network parameterized by θE, which maps the
input sequence Xℓinto a sequence of internal representations
Hℓ= {ht}ℓ
t=1 such that ht ∈R2q is the combined hidden
state of a bidirectional RNN (forward and backward recurrent
networks with hidden state of size q).
Then, the autoregressive decoding function D parameterized
by θD in (8) predicts the future vessel state ˆyj (given the
previous state ˆyj−1) for each time step j, such that:
ˆyj = D(ˆyj−1, uj, zj, ψ; θD),
(8)
where uj is an RNN hidden state, ψ is the journey descriptor,
and zj is the context vector produced by a suitable aggregation
function (9) as follows:
zj = A(Hℓ, uj−1; θA)
(9)
where A is able to compress the sequence of encoded hidden
states Hℓand the decoder state uj−1 ∈Rq (possibly empty
in the case of static aggregation functions) into the low-level
context representation zj. The aggregation function generates h
context representations in accordance with the decoding phase.
Finally, by applying sequentially the encoder (7), the
decoder (8), and the aggregation (9) functions, the architecture
generates the following output sequence of length h:
ˆYh = Fℓ,h(Xℓ, ψ),
(10)
where the prediction output ˆYh represents the future trajectory
conditioned on the sequence Xℓof observed kinematic states
and the journey descriptor ψ.
In the proposed method, the encoder and decoder are both
RNNs, which represent an end-to-end trainable architecture
to address the sequence-to-sequence learning task. In the
remainder of this section we provide more details on the
encoder and decoder recurrent layers, and on how a suitable
aggregation function can be used to connect together the two
networks to perform the prediction task.
A. Encoder network
The encoder network in (7) is designed as a bidirectional
RNN [41] to be trained simultaneously in positive and negative
time directions. The bidirectional architecture combines two
recurrent networks, one processing the data in the positive
temporal order, and the other in the opposite direction, with
two separate hidden layers that are subsequently fed onward
to the same output layer. In particular, we use a Bidirectional
LSTM (BiLSTM) [42] in (7) to map the input sequence Xℓ
into two output sequences, the forward hidden sequence −→
Hℓ≜
{−→
h t}ℓ
t=1, −→
h t ∈Rd, and the backward hidden sequence ←−
Hℓ≜
{←−
h t}1
t=ℓ, ←−
h t ∈Rd, by iterating the following operations:
−→
h t = LSTM(xt, −→
h t−1; −→
θE)
(11)
←−
h t = LSTM(xt, ←−
h t+1; ←−
θE),
(12)
where each LSTM function is a recurrent network of type
(6), which adapts parameters (−→
θE, ←−
θE) to learn long-term
patterns in both temporal directions. As commonly done in
BiLSTMs [42], the output layer of the encoder is ﬁnally
obtained by concatenating the forward and backward hidden
states, encoded by the two unidirectional LSTMs (11)-(12),
into a compact bidirectional representation
ht = [−→
h ⊤
t , ←−
h ⊤
t ]⊤,
(13)
such that Hℓin (7) is a sequence of output vectors
{h1, . . . , hℓ}, where each element ht ∈R2q encodes bidi-
rectional spatio-temporal information extracted from the input
vessel states preceding and following the t-th component of
the sequence.
B. Aggregation function
The aggregation function A in (9) allows compressing all the
information encoded in Hℓinto the contextual representation
z, which will be used by the decoder to produce the output
sequence of length h. We can consider the aggregation as a
pooling operation, whose objective is to summarize (down-
sample) the entire encoded sequence Hℓin a compressed
context representation z to preserve important information
while discarding irrelevant features [43]. We investigate three
possible choices of aggregation functions:
1) Max pooling over time (MAX): the sequence Hℓis
reduced by the max-pooling operation to a single vector
z = col(zr) ∈R2q, r = 1, . . . , 2q such that
zr = max
t (Hℓ)r,t,
t ∈{1, . . . , ℓ}.
(14)

8
LSTM
x1
LSTM
h1
LSTM
x2
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
xℓ
LSTM
LSTM
y1
MLP
LSTM
y2
MLP
LSTM
yh
MLP
LSTM
yj
MLP
E
N
C
O
D
E
R
D
E
C
O
D
E
R
attention
h2
ht
hℓ
xℓ
y1
yh-1
z1
z2
zj
zh
context
observed
predicted
xt
init
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
yj-1
Fig. 4: The proposed encoder-decoder recurrent architecture to
address the task of vessel trajectory prediction. The encoder
is a bidirectional LSTM RNN that maps the input sequence
into a sequential context representation. Then, an attention-
based aggregation function combines the sequence of encoder
hidden states into the context representations. Finally, the
motion pattern descriptor and each context representation is
fed to the decoder LSTM network to generate the output
sequence. Encoder and decoder networks may have a multi-
layered structure to improve learning of internal representations.
This type of aggregation function encourages capture of the
most important feature over time [44], i.e., selecting the highest
unit value for each row r over the whole temporal sequence
Hℓ. The resulting context vector z will be then repeatedly used
by the decoder network to sequentially generate the output
prediction.
2) Average pooling over time (AVG): the sequence Hℓis
reduced by the average-pooling operation to a single context
vector z = col(zr) ∈R2q, r = 1, . . . , 2q by computing the
mean value for each hidden unit. In this case, each context
feature zr is computed as:
zr = 1
ℓ
ℓ
X
t=1
(Hℓ)r,t,
t ∈{1, . . . , ℓ}.
(15)
This aggregation computes an average representation of the
input sequence considering the whole Hℓrepresentation
computed by the encoder layer. The computed context repre-
sentation is then repeatedly used by the decoder to produce
the output prediction.
3) Attention mechanism (ATTN): Attention-based neural
networks have recently proven their effectiveness in a wide
range of tasks including question answering, machine trans-
lation, and image captioning [37], [38], [45]. The attention
mechanism is introduced as an intermediate layer between
the encoder and the decoder networks to address two issues
that usually characterize encoder-decoder architectures using
simple aggregation functions: i) the limited capacity of a ﬁxed-
dimensional context vector regardless of the amount of infor-
mation in the input [26] and ii) the lack of interpretability [37].
The attention mechanism can be adopted to model the relation
between the encoder and the decoder hidden states and to
learn the relation between the observed and the predicted
kinematics states while preserving the spatio-temporal structure
of the input. This is achieved by allowing the learnt context
representation of the input to be a sequence of ﬁxed-size vectors,
or context sequence z = {z1, . . . , zh}.
Consider the sequence of encoder’s hidden states Hℓand the
hidden state uj−1 of the decoder network, then each context
vector zj can be computed as a weighted sum of the hidden
states, i.e.,
zj =
ℓ
X
t=1
αjtht,
(16)
where αjt represents the attention weight calculated, from
score ejt, via the softmax operator as
αjt =
exp(ejt)
Pℓ
t=1 exp(ejt)
,
(17)
with
ejt = v⊤
a tanh(Whht + Wuuj−1).
(18)
Note that the weight matrices Wh ∈R2q×q, Wu ∈Rq×q,
and va ∈Rq in the trainable neural network (18) are used
to combine all encoder’s hidden states ht for each decoder
state uj−1 to produce ejt, which scores the quality of spatio-
temporal relation between the inputs around position t and the
output at position j. The main task of the attention mechanism
is to score each context vector zj with respect to the decoder’s
hidden state uj−1 while it is generating the output trajectory to
best approximate the predictive distribution (2). This scoring
operation corresponds to assigning a probability to each context
of being attended by the decoder.
C. Decoder network
The decoder D in (8) aims at generating the future trajectory
given the context representation z of the input sequence. This
generation phase can possibly be conditioned by the pattern
descriptor ψ, which, in the case of maritime trafﬁc describes,
for instance, a ship’s intended journey (departure, arrival). The
pattern descriptor augments the context information, helping
the decoder to produce better predictions.
Formally, the autoregressive decoder is trained to predict the
next vessel state ˆyj given the context vector zj, the possibly
available journey descriptor ψ, and all the previously predicted
states {ˆy1, . . . , ˆyj−1}.
Mathematically, the decoder computes the conditional prob-
ability of the predicted sequence given the observed sequence
by factorizing the joint probability into ordered conditionals.
These assume conditional independence between the past and
the future sequence given the context representation and the
previously predicted states, i.e.:
p(y1, . . . , yh|x1, . . . , xℓ) =
h
Y
j=1
p(yj|{y1, . . . , yj−1}, zj, ψ).
(19)
Each conditional probability in (19) can be modeled by an
RNN D and expressed as in (8) with the following form:
p(yj|{y1, . . . , yj−1}, zj, ψ) = D(ˆyj−1, uj, zj, ψ; θD),
(20)
where the predicted vessel state ˆyj is computed by D given
the context vector zj that summarizes the input sequence at

9
the time step j, the hidden state uj of the decoder RNN,
as well as its previous predictions ˆyj−1, and the journey
descriptor ψ. The advantage of a decoder network with
such a recursive architecture is that it can, by design, model
sequences of arbitrary length. In our case, we consider an
output sequence of length h, and we implement the decoder as
a unidirectional LSTM network, which generates the sequence
of future predictions by iterating for j = 1, . . . , h a single
forward layer as follows
µt = [ˆyj−1, zj, ψ]
(21)
uj = LSTM(µt, uj−1; θD)
(22)
ˆyj = Wyuj + by,
(23)
where ˆy0 = xℓ, zj is the context vector computed by the
aggregation function, Wy and by are trainable parameters of
a neural network that maps the LSTM output uj ∈Rq into
the next predicted state ˆyt.
Note that the ﬁrst operation is to concatenate the previous
predicted state ˆyj−1, the context information zj, and the one-
hot descriptor ψ into the input vector µt. The dimension of
µj is dependent on the nature of the aggregation function, so
that when a static aggregation function (MAX or AVG) is used,
then zj ∈R2q, otherwise zj ∈Rq.
In [37] the authors propose to initialize the decoder hidden
states with the last backward encoder state. We take a slightly
different path and initialize the decoder state with
u0 = tanh(Wκ
−→
h ℓ+ bκ),
(24)
where Wκ ∈Rq×q and bκ are trainable parameters.
This end-to-end solution is trained by the stochastic gradient
descent algorithm in order to learn an optimal function
approximation (3). Figure 4 illustrates the proposed sequence-
to-sequence architecture for trajectory prediction with the
attention-based aggregation function as intermediate layer
between encoder and decoder networks.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section we describe how to apply the proposed method
to vessel trajectory prediction using real-world AIS data. To
this aim, we assemble a dataset that will serve as benchmark to
evaluate different deep-learning solutions in terms of prediction
performance.
A. Dataset preparation
A ﬂowchart of the dataset preparation routine is illustrated
in Fig. 5. The input is represented by AIS data in tabular
format [46]; each row in the input dataset corresponds to a
positional AIS message broadcast by a ship and must contain: a
timestamp, the ship’s identiﬁcation (MMSI number), the ship’s
position (latitude, longitude coordinate pair), and the ship type
(cargo, tanker, passenger, etc.) As a ﬁrst step, we apply a
bounding box ﬁlter, which retains only the AIS messages
broadcast from within a rectangular bounding box deﬁned by
its latitude and longitude extents. Then, a MMSI validation
step discards the AIS messages with invalid MMSI numbers
(i.e., numbers with less than nine digits and numbers whose
ﬁrst three digits do not correspond to a valid MID code).
Subsequently, we retain only messages broadcast by a speciﬁc
ship type C. After this step, AIS messages can be aggregated
by MMSI; the aggregation transforms the dataset of positions
into a collection of trajectories, i.e., time-ordered lists of
messages broadcast by a single vessel, identiﬁed with its MMSI
number. Each trajectory is then split into one or more sub-
trajectories, so that the time intervals between subsequent
AIS messages in every sub-trajectory are all below a given
threshold TG. It follows a linear interpolation step, which
resamples the data at a ﬁxed interval of ∆seconds. After
the interpolation, each trajectory is (possibly) annotated with
a pattern descriptor and only the trajectories belonging to a
speciﬁc set of patterns Ψ are retained; the output of this step is
a trajectory dataset that will be persisted and will undergo a K-
fold splitting procedure, which splits the dataset into K groups
with approximately the same number of trajectories. Finally,
a windowing procedure generates, from the trajectory data, a
list of input/target sequences of length ℓand h, respectively,
that will be used to train and test the models.
B. Scenario description
The data that we used in our experimental setup comes from
the Danish Maritime Authority (DMA), which makes AIS data
from Danish waters freely available [1]. As evident from the
density map in Fig. 2a, the area of the analysis is characterized
by complex maritime trafﬁc patterns, which may result difﬁcult
to analyze. For this reason, we focus only on AIS positions of
tanker vessels, both for computational reasons and to create a
dataset as homogeneous as possible; the time period used for
our analysis spans from January to February 2020.
More speciﬁcally, we focus our attention only on two motion
patterns deﬁned by a departure area, identiﬁed by the polygon
O in Fig. 2a, and two destination areas, identiﬁed by the
polygons A and B in Fig. 2a. Given the polygons O, A and B,
we build the dataset of AIS trajectories limited to those that
transit in O and, subsequently, A or B; in other words, we
build the set C described in Section IV-A, where the categorical
feature Ψ represents, in this case, the destination (A or B).
This selection stage leaves us with a dataset of trajectories
with variable duration—as much as thirteen hours; the time
interval between consecutive reported positions is also variable
and has a mean value of about 10 seconds. At this point, the
dataset is ready to be resampled, and the trajectories are all
interpolated using a ﬁxed sampling time. In our experimental
setup, we selected a sampling time of ∆= 15 minutes, as
a good trade-off between training time and time resolution,
considering the limited maneuverability of tanker vessels. The
ﬁnal dataset contains 394 trajectories, out of which 232 belong
to the motion pattern (O, A), and 162 to (O, B). Finally, before
starting the experiments, we perform the data windowing and
segment trajectories into ﬁxed-length input/output sequences of
length ℓ= h = 12 (equivalent to three hours, with a sampling
period of ∆= 15 minutes) that we will use to train and
evaluate the models (see Section IV-B). As already mentioned,
the windowing procedure produces a dataset of input/target
sequences, which are of ﬁxed lengths (ℓand h, respectively); the
exact number of sample sequences is reported in SectionVI-G.

10
AIS data
Bounding box
filter
MMSI
validation
Ship type
filter
Time gap
split
Pattern descriptor
annotation
Pattern 
selection
Linear 
interpolation
Aggregation by
MMSI
Trajectory 
dataset
K-folding
Trajectory
dataset #1
Trajectory
dataset #2
Trajectory
dataset #K
Windowing
Windowing
Windowing
Testing 
dataset
Training
dataset
Fig. 5: Flowchart of the dataset preparation method used in the experiments.
C. Models
We compare the performance of the developed encoder-
decoder architecture for different aggregation mechanisms
against baseline methods that can be applied to trajectory
prediction problems. We test different deep-learning models,
whose hyper-parameters have been selected after an extensive
hyper-parameter optimization procedure aimed at ﬁnding the
most suitable conﬁgurations. A list of models evaluated in our
analysis follows.
• Linear regression (Linear): The multi-output linear regres-
sion model [47] predicts the future trajectory given the
full motion history. Each predicted value in the output
trajectory is computed by an independent linear regressor.
• Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP): A feed-forward neural
network [48] that maps a given input sequence into a
future output sequence (3). In our setup, the model receives
the input sequence of ℓ= 12 pairs of latitude, longitude
values as a ﬂattened vector. The network is composed of
two hidden layers with 512 neurons, both followed by
the ReLu activation [49]. Then, the ﬁnal layer computes
a linear transformation from the hidden features to 24
output units, which corresponds to 12 prediction states
(longitude and latitude), a duration of 3 hours, given a
sampling period of ∆= 15 minutes. We train the MLP (4)
with the mean absolute error loss function. The choice
of this speciﬁc loss function is a result of preliminary
experiments varying the network’s width and depth, which
showed that the mean absolute error allows achieving the
best performance. Adding more layers or augmenting
the network width lead to weaker performance (stronger
over-ﬁtting).
• Encoder-Decoder (EncDec): This is the proposed archi-
tecture described in Section V, which is composed of
a BiLSTM encoder layer with 64 hidden units, and a
LSTM decoder layer with 64 hidden units. We compare
three different aggregation functions: Max global pooling
(MAX), Average global pooling (AVG) and the Attention
mechanism (ATTN). We train the model (4) by using
the mean absolute error loss function, which we selected
again as the one that achieved the best performance in
preliminary experiments.
Moreover, inspired by [11], we compare two fundamentally
different approaches to account for the vessel behavior based
on labeled and unlabeled trajectories. In other words, in the
labeled case the models are trained to exploit, when available,
the high-level pattern information ψ that represents the vessel’s
intended destination. Therefore, we evaluate an unlabeled and
a labeled version for each of the three models in the previous
list.
• Unlabeled (U): We train the predictive model and perform
prediction using unlabeled trajectories, i.e., using only
low-level context representation encoded from a sequence

11
of past observations, without any high-level information
about the motion intention. The employed model is that
described in Section V, where the pattern descriptor ψ
is removed from the decoding phase. This amounts to
considering a reduced version of the proposed architecture
to compute (3).
• Labeled (L): We train the model and perform prediction
using labeled trajectories, i.e., using low-level context
representation encoded from a sequence of past obser-
vations, as well as additional inputs ψ about high-level
intention behavior of the vessel (ﬁnal destination). In
our experiments, the descriptor deﬁnes the destination
area, i.e., one of the polygons A or B depicted in Fig. 2.
This model exploits the descriptor in the generating phase
to predict the future trajectory. For the linear and MLP
models, the descriptor is incorporated directly into the
input vector.
D. Training settings
The ﬁnal goal of the learning process is to ﬁnd the best
approximation for the predictive function, i.e., the function
that maps past trajectories into future ones, both composed
of continuous values. First, we apply a linear transformation
to latitude and longitude pairs so that the data, after the
transformation, is distributed with with zero mean and unit
variance. Then, we train the neural networks with ADAM [50],
a gradient-based algorithm to minimize the loss function and
learn the internal parameters. We use the ADAM default
conﬁguration proposed in [50] where β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999,
and ϵ = 10−8. We let the training run for 3000 epochs max
with a learning rate of 0.0001 and a mini-batch size of 200
samples; we use the early-stopping criterion evaluating the
error measure (mean absolute error between prediction and
ground truth sequences) on the validation set and providing
guidance on how many iterations we can perform before the
model begins to over-ﬁt [51].
Initialization is a crucial step to achieve satisfactory per-
formance. We initialize the MLP weights by using the He
method [52]. The LSTM-based encoder-decoder architecture
needs a different initialization, so we follow recent approaches
using orthogonal initializations of the transition matrices for
LSTM RNNs [53], [54], while the other weight matrices are
initialized using the Xavier schema [55]. Moreover, we initialize
the biases of the forget gate to 1, and all other gates to 0 [56].
E. Evaluation metrics
In vehicle trajectory prediction, the model performance
is usually assessed with the average displacement error
(ADE) [57] on all the predicted positions with respect to
ground truth. This metric measures the performance in terms
of mean square error (MSE) between the actual an the predicted
positions. In our speciﬁc application, the positions being
expressed as pairs of geographical coordinates, the prediction
error dH is deﬁned as the great-circle distance between the true
and the predicted positions on the Earth surface. We use the
TABLE I: Comparison of the MAE (expressed in nautical
miles) for different prediction horizons in a 5-fold cross
validation study achieved with unlabeled and labeled models.
In parenthesis, we report the percent improvement of labeled
models with respect to their unlabeled counterpart.
Unlabeled
Labeled
Model
Aggr.
1h
2h
3h
1h
2h
3h
Linear
-
1.51
3.99
7.12
1.48
(6 %)
3.74
(6 %)
6.14 (14 %)
MLP
-
0.89
2.13
4.01
0.67 (25 %)
1.24 (42 %)
1.96 (51 %)
EncDec
MAX
0.81
2.01
3.80
0.60 (26 %)
1.16 (42 %)
1.84 (52 %)
EncDec
AVG
0.80
2.02
3.84
0.56 (30 %)
1.10 (45 %)
1.77 (54 %)
EncDec
ATTN
0.78
1.93
3.66
0.56 (28 %)
1.08 (44 %)
1.73 (53 %)
haversine formula to calculate the distance between any two
points s1 and s2 expressed by their geographical coordinates:
dH(s1, s2) = 2R arcsin
q
sin2 ˜φ + cos φ1 cos φ2 sin2 ˜λ,
(25)
where si = [φi, λi]T , i = 1, 2, R is the radius of the Earth,
φ1 and φ2 denote the latitude values, λ1 and λ2 the longitude
values, ˜φ = φ2−φ1
2
, and ˜λ = λ2−λ1
2
.
Considering the haversine formula (25) as a distance function
expressed in nautical miles (nmi), the mean absolute error
(MAE) can be deﬁned as the displacement haversine error over
a set of N test samples, i.e.,
MAEj = 1
N
N
X
i=1
dH(yi
j, ˆyi
j)
(26)
where yi
j and ˆyi
j represent the true position and, respectively,
the predicted position of sample i after a given prediction
horizon tj = j ∆, j = 1, . . . , h.
Remark: Even if the area of the experiment is limited,
the difference between the great-circle and the Euclidean
distance in the longitude, latitude space is not always negligible.
Especially over a waypoint and for long time horizons, the
predicted position might be signiﬁcantly off from the ground
truth; in these cases, the great-circle distance provides a more
correct estimation of the prediction error.
F. Results: quantitative analysis
We use the K-fold cross validation procedure to evaluate the
proposed methods on a limited data sample [58]. This method
involves randomly dividing the set of trajectories into K groups
of approximately equal size. In our experiments, we split the
dataset composed of 394 full trajectories in K = 5 folds. For
each split, one fold is used for testing, while the remaining K−1
folds are used to ﬁt and validate the model in the training phase.
In this way, we can have complete and independent trajectories
in each fold. The windowing procedure generates approximately
2400 samples of ﬁxed-length input/target sequences in each
fold. Note that the exact number of sample sequences varies
with the length of the trajectories falling into a speciﬁc fold,
which is variable, because the windowing procedure applied
to the generic i-th trajectory generates ni samples, with ni ≫
ℓ, h. usually Finally, we compute the average MAE over the
extracted sequences from the ﬁve folds, obtaining the results
shown in Table I. As we can see from Table I, the encoder-
decoder architecture (EncDec) achieves the best performance

12
for each considered prediction horizon in both the labeled and
unlabeled experiments. The ATTN aggregation mechanism (see
Section V) outperforms both the MAX and AVG aggregation
functions; intuitively, the reason of this behavior can be found in
the increased ﬂexibility of ATTN (18) to learn spatio-temporal
relationships among all input states and output states.
Comparing the results obtained with labeled and unlabeled
training data, we can see that deep learning-based models
are able to leverage the high-level pattern descriptor better
and achieve better prediction, as opposed to linear regression.
Moreover, the MAE of labeled neural models with prediction
horizon of 3 hours is shown to be around half of the error
obtained using unlabeled input data. We also note that the high-
level pattern information is especially important for long-term
prediction. Indeed, while both unlabeled EncDec and MLP
achieve reasonable prediction performance in the short term, for
longer time horizons, not using the motion pattern descriptor
makes the prediction performance degenerate quickly.
G. Results: qualitative analysis
In this section, we provide a qualitative analysis of the
prediction results by ﬁxing the K-fold split index, which
translates to using a dataset with 284 trajectories for training, 32
for the validation, and 78 for the test. The windowing procedure
(see Section IV-B) produces 8574 input/target sequences with
length 12 samples each (ℓ= h = 12) for training and
1054 input/target sequences for validation. Then, we use 2379
input/target sequences in the testing phase to evaluate the model
performance.
The test trajectories of the chosen split are illustrated in
Fig. 6a, with a color that changes with the distance traveled
from a ﬁxed origin point. Figure 6b illustrates the MAEh
as a function of the vessel’s traveled distance from the ﬁxed
origin point. Intuitively, this allows mapping all the prediction
errors on a common axis and identifying the regions where
the prediction error is high. In terms of prediction error, the
EncDec with ATTN outperforms the MLP model for each value
of traveled distance. On the other hand, a signiﬁcantly lower
prediction error can be achieved with the proposed EncDec
using labeled training data. In particular, we can see that the
MAEh obtained with unlabeled models is very high compared
to that of the EncDec labeled model in a speciﬁc geographical
area WP (distance between 80 and 100 nmi), which is also
highlighted in Fig. 6a. Interestingly, a branching is present
in this area, where vessels can take three different directions;
it is therefore very challenging for the prediction system to
decide ahead which path the vessel is going to take. It is also
worth noting that high-level information is key to improve
prediction performance corresponding to branching areas (e.g.,
area WP in Fig. 6a), while, outside such areas, the labeled
models tend to put heavy weight on (or co-adapt too much to)
the journey descriptor, and not enough on the low-level context
representation (past observed states). The major difference
between unlabeled and labeled predictions can be explained as
follows: the former use the past observed positions to generate
future states, while the latter also use an additional high-level
pattern information, i.e., the ship’s intended destination: in our
WP
40
60
80
100
120
Distance traveled from origin (nmi)
(a)
40
60
80
100
120
Distance traveled from origin (nmi)
0
2
4
6
8
MAEh (nmi)
MLP-U
MLP-L
EncDec-ATTN-U
EncDec-ATTN-L
(b)
Fig. 6: MAEj for j = h (i.e., with prediction horizon of 3
hours) as a function of the vessel distance from a ﬁxed origin
point. The prediction error of the MLP model and the EncDec
models are compared for a network with or without the ship’s
intended journey descriptor as input information. Contains data
from the Danish Maritime Authority that is used in accordance
with the conditions for the use of Danish public data [1].
experiments, the polygons A or B, which can be replaced, for
instance, by the destination port in practical applications. In
the area WP (Fig. 6a), the main disadvantage of the unlabeled
models is the unavailability of any prior information that helps
them to take the correct decision about the future path to be
followed by the vessel after branching. Instead, the labeled
model has more information available, and thus generates
more realistic future trajectories by exploiting the information

13
WP
WP
WP
Fig. 7: Comparison of computed predictions versus ground-
truth vessel trajectories in a pre-determined water zone. From
left to right, the plots depict: the real target trajectory, the
EncDec-ATTN unlabeled predictions, and the EncDec-ATTN
labeled prediction. Contains data from the Danish Maritime
Authority that is used in accordance with the conditions for
the use of Danish public data [1].
related to the pattern descriptor. As clearly shown in Fig. 7,
unimodal trajectory prediction models which are independent
of the vessel’s intended journey may tend to average out all
the possible trajectory modes, since the average prediction
minimizes the displacement error. However, the average of
modes may not necessarily represent a valid future behavior of
the vessel. This leads, in the case of unlabeled model, to the
generation of future trajectories that may have never been seen
in the training phase. Such averaging effect of the unlabeled
predictions will result in predicted trajectories with higher
variability (see Fig. 7) with respect to the target future positions.
The labeled model, instead, generates future trajectories that
are consistently more similar to the real (target) ones, as we can
see from Fig. 7 showing the target and predicted trajectories
from the labeled and unlabeled EncDec-ATTN models.
In Fig. 8 we compare the empirical cumulative distributive
function (CDF) of the prediction error in terms of MAEh for
different models. This ﬁgure illustrates the complete distribution
of the prediction error and complements the information already
conveyed by Table I and Fig. 6, showing that the labeled
prediction consistently outperforms the unlabeled one. Note that
the labeled EncDec model with attention aggregation achieves
a ﬁnal displacement error below 2.5 nmi in approximately 90%
of the cases. Considering the unlabeled models, we can see
that the EncDec is slightly better than the MLP, and that the
accuracy in prediction after 3 hours of the neural architectures
(MLP and EncDec) is lower than 2.5 nmi in approximately
70% of the cases. Considering also the labeled models, we
note that EncDec is slightly better than the MLP, conﬁrming
that the intention information is a key factor to increase
the prediction performances of different neural architectures.
Conversely, the linear regression model is not able to achieve
comparable prediction performance compared to the considered
deep-learning solutions.
Finally, in Fig. 9 we show the results at four time steps (the
predicted sequences in the left column, the attention weight
scores from the unlabeled recurent model in the middle column,
and the attention weight scores from the labeled recurrent
model in the right column) obtained by four trained models on a
speciﬁc trajectory, which intersects the area WP (Fig. 6a). The
predictions are computed with the sliding window approach
already discussed (see Section IV-B), and the sequence of
predictions follows the temporal index k on the given trajectory.
We show that the labeled models (both MLP and EncDec-
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
MAEh (nmi)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Cumulative probability
Linear-U
MLP-U
MLP-L
EncDec-ATTN-U
EncDec-ATTN-L
Fig. 8: Empirical cumulative density function of the mean
absolute error (with prediction horizon of 3 hours) in nautical
miles. We compare ﬁve models, showing that the labeled
models outperform the unlabeled models in terms of the
probability that MAEh will take on a value less than or equal
to a speciﬁc haversine distance.
TABLE II: Evaluation of the prediction error in nautical miles
at 3 hours in the cases shown in the left column of Fig. 9.
k −1
k
k + 1
k + 2
MLP-U
30.32
36.78
4.33
3.14
EncDec-ATTN-U
30.31
34.66
1.91
0.37
MLP-L
1.76
1.68
0.92
2.27
EncDec-ATTN-L
1.03
1.22
1.36
1.35
ATTN) are able to forecast the vessel’s position many time
steps before the maneuvering point (see Figs. 9a and 9d);
conversely, the unlabeled models predict the correct direction
only after the (branching) critical position is observed at time
step k (see Figs. 9g and 9j). Intuitively, the labeled models can
achieve better prediction performance because the additional
information allows going from a higher modality prediction
task to a lower modality one. In other words, the intention
information enables labeled models to exclude well in advance
paths that are incompatible with the actual vessel’s destination.
Moreover, to quantify the error of the predictions shown in
the left column of Fig. 9, we measure the haversine distance
dH(ˆyk+1
h
, yk+1
h
) in nautical miles with a 3-hour prediction
horizon between the predicted position ˆyk+1
h
and the target
position yk+1
h
. Reading Table II, we also note that the EncDec-
ATTN model in general achieves better prediction performance
than the MLP. The only exception is at time k + 1, when
the labeled MLP is slightly better than the labeled recurrent
model. In the following section, we explore how the attention
mechanism can be used to interpret the neural model decisions.
H. Attention weight scores analysis
The attention mechanism also facilitates explanation of the
internal working of a neural network by computing a vector
of importance weights on the input sequence at each position

14
x11
x12
Xk
1,
y1
y11
y12
Yk
1, h
observation
ground-truth
MLP-U
MLP-L
EncDec-ATTN-U
EncDec-ATTN-L
(a) k −1
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
y10 y11 y12
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
x10
x11
x12
0.10
0.13
0.15
0.17
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
(b) EncDec-ATTN-U (k −1)
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
y10 y11 y12
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
x10
x11
x12
0.11
0.18
0.27
0.34
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.06
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
(c) EncDec-ATTN-L (k −1)
x11
x12
Xk,
y1
y11
y12
Yk, h
observation
ground-truth
MLP-U
MLP-L
EncDec-ATTN-U
EncDec-ATTN-L
(d) k
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
y10 y11 y12
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
x10
x11
x12
0.10
0.14
0.18
0.20
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
(e) EncDec-ATTN-U (k)
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
y10 y11 y12
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
x10
x11
x12
0.06
0.12
0.19
0.27
0.31
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
(f) EncDec-ATTN-L (k)
x11
x12
Xk + 1,
y1
y11
y12
Yk + 1, h
observation
ground-truth
MLP-U
MLP-L
EncDec-ATTN-U
EncDec-ATTN-L
(g) k + 1
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
y10 y11 y12
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
x10
x11
x12
0.13
0.21
0.28
0.05
0.15
0.09
0.04
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.06
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
(h) EncDec-ATTN-U (k + 1)
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
y10 y11 y12
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
x10
x11
x12
0.07
0.13
0.21
0.24
0.28
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
(i) EncDec-ATTN-L (k + 1)
x11
x12
Xk + 2,
y1
y11
y12
Yk + 2, h
observation
ground-truth
MLP-U
MLP-L
EncDec-ATTN-U
EncDec-ATTN-L
(j) k + 2
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
y10 y11 y12
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
x10
x11
x12
0.19
0.29
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.19
0.11
0.10
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
(k) EncDec-ATTN-U (k + 2)
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
y10 y11 y12
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
x10
x11
x12
0.16
0.18
0.24
0.23
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.09
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
(l) EncDec-ATTN-L (k + 2)
Fig. 9: Four different models map four input sequences Xi,ℓ(from a journey which intersects the area WP in Fig. 6a) into
their respective future trajectories ˆYi,h with i = k −1, k, k + 1, k + 2. The temporal order of input and predicted sequences
follows the index k and increases row-wise from top to bottom. In this speciﬁc context, the labeled model outperforms the
unlabeled one (for both the MLP and EncDec-ATTN architectures). The middle and right column illustrate the attention weight
scores related to the predictions computed by the unlabeled (EncDec-ATTN-U) and labeled (EncDec-ATTN-L) recurrent models,
respectively. In each panel, asterisks mark the maximum value on each column; instead, text labels indicate the maximum
attention weight assigned to that position in relation to the output sequence. Contains data from the Danish Maritime Authority
that is used in accordance with the conditions for the use of Danish public data [1].

15
in the predicted sequence. In other words, since it computes a
distribution over inputs, we can use the attention to provide
an interpretation of model decisions [37], [59], [60].
Inspired by prior work on attention interpretability [59]–
[61], we can visualize the attention weights computed both
by the unlabeled and labeled recurrent models on the same
set of input/target sequences and attempt an interpretation
of the importance the network gives to speciﬁc trajectory
features. Fig. 9 is organized as follows; a single test trajectory
is considered, from which we extracted four input/target
sequences at consecutive time instants, one for each row in
the ﬁgure, so that the time instant k corresponds to the last
input sequence before the waypoint. The left column shows
the input, target and predicted sequences with the considered
models; the middle and right columns show a visualization
of the attention weight scores from the unlabeled and labeled
models, respectively. More precisely, we visualize the attention
weights αij in (17). Each matrix column in each plot indicates
the weight distribution over the input sequence, so that it is
possible to ﬁgure out which positions in the history pattern
were considered more important when generating the predicted
trajectory. As time ﬂows (from the top to the bottom row), the
unlabeled model (middle column) is able to give more inﬂuence
to the salient features of the input sequence while generating
the output sequence. This is also apparent at visual inspection:
the network gives more importance to the ending of the input
sequence when computing the beginning of the output sequence
(top two rows), but it is still able to recognize a maneuver in
the input sequence and give more importance to the turning
point; this is evident from the two bottom rows, where there is
a brighter row that corresponds to the position of the turning
point in the input sequence, which moves upwards as time ﬂows
and the position of the turning point shifts in the input sequence.
More speciﬁcally, at time instants k −1 and k, the unlabeled
model gives more importance to the last position in the input
sequence at the beginning of the predicted sequence, differently
to what happens in the rest of the sequence, where the score is
gradually reduced, with the score almost reducing to an average
operation on the encoded features (Fig. 9b and 9e). In these
cases, the predictions computed with the unlabeled models are
also far away from the ground truth, as they follow the “wrong”
path after the crossroad area. A signiﬁcantly different behavior
is that of the labeled model, which gives more importance to
the last ﬁve positions of the input sequence while generating
the output sequence (Fig. 9c and 9f); in these cases, the network
is able to pick the correct path after the waypoint, and the
predicted trajectories are close to the ground truth.
The behavior at time instants k + 1 and k + 2 is worth of
note, as both the labeled and unlabeled models place greater
emphasis on the positions in the input sequence that correspond
to the area where the ship changed direction (waypoint). This
is likely because even the unlabeled model is able to recognize
the turning maneuver in the input sequence and thus put more
emphasis on the input region where this pattern is clear. A
major evidence of this behaviour is seen in the labeled model
where the magnitude of weight score is very high in relation
to that speciﬁc pattern in the input sequence (Fig. 9i and 9l).
VII. LIMITATIONS AND EXTENSIONS
The proposed encoder-decoder model presents some lim-
itations which may be interesting to explore through future
extensions. First, for reliable and accurate predictions, our
method heavily relies upon historical data of paths belonging
to the same motion pattern of the test trajectory, i.e., a large
and representative sample of data from the domain. This means
that the performance of our method may be sensitive to the
training dataset, in particular, the number of ship trajectories
available and domain representativeness. The fact that the
dataset may be an unrepresentative sample of data from the
domain, and that predictive model performance often improves
with dataset size, are well-known issues. However, how to select
the dataset is still a challenging open problem. This is usually
addressed by performing a sensitivity analysis to quantify the
relationship between dataset size or domain representativeness
and model performance. It is also worth pointing out that,
although the proposed encoder-decoder architecture achieves
the best performance in the experiments, the MLP model can
provide a good trade-off between complexity and prediction
performance, especially in the short term. However, this comes
at the expense of diminished interpretability that the attention
mechanism can provide, and the lowered ability to map an
input sequence to an output sequence that is not necessarily of
the same length. As a matter of fact, compared to standard NN-
based models, the encoder-decoder architecture allows training
the RNNs to map a variable-length input sequence to another
variable-length output sequence.
Another possible limitation concerns the use of high-level
intention information in the labeled models. As shown in the
results, the intention information turns out to be very useful
to solve the problem of multimodality of the prediction task
when using unimodal forecasting, and exclude predictions that
do not fulﬁll the constraint imposed by the intention. However,
such additional information is shown to be unhelpful when the
multimodality involves a set of trajectories sharing the same
intention. This is apparent from Fig. 7 where we can see how
the labeled architecture on one hand can reduce the averaging
effect between the two main branches compared to unlabeled
models, but on the other hand, cannot completely address
multimodality. Future extensions in this direction include the
investigation of mixture density prediction techniques, which
could deﬁnitely remove the averaging effect of patterns sharing
the same intention information (i.e., destination).
VIII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a recurrent encoder-decoder
architecture to address the problem of trajectory prediction in
the presence of complex mobility patterns, testing the approach
in a maritime domain case study. An extensive experimental
campaign with real AIS data showed that the proposed
architecture is able to learn space-time dependencies from
historical ship mobility data and successfully predict future
vessel trajectories. Experimental results show the superiority of
attention-based models over simple aggregation functions, and
that a signiﬁcant performance improvement can be achieved
with the use of information on the vessel’s destination. Future

16
work will focus on extending the proposed encoder-decoder
architecture to directly address the multi-modal nature of the
vessel prediction task, as well as on modeling the prediction
uncertainty.
