Designing for the Long Tail of
Machine Learning
Martin Lindvall

Sectra AB
Linköping, Sweden
Department of Science and Technology, ITN,
Linköping University
Jesper Molin

Sectra AB
Linkoping, Sweden
ABSTRACT
Recent technical advances has made machine learning (ML) a promising component to include in
end user facing systems. However, user experience (UX) practitioners face challenges in relating ML
to existing user-centered design processes and how to navigate the possibilities and constraints of
this design space. Drawing on our own experience, we characterize designing within this space as
navigating trade-offs between data gathering, model development and designing valuable interactions
for a given model performance. We suggest that the theoretical description of how machine learning
performance scales with training data can guide designers in these trade-offs as well as having
implications for prototyping. We exemplify the learning curve’s usage by arguing that a useful pattern
is to design an initial system in a bootstrap phase that aims to exploit the training effect of data
collected at increasing orders of magnitude.
KEYWORDS
machine learning, user-centered design, ML as a design material, human-centered machine learning,
AI-infused systems
ACM Reference Format:
Martin Lindvall and Jesper Molin. 2019. Designing for the Long Tail of Machine Learning. In CHI 2019 HCML
Workshop: ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
CHI 2019 HCML Workshop, May 04–09, 2019, Glasgow, UK
2019. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
arXiv:2001.07455v1  [cs.HC]  21 Jan 2020

Designing for the Long Tail of Machine Learning
CHI 2019 HCML Workshop, May 04–09, 2019, Glasgow, UK
INTRODUCTION
Recent works have advocated making machine learning (ML) more accessible by helping non-ML
experts build and design better learning-based systems [8]. The designers of ML-based systems has
the potential to improve the experiential value at all stages of development, from problem framing
to maintenance phases [3] but this technology does not come without challenges. Framing ML as
a design material highlights the fact that designers must be aware of its properties when used in
human-centered design methods [2].
In our own practice of prototyping, building and deploying ML-based systems we have often found
ourselves trying to decide which activity might at any given time best forward our ambition to create
ML-based systems that improve patient outcomes in real clinical situations. As it happens, we are
often trying to decide whether to gather more or different training data, to spend time on improving
the training algorithms or whether to employ human-centered methods to design user interactions
that could render a model’s performance usable in a collaborative way within the deployed solution,
a trade off we depict schematically in Figure 1. While the reality of practice is messy, we hope that
by this simple description of three highly ML-related activities we can begin a discourse on how
ML-specific constraints and possibilities affect the design process.
model development
data gathering
human-AI 
interaction design
Figure 1: When exploring the design space
of a ML-based system, there is usually a
trade off between pursuing training algo-
rithm improvements through model de-
velopment, gathering more training data
and attempting to design a suitable in-
teraction using the current best perfor-
mance.
Navigating the design space of ML
For our projects to date we have largely relied on what has sometimes been referred to as traditional
machine learning [1]. The part of the process relevant to this discussion of ML typically begins in
the corner of what we, for lack of a better term, call human-AI interaction design. At some early point,
one or multiple rather vague concepts are ideated with end users. Such a process usually results in a
problem definition, an idea of how ML might bring value and a very rough sketch of how that value
might be realized in use through interaction with end users. Some very quick and dirty conceptual
model development follow in order to clarify what kind of training data to gather before a very small
data gathering pilot starts. After some added model development on that initial data, the order of
the process gets murky. How much model development is worth doing on a small amount of initial
data? Should one blindly go collect more data, if so, how much? Furthermore, at which point should
we revisit our human-AI interaction design to align concepts with new notions of achievable model
performances?
Instead of prescribing some order of activities, we think it sensible that for each iteration one is
able to reflect upon the cost of each activity in relation to its predicted impact on advancing the
overall design goal. While designers probably have a good idea of the costs and benefits of employing
user-centered design methods to further human-AI interaction designs given a fixed model performance,

Designing for the Long Tail of Machine Learning
CHI 2019 HCML Workshop, May 04–09, 2019, Glasgow, UK
they might lack tools for estimating the effect of data gathering and model development on model
performance.
As we have continued to work in design of ML-based systems, the theoretical relationship between
training data amount and model performance has helped guide our decisions on which part of the
improvement triangle to address at which phase of the design project. Recent work has highlighted
that UX designers may not have a clear understanding of the relationship ML has with data [2], thus
we think that an extended discussion on how this relationship impacts design decisions might be
generative in informing both process and particular system designs.
THE MACHINE LEARNING CURVE FOR DESIGNERS
Machine learning algorithms train a prediction model from samples. In general, the performance of
the trained model improves with the amount and quality of training data. Since the model learns by
incorporating new information, the value of each training sample will decline because, if drawn from
the same source, chances increase that the new sample embodies something the model has already
learned. This means that the generic shape of a learning curve follows an inverse power law, with the
details depending on e.g. model size, problem difficulty, and label noise [5]. It has been shown that
this power law holds up to at least 300 millions samples, as long as the accuracy level does not reach
the inherent noise level in the data [7].
Dataset Size
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Error
Early
"bootstrap"
initial deployment
The long tail of the late phase
Figure 2: Deep learning model error de-
creases with increasing data set size fol-
lowing an inverse power law. When de-
signing systems using these models, this
can be exploited by dealing with design
challenges in the initial bootstrap phase
and the following long tail phase.
As we have previously described [6] we found that a reoccurring theme for our work with creating
ML-based systems was first training a model on a relatively small dataset that had been expert-
annotated by manual means, to then design an interaction embodying a successful task decomposition
such that the collaborative workflow both helps the medical practitioner in her daily work while also
implicitly generating training data that we imagined would increase the model’s performance by a
future update.
This way of approaching system design in two phases can be viewed as exploiting the learning curve
to address the cost of gathering data. Since the improvement to the model solely from data requires
the collection of data at increasing order of magnitudes, the cost of data collection in the development
environment might grow out of proportion quickly. Inversely, trying to deploy a product with too
weak a model might not provide enough value to end users to achieve wanted usage, which can be
the rationale behind investing in "manual" data gathering solely for development. The relationship
between training data amount and model performance and its evolution over time, loosely divided
into an early bootstrap and a late long tail phase, with different characteristics and implications for
design is illustrated in Figure 2.

Designing for the Long Tail of Machine Learning
CHI 2019 HCML Workshop, May 04–09, 2019, Glasgow, UK
Bootstrap phase
At this stage, the model improves rapidly with relatively small amounts of training data and challenges
include problem framing, feature engineering and training a model with sufficient performance to
enable realistic user interface prototyping. It is at this stage that the design of manual annotation
and labeling tools might be employed to engage domain experts as providers of training labels for the
prototype models. The reasonable target performance in the bootstrap phase is probably less than
that of the domain experts providing supervised labels, if such are employed. Hence, the human-AI
interaction design will need to especially consider that the error characteristics of the resulting model
predictions can be compensated by human behaviour in the context of use.
The long tail
When starting to approach the long tail, for many practical applications, further improvement to
the model performance requires either the data collection to move towards large scale collection or
attempting to improve the model by pursuing breakthrough research within machine learning. The
design activities will focus on ways to make systems continuously collect training data in a way that
it has minimal impact on end users goals and user experience. In order to increase data collection by
orders of magnitude, the collection will move from being explicit to implicit. Other notable issues the
system design needs to address are model drift, quality assurance, systematic bias and generalizability
between contexts.
IMPACT FOR HUMAN-CENTERED MACHINE LEARNING
Previous work has indicated that designers believe it may require an "unwieldy amount" of data
to create functional prototypes [2]. The theory surrounding deep learning suggests it is possible to
estimate the scaling of model performance with data if enough is gathered to get past a ’small data’
plateau and into the power-law region [5]. We believe that by combining experiments using small
data and using the learning curve as a heuristic, designers can start imagining the points on the curve
where resources required for data collection and model development exceed those that would be
required to realize a system enabling valuable interactions with the current model performance. The
designer could diverge to a few hypothetical designs by aiming for different target performance levels,
as illustrated in figure 3. If the prediction goal of those concepts are kept somewhat similar, this can
be done with a low impact in terms of extra resources for data gathering and model development.
Dataset Size
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Error
threshold for design concept #1
threshold for design concept #2
threshold for design concept #3
Figure 3: Designers can use the machine
learning curve as a tool to diverge multi-
ple hypothetical design concepts that de-
pend on model performance of a certain
quality.
By creating a timeline for ML-based systems associated with both machine performance and
amount of training data, it becomes possible to nuance questions such as “are human labelers useful
or should we do something different?”. By the principles we have introduced we might conclude that

Designing for the Long Tail of Machine Learning
CHI 2019 HCML Workshop, May 04–09, 2019, Glasgow, UK
such model-centered performance activities can be useful in the bootstrap phase but with declining
motivations in later phases.
The learning curve relates the effect of additional training data to model performance with a fixed
model training pipeline. However, activities of model development such as algorithm selection, hyper
parameter tuning and feature engineering can also effect model performance. In our practice, we
constrain our explorations of this vast space of options to applying techniques and pipelines that have
been shown to be fruitful in scenarios similar to ours or to be widely usable in general. Our rationale
behind this is somewhat tentative and based on two assumptions. First, we assume that similarly
to how the benefits of increased data declines, so does the impact of model development in relation
to time. Second, we believe that the focus on human-AI interaction and the overall solution means
that the value of a few percentage’s increase in performance, while being very important to machine
learning researchers, is less important to designers.
Finally, the learning curve assumes that examples are uniformly drawn from a population. In
interactive machine learning systems [1] that lets users iteratively refine training data by observing
model performance, the subsequent examples might still be very informative. For instance [4] showed
that single-user selected sampling can outperform random sampling. However, the learning curve of
this kind of user sampling as seen over large data sets is to our best knowledge, yet unknown.
