Interactive Plan Explicability in
Human-Robot Teaming
Mehrdad Zakershahrak and Yu Zhang
Computer Science and Engineering Department
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona

Abstract—Human-robot teaming is one of the most important
applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in the fast-growing ﬁeld of
robotics. For effective teaming, a robot must not only maintain
a behavioral model of its human teammates to project the team
status, but also be aware that its human teammates’ expectation
of itself. Being aware of the human teammates’ expectation leads
to robot behaviors that better align with human expectation,
thus facilitating more efﬁcient and potentially safer teams. Our
work addresses the problem of human-robot cooperation with the
consideration of such teammate models in sequential domains by
leveraging the concept of plan explicability. In plan explicability,
however, the human is considered solely as an observer. In this
paper, we extend plan explicability to consider interactive settings
where human and robot behaviors can inﬂuence each other.
We term this new measure as Interactive Plan Explicability.
We compare the joint plan generated with the consideration
of this measure using the fast forward planner (FF) with the
plan created by FF without such consideration, as well as the
plan created with actual human subjects. Results indicate that
the explicability score of plans generated by our algorithm is
comparable to the human plan, and better than the plan created
by FF without considering the measure, implying that the plans
created by our algorithms align better with expected joint plans
of the human during execution. This can lead to more efﬁcient
collaboration in practice.
I. INTRODUCTION
The notion of a robotic teammate, or that using robots to
complement humans in various tasks, has attracted a lot of
research interest. At the same time, the realization of this
notion is challenging due to the human-aware aspect [3], or
that the robot must consider the human in the loop, in terms
of both physical and mental models while achieving the team
goal. In such cases, it is no longer sufﬁcient to model humans
passively as parts of the environment [1]. Instead, human-
robot teaming applications require the robot to be proactive
in assisting humans [9].
There are different aspects to be considered for human-
robot teaming. First, the robot must take the human’s intent
into account. Various plan recognition algorithms [10, 12] can
be applied to perform plan recognition based on a given set
of observations. The challenge is how the robot can utilize
this information to synthesize a plan while avoiding conﬂicts
or providing proactive assistance [2, 5]. There are different
approaches to planning with such consideration [1, 4]. Another
the key consideration is to be socially acceptable [8, 15],
where the robot must be aware of expectation of the human
teammates and acts accordingly. The challenge here is to
model the human’s expectation of the robot.
The ability to model the human’s expectations enables the
robot to assist humans in an expected and understandable
fashion that is consistent with the teaming context [11]. This
type of coordination results in effective teaming [6]. One of
the key challenges for such effective teaming is for the robot
to learn the human’s preconceptions about its own model, as
illustrated in Figure 1. To learn about this model, similar
to [16], we assume that humans understand other agents’
behavior by associating abstract tasks with agent’s actions.
Alternatively, when the robot’s behavior does not match that
of the human’s expectation, the human would not be able to
associate some of its actions with task labels. The labeling
process can be learned using conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs).
Then, the learned model can be used to label a new robot plan
to compute its explicability score. The explicability measure
in Zhang et al. [16] is deﬁned as follows:
Plan Explicability: After a plan is labeled, its explicability
score is computed based on its action labels. The explicability
score is calculated as follows:
Fθ(Lπ) =
P
i∈[1,N] 1L(ai)̸=∅
N
(1)
where Fθ(Lπ) : Lπ →[0, 1] (with 1 being the most expli-
cable), π is the robot plan, 1 is an indicator function, N is
the total number of actions in the plan, and Lπ denotes the
sequence of action labels for plan π, and Fθ is a domain
independent function that converts plan labels to the ﬁnal
score. When the labeling process can’t assign a label to an
action ai, its label L(ai) will be empty.
In this work, we extend the notion of plan explicability to
an interactive setting where the human is cooperating with
robot. In such a case, a plan is comprised of both human and
robot actions, and the inﬂuence of the agent’s behavior on each
other must be explicitly considered. Another contribution is
the implementation and evaluation of our approach in a ﬁrst
response task domain in simulation.
II. INTERACTIVE PLAN EXPLICABILITY
The explicability of a plan [15] is correlated with a mapping
of high-level tasks (as interpreted by humans) to the actions
arXiv:1901.05642v1  [cs.RO]  17 Jan 2019

Fig. 1.
The robot’s planning process is informed by an approximate human
planning model as well as the robot’s planning model.
performed by the robotic agent. The demand for generating
explicable plans is due to the inconsistencies between the
robot’s model and the human’s interpretation of the robot
model [13]. In our work, the robot creates composite plans for
both the human and robot using an estimated human model and
the robot’s model, which can be considered as its prediction of
the joint plan that the team is going to perform. At the same
time, however, the human would also anticipate such a plan to
achieve the same task, except with an estimated robot model
and the human’s own model.
Each problem in this domain can be expressed as a tuple
PT = ⟨I, G, MR, g
MH, ΠC⟩. In this tuple, I denotes the initial
state of the planning problem, while G represents the shared
goal of the team. MR represents the actual robot model and
g
MH denotes the approximate human planning model provided
to the robot. The actual human planning model MH (that the
human uses to create his own prediction of the joint plan)
could be quite different from the model g
MH provided to
the robot. Similarly, the human will be using g
MR that may
be different from the actual robot model MR. Finally ΠC
represents a set of annotated plans that are provided as the
training set for the CRF model.
To generate an explicable plan, the robot needs to synthesize
a composite plan that is as close as possible to the plan that
the human expects. This is an especially daunting challenge,
given that we have multiple points of domain uncertainty (e.g.
from g
MH and g
MR). As shown in Figure 1, the robot only
has access to g
MH and MR. Thus, the problem of generating
explicable pan can be formulated as the following optimization
problem:
argmin
π
MR, g
MH
C
cost(πMR, g
MH
C
)
+ α · dist(πMR, g
MH
C
, π
g
MR,MH
C
)
(2)
where πMR, g
MH
C
is the composite plan created by the robot
using MR and g
MH, while π
g
MR,MH
C
is the composite plan that
is assumed to be created by the human (the plan that the human
expects). Similar to [15], we assume that the distance function
dist(πMR, g
MH
C
, π
g
MR,MH
C
) can be calculated as a function of
labels of actions in πMR, g
MH
C
.
argmin
π
MR, g
MH
C
cost(πMR, g
MH
C
)
+ α · F ◦LCRF (πMR, g
MH
C
| {Si | Si = L⋆(πC)})
(3)
As shown in (3), the label for each action is produced
by a CRF model LCRF trained on a set of labeled team
execution traces (πC). Since we do not have access to the
human model or the human’s expectation of the robot model
so that mispredictions are expected, we will rely on replanning
when either the human deviates from the predicted plan of the
robot.
To search for an explicable plan, we use a heuristic search
method, f = g + h, where g is the cost of the plan preﬁx and
h is calculated as shown in the following:
h = (1.0−Fθ(L(state.path#rp)))∗|state.path#rp|∗|rp|+|rp|
(4)
where
#
means
concatenation
above
and
rp
=
relaxedPlan(state, Goal).
III. EVALUATION
To evaluate our system, we tested it on a simulated ﬁrst
response domain, where a human-robot team is assigned to a
ﬁrst-response task after a disaster occurred. In this scenario,
the human’s task is to team up with a remote robot that is
working on the disaster scene. The team goal is to search all
the marked locations as fast as possible and the human’s role is
to help the robot by providing high-level guidance as to which
marked location to visit next. The human peer has access to
the ﬂoor plan of the scene before the disaster. However, some
paths may be blocked due to the disaster that the human may
not know about; the robot, however, can use its sensors to
detect these changes. Due to these changes in the environment,
the robot might not take the expected paths of the human.
For data collection, we implemented the discussed scenario
by developing an interactive web application using MEAN
(Mongo-Express-Angular-Node) stack.
In our setting, the robot would always follow the human’s
command (i.e., which room to visit next). The human can, of
course, change the next room to be visited by the robot anytime
during the task if necessary, simply by clicking on any of the
marked locations. The robot uses BFS search to plan to visit
the next room. After a room is visited, the human cannot click
on the room anymore. Also, the robot always waits 1 second
before performing the next action. For simplicity, the costs of
all human and robot actions are the same.
A. Experimental Setup
For training, after each robot action, the system asks the
human whether the robot’s action makes sense or not. If the
human answers positively, that action is considered to be expli-
cable. Otherwise, the action is considered to be inexplicable.
This is used later as the labels for learning the model of
interactive plan explicability. All scenarios were limited to four

Fig. 2.
A sample map that the human subjects see with a description of the
object types.
Fig. 3.
A sample map corresponding to the map in Figure 2 that the robot
sees; the gray cells are hidden obstacles.
marked locations to be visited, with a random number (2 −5)
of visible obstacles and manually inserted hidden obstacles
(invisible to the human) in the map. We have generated a set
of 16 problems for training and 4 problems for testing.
We collected in total 34 plan traces for training, which were
used to train our CRF model. All training data was collected
with human trials, with random initial robot initial and goal
locations. To remove the inﬂuence of symbol permutation, we
performed the following processing on the training set: For
each problem, we created an additional 1000 traces that are
the same problem only with different permutations of symbols.
A sample map of the actual environment is shown in Figure
2. Figure 3 shows the same map that the robot sees with hidden
obstacles drawn on the map.
B. RESULTS
Table I shows the ratios (refer to as the explicability ratio)
between the number of explicable actions and the number of
actions over all plans, created for the testing problems using
our approach, FF planner, and human plan, respectively. The
interactive explicable plan (our approach) is created using the
heuristic search method mentioned in Equation (4). Note that
all the human actions will be considered explicable in our
plans (although one can argue that is not the case).
As we can see in Figure 4, the explicability ratio for our
approach is similar (0.1% difference) to the human plan while
being quite different from the FF plan (13.9% difference). This
is also intuitively explained in Fig. 4, where We can clearly
see that the explicable plan is similar to the human plan, in
the sense the human tends to change commands in this task
domain due to unknown situation.
The above results show that the plans created by our
algorithm are closer to what the human expects, and thus
enabling the robot to better predict the team behavior and
potentially lead to more efﬁcient collaboration in practice. The
explicability scores for the four testing problems are shown
in Table II. The reason for the low explicability score of FF
plan is that FF tends to create plans that are less costly while
ignoring the fact that the human and robot may view the
environment and each other differently, and thus less costly
plans in one view are also more likely to be misaligned with
less costly plans in the other. Note, however, that whether the
explicable plan would lead to better teaming performance (e.g.,
less replanning efforts for the robot and less cognitive load for
the human) requires further investigation and evaluation with
actual human subjects. This will be explored in future work.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF EXPLICABILITY RATIO FOR TESTING SCENARIOS
Plan Type
Interactive Explicability Score
Interactive Explicable Plan
0.820
FF Planner
0.672
Human Plan
0.811
TABLE II
ELABORATED EXPLICABILITY SCORE FOR TEST SCENARIOS
Scenario #
FF Plan
Interactive Explicable Plan
1
1.0
1.0
2
0.56
0.714
3
0.629
0.757
4
0.8
0.8
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We created a general way of generating explicable plans
for human-robot teams, where the human is an active player.
This differs from prior work in the sense that we do not
assume that the human and robot have the same knowledge
about the environment and each other; or in other words, there
exists information asymmetry, which is often true in realistic
task domains. To generate an explicable plan for a human-
robot team, we need not only consider the plan cost, but also
the preconceptions that the human may have about the robot.
Although we have mainly focused on two member teams, we
believe that these ideas can be easily extended to larger team
sizes with a few changes to the current formulation. It should
also be straightforward to extend the current formulation to
support simultaneous action executions by considering joint
actions at any time step. Another way we may be able to
achieve this would be by using temporal planners [7] instead
of relying on sequential ones. Also, the current system assumes
the provision of an approximate human planning model and
relies on replanning to correct its plans whenever the human
deviates from the predicted explicable plan. We could possibly
explore the idea of incorporating models like capability model
[14] to learn such human models.

Fig. 4.
Comparison of plans for a speciﬁc problem. (Left) The optimal plan; (Middle) The explicable Plan; (Right) The human plan. The initial location of
the robot is indicated with a white arrow inside a red box. Yellow cells refers to where the human commands are received.
