arXiv:1604.08148v1  [cs.AI]  11 Feb 2016
Deﬁning Concepts of Emotion: From Philosophy to Science
Changqing Liu
ClinTFL Ltd., UK

Abstract
This paper is motivated by a series of (related)
questions as to whether a computer can have plea-
sure and pain, what pleasure (and intensity of plea-
sure) is, and, ultimately, what concepts of emotion
are.
To determine what an emotion is, is a matter of
conceptualization; namely, understanding and ex-
plicitly encoding the concept of emotion as people
use it in everyday life. This is a notoriously difﬁcult
problem (Frijda, 1986; Fehr & Russell, 1984). This
paper ﬁrstly shows why this is a difﬁcult problem
by aligning it with the conceptualization of a few
other so called semantic primitives such as “EX-
IST”, “FORCE”, “BIG” (plus “LIMIT”). The deﬁ-
nitions of these thought-to-be-indeﬁnableconcepts,
given in this paper, show what formal deﬁnitions
of concepts look like and how concepts are con-
structed. As a by-product, owing to the explicit ac-
count of the meaning of “exist”, the famous dispute
between Einstein and Bohr is naturally resolved
from linguistic point of view. Secondly, defend-
ing Frijda’s view that emotion is action tendency
(or Ryle’s behavioral disposition (propensity)), we
give a list of emotions deﬁned in terms of action
tendency. In particular, the deﬁnitions of pleasure
and the feeling of beauty are presented.
Further, we give a formal deﬁnition of “action ten-
dency”, from which the concept of “intensity” of
emotions (including pleasure) is naturally derived
in a formal fashion.
The meanings of “wish”,
“wait”, “good”, “hot” are analyzed.
1
Introduction
To explain what emotions are, philosophers and psycholo-
gists put forward various theories.
Many observations of
theirs capture important aspects of emotion phenomena; e.g.
many agree that desire is a component of emotions. In par-
ticular, Ryle observes that emotions are dispositions to be-
have. Frijda deﬁnes emotion concept as “action tendency”.
Wierzbicka uses “want” as a basic term to deﬁne emotion
concept. The building blocks of their theories includes such
concepts as “tendency”, “satisfaction”, “reward”, “punish-
ment”( Frijda, 1986), disposition (Ryle, 1949), “unexpect-
ness” (Ortony, Clore and Collins, 1988), “want”, “good”,
“bad” (Wierzbicka, 1992) and “motivation”, “desire”, “goal”
or “purpose”, etc. These building concepts, called semantic
primitives, are thought to be indeﬁnable. Thus the emotion
theories stop at the level of these indeﬁnable concepts. So
without (formal) deﬁnition of what people mean by “action
tendency”, “want”, “good”, “satisfaction” etc, none of the
theories can convince people such and such thing in a com-
puter is the equivalent of “action tendency”, “want” etc.; any
robot claimed to have emotion would always be thought to be
emulating the manifested behavior of emotions, rather than
emotions themselves.
The reason for the lack of the deﬁnitions of these semantic
primitives may be two fold. First, traditionally (before AI)
there have been rarely need to formally deﬁne the meanings
which are intuitively clear.
People including philosophers
are happy with daily language in expression, comprehen-
sion and arguments about everyday, “commonsense” world
around them; there is no problem at all in people’s usage of
them in daily life (this fact reminds us of Wittgenstein’s view
that the meaning of a word is its use). Even the meaning of
“force” in physics has not been deﬁned. Only two exceptional
occasions are: a) when people were asked to ﬁnd the mean-
ing of “limit” after it had already been employed by math-
ematicians for 100 years, and b) when Einstein felt need to
investigate what “simultaneously” really mean. Second, the
task to ﬁnd the “real meaning” is difﬁcult, as in the cases of
“simultaneously”, “limit”, “big”, “exist”. As Nilsson (1991)
pointed out
“ ... there are some particularly difﬁcult subjects to con-
ceptualize. Among these are processes, events, actions, be-
liefs, time, goals, intentions, and plans ... Interestingly, many
of the most difﬁcult conceptualization problems arise when
attempting to express knowledge about the everyday, “com-
monsense” world. AI researchers join company with philoso-
phers who have also been attempting to formalize some of
these ideas. Choosing to use ﬁrst-order predicate calculus as
a representation language does not relieve us of the chore of
deciding what to say in that language. Deciding what to say
is harder than designing the language in which to say it!” 1
1Indeed, the deﬁnition of “limit” was ﬁrst described in natural

In this paper, we show by examples how the semantic prim-
itives are deﬁned in a formal manner. Having analysed the
concept of force and tendency, we deﬁne “action tendency”
formally and thus ground the concepts of emotion on more
fundamental formal concepts. With the deﬁnition of emotion,
we are allowed to give the answer in coherent manner to the
question of what emotion intensity is. 2.
Our approach to meaning of semantic primitives including
“tendency” has the same ﬂavour as Cauchy’s to the meaning
of “limit” which is intuitively clear while to ﬁnd the deﬁnition
took people more than 150 years. The approach may be sum-
marized as “concepts are constructed out of the observation
of behavioral regularities”.
2
Deﬁning concepts (formally)
We will give several examples to show what concepts’ (for-
mal) deﬁnitions look like and to demonstrate why it is not
easy to deﬁne a concept formally.
The ﬁrst example is “BIG”. This concept is intuitively
clear. To deﬁne it is not a trivial problem 3. Obviously, ’big’
actually means ’bigger (than)’ because by ’big’ people mean
something bigger relative to other things. Without loss of
generality, we consider ’longer’ for simplicity. So what is the
meaning of “stick A is longer than stick B”? The meaning
of “longer” is ”whenever you align one end of A with one
end of B and do cut along the other end of A, you will see an
extra piece of stick off B”; “cut” here represents any operation
of comparing. In other words, the interpretation of the string
“x > y” is x−y > 0 which in turn is interpreted as “whenever
you make a comparison, you will see one piece of A, one
piece of B (of the same size), and another piece of stick off
B”. Concept is constructed out of observations of behavioral
regularity.
“FORCE”. Believe or not, the concept of “force” has no
deﬁnition so far, though people understand what it means in-
tuitively. The following situation is one of many from which
people form their concept of “force”. You carrying a tray
with one of your hands, whenever (every time, at any time)
you withdraw your support, the tray will fall down to the
ground. Let us write the concept of force as “¬C →M”
where C stands for “condition”. The interpretation of it is,
whenever there is no support (i.e. the condition C does not
holds) movement M occurs. This is the deﬁnition of “force”,
we suggest. In the deﬁnition, the behavioral regularity is sig-
niﬁed by the notion “whenever ...”. Further, you may have
a another feeling of another force such that whenever you
don’t use both hands to support the tray it falls down, namely,
“¬(C1 ∧C2) →M” (C1 denotes that there is support of
the ﬁrst hand and C2 the second hand). Thus you acquire
the concept of “intensity” of force; you distinguish between
force A and force B by their condition parts, i.e. ¬C1 vs
¬(C1 ∧C2), so that you say “B is stronger than A” in this
sense. In physics, only properties of force such as magnitude
and direction, rather than the concept itself, are dealt with.4
language by Cauchy. No doubt it is a formal deﬁnition.
2This problem has rarely been addressed in previous literature
3’BIG’ is in Goddard’s (2002) list of semantic primitives
4Perhaps it is not necessary to examine the everyday concept of
Neither has the semantic interpretation of force ever been de-
ﬁned in linguistics. We are not concerned with real force in
the real world, unlike Hume. We are just interested in the
concept of “force”, a behavioral regularity.
“LIMIT” (“inﬁnitesimal”, “inﬁnity”). It is not difﬁcult
for school students to understand what lim 1
n →0 means.
In folk language, it means 1
n approaches to 0 as n goes big-
ger and bigger indeﬁnitely. It is not difﬁcult for school stu-
dents to understand what this means. They apprehend it well
as Newton, Leibniz and Euler did.
However, to translate
it into a formal statement is so difﬁcult that scholars strug-
gled for 100 years before ﬁnding its formal deﬁnition, (ε, δ)-
procedure (thanks to Cauchy and Weierstrass). It can be seen
that the (ε, δ)-procedure deﬁnition does not resemble its intu-
itive counterpart at all. This fact might illustrate why deﬁning
the concept of limit formally is not an easy task. In fact, when
high school students enter universities and are exposed to the
formal deﬁnition of limit all of them are confused by the for-
mal deﬁnition; it is strange and different from limit learning
in high school. Not only does it take long time for them to
understand the formal deﬁnition of the limit, but also almost
all of them grasp the formal deﬁnition only in the sense that
they can remember it and correctly apply it to solve problems
given. Indeed, it is difﬁcult for them to understand why (ε, δ)-
procedure is the meaning of “limit”. This fact demonstrates
where the difﬁculty of conceptualization stems from; the for-
mal deﬁnition looks so different that it is hard for people to
link them together. The same can be said with respect to the
case of emotion. 5
“EXIST/THERE IS”.
People have an intuitively clear
idea of what we are saying by “there is/exists a table in the
room”. There is no deﬁnition for its meaning 6. Formally, we
suggest, when you say “there is/exist a table” the meaning of
this alphabetical string is no more than, whenever you “look”
at there you will “see” it. This is the deﬁnition of “exist”. A
human being gets this object permanence concept when he is
as young as an infant (Bremner, 1994) and, we argue, it won’t
change substantially when he becomes a toddler, a teenager,
an adult and a scientist like Einstein.
Like in the example of ‘big’, here ‘look’ and ‘see’ just rep-
resent any way of perception (look, touch, smell ...) and its
outcome (true or not) respectively. People often say, “because
the moon exists, whenever we look we will see it”. This say-
ing misleads people into thinking that ‘existence’ and the be-
havior regularity “whenever ... we will see it” are cause and
effect; two separate things. The truth is the reverse, namely
that it is because you observe the “whenever ... you see”,
you construct the concept of “existence”. Philosophers de-
bate whether there is a real existence which is independent
of people’s observation. We don’t want to involve this type
of philosophical argument in this paper but just wonder curi-
ously that what the meaning is in their exposition. We agree
force for the purpose of physics. But it is not always unnecessary
to examine the everyday concepts for the purpose; for example, the
concept of “simultaneity”.
5The second difﬁculty of emotion is body-mind problem, which
however is solved by Gilbert Ryle to mention one.
6This is also in Goddard’s (2002) list of semantic primitives

with those maintaining that that metaphysical thing is beyond
the capability of scientiﬁc concept. Scientiﬁc theory must be
meaningful; every concept must be meaningful - associated
with a given interpretation.
Let’s turn to Bohr–Einstein debate. Einstein’s famous chal-
lenging question is “Is the moon there when no one looks”?
To both Bohr and Einstein, if the answer is “no”, then this
contradicts the commonsense. If the answer is “yes”, then
it means there is an absolute reality (existence) which is in-
dependent of people’s observation, and this is inconsistent
with quantum theory’s observation. Unable to answer Ein-
stein’s question directly, quantum theorists eschewed the type
of debates and they “shut up and calculate”. To be sure Bohr
is proved right and Einstein is wrong. However, Einstein’s
question is still there. Here we suggest a direct answer to
Einstein’s question. Einstein’s question can be translated as
“If no one looks, is it true that whenever one looks one can
see a moon?”. So the hypothesis that no one looks does not
refute the proposition “whenever one looks one sees it”. In
other words, Einstein’s question can be expressed in notion
“if ¬A, A →B = True?” 7. Obviously, the answer is “Yes”. It
is Einstein who should “shut up”. Or he must give the mean-
ing of his ‘exist’ explicitly; had he tried to do so, we believe,
he should have found its real meaning which he grasped when
he was a toddler, what we make explicit here.
3
Emotion is desire
Gilbert Ryle (1949) see emotions as being behavioral dis-
positions. Frijda (1986) deﬁnes emotion as action tendency.
Wierzbicka (1992) characterizes emotions in terms of want-
ing to do, to mention a few. It can be seen that this group of
philosophers tend to eliminate mental terms from accounts of
emotion. Their theories are convincing, at least for some of us
AI researchers. In this paper, we will give formal deﬁnitions
for action tendencies and thereby show how computers can
have emotions. To make the reduction from the common-
sense idea about emotion to the formalized concept mildly,
we reduce the concepts of emotion to desires ﬁrstly. If the
readers already accept Frijda’s action tendency account for
emotion, they can skip the ﬁrst half of this section and turn to
the part of pleasure and feeling of beauty. Indeed, intuitively
it seems that desiring to do conveys the same meaning as ten-
dency to do, or, action tendency (or, a state of readiness to
execute a given kind of action) —can you interpret explicitly
the difference in meaning, if you feel it at all? They are vir-
tually synonymous. With regard to the idea that emotions are
equivalent to desire, much previous work has provided insight
on this. Hebb (1949, p. 190) deﬁnes hunger as the tendency
to eat. Amold (1960) says that emotion is felt action ten-
dency. Searle (1984, p. 24) says that to be thirsty is to have,
among other things, the desire to drink. The difference be-
tween their theories and ours lies in that we identify emotion
with desire conceptually — namely every emotion is simply
a desire (to do ...). Feeling hungry is identiﬁed with the desire
to eat, an itch with the desire to scratch, feeling thirsty with
the desire to drink, and so on. It is often said “because I am
7unless his ’exist’ is of metaphysics, and therefore, we maintain,
is meaningless
hungry, I desire to eat”. Again this form of phrasing misleads
people into thinking that ”being hungry” and ”desire to eat”
are two separate things. When we are talking of thirst we are,
by that very token, talking of the desire to drink. Or, it can be
said, the desire to drink causes thirst, in the sense in which we
speak of one thing explaining, or being explaining of, another
thing. The second reason of resorting to the notion “desire” is
for the sake of syntax; it would be more natural to say ”desire
to do” than ”action tendency to do”. The following is a mini
dictionary of emotions deﬁned by desires.
feeling hungry: desiring to eat;
feeling thirst: desiring to drink;
feeling an itch: desiring to scratch; for instance, feeling an
itchy toe is the desire to scratch the toe.
feeling cold (hot): desiring to warm(cool) oneself;
feeling of fear: desiring to ﬂee, or escape, etc.; that I feel
fear of someone/something means I desire to go away from it.
feeling of love: desiring to be with;
regret: desiring to do what could have made oneself not do
what was done by oneself;
hate: desiring to make someone feel pain, die, etc.; desir-
ing to retaliate someone;
pain(in the general sense of unpleasant feeling): desiring,
when P (a fact or a state of affairs) is true, to do something
as a result of which P will not hold;
feeling of excitement (social emotion): desire to cheer;
pleasure: desiring to do what is being done. (More about
this later.);
For instance, desiring to warm myself when I am warming
myself (making heat ﬂow into the body)— for when I am
warming myself by, say, sitting near a ﬁreplace, my body
may physically still need heat ﬂowing into it—is a kind of
pleasure. Similarly, (when one is drinking) desiring to drink
(we do not call it thirst in this case) is a kind of pleasure.
In this fashion, every particular emotion should be deﬁned in
terms of desire (to do ...). A common mistake is to suppose
that pleasure results after one’s thirst is quenched. For an-
other example, desiring to scratch oneself when one is doing
so is an instance of pleasure. (It is undeniable that when one
is scratching an itch one is feeling a kind of pleasure.) Where
there is no desire there is no pleasure. It can be said that plea-
sure is awareness of “desire to do A when you are doing A”.
To determine what an aesthetic feeling is, is considered
a difﬁcult problem. The aesthetic feeling of beauty, as it is
commonly considered, refers to the pleasant feeling caused
by seeing a beautiful object such as a ﬂower, a girl, etc.. But
what is “beautiful” then? In fact, the sense in which an object
is “beautiful” is that whenever one sees the object in question
one has a feeling of beauty. Therefore, the notion “beautiful”
ought to, as many have pointed out, be eliminated. Actually,
the adjective “beautiful” makes no reference to any objective
property of the object, but simply that: when seeing the object
one has a pleasant feeling. We have the following deﬁnition:
feeling of beauty : desiring to see the object while I am
actually seeing it.
Thus, feeling of beauty is an instance of pleasure, the pattern
of “one is doing what one desires to do” in concept. Feeling
of the sublime is another puzzle to philosophers. In short,
when you contemplate a picture of scenery, which in a real

life situation would induce a feeling of fear, it is to be said that
you have a feeling of the sublime, which is a sort of pleasure,
as aestheticians put it. With the above deﬁned concept of
pleasure, here we explain what sublime is.
Imagine this painted scene; under the black cloud-covered
sky, a broad expanse of the sea darkened to gray, no ship sail-
ing. If you were on the sea all alone, you would feel fear.
Bear in mind, this is a painting, a work of art. We argue that
while you are looking at the picture without telling yourself
(by shifting your consciousness to the fact that you are now
in a room of the gallery.) that you are not really on a sea but
just in a gallery, you are, at that very point, seeing the sea as
if you were really on it: Or, to put it another way, you have
the same experience of seeing the sea as if you were really on
it. As a result, you have a feeling of fear—desire to ﬂee, or,
to get away from the scene. Immediately afterward, you have
escaped: You are now aware of being safe. Then you look at
the picture again. Contemplating the picture is a procedure
which consists of the repeated almost instantaneous occur-
rences of begin: seeing the sea desiring to get away having
got away end.
As it can be seen, at a macro-level, there is a form of desir-
ing to do A when doing A, namely desiring to get away when
getting away, in this process, which is recognized as pleasure
of a sort, an instance of pleasure deﬁned above. In real life,
when you are really on the sea in question, you would in no
way have a sense of having gotten away from it, and simply
a feeling of fear. This might be, and, in fact, is just what
Burke says: “when danger or pain press too nearly, they are
incapable of giving any delight, and are simply terrible;”
To conclude, the study of emotions should be the study
of desires rather than, as some psychologists have tended to
do, to explore physical and physiological causes of emotions.
The approach to this problem, we suggest, is to examine what
one desires to do when having an emotion. To determine what
emotions are is to determine what desires are. The only rea-
son an emotion is claimed not a desire is that either the desire
has not been correctly identiﬁed or that feeling is not an emo-
tion.
4
Formal deﬁnition of action tendency
(disposition, propensity)
As mentioned above, at the semantic level we treat desire and
action tendency equally. Therefore, sometimes we use ’de-
sire’ for ’action tendency’ for the sake of convenience. Frijda
(1986) construed “action tendencies” as “states of readiness
to execute a given kind of action, [which] is deﬁned by its
end result aimed at or achieved” (p 70)“. His interpretation
uses such notions as “readiness”, “achieve” and “aim”, the
meanings of which are not clear. For us, “action-tendency”
sounds clearer than the interpretation given by him. We now
begin our analysis of the concept of “action-tendency” (de-
sire). Consider the following cases:
Case 1: a horse tied to a stake, making an effort to move
forward, the reins being drawn tight, Everything is still.
Case 2: a bow fully drawn with the arrow loaded; every-
thing is still.
Case 3: a stone put on a bridge; everything is still.
Then, compare the following:
Case a: the horse tied to the stake, standing calmly; every-
thing is still.
Case b: the bow not drawn, with the arrow loaded; every-
thing is still.
Case c: the stone put on the bank, beside the bridge; every-
thing is still.
It cannot be denied that there is a kind of thing which case
(1), case (2) and case (3) all have, while case (a), case(b)
and case(c) do not. What is it, or, how should we express
it? Allow us to say, it is a kind of tendency. But what is a
tendency? One might say that that thing is just a physical
force. Admittedly, it is force.
This leads to the deﬁnition of action tendency: S →A,
where S is a circumstance or fact, which can be described
by a propositional formula, and A is action or occurrence of
event.8 The interpretation of S →A is whenever S holds
A happens, the same form as the concept of “force”. So we
say that tendency means just S →A. It cannot be said that
tendency causes S →A, but should be said that we signify
S →A by the word “tendency”. Both force and desire are
tendencies. Returning to the cases described above, in case
(1), case (2) and case (3), S is respectively: the reins are cut,
the bow string is released, the bridge is broken. And A is
respectively: the horse running forward, the arrow shooting,
the stone dropping down. In case (1), for example, when the
reins are cut, the horse moves, while in case (a), it won’t.
In the case of feeling hungry, S may be this: food is at
hand, or food is in my mouth, or food is at hand and at the
same time I am not on a diet, and so on, and the a is eating. If
the case of thirst, S may be this: water, or beer, and the like
is at hand, etc. The action A characterizes the desire’s qual-
ity, which determines a desire’s characteristic feel or quale.
For example, if A is eating, the desire S →A counts as feel-
ing hungry, and if scratching, counts as feeling an itch, and
so forth. The condition S determines a desire’s intensity, of
which we will go into details in the next section.
Since action tendency is now deﬁned formally, deﬁnition
of pleasure given above is a formal deﬁnition, without any
mental term, a scientiﬁc concept. If one programmed a robot
to have a mechanism of S →A, one would be right to claim
that one had produced an emotion, because one had produced
what is fundamentally identical to what people designate as
“emotion”.
5
Intensity of action tendency (emotion
intensity)
Our daily language and experience recognize that emotions
may exist in varying degrees of intensity. For example, “I am
feeling a little bit hungry”, “I am feeling hungry” and “I am
feeling very hungry”, do reﬂect the conception of emotional
intensity; in essence the three emotions are simply three men-
tally distinguishable feelings, which, though distinguishable,
cause the same action —namely, eating. We often distinguish
8It would be more precise to say that S names a type of circum-
stance, and A a type of event. For the sake of convenience, without
loss of points, we will let the present usage stand.

between apprehension, anxiety, fear, and panic or between
contentment, pleasure, happiness, joy and ecstasy. Further-
more, there seems to be a kind of order relationship among
emotions.
People are clearly aware that if emotion E1 is
”stronger” than E2, and E2 is ”stronger” than E3, then there
is the same relationship between E1 and E3 as between E1
and E2, or between E2 and E3 —transitivity. And people
would not think that emotion E2 is ”stronger” than E1. If
E1 is ”stronger” than E2 , that, for example, a bit hungry is
”stronger” than very hungry—antisymmetry. Also, people do
not think that there is such a relationship between an emo-
tion and itself as that between, say, very hungry and a bit
bit hungry—antireﬂexivity. Yet strangely enough psycholo-
gists and philosophers have rarely examined this dimension
of variation of emotion (Plutchik, 1991,p. 14). Like most
psychologists, Frijda denies emotion intensity as a unitary
concept (p. 290). Instead, they treat emotion intensity as the
stimulus intensity, or variation in some dimensions of emo-
tional behavior. In this stance, being very hungry vs being a
little bit hungry may be measured by having not eaten for ten
hours vs ﬁve hours. This sounds not to describe the hunger
itself, but one of the causes of it. People do not mean “very
hungry” in that sense.
Our theory of emotion allows us to coherently address this
problem. The formal deﬁnition of emotion naturally captures
the dimension of emotional intensity .
The key to the problem of emotion intensity, we view, is
to elucidate the concept of emotional intensity, to determine
what the meaning of “stronger” is. To begin with, it is in-
structive to reﬂect on some important facts which might be
easily overlooked:
• When extremely hungry, one would eat whatever edibles
are available; while if only a bit hungry, one would not until
some “delicious” food is available.
• When feeling a mild need to urinate, one might urinate
only when a convenient opportunity presents itself; while if
feeling an urgent need to urinate, one might urinate without
so much (or any) attention to the place and its convenience.
• With feeling a little bit hungry and at the same time very
thirsty, if both food and drink are available one would begin
to drink rather than eat.
• et cetera.
Further probing what it means for an emotion to be stronger
than another leads to the following deﬁnition.
Let E1 be S1 →A1 and E2 be S2 →A2. Using E1 > E2
for “E1 is stronger than E2”, we have
Deﬁnition (stronger): E1 > E2 iff If E2 gives rise to
action A2 in some circumstances then E1 will necessarily
give rise to action A1 under the same circumstances, and
not vice versa; in other words, there cannot be such a cir-
cumstance that A2 is triggered under it while A1 is not, but
there are some circumstances under which A1 will be trig-
gered whereas A2 is not.
For example, suppose A is eating, then C1 →A is stronger
than C1 ∧C2 →A; namely, hunger1 is stronger than
hunger2. C1 ∨C2 →A is stronger than C1 →A. The
condition part of action tendency determines a desire’s inten-
sity.
Therefore, to have a strong pleasure simply means satisfy-
ing (executing A of the desire) a strong desire (thus ’satisfac-
tion’ is clearly deﬁned).
Since the intensity of emotion or desire only involves the
condition parts of emotions or desires, two emotions of differ-
ent quality may be comparable with each other with respect
to intensity. This is also reﬂected by our intuitions. For ex-
ample, it seems meaningful to say that feeling a little bit hun-
gry is weaker than feeling extremely thirsty. Nevertheless,
not every pair of emotions are comparable with one another.
For example, it seems that, intuitively, some feelings of fear
and some of thirst are, to some extent, not comparable with
one another, with respect to intensity. This is because, sup-
pose E1 and E2 are not comparable with one another, neither
E1 > E2 nor E2 > E1 holds, in this case. The conditions
speciﬁed by the condition parts not only refer to the exter-
nal world states but also may include the internal states of an
agent. For example, when one feels hungry, one might take
no action to eat even if some food is at hand, if one is on a
diet; with the hunger becoming strong enough, one would eat
the food.
6
More about Pleasure and Pain
As has been seen, the concept of emotion is stood for by
S →A, and thereby we mean that an emotion, or desire,
is uniquely determined by a condition and an action. Plea-
sure has not this characteristic form of expression. In fact,
if we call those that are characterized as the form S →A,
such as fear, itch, etc., “basic” or “fundamental” emotions,
pleasures are not basic emotions; they are “forms” of desires,
rather than desires themselves. As mentioned earlier, the con-
cept of pleasure is deﬁned as “desire to do A while A is being
performed”. For instance, one desires to scratch (that is, one
is itchy) when one is scratching.
This is best illustrated by examples. Suppose the desire
now is thirst, namely desire to drink water.
Let us write
S(·)(w) to represent the condition part of the thirst, and A
to represent the action—drinking. The notation of S(·)(w)
is used to indicate that the condition under which A occurs
depends on the level of ﬂuid content of one’s body or in one’s
stomach, or throat. The lower the level is the weaker the con-
dition is and therefore the stronger the desire to drink is, and
vice versa. In short, the condition part S(·) is a function of the
level of ﬂuid content. The occurrence of A can have affects
on S(·)(w), leading to the increase of the level of the ﬂuid
content and this in turn causing S(·)(w) to vary. After one’s
having taken a swallow of water, the thirst would be weak-
ened. The goal of A, and also of the desire, is, say, “water is
ﬂowing through the throat”. At the starting point, the desire
is
S(·)(w0) →A.
When it comes that S(·)(w1) is still satisﬁed by a
circumstance—for example, the one that water is at hand—A
occurs, that is, it occurs taking a swallow of water. Thereby,
the level of ﬂuid content would be up to a higher point, w1,
and thus the thirst now is
S(·)(w1) →A.
Providing S(·)(w1) is still satisﬁed by the circumstance, the

second swallow of water would be taken. And so forth. This
procedure terminated at a point when, because enough water
has ﬂown into the body, S(·)(w) is too strong to be satis-
ﬁed so that, we say, the intensity of thirst is “zero”, that is,
one now does not feel thirsty. During the whole process, one
keeps having the desire to drink, and meanwhile keeps drink-
ing; provided S(·)(w) is true, nothing would cause one to
stop drinking. As it is, the more intense the thirst is, the more
intense the pleasures experienced when drinking are. Neither
occurrence of action nor desire are themselves pleasures; as
has been emphasized, in order to characterize a pleasure there
must be mention of both a desire and the occurrence of the ac-
tion which is desired. Phenomenologically, there are no such
distinct emotions as “pleasures”.
One might argue that pleasures result from satisfaction—
that desires are satisﬁed. Disregarding the issues of the notion
of “satisfaction”, if “desires are satisﬁed” refers to the fact
that the goal of a desire holds—that is, thus interpreted, the
goal is a state of affairs (for example, the ﬂuid content of
one’s body is at a normal level)—then why the stat that the
ﬂuid content of one’s body is on a normal level (therefore one
does not feel thirsty, i.e., does not desire to drink) does not
cause one to feel pleasure, even though this state of affair was
the goal of one’s desire an hour ago when one was thirsty?
Traditionally it is believed that desires and pleasures are
persistent, i.e., they exist in an interval rather than at a point of
time. But essentially, “a fact holds during an interval” means
no more than that the fact in question holds every time we
test it. Consider the proposition “S holds during the interval
[t1 ,t2]”. What is the meaning of the proposition? It can but
mean that every time (during the interval) you test S you, at
that point, obtain a truth. When it is not tested, it is neither
a truth nor falsehood, and it is meaningless to say that it is
at that point true or false. Therefore when a notion is pre-
sented that something holds during an interval, it coherently
refers to the case where something holds repeatedly as op-
posed to “continuously” during an interval. This allows us to
say that the repeated occurrence of desire to ﬂee and action of
ﬂeeing (see the early account of aesthetic feeling), counts as
pleasure — the characteristic of aesthetic feelings. Parenthet-
ically, to account for the functionality of pleasure, we argue
that pleasures’ function is to keep one doing (or repeatedly
doing) what one is doing (or has done).
When one is having a pain, one has a desire to do an action
which will cause a certain fact not to hold; without taking into
account the difference between the two forms of goals—one
is a proposition, another is in the form of the negative of a
proposition—we can simply say that pain is a desire to do an
action which has not taken place. This explains why feeling
thirsty is a painful, love is a sort of pain, and so on.
7
“WISH” and “WAITING”
“Desire to do” vs “wish G happens” signify the different
meanings of the two notions. The latter is usually seen in the
scenario when a person can do nothing to achieve G while
waiting for it to happen. For example, as an audience, a per-
son wishes Manchester United to score a goal. Our analysis
of the concept of ’wishing’ and ’waiting’ gives the deﬁnition
of wish as follows. When you are waiting a present sent by
a friend of yours, the wish is “ G (the present arrives) →
stop checking”. In the case of watching football game, the
wish is “G →stop checking and start to cheer (or desire to
cheer)”. The meaning of ‘waiting’ can be signiﬁed by the dif-
ference between such two circumstances: a) that one is sitting
there without any wish—he is not waiting, and b) that sitting
there with a wish — he is waiting. That is to say, at the se-
mantic level and in this context (one may wait bad news not
wished), ‘waiting’ and ‘wishing’ are equivalents. That is why
wish cannot be deﬁned in terms of waiting, without circular.
Wishing has not got the same deﬁnition of intensity as desire.
However, people say “I have a stronger wish”. What does that
mean? That means more ‘frequently checking’ or “a strong
desire to cheer when the goal is achieved”. Therefore, in the
case of wishing, the frequency or strength of the action part
of the deﬁnition is deﬁned as the strength of a wish. Never-
theless, the condition part of the deﬁnition can still be recog-
nized as one dimension of intensity, as desire. For example,
“G →Stop waiting” is stronger than “S ∨G →Stop wait-
ing”, because in the situation of the former the agent keeps
checking until only G is true, whereas in the latter S (say “it
is raining”) can stop the checking.
8
Meaning of “good”
When one says a thing is good, one is merely expressing that
one likes it, rather than referring to something objective of
the thing. When one voices “something is good”, the ob-
ject (usually, the speaker) to whom it is good is tacitly re-
ferred to. Again, it is not because it is good that I want it,
but vice versa. There is no something “good” but people’s
desire to have it. This is another example that inappropriate
linguistic forms are expressed in statements whose superﬁcial
grammatical form mistakenly engenders the hypostasization
of non-existent objects of various sorts. The delicious food is
delicious just because we have a strong desire to eat it, rather
than because of the “deliciousness”. The water is 80 ◦C refers
an objective of water, whereas to say the water is hot refers to
your own desire. The same argument applies to ’beauty’.
9
Conclusion
To determine what an emotion is, is to ﬁnd a scientiﬁcally de-
ﬁned concept of emotion, which accords with our everyday
concept of what an emotion is. Hence what we should do is
to make clear the everyday concept – to express it explicitly.
Conceptualization is difﬁcult to make when attempting to ex-
press knowledge about the everyday, “commonsense” world.
Consequently, the existing theories stop at the level of “se-
mantic primitives” which are thought indeﬁnable. In this pa-
per, we have shown how to divide those ‘atoms’ into smaller
“particles”; we demonstrate how semantic primitives can be
further deﬁned in a formal manner.
